R733 R8280 12195864 55979
Reflections upon the Opinions OF Some Modern Divines, CONCERNING The Nature of Government.
Licens'd, June 29. 1689. J. FRASER.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. COncerning the Original of Sovereign Power, Page 1 CHAP. II. The different Opinions of Philosophers and Divines concerning this matter Page 7 CHAP. III. That Sovereigns do not receive their Power immedi∣ately from God Page 10 CHAP. IV. An Examination of the Arguments which are alledged for the Proof of this Opinion Page 13 CHAP. V. Whether the Power of Sovereigns be absolute and unlimited Page 19
CHAP. V. Concerning the Extent of the Power of Sovereigns Page 24 CHAP. VI. Concerning Non-resistance Page 28 CHAP. VII. That the Scripture doth not assert the point of Non-resistance Page 31 CHAP. VIII. Whether the States can deprive Sovereigns of their Au∣thority when they abuse it Page 34 CHAP. IX. Concerning Regal Dignity, and the Rights belonging to it among the Jews Page 38 CHAP. X. Concerning the Royal Law in favour of the Roman Emperors Page 50 CHAP. XI. That the States of the West, and of the North, never knew this Royal Law Page 56
CHAP. XII. That the Power of the Emperors of the West, is a limited Power Page 63 CHAP. XIII. That the Power of the Kings of Poland is limited Page 66 CHAP. XIV. That the Monarchy of France is not an absolute Em∣pire, but a limited Royalty Page 68 CHAP. XV. That the Royalty of England never had any other form than the rest of the Northern and Western States Page 79 CHAP. XVI. An Answer to some Difficulties moved against this Truth Page 85 CHAP. XVII. An Answer to the last Objection Page 91 CHAP. XVIII. A Reflection on some Remarks made out in this Treatise Page 97
APPENDIX. CONCILII TOLETANI IV. Canon. LXXV. Pag. 103 The 75. Canon. of the Fourth Council of Toledo, ibid. Capitula super quibus facta est Magna Charta Re∣gis Johannis, ex MS. Arch. Cantuar. Fol. 14. Quae etiam authenticè cum Sigillo extant in mani∣bus Episc. Salisburiensis. 113 Diploma Regium sive Ordinationes JOHANNIS Re∣gis Angliae, queis statuit quid Nobiles, quid Plebeii observare debeant, ad pacem & tranquillitatem Regni stabiliendam 121
THE PREFACE. 'TIS a strange and almost incomprehensible thing, that at this time there should be found so many discon∣tented Persons among us; when but a little while since, the whole Body of Protestants appeared so unanimous, viz. at the beginning of the miraculous Revolution. Though it hath already retrieved the State from Ruine, and will without doubt prove its Happiness; it might easily be guess'd, that those who had contributed to the overthrow of the Laws, appre∣hending the Reward they had so justly deserved, would make up a Body of Malecontents, and that their Numbers would be consi∣derable. 'Tis notorious also, that in all times, those who think they are not considered or treated according to the Justice of their Merit, are ready to murmur against the Government; and the Ambition that possesses them, renders them every where, a Race of discontented Persons. But whatever difference of Principles there might be among Protestants, the fear of their common danger having reunited them, and made their Interests the same with those of the State and Religion, which they saw equally expos'd to inevitable Ruine, there seem'd but small ground to apprehend, that as soon as the Fright was over, there should still be found a Ge∣neration of Men, whom their old Animosities, and habitual Pre∣judices, would engage in disaffection and murmuring against the Government. And yet it is but too true, that scarce did the State and Religion begin to breath again, but immediately there appeared a Party, who made it appear by their snarling, that what fill'd the generality of Men with Joy, and made them give Thanks to God, afforded them very small Satisfaction. I pretend not to tax the whole Body of the English Church: It is well enough known, that as their Settlement was
furiously struck at by Popery triumphant, and observing no kind of measures, her principal Members, as well as the generality of those that resort under her, have, and still do witness their Zeal for the Government, which God has been pleased to establish among us. I speak only of some certain Members of this Church, whom the Court has long employed in overthrowing, by their Maxims, the Foundations of the Publick Liberty, in order to a sure Establishment of Popery. Those Disciples of L'Estrange, the Pensioner and Drudge of a Popish Court, no sooner perceived that what was like to happen upon James the Second's Desertion, would extremely expose them, as Men that had betrayed the Interests of their Religion and the Government, by Maxims which they had maintained with so much boldness, every where began to publisb their discontent, and still endeavour to inspire the same into the People, as founded upon pure Tenderness of Conscience. It cannot be denied, but that hitherto the Government has shewed an extraordinary lenity, in reducing them to Reason, whom Danger seemed to have made wiser. The method and careful management which has been made use of to obviate whatsoever might afford them the least Jealousie, or give them the least trouble, is an evident Mark hereof. But in fine, since they continue in their Mistakes notwithstanding all this care and tender∣ness, and that nothing will satisfie them; what can be more pru∣dently undertaken, than to prevent the pernicious Effects which their Example, and the Maxims wherewith they are leavened, might produce in the minds of the People. We have thi Satis∣faction already, that the Publick is well aware they know not themselves what they would be at; for how free soever they may be to disperse their Murmurs and Disaffection, yet probably there is scarce one among them that would have James II. recalled; nei∣ther indeed would it be so difficult a thing for them to find him out, in case their Consciences link'd them so closely to him, as they would make us believe. But we may have also another satisfaction in this Point; which is, That in examining their Maxims in good earnest, we may make it appear, That they know not themselves what they affirm; and that the Opinions they have so long maintained, concerning the Nature of Government in general, and that of England in particular, are properly and truly a Heresie in Matters of State. Let no Man wonder that I call this Opinion of some of the Clergy of England, a
Political or State-Heresie. Their Opinions respect a Political Question truly such; but these Gentlemen have been pleased to mould it into an Article of Faith, forsooth, of the Church of England; and their aim was to make that pass for an Article of the Law, which indeed was no better than a dangerous Error in Policy. And truly all the Characters of Heresie so fitly suit these their Sentiments, that it is a hard thing to resist the Temptation of giving them that Title. These Assertions are a perfect Novelty in Policy, as well as Divi∣nity. Some late Writers have fully made out, That their Opi∣nions are little more than of fifty years standing. And it is as true, that they are the fruits of Ambition. Consider whe∣ther all those that ever undertook the defence of them, did not do it, to raise themselves in the Church, and to be promoted to higher dignities than they could hope for from their merit. Truth never employs any thing for its own defence, but the light and evi∣dence which are so connatural to it; but would to God the Authors and Defenders of these Opinions had never practised any violent means, to make their Party triumphant, by which both Church and State have equally suffered, and been both reduc'd to within two inches of their utter Ruine and Destruction. I confess these Gentlemen have endeavoured to delude the World, by alledging the Holy Scripture and Fathers, in favour of their Opi∣nion. But herein they have behaved themselves as the Hereticks do, in citing the Scripture and Tradition in defence of their Novelties; that is to say, wresting them to their own Perdition, as St. Peter saith; and making the Father speak what best pleaseth them, rendring them as pliable as the Sound of Bells, which (according to the Proverb) do tink as the Fool is pleased to think. And this is that which I undertake to justifie and make out, by my Reflections on this Matter. To perform this with some method, I shall first of all explain the Original of the Power of Kings. Secondly, I shall examine the Extent of that Power. And Thirdl, I shall consider the Remedy that may be justly opposed against the Abuse of it. And in the sequel, shall make it my business to apply these general Matters to most of the Western Kingdoms; and shall make it evident, That there is no pretext at all for the vast Pretensions of those, who set no bounds to the Power of Kings, and who believe that nothing but a Stoical and invincible Patience, can lawfully be opposed to their Injustice and Tyranny. And for as much as in examining these three Articles, I shall be obliged to oppose the Prejudices of some New Divines, I
think my self bound to advertise the Reader, That it is not against their Character, but against their Opinions, that I set my self; and that I do not in the least pretend, by entring into the Lists with them about a Political Question, to derogate in the least from their Authority, or to render their knowledg in Theological Questions suspected. Tractent Fabrilia Fabri, Let Smiths keep to their own Anvil; for by their disregarding of this Proverb, they have wan∣dred and lost themselves. They have cut the King lumping Penny-worths out of the Rights of the People, and imprudently made way for the Establishing of that Tyranny, which would infallibly, in con∣tinuance, have destroyed their Religion. We must therefore, if it be possible, oblige these Gentlemen to permit others to enjoy their Rights, and then the World will be happy. I am not ignorant, that there be many among those, who are dipt in this Opinion, that make great shew of Vertue and Piety: But forasmuch as by this their Conduct they delude and hoodwink the People, it is but fitting to endeavour to prevent this ill effect, in defending the Truth. Shall we account the Rights of Truth the less certain, because they have escaped the discerning of some honest and vertuous Men? Or the Delusion the less dangerous, because proceeding from those that are such? Let it be lawful for us then to bring back these Men from their Wan∣drings; and to convince them, that they ought no longer to defend Maxims, whose falsity is not more visible, than it is prejudicial to the Interest of the Church and Community.
REFLECTIONS UPON THE OPINIONS OF SOME MODERN DIVINES, CONCERNING The Nature of Government in General, AND That of ENGLAND in Particular. CHAP. I. Concerning the Original of Sovereign Power. WE may assert, That the Rights of Sovereignty, to speak properly, have no Institution in the Law of Nature. A Father indeed has his Chil∣dren in his power, and they are subject to him by a Natural Institution, as well because they have received their Life from him, which is the Foundation of all Good, as also for that they are beholden to him for their Education; which is ano∣ther
Life, no less precious than the former. But though this Power were not included within the narrow Bounds of each particular Family, and though we should suppose it extended to the taking away of the Life of Rebellious Children, yet certain it is, that the Paternal Power is not unbounded, with respect to Time; for as soon as a Man is married, and begins to form another Family, this Act emancipates him from the Paternal Authority, as Jesus Christ supposes, when he said to the blessed Virgin, John 2.4. Is not my hour come yet? Which words Gregor Nyssn explains thus, An nondum venit mea hora, quae praebet aetati ut imperet, & sui sit Juris? Is not my hour come yet, which allows my Age to command, and leaves me at my own dispose? But the case is not the same with Magi∣strates, whose Authority reacheth over a whole Society com∣posed of several Families; for as they do not owe their Birth to the Magistrate, nor are obliged to him for their Education, as they are to their Parents, their Command cannot be founded on the Right of Nature, which subjects Children to their Parents. Neither can we suppose that the Authority of Magistrates is bottom'd upon some Excellence they have by Nature above their Subjects. I own there be some Vertues and Talents which do ordinarily submit the Spirits of such as know them, to those who are adorned therewith; and the highest degrees of Vertue and Wisdom do naturally procure a veneration for those that possess them. But who sees not, that this is insuffi∣cient to be the foundation of Civil Power. A Magistrate is not always distinguished by these illustrious Talents and Qua∣lifications, which so powerfully attract Veneration in parti∣cular. A Man may be very wise, and yet be ne'er the more obeyed by those who don't understand the price of Wisdom. He may be very valiant, but his Courage, being unaccom∣panied with Prudence, may render him contemptible in the Eyes of those who apprehend his Temerity. It is plain then, that it is not this natural difference God hath put between Men, which is the ground of the Magistrates Authority▪ Indeed, the same is the case of Magistracy, as of the Cere∣monial Law, which entred into the World because of Sin; for certainly, if Men in their behaviour liv'd up to the Pre∣cepts of the Law of Nature, one Man would never invade
what his Neighbour is possessed of, either by Inheritance, or by his own Industry: One Man would not defile the Bed of his Neighbour, or spill his Blood, to hinder the Opposition his Neighbour might make against his Enterprises. But be∣cause Men are so prone to violate those equitable Laws, to sati fie their Passions, and corrupt Inclinations, therefore is the Magistrates Authority become necessary. And how great soever we may conceive this Authority to be, yet we must acknowledge, that God never instituted it till after the Deluge, as appears from Gen. 9.6. We read in the Scripture, that Cain, when he had kill'd his Brother Abel, told God, That he feared that every one that met him, would kill him; but do not find, that he did in the least ap∣prehend, that his Father, as his Natural Sovereign, should sentence him for that Murther. This Impunity of Cain prov'd an encouragement to Lamech, as we see Gen. 4.24. It seem'd indeed that the Authority of Adam, their common Father, together with that of the Patriarchs, might have been suffi∣cient to contain Men within the Bounds of their Duty, as well as the near Relation and Alliance that was between them. But this Paternal Authority, having by the space of fifteen Ages been found incapabe to restrain the licentiousness of Men, and too weak to put a stop to their Debaucheries and Murthers, which at last drew down the Deluge upon them; we find that God afterwards instituted Magistracy, as a stronger Curb, to stop the impetuosity of Mens exorbitant Passions. Moreover, Men being obliged to separate them∣selves from one another, in order to their peopling of the whole Earth, consequently could not observe the same Prin∣ciples of Communion which linked them together under the Patriarchs; wherefore it was Natural to substitute to that Pa∣triarchal Authority, a Government more accommodated to the state of Men in their different and dispersed Habitations. Wherefore, because Men had learnt from the Example of those who were drowned by the Flood, to make small account of the remonstrances of their Parents, as well as of the Divine Denunciations, God thought fit to lay a more strong Curb in their Mouths, and to restrain them, by making temporal Death the Reward of those who would not be contain'd within the Bounds of their Duty by the fear of Eternal
Sufferings, in these words, Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. This being the sense and full import of this Declaration, according as the Jews unanimously agree. Now this granted, it is evident, that since Soveraign Power was instituted by God for a Curb to sin, we must suppose that there be Laws, which serve for a foundation of Society, and for the conservation of which Soveraignty was intro∣duced at first: 'tis to make these Laws inviolable, and by punishments to restrain the unruliness and exhorbitance of the passions of Men, from transgressing of those Laws, that the Sword at first was put into the Soveraign's Hand, and power given him to punish Criminals, or utterly to cut them off, as destructive to Society it self. From these two Principles, we very naturally deduce a third, viz. That the Character of a Soveraign, consequently requires, That he who is clothed therewith, be one of the most perfect of the Society, that is one at the greatest distance, from a disposition to violate the Laws: for if he encourages others by his Example to violate them, and if by this means he subvert the foundations on which the So∣ciety subsists, directly crossing the design and aim for which he was made a Soveraign; it is evident to a demonstration, that he possesses the Soveraignty contrary to the intention of God, and the natural end of Society. Nothing is more evident, than what I have here laid down; but it respects only the Society, considered with regard to those of whom it consists: for if we look upon it with respect to those who are strangers, and who may destroy it, by invading it by force of Arms, it appears clearly that the Soveraign, being the defender of Justice at home, finds himself natu∣rally obliged, to protect the Society by Force; so that toge∣ther with Justice, he ought also to be qualified with the Cha∣racter of Valiant, that he may oppose himself, with Suc∣cess, to all Enemies from abroad, and hinder them from de∣stroying the Society. And lastly, the Character of Wse is particularly required in a Soveraign, for neither Justice, nor Valour, are of any great use, as log as they are separate from Wisdom and Prudence. Wisdom is useful in Peace, and no less in time of War, is necessary with respect to Subjects as well as
Enemies; she shines forth in Treaties, as well as Ruptures; she is of use in the prosecuting of injuries, as well as in the choice of means to obtain reparation; she finds out Ex∣pedients, against the greatest difficulties; and, in a word, we may say that without her, the Political Government is as a Body without a Soul, and a Ship without a Pilot, or Helm, which is abandoned to the Winds to be tossed at pleasure, and which at last perisheth infallibly by dashing it self against the first Rock it meets with. If we attentively heed what hath been here advanced, we shall find that this has served as a common Principle, to all the different forms of Government, that have at any time obtained amongst Men. Indeed it is not easie to de∣termine, what form of Government God instituted by that Law, mentioned in the Ninth of Genesis, whether he by those words determined the Authority to one or more Ma∣gistrates; because the word Man, is often taken collectively, to express many; so that the words are too general to de∣cide this question: they conclude only that Murther is to be punished with Death. From whence we infer that the Magi∣strate has power to punish Murtherers and other Criminals, that destroy the Laws, whereby the Society subsists. It is manifest therefore that by reason and experience Men came to prefer one kind of Government before another, and variously to divide the Authority amongst many, according to the different acts to which it ought to be extended. It seems that force was at first only made use of as a refuge for the weak, either to destroy the wild Beasts, that devoured their Cattle, and some times Men too; or to put a stop to the injustice of those, whose bodily strength in∣spired them with designs to rob the weaker sort of their possessions. And it is very probable, that forasmuch, as soon after, they observed that the force which protected them, might as well oppress the Society, for whose de∣fence and protection it was armed, they found that Ma∣gistracy could not be lookt upon as an advantage, if it were not committed to the wise conduct of the most an∣tient of the Society, who seem to have been the Judges, Magistrates and Counsellors of State, among all Govern∣ments, that were ever instituted with any prudence. Those
who considered the great parts that are necessary for the governing of a Society, preferred the way of choosing their Governours. Those who had experienced the ill ef∣fects of corrupt Elections by Bribes or other ways, fol∣lowed the way of taking for their Governours, the Chil∣dren of those who had ruled them with Prudence. They who observed that one person is rarely capable of resist∣ing and moderating so many different passions as may trouble a Society, thought good to divide the command amongst many. Those who took notice that this equality produced dissensions amongst many Governors, placed the power in one person only. Those that were aware that a single person might overturn the Laws, and set up his will as the only rule of his conduct, found it necessary to preserve to the People their share in the Government. In a word, every Nation chose that way they thought most sure and proper to obtain the true ends of an happy Go∣vernment in order to secure and preserve the Society. What I have said in general, concerning the original of Soveraignty or Magistracy amongst Men, shews that it can∣not be denied, but that the institution thereof is Divine, though God did not think fit to determine it to any cer∣tain form of Magistracy, whether of Monarchy, Aristo∣crasie or Democrasie, but left it to the Peoples free choice, to pitch upon that form they should judge most convenient for them. But to procure a farther light to this matter, we must consider the Judgment of Philosophers and Divines con∣cerning this point.
CHAP. II. The different Opinions of Philosophers and Divines concerning this matter. IT may be said, That there are three Opinions concerning the original of Soveraign Magistracy. Cicero, in his Books of the Commonwealth, was of Opinion, as appears from the definition he sets down, That Governments were at first formed by an effect of pure necessity,St. August. de civit. D. which forced the weaker to seek for aid and succour, from those that were stronger, to secure themselves from oppression. This was also the Opinion of the famous Archbishop of Burgos in the Council of Basil. Fascic. Fol. 7. The Body of Christian Divines maintains that the Au∣thority of the Sword was instituted by God, as may be seen Gen. 9. And it appears that whereas before the De∣luge the Patriarchs were the only Masters of their Fami∣lies, which gave occasion to abundance of Crimes, Justice not being executed with vigour enough, to put a stop to the course of exorbitances: as long as it was in the hands of a common Father, God was pleased to enact a Law whereby the Sword should no longer be bound up to each head of a Family, but committed to one who should be particularly charged therewith by the common consent of the Society. The Third Opinion is that of some new Divines, and other flatterers of the unbridled power of Princes, who maintain that Kings derive their Authority immediately from God, and not mediately from the consent of the People. Thus Peter de Marca declares himself on this point, de concord. lib. 2. c. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. following therein the senti∣ments of Victoria and Duval, the one a Spaniard and the other a Frenchman. We need not wonder, if Cicero was mistaken in the de∣ciding of this matter, as being destitute of that light, which Moses furnisheth Divines with. He determines this
point only as a natural Philosopher. However we must observe that Cicero himself, and the most wise amongst the Heathens, have sufficiently given to understand, that they conceived Magistracy, without which it is impossible for a Society to subsist, to be of Divine Original, as well as all other good and profitable institutions for the benefit of Mankind. But not to insist upon this, forasmuch as all Divines agree that the original of Magistracy is from God, our business only is, to enquire, which is the truer Opi∣nion, theirs who acknowledging the Divine institution of Magistracy, maintain that this Authority is communicated to the Powers and Magistrates by the People, or of those who pretend that God immediately communicates the same to the Magistrates that are invested therewith. In order to the resolving of which, before we pass any further, we are to observe, 1st. That the Body of Divines who defend the former of these Opinions, do agree, That the Authority of Magistrates is not to be accounted less Divine, because it does not immediately come down from God. They own these Two things. 1st. That God has ordered there should be Sovereign Magistrates to regulate and govern Societies. 2ly. That God having divested private Persons of the right of doing themselves Justice, in case of Offences given them, has ordained that the Magistrates should have the Sword put into their Hands, by Capital and other Punishments, to stop the violence of those who disturb the Peace of the Society, and violate the Rules of Justice. And in this respect they acknowledge Magistracy, , a divine Settlement and Institution. Secondly, We are to observe, That when on the other hand they maintain, That the Power of the Magistrates is conferred by consent of the People; in which respect they pretend, That St. Peter calls them , that doth not in the least diminish the Authority of this Divine In∣stitution of Magistrates, which they refer solely and imme∣diately to God. Thirdly, That whatsoever Notion we may frame of the Power of Magistrates, whether we suppose it conferr'd upon
them immediately by God, as M. de Marca pretends; or whether it be only mediately derived to them from God, by the intervening consent of the People, the thing is still the same; because it is evident, that this Power is not communi∣cated to them, but for the subsistence of the Society, the Pre∣servation whereof is the natural End of Government and Sovereignty. Fourthly, That they do not oppose this Notion of the im∣mediate Collation of the Sovereign Power by God, save only that they might express themselves more exactly, and distin∣guish the ordinary Governments of the World from the King∣dom of Israel. For the same Divines generally own, That the Institution of the Royal Power in Israel, was an immediate Act of God; but withal maintain, That the same cannot be said of other Sovereigns. This laid down, I say, That nothing can be imagined more vain, than the second of these Opinions; and it is enough only to understand the terms which those Divines make use of to express their Sentiment, concerning the Original of Sovereign Magistrates in every State, and to consider the Proofs they alledge, to evidence the falseness of it; which Opinion ac∣cordingly I shall refute in the following Third Chapter.
CHAP. III. That Sovereigns do not receive their Power imme∣diately from God. I Say then, That it is false, That Sovereigns receive their Power immediately from God. This is a Truth may be easily made out. Indeed, though the Power of Magistrates, of what sort soever they be, be of Divine Institution; which of all the present Sovereign Powers, whether Monarchs, Com∣monwealths, or any other Form of State, was instituted im∣mediately by God? And who are the Persons invested therewith, whom God has immediately called to that sort of Power? All States are formed either by Conquest, or by Consent of the People; which intervenes in the Election at the first Founding of a State, and which is re∣newed in every subsequent Election of Princes, or which is perpetuated in successive Kingdoms. Was there any thing like to this in the advancement of David to the Royal Dig∣nity? Secondly, Is it not visible, that in order to an immediate Establishment from God, there is required an express Reve∣lation, such as may be equivalent, at least to a publick de∣claration of his Will, in favour of him whom he will set on the Throne? Thus things were carried with respect both to Saul and David; and who will affirm there is any King now in the World that has attain'd the Regal Power after this manner? If there be any, let them acquaint us with his Name, and the manner of God's revealing himself to the People, to make them know, that he immediately made choice of such a Person to supply that Place. Thirdly, Who sees not, that the whole Discourse of these Divines is nothing but a continual Equivocation? An Office is instituted immediately by God; wherefore all that are called by ordinary ways and methods, are immediately esta∣blished in it by God. I had as lief they should tell me, That because Marriage derives its first institution and begin∣ning
from God in the Person of Adam and Eve, whom God joyned to Adam, That therefore all Marriages are made im∣mediately by God, and that he is the immediate Author of them. The one is every whit as reasonable as the other, and in the mean time the second is absolutely false. The Author of Ecclesiasticus saith, Chap. 7.16. That the Art of Tilling the Ground was created by God: Doth it follow from thence, that God hath immediately setled such and such a one in the Calling of Husbandry. Fourthly, If all Sovereign Magistrates desire their Institu∣tion immediately from God, how is it that we find so great a diversity in the Form of these Sovereign Governments. In some States we find Kings, in others Aristocrasies or De∣mocrasies: Doth not this variety make it evident, that though God indeed have instituted Magistracy in general, yet he hath left it to the People to determin the Form of it, according to their Need, their Inclinations, and the Circum∣stances wherein they find themselves. Fifthly, Doth it not most evidently appear, That if the Person were immediately instituted by God, it would be great folly for any Society to trouble themselves about enact∣ing Laws for a Free Election at every Change, or to establish it by way of Succession in Monarchies? If God establisheth all Sovereign Magistrates immediately, to what purpose are all those Rules and Limitations, which by their variety afford us a sufficient demonstration, that this Institu∣tion is not an immediate effect of the Deity. The Philosophers were fully of this Opinion, as we may see in the Books of Aristotle's Policy; where he makes out, That the cause of the various sorts of Governments that are in the World, is nothing else but the different Judgments of the People, concerning the several sorts and manners of Government: Some of which have chosen one Form, to avoid the Inconveniencies they foresaw and apprehended from another; and others again being induced to embrace that Form, by the advantages they discerned in it, rather than another. This is a matter we ought to mind very carefully, that we may not put a ridiculous sense upon some Ex∣pressions of the Antients when they speak of Magistracy, as founded in the Law of Nature.
The Lawyers agree with the Philosophers in this Point. Ʋlpian and Justinian both of them tell us, That the People of Rome bestowed upon the Emperor Augustus, by the Royal Law, all the Right and Empire by which they were sub∣jected unto that Emperor, lib. 1. ff de Constit. Princip. Theo∣philus explains what properly a Prince is, in these terms; A Prince (saith he) is a Person who has received from the People the Power of Commanding and Ruling over them, §. 6. de Jure Natur. & Gent. The Canonists of the Church of Rome are no less express in this Matter, than the Philosophers and Lawyers. Car∣dinal Bertrandi lays it down for his Foundation, in his Trea∣tise of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, Bibliotheca Patrum, which was copied by an English Monk, and is found among the Manuscripts. The Divines of that Communion make a Principle of it, as appears by the Discourse of the Archbishop of Burgos, which I have before cited. And Soto saith, lib. 4. de Just. & Jure, Regalem potestatem, Populi naturali lumine erexerunt, That the People, by the Light of Nature established Kingly Power M. de Marca owns, That the Canonists of his School do not favour his Opinion; but withal maintains, That they have fallen upon the Opinion contrary to his, that they might make a greater difference between the Civil and Ec∣clesiastical Power, than there is indeed; and to depress the Civil Power below the Ecclesiastical. He might also have alledged against the Divines of his School, That in this Question they relied too much on the Judgment of Aristotle, who was their St. Paul, until the times of the Reformation. However, that which M. de Marca declares as his Judgment concerning this Matter, is too generally spoken: For we see Marsilius of Padoua following the same Principles, in his Defensorium Pacis, though he undertook the Defence of the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, against the Enterprises of the Pope; but however he pretends, That the Scripture and Antiquity furnish us with quite other Notions about this Matter; which we shall next make it our business to enquire into.
CHAP. IV. An Examination of the Arguments which are alledged for the Proof of this Opinion. HE alledges only two places of Scripture, the one is that of St. Paul, Rom. 13. and the other is taken from the Sixth Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, which is an Apocryphal Book; but neither the one nor the other proves the thing he pretends. It appears by the former of these Texts, That the Apostle endeavours to oppose the Opinion of those among the Jews, who pretended, That because the Monarchies or States of the Heathens had not an immediate Institu∣tion from God, as that of Israel, to which God had in a particular manner subjected the Jews, that therefore they were not obliged to submit themselves to the Authority of Heathen Magistrates. Wherefore he points them from that immediate Institution made in favour of the Kings of Judea, to that common and more ancient Institution of Magistracy among the Posterity of Noah, which Moses sets down, Gen. 9. as being sufficient to make the Authority of Magistrates respected, whatsoever Nation or Religion they might be of; whether they deriv'd their Power from the Consent of the People, or whether they had obtained it, by Rob∣bing the lawful Sovereigns of their Authority, as the Ro∣mans had done, with respect to the Kings of Judea. In a word, the Apostle in that place intends nothing else but to authorize the Maxim of the Essenians, as it is re∣lated by Josephus, lib. 2. de Bello Jud. cap. 12. Fidem omnibus servare, maxime verò principibus, , to be faithful and true to all Men, but more especially to Princes; because the Sovereign Command never befel any one without the Divine Providence. These Essenians maintained against the Sect of the Pharisees, that
they might lawfully submit themselves to a Heathen Con∣queror, without always fostering a Spirit of Rebellion against him, and without disputing or questioning his Au∣thority, under pretext that the Jewish Government had been established immediately by God. But doth this Text of St. Paul in the least prove, that every Pagan Prince was immediately set upon the Throne by God? The Passage quoted from the Sixth Chapter of the Wis∣dom of Solomon, is nothing at all to their purpose; because the Author of that Book addresses himself, in all appearance, to the Kings of Judea, who, as all agree, deriv'd their Accession to the Throne immediately from God; so that it might well be said to them, Power is given you of the Lord, and Sovereignty from the Highest. True it is, That Jesus Christ expresseth himself in words much to the same purpose, John 19. speaking to Pilate the Governor of Judea; Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. But it is visible that he speaks this only with respect to the Order of the Divine Providence, which had suffered the Throne of Judea to be overthrown by the Romans; so that instead of her Natural Magistrates, she was now subject to Strangers. The Empire of Nimrod was founded in the same manner with that of the Romans, and yet I scarce think any Man will pre∣tend, that God committed the Sovereign Power to him, in the same manner that he did vouchsafe it to David. True it is, That the Scripture gives Cyrus the Kng of Persia the Title of the Lord's Anointed; which seems to import, as if God had in an immediate manner raised him to the Throne like David: But this is no due consequence; for the Notion of the Lord's Anointed, signifies only his particular Destination of him, to be the Instrument of the Jews deliverance from their Captivity. I freely own, That a Divine Providence may ordinarily be observed in the Elevation of Kings; and that the same may be taken notice of, as intervening in a more especial manner, in the raising of those Kings whom God designs to make use of for the good of his Church, which is linked with the Civil Society: But I do not conceive that from thence it will follow, either that the acts of ordinary Providence,
manifesting themselves upon occasions, are sufficient to make an immediate divine Institution of Princes, no more than other Events, wherein Providence intervenes, can properly be called immediate Effects of the Deity; nor that the ex∣traordinary Acts of Divine Providence, as were those that respected Cyrus, ought to be alledged as an Argument in common Events. The words we find in the Eighth Chapter of the Proverbs, are also commonly quoted to this purpose, By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; but it is manifest, that this is said with regard to Wisdom, of which he was speak∣ing before, and which displays it self in the management of Humane Affairs, without intimating any immediate Act of the Deity. Moreover we are carefully to observe, That though the Scriptures attribute to God the Institution of Magistrates, in which respect also they call them a Divine Institution, and ascribe to God the Exaltation of Princes in particular; yet they never express themselves but in a very general manner, as when they set forth to us the part God bears in all Events. Thus God is said to overturn Thrones, in like manner as he is said to erect them; he is said to settle Tyrants, as well as the most lawful Kings: All which Expressions relating to his Providence, which does or per∣mits things by the intervening ministry of Second Causes, can have no influence upon the Judgments we are to make concerning the Authority of Princes, with regard to their Divine institution. M. de Marca makes use of some Passages out of the Fathers, to confirm his Opinion. But, First, they infer nothing but what we are ready to grant, viz. That God having or∣dained Magistracy, those who are invested therewith, ought to be considered, as the Ministers of God; which is sufficient for a foundation of their Authority, without any necessity of supposing, that God immediately endows every King with the Royal Power, wherewith he is invested. This is the Opinion of Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, ad Au∣tol. Lib. 1. where he saith, That the Prince has received in some sort from God the administration of the Govern∣ment () which expression doth visibly respect a
mediate institution, but doth not at all express an im∣mediate institution, as M. de Marca conceives. Se∣condly, They distinctly lay down, That Magistracy is a humane institution, as St. Peter qualifies it, because all Magi∣strates, and Kings themselves are ordained, and established by Men; as Oecumenius explains that place, 1 Pet. 1.2. St. Irenaeus says no more, lib. 5. contr. Haer. C. 24. He refutes the Opinion of the Gnosticks, who would have Ma∣gistrates to be an institution of the Devil, and he makes it appear, that both the Old and New Testament con∣firm, That Magistrates are one of the means which Provi∣dence has judged necessary to put a stop to the Cur∣rent of Wickedness and Crimes, which had deluged the Heathen World, whom the fear of God alone was not able to keep within the bounds of Justice. To which purpose he saith, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu & Reges instituuntur; by whose command Men are born, by his command Kings are ordained. Neither doth Epiphanius advance any thing more than this. Haeresi 40. contra Archontic. Tertullian expresseth himself to the same purpose, in his Apologet. cap. 30. Inde est Imperator, unde & homo antequam Imperator; inde potestas illi, unde Spiritus. Thence is the Emperor, from whence Man is before he was Emperor, thence he has his power from whence he has his Breath. St. Chrysostom exactly follows their footsteps, as well as St. Isidore Bishop of Pelusium, Lib. 2. Epist. 206. Indeed how could St. Chrysostom teach any other Doctrine, who in his 23. Hom. upon the Epistle to the Rom. plainly asserts, That Jesus Christ never gave his Laws with design to overturn the received forms of Government, . and expresly denies that those words in the 13. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans; for there is no power but what is of God, must be understood con∣cerning Government in general, and not of those who are invested therewith. Quid dicis, Omnis ergo Princeps à Deo constitutus est? Istud, inquit, non dico. Neque enim de quovis Principe sermo mihi nunc est, sed de ipsa re. Quod enim principatus sunt, quod isti quidem imperant, isti vero subjecti sunt, quod∣que non simpliciter ac temere cuncta feruntur.... divina sa∣pientiae
opus esse dicit. Propterea non dicit, Non enim Prin∣ceps est nisi à Deo, sed de re ipsa disserit dicens; Non enim Potestas est nisi à Deo. What do you say then that every Prince is constituted by God? No I don't say so, for I am not speaking here of every particular Prince, but of the thing it self. For that there are Principalities, that some rule, and others obey, and that all things are not carried rashly and without order; this the Apostle de∣clares to be an effect of the Divine Wisdom. Where∣fore also he does not say, for there is no Prince but who is of God, but, for there is no power but what is of God. St. Augustin de Civitate Dei, Lib. 5. cap. 21. holds forth no other Doctrine. Qui Augusto Imperium dedit, ipse & Neroni, qui Vespasianis, vel Patri vel filio, Suavissimis Imperatoribus, ipse & Domitiano crudelissimo. He that bestow'd the Imperial Dignity upon Augustus, gave it also to Neo, and the same who advanced the Vespasians, Father and Son, most beneficent Em∣perours, exalted also the most cruel Domitian. All which ex∣pressions do evidently refer to nothing else, but the order established by the Divine Providence, without, in the least, deciding the question in Controversie. Neither do I find that the Bishops of France entertain'd any different Opinions concerning this matter, when they represented to Lewis the good, the greatness and importance of his Dignity, and the necessity that lay upon him, to afford Justice to all his Subjects, because he owed his Soveraign Dignity to God himself and his Predecessors. Quapropter, say they, quisquis caeteris mortalibus, temporaliter imperat, non ab hominibus, sed à Deo, commissum sibi regnum credat. Multi namque munere Divino, multi etiam Dei permissa regnant. Wherefore whosoever temporally rules over other Men, ought to think his Kingdom committed to him, not by Men but by God. For many do reign by a Divine Grant, and many only by Divine Permission. Which words were used by them, only as a motive, to oblige that Emperour, not to look upon the Royal Dignity as an Inheritance or Possession, but as a charge or office instituted by God, of the ad∣ministration whereof he was to give an account to God. Concil. Paris. Lib. 2. cap. 5. Anno 829. The Fathers also of the Council of Trosly, simply declare, That the Royal
Dignity was instituted by God, when the Apostle said, Be subject to the King as chief, which would be a strange Con∣clusion, if he had not had an eye to the institution of the Office, and not to the immediate institution or consecration of the Person. I know it has been customary for Emperors and Kings, to look upon themselves as chosen of God, Crowned of God, &c. which hath given occasion to some Painters and Gravers to represent them, as receiving their Crowns from Heaven. I am not ignorant also that the Emperour Lewis, of Bavaria, maintains, That the Imperial Power and Au∣thority, is immediately from God, and not from the Pope; but his first expression respects only the order of Providence, and the second the Pope's pretensions, who maintained, That Emperors held the Empire as a Fief, whereof the Pope was the Lord Paramount. After all, though these Gentlemen, who attribute to every Soveraign Magistrate and to every King, the power which they enjoy, as immediately conferred upon them by God, think by this means to lay a more sure foundation for the veneration which the People owe to the Royal Power, it is very evident that they advance little by this their Opinion, if it be true, that this power, though we should suppose it granted immediately by God, must be limited by certain Laws, and that the People have right to impose them upon them, when they elevate them to that Dignity.
CHAP. V. Whether the Power of Soveraigns be absolute and unlimited. IT is commonly conceived that there are two sorts of Government, the one Absolute, and the other Li∣mited: Absolute Government is supposed to be that, where∣in the Governor doth so absolutely enjoy all the Autho∣rity necessary for the subsistence of the Society, that none share with him in it, so that he exerciseth it according to his good pleasure. In such a Government as this, the Prince can make Laws, and again revoke, or dispence with them. He can settle inferiour Magistrates, and discharge or remove them again at pleasure, and repeal their Acts or Decrees. He can declare War to the Ene∣mies of the State, and make Peace with them. He can save the Lives of Criminals, or take them away: all which he may do without any one having any right to contra∣dict or oppose him. Neither is there any thing contrary to the nature of Government, in this Absolute Power: for since it is necessary to make Laws for the good of the State, according as there is need, to nominate Magi∣strates, and to remove them; to examine the Judgments of in∣feriour Courts, and repeal them, if they be unjust: it is a thing indifferent to the State, by whom these things are done, so they be but done in such a manner, as to answer the natural end of Government, which is the good of the Society. But we must take heed of conceiving any such Absolute Power inherent in any Sovereigns whatsoever, whereby they may lawfully frustrate and overthrow the ends of Govern∣ment. For how absolute so ever a Pince may be conceived to be, yet can he not be so in all respects: for first he is subject to the Divine Laws, as well as the meanest of his Subjects. Secondly, He is subject to the Laws that are
founded on the Right of Nations. Thirdly, He is obnoxi∣ous to the fundamental Laws of the State, which he governs. Fourthly, he lies under an obligation of follow∣ing the Laws of the Government, committed to his charge, so far as to endeavour to obtain the ends thereof, by pro∣curing the happiness of the Society. But if any Man conceives a Government absolute in all re∣spects, and whereof the Sovereigns are not bouht up by the four Tyes abovesaid, he imagines an illegal and monstrous Government; neither can there be any such, but the Ty∣rannical, which is no Government at all. For seeing that Tyranny is diametrically opposite to the natural end and aim of Government, I do not see how it can be ranked with lawful Governments, there being as much absurdity in supposing it such, as to suppose an unjust and impossible Law, to be a good and true Law, because published by one, who has the Authority to do it. I cannot find that ever there was any Empire or Authority Absolute in all respects, as is pretended. Those very So∣veraigns which are conceived to be resolute to this degree, as those of the Medes and Persians, had notwithstanding some irrevocable and inviolable Laws, which were funda∣mental to that State; as appears from the Book of Daniel, Aristotle seems to speak of these ss of Government. Polit. Lib. 3. 210. where he distiishes them from a Tyrannical Government, forasmuch as they were establish∣ed upon some fundamental Laws or Customes. And I ve∣ry much question, whether any such example can be pro∣duced, no not in the Empire of the Turks, which has been always lookt upon as the most Absolute and Despo∣tical Government, where the Soverigns have attributed to themselves so vast and unbounded a Power, and actually enjoy'd the same. I know it is commonly apprehended, that Conquerors, such as Nimrod, and many others, did in so absolute a manner possess themselves of all the Rights of Sovereignty, that there was nothing left to their Subjcts of what Rank or Order soever. But to declare my sense of this matter, we are to observe, First, That Conquerors had no other aim, but to rob other Sovereigns of their Power, without changing
any thing in the Government of the State they had in∣vaded. Secondly, That those Invasions having no other foundation, but a Conquest by force of Arms and Violence, contrary to the Law of Nature, which made Seneca call this sort of Conquerors Magnos & furiosos Latrones, great and furious Robbers; these Conquerors easily perceived, it was necessary for them, to trim and rectifie this their unjust Power, if they would have their Authority to be lasting: whereupon they accordingly took care to moderate it, by Conventions and Laws, to the Justice of which the People gave their consent. Thirdly, That these Conventions and these Laws, were to speak truly and properly, the lawful Title of all the Authority their Subjects owned in them. Fourthly, That this consent of the Subjects, always supposeth, that the ends of Government be preserved, except we should per∣swade our selves, that there be Subjects Fools enough to con∣sent to a Government, whose aim should not be levelled at their Advantage and Prosperity. 'Tis horribly to delude ones self, to found the Idea of an Absolute Government in all respects, amongst Men, upon a notion of the absolute Empire God has over all his Creatures: for is it not evident that this Divine Empire, supposeth an immoveable Justice, and infinite wisdom, and a most tender love for his Creatures, which are the Es∣sential Attributes of God, and which cannot be found in any mortal Man? But some, it may be, will tell me, That I contradict the Stile of Holy Scripture, in denying that Tyrants can lawfully enjoy so absolute a Power, when the Prophets tell us, concerning some Kings, That God gave them such absolute Power: as we find it ex∣prest in particular concerning Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.18, 19. But the answer to this Objection is obvious, First, That which ought to be referred to God's Permission only, is not to be attributed to a concession of the Deity, which latter is only sufficient to establish a lawful Right; for otherwise, we must say, That God had given a just right to the false Prophets to deceive Ahab, by their lying Ora∣cles. If this be not the case, let any Man answer me these Two Questions, First, Whether Nebuchadnezzar sin∣ned, in using this absolute Power, which he had, without
any consent or concurrence of his Subjects, in killing them without cause, and contrary to the Laws of Justice and Equity? Secondly, Whether God could justly punish Ne∣buchadnezzar, as he did, for making use of this Tyrannical Power, which he had suffered him to invade. Nemini injuriam facit qui jure suo utitur. He that makes use of his own Right injures no body, is a Maxim of Law. Secondly, Otherwise we should be fain to suppose, That those, who at any times have raised themselves against Tyrants, had been great Criminals, whereas the Holy Scripture doth set them forth for Heroes, such as Ehud, who have undertaken to rid the World of their unjust op∣pression, by killing them. Possibly it may be further objected to me, That by these assertions I oppose the Doctrine of the Old and New Testa∣ment, which equally command all both Jews and Christi∣ans to submit themselves to the Powers that had conquered them, and particularly to the Power of the Romans, who pretended to be absolute over all their Subjects. But it will be found that there is nothing at all of any contra∣diction between that which I maintain, and what is here objected. The Jews being conquered by Nebuchadnezzar, were become the Slaves of that Monarch, and owed him all manner of obedience, which Bondmen do to him who has saved their Lives, when it was in his power to kill them. And for the rest, the Scripture does not determine, whether the Tyrannical power they attributed to them∣selves, be lawful or no. Sure it is, that an unlawful and Tyrannical Sovereign may rule legally in several respects, in which case, it imports little, to those who are subject to it, contrary to their wills, whether the Power, under which they are, be lawful in all respects or not. Let this therefore be laid down for a certain truth, That every lawful power is necessarily limited by Laws, That these Laws are the foundation of the Government; from which the Sovereigns cannot depart, without over∣turning the Society, for the subsistence of which, the Political Government was at first instituted by God.
But this is not the only kind of limitation, which may be observed in the Powers that govern Societies. As God has not prescribed any sort of Government, in preference to others, the Wisdom of Men have diversly limited the way and constitution thereof. Most People finding by Experi∣ence, That Monarchy, though it have many advantages be∣fore other Governments, is apt to degenerate to Arbitrary Power, thought it fitting that the greatest Lords of the Community, should concur with the King in the exercise of his Authority: others again were of Opinion, That the People ought to have the chiefest share in the Government, forasmuch as the main end of the Government is to make them happy. These different apprehensions of Men, have esta∣blished the several forms of Government, the aim of those, who contrived those different forms, being only to prevent oppression and injustice, which directly cross the end of Government.
CHAP. V. Concerning the Extent of the Power of Sovereigns. WHat I have here set down concerning the Nature of Governments, the most Absolute of which are not unbounded by the Laws of God, by the Laws which con∣stitute the Right of Nations, by the fundamental Laws of the State, and more particularly by Bounds prescribed to the Authority of Sovereigns: sufficiently shews what is the just extent of Sovereign Power, and how far Men are ob∣liged to yield Obedience to it. Indeed, forasmuch as Au∣thority and Obedience are relative terms, which recipro∣cally establish or overthrow one another, it is easie to judge, That Obedience cannot be due to Authority, but in propor∣tion to the extent of the Authority. Paternal Authority, in the manner as God had estab∣lished it under the Law, could not inflict Death upon a Son, but in the presence of the Judges, and upon the hear∣ing of Witnesses. The Authority of a Judge cannot be discharged, but in the due Forms of Judicature, and accord∣ing to the Laws; he cannot punish a Criminal extra∣judiciously, notwithstanding he might have absolute know∣ledge of his Offence. This laid down, and there is nothing more evident, it will be easie to determin, how far the Obedience of Sub∣jects is engaged in the various sorts of Government under which they resort.
As to those Governments or Powers, which have no other Law but their own Will, whether at first they were raised by way of Conquest, which seems to reduce Subjects to the con∣dition of Slaves; or whether from lawful Governments they have by degrees degenerated into Tyranny by the In∣justice of Sovereigns, we ought naturally to distinguish between the use these Powers make of their Authority; and their abusing of it, by rendring their Authority unlaw∣ful, and extending it beyond its just limits. The Captain of a company of High-way-men, that is a Father, may exact of his Son the Obedience which a Child owes his Father; but his quality of Captain of High-way-men, does not give him any right to command his Son to rob or mur∣ther: And so far is the Son from being obliged to obey such kind of Commands, that he becomes Criminal by obey∣ing them. It is evident then, That in these sorts of Governments, as long as the Prince enacts Laws conformable to the fundamental Laws of the State, and that he behaves him∣self as a Father of his Country, there lies a necessity upon the People of obeying him; and this necessity is founded upon their Relation to the Authority, which is just and legal, with respect to its Function and Exercise. But we must judge otherwise, when the Question is of unjust Laws which the Power enacts for the Oppression of his Subjects: For then there seems no further necessity of obeying, to lye upon the Subjects, than what results from a desire of avoiding their own destruction, which depends on the Pleasure of the Power that oppres∣seth them, which cannot settle a lawful Right on Ty∣rants, other than such as a Master may have over his Slave or Bondman, according to the Laws of Servi∣tude. And as to Governments which are bounded by fun∣damental Laws, it is apparent, That the Powers having no Authority at all, but according to the Laws whereby they
are established, their Subjects are set free from obeying them, as soon as they transgress those Laws. If a King, who has no Power to make Laws, will of his alone Authority under∣take to publish any, without the concurrence of those who share with him in the Legislative Power, none of his Sub∣jects are obliged to obey him. If a King, who has no right to lay any Taxes on his People, undertake to charge them with Impositions, the People are not obliged to pay ought of them. If the King, who has no Power to declare War, doth do it without consent of the State, the People are not obliged to go to War. Nothing is more visible, than that Obedience may yet more justly be refused, when Sovereigns undertake to over∣throw the State, in dispensing with all the Laws, and in attempting to rule by an Arbitrary Power: whereas the fun∣damental Laws of the State, which are the Bond of the So∣ciety, do only allow them a limited Power. Hitherto our New Divines agree with others, That Subjects are dispensed with from giving Obedience to an Illegal Power. But forasmuch as a State must necessarily perish, when subject to a Power that is resolved to overthrow all; the Question is, What may be expedient and lawful for People to do in this case? There are but Two means imaginable to remedy so urging an Extremity: The one is to resist the Power that abuseth his Authority, thereby to oblige him, for time to come, to keep himself within the Bounds that are set him. The other is to reject him altogether, and to rid them∣selves of him, when there appears no probability of reducing him to the terms of Justice, and to the Rules of his Institu∣tion. 'Tis against these Two Articles our New Divines op∣pose themselves might and main. They conceive on
the one hand, that though the People be not bound to obey unjust Commands, yet they never can have any Right to resist the Sovereign Power; no, not when they make use of Violence, to oblige the People to execute their wicked Designs. This is the Doctrine of Non-resistance or Passive Obedience, which has been so much agitated of late years. And as to the other Article, they maintain the People have yet less right to cast off their Princes, or rid themselves of them, how high soever the Abuses may be they commit, in exceeding the bounds of their Authority, and how Tyrannical or Arbi∣trary soever their Government may be: That Sovereign Pow∣ers depend on none but God, so that the People cannot, with∣out invading the Rights of the Deity, undertake to depose or punish them. These are the Points we are to consider at present. I begin with Non-Rresistance, otherwise called Passive-Obe∣dience.
CHAP. VI. Concerning Non-resistance. THis Doctrine of Non-resistance, seems to me to be founded upon Three Suppositions, which may be easily convinc'd of Falsity. First, These Gentlemen forge to themselves an Idea of Sovereign Powers, and ascribe certain Rights to them, which they afterwards look upon as Essential to Govern∣ment, and consequently as Rights inseparable from Sove∣reignty, whatsoever sort of Sovereignty it may be. Which Essential Rights, according to their account, are these: First, Not to be accountable to any but God. Secondly, To have the whole disposal of the Sword. Thirdly, To be exempt from all Coercive Power whatsoever. Fourthly, Not to be liable to suffer Resistance, on any pretext. Fifth∣ly, to be invested with the Legislative Power. They con∣ceive, that without these Rights a Prince is still but a Subject; and consequently, that they are all Essential to Sovereign Power, and therefore inseparable from it. Upon these Premises they with ease establish this Conclu∣sion, That forasmuch as the Right of not being liable to Resistance, is inseparably annexed to Sovereignty, the People can never of Right resist their Princes on any pretext what∣soever. If we object against this their Scheme, That the Rights they attribute to Sovereignty, are such as cannot agree with a Sovereignty limited by Laws, which allow of Re∣sistance, because there can be no Authority but by Law, and according to Law: Whence it follows, That it is lawful to Resist him who has no Authority.
They suppose in the Second place, That all Limitations whatsoever, do only respect the Exercise of the Sovereign Power, without being able in the least to derogate from the Essentials of Sovereignty; and that after all, these Limitations are only the Effects of the consent of Sovereigns; which pro∣ceeding only from their good will, are revocable, ipso facto, as soon as it pleaseth them so to do. The Third Supposition is this: They pretend that the Holy Scripture holds to us such a Power inherent in Sove∣reigns, as can never be lawfully resisted; and that it ex∣horts People to submit themselves so absolutely to it, that they never undertake to oppose themselves against its unlawful Effects otherwise than by Patience, when they are convinced in Conscience, of the Injustice of the Laws and Commands enjoyned. 'Tis an easie matter to overthrow the First of these Sup∣positions. First, I would fain know who has given these Gentlemen the Power of determining, as they do, what is Essential to Sovereignty. Do they derive these their Notions from Re∣velation, or from Reason, which is common to all Men? If they say they derive the definition they give us of Sove∣reignty from Revelation, they will do well to point us to the places of Scripture where this Notion is set down. If they draw it from Reason, then I cannot but wonder that so many Statesmen and Writers of Civil Matters have fail'd of stumbling on the same Notion; and it seems to me an inextricable thing, that so many Nations should agree to reject what they approve, and to approve what they reject. To say here, That they draw this definition from the Idea of Sovereignty, which loseth its nature when divested of these Characters, shews they are willing either to abuse themselves or others by a pitiful Equivocation. The word Sovereign imports a relation to Inferiors; and as the relation has a certain foundation, so it is likewise evident, that it hath its bounds set proportionable to its foundation.
Where there is no Authority, neither is there any founda∣tion for Obedience: Now there is no Authority but in pro∣portion to the Laws which establish the Authority; wherefore it incontestably follows, There can be no Authority where the Law is so far from allowing any, that it opposes it. It will never cease to be true, That the Authority is Sove∣reign, though it be not so in all respects. The Consuls of Rome were Sovereign Magistrates, though the People had Power to oppose themselves against their Authority, when they abused the Power they were intrusted with, for the good of the Commonwealth. In France they give their Parliaments the Name of Sovereign Courts, though their Sen∣tence be not always irrevocable. The Second Supposition is only founded upon this Notion, That Conquerors having invaded the Liberty and Privi∣leges of the People, were afterwards so kind, to restore some part thereof to them again by their Concessions; but that these Acts of Grace do not at all divest them of the Right of Acting whenever it shall please them, as if their Power was altogether Unlimited and Arbitrary. This Notion is much the same with that of the Partisans of the Court of Rome, who maintain, That the Liberties of the Gallican Church are only Acts of Grace and Favour granted to that Church; whereas the French pretend, That they are common Rights and Franchises which their Ancestors have constantly main∣tained, according to what P. Pithou declares concerning them. But indeed, to speak truly, this Supposition cannot be admitted with respect to conquered States, at least for the most part. Ordinarily a Conquest is made upon the Power that governs the State; so that the State only changes its Master, the fundamental Laws of the Land receiving no Alteration from this Change. Of this we have an Instance in England, when King William conquered it, who at his Coro∣nation sware to keep the Laws of St. Edward; and his Suc∣cessors were fain to swear the same. Now one of these Laws (c. 15. T. 1. Spelm. p. 622.) imports, That a Prince that abuseth the Power he is intrusted with, does lose the Title of King: From whence it follows, That his Subjects
need not own or obey him, and that consequently it is law∣ful to resist him. To maintain, That a King, whose Power is limited by the fundamental Laws of a State, and which he is invested with upon that condition, when at his Coronation he swears to the People, is indeed obliged to keep the said Oath, for fear of God; but that he is not at all engaged by this his Oath to the People, is rather a piece of Raillery, than Rea∣soning. What, Does not the Oath the People swear to the King oblige them in Allegiance to him? and how can we then suppose that the reciprocal Oath of the King should not as well oblige him to his People? Surely, if we well weigh the case, 'tis impossible but we must discern a palpable falsity in this Opinion of Passive Obedience, in the way these Gentlemen propose it. First, They grant a Right unto Sovereignty which is dia∣metrically opposite to the end of Sovereignty, according to the Divine Destination. For the good of the Society, and its Subsistence, was God's End in insticuting of the Sovereign Power; whereas by their Hypothesis the Sovereignty may become an instrument of the utter ruin of the Society, when∣soever it shall please the Sovereign; his Subjects in the mean time having no means to attain the said End, or being in any condition to hinder their being deprived of it. Secondly, They suppose, That God in allowing a lawful Right to Sovereigns, has subjected the People to a necessity of groaning under an Illegal Right, and which God has never bestowed upon them; and for the Usurpation of which he will condemn those who do arrogate the same to themselves; which is much to the same purpose, as if I should say, That because God has established Judges, he has thereby obliged the People to suffer Robbery, when the Judges shall think fit to turn Robbers. Thirdly, They make the condition of a Civil Society more unhappy, than was the condition of Families in the state of Nature, before Societies were formed. For the liberty of defending one's self is permitted to every one by Nature;
but after the Society is once formed, it would follow, That the whole Society would be obliged, by a Principle of Con∣science, to suffer their Throats to be cut by a Prince of the humour of a Nero or a Caligula. Fourthly, They turn to meer Chymera's and Visions, what∣soever the wisdom of Men have been able to find out to make States happy, by securing them against Tyranny. I speak of Laws and Oaths; the Laws are the bands and cement of the Society, and the foundation, as well as the measure of the Obedience we owe to Princes. The Oaths are the Seal of the Contract, by which the Subjects are obliged to obey them, upon condition that they govern according to Law. But all this is to no purpose, and is of no use to the People, as soon as the Tyrant thinks fit to overturn the Laws, and to mke a Scoff at his Oaths. Forasmuch as the Third Supposition, viz. That the Scri∣pture maintains Non-resistance, with regard to Sovereigns, whether they act according to or against Law, is of greater im∣portance, it will be convenient to examine the same more heedfully; and the rather because Men of Abilities and Learn∣ing have endeavoured strongly to assert it, and to make it pass current with others, and that with all their might.
CHAP. VII. That the Scripture doth not assert the point of Non-resistance. FOrasmuch as the Doctrine of Non-resistance directly thwarts a natural Principle, to wit, that of our own preservation, and that of the Society whereof we are Mem∣bers; we may easily judge, That in case the Scripture does assert it, we must suppose it has done it, with all possible clearness and distinction; but we do not find any such thing. I find but one place in the Old Testament, which can be wrested to this purpose with any probability; 'tis the Description of the behaviour of a King, set down 1 Sam. 8. & 10. where the vulgar Translation interprets Mispath, by the Word Right, hoc est Jus Regis. But I am astonished how any could be mistaken in this case. For First, It ap∣pears that God in that place gives us the Description of a Tyrant, and not of a King: for indeed we find nothing like to it in the Description he gives us of a King by Moses, Deut. 17. Which appears to be so, because Samuel held forth this Looking-glass to them, to make them quit their demand of having a King set over them, as the rest of the Nations about them. Secondly, It is apparent that what he saith of their crying to the Lord, when oppres∣sed by their King, would have been most ridiculous, sup∣posing the King to have these Rights from God, and by his Concession. When Moses tells the Jews, That they should cry unto the Lord, when they should be oppressed by their Neighbours, waging War against them, because of their forsaking of the Lord; Does he not plainly suppose, That
they would do this to obtain his Protection against the injustice of those Tyrants? And can any one be supposed Fool enough to imagine, that according to God's Inten∣tion it was unlawful for the Israelites to defend themselves against the Moabites, Philistims and other Nations that op∣pressed them. Thirdly, It is evident that this supposed, God could not in Justice punish a Tyrant; or if he did, it would be for making use of a Right, himself had con∣ferred upon him. This reason made R. Juda to oppose R. Jose, as Kimki observes upon this Text. The same is also acknowledged by the wisest of Divines. Marchat in horte Pastorum, Lib. 3. Tr. 4. Lect. 13. explains himself thus, Hoc est jus Regis, idem est ac si diceret, Haec est con∣suetudo Regum: This is the Right of a King, is the same as if he had said, This is the Custom of a King, Jus Re∣gum, Jus non legitimum sed usurpatum. Estius. Samuel speaks there not of a lawful Right of Kings, but of an usurped and arrogated Right, and the same is the Opinion of Cornel. à Lapid. and the Jansenists of Port Royal. After all that has been said, it is natural to observe, That forasmuch as all the several kinds of Government, are no less founded on Divine Authority, than the King∣ly, yet according to this Hypothesis, none of them would be invested with this Right so fatal to Society, but Kings only, which certainly is the worst Argument they could have lighted on, to recommend a Government, which God by his own institution, has constituted a true Ty∣ranny. The second place is that of St. Paul, Rom. 13. where the Apostle forbids resisting of the Powers, for fear we should resist the Ordinance of God. But we are to take notice, that the Apostle in that place does not in the least touch this Question, Whether it be lawful to resist the Poers, when they endeavour to overthrow the Go∣vernment. First, He considers the Powers in the lawful use of their Authority, punishing the Evil, and protecting the Good. Now it is ridiculous to suppose, that the same Priviledge that appertains to him, who makes a lawful use of his
Authority, is every whit as applicable to him who has lost his Title by the abuse of his Power. Rex, saith St. Isidore, à recte agendo dicitur; si enim piè & justè & misericorditer agit, merito Rex appellatur; si his caruerit, non Rex, sed Ty∣rannus est. A King has his name from acting right and well; for if he acts piously, justly and mercifully, he is deserved∣ly called a King; but if he want these qualifications, he is no King, but a Tyrant. Addit. 2. ad capit. Carol Magn. cap. 21. Secondly, This would suppose the Powers that act under Sovereigns to be every whit as irresistible as the Sovereigns themselves; which is an extravagant position in the sense of all Modern Divines. Besides we are to observe that So∣vereigns with their Power, are only the Organical chiefs of the Society; the true head or chief is the Principality with its Members, which are the integral parts of it. This is the same that was acknowledged by Charles Mou∣lin, the Prince of French Lawyers, and the great defender of the Kings of France and their Authority. Upon this account it is that the People have right to prosecute the misdemeanours of the King's Attornies and Ministers, and to punish them; which would be strangely ridiculous, if the State were not perswaded, that all the Power they have, is a power received from the State, thô the King have the Power to elect and raise them to those Employments. It is apparent therefore, That these words of St. Paul, only have an eye to the repugnance the Christian Jews had, to sub∣mit themselves to the Dominion of Heathens. This was the Opinion of the Pharisees, who tempted Jesus Christ, upon occasion of the Tribute which the Emperor levied in Judea; Josephus shews that the Essenians opposed them in this point, and St. Paul here takes the Part of the Essenians. And indeed we do'nt find that the Christians did any way oppose the Decree of the Senate, when they declared Nero, The Enemy of all Mankind. We find also that the Christians of Tertullian's time, and those that followed after, did very well agree with the Sentiment of Hea∣then Authors, about the Justice of the People's or Senate's
resistance against such Tyrants; as is apparent from Lactantius de Montibus Persecutorum, and the like may be seen in Eusebius, Orosius, and in St. Augustine de Civit. Dei. But I can say more than this, viz. That the Scripture is so far from teaching the Doctrine of Non-resistance to an unjust Power, and that violates the Laws, that she repre∣sents to us contrary Examples, with commendation, and sufficiently intimates that we rather sin in not resisting. For don't we see David taking up Arms to defend him∣self against Saul? Don't we see him offering Achish to fight for him against Saul, notwithstanding he was his Father-in Law? Don't we see the Ten Tribes opposing themselves against Rehoboam, upon his declaring for Tyranny and Ar∣bitrary Government? Let us take the pains heedfully to consider the carri∣age of the High-Priest, and his Collegues, when King Ʋzziah presumed to exercise the Functions of the Priest∣hood in offering Incense, and it will plainly appear, they did not think it unlawful to resist Sovereign Authority, when it goes beyond its bounds, 2 Chron. 26.17. Azariah the High-Priest follows him with fourscore Priests, all vali∣ant men, drives him out of the Temple; and after∣wards he is deprived of his Government, and his Son placed on his Throne. It cannot be alledged by these Gentlemen, that this happened to him because of his Leprosie, because they suppose that a Prince cannot be resisted, whatever his behaviour may be, or devested of the right of Governing, for any reason what∣soever. After all, Let us consider how severely God punished Israel, for the sin of Saul, in breaking the Troth plighted to the Gibeonites, and we shall find they were enveloped in the punishment of his sin, because they had not opposed themselves against Saul's breach of Faith. And we make the same Reflection, about the punishment God inflicted on the People, for their consenting to David's numbring of them, which God had forbid. And why so, but because they did not oppose themselves against this enterprize of David, as they ought to have done? We
do not fid the People engaged in the punishment of Da∣vid's Adultery with Bathsheba, because indeed the People had no share in that sin. We see the inhabitants of Libna rejecting Joram, because he had forsaken the Lord his God, 2 Chron. 21.10. Lastly, I desire that those, who talk so much of Pas∣sive Obedience, would be pleased attentively to consider the behaviour of the Maccabees, when they shut the Gates of Modin against the Envoys of Antiochus, and afterwards took up Arms for the defence of their Liberty and Re∣ligion, 1 Mac. 2. As also that of Matthias, who shut the Gates of Modin, in exhorting his Children to con∣tinue in their resistance; and does the same at the hour of his Death, without believing that he was guilty of any sin in taking up Arms; and his Children follow his Exhortations, with an extraordinary Courage and Piety. I own that the Books which have preserved this Histo∣ry are not Canonical, no more than Josephus, who has followed them. But I must observe, First, That it sufficiently appears, what the Opinion of the Jewish Church was in this point; who still retains an Abridgment of these Books, in her Books of Prayers, highly praising the Maccabees for their Virtue and Piety. Secondly, That the Christian Church has allowed the publick reading of them, notwithstanding they were not Canonical, and that with great esteem too; which would have been extravagant and impious, in case the resistance of the Maccabees had been a true Re∣bellion. Thirdly, I have still more to say, viz. That the Apostle St. Paul, in the Eleventh of the Hebrews, makes an Enco∣mium of the Maccabees, and approves the War they un∣dertook. This is that which is acknowledged by the
learned Thorndike in his Right of the Church, Page 306. by St. Chrysostome Hom. 27. in Epist. ad Hebr. and by Hay∣mon Bishop of Halbarstad, as also by Menochius and Estius in their Commentaries. Fourthly, That Lucifer de Cagliari in his Book, De non parcendo in Deum delinquentibus (a Book approved by St Atha∣nasius, who calls this Lucifer a New Elias, Page 1068.) openly sets down, not only that he believed it was lawful to resist Kings, under the Old Testament, but also to put them to Death, in case of Idolatry, which he main∣tains the Arrians were guilty of. Si veteris Testamenti tem∣poribus vixisset (Constantius Imperator) gladio potuisset extingui, & defuncti ossa igne absumpta fuissent. If Con∣stantius the Emperour had lived in the times of the Old Testament, he might have been killed with the Sword, or at least his Bones after his Death would have been burnt.
CHAP. VIII. Whether the States can deprive Sovereigns of their Authority when they abuse it. THEY who maintain it is not in the Power of the Subject, justly to resist the Authority that is once established, though it abuse the Power committed to it. believe also consequently, That it is not lawful for a State to reject their Sovereign, nor to deprive him of his Authority, though he make use of it, to over∣throw the Government: but forasmuch as the former Opinion is wholly contrary to all good Sense, and Justice; the lesser cannot be less so. I own it is un∣just to deprive a Sovereign of the Power he enjoys, as long as he useth it lawfully: and in this regard it is, we must not attempt any thing against the Au∣thority of Kings, or other Sovereign Magistrates. I acknowledge also that the People may not rise up against their Superiors, for the first Fault they com∣mit, in matter of Government, Kings being no more infallible than other Men; we cannot with justice ex∣pect from them, that they should commit no faults at all in their managing of the Government. It is also evident enough that the People must not oppose themselves against every thing that seems to have some air of severity or hard usage in the Government; as St. Paul also orders Servants to suffer patiently the hard usage of a too severe Master. Good sense alone is sufficient to inform People, That they must not expose the publick Tranquillity to danger, for some severity,
or for some interest which respects only some particular persons. And indeed with this respect we may say that private persons are obliged to sacrifice their particular interest, to the publick Good and Peace. But there is a vast difference between a King, that governs justly, or that falls into some error, which he is willing to retract and amend upon a remonstrance from his Sub∣jects; and a Tyrant who overturns the Laws of the State, and the end of the Government designedly and of deliberate purpose. It would be a strange delu∣sion for us to attribute to a Tyrant the Priviledges of a King; or to suppose, as otherwise we must, That there is no means to distinguish them; both which Extreams are equally ridiculous. For, First, All wise Men that ever were, have declared, That it is easie to know the difference between a King and a Tyrant. Aristotle gives us an exact Idea of a Ty∣rant, Polit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Pol. 6. Hist. lib. 5. gives us the Character of a Tyrant, in opposition to that of a King. Synesius also gives us a very lively Portraiture of one de Reigno. Isidorus gives us this description of Tyrants, Origin, lib. 9. cap. 3. Jam postea in usum accidit Ty∣rannos vocari pessimos atque improbos Reges luxuriosae Do∣minationis cupiditatem, & crudelissimam Dominationem in Po∣pulis exercentes; Now it is become customary to call bad and wicked Kings Tyrants, who are ambitious of Arbitrary Power, and oppress their Subjects by a most cruel Dominion. A King (saith the Scholiast of Ari∣stophanes) differs from a Tyrant, in that a King possesseth his Kingdom, certis sumens conditionibus, , receiving it on certain conditions; whereas a Tyrant enters upon it by force and violence. Bartholus, among the Lawyers, gives us a Description of a Ty∣rant, and the Characters wherewith he sets him forth are infinitely different from those that ought to be in every King. Wherefore we cannot imagin, that the difference between a King and a Tyrant should be none at all, or im∣perceptible.
Secondly, Heathens as well as Christians, Papists as well as Protestants equally agree, That it is lawful for a State to rid themselves of a Tyrant, by wholly casting him off. This is a constant Maxim among Heathens, whereof we may see the Proofs in Thucydides, lib.— in Pau∣sanias in Attic. in Polyb. lib 2. in Cicero, lib. 3. de Offic. & Orat. pro Milone, & lib. 2. de Invent. in Seneca, lib. 2. de Benefic. cap. 20. in Seneca the Tragedian, in Hercule Furente; in Pliny, lib. 3. cap. 4. in Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. cap. 10. in Plutarch. in vita B uti, and in Themistius Orat. 14. The Jews have reduced this Maxim into practice, as we may see in the History of the Maccabees, who took up Arms against the Authority of Antiochus Epi∣phanes. As for Christians, we find this Sentiment confirmed by Lucifer de Cagliari, and approved by St. Athanasius. We find that St. AustinAugust. libro contra Adim. c. 17. Nec ta∣men hoc sece∣runt justi ho∣mines, nisi au∣thoritate di∣vina, ne quis arbitretur pas∣sim sibi esse permissum ne∣care quem ve∣lit, aut judicio persequi aut poenis quihussi∣bet afficere. Aliquando au∣tem aperte ponitur in scripturis ipsa divina authoritas, aliquando autem occultatur, ut & manifestis lector instruatur, & exercetur obscuris. Certè inimicum & persecutorem suum, nimis ingratum & nimis infestum Saul Regem accepit David in potestatem ut ei faceret quod vellet, & elegit parere potius quam occidere. Non enim erat jussus occidere, sed neque prohibitus, imo etiam divinitus audierat se impune facere quicquid vellet inimico, & tamen tantam potestatem ad mansuetudinem contulit. Dicatur mihi quem timuit, cum interficere noluit? Nec hominem possumus, dicere timuisse quem acceperat in potestatem, nec Deum qui dederat. Ʋbi ergo nec difficultas fuit occidendi nec timor, dilectio profuit inimico. Ecce David ille bellatur implevit praeceptum Christi quod accepimus, ut diligamus inimicos. maintains against Adimant, cap 17. That though David did not kill Saul, yet he had right to do it. Brontius agrees with this Judg∣ment of St. Austin. And Sozomenus, lib. 6. proves, That if the Roman Soldier, who was suspected to have killed Julian the Apostate, had done it indeed, that he had done it justly and of right. We find the same thing asserted by Englishmen, as by Joannes Sarisbur. Polycrat. de nug. curial, lib. 7. cap. 17, 18, 19; by Matthew Puris ad An. 1233, in the business of the Bishop of Win∣chester.
The Church of Rome has always been of this Opi∣nion, before the Reformation, as appears by the Judge∣ment of Thomas Aquinas 22. qu. 24. art. 2. of Aureolus and all the Schoolmen. In a word, we can affirm, That this was received as an indubitable Opinion, in the Council of Basil, who laid it down as a Principle, whereupon they grounded their right of Deposing the Pope. This has always been the Opinion of Popish Lawyers and Canonists, as we may see in L. decerminus de Sa∣crosanct. Eccles. in Bartholus, in tractatu de Tyrannia: in Paris de Puteo: in Syndic. where he puts the Question, Whether it be lawful to kill a King that is a Tyrant. In Andreas Iserus institut. quae sint Regalia. In Mar. Lau∣dun. in tractatu de Princip. §. 3. in Angelus de Clavasio in Summa voce, Seditio. Quaest. ultima, in St. Antonin. in summa 2. par. tit. 4. c. 8. §. 1. Neither do the Protestants differ from them in this point, as is evident from the Writings of Zuinglius, Luther, Calvin, Paraeus, Bilson, Abbot, &c. Conringius lays it down as an indubitable truth, ad Lampadium de Imp. Rom. 119. And the Papists since the Reformation are of the same judgement, as will appear, if we consult Gregor. de Valentia, Tit. 3. disp. 5. qu. 6. Tolet. in summa l. 5. c. 8. Mariana de Rege Lib. 1. Cap. 3. & 6. Lessius de Jure & Justitia Lib. 2. cap. 9. dub. 4. Molina tr. 3. disp. 6. de Justitia & jure. Eman. sa in Aphor. verbo Tyran∣nus. Suarez in defens. fidei, lib. 6. cap. 4. Neither let any one imagine, That this is only a Doctrine of the Jesuites: We may see the contrary, in those who have written concerning the Deposition of Henry the Third, and who have maintained the Justice of that Deposition. And we may affirm, That among
so many French Authors, who have writ against Baro∣nius and Bellarmine, who attribute the Deposing of Childeric to Pope Zachary, and the placing Pepin on the Throne in his stead, there is scarce any to be found, who whilest they dispute the Pope's Right to Depose Kings, do not acknowledge, That it is a Right inhe∣rent in the States of the Kingdom. And indeed to weigh the thing in it self, it is evident, That when a Prince is become the Enemy of his Peo∣ple, and endeavours to destroy them, he thereby loseth the Right of Governing them. If we take the Sword out of the hand of a Madman, that he may do no hurt with it; who doubts but we have the same right to take away that Power from a Prince, which he makes use of, as if he were a Madman. The History of Portugal fully sets forth to us the Judgement of that Nation, with respect to King Al∣phonsus III. This Prince minding nothing but hunting, his Council represented to him, That if he did not apply himself to the business of State, they would Depose him, and place another on the Thone. What would not they have said, think we, had they seen him Murthering his Subjects in cold Blood, as their last King, whom they banished, because of a like madness. I acknowledge, That the Commonwealth has put its rights into the hands of the Prince, by which she seems to have deprived her self of that Power. But it is a strange and uncouth imagination to suppose, that a State should deprive it self of the right of resisting injustice and violence, which is a right, that Nature communicates to every Creature together with its Being. Besides it is certain, That if a State be limited by Laws, and that the People are the Authors of them; so that they share and exercise the Sovereign Power, in this case they are naturally supposed to possess and hold the
Authority, which is necessary to preserves the Right that belongs to them. Let Men Philosophise as long as they please, they shall never be able to make out, either that a Prince can pretend to a Power of destroying the Society, without any danger of being called to an account for it; or that a People can ever be esteemed to have granted him a Right, tending to their own Ruine and Destruction. But some may say, That the Title of a King, ought to secure a Tyrant against any resistance, he might be liable to from his Subjects; even as the name of a Fa∣ther is a Title that puts Children out of a Condition of setting themselves against him, whose cruelty they have experience of. But besides that, there is a great deal of difference between these two Titles, which is the ground of the difference there is between the Subjects and a King, and the Children and a Father; is it not notorious, and practised every day, that a Father who is become the Enemy of his Children, is deprived of the admi∣nistration of his Goods, and of the disposal of his Children; which practice being grounded on the Law of Nature, doth not in the least violate the order of the Society. Moreover it is certain that a Title, how venerable so ever it may be, cannot secure him that bears it, from the resistance of those that are oppressed by him. Let us conceive a Physician, that has a design to Poison his Patient; the Title of a Physician which has induced his Patient to commit the care of his Health to his trust, can it hinder the Patient from prosecuting him as a Murtherer, in case he resolv'd to take away his Patients Life, instead of contributing to his Cure.
We know that Divines look upon the Government of the Church, as a Government instituted by God, and immediately instituted by him: and yet who knows not, that they have de∣posed the Pope, Bishops and Popish Priests, by withdrawing themselves from their Dominion, and that upon this Ground, that tho there be something lawful in their Ministry, yet they oppose themselves to the end of their Ministry, by reason of the Tyranny which they exercised over their Consciences. But some may imagine, that because God has not expresly given this Right to People to cast off their Kings when turn'd Tyrants, and that he has thought it sufficient to recommend Obedience to them, he has thereby authorized all their unjust Proceedings and Violence, without leaving any means to the People of opposing themselves against their Oppression by de∣posing them. This is a meer Delusion; and to see through it, we need only consider God's Silence concerning the irregular comportment of the High Priest, who notwithstanding was subject to the same Punishments, as were the meanest Levites, in case of his violating the Rules of his Institution, and trans∣gressing the Laws which God had given to all the People of Is∣rael, and to the Priests in particular. Indeed, it was not need∣ful that God should prescribe any such thing to the People, because Nature alone is sufficient to teach People aright they are possessed of, by giving their Consent to the Elevation of the Powers that govern them. In a word, I say, that God had suf∣ficiently intimated to the Israelites, that they could not lawful∣ly be oppressed, in that he had expresly forbid their Kings to heap up vast Riches, or to multiply the Number of their Ca∣valry, which the Kings could not do without violating the Law of God, and without drawing upon themselves the Resistance and Opposition of their Subjects; as Josephus very well infers, who maintains, Lib. 4. cap. 8. That the People ought of Du∣ty to oppose themselves against a Prince, who transgress'd the Bounds God had prescribed to him in the 17th of Deutero∣nomy. But this Point leads us insensibly to consider more particular∣ly, what kind of Royalty it was, that obtained amongst the Jews, which deserves carefully to be examined. This I intend next to consider, and afterwards shall proceed to take a view what was the Law of Royalty among the Romans; and shall
make it appear, that the Kingdoms of Europe, which have been formed out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire, have neither followed the one nor the other of these Models, tho some Di∣vines have asserted it without respect to Truth. CHAP. IX. Concerning Regal Dignity, and the Rights belonging to it amongst the Jews. I Am to make out four Things in order to the clearing of the Character of Royalty, which obtain'd amongst the Jews. The first is, to enquire, whether it was immediately establish∣ed by God? 2ly, To shew, that it was limited according to the Descrip∣tion we have of it in the 17th of Deuteronomy. 3ly, To evince solidly, that all that Samuel declared concern∣ing the Right of Kings, was only a Prophecy about the Tyran∣ny of Kings, and not the Right of Royalty. 4ly, To make it appear, that supposing that of Samuel's, to be a Description of a Lawful Right, yet that particular Settle∣ment could not be of any Consequence to those Estates that had another Institution. For the first, I say, that the Institution of some Magistrates amongst the Jews, was by express and immediate Revelation from God: Moses his Ministry and Authority was established and confirmed by miraculous Signs and Tokens, as appears Exod. 3. And for the Judges of the People of Israel, as may be seen in the 18th Chapter of the same Book; But we find no∣thing like this, in the establishment of the Kingly Authority a∣mongst them. For we do not find that God, in the 17th Chap∣ter of Deuteronomy, enjoins the People to establish a King over them, as the Jews themselves believe; but only that he fore∣saw the disorderly Inclinations of the People, who in Time to come would demand a King to rule over them, in conformity to those of their Neighbour Nations. A demonstrative Proof of what I say is, because that God himself having declared himself
solemnly to be their King, in giving them Laws, in leading their Armies, &c. they could not reject him without committing a great Sin. This is that which Gideon was very sensible of, as appears by his absolute refusal of the Royal Dignity. The same thing may also be gathered from the words of Samuel, 1 Sam. 8. and of God himself. I own indeed, that when the People shewed themselves obsti∣nately resolv'd to have a King, there happened something of an immediate designation of Saul to that Dignity, as may be seen 1 Sam. 10. for the Election was made by casting of Lots in the presence of Samuel, to shew that the appointment of Saul was immediately from God. But for all this it continues a great Truth, That the establishment of the Royal Power in Israel was an Act of the People, and not an immediate Act of the Deity. And we ought to give the more heed to what was immediate in the Institution, because it is the Foundation of many particular Expressions we find in Scripture; when it is said of the Judges of Israel, Deut. 1.17. That their Judgment was God's Judg∣ment; That they are Gods, Exod. 21.16. & 22.8, 9, 28. Psal. 82.1. John 10.35. That God is with them in their Judgment, 1 Chron. 19.6. All those Expressios refer to their immediate Divine Institution. When the Scripture, speaking of the Kings of Judea, saith, That Solomon sat upon the Throne of God, 1 Chron. 29.23. that is to say, that God had placed him on the Throne of Israel, which God himself was possest of, till their demanding a King of Samuel, 2 Chron. 9.8. When it calls them the Kings of God, 1 Sam. Psal. 18.50. and his Anointed Ones, 2 Sam. 22.51. which Title is given to Saul, as well as David and Josiah; all those Expressions respect God's Establishment of Kings, after that the People had earnestly and obstinately de∣manded to be govern'd by their Ministry. As to the second Head which respects the Laws that God prescribes to the Jews, to regulate the Choice, and the Conduct of their future Kings, set down by Moses, in Deut. 17. v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. We may therein observe these two things. 1st. That God supposeth, that forasmuch as they would some time after set up a King over them, they would also suppose it lawful for them, to prescribe to the Royal Power, the Form
and Rules which their Neighbour-Nations, amongst themselves, had set to that Form of Government. 2ly, That God leaving to the People the natural Right of limiting the Royalty amongst themselves, according to their own liking and fancy, or for giving it more scope and liberty, as their Neighbours had done, only thought good to prescribe to them these Rules and Limitations. 1. God limits their choice as to the Person of a King, that he must be one chosen by himself. 2. They might not choose a Stranger. 3. He do's not allow the King to multiply Horses; 4. Nor to lead back the People to Egypt; 5. Nor to have great store of Wives; 6. Nor to heap up vast Riches. 7. He enjoyns him to study the Law of God, and have it always with him to observe and keep it. And, 8. To do Justice equally to all without distinction. These are the Laws which Josephus hath compendiously set down, Lib. 4. cap. 8. p. 123, after Philo, in his Treatise, con∣cerning the Creation of the Prince. Now it is natural and obvious, to conclude from all this; 1. That God doth not in that place proscribe a plat-form of a Mo∣narchy for the Government of the Jews; but only supposeth that the Jews, being desirous of Monarchy, would be apt to borrow the Model of it from the Neighbour-Kingdoms. 2. That in prescribing some Rules concerning the choice and be∣haviour of a King, he endeavors to prevent the State of Israel from falling into the Inconveniences, into which their Neigh∣bour-Nations had cast themselves, by allowing their Kings, or at least suffering them to take too great a Power and Authority, whether in Matters of State or Religion. 3. That he suppo∣seth, that the People ought to oblige the King to observe these Laws of God, and that they might oppose themselves to Prin∣ces, who at any time should have the boldness to violate them; as Josephus expresseth himself in the place quoted before. 4. That he allows the People of Israel the same Rights to oppose themselves against the unjust Enterprizes of their Princes, turn'd Tyrants, which other Nations were possest of against their Princes, when they abused their Authority: the Reason why People desire a King, being, that he may Judg and Govern them, not that he should Destroy them by playing the Tyrant. It is of importance to make these Observations, because it appears that in all this God did so far accommodate himself to
the Design of the Jews, that he never pretended to carry his Laws any farther: for we see he does not speak to them con∣cerning the Manner how they ought to behave themselves, when they should be attak'd or subjugated by Foreign Powers, as sup∣posing that common sense would be sufficient to instruct them, that in those Cases they were to follow the Example of other Nations, who bore patiently the Yoke of the Prince that con∣quer'd them. These things thus laid down, it clearly appears, that God set Bounds to the Royal Power, long before he established any King in Israel, and that the Jews could not but believe, that Kings had another Law set them than that of their own Wills. Indeed we see, 1st, That this Institution did not at all de∣rogate from the Rights of the People, to choose their own Kings, under certain Conditions, and by a form of Treaty, Compact, or Capitulation. We find that the Election of Jephtha, Judg. 11.10. clearly supposeth this, as likewise after∣ward the same may be seen in the Election of Saul, David and Solomon, 1 Chron. 28.8. and 1 Chron. 29.24. We find that Ishbo∣sheth was brought into the Camp by Abner, only to show him to the People, that they might consent to the choice of him, 2 Kings 2.9. 2ly, Though this Institution seem to be immediate, yet did it not at all hinder or prejudg the Peoples Right of making Treaties and Capitulations with their Prince, and consequently of rejecting them, when at any time they should invade or vio∣late the said Rights and Capitulations. And of this we have an illustrious Example in the Sons of Samuel, whose ill admini∣stration gave the Jews an occasion to demand a King, by which means Samuel himself was, as we may say, obliged to renounce his Power as Judg, which notwithstanding he had received immediately from God himself. 3ly, How immediate soever the Kings of Juda may have been established by God, yet they never had the Character of an Arbitrary and unbounded Power, as is suppos'd by those, who would infer, that because Monarchy was instituted by God, the Power of him that is invested with it cannot be justly limited, neither can, for any Misdemeanour whatsoever, be deposed. To make it more sensible and evident, we need only take no∣tice of what the Scripture tells us in several places.
1st. They could not alienate the Lands and Countries that belonged to the State, to any Strangers, neither could they take them from their Subjects by way of Truck or Exchange, as ap∣pears from that History of Naboth, 1 Kings 21. 2ly. They could not invade the Sacerdotal Functions, as is apparent from the History of Ʋzzia, who was boldly and cou∣ragiously resisted by the High Priest Azaria and his Colleagues, 2 Chron. 26.18. 3. They could not constrain the Levites to go to War; that Tribe being excepted from all the rest, who were subject to that Service, as Abulensis owns it, 1 Kings 9.22. 4. They could impose no Tributes but in case of Necessity, and with the consent of the People; and those who have under∣taken to do otherwise, have been censured therefore by the Pro∣phet, Mic. 3.1. Not to mention, that the excessive Tributes Solomon imposed on the People, were the cause of the ten Tribes shaking off Rehoboam's Yoke, 1 Kings 12.3. 4ly. I say that though God had seemed, to fix the Royal Dig∣nity to one Family, to wit, that of David, yet was it not so bound up, that the Succession must always pass from the Fa∣ther to the eldest Son, and not to the younger. Thus we see that Solomon was preferred to Adonijah by David, by the consent of the People. Thus Rehoboam designed to settle the Succession upon Abijah the Son of Maachah, as thinking him most fit for Government, though he had elder Brothers, 2 Chron. 11.22. Jehoshaphat on the contrary preferred Jehoram to the Succession before all his other Sons, because he was his First-born, 2 Chron. 21.3. All which evidently proves that both Kings and People, sup∣posed themselves to have right, from the Divine Graunt or Con∣cession for the Establishment of Kings, to regulate the Rights of Royalty, and the Questions depending thereon, according to the Maxims of Political Prudence, and the Rights of Nations. Neither do we find that Samuel grounds his Discourse on any other Principles, or that he supposes that Kings ought to be in∣vested with a boundless Power, as some imprudently do ima∣gine. See in what manner he expresseth himself, to diswade the Jews from their importunate Demand to have him settle a King over them, 1 Sam. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, to the end. And it came to pass, that when Samuel was old, that he made his Sons
Judges over Israel. But his Sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after Lucre, and took Bribes, and preverted Judgment. Then all the Elders of Israel assembled themselves together, and came to Samu∣el unto Ramah, and said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy Sons walk not in thy ways; now therefore make us a King to judg us like other Nations. But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a King to judg us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the Voice of the People, in all that they say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. According to all the Works which they have done, since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt, even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other Gods, so do they also unto thee. Now therefore hearken unto their Voice, howbeit protest solemnly unto them, and shew to them the manner of the King that shall reign over them. And Sa∣muel told all the Words of the Lord unto the People that asked of him a King; and he said, This will be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, he will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariot; and he will appoint him Captains over thousands, and Cap∣tains over Fifities, and will set them to ear his Ground, and to reap his Harvest, and to make his Instruments of War, and Instruments of his Chariots; and he will take your Daughters to be his Confectioners, and to be his Cooks and Bakers. And he will take your Fields and your Vine-yards, and your Olive-Yards, even the best of them, and give them to his Servants. And he will take the tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards, to bestow it upon his Officers and his Servants. And he will take your Men-Servants and your Maid-Servants, and the goodliest of your young Men, and your Asses, and put them to his Work. He will take the tenth of your Sheep, and ye shall be his Ser∣vants: And ye shall cry out in that Day because of your King, which ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that Day. Nevertheless the People refused to obey the Voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay, but we will have a King over us, that we also may be like all the Nations, and that our King may judg us, and go out before us, and fight our Battels. And Samuel heard all the Words of the People, and he rehearsed them in the Ears of the Lord. And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto their Voice, and make them a King: and Samuel said unto the Men of Israel, Go ye every Man unto his City.
'Tis obvious to observe from this account: 1st. That the In∣justice and Miscarriage of Samuel's Sons was the cause why the Jews demanded a King to be set over them. 2ly. That their Demand is couch'd in those terms, that make it evident, they desired to be governed after the manner of their Neighbour-Nations. 3ly. That this their Demand was displeasing to Samuel. 4ly. That God look'd upon it as a Contempt of himself, and a casting off of his Authority, for the Reasons before alledged. 5ly. That God strictly enjoyns Samuel to protest and declare unto them, how they must expect to be treated by the Kings that should reign over them. 6ly. That Samuel in this his Declaration delineates to them the compleat Pourtraiture of a Tyrant rather than of a King, to affright the People from the Demand they had made; and that as a Prophet he foretells the things should happen to them un∣der the Government of their Kings. 7ly. That he represents to them the Miseries annex'd to Royalty, as their Bondage in Egypt, and the several other Servitudes, which had forced them to cry unto God, but denounces to them, that God, to punish them for this their Rebellion against him, and their Contempt of his Administration, would not hear them. 8ly. That the People dazled with the Lustre of Royalty, and the Advantages they thence promised to themselves; in time of War, notwith∣standing this Remonstrance, persevered in their Demand. 9ly. That finally therefore God commands Samuel to give way to their Request, and to set a King over them according to their Desire. This in short is the sense, which Josephus gives of this Histo∣ry.Antiq. lib. c. 4. From whence it is evident, that the Synagogue never be∣lieved that God had granted to the Kings of Judea, any of those Tyrannical Rights, which some would appropriate to Kings from these Words, Hoc est jus Regis. Josephus makes out, that what is said, 1 Sam. 10.25. that Samuel wrote the Right (or rather the Manners and Behaviour) of a King in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord, was done by him for this end, that the People for time to come might know, that he, as a Prophet, had, in this his description of the Manners of a King,Ibid. cap. 5. foretold them all the Calamities and Miseries that would overtake them under a Monarchy, chang'd into Tyran∣ny, that thereby they might be induc'd to Acknowledge their
unthankfulness towards God, and their Folly in being so earnest for a King, as often as they should cast their Eyes on this his Prophecy. I know that some to assert the unbounded Power of Mo∣narchs, have endeavoured to prove from these Words of the vulgar Latin Translation, hoc est jus Regis, that the Monarchi∣cal Government amongst the Jews was of this Nature, and that therefore Samuel does not represent the Kings here as subject to any Laws or Punishments, which it seems he consequently ought to have done, after that he had declared their Conduct and Behaviour, as absolutely contrary to the Rights of the Society. But as I have already before observed, never was so weak a Foundation made use of, whereon to raise such vast Preten∣sions as may be easily made out so as to convince those, who make use of an improper Translation, both to delude them∣selves, and to abuse others, about a Question which is of so great Importance to the Society. Now that Samuel had not any the least Design to appropriate an unbounded Power to the Kings of Israel, 1 Sam. 8. by these Words, hoc est jus Regis, appears 1st. Because the word Mis∣path ordinarily signifies, consuetudo, agendi ratio, a custom, manner or way of acting, in case we do not explain this word in the same sense it carries in the 2d. chap. of the same Book, ver. 13. we shall make this passage to contradict Deut. 17. which cannot be otherwise avoided. This is acknowledged by Learned Men, who therein agree with Schickardus de jure He∣braeorum, Cap. 2. Thess. 7. p. 65. 2ly. The Fathers are of the same opinion; see what Beda saith in his Exposition upon Samuel, Lib. 2. Hoc erit jus Regis, qui imperaturus est vobis. Non qualis esse debeat, moderatus & justus Imperator, exposuit, cujus & in plerisque Scripturae sacrae lo∣cis, & maxime in Deuteronomio, perfectio docetur, sed potius Rector improbus, qui austeritate, subjectos sit oppressurus, intimat, ut per hoc populum a pertinaci ejus petitione revocet. This will be the Be∣haviour of the King that shall rule over you. He doth not st forth the Qualifications of a moderate and just Ruler, who is fully represented to us in many places of Scripture, but espe∣cially in Deuteronomy, but rather those of a wicked Gover∣nour, who by his Cruelty should oppress his Subjects, that
thereby he might deter them, om their obstinate demanding of him. 3. The Divines that did not understand Hebrew, yet by good sense and Reason were led to the true meaning of this word. Gerson lays it down as a certain Truth, that this word does not express a lawful Right, but an unjust Power. Dictio haec [Jus] non significat semper Jurisdictionem, sive Justitiam, sed significat interdum Potestatem quae non est justa, &c. sicut haec dictio Rex, quandoque sumitur pro Tyranno, & Benedictio, pro maledictione, & Lex injustitiae, pro injustitiae execratione, & Deus pro Diabolo. This word [Jus] doth not always signifie Right or Justice; but sometimes an unjust Power, &c. even as also the word King, is sometimes taken for a Tyrant, and Blessing for Cursing, and the law of unrighteousness, for the execrable unrighteousness, and God for the Devil. Opusc. contr. Adulator. Princip. in Consid. 8. The same also was the Judgment of Claudius Espenseus a famous Divine of the Romish Church, who told Henry II of France: Your Majesty ought to abhor that Right nothing less than Regal, and nothing more than Tyrannical, which God by the mouth of Samuel did not allow the King, but wherewith he threatned the People, saying, Hoc erit Jus Regis, this will be the Right of a King. Treatise of the Institution of a Prince Ch. 8. 4. It appears evidently that Samuel represents to us the picture of a Tyrant, in opposition to the description of a King, God had set down in the 17 chap. of Deuteronomy. 5. The Jews of old have always owned as much, as appears from Josephus, Lib. 4. cap. 8. 6. It appears that those who conceive the matter otherwise, suppose a greater Power and Authority in Princes, than they ascribe to God himself, who never commands any Thing but what is reasonable and just; as St. Paul judged, who calls all the Duty we owe to God, a Reasonable Service, Rom. 12. 7. If any one will take the pains to read the Characters Solo∣mon has given of a King, in divers places of the Proverbs, he shall find that nothing can be more opposite to this Idea of an un∣bounded Power, which some would gather from these words of Samuel. 8. The Kings of Israel never enjoyed any such Power, or ever pretended to it: the History of Naboth, whose Vineyard
King Ahab greatly desired, is a proof hereof beyond all excep∣tion. 1. Kings ch. 21. Jezebel would never have been put to the trouble, to employ false Witnesses to destroy Naboth as a Blasphemer, if she had had in Israel some of those Divines, Flatterers of the Grandeur of Princes, who abuse the Holy Scrip∣ture to authorize all the injustice and oppression they are guilty of. I am sure it is impossible to read without astonishment the extravagance of some Divines, who conceive that the words of Samuel contain an Explication of the Rights of Royalty, and that Samuel wrote them in a Book as being the publick and in∣contestable Rights of Monarchy. Withal let us make this Reflection which is very natural: The Jews here complain of the injustice and violence of Samuel's Sons, who made a mock of the Laws; whereupon 'tis supposed that they to remedy this mischief, require of Samuel to set a King over them, that might govern them according to his own Fancy, and treat them like Slaves: Is there any thing of sense in the Supposition? We suppose that the King has already a Rule prescrib'd him in the 17 of Deuteronomy, and at the same Time we maintain that Samuel a Prophet, has in a publick Re∣cord set down the Description of a Tyrant, to whom God gives Right, to violate all the Rules he had prescribed in his Law. Sure it is that neither the Antient nor Modern Jews, did ever conceive any such thing. If we read Josephus, where he sets down an abridgment of the 17 of Deuteronomy, we shall find that he expresly asserts, that it was not only the Right, but also the Duty of the People to oppose themselves against their Designs in case they violate the Rules of the Royalty God had prescribed them. Let us consider the carriage of the Maccabees against Antiochus, and we shall find that they did not believe it unlawful to resist Tyrants, and to oppose themselves to their destructive Government. Let any one read the 14 of the first Book of the Maccabees, and he will see whether the Rights of the King, which at that Time were engraven on Brass, had any resemblance with what we find in the 8th chap. of Samuel. This is a sure way to judge whether the Jews ever pretended that God, by these words of Sa∣muel, had granted to Kings an unlimited Power. They to this day acknowledg, that the Scripture does not only prescribe Moral Laws, which their Kings could not violate; but also
positive Laws, to which they were obnoxious, and which they could not transgress, without submitting themselves to the same punishments with the rest of their Subjects. This is the common opinion of the Jews, as we may see in Maimonides de Regibus Cap. 3. Sect. 4. and in the treatise of the Sanhedrim cap. 19. num. 166, 167, 168. which Doctrine he borrowed from the Talmud cap. Cohen Gadol, and from Siphri upon the Parasche Scho∣phetim. 2ly, They hold that if the King did change the form of Go∣vernment into Tyranny, the People had Right to reject him. The History of Rehoboam rejected by the ten Tribes, is a proof hereof beyond exception. 3ly, They hold that the People suppos'd themselves to have Right, and that it was their Duty to reject Athaliah, who tho she was a Woman, yet had invaded the Throne, 2 Kings 11 ch. ver. 3. which the Jews pretend to be contrary to the Law set down in the 17 of Deuteronomy. 4ly, They declare that King Herod appeared as a Criminal and indicted Person before the Sanhedrim, tho they mistake themselves in the story related by Josephus lib. 14. cap. 17. Antiq. whence it appears that he was only Vice-Roy. I acknowledge that Casaubon, Exercit. 13. §. 3. (from whence Bishop Ʋsher seems to have taken it) maintains, that the Jews believe, That no Creature can judge the King but God alone; and to this purpose quotes a passage out of Midrasch Devarim Rabba in Shophetim: but it is now 64 Years since Schickard has observed Casaubon's mistake, in handling a matter he did not un∣derstand; for indeed the Jewish Maxims are directly opposite to it. 1st. In the place by him cited, we find a Gloss, which shews that that passage did not concern the Kings of Judah, but those of Israel, who by their Power had changed the Govern∣ment into Tyranny. Schickard de Jure Regio, pag. 63, 64. and trampled under Feet the Laws of God, which made them ob∣noxious to punishment. 2ly, We must observe that the Jews believ'd, that the Maxime never took place, but a little before the last extirpation of their States, upon occasion of one of their last Kings named Jamneus, Gemar in cap. 2 Sanhedrim. I own that Samuel doth not set down any express Law for the deposing of Kings, or punishing of them when turn'd Tyrants: but yet he supposed as a thing certain and evident, 1st. That
their Crimes being contrary to the Law, were punishable accord∣ing to the general Definitions of the Law against Idolaters and other Criminals: We don't find that God has spoken any thing in particular neither concerning the High-Priest, from whence the Papists falsly conclude, That he was exempt from Punish∣ment, tho he did transgress the Law. 2ly, I say that tho the Execution of those Laws was not committed to Inferiour Magi∣strates, yet did it of right belong to the publick, according to the natural Dictates of common Sense. But after all, whatsoever Idea we may frame of the Jewish Monarchy, I maintain that it cannot be of any consequence to other States. 1st. Because that State was formed immediately by God, for particular Ends which do not respect other Socie∣ties. God might, by Example, grant to the Family of David, which he had a mind to distinguish from others, some Preroga∣tives, which he had no design to communicate to other So∣veraigns. 2ly, Because it is false that God has granted any par∣ticular Right to the Kings of Israel, contenting himself to give way to the Peoples desire, who would be govern'd by a King like their Neighbours. 3ly, Because whatever the Rights of Royalty may have been amongst the Jews, it is certain they have been abolished by an Order of Providence, which has wholly destroy'd the State of the Jews, and the Rights of their Kings. We don't find that Jesus Christ obliged his Followers to regulate their Obedience to Soveraigns, according to the measure of O∣bedience the Jews rendred to their Kings. 4ly, Neither do we see, that the Jews since their dispersion did ever take part with Tyrants, when the States where they lived rejected them, or that they thought themselves oblig'd thereto by the Law. 5ly, We should be forced to suppose that all the Christian States, and all the Bishops and Pastors in the Churches and States with∣out the Roman Empire, had been pitifully mistaken in not fol∣lowing or recommending this Judaical Form of Despotical Royalty, and purely Tyrannical, described by Samuel, which is so strangely extravagant, that it is unworthy to insist on the re∣futation of it.
CHAP. X. Concerning the Royal Law in favour of the Roman Emperors. 'TIS a difficult thing to understand the Nature of the We∣stern Governments, without being acquainted with the Nature of the Government of the Roman Emperors, of that Empire, whose Ruin has been the rise of most of the Western Monarchies. Now it is certain, that as Contraries serve to il∣lustrate one another, so the opposition which is found between the Constitution of those Kingdoms, and that of the Roman Empire will afford us a clear sight of the Characters which di∣stinguish them. We must know then, that in the Year 729. of the City of Rome,Dion. lib. 53. Tacit. annal. lib. 2. Augustus and Norbanus being Consuls, Lata est Lex Regia, quâ summa & Regia Potestas, quam sibi Populus Romanus ab ejectis Regibus sumpserat, in unum Principem translata est, ita ut is, nulla Legis necessitate teneretur, omnique jure scripto solutus esset; ei verò parerent omnes. The Royal Law was enacted, whereby the Sovereign and Kingly Power which the People of Rome, ever since their rejecting of the Kings, had taken to themselves, was transfer'd upon the Prince alone; so that he was not bound to the Law at all, and was exempted from all written Constitu∣tions, but that all were to obey him. This is the true Epocha of the Power which the Roman Emperors had of making Con∣stitutions, and to publish Answers to Questions of Law propo∣sed to them. Antonius Augustinus has published some of the Remains of the Royal Law, which was divided into several Tables. See here some of the chief Articles of it, which Gruterus has inser∣ted in his Inscriptions, pag. 242.—foedusve cum quibus volet facere liceat, ita uti licuit Divo Augusto Ti. Julio Caesari Augusto, Tiberioque Claudio Caesari Augusto Germa∣nico.
Ʋtique ei Senatum habere, relationem facere, remittere, Senatus-consulta per relationem, discessionemque facere liceat, uti licuit Di∣vo Augusto, &c. Ʋtique cum ex voluntate Authoritateve, jussu mandatuve ejus, praesenteve eo Senatus habebitur, omnium rerum jus perinde habea∣tur, servetur, ac si è lege Senatus edictus esset, habereturque. Ʋtique quos Magistratus potestatem, Imperium, Curationemve, cu∣jus rei petentes Senatui Populoque Rom. commendaverit, quibusque suffragaonem suam dederit, promiserit, eorum Comitiis quibusque extra ordinem ratio habeatur. Ʋtique ei fines Pomoerii proferre, promovere, cum ex Republica censebit, esse, liceat, ita uti licuit Ti. Claudio Caesari Augusto. Ʋtique quaecumque ex usu, Reipublicae Majestate, Divinarum, Hu∣manarum, Publicarum Privatarumque rerum, esse censebit ei agere, facere jus potestasque sit, ita ut Divo Augusto, Tiberioque Julio Caesari Augusto, Tiberioque Claudio Caesari Augusto Germanico fuit. Ʋtique quibus Legibus, Plebísve scitis scriptum fuit, ne Divus Augustus Tiberiusve Julius Caesar Augustus, Tiberiusve Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus tenerentur, his Legibus Plebisque scitis, Imperator Caesar Vespasianus solutus sit, quae{que} ex qua{que} Lege, rogatio∣ne Divum Augustum, Tiberiumve, Julium Caesarem, Tiberiumve Clau∣dium Caesarem Augustum Germanicum facere oportuit, ea omnia Cae∣sari Vespasiano Augusto facere liceat. Ʋtique quaecunque ante hanc Legem Rogatam acta, gesta, decreta, imperata, ab Imperatore Caesare Vespasiano Augusto jussu mandatuve ejus à quoquo sunt, ea perinde justa rataque sint, ac si Populi ple∣bísve jussu acta essent. SANCTIO. Si quis hujusce Legis ergo, adversus Leges, Rogationes, Plebísve∣scita, Senatusve-consulta fecit, fecerit, sive quod eum ex Lege Ro∣gationeve, Plebisvescito, S ve C. facere oportebit, non fecerit hujus Legis ergo, id ei ne fraudi esto, neve quit ob eam rem Populo dare debito, neve cui ea de re actio, neve Judicatio esto: Neve quis de ea re apud se agi sinito. These are the chief Articles of the Royal Law, which were engraven in Marble, from whence Antonius Augustinus copied
them. This Marble stood in the Palace of St. John of Lateran, and was engraven under the Reign of Vespasian. We are to observe, for the better understanding of this Law; 1st, That it was extorted, Vi & Metu, by Force and Fear, as Dion Cassius tells us, Lib. 53. Indeed, we read in Cicero against Verres, Regiè seu potius Tyrannicè statuit; He ordain'd King-like, or rather Tyrant-like. There is but little appear∣ance that the Law was called Lex Regia, or the Royal Law, the Emperors chusing rather to take that Title, which signified only the General of an Army, than that of Kings, which the People of Rome had an horror for, ever since the Tarquins. And Dion Cassius relates in the before-cited place, with what sweetness Augustus always carried it towards the Senate, and how great a share he left in the Administration of the Affairs of the Empire, reserving chiefly for himself the Care and Conduct of the Provinces, which were exposed to the Violence of Ene∣mies. 2ly, That the wisest of the Roman Emperors have condem∣ned the Government which this Law supposeth, for a Tyran∣nical Government. This was the Judgment of the Emperor Pertinax, in a Speech of his to the Senate, set down by Herodi∣an, pag. 372 Edit. Steph. 3ly, That after all, Justinian agrees, that the People of Rome had transferred all the Power upon the Person of the Emperor: See how he expresseth himself; Cum enim Lege antiquâ, qua Re∣gia nuncupatur, omne jus, omnisque potestas Populi Rom. in Im∣peratoriam translata sint potestatem. Lib. 4. cod. de veter. Jure enncleando, & tit. de Jure Naturae & Gentium & Civili. 4ly, That by this Law the Roman Emperors were not above all Laws, but some Laws only, being subject to the rest as well as any of their Subjects. 5ly, That the Power which the People of Rome had granted to their Emperors, expired together with them, and was fain to be renewed upon every Succession. 6ly, That what-ever was done in virtue of this Law, before such renewal of it, did make the Doer of Right liable to Pu∣nishment.
But however thus much is apparent, That though the Roman Emperors were above certain Laws; yet they had not wholly depriv'd the Common-Wealth of their Authority, nor the People of their Liberty, of which we can give some very evi∣dent Instances. 1st, This Royal Law did not overthrow the Propriety of the Subject, as appears from the recital of Bodin, concerning Ju∣stinian, who himself was obliged to demand leave of a Widow to pull down her House, for to build the Church of Sancta So∣phia, which she had refused the Lords he had sent to desire her to surrender her House to him. 2ly, It did not expose the Subjects to the blind Fury of the Emperors, otherwise it would have been a great Folly in Theo∣dosius to have undergone the Publick Penance which St. Ambrose laid upon him, for having caus'd some of the Inhabitants of Thessalonica to be murther'd by his Souldiers, for assisting in a popular Sedition, where a General of his Army had been kill'd. 3ly, The Emperors never pretended that the People were be∣come their Slaves: In which Point the Romans differ'd from the Persians, which made Lactantius say, speaking of Maximian, as of a Tyrant; Post devictos Persas, quorum hic ritus, hic mos est, ut Regibus suis in Servitium se addicant, & Reges Populo suo, tan∣quam familia utantur, hunc morem nefarius homo in Romanam ter∣ram voluit inducere, quem ex illo tempore victoriae, sine pudore, lauda∣bat. After he had overcome the Persians, whose Custom and Manner it is to be Slaves to their Kings, the Kings using their People as their Servants and Domesticks, this wicked Man was willing to introduce the same Custom amongst the Romans, which from the time of his this Victory he commended without all shame. 4ly, The Emperors made no alterations in the Laws, though they attributed to themselves the right of interpreting them, and to enact new Ones upon emergent Occasions. The Right of assembling the Senate, and the Nomination to Offices and Places of Trust, as well as the Power of appointing Governours in the Provinces, which before were left to the dis∣posal of the Senate, was the greatest Right of the Emperors.
The Right of making Peace and War, was of the same Na∣ture: There was only this difference, viz. That this Right was granted to the Emperors for ever, whereas it was but rarely granted to the Generals which Rome formerly nominated. And as for the Right of not being subject to Laws, that was only a Right limited to certain Laws, and was not to be under∣stood with respect to all Laws whatsoever; Accordingly we see, 1st. That the Emperor Constantine expresseth himself thus: Contra Jus rescripta non valeant, quocunque modo fuerint impetrata. Quod enim publica Jura praescribunt, magis sequi Judices debent. Orders contrary to Law are invalid, which way soever they be obtain'd. For the Judges ought to keep themselves to what the Publick Laws prescribe, Lib. 1. cod. Theod. de divers. rescript. The Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian, speak yet more ex∣presly; Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis, legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri. Adeo de Authoritate Juris, nostra pendet Au∣thoritas. It is a saying worthy of the Majesty of a Ruler, for a Prince to profess himself bound by the Laws: so far does all our Authority depend upon the Authority of the Law. Lib. 4. cod. de Leg. & constitut. Princip. We see in the second place, that the Senate sentences Nero, without believing that by this Act they violated the Oaths they swore to the Emperors every New-years day. The Senate declares some Emperors, as Heliogabalus, Enemies of the State, and arm their Subjects to destroy them, and make void all their Acts: which makes it evident, that tho the Emperors often boast themselves of their not being tied to Law, yet they were fain to approve the Proceedings of the Se∣nate against their Predecessors. The Reason of this Conduct is, that though it be a general Compact of Humane Society to obey Kings, as St. Austin speaks, lib. 3. confess. c. 8. yet it is no less notorious, that this Compact doth not respect Tyrants. Accordingly we see that the wisest of the Emperors did so little believe that it was lawful for them to govern arbitrarily, that Trajan, in favour of whom the Royal Law was renewed, at the time of his exaltation to the Empire, addresseth himself in these words to the Prefect of the Praetorium; Accipe hunc gladium, pro me si rectè agam; sin aliter, in me magis; quod mo∣deratorem omnium errare minus fas sit; Take this Sword and use
it for me, in case I rule well; but if not, rather against me; because it less becomes him that rules over all, than it does others, to commit an Error. Dion. & Aurel. Victor. 2ly, That the Emperors, who were most renowned for Ver∣tue, did never affect to publish any Laws of their own Heads, till after they had got them approved by the Senate. This is that which Lampridius records concerning Alexander Severus; and we see the same practis'd by Theodosius, l. Humanum C. de F. But whatever this Royal Law may have been, sure it is, 1st, That the same was abolished together with the Roman Empire, which ended in the West with Augustulus. 2ly, That it ceased in the East with the Emperors of Con∣stantinople. 3ly, It is certain that they who ruin'd the Empire in the West, did never adopt this Royal Law, to govern their Sub∣jects by that Arbitrary Rule. 4ly, It is also certain that the Princes, who since the Year 800 have succeeded Charles the Great, and who have taken to themselves the Names of Roman Emperors, did not govern ac∣cording to this Law, nor ever pretended that that Law ought to be observed in favour of them, under pretence of their bear∣ing the Title of Roman Emperors. This is that, which I believe it will be of use solidly to evince, though I intend to do it very compendiously, that I may not tire the Reader.
CHAP. XI. That the States of the West, and of the North, ne∣ver knew this Royal Law. THough the People of the West allow'd their Princes the Ti∣tle of King, yet it may be averr'd, that the most part of those Kingdoms, which had their Rise from the Ruins of the Roman Empire, never owned this Royal Law. The Power of their Kings was originally limited, as Caesar witnesseth in his Commentaries concerning the German Kings, which were, to speak properly, only Commanders or Generals. I make parti∣cular mention of the Germans, because, for the most part, they were the Founders of the Northern and Western King∣doms; Germany having been, as it were, the Nursery, from whence have proceeded most of those Nations, who at this Day have any Name in Europe. See what Tacitus asserts con∣cerning the German Kings; Nec Germanorum Regibus infinita aut libera potestas est; de minoribus rebus Principes consultant, de ma∣joribus omnes. Rex aut Princeps auditur Authoritate suadendi, magis quam jubendi potestate; si displicuit sententia, fremitu a∣spernantur. Neither is the Power of the German Kings altoge∣ther free or unbounded. Matters of lesser Moment are left to the Advice of the Princes, but those of greater Concern are debated by the whole Society; they hear the King as one having Authority to persuade, rather than any Power to command them; and if his Sentiments displease them, they are rejected with boldness. Caesar gives us much the same portraicture of the Kings of the Gauls. And that their Successors, who tore the Roman Empire to pieces, have retained this Form of a Limited Monarchy, is Mat∣ter of incontestable Evidence, to every one that will take a lit∣tle pains to peruse the Histories of those Nations, to run over their Laws, and take notice how they have carried it towards their Kings when-ever they fell to Tyranny.
They who would be informed how far the Power of the Go∣thick Kings in Spain was limited, need only to cast their Eyes upon the account which Gregory of Tours gives us, Lib. 2. cap. 31. concerning this Matter, and upon their History in the Chronicle of St. Isidorus. We have the fundamental Laws of their King∣dom set down by Molina, de Hispan. Primogenit. Cap. 2. N. 13. But this appears yet more clearly from the Body of their Laws, which is still extant, and published by Lindenberg. 1st. It appears that their Laws were enacted, ex universali consensu Civium & Populi, by the universal Consent of the Citi∣zens and People, Lib. 1. Tit. 7. 2ly, It appears that the Kings were no less obnoxious to the Laws, than the Subjects themselves. Lib. 2. Tit. 2. 3ly, It appears not that the Romans Laws, and much less their Royal Law, had any Authority amongst them. Lib. 2. Tit. 9. 4ly, It appears, that their Kings had not so much as the Power to pardon Crimes, without the consent of the Bishops, and chief Lords, Lib. 6. Tit. 7. Lastly, It is evident from their History, that their Kings were liable to be deposed by the States, when ever they went about to transgress their Bounds, and tyrannize over their Sub∣jects. I confess, that the Council of Toledo IV. in their last Canon thus express themselves. Quicunque amodo ex nobis, vel totius Hispaniae populis, qualibet conjuratione vel studio, sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro Patriae Gentisve Gothorum statu, vel conservatione Regiae salutis (vel incolumitate Regiae Potestatis) pollicitus est, teme∣raverit, aut potestate Regni exuerit, aut praesumptione Tyrannicâ Regni fastigium occupaverit, Anathema in conspectu Dei Patris & Angelorum, atque ab Ecclesia Catholica, quam perjurio profanaverit, efficiatur extraneus, & ab omni Coetu Christianorum alienus, cum omnibus impietatis suae fociis: quia oportet ut una poena teneat obnox∣ios, quos similis error invenerit implicatos. Whosoever from this time forwards, either of us, or of any of the People of Spain, shall by any Conspiracy or Attempt, break the Oath of his Fidelity he has taken for the welfare of his Country, and the Gothick Nation, the conservation of the King's Life, and maintenance of the Royal Power; or who shall deprive him of
his Kingdom, or by a Tyrannical Presumption usurp the Throne, let him be Anathema in the sight of God the Father, and the Angels, and be cast out from the Catholick Church, which he has profaned by his Perjury, and be turn'd out of all Christian Assemblies, with all the Complices and Associates of his Wickedness: because it is but fit, that all they should be lia∣ble to the same Punishment, who are involved in the same Crime. The same is repeated in the Council of Toledo V. cap. 1. and in the Council of Toledo X. Cap. 2. But we may affirm with truth, that those who have worn this Canon threadbare by their frequent citing of it, did either not understand it, or changed the sense of it to impose upon and delude others. Wherefore let those that read these words well observe; 1st. The Order which the Fathers of the Council of Toledo IV. observe in speaking of Oaths, Sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro Patriae, Gentisque Gothorum statu, vel conservatione Regiae sa∣lutis (vel incolumitate Regiae potestatis) pollicitus est. I own it is to be considered that the [vel] here signifies as much as [&], this being the common stile of those Times. I say it is remarkable, that the good and happy State of the Nation, was the first Object of their Oaths, the second Object was join'd with it, viz. the Conservation of the King, yet with the understood Proviso, if he did not oppose the first, but was subservient to it. For indeed, I cannot believe that God made the Goths of another nature than the rest of Mankind, or so much Fools (enough) as to prefer the Means before the End; and to believe that they ought to engage themselves to seek the Means, any further than they are of use to obtain the End. Ad Tutelam Legis Subditorum Rex creatus est. The King, saith Chancellor Fortescue, is made for a Safeguard to the Subjects Laws. The Preservation of the Subject is the first Obligation, and the next that of the Prince. 2ly, We must observe, that the words of the Canon regard those, who by a Conspiracy undertake either to kill the King, or to deprive him of his Kingdom, or to usurp the Throne by a Tyrannical Presumption. But all this while they suppose a lawful King, that is to say, a King acknowledged as such by the State, attack'd by some furious Conspirators, with design to dethrone him, against all Right and Justice, for to place another in his stead. The Council does not in the least suppose that it is unlawful for the State to deprive a Tyrant of the
Authority he abuseth. If we suppose the contrary, we must take St. Isidore, who was President of that Council, for a Fool, fit to be shut up in Bedlam, for he expresly makes this Observation, that Rex à rectè agendo vocatur; si enim piè & justè & misericor∣diter agit, merito Rex appellatur: si his caruerit, non Rex sed Tyran∣nus est. Addit 2 ad Cap. Caroli Magni, c. 21. 3ly, I maintain that of all the Passages of Antiquity which are alledged by the Defenders of Passive Obedience, there is not any to be found which they ought to have been more careful to suppress in silence, than that of this Council. And we must judg them possess'd with a brutal Stupidity, or guilty of strange Malice, in employing such a Passage as this to support their Pre∣judices in favour of those Princes who overturn the Govern∣ment. For who were these Fathers of the 4th Council of To∣ledo? They were the very Men, who three Years before this Council, had cast off Suinthila, after he had reign'd ten Years over them; who had raised Sisinandus in his room, against whom they justly feared that some furious Fellows might hatch a Conspiracy. They were the Men who pronounced three Anathema's against Suinthila for the Crimes he had been found guilty of, whilst he was possest of the Royal Power. They were the Men who declar'd, That if a King does not well acquit himself of the high Charge he is entrusted with, he ought to be excommunicated, and consequently depriv'd of all Power in his Kingdom. All which is contain'd in Chap. 75. of the same Council, where they observe, that the Election of Kings took place after the Death of their Fathers. Which makes it ap∣parent, that there is no ground at all to suspect the Goths, or the Bishops of Spain and of Gallia Narbonensis, who assisted at that Council, to have espous'd the Maximes that some would fix upon them. The Lombards observed the same Rules in their Government, as we may see in their History written by Paulus Diaconus. And as for what the other Kingdoms that were formed of the Ruines of the Empire of Charles the Great, we find that their Power was always limited in the same manner, none of those Princes having ever thought of reviving the Royal Law of the Ancient Roman Emperors in favour of themselves. And because this Affair bears so great a resemblance with the present Revolution, I desire the Reader not to take it ill, that
I have copied the 75th Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo, at the end of these Remarks, and that he may make his Reflections thereupon: for he will find that those who make use of it, have no reason to complain, That they who have made choice of the Prince of Orange, upon the desertion of James II, after so ma∣ny unjust Proceedings and Enterprizes, tending to the total overthrow of the State and Government, have exactly followed this Example of the Kingdom of Spain; and that the Clergy who have followed these Decisions of State, have therein imi∣tated the Conduct of this Council of Toledo; and that those who oppose themselves against it, are found in the same Case with those whom the Church of Spain and of Gallia Narbonen∣sis did so solemnly excommunicate. The Kings of Burgundy reigned with the same Limitations: For which we may consult the Law of Gondebaud, which is still extant, and which was made, Habito Consilio Comitum & Proce∣rum, with the Advice of the Earls and Lords, who signed the Law as well as King Gondebaud: which makes it very evident that the Kings of this People had not the Legislative Power in∣vested in them alone. We find the same Clause in the second Addition to that Law. And indeed we need only to take no∣tice of what Marius Aventicensis relates concerning King Sigis∣mond in his Chronicle, to enable us to judg that those People had other Laws besides that of the Will of their Princes. For this Prince having caus'd his Son to be strangled without any Form of Justice, his Subjects conceived so great an Indignation against him, that he was forced to hide himself, and to take upon him a Fryars Habit, for a Mark of his Repentance, which yet was not able to give them Satisfaction, for as soon as he ap∣peared, they delivered him to Clodomer King of Orleans, who carried him to France, where soon after he lost his Life in a Tra∣gical manner. We find Instances of the sharing of the Soveraign Power between the Lords and the King in the Ancient Histories of Swe∣den, as may be seen in Joan. Magnus, Hist. lib. 15, & 29. and in Crantzius, lib. 5. We find also that by the Oaths taken at the Coronation of their Kings, the Bishops, Nobles, Citizens and People oblige themselves, in case the King commit any thing by himself, or by another, contrary to the Articles or Treaty he swears to at his Coronation, to oppose themselves to his Enter∣prizes
upon their Honour, and upon their Oath, Chytraeus, lib. 2. They who do not know the Manner of the States of Sweden deposing of Sigismond, and the Reasons they alledged for it to King James, may peruse the Relation of it in Goldast. We find the same Limitations of the Regal Power in Den∣mark, as Pontanus observes in his 8th Book; and it was for en∣deavouring to break through these Bounds, that Christiern the II. was deposed, as may be seen in Petersen, in Chron. Holsat. Where he hath set down the Acts and Reasons of the State of Denmark about that Proceeding. That the Power of the Kings of Hungary, was a Power li∣mited by the Fundamental Laws of the State, is a Matter so notorious, that Chalcondilas has made it his Observation, in the second Book of his History, where he compares the Royalty of Hungary in that respect to the Kingly Power in England. And which may be farther made out by the Fundamental Laws of Hungary, set down by Bonfinius, Decad. 4. lib. 9. Where we also find the Oath taken by those Kings at their Coronation, being the most expresly conditional that can be imagined. Chalcondile saith the same Thing of the Kingdoms of Arragon and Navarre, Lib. 5. where he observes, that the Kings did not create the Magistrates, that they could not make any Garri∣son without the Consent of the People, and that they could not require any thing of them, contrary to their Customs, that is to say, contrary to their Laws. Accordingly we find that the Kings of Spain have no Power to lay any new Impositions upon their Subjects without their consent. They are obliged to swear they will observe the Laws. And in Arragon the People declare to the King at his Coronation, that if they do not perform their Oath and Promise, their Subjects are thereby set free from their Oath of Allegiance. We find the same Thing in the History of the Kingdom of Portugal, but especially in that part of it which gives an Ac∣count of the Reign of Alphonsus III. The Fundamental Laws of which Kingdom we find in the 17th Title of the Ordinances of Portugal, Lib. 2. §. 2, 3. & seq. So true is it that all those Kingdoms never in the least suppo∣sed that their King had an Absolute Power over them. And it is as certain, that almost all those States have always
maintained, That the Power of their Soveraigns was so li∣mited, 1. That they could make no Laws without the States Gene∣ral of the Kingdom. 2. That they could not levy any Mony on their Subjects with∣out their Consents. 3. That they could not break the Laws according to their Will and Pleasure. 4. That in case of their violating the Fundamental Laws of the State, they were liable to be deprived of a Power which they abused. 5. That the States were free to chuse such a Form of Go∣vernment, and such a Person for to govern them, as they thought most expedient for them. This is that which I intend to prove more particularly by Examples taken from the Empire, and the Kingdoms of Poland, France, Scotland, and England; to which I shall add some Re∣marks upon those Titles which deceive some, who consider Things of this Nature with too little attention.
CHAP. XII. That the Power of the Emperors of the West, is a Limited Power. THis is a Matter that may be easily gathered from these fol∣lowing Instances: 1. Because Charles the Great, who was the first that took up∣on him the Title of Roman Emperor, reigned according to the Customs of the Princes of Germany, of whose Opinion concern∣ing an Absolute and Despotical Government, Tacitus has given us some Account, who represents them, as having the greatest abhorrence for it. 2. Because Lewis the Good, did himself acknowledg, that the Soveraign Power was shared between him and the chief Mem∣bers of the Empire; Capitular. Lib. 2. Tit. 3. Sed quanquam summa hujus ministerii in nostra persona consistere videatur, tamen & Divinâ Authoritate, & humanâ ordinatione, ita per partes divi∣sum esse cognoscitur, ut unusquisque vestrûm in suo loco & ordine, partem nostri Ministerii habere cognoscatur. But though the whole of this Ministry seem to consist in our Person, yet it is known to be so shared and divided, as well by Divine Authority, as Humane Ordination, that every one of you in his respective Place and Order, is known to partake of this Ministry. Thus was he pleased to express himself in the Assembly of the States General, whose Authority he owned to be as much of Divine Right as his own; which made Charles du Moulin, the most fa∣mous of all French Lawyers, say, Ergo solum Caput non omnia potest, imo persona Principis non est Caput nisi Organicum, sed verum Caput est Principatus ipse, cum membris integrantibus eum; Where∣fore the Head alone cannot do all, yea, the Person of the Prince is only the Organical Head, but the true Head is the Principali∣ty it self, with its integral constituting Members. Which are his express words in his Commentaries upon the Stile of Parlia∣ment, dedicated to the first President of Paris, and printed with Priviledg.
3. Because though the Western Empire did seem to be so He∣reditary, that the Emperors had divided it amongst their Children; yet, in process of time, it became Elective, which began to take place in the Eleventh Century, in the Person of Rudolphus. 4. In that they always excluded Females from the Succession to the Empire, though they had respect in their choice to the Imperial Blood. With respect to the Rights of Soveraignty we find, that tho the Empire be a Monarchical Government, yet we see it is mixed with Aristocracy; for the Emperor cannot enjoy it, but with the Consent of the States of the Empire, without making himself liable to be contradicted and deposed also. He has not the Right of making Laws, without the Consent and Authority of the States of the Empire. He has no right to declare War, without the foregoing con∣sent of the States. He has no right of levying any Imposition on the States, without the Consent of the Diets. Whenever he begins to usurp the Rights that do not belong unto him, and to infringe the Rules of Government he has sworn to observe, the States have a Right to oppose his Enter∣prizes, to repel Force with Force, and finally to deprive him of the Empire, in case he continue in the Design of changing the Form of Government. For though there be no Laws, which bound and regulate the Article of the Deposing of Emperors, when they abuse their Power for the overturning of the State, or for invading the Rights of the Princes of the Empire, and Imperial Cities; yet the Germans have always held, and still do hold it for a certain Truth, that it is a Right inherent in the Empire, to deprive an Emperor of the Imperial Power and Dignity, and to confer the same on another. This is the com∣mon Opinion of the German Lawyers represented to us by Lam∣padius, Arnizaeus, Diderick, Conringe, and many others. And indeed we may say, that there is nothing more certain, if we consider the Examples of Emperors that have been deposed since these 7 or 800 Years; Examples that are neither rare nor unknown, and upon occasion of which the States of the Empire have had an opportunity to declare & make out their Rights and Pretensions. One of the first Examples we find respecting this Mat∣ter,
is the Deposition of Lewis the Good, in the Year 833. The Acts whereof we may see in Baronius, Goldast, du Chesne, and le Comte; Whereupon we may make these Reflections; 1. That the Thing was done with the Consent of the Bishops, and of all the Nobility. 2. That the Estates above all accuse him for having broke his Coronation-Oath. 3. That though this Lewis was afterwards restored to the Throne of the Empire, yet those that restored him, never contested the Power the State had to reject a Prince, who overturn'd the Rules of Government, but supposed only that he had not been duly convinced of the Crimes laid to his charge. We have another Example, in the Deposition of Henry IV. The Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes and Earls, declare, that they had not sworn to him, till after he had engaged himself by his Oath to them, to observe the Laws and the Capitulations of the Empire: so that having now violated them, they were set free from the Oath they had sworn to him, and that they con∣sidered him as an Enemy, against whom they would wage war to their last breath. Lambert Schafnaburg. One of the last Instances we find in the deposing of the Em∣peror Wenceslaus, who was deposed by the Electors of the Empire in the Year 1400, after that he had been twice taken Prisoner, and had been exhorted by the State, to amend and take up from his irregular Actings. Aventin. lib. 7. Annalium & Cuspinian. in Vita Venceslai. We may see the most part of these Articles, and many more solidly confirmed in the Book of Carpsovius, de Lege Regia Imperatorum Germaniae, and in the Imperial Capitulations, and other Laws, which he has caused to be printed at the End of his Treatise.
CHAP. XIII. That the Power of the Kings of Poland is Li∣mited. WE find the same Limitation in other States, whether they be Successive or Elective, I shall content my self to alledge only one Example concerning the Kingdoms that at present are Elective, and that shall be of the Kingdom of Po∣land. Poland, from the Relation of Cromer, gives us an illustrious Example of the Wisdom of Northern People, in bounding the Power of their Princes. After that the Family of Lech, the first Founder of that Kingdom, was extinct, that State changed the Royal Government, into that of XII Waywods, otherwise called Palatines. These Palatines abusing their Authority, they re-established the Regal Government, in favor of Cracus, whose second Son was expell'd by the Polanders for killing his El∣der Brother. They afterwards chose the Daughter of Cracus for their Queen, who, 'tis said, having drowned her self to avoid Mar∣riage, the Polanders again established 12 Palatines, as they had done before: but afterwards suppressed them again, because they found them insufficient to defend the Countrey, and chose Premiel for their King. This is Lesko the 1, who lived about the year 750. It was not till the Year 965 that Miesco turn'd Christian, and took upon him the Title of King of Poland, which Title was confirmed by the Emperor Otho III to Bosletas his Successor. His Successors having reigned until Lesko Surnamed the Black, who was forced by Flight to quit the Kingdom, because he was not able to resist the Tartars, and died without Issue: the Poles wearied with intestine Wars, excited by the Ambition of their great Lords, chose Premiel to be their King, who being kill'd, without leaving any Children behind him, they made choice of
Ladislaus, who was afterwards desposed, for Male-Administra∣tion, by the States General. Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, who had been chosen in his stead, dying in the Year 1305, Ladislaus was recall'd to the Government, to whom Casimir his Son suc∣ceeded; who in the Year 1370 designed for his Successor, with consent of the States, Lewis, the Son of Charles King of Hungary, by his Sister. The Poles after the Death of Lewis, chose Edwiga his Daughter, upon condition that she should marry the Person whom the States should recommend to her for a Husband; the Person recommended by them was Jagello Duke of Lithuania, who had the name of Ladislaus given him by the Archbishop of Gnesna, who anointed and Crowned, after he had first baptiz∣ed him. He outliv'd Edwiga who died without Children, and had for Successors the children of his fourth Wife, who reached until Sigismund Augustus, after whose Death the States chose in the Year 1573 Henry Duke of Anjou, who after he had reigned four Months in Poland, abandon'd the Kingdom, to take posses∣sion of the Crown of France, and was deprived of that of Poland, by the States, as may be seen from the Acts recorded by Histori∣ans. This Vacancy occasion'd a Division in the States, one part of them having chosen the Emperor Maximilian the Second; and the other part Anne the Sister of Sigismund Augustus, to whom they gave Stephen Battori Prince of Transylvania for her husband, who Married the said Anne, and was Crowned at Cra∣covia in 1576. After the Death of Stephen, the States chose Si∣gismund, Son of John III King of Sweden, and of Katharine Daughter of Sigismund I. of that name, King of Poland. It is evident from this Abridgment, 1st. That the Poles al∣ways pretended to be the Masters that had right to give the Form to their State, which seemed to them most comporting with the Good and Welfare of it. 2ly, That they took it for granted that they had Power to reject those Princes or Palatines, whose Behaviour was contrary to the Publick Good, for which they had raised them. 3ly, That they ever had an Eye to Succession, so far as to be∣stow the Crown sometimes upon Daughters, yet not thinking themselves bound to it, but only so far as the good of the State did permit.
4ly, That they had regard to the appointing of a Successor, when the States had first consented to it. 5ly, That the Flight or Desertion of their Kings, has ap∣pear'd to them a sufficient Ground to proceed to a new Election, in their stead, and to reject them. This is evident from the History of Lesko, surnamed the Black, and of Henry the III of France. 6ly, That the anointing and Crowning of their Kings, was of no avail to dispense with their Oath in which they publickly declare, That if they do not observe the Laws of the State, the People are dispensed from their Oaths of Fealty they have sworn to them. CHAP. XIV. That the Monarchy of France is not an Absolute Em∣pire, but a Limited Royalty. 'TIS not of to day only, that some have imagined the Mo∣narchy of France, to be an unlimited Power, and an Ab∣solute Empire: Bodinus was of that opinion before them; but they that follow his sentiment, understand nothing of that Constitution: or if they do, have a greater desire to flatter the unjust Pretensions of that Court, than to maintain the Truth. We need only to lay open the nature and antient Power of the States General, with the manner of their Behaviour to∣wards those Kings, who abused the Power committed to them, to make it evident, that the French Monarchy is limited in its Constitution. Under the first and second Race of the Kings of France, there was no mention of any Assembly of the States General, but on∣ly of the Franks, that is to say, the Nobles and Prelats, who were used to meet together, on the first of May, in the open Field, where they deliberated with the King, concerning mat∣ters of Peace and War, and took Resolutions of what was to be done all the Year after. After the breaking up of this Assem∣bly,
the Court of the Royal Palace, otherwise called the Court of France, composed of the Prelats and Great Barons, that is to say, the immediate Vassals of the Crown, met together five or six times a Year to take care of the Execution of what had been re∣solv'd upon in the General Assembly, to deliberate about pub∣lick Affairs that offer'd themselves, and to determine as Judges the most important matters of private Persons. Under the declination of the 2d Race, the Governours of Cities and Provinces, having made themselves Hereditary Lords of the places of their respective Governments, under the Title of Counties and Dutchies, cut themselves large Portions out of the Soveraign's Lands: by which means the Court of France was no more frequented by the Lords, except only, when they were obliged to do Hommage, and take the Oath of Fidelity, or when an Enemy invaded France: for then they presented themselves before the King, to advise about the present necessi∣ty. This Disorder continued until the Reign of Philip Augustus, who having conquer'd Normandy, and the Counties of Tourain, Anjou, Maine, from John without Land, King of England, and the Country of Vermandois from the Earl of Flanders; restored in some manner the Royal Authority, and forced the Barons to frequent his Court, and to be present at the Assemblies he called for the Affairs and Necessities of State. Nevertheless those Assemblies consisted only of the Prelats and Barons, and this till the Reign of King John (some Authors say of St. Lewis) who being taken at the Battle of Poictiers, and carried to Eng∣land, they were forc'd to raise a great Sum of Money for his Ransom; and to this End they appli'd themselves to the Mer∣chants, and other Inhabitants of Cities, who were then the richest Men of the Kingdom, who agreed to pay the King's Ransom, upon condition that they might be received into the Charges and Offices, as well of Peace as of War, and be allow∣ed to have a Place and deliberative Voice in the States-General, which was accordingly granted to them. The Power and Prerogative of the States-General was such, that the Kings of France could not make any new Levies of Mo∣ny without them. Which continued so till the Reign of Charles
VII. as is acknowledged by Philip de Commines Lib. 6 c. 7. Nei∣ther could they make any new Ordinances, nor repeal or sup∣press the old, without the consent of the said States, as is own∣ed by Davila lib. 2 de li Guerri Civili. Under the First, and second Race of the French Kings, the Ordinances were likewise made in the Assembly of the Prelats, and Barons, which constituted the Soveraign Court of France; 'twas there the Treaties of Peace were made between the Kings of France and Foreign Princes, and Nations; the Portions of the Children of France were there regulated; there they treated of their Marriages, and generally of all that concern'd the Af∣fairs of State, of the King's Houshold, and the Children of France. The Ordinances that were made in the said Assemblies, in the Name of the Kings of France, were conceived in these Terms; Nos de consilio & consensu Procerum nostrorum statuimus, &c. We with the Advice and Consent of our Lords do ordain. And from hence is derived the Custome observed at this Day, of verifying the Royal Edicts in the Parliament of Paris, which in some sort represents the Assembly of the Prelats and Barons, who composed, as we have said, the Soveraign Court of France. In the Treasury of the French Kings, at Chartres, are found several Treaties between King Philip Augustus, and Richard and John without Land, Kings of England, at the bottom of which are the Seals of the Prelats and Barons; by whose Consent and Approbation the said Treaties had been made. And Pope Inno∣cent VI having sent to entreat St. Lewis that he would be pleas'd to permit him to retire into France, to secure himself from the attempts of Frederick II. the said King answered the Popes Nun∣cio, that he would communicate the Matter to his Parliament, without whose Consent the Kings of France could do nothing of Importance. This is related by Matthew Paris, in the Life of Henry the III. King of England, ad Annum 1244. We find also the manner how the States determined all Affairs respecting the Crown and Succession, as for Example the Pro∣cess which was between Philip de Valois, and King Edward. In this Assembly of the States, saith the Chancellor de l' Hospital, was Tried and Debated the most Noble Cause that ever was, viz.
To whom the Crown of France did belong, after the Death of Charles the Fair, to Philip of Valois his Cousin, or to Edward King of England, King Philip not presiding in that Assem∣bly, because he was not yet King, and besides was a Par∣ty. It appears clearly from the Power of the States General, That the Power of the King of France is bounded by Law; in∣deed this is a Truth whereof we cannot make the least doubt, forasmuch as we find it acknowledged by Lewis XI. the most un∣bridled Monarch that ever was. See what he writes in the Ro∣sary of War, composed by him a little before his Death, for the use of Charles VIII. his Son. When Kings or Princes, (saith he) have no respect to the Law, they take from the People, what they ought to leave them possest of, and do not give them what they ought to have; and in so doing they make their People Slaves, and thereby lose the name of a King. For no body can be called a King, but he that rules and has Dominion over Free-men. This thing was so notorious even to Strangers themselves, that Machiavel maintained that the Stability of the Monarchy of France, was owing to this, because the Kings there were ob∣liged to a great number of Laws, which proved the Security and Safe-guard of all their Subjects. Lib. 1 di Discorsi c. 16. Messire Claudius de Seissel, in his Treatise of the French Mo∣narchy, part 2. chap. 12. dedicated to Francis I. maintains upon this account, That the Monarchy of France does partake of Ari∣stocrasy, which makes it both more perfect and durable. Yea he asserts that it was also in part Democratical, and expresly maintains that an absolute Monarchy is no other than true Ty∣ranny, when it is made use of against Religion, Justice and the Government; That a Prince who passeth these Bounds, must be held and esteemed for a wicked Tyrant, cruel and intolera∣ble, who by this means pulls down the Hatred of God and his Subjects upon himself. Du Haillan Historiographer of the Kings Henry III and Henry IV. follows the same notion of Claudius de Seissel, in his third Book of the state of the Affairs of France, dedicated to Henry
III. maintaining that the Government of France is composed of Aristocrasy and Democrasy, p. 168. And indeed who can judg otherwise, when he attentively considers these six things, which are a part of the publick Con∣stitution of the Kingdom of France. 1st. That though the Crown for a long time since has fol∣lowed the form of Succession, yet the form of Election is still observed at the Coronation. Hunc vultis, hunc jubetis esse Regem, This is he whom you will and require to be your King; these Words are spoken to the People before the Coronation. We find the Peoples Election is mentioned, and the King called elect in the form of Coronation, published by Hugo Menard a Benedictin. 2ly. The King is there engaged by his Oath, to rule accord∣ing to the Laws of the Kingdom; as may be seen in the Cere∣monial of France. 3ly. He can make no Laws but in the Parliaments or States General; whereof we have an Instance in the States of Orleans, in the Year 1560. and is the same with what D'avila has ob∣in his 2d Book of the Civil Wars. 4ly. He can make neither Peace nor War but by the Advice of the States General. This is acknowledg'd by Lewis XI as we find in Philip de Commines 2 Book ch. 14. 5ly. He can raise no Mony but by Concession from the States General. We find this point thus decided by the States of 1338, with the consent of King Philip, That no Taxes could be imposed or levied on the People of France, without urgent and evident Necessity did require it, and then only by the grant of the States. Gila Fol. 157. Philip de Commines, lib. 5. c. 18. saith, with respect to this point: Is there any King or Lord on the Earth, who has Power, besides his Demesne, to im∣pose so much as a Penny upon his Subjects, without the Grant and Consent of those who are to pay it, except it be by Tyranny and Violence? 6ly. The Kings of France are liable to be deposed by the States General, in case they abuse the Authority they are en∣trusted with.
This last Article, viz. of the Proceedings of the French against those of their Kings, who abused their Authority, does evidently demonstate, That the Monarchy of France is altogether limited, according to the Platform Caesar gives us of the Government of the ancient Germans or Francs, who are descended from them. There is a passage, which is ordi∣narily abused, to prove that unjust Kings and Tyrants cannot be deposed, wherein Gregory of Tours thus expresseth himself, to Chilperic Lib. 5. c. 19. If any one of us who are Lords transgresseth the Bounds of Justice, you have the Power to punish him; but if you your self do not keep within them, who is it can correct you? We indeed speak to you, and you hear∣ken to us, if you please, and if you will not, who is it shall condemn you? except he who has said, that he is Righteous∣ness it self. I don't believe there was ever any Author, that undertook to defend the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, who has not made use of this Proof: but give me leave to say, that they have quoted this passage with as much Judgment as they alledged the 75th Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo: for 1st. Observe that this is the Discourse of Grego∣ry of Tours, who was accused by Chilperic, for opposing him∣self to the Justice that Prince demanded of a Council, against Pretextat Bishop of Roven, whom he accused of high Treason, and forasmuch as the Bishops were perswaded of his Innocence, whom they saw attackt by false Witnesses, this Gregory had the Courage, to maintain that it was their Duty to make their Remonstrances to the King concerning this matter. The King took their Design of remonstrancing him for an opposition to the Justice he had demanded; whereupon Gregory of Tours made the Discourse just now mentioned. So that it plainly ap∣pears; that this Discourse only respects the order of Bishops, who under that Relation, have no other way to redress them∣selves, with regard to Kings, but only by Remonstrances, but does not at all speak of the Body of the State, who are in∣vested with other Rights, in Reference to a King who under∣takes to pervert Justice. But to make it appear that French∣men, at that time, did not believe, that Kings had the Privi∣ledg, that they could not be deposed by the States: Though
they abused their Authority, we need only to consult the Histo∣ry of the deposing of Childeric, Father of Clovis, which is set down by Gregory of Tours, Lib. 2. ch. 11. and approved of by him. We find that they had preserved this their Right by the Deposition of another Childeric in the 8th Century, and whereupon it is obvious and natural to make these Reflecti∣ons. 1. That the Francs had the Power of choosing and deposing their Kings. 2. That the Oath they swore to their Kings was conditional, and supposed their acquitting themselves of the charge and trust reposed in them, and which they were obliged by Oath to make good. 3. That it is false that King Childeric was deposed by the Authority of Pope Zachary, as the Papists have maintained; forasmuch as that proceeding was an Act of the States Gene∣ral, who made use of their Right on this occasion. This is so true, that Pope Zachary himself laid it down as a Maxim in his Letter to the Francs, that this was a right inhe∣rent in the People. Nam si Princeps Populo, cujus beneficio Regnum possidet, obnoxius est; si Plebs Regem constituit, & destituere potest: For if a King, saith he, be obnoxious to his People, by whose graunt he possesseth his Kingdom; if the People constitute a King, they may also depose him. If we come to the Race of Charles the Great, we find Lewis the Good deposed by the States assembled at Thionville. The whole Proceeding whereof may be seen in Baronius, du Chesne Le Cointe, where we may observe 1. That it was done with con∣sent of the Bishops. 2. We see there an Indictment on di∣vers Articles, which contains as many Crimes against the State. 3. When this Deposition was recalled afterwards, they did annul the Acts of the former Assembly, not as if they had acted without Power, but because they had proceeded on false Accu∣sations, and insufficient Grounds. We find also the same Pro∣ceeding with respect of Charles the Gross, and Charles the Simple.
Indeed it was then so notorious, that the Power of the Kings of France, though they took to themselves the Title of Empe∣rors, was limited, the Estates being invested with part of the Soveraign Authority, that Lewis the Good solemnly avows the same, Lib. 2. Capitul. c. 2, & c. 12. We find also that the Cler∣gy of France was so far convinced that the States of the King∣dom had right to dispose of the Crown, for the good of the State, that when Charles the Bald was chosen by the Kingdom of Lorrain in Prejudice of the Children of the King his Bro∣ther; and that Pope Adrian II. wrote to them thereupon by Hincmar Archbishop of Rheims, threatning to excommunicate them, they sent back this Answer to him by the said Hincmar: Petite Dominum Apostolicum, ut quia Rex & Episcopus simul esse non potest, & sui Antecessores Ecclesiasticum ordinem quod suum est, & non Rempublicam, quod Regum est, disposuerunt, non praecipiat nobis habere Regem, qui nos in sic longinquis partibus adjuvare non posset contra subitaneos & frequentes Paganorum impetus, & nos Francos non jubeat servire, cui nolumus servire, quia istud jugum sui Antecessores nostris Antecessoribus non imposuerunt, & nos illud portare non possumus, qui scriptum esse in sanctis libris audimus, ut pro libertate & haereditate nostra, usque ad mortem certare debeamus. Desire the Apostolical Lord, that forasmuch as he cannot be King and Bishop both together, and that his Ancestors have con∣cerned themselves with the Ecclesiastical Order, which is their particular Province, and not with the Common-wealth, which is the Office of Kings, not to command us to take such a one for our King, who at so great a distance, is not able to help us against the sudden and frequent Assaults of Heathens, and to require us Francs to serve him, whom we will not serve, be∣cause his Ancestors never offer'd to impose this Yoke upon our Ancestors, neither can we bear it, who find it written in the Holy Books, That we ought to fight for our Liberties and our Inheritance even unto Death. We see also that he who was the Head of the Third Race, viz. Hugh Capet, was chosen King of France, notwithstanding the apparent Rights of Charles of Lorrain, who was the next Heir of Lewis V. by reason that the said Charles seemed too
much linked to the Interests of the Germans, who at that time were Enemies to France, Guil. de Nangis ad An. 987. and others in du Chesne. Who does not know the History of Henry III. who having been deposed in Poland, for deserting that Kingdom, was after∣wards deposed in France, by advice of the Sorbonn, and of the greatest part of the States. We may easily judg from these two Characters, that French∣men never were infected with the Doctrine of Non-resistance: The one is, because they look'd upon this Doctrine as an Error. See what Gerson the famous Chancellor of the University of Pa∣ris saith of it; Error est dicere terrenum Principem in nullo, suis subditis, dominio durante, obligari; quia secundum jus Divinum & Naturalem aequitatem, & verum Dominii finem, quemadmodum subditi debent fidem, subsidium & servitium Domino, sic etiam Do∣minus subditis suis fidem debet & protectionem. Et si eos mani∣feste & cum obstinatione in injuria & de facto prosequatur Princeps, tunc Regula haec Naturalis, vim vi repellere licet, locum habet. Opusc. adversus Adulat. consid. 7. It is an Error, saith he, to assert, that an Earthly Prince, as long as his Dominion lasts, does not stand engaged to his Subjects in any thing; because, according to the Divine Law, Natural Equity, and the true End of Dominion, as the Subjects owe to their Prince Faith∣fulness, Subsidy and Service, so their Prince owes them Faithful∣ness and Protection; and in case he doth publickly and with obstinacy imperiously oppress them, then that natural Rule takes place, That it is lawful to repel Force by Force. The second is, that they have always with horror rejected the Abuse that has been made of the Expression in 1 Sam. 8. Hoc est Jus Regis, for to maintain the Tyranny of Princes. If we will believe the Laws amongst you Princes, (saith Clau∣dius d' Epense to King Henry II.) you are Lord of our Body and Goods; or to speak more like Christians, we and ours are at your command. Your Majesty ought to abhor that Right nothing less than Royal, and nothing more than Tyrannical, which God by the Mouth of Samuel did not al∣low to Kings, but only threatned the People with, telling them, This shall be the Right of the King, &c. And then
adds, Go to now ye Dogs and Flatterers of the Court, go to, and alledg hence-forward this Right, not Regal but Barba∣rous, but Turkish, but Scythian, or if any worse Epithet can be invented. I acknowledg that the Face of Affairs is very much changed since these hundred Years. The States General have not been assembled almost these Seventy Years. The Parliaments them∣selves, which were established by the Kings and the States General, to preserve the Rights of the States, have been for∣ced, by the present King, to verify without any Debate, all man∣ner of Edicts for the Imposition of Mony. But yet after all, this Change is of so late standing, that there is little appear∣ance it should be look'd upon as a sufficient Prescription a∣gainst the Interest of the State. Those French-men who have any knowledg of the Laws of the State, and its Constitution, set down the Epocha or Date of this Change of the Ancient Maxims of the Kingdom, to wit, the time which followed the Cessation of the Holding of the Estates General, or the Mino∣rity of Lewis XIII, and the Reign of Lewis XIV. Let no Body imagine that the Ancient Idea of the Govern∣ment of France, is quite effaced out of the Spirit of the Na∣tion. I own, that Lewis XIV. by a Reign both very long and very violent, has made the French lose a great deal of their Courage. The Clergy of that Kingdom have, above all, en∣deavoured to support his Tyranny; by Maxims advanc'd and contriv'd by them for the ruin of the Protestants, with as lit∣tle regard for their Country, as they have shewed Conscience in their base Panegyricks pronounced to his Honour. But how∣ever there are still in being a great number of honest Men, who adhere to those Ancient Maxims. I can at this present produce one of these from amongst the Clergy, the Learned and illu∣strious M. Joly, Canon of the Church of Paris, who in the Year 1663, publish'd a Book, with this title, Important Maxims for the Education of a King. This Man alone may suffice to prove my assertion, for he very vigorously confirms these Max∣ims, by the Testimony of Kings themselves, Chancellors, Mi∣nisters
of State, Lawyers, and Historians of France, that they were always of Opinion in that Kingdom, That the King holds his Authority from the People; That the Power of Kings is Limited; That the French Monarchy is a Monarchy allay'd and temper'd with Aristocrasy and Democrasy; That the Kings can do nothing without the States General, which are the very same things, with our Parliaments; That the Judges are the Peoples Officers; That the words so much abused, Such is our Pleasure, signify only, This is the Decree of our Courts of Ju∣dicature: That they have no Right to levy any Impositions, without the Consent of the States; and many other Articles of that Nature.
CHAP. XV. That the Royalty of England never had any other form than the rest of the Northern and Western States. I Have insisted the longer to shew how the Royalty was limited in France, because the most part of our Modern Writers, seem to have had in their aims to reduce our Monarchy to the Form of that Kingdom, as supposing that it would have been a most glorious and advantageous Thing for our late Kings, to transform them into so many Lewis's XIV; that is to say, to change us into Slaves, and our Princes into Tyrants. I shall say nothing of the Royalty in Scotland, nor of the Bounds have been always set it by the Fundamental Laws of the State. There has been lately so much writ concerning this Matter, to justify the Proceedings of the Convention of that Kingdom, that it would be of no use to repeat it here. And for the same reason I shall excuse my self of the trouble of treating what concerns the Limitation of the Royalty in England so largely, as the Subject seems to deserve: however what I shall say will be sufficient to make it appear, that Royalty has been always on the same foot in that Kingdom, as it is still in the other Western Kingdoms. If we consider the most remote times that History gives us any account of, we shall find that the Saxons, as to the Power of their Kings, followed the Example of the Ancient Germans, whose Authority, if we may believe Caesar and Tacitus, was altogether limited and restrain'd. We find in the Mirror of Justices, cap. 1, 2. that the first Saxons created their Kings, that they made them take an Oath, and that they put them in mind that they were liable to be judged as well as their meanest Subjects.
After that the Right of Succession was received in England, yet it never deprived the English People of the Right of choosing their Kings. This is evident from the Form of the Coronation published by Hugh Menard, at the end of the Book of Sacraments of St. Gregory, p. 278. which Form was as fol∣lows. After they had made the King promise to preserve the Laws and the Rights of the Church, we read these words: Deinde alloquantur duo Episcopi populum in Ecclesia, inquirentes eorum voluntatem, & si concordes fuerint, agant gratias Deo Omni∣potenti, decantantes Te Deum laudamus? Then let two Bishops speak to the People in the Church, and demand their Will and Pleasure, and in case they do agree, let them give thanks to Almighty God, singing, We praise thee, O Lord. And, pag. 269, & 270, We pray thee most humbly to multiply the gifts of thy Blessings, upon this thy Servant, whom we chuse to be our King, viz. of all Albion and of the Franks. That the Kings of England are as well bound by their Oath, as their Subjects, appears by the confession of Henry III, upon occasion of one of his Councellors of State, pretending, that he was not obliged to preserve the Liberties of the Nation, as being ex∣torted from him, expressing himself in these terms recorded by Mat. Paris under the Year 1223. Omnes libertates illas juravimus, & omnes adstricti sumus, ut quod juravimus observemus, pag. 219. All these Liberties we have sworn to, and we are all bound to observe and make good what we have sworn. English Men were always so well perswaded of this Truth, that in their de∣posing of Richard II, they thought they had done enough to prove, That the King had forsworn himself by the Oath he had taken, having broken several of the Articles he had promised to his Subjects by Oath to observe, as we may see in the Acts of his Deposal recorded in the Chronicle of Knigh∣ton. James the First was convinced of this, when he told the Par∣liament of 1609. the 21st of March, That the King is bound by a double Oath, tacitly, as being King, and so bound to protect his People and the Laws, and expresly by his Coro∣nation Oath, so as every just King is bound to preserve
that Paction made with his People by his Laws, framing the Government thereunto; and a King leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to govern by Law. For what concerns the Laws, we find that the Kings alone had not the Authority of making them. King Edwin published his Laws, Habito cum Sapientibus & Senioribus Consilio, with Ad∣vice of the Wise Men and Elders. Ina King of the West Sax∣ons did the like. The Laws of Alfrede were made after the same manner, Ex consilio prudentissimorum, atque iis omnibus pla∣cuit edici eorum omnium Observationes. As for the Government of the State, we find that the Parlia∣ments met, and that their Meetings were fix'd once a Year by Alfred; which was renewed by Edward II, by two Laws. Moreover the King was obliged to assist at them, in case he was not sick; and nothing but his Sickness could dispense with his Attendance. That English-men never believed that the King of England could violate the Laws, and overturn the State at his Pleasure, without making himself thereby liable to punishment, clearly appears from the Laws of St. Edward, and by the manner of holding Parliaments, confirmed by William the Conqueror, and printed by the care of Dom. Luc. D'achery, in the 12 To me of his Spicilege. Sure it is, that we clearly find these three things, 1st. That by the Agreement and Consent of King John, upon the Com∣plaints made against him by the whole State, there were chosen 25 Barons, with Power to represent to the King his unjust Op∣pression of the Nation, and to oblige him by force of Arms to redress them, which he himself published by his Letters Patents in the Year 1215. which piece was published by Dom. Luc. D'achery, in the old Norman Tongue. Spicil. Tom. XII p. 583, 584, 585. as it is to be read in Matthew Paris ad An. 1215.
Secondly, We find that the opinion of the English Nation of old was, That they could not only resist their Prince, which abused his Authority, but wholly deprive him of it, by driving him and his wicked Councellors out of the Kingdom; as we see in Matth. Paris, in the Year 1233, where he relates, that Henry III, having call'd a Parliament, upon the Complaints that came in from all Parts against his Ministers, and the Strangers, whose Service he made use of in the management of the Affairs of the Kingdom, the Members of the said Parliament per∣ceiving that they could not with safety meet together, refused to come up; Denunciantes Regi per nuncios solennes, quatenus omni dilatione remota ejiceret, by solemn Messengers requiring the King, that without any delay he should turn out those Strangers. 3ly, They judged that if the Sword of St. Edward, called Curtana, signified, that the King reserved to himself the Right of exercising Justice against Delinquents; yet he was liable to the same Penalties with private Persons, whenever he trans∣gress'd the Laws of the State, whereof he was the Keeper and Defender, as the same Matth. Paris explains it in the Life of Henry III. much after the same manner as Aurelius Victor re∣ports in the Life of Trajan, That that Emperor understood the Ceremony of delivering the Sword to the Prefect of the Pre∣torium. Surely if we consider our History, we shall find, 1. That the Kings alone never had the Power of making Laws. 2. That they had no Power to lay Taxes on the People. 3. That they had not always the Power of making Magi∣strates. 4. That they had not the Right of waging War, without the Advice of Parliament, as is observed by Philip de Commines, Lib. 4. cap. 1. 5. That as they were chosen by the People, they had also Power to depose them. Nennius the most ancient English Hi∣storian after Gildas, tells us, That Vortigerne was deposed by St. Germain, and the Council of the Britains, because he had
married his own Daughter, who placed his Son Vortimer upon the Throne. Edward II. Richard II. 6. That the States have cut off the Succession, may be seen by Henry VII. Indeed we find that our Ancient Lawyers, our Ministers of State, and our Kings, who of all Men ought well to understand the Form and Constitution of our Kingdom, were so far from believing that the Royalty in England was an Absolute and Un∣limited Government, that they have expresly declared that it is a Government bounded by Fundamental and Essential Laws, and composed of a mixture of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and De∣mocracy. See how Bracton expresseth himself to this purpose, Lib. 2. c. 16. Fleta l. 1. c. 17. In populo regendo Rex habet Supe∣riores, Legem per quam factus est Rex, & Curiam suam, viz. Co∣mites & Barones: Comites dicuntur quasi Socii Regis, & qui habet Socium habet Magistrum; & ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, id est sine Lege, debent ei fraenum ponere. In Ruling the People, the King has above him the Law, by which he is made King, and his High Court, viz. the Earls and Barons; Earls are so called as being the King's Companions; and he who has a Companion, has a Master; and therefore if the King be without Bridle, that is, without Law, they must bridle him. Chancellor Fortescue saith, That the King cannot alter the Laws of his Kingdom, for he governs his People, not only by a Regal, but a Political Power; when it is said the Prince's Will has the Force of a Law, this (saith he) is to be under∣stood of a Regal or Absolute Power, from which a political Power much differs, for such can neither change the Law, nor charge the People with new Impositions, against their Wills. This is a thing so notorious that Philip de Commines has taken notice of it in his Memoires, Lib. 4. cap. 1. and elsewhere; as also Polydore, lib. 11. Neither have those only, who have expresly treated of the Government of England, as Secretary Smith, consider'd our Monarchy as a Government mix'd and bounded; but Charles I himself spake of it in these terms: There being three
kinds of Government, absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, and all having particular Conveniences and In∣conveniences; the experience and Wisdom of our Ancestors hath so moulded this out of a mixture of those, as to give this Kingdom the Conveniences of all three, without the In∣conveniences of any one, as long as the ballance hangs even between the three Estates, and they run jointly in their proper Channels. The ill of absolute Monarchy, is Tyran∣ny; of Aristocracy, Faction and Division; of Democracy, Tumults, Violence, and Licentiousness. The Good of Mo∣narchy is uniting a Nation under one Head; the good of Aristocracy, is the conjunction of Counsel in the ablest Per∣sons for the Publick Good; the good of Democracy, is Liberty, and the Courage and Industry which Liberty begets. The Lords being trusted with Judicatory power, are an Ex∣cellent Skreen and Bank, between the Prince and the People, by just Judgment to preserve the Law: wherefore the Power of punishing is already in your hands according to Law. Let any one judg after all this, whether our Ancestors ever entertain'd any of those pernicious Maxims, maintain'd by some of our Modern Divines, Maxims that have been the fruitful Mother of Tyrants: viz. That Princes can dispose of the Goods, Body, and Lives of their Subjects at their pleasure; That they are not subject to Laws, or to give any Accompt; That their Succession to the Throne, is by Nature and Genera∣tion, and not at all by the Authority or Approbation of the States; That neither their Merits or Demerits can be brought into consideration, to alter any thing about the Right of their Succession, which is unalterable, That without precipitating our selves into eternal Condemnation, we may not oppose their Designs, though directly and openly level'd at the Ruin of the State, and the Change of Religion: In a word, that they may commit all manner of Injustice and Violence they please, and that safely and securely, because none but God alone can punish them.
CHAP. XVI. An Answer to some Difficulties moved against this Truth. AFter having set this Matter in so clear and evident a Light, it is not without some Shame and Reluctancy that I make a stop to answer some insignificant Difficulties, which those who defend the unlimited Power of the Kings of England, oppose, to the proofs I have alledged. However such as they are, I am willing to consider them, that I may rid the Makers of them, from the least pretext of continuing any longer in so gross and dangerous an Error. They alledge in the first place the Title of Imperial given to the Crown of England, which, in their Judgments, seems to equa∣lize our Kings with the Roman Emperors; and to attribute an ab∣solute Empire or Dominion to them: concerning which I have already shewed, that tho this Title were well grounded, yet the consequence they draw from thence would be null, whether we consider the antient Roman Empire, or whether we consider the Empire, as it is now in Germany. I add here for a further clearing of this Matter, that the same thing happened to the Kings of the West, with regard to the Emperor of the West, as befell the other Kings, who rose after the Destruction of the Roman Empire, and to the Empe∣ror of Germany, with respect to the Emperors of the East. The Emperors of the East, as appears from the Embassy of Luit∣prand at Constantinople, could not endure that other Princes should take upon them the Title of () Kings, or Em∣perors, believing that the Name of Kings, left them in some dependence upon the Empire of the East: this obliged the Em∣perors
of the West, to take upon them the Title of Emperor, to intimate their independency upon the Princes of the East. Which Title the Emperors of the West having afterwards made use of, as a pretence, to raise themselves above the rest of the Princes of Europe, the Western Kings did the same which the Emperors of the West had done before, to assert their Independency. For not only the Kings of England, but some other Western Kings, have taken upon them the Title of Emperors. Alphonsus VI, King of Spain, took upon him this Title by a Concession from Pope Ʋrban II, because he had suppressed the Mosorabick-Office: Alphonsus VII, and VIII, assum'd the same Titles, and Alphonsus VIII, was Crowned in that quality by Raymond Arch-Bishop of Toledo, in the Church of Lions, with the consent of Pope Innocent II, as is reported by Garibay lib. 8. hist. cap. 4. We find that Peter de Clugny, writes to this Alphonsus, as Emperor of Spain, Epist. 8. And long time before these Prin∣ces, it is certain that the Kings of the Goths, since Richaredus, had taken to themselves the Title of Flavians, in imitation of the Roman Emperors; as may be seen in the Councils of Toledo. Yet Philip II, having demanded this Title in 1564 of Pope Pius IV, it was refused him. The Kings of Lombardy had assum'd the Title of Flavians, even since Autlaric, according to the Account given us by Paul Diacon. lib. 3. cap. 8, which they did to shew, that they were Emperors in their own Lands and Territories, and that they acknowledged no Soveraign or Superior. And it seems that in Process of Time, some Western Kings affected that Title for the same reason; and were the rather perswaded so to do, because some Canonists and Lawyers, have impudently maintained, That the Kings of Spain, France and England, were Subjects of the Emperors of the West. Glossa in cap. Venerabil. de Elect. in verbo transtulit, & in caput Venera∣bil. qui filii sint legitimi. Bartolus in caput hostes ff. de captivis. Alciat. lib. 2 disjunct c. 22. Baldus in cap. 1 de Pace, juramento fer∣vando in usibus Feudorum. Tho he contradict himself, by assert∣ing
elsewhere That the King of France is not subject to the Emperor. And thus much for the first Illusion some make use of to per∣swade us that the Kings of England possess the same Rights as the Emperors. A second which seems to have some more Ground is this: They say that as the Emperors that were after Vespasian, had the Right to divide the Empire, and to settle it by their Wills on their Heirs, the Kings of England having done the like; it appears thereby, they were in Possession of the same Right the Emperors had: to this purpose they alledge the last Will of William the Conqueror, in favor of his Son William Rufus. But nothing can be more vain than this Objection. 1. We cannot deny, but that the Election of Kings took Place, during the Reign of the Saxons; not that they did it with that Freeness, as to prefer the Uncle before his Nephew, that was under Age 'tho the Kings Son, and the youngest Brother before the Eldest. 2ly, It is true that William the Conqueror did act in an ex∣traordinary manner, in disposing of his Kingdom in Favor of William Rufus, in the same way as one disposeth of a Conquest (and this in prejudice to Robert his Eldest Son) as was also done by William Rufus. But these two Princes dying without Heirs, Henry, who had Married the Daughter of King Alexander of Scotland who had the Rights of the Saxon Kings, and who in Consideration of that Marriage, renounced the Rights he might pretend to England, as heir Presumptive of the Saxon Kings, having obtain'd the Government by the Right of his Wife, the Laws recovered their Strength, and Things returned to their antient Channel, as they were in the time of the Saxons. So that it appears that it is Folly for any one to imagine that the Kings of England may alienate their Estates, as a private Person can alienate his Inheritance. This was evident in the case of King John, who was opposed by the whole State, for pretend∣ing to subject the Crown of England to Pope Innocent III.
And indeed if we consider the Thing in it self, and according to the unanimous Opinion of all Lawyers, these last Wills can really be of no Force, without the consent of the States, to authorize them, as we find that the same did intervene in both the fore-mentioned Cases. The reason whereof is invincible, forasmuch as all States do not consider their Kings as Proprie∣tors of their Kingdoms, but only as publick Ministers, who are intrusted with a Jurisdiction and Administration for the Good of the publick. And this is the Title by which even Con∣querors themselves are at last obliged to hold their Au∣thority. They tell us in the 3d place, that the Kings of England en∣titling themselves Kings by the Grace of God: it appears that their Power being come from God, cannot be limited by their Subjects, over whom God has set them. A wonderful way of arguing, and never known till these our Times: at least, it is evident, that he who has defended Nicholas de Lyra against Burgensis, hath made a very different use of these words, Dei Gratia, by the Grace of God, wherewith the Kings of the North prefac their Titles, from what some now a days make of it. For he maintains that it is the Character of a limited and temper'd Government: see how he expresseth himself upon the 8. ch. of the 1 Book of Kings. Titulus Imperatoris modo regendi vitiato (that is to say, illimitato, as he expresses himself before) contradicit; nam titulus ejus est, N. Dei gratia Romanorum Rex & semper Augustus, hoc est Reipublicae non privatae accommodus. Ita & aliorum Regum Protestationes sunt sub Dei gratia quae vitiatum Principatum non admittit. The very Title of the Emperor, saith he, is a Contradiction to an Arbitrary and Unlimited kind of Government; for his Title is, N. by the Grace of God, King of the Romans, always Augustus (that is enlarger of the Empire) which implies that his Government is accommodate to the Common good and not his Private Interest. So likewise we find that the Protestations of other Kings are under Dei Gratia (the Grace of God) which doth not admit of Arbitrary Govern∣ment.
There remain but two difficulties more; the first is this, Several Members of the Church of England having perswaded the People, that a necessity was laid upon them to suffer all from the Hands of their Kings; The Kings of England have ac∣cordingly usurped those Rights, and were actually in possession of them, when the same began to oppose themselves to King James; this is that they call a right of Prescription. They consider the State, as having lost its Liberty, since their con∣senting to the Establishment of Tyranny, and consequently having no right to attempt any thing towards the Recovery of it. But I desire those who fain would obtrude this Delusion up∣on others, as they have upon themselves, to consider, 1. That known Maxime of Right, Possessor malae fidei non praescribit, An unjust Possessor makes no Praescription. Indeed if this be true, That a Man needs only usurp the Goods and Rights of another, to make himself the lawful Master of them; Robbers, Usurers, and those who by abusing of the Law deprive others of their Rights, will be found to be of the best and most thriving Trades in the World. If this be so, the Church of Rome and the Pope, by the Possession they have been in for so many Ages, must carry it by Prescription, to hang, burn, and massacre; neither can any one oppose himself against their just Title. 2. They ought to consider that if Kings be accounted Mi∣nors or under Age, because they cannot alienate their Domi∣nions, as being only granted them for the good of the State, the People are so, on a much better Title, and Prescription can never prejudice them. I know it is a Maxime in Law, Praetor cum injustè judicat, jus dicit; that a Judg, though he judges unjustly, his Judgment stands good in Law, and accordingly must be obey'd: from whence some might conclude, That the most unjust Kings can∣not
be contradicted, and that it is unlawful for any to oppose themselves to their Decisions. But those who should make this Objection, probably would not take notice of the Conse∣quence of it. It is for the Interest of the Society, that the Judgments pronounced by the ordinary Judges should be valid, though some of their Judgments may be unjust: but no body ever believed, that this Maxime authorizeth the Magistrate, either Subaltern or Soveraign, to tread under-feet the Laws, and to make publick Profession to judg all things according to their fancy. 2ly. 'Tis a constant truth, That Kings could ne∣ver justly touch the Peoples Rights, they being commissionated neither by God nor Man to judg what be the Rights of the People, and having no more right to deprive them thereof than a party at Law, has right to deprive his party of the Right that justly belongs to him.
CHAP. XVII. An Answer to the last Objection. AFter all that hath been said, I cannot suspect that any should make an Objection, that has so little Appearance of any Probability, as is that which is the 2d of those that remain to be examined by me; some suppose their conceit to be of some weight, who urge the Acts of Parliament under King Charles II, as destructive of this form of the English Govern∣ment. The Words are these; That it is not lawful on any Pretence whatsoever to take up Arms against the King, &c. In∣deed it cannot be denied but that these Words seem to suppose, that those who swear to them, cannot believe it is lawful to take up Arms against the Kings of England, howsoever they may behave themselves, nor by any opposition to hinder the overturning of the Laws and Government. We may well ac∣knowledg that Power to be unbounded, which it is not lawful to oppose by force of Arms; now these Acts of Parliament de∣clare that it is not lawful to resist the King; wherefore the King of England must be supposed an unlimited and absolute Monarch, and by Consequence we must conclude, that the Go∣vernment of England is wholly changed and destroyed; so that whatsoever we have alledged in the foregoing Discourse, can only be made use of as a History of what is past, but not as a Rule or Precedent for what is to come. This conceit is so unreasonable, that it seems scarce worth the pains to stop at it; however I shall endeavour in few Words to satisfy those who seem unwarily to be taken in the Snare, which the Malice of a Popish Court had laid for them. 1st. They must know that the Fundamental Laws of any State, are of the Nature of Contracts, Pactions and Capitu∣lations,
which according to the common opinion of Lawyers are irrevocable. Buxtorf. in Bull. aurea cap. 1. § 7. whence it follows, That all Oaths that are taken against Capitulations of this nature, may be Sins to those who take them, but cannot oblige them, as being unlawful Oaths. 2ly. They cannot suppose that the Parliaments of Charles II did ever think of repealing these Fundamental Laws, without accusing the Members that composed them of having been pre∣varicators and betrayers of the Interest of their Country, by changing the limited Monarchy into a true Tyranny. 3ly. They cannot do this Injury to these illustrious Assem∣blies, without casting the same Blemish upon the Bishops, in the House of Lords, during those Sessions of Parliament, and making them altogether odious either for their Stupidity, or for their Malice: for their Stupidity, if imprudently they gave their consent to Laws made on purpose to change the Kingly Government into Tyranny; or for their Malice, if they wilfully betrayed the Interest of the State, though they knew well enough what must be the end and aim of these Re∣gulations. I desire these Gentlemen to make some Reflection on this truth. Is it possible they should have no Consideration at all, either for the Reputation or Conscience of their An∣cestors. They have shewed themselves so jealous of a change in the form of the Government, by making of a successive State, an Elective one, and yet they suppose that the Parliament and the Bishops that sat in them have in sport changed the form of the Government, by making it of a limited Royalty, to become an absolute and unbounded Monarchy. 4ly, They must needs accuse these Parliaments of a strange Folly; for these Gentlemen suppose that the Disorders which then ruled in the State, obliged the Parliament to restore Charles II. They suppose that the Anarchy and various Sects which had the upper hand before his recall; making wise Men not without cause to apprehend the Ruine of the Protestant Religion, as well as the Overthrow of the State, they thought
themselves obliged to employ all their strength, for restoring of Charles II. as supposing him a good Protestant and a King whom his Adversities had made wise, in hopes of being go∣verned by him according to the ancient Laws of the Kingdom. And yet after this they will perswade us, That the Parliament thought it fit and reasonable, to destroy the Nature of the Roy∣alty in England, by making it Mistress of the Laws, and autho∣rizing it to destroy the Protestant Religion, whenever the Po∣pish Faction should think fit to have it done. 5ly. They must accuse these Parliaments of the commission of a horrid piece of Imprudence, in attempting upon the Liberty of the People: For if this were indeed their Design, were they not obliged at the same time to repeal all the other Laws which restrain the Power of the Kings of England? For we know that a Law cannot be valid nor derogate from other Laws, except in the said Law express mention be made of the said Derogation with a Notwithstanding to the Reglements set down in other Laws that are in Authority on that Subject. De Decimis c. nuper. Ought not they also in like manner to have declared, and that very precisely too, that they dispensed Charles II from keeping his Coronation-Oath, and to have set down in very distinct terms, that in case the King should think fit to call in an Army of French Dragoons to ravish their Wives and Daughters, and to force all his Subjects to change their Religion, they do not think it lawful to take up Arms against him or them, for to repel their Violence. 6ly. They are to take notice that Charles II did never con∣ceive that those Acts had changed the Government of the State. Do we not know that he offered to the Parliaments of Westmin∣ster and Oxford, to impose such Conditions on the D. of York, as the Parliament should judg necessary, provided only the Succession might be assured to him: now could any thing be more ridiculous and extravagant than this Proposition of the King, had he believed that the Acts already past in his Favour, had given him and his Successors a Right to overturn all, with∣out being able to be challenged or opposed by any one for so
doing? They themselves did suppose the same thing, and went upon that Ground; what else could be their meaning in Crowning James II, if they supposed that he was in full and rightful Possession of the Government by virtue of the Succession, without being obliged to take the Oaths, by which the Kings of England oblige themselves to keep the Laws of the State. 7ly. They ought to take notice, that they themselves sup∣posed that the Fundamental Laws of the State were not abolished. I don't speak here of those loud Murmurs that were heard every where, when James II by an Act of his Council, of his own Authority raised the same Sums, which had been granted to Charles II which he could not do without the Authority of Parliament; nor of the Complaints that were generally made when he turned out my Lord Clarendon from being Lord De∣puty of Ireland, banish'd several Protestant Lords out of his Council, and put Papists into all Offices whether Civil or Mi∣litary. I only take notice here of the Petition presented in the Name of the Clergy by the seven Bishops upon occasion of reading the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; for had they been of another opinion, with what pretence of rea∣son could they have complained of James II, governing with an Arbitrary Power, and his dispensing with the Laws? Why in their Petition did they alledg those Acts of Parliament which had condemn'd that Power in 1673, when Charles II published his Proclamation for Liberty of Conscience. These Acts of theirs, upon this Supposal, could not be accounted of other∣wise, than as Acts of Rebellion, nor could they be made use of with a good Conscience, after they had been convinc'd that the Fundamental Laws being repealed and abolished, they were now subject to an arbitrary and unbounded Go∣vernment. Indeed we cannot enough commend the Constancy of the Clergy and those worthy Prelates, who refused to read the Declaration of James II for Liberty of Conscience: that De∣claration being grounded upon the Power he attributed to him∣self
of dispensing with the Laws. But on the other Hand nei∣ther can we imagine any more convincing Proof to make out that at that Time they did not conceive, any more than the whole State, who so generally applauded them, that they themselves, as well as the whole State, had cast themselves headlong into Slavery by their Oaths, because the Power of the Kings of England was become unbounded and Arbitrary. In a Word, how ample an extent soever these Gentlemen may give to the Oath they have taken in pursuance of an Act of Parliament in the 13 Year of Charles II, they must remember one Thing which is always supposed, which is the natural Condition of all Oaths, rebus sic stantibus, c. ad naturam, Things continuing in the same State; for indeed as soon as things have changed their Nature, or that Circumstances are altered, there remains no more Obligation in Cases, where exceptions are naturally supposed. I am bound to Obey my Father in all Things, this being what the Scripture expresly teacheth me; but I am not bound to Obey him any farther, than he Acts like a Father, neither am I oblig'd to keep this Command of obeying him in all Things, but only so far as the Things enjoyned by him are just and lawful. I am bound to obey the King accord∣ing to the Laws, neither may I lawfully resist Him, in his exe∣cuting of the Laws, or upon any pretext whatsoever take up Arms against him: but if in stead of governing according to Law, he useth his utmost Endeavours to overthrow the Society, by destroying the Laws which are the Band of it, then all the Oaths I have taken are no longer of any Force, 'tis my Right to Endeavour to preserve the Society, which he goes about to overthrow, and to oppose his Violence by taking up Arms a∣gainst him, and to put a stop to the unjust Proceedings of a Prince, who declares himself an Enemy to the State, by the ways which providence affords me for my Security. But if after all these Considerations, these Gentlemen will still maintain, that they have taken these Oaths in so strait a Sense, that nothing is capable of satisfying their Consciences; we have great Reason to be Astonished, how it was possible
that Men of so Tender and Delicate a Conscience, could take such Oaths, which taken in their Sense do visibly overturn both the State and Religion. Indeed there is no need of any ones being a Prophet to make him conceive, that they were rather obliged in Conscience to refuse the taking of such Oaths, and to fly to the End of the World, rather than take them, than they are bound to keep them, with the hazard of the utter Ruin of their Native Country and their Religion; or see them Perish without having any Power to Defend them, as they are obliged by the Laws of nature, and by all the Duties of the Society and Religion. It has already been made out by several Writings, that God seeming to spare and wink at the weakness of those who be∣liev'd themselves thus fast bound and tied by their Oaths, and destin'd to become Victimes to Popery and Tyranny, has been pleas'd happily to deliver them from the trouble wherein they had involed themselves in sending them a Deliverer, whose Rights, in a War which James II. unjustly wageth against him, are above all those Difficulties, which seem to be matter of Scruple to them: so that it is not needful for me to insist any longer on this Matter.
CHAP. XVIII. A Reflection on some Remarks made out in this Treatise. I Am perswaded, that every equal Reader cannot but acknow∣ledg, that to judg aright of Things, the Proceedings of England, with respect to James II. have been the most just and lawful that could be. The Things I have made out in this Treatise, are summarily contain'd in the following Articles. 1. That the Constitution and Establishment of any Govern∣ment, is the Effect of the Original Consent of the People, though the Authority of the Magistrates be a Thing established by God. 2. That this Establishment supposeth the Subsistence of the Laws, which are the End of the Government in the Design of God; for indeed Kingdoms without Justice, are no better than great Robberies, as St. Austin calls them, De Civit. Dei, Lib. 4. cap. 4. 3. That these Fundamental Laws, for the Subsistence of the Society, are a Bond which so strictly ties the Soveraigns, that nothing is able to dispense with their Obligation to them. 4. That when the Soveraigns do violate them, they break the Ties, whereby their Subjects are bound to their Lawful Au∣thority. 5. That the Subjects can never be deprived of their Right to hinder the Ruin of the Society, and of the Laws, for the con∣servation of which only they have put their Rights into the Hands of the Prince. 6. That there was never any State that subsisted under other conditions than these.
7. That England in particular, and Scotland, have always had this Right. Now these Things supposed, it is evident, 1. That James II. has forfeited all his Rights to the Crown, even before his Desertion. 2. That the Lords and People justly took up Arms against him, to oblige him by Force to reform the Disorders he had caused. 3. That the States had Power, without any regard had to Him, to raise the King and Queen to the Throne. 4. That the Subjects are more than enough freed from their Oath of Allegiance to King James. 5. That they have Right, and are under Obligation, to take up Arms, and oppose themselves against James II. and to main∣tain the Authority of the King and Queen. 6. That those who oppose themselves to this, are declared Enemies of the State, and of our Religion, and the Authors and Abettors of Tyranny and Popery. 7. That those who pretend themselves scrupulous in these Points, are the Cause of the Division, and consequently of the Ruin of the State and Religion, whereby they grievously sin against God, and therefore are obliged in Conscience to repent and make amends for the Mischief their Division has caused. The thing is very evident, and forasmuch as it is of the highest importance for their Salvation, I beg of them well to weigh and consider these following Articles, and witness their Repentance in all these respects. 1. Then they ought to repent, for that they making profes∣sion to have so strong an Affection for James II. they have made him fall upon the Designs of changing the Government into a Despotical and Arbitrary Power, and thus by their Max∣ims have advanced and precipitated his Ruin. They are the Men who have made him conceive the Design of esta∣blishing a Tyranny in England; they have given birth to his hope of being able to compass it according to his Hearts desire, and his Ruin proceeding from the opposition that was made
against these his Designs, 'tis them he may thank for all the Mi∣series into which he is plunged; and consequently they have great reason to repent, for having precipitated his Ruin by their false and deceitful Foundation. See what Gerson saith, In opusc. contr. Adulat. consid. 10. Clericus ille Regem suum aut Principem amaret minimè, qui perversas, & tales vellet dare doctrinas, aut toto posse & scientia illas non impediret—quia non est modus certior, quo Rex aut Princeps se perderet in corpore & in anima, totamque ejus damnationem, quam habendo falsas tales opiniones, & eas opere exequendo. Cur? Quoniam Dominatio sua in Tyrannidem vertere∣tur & in infidelitatem. That Clergy-man would be far from loving his King or Prince, who should teach him such perverse and false Doctrines, or that with all his Power and Skill should not oppose them; because there is not a more sure way for a Prince to destroy himself, Soul and Body, and to procure his total Damnation, than by entertaining such false Opinions, and reducing them into practice. Why so? Because his Govern∣ment by this means would be changed into Tyranny and Perfi∣diousness. 2. They ought to repent, for their having contributed so much towards the establishing of Tyranny, not only because that would have destroyed the Publick Liberty, but because his Design at the same time was, to overthrow the Protestant Re∣ligion, and substitute in the place of it the Idolatry, Supersti∣tion and Tyranny of Popish Usurpation. This was a thing they could not do without imitating the Conduct of the Popish Clergy, who since the Popes have undertaken to tread under their Feet the Rules of the Gospel, and of the Church, have endeavoured to inspire Princes with an indifferency for their Oaths, and contempt of the Laws, which are a Safeguard and Security of the Civil Society. 3. They must repent, at least some of them, for having ob∣stinately endeavoured to hide and disguise the Conspiracies which were design'd for the Ruin of our Religion and Liberty. 4. They must repent for having writ in favour of an Opinion contrary to the Judgment of the Ancient Reformers of England; and for having traduc'd, as Rebels, the Protestant Churches beyond the Sea, for their maintaining the Maxims which the
first Reformers of England have Asserted, and for which they have Writ, in defence of their Protestant Brethren. 5. They must repent, for that by their Sermons and Writings they have insinuated to the People those Maxims which have put them upon betraying the Natural Rights of the Society, and in the Sequel, upon imprudently exposing themselves to betray the Interest of the Protestant Religion, which they were obliged to deliver safe to their Posterity. 6. They must repent, for having by this means encouraged the Judges to tread underfoot the Authority of the Laws, and to dispence with them, as having taught them to look upon the Laws, as the Concessions of Princes, and Acts of their Will, and by Consequence revocable at their good Pleasure. 7. They must repent, at least some of them, for having mounted to Ecclesiastical Dignities, by publickly appearing in the Lists for defence of these pernicious and tyrannical Maxims, directly level'd at the Ruin and Overthrow of our Liberty and Religion. 8. They must repent, for that their Opinions at this Day are the Causes of the present Conspiracies, Rebellions and Treasons against the Government, by which God has been pleas'd so graciously to secure our Liberty and Religion, from the inevi∣table Ruin wherewith they were threatned. However, we have cause to bless God, that those who are guilty of these Sins, are but inconsiderable in their Numbers. And I ardently wish for them, they may once seriously enter into themselves, and that by the Example of their Brethren, they may, for Time to come, employ all their Endeavours to make reparation for the Mischief and Scandal their Errors and Preju∣dices have in a great measure brought both upon the Church and State. FINIS.
THE APPENDIX CONTAINING I. Concilii Toletani IV. Canon. LXXV. II. Capitula super quibus facta est Magna Charta Regis Johannis, ex MSS. Arch. Cantuar. Fol. 14. Quae etiam authenticè cum Sigillo extant in manibus Episc. Sa∣lisburiensis. III. Diploma sive Ordinationes Johannis Regis Angliae, queis statuit quid Nobiles, quid Plebes observare debeant ad pacem & tranquillitatem Regni stabiliendam. LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell. 1689.
APPENDIX. The 75. Canon of the Fourth Council of Toledo. AFter some Ordinances and Decrees made by us, with respect to the Ecclesiastical Order, and their particular Discipline, the last Resolution taken by us Priests, is to enact a final Pon∣tifical Decree for the puissance of our Kings, and the stability of the Gothick Nation, in presence of the Great Judge of the World. For many Nations are so false and perfidious, that they make slight of the Oath of Faithfulness they have sworn to their Kings, and tho with their mouths they profess Allegiance to their Prince, yet retain Perfidiousness in their hearts: they swear indeed to their Kings, but are as ready to break it again upon occasion, not fearing that Roll of Judgment, which brings a Curse and manifold Pu∣nishments upon those who swear
falsly by the name of the Lord. What hope is there that such as these should either stand to their Ca∣pitulations in time of War, or observe their Treaties of Peace with other Nations? Or what Covenant or Contract will they not break? Or what Promise made to their Enemies will they keep, when they violate the Alle∣giance sworn to their own Kings? For who is so mad as to endeavour to cut off his Head with his own Hand? This is notorious, that unmindful of their own Preser∣vation they kill themselves, turn∣ing their force and violence against themselves and their own Kings. And whereas the Lord saith, Touch not mine Anointed: and David, Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltless? these are neither afraid of Perjury, or murthering their own Princes. Sure it is, that a Promise, tho made to Enemies, ought to be kept: Now if we must keep Faith and Truth in War to our Enemies, how much more are we to keep them on all other oc∣casions? For it is a piece of Sa∣criledge for Subjects to violate the Faith promised to their Kings, beuse in so doing they not only sin against their Princes, but a∣ginst God himself, in whose name they make their promise. Hence it comes that the wrath
of God doth oft change and trans∣fer many of the Earthly King∣doms, the breach of Faith and corruption of Manners, making way for the destruction and change of the Government. Wherefore also it ought to be our great care to avoid the mishaps attending these Nations, lest we be involved with them deserved∣ly in the same Punishment. Thus we see that God did not spare the Angels that rebell'd against him, who by their disobedience forfeit∣ed their Heavenly Mansions. Wherefore 'tis said also by the Prophet Isaiah, My Sword is made drunk in Heaven; how much more then ought we to stand in awe, and fear the same disaster, lest by our perfidious∣ness we be destroyed by the same Sword of an angry God. If therefore we desire to avoid the divine wrath, and to have his severity turn'd into Favour and Clemency towards us, let us a∣bove all things with fear keep and observe to God the Religious Worship and Service we owe him, and to our Kings the Faith and Allegiance we have promis'd them: Let there not be found a∣mongst us, as in some other Na∣tions, any wicked contrivance of Ʋnfaithfulness, or cunning Per∣fidiousness, or the horrid Crime of Perjury, or mischievous Plot∣tings of Conspiracies: Let none
amongst us, egg'd on by Presum∣ption, invade the Throne, or stir up Seditions amongst his Fellow-Citizens, or compass and con∣trive the Death of Kings: but when the King is departed this Life in Peace, let the Lords of the Nation, together with the Priests, by joint Advice and Con∣sent, appoint and constitute a Successor of the Kingdom; that so whilst this band of Unity and Concord is thus preserved a∣mongst us, none may endeavour to make a rent in the Kingdom by force or unjust ways. But in case this Admonition prove not of sufficient force, to correct the bad impressions which may be on the minds of any, and to incline the hearts of all to pro∣mote the common good, we think good to pronounce Sentence. Whosoever therefore, either of us, or any of the People of Spain, shall by any Conspiracy or Endeavour come to break and falsifie the Oath he has taken, for the good State and Welfare of the Gothick Nati∣on, and the safety of the King, or shall presume to kill the King, or deprive him of his Royal Dignity, or by a Tyran∣nical presumption shall Usurp the Throne, let him be Anathe∣ma in the Eyes of God the Fa∣ther and the Holy Angels, and be cast out of the Catholick Church
which he has profan'd by his Per∣jury, and be turn'd out from all Christian Societies, together with all the Complices of his wick∣edness, because it is but just that they who are guilty of the same Crime should be involved in the same punishment. Which therefore we think good to re∣peat again; saying, Whosoever from this time forwards, either of us, or of all the People of Spain, shall by any Conspiracy or Endeavour, break the Oath which he has taken for the good State of his Native Country, and of the Gothick Nation, and for the safety of the King's Person, or shall presume to kill the King, or deprive him of his Kingdom, or by a tyrannical presumption shall Usurp the Throne, let him be Anathema in the sight of Christ and his Holy Apostles, and be cast out of the Catholick Church, which he has profan'd by his Perjury, and thrust out from all Christian Societies, and as a damn'd Person be deliver'd up to the just Judgment of God to come, together with all his complices and partakers. Yea we repeat a third time, That whosoever of us, or any of the People of Spain, in contrivance or deed, break his Oath which he hath taken for the good Sate and Welfare of his own Native Countrey, and the Gothick Na∣tion,
and the safety and preser∣vation of the King's Person, or attempt the life of the King, or deprive him of his Royal Dig∣nity, or by a tyrannical pre∣sumption shall Usurp the Throne, let him be Anathema in the sight of the Holy Ghost and the Martyrs of Christ, and be ex∣communicated from the Catholick Church, which he has profaned by his Perjury, and be renounced all Christian Communion, with∣out ever having any share or part with the Righteous, but with the Devil and his Angels be condemned to Eternal punish∣ments, with all his Partners joyn'd with him in the same Con∣spiracy, that the same punish∣ment of final perdition may reach all that are Complices and Par∣takers of the same guilt. Wherefore if this thrice repeated Sentence be according to the mind of all you that are here present, confirm the same with your Unanimous Voices. Accordingly the whole Body of the Clergy and People have said and declared, Whosoever shall presume to do any thing against this your Decree, Let him be Anathema, Maranatha, that is, accurst and damn'd at the coming of our Lord, and have his share and lot with Judas Iscariot, both they and their Complices. Amen. In consideration therefore of the Premises, we Priests do admonish and warn the Holy Church of Christ, and all the People, to take care that this tremendous and so oft repeated Sentence of Excommu∣nication may not make any of us obnoxious to present and eternal
con∣demnation, but that keeping the Faith we have sworn to our most Glorious Lord, King Sisenandus, and serving him with sincere Loy∣alty, we may not only incline the Divine Clemency and Goodness towards us, but may also de∣serve the favour of our Gracious Prince. Amen. We also with the Humility that becomes us, do entreat thee,These qualifi∣cations of a good Prince, are most of them taken out of St. Au∣stin. Lib. 5. de Civitate Dei. O King, here present amongst us, and all Princes thy Succes∣sors for time to come, that beha∣ving your selves with all moderation and gentle∣ness towards your Subjects, you may in Righteousness and Godli∣ness rule the People by God com∣mitted to your charge, that so you may be able to give a good account of your Stewardship to Christ who has constituted you; governing your Subjects with humbleness of Heart, and being found in a constant endeavour of procuring their Good and Welfare. That none of you alone may un∣dertake to judge of Capital Mat∣ters, or any Mans Estate; but that by publick consent of the Judges and other Magistrates, and in an open Tryal, the Guilt of Delinquents may be made ap∣parent, observing a merciful dis∣position towards those who have
offended, that your indulgence and mercy in sparing may appear, as well as your Severity in punish∣ing: So that all things, by the assistance of God, being admini∣stred and preserv'd by you, with a godly Rule and Government, you Kings may have reason to rejoyce in your People, as well as your People in you, and that God, may rejoyce in you both. And as to what belongs to all fu∣ture Kings, we pronounce this our Sentence, that in case any of them without being restrain'd by the Reverence due to the Laws, shall by a proud Lordli∣ness, being puft up with the Royal dignity, by injustice, vi∣olence and oppression, exercise a tyranical and cruel Power against his Subjects, let all such be con∣demn'd and anathematiz'd by Christ, and be separated from God, and subjected to his Judg∣ments; for that he presumed to act wickedly, and to endeavour the hurt and ruine of the King∣dom. And as for Suintilanus, who fearing the punishment of his Crimes, has deserted the Kingdom, depriving himself thereby of the Royal Power, we, with the Consent of the People, have Decreed that neither he nor his Wife nor Children, shall e∣ver be received by us into our So∣ciety, because of the wickedness they are guilty of; or restored to
those Honours from whence they have been so justly cast down; and that they shall not only for ever stand deprived of the Pre∣rogatives of the Royal Dignity, but also forfeit all the Wealth they have got by oppressing the miserable People, except only that which shall be allow'd them by the goodness of our Gracious Prince The same Sentence we likewise pronounce against Gei∣lanus, the said Suintilanus his Brother, as in Blood, so in Crimes and Wickedness, who was perfidious to his own Bro∣ther, and has broken his Faith promised to our most glorious Lord, wherefore we also cast him and his Wife, and banish them from our Society, together with those before-mentioned, and exclude them from the Common∣wealth of our Nation, and that they shall not be restored to the Possessions, which by wickedness they had gotten, except only what they may obtain from the Bounty of our most Gracious Prince, who as he is ready to en∣rich those that are good with bountiful Rewards, so neither does he altogether exclude those that are wicked, from his dif∣fusive. Beneficence. Now Glory and Honour be ascribed to our Almighty God, in whose name we are here Assembled, and may Happiness, Peace, and a long con∣tinued Reign be the Portion of our most Pious Lord and Lover of
Christ, King Sisenand, whose Piety and Devotion has cal to this Assembly, to establish and enact this wholesome Decree. May the Glory of Christ strengthen and establish his Kingdom and the Gothick Nation in the Catholick Faith, and multiply his Years and Virtues, preserving him to the highest old age; and may he af∣ter the Glory of his Reign here on Earth, pass over to the Eternal Kingdom in Heaven, that he may Reign there without end, who here has Reigned well and happily by the grace and help of him who is King of kings and Lord of lords, with the Father and Ho∣ly Spirit for ever and ever. Amen. The things above written be∣ing thus decreed and determined by us, with the Consent and Ap∣probation of our most Religious Prince, we also have engaged never to infringe any Point there∣of, but exactly to keep and ob∣serve the same; and because these things do greatly concern the good of the Church, and the welfare of Souls, we have thought good to strengthen and confirm the same by our particu∣lar Subscription, that they may stand ratified for ever. And ac∣cordingly was subscribed by all of them.
Concilii Toletani IV. CAN. LXXV. POst instituta quaedam ec∣clesiastici ordinis,Concilio Tolet. v. cap. 7. de∣cernitur ut hoc decretum in omnibus synodis peractis publicâ voce pronuncie∣tur. vel de∣creta, quae ad quorundam pertinent disciplinam, post∣rema nobis cunctis sacerdoti∣bus sententia est, pro robore nostrorum Regum, & stabili∣tate gentis Gothorum, pon∣tificale ultimum sub Deo ju∣dice ferre decretum. Multa∣rum quippe gentium (ut fa∣ma est) tanta extat perfidia animorum, ut fidem Sacra∣mento promissam regibus suis servare contemnant, & ore simulent juramenti professio∣nem, dum retineant mente perfidiae impietatem.Zach. 7. ef. 8. Jurant enim Regibus suis, & fidem quam pollicentur praevaricant, nec metuunt volumen illud judicii, per quod inducitur maledictio multaque poena∣rum
comminatio super eos qui jurant in nomine Dei mendaciter. Quae igitur spes talibus populis contra hostes laborantibus erit? quae fides ultra cum aliis gentibus in pace credenda? quod foedus non violandum? quae in ho∣stibus jurata sponsiostabilis perm. perma∣nebit, quando nec ipsis pro∣priis regibus juratam fidem conservant? Quis enim adeo furiosus est, qui caput suum manu proprià desecet? illud notum est, immemores salutis suae proprià manu seipsos in∣terimunt, in semetipsos suos∣que reges proprias converten∣do vires, & dum DominusDicat Psalm. 104. 1 Regum 26. dicit, Nolite tangere Chri∣stos meos: & David, Quis, inquit, extendet manum su∣am in Christum Domini, & innocens erit? illic nec vita∣re metus est perjurium, nec regibus suis inferre exitium. Hostibus quippe fides pacti datur, nec violatur. Quod si in bello fides valet, quanto magis incaeteris. suis servanda est. Sacrilegium quippe est, si vi∣oletur à gentibus regum suo∣rum promissa fides, quia non solum in eos fit pacti trans∣gressio, sed & in Deum qui∣dem, in cujus nomine polli∣cetur ipsa promissio. Inde est quod multa regna terrarum coelestis iracundia ita permu∣tavit,
ut per impietatem fidei & morum, alterum altero sol∣veretur. Unde & nos cave∣re oportet casum hujusmodi gentium; ne similiter plagâ fe∣riamur praecipiti, & poena puni∣amur crudeli. Sic enim Deus angelis in se praevaricantibus non pepercit, qui per inobe∣dientiam coeleste habitaculum perdiderunt. Unde & per Isaiam dicitur,Isai. 34. Inebriatus est gladius meus in coelo, quanto magis nos nostrae salutis inte∣ritum timere debemus, ne per infidelitatem eodem saevi∣entis Dei gladio pereamus. Quod si divinam iracundiam vitare volumus, & severita∣tem ejus ad clementiam pro∣vocare cupimus, servemus erga Deum religionis cultumatque timo∣re, & usque ad mortem custod. cum timore; custodiamus erga Principes nostros pollici∣tam fidem, atque sponsio∣nem; non sit in nobis, sicut in quibusdam gentibus, infi∣delitatis subtilitas impia, non subdola mentis perfidia, non perjurii nefas, nec conjuratio∣num nefanda molimina. Nul∣lus apud nos praesumptione regnum accipiat; nullus ex∣citet mutuas seditiones ci∣vium; nemo meditetur in∣teritus regum; sed & de∣functo in pace principe, pri∣mates totius gentis cum sacer∣dotibus successorem regni
concilio communi constitu∣ant: ut dum unitatis concor∣dia à nobis retinetur, nullum patriae gentis dissidium per vim atque ambitummoliatur. oriatur. Quod si haec admonitio men∣tes nostras non corrigit, & ad salutem communem cor nostrum nequaquam perdu∣cit, audite sententiam no∣stram. Quicunque igitur à nobis, vel totius Hispaniae po∣pulis, quâlibet conjuratione vel studio sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro patriae gentis∣que Gothorum Statu, velObservatione. conservatione regiae salutis pollicitus est,Tentaverit. temeraverit, ut regem nec attrectaverit, aut potestate regni exuerit, aut praesumptione Tyrannicâ regni fastigium usurpaverit, anathema sit in conspectu Dei patris & angelorum, at∣que ab ecclesia catholica, quam profanaverit perjurio, efficiatur extraneus, & ab omni coetu Christianorum a∣lienus, cum omnibus impieta∣tis suae sociis: quia oportet ut una poena teneat obnoxios, quos similis error invenerit implicatos. Quod iterum se∣cundo replicamus dicentes: Quicunque amodo ex nobis vel cunctis Hispaniae populis quolibet tractatu vel studio sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro patriae gentisque Gotho∣rum
statu, vel conservatione re∣giae salutis pollicitus est, viola∣verit, aut regem nece attrecta∣verit, aut potestate regni exue∣rit, aut praesumptione tyran∣nica regni fastigium usurpa∣verit, anathema sit in con∣spectu Christi, &Angelorum Aposto∣lorum ejus, atque ab ecclesia catholica, quam perjurio pro∣fanaverit, efficiatur extrane∣us; & ab omni consortio Christianorum alienus, & damnatus in futuro Dei judi∣cio habeatur, cum comparti∣cipibus suis. Quia dignum est, qui talibus sociantur, ip∣si etiam damnationis eorum participatione obnoxii tene∣antur. Hoc etiam tertio ac∣clamamus, Quicunque amo∣do ex nobis vel cunctis Hispa∣niae populis qualibet medita∣tione vel studio sacramentum fidei suae, quod pro patriae salute, gentisque Gothorum statu, vel incolumitate regiae potestatis pollicitus est, viola∣verit, aut regem nece attre∣ctaverit, aut potestate regni exuerit, aut praesumptione tyrannicâ regni fastigium u∣surpaverit, anathema sit in conspectu Spiritus Sancti, & martyrum Christi, atque ab ecclesia catholica, quam per∣jurio profanaverit, efficiatur extraneus, & ab omni com∣munione Christianorum alie∣nus;
neque partem justorum habeat, sed cum diabolo & angelis ejus aeternis suppliciis condemnetur, una cum eis qui eâdem conjuratione ni∣tuntur:Et ut par poena perdi∣tionis constringat, quos in per∣niciem prava societas copu∣lat: & ideo, si placet omni∣bus qui adestis.Hoc tertio reïteratum sententia ve∣strae. Haec tertio reïterata sententia vestrae vo∣cisNostram. eam consensu firmate, ab universo clero, vel populo dictum est: qui contra hanc vestram definitionem prae∣sumpserit, anathema, mara∣natha (hoc est) perditio inadventu. adventum domini sit, & cum Juda Ischariot partem habeat, & ipsi & socii eorum. Amen. Quapropter nos ipsiEt sacerdotes omnes sanctam Ecclesiam. sacer∣dotes omnem ecclesiam Chri∣sti ac populum admonemus, ut tremenda haec & totiens iterata sententia nullum ex nobis praesenti atque aeterno condemnet judicio; sed fi∣dem promissam erga glorio∣sissimum
dominum nostrum Sisenandum regem custodi∣entes, ac sincera illi devoti∣one famulantes, non solum divinae pietatis clementiam in nobis provocemus, sed etiam gratiam antefati Prin∣cipis percipere mereamur. Amen. Te quoque praesentem re∣gem futurosque sequentium aetatum principes humilitate quâ debemus deposcimus,Haec omnia de formando opti∣mo Principe, fe∣rè desumpta sunt ex Au∣gust. lib. 5. de civit. Dei, cap. 24. ut moderati & mites erga subje∣ctos existentes, cum justitia & pietate populos à Deo vobis creditos regatis, bonamque vicissitudinem qui vos consti∣tuit largitori Christo † re∣spondeatis; regnantes cum humilitate cordis, cum stu∣dio bonae actionis. Ne quic∣quam vestrum solus in ‖ cau∣sis capitum, aut rerum sen∣tentiam ferat: Sed consensu publico, cum rectoribus ex judicio manifesto delinquen∣tium culpa patescat; servata vobis in offensis mansuetudi∣ne, ut non severitate magis in illis quam indulgentia pol∣leatis: Ut dum omnia haec, auctore Deo, pio à vobis moderamine conservantur, & reges in populis, & populi in regibus, & Deus in utris∣que laetetur. Sane de futu∣ris regibus hanc sententiam promulgamus, ut si quis ex
eis contra reverentiam legum superba dominatione, & fa∣stu regio in flagitiis & facino∣re, sive cupiditate crudelissi∣mam potestatem in populis exercuerit, anathematis sen∣tentia à Christo domino con∣demnetur, & habeat a Deo separationem atque judicium, propter quod praesumpserit prava agere, & in perniciem regnumdeducere. convertere. De se Suintilane vero, qui scelera propria metuens, seipsum regno privavit, & potestatis fascibus exuit, id cum gentis consultu decrevimus, ut ne∣que eundem vel uxorem ejus, propter mala quae commise∣runt, neque filios eorum uni∣tati nostrae unquam consocie∣mus, nec eos ad honores, à quibus ob iniquitatem dejecti sunt, aliquandoprovehamus promo∣veamus; quique etiam, sicut à fastigio regni habentur ex∣tranei, ita & à possessione re∣rum, quas de miserorum sum∣ptibusauxerant. hauser ant, maneant a∣lieni; praeter id quod pietate piissimi principis nostri fue∣rint consecuti. Non aliter &Geilanem. Gelanem memoratiSuintilanae. Suintilani & sanguine & scelere fratrem, qui neque in germanitatisfide. foedere stabilis extitit, nec fidem gloriosis∣simo nostro domino pollicito conservavit, hunc igitur cum
conjuge sua, sicut &antefactum est. antefa∣tos, à societate gentis, atque consortio nostro placuit se∣parari, nec in amissis faculta∣tibus, in quibus per iniquita∣tem creverant, reduces fieri;praeter in id. praeter id quod consecuti fuerint pietate clementissimi principis nostri: cujus gra∣tia & bonos donorum prae∣miis ditat, & malos à bene∣ficentia suacongruè non separat. non separat. Gloria autem & honor omnipotenti Deo nostro, in cujus nomine congregati su∣mus. Post haec salus & pax, & diuturnitas piissimo & a∣matori Christi domino Sise∣nando regi; cujus devotio nos ad hoc decretum saluti∣ferum convocavit; Corrobo∣ret Christi gloria regnum il∣lius,gentesque. gentisque Gothorum in fide Catholica: annis & meritis protegat illum usque ad ultimam senectutem sum∣ma Dei gratia: & post praesen∣tis regni gloriam, ad aeternum regnum transeat;&. ut sine fine regnet, quiin saeculo. intra Saecu∣lum feliciter imperat; ipso praestante qui est Rex regum & Dominus dominantium, cum Patre & Spiritu San∣cto in Saecula Saeculorum Amen.
Definitis itaque iis quae su∣perius comprehensa sunt, an∣nuente religiosissimo principe, placuit deinde, nulla re impe∣diente, à quolibet nostrum ea quae constituta sunt temerari, sed cuncta salubri consilioconservari. conservare: quae quia pro∣fectibus Ecclesiae, & animae nostrae conveniunt, etiam pro∣priâ subscriptione, ut perma∣neant, roboramus& subscripse∣runt omnes..
AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the ARTICLES OF MAGNA CHARTA of King JOHN. As also concerning The MAGNA CHARTA now printed in this APPENDIX. THESE Articles or Capitula were found in the Study of Bishop Warner, late Bi∣shop of Rochester: They were commu∣nicated by a Gentleman of that Family to Mr. Geddis, and by him to the pre∣sent Bishop of Salisbury. There can be no reasonable scruple raised against the Authentickness or Truth of the Writing: For first, 1. It is in a Hand very ancient: They that are com∣petent judges of such Antiquities, say, It well preten∣deth to the Time of which it treateth.
2. It hath yet appendant the Seal of King John, without any suspicion of being lately affixed. 3. In the famous Library of Sir John Cotton, there are now to be seen many private Charters of King John, which exactly agree with this, both in respect of the Writing, and also of the Seal. 4. In the Books of the Archbishoprick of Canter∣bury, amongst many things there entred, of the time of King John, these Articles are Recorded, and were thence transcribed, many Years before the Original of them came into the Hand of the Bishop of Salis∣bury. 5. This Instrument is the same which Matth. Pa∣ris mentioneth, Page 254. by the name of SCHE∣DƲLA. Archiepiscopus Schedulam illam, &c. The Arch-Bishop, with others, bringing that Schedule to the King, recited before the King all the Capitula, &c.— Which tho' the King then rejected, yet shortly after upon better Advice, He granted; as may be gathered from the next Page of Matth. Paris. These Arguments may satisfie those, who since the late mentioning of these Articles in the Pastoral Let∣ter of the Bishop of Salisbury, have had the Civi∣lity to doubt of the Truth of the whole mat∣ter. 1. As to the substance of these Articles; It is to be ob∣served, that they contain some part of the Rights of the Barons, due to them by the Unwritten or Common
Law of the Land; which Rights, for more certain∣ty, were in several Reigns drawn into Writing: And, for more obligatoriness, into Charters, after the en∣trance of the Normans. In the time of the Confessor, they were contained in the Laws of that King. Wil∣liam the Conqueror confirmed (to the old, and new Ba∣rons of his Investiture according to Custom of Eng∣land) the Laws of the Confessor, as appeareth by the Record in Ingulf, and other Testimonies. 2. These Articles, or the Laws of the Confessor, were recognized, and by Oath re-confirm'd by Wil∣liam Rufus; no doubt, at His Coronation; or not long after. The old English Chronicle writeth thus, William Rufus by his Letters Summon'd the Bishops, Earls and Ba∣rons to St. Pauls, and there he Sware, and made to them Surety by Writing, to sustain, and maintain the Right. 3. King Henry I. ratified these Rights. In his Charter we find in general, Lagam Edwardi Regis vo∣bis reddo cum its emendationibus, quibus Pater meus eam emendavit, &c. I restore to you the Law of King Ed∣ward, as it was mended (or enlarged) by my Father, with the Advice of his Barons. 4. It is evident that King John (to omit others) both by His Coronation Oath, and at other times, confirmed these Articles or Explanations of the Old Law. Matth. Paris, pag. 239. The King (John) strictly commanded that the Laws of His Grandfather King Henry, should be observed by the whole Kingdom. But what this Law of King Edward, or Emendations contained, the same Matth. Paris setteth down in short, pag. 252.
The Charter of King Henry [the First] contained cer∣tain Liberties and Laws of King Edward, granted to the Church of England, and the great Men; as also some Liberties superadded by King Hen. I. And pag. 254. Capitula quoque legum & libertatum, &c. The Heads (or Articles) of the Laws and Liberties which the Great Men desired to be confirmed, are already entred, partly above in the Charter of Henry I. and partly were gathered out of the Old Laws of King Edward. The Historian speak∣eth of these very Articles here Printed. 5. 'Tis observable, That in these Articles, there is no care taken for the Liberties of the Church. The reason of which I conceive to be this: The Church∣men mostly then held with the King. And the Hand of the King was most heavy upon the Laity, who framed these Articles, without the Clergy. 6. These Articles provide nothing concerning the Summons and holding of the Common Council of the Realm. The reason whereof probably was this: The Barons of that time had introduced a Practice, of them∣selves to appoint the Time and Place of the Meeting of the Common Council of the Nation: At the granting of these very Articles, King John sent to the Barons; Ʋt diem & locum providerent congruum, ad haec omnia prosequenda. That they (the Barons) would appoint Time and Place for the concluding that matter. In the time of Henry III. (in whose Charter the Ar∣ticle de communi concilio habendo was omitted; and in whose time the Barons begun again to War) we find, that the Lords came unto the King and said, He must ordain and see for the Welfare of the Realm,
and then set the King a Day to meet at Oxenford, and there to hold a Parliament. So the English Chronicle. However, this grand Affair, as also that of the Church, were provided for in the Magna Charta of King John. Whereby it further appears, That these Arti∣cles were but the Rudiments of that Charter, after further enlarged, upon further deliberation. I COME now in the second place to say a few things concerning the Perfect and Compleat Magna Charta of King John, here printed in French. 1. It was the Custom of old Times to make three several Copies of Publick Acts and Charters. Of the Magna Charta we have one in Latin, in Matthew Paris. This in French (or old Norman Language) was kept in the Records of France, and thence Pub∣lished some years past by Luke Dachery, in his Spici∣legium. That in English was sent into all Counties, but as yet no Copy in this Language appeareth. Thus also the Laws of Canute, and the Provisions of Oxford (to mention no more) made in the time of Hen. III. were Publisht in three Languages. 2. The very same Charter Publisht in Latin by Matthew Paris, is also extant in the History of Rad. Niger, almost word for word; and also in two several Manuscripts in the Cottonian Library; where also about twenty years past the very Original was to be seen. 3. The Magna Charta of King John is not extant in any Record in the Tower, or elsewhere, as several
affirm; nor the Magna Charta of H. III. but only by Inspeximus in the time of Edw. I. A thing much to be wondered at. Rudburne writeth of the Charters of Hen. I. Sublatae sunt omnes variis fallaciis, exceptis tri∣bus. All but three were embezel'd. 4. The Magna Charta of King John, and that of Hen. III. are said to be the very same; where as they do exceedingly differ, as Mr. Selden in his Epi∣nomis hath partly observed, and may further appear to any that will compare them. Matthew Paris pag. 323. The Tenor of these Charters is fully set down, above, where our History treateth of King John: So as the Char∣ters of King John and Hen. III. are not found to differ in any thing. These words are not the words of Matthew Paris, but of Roger VVendover, (whom Matthew Paris often transcribeth very hastily) in whose History the Charter entred as King John's, is exactly the same with that Charter of Henry the Third. 5. As to that remarkable Article, Et ad habendum commune concilium Regni.— And to the holding the Commune Council of the Realm, &c. I shall briefly say, 1. That it hath been left out of all the Charters after King John's time, but is found in several Copys very Authentick, and particularly in the French Copy now here printed. 2. That this Article doth not, as some have written, give the Original to our Parliaments; for such Parliaments (or communia concilia) were held be∣fore this time. King Richard the First, after his return from the Holy VVar, summon'd a Common Council (or Parliament) at London, of the Clergy and Laity,
where he demanded Council about his making War upon the King of France; Earl Roger answered for the whole Parliament, The Earls, Barons and Knights, will aid you, O King, with their Swords; the Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Citizens, Burgesses, and Ecclesiastick Persons will aid you with Money; Abbates, Priors, and such others will aid you with their Prayers. So the English Chron. And to omit others, an Instance of such a Par∣liament is found in the Annales of Burton, pag. 263. compared with page 265. King John call'd to Northampton all the Earls and Barons of England: it followeth, Pandulfus spake (at the same time) to the Earls, Barons and Knights, O that you, &c. The Clergy indeed are not here mentioned, but were certainly present, because the occasion of that Council was to restore Peace to the Church and Kingdom, as Matthew Paris, or as the Annalist of Wa∣verly wordeth it, betwixt the King and the Archbishop. 3. I conceive the chief end of adding this Article, was to prevent the taking of Aids, (commonly called Talliage) or Escuage, by surprize, or by the consent only of a few, which King John had lately done. For the summoning of the Commune concilium here is plainly limited to the Sessing of Aids and Escuage: But the Mirror giveth another account of the meet∣ing of Parliaments, worthy of Consideration, page 225. where the Author refers us to higher times. There is yet one Article more in this Charter of King John which deserveth our regards, the rather because it being lately alledged in the Pastoral Let∣ter, hath much scandalized some, with its suprising Novelty.
The words are, Barones cum communia totius ter∣rae gravabunt nos. The Barons with the Community of the Land, shall aggrieve, or distress us, &c. But why should this sound uncouth to any, who have with Reflection perused the Histories of this, or the Neighbouring Kingdoms, wherein the same Practice is frequently found. Andrew King of Hungary al∣lowed the same Liberty to his People, as may be seen at large in the Decrees of the Kings of Hungary, in the end of Bonfinius: Like Examples occur in the French Annales; and in the Annales of Waverly in the time of Hen. the Third, pag. 217. If any will yet suspect that Matthew Paris, in this Point, hath not writ fairly, or that the Articles pro∣duced by the Bishop of Salisbury are not to be relied on, (and some such dissatisfied People there are) then let them (if they can be believed desirous of satisfaction) repair to the Red Book of Exchequer, where fol. 234. they may find the very same VVords, and Liberty granted, as before: Which Record cannot well be suspected of being corrupted, because it hath been always in good Custody.
Capitula super quibus facta est Magna Charta Regis Johannis, ex MS. Arch. Cantuar. Fol 14. Quae etiam authentice cum Sigillo extant in ma∣nibus Episc. Salisburiensis. ISTA sunt Capitula quae Barones petunt, & Dominus Rex concedit signata Sigillo Johannis Regis. Post decessum Antecessorum haeredes plenae aetatis ha∣bebunt haereditatem suam per antiquum relevium exprimen∣dum in Charta. Haeredes qui intra aetatem sunt & fuerunt in custodia, cum ad aetatem pervenerint, habebunt haereditatem suam sine re∣levio & fine. Custos terrae haeredis capiet rationabiles exitus, con∣suetudines & servitia sine destructione & vasto hominum & rerum suarum. Et si Custos terrae fecerit destructionem & vastum, amittat custodiam, & custos sustentabit domos, parcos, vivaria, stagna, molendina, & caetera ad terram illam pertinentia de exitibus terrae ejusdem. Et ut Haeredes ita maritentur ne disparagentur & per concilium propinquorum de consanguinitate sua. Ne vidua det aliquid pro dote sua, vel maritagio post deces∣sum Mariti sui, sed maneat in domo sua per XC. dies post mor∣tm ipsius: & infra terminum illum assignetur ei Dos, & marita∣gium statim habeat & haereditatem suam. Rex vel Ballivus non saisiet terram aliquam pro debito dum catalla debitoris suffi∣cient,
nec plegii debitoris distringantur dum capitalis debitor sufficit ad solutionem. Si vero capitalis deitor defecerit in solutione, si plegii voluerint, habeant terras debitoris donec debitum illud persolvatur plene, nisi capitalis debitor mon∣strare poterit se esse inde quietum erga plegios. Rex non concedet alicui Baroni quod capiat auxilium de liberis hominibus suis, nisi ad corpus suum redimendum, & ad faciendum primogenitum filium suum militem & ad pri∣mogenitam filiam suam semel maritandam, & hoc faciet per rationabile auxilium. Ne aliquis majus servitium faciat de feodo militis qum inde debetur: ut communia placita non sequantur uriam Do∣mini Regis; sed assignentur in aliquo certo loco, & ut recog∣nitiones capiantur in eisdem comitatibus in hunc modum. Ut Rex mittat duos Justitiarios per quatuor vices in anno, qui cum quatuor militibus ejusdem comitatus electis per co∣mitatum capiant assisas de novâ dissaisina, morte antecessoris, & ultima praesentatione, nec aliquis ob hoc sit summonitus nisi juratores & duae partes. Ut liber homo amercietur pro parvo delicto secundum mo∣dum delicti, & pro magno delicto secundum magnitudinem delicti, salvo contenemento suo. Villanus etiam amercietur, salvo Wainagio suo, & Mercator eodem modo, salva mercan∣disa, per Sacramentum proborum hominum de visneto. Ut clericus amercietur de laico feodo suo secundum modum aliorum praedictorum & non secundum beneficium Eccle∣siasticum. Ne aliqua villa amercietur pro pontibus faciendis ad ripa∣rias, nisi ubi de jure antiquitus esse solebant. Ut mensura vini, bladi, & latitudines pannorum, & rerum aliarum emendetur, & ita de ponderibus. Ut assisa de nova dissaisina & de morte antecessoris abbrevi∣entur & similiter de aliis assisis. Ut nullus Vicecomes intromittat se de placitis ad Coro∣nam pertinentibus sine coronatoribus, & ut comitatus & Hundreda sint ad antiquas firmas absque ullo incremento, ex∣ceptis dominicis Maneriis Regis.
Si aliquis tenens de Rege moriatur, licebit Vicecomiti vel alio Ballivo Regis seisire & inbreviare catallum ipsius per vi∣sum legalium hominum, ita tamen quod nihil inde amovea∣tur donec plenius sciatur si debet aliquid liquidum debitum Domino Regi, & tunc debitum Domini Regis persolva∣tur. Residuum verò relinquetur executoribus, ad faciendum testamentum defuncti. Et si nihil Regi debetur, omnia catalla cedent defuncto. Si aliquis liber homo intestatus decesserit, bona sua per manum proximorum parentum suorum & amicorum, & per visum Ecclesiae distribuantur. Ne viduae distringuantur ad se maritandum dum voluerint sine marito vivere, ita tamen quod securitatem facient quod non maritabunt se sine assensu Regis, si de Rege teneant, vel dominorum suorum de quibus tenent. Ne Constabularius vel alius ballivus capiat blada vel alia catalla, nisi statim denarios inde reddat, nisi respectum habere possit de voluntate venditoris. Ne Constabularius possit distringere aliquem militem ad dandum denarios pro custodia castri si voluerit facere custo∣diam illam in propria persona, vel per alium probum ho∣minem, si ipse eam facere non possit per rationabilem cau∣sam. Et si Rex cum duxerit in exercitum sit quietus de custo∣dia secundum quantitatem temporis. Ne Vicecomes vel Ballivus Regis vel aliquis alius capiat equos vel carectas alicujus liberi hominis pro carriagio faci∣endo nisi ex voluntate ipsius. Ne Rex vel Ballivus suus capiat alienum boscum ad castra vel ad alia agenda nisi per voluntatem ipsius cujus boscus fuerit. Ne Rex teneat terram eorum qui fuerint convicti de felo∣nia, nisi per unum annum & unum diem; sed tunc reddatur Domino feodi. Ut omnes Kidelli de caetero penitus deponantur in Tamisâ & Medeway & per totam Angliam. Ne breve quod vocatur Percipe de caetero fiat alicui de aliquo tenemento unde liber homo amittat Curiam suam.
Si quis fuerit dissaisitus vel prolongatus per Regem sine ju∣dicio de terris, libertatibus, & jure suo, statim ei restitua∣tur, & si contentio super hoc orta fuerit, tunc inde dispona∣tur per judicium XXV. Baronum, & ut illi qui fuerint dis∣saisiti per Patrem vel fratrem Regis, Rectum habeant si∣ne dilatione per judicium parium suorum in curia Regis. Et si Rex debeat habere terminum aliorum Crucesignatorum, tunc Archiepiscopus & Episcopi facient inde judicium ad certam diem appellatione remota. Ne aliquid detur pro brevi inquisitionis de vita vel mem∣bris, sed libere concedatur sine pretio, & non negetur. Si aliquis tenet de Rege per feodi firmam, per soccagi∣um, vel burgagium: & de alio per servitiu militis, Domi∣nus Rex non habebit custodium militum de feodo alterius occsione Burgagii, vel Soccagii vel feodifirmae; nec debet ha∣bere custodim Burgagii, Soccagii vel feodifirmae, & quod liber homo non amittat militiam suam occasione parvarum sergantisarum sicuti de illis qui tenent aliquod tenemen∣tum, reddendo inde cultellos, vel sagittas vel hujusmodi. Ne aliquis Ballivus possit ponere aliquem ad legem sim∣plici loquela sua sine testibus fidelibus. Ne corpus liberi hominis capiatur nec imprisonetur, nec dissaisietur, nec utlagetur, nec exuletur, nec aliquo modo destruatur. Nec Rex eat vel mittat super eum vi nisi per judicium pa∣rium suum vel per legem terrae. Ne jus vendatur, vel differatur vel vetitum sit. Quod Mercatores habeant salvum ire & venire, ad emen∣dum vel vendendum sine omnibus malis Toltis per antiquas & rectas consuetudines. Ne scutagium vel auxilium ponatur in Regno, nisi per commune consilium Regni, nisi ad corpus Regis redimendum & primogenitum filium suum militem faciendum & filiam suam primogenitam semel maritandam & ad hoc fiat ratio∣nabile auxilium. Simili modo fiat de Tallagiis & auxiliis de civitate London & de aliis civitatibus quae inde habent liber∣tates, & ut Civitas London. plenè habeat antiquas libertates & liberas consuetudines suas tam per aquas quam per terras.
Ut liceat unicuique exire de regno, & redire salva fide Do∣mini Regis, nisi tempore Werrae per aliquod breve tempus propter communem utilitatem regni. Si quis mutuo aliquid acceperit à Judaeis plus vel minus, & moriatur antequam debitum illud solvatur, debitum non usurabit quamdiu haeres infra aetatem, de quocumque te∣neat. Et si debitum illud inciderit in manum Regis, Rex non capiet nisi catallum quod continetur in Charta. Si quis moriatur & debitum debeat Judaeis, uxor ejus ha∣beat dotem suam; & si liberi remanserint, provideantur iis ne∣cessaria secundum tenementum, & de residuo solvatur debi∣tum, salvo servitio Dominorum. Simili modo fiat de aliis debitis, & ut custos terrae reddat haeredi cum ad plenam aeta∣tem pervenerit terram suam restauratam secundum quod ra∣tionabiliter poterit sustinere de exitibus terrae ejusdem de Ca∣rucis & Wainagiis. Si quis tenuerit de aliqua escaeta ficut de honore Walling∣ford & Nottingham, Bonon & Lancaster, & de aliis escaetis quae sunt in manu Regis, & sunt Baroniae, & obierit, haeres ejus non dabit aliud relevium vel faciet aliud servitium quam faceret Baroni, & ut Rex eodem modo eam teneat quo Baro eam tenuit. Ut fines qui facti sunt pro dotibus, maritagiis, haereditati∣bus & amerciamentis, injustè & contra legem terrae, omnino condonentur, vel fiat inde per judicium XXV. Baronum, vel per judicium majoris partis eorundem una cum Archiepis∣copo & aliis quos secum vocare voluerit, ita quod si aliquis vel aliqui de XXV. fuerint in simili querela, amoveantur, & alii loco illorum per residuos de XXV. substituantur. Quod obsides & Chartae reddantur quae liberatae fuerunt Regi in securitatem. Ut illi qui fuerint extra forestam non veniant coram Justi∣tiariis de Foresta per communes summonitiones, nisi sint in placito, vel plegii fuerint, & ut pravae consuetudines de fo∣restis & de forestariis & Warrennis & Vicecomitibus & vi∣variis emendentur per XII. milites de quolibet comita∣tu qui debent eligi per probos homines ejusdem comi∣tatus.
Ut Rex amoveat penitus de Balliva parentes & totam se∣quelam Gerardi de Aties quod de caetero Ballivam non ha∣beant, scilicet Engelardum, Andr. Petrum, & Gigonem de Cances, Gigonem de Cygon, Mattheum de Martino & fratres ejus & Gelfrid nepotem ejus & Philippum de Marke. Et ut Rex amoveat alienigenas milites, Stipendiarios, Bali∣starios & Ruttarios, & Servientes qui venerunt cum equis & armis ad nocumentum regni. Ut Rex faciat Justitiarios, Constabularios & Vicecomites & Ballivos de talibus qui sciant legem terrae & eam velint bene observare. Ut Barones qui fundaverunt Abbatias unde habent chartas Regum vel antiquam tenuram, habeant custodiam earum cum vacaverint. Si Rex Walenses dissaisierit vel elongaverit de terris, vel libertatibus, vel de rebus aliis in Anglia vel in Wallia, eis sta∣tim sine placito reddantur: & si fuerint dissaisiati vel elongati de tenementis suis Anglicis per patrem vel fratrem Regis sine judicio parium suorum, Rex eis sine dilatione justitiam ex∣hibebit eo modo quo exhibet Anglicis justitiam de tenemen∣tis suis Angl. secundum legem Angl. & de tenementis Wall secundum legem Wall. & de tenementis Marchiae secun∣dum legem Marchiae. Idem facient Wallenses Regi & suis. Ut Rex reddat filium Lewelini & praeterea omnes obsides de Wallia, & Chartas quae ei liberatae fuerunt in securita∣tem pacis. Ut Rex faciat Regi Scotiae de obsidibus reddendis & de li∣bertatibus suis & jure suo secundum formam quam fecit Bar. Angl. nisi aliter esse debeat per Chartas quas Rex ha∣bet per judicium Archiepiscopi & aliorum quos secum vocare voluerit. Ut omnes forestae quae sunt aforestatae per Regem tempore suo deafforestentur, & ita fiat de ripariis quae per ipsum Re∣gem sunt in defenso. Omnes autem istas consuetudines & libertates quas Rex concessit regno tenendas quantum ad se pertinent, erga suos,
omnes de regno tam Clerici quam Laici observabunt quan∣tum ad se pertinet erga suos. Haec est forma securitatis ad observandam pacem & li∣bertates inter Regem & Regnum, Barones eligent XXV. Ba∣rones de tegno quos voluerint, qui debent pro totis viribus suis observare, tenere, & facere observari pacem, & liber∣tates quas Dominus Rex eis concessit, & Charta sua confir∣mavit. Ita, viz. Quod si Rex, vel Justitiarii, vel Ballivi Re∣gis vel aliquis de ministris suis in aliquo erga aliquem de∣liquerit, vel aliquem articulorum pacis, aut securitatis trans∣gressus fuerit, & delictum ostensum fuerit IV. Baronibus de praedictis XXV. Baronum: illi IV. Barones accedent ad Dominum Regem vel ad Justitiarium suum, si Rex fuerit extra regnum, proponentes ei excessum & petent ut ex∣cessum illum sine dilatione faciat emendari. Et si Rex vel Justitiarius illud non emendaverit, Si Rex fuerit extra reg∣num, infra rationabile tempus determinandum in Charta, praedicti IV. referent causam illam ad residuos de illis XXV.Communâ, C. M. Ep. Sal. Baronibus, & illi XXV. cum communia totius terrae de∣stringent & gravabunt Regem modis omnibus quibus pote∣rint: scilicet per captionem castrorum, terrarum, possessio∣num & aliis modis quibus poterint, donec fuerit emenda∣tum secundum arbitrium eorum. Salva Persona Domini Regis, & Reginae, & Liberorum suorum. Et cum fuerit emendatum, intendant Domino Regi sicut prius. Et qui∣cumque voluerit de terra, jurabit se, ad praedicta exequenda, pariturum mandatis praedictorum XXV. Baronum, & gra∣vaturum Regem pro posse suo cum ipsis. Et Rex pub∣licè & libere dabit licentiam jurandi cuilibet qui jurare vo∣luerit, & nulli unquam jurare prohibebit. Omnes autem illos de terra qui sponte suâ, & per se jurare voluerint XXV. Baronibus de distringendo & gravando Regem, cum iis Rex faciet jurare eosdem de mandato suo sicut prae∣dictum est. Item si aliquis de praedictis XXV. Baronum decesserit,Sic & M. Ch. Episc. Sar. vel à terra recesserit, vel aliquo alio modo impeditus fuerit quominus ista praedicta possit exequi, qui residui fuerint de XXV. eligent alium loco ipsius pro arbitrio suo, qui
simili modo erit juratus quo & caeteri. In omnibus autem quae istis XXV. Baronibus committantur exequenda, si fortè ipsi XXV. praesentes suerint & inter se super re aliqua dis∣cordaverint, vel aliqui ex eis notati nolint vel nequeant interesse, ratum habebitur & firmum quod major pars ex eis provident vel praeceperit, ac si omnes XXV. in hoc con∣sensissent. Et praedicti XXV. jurabunt quod omnia ante∣dicta fideliter observabunt, & pro toto posse suo facient observari.D. Matth. Par. Praeterea Rex faciet eos securos per Chartas Archiepiscopi & Episcoporum & Magistri Pandulfi, quod nihil impetrabit à Domino Papa per quod aliqua istarum conventionum revocetur vel minuatur.Hic & Ch. M. Episc. Sar. sine date. Et si al quid tale impetraverit, reputetur irritum & inane, & nunquam eo utatur. Sine dato.
DIPLOMA REGIUM:Eruit D. d'Heroval. SIVE Ordinationes JOHANNIS Regis An∣gliae, queis statuit quid Nobiles, quid Plebeii observare debeant, ad pacem & tranquillitatem Regni stabili∣endam. VIII. JOHAN par la grace de Deu Roi Dengleterre, as Arceveskes, as Eveskes, as Abbez, as Contes,An. Chr. 1215. as Barons, as Iustises, as Forestiers, as Viscontes, as Prevoz, as Ministres, & a toz ses Bailliz, & ses féels, saluz. Sachiez que nos par la grace de Deu & pur le sauvement de nostre asme, & de toz nos ancestres, & de noz eirs, & de lenor de Deu, & le sauvement de seinte Iglise, & lamendement de nostre Regne, par le consel de noz enorez peres Larceveske Estievene de Cantorbire Primat de tote Engleterre & Cardinal de Rome, & Larceveske Henri de Diveline, & Leveske Willaume de Londres, Leveske Pieres de Wincestre, Leveske Jocelin de Ba, Leveske Hue de NicholeLincolne., Leveske Gautier de Wirecestre, Leveske Will. de Cestre, & Leveske Beneit de Rovecestre, & Maistre Pandol Sodiacre nostre Seignor Lapostoire, & nostre ami frere Anner Maistre de la Chevalerie del Temple de Engleterre, & de nos Barons Will. le Marescal Comte de Penbroc, Will. Conte de Salisbires, Will. Conte de Warenne, Will. Conte de Arondel, Alain de Galwche, Conestable d'Escoce, Warin le fiz Gerod, Pe∣res le fiz Herebert, Hubert de Borc Seneschau de Peitou, Huge
de Nuevile, Matheu le fiz Herebert, Thomas Basset; Alain Bas∣set, Philippe Daubeigni, Robert de Ropelée, Johan. Marescal, & Johan le fiz Hue, & de nos autres féels. Premierement que nos avons ottieotriè. a Deu & le confermons par ceste nostre presente Chartre, por noz, & por nos eirs a toz iorz, que les Yglises de Engleterre, seront franches & aient lor dreitures franches & enterines & plenieres, & volon que cili seit garde la que chose apert, par co que nos otriames par nostre pure volunte & de gre les franchises des Ellections que len tienent par plus grant & par plus necessaire as Yglises de Engleterre, devant que la descorde fust commencie entre nos & nos Barons, & la confirmames par nostre Chartre & parchacames que ele fu confirmée par nostre Seignor Lapostoire Innocent le tiers, la∣quelle nos garderons & volons que nostre eir la gardent toz jorz en bone fei. Nos avon encore otrie a tez les francs homes de nostre Regne pur nos, & pur nos eirs a toz iorz totes les fran∣chises qui de soz sunt escrites, quil les aient & les tiegnent il & lor eir de nos & de nos eirs, se acuns de nos Contes, vo de nos Barons, vo des altres qui tienent de nos en chief par servise de Chevalier mora, et quant il sera mors & ses eirs sera de plein aage & devra relief, ait son heritage par l'ancien relief, co est a savier li eir, ou li eir del Conte, de Baronie Contal entiere par C. livres li eirs ou li eir del baron de la baronie par C. livres: li eirs ou li eir de Chevalier de fie de Chevalier entier par C. sol au plus, & qui meins devra meins doinst solon lanciene costume del fie. Si le eirs d'aucun di tels sera dedens aage, & sera en garde; quand il sera parvenu a aage ait son heritage sans relief & sans fin. Les gardeors de la terree de tel heir qui sera dedens aage ne pregne de la terre de leir fors Reignables, eissues & Reigna∣bles costumes, & Reignables services, & ce senz destruiement, & senz vast des homes & des choses. Et se nes avons livrée la garde de la terre daucun itel a Visconte o a acune altre qui nos dei respondre des eissues de la terre, et cil de la garde fera destruiement o gast, nos prendrons de celuy amende, & la terre sera livrée a deus leals prodeshomes
de cel fei qui respoignent des eissues a nos, o celui que noz comanderons. Et se nos avons done o vendu a aucun la garde de la terre de aucun itel, & cil enfra destruiement o wast per de cele garde, & seit livre a deus leials sage prodeshomes & dicele que I nous respoignent, si come nos avons de∣vant dit. Et si le gardior tant dis com il aura la garde de tele ter∣re, sostinges les meisons, les viviers, les pars, les estans, les molins, & les altres choses qui apartient a cele terre de eissues, & de celle meimes terre: & rendra al heir quant sera parvenus en plain aage sa terre tote estorée de charues, de granges, solon coque li tens de la gaignerie requera, & les eissues de la terre porront musurablement soffrir reisuablement. Li heir scient marie sans desparagement cissi ne purquant que ainz que li mariages seit fet, seit mostre al prochains del lignage de cel heir. La Veve empres la mort de son mari namtenant & sans gre∣vance ait son mariage & son heritage, ne riens ne doinst pour son mariage, ne pour son doaire, ne pour son heritage que el∣le & ses maris tiudrent, al ior de la mort del mari, & seit en la maison de son mari puis quil sera mort xl. forz dedens les quels forz li seit les doairez livrez. Nule Veve ne seite destreite de sci marier tant dis come ele voldra vivre sanz mari, ssi ne purquant que ele face seurte que cle ne se marira sanz nostre otrei, se ele tinent de nos o senz lo∣trei de son Seignor de qui elle tient, se ele tient dautrui. Ne nos ne nostre Bailli ne seiseron terre ne rente del dettor pour aucune dette tandis com sis chattels soffisent a paier la det∣te, ne si plege ne seront destroit tant dis come le chevetaigne det∣tor soffira a la dette paier. Et se le chevetaigne detor na de quei paier sa dette, respoigne li plege de la dette. Et sil volent aient les terres, & les rentes del detter jusquil aient restore∣ment de la dette quil ont devant paiée pour lui; se le chevetaigne detor ne monstre quil en est quitte vers cels pleges. Se aucuns a emprunte as IeusId est Iuis. plus o meins, & muert devant quil lor alt paie lor avoir, ne croise mie la dette tant dis com li heirs sera dedens aage, & se cele dette vient en nos
maius nos nen prendron que le chastelId est, le capital, le principal. que nos troveron en la charte. Et se aucun muret, & deit dette as Ieus, sa feme ait son doaire, & ne paiet nient de cele dette, & se li enfant qui remain∣dront del mort sont dedenz aage, porveu lor seit lor estoveir rais∣nablement solonc le tenement qui fu del mort, & del remanant seit paiée la dette, sauf le service des Seignors, & en tel ma∣niere seit feit de dettes que l'on deit a altres que a Iues. Leu ne mettra nul escuagef. taille., ne aieaide. en nostre Regne, fors par commun conseil de nostre Regne, fors a nostre reimbreId est, ad nostrum cor∣pus redimen∣dum si in bel∣lo capti fueri∣mus, ut infra. & a nostre ainzne fiz faire Chevalier, & a nostre ainznée fille ma∣rier une feiz; & a cestes choses ne face len aie se raisnable non. En cele mainere seit feit daies de la cite de Londres, & estre co la cite de Londres ait totes ses ancienes costumes, & ses fran∣chises & par mer & par aigue. Nos volons estre co, & otrions que totes les altres citez & li borc, & les viles, & li port aient en totes lor franchises, & lor franches costumes, & aient le commun conseil del Regne, de laie a asseeir altrement que as treis cas qui sont devant dit. E lescuage aseer ferous somondre les Arceveskes, les Eves∣kes, les Abbez, les Comtes, les greignors Barons: chacun par sei par nos lettres, & estre co ferons somondre en commun par nos Viscontes, & par nos Bailliz toz ceus qui de nos tienent en chief a certain jor, co est al terme de xl. jorz al mainz & a cer∣tain lieu, & nomerons la cause en totes lettres de ceste somon∣se. Et quant la somonse sera issi feite voist li afaires avant, au jor assigne solon le conseil di cels qui seront present; ja seit coque ne seient pas venu tuit cil qui furent somons. Nos notrions a nul des ore en avant quil pregne aie de ses frans homes fors a son cors raimbreVide supra. & a son ainzne fiz faire Chevalier, & a sa fille ainznée marier une feiz, & a co ne seit feit aie se raisnable non. Nuls ne seit destreinz a faire grenor servise de fieu de Cheva∣lieo o daltre franc tenement, que tant come il tient & deit. Li commun plait ne suient mie nostre cort, mais saient tenu en alcun certain lieu. Les reconussances de novele dessaisine de mort dancestre, & de darrain presentment ne seiente prises fors en lor Contez & ceste maniere: Nos o nostre Chevetains Iusticieres se nos fumes fors
del Regne enveierons deus justices par chascun Conte par iv, feiz en lan qui o quatre des Chevaliers de chascun Conte esseuz par le Conte pregnent el Conte, & el jor del Conte, & en cer∣tain lieu les devant dites assises, & se les devant des assises ne puent estre prises el jor del Conte, tant Chevaliers & franche∣ment tenanz remaignent de cels qui furent present al Conte en icel jor par qui puisent li jugement estre fait sofisaument, solon co qui li afaire sera plus grant oplus petit. Frans hom ne set amerciez pour petit forfit fors solon la ma∣niere del forfait, & pour le grant forfait seit amerciez solonc la grandesce del forfait sauf son contenement, & li marcheant en∣semt sauve la marchendise. Li Vilaint ensemt seit amerci∣ez saals son gaagnage sil chiet en nostre merci, & nule des de∣vant dites merciz ne sera mise fors par le serement de prodo∣mes & des leaus des visnez. Li Conte & li Baron ne seient amerciez fors par lor pers & solonc la maniere del forfait. Nus clers ne soit amerciez de son lai tenement, fors solonc la maniere des altres qui devant sunt dit, & nun pas solonc la quantite de la rente de Siglisdef. des Iglise, ou de Liglise.. Ne vile ne home ne seit destreiz a faire ponz a rivieres, fors cil qui ancienement & par drect les devent faire. Nuls Visquens ne Conestables ne nostre Coroneor ne nostre altre Bailli ne tiegnent les plaiz de nostre Corone. Chascune Comtez, Hundrez, Wapulzac, & Treingues, soient as ancienes fermes sens nul croisement, fors nos demeins ma∣niers. Se aucuns qui tient lai fie de nos muert & nostre Visquens, o altres nostre Bailliz, monstre nos lettres overtes de nostre se∣monse de la dette que li mort nos deveit, leissie a nostre Visconte o a nostre Bailli atachier & enbrever les chatels del mort, qui se∣ront trove el lai fie a la vaillance dicelle dette, que li morz nos deveit par veue de leaus homes, eissi ne par quant que riens ne seit oste jusque nos seit paiée la dette qui sera coneue; & li rema∣nant seit saissie as executors a faire le testament del mort: & sil ne nos deivent rien tot li chatel seient otrie al mort, sauves les reignables parties de sa feme & de ses enfans. Se aucuns frans huem muert senz testament, li thatel seient departi par les mains des prochains parenz & de ses amis par la veue de seinte Iglise, sauves les dettes a chascun que le mort lor devoit.
Nus de nos Conestables ne de nos altres Bailliz ne pregne les blez, ne les altres chatels daucun, se maintenant nen paie les deniers, sil nen puet aver respit par volente del vendeor. Nus Conestables ne destreigne nul Chevalier a doner deniers pour la garde del Chastel, sil lavoit faite en sa propre persone u par altre prodome sil ne la puet faire par aucune reignable achaisunId est raiso∣nable occasi∣on., & se nos le menons o enveions en ost, il sera quites dicele garde tant dis cum il sera par nos en lost. Nus Viscontes ne nostre Bailliz ne altre ne pregne les che∣vals ne les charettes daucun franc home, pour faire cariage, fors par la volente de cel franc home. Ne nos ne nostre Baillie ne prendrons altrui bois a nos Cha∣stels, o a nos altres ovres faire, fors par la volente de celui cui sera li vois. Nos ne tendrons les terres de cels qui seront convencue de fe∣lonie, fors un an & un jor, & adons les rendrons as Seignors des fiez. Tot li Kidel seient dici en avant oste del tot en tot de Tamise & de Medoine, & par tote Engleterre, fors par la costiere de la mer. Li bries qui est apelez precipz des ci en avant ne feit faiz a nul daucun tenement, dont frans hoem peusi perdre sa cort. Une mesure de vin seit par tot nostre Kegne, & une mesure de cerveise, & une mesure de ble, eo est li quartiers de Londres, & une leise de dras teinz, & de rosez, & de habergiez, co est deus au∣nes dedenz listes, & des peispois. seit ensement come des musures.mesures. Riens ne seit done ne pris des ci en avant pour le brief del en∣queste de vie, o de membres de aucun, mais seit otrée en pur don, & ne seit esconduit. Se aucuns tient de nos par feuferme o par, sokage, & tient ter∣re daltrui par servise de Chevalier, nos n'aurons mie la garde del heir, ne de la terre qui est daltrui fie par achaison de cele feu∣ferme, o del sokage, o del borgage. Ne n'aurons la garde de cele feuferme, o del socage, o del borgage, se cele feuferme ne deit service de Chevalier. Nos n'aurons la garde del heir ne de la terre dalcun, que il tient daltrui par servise de Chevalier, par achaison daucune petite serjanteri, quil tient de nos par servise de rendre saettes, o co∣telz, o tels choses. Nuls Bailliz ne mette des cien avant alcun a lei par sa sim∣ple parole, fors par bons tesmoins amenez aice.
Nuls frans hom ne sera pris, ne emprisonez, ne dessaisiz, ne ullagiez, ne eissillieze, ne destruiz, ne aucune maniere, ne sor lui n'irons ne n'enveierons, fors par leal jugement de ses pers, o par la lei de la terre. A nulli ne vendrons, a nulli nescondirons ne ne proloigne∣rons dreir ne justise. Tuit li marchant aient sauf & feur eissir d'Engleterre, & ve∣nir en Engleterre & demorer,, & aler par Engleterre, par terre & par eaue a vendre & a chater, sans toes males totes par les ancienes drettes costumes, fors el tens de guerre, cil ki sunt de la terre qui nos guerroie, & se tel sunt trove en nostre terre el commancement de la guerre, soient atachie sans domage de lor cors & de lor choseo, jusqu'il seit seu de nos o de nostre chevetein Iustifier coment li marcheant de la nostre terre seront traitie, qui donc seront trove en la terre qui contre nos guerroie, & se li nostre sunt ilucke sauf, seient si lor sauf en la nostre terre. Leise chacun des ci en avant eissir de nostre Regne & repairier sauf & seur par terre & par eue sauve nostre fei, fors el tens de guerre par alcun petit tens pour preu del Regne: Mais di co sunt jet te fors li emprisone, & li utlagie solon la lei del regne, & la gent ki contre nos guerroie. Des marcheans seit feit, si come nous avons devant dit. Se aucuns tient daucune eschaette si come del honor de Wa∣lingeford, Notingehan, Boloigne, Lancastre, u dautres echae∣tes qui sunt en nostre main, & sunt de baronie, & il muert, ses heirs ne doinst altre relief, ne face a nos altre servise, qui feist al Baron, ce cele Baronie fust en main del Baron, & nos la tendrons en tele maniere que le Baron la tint. Li home qui maignent fors de la forest, ne viegnent de ci en avant devant nos Iustises de la forest par communes somonces, sil ne sont en plait u plege de aucun ou d'aucuns qui seient ata∣chie pour la forest. Nos ne ferons Viscontes, Iustises, ne Bailliz, fors de tels qui sachent la lei de la terre, & la voillent bien garder. Tuit cil qui fonderent Abbeies, dont il ont charges des Reis d'Engleterre, o anciene tenue, aiant en la garde quant eles se∣ront voides, si com il avoit devent. Totes les forez qui sunt aforestées en nostre tens seient mein∣tenant desaforestées, et ensement seit feit des rivieres qui en no∣stre tens sunt par nos mises en defens.
Totes les males costumes des forez et des Warennes, et des Forestiers, et des Warrenniers, des Viscontes et de lor mini∣stres des rivieres, et de lor gardes, setent maintenant enqui∣ses en chascun Conte par xii. Chevaliers Iurez de meimes le Conte, qui devent estre esseu par prodeshomes de meismes le Conte et de denz xl. jorz apres co quil auront fette lenqueste, seient del tot en tot ostées par cels meismes, si que jamais ne saient rapelées, eissi ne por quant que nos le sachons avanto no∣stre Iustise, se nos ne sumes en Engleterre. Nos tendrons maintenant toz les hostages et totes les char∣tres, qui nos furent livrées des Engleis en seurte de pais, o de feel servise. Nous osteron de tot en tot des baillies les parens Girard d' Aties, si que des ci en avant n'auront nulle baillie en Engle∣terre, et Engelart de Cigoigni, Peron, Guion, Andreu de Chanceas, Gion de Cigoigni, Gistrai de Martigni et ses fre∣res, Phelippe, Marc et ses freres, Gefrai son nevo, et tote lor siute, et maintenant empres le reformement de la pais oste∣rons de nostre Regne tos les estranges Chevaliers, Aubelasti∣ers, serjans, soldiers quo chevals et o armes vindrent al nuise∣ment del Regne. Se alcuns est dessaisiz o esloigniez par nos, sens realLeal, ut in∣fra. juge∣ment de ses pers, de terres, de chastels, de franchises, o de sa dretture maintenant li rendrons, et le plaiz en commencera di co, adonc en seit fait par jugement des xxv. Barons, dont len parole de soz en la seurt de la pais. De totes iteles choses dont alcuns fu dessaisiz o estoigniez senz leal jugement de ses Pers par le Rei Henri nostre pere, o par le Rei Richart nostre frere, que avons en nostre main, o al∣tre tienent cui il nos cvient garantir, aurons respit jusqu'a commun terme des croizier, fors que celes choses dont plaiz fu comenciez o enqueste faire par nostre comandement devant que nos prissions la Croiz. Et se nos repairons del pelerinage o par avanture remanons del pelerinage maintenant en frons pleine dreiture. Cest meimes respit aurons et en ceste ma∣niere de dreiture faire des forez desaforester, o que remaig∣nent forez que li Reis Henri nostre pere, o li Reis Richart nostre frere aforesterent, et des gardes des terres qui sunt daltrui fie; que nos avons eues jusques icy par achaison de fie que alcuns teneit de nos par servise de Chevalier, et
des Abbeies qui furent fondée en altrui fie que el nostre, esquels li sires del fie dit quila droiture, et quant nos feron repairie de nostre pelerinage, o se no remanons, nos enfrons mainte∣nant pleine droiture a cels qui sen plaindront. Nuls ne soit pris ne emprisonez pour apel de feme de la mort daltrui, que de sun marri. Totes les fins et toz les amerciemens qui sont feit vers nos a tort et contre la lei de la terre, soient tot pardone, o len en face par jugement del xxv. Barons dont len parole de soz, o par le jugement de la greignor partie de cels ensemble, o le devant dit Arcevesque Stefne de Cantorbe sil I puet estre: et cels quil vodra apeler od sei, et sil ni pora estre neien meins ne voist li afaires avant senz lui en tel maniere que se alcuns o alcun des devant diz xxv. Barons, seront en tel querele seient oste de cest jugement, et altre esteu et jure seient mis a co faire en lieu de cels par le remanant des devant diz xxv. Barons. Se nos avons dessaisiz et estoigniez les walais de terre et de franchises, o daltres choses senz leal jugement de lor Pers en Engleterre, o en wales, maintenant lor seient rendues, et se plaiz en sera comanciez selor en seit fait en la Marche par jugement de lor Peres des tenemenz d' En∣gleterre solonc la lei d' Engleterre des tenemenz de wales solonc la lei de wales, des tenemenz de la Marche solonc de lai de la Marche, et ce meismes facent li walais a nos et as noz. De totes celes choses dont alcuns des walaix fu dessaisiz, o esloignie senz leal jugement de ses Pers par le Rei Hen∣ry nostre pere, o par le Rei Richart nostre frere, que nos avons en nostre main, o altre tienent cui il nos covient ga∣rantir, aurons respit jusqual commun terme des Croisiez, fors de celes choses dont plaist fu commenciez o enqueste faite par nostre commandement devant que nous prissions la Croiz, et quant nos serons repairiez o se par aventure remanons de nostre pelerinage maintenant lor enfrons pleine dreiture solonc les lez de wales, et les devant dites parties. Nos rendrons le fil Lewelin maintenant et toz les ho∣stages de wales, et les chartres que l'en nos livra en seur∣te de pais.
Nos ferons a Alisandre le Rei d'Escoce de ses setors et de ses hostages rendre, et de ses franchises, et de la dret∣ture solonc la forme que nos frons a nos altres Barons d' Engleterre, se altrement ne deit estre par les chartres que nos avons de son pere Willaume, qui fu jadis Reis d'Escoce, et co sera fait par jugement de ses Pers en nostre Cort. Totes ces costumes devant dites et les franchises que nos a∣vons otriées a tenir en nostre Regne quant a nos apartient en∣vers les nos, tuit cil de nostre Regne, et Clerc et lai devent garder quant a eus apartient envers les lor. Et car nos avons otriées totes les choses devant dites por Deu, et par amandement de nostre Regne, et por mielz plai∣sier la descorde qui es comanciée entre nos et nos Barons; nos voelliant que ces choses séent fermes et estables a toz∣jorz, faisons et otrions a nos Barons la seurte de soz escrite; co est que li Baron essisent xxv. Barons del Regne telz quil vodrent, qui dient de tot lor poer garder et tenir, et faire gar∣der la pais et les franchises que nos avons otriées et confer∣mées par ceste nostre presente Chartre, eissi co est a saver que se nos, o nostre Iustise, o nostre Bailli, o aucuns de nos mini∣stres mesfaisons en alcune choses vers alcun, o trespassions en alcun point de la pais, o de la seurte, et nostre mesfais sera mostrez a quatre Barons del devant dit xxv. cil quatre Baron viegnent a nes, o a nostre Iustise, se nos fumes fors del Reg∣ne, et nos mostrent nostre trespassement, et requierent que nos faciens amender cel trespassement senz proloignement et se nos namendions le trespassement, o se nous sumes fors del regne nostre Iustise ne lamendra devant xl. jors em∣pres co que il sera mostre a nos, o a nostre Iustise se nous sumes fors de la terre, adone li devant dit quatre reportent cele cause al altres de celz xxv. Barons, et adone cil xxv. Baron a la commune de tote Engleterre nos destreindront et greveront en totes li manieres que il porrout. Co est par prendre chastelz et trres et possessions, et en queles altres maniers quil poront, jusquil seit amende solone lor jugement, sauve nostre personne et de nostre Reine, et de nos enfans, et quant il sera amande il atendront a nos, eissi come devant. Et qui vodra de la terre jurt que a totes les devant dites choses parsivir, il obeira al comandement des devant diz xxv. Barons, et quil nous grevera ensemble oels
a son poer, & nous donons comunement & franchement con∣gie de jurer a chascun qui jurer vodra, & ja ne le defen∣drons a neis un, & toz cels de la terre qui de lor von gre voldront jurer as xxv. Barons, de destreindre & de grever nos, nos les frons jurer oels par nostre comandement, si com devant est dit. Et se alcuns des xxv. Barons morra, o partira de la ter∣re, o sera destorbez en aucune maniere quil ne puist les cho∣ses qui sunt devant dites poursivir, cil qui seront remes des devant dit xxv. Barons, estisent un altre en lieu de celui solonc lor esgart, que jurera en tel maniere com li altre ont fait. Et en totes les choses que li xxv. Baron devent poursi∣vir se paraventure cil xxv. seront present, & descorderont en∣tre els d'aucune chose, o aucun de cels qui seront somons ne vodront, o ne pouront estre present, seit ferm & certain co que la greignor partie de cels qui seront present porverra, o recevra ensement com se tuit I aveient consenti. Et li devant dit xxv. Baron juerent que totes les choses qui sunt devant dites, quil garderont feelement, & feront garder de tot lor poer. Et nos ne porchacerons dalcun par nos, ne par altrui rien pour quei alcuns de ces otreiemenz o de cestes franchises seit rapelez o amenusiez, & se alcune tel chose sera pourchacie seit cassée, & veine, & ja nen userons par nos ne par altrui. Et totes males volentes, desdeigz, rancors, qui sont nées entre nos & nos homes clers & lais, deske la descorde, co∣manca, avons plainement relaissiées & pardonées a toz, & estre co toz les trespassemens qui sunt fait par achaison di ceste descorde des la Pasche en la sezain de nostre Regne jusqual reformement de la pais avom plainement relaissie a toz clers, & a lais & quant a nos aportient lor avon plainement pardone & otrie di co lor avon fait faire lettres de tesmoin overtes de Seignor Stefne l' Arceveske de Cantorbire, de Seignor Henri l' Arceveske de Diveline, & des devant diz Evesques, & de maistre Pandolf sor ceste seurte & ces otreiemenz, por la que chose nos volons & comandons fermement que l' E∣glise d' Angletrre soit franche, & que li home en nostre Regne aient & riegnent totes les devant dites franchises, & les deitures, & les otreiemenz bien & en pais franchement & quit∣tement,
plainement & entierement a els, & lor heirs en totes choses, & en toz leus, a tozjorz si com devant est dit. Et si fu jure de nostre part, & de la part des Barons que totes cho∣ses qui desus sunt escrites, seront gardées a bone fei sanz ma∣lengin. Tesmoig en sont cil qui sunt devant dit, & mult altre. Ceste chartre fu donée el pre est appelez Roveninkmede entre Windesores & Sanes, le quinzain jor de juig l'an de nostre Regne dis & sept ans. Iohan par la grace de Deu Reis d'Engleterre as Visconte de Suthantesire, & a dosce esseuz en tel Conte a enquerre & oster les malvses costumes des Viscontes & de lor mini∣stres des fores & des forestiers, & des Warennes, et des War∣renniers & des viers, & de lor gardes saluz. Nos vos man∣dons que senz deai sasisiez en nostre main les terres, & les tenemenz, et les chaeis de toz celz del Conte de Suthantesire qui ne vodront jurer as xxv. Barons solonc la forme qui est escritte en nostre chartre des franchises, o a celz quil auront a co atornez; et s'il ne volent jurer maintenant empres quince jorz acompliz, puisque lor terres et lor tenement, et lor chatel seront seisi en nostre main: faites vendre toz lor chatelz, et les deniers qui en seront pris gardez sauvement a metre en laie de la sainte terre de Ierusalem; et lor terres et lor tenemenz tenez en nostre main jusquil aient jure, et co fu pourveiu par le jugement l' Arceveske Stefne de Can∣torbire et des Barons de nostre Regne. Et en tesmoig de ceste chose nos enveons cestes nos lettres overtes. Tesmoig mei meisme. A Odibaam le vint et septain jor de Iuig, lan de nostre Regne dis et septain. FINIS.
The ARTICLES upon which the Great Charter of King John was framed: Taken out of a Manuscript of the Archbishop of Canterbury Fol. 14. The Ori∣ginal whereof, with the Great Seal annexed, is ex∣tant in the hands of Dr. Gilbert Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury. THese are the Particulars which the Barons demand, and the King grants, Signed with King John's Seal. Heirs of full age shall have their Inheritance after the decease of their Ancestors, paying the Ancient Relief to be exprest in the Charter. Heirs within age, and that have been in Ward, shall have their Inheri∣tance, when they come at age, without paying Relief or making fine. The Guardian of an Heirs Land shall take the reasonable Issues, Customs and Services, without destruction or waste of his Men or Goods. And if such Guardian make destruction and waste, he shall lose the Wardship, and the Guardian shall keep in repair the Houses, Parks, Ponds, Pools, Mills and other Appurtenances to the Estate out of the Profits of the Land. And shall take care that the Heirs be married without disparagement, and by the Advice of their near Kindred, That a Widow shall give nothing for her Dower or Marriage after the death of her Husband, but shall be suffered to dwell in her Husband's House Ninety days after his death; within which time her Dower shall be assign∣ed her, and she shall immediately have her Marriage and her Inheritance. The King nor his Bayliff shall not seize any Land for debt, if the Debtors Goods be sufficient; nor shall the Debtors Sureties be distrain'd upon, when the Debtor himself is able to pay the Debt. But if the Debtor fail of payment, the Sureties, if they will, may have the Debtors Lands, till the Debt be fully satisfied, unless the Principal Debtor can shew that he is quit against his Sureties. The King shall not allow any Baron to take Aide of his free Tenants, but for the Redemption of his Person, for the making his Eldest Son a Knight, and towards the Marriage of his Eldest Daughter once, and here∣unto he shall have but a Reasonable Aid. That none shall do more Service for a Knights Fee, than is due for the same. That Common Pleas shall not follow the King's Court, but shall be holden in some certain Place: And that Recognitions be taken in their proper Counties, and after this manner, viz. That the King shall send two
Justices four times a year, who together with four Knights of the same Shire, chosen by the Shire, shall take Assizes of Novel disseisin, Mordancester, and Darrein presentment; nor shall any be summoned hereunto, but the Ju∣rors and the two Parties. That a Freeman shall be amerced for a small fault after the manner of the fault, and for a great fault according to the Greatness of the fault, saving his Contenement. A Villain also shall be amerced saving his Wainage, and in like manner a Merchant, saving his Merchandise, by the Oath of good Men of the Vicinage: That a Clerk shall be amerced according to his Lay-see in manner aforesaid, and not according to his Ecclesiastical Be∣nefice. That no Town be amerced for not making Bridges nor Banks, but where they have been of old time, and of Right ought to be. That the measure of Wine, of Corn, and the breadth of Cloth, and the like, be rectified, and so of Weights. That Assizes of Novel Disseizin and Mordancester be abbreviated, and so of other Assizes. That no Sheriff shall entermeddle with Pleas of the Crown without the Coroners; and that Counties and Hundreds shall be at the ancient Farms with∣out any Encrease, except the King's own Demesn Mannors. If any Tenant of the King die, the Sheriff, or other the Kings Bayliff may seize and enroll his Goods and Chattels by the view of lawful Men; but yet so as that nothing thereof be taken away, till it be fully known whether he owe any clear debt to the King; and then the Kings Debt shall be paid, and the Residue shall remain to the Executors to perform the Testa∣ment of the Dead. And if nothing be owing to the King, all the Goods shall go to the use of the dead. If any Free-man dye Intestate, his Goods shall be distributed by his nearest Kindred and Friends, and by the view of the Church. Widows shall not be distrain'd to marry, if they are minded to live un∣married, provided they find Sureties, that they will not marry without the King's Assent, if they hold of the King, or without the Consent of their Lords of whom they hold. No Constable or other Bayliff shall take any Man's Corn or other Chattels, but he shall forthwith pay for the same, unless he may have respit by consent of the Seller. That no Constable shall distrain any Knight to give Money for the keep∣ing of his Castle, if he himself will do it in his own proper Person, or by another sufficient man, if he may not do it himself for a reasonable Cause. And if the King lead him in his Army, he shall be discharged of Castle∣ward for the time. No Sheriff or Bayliff of the King, nor any other person shall take the Horses or Carts of any Free-man to make carriage without his leave. The King, nor his Bayliffs shall not take any Man's Wood for Castles or other Occasions, but by License of him whose the Wood is. That the King do not hold the Lands of them that be convicted of Fe∣lony longer then a year and a day; after which they shall be delivered to the Lord of the Fee.
That all Wears from henceforth be utterly put down in Thames and Med∣way, and throughout all England. That the Writ called Precipe be not from henceforth granted to any per∣son of any Freehold, whereby a Freeman may lose his Court. If any be disseiz'd or delay'd by the King, without Judgment, of Lands, Liberties, or other his Right, he shall forthwith have restitution; and if any Dispute arise upon it, it shall be determin'd by the Judgment of the Five and twenty Barons. And such as have been disseiz'd by the King's Fa∣ther, or his Brother, shall have Right immediately by the Judgment of their Peers in the King's Court. And if the King must have the Term of others that had taken upon them the Cross for the Holy Land, the Arch∣bishop and Bishops shall give Judgment therein, at a certain day to be pre∣fixt, without Appeal. That nothing be given for a Writ of Inquisition of Life or Member, but that it be freely granted without price, and be not denyed. If any hold of the King by Fee-farm, by Socage, or Burgage, and of any other by Knight's Service, the King shall not have the Custody of the Heir, nor of his Lands that are holden of the Fee of another, by reason of such Burgage, Socage or Fee-farm: Nor ought the King to have the Custody of such Burgage, Socage or Fee-farm; and no Freeman shall lose his Degree of Knighthood by reason of petty Serjeanties, as when a Man holds Lands, rendring therefore a Knife, an Arrow, or the like. No Bayliff shall put any man to his Law, upon his own bare saying, with∣out faithful Witnesses. That the Body of a Free-man be not taken, nor imprisoned, nor that he be disseiz'd, nor Out-law'd, nor Exil'd, nor any way de∣stroyed. Nor that the King pass upon him, or imprison him by force, but only by the Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. That Right be not sold, nor delay'd, nor denyed. That Merchants have liberty to go and come safely to buy and sell, without any manner of Evil Tolls, by the Old and Lawful Customs. That no Escuage or Aid be laid upon the Kingdom, but by the Common-Council of the Kingdom; unless it be to redeem the King's Person, or to make his eldest Son a Knight, or to marry his eldest Daughter once; and for these a reasonable Aid shall be given. That it be in like manner with respect to Tallages and Aids from the City of London, and other Cities that have Priviledges therein: And that the City of London may fully en∣joy her ancient Liberties and free Customs, as well by Water, as by Land. That it shall be lawful for any Man to go out of the Kingdom, and to return, saving his Allegiance to the King, unless it be in time of War for a short time, for the common profit of the Realm. If any borrow Money of a Jew, be it more or less, and die before the Debt be paid, no Interest shall be paid for the same so long as the Heir is under age, of whomsoever he hold. And if the Debt become due to the King, the King shall take no more than what is contain'd in the Charter.
If any Man die and owe Money to the Jews, his Wife shall have her Dower; and if he left Children, Necessaries shall be provided them ac∣cording to the quantity of the Freehold, and the residue shall go to pay off the Debt, saving the Services due to the Lords. The like shall be ob∣served in case of other Debts, and when the Heir comes of age, his Guardian shall restore him his Land as well stockt as he could reasona∣bly afford out of the Profits of the Land, coming in by the Plough and the Cart. If any Man hold of any Escheat, as of the Honour of Wallingford, and Nottingham, Bonon, and Lancaster, or of other Escheats, which are in the King's Hand and are Baronies, and die, his Heir shall pay no other Re∣lief, nor perform any other Service then he should have paid and perform'd to the Baron, and that the King shall hold such Escheats as the Barons held them. That Fines made for Dowers, Marriages, Inheritances and Amercements, wrongfully and contrary to the Law of the Land, be freely remitted, or ordered by the Judgment of the Five and twenty Barons, or of the major part of them, together with the Archbishop and such as he shall call to him; Provided that if one or more of the Five and twenty have themselves any like complaint, that then he or they shall be removed, and others put in their rooms by the residue of the Five and twenty. That the Hostages and Deeds be restored, which were deliver'd to the King for his Security. That they that live out of the Forest be not obliged to come before the Justices of the Forest by common Summons, unless they be Parties or Pledges: And that the Evil Customs of the Forests and Foresters, War∣rens, and Sheriffs, and Ponds be redress'd by twelve Knights of each Coun∣ty, who shall be chosen by the Good Men of the County. That the King remove wholly from their Bayliff-wick, the Kindred and whole Dependance of Gerard de Aties, that hereafter they have no Bayliff∣wick, to wit, Engeland, Andr' Peter' Gigo de Cances, Gigo de Cy∣gon, Matthew de Martino, and his Brethren, and Gelfrid his Nephew, and Phillip de Mark. And that the King put away the Foreign Soldiers, Stipendaries, Slingers, and Troopers, and their Servants, who came with Horses and Arms to the Nusance of the Realm, That the King make Justitiars, Constables, Sheriffs and Bayliffs of Men that know the Law of the Land, and will cause it to be well observed. That Barons who have founded Abbies, for which they have Char∣ters of Kings, or ancient Tenure, shall have the Custody of them when they are vacant. If the King have disseiz'd the Welsh men, or esloyn'd them from Lands or Liberties, or of other things in England or in Wales, let them pre∣sently be restored to them without Plea: and if they have been disseiz'd or esloin'd from their English Tenements by the King's Father or his Brother, without Judgment of their Peers, the King shall without de∣lay do them Justice, as he does Justice to Englishmen of their English
Tenements, according to the Law of England, and of Welsh Tenements, ac∣cording to the Law of Wales, and of Tenements in the Marches, according to the Law of the Marches. In like manner the Welshman shall do to the King and his Subjects. That the King restore Lewelin's Son, and all the Welsh Hostages, and the Deeds that were delivered to him for security of the Peace. That the King do Right to the King of Scotland concerning restoring of Hostages, and his Liberties and Right, according to the Form of the A∣greement with his Barons of England, unless it ought to be otherwise by vertue of some Deeds which the King has, by the Judgment of the Arch∣bishop and others, whom he shall think fit to call to him. That all Forests that have been afforested by the King in his own time be disafforested, and so of Banks, which by the King himself have been put in defence. All these Customs and Liberties, which the King has granted to the Kingdom, to hold and keep for his own part towards his Men, all Clerks and Lay-men of the Kingdom shall observe and keep for their parts towards their Men. This is the Form of the security for keeping Peace and the Liberties betwixt the King and the Kingdom. The Barons shall chuse Five and twenty Barons of the Realm, whom they will themselves, upon whom it shall be encumbent, that with all their might they observe and keep, and cause to be observ'd and kept, the Peace and Liberties which the King has granted to them, and confirm'd by his Charter, to wit, That if the King, or his Justices, or Bayliffs, or any of his Ministers, offend any Per∣son contrary to any of the said Articles, or transgress any Article of this Peace and Security: And that such offence be made known to four of the said Five and Twenty Barons; those four Barons shall go to the King, or to his Justitiar, if the King be out of the Realm, declaring to him that such an abuse is committed, and shall desire him to cause it speedily to be redressed. And if the King, or (if he be out of the Realm,) his Justitiar do not redress it, those four Barons shall within a reasonable time to be limited in the Charter, refer the matter to the re∣sidue of the Five and twenty Barons. And those Five and twenty, with the Commonalty of all the Land, shall distress the King all the ways they can, to wit, by seizing his Castles, his Lands and Possessions, and by what other means they can, till it be redrest according to their good like∣ing, saving the Person of our Lord the King, and of the Queen and of their Children. And when it is redrest, they shall be subject to the King, as before. And whoever will, may swear to put these things in Exe∣cution, viz. To obey the Commands of the said Five and twenty Barons, and to distress the King, to the utmost of his Power with them. And the King shall give publick and free Liberty for any man to swear that will, and shall never pohibit any to swear. And all those of the Nation, who will voluntarily of their own accord, swear to the Five and twenty Barons, to distress the King with them, the King himself shall issue his Praecept, Commanding them to swear as aforesaid.
Item, If any of the said Five and Twenty Barons dye, or go out of the Realm, or be any other way hindred from performing these things, the residue of the Five and twenty shall chuse another, whom they think best, in his place, who shall be sworn as the rest are. And in all matters referred to those Five and twenty Barons, if they happen to be all pre∣sent, and differ amongst themselves, or if any of them being thereto ap∣pointed, will not or cannot come, what the major part of them shall agree upon and enjoyn shall be valid, as if all the Five and twenty had agreed in it. And the said Five and twenty shall swear that they will faithfully observe and keep the Articles aforesaid, and with all theit might cause them to be observed. Moreover the King shall give them the Securities of the Archbishop and Bishops, and Master Pandulphus, that he will not obtain any thing from the Pope, whereby any of these Articles of Agreement may be revoked or diminished. And if any such thing be obtain'd, that it be reputed void and of none effect, nor shall ever be made use of.
THE GREAT CHARTER OF KING JOHN, A True Copy, from the Original French. JOHN by the Grace of God King of England, to the Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Justices, Foresters, Sheriffs, Prevosts, Ministers, and all his Bayliffs and his Lieges, Greeting. Know ye that We by the Grace of God, and for the saving of our Soul, and the Souls of all our Ancestors, and of our Heirs, and for the Honour of God, and the safety of Holy Church, and for the amendment of our Government, By the Advice of Our Honoured Fathers, Stephen Archbishop of Canter∣bury, Primate of All England, and Cardinal of Rome; Henry Archbishop of Dublin, William Bishop of London, Peter Bishop of Winchester, Jocelin Bi∣shop of Bath, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, Walter Bishop of Worcester, Willi∣am Bishop of Chester, Benedict Bishop of Rochester, and Master Pandulph Sub-deacon of our Lord the Apostle, and of our Friend and Brother An∣ner Master of the Order of Knights Templers in England; And by the Advice of our Barons, William Earl Marshal Earl of Pembroke, William Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of Warren, William Earl of Arundel, Alan of Galloway Constable of Scotland, Warin Fitz-Gerard, Peter Fitz-Herbert, Hubert de Burgh Steward of Poictou, Hugh Nevill, Matthew Fitz-Herbert, Thomas Basset, Alan Basset, Phillip d' Aubenie, Robert de Ropelee, John Marshall, and John Fitz-Hugh, and by the Advice of other our Lieges, Have in the first place granted to God, and confirmed by this our present Charter, for us and for our Heirs for ever, That the Churches of England shall be free, and shall enjoy their Rights and Franchises en∣tirely and fully: And this our Purpose is, that it be observed, as may appear by our having granted, of our meer and free Will, that Electi∣ons should be free (which is reputed to be a very great and very ne∣cessary
Priviledge of the Churches of England) before the difference a∣rose betwixt Us and our Barons, and by our having confirm'd the same by our Charter, and by our having procur'd it moreover to be confirmed by our Lord the Apostle Innocent the third: Which Priviledge We will maintain: And our Will is, that the same be faithfully maintain'd by our Heirs for ever. We have also granted to all the Free-men of our Kingdom, for us and our Heirs for ever, all the Liberties hereafter mentioned, to have and to hold to them and their Heirs of Us and our Heirs. If any of our Earls, our Barons, or others that hold of us in Chief by Knight-Service, die, and at the time of his death his Heir be of full age, and Relief be due, he shall have his Inheritance by the ancient Relief; to wit, the Heir or Heirs of an Earl, for an entire Earldom, C pounds; the Heir or Heirs of a Baron, for an entire Barony, C Marks; the Heir or Heirs of a Knight, for a whole Knights Fee, C Shillings at most; and where less is due, less shall be paid, according to the ancient Customs of the several Tenures. If the Heirs of any such be within Age and in Ward, they shall have their Inheritance when they come of Age without Relief and with∣out Fine. The Guardians of the Land of such Heirs being within age, shall take nothing out of the Land of the Heirs, but only the reasonable Profits, reasonable Customs, and reasonable Services, and that without making de∣struction or wast of Men or Goods. And if we shall have committed the Custody of the Land of any such Heir, to a Sheriff or any other, who is to account to us for the Profits of the Land, and that such Committee make destruction or wast, We will take of him amends, and the Land shall be committed to two lawful and good Men of that Fee, who shall account for the Profits to us, or to such as we shall appoint. And if we shall give or sell to any Person, the custody of the Lands of any such Heir, and such Donee or Vendee make destruction or wast, he shall lose the Custody, and it shall be committed to two Law∣ful, Sage, and Good Men, who shall account to Us for the same, as aforesaid. And the Guardian, whilst he has the Custody of the Heirs Land, shall maintain the Houses, Ponds, Parks, Pools, Mills, and other Appurte∣nances to the Land, out of the Profits of the Land it self; and shall re∣store to the Heir, when he shall be of full age, his Land well stockt, with Ploughs, Barns, and the like, as it was when he receiv'd it, and as the Profits will reasonably afford. Heirs shall be married without disparagement; insomuch that before the Marriage be contracted, the Persons that are next of Kin to the Heir, shall be made acquainted with it. A Widow after the death of her Husband, shall presently and without oppression, have her Marriage and her Inheritance; nor shall give any thing for her Marriage, nor for her Dower, nor for her Inheritance, which she and her Husband were seiz'd of the day of her Husband's death;
and she shall remain in her Husband's House Forty Days after his death; within which time her Dower shall be assign'd her. No Widow shall be compelled to marry if she be desirous to live single, provided she give Security not to marry without our leave, if she hold of us, or without the Lord's leave, of whom she holds, if she hold of any other. We nor our Bayliffs, will not seize the Lands or Rents of a Debtor, for any Debt, so long as his Goods are sufficient to pay the Debt: Nor shall the Pledges be distrain'd upon, whilst the Principal Debtor is able to pay the Debt. But if the Principal Debtor have not wherewith to pay the Debt, the Pledges shall answer for it: And if they will, they shall have the Lands and Rents of the Debtor, till they have received the Debt which they payed for him, if the Principal Debtor cannot show that he is quit against his Pledges. If any Persons have borrowed Money of Jews, more or less, and die before they have paid the Debt, the Debt shall not grow whilst the Heir is under age; and if such Debt become due to us, we will take no more than the Goods exprest in the Deed. And if any die and owe a Debt to the Jews, his Wife shall have her Dower, and shall be charged with no part of the Debt; and if the Children of the deceased Person be within age, their reasonable Estovers shall be provided them, according to the value of the Estate which their Ancestor had, and the Debt shall be paid out of the Residue, saving the Services due to the Lord: In like manner shall it be done in Cases of Debts owing to other persons that are not Jews. We will impose no Escuage nor Aids within our Realm, but by the Common Council of our Realm, except for our Ransom, and for the making our eldest Son a Knight, and for marrying out eldest Daugh∣ter once: And for these purposes there shall but a reasonable Aid be required. In like manner shall it be done within the City of London: and more∣over the City of London shall have all her ancient Customs and Liberties, by Land and Water. We Will moreover and Grant, that all other Cities, and Boroughs, and Towns, and Ports, have in all respects their Liberties and free Customs. And as for coming to the Common Council of the Kingdom, and for asses∣sing Aids, (except in the three cases aforesaid.) And as for the assessing of Escuage, we will cause to be summoned the Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Abbots, Earls, and the Greater Barons, each in particular by our Letters, and moreover we will cause to be summon'd in ge∣neral, by our Sheriffs and Bayliffs, all that hold of us in Chief, at a cer∣tain day, to wit, Forty days after at least, and at a certain place: and in our said Letters we will express the cause of the Summons. And when Summons shall be so made, business shall go on at the day assign'd, by the Advice of such as are present, though all that are summoned do not appear. We will not allow for the future, that any take Aid of his free men, but only to ransom his Person, to make his eldest Son a Knight,
and to marry his eldest Daughter once; and for these purposes there shall but a reasonable Aid be given. None shall be distrained to do greater Service for a Knight's Fee, or for any other Frank-Tenement then what is due by his Tenure. Common Pleas shall not follow our Court, but shall e held in a cer∣tain place. Recognizances of Novel Disseisin, Mordancester, and Darrein presentment, shall be taken no where but in their proper Counties, and in this man∣ner: We, or our Chief Justice (if our Selves shall be out of the Realm) will send two Justices through every County four times a year, who with four Knights of every County, to be chosen by the County, shall take the said Assizes in the Country, at a day when the County Court is held, and in a certain place; and if the said Assizes cannot be taken up∣on that day, so many Knights and free Tenants of them that were present in the County Court that day, shall stay, as may give a good Judgment, according as the concern may be greater or less. A Free man shall not be amerced for a little offence, but according to the manner of his offence, and for a great offence he shall be amerced ac∣cording to the greatness of his offence, saving his Contenement: And so a Merchant saving his Merchandise: And a Villain in like manner shall be amerced saving his Wainage, if he fall into our Mercy: and none of the said Amercements shall be affeered, but by Oaths of good and lawful Men of the Visinage. An Earl and a Baron shall not be amerced but by their Peers, and accor∣ding to the manner of their Offence. No Clerk shall be amerced but according to his Lay-fee, and in like manner as others aforesaid, and not according to the quantity of his Church Living. No Ville nor any man shall be distrain'd to make Bridges over Rivers, but where they anciently have, and of Right ought to make them. No Sheriffs, Constables, Coroners, nor other our Bayliffs shall hold the Pleas of our Crown. All Counties, Hundreds, Wapentakes and Tythings shall be at the an∣cient Farms without being rais'd, except our own demesne Mannors. If any that holds of us a Lay-fee dye, and our Sheriffs, or other our Bayliffs, show our Letters Patents of Summons for a Debt, which the de∣ceased owed to us, our Sheriff or Bayliff may well Attach and Inventory the Goods of the Dead, which shall be found upon his Lay-fee to the va∣lue of the Debt, which the deceased owed to us, by the view of Lawful Men, yet so as nothing be removed till such time as the Debt which shall be found to be due to us, be paid; and the residue shall go to the Exe∣cutors to perform the Testament of the dead: and if nothing be owing to us, all his Goods shall go to the use of the Dead, saving to his Wife and Children their reasonable Parts. If any Free-man dye intestate, his Goods shall be divided by the hands of his near Kindred and Friends, by the view of Holy Church, saving to every one their Debts which the Dead owed them.
None of our Constables, nor other our Bayliffs, shall take the Corn, nor other the Goods of any Person, without paying for the same presently, un∣less he have time given him by consent of the Vendor. Our Constables shall distrain no man, who holds by Knight Service, to give Money for Castle-garde, if he has perform'd it himself in proper Person, or by another good Man, if he could not perform it himself for some reasonable Cause: And if we lead him or send him into the Army, he shall be discharg'd of Castle-garde for so long time as he shall be with us in the Army. Our Sheriffs, our Bayliffs, nor other, shall not take the Horses nor Carts of any Free-man, to make carriage, but by leave of such Free-man. Neither our selves nor our Bayliffs shall take another Man's Wood for our Castles, or other occasions, but by his leave whose Wood it is. We will hold the Lands of such as shall be convict of Felony, but a year and a day, and then we will restore them to the Lords of the Fees. All Weares shall from this time forward be wholly taken away in Thames and Medeway, and throughout all England, except upon the Sea-Coast. The Writ called Precipe henceforth shall be made to none out of any Tenement, whereby a Free-man may lose his Court. One Measure of Wine shall be used throughout our Kingdom, and one Measure of Ale, and one Measure of Corn, to wit, the London Quart. And there shall be one breadth of dyed Cloth, Russets, and Haubergets; to wit, two Ells within the Lists: And concerning Weights, it shall be in like manner as of Measures. Nothing shall be given or taken henceforth for a Writ of Enquisition of Life or Member, but it shall be granted freely and shall not be denyed. If any hold of us by Fee-farm, or by Socage, and hold likewise Land of others by Knight-Service, we will not have the Custody of the Heir, nor of the Land which is of the Fee of another, by reason of such Fee-farm, Socage or Burgage, unless such Fee-farm owe Knight-Service. We will not have the Wardship of the Heir nor of the Land of any Per∣son, which he holds of another by Knight-Service, by reason of any Petit Serjeanty, by which he holds of us, as by the Service of giving us Arrows, Knives, or such like. No Bayliff for the time to come shall put any Man to his Law upon his bare word, without good Witnesses produced. No free man shall be taken nor imprisoned, nor disseised, nor outlawed, nor exil'd, nor destroy'd in any manner, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by the Lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. We will sell to none, we will deny, nor delay to none Right and Justice. All Merchants may with safety and security go out of England, and come into England, and stay, and pass through England by Land and Water, to buy and sell, without any Evil Tolls, paying the Ancient and Rightful Duties, except in time of War, and then they that are of the Country, with whom we are at War, and are found here at the begin∣ing
of the War, shall be attach't, but without injury to their Bodies or Goods, till it be known to us or to our Chief-Justice, how our Merchants are entreated, which are found in our Enemies Country, and if ours be safe there, they shall be safe in our Land. It shall be Lawful for all men in time to come, to go out of our King∣dom, and to return safely and securely by Land and by Water, saving their Faith due to us, except it be in time of War, for some short time, for the profit of the Realm. But out of this Article are except∣ed Persons in Prison, Persons out-law'd according to the Law of the Land, and Persons of the Country with whom we are at War; concerning Merchants, what is abovesaid shall hold as to them. If any hold of any Escheat, as of the Honour of Wallingford, Notting∣ham, Boloin, Lancaster, or of other Escheats, which are in our hand, and are Baronies, and dye, his Heirs shall owe us no other relief, nor do us any other Service, then was due to the Baron of such Barony, when it was in his hand, and we will hold the same in like manner as the Baron held it. Men that dwell out of the Forest, shall not appear before our Justices of the Forest by common Summons, unless they be in suit themselves, or Bail for others, who are attach't for the Forest. We will not make Sheriffs, Justices, nor Bayliffs, but of such as know the Law of the Land, and will keep it. All that have founded Abbies, whereof they have Charters from Kings of England, or ancient Tenure, shall have the custody thereof, whilst they are vacant, as they ought to have. All the Forests that have been Afforested in our time, shall instantly be Disafforested; in like manner be it of Rivers, that in our time and by us have been put in defence. All evil Customs of Forests and Warens, and of Foresters, and Wa∣renners, of Sheriffs and their Ministers, of Rivers, and of Guarding them, shall forthwith be enquired of in every County by twelve Knights sworn of the same County, who must be chosen by good Men of the same County. And within forty days after they have made such Inqui∣sition, the said evil Customs shall be utterly abolished by those same Knights, so as never to be revived; provided they be first made known to us, or to our Chief Justice, if we be out of the Realm. We will forthwith restore all the Hostages and all the Deeds, which have been delivered to us by the English, for surety of the Peace or of faithful Service. We will wholly put out of Bayliffwicks the Kindred of Gerard de Aties, so that from henceforth they shall not have a Bayliffwick in Eng∣land; and Engeland de Cygoigni Peron, Guyon, Andrew de Chanceas, Gyon de Cygoigni, Geffry de Martigni and his Brothers, Philip, Mark and his Brothers, Geffray his Nephew and all their Train: And presently, after the Peace shall be reform'd, we will put out of the Realm all Knights Foreigners, Slingers, Serjeants and Soldiers, who came with Horse or Arms to the nusance of the Realm.
If any be disseiz'd or esloyn'd by us, without Lawful Judgement of his Peers, of Lands, Chattels, Franchises, or of any Right, we will forth∣with restore the same; and if any difference arise upon it, it shall be determined by the Judgement of the Five and twenty Barons, of whom mention is made hereafter in the security for the Peace. As to all things, whereof any have been disseiz'd, or esloyn'd without Lawful Judgement of their Peers, by King Henry our Father, or by King Richard our Brother, which we have in our hands, or which any other has, to whom we are bound to warrant the same, we will have respit to the common Term of them that are crost for the Holy Land, except such things for which Suits were commenced, or Enquest taken by our Order before we took upon us the Cross. And if we return from the Pilgrimage, or perhaps forbear going, we will do full Right therein. The same Re∣spit we will have, and the same Right we will do in manner aforesaid, as to the Disafforesting of Forests, or letting them remain Forests, which the Kings, Henry our Father, or Richard our Brother have Afforested; and and as to Custodies of Lands which are of the Fee of other Persons, which we have held till, now by reason of other Men's Fees, who held of us by Knight-Service; and of Abbies that are founded in other Men's Fees, in which the Lords of the Fees claim a Right: And when we shall be returned from our Pilgrimage, or if we forbear going, we will imme∣diately do full Right to all that shall complain. None shall be taken nor imprisoned upon the Appeal of a Woman, for the death of any other than her Husband. All the Fines and all the Amercements that are imposed for our use, wrongfully and contrary to the Law of the Land, shall be Pardoned; or else they shall be determined by the Judgment of the Five and twenty Ba∣rons, of whom hereafter, or by the Judgement of the greater number of them that shall be present, or before Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, if he can be there, and those that he shall call to him; and if he cannot be present, Matters shall proceed notwithstanding without him; so always, that if one or more of the said Five and twenty Barons be concern'd in any such Complaint, they shall not give Judgement thereupon, but others chosen and sworn shall be put in their room to act in their stead, by the residue of the said Five and twenty Barons. If we have disseiz'd or esloin'd any Welshmen of Land, Franchises, or of other things, without lawful judgment of their Peers, in England, or in Wales, they shall forthwith be restored unto them; and if Suits arise there∣upon, right shall be done them in the Marches by the Judgment of their Peers; of English Tenements according to the Law of England, and of Tenements in Wales, according to the Law of Wales; and Tenements in the Marches, according to the Law of the Marches: And in like manner shall the Welsh do to us and our Subjects. As for all such things, whereof any Welshmen have been disseiz'd or esloyn'd without Lawful Judgment of their Peers by King Henry our Father, or by King Richard our Brother, which we have in our hands, or which any others have, to whom we are bound to warrant the same, we will
have respit till the common Term be expir'd of all that crost themselves for the Holy Land, those things excepted, whereupon Suits were Com∣menced or Enquests taken by our Order, before we took upon us the Cross; and when we shall return from our Pilgrimage, or if peradven∣ture we forbear going, we will presently cause full Right to be done there∣in, according to the Laws of Wales and before the said Parties. We will forthwith restore the Son of Lewellyn and all the Hostages of Wales, and the Deeds that have been delivered to us for security of the Peace. We will deal with Alexander, King of Scotland, as to the restoring him his Suitors and his Hostages, his Franchises and Rights, as we do with our other Barons of England, unless it ought to be otherwise by vertue of the Charters, which we have of his Father William, late King of Scot∣land, and this to be by the Judgment of his Peers in our Court. All these Customs and Franchises aforesaid, which we have granted to be kept in our Kingdom, so far forth as we are concerned, towards our Men, all Persons of the Kingdom, Clerks and Lay, must observe for their Parts towards their Men. And whereas we have granted all these things for God's sake, and for the amendment of our Government, and for the better compremising the discord arisen betwixt us and our Barons, We, willing that the same be firmly held and established for ever, do make and grant to our Barons the scurity underwritten; to wit, That the Barons shall chuse Five and twenty Barons of the Realm, whom they List, who shall to their ut∣most Power keep and hold, and cause to be kept the Peace and the Li∣berties, which we have Granted and Confirmed by this our present Charter, insomuch, that if we, or our Justice, or our Bayliff, or any of our Ministers, act contrary to the same in any thing, against any Per∣sons, or offend against any Article of this Peace and Security, and such our Miscarriage be shown to four Barons of the said Five and twenty, those four Barons shall come to us, or to our Justice, if we be out of the Realm, and show us our Miscarriage, and require us to amend the same without delay; and if we do not amend it, or, if we be out of the Realm, our Justice do not amend it within Forty days after the same is shown to us, or to our Justice, if we be out of the Realm, then the said Four Barons shall report the same to the residue of the said Five and twenty Barons, and then those Five and twenty Barons, with the Commonalty of all England, may distress us by all the ways they can; to wit, by seizing on our Castles, Lands and Possessions, and by what other means they can, till it be amended, as they shall adjudge; saving our own Person, the Person of our Queen, and the Persons of our children; and when it is amended, they shall be subject to us as before. And whoever of the Realm will, may swear, that for the Performance of these things, he will obey the Commands of the said Five and twenty Barons, and that together with them, he will distress us to his Power: And we give Publick and free leave to swear, to all that will swear, and will never hinder any one: And for all Persons of the Realm, that of their own accord will swear to,
the said Five and twenty Barons, to distress us, we will issue our Precept, Commanding them to swear as aforesaid. And if any of the said Five and twenty Barons die, or go out of the Realm or be any way hindred from acting as aforesaid, the residue of the said Five and twenty Barons shall chuse another in his room, according to their discretion, who shall swear as the others do. And as to all things which the said Five and twenty Barons are to do, if peradventure they be not all present, or cannot agree, or in case any of those that are Summon'd, cannot or will not come, whatever shall be de∣termined by the greater number of them that are present, shall be good and valid, as if all had been present. And the said five and twenty Barons shall swear that they will faithfully observe all the matters aforesaid, and cause them to be observed to their power. And we will not obtain of any one for our selves, or for any other, any thing whereby any of these Concessions, or of these Liberties may be re∣voked or annihilated; and if any such thing be obtained, it shall be null and void, nor shall ever be made use of by our selves or any other. And all ill will, disdain, and rancour, which has been betwixt Us and our Subjects of the Clergy and Laity, since the said discord began, we do fully release and pardon to them all. And moreover all Trespasses that have been committed by occasion of the said discord since Easter, in the six∣teenth year of our Reign, to the restoring of the Peace, we have fully released to all Clerks and Lay-men, and so far as in us lies we have fully pardoned them: And further we have caused Letters Patents to be made to them in testimony hereof, witnessed by Stephen Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Henry Archbishop of Dublin, and by the aforesaid Bishops, and by Mr. Pandulphus upon this Security and these Concessions: Whereby we will and strictly Command, that the Church of England be free, and enjoy all the said Liberties, and Rights, and Grants well and in Peace freely and quietly, fully and entirely to them and their Heirs in all things, in all places, and for ever as aforesaid. And we and our Barons have sworn that all things above written, shall be kept on our parts in good Faith without ill design. The Witnesses are the Persons above-named and many others. This Charter was given at the Meadow called Running-Mead, be∣twixt Windsor and Stanes, the 15th day of June, in the Seventeenth Year of our Reign. JOHN by the Grace of God King of England,  to the Sheriff of Hamp∣shire, and to the Twelve that are chosen in that County, to enquire of and put away the evil customs of Sheriffs, and of their Ministers, of Forests, and Foresters, of Warrens and Warrenners, of Rivers, and of guarding them, Greeting. We command you, that without delay, you seize in∣to our Hand, the Lands and Tenements, and the Goods of all those of the County of Southampton, that will not swear to the said Five and twenty Barons, according to the form exprest in our Charter of Liberties, or to such as they shall have thereunto appointed; and if they will not swear
presently, at the end of Fifteen days after their Lands and Tenements and Chattels are seized into our Hands, that ye sell all their Goods, and keep safely the Money that ye shall receive for the same, to be em∣ployed for the Relief of the Holy Land of Jerusalem; and that ye keep their Lands and Tenements in our Hands till they have sworn, or that Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Barons of our Kingdom have given Judgment thereupon. In witness whereof we direct unto you these our Letters Patents. Witness our Self: At Odibaam the Seven and twen∣tieth Day of June, in the Seventeenth Year of our Reign. FINIS. Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell. THE Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered, in a Letter from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 4o. A Breviate of the State of Scotland, in its Government, Supreme Courts, Officers of State, Inferiour Officers, Offices and Inferiour Courts, Districts, Jurisdictions, Burroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol. Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4o. Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-hand in the Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbours. The History of the Desertion; or an Account of all the Publick Affairs in England, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of Febru∣ary following. With an Answer to a Piece called, The Desertion discussed, in a Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality. K. William and K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings: And that the matter in Controversie is not now between K. William and K. James, but between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations. An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of Al∣legiance, by a Divine of the Church of England. A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance. The Case of Oaths stated. 4o. A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman upon the Present Revolution, 4o. The Advantages of the Present Settlement, and the great danger of a Relapse. The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland.
