s3622 12049014 53117
A SHORT RELATION Of the most Remarkable TRANSACTIONS IN SEVERAL PARTS OF EUROPE BETWEEN THE Christians and Turks; INCLUDING An Exact DIARY of the SIEGE of BUDA. Written Originally by a Person of Honour, a Voluntier in the Campagne, and done into English by P. R. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Randolph Taylor near Stationers-Hall, 1685.
A SHORT RELATION Of the most Remarkable TRANSACTIONS In several Parts of EUROPE, &c. THERE is no question to be made but that the happy success of the D. of Lorain since he undertook the command of the Imperial Forces, has won him the renown of being one of the greatest Captains of his time. Nor was the raising the Seige of Vienna, assail'd with the whole Power of the Turkish Empire, the least of his glorious Enterprizes, where the Presence of the warlike King of Poland did no way eclipse his Honour, while his Councils, his Conduct, and his Valour entitul'd him to an equal share of the Victory with any of the Confederates. For that he then stood firm upon the Basis of his own merit and courage, fortified with a long experience in War, is apparent by his single Actions in the prosecution of that memora∣ble overthrow. His chiefest business, during the severity of so hard a Winter was to enlarge his Quarters into the Enemies Country which he did as far as Newsol upon the River Grana, by which means he kept New∣hansel so closely block't up, that all the attempts of the Turk to relieve it were in vain. In the mean time he labour'd at Court the reinforce∣ment of his Army against the next Spring; and the accomplishment of the League between the Emperour, the King of Poland, the Ve∣netian and the Pope, and which upon the 29th. of February was sign'd by the Cardinal Bonvisi, in behalf of the Pope, by the Count of Conlinseck and the Baron Straetman for the Emperour and Crown of Poland, and for the Commonwealth of Venice by their respective Em∣bassadors, being to continue for fix years. Nor was he less careful in his endeavours to reduce the head of the Rebels, Count Teckelie by fair means, to which purpose a general Act of Oblivion was publish'd by the Emperour with pardon to all that would return to their O∣bedience; which Teckelie himself was free to lay hold of, as a Gen∣tleman
of Hungary, provided he did not expect to be consider'd in any higher Degree. And indeed such was the consequences of that famous Enterprize wherein his Prowess was so lately and so highly eminent that it seem'd to influence the more Northern people, and warm their valour in that extremity of weather, to add to the har∣vest of his Triumphs. For about the midst of January came News to the Court at Lintz, that the Cossacks under the Command of their chief Leader Kuneski, having straighten'd Caminiac a strong Garrison of the Turks in the Ʋkrain, the Turks and Tartars under the Leading of their own Ge∣nerals, joining in a Body of forty thousand Men, resolv'd to remove the Enemy at a farther distance from the Town. Of which the Cos∣sacks having intelligence, drew together no less then thirty thousand compleat, and with a speedy march, unlook'd for, upon the fourth of December so furiously assail'd the Enemy, that they slew near Thirty Thousand upon the place; and in the pursuit, the Earth being cover'd with the bodies of the slain for several Miles together, the two Chieftains of the Tartars, endeavouring to rally their men were both slain, at what time Haley Bey who commanded the Turks, being taken Prisoner, offer'd a Hundred Thousand Crowns for his Ransom, but the Cossacks quarrelling about the division of the Mo∣ney, slew him in the heat of the Contest. With the Tartar Gene∣rals was also slain the Bassa of Biatogrod, and several Mirza's, who are the cheif Officers of quality among the Tartars. In pursuit of which Victory, the Cossacks fail'd not to enter Budziack, where they wasted all before 'em with Fire and Sword not sparing either Age or Sex. These Cossacks so call'd from Cosack, signifying a Goat; because they wandred like Goats upon the Mountains, or from Cazack in the Tartar Language, which signifies a Robber, were a sort of Rovers, the same with the Banditi in Italy, first taken into pay by Stephen King of Poland, who gave them also leave to choose themselves a Cap∣tain, whom they pleas'd, of their own gang, to be consirm'd by the Polish Prince, he assign'd 'em likewise the Castle of Techtimirocco sea∣ted upon the Banks of the Borysthenes or the Nicper, with the Terri∣tories belonging to it, for their habitation. And thus embodied into a kind of a Nation, they liv'd in subjection to the Polander, till the Reign of Ʋladislaus; but in the year 1638, they began to grow tumultuous and rebellious, from whence arose a most cruel War, wherein the Turks generally took their part, and at length by ver∣tue of the Articles of Peace between the Ottoman and the Polander, concluded October 18th. 1672 all the Ʋkrain, so call'd from the Tartar. word, which signifies a Border or Limit, as being the utmost limit of the Polish Dominions was surrender'd to the Cossacks, to hold of themselves; the Polander at the same time, renouncing all his Claim, Right, Title or Pretension to it. In this Province stands the City of Camenecia or Caminiac, one of Natures wonders, as being seated upon a high and steep Rock, taken by the Turk in the year 1672 and now in a fair way to be retaken again. This Victory obtain'd in December, was seconded by another in January, at what time the new Palatine or Hospodar of Walachia Dukas, marching with 30000 men to displace Petrozensco, whom the
King of Poland had re-establish'd in that Government, and think∣ing to have surpriz'd the Cossacks in his march, was himself routed and taken Prisoner with his son, after he had lost seventeen thousand of his men upon the place, and two pieces of Canon. Some skirmishes and disputes there also happen'd between the Im∣perialists and the Rebels under Count Teckeley, which though they were not so remarkable as the preceding, yet the Imperialists still pre∣vailing they serv'd to enlarge their own and straiten the Quarters of the Enemy. But so soon as the Season permitted the Duke himself hasten'd to take the Field with all the Expedition he could, and so toward the beginning of June the Army being randevouz'd about Nestria, he pass'd the Danow at Komorrah, and march'd for Gran where he encamp'd, expecting the Regiments of Moravia and Silesia; and thence intend∣ing for the Siege of Buda, upon the fourteenth of June he pass'd the River again at the same place. Which he had no sooner done, but upon the sixteenth of June, he invested Vicegrade seated on the o∣ther side of the River, and heretofore considerable for the fre∣quent Residence of the Kings of Hungary, with a Body of Horse, and the same evening attack'd and gain'd the Town; upon which the Turks, that were in the Castle to the number of seven hundred and forty men, came to a Capitulation the next day and march'd out with their Arms and Baggage. But while the Duke was thus employ'd, the Garrisons of Alba Regalis, Zygeth and other places, having notice that the Imperialists had left their Baggage at Gran, guarded only by a small party of Horse and Foot, under the Com∣mand of Major General Holloweil with a Body of six thousand men advanc'd to Gran, and with so much fury fell upon the Imperialists that the foremost Troops being put into some disorder, the Major General was after a brave resistance slain. But then the Regiments of Rabata standing the whole brunt of the Enemy, till the other Troops recovering out of their disorder came into their assistance, they put the Turk to an absolute flight, and pursu'd 'em for several Miles. In this encounter the Turks lost 6 or 700 men, and four stan∣dards, afterwards presented to the Emperour; the Imperialists about two hundred; among whom the Baron Levi was said to be ei∣ther kill'd or taken. Count Rabata was also a Prisoner, and tied by the Turks to one of their Horses tayls, but releas'd in the pursuit. All this while Newhausel had been closely block'd up by Caprara, who had kept it all the winter time from being reliev'd by the Turks; so that it was by this reduc'd to pinching extremity: And therefore the Ottomans finding they could do no good with small parties, re∣solv'd to succour the Town with a compleat Army of 20000 men. The Duke of Lorrain having intelligence that the Enemy was ad∣vanc'd as far as Vaccia, between Buda and Novograde, resolv'd to give 'em battel. To this purpose he set forward, and coming with∣in sight of the Enemy, found 'em drawn up in Battalia upon the Hills near Vaccia, having on the right Wing the River Danow and a large Morass, and the left secur'd by a thick Wood. Thereupon the Duke having embattell'd his own men, about eleven a Clock at Noon mov'd directly toward the Enemy in two lines, besides the reserve, and the Troops left to guard the Baggage. The Turks suffer'd him to advance without opposition till he came to the foot of the Hill,
and then with their usual cries made a desperate charge upon Taff's Regiment, which was almost in the middle of the line, and where the Duke being in person, had his own Horse wounded under him, and two more Horses of the Officers next him kill'd with Pistol shot. The Turks having thus spent their first fury, and observing the firm∣ness of the Imperial Battalions, turn'd their back for a while; but then rallying again, fell upon the Christians on every side, and then wheeling off, return'd a third time and made another desperate charge, but not being able to break their Enemies array, who still made their way in good order, they fell into confusion, and routed by their own fears, the Horse abandoning the Foot, betook them∣selves to flight; being pursu'd by the Imperial Cavalry of the first Line for above an hour: but by reason of the swiftness of their Horses they soon got out of sight. The Foot thus left to mercy were most of them slain; the rest escaping into Vaccia. This Body consisted of about 20000 men, of which four thousand were Tar∣tars, commanded by the Bassa of Buda and several Bassa's under him. The Bassa of Buda himself was suppos'd to be slain, his Horse being tak'n by a private Soldier of Taff's Regiment, who presented it to the Duke of Lorrain. Nor did Vaccia protect the fugitives, the Im∣perialists soon after making themselves Masters of the Town, where the Turks surrender'd at discretion. So that in all the number of the Enemy slain was reputed to be 3000. and 1500 taken Prisoners, and among the rest a Bassa and ten Aga's; with seven pieces of Canon and several Colours. As for the loss of the Christians it was very in∣considerable, as not having mist above twenty or thirty men in the whole Action; Vaccia being thus surrender'd, Novograde was immedi∣ately quitted by the Turks, and assoon possess'd by the Imperialists. This Battle was fought the 27th. of June, which Month thus end∣ing with this memorable defeat of the Turks, at the beginning of July, the Duke of Lorrain hasten'd with his victorious Army to Pest, another Garrison of the Turks on the farther side of the Danow, and began without delay to batter the Town with his Canon and Fire Bombes. But the Turks in great fear and disorder retir'd with the best of their goods to Buda, having first set fire to several houses in the Town, as also to the Bridge, to prevent the pursuit of the Impe∣rialists. But they entring immediately, soon became Masters of the Fire, and of a place, which had the Enemy had the courage to de∣fend, might have cost both time and men. The Duke of Lorrain being thus in possession of Pest plac'd there∣in a considerable Garrison consisting of two Battalions of Foot, and a party of Dragoons; and being reinforc'd by Caprara with a body of six thousand men, among which were six hundred Hunga∣rians that had deserted Count Teckelie; and by Lubomirskie, with an addition of 4000 Poles, in all 40000 strong, repass'd the Danow upon the 11th. and 12th. of July, over a Bridge of Boats laid over the River not far from the Isle of St. Andrew; while Lesley was or∣der'd with the Forces under his command toward the Bridge of Esseck, to make good that pass. Upon the 14th. of July the Duke of Lorrain having forc'd the Turks from the Posts which they had on this side Buda, came with all his Forces and sate down before the Town. Buda, by the Germans call'd Ofen, is a City of the lower or hither∣most
Hungary, standing for the most part upon a Hill near the Banks of the Danow, the other part lying in a plain level about fifty four German Miles from Vienna to the South, and forty nine from Belgrade to the North. Formerly the Residence of the Hungarian Princes, and which King Sigesmund adorn'd, with several Magnificent Stru∣ctures; particularly with a Palace built after the old Roman man∣ner, environing the Castle with beautiful Walls and Terrass'd Walks, that overlookt most pleasant Gardens and Fields adjoyning. It is fortified with strong Walls and Bulwarks, containing a great num∣ber both of private and publick Structures exquisitely built, so that all the rest of Hungary can hardly be said to shew anything more e∣legant, more pleasant, or more secur'd by art and nature: It was taken the 12th. of August in the year 1519. after it had been eleven times assaulted by the whole force of the Ottoman Army. The Duke of Lorrain being sate down before this City, in a short time made himself Master of the lower Town and lodg'd his Soldi∣ers in the Ditch under the Wall of the upper Town, before he sent his first express to the Emperour. Whilst the Duke lay in this posture before Buda, the Turks in a Body of thirty or five and thirty thousand men hover'd about two German miles from the Town near Hanschabets, expecting all oppor∣tunities to relieve it. But the Duke not willing to be pester'd with so troublesome a neighbour and the toyl of continual skirmishes, resolv'd to dissi∣pate the main Body from whence these petty Obstacles of his grea∣ter Enterprises had life and Motion. To this purpose about the 21 or 22 of July, after he had left all his Infantry and what Horse was necessary to continue the Siege, with the rest of the Cavalry and a thousand Foot commanded by the Count of Aversperagh, to∣gether with fifteen hundred Hussars under the conduct of Count E∣sterhasi, Governour of Raab, he march'd all night to encounter the main Body of the Enemy, who though very well entrench'd, so soon as they saw the Imperialists, came out of their Camp about twenty thousand strong: The Duke of Lorrain divided his Army into two Battalias; the two Wings being each compos'd of thirty Squadrons of Cuirassiers, and ten of Dragoons, and the Foot being plac'd in ten small Bodies between the intervals of the Horse. The Turks had plac'd 2 or 3000 Janizaries upon the descent of the Hill, and six thousand Horse at the foot of the Hill toward the right Wing of the Im∣perialists, where were posted a thousand Hungarians, and made se∣veral movements, which plainly demonstrated their design of attach∣ing their Adversaries in the Flanks, which while the other labour'd to prevent, the fight began, wherein the Turks maintain'd a sharp dispute for the time; and making use of policy as well as strength drove a hundred Camels upon the left Wing of the Christians, think∣ing to have put it into disorder, but the stratagem failing, by the in∣dustry of 30 Dragoons which turn'd 'em quite another way, the Turks recoyl'd, and were follow'd so close, that at length being all in confusion, they betook themselves fairly to their Heels, and fled up to the top of the Hill, where they routed their own re∣serve, while the Victors in the pursuit became Masters of their whole Camp, as at the raising of the Siege of Vienna, their Tents, their Bag∣gage consisting of 1000 Camels and 500 Mules, their Artillery being
eight peices of Canon and all their wealth. Four thousand were slain upon the place, among which were a thousand Janizaries, be∣side what were kill'd and wounded in the pursuit by the Poles and Hungarians, who was order'd to continue the chase. The great Standard of Mahomet was taken, which the Sultan usually gives to the grand Visier, when he takes upon him the general command of the Army, and the Pavillion of the Turkish Officer, who is known by the Title of Serasquier; and was chief Commander of the Army in the absence of the Visier. At the same time Count Lesly, lying before Berzeche, or Virovitza a Town about two Miles distant from the Dravus, had intelligence given him that the Turks were drawing together all the force they could make between the Savus and the Dravus to succour the place. More particularly that the Bassa of Marotz, who had the guard of the Bridge of Esseck, was advanc'd with two thousand five hundred Turks as far as Flatina in order to his joyning with the Beg of Zer∣neg and Governour of Gradischia, who for that purpose were upon their march with 1400 men more, thereupon he sent away four thousand Croats under the Command of Count Trautmansdorffe to hinder the Enemies conjunction; who marching all night about se∣ven the next morning set upon the Bassa in his Camp near Flatina; where after a short resistance the Turks were forc'd from their Post, with the lost of many men kill'd and taken Prisoners; the rest be∣ing pursu'd as far Tarbina. But then the Victors returning from the pursuit, met with a party Commanded by the Beg of Zarney, who knew nothing of the defeat of the Bassa of Marotz, with whom they were going to joyn, and by that means unluckily dropt into the mouth of a victorious Enemy. For the Christians flesh'd with their late success, fell upon the half surpriz'd Infidels with that vigorous Resolution, that they slew near five hundred upon the place, took many more Pris'ners with a con∣siderable quantity of Ammunition and Provision intended for the Releif of the Garrison. So that the loss of the Turks in both these Actions was reckon'd to be no less than a 1000 of the choicest men of these two Bodies slain out-right, while Trautmansdorffe thus dou∣bly Crown'd with fresh Lawrels return'd with Plunder and Pris'ners to the Leaguer before Vicovitza. The next day being the twentieth of July Count Lesley command∣ed the Prisoners that had been taken, to be plac'd at the head of his Trenches, and among all the rest he order'd one to acquaint the besieged with the defeat of the Body from whence they expected their Relief; to which although the Garrison return'd no Answer; yet did the General grant 'em till five in the Evening to consider of certain Propositions for the surrender of the Place: and for two hours there was a Cessation from all Acts of Hostillity. But then the same Evening the Besieged began to fire again: Thereupon the General gave order for the filling up of the Mote and the Morass, and for the providing ten Thousand Faggots for that purpose. Which being done and all things now ready for an assault; the Besieged began to reflect upon the danger they were in, and unwilling to venture the last extremity, in season desir'd a Parley, and presently after the Hostages were exchang'd, though the Articles were not agreed upon till the next day. But then all things being
concluded, Virovitza was surrenderd to Lesley, and six Hundred Men with the like number of Women and Children march'd out of the Town, leaving behind 'em sixteen Peices of Cannon, having all upon 'em the Arms of the Emperours Maximillian and Ferdinand. The Garrison according to the Articles of Capitulation was con∣vey'd two Miles from the City by a Guard of the Besiegers; but af∣terwards meeting with a Party of Croats, they were all or the most part stripp'd, plunder'd, and cut in peices together with the Wo∣men and Children. Upon the taking of Virovitza, the Turks having abandon'd Soppia, Fatina, and Werazin, Count Lesley sate down before Bezowits, which not being able to hold out made a timely Capitulation, and surren∣der'd upon the same Articles that Virovitza had done. By which means he had both leisure and opportunity to lay a Bridge over the River Dravus, that so he might be in a condition to joyn the Duke of Lorrain upon all occasions. While thus Count Lesley secur'd the main Leaguer at a distance the Imperialists took their several Posts about Buda; and though the lower Town had no other defence then a single Wall, yet did the General think it convenient to make formal Approaches to it, as well because of the great Garrison that was in it, as because of the Communication which they had with the upper Town. These Approaches therefore being finish'd, the Duke of Lorrain, caus'd an Assault to be made upon the lower Town upon the nine∣teenth of July, wherein the Imperialists behav'd themselves with that Bravery that they made themselves Masters of the Place, notwith∣standing the great number of Janizaries that defended it; of whom there were slain not fewer then a Thousand who had not time to re∣tire into the upper Town. The next day the Duke caus'd an attack to be made upon the Fort of St. Gerard, which the Enemy quitted together, with the Cannon that was in it. And now being thus Master of the lower Town and the Fort, he caus'd his men to take two Posts more; one next the great Tower in the way to Gran, the other near the Court in that joyn'd the Town and the Castle. On the other side the Besieged were not idle, but finding them∣selves very much annoy'd by the Christians from St. Gerrards Hill, upon the first of August, made a thund'ring Salley, toward the close of the Evening, which began a sharp and fierce encounter between them and the Christians; in which the besieged suffer'd a repulse; wherein the slaughter of the Enemy could not choose but be very considerable as being repell'd, when it cost the lives of two hundred of the victorious Besiegers; among whom the Signior Cavallieri Lieu∣tenant Collonel of the Regiment of Grana and the Marquess Bagni were slain; the Count of Sherfenberg, Major General, and the Mar∣quess de Parella, with several other Officers wounded. The day following the Enemy made another Salley, but retir'd presently again; perceiving perhaps those disadvantages in the day; on which they had run headlong the night before in the dark. Whatever were the reason of their sudden retreat, certain it is, that the Turks got nothing by either Salley, but broken pates; be∣sides the Christians gain'd a work which the Besiegers had cast up, to guard a breach which the Besiegers had made in the Wall of the
Town; and for some days continu'd their Batteries with their Bombs and Cannon with so much vigour, that they made several other breaches, and proceeded so succesfully in their Mines, that the Duke of Lorrain minding to give a general assault, sent an Officer with two Turkish Prisoners before-hand, to summon the Governour Cara Mahomet to surrender the Town; and to let him know that if he suffer'd things to run to the last extremity, he must not expect any Quarter: Which was answer'd with no less inhumanity then haugh∣tiness by the Barbarian: For after he had caus'd the heads of forty Christian slaves to be cut off in his own and the presence of the Messenger, he bid him tell his General he would neither give nor expect Quarter. However he did not long enjoy the satisfaction of his cruelties, nor his insulting replies. For upon the sifth of August the haughty Turk receiv'd his death wound by a shot from the Camp as he was viewing one of the Christian Batteries; of which he died within two or three days after. He was said to be one of the best Officers the Turks had; as being one who had serv'd in the Sieges of Candia, Caminiec, and Vienna, in the battle of Choczin against the Poles, and in all the most memorable Occasions of his time. To whom im∣mediately succeeded Cheitan Bassa, no less infortunate, as being kill'd with a Cannon shot before he was hardly warm in his Government; so that the closest Aga of the Janizaries, to prevent a vacuum in au∣thority, was forc'd to take upon him the defence of the place. In the mean time the Christians, tho' continually vex'd with warm and frequent Alarums and Salleys, fail'd not to make their approa∣ches with a most obstinate resolution. To which purpose upon the eighth of August, the Christians after they had beaten back a thou∣sand of the Turks who Salli'd out early in the morning, with some loss to themselves, but a greater slaughter of the Enemy. They also sprung a mine the same day in a place near one of the principal Bat∣teries of the Besieged; which tho' it took not the intended effect, yet were the Besiegers thereby nothing discourag'd in their laborious Progress, but having finisht the rest of their Mines within some few days after sprung 'em together, which so well succeeded that they made a very large Breach in the Wall. However the Duke of Lor∣rain did not think it fit to give a general Assault; for that he found the besieged had made a large retrenchment behind the Wall of the Town, and understood moreover, that the Garrison was very nu∣merous. But there was a more powerful reason for the Duke of Lorrain to defer a general Assault, which was his small number of Infantry reduc'd by continual Salleys and hard labour to little more then 8000 fighting men; and those dishearten'd by the loss of several of the young German Nobility, and their inspiring Leaders. And therefore he thought it more proper to stay for the Bavarian suc∣cours that were daily expected. While they therefore are marching to his relief, it may not be a∣miss to give a brief accompt of what happen'd in other parts in re∣ference to the Diversions which the Christians made in other places; which no question were no small hindrance to the relief of the Turks in Buda. Among which we are not to imagine that of the Venetians to be the least. Who with their own and several Galleys of
Malta, the Pope and Duke of Tuscany, consisting in all of forty six Galleys, six Galleasses, thirty three Men of War, and several other smaller Vessels man'd with twenty four thousand foot, and four hun∣dred mounted Cavalry, under the Command of Morosini, as Captain General, put forth to Sea about the nineteenth of July from Corfit, and the next day arrived before Sancta Maura. This Sancta Maura is an Island joyning almost to the Continent, seat∣ed in the Golf of Larta, otherwise Prevesa, famous for the victory of Augustus against Marc Antony; and wrested from the Venetians by Ma∣homet the second; since which time it has continu'd under the subje∣ction of the Turk, to the great annoyance of the Venetians by Pyracie; being well peopled and about seventy Miles in Circuit. The main For∣tress is seated at the mouth of the Gulf, on a little neck of Land, very strong and well fortified, having the Sea on the one side and a great Morass on the other. On the 21th. of July the light Vessels enter'd the Port of Damata, on the right side of the Island, sufficiently capacious to receive a large Fleet, and secur'd by a Mole. Signior Monetta landed first with a hundred and fifty men; and after him General Strasoldo with two Ve∣netian Regiments, the Popes and the Infantry of Malta; at what time the rest of the Venetian forces and those of the Duke of Tuscany land∣ed on the West side. The next day the General sent a Summons to those in the Fort to surrender it: To which the Governour return'd for answer, That the Fortress belong'd to the Grand Signior, who had given him charge of it, and that according to his duty he would defend it to the last. Thereupon a party of Horse was sent toward the Suburbs of the Town on the East side which they found quitted by the Enemy. The 23th. of July the Ships began their batteries from the Sea, but with small success by reason of the high Winds. The next day the whole Fleet was so dispos'd, as to do more signal execution with their Canon; and some of the Galeasses roaring within Musket shot, threw a great many Bombs and Fire-balls into the Place, which did great execution, yet not so but that the Galleas commanded by General Carnaro receiv'd two dangerous shot from the enemies Can∣non, the General himself being wounded with a splinter; besides that the Galley belonging to Signior Quirini, which row'd the Galleass, was very much disabl'd. The 25th. a Battery was finish'd of 10 peices of Cannon carrying Balls of fifty pound weight, and upon the 27th. another somewhat nearer the Castle, both on the East side of it. The day following the Christians posted themselves in the Suburbs and rais'd another battery on the West side. Two days after a large breach was made in the Wall; at what time the Turks Sally'd out, but being discover'd were soon beaten back. Thus disappointed, they labour'd to fill up the breaches with bags of Straw and packs of Wool; but that labour being easily frustrated by the Cannon from the batteries, the Christians advanc'd their Trenches to the Counterscarp, and made a descent into the Mote. After that upon the fourth of August they made two descents more into the Mote, their Cannons having made another wide breach and dismounted all the Cannon of the Fort on that side. Upon the sixth all things being prepar'd for a vigorous assault; the
General sent a second Summons to let the besieged understand, That if they refus'd the second offer of his Clemency, they were to expect but the utmost severity. Thereupon, the next morning three Commissio∣ners were sent out, who being brought before the General, cast them∣selves upon the ground and desir'd they might be admitted to compo∣sition. Which being granted, the Conditions were soon accepted, that the Garrison should march away with their Arms and what they could carry about 'em: and the Christians took possession of the For∣tress: wherein they found fourscore Peices of Brass Cannon, of which twenty had the Arms of St. Mark upon 'em, together with a great quantity of Ammunition and Provision. There march'd out of the Garrison about 600 men and the like number of women and Children who were convey'd to Prevesa; and by this means a great many Christian slaves were releas'd. During the whole time of the Seige, which lasted about seventeen days, the Christians lost 400 Men, the Turks 300. While things thus prosperously succeed at Sancta Maura, the Seige of Buda carri'd on with so much vigour, and the noise of the Bavarian Forces, ready to joyn with the Besiegers, so Alarums Adrianople, that the Sirasquier Bassa receives positive orders to relieve the Town or die in the Attempt. But General Lesly lay so unluckily posted in his way, that he deem'd it necessary to remove so formidable an Enemy, before he could proceed any farther. Lesley, having receiv'd advice of this, and that to accomplish his de∣sign, he was decamp'd from Walpa re-inforc'd with several Bridges of Horse and Foot from Bosnia and other places with a resolution to at∣tack him, posted himself in an advantageous place, between two Mo∣rasses, about half an hours march from the Bridge which he had made over the Drave, at which time there came to his aid a seasonable recruit of 800 Croatian Gentlemen, and a 1000 Soldiers from the Province of Zethmar, which he plac'd before the two Morasses that cover'd the wings of his Army. No sooner had he secur'd himself, but the Enemy appear'd in sight upon the nineteenth of August, and the next day made a furious on∣set upon the Croats and Zethmarians, thinking to force them from their Station. But they so rudely entertain'd their Assailants, and were so bravely assisted by the Dragoons and Musketeers that were sent to their relief, that the Turks were forc'd to retreat with considerable loss, Nevertheless soon after they return'd again with a greater num∣ber, and renewed the encounter with such a redoubl'd resolution, that the Croats were constrain'd to give ground, leaving three Standards in the victors hands: which so highly enrag'd the Serasquier, that he came on with his main Forces and fell upon two of Lesley's Posts on that side of the Morass where the German Cavalry and Infantry were plac'd; who so stoutly behav'd themselves, that after an obstinate conflict for three hours together, the Turks were forc'd to retire, notwithstanding the inequality of their number: For that the Serasquier had no less then thirty thousand in his Army, Lesley not above fourteen thousand to encounter him. In this Action the Bassa lost five hundred of his best men; of the Christians about two hundred were kill'd and wounded. All this while great were the expectations on both sides at Buda; while the besieged look'd many a long look for the Serasquier, and the
besiegers impatiently attended the Baverian re-inforcement. And per∣haps it might have been worse for the Christians had not their cause born up their resolution above their expectations. For about the be∣ginning of September the Duke of Lorrain himself, wearied with the toils of Wars, and watchful cares of an industrious General, fell sick of a Fever which held him till past the middle of the Month, so that he was forc'd to retire for a while to a place near the Camp call'd the old Town. At the same time also, sickness forc'd the Duke of Croy, and Commissary General Breiner to leave the Camp. Which distempers of the General, and other great Officers though they had no fatal effect upon the Army, yet it caus'd some abatement of their wanted successes. 'Tis true that the Enemy was repuls'd with loss in two Sal∣leys which they made, the first upon the eighth of September to their great damage, and a second the same Evening with as ill success; for the Battalions of Souches, Beck and Newburgh coming into the timely assistance of those that guarded the Trenches, the slaughter of the E∣nemy happen'd to be very great; however they lost Lieutenant Col∣lonel Souches with several other officers and forty Soldiers. Neverthe∣less for want of Foot, the besieged ruin'd the Works which the besieg∣ers had rais'd to cut off the communication between the Town and the River. Before this also upon the first of September, the Turks made a despe∣rate Salley in the night, which before they had not done, the fury of which fell upon the Dragoons who did not expect their coming, of whom they slew a hundred and fifty with little loss on their side. The next morning likewise they made a second Salley with Horse and Foot, but the besiegers having timely notice of it, repell'd the E∣nemy with a far greater slaughter, and several Prisoners taken. Equal or rather far better success had Collonel Heuster who being sent out with a thousand Imperial Cuirassiers, and six hundred Hungarian Horse, and understanding that a great Convoy, consisting of four hun∣dred Wagons laden with Provision, drawn every one by four Oxen under the guard of four thousand Turks, had pass'd the Bridge of Esseck, and were marching for Alba Regalis, plac'd a convenient Ambuscade in their way, which at the first discharge kill'd above fifty of the Ene∣my and put the rest to flight: Yet were they not so totally routed, but that they ralli'd again in hopes to recover the Waggons which they had so cowardly abandon'd and fell upon his rear. But it was then too late, for they that were scar'd before not being able to endure a second charge were soon constrain'd to shift for their lives, while Heuster return'd to the Leaguer with all his booty, which prov'd a sea∣sonable supply for the Army. These were the most remarkable passages that happen'd before the Conjunction of the Bavarian Forces: which about the middle of Sep∣tember was happily notifi'd to most parts of Europe; for upon the twenty eighth of August the Elector of Bavaria arriv'd at Vienna by water, where he was first complemented by the Deputies of the Au∣strian Nobility, and then met by the Emperour himself, who carry'd him in his Coach to the Palace, being saluted all the way by a treble discharge of all the great Guns of the City. On the third of September he departed from Vienna, and the next day arriv'd at Presburgh with his Infantry and train of Artillery. The 5th. he parted from thence for Gran, where after he had ran∣devouz'd all his Horse and Foot he march'd in a body to Buda, and
arriv'd there about the 9 or 10th, of the same Month. On which day was observ'd at Vienna the Anniversary of the Cities deliverance by the victorious Arms of the Emperour, the King of Poland, and those o∣ther Princes of the Empire. There was a general Procession of all the Clergy as well Secular as Regular; at which the Emperour assisted on Foot with the Nobility, and the Officers of all the Soveraign Courts in their Robes; which being once over, all the Guns about the Town were thrice discharg'd. So soon as the Elector arriv'd at the Leaguer with all his Forces, the Imperial Army upon a Muster appear'd to be 20000 Horse and 10000 Foot, besides the Bavarian Succours, which were about sixteen thou∣sand, and the recruits daily expected from Suabia and Bohemiah. And now the Duke of Lorrain, as if the recruit of his Army had recruited his health, pursu'd the chase of victory with his accustom'd vigor. His Soldiers also laboured in their approaches with renew'd courage, while the Bavarians undertook that part of the Town that lay next the water, from whence they soon depriv'd the besieged of enjoying their late Conveniencies. For now upon a general Muster, the whole Army appear'd to consist of twenty thousand Horse, and about six and twenty thousand Foot, reckoning in the Bavarian succours which together with the recruits expected out of Suabia and other Parts were deem'd sufficient to fight the Serasquier and maintain the Seige at the same time. For now the intelligence grew hotter then be∣fore, that the Bassa had receiv'd positive orders to raise the Seige at the hazard of his life. Of this Lesley gave speedy notice both to the Emperour at Vienna and to the Camp before Buda. Who keeping his Post at the Bridge of Turanowath, with a reinforcement of three thousand Croatians, could not be forc'd from his Morasses, but still watch'd the motion of the E∣nemy. The Serasquier therefore resolv'd to leave him, and march di∣rectly for the relief of the distress'd Town. However he could not decamp so secretly, but that the Country People gave Lesley intelli∣gence of his march; who tho he thought it not convenient to stir from his Post, yet sent a Party after him, and finding that he was upon his march toward the Bridge of Esseck, dispatch'd away his Adjutant General Miglio to give notice of his design. But notwithstanding the severity of his receiv'd orders, and that he was advanc'd some part of his way, when he understood that the Bavarian succours were ar∣riv'd, and that the convoy sent to Alba Regalis was surpriz'd and taken by the Imperialists, he put a stop to his march, and as it was reported, was resolv'd to have repass'd the Bridg of Esseck, as one that dispair'd to accomplish the relief of the Town. And it is thought he would have made no farther attempt, had not fresh Commands and repeated Menacies constrain'd him to proceed. In the mean time the Bavarians briskly carried on their two new at∣tacks toward the Water-gate, which they were inform'd by a Gunner taken Pris'ner since the War, and escap'd a little before was the weak∣est side of the Town, and where in a short time they had compleat∣ed three Batteries, while the Imperialists with no less industry carry'd on the other attaques, in order to a general Assault. And so great were their hopes to carry the Town by storm, that upon the 22d. of September, the Duke of Bavaria sent a Corporal with a Turkish Pris'ner into the Town with Letters to the Bassa in Command, to let him know that his Highness gave him an Accompt of his arrival before the
Town, from whence he was resolv'd not to stir till he had reduc'd the place under the obedience of the Emperour; and withal admonishing him not to let things come to extremity. But such was the resolution of the Bassa, that after he had assembl'd the Principal Officers of the Garrison, he sent for the Corporal, and when he had read the Letters in their hearing, addressing himself to the Christian Officers, made answer, That he thank'd his Highness for the Accompt he gave him; that he had beheld the Arrival of his Forces; and that he understood very well the Rules and extremities of War, as having been a Souldier for many years; however that he wou'd not surrender the place so long as he had men and Ammunition to defend it, and provisions to subsist: Which said, he gave the Corporal twelve Ducats and sent him back to the Elector. But as this was no more then was expected, so both Imperialists and Bavarians omitted nothing either of Art or Industry to carry on their approaches, wherein the Bavarians were so successful, that with a mine which they sprung they made a considerable breach in the Wall, not∣withstanding the frequent Sallies of the Turks and the great number of Granado's and Artificial Fires which they flung into the Trenches of the Christians; which did very little or no harm, in regard that the besiegers secur'd themselves with Gabions and packs of Wool. Whilst thus the one side laboured in assurance of being speedy Ma∣sters of the place, and the other as stoutly defended the Town in hopes of releif, the Imperial Camp was warmly alarum'd with the ap∣proach of the Serasquier; who was said to be advanc'd with a Body of five and twenty Thousand Horse without Cannon or Infantry as far as Alba Regalis formerly the place of the Coronation and enterment of the Hungarian Kings, two and forty Miles distant from Buda. Thereupon the Duke of Lorrain leaving the Elector to manage the Seige, set forward upon the 16th. of September with a Body of twenty Thousand Horse and Dragoons to meet and fight him by the way. But when both sides came in view of each other, the Duke found the Bassa so strongly entrench'd with the River Sarwitz before him that he did not think fit to attaque him at so much disadvantage. The wary Turk also kept close within his Trenches, unwilling to hazard a battel so far from the Place which he was to releive. So that after a short stay the Duke of Lorrain thought it more convenient to return to the Seige, leaving the Prince of Baden with ten thousand Horse to observe the Enemies motion; upon his return to the Leaguer, a Council of War was call'd where it was resolv'd by the Imperialists to expect the Ene∣my in their Camp; to which purpose the Elector and Duke attended by all the General Officers visited all the Quarters and Lines of Circum∣vallation, as well as the Trenches and Posts toward the Town, and every where gave necessary Orders. On the other side, the Serasquier observing the retreat of the Duke came boldly on, and upon the 22th. of September, attack'd the Christi∣an Camp with great fury in two places, endeavouring to break in upon the Imperialists and to force his way to the Town; but he met with so stout and undaunted a resistance, that after a sharp and obstinate fight for several hours, wherein many were slain on both sides he was forc'd to retire in much disorder, and to leave two of his Standards behind him. In the mean time, the besieged made a desperate Salley with fifteen Hundred men as well Horse as Foot, and fell upon the Guards of the Trenches with so much resolution, that the Besiegers were forc'd to give ground; upon which the encourag'd Turks advanc'd,
ruin'd several of the Besiegers Works, and one of their principal Bat∣teries, nailing the Cannon that was mounted upon it, with the loss of three hundred of the Christians: but then certain Squadrons of Horse speeding to their assistance, the Turks were again beaten back to the very Gates of the Town, with the slaughter of above two Hundred men. The Serasquier also retreated that Night about two Miles from the Leaguer; but the next morning he made another attempt, though not with that Vigour as the day before; and seem'd by the event to be more out of design then that he thought to do any good. For while the Imperialists were engag'd, five Hundred Janizaries wading through a Morass, which was lookt upon to be impassable up to the Arms in Water and Mud, got into the Town; yet not with that good luck but that they left some of their Company sticking in the Mire, who became the Sport of the Musketeers. These two attacks seconded by a Salley, and three brave Repulses cost the lives of many valiant Men. However the Serasquier, hoping he had done enough to save his Neck by putting five hundred men in∣to the Town, was glad he was got off so, making all the hast he could from his unwelcome entertainment, being pursu'd by the Duke of Lor∣rain till he had secur'd himself under the Guns of Alba Regalis. Thus September drew toward an end; a Month no less remarkable for other notable atcheivements perform'd against the Turks to their considerable dammage, which as they very much weaken'd the Ottoman force, so they greatly impeded the Releif of Buda. For on the one side the Morlakes in Dalmatia toward the beginning of this Month, made an incursion into the Turkish Territories, not far from Clissa, and after they had burnt several Villages, brought away a considerable number of Prisoners. In their return they met with eight Hundred Turkish Horse marching toward Clissa, which they utterly de∣feated, killing two Hundred upon the Place, and taking all their Bag∣gage. Nor was this all; for being reinforc'd with a recruit of six Thou∣sand men, they posted themselves near Clissa in order to their Conjun∣ction with General Mocenigo, who was resolv'd to attack that place, be∣ing a neat City with a strong fortified Castle. Much about the same time another Party of Morlakes and Heydukes, being joyn'd with the Banditi sent by the Viceroy of Naples to serve the Venctian in Dalmatia, defeated another considerable Body of Turks that were drawn to∣gether in the vicinity of Spatetro to hinder their incursions, slew between two and three hundred upon the Place, took several Pris'ners, and brought away a considerable Booty of seven hundred Head of Cattle. At a farther distance, the King of Poland toward the latter end of August invested the strong Castle of Jaslowits, not far from Caminiec, and summon'd the Governour to surrender, who at first according to the haughty manner of the Turks, return'd q fierce answer. That he had Powder and Bullet sufficient to defend the Place, and would therefore maintain it to the last extremity; but no sooner did the Polish Batteries begin to play, and the Bombs and Caresses to fly about his Ears, but suddain Terrour seiz'd the besieged in such a manner, that they desir'd a Parley, which soon ended in a Composition; in pursuance of which, the Turks march'd out the third day after the Seige, to the number of 500 fighting men: at what time several of the Turkish Officers besought the King for his Protection, and that they might have liberty to remain within the Polish Territories, being unwilling to return home for fear of being question'd at their return for their Cowardice. Which success was attended by another of no less importance; for much a∣bout the same time, the Treasurer of the Crown of Poland wrested a compleat Victory from the Waywod of Walachia, to the destruction not only of his own For∣ces, but the Turkish Auxiliaries that were joyn'd with him, who together with their lives lost also their Camp and all their Baggage. Successes so much the more considerable, because they kept the Turks upon their Guard in those Parts from whence the Serasquier expected his chiefest Reinforcements.
In the Upper Hungary General Schultz, who commanded the Emperour's Forces in those Parts, having notice that Count Tekeley had put an 150 Men with two Peices of Canon into Zeben, a small Place bordering upon the Mountains not far from Espe∣ries, hasten'd thither, took the Place, and put all the Garrison to the Sword, in revenge of what Tekeley had done before, upon his taking a small Garrison from the Imperialists. Zeben thus recover'd, General Schultz sent several spies into Count Tekeley's Army; by whom being duly inform'd of the number of his Men, and the Situation of his Camp he resolv'd to give him a visit. Accordingly, leaving the lumber of his Bag∣gage at Zeben, upon the seventeenth of September about five in the Evening he ad∣vanc'd with all his Cavalry and part of his Infantry, which the Horsemen carry'd be∣hind 'em. About three in the morning, being come near the Enemies Camp, he put his Men into Order, and fell so suddainly upon the Rebells, that they had no time to put themselves into a Posture of defence. All they could do in so great a confusion was to think how to save themselves; so that some flying one way; some another, the Imperialists were soon Masters of the Enemies Camp, all their Artillery, con∣sisting of five Peices of Cannon; all their Ammunition, Tents and Baggage, even to the very Coach and Standard of Tekeley. He himself was in his Bed, and having hardly time to put on his Cloaths, fled away with only two or three persons in his Company. In his Tent were found his Sable, his Papers, his wearing Appa∣rel, his Plate and Money. It is certainly reported that above four thousand were slain or drown'd in the Ri∣vers of Tarza and Secso, which they endeavour'd to pass in their flight, being closely pursu'd all the way by the Imperial Cavalry. Fourteen Standards and other Colors were afterwards sent and presented to the Emperour as the Trophies of this Victory. In pursuance of his good Fortune, the Victorious General upon the 24th. of Sep∣tember sate down before Barfeodt, a Town well fortified with a strong Wall with se∣veral Towres and Redoubts, and a deep Mote, wherein was also a Garrison consist∣ing of between three or four Hundred men, besides Inhabitants that bore Arms. Who having notice of the General's March, made all the Preparation they could for a stout resistance, uncovering their Houses to prevent their being fir'd by the Bombs and Fire-Works of the Assailants, removing their Goods into Vaults and Cellars: and then casting up several Works within the Town. So soon as the General had posted his men, he caus'd a large Battery to be rais'd, under the shelter of which five or six Hundred chosen men commanded by Collonel Veterani advanc'd to the Mote and making a descent, lodg'd themselves with their Ladders under the Wall. Which so dismay'd the Inhabitants, that they presently dispatch'd out Commissioners to capitulate; who being sent back for the extrava∣gancy of their demands, Veterani in the interim made the Inhabitants sensible how he was Posted under the Wall, and withal told 'em that he had prepar'd such a Mine, which would not only blow up the Wall but a good part of the Town. Which so terrifyed the credulous Hungarians, that they quickly condescended to meaner Ar∣ticles, desiring only the preservation of their Ancient Priviledges, as well in Civil as Ecclesiastical Matters. The Soldiers were to March out with only their Arms; and what they could carry about 'em, with liberty to such as would, to be entertain'd in the Emperours Service. Which Conditions being agreed to, the Garrison march'd out, and General Schultz took possession of the Town. From hence he march'd to the Castle of Muscowitz, which he immediately Sum∣mon'd; but the Governour relying upon the strength of the Place, and the num∣ber of the Garrison consisting of 400 Men, besides a great many Martial Peasants, instead of returning an Answer, hung out a red Flag. Upon which the General forthwith began to raise his Batteries and make his Approaches, at the same time throwing into the Town a great number of Granado's and Bombs; by which means in a short time he made a descent into the Mote. So that the Garrison apprehen∣sive of the danger of a storm from those that proceeded with such a swift and vi∣gorous Resolution, after a Seige of fix days surrendred upon Condition. During this Seige, Captain Molner one of Schultz's Officers meeting with a Party of 300 Rebells, under the Command of Subeida, Count Teckeley's great favourite, who were going to put themselves into the Castle of Maskowitz, totally routed their whole Body, took Subeida and his Wife Prisoners; and besides other good Booty forty Thousand Crowns in ready Money. Nor was the Venetian Fleet less active in the Archipelago; For on the seventeenth, of September they made a descent near to Dragomasto, anciently a City of Acarnania call'd Oeniade, seated at the mouth of the River Achelous; so famous among the Fa∣bles
of the Pozes. Where they were no sooner landed but they were joyn'd by two Thousand and five Hundred of the Greeks, desirous of their ancient Liberty; and thus embody'd march'd 50 Miles up into the Country, wasted the whole Pro∣vince of Acurnania, burnt two great Towns, Ʋragosi, and Zapaachi, together with a great many small Villages; defeated the Sangiac of the Province, who endeavour'd, with what Forces he could get together, to make opposition against 'em, and at length, with a great Booty and many Pris'ners, return'd to their Fleet. But now to return again to the City of Buda, the success of which Leaguer all Europe listen'd after with attentive Ears, we find the Serasquier Bassa, after an at∣tempt to relieve the Town, twice repuls'd toward the beginning of October; and then when he found himself disappointed, retiring back again in hasty disorder with the Duke of Lorrain and twenty Thousand Horse at his heels, not daring to make head, or look back till he had posted himself under the Cannon of Alba Regalis. In the mean time the Elector no less eager in the pursuit of Honour toil'd in pre∣paring all things ready for a general Assault, raising Batteries, advancing his ap∣proaches, and opening Mines, in a mon ent to demolish the labour of many years. While the perverse and half starv'd Enemy, as if they had only fed upon the hopes of Releif, as restlesly labour'd with continual Salleys to disturb the Progress of his indefatigable Endeavours. This was the Pains and Travel of this Month which ex∣ercis'd both Parties. Upon the Second of November they made a Salley with three Hundred Men, but were beaten back again by the Bavarians with the loss of seventy of their Number, who were slain upon the Place. The next day they appear'd again with between three and four Hundred Horse: but perceiving that the Bavarians were drawn up in a Posture ready to receive 'em, they presently retreated back. The very same day they made another Salley on that side next to old Buda, where the German's guarded the Trenches; but there they were so warmly welcom'd, that they were glad to retreat in great disorder leaving twelve of their number Pris'ners, besides what were slain in the skirmish. These Pris'ners, upon their Ex∣amination, affirm'd that the Janizaries who got into the Town a little before, brought no Provisions along with 'em; of which however there was then at that time so great want, that a pound of Horse-Flesh was sold for nine Pence. On the Fourth of November the Bavarians storm'd the Tower of the Castle which looks toward the Water, by others call'd the Great Tower; but were not able to make themselves Masters of it, though they contended for it several hours together with great slaughter on both sides: However afterwards, they made a shift with a Battery of six Peices of Cannon to beat down all the Towers of the Castle a∣bout the Turks Ears, and to lodge themselves very near the Castle it self: so that now all the publick Intelligence in this Part of the World sounded loud to a Ge∣neral Assault, and the fatal Determination of so long and so bloody a dispute. And there is no question to be made, but that never any Besiegers labour'd with more indefatigable pains; with such an obstinacy, that neither inundation of Water; nor unseasonable Weather could stop the Career of their Travel, beyond all the Roman Industry before Jerusalem: But when the day was appointed, the Duke of Lorrain relaps'd to such a degree that the Margrave of Baden was sent to Command the Army during his Indisposition; and more than that, not to mention the Rainy weather alleadg'd for another Cause, the Serasquier Bassa, said to be re∣pass'd the Bridge of Esseck, so soon as the Duke had ceas'd his pursuit, advances again and lodges himself within four Hungarian Miles of Buda. It behov'd him to use all his Wits to save his Neck: and therefore while he lay there, he provided five Boats laden with Provision and Ammunition to be sent up the River, and at the same time having given orders to the Bassa of Agria to Ala∣rum the Imperialists of Pst, resolv'd himself to advance near the Leaguer; as if he intended to assail the Christian Camp, to the end that by the favour of the Night and such a Diversion the supply might the more easily be got into the Town. But the Duke of Lorrain, having notice of his design, commanded Major Ge∣neral Dunevelt to pass the Danaw with a Body of Horse near Vacia, which he did, directing his March toward Pest: So soon as the Turks perceiv'd the Imperial Troops, they retreated with all the haste they could. On the other side Dunevelt advancing along by the River side, had the good Fortune to meet with five Boats; which he took with ease, and put to the Sword all the Turks that were in 'em. By which means the support intended for the Garrison became a supply no less seasonable to the Besiegers.
But notwithstanding this Disappointment, and that the Besieged were said to be reduc'd to four Thousand Men; they forgot not their wonted Custome of ma∣king Sallies; first upon the thirteenth of November, at what time they were bea∣ten in again with little loss to the Besiegers: The next day they came forth a∣gain and forc'd the Bavarians from their Works, but other Forces coming in to their timely assistance the Christians regain'd their Posts, though with the loss of two Hundred Men. The fifteenth day they made another Salley with six Hun∣dred Men, and prevail'd so far, that they took away and carry'd into the Town the very Deal Boards which the Besiegers made use of in working their Mines: Which nevertheless was not so prejudicial as their Counter-mines which now be∣gan to take Effect. And certainly it was encouragement sufficient for the Besieged to do their ut∣most to preserve themselves and annoy their Enemies; when they saw the Serasquier Bassa with his numerous Troops o'r-spreading all the neighbouring Feilds; and watching all opportunities to send 'em fresh Relief: For the Bassa was all this while posted within five Miles of the Town; so that the Imperial Cavalry being hinder'd from forraging suffer'd very much; while the Besiegers seem'd in a man∣ner besieg'd themselves. But that which mainly incommoded the Christians was the unseasonable Wea∣ther; which had not only drown'd several of the Bavarian Trenches, but begot sundry distempers as well among the Officers as Soldiers, lying wet and cold, which had much impair'd the Infantry, and much weaken'd the Cavalry; insomuch that the Regiments of Savoy, Magni, and Heuster were reduc'd to Thirty and Forty Men. Yet notwithstanding all the hardships which they suffer'd, the Imperialists could not so soon resolve to go without the purchase of a Place which had cost the ex∣pence of so much time and blood. And therefore perceiving that the Serasquier embolden'd with a Reinforcement of forty Thousand fresh Men, and fourteen Peices of Cannon, drew nearer and nearer, within two Miles of the Camp, a Council was call'd, wherein they resolv'd to abide the Enemy in their Trenches which were deep and well fortifi'd. On the other side the wary Turk did not think it convenient to make a general Attacque upon the Enemies Camp, where he well knew he should meet with a dangerous opposition. For upon his first approaches certain Detachments of the Imperialists being sent out to encounter his formost Troops; had given 'em such proofs of their Courage, that the Bassa was forc'd to retire: Which the Besieged impatient of his delays observing, and to ruine one of the Christian Batteries which did very much annoy the Town, made a desperate Salley upon the Bavarian Quar∣ters, but were repuls'd with considerable loss; at what time Collonel Kreig who commanded in the Trenches, two Captains and a Lieutenant of the same Regi∣ment were slain. On the 25th. the Besieged made another Salley wherein they ruin'd several of the Besiegers Works and discover'd their chief Mine. Nor was it possible to prevent some successes of the Enemy, where so numerous an Army daily hover'd so near their Camp. Among the rest it was not the least, that the Bassa of Agria, having forc'd the Entrenchments which the Imperialists had made on that side next to Pest, and put to the Sword those few men that were left to guard 'em, had convey'd about eight Boats with Men and Provisions into the Town; that another strong Party of the Turks being sent out towards old Buda, had surpris'd several of the Imperial Forragers, had taken 500 Horses and all the Baggage of the Count de Schram; and that the Bavarians were forc'd to abandon their Mines, being all fill'd with water. On the 27th. of October the Serasquier advanv'd so near the Christian Camp that he beat in their main Guard. But the Polish Horse commanded by Prince Lubo∣mirski not only gave a stop to their further Progress, but constrain'd 'em to retire with some loss. Nevertheless the Besieged encourag'd with their new recruits of Men and Provision the same day made so desperate a Salley with 2000 Men, that they forc'd the Imperialists from their Trenches, and being conducted by a Re∣negado who two days before had got into the Town, to their Principal Mine, they took the Powder out of it, ruin'd all their Works on that side and advanc'd to the Besiegers chief Battery; but the Forces that guarded the next Post, hast'ning to their Releif; the Enemy was beaten into the Town again. Thereupon at length in consideration of the Season, the ill Condition of the Army, and for that their Principal Mines and Works were spoil'd, both Generals resolv'd, in pursuance of the Emperours Orders, to raise the Seige. To which pur∣pose all the sick and wounded men, to the number of 8000 being first sent away
with the Baggage and Camp Attendance, the great Guns were drawn off from the Batteries; and, for the defence of the Army in their retreat, planted in the Island of St. Andrew, where the whole Army; consisting of about 30000 men pass'd the Da∣naw, the first of November over a Bridge of Boats; the Cavalry facing the Enemy while the Foot march'd off. Which was perform'd with that wariness and exact Order; that they were neither attaqu'd by the Serasquier; nor from the Town; so that they lost not so much as one map in the Retreat. This was the unfortunate Issue of this Summers Seige of Buda, which might have well deserv'd the Pen of another Homer to eternize the performances of those great Personages; no less famous then his Achilles's or Patroclus's, whose valour how∣ever could not prevent their being buried in their own Trenches. They fought on∣ly for the honor of one part of Greece, these for the Good of all Christen∣dom, strenuously endeavouring to have recover'd by their courage what had been wrested from the Christians formerly; and all the while every Salley and Repulse of the Enemy was a Theme for Heroick Invention: As for those that surviv'd, they continu'd their indefatigable endeavours to level the Fortifications, not only of Art but ev'n Nature it self, till Nature releiv'd Nature with the Stoppings and Inunda∣tions of the Season; and Winter prov'd no less favourable to the Turks, than the Summer had been to the Christians. Yet is not this the first Seige of this Nature rais'd after the loss of men, and the laborious toyls of the Besiegers frustrated. We read of the famous City of Rhodes, that when the Walls were almost levell'd with the Earth, and the yawning Breaches gap'd to let in the numerous Enemy, the whole Force of the Ottoman Empire daily reinforc'd, continually recruited, was forc'd to retire with shame and dishonour from the Ruins of their own Batteries. But much more Fresh in memory is the late Seige of Vienna it self, a much weaker Town then Buda, assail'd and storm'd on every side for several Months, and yet the haughty Bassa that invested it, was at length constrain'd not to rise end march fairly off, but to fly from his Leaguer and leave the whole Plunder of his Camp to the Victor. It was not so here; for tho' the Besiegers were inferior in number to those that came to the releif of the Besieged, yet they maintain'd their Posts, drew off all their Artillery, sent away all their wounded and sick People, all their Baggage, fac'd the Enemy and march'd off leisurely without disturbance or the loss so much as of one man. 'Tis therefore true that the Turks themselves may have some reason to be glad; nor are they to be blam'd for being glad to find themselves in some measure repaid for their greater and much more ignominious loss before Vienna, by releiving so seasonably a Town which has preserv'd 'em the cheifest Trophy of all their former Hungarian Conquests. But that there should be a sort of Turkish Christians, that shewed themselves so pensive as they did, when the Town was near losing, and now share with the Turks in the Mirth of their Triumph, cannot otherwise be thought than very strange. It is said of Solyman, who first took Buda from the Hungari∣ans, that with tears in his Eyes he bewail'd the slaughter which his Sword had made, and the untimely end to which he had reduc'd the unfortunate Lodowic the Second; but these people are sorry that the Christians were not all Buried under the Walls of Buda and because the Turk could not do it in performance, please themselves with pursuing and destroying the retreating Besiegers in their discourse and reports. But then again when we consider that all this is for Count Tekelie's sake, upon whom they look as the great Champion of Hungarian Liberty and Property, and Freedom of Conscience, as they call it, 'tis not so much to be admir'd that their Interests are so twisted with his, and that their simpathy extends so many German Miles to con∣dole or congratulate the losses or successes of the Turk his Protector. But this it is, not to understand the depth of true Protestant Interest; otherwise what greater wonder in the world then that Julius, the Head of the Papists, should be condemn'd for calling in the Turks to his assistance; when it shall be lawful at the same time for these sublimated Protestants to repine at the successes of their follow Christians, and rejoice at the prosperity of Infidels? But the Turks were so kind as to relieve the distressed Pope besieg'd in Bologna, and now have rais'd the drooping Spirits of these Protestant Mussel-men by the relief of Buda. 'Twas pity Count Tekelie, their ador'd friend, was so shamefully surpriz'd that their joy might have been compleat. However we have still this advantage over 'em, that they are glad the Seige is rais'd; and we are much more glad, 'twas rais'd without the loss of Men or Reputation. Which the Turks could not say, when chas'd and scattet'd from Vienna. FINIS.
