S5070 12728793 66403
blazon or coat of arms of Sir Thomas Fairfax FARE FAC
Anglia Rediviva; Englands Recovery: BEING THE HISTORY Of the Motions, Actions, and Suc∣cesses of the Army under the Immediate Conduct of His Excellency Sr. Thomas Fairfax, Kt. CAPTAIN-GENERAL Of all the PARLIAMENTS Forces IN ENGLAND. Compiled for the Publique good BY IOSHUA SPRIGGE. M. A. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Iohn Partridge, and are to be sold at the Parot in Pauls Church-yard, and the Cock in Ludgate-streete. 1647.
To the Honourable, VVilliam Lenthal, Esq Speaker of the Honourable House of COMMONS. SIR, IF my own Genius had not prompted me, the Nature of this Discourse would have led me to You; being of the Acti∣ons of that ARMY, which (as it received the compleat actu∣ation of its Form, by the concurrence of the Right honourable the House of PEERES; so it) received its first rise from that Honourable House where you sit, and have sate as Speaker, (after an unparallel'd instance) for sixe con∣tinued Years together; deriving in the mean time, not so much wonder, as benefit to the King∣dome thereby: having, all along, by the same
Publique Organ asserted the English freedome, whereby once (since the beginning of this Par∣liament) You answered His Majesty, (who had then after an unusual manner entred your House:) That you had neither eyes to see, nor tongue to speak, but what that Honourable House gave you. In all the warm Influences and Moti∣ons whereby this Army hath been cherished, You have been One in the Constellation, yea, a chief and leading One. SIR, I mention not these things to lay a stumbling-block of Pride before you; But to minde you of that which I know you acknow∣ledge, That One greater then States, gave you this faithfulnesse. Now as for this Story Sir, what is wanting in it of Elegancie of Phrase, hath been endeavoured to be supplied in the truth of the Relation: And next to that, a good propor∣tion of my care hath been to carry it without such distatefull reflection, as might render it unfit for your Candor to patronize; I make no questi∣on but you will easily discern a thread of Divi∣nity running through the whole proceeding of this Army, and that their Actions have been no∣thing else, but a Copy of the Wisdom, Power, Pro∣vidence, and love of God put forth in men. My Prayers for you, and the Honourable Senate are, That God who hath made all your Ene∣mies without, appear but flesh, and that flesh grasse,
would save you from the power of flesh within, that you may act all things in the strength and excellency of that Spirit that hath wrought these things for ye, that ye may be partakers of as much of God as of Victory; whereby ye shall be sure, not only to arrive your selves laden with Honour, and all the sweet fruits of your unwearied Labours at the Port of glory, but shall also direct the tossed Bark of this Common-wealth towards the Haven of Rest and Righteousnesse. SIR, In your publike merit many thousands are no lesse then I am, who am professedly, Sir, Your most humble Servant, I
To his EXCELLENCIE Sir Thomas Fairfax, &c. AN APOLOGIE. SIR, IT may be thought neither Iustice nor Gratitude, That this Book is not dedicated to your Name, for your great merit and interest in the subject of it. Sir, As your worth, and name, qualifies you for the Patronage of the best Subject or Discourse whatsoever; and your Martial fame and Prowesse, for the best Story of that sort: so your interest in, and relation to the contents hereof, is, and without controversie must be acknowledged so great, as renders you altogether uncapable of recei∣ving any accession of Title thereto by a Dedication. The truth is, This being but the Picture of that VVisedome, and Courage, and what more of GOD did appeare in You; I dare not present
it to you, being not drawn to the life. But when moreover I consider of the Kingdoms interest in these things done, and more particularly the Parlia∣ment's, who set you on work; I am fully satisfied and resolved, That if the right of Dedication be yours, yet the debt of Patronage which is Onus, as well as Honos; a Care, as well as a Courtesie) I am sure is theirs: For though You are the Person by whom; yet it is the Publike, 'tis the Parliament, for whom these Things have been done; And there∣fore the justice seems to be on that side, that They should take these Services off Your hands, and own and avouch them as having been done in Their name, and by their authority. And as Your services have been of that consider∣ation and merit, as to engage Kingdoms and Parli∣aments; So the consideration of Gratitude is not fit for the adventure of a private man, it is worthy the advice of a Parliament. And as both Houses have with much Noblenesse, and in high Honour to You in that relation, acknowledged as much by a solemn congratulatory Visit, at your comming to London; so They will, I am confident, proceed in all suitable expressions of real thankefulnesse; and least of all think their gratitude at an end, now that your services are come to so good an end. Though I may say without dishonour to them, when they have done all, They must die your Debters: And he is not an English-man, that doth not acknowledge,
That as the Honour of these Actions, under GOD, is Yours; so all that they enjoy by these successes, is also Yours: And that when this Generation have exhausted themselves, and done their part, they must commend it to their Posterity, to pay the Remainder to your Name. SIR, I speak not these things to lift you up, for that were to insnare you, and bring you down in that wherein you have as much exceeded the most of the sonnes of men, as in any thing; I mean in the carrying of so much Honour as GOD hath put upon you, in greatest humility; but to lift up GOD in you. My only prayer for you is, That as you have seen much of GOD in the action, so you may live to see proportionably of GOD in Ʋs, in the improvement of them; And that you may taste as much of GOD in the Kingdomes Peace, as you have done in the Kingdomes Warres. Your Excellencies most humble, and most affectionately devoted Servant, Ioshua Sprigge.
To all True ENGLISH-MEN. MY dear Country-men; (For to you I direct this Story: for it is yours; In your Land were these Battels fought; these Actions done, for your sakes, (the vindication and defence of your Parliament, Lawes and Liberties;) and by your hands.) You, that have with bleeding hearts, and distilling eyes, been Specta∣tors of, and common Sufferers under the insulting paces of Arbitrary power, and unlimited Prerogative; and have felt the twinging convulsions, and violent concussions of the same: And at last (to accomplish your misery, and your Exactors sins) have had a Cup of Blood prepared for you, (by Divine ordination, indeed, (and so righteously;) but immediately put upon you by the lusts of those, whom GOD, for your sins, had given up to these things:) And have been drinking thereof these three years and more, (I pray God it hath passed from you.) Only, at present, God hath taken it out of your hands, (though we see not, yet, he hath made your Enemies drink the dregs of it.) I can∣not but hope and expect, That as those Feet have been beau∣tiful that brought you the Retail-tidings of your expiring Warfare; so that Hand that shall transmit the Series of them to your view, shall not want his due proportion of benevolous acceptance.
You may not expect here an History, beginning with our late unhappy Wars; but (that which is better) it ends with them, (For, better is the latter end of a thing, sayes Solomon, then the beginning.) And therefore this Peece (though last acted, yet) being first intended in Providence, may well be first committed to History, as containing that Point, where∣into, as into its Center, all the former Actions did thrust; If any have a story of them to bring forth, this doth not at all prevent, but prepare for it. It is pleasant discoursing of the Wracks of Warre, in the Harbour of Peace; As once Aeneas to his Men: Vos & Scyllaeam rabiem, penitus{que} sonanteis Accestis scopulos; Vos & Cyclopea saxa Experti, revocate animos, moestum{que} timorem Mittite; forsan & haec olim meminisse juvabit. Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum, Tendimus in Latium, sedes ubi Fata quietas Ostendunt, illic fas regna resurgere Trojae: Durate, & rebus vosmet servate secundis. Into this Harbour hath GOD now brought our English Bark; Of this Peace, and the immediate Action that wrought it out, doth this History give you a prospect, wherein I hope GOD is drawn through all, and Providence in the fairest colour, and the greatest letter in the Book. The Olive branch I bring, might discharge me from owing any Excuse; yet there are two things (whatever more may be) for which I shall tender a short Apologie, viz. That this Olive branch is no fairer; That it is no fresher. For the first, I may say of the Actions of this Army, in a good proportion of truth, what was said in another case: If they had been all largely expressed, such a Volume could not have contained them: For as in populous Cities, especially if of great wealth and trading, Houses are thwackt together
without those liberties of Gardens and Orchards, which Country villages are accommodated with: Even so, in the Story of this ARMY, into which so many great and glorious actions, and births of Providence have throng'd, to make it rich and glorious by the mutuall projections of their Lights; you cannot expect to have such Elbow-room of Expression, and Accommodation of Words, as in more single stories. Or as lesser Lights shining in an Orbe by themselves, seem fair and specious, and of greater magnitude then bigger starres in Con∣stellations: Even so, How many of these Actions, were each of them improved and extended by the Art of Speech, spread in their just breadth, the Folds of their particular Circumstances, opened, would make so many competent Stories by themselves. For the latter; Should this Story have been adorned with such Artificial stuffe of feigned speeches, Prosopepeia's, and Epistrophe's, &c. it might find better accesse to some eares: But whether it be not the glory of the Story, Not to need the Trappings of Words, I make no question at all. Truth is that, which is the commendation of History; and the greatnesse of an action (which makes it great in Wise∣mens eyes) is native, not adventitious. I should count my self unhappy, to detain the Reader in the Artifice of the Style, from the Greatnesse of the Matter; Lofty language, is but to Mount Pigmee actions, and to please a lower Sense. I dare not be too sollicitous of arraying the works of GOD, let while I seek to honour them with a gorgeous Habit, I hide the true Glory and Majesty of them: Besides that, the humbler the Phrase is, the more sutable to the Persons by whom these things were done, and the manner of doing; For, not by Might, nor by Power, &c. And I write them not for men to pick Phrases out of, but to gather matter of Praises to GOD: And if this be the fruit, I have my end in relation thereto, and furtherance thereof. I shall adde but two or three words more: And the first is, concerning the Action; the second, concerning the Instruments; and lastly, concerning the Authour, GOD.
1. For the Action: You that have travelled in all Stories both ancient and modern; whose Mindes are so greatned, as that you will look upon no small things; Tell me, (I will be bold to put the question, and venture the shame of the worst answer that truth and ingenuity can make) Did you ever read such a Story as this? (I relate to the matter of it) Did you ever read (setting Israels warres in Canaan aside) of so many Actions, so considerable, done in so short a time? Such Vnanimity in Councels, such Concord in Leaders, such Successe upon Endeavours, such Feare upon Enemies? It was the admiration of a The Prince of Orange. Great man, and Souldier, in Foraign parts, upon the former Services: What, two Battels in a Summer! I know not what he may say of these; perhaps nothing: Admirationes leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. But as the height of Mercy cannot well be taken but from the depth of the precedent Misery; so neither can the transcendencie of this Army's Merit be estimated, but by the greatnesse and compasse of their Work. You shall find therefore in a Table prefixed to the Story, the state of the Kingdom set in your view, as it stood when this New-Model was raised and sent forth. For as it usually fals out, that sicknesses and distempers in mens bodies, appearing in the greatest height and threatning, is the very Crisis and fore∣runner of Recovery; so fared it in this matter: The Enemy never had a fairer day for his purpose; and on the other hand, the Parliaments affairs was never since these Warres more low and declining; As by referring to the ensuing Table, may appear. 2. Concerning the Instruments, The goodnesse of GOD hath appeared to us (in furnishing us with such Instruments out of our selves, in a Paralel way to that Successe he hath given out by them; in making the ENGLISH Root again to bud with Honour, after the disadvantage of a long∣continued Peace for 80. yeares, wherein Rest had been con∣veyed in our Blood, from Father to Sonne. And now to make the Gallantry, Valour, and Prowesse of our Fore∣fathers to rise up in their Children, in such a Cause, and not
only to bud, but to bear ripe Almonds; is that, which, (abstracting from the eat of the Wars within our own bowels) would have made a delectable story, although it had been without successe. 3. But we would least of all be thought, by this Historie of things done, to fixe unconquerablenesse, and unvariable successe upon this Army; That were to dare Providence to undo us: We know, we are as soon broken, as made up; as soon flying, as conquering: We desire therefore Friends, not to believe this Army shall do more, because it hath done so much; and that it cannot be conquered, because it hath conquered: But, that it shall be still victorious while GOD is in it, and no longer. Accept these Mercies, and with them the Instruments, in the undeniable demonstration of their Love and Loyalty to their Country, in so free an expence of their Blood, and so chearfull undergoing all hardships of War, for your sakes. J. S.
The state of the Kingdome, when His Excel∣lencie Sir THO. FAJRFAX marched forth, May. 1645. Exhibited in Two TABLES. The one shewing, into what Counties, Cities, Towns, Castles, and Places of strength, the KING reached, and Garrisoned: As also the Field-force His Maiestie had to maintain the same, and to enlarge his Quarters. The other shewing all along, what Force, Garrisons, or Places of strength the PARLIAMENT had, to check or ballance the Enemie. In two DIVISIONS. The one containing the Western Counties; The other, the Midland Parts. THE FIRST DIVISION. IN The KING had, The Parliament had, Cornwal. The whole County intire to himself, with these places of strength therein well fortified, and manned: Viz. The Mount, the strong Castle of Pendennis, Dennis-Fort, and Helford-fort, which commanded the com∣modious Harbour of Falmouth. The Garrisons of Foy, Salt-Ash, Mount-Edgcombe, and Lanceston: Besides, His Majesty kept some Forces at Padstow, and St. Ives. Neither Field-Force, Port-Town, nor Inland-Garrison; and besides, the People were gener∣ally disaffected to the Parliament. Devon. All Devon intire to himself (except Plimouth only) and therein these considerable Garrisons well fortified and manned, viz. Excester, Barnstaple, and Dartmouth, the Fort at Exmouth, Pouldram-Castle, Fort-Charles at Salcombe, Ilfordcombe, Hoptons Fort, and the other Forts before Plimouth; St. Budeax, the garrison at Sir Francis Drakes house, Peymouth-house, Barley-House, and Inch-Garrison. Plimouth only; and that besieged.
Somerset. All in his power (except Taunton only, which was then straitly be∣sieged by him) And in that County the strong Garrisons of Bristol and Bridgewater, Bath, Lamport, Burrough, Nunny-Castle, Portshead-Point, Il∣chester, Chidiak-House, and Farley-Castle. The garrison of Taunton (close besieged at that time.) Dorset. Portland-Castle and Island, Corf-Castle, and Sherborn-Castle. The Port-Townes of Poole, Lyme, and VVey∣mouth. Wilts. The Garrisons of the Devizes, Laicock-House, Langford-House, and Highworth. Malmesbury—Garrison only. Hants. The strong Garrisons of Basing and VVinchester. The Garrisons of Ports∣mouth, Southampton, and Christ-Church, (Port-Towns.) Berks. Farringdon, VVallingford, Denning∣ton, and Radcot. Abbingdon, Reading, and VVindsor. Oxford. The City of Oxford, (the Kings Head-garrison) Banbury, VVoodstock, Gaunt-House, Blechingdon-House, & Godstowe. Henley-Garrison. Bucks. Borstall-house Garrison. Alisbury. The KINGS Field-Force for the VVEST. The PARLIAMENTS Field-Force for the WEST. The King's Field-Forces for the securing of these Western Counties and Garrisons, even from Oxford to the Mount in Cornwal, under the Command of the Lord Goring, the Lord Hopton, Sir Richard Grenvile, and Major-General Sir John Digby, Brother to the Lord Digby: May modestly be com∣puted to be, in all, 14000. Horse and Foot, besides their severall Garrisons secured with Horse and Foot; as may easily be credited, if it be considered, the great Force they had before Taunton, during the two strait Sieges thereof, and the many men they lost in both those services; And yet with what a con∣siderable Army they were at Lamport, when they were beaten there, and at the same time also maintaining the Siege before Plimouth with a considerable Force, (besides those 14000.) His Highnesse Prince Charles was then in person in the West, raising new For∣ces, whose Presence had such influence on those Parts, especially on the Club-men (who were thereby made bold in their Meetings, and received Commissions under his High∣nesse hand and seal, to form themselves into Regiments) that it was no little addition of Reputation to that Army. The Parliament (not thinking it safe to spare the new raised Army under his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax, to attend the great bu∣sines of the VVest, and leave the Parliament, City, and Association without a Guard, and the Royal Army about Oxford, unattended:) Designed onely the remaining Regiments of the Earl of Essex's, and Sir VVilliam VVallers Horse, which were not reduced into the New-Model, to busie the Enemy in the West; viz. Of Sir VVil. VVallers, Colonel Cooks, Colonel Fitz-James, Colonel Popham, and the Plimouth Regiment. Of the Earl of Essex's, the Relicts of Colonel Beer's, and Colonel D Albiers Regiments under Lieu. Colonel Buller, assigned over to Major-Gen. Massey: which Re∣giments were formed into a Bri∣gade, and designed under the Command of Major-Gen. Massey for the Western parts, but a lit∣tle before the Battel of Naseby.
THE SECOND DIVISION. In the County of The KING had, The Parliament had, Hereford. That County entirely to himself, with the Garrisons of Hereford, Go∣theridge, and Cannon-Froom. No Garrison, Place of Strength, nor Field-Force. Worcester. The City of VVorcester, Evesham-Garrison, and Hartlebury-Castle. Hawksworth Castle only. Salop. The Garrisons of Ludlow, Bridge-North, Dawly, Shrawarden-Castle, Caes-Castle, Morton-Corbet-House, Stockley-Castle, Rowton-Castle, Linsel-Manour, Apley-House, High-Archal, Carew-Castle, Embleden-Castle. Shrewsbury, VVem-Garrison, and Oswestree. Stafford The strong Garrisons of Lichfield and Dudley, and Burton and Trent. The Garrison of Staf∣ford. Chester. The City of VVestchester, Beeston-Castle, Hawarden-Castle. Namptwich. Leicester. The Garrison of Ashby-de-la-Zouch. Leicester town, (shortly after lost.) Lincoln. Belvoir-Castle. Lincoln-City, Crow∣land Garrison, Hougham Garrison, Burleigh. Nottingh. On this side Trent, the strong Gar∣rison of Newark, Shelford-House, and VViverton. The town and castle of Nottingham.
Errata. Page 17. §. 7. A whole line left out that should begin the Section, viz. [But the commands given with publique and unfained ends were not disputed, but obeyed] Accordingly, &c. p. 30. l. 1. for part read partee p. 68. l. last but one f. framing r. freeing p. 90. l. 11. f. Kenisome r. Keinsome l. 15. f. rather r. would rather l. 18 f. setting r. setling p. 95. l. 25. f. in whom r. then in whom l. 30, 31. f. and which r. which p. 119. l. 11. f. Priors fort r. Priors hill fort l. penult. f. Town r. Line p. 131. l. 4. f. Ben∣net r. Sir Humphrey Bennet l. 4. f. prisoners r. hostages p. 136. §. 7. Marg. l. 6. f. the mood r. that mood p. 140. l. 22. f. in all these r. in these p. 145. l. 6 after the word Iustice supply [an Irish Rebell was ta∣ken and executed] p. 161. f. Dec. 32. r. Dec. 23. p. 163. l. penult. f. set forward r. advanced p. 165. l. 7. f. three r. two p. 171. §. 7. l. 4. f. own r. Fort p. 177. l. 15. f. S. Edmund r. Sir Edmund p. 179. l. 8 f. William r. Will p. 181. l. 31, 32 f. in order to the Oxford horse r. in order to the checking of the Ox∣ford, &c. p. 182. l. 10. f. Reymouth r. Peymouth p. 185. l. last but two f. advisable it might engage r. advisable being night to engage p. 195. l. 25. f. Holsworth r. Holsworthy [so p. 197. l. 27.] l 30. who all dele who p. 196 l. 7. this last defeat dele last l. 14. f. Sir George Digby r. Sir Iohn l. d. f. Gover∣nour r. Commander p. 197. l last but one f. Tomerton r. Tamerton l 25. f. Taverstock r. Tawstock p. 198. l. 14. f. by the r. but by the p. 199. l. 9. f. Lime Regiment r. Plimouth Regiment p. 252. l. 7. f. the end r. therein p. 253. l. 16. f. old through time r. old & decayed through, &c. p. 281 l. 8. f. divine r. dimm p. 284. l. 11. f presumptory r. peremptory p. 313. l. 4. f. last r. cast p. 315. l. last but four f. the r. that l. last but two f. Victory, sweld r. Victory-sweld p. 317. l. 14. f. possimus r. poscimus l. 23. f. commo∣nalty r. commodity p. 320. l. penult. after acceptance of r. God.
ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY. PART I. CHAP. I. Containing by way of Proeme and Introduction, a generall account of the miserable condition of this Kingdome, before this present Parliament; The occasion and Instruments of calling it; The snare laid for us in a former Parliament. The quarrel between the Royall party, and the Par∣liament, stated: And shewing how the Command of the Parliaments Forces came to be devolved to Sir Thomas Fairfax, their present Generall. Englands mi∣sery to be rec∣koned from a longer date then this late discovery. PRRINCIPLES of Misery, and seeds of Diseases in the Body politique; strengthen∣ing themselves through a long tract of time, and at length discovering them∣selves more and more in outward sym∣ptomes; afforded an happy rise and ad∣vantage of seeking out the means of cure. Of which God had not left this Kingdome destitute, in so sufficient a proportion, as that few States or Common-wealths in the world enjoy the like: The constitu∣tion of Eng∣lands Govern∣ment, highly to be approved. Being of it self of a sound and healthy constitution and temper, able (if not ob∣structed) to conflict with, and expell all burthensom humours, and correct all vitious dispositions to Tyranny; There being no Government better tempered in the world, if true to them∣selves, in a timely application of Remedies at hand.
The Peeres at York petiti∣on the King for this Parli∣ment. Accordingly therefore, so soon as the Body, by the Nobler senses, began to take notice of, and be seriously affected with her sicknesses, and to be sensible of the meanes at hand; Recollecting their resolution, they urge the calling of this second PARLIAMENT. The snare that was laid for us in the former Parliament. There was a former Parliament called by the KING; (And never was the Kingdome in greater danger: For never more danger, then when good meanes are tampered with to bad ends; when Ahab cals a Fast to accuse Naboth; and Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of light.) The snare broken. And this first act and putting forth of the Politique nature, though not perfective of the Cure, nor having any thing in it again so eminently remarkable, as the National justice and affection expressed to the Scots, declining upon ever so fair proffers and conditions, to assist the King in his engagements a∣gainst them, (an act that should ever make the English of precious remembrance with that Nation.) Yea, though this first Essay of Nature was seemingly overcome by the pre∣valency of the malignant matter, to the breaking up of that Parliament; yet was it not in vain: For notwithstanding that for the present the Disease took its turn, and did appear in a higher way of opposition and contest to strengthen it self, and to overcome its antidote; yet this did but put Nature upon more vigorous and industrious actings to defend it self, (as was need) and so was subservient unto the calling of this second Parliament. The utmost endeavours of the Malignant party. Wherein both Interests conflicting, and the Malignant party seeing it self so eminently threatned and endangered, and redacted to that extreme necessity, as to use the utmost means for its preservation; and being no longer able to endure at so neer a distance, those strong motions and workings of the Heart, betakes it self from the vital parts to some remoter members of the Body, gathers and settles there, causing an inflammation of those parts, & hopes to derive the same from part to part through the whole body; at last choosing to sacri∣fice all, rather then to be corrected at all. Hereupon the Heart of this Kingdome (I mean the Parliament) which had per∣formed
its own defence so well, endeavours its office for the Body; The Parlia∣ments Arms defensive. and being necessitated to meet with the distemper in the way it had put it self, opposeth fire to fire, force to force, sword to sword; hoping by this means, as by the open∣ing of a Vein, to breath out the Distemper, though with the losse of some Blood. The quarrel between the King and Par∣liament stated The King, with his unhappy Counsellours and Courtiers, who had promised themselves to be petty Tyrants under him, had driven on far, and well neer accomplished the great designe of an Absolute, Arbitrary, and Tyrannicall Government; The Popish and Prelatical party fall in for their Interest, hope∣ing by this means to usher in the long-wished for Altera∣tion of Religion within this, and the neighbour-Kingdomes. The troubles of Scotland, and the Parliaments of both King∣domes ensuing thereupon; The Execution of Strafford, and Prosecution of his Companions & Partisans, unexpectedly crosse and interrupt this grand designe. The King offered the Scots foure Counties, to be annexed to the Crown of Scotland, viz. Northumber∣land, Cumberland, Westmerland, and the Bp. of Durham, to come up to London, and serve him against the Parliament; and moreover the ran∣sacking of the City of London, which was reckoned to them at a greater value then the 300000. l. the Parlia∣ment granted them. Many wayes are at∣tempted, many practices are set on foot, Every stone is turned, the Armies of both Nations, English and Scotish, are tampered with, to overthrow the proceed∣ings and power of the Parliament. And when all these wayes proved successelesse, secret practices and bands are set on foot in Scotland, a Rebellion is raised in Ireland; and in the end the King attempts to seize the persons of some eminent Members of both Houses; and by an example not to be paralleled in the story of any Age, comes himself in person accompanied with a band of Ruffians, to take five of the Members of Commons by force out of that House. As divers Souldiers and other loose people flocked to Court; so, many well-affected Citizens and others testified their af∣fection, in a voluntary way, to the Parliament, the preserva∣tion of their persons and priviledges. These called the other Cavaliers, and they termed these Round-heads; whence arose those two Names, whereby in common talk the two parties in this War were by way of nick-name distinguished.
The Parliament, upon the attempt of violence on their Members sitting in Parliament; having for the present in an orderly way, by the assistance of the Trained Bands of the City of London, procured for the security of their Mem∣bers, that they might sit and consult safely in Parliament, considering the many practices of force that had been at∣tempted against Them and their Authority, in order to the subversion of their Religion, Lawes, and Liberties; Desire the King, that the Militia might be in such hands as both Houses of Parliament should name and appoint. Hereupon the King withdrawes himself, refuses to settle the Militia according to the desire of his Parliament, endeavours to seize upon Hull, and the Magazine there, but is prevented; sends into the Low-Countries for Cannon, Arms and Am∣munition, which after arrived and was landed not far from Hull; Began the body of an Army, under the name of a Guard for his person, at York; Protected by force, Offenders from the Justice of Parliament; sends forth Commissions of Aray in opposition to the Ordinance of the Militia established by the Parliament, upon the Kings refusal to joyn therein; sets up his Standard at Nottingham, and declared open war against his Parliament. —Blood had already dy'de The King's stain'd sword, and God did well provide That there the mischief should begin, and we First suffer wrong.—Let no man call our Arms Offensive wars; but for received harms Our Countries just revenging ire. Jam tetigit sanguis pollutos Caesaris enses: Dii melius, belli tulimus quod damna priores: Caeperit inde nefas— —Nec dicier arma Senatus Bella superba decet, Patriae sed vindicis iram. Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 2. The Parlia∣ments cause. The Parliament on the other side Arm in their own defence, and in defence of their Priviledges and Authority, and therein of their Religion, Lawes, and Liberties; and par∣ticularly, to cause obedience to the Summons of Parliament, and to bring Delinquents to Iustice, and to maintain their Ordi∣nance of the Militia, and the Fundamentall right seated in them in the ordering the same for the preservation of Religion,
Iustice, and the Lawes and Liberties of the Kingdome, either with the Kings concurrence, or without the same, in case he ei∣ther cannot, or being seduced by evill Counsellours, will not joyn with his Parliament therein. No spoile seek these Arms, nor self-soveraignty: But t'help the Land 'gainst imminent slavery. Nec praeda hisce Armis, nec Regnum quaeritur ipsis: Tantum afferre vires populo servire parato. ferè Lucan. A brief ac∣count of the former Ar∣mies. Forces being raised on both sides; Those of the Parlia∣ment were at first put entirely under the Command of the Earl of ESSEX; but after they took severall forms, and were divided into several bodies, by Commissions granted unto divers persons, as Major-Generals; Each diversity and alteration taking its rise from an inacquiescency and dis∣satisfaction with the successe of the present: which moved to turne every stone; and try if by this, or that means, the de∣sired End might be obtained. Yet severall good services were performed by those Forces, and very notable ones under the first and originall conduct of the Earl of Essex; as besides Edge-hill and divers others, that famous and never to be forgotten relief of Gloucester, skirmishing the Enemy a good part of the way both going and comming, and at last upon their return giving the Enemy battel in a pitcht field at Newbury; whereof the story of these times, where∣ever they shal come, will ring deservedly. (In the mention of this particular, might I be secure from moving envy, or detracting from others (who might also deserve extremely well in the action) I should at least glance at the singular and extraordinary service of Colonel Harvey with his Horse, & the gallant Foot of the City of London, who stood so stoutly to it that day.) These being not within the line of my story; and being recorded by other pens, I must thus passe over: As also all the considerable actions of the Earle of Manchester, and Sir William Waller, performed for this Kingdome by them, and their deserving Officers and Souldiers; The extent of their service. amounting at least to so much, as that there∣by many a Gap was stopt, the Kingdome saved from be∣ing
totally over-run, the successe of the Enemies affaires still brought to a reasonable composition, the balance kept pretty even, and sometimes we were sent before God with songs in our mouthes, and occasion was afforded for greater hopes, and more blessed expectations. Their unhap∣pinesse. But, whatever was the matter, two Summers past over, and we were not saved: The Parlia∣ments tender∣nesse of them. our Victories so gallantly gotten, and (which was more pitty) so graciously bestowed, were put into a bag with holes; what we wonne one time, we lost another; the Treasure was exhausted, the Countries wast∣ed, A Summers victory proved but a Winters story; the Game, however set up at Winter, was to be new played again the next Spring, and mens hearts failed them with the obser∣vation of these things. The cause hereof the Parliament was tender of ravelling into, only men could not be hindred from venting their opinions privately, and their feares; which were various, and variously expressed, whereof I determine nothing: but this I would only say, Gods time to deliver England was not yet come. And this was apparent, That the Forces being under severall great Commanders, want of good correspondency among the Chieftains, oftentimes hindred the Publick service. The Parlia∣ment consci∣entiously ad∣vising the Remedy. The Parliament in prudence waving a strict enquiry into the Cause of these things, applyed themselves to seek out the Remedy, which was most necessary: This Army was conceived and brought forth by a New-Model. And there being not only no other comparable, but scare any other meanes at all that presented it self to them, This New-Model was propunded, The danger of this device. a designe that carried danger enough in the front of it, both in respect of disobliging those at home, and giving advantage to the Enemy abroad, while we were without an Army, or at least whilest our Army was all to peeces. But if it were here seasonable to open the grounds thereof, it would appear to have been no lesse necessary, then hazardous. And as desperate cures require desperate reme∣dies, so do they often prove very successful, as this hath done beyond all expectation, God having in most fair and great characters written upon it, That it was His Designe, and
thereby owned both the Counsel and the Counsellours. This experi∣ence applied to the Parli∣ament. And now let all men, especially the Parliament of England, trust GOD hereafter, and venture upon whatsoever is just, and necessary, by this experience; It being as much beyond the belief of man, as any thing can be, that such an Enterprise as this, should be effected so quietly amongst our selves, and without any affront from our enemies. The New-Model thus resolved on, is gone in hand with∣all; and now where to find a General, puts them all to a stand: Providence strangly de∣signing the General. Till by a strange providence, without any preme∣ditation or designe, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX was nominated. The motion took, was Voted, and carried presently: And to be brief, the old Commissions being laid down, and those that were waved in this New-Model being dismist from the imployment; the Command of the rest, to be recruited to Twenty one thousand, is devolved to Sir Thomas Fairfax. Of whom, and whose successe, since he served the Parliament as General of their Forces, is this story instituted: which I cannot better begin, then with a brief account or description of him. CHAP. II. Wherein a brief Character of the General, and Lieutenant-General; The framing of the New-Model; The beginning of their Action at Islip-bridge, Blechington-house, Bampton-bush, &c. And the effect these things had on His Majesty at Oxford. SIr THOMAS FAIRFAX, eldest Son of the Lord FAIRFAX, of Denton in the County of York: Martially disposed from his youth; Not finding action suitable to him in his own Country, (for through the great goodnesse and long suffering of God, England hath been a quiet habitation these 80 years) And there being imploy∣ment in Holland, he went over thither to enable himself in military experience: And upon his return into England,
he matched into a most Noble and Martial family, taking to Wife one of the Daughters of that ever Renowned General, the Lord VERE. And thus the Reader may take notice, how not only his Extraction, Disposition, and Education bespake him for a Souldier, but his Contract also portended nothing lesse. Albeit, so far was he from con∣gratulating such a condition of his Country, when he saw it like to need the exercise of his faculty; that he most sin∣cerely offered the first attempts of his resolved Minde at the Altar of Peace. When at the King's first endeavours to raise a Guard for his own person, at York; apprehended then by those parts, and found quickly after to be the beginning of an Army: He was entrusted by his Country to preferre a Petition to His Majesty; the scope whereof was, to beseech him to hearken to his Parliament, and not to take that course of raising Forces, he was then engaging in: which Petition the King refusing, he prest with that instance and intention, following the King so close therewith in the field, called Heyworth Moor, in the presence of 80. if not 100000. people of the County (the like appearance was hardly ever seen in Yorkshire) so close, I say, til at last he tendred the same upon the pomel of his saddle. But finding no Propitiatory here, and seeing a War could not be avoided, he early paid the vowes of his Martial dedication; And so soon as these unhappy troubles brake forth, took a Commission under his Father, Ferdinando L. Fairfax, (whose timely appearance and gallant performances for his country in the North, deserves a story by it self;) And served the Parliament in lower Commands, then what Providence since hath ad∣judged his capacity and merit unto, making him now General of the Parliaments forces; to which trust and ho∣nour he was preferred upon no other grounds, than the observation of his Valour, and all answerable abilities for the same, testified in many notable services done by him in the North, whilest he was yet in a lower sphere. And now how delightfully remarkable is it (as a most apt ca∣dency of providence) if God shall make him, who was by
the King rejected in his milde endeavours to prevent the trou∣bles of the Land by a Petition, (then which he sought no∣thing more) a most powerfull Instrument of restoring Peace thereunto by the sword! The General personally as∣sisting the framing of the New-Model. Sir Thomas Fairfax, having with much modesty accepted this command, immediately applyes himself to the dis∣charge of it: it was the first of April ere his Commission was granted; and the third of April he went from London to Windsor, to see, and personally to assist in the frameing of a new Army: He went in a private manner, purposely avoiding that pomp, which usually accompanies a Gene∣ral into the field. His Excellency continued at Windsor, from the third to the last of April, in that work: The difficulty of the worke. The difficulty whereof (to say nothing of the danger, through the discontents of them that were reduced under new Commanders, and of those that went off the imployment; which rendred it a busi∣ness requiring much wisdome and tenderness, as well as resolution) might well accompt for this time, if it had bin a longer space: considering, that besides the fitting the Train for the field, and the attendance of the Recruits from London, which with the old that continued, were to make up the designed number; an entire new forme was to be introduced into the whole Army, the Forces that re∣mained of the old Army being not only to be recruited, but to be reduced into new Companies and Regiments, as if they had been new raised. A digression in due com∣mendation of Major Gen. Skippon, for his free and faithfull assi∣stance therein. In the mention of this particular, the great paines, care, and diligence of that valiant and discreet Commander, Major-General Skippon, whose prudent carriage added much life and expedition to the busines, is not to be omit∣ted: of whose singular and extraordinary service therein, the House of Commons taking notice, by Letters that were sent to them, Ordered and sent a Letter, returning him the hearty thanks of the House, for this and all his former faithfull services.
Whilest the Army lay about Windsor, thus forming and fitting for the field; Prince Rupert with the Kings main force for the midland, lay about Worcester and the frontiers of Wales, preparing from thence to take the field: but the Kings person, with most part of the Train, and some of their Foot, intended for the field, being then in Oxford, A Convoy of horse, reputed about 2000. was ordered from Worcester to fetch them off from Oxford; upon adver∣tisement whereof, the Committee of both Kingdomes wrote to the General, to send some horse to march beyond Oxford, and lie on the further side thereof towards Worcester, to intercept that Convoy, and keep the King and his train from passing out. The charge of this service they re∣commended particularly to Lieutenant-General Cromwel; who looking on himself now as discharged of military imployment, by the new Ordinance, which was to take effect within few dayes, and to have no longer opportunity to serve his countrey in that way; was, the night before, come to Windsor from his service in the West, to kisse the Generals hand, and to take his leave of him; when in the morning, ere he was come forth his chamber, those Com∣mands, then which he thought of nothing lesse in all the world, came to him from the Committee of both King∣doms. The General then immediately commanded a party of Horse and Dragoons, then upon the field, to be mustered and recruited, as of the New-Model, to march under his Command into Oxfordshire forthwith, not staying at all either for Pay, or Recruits. And here also being the first mention of this worthy Commander, I must crave leave to digresse a little, to present the world with some more particular notion of him, whose name they will so often meet with throughout this story, and whose actions wil best represent him, as in other stories, so in the sequel of this. A digression upon occasion of the first mention of Lieut. Gen. Cromwell. This Gentleman, a Member of the House of Commons, long famous for godlinesse, and zeale to his countrey, of great note for his service in the House; accepted of a Com∣mission
at the very beginning of this War; wherein he served his Country faithfully, and it was observed GOD was with him, and he began to be renowned: insomuch that men found, that the narrow room whereunto his first imployments had confin'd their thoughts, must be enlarged to an expectation of greater things, and higher imploy∣ments, whereunto divine providence had designed him for the good of this Kingdom. When the time therefore drew near, that He, as the rest had done, should lay down his Commission, upon a new Ordinance; The House con∣sidering how God had blessed their affairs under his hand, thought fit to dispence with his absence from the House. And therefore as they were in the first place happy in a General, they resolved in the next place to make them∣selves and their General further happy, in a Lieutenant-Generall. Lieut. Gen. Cromwel in action at Islip-bridge. To return therefore from whence I digrest. Lieutenant-General Cromwel having received the fore-specified com∣mands from the General, marched immediately, found the Enemy, and engaged them neer Islip-bridge; the Enemies Brigade consisted of the Queen's, Colonel Wilmot's, the Earl of Northampton's, and Colonel Palmer's Regiments of horse: routed them, slew many, took about 500 horse, 200 prison∣ers, whereof many Officers and Gentlemen of quality; and as an ill Omen of her Majesties designes against this Army, the Queens Standard. Improving his successe there, to the reduce∣ing of Blech∣ingdon house. The Lieutenant-General not resting satisfied with this victory, pursued the enemy, lodged most of the remains of the rout in Blechingdon-house, where Colonel Windebank kept garison for the King; he faced the house with Horse and Dragoons, summoned the Governour with a sharp Message, (our Souldiers casting out words for the Foot to fall on, as if there had been Foot in readines) the answer was required to be instantly given, or else he must expect the greatest severity that the souldiers could use towards him. The Governour having no intelligence of, or else doubt∣ing relief from Oxford, rendred the house, with all the
arms and ammunition therein. Thus God was with out New-Model, or rather a branch of it, and declared himself so to be, betimes. The King him∣self confesseth in his letter to H. Iermyn, April 30. 1645. that this blow did much change the face of his affairs. Which was by the Enemy esteemed of such evil consequence to their affairs, and so great an af∣front, (in regard it was done by the New-Nodel; as they scornfully termed this Army) that they could not tell which way to redeem their honours, but by calling the Governour to a Councel of war, whom, for delivering the house, they condemned to be shot to death. Much means was used for the sparing his life; but notwithstanding the great interest Secretary Windebank his Father had at Court, for the great service he had done the Church of Rome, they could not prevaile for a pardon (so high they accounted his offence) only a reprieve for a few dayes; and shortly after the Governour was shot to death: and his brother, a Lieutenant-Colonel, laid down his Commission thereupon. The former successes im∣proved to a further advan∣tage, at Bamp∣ton Bush. No sooner was the Lieutenant-Generall possessed of the house, but he sent away the Arms and Ammunition to Alisbury, and quit the house, as not advantageious to our affairs, nor indeed having Foot with him to put into the house, only a few Dragoons, which he could not spare from his other designes. The Enemy, a few dayes after this, sent from Oxford about 350 Foot, under the command of Sir William Vaughan, towards Radcot-bridge: The Lieu∣tenant-Generall marching privately towards Witney, and having intelligence thereof, pursued them, forced them in∣to Bampton-bush; where Sir William Vaughan, Lieut. Colonel Littleton, divers Officers, and about 200 prisoners, with their arms and ammunition, were taken. A piece of good service done by Col. Iohn Fiennes. Moreover, the Lieutenant-Generall having in his March notice of some of the Enemies horse, which had a few houres before crossed his way, he sent Colonel Iohn Fiennes with a party after them, who fell upon them, and took about 150 Horse, 3 Colours, 40 Prisoners, and 50 Arms. The Lieutenant-Generall in the mean time marched over the river towards Faringdon, having dispatcht his prisoners
away with a Convoy to Abingdon, consulting with the Offi∣cers of what advantage it would be to reduce that Garison of Faringdon; wherein they did readily concurre: but ha∣ving no Foot to effect the same, he sent to Abingdon to Major-General Brown, for the assistance of some Foot, who (according to his wonted readines to promote the publike service) very readily sent about 5 or 600. wherewith the place was attempted, but without successe; and after the expence of about 14 men upon it, the designe was given over. Rupert and Maurice sent for. The losses the King sustained, whilest these Forces hovered thus up and down, & affronted them under their walls, so perplexed them at Oxford, that His Majesty sent for Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, with all the Forces they had, to come to Oxford, the better to enable His Majesty to march out into the field: and, for more security, Gen. Goring was also sent to for that purpose, out of the West. CHAP. III. The General with the Army marching into the West; Vpon after∣advice recalled, and a Party only sent to Taunton; Their good successe in the relief of Taunton. Lieutenant-Generall Cromwel defending his Quarters against Goring. The Army now raised, where to be disposed, is controverted. AND now by this time the Army was well nigh rai∣sed: Whither they should first bend, was taken into consideration. Oxford and the West are put into the scales of competition. Oxford, besides that it was the head-quarter and garison, and lodged all the Kings Ordnance and Artillery, that he was to draw forth into the field; (which now to surprise, or at least to prevent the drawing of them forth, was held very councellable, as that, that was likeliest to hinder the Kings taking the field) Repre∣sents it self also in other respects to be first considered, as being a Midland garison in the heart of the Kingdome, where to suffer an Enemy is most mischievous: besides that, that County had longest suffered of any place in the
Kingdom, being the constant seat of the War from the be∣ginning. But the consequence of the West, and the com∣miseration of Taunton in particular, then greatly distressed by a close siege, whereinto also most of the best affected in those parts had drawn themselves for safety; Pre∣vailes, and swayes to decline the designe upon Oxford at that time, though otherwise needfull enough: And so the first fruits of this Army are devoted to the West. His Excellency undertakes the Western expe∣dition. According to this result, the Generall, though under an indisposition of body, by reason of an Ague that had exer∣cised him for some time, yet undertakes this Western ex∣pedition with a great deal of cheerfulnesse, though the whole fruit of that Yeares service was in great hazard to have been thereby blasted in the bud; the King being then in a condition ready to take the field, having made severall Dispatches for that purpose to imbody all his Forces, and we having no balancing Force to attend his motion, Lieut. General Cromwel being farre too weak to engage him, and the Scots at too remote a distance. And though it was urged to be most necessary to relieve our friends; yet the slight retrenching and garisoning of many Townes of no great strength by nature and situation, though it may serve for the present securing of particular Counties, and particular mens Estates from plundering Parties, yet are they prejudi∣cial to the Publike, and to the main of the wars: For such places are not able to hold out long; and then ei∣ther there must be a losse of charge, arms, or of our friends, which would be a discouragement to our whole Party; or else an Army must be diverted from their principal designes, and besides the danger other places by its absence may be exposed to, expose it selfe also to the certtain toyle, inconveniences, and hazardous chances of a long March, which is likely also to end in a Fight. And therefore it hath been held great wisdome by ancient and well experienced Souldiers, to have but few Garisons, and those very strong, which may hold out long without relief; which is the more necessary, if they shall be in the corners of a country, and remote from reliefe.
A party left with L. Gen. Cromwel, to straiten Ox∣ford. But to returne. The first of May his Excellencie began his march with the whole Army (except the foremention∣ed Party of horse and Dragoons, which were with Lieut. Generall Cromwel, and four Regiments of Foot besides, who were ordered, when their recruits were come up, to joyn with him to busie the Enemy about Oxford) And by the seventh of May they reached Blanford in Dorset-shire, march∣ing the whole seven dayes, and some of them very long marches, without any intermission: so willing were the Souldiers to come timely to the relief of distressed Taunton. To Salisbury were they come, before the Enemy was a∣ware; as was discovered by letters of Sir Ralph Hopton to the Governours of Winchester and Basing, wherein he de∣sired them to send him word, when they thought Fairfax would be able to take the field. In this first March of this New-Model, the Generall, to lay an early foundation of good successe, in the punishment of former disorders, & prevention of future misdemeanours; caused a Councel of War to be called, that morning that they marched from Andover, a mile from the Town; where the severall Regiments were drawn up, and stayed two or three houres: at which Councel severall Offenders were tryed for their lives: A Renegado, and four more Authors of the Mutinie in Kent, were cast, one of which (whose lot it was) with the Renegado, were executed upon a Tree, at Wallop, in the way of the Armies march, in terrorem. And the next day was Proclamation made through the Army, That it should be death for any man to plunder. But little or no action or execution against the Enemy happened in this march; save that the same night that they quartered at Newbury, good Scouts, and parties of horse were sent out towards Hungerford and Marlborough, where∣abouts General Goring was, with a great body of Horse and Dragoons, comming out of the West; our Parties met with some of the Enemies horse, and took Lieut. colonel Hacket, and some other prisoners: upon examination of whom, and by other intelligence, which came in the nick
of time, Goring in∣tending to beat up the L. Gen. quarters neer Faringdon, prevented. we understood Gorings designe was, that night, or the next morning early, to beat up Lieut. General Cromwels quarters near Faringdon, and to relieve that place. The Lieutenant-General being newly come to the General at New∣bury, and present at this Intelligence, immediately repaired to his charge, and was drawn into a Body betimes. General Goring marched with what speed he could, on the West of Faringdon, and recovered Radcot-bridge. The Lieutenant-General sent a party of horse over the river, to discover his motion: where Major Bethel engaging too far, in the dark, was taken prisoner, and about four men more lost, and two Colours, severall wounded. The Enemy kept his advan∣tage of the River, and quartered his horse as far back as Latchlade, whilest the Lieutenant-Gen. was making a passage over New-bridge, and having gained the same, Gen. Goring either declining an engagement, or desiring to prevent the raising of the siege at Taunton, marched back with all speed after the Army into the West. This is the totall routing of Cromwels forces, as the King, in his Letter to the Queen of this engagement near Newbridge, relates it to be. A poor cause, and a condition far from envie, that is pensioner to such Royal mistakes, to support its reputation! His Majesty taking the field. The King, taking the opportunity of the army's marching westward, draws forth his artillery out of Oxford, to embo∣dy himself in the field. L. Gen. Cromwel, and Major-Gen. Brown, were ordered to attend his motion; and moreover, it was held necessary to recall his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax from the service of the West, and to allot only a portion of his Army for Taunton. Two Expresses to this purpose were sent from the Committee of both Kingdoms to his Excellency, who was marched as far as Blandford. And now comes the triall of this new Army, which God had designed for some more then ordinary service; whohad scarce warmed their heads with glorious designments, nay, ere they could reflect upon the strength & content of their united March, were by this means to be divided three severall wayes, ere ever the Army came to perfection or
This, like a black cloud, for the time, intercepted those pro∣spects of glorious atchievements and success, which them∣selves and others saw before to this Army; and like a fierce storm, threatned to dash all. A Brigade ap∣pointed for Taunton: the rest march back. Accordingly, a Brigade is appointed for Taunton, of four Regiments of Foot, viz. Colonel Welden's, Colonel Fortescue's, Colonel Floyd's, and Colonel Inglesby's, com∣manded by Colonel Welden as eldest Colonel; unto whom six Companies of Foot, belonging to the garrison of Chi∣chester, joyned themselves about Dorchester, and as many Colours from Lime, after that; in all, 4 or 5000 Foot, be∣sides a body of Horse of 1800 or 2000, consisting of Co∣lonel Graves his Regiment, Colonel Cooks, Colonel Pop∣hams, Colonel Fitz-Iames, and the Plimouth Regiment. All which Horse and Foot were well combined in mutuall love to each other, and common resolution against the Enemy. They march'd without any stop or stay, till they came within a dayes march of Taunton, near enough to raise the siege, The Enemy mistaking that Brigade, by a happy Synecdoch of a part for the whole. as it proved (by the good providence of God) giving that Brigade the repute of the whole Ar∣my, as appeared after by a Letter from Colonel Iohn Digby, wherein he much laments his unhappiness, in being in∣formed that Fairfax, with his whole Army, was advanced from Blandford, to the relief of Taunton; when it proved but a part; there being double the strength before the Town, sufficient, in his opinion, to fight our party, and make good the siege. Neither was this intelligence of his altogether without ground, or appearance at least; For the General with his whole Army did advance out of Blandford towards Dorchester, as if the whole had been for Taunton. But after some stay at the Rendezvouz, the General whee∣led about Eastward, and parted with that Brigade, who marched on towards Taunton. But whether this were a fegined excuse of Digby, or a reall truth, this we are sure, the Enemy drew off the siege, upon their advance so near, and that in great disorder, leaving many arms behinde them, and cut down many trees to barracado the wayes,
lest we should fall upon their rear. And so Colonel Welden had a fair passage to the town, which he entred, May 14. to no lesse joy to the Besieged, then discomfort to the Enemy. Some remark∣able passages of the relief of Taunton. The main passages of, and particulars, relating to this expedition and action, are briefly these. When the Bri∣gade came within ten miles of Taunton, having the advan∣tage of the hills, they gave them a Peale of their Artillery, ten Peeces being discharged, to give them notice of their being advanced within that number of miles, having be∣fore by their Spies prepared them with the meaning of that signal. Notwithstanding they were frustrated in their end: By reason that some few dayes before, the Enemy divided themselves; one party of their horse and foot, with some peeces of cannon, skirmishing with the other in sight of the town, but, only with powder; to make the Town believe (as they gave out) that the Parliaments forces, who were comming to relieve them, were there en∣countred and beaten; hoping by this stratagem to have drawn a Party out of the Town to their friends succour, and so to have cut them off by an ambuscado. But God turned this wisdome of the enemy into foolishnesse; the besieged kept close to their works; the Enemies returning from their mock-chase, fell to firing the Town with their granadoes and mortar-peeces, whereby two long streets of the town, of fair buildings, were burnt to the ground; and withall they stormed most furiously. But they met with a gallant Commander in chief, Col. Blake, & as valiant Soul∣diers, that gave them such showres of Lead, as filled the Trenches with their dead carkases: And that which adds to the mercy, the Town, in all, from the beginning to the raising of the siege, had not lost 200 men. Towards even∣ing a party of horse were sent, who approached to the very works, (for the Enemy had drawn off their guns, and their Rear was upon their march) And the Town thereupon being confirmed of the approach of their friends to their relief, sallied out and fell upon the rear of the Enemy, kil∣led some, and took others prisoners. The whole Body
marcht to Pitminster, within two miles of the town, took up their quarters in the fields; and on Monday morning, Col. Welden with the Officers went to Taunton (where they found a sad spectacle of a flourishing town almost ruined by fire, and the people nigh famished for want of food.) And gave order for the whole Brigade to retreat back to Chard, where they quartered on Saturday; and the 14. was the first dayes rest they had, from their first motion Westward. Thus, Taunton happily and seasonably relieved, is a good Earnest of the prosperous successe of this Army in after∣actions. CHAP. IV. The Army imployed to besiege Oxford: How far they proceeded therein. Severall Garisons thereabouts besieged, and some taken. The losse of Leicester, and the Discontents and Discouragements that ensued thereon. VVith a modest enquiry into the cause of our low condition at that time. THe General in the mean while was a good part of his way back, marching through inclosures, avoiding the Champion-way, in regard he had not many Horse, if he should meet with Gorings Horse, who were upon their retreat from Oxford into the West. By the 14. of May they attained Newbury. In their march, besides exemplary justice done upon a rude Souldier, (as upon two before, in their march towards the West) and other things of par∣ticular note; there was one passage of great wisdome and condiscension in the General, very remarkable: A pattern for Generals. viz. That when the duty became so hard to some of the Regiments, as each other day to bring up the Rear; the Generals own Regiment claiming a priviledge to march alwayes in the Van, which was convenient now to be waved for the relief of the rest; but they being unwilling thereunto, the Gen. in stead of severe discipline, alighted himself, and marched on foot in the head of his Regiment, about two miles, and so brought up the Rear: and to this day, his own Regiment
takes the turn upon all duties: A thing, if rightly consider∣ed, nothing to their dishonour, (if it were to outvie others to do service) and redounding much to the good, and good successe of an Army; there being not any one thing that more frequently and certainly breeds distempers, and cau∣ses mutinies in an Army, then claiming of priviledges, and insisting thereon in time of service. His Excellency returned, im∣ployed to block up Oxford. The Army thus arrived at Newbury, rested there a day or two, which was a great refreshment to the Foot, sore gau∣led with a hard and tedious march to and fro, (having had but one dayes rest in fourteen dayes march.) What was the designe of calling them back, or which way they should now be imployed, they were yet ignorant, till the second day, when the Generall received an Expresse from the Committee of both Kingdomes, to advance to Oxford, to lay close siege to it: which was no more disputed, then the former commands at Blandford; but forthwith obeyed, how much soever it was against his own opinion. Lieut. General Cromwel, and Major-general Brown, called from attend∣ing the Kings motions, to assist against Oxford. Lieu∣tenant-General Cromwel, and Major-General Brown, who followed the King, and attended his motions with a party of Horse and Foot, were recalled to joyn with the Forces his Excellency had brought back with him from the West; wherein it was conceived that they might do better service, for that they alone were too weak by far to engage with the Kings forces, (as by their Letter they signified to the Committee of both Kingdomes, and as was obvious to every man) the Kings army being grown to that strength, as that they thought themselves enough (as indeed they were, especially for Horse, wherein we fell short of them) to fight his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax his whole Army. Only a party of 2500 Horse and Dragoons (being part of the force with Lieutenant-General Cromwel, and belonging to this Army) were sent, under the command of Colonel Vermuden, to joyn with the Scots, (Lieutenant gen. Cromwel being, for I know not what reason, not so acceptable to their Army) to enable them the better to attend the Kings motions, and check his enterprises, to which they were
designed. His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, according to his Orders, marches towards Oxford, and in order to a siege sends for so much of the Train and Ammunition as was left at Windsor, at their first marching forth, and called a Councel of War, to consider what other provision was ne∣cessary; which they sent to the Parliament to speed down. Lieut. general Cromwel was come back to them, their quar∣ters setled, a bridge made over the river: they lay 15 dayes before the town, but the requisites to a close siege were not come up to them, nor neer them, till Iune 3. the day before they received Orders to rise from before the Town; which Orders were well received by the Army, who did not conceive themselves secure, nor sufficient for such an undertaking, while that the King was unattended in the field, as was at large represented by the Generall to the Com∣mittee of both Kingdoms. And in that respect (because they looked upon this designe against Oxford, as unlikely to prove successefull) they thought not good to summon the Town, during their lying before it; by which means they were secured, that they might rise from before it with the indempnity of their reputation. The action of our Army, while they lay before Oxford. Nor did any great action, in relation to that place, hap∣pen all the while they lay there; save that at their first drawing neer it from Newnham, a party of horse were sent forth towards Oxford, under the command of Adjutant-General Fleming, who met a party of the Enemies horse and foot, routed their horse, being commanded by Capt. Gardiner, and took prisoners about 200 Foot: which served as a good means and provision for the release of a Foot∣guard, consisting of 100 men; who afterwards, neer their rising from before Oxford, (much through their own neg∣ligence timely to retreat to a place of security, as they might) were by a sally of the Enemy early in the morning surprised, twelve of them slain, the rest taken, but the next day released upon exchange of the like number of those whom we had taken (as before) and sent to Abingdon. Moreover, upon the General's viewing the Works on the
North-east side of Oxford, the Enemy set a Mill on fire, and also quit the garison of Godstow neer Wolvercot, and set it on fire: but some of Colonel Sheffields horse came in seasonably, quenched the fire, and preserved the Powder and Ammunition in the house, and took the Governour and some others, in their flight towards Oxford, prisoners. Bostol-house besieged. May 24. The General rode to view Bostol garison, and some few dayes after sent a Party to besiege it. Adjutant Gen. Fleming was there engaged in a single encounter, shot his enemy, yet received a wound himself, conceived then to be mortal, but of which he afterwards recovered. Gaunt-house besieged. May 31. The General viewed the garison of Gaunt-house, sent Col. Rainsborow, with a party of Foot, and some Horse, to besiege it, who battered it sore all that day; but by rea∣son of the Moat, the accesse was ill to it. The Governour was summoned to deliver it: but he returned a positive denial, adding further, That he liked not Windebanks law. til the next day, Iune 1. when Col. Rainsborow being prepared, and ready to fall on to storm, having provided carts, and all things necessary, the Governour perceiving the same, sounded a parley, waving the consideration he insisted on the day before; and surrendred the house, with all the arms and am∣munition therein, upon quarter for himself & his souldiersHere we received the news of the taking of Evesham by Col. Massey. A seasonable and good service.. About this time came news of a remarkable passage in Gen. Gorings army in the West; which, as will afterwards appear, hath been their lot to happen among them more then once: Namely, a hot skirmish, which one party of his horse had with another party of his own horse, neer Crookhorn, thinking they had been ours, (For indeed a party of horse of Col. Weldens Brigade were then within a mile of them, at Hinton St. George:) in which skirmish many of the Enemy were slain, both Officers and Souldiers, by one another; and that party of their horse that was routed, fled as far as Bath, giving a hot alarm as they went, which for the present put them in some distraction. Providence had ordained this accident, as an advantage for that party of our Horse, who otherwise might have been endangered
(by the sudden advance of the Enemies forces) in their re∣treat from Pederton to Taunton. The Inhabitants there∣abouts confirmed the truth of this accident, when the Army marched the second time to relieve Taunton, and had a ren∣dezvouz on the same place where this skirmish was; be∣sides, many of the enemy have since confessed the same. And upon the heels of this good Newes, viz. May 29. came two parcels of lesse pleasing Intelligence. The one, of the Kings advance from the relieving of Chester, towards Leicester and the Association; and of the Scots army being gone towards Westmerland, who we had thought had at∣tended the motions of the King. The other, out of the West, viz. That General Goring, Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir Richard Grenvile had joyned all their Forces together, and distressed Col. Weldens Brigade, in a manner besieging them close in Taunton. And on the first of Iune, a third, and more sad peece then either, viz. Of the Kings taking of Leicester by storm, & of the cruel usage of many of the Inhabitants: the particulars whereof are too tedious here to mention; only thus in brief. A briefe ac∣count of the losse of Lei∣cester. On Tuesday at noon, a Summons was sent by Prince Rupert, to the Souldiers, Towns-men, and Countrey-men, wherein Quarter was offered to the whole Town. Where∣upon the Committee called together all the Commanders, and read the Summons unto them; and upon debate, it was re∣solved to take the next morning to give an Answer. But the Trumpeter was no sooner arrived at the Kings army with this desire, but the a Drum was presently dispatched to de∣mand a resolution of the Summons within a quarter of an houre; which while they were debating at a Common∣hall, before any could expresse themselves, the Kings can∣non from the Battery played, and all were commanded to repair to their charge, which was done with much courage and resolution. And now both sides plyed each other with Cannon and Musquet shot, as fast as they could charge and discharge, and so continued all day, and all night: at which time the Enemy prepared to storm at six or seven
places. At the Newark breach was the fiercest assault, the Enemy there comming to push of pike: amongst the rest, Colonel St. George, in a bravery, came up to the cannon, and was by it shattered into small pieces, and with him many more; for after the manner of the Turks, the Horse forced on the Foot to fight, who being played upon by the Musquetires, were many of them slaughtered. About three of the clock on Saturday, was the Town entred, the Enemy put many to the sword at their first entrance, and dealt also extreme cruelly with the Town, plundering all they had, and putting many to great ransomes, when they had taken away all their monies and gods. There was buried of the Enemy in Leicester, 709. as hath been colle∣cted by the burials there, besides those that have died of hurts since: there was above 100. of the Town souldiers slain. The sad po∣sture of our affairs at that time when Leicester was lst, discourst upon. Vpon the losse of Leicester many discourses were raised, each one venting his discontent according as passion by∣assed his affections. Great was the discouragement of the Parliaments friends, and as great was the confidence of the Enemy; in so much, that soon after, viz June 8. the King himself, in his Letter to the Queen, used this expression: I may, without being too much sanguine, affirme, That since this Re∣bellion my affairs were never in so hopefull away. But what's the matrer? Was there no Balme in Gilead? Was there no Physitian there? Had England no Army then? Nay, had they not two armies to the Enemies one? had they not an army of our Brethren the Scots, that had Wintred then in the Kingdom, consisting of 21000. Had they not a New Model newly raised? How fell we then into this low condition? I shall endeavour to give a brief account of that business, in its relation to this army. As it often fals out, that the Sun at its first rising is clou∣ded with some smal Mist, which after it hath once broken through, ensueth a most fair and glorious day. So this new army, at its first going out, seemed to be a little dark∣ned by the sitting down, and after rising from before Ox∣ford;
the Kings increasing his forces and strength in the field; and the losse of Leicester. And these Vapours gathered into such a Cloud, as that they did not a little obscure the first motions of that Army, at least the Counsels and Coun∣sellours whereby it was conducted: and not so only, but portended to its enemies, a joyfull; to its friends and favou∣rers, a sad prognostick of a sore storm ready to poure down upon them, which they could not have avoyded, but that through the mercifull disposition of the all-seeing GOD, (privy to the integrity of good mens hearts and actions) the victorious Beams of this Rising Sun brake forth so glorious∣ly at Naseby field; & ithath run its course ever since with such a constant lustre and brightnesse, (not so much as one Cloud passing over it) that it hath dazeled the eyes of all the be∣holders, and turned the scorn of its enemies into bitter en∣vie, and their choler into deep and inveterate hatred. But how, and from whence this Mist arose in the morning of this new Army, I now come to shew. His Excellencie, with the greater part of his Army, be∣ing recalled and returned out of the West; the questi∣on then was, Whether he should pursue the first de∣signe of besieging Oxford, or whether he should follow the King, who seemed to bend Northwards? On the one side it was considered, that the Parliament had in their pay a great Army in the North, of 21000 horse and foot, of our bre∣thren of Scotland; That there were considerable Forces in Lancashire and Cheshire, under Sir Will. Brereton, which held Chester straitly besieged; That in Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, & Lincolnshire, there were also very considerable Forces, which might joyn with the Scotish army, if there were need; and were commanded so to do, in case the King marched Northwards: besides the party of 2500 Horse and Dragoons under Col. Vermuden, which were appointed to joyn with the Scotish army, because they seemed only to want a due proportion of horse to engage with the Kings army: and upon the appointment of them to that service, the Commissioners of Scotland wrote to
his Excellency the Earl of Leven, to advance; and the Com∣mittee of both Kingdomes ordered Col. Vermuden with his par∣ty to march into Derbyshire, to joyn with them, which ac∣cordingly he did, and came to the rendezvouz at the time appointed. This provision was held sufficient, and more then sufficient, in case the King should move Northward; not only to check him in any enterprise upon the Towns of the Parliament, or relief of Chester, Pomfract, or Scarbo∣rough, which were then besieged, but also to fight with him to the best advantage, if need so required. On the o∣ther side, in case the King should have moved Southward or Westward, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax lying before Oxford, was in the most convenient Post to fight with him, and to hinder his designes: whereby it may appear to him that considers it, that our Forces were so disposed by providence at this time, that the King had a sufficient Army both before and behinde him, to fight with him; and as great, if not greater then those that after beat and whol∣ly overthrew his Army at Naseby: So that a designe could hardly have been laid to greater advantage: yet it took not effect; for that the Army designed to attend the Kings motions, did not advance according to order, but instead of marching Southward, returned back into West∣merland. Sir William Brereton, fearing the approach of the Kings Army, and seeing no Army ready at hand to ba∣lance it, raised the siege of Westchester; whereupon the King; seeing the work done to his hand, marched to Lei∣cester, and took it also, there being no Army to check or controll him.
CHAP. V. The Army commanded to rise from before Oxford; Their severall Marches till the Battel at Naseby, with all the particulars thereof, fully related. VPon the sad news of the losse of Leicester, and the dan∣ger thereupon of the Kings breaking into the Associa∣ted Counties; Lieutenant-General Cromwel was ordered by the Committee of both Kingdomes, to march only with three Troops of horse to secure the Isle of Ely; which com∣mands, he, in greater tendernesse of the publique service, then his own honour, in such a time of extremity as that was, disputed not, but fulfilled. And his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax was commanded to rise from before Ox∣ford, and to march to defend the Association; accordingly Orders were immediately given for the Forces on the other side the river to march to Islip, and Major-General Brown was desired to put a garison into Gaunt-house, being a place that was conceived would much conduce to the straitning of Oxford; which accordingly was done, and the bridge lately made, pulled up: and the next day, being Iune 5. the Army rose from before Oxford, and marched that day to Marsh-Gibeon, ten miles. The General in his march turned out of the way, to see the siege before Bostol-house, where Major-General Skippon, according to order, had that morning made some attempt, but the successe was not according to our desires (the Moat being much deeper then we expected.) This night, at the Head quarter, intelligence came that the King was marching from Leicester towards Daventry, with intention to raise the siege at Oxford, as was conceived; which was by order before done to his hand. Friday, Iune 6. the Army marched to great Brickhill, twelve miles, where the head-quarter was that night, which was once intended to be at Stony-Stratford, but that the intelli∣gence
which came that night to us of the Kings horse facing Northhampton that day, rendred it not safe so to ad∣venture: whilest the greatest body of our Horse, sent into Derbyshire, were not as yet returned. This night a great fire happened at the Generals quarters at Brickhil, which was so sudden and violent for the time, that a man and a boy, and three or four horses were burnt in the Barn where the fire began, before the Guard could get to preserve them. It happened most remarkably, in the house of one who expressed no good affection to this Ar∣my, and denyed to furnish those conveniences for quarter, (affirming that he had them not,) which afterwards by occasion of the fire, he was enforced to bring out. The next day, Iune 7. the Army marched to Sherrington, a mile East of Newport-Pagnel, to the end the Forces with Colo∣nel Vermuden (who upon the Scots retreat to Westmerland were recalled, and upon their march back) might more conveniently joyn, but especially to be on that side the River, the better to secure the Association, in case the King, who the day before had faced Northhampton, and seemed to intend that way, should attempt to break into it; where∣in it appeared they did not consult their safety and quarter on the back of a garison, as without incurring any great censure they might have done; but rather consulted their honour and the publick service. Expresses were sent to Lieutenant-General Cromwel into the Association, to in∣form him whereabout our Army was, that in case the Association were in danger, he might know how to joyn with us. Lords day, Iune 8. the Army resting in their quarters, severall parties of horse were sent out as far as Tocester, to gain intelligence of the motions of the Kings Army, who brought in some prisoners of Sir Marmaduke Langdales Brigade, from whom information was gathered that the Kings Army continued still about Daventry: Whereupon the General called a Councel of War, to con∣sider of the best way to engage the Enemy. Where taking into consideration of what use Lieutenant-General Crom∣wel
would be to them in a time of so great action: The General propounded to the Councel of War, and it was by them unanimously consented unto, that a Letter should be writ to the Parliament, to desire that they would please for a time to dispence with L. Gen. Cromwels absence from the House; and to give way he might command their Horse, there being like to be very speedily an engage∣ment. Which Letter was sent by Colonel Hamond, who went Post the same day to the Parliament, and was in∣stantly returned with an answer according as was desired, to the great content of the General, and the whole Army. This day, Colonel Vermuden, who the day before was with his party of Horse returned, and come near to the quarters of the army, himself came to the General, desiring (in regard of some speciall occasions which he said he had to draw him beyond seas) that he might have leave to lay down his Commission, which was yielded unto, and accordingly he received his discharge. At this dayes de∣bate, Major-General Skippon was desired to draw the form of a battell: and at the same time the Army was divided into severall Brigades of Horse and Foot, in order to their being better disposed for an engagement. The General, though not depending upon multitudes, yet serving Pro∣vidence in the use of all good means; sent one Post after another to Sir Iohn Gel, Colonel Rossiter, to the Governours of Coventry, Warwick, Northhampton, and Nottingham, To march with all speed with their Forces to the Army, for that there was likely to be speedily an engagement with the Enemy. In the mean, the Army neglected no time, but on Wednesday, Iune 11, though a rainy day, marched from Stony-Stratford to Wootton, within three miles of Northampton, where intelligence still confirmed the Kings continuance at Daventry, quartering all his Foot and Car∣riages upon Burrough-hill; a place of great advantage (ha∣ving formerly been an ancient fortification) and making show, as if he had chosen that place to fight upon, in case we durst advance to him. But afterwards it appeared, that
his stay there, was only till a part of 1200 horse were re∣turned, which he had sent from his Army to Oxford, as a convoy with the plundered cattel & sheep of Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, &c. the better to enable Oxford to en∣dure a siege, in case it should be attempted again in his absence, himself being intent upon a march for the relief of Pomfract and Scarborough; which he then apprehended to have smal difficulty in it, understanding the removall of the Scotish army. The Army being come to Wotton, they found there none of the best accommodation for quarter; only, what was wanting that way, was kindly and respectively endeavour∣ed to be supplied by the Major and Magistrates of North∣hampton, who the same night came to the General at the head quarter, upon the errand of a congratulatory visit and present. The next day, the Army marched to Gilsborough, (four miles on the west of Northampton, and within five miles of Burrough-hill, where the Enemy still continued) Marching in very good order; for that they did advance directly upon the place where the enemy had pitcht him∣self. A commanded party of horse gave the Enemy an alarm, and took some prisoners, by whom they under∣stood the King was a hunting, the Souldiers in no order, and their horses all at grasse, having not the least know∣ledge of our advance, and being in the greatest security that could be; but the alarum was so quickly taken through all their quarters, that our Foot being somewhat behind, and night approaching, it was not thought wisdome to make any further attempt. About twelve that night, the General took horse, and rode about both the Horse and Foot guards, till four in the morning (expecting the Enemy would have shewn some gallantry that night, and fallen upon some of his quarters, as he had hindred them in their sport at hunting the day before.) In the very entrance whereof this hard condition befell the General himself; That having forgot the Word, he was stopped at the first Guard; and requiring the Souldier that stood Sentinel, to
give it him, he refused to do it, telling him, he was to de∣mand the Word from all that past him, but to give it to none; and so made the General stand in the wet, till he sent for the Captain of the guard to receive his commission to give the General the word, (In such subjection are the Highest, to those lawes that rst derived their sanction and authority in great part from themselves) and in the end the Souldier was rewarded for his duty and carefulnesse, (as it was interpreted.) As the General was riding in the morning about three of the clock, within a mile and half of Flowre, where the Enemy kept an horse-guard; He could discern the Enemy riding fast over Burrough-hill, to make fires in abundance, as if they were firing their Huts; which gave some cause to believe they were about to march, as indeed it proved afterwards. For, About five in the morning, Iune 13. the General being returned to the head-quarter, the Scoutmaster gen. Watson (whose continued diligence in getting timely intelligence of the Enemies motion, then, and alwayes, redounded not a little to the enablement of the Army) brought him certain notice, that the Enemy was drawing off from Burrough-hill; had stood in arms all night, and were all amazed that our Army was so neer; it being spread abroad in their army we were gone for security into the Association; And four or five more of the Spies came one after another, confirming the same intelligence, adding further, that most of their carriages were drawn from Burrough-hill towards Harbo∣rough. And indeed, the Convoy of horse being returned from Oxford the night before, and this unexpected march of the Army close up to them, being in a manner a surprise of them; caused them speedily to resolve upon their fore∣mentioned march towards Pomfract; either judging, the Army would not follow them, or if they did, they should be able to fight us at more advantage, after they had drawn us further Northward. About six of the clock in the morning, a Councel of War was called, to consider what attempt to make upon
he Enemy. In the middest of the debate, came in Lieu∣tenant-General Cromwel, out of the Association, with 600 Horse and Dragoons, who was with the greatest joy re∣ceived by the General and the whole army. Instantly or∣ders were given for Drums to beat, Trumpets to sound to horse, and all our army to draw to a rendezvouz; from whence a good party of Horse were sent towards Daven∣try, under the command of Major Harrison, (of whose continued fidelity the Publique hath had sufficient testi∣mony) to bring further intelligence of the Enemies moti∣on: and another strong party of Horse was sent under under the command of Colonel Ireton, to fall upon the flank of the Enemy, if he saw cause: and the main body of our Army marched to flank the Enemy in the way to Harborough, and came that night to Gilling; the Countrey much rejoycing at our comming, having been miserably plundered by the Enemy; and some having had their children taken from them, and sold before their faces to the Irish of that Army, whom the parents were enforced to redeem with the price of money. That evening we un∣derstood that the Van of the Enemies army was at Har∣borough, the Rear within two miles of Naseby: and no sooner was the General got to his quarters, but tidings was brought him of the good service done by Colonel Ireton, in falling into the Enemies quarters, which they had new∣ly taken up in Naseby Town; where he took many priso∣ners, some of the Princes Life-guard, and Langdales Bri∣gade, and gave a sound alarm throughout the Enemies army (the confidence of the Enemy in possessing these quarters, grounded upon their slight esteem of this Army, and want of intelligence, was very remarkable.) Upon this alarm, the King (not having notice of it till eleven at night, as he had little imagined the nearnesse of our Ar∣my, or that they durst bear up to him) much amazed, left his own quarters at that unseasonable time; and for secu∣rity went to Harborough, where Prince Rupert quartered; and so soon as he came thither, sent to call up his Nephew,
(resting himself in a chair, in a low-room, in the mean time) who presently arose; a Councel of War was called: the question was put, What was best to be done seeing our Army was so neer, and as they then perceived fully inten∣ded to ingage them. It was considered by them, that should they march on to Leicester, if the Rear were enga∣ged, the whole Army might be put in hazard; and there was no marching with the Van unlesse they could bring the Rear clear off, which they discerned to be very diffi∣cult. Whereupon it was resolved to give battell, taking themselves (as indeed they were) for a more considerable force then we, especially in Horse, on which they chiefly depended; being also as confident, they might relye upon their Infantry for valiant resolute men; & they resolved (as appeared) not to abide in that place till we marched up to them, but in a gallant bravery to seek us out. Herein the Kings Counsel prevailed against the minde of the most of his great Officers, who were of opinion, that it was best to avoid fighting. Saturday Iune 14. The General with the Army advanced by three of the clock in the morning, from Gilling towards Naseby, with an intention to follow close upon the Ene∣my, and (if possible) retard their march with our Horse, till our foot could draw up to them, in case they should have marched on to Leicester (the intelligence being, that they had drawn some of their Carriages in the night through Harborough) that way. By five in the morning, the Army was at a Rendezvouz near Naseby, where his Excellency received intelligence by our Spies, that the Ene∣my was at Harborough; with this further, that it was still doubtfull, whether he meant to march away, or to stand us. But immediately the doubt was resolved: great Bo∣dies of the Enemies horse were discerned on the top of the hill on this side Harborough, which increasing more and more in our view, begat a confidence in the General, and the residue of the Officers that he meant not to draw away, as some imagined, but that he was putting his Army in
order, either there to receive us, or to come to us, to engage us upon the ground we stood: whilst the General was thus observing the countenance of the Enemy, directions were given to put the Army into such a posture, as that if the Enemy came on, we might take the advantage of our ground, and be in readinesse to receive him; or if not, that we might advance towards him. And whilest these things were in consultation and action, the Enemies Ar∣my, which before was the greatest part of it out of our view, by reason of the Hill that interposed, we saw plain∣ly advancing in order towards us: and the winde blow∣ing somewhat Westwardly, by the Enemies advance so much on their right hand, it was evident, that he designed to get the winde of us: which occasioned the General to draw down into a large fallow field on the Northwest side of Naseby, flanked on the left hand with a hedge, which was a convenient place for us to fight the Enemy in. And indeed seeing his resolution to advance upon us, we took the best advantage we could of the ground, pos∣sessing the ledge of a Hill, running from East to West; upon which our Army being drawn up, fronted towards the Enemy. But considering it might be of advantage to us to draw up our Army out of sight of the Enemy; who marched upon a plain ground towards us: we retreated about an 100 paces from the ledge of the Hill, that so the Enemy might not perceive in what form our battell was drawn, nor see any confusion therein, and yet we to see the form of their battell; to which we could conform our selves for advantages, and recover the advantage of the Hill when we pleased, which accordingly we did. The Enemy perceiving this retreat, thought (as since they have confes∣sed) we were drawing off to avoid fighting (and just then it was brought to the King, that our Army was flying to Northhampton) which did occasion them the more to pre∣cipitate; for they made so much haste, that they left ma∣ny of their Ordnance behinde them. The General, together with the Major-General, put the
severall Brigades of Foot into order: having committed the Ordering of the Horse to Lieutenant-General Cromwel, who did obtain from the General, That seeing the Horse were neere 6000. and were to bee fought in two wings; His Excellency would please to make Col. Ireton Commissary gen. of horse, and appoint him to com∣mand the Left wing, that day; the command of the Right wing being as much as the Lieutenant-General could apply himself unto. Which being granted by the General, the Lieutenant-General assigned him five Regiments of Horse, a Division of 200 Horse of the Association, for that Wing; and the Dragoons to line the forementioned hedge, to pre∣vent the enemy from annoying the Left flank of the Army. In the mean time the Lieutenant-General having sixe Regi∣ments of Horse with him for the Right wing, disposed them according as the place gave leave. And the form of the whole Battail you have here inserted. Upon the Enemies approach, the Parliaments army marcht up to the brow of the hill, having placed a Forlorn of Foot (musquetiers) consisting of about 300. down the steep of the hill towards the enemy, somewhat more then Carbine shot from the Main battail, who were ordered to retreat to the battail, whensoever they should be hard pressed upon by the Enemy. The Enemy this while marched up in good order, a swift march, with a great deal of gallantry and resolution, according to the form here inserted. It is hard to say, whether Wing of our Horse charged first: But the Lieutenant-General not thinking it fit to stand and receive the Enemies charge, advanced for∣ward with the Right wing of the Horse, in the same order wherein it was placed. Our Word that day was, God our strength; Their Word was, Queen Mary. Colonel Whaley being the left hand on the right wing, charged first two Divisions of Langdales Horse, who made a very gallant resistance, and firing at a very close charge, they came to the sword: wherein Col. Whaley's Divisions routed those two Divisions of Langdales, driving them
back to Prince Ruperts Regiment, being the Reserve of the enemies Foot, whither indeed they fled for shelter, and rallied: the Reserves to Colonel Whaley were ordered to second him, which they performed with a great deal of resolution. In the mean time, the rest of the Divisions of the Right wing, being straightned by Furzes on the right hand, advanced with great difficulty, as also by reason of the uneavennesse of the ground, and a Cony-warren o∣ver which they were to march, which put them somewhat out of their order, in their advance. Notwithstanding which difficulty, they came up to the engaging the residue of the Enemies horse on the left wing, whom they routed, and put into great confusion, not one body of the enemies horse which they charged, but they routed, and forced to flie beyond all their Foot, except some that were for a time sheltred by the Brigade of Foot before mentioned. Colonel Rossiter, who with his Regiment was just come into the field as the Armies were ready to close; was edg'd in upon the right flank of the right wing of horse, time not permitting a more fitting and equal disposal of him: whose timely comming (according to his Orders) gave him opportunity of such gallant performance in the bat∣tel, as deserves an honourable mentioning. The Horse of the enemies Left wing being thus beaten from their Foot, retreated back about a quarter of a mile beyond the place where the battail was fought. The suc∣cesse of our Main battail was not answerably; The right hand of the Foot, being the Generals Regiment, stood, not being much pressed upon: Almost all the rest of the main Battail being overpressed, gave ground and went off in some disorder, falling behinde the Reserves; But the Co∣lonels and Officers, doing the duty of very gallant Men, in endeavouring to keep their men from disorder, and finding their attempt fruitless therein, fell into the Reserves with their Colours, choosing rather there to fight and die, then to quit the ground they stood on. The Reserves ad∣vancing, commanded by Col. Rainsborough, Col. Hammond,
and Lieut. col. Pride, repelled the Enemy, forcing them to a disorderly retreat. Thus much being said of the Right wing and the main battail, it comes next in order, that an account be given of the Left wing of our Horse. Upon the approach of the Enemies Right wing of Horse, our Left wing drawing down the brow of the hill to meet them, the Enemy comming on fast, suddenly made a stand, as if they had not expected us in so ready a posture: Ours seeing them stand, made a little stand also, partly by reason of some disadvantage of the ground, and untill the rest of the Divisions of Horse might recover their stations. Upon that the Enemy advanced again, whereupon our Left wing sounded a Charge, and fell upon them: The three right hand Divisions of our Left wing made the first onset, and those Divisions of the enemy opposite to them, received the Charge; thetwo left hand Divisions of the Left wing did not advance equally, but being more backward, the opposite Divisions of the Enemy advanced upon them. Of the three right hand Divisions (before mentioned) which advanced, the middlemost charged not home, the other two coing to a close Charge, routed the two oppo∣site Divisions of the Enemy, (And the Commissary Gene∣rall seeing one of the enemies Brigades of Foot on his right hand, pressing sore upon our Foot, commanded the Divi∣sion that was with him, to charge that Body of Foot, and for their better encouragement, he himself with great re∣solution fell in amongst the Musquetiers, where his horse being shot under him, and himself run through the thigh with a Pike, and into the face with an Halbert, was taken prisoner by the enemy, untill afterwards, when the battell turning, and the enemy in great distraction, he had an hap∣py opportunity to offer his Keeper his liberty, if he would carry him off, which was performed on both parts accord∣ingly.) That Division of the enemies which was between, which the other Division of ours should have charged, was carried away in the disorder of the other two; the one of those right hand Divisions of our Left wing that did rout
the front of the enemy, charged the Reserve too, and broke them, the other Reserves of the enemy came on, and broke those Divisions of ours that charged them; the Divisions of the left hand of the right wing were likewise overborn, ha∣ving much disadvantage, by reason of pits of water, and other pieces of ditches that they expected not, which hin∣dred them in their order to Charge. The enemy having thus worsted our left wing, pursued their advantage, and Prince Rupert himself having prose∣cuted his successe upon the left wing, almost to Naseby town, in his return summoned the Train, offering them quarter, which being well defended with the Fire-locks, and a Rear-guard left for that purpose, who fired with admirable cou∣rage on the Princes horse, refusing to hearken to his offer, and the Prince probably perceiving by that time the suc∣cesse of our Right wing of Horse, he retreated in great haste to the rescue of the Kings Army, which he found in such a general distresse, that instead of attempting any thing in the rescue of them (being close followed in the Rear by some of Commissary Generals, Col. Riches, Col. Fleetwoods, Ma∣jor Huntingtons, and Col. Butlers horse) he made up further, untill he came to the ground where the King was rallying the broken horse of his Left wing, and there joyned with them, and made a stand. To return again to our right wing, which prosecuting their success, by this time had beaten all the enemies horse quite behinde their foot, which when they had accomplished, the remaining business was with part to keep the enemies horse from coming to the rescue of their foot, which were now all at mercy, except one Tertia, which with the other part of the horse we endeavoured to break, but could not, they standing with incredible courage & resolution, although we attempt∣ed them in the Flanks, Front and Rear, untill such time as the General called up his own Regiment of foot (the Lieut. General being likewise hastening of them) which immedi∣ately fell in with them, with But-end of Muskets (the Ge∣neral charging them at the same time with horse) and so
broke them. The enemy had now nothing left in the Field, but his horse, (with whom was the King himself) which they had put again into as good order as the short∣nesse of their time, and our near pressing upon them would permit. Charging in person the Blew Regimt. which kept to their Armes so stoutly. The Generall (whom God preserved in many hazard∣ous ingagements of his person that day) seeing them in that order, and our whole Army (saving some Bodies of horse which faced the enemy) being busied in the execution up∣on the foot, and taking, and securing prisoners, endeavour∣ed to put the Army again into as good order as they could receive, to the perfecting of the work that remained: Our foot were somewhat more then a quarter of a mile behinde the horse, and although there wanted no courage nor re∣solution in the horse themselves alone to have charged the enemy, yet forasmuch as it was not judged fit to put any thing to hazard, the businesse being brought (through the goodnesse of God) to so hopefull an issue, It was order∣ed our horse should not charge the enemy untill the foot were come up; for by this time our foot that were disor∣dered upon the first Charge, being in shorter time then is well imaginable, rallyed again, were comming up upon a fast march to joyn with our horse, who were again put in∣to two wings, within Carbine shot of the enemy, leaving a wide space for the battail of foot to fall in, whereby there was framed, as it were in a trice, a second good Batalia at the latter end of the day; which the enemy perceiving, and that if they stood, they must expect a second Charge from our Horse, Foot, and Artillery (they having lost all their Foot and Guns before) and our Dragoons having al∣ready begun to fire upon their horse, they not willing to a∣bide a second shock upon so great disadvantage as this was like to be, immediatly ran away, both Fronts, and Re∣serves, without standing one stroke more: Our horse had the Chase of them from that place, within two miles of Leicester (being the space of fourteen miles) took many prisoners, and had the execution of them all that way:
The number of the slain we had not a certain account of, by reason of the prosecution of our Victory, and speedy advance to the reducing of Leicester: the prisoners taken in the field were about five thousand, whereof were six Colo∣nels, eight Lieut. Colonels, eighteen Majors, seventy Cap∣tains, eighty Leiutenants, eighty Ensignes, two hundred other inferiour Officers, besides the Kings Footmen, and houshold servants, the rest common Souldiers, four thou∣sand five hundred. The enemy lost very gallant men, and indeed their foot, commanded by the Lord Astley, were not wanting in courage; the whole booty of the Field fell to the Souldier, which was very rich and considerable, there being amongst it, besides the riches of the Court, and Of∣ficers, the rich plunder of Leicester. Their Train of Artillery was taken, all their Ordnance, (being brasse Guns) whereof two were Demi-Canon, be∣sides two Morter-pieces, (the enemy got away not one Carriage) eight thousand Arms and more, forty Barrels of powder, two hundred horse, with their riders, the Kings Colours, the Duke of Yorks Standard, and six of his Co∣lours, four of the Queens white Colours, with double Crosses on each of them, and near one hundred other Co∣lours both of horse and foot, the Kings Cabinet, the Kings Sumpter, many Coaches, with store of wealth in them: It was not the least mercy in this Victory, that the Cabinet Letters, which discover so much to satisfie all honest men of the intention of the adverse party, fell likewise into our hands, and have been since published by the Authority of the Parliament, to the view of the whole Kingdome. The Field was about a mile broad where the battail was fought, and from the outmost Flank of the right, to the left Wing, took up the whole ground. Thus you have a true and exact relation of the work of this happy day. 1. The battail was fought much upon equall advantage, whether you respect the numbers on each side, there being in that not 500. odds, or the ground it was fought upon
being on both sides Champaign, and in that respect equal, and the winde at length favouring neither side more then other. But in this the enemy had much the odds of us, that they had on their side not so few as fifteen hundred Officers, that were old souldiers, of great experience through long experience in forraign parts; when on the o∣ther hand, we had not ten Officers that could pretend to a∣ny such thing, as the experience of a souldier, save what this war had given them, being for the most part such, whose Religion, Valour, and present Reason was their best Conduct; and herein God went beyond our Enemies in their pride, and seeming friends, in their contempt of this Army. 2. Of how great consequence this Victory was to the whole Kingdom: That it may the better appear, let us take a view of it, and suppose we beheld it through the counter-prospective of the contrary event, as if the Enemy had had the victory, and we been beaten; and then me thinks I see, not only this Army, the only guardion of the Kingdom, lying on a heap, furnishing the enemy with in∣sulting Trophees, but also our party in the West ruined, and the enemy there like a violent Torrent, carrying all before him. Me thinks I see the King and Goring united, making a for∣midable Army, and marching up to the Walls of London, incouraging their souldiers, as formerly, with the promise of the spoyle of that famous City. And if this successe had been indulged them, and London not denyed, (as who should such an Army have asked it of) what could have ensued worse or more! When once that City by such a fate had restored an Embleme of undone Rome, when Cae∣sar came against it, That The Senate shooke, the affrighted Fathers leave Their Seats, and flying, to the Consuls give Directions for the War; where safe to live, What place t'avoid they know not, whether ere A blest-ripe wit could guide their steps, they bear, Th'amazed people forth in Troops, whom nought So long had stird. —Ingenti nec modo vulgus Perculsum terrore pavet, sed curia, & ipsi Sedibus exiliere Patres, invi∣saque Belli. Consulibus fugiens mandat decreta Senatus. Tunc quae tuta petant, & quae metuenda relinquant Incerti, quocunque fugae tulit impetus, urgent Praecipitem populum, serie{que} haerentia longa Agmina prorumpunt.
And who needs any interpretation of this to have been, a being cast in our Cause, and a loosing of our Charges. All this did God mercifully prevent by the successe of that battail, and turned over this condition to the enemy, and thereby laid the happy foundation of all the blessed suc∣cess we have had since. He that shall not in this victory look beyond the instru∣ment, will injuriously withhold from God his due: he that doth not behold God in the instruments, will not know how to give him his due; for when he doth actions by instruments, his glory is to be seen in instruments: now had I only to deale with actions, I might possibly by a competent expression give on account of them; but who may undertake to represent the lively frame of an heighten∣ed soul, and the working of the affections in such Heroick actions. The General, a man subject to the like infirmi∣ties of body, as well as passions of mind with other men, especially to some infirmities (contracted by former wounds) which however at other times they may hinder that puissant and illustrious soul that dwels within, from giving a character of its selfe in his countenance; yet when he hath come upon action, or been near an engagement, it hath been observed, another spirit hath come upon him, another soul hath lookt out at his eyes; I mean he hath been so raised, elevated, and transported, as that he hath been not only unlike himselfe at other times, but indeed more like an Angell, then a man. And this was observed of him at this time: now with what triumphs of faith, with what exultation of spirit, and with what a joynt shout of all the affections God is received into that heart, whose eyes he uses as an Optick to look through, and trouble a proud enemy, it selfe only is privy to? what high transa∣ctions, what deep and endearing ingagements passe mutu∣ally between God and such a soul? (for certainly the most immediate worship gives not a greater advantage) is better felt experimentally, then described historically; but such a discovery of these things was made in his outward man
at this Battel as highly animated his Souldiers. Lieutenant-General Cromwel useth these expressions con∣cerning Him, in his Letter to the House of Commons: The General served you with all faithfulnesse and honour; and the best commendations I can give of him, is, That I dare say he attri∣butes all to God, and would rather perish, then assume any thing to himself, which is an honest and thriving way; and yet as much for bravery may be given to him in this action, as to a man. I shall inlarge no further in this particular, but conclude, it was none of the least pledges, none of the lowest speak∣ing Providences betokening good successe to this Army, and promising much happinesse to this Nation; GOD's giving us such a General, and so giving out himself to our General. The great share Lieutenant General Cromwel had in this action, who commanded the Right wing of Horse, (which did such service, carrying the field before them, as they did at Marston-moor) is so known and acknowledged, that envy it self can neither detract, nor deny. One passage relating to his service in this Battel, which I have received from those that well knew it, I shall commend to this Historie: That he being come not above two dayes before out of the Association, and (that day the battel was) attending the General in the field, who was going to draw up for an ingagement; He had the charge and ordering of all the Horse cast upon him by the General unexpectedly, but a little before the Battel; which he had no sooner received, but it was high time to apply himself to the discharge of it: for before the Field-Officers could give a tolerable account of the drawing up of the Army, the Enemy came on amain in passing good order, while our Army was yet in dis∣order, or the order of it but an Embrio: which the Lieut. General perceiving, was so far from being dismayed at it, that it was the rise and occasion of a most triumphant faith, and joy in him, expecting that GOD would do great things, by small means; and by the things that are not, bring to nought things that are. A happy time, when the
Lord of hosts shall make his Tabernacle in the hearts and countenances of our chief Commanders; from thence to laugh his enemies to destruction, and have them in derision to confusion! Had not Major gen. Skippon done gallantly, he had not received such an early wound in his side; and had he not had a Spring of Resolution, he had not stayed in the field, as he did, till the battel was ended; (for being desired by his Excellencie to go off the field, he answered, He would not stirre, so long as a man would stand.) That I mention not all those Officers and Souldiers particularly, who behaved themselves so gallantly in this Action, is to avoyd emulation and partiality: I shall satisfie my self, to adde concerning them, and the whole businesse, the words of the General, and Lieutenant-General, in their several Letters to the Speaker of the house of Commons, with which I shall conclude. Lieut. Gen. Cromwels close of his Letter to the Speaker of the house of Commons. Honest men served you faithfully in this action; Sir, they are trusty; I beseech you in the name of God, not to discourage them: (which they have not done, blessed be God, and I hope never will.) He proceeds, and wisheth, This action may beget thankfulnesse and humility in all that are con∣cerned in it; And concludes thus modestly himself, He that ventures his life for the liberty of his Country, I wish he trust GOD for the liberty of his Conscience, and You for the Liberty he fights for, &c. The close of the Generals Letter to the Speaker. All that I desire, sayes the General, is, That the honour of this great, never to be forgotten mercy, may be given to GOD, in an extraordinary day of Thanksgiving, and that it may be im∣proved to the good of his Church, which shall be faithfully en∣deavoured by, Sir, Your most humble Servant, Thomas Fairfax.
After the Battel was ended, and the Horse gone in pur∣suit; the Army marched (5 miles) that night, to Harborough, (the head-querter) Most of the Prisoners that were taken in the fight, were that night brought into Harborough church, except those that were wounded and sent to Northampton. Among other Writings taken in the Battel, there was a Manuscript presented to the General, (written by one Sir Edward Walker Herald of Arms) of the Kings great Victories in this War; wherein there was one passage very observa∣ble: That whereas he, taking occasion to speak of the Irish, cals them Rebels; the King having perused the Book, a∣mong the alterations he had made therein in divers places with his own hand, in that place puts out Rebels, and writes over the head, Irish, with his own hand, (so much care was there to correct and qualifie any Expression that might reflect on those blood-thirsty Rebels.) There was also brought to the head-quarter, at wooden Image, in the shape of a man, and in such a form, as they blasphemously called it the God of the Roundheads; and this they carried in scorn and contempt of our Army, in a publike manner, a little before the Battel begun. The next day, Colonel Iohn Fiennes, with his Regiment, was sent up to London by the General, with the Prisoners and Colours taken in the Fight; His Regiment took 11. Co∣lours in the Battel. Who had a great share in the performance of that Day, (being placed with his Regi∣ment in the Right wing of Horse) carried himself gallant∣ly, and was very happy in his successe.
CHAP. VI. The Victory at Naseby improved, by pursuing the Enemy, who fled into Wales. Leicester (not long before taken by the Enemy) summoned, and after preparations for Storm, surrendred upon Articles. Some cla∣mours of the Enemy for breach of Articles, found to be unjust, and the charge retorted on them. A instance of the Enemies desperate Pro∣phanenesse, joyned with barbarous and inhumane Cruelty. THe Enemy thus driven out of the field, his Excel∣lencie gave Orders for the Army, Horse, Foot, and Train, to march after them the next day, which was Lords day, without any more intermission; the pursuing of the Victory, being of parallel consequence with the get∣ting it: In obeying of which Orders, the readinesse and chearfulnesse of the Souldiers was admirable, and worthy our observation and remembrance, That when in respect of their long and hard March for many dayes together be∣fore the Battel, and the vehement and sharp battel they had fought, they might well have pleaded for some time of re∣freshment; yet no sooner was the Generals order given for marching, but they repaired all to their Colours, and that very next day after the battel, marched to great Glyn, the head-quarter, four miles short of Leicester. The Horse marched within a mile of Leicester that night, and kept Guards, which so alarm'd the Nobles and Gentry that had fled thither for security, that they departed thence in much haste, leaving the Lord Hastings to defend that place. This day his Excellencie received intelligence, that Sir Iohn Gell, with about 2000 Horse, was on his march to∣wards the Army, according to Orders formerly sent him; as also that the King, with one part of the Routed horse, not judging himself safe in Leicester, went thence that evening to Ashby-de-la-Zouch, where he reposed himself some few houres: but understanding that our Army advanced, and that our Horse pursued the chase; Mounted on horse-back
in the night, and fled to Liechfield, and from thence into Wales, without any considerable stay, (so great was the af∣fright) the other part of the Rout being the Northern horse, under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, fled the same night near Newark; both passing so, that it was the wonder of all men how they (being in such a tired and distracted con∣dition) could escape Sir Iohn Gels horse, who the same day were on their march from Nottingham towards Leicester. This day furnished his Excellency with a full intelli∣gence of the state both of our friends, and our enemies af∣faires in the West, by meanes of the contrivement of Scout-Master-generall, the manner thus: A Spie of his, formerly imployed by him to Secretary Nicholas in Oxford, was the day that the Army rose from before it, sent to him again, (yet as one comming of his own accord) to give him intelligence, that the Army would that morning march away (a thing they in Oxford knew well enough) it being conceived that either the Secretary would send him, or he might finde some opportunity to go into the West, where Generall Goring then lay with his Army about Taun∣ton, and bring us the intelligence we desired; accordingly it fell out; Into the West he was sent, first to Bath, where the Prince of Wales then was, to whom he brought the first news of the Parliaments Army rising from before Ox∣ford, from thence (bearing the reward of ten pieces from the Prince) to General Goring about Taunton, who received him and the news very gladly, and looking upon him as a fit instrument to be imployed to the King, then about Leicester, and as they supposed, intending Northward; deal with him (as about a businesse of great concernment) to carry a Pacquet of Letters from him, the Prince, and his Councell, to the King; He with some seeming difficulty suffered himselfe to be perswaded, received the Pacquet, brought them to his Excellency fair sealed up, discovering to him the true state of the Enemies Armies and affairs in the West: The Letters from the Lord Goring to the King signifying, how that in three weeks time (nine dayes where∣of
was then expired) he was confident to master our For∣ces at Taunton, and by consequence, to settle the West of England in an absolute posture for his Majesties service, and march up with a considerable Army to his assistance; advi∣sing the King by all means in the mean time to stand upon a defensive posture, and not to engage till his forces were joyned with his Majesty; Had these Letters bin delivered to the King (as they might have bin but for this defeatment) in all probability he had declined fighting with us for the pre∣sent, and staid for those additionals, which would have been a far greater hazard: this intelligence, did withall much quicken us to make speed to relieve Taunton; yet be∣ing so neer Leicester, and Leicester in all probability being easily to be made ours, (considering the fear that they with∣in were possest withall by the losse of the day at Naseby, be∣sides the want of men thereby (in all likelihood) to make good their Works, it was resolved first to assay that, accord∣ingly Monday Iune 16. about noon the whole Army came be∣fore the Town: The General sent a Summons to the Lord Hastings, to surrender the Garrison, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein, who returned a peremp∣tory answer, as if he meant to defend it to the last man; whereupon a Councel of War being called, it was resolved to storm the place: warrants were sent to the hundreds to bring in ladders, carts, hay, straw, & other things fitting for a storm; wherein the country was very forward to give assistance. Tuesday Iune 17. great store of ladders were brought in, a battery was raised, upon which two Demy-Cannon and a whole Culverine taken at Naseby were planted, which played upon an old work called the Newark; being the very same Guns which the King not many dayes before had used against the same place: The Lord Hastings now beginning to perceive his condition was like to be despe∣rate, sent a Trumpeter with a Letter to the Generall, desi∣ring a parly concerning the surrender of the towne, which his Excellency desirous to save blood, hearkened unto: Commissioners were appointed to treate (on our side
Colonel Pickering, and Colonel Rainsborough) Hostages on both sides were given; the Treaty begun that evening, and held debate till twelve a clock that night, and was conclu∣ded upon these Articles: 1. TThat the Lord Loughborough shall have quarter granted him, and have protection for his Person to be safely conveighed to the Garrison of Ashby-de-la-Zouch. 2. That all Field Officers, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Serjeants, Majors, and Captains, and Lieutenants of Horse, (but not of Foot) shall march away with their own particular single Horse and Arms, with protections for their own Persons. 3. That all the rest of the Officers shall be conveyed safely to the Garrison of Lichfield with Staves only, and no other weapons in their hand. 4. That all common Souldiers have quarter only for their lives, and be conveyed to Lichfield without any other weapons, save only staves in their hands. 5. That before 10 of the clocke the said morning June the 18. the Governour of the Towne, and the Lord Loughborough and all the rest of the Officers, and Souldiers march out of the Garrison according to the agreement aforesaid. 6. That Sir Thomas Fairfax be permitted to enter in at 10 of the clock the said Wednesday morning aforesaid, with his Forces, and take possession of the Garrison. 7. That all the Pieces of Canon, great and small now in the Gar∣rison of Leicester, be left to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 8. That all the Armes, and Ammunition now in Leicester be left to Sir Thomas Fairfax, save only what is agreed to for the Officers of Horse aforesaid. 9. That all the Provisions, Colours, Bag and Baggage be also left to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 10 That all the Horse (save onely those excepted for the Offi∣cers aforesaid) that are in the Garrison of Leicester be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the service of the Parliament.
11. That all the officers & souldiers have quarter for their lives. 12. That all the Prisoners of War that are in Leicester at the same time, be released and set free to serve the Parliament. The Guards and Centinels of the gate-house prison in the Newarke, hearing of the conclusion of the Articles, a∣bout four a clock on Wednesday morning went away from their duty, and left their Armes behind them, and the prison door open, whereupon the prisoners went out, and finding the Enemy a plundering, they fell a plundering too. About seven a clock all their guards were drawn off, the souldiers on the Line threw downe their Armes, quit their Posts, and the gates were opened, which gave invita∣tion to divers of our stragling souldiers to get into the Town at the Ports, and over the works: Complaint here∣of being made to his Excellency, by some from the Lord Hastings (or Loughborow) of the violation of the Articles by our souldiers: His Excellency sent to the Lord Loughborow to keep all his men upon their guards, and if any offered violently to enter the Towne before the time, to fire upon them, and immediately issued out a Proclamation, com∣manding the punctuall observance of the Articles by his owne souldiers, under paine of death. But the Lord Hast∣ings instead of standing upon his guard (according to the Articles, till ten of the clock that morning, which he ought to have done, whereby he might have prevented that in∣conveniency which fell out, and have performed his Ar∣ticles in delivering the Towne to his Excellency with the Arms and Ammunition:) mounted on horse-back in the morning with divers Gentlemen (officers and others) and left the towne some houres before the time appointed for his marching forth; so that when our Commissio∣ners came according to appointment to see the Articles punctually performed, they found the Lord Hastings was gone, and all the towne in a confusion; but the soul∣diers were commanded off, and things were present∣ly settled in good order, and about eleven a clock that day, the Army entred the towne, where we found di∣vers
Commanders of note, viz. Serjeant-Major-Generall Eyres, Colonell Lisle, Lieutenant Colonell Mouldsworth, Lieutenant Colonell Pemberton, Major Naylor, Major Trol∣lop, besides divers persons of quallity, all wounded in the battail. There were taken in the towne, fourteen peece of Ord∣nance, thirty Colours, two thousand Armes, five hun∣dred horse, fifty barrels of Powder, and other Ammunition, in a good proportion: The poor Inhabitants were over∣joyed at their deliverance, though in a sad Condition, be∣ing so plundered by the Enemy at first taking the towne, that many had nothing left but the bare walls, who before had their shops and houses well furnished: the Mayors house only escaped at that time, which now suffer∣ed for it: There is one peice of eminent wickednesse, fit to be transmitted to the notice of the world, not only for its relation to this story, but to rectifie their consciences, who have been led with too good an opinion of the Ene∣my; and it is attested by persons of good credit and quality; It is concerning Colonell Thomas a Welch-man, a Papist, who was slaine at the battail of Naseby: There were two brothers of them; the other was a Lieutenant Colonell taken prisoner in the battail, the former was con∣ceived to be the man, by the discription of some of the in∣habitants of Leicester who have under their hands given this information. That the next day after the King had taken Leicester by storme, this Colonell Tho∣mas came to the Gaole, where the prisoners they had taken at the entring the Town were put, and called for the prisoners, and commanded such as were willing to serve the King, to come to one side of the room, divers of them comming accordingly, he commands them one by one to kneel down, and swear by Iesus Ile serve the King, which some of them accordingly did: He not satisfied therewith, required them to swear God-dammee Ile serve the King, affirming publiquely, he was not fit to serve the King, that refused that Oath, which they refusing, he drew
his Sword, cut them in the Head, in the Head, in the Arms, and other parts of the Body, wounding them in a most cruell man∣ner; some of the Town of Leicester (amongst others) were the persons on whom this cruelty was exercised, and re∣main still to this day maimed by these wounds. Wednesday Iune 18. The Treasure being come down, the Army was mustered, and the Town was setled in some or∣der, and an Expresse sent up unto the Parliament, with the Conditions upon which Leicester was surrendred. Intelli∣gence came this day, that the King was gone towards He∣reford; it was taken into consideration to send horse after him, but the thoughts of the West occasioned the deferring the debate thereof for the present. Thursday Iune 19. Complaint being made to his Excel∣lency by some of the Kings party, that they had been pil∣laged by our souldiers, his Excellency declared, whosoever should be found guilty thereof, they should suffer the ex∣tremity of that punishment that belonged to the violators and betrayers of the justice and honour of the Army, and therefore willed they might be informed against to the Judge Advocate of the Army. But upon examination of divers witnesses, his Excellency saw cause to charge the breach of Articles on the Lord Loughborough, and the inju∣ries he complained of to his own failour, and therefore to demand reparation of Him; and the carriage on the ene∣mies part appearing so foule in many particulars, which were here too tedious to mention, the General thought fit to detain the Hostages; offering notwithstanding an exa∣mination of the businesse by Commissioners, and en∣gaging himself to make good whatsoever could be de∣manded of him in Justice and Honour, as he should ex∣pect the like from them. But they, loath to trust to the issue, answered not the meeting of our Commissioners; his Excellency therefore for a time detained the Hostages, till afterwards, upon noble considerations, the indempnity of his own, and the Armies honour being sufficiently cau∣tioned, he was pleased to release them.
ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY. PART. II. CHAP. I. His Excellency with the Army, marching Westward to relieve Taunton the second time; taking in Hiworth Garrison by the way: Curbing the Clubmen, the retaking of Ilchester, and the brave Fight at Langport. NO sooner had the Army done the work that God had for them thereabouts, but they marched towards Warwick, solici∣tous in nothing so much, as which way they might best advance the pub∣lique service; and although (being ve∣ry doubtfull whether it were better to follow the King, and hinder his recruiting, and raising a new Army in Wales, or go down to the West to relieve the other part of our Army, who had deserved no other at our hands, and stood in great need of it;) who should they by any unhappy blow be ruined, as they were certainly in great straits (the enemy being, in common report, twelve thousand, and Major Generall Massey, who was sent to
their relief, hardly three thousand; whereby it was thought that Goring might both keep off him, and keep up our men about Taunton) it would have been of sad consequence to the whole Kingdom; for then would the enemy have possessed the whole West (except the Garrisons of Lime, Poole, and Weymouth) intire to themselves: The conse∣quence of which, in respect of the Trade and Riches of those counties, the considerable Towns and Ports of both sides, both towards France and Ireland, seemed with a great deal of reason to perswade our present march thither; and being desirous, in a businesse of that importance, not to de∣termine themselves, they had sent to the Parliament, and Cōmittee of both Kingdoms, to have their resolution up∣on it, declaring their willingness to be swayed by their ad∣vice, and counsell: Yet that they might not lose any time, they marched on to Marlborough (with a disposition, either to go over Severn at Gloucester, towards the King in Here∣fordshire, or to move Westward, as they should be ordered) where they receiving notice from the Committee of both Kingdoms, that Letters were sent to the Scotch Army to march towards Worcester, and that they had their consent, and the Houses also, to march Westward; the Army bent their course that way, having yet so tender a consideration of Gloucestershire, that they sent Colonel Butlers Regiment of horse to lie before Barkley-Castle, to keep in Sir Charles Lucas (an active enemy, and good souldier) whilest the Gloucestershire Troops might look to the security of that part of their Country beyond Severn. This Regiment was sent under quarter Master Generall Fincher, a stout man, and a good souldier, and one that knew the Country well, (Colonel Butler and his Major, Major Horton being then under cure of their wounds received at Naseby.) In five dayes march, viz. by Thursday Iune 26. the Army reached as far as Lechlade, where some of the enemies Garrisons were gathering Contribution. Our forlorn hope fell upon them, shot Lieutenant Colonel Nott, took four prisoners of Radcot Garrison, and rescued some Country people
whom they were carrying away prisoners. Hiworth taken. Friday Iune 27. The Army marched to Wanburrow, and in the way made an halt, and drew up before Hiworth gar∣rison, (being a Church fortified by a Line and Bulwarks) summoned the place, Major Hen the Governour refused to yield, they planted their Ordnance, men were designed to storm, who beaing ready to fall on, he took took down his bloody Colours, and sounded a Parley, and yielded upon quarter. The souldiers had good booty in the Church, took seventy prisoners, and eighty arms. This place standing convenient in a Line for the garrison of Malmsbury, the Ge∣nerall appointed the Governour of Malmsbury to continue the place a garrison, for the better in larging the Parliaments quarters. From Wanburrow the Army marched to Burchalk in Wilt∣shire, by three stages, without any considerable action, save that on the Lords day (June 29 while they rested at Marl∣burrow) Spies were sent from thence to Taunton, to give them notice of the Armies advance for their reliefe. Munday Iune 30 the Army marched from Marlburrow to Almsbury 14 miles; that day being a day for a Faire to be kept at Marlburrow; some straglers stayed behind the Army, whom Deut from the Devizes surprized. Thence on Tues∣day Iuly 1. they marched to Burchalke 12 miles, and being drawne up that morning to a Randezvouz at a place call∣ed Stonage, marched in Battalia upon Salisbury plaine: some Officers and others of the Army who went-out of the way through Salisbury, found the townsmen very peremp∣tory, being confident of their own strength, by their asso∣ciation with other counties, in their meetings of Club-men, wearing white Ribbonds in their hatts, (as it were in affront of the Army) not sparing to declare themselves absolute Neuters (or rather friends to the enemy) more∣over news came this night that the Club-men had risen upon some of Major-Generall Massies forces; that his men had done some execution upon them, and that they with much confidence required reparation.
Wednesday Iuly 2. the Army marched to Blandford twelve miles, and in their march took Mr. Penruddock, and one Fussell, two Captaines of the Club-men, who being exami∣ned and convinced of their errour, in causing such unlaw∣full assemblies without authority, promised never to ap∣pear any more in that business, & thereupon were released. In a narrow lane in this dayes march was a souldier ex∣ecuted, (one of the forementioned straglers) being by the country apprehended and accused, for plundering of a Gen∣tleman passing on the way neer Marlburrow. That night Intelligence met the Generall at Blanford, that Goring had drawn off to Black-downe and burnt his hutts; that some of our Spies sent to give them Intelligence, were got into Taunton, & gave them notice of our coming. Thursday Iuly 3. the Army marched from Blanford to Dor∣chester 12 miles, a very hot day, where Colonell Sidenham governour of Weymouth (whose parts and resolution shew'd in the defence and recovery of that place, deserves not to be forgotten) met the General, and gave him information of the condition of those parts, and of the great danger of the Club-risers, who would not suffer (so high were they growne) either Contribution or victuals to be carryed to the Parliaments Garrisons. That night Mr. Hollis, the cheif leader of the Clubmen, with some others of their leaders, desired a Let-passe from the Generall, to present a Petition to the King and Parliament; the Petition being read, and found to be of a strange nature, the matter was debated, their designe appear'd to be desperately evill a∣gainst the Parliament: Hollis peremptory in his opinion, not to be convinc'd, affirming himselfe to be one of their leaders, and that it was fit the people should shew their strength: they were promised they should have an answer in writing the next morning; They were so strong, and withall so confident of their strength at that time, that it was held a point of prudence to be faire in demeanour to∣wards them for a while, for if in case we should engage with Goring, and some of our men be put to the Rout, these
Club-men would be more cruell then the Enemy, and knock our men on the heads as they should flie for safety; and some of them did not stick to say, we know our own strength to be such, that we are able both against King and Parliament to defend our selves, and to doe more if need require; and indeed if this had not been crushed in the Egge, it had on an instant run all over the Kingdome, and might have been destructive to the Parliament. The King being assured, if this third Partie had so prevailed, as to be in a condition to give a Law to either side, it would have been no disadvantage to his affairs, being indeed raised, ma∣ny of them by Commission from him, and countenanced by a neutrall party within our selves. This night more certaine and particular Intelligence came, that Goring had drawne off his men to Black-Downe, to invite them in Taunton to sally out, that he might take advantage to surprize them; but fayling of his expectation, returned back againe to his former quarters about Taunton, and made some slight attempt upon our Party there, but to little purpose. Our Foot hearing that Goring was fallen on againe, were eager to march all that night, after 12 miles march that day, which was also but the moity of 62. miles march in five dayes before, so far did their compassion to Taunton, and our party there cary them beyond considera∣tion of themselves. This day Intelligence was, that the Club-men were risen against the Lyme forces, and were engaged, and many of them slaine, and taken the Governours brother, (Major Ceeley, a stout man, hardly escaping.) Friday Iuly 4. Hollis the Club-man received his answer in writing, which with the Petitions were transmitted to the Parliament, which for the Readers satisfaction, but especially, that we may be affected with this great mercy of God, in checking this great mischeife, and Royall designe, I shall insert the extract of their Petitions, with the Generals answer to them, that in the dangerousnesse of their positions, as in a glasse, and by the help of the Generals answer, you may see the greatness
of the deliverance. In the Armies passage from Blanford to Dorchester came four Agents of the Club-men of Dorsetshire and Wiltshire; the cheif Speaker was Mr. Hollis of Dorsetshire, brother to him of Salisbury: their business was to procure a pass from the Generall, for these persons to go to the King and Parliament with petitions; to the King were to goe Docter Henry Goche of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, and Mr. Thomas Bromwell Divines, Iohn St. Loe, Peter Hoskins, Es∣quiers, Mr. Thomas Young an Atturney, and Mr. Robert Paw∣let Gentleman. To the Parliament, Mr. Melchizadeck Wal∣tham, Mr. Richard Hook Club-divines, Thomas Trenchard, Robert Calliford, Esquires, George Hawles, Richard Newman, Gentlemen. Mr. Hollis tendered to the Generall the Petiti∣ons, so to be conveyed; as also the Articles of Association: the brief account of both is this; the Articles were, That the Associates provide Armes, set watches, be quiet with them that are so, lay hold on disorderly souldiers, bring them to the next garrisons, not to refuse quarter and contribution to their ability, till their Petitions be delivered, not to fa∣vour either party, nor to protect any not associated. The heads of the Petitions were, to desire a renewed treaty, with a Cessation, as also that the Garrisons of Dorset and Wiltshire be put into their hands, till the King and Parliament agree about their disposall; that they be free from all charge, but the maintenance of those garrisons; that all laws not repealed, be in force and executed by the ordinary Officers; that all men who desire it, may lay downe Armes; that others that have absented themselves from their dwellings, may have free liberty to returne and live at home. After speech had with them, and some consultation what to do in the business: It pleased the Generall to returne his answer in writing, to this purpose. Although the Paper brought to me, being not subscri∣bed, cannot challenge any answer, yet to clear my self from any aversnesse, to the satisfaction of the Country, who are pretended to be interested in these Petitions, I return this: That my affections, and the affections of this Army are
as much inclined to peace, as any mens whatsoever; and we undertake the War for no other end, but the establish∣ing of a firm and happy peace, by opposing the enemies thereof; and that I shall be ready, so far as concerns me, to further all lawfull and fit means to procure it: But ha∣ving seen the Petitions, upon which a Let-passe is desired, I must professe my self not so well satisfied with some things contained in them, as to concur to their delivering by any act of mine: In particular, in that a Cessation is desired; whilest by Letters written by the King and Queen, taken at the late battail of Naseby, it evidently appears, that contracts are already made for the bringing in ten thou∣sand French, and six thousand Irish. It is further desired, that the Garrisons in these parts, whereof three are Sea-Ports, should be delivered up to the Petitioners; which to grant, were for the Parliament to acquit part of the trust reposed in them by the Kingdom; and considering these forraign preparations, to run very great hazzard to those Ports themselves, and to the whole Kingdom. Thirdly, it is propounded, that liberty be given to all souldiers to dis∣band, and to return to their home, if they desire it; which may with equal Justice be desired by all parts of the King∣dome, and so the Parliament made unable to mannage the War, before peace setled. These considerations, with some other yet to be debated, will not allow me to grant the desire of the Letter: But as for that part of the Petition which declares the grievances of the Country by plunder and violence, committed either by Garrisons or Armies: I do hereby promise and under∣take for the Garrisons and Armies under the command of the Parliament, that whatsoever disorders are committed by them, upon complaint making known the offences, and persons, justice shall be done, and satisfaction given: As also, I shall endeavour that the Parliaments Garrisons may be regulated according to any reasonable agreement with the Country; and without doubt the Parliament will cause them to be slighted, so soon as the condition of
those parts, and the publike good shall permit: And that the Army under my command shall be ordered as may be most for the good and advantage of these Counties, and of the whole Kingdom; of which some reasonable testimo∣ny is already given, in their quiet and orderly passage through these, and other Counties, without many of those complaints which usually follow Armies. I further desire, that in the publishing this my answer to your request, all assembling the people to publike Rendez∣voz may be forborn, and that Copies hereof may be di∣spersed to the severall Parishes, that the Country may be acquainted therewith. THO: FAIRFAX. If this would not satisfie these men, their own Clubs would in time have beaten reason into them: But to leave them, and proceed with my Story. The Army marched that day from Dorchester to Beau∣minster, the Train and most of the Foot quartered on the top of an hill, some few in Beauminster town, a place of the pittifullest spectacle that man can behold, hardly an house left not consumed with fire; the town being fired by some of the enemy in five places at once, when Prince Maurice was there, by reason of a falling out between the French and Cornish. Intelligence was positive that night, that Goring had quite drawn off the siege from Taunton, and was come to Ilmister, and as that night his quarter would be Summerton: Whereupon his Excellency sent a party of horse to Crookhorn, who took some of his souldiers priso∣ners, and brought them away to the Generall at Beaumin∣ster, who confessed no lesse then what we had heard, that the siege was raised, and that Goring was marched towards Langport. Thus is Taunton the second time relieved, and our party there delivered from an eminent danger, which they feared, if we had not come thus seasonably to them (being greatly distressed both for Ammunition and Victuals.) In maintaining the place this siege, we lost Colonel Floyd, and Colonel Richbell, both of them faithfull experienced soul∣diers;
and some officers more: In exchange of whom the Enemy lost many Officers, and persons of quality; one of them of more note, viz. Sir Iohn Digby, brother to Sir Ke∣nelm Digby, received there his Mortall wound, of which he afterwards dyed. But the Enemy flying, what was the Army to do but follow? And so they did on the morrow, a very hot reason, the foot weary with their long and tedious march; the carriage-horses tyred out, the way ill and narrow; (being all inclosure) they marched that day but to Crookhorn, some six miles; but here Intelligence came that made them pull up their stumps, (as weary as they were) after that the Army was come into Crookhorn, they heard that our horse sent un∣der the command of Colonel Fleetwood, had fallen on their Reare, taken some Prisoners, and the great bodies were like to engage; whereupon three Regiments more were commanded to march up and assist them, if there should be cause; two Regiments of foot also being ordered for that service, notwithstanding their weary march, leapt for joy; that they were like to be engaged, and according to orders marched from Crookhorne (after they had rested an houre) to Pederton that night; the Enemy having pulled down Pederton Bridge, and made breast-works on the other side, upon our first approach with the partie under Colo∣nell Fleetwood, deserted the pass: We instantly made up the Bridge, and marched over it till we came nere Ilchester, and another party to Load-bridge where the Enemy kept the pass with a strong guard: the Generall and Leiutenant-Generall mounted instantly, and rode from Crookhorne after the forces, to order them, if an engagement; but the enemy standing upon the advantage of the pass, avoided it; the Generall having appointed strong guards at Pederton, and Martock, returned back to Crookhorn, where some of the Commanders of Taunton met the Generall, and mutuall congratulations passed betwixt them and the Army by oc∣casion of this timely relief of Taunton the second time: The valour, diligence, and fidelity of Colonel Welden, with the
rest of those Commanders engaged with him in the de∣fence of that besieged place, deserves to be expressed at large; but for want of a relation of their proceedings du∣ring that siege, I must content my self only to mention their service with honour: As also the good service of the Horse commanded by Colonel Graves, who in severall Sallies upon the enemy were very successfull. Lords day, Iuly 6. the Army resting at Crookhorn, and the rest of their quarters; about four in the afternoon, (six in the evening, twelve at night, and two in the morning) the Generall had certain intelligence by his Spies, confirmed by severall hands, that the enemy continued still at Long-Sutton, keeping a guard at Load-bridge, and making good the garrison at Ilchester and Langport, the two passes upon the River, and had broken down the Bridge towards the town of Evill, higher up the River; whereupon orders were given for Drums to beat by four in the morning. And accordingly, Munday Iuly 7. the Foot were drawn out by six of the clock to a Rendezvouz, in a field about a mile from Crookhorn, in the way to Pederton. The Generall, and Lieutenant Generall went with a Party, and viewed the Pass at Load-bridge: Our horse appearing in great numbers, gave the enemy an Alarm, whereupon they drew up their Foot, and marcht some Regiments from Load-bridge, along the River side to Ilchester, fearing we should storm that place, our horse and theirs skirmishing upon the Meadows near the River by parties all that day. A Councell of war was called in the Field, to consider what course to take to engage the enemy, who keeping himself beyond the River, and having the Garrisons of Ilchester, Langport, Burrough, and Bridgewater, there was no possible comming over upon that side; to force our passage in that place where the enemy stood in good order on the other side the River to receive us, was a business of exceeding difficulty, it being also a Moorish ground. Upon the right hand the enemy had broken down the Bridge at Evill, keeping a guard of horse upon it, and all the Bridges upon
that side, so that there seemed to be no passage convenient for us, till we came to the head of the river about Sherborn, which would prove a difficult, and long march; upon which it was resolved to march the greatest part of the Ar∣my to Evill, and there to force our passage, leaving still a convenient number both of horse and foot, over against Ilchester and Load-Bridge, to engage the enemy, in case he should attēpt to advance on this side; accordingly our foot marched to Evill, the head-quarter for that night; we were no sooner come there, but the enemies horse retreated to Il∣chester; Orders were given to make up the bridge, which was speedily done: Iuly the 8. early in the morning certaine Intelligence was brought to the Army, by one of their spies (sent for that purpose into the Enemies Army) that the enemy (hearing the pass at Evill was gained by our forces,) retreated towards Langport with the Army, quit Load-Bridge, burnt divers faire houses there. Colonel Phillips the Gover∣nour of Ilchester in the night time, quit the towne, leaving the works standing undemolished, only the Bridewell, a place the enemy had fortified, they set on fire, which was quickly quenched by the Inhabitants. This day the Army declining to march over the passe at Evill, hearing Ilchester was quit, marched back towards Il∣chester, upon the same side the river, and quartered there that night, where no provisions were left for our souldiers. Intelligence also came, that whilst we went on the other sde, Goring being drawn downe to Langport, had drawne a great part of his Army towards Taunton, as if he intended to surprize the Towne, thinking to find them in security: whereupon the Generall sent Major-Generall Massey after Goring with his own brigade of horse, and a considerable strength of Horse and Dragoons of his owne Army; and moreover the Generall took care that a considerable party of horse more should be sent after those horse, as a reserve if need were. This day Colonel Butlers Regiment commanded by Major Fincher, quarter-master-Gen. of our horse, came up
to the Army, & in their march from Barkly Castle, did very good service; first at Dursly, they entertained Sir Charles Lu∣cas, comming to beat up their quarters, kil'd the Captain of the forlorne hope, after that charged the party with two troops, kil'd ten (whereof two Captains) took 39 priso∣ners, hurt Sir Charles Lucas himselfe; from thence they came to Hyworth, where the enemy from Farringdon had entred the towne, whom they beat out, and delivered to the Go∣vernour the quiet possession of his garrison; from thence to the Devizes, where they took some horse, and so to Dor∣chester, where they took some of Sherborn horse, and so came to the Army very seasonably, the Army being neerer an en∣gagement then they expected. Wednesday Iuly 9. The Army marched to Long-Sutton, news came there that Major-Gen. Massey was neer upon an engagement; the Generall immediatly gave command that Colonel Montague should march with 2000 musquetiers to his assistance, (being in an inclosed country) who marched accordingly, but the engagement was over before he could come up, and the welcome newes was brought that Gorings party which the Major-Gen. had there engaged, was beaten, many slaine, nine Colours and 300 horse taken, Colonel Cook a Gentleman of much temper and resolu∣tion, carryed himselfe gallantly in that service, and received a shot through both cheeks: this afternoon ours had continuall skirmishing with the enemies horse at a passe, a mile on this side Langport, took a French Cornet and his Colours, a Dutchman and a Spaniard prisoners. Thursday Iuly 10. A councel of War was held, what course we should take to force the enemy to fight, seeing he stood upon his advantage, having the passes upon the River, and might fight or flie at pleasure; whilest the counsell of War were in debate thereof, not knowing what to do (the enemy being still at his election, whether to fight or not) Intelli∣gence came that the enemy was advanced with his foot from Langport to the pass, and had lined the hedges thick with musquetiers, and drawne up his Ordnance; this resol∣ved
ved the question at the councell of War, without puting it; whereupon the Generall and Lieutenant-Generall Crom∣well, and all the Officers instantly mounted, rode up to the field, perceived the enemy to put himselfe in a posture for an engagement; instantly the Army was ordered to be put in Battalia, the forlorne hope of horse and foot drew out, Ordnance were drawn downe to places of advantage, mes∣sengers were sent to recall most of the horse and foot, late∣ly sent to assist Major-Gen. Massey, but before they could come up, our Ordnance began to play (a good while before the foot engaged) doing great execution upon the body of the enemies Army, both horse and foot, who stood in good order upon the hill, (about musquet shot from the passe) and forcing them to draw off their Ordnance, and their horse to remove their ground; Our foot advanced down the hill to the pass, and with admirable resolution charge∣ed the enemy from hedge to hedge, till they got the pass; the enemies horse upon this drew downe towards us, whereupon our horse advanced over the passe up the hill to the enemy; the Forlorne-hope of horse commanded by Major Bethell, gave a valiant and brave charge indeed, broke that body that charged him, and the next reserve: our reserve of horse that was commanded by Major Desborough, very resolutely charged the next standing bodies of the ene∣my so home, that instantly they put them to a disorderly re∣treat, & our musquetiers came close up to our horse, firing upon the enemy, whereupon their Regiments of white Colours; and black Colours of foot, before ever they engaged, marched away apace; the Forlorne under Major Bethell, and those under Major Desborough, were going in pursuit of the chase, but receiving orders to stay till more bodies of horse were come up, that the pursuit might be orderly, and with good reserves, in case the ene∣my should face about, and charge againe, (which was not impossible) they obeyed their orders, as good souldiers will, though it check their sweetest pleasure (as to pursue a flying enemy was no less:) when the enemy had fled about two
miles they made a stand in a plaine green field, (where the passage out was narrow) called Aller Drove, but received only a piece of a charge, and then seeing our bodies come∣ing on orderly and fast, faced about, and never stood after: the passes being narrow in many places, and the ditches being deep and wide, especially at that place where they first faced about, many horses of the Enemies were lost in the ditches, whereof our souldiers recovered store, and the riders got into the meadows, hoping to escape, but could not. We pursued the Enemy within two miles of Bridge∣water, (whither the enemy fled,) doing execution upon them all the way (being eight miles in length) took about 1400 prisoners, about 1200 horse, and divers Officers of quality, Colonel Henningham, Colonel Slingsby (the Ge∣neral of Gorings Ordnance) were also taken; about thirty Colours of Horse and Foot: and on the other hand, it was a victory as cheap to us, as dear to them; we lost no Offi∣cer, not twenty common souldiers; some fourteen or six∣teen of Major Bethels troop were hurt, and himself shot in the right hand. No sooner was the Enemy put to a retreat, but in great confusion they quitted Langport, into which many of them had fled (a strong garrison, naturally well fortified, being about half a mile from the place of the fight) and set it on fire, but by the industry of the souldiers and Townesmen it was quenched. The Enemy with a body of Foot drawing along with them two pieces of Ordnance by the way of Langport, were pursued by Lieu∣tenant General Cromwel, and the Ordnance and most of the Foot taken. And thus you have in a very short space an account of a very great action. CHAP. II. The particulars of that gallant service, The storming of Bridgewater. AFter this battail the army marched five miles to Mid∣dlesay in the way to Bridgewater; the bold carriage of
Hollis the Club-man, was very notorious, who the morn∣ing (an houre) before the fight began, came with a Petition to the General, from his fellowes and followers: withall telling the General in plain terms, that if he did not give them better satisfaction then what he had yet given them, they must take another course. His Petition, upon reading, was found of that nature, and his impudent carriage so in∣sufferable withall, that the General committed him to the Marshal; but he made a shift to get away, so soon as he saw the day was lost. The next day, the whole Army, horse and foot, with the Train, were drawn up in Weston∣moor, otherwise called Pensy pound, two miles from Bridge∣water. The Country-men thereabouts, that had been vexed with the Cavaliers, hearing of the defeat given unto them, and fearing to taste of their former cruelties, rose in great numbers, and with their colours, clubs and arms, appeared upon Knol-hill; which being made known to the General, he with the Lieutenant gen. and other Officers, marched up to them, who seemingly received him with joy, and in token thereof gave a volley of shot: whence after ome conference with them, and their Leader, who made a Neutral speech, the General returned, and the Army that night went to quarter, the head-quarter that night being appointed at Chedsay, within two miles of Bridgewater. Friday, Iuly 11. Colonel Weldens Brigade was command∣ed on the North side of the Town towards Devonshire, and the rest of the Army on this side towards Chedsay; the guards being set, the General, with the Lieutenant gen. went to view the Town, which they found to be very strong, standing in a valley, yet glorying in the equality of its level with the ground about it, there being not a clod that could afford any advantage against that place; the Fortifications very regular and strong, the Ditch about it very deep, and about thirty foot wide, which for a great part about the town, was every Tyde filled up to the brim with water, the compasse of ground within the line and works not great, very well manned, having in it about
1800 Souldiers to defend it; within the town was a castle of indifferent strength, there was planted on the severall Batteries about 40 peece of Ordnance; well stored with ammunition and victuals, being a magazine for all the petty garrisons thereabouts. Saturday, Iuly 12. The Army continued in quarters, and new places for guards were appointed. Burrough-garrison, taken by Col. Okey. Lords day, Iuly 13. We rested at Chedsay; and Colonel Okey having, from that day the battel was at Langport, be∣sieged Burrough-garrison with his Dragoons, had the same surrendred unto him upon quarter, wherein were 140 prisoners, the Officers being promised fair usage. Monday, Iuly 14. a Councel of war was called, great debate whether to storm the town, or not: Some incli∣nation to it, but no positive resolution; Notwithstanding preparations were made in order to a storm, the Souldiers cheerfully made their faggots, and were drawn in readines for a storm, but upon further consideration were for that time drwn back to their quarters; and more time being taken, there were 8 long Bridges, betwixt 30 and 40 foot length, devised to be made by Lieutenant-general Hamond, the Lieutenant-general of the Ordnance (a Gentleman of approved fidelity, and of a most dexterous and ripe inventi∣on for all such things) which were approved of by the Commanders and Officers, and accordingly Ordered to be made, and were of very great use to the Souldier in the storm. This day, the General going over the river to view the posts on the other side, was graciously delivered from a great danger he was near unto by a sudden surprisal of the Tide called the Eager, where he very narrowly escaped drowning. Tuesday, Iuly 15. the General went to Glastenbury, and re∣turned that night to the head quarter. Wednesday Iuly 16. a Counsel of war was again called, and several propositions were made for the framing of our Army, and reduction of the town, both being of great con∣sequence,
and vehemently desired by us. To rise with our whole Army and leave the town unattempted, was con∣ceived to be very prejudiciall to our future progresse; To sit down before it (being a place of that strength, and we not sure to carry it) leaving the Enemy at liberty to rally his broken forces, seemed very hazardous. The blocking of it up by Forts on both sides with a part of our Army was propounded; but the difficulty of laying a Bridge over the River through the violence of the current, (which yet was necessary for the maintaining a communication between our quarters on both sides) hindred that designe. It was propounded to attempt it by approaches; But it was considered, that if we should have gone that way, it would have proved very tedious; and if during our stay about it any great glut of rain should have fallen, it would have laid us wet in our trenches, and disabled us from ef∣fecting the business. At last, a resolution to storm it was agreed upon, though it carried the greatest danger with it: yet the desire which the Army had to be speedily free for the further service of the Kingdom, surmounted all difficulties: the storming being thus happily resolved on, to the great and generall satisfaction of all that Army, both Officers and Souldiers; Lots were drawn for every one to take their posts, some to storm, some to be reserves, others to alarm, but the time of falling on not yet determined. Friday Iuly 19. it was resolved at a Counsel of War, that the time of the storm should be on Monday morning to∣wards dawning of the day. The Brigade appointed to storm on that side towards Devon was commanded by Major General Massey, being the Regiments of Col. Wel∣den, Col. Inglesby, Col. Fortescue, Col. Herbert, Col. Birch, and Major General Massies own Regiment: the Regiments designed on this side, were the Generals, Major-generals, Col. Pickerings, Col. Montagues, Sir Hardresse Wallers, the Regiment commanded by Lieut. Colonel Pride, Colonel
Rainsboroughs, and Colonel Hamonds. The General rode round about the town this day, to see if all things were in readines for the storm, that both sides might fall on toge∣ther. On the Lords day, Iuly 20. Mr. Peters in the forenoon preached a Preparation Sermon, to encourage the Souldiers to go on: Mr. Bowles likewise did his part in the afternoon. After both Sermons, the Drums beat, the Army was drawn out into the field: The Commanders of the forlorn hope who were to begin the storm, and the Souldiers, being drawn together in the field, were there also afresh exhorted to do their duties (with undaunted courage and resolution) by Mr. Peters, who did it (as one sayes of him) tàm Marte, quàm Mercurio. As soon as it grew dark, the Souldiers drew every one to their severall Posts allotted them to storm; the signe when the storm was to begin, was, the shooting off three peeces of Ordnance on this side, which the Forces on the other side were to take notice of, and to fall on at the instant: and on Monday, Iuly 22. about two of the clock in the morning, the storm began accordingly on this side of the town, (the Forces on the other side only alarm∣ing the Enemy, which kept them upon the Line, expect∣ing a storm) Our Forlorn hope was manfully led on by Lieut. colonel Hewson; and as valiantly seconded by the Generals Regiment, commanded by Lieut. colonel Iackson; and the Major-generals, commanded by Lieut. colonel Ashfield. The Bridges prepared to passe over the Moat, were quickly brought to the Ditch, and thrown in, on which the Souldiers with little losse got over the deep ditch, and with undaunted courage mounted the Enemies works (notwithstanding the great and small shot which showred about them) beat them from their Ordnance, turn'd them upon the enemy, & let down their drawbridg; which made many of their Foot instantly cry, Quarter, Quarter. The Bridge being let down, Captain Rainolds, who commanded the forlorn hope of horse, immediatly entred, and scoured the streets of that part of the Town so gained, called Eastover, with much gallantry and resolution, even
up to the Draw-bridge over the main Ditch, leading to the second Town: whereupon the rest of the Officers and Souldiers that were in a body, and yet annoyed us in that part of the town which we had won, threw down their arms, and had fair quarter given them: (there were about 600. taken prisoners, Officers and Souldiers) The Enemy instantly made barracadoes at the gate upon the bridge, and drew up the bridge that divided one part of the town from the other. Our forces had not been two houres in the first town, but the Enemy shot granadoes, and slugs of hot iron, and fired it on both sides, which by the next morning burnt that part of the town (of goodly buildings) down to the ground, except three or four houses, Major Cowel, who had a good share in that service, standing all that while in the midst of the street, which was both sides on fire, keeping guards to prevent the Enemies sallying up∣on them: Captain Sampson, in that remarkable action, received a shot. The General, hoping that the Storm might have wrought upon the Souldiers, & the Fire upon the Towns-men, so far, that they would have hearkened to a treaty; renewed his Summons, which the Governour perempto∣rily refused, according to his allegiance (as he said) where∣upon, Tuesday, Iuly 22. it was resolved to alarm the town by our forces on this side, and to storm it by the other forces on the other side, at two of the clock the next morning; for which purpose the General was there in per∣son to see it done, though it was held fit on after con∣siderations, only to alarm on both sides, which much amazed the Enemy, and kept him waking that night: Also about two of the clock in the afternoon, the General sent to the Governour a Trumpet with a message to this purpose, that his denial of fair tearms had wrought in him no other thoughts, but of compassion towards those that were innocent, who otherwise might suffer through the Governours obstinacy: Wherefore he signified his noble pleasure, that all women and children that
would accept of this liberty, should come forth of the town by four of the clock in the afternoon, which being made known to them, the Governours Lady and divers others came out. They were no sooner come forth, but our Cannon plaid fiercely into the town, Granadoes were shot, and slugs of hot iron in abundance, whereby several houses in the town were fired, and the wind being high increast the flame, the townsmen within were in great distraction, every man imployed how to save his house and goods, the Enemy in a great amazement, and the Governour so far melted, as to send forth Tom Elliot in haste, to desire to know the Generals tearms; the General refused to admit of any treaty at all, resolved that the Governour and they within that had destroy∣ed so fine a town, should have no conditions, but should submit to mercy; which being signified to the Enemy, they yet would try the General with these three particulars. First, that the Governour with all the Officers and Gen∣tlemen that were in the Town, with their servants, horses, swords, pistols and cloak-bags, might march with a safe Convoy to Exeter. Secondly, that all the souldiers might likewise march to Exeter leaving their armes. Thirdly, that all Clergie-men in the town, and Towns-men might have liberty to march with them, or abide at home. Edmund Windham. Whereto the General returned these. 1. To all their lives. 2. To the inhabitants, their liberty and freedome from plunder. 3. Neither Officers nor Souldiers to be plundred of the clothes they had upon them. 4. The Gentlemen to be disposed of as the Parliament should appoint, and in the mean time to have civil usage. Six Hostages to be sent, and an answer in a quarter of an hour. Tho. Fairfax.
The Governour returned answer, that he found those Propositions so ill resented, both by the Gentlemen and Souldiers, that he could not accept of them. The General thereupon gave order to the souldiers to stand upon their guard, and go to their duties; Tom Elliot desired nothing might be done till he returned, leaving Sir Iohn Heale as caution, which was agreed to; and he presently returned with an answer of submission to the Generals Articles, only slipt in a motion for himself, that he might have liberty to carry the news to the King upon his Parol. May he have more such imployment till peace be setled! Thereupon the Hostages were sent, Sir Iohn Heale, Sir Hugh Windham, Mr. Waldron, Mr. Warr, Mr. Siddingham, Mr. Speake. And we sent some into the Town to them. They were to deliver the Town and yield themselves prisoners the next morning by eight of the clock, and all that night they imployed themselves to quench the fire in the town. The losse of men in this storm was not many, Mr. Martin an Officer in the train had his leg shot, and af∣terwards cut off, whereof he died, he behaved himself va∣liantly. Wednesday Iuly 23. the town was surrendred, about 1000 Officers and Souldiers, besides Gentlemen and ma∣lignant Clergy, marched out as prisoners. There were ta∣ken in the town about 44 barrels of powder, 1500 armes, 44 piece of ordnance, 400 weight of match, Enemies goods of great value, that had been carried for security in∣to that place, and were seized by the Commissioners of the Parliament, and sould; and 5. s. a man raised upon the sale, to be bestowed as a reward upon the common souldiers for their good service in the storming of the place. That which may seem to allay the happiness of the suc∣cesse was, that the town was fired; but truly though in strictness of souldiery this might be very well justified, yet God in his providence concurred to the justice of it, and our acquittance: They refused treaty after part taken, they
fired the part we had taken, and rang the bels for joy when they saw it blaze: and as we are credibly informed, they fired the town themselves in many places where fire∣works could do no hurt, the souldiers saying, The Town did it to be rid of them; the town said, the souldiers did it, when they were in little hopes to hold it. But God be thanked, we found much more of it standing then we expected. Some things there are which made the businesse considerable. As first, that by it a line of garrisons was drawn over that Ihstmus of ground between the South-sea and Severne, by Bridgewater, Taunton, Lime, and Langport, it being from Bridgewater to Lime little above twenty miles, by which the Counties of Devon and Corn∣wal then wholly in the Enemies possession, except Ply∣mouth, were in a manner blockt up from all entercourse with the Eastern parts, a business of no small consequence, if we had proceeded no further. Likewise this being ta∣ken, our Army was at liberty for further work, which was a great mercy at that time of the year. It was a great gain with little losse: and that which addes as much to the commendation of the action, as any thing, we kept our Articles exactly, which is not only honourable in the eyes of men, but acceptable in the sight of God, and that which this war hath scarce formerly attained; and it was not done without some difficulty now, in regard our soul∣diers had suffered so much, and Cornwal was so near. Thursday Iuly 24. All the day was spent in ordering the manner of sending away the prisoners, and securing Ma∣lignants goods in the town. And thus you have that gal∣lant fight at Langport crowned with an easie recovery of that considerable strength of Brigdewater, whose natural fortification by water, they that knew, must needs con∣clude, God was the Bridge by which our Army got over.
CHAP. III. The taking of Bath. The Club-mens reply, and his Excellencies rejoynder, in two considerable Actions defeating them. The impregnable Castle of Sherborn taken by storm. FRiday, Iuly 25. A Councell of war was called, to ad∣vise how, and which way next, the Army might lay out themselves to the most advantage and best service of the Common-wealth; whether to make up further West to Goring, or to stay in the Eastern parts to curb the Club-men. And in favour of this latter, it was considered, that the Army wanted Ammunition, to march far West, to un∣dertake any considerable action: and that this was a need∣full work, there being also severall Garrisons of the Ene∣my, by which the Club-men took great boldnesse to shew themselves. It was therefore inclined unto by the Councell of war, that the Army should first make it their businesse to reduce the Club-men to better manners, and to that end, to attempt the taking in, at least, to keep in that Garrison, which countenanced and encouraged them, viz. Sherborn Castle, where Sir Lewis Dives, an active Enemy, and reso∣lute Souldier, was Commander in chief: But the determi∣nation of the Councell of war was, notwithstanding, to advance rather more West, to prosecute our victory at Lam∣port and Bridgewater, and hinder Goring for rallying his shat∣tered force, or raising any considerable body, leaving some force to attend P. Ruperts motion about Bristoll, and to di∣sturb the Clubmen if they frequented meetings as formerly. A march being thus resolved on; it was accordingly under∣taken on the morrow, whence the Army marched to Mar∣tock, ten miles, in order to a more Westerly march: where resting the Lords day, there was a thanksgiving for the successe in the taking of Bridgewater. The Generall, who ever accounted it his greatest safety, to act according to the advise of his Councel of war (whom God had so often blessed in their resolutions) was at this time much troubled in his thoughts, concerning his march further West, before Bath and Sherborn were absolutely reduced, and the dis-af∣fected Club-men brought to more obedience: Reckoning
it also a service of importance to take in Bath, in order to the straitening of Bristoll, and hindring P. Rupert for raising any considerable force in those parts: Whereupon his Ex∣cellency took a resolution to march back, and accordingly came to Wells that night with part of the Army and Train, being 14. long miles, and a hot day, and sent a Brigade of horse and foot unto Sherborn under the command of that pi∣ous and deserving Commander, Col. Pickering, to face that garrison, and to view the same; and if there were hopes to re∣duce it, to sit down before it, in order to a siege. The Horse∣quarters this night were neerer unto Bath, & more force was sent to get between Bath and Bristol; having intelligence that their distractions were such in Bath, that they would easily be driven to quit it: But the General stayed at Wells, expect∣ing to hear from the party of Horse and Dragoons under the command of Col. Rich, which he had sent towards Bath. Tuesday the 29. Colonel Rich facing the town with horse and dragoons, summoned the town, but the Governour refused to surrender. Towards evening, our Dragoons, commanded by Colonel Okey, were drawn neer the bridge, and crept on their bellies over it, to the Gate, seized on the small end of the enemies Musquets, which they put through the loop-holes of the Gate, and cryed to the enemy to take quarter, which so affrighted the enemy, that they an to their Work which flankered the bridge, and left their Musquets behinde them, as of no use to them, so of as little to us: Our men instantly fired the Gate, and became Masters of the bridge; upon which the Deputy∣governour sent for a Parley, and upon the Treaty the town was yielded upon Articles, making the common souldi∣ers, who were about 140. prisoners, and having conditi∣ons for the Officers to march away to what garrison they pleased. We found in the town six pieces of Ordnance, 400. Arms, 12. barrels of Powder, the Works, besides the Wall of the City, strong and tenable. It was yielded in a good time, for Prince Rupert was advanced with a Party of 1500 horse and foot from Bristol, within four miles, to
relieve the town, but comming too late, retreated. Wednesday Iuly 30. The Army was drawn up to Mendeep hils, with intention to march to Bath, but upon intelli∣gence the horse and dragoons alone had taken the town, His Excellency sent back the Army to Wells, marching on∣ly with two Regiments of foot to Bath (which he intend∣ed to leave there for the security of that place, and parts thereabouts.) The Generall quartered there that night, stay∣ed there next morning, and setled things for the safety of that place, and in the afternoon returned to Wells, leaving the two Regiments at Bath. Friday, August 1. the Army marched from Wels to Queen-Camel, where the Head-quarter was that night, but the General himself went with a few Horse to Sherborn, view∣ed the Works and Castle, and quartered there that night. And on Saturday August 2. the General and Lieut-General rode again to the Lodge, and upon a second view and ob∣servation, conceived the place might shortly be reduced; guards were therefore appointed neerer to it, and orders were given for all things in reference to a close siege. This day Intelligence came that the Club-men of three Counties viz. Dorcet, Wilts, and Summerset, were to meet at Shaftsbury, and that a faire opportunity would be offered for the surprisall of them, who were so disaffected to the Parliament; whereupon Col. Fleetwood was commanded forth with a good party of horse, to see if he could surprise them; who accordingly came seasonably, incompassed them in the towne with about 1000 horse, and took about 50 of the Ringleaders, whereof Mr. Hollis, Carey, Young, Cra∣dock, and Doctor Goche were the chiefe, who being brought prisoners by a guard of horse, were presently dismounted, and disarmed, and sent to prison, untill leisure were afford∣ed to examine them, and to consider how to dispose of them, which was done by a Committee chosen on pur∣pose four or five dayes after; and after the reducement of Sherborne, they were sent to London with other prisoners; but we have not so done with the Club-men, or rather they with us.
Lords day August 3. News came this day that all the Country of Wilts, and Dorcet, and part of Summerset, were up in Armes, and would have a Rendezvouz of 10000. men at least, pretending they did it to fetch off their Lead∣ers; (but privately we understood it was to interrupt our siege, and to hinder provisions from comming to the Lea∣guer; giving out withall, that Goring with his Army was comming out of the West to raise the siege. On Munday August 4. Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell having Intelligence of some of their places of Rendezvouz for their severall divisions, went forth with a party of horse to meet with them; (being well satisfied of the danger of their designe.) As he was marching towards Shaftsbury with the party, they discovered some colours upon the top of a high hill, full of wood, and almost inaccessible; a Lieutenant with a small party was sent to them to know their meaning, and to acquaint them that the Lieutenant-Generall of the Army was there; whereupon Mr. New∣man, one of their leaders, thought fit to come downe, and told us the intent was to desire to know why the Gentle∣men were taken at Shaftsbury on Saturday; the Lieute∣nant-Gen. returned him this answer; that he held himselfe not bound to give him, or them an account; what was done was by authority, and they that did it were not ac∣responsible to them that had none: but not to leave them wholly unsatisfied, he told him that those persons so met, had been the occasions and stirrers of many tumultuous and unlawfull meetings, for which they were to be tri∣ed by law, which triall ought not by them to be question∣ed, or interrupted: Mr. Newman desired to goe up to re∣turne the answer; the Lieutenant-Generall with a small party went with him, and had some conference with the people, to this purpose: that whereas they pretended to meet there to save their goods, they took a very ill course for that: to leave their houses was the way to loose their goods; and it was offered them, that Justice should be done upon any who offered them violence; and as for
the Gentlemen taken at Shaftsbury; it was only to answer some things they were accused of, which they had done contrary to Law, and the peace of the Kingdome: These men were well satisfied, and promised to return to their houses, and accordingly did so. These being thus quietly sent home, the Lieutenant ge∣nerall advanced further, to a meeting of a greater number, of about 4000. who betook themselves to Hambleton Hill, near Shrawton; at the bottome of the hill we met a man with a Musquet, and asked whither he was going, he said, to the Club-Army; we asked what he meant to do, he asked what we had to do with that: Being required to lay down his Arms, he said he would first lose his life, but was not so good as his word, for though he cockt, and presented his Musquet, he was prevented, disarmed, and wounded, but not killed. Then we marched up the hill, which had been an old Romane-work, deeply trenched: The Lieutenant-generall sent before a Lieutenant with a party of horse, to require an account of their meeting; he was answered with half a dozen shot, and could get no other answer; thereupon one Mr. Lee, who upon our ap∣proach came from them, was sent in, requiring them to submit to the power and protection of the Parliament, and lay down their Arms; they refused to leave their Arms, and gave us a shot as we were drawing up, the Lieutenant Generall unwilling to bloodshed, sent Mr. Lee again, to tell them, that if they would not lay down their Arms, he would fall upon them; they refused this third message also, through the instigation of Mr. Branell, Minister of Compton, who told them they must stand to it now, rather then lose their Arms, and that he would Pistoll them that gave back. Thereupon Order was given to the Generals Troop to fall on, who did so, and received a repulse, and some losse through the disadvantage of the place, for the Club-men shot from the bank of the old Work, and kept the passage with Musquets, and other weapons, which was no broader
then for three horse to march a brest; upon this attempt we lost a man or two, had eight or nine wounded, six or seven horses killed: upon this, Major Desborough with the Generals Regiment, went round about a ledge of the hill, and made a hard shift to climbe up and enter on their rear; which they no sooner discerned, but after a short dispute they ran, and the passage formerly as∣saulted was opened, and all the Club-men dispersed, and disarmed, some slaine, many wounded, the rest slid and tumbled downe that great steep hill, to the hazard of their necks; there were brought away 400. of them to Shrawton, of which neere 200. were wounded in this skirmish, Capt. Paltison was sore hurt on our side, of which afterwards he dyed, and about twelve more; we found among them a∣bout 16. of our men whom they had disarmed, and taken prisoners, and threatened to hang some of them, but the Tables were then turned; we quartered that night at Shrawton, and kept the Club-men in the church, and with them, four Vicars and Curats which were taken with them, upon the Hill; whereof Mr. Talbot of Milton was one, and Lawford of Auckford, the worst, another. There was taken about 12 Colours, the Motto of one of them was thus: (If you offer to plunder or take our cattel, Be assured we will bid you battel.) In others of them they had sentences of Scripture, profanely applied by their Malignant Priests, who were the principal stirrers up of the people to these tumultuous assemblies. The next day, Aug. 5. we took their names and exami∣nations, who were their Leaders, and what the grounds of their meeting were; which they freely discovered, and confessed that Mr. Bravel the Minister of Compton, sent out the Warrants; and the intent was (as appeares by a War∣rant from Mr. Rogers of Langton) gallantly to demand their Countrymen, or to take so many prisoners as should re∣lease them, as the Warrant ran. And that they had laid down their arms and submitted, had it not been for Bra∣vel, and White, and Lawford; and that they sent to Wiltshire
to come and joyne with them, whose journey is now stopt. After the examination, the Lieutenant-Gen. spake to them, giving them liberty to defend themselves against plunderings; only forbidding any such meetings, which they protested against, and freely consented, that if any of them (whose names were in the paper) were taken again opposing the Parliament, or in any such assembly, they deserved to be hanged, whereupon they were dismissed, to their very good satisfaction, and confessed they saw them∣selves misled by their leaders, who by a pretence to save their goods, indangered both their goods and lives, and so ours parted with them, hoping never to meet them again upon such terms; but their leaders were extreamly partiall on the Kings side, notwithstanding their pretended indiffe∣rencies, as appeared in Bravels activity, since he was at Court with their Petition, & their calling men Roundheads that re∣fused to joyn with them; thratening no less then loss of goods and danger of life, to them that would not come in to them. This work, though unhappy, was very necessarie, for that the Army could send neither messengers nor par∣ties before; whereas this done, a man might ride very qui∣etly between Sherborne and Salisbury. The influence the King had upon them was very palpable and notorious, and that they acted his very designe; Commissions were found under the Princes owne hand, for raising Regi∣ments of Club-men, which commissions were sent up to the Parliament; and that this designe was to have been set on foot in other parts, yea in the Associated counties, and all the parts of the Kingdom, to raise a third party (as that that the King did much rely upon, if other aid did faile) there is but too much reason to beleive; and that Letters of the Club-men were found among Sir Lewis Dives his pa∣pers, declaring their intention to serve the King, is no te∣merity to affirme, and such was the sense of the danger the kingdome and the Parliaments cause was in by this third party, had it gone on as it was beginning, that to re∣peat it is sufficient (I need not inlarge upon it) to provoke
thankfulnesse to God for the seasonable laying of this spirit, which never afterwards appear'd. On Tuesday at night August 5. The Lieutenant-Generall with the party returned to Sherborne, where they found the Generall and the rest of the Army very busie at the siege; a storme was intended, but upon second thoughts divert∣ed; the Army seeing recruits come so far below expecta∣tion, both in time and number, it behoved them to take more then ordinary care of their men, though after all their tedious marches, and desperate services, to that time the Army was not much abated; that day a commanded party crept underneath the stone wall close by Sherborne Castle, and gained the hay-stack within a stones cast of their Works. Wednesday August 6. The Enemy making a new work to plant Ordnance to beat our men from the hay-stack, we beat them off that work, and dismounted their Canon, but had four Captaines wounded, and one slaine; all things were in a preparation to storme; this day the soul∣diers had every one his faggot prepared, another Sum∣mons was sent unto the Castle to surrender the same, but a deniall was returned, whereupon a councell of War was called, and it was resolved, that since an whole Canon was upon the way from Portsmouth, and that from Mendeep hils we might have excellent Miners, that therefore we should proceed in approaches & Batteries for the reducing of the Castle, being well informed that the ground whereon it stood was mineable: This day towards evening, Capt. Horsey another of Colonel Rainsboroughs Officers was shot dead in the place with a birding peice from one of the Towers: who with Captain-Lieutenant Flemming of Col. Rainsboroughs Regiment, (who was shot before) were the next day buried after a martiall manner in the Church at Sherborne, being the place where Captaine Horseys Ancestors were intombed. On Friday August 8. The Generall going to see the
working of the Mine, (as afterwards both Saturday and Lords day he did severall times,) and the making of the Gallery, escaped another great danger by his own souldi∣ers, who encompassing some Dear, shot round, and kil∣led one of their fellows, and missed the General (as he was passing by) narrowly. Very freely did the souldiers work in the Mines and Galleries, and making of Batteries, every man being re∣warded twelve pence a piece for the day, and as much for the night, for the service was hot and hazardous. By Monday August 11. The whole Canon, and the Trea∣sure for the Army formerly mentioned, and then long ex∣pected by the Army, came to the head quarter. This day his Excellency had intelligence, that Major Generall Massies horse, who were quartered near Taunton, to interrupt Go∣rings forces in case they advanced this way, had fallen on some of Gorings horse, and taken severall prisoners. Tuesday August 12. The Mendeep Miners came, and were set to work; the enemy threw fiery Faggots over those parts of the Wall where the Miners were, and where a Bridge likewise was making (over a little Rivolet,) which was in part burnt thereby, but the souldiers presently quenched it, and it was put over that night. The Generall according to his wonted nobleness sent to Sir Lewis Dives, That if he pleased to send out his Lady, or any other wo∣men, he would give way to it; Sir Lewis thankfully ac∣knowledged the favour, seemed to incline to accept of it, but gave no positive answer, expressing withall his resolu∣tion (souldier-like) to hold out to the last; but under fa∣vour, it was a madnesse rather then valour, seeing he de∣spaired of relief, and since that he hath felt the misery of it by a long imprisonment in the Tower. Wednesday August 13. The Canon and Demi-Canon were planted on the new Battery, where another chiefe Gunner of ours was slain, besides one Ienkins, another Gun∣ner was shot from the Tower. The Miners wrought with∣in two yards of the Wall, where the Rock appearing, we
feared it would have given more interruption then it did, but it proving but a soft stone, was easily wrought tho∣row. The Generall and Lieutenant Generall vvere twice again this day at the Works and Mines, so much did they still engage their persons in the care and oversight of every such vvork. Thursday August 14. The great Guns began to play about eleven of the clock, and before six had made a breach in the middle of the Wall, that ten a breast might enter, and had beaten down one of the Towers, vvhich much dis∣heartened the enemy. On this occasion the great adventu∣rousness of many of the souldiers comes fitly to be re∣membred, vvho (vvhilest our Canon played hard upon the Castle, and vvanted shot) fetcht off the Bullets (that vve had shot) from under the enemies Walls, and had six pence a piece for every Bullet they so brought off, vvhich vvere vvorth as much to the service at that time. After the breach so made, such vvas the noble and mercifull dispo∣sition of the Generall, that he sent a third Summons to surrender the Castle, or to expect extremity, vvhich drave the Governour into a great passion (vvhich is not hard to do) in so much as he said, he vvould hang the Drum; and vvhen the Drum, delivering his message stoutly, vvas as he thought, sawcy, he told him he must have more man∣ners in his presence, and sent an answer to this purpose; That the language was so far differing from vvhat he had formerly received, that he could not believe that it came from the same hand, but said, that he vvould not lose his honour to save his life (it may be (as one sayes of him) because his Cause and carriage had already lost it) if the last vvere, he should think it vvell bestowed in the service. This day another of our Gunners vvas shot vvith a bird∣ing piece. By this time our approaches vvere so near, that they could have no use of their Musquets, only threw down stones: And this day our souldiers upon the guard, (commanded then by Colonel Inglesby, a gallant and vvel∣deserving Gentleman) happily gained the Tower in the
corner of the Castle, out of which our Musquetiers play∣ing into the Castle, recompenced with a fatall shot one of the enemies chief marksmen, that had so often shot out of the Tower with the birding piece, and killed our men: Impatient were our men to fall on, but in regard the Mine was not ready to spring, that night it was resolved to put off the storm till the next day, but in the mean time so near did our souldiers venture to the Walls from the Gal∣lery, that they pulled the Wooll out of the Wooll-sacks that lay on the enemies Works, vvhich caused that strong guards vvere set by the enemy: this night great fires were made in the Castle all night long, to discover our ap∣proaches and mines. Friday August 15. Two in the morning, the Governour having cooled his brain with a little sleep, (without any other provocation) sent out a Drummer with a message, that he was willing to surrender upon honourable terms; answer vvas returned, no terms but Quarter, seeing he had slipt and slighted the opportunity, and he vvas not to ex∣pect that, except he rendred speedily. Immediatly the Ge∣nerall went in person to the Works, and viewed the Ca∣stle within, over the Wall, not without great hazard, gave Orders for all things to be prepared for a storm, every souldier to cut his fresh Faggot, whereby in two houres they had above 6000 Faggots, with which they were to fill the Trenches, and to throw stones and rubbish upon them; whilst this was in doing, our souldiers that had before gained one Tower, recovered also another of their Towers, and from thence proved as good marksmen as theirs vvere; and out of the same Towers vvhere they shot so many of our men, did good execution upon the enemy within: (Sir Lewis Dives his Secretary vvas slain by a shot from thence;) and being so happily possest of this Tower, vve improved it further, to the in∣forcing them from their Guns within, which they had planted to oppose our entrance at the breach; the Miners had by this time wrought quite through the foundation
of the Wall, and our foot plaid so hard from the breach, that they were forced to quit the great Court within the Castle; this much disheartened the enemy, and especially seeing our souldiers comming forwards so merrily with Faggots on their backs to fall on, some of them before their time appointed leaping over the Works, all which concurring, so daunted the enemy, that they fled out of one Work into another, and so into the Castle; which be∣ing discerned by the rest of our Army, they all went over without any more ado, which so ripened the amazement of the enemy, that instantly they pulled down their bloody Colours, hung out a white Flag, had no power to make opposition, sent a Drum for to crave Quarter, but before he could get out, and return, a great part of our foot were entred, they within had thrown down their Arms, and cryed for Quarter to our souldiers, which our souldiers (in∣clining rather to booty then revenge) gave them, but stript they were to the purpose, all except Sir Lewis Dives, and his Lady, and some few more, and so we became Masters of the Castle, and all within it; the souldiers finding plun∣der of great value, the taking of which in a disorderly manner could not then be prevented: There was taken about 400 prisoners in the Castle, besides Sir Lewis Dives the Governour, Col. Giles Strangewayes, formerly a mem∣ber of Parliament, Sir Iohn Walcot, Col. Thornhill, and others of quality, and 18. pieces of Ordnance, and a Mortar-piece. The reducing of this place was of the greater cōcernment, in regard of the influence it had upon the dis-affected Clubmen in those parts, who having the countenance of this garrison, were made so much the more bold in their attempts and meetings. The souldiers spoil lasted all that day, and most part of the night, whose fair demeanour in the town of Sherborne during the siege, deserves commendation, when notwith∣standing that about sixty townsmen who had families in the town, were in the Castle, and fought against them, yet not one of their houses were plundered.
On Saturday August 16. Being market-day, our souldi∣ers, with the booty they had got, kept a great market to the Country, who bought the goods of them; and all this day and the next was necessarily spent in ordering the disposall of prisoners, and in considering what to do with the garrison, which not above two or three dayes after was ordered to be slighted: And thus hath God led us into a∣nother strong hold of equall difficulty and consequence. In the reduction of which place, as elsewhere, the dexteri∣ty, industry and resolution of Captain Dean, Comptroller of the Ordnance, deserves to be had in memory. CHAP. IV. The siege of Bristol, the taking of it, with the actions that intervened, viz. The taking of Nunny-Castle, &c. SHerborne being now by Gods blessing reduced, a coun∣cell of war was called, where the subject of the debate was, what should be the next designe of the Army, the West, or Bristoll; the reasons upon which it was endea∣voured to perswade the West, were, The pursuing of our Victory at Langport, the hindring of Goring from re-in∣forcing his shattered Army in Devon and Cornwall, (where∣unto he might probably finde the Cornish, being generally disaffected to the Parliament, easily drawn, the Prince be∣ing in person with them, and acting to that purpose) the miseries of the people in the West, and the necessities of Plimouth crying for present relief: besides, it was urged on the negative of Bristol, that to go thither, was to hazard the whole Army, the Plague being sore in the City, an hundred dying weekly, and that it was in most of the Villages a∣bout the Town. But on the other side, it was considered, That Prince Rupert being in Bristol, and able to draw into the field 3000 Horse and Foot (leaving also sufficient to defend that garison) Might, with the assistance of the ill∣affected Club-men (of whose disaffection to the Parlia∣ment
there was sufficient proof) and having the advan∣tage of sending Forces and Recruits out of Wales, (which were easily to be transported over Severn) raise a consider∣able Army in the Midland parts, which might interrupt the proceedings of our Army, by marching on their Rear, when they were far advanced West, vvhereby Goring being in the Front, they might come to be inclosed between two Armies, and so all intercourse vvith London, and the Eastern parts would be thereby cut off; besides, the great impor∣tance of the place, as to the enemy, Bristol being the only considerable Port the King had in the whole kingdom, for shipping, and trade, and riches; being withall his ma∣gazine for all sort of Ammunition: which should it please God to make us masters of, must needs prove sadly fatal to his affairs, and would so be judged in this and for∣raign Kingdoms. What advantage it would be to the Par∣liament, both in reputation and reall improvements (it being justly reckoned in the first rank of populous and rich Cities in this Kingdom) was very clearly evident. These and other like considerations being offered, for the present reducing of Bristol; After long consultation and debate, it was resolved to march thither in order to the reducing of that place. After once this resolution was taken, it was said by the General: Seeing our Iudgements lead us to make Bristol our next designe, as the greatest service we can do for the Publique; As for the Sicknesse, let us trust God with the Army, who will be as ready to protect us, in the Siege, from Infection, as in the Field, from the Bullet. Hereupon orders were given for the Army to march towards Bristol. The Generall resting all the next day at Sherborne to settle the business of the County. And on Monday (after Sir Lewis Dives and the prisoners, together with the Club-leaders before mentioned, who were had in hold, were sent away with a guard to London) the Army marched to Castle-Carew (save that Colonel Rainsborough with his own, and Colonel Ha∣monds Regiments, and two pieces of Ordnance, was sent
to Nunney castle, for the reducing thereof) the rest of the Army marched that night to Castle-Carew: the next day the General himself went to view Nunney castle, and found it to be a very strong piece. The Head quarter was that night at Shepton-Mallet, but 5 miles from Carew, far enough for the Train, which was 4 miles behind from the quarters the night before: but to expedite, what might be, this designe against Bristol, and the relief of the country there∣abouts, in the mean time, two thousand Horse and Dra∣goons were sent under the command of Commissary General Ireton, to preserve the towns adjacent to Bristol from plunder and firing, for the better accommodation of our quarters▪ the next day the Army marched to Chue, 9 miles, and ill way; and in relation to the straiter siege, Messengers were sent to the Vice-Admiral, Captain Moul∣ton, riding about Milford Haven, to send ships into King-roade to block up Bristol by sea, as this Army intended to do by land. Some prisoners were taken by our Horse near Bristol, others came in voluntarily unto us; all agreeing, said, the Enemy did not imagine our forces to be so near, or that we had any designe upon Bristol. And by a Trum∣peter that came with a Message from thence, they seemed to be so far from a belief thereof, that he said he did not expect to finde us on that side Sherborne, and when he met our Horse, he took them to be the Kings (not offering to sound his trumpet as he ought to have done) that night there was a strong party of Horse and one Regiment of Foot disposed at Hanham, within three miles of Bristol, on Gloucestershire side, by whom the Enemy was alarm'd. Vp∣on this approach of ours, the Enemy fired Benminster on Somersetshire side, and burnt it down to the ground, as also divers houses on Gloucestershire side. It was but the day before, when Prince Rupert was sending out a party to relieve Barkley-castle, which was much straitned by the Gloucester forces; but the approach of our Horse under Commissary Ireton diverted that designe. Thursday, 21. in the morning, to encourage us in our
engagements, we received intelligence of the surrender of Nunny castle to Colonel Rainsborough, upon condition to have liberty to go to their own houses. By reason of the Train coming in so late; the Army rested that day at Chue, save that another party of Horse and Foot advanced to∣wards Benminster, upon intelligence that the Prince inten∣ded to break through with his Horse, and joyn with Go∣ring; with which party the General and Lieutenant-general went, viewed the Town, and appointed guards and quar∣ters on the West side the River, and quartered himself at Kenisome that night; where divers Lords sent for Passes to come out of the City and go beyond sea, but upon good reason were denyed; it being a received opinion, that persons of quality and great estate, in a besieged town, rather encline to a timely yielding, then hazardous defend∣ing thereof, when no relief is at hand. Friday the 22. there was a general rendezyouz of Horse, and all that day was spent in setting of guards on Somer∣setshire side, where the Countreymen maintained a passage at Clifton, the Head-quarter that night being removed to Hanham. Saturday 23. the General and Lieutenant-General imploy∣ed the whole day, in the setling of quarters and guards on the other side of Bristol. This day the Enemies Canon played from the great Fort, and Pryors Fort, but hurt none but one Dragoon, who had his thigh shot off. The Ene∣my sallied out also with a party of Horse, but were beaten in again, where Sir Richard Crane was mortally wounded, who presently after dyed of his wounds. The Head-quarter this night was removed to Stapleton. Lords day, Aug. 24. the Enemy about noon sallied out again, at the Sally-port near Prior-hill Fort, in a full career, and were upon our Dragoons on the sudden; yet by our Horse comming on, were beaten back again, as also their Foot were, by the Foot of Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade, made to retreat in disorder, and worse then they came forth, by the losse of a Major and some others.
Monday, 25. Warrants were issued out by the General, to Sir Iohn Horner, High Sheriffe of the County of Somer∣set, to raise the power of the County, which was much promoted by the interest and endeavours of Mr. Ash and Mr. Moore, two worthy Members of the House of Com∣mons. This day the army had intelligence, that Goring, then about Collumpton in Devon, did seem to draw to a Rendez∣vouz, as if he intended a march to interrupt our siege. But Major-Gen. Massies Brigade of Horse were quartered not far from Taunton, in such an advantagious posture, that the Enemy could not move, but he might flank them, and interrupt their motion, whilest our Horse might draw off to meet them, in case they should attempt the forementioned designe. Tuesday, 26. four in the morning, the Enemy made a third sally on Somersetshire side, on a post of Colonel Wel∣dens Brigade at Bedminster; and through the negligence of the Officer that had then the command there, they took 10. and killed as many: towards a recompence of which affront, the same day, Captain Molleneux, a very valiant man (Captain Lieutenant to Colonel Butler) and with him another stout souldier, perceiving three gallant Ca∣valiers under their Works (whom afterwards they found to be Sir Bernard Ashley, Colonel Daniel, and a third man) rode up to them, askt them who they were for, they swore, God dam them, for the King, and shot at ours: where∣upon, our men discharged their Pistols at them, woun∣ded them, and after some bickering took Sir Bernard Ash∣ley, who dyed within few dayes of his wounds: But Co∣lonel Daniel, though dangerously wounded, escaped from them. Wednesday 27. the Enemy drew out the fourth time, about the close of the evening, with intention to fall on our guards; which ours perceiving (& they understanding that they were privie to their intention) they drew back to their Works. All this night, the General and Lieutenant-General were abroad upon the field, to be in readinesse if any alarm should happen.
Thursday 28. Rupert sent out those foot of ours, which were taken prisoners on Somersetshire side, being in number ten, with a Trumpet, propounding also an exchange for Sir Bernard Ashley, but the exchange was not hearkned to. This day we had intelligence of the Kings plundring of Huntingdon, and the cruel usage of the people by his forces in those parts, having unhappily escaped the Scotch and Northern horse, out of Nottinghamshire. Mean while, as an earnest of the whole, the Fort at Portshead point that had bin four dayes besieged by Lieutenant Colonel Kemp∣son, of Colonel Weldens Regiment, with a party of Foot, was with six pieces of Ordnance this day surrendred un∣to him; who managed that businesse with much judge∣ment and resolution; by the taking whereof the passage into King-road with our ships was made open. Friday 29. A Fast was kept through the Army, to seek God for a blessing upon the designes against Bristol: Mr. Del and Mr. Peters kept the day at the Head quarter. The Enemy endeavoured to interrupt us by a sally about noon time, upon our quarters near Lawfords-gate, where he took three or four souldiers. After the publick exercises a Coun∣sel of War was called; and it being agreed in the first place, to punish the vices of the Army, it was propoun∣ded, whether to storm Bristol or not; the debate was long, opinions various; however it was agreed, that all things should be prepared in order to a storm, and afterwards to take into further consideration, whether to storm or to intrench the Leaguer. In the midst of these thoughts and resolutions, tydings were brought the Army of the defeat given by Montrosse to our Brethren the Scots, and that he was marched to Edenbrough in pursuit thereof; and that the King was now advanced to Bedford unfollowed, and was expected speedily to raise the siege at Bristol: and this day towards evening, the intelligence was confirmed by Letters from the Committee of both Kingdomes, of the Kings speedy march towards Oxford, and probably to these parts. At the same time, his Excellency had intelli∣gence
that Goring in the West advanced his quarters nea∣rer Chard, and as it was verily thought, intended a conjun∣ction with the King. And now was the Army in a great straight, the whole strength thereof being but sufficient, and scarce that, for its present undertaking before Bristol, utterly unable to check the Enemies conjunction, or attend their motions at any distance from the Leaguer: and though the further proceeding with the siege of Bristol in this conjuncture of affairs seemed very hazardous, yet resolving to abide the utmost, and not to give it over upon great looks, we put our selvs into the best condition we could to receive them, in case either or both should attempt us. Lords day August 31. Captain Moulton, Admiral for the Irish coasts (who was now come into Severne) came from aboard his ship to the General: expressed much readiness to assist in the storming of the City (if it were so determi∣ned) with his Seamen. A debate was then had concerning the storming of Bristol, and what might be done by water with the assistance of the Seamen. Gorings Letters from Exeter to Secretary Nicholas bearing date August 25. were this day intercepted: Wherein he writes, that in three weeks time he will be ready to interrupt Fairfax in his siege before Bristol. Monday September 1. the weather wet and misty, about 12 at noon, Prince Rupert with 1000 Horse and 600 Foot sallied out the sixth time, in a full carere, and came upon our Horse guards with much fierceness; but the Horse instantly came up, and with the assistance of the Foot of Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade, forc'd them to as hasty a retreat. We lost in that skirmish Captain Guilliams, a cap∣tain of Horse, a valiant, faithfull, and religious man; be∣sides that, Colonel Okey, colonel of Dragoons, (it being in the mist) fell amongst the Enemy unawares, and by that accident was taken prisoner. At that time, further adver∣tisements confirmed our former hints, of the Kings ad∣vance from Oxford towards Bristol: Orders were given for
all the colonels to view the Line and Works; and for our souldiers to make Faggots, and all fitting preparati∣ons for a storm. Tuesday, September 2. A Councel of War being called, and all the Colonels present; after a long debate, whether to storm Bristol or no, it was put to the question, and re∣solved in the affirmative; and for the manner of the storm, it was referred to a Committee of the Colonels of the Army, to present in writing to the General the next morn∣ing, to be debated at a general Counsel of War: Accord∣ingly, Wednesday September 3. the manner of the storm was presented in writing to the General, which was to be after this manner. Colonel Welden with his Brigade, consist∣ing of the four Regiments that were at Taunton, (viz. his own, colonel Inglesbies, colonel Fortescues, and colonel Her∣berts Regiments, whose posts were to make good Somer∣setshire side,) was ordered to storm in three places, viz. 200 men in the middle, 200 on each side, as forlorn hopes to begin the storm; 20 Ladders to each place, two men to carry each Ladder, and to have 5 s. a piece; two Serjeants that attended the service of the ladder, to have 20 s. a man; each musquetire that followed the ladder, to carry a fagot, a Serjeant to command them, and to have the same re∣ward: 12 files of men with fire-arms and Pikes to follow the ladders to each place where the storm was to be: those to be commanded, each by a Captain and a Lieutenant; the Lieutenant to go before with five files, the Captain to second him with the other seven files; the 200 men that were appointed to second the storm, to furnish each party of them twenty Pioners, who were to march in their Rear; the 200 men, each to be commanded by a Field-Officer, and the Pioners each by a Serjeant: (those Pioners were to throw down the Line, and make way for the horse;) the Party that was to make good the Line, to possesse the guns, and turn them; A Gentleman of the Ordnance, Gunners and Matrosses, to enter with the Par∣ties; the Draw-bridge to be let down; two Regiments
and a half to storm in after the Foot, if way were made. Much after this manner was the Generals Brigade, under Colonel Montague's command, consisting of the Generals, Col. Montagues, Col. Pickerings, and Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiments, to storm on both sides of Lawfords gate, both to the river Avon, and the lesser river Froom; the bridge over Froom to be made good against horse with Pikes, or to break it down. Colonel Rainsboroughs brigade, consist∣ing of his own, Major-General Skippons, Col. Hammonds, Col. Birches, and Lieu. colonel Prides Regiments, to storm on this side the river Froom, beginning on the right hand of the Sally-port up to Pryors-hill Fort, and to storm the Fort it self, as the main busines: 200. of this brigade to go up in Boats with the Sea-men to storm Waterfort (if it were to be attempted) One regiment of horse, and a regi∣ment of foot, to be moving up and down in the closes before the Royal fort, and to ply hard upon it, to alarm it, with a Field-Officer to command them. The regiment of Dragoons, with two regiments of Horse, to carry ladders with them, and to attempt the Line and Works by Clifton and Washingtons breach. The manner of the storm being thus agreed on (though its probable, some more certain information might change the attempts from one place to another) the Souldiers were drawn out to try their inclination, in whom more courage, joy, and resolution, could not appeare in men. The General, to make good his promise to reward them for the service of Bridgewater, Ordered them immediately to receive 6. s. a man, which by the care of the Commissi∣oners of Parliament was forthwith paid unto them, and which put a great obligation upon the Souldiers. At this councel of war it was also agrred, that a Letter should be written, and subscribed by the General, and all the Officers, to General Leven, to expresse how sensible they were of the losses their Forces had received in Scotland by Montrose; and their willingnes to serve them, if need were, for the setling of their Nation in peace, so soon as
the condition of this Kingdom could spare them. The copy of which Letter followeth in these words. May it please your Excellency, and the rest, honoured Friends, and beloved Brethren, VVE have, not without much grief, received the sad report of your affairs in Scotland; how far God, for his best and secret ends, hath been pleased to suffer the Enemy to prevaile there: And are (we speak unfainedly) not lesse sensible of your evils, then you have been and are of ours, nor then we are of our own. And the greater cause of sympathie have we with you, and the more do our bowels earn towards you, because whatever you now suffer your selves in your own Kingdom, are chiefly occasioned by your assisting us in ours, against the power that was risen up against the Lord himself, and his Anointed ones. Wherefore we cannot forget your labour of love, but thought good at this season, even amongst our many occasions, to let you know, that when the affairs of this Kingdom will possibly dispence with us, the Parlia∣ment allowing, and you accepting of our assistance; We shall be most willing, if need so require, to help and serve you faithfully in your own Kingdom, and to engage our selves to suppresse the Enemy there, and to establish you again in peace. In the mean time we shall endeavour to help you by our prayers, and to wrestle with God for one blessing of God upō both Nations; between whom, besides many other strong relations and engagements, We hope the Vnity of Spirit shall be the surest Bond of Peace. And this, whatever suggestions or jealousies may have been to the contrary, we desire you would believe, as you shall ever really find to proceed from integrity of heart, a sense of your sufferings, and a full purpose to answer any call of God to your assistance; as become Your Christian friends, and servants in the Lord,
Thomas Fairfax. Oliver Cromwel. Thomas Hamond. Henry Ireton. Edward Montague. Richard Fortescue. Richard Inglesby. Iohn Pickering. Hardresse Waller. William Herbert. Robert Hamond. Iames Gray. Thomas Pride. Robert Pye. Thomas Rainsborough. Thomas Sheffield. Charles Fleetwood. Ralph Welden. Iohn Raymond. Leon Wattson. Arthur Evelin. Richard Dean. Thomas Iackson. Iohn Desborough. Christopher Bethel. The report concerning the storm being made unto the Counsell of War, and fully agreed unto: the Canon bas∣kets were ordered to be filled, Seamen and boats sent for. Thursday September 4. The weather that had been so ex∣tream wet before, that many Souldiers and Horses dyed thereby (& with extream hard duty) in that wet season, be∣gan to alter, to the great reviving of the drooping soul∣dier. Our great guns played this day from off the new battery against Pryors fort. Summons was also prepared to be sent to Prince Rupert; and being agreed unto, was sent in accordingly, which runs in these words; For his Highnesse Prince Rupert. Sir, for the service of the Parliament, I have brought their Army before the City of Bristol, and do summon you in their names to render it, with all the Forts belonging to the same, into my hands for their use. Having used this plain language, as the business re∣quires; I wish it may be as effectuall unto you, as it is sa∣tisfactory to my self; that I do a little expostulate with you about the surrender of the same, which I confesse is a way not common, and which I should not have used, but in respect to such a person, and to such a place. I take in∣to consideration your royal birth, and relation to the Crown
of England, your honour, courage, the vertues of your per∣son, and the strength of that place, which you may think your self bound and able to maintain. Sir, the Crown of England is and will be where it ought to be; we fight to maintain it there. But the King misled by evill Counsellours, or through a seduced heart, hath left his Parliament, under God, the best assurance of his Crown and Family: the maintaining of this Schisme is the ground of this unhappy war on your part: and what sad effects it hath produced in the three Kingdomes, is visi∣ble to all men. To maintain the rights of the Crown and Kingdom joyntly; a principal part whereof is, that the King in supream acts is not to be advised by men of whom the Law takes no notice, but by his Parliament, the great Counsel of the Kingdom, in whom (as much as man is capable of) he hears all his people as it were at once advi∣sing him; and in which multitude of Councellours lyes his safety, and his peoples interest: and to see him right in this, hath been the constant and faithfull endeavour of the Parliament, and to bring these wicked instruments to justice that have misled him, is a principal ground of our fighting. Sir, if God makes this clear to you, as he hath to us, I doubt not but he will give you a heart to deliver this place, notwithstanding all the other considerations of honour, courage, fidelity, &c. because of their constancy and use in the present business, depends upon the right or wrongful∣ness of this that hath been said. And if upon such condi∣tion you shall surrender it, and save the losse of blood, or hazard the spoiling of such a City; it would be an occasi∣on glorious in it self, and joyful to us, for restoring of you to the endeared affection to the Parliament, and people of England, the truest friend to your Family it hath in this World. But if this be hid from your eyes; and through your wilfulness, this so great, so famous, and ancient a City, and so full of people, be by your putting us to force the
same, exposed to ruine and the extremities of war (which we yet shall in that case, as much as possible, endeavour to prevent) then I appeal to the righteous God to be judge between you and us, and to require the wrong. And let all England judge whether the burning of its Towns, rui∣ning its Cities, and destroying its people, be a good re∣quital from a person of your Family, which hath had the prayers, tears, purses, and blood of its Parliament and peo∣ple. And (if you look on either as now divided) hath ever had that same party both in Parliaments and amongst the People, most zealous for their assistance and restitution, which you now oppose and seek to destroy, and whose constant grief hath been their desires to serve your Family, have been ever hindred or made fruitless by that same par∣ty about his Majesty, whose counsel you act, and whose interest you pursue in this unnaturall war. I expect your speedy answer to this Summons, with the return of the Bearer this evening, and remain Your Highness humble Servant, Thomas Fairfax. This day, about 2000 well affected countreymen, who with many more, upon treaty with the Lieutenant-General at the beginning of the siege, had engaged their assistance to make good the same; marched with some 36 Colours in the face of Bristol, had quarters assigned them, and kept guards. Two pieces of Ordnance also were sent unto them for their encouragement; it not a little grieving the Enemy within to see the forwardness of the countrey to come to our assistance; for which reason (and to lay an effectual caution against their revolt) it was held fit to make use of those force from the countrey, rather then for any considerable service could be expected from them. The Trumpeter that went in with the Summons was detained all night, during which space no sally was made by the Enemy, nor no alarm given by us. Only the Sea-men and their boats comming up the river to St. Vincents
Rock, was all the motion this day produced. Neither up∣on Friday, September 5. was there any sallying out, but all was quiet on both sides; and the Trumpeter returned from Prince Rupert with an answer to the Generals Sum∣mons, in these words. Sir, I received yours by your Trumpeter, I desire to know, whether you will give me leave to send a Messen∣ger to the King to know his pleasure in it. I rest, Your servant, Rupert. Saturday, September 6. A Trumpeter was sent in with a reply to Prince Ruperts answer, in these words. Sir, your Overture of sending to the King, to know his pleasure, I cannot give way to, because of delay. I con∣fess your answer doth intimate your intention, not to sur∣render without his Majesties consent: yet because it is but implicite, I send again to know a more positive answer from your self, which I desire may be such as may render me capable of approving my self Your Highness humble servant, Tho. Fairfax. This day came 12 Colours more of the well-affected Countrymen, as an addition to the former Forces. The Trumpeter was detained all that day and night: Every thing was prepared for a storm; the General was in the field to that end; the Souldiers had their faggots on their backs, and leaped for joy they might go on; yet about ten at night, for severall reasons it was held fit to give orders to put off the busines till Munday morning two of the clock: and only to alarm the Enemy for that time, as we did often, to amuse them, and keep them waking. Lords day, Septemb. 7. in the forenoon, the Trumpet returned with these Propositions from Prince Rupert.
Sir, Whereas I received your Letter for the delivery of the City, Forts, and Castle of Bristol; and being willing to joyn with you for the sparing of blood, and the preserving of his Majesties subjects: I have upon those grounds, and none other, sent you these following propositions. First, that my self, all Noblemen, Commanders and Souldiers of Horse and Foot, that have served either his Majesty, or Parliament, in England or elswhere; as like∣wise all persons whatsoever, men or women, now resident in this City of Bristol, Castle and Forts thereof, shall have free liberty to march away out of the said city, castle and forts, with their Arms, flying Colours, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Pistols cockt, Swords drawn, Matches lighted at both ends, and as much Powder and Match as they can carry about them, with all their bag and baggage, horses, arms, and other furniture, ten peeces of canon, 50 barrels of powder, Match and Bullet proportionable. 2. That neither mine own person, nor the person of any Nobleman, Commander, Officer, Gentleman, or Souldier, or any other of mine or their Retinues, be search∣ed, molested, or troubled upon what pretence soever; but left to their liberties, to depart, or stay, as it shall be most convenient for them. 3. That none of your Army whatsoever, shall entice or perswade any Officer or Souldier of mine from their Re∣giments or Colours, with any promise of preferment or reward. 4. That all such Officers and Souldiers that are hurt and sick, and cannot now march out of this city, castle, and fort, shall have liberty to stay till they be recovered, and then have safe-conducts to go wheresoever they please, either to any of his Majesties armies or garrisons, or their own houses, where they may live quiet; and that in the interim, those being sick and hurt, may be protected by you, and have civil usage. 5. All prisoners taken on both sides since the beginning of this siege, be forthwith set at liberty.
6. That my self, and all those above mentioned, may not be required to march further in a day, then what con∣veniently we may; and that a day or two of rest be allow∣ed upon our march, if we shall find it requisite; and that we be accommodated with free quarter during our march, and a sufficient convoy to any of the Kings armies or gar∣risons which I shall name, to secure us in our march from all injury or incivility that shall any ways be offered to us. And likewise that there be one hundred and fifty carriage-horses, and forty Wains, with sufficient teams provided for carriages of all sorts. 7. That no person here in these Articles mentioned, shall be in their march, endezvouz or quarters, searched or plundred, upon any pretence whatsoever: And that two Officers be appointed by you, the one for accommo∣dation for free-quarters for Officers, Souldiers, and others, and the other for providing of horses and carriages for our baggage and train. 8. All Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergy-men, Citizens, Resiants, or any other person within this city, suburbs, and liberties thereof, shall at any time when they please, have free liberty to remove themselves, their goods and families, and to dispose of them at their pleasures, according to the known and enacted laws of the land, either to live at their own houses or elswhere; and to enjoy their houses, lands, goods and estates, without any molestation, and to have protection for that purpose; and this article to extend to all those whose estates are sequestred, or not sequestred, and that they may rest quiet at their abodes, and travell freely and safely upon their occasions. And for their better removal, they may have Letters of safe-conduct, with horses and carriages at reasonable rates, upon demand. 9. That all persons above mentioned, may have free liberty to passe to any part beyond the seas, any time with∣in three moneths, as their occasions shall require. 10. That the Lines, Forts, Castle, and other Fortifica∣tions about, or in the city of Bristol, be forthwith slighted,
and the City stated in the same condition it was before the beginning of this unnaturall warre: And that hereafter the Parliament during this war, place no garrison in it. 11. That no Churches be defaced: that the severall members of the foundation of this Cathedral, shall quiet∣ly enjoy their houses, and revenues belonging to their places, and that the Ministers of this city may likewise en∣joy their benefices without trouble. 12. That no Oaths be imposed upon any person now in this city, suburbs and liberties, other then are required by the ancient and enacted lawes of the land. 13. That the Major, Sheriffs, Aldermen and Citizens within this Corporation of the City of Bristol, shall be free in their persons and estates, and enjoy all their priviledges, liberties and immunities in as full and ample manner as formerly at any time they did before the beginning of this war, and that they shall have freedom of trade both by land and sea, paying such duties and customes as formerly they have done to his Majesty: and that no mulct of fine be imposed upon any person mentioned in this article, up∣on any pretence whatsoever, or questioned for any act, or thing done, or committed before the day of our marching forth. That no free-quarters shall be put upon them with∣out their own consents. 14. That all other persons, whose dwellings are in this city, and now absent, may have the full benefit of these articles, as if they were present. 15. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, that have goods in this city, and are now present, or absent, may have liberty at any time within three moneths to dis∣pose of their goods as they please. 16. That there be no plundering or taking away of any mans person, or any part of his estate, under what pre∣tence soever; and that Iustice, according to the known lawes of the land, be administred to all persons within this City by the Civil Magistrate. And for the performance of these articles, I expect such
hostages to be given as I shall accept of, and hereunto I de∣sire your speedy Answer. Sir, By this you may evidently perceive my inclination to peace, and you may be assured that I shall never desire any thing more then the honour of the King, and safety of the Kingdom; and that I may become, Sir Your Servant, Rupert. To which Propositions the General returned this Answer. Sir, I have perused your Propositions, wherein some things are doubtfully exprest; other things inconsistent with the duty I owe to them I serve. Notwithstanding, to the end I may give assurance, that I earnestly desire to save effusion of blood, and the ruine of a City and peo∣ple, that may in time be so serviceable to the Crown and Kingdom. If it please your Highness, that Commissio∣ners may treat between us, concerning the accommoda∣ting of things: I hope to make it evident to the world, that what shall respect the honour of a souldier, due civi∣lity to all men, the good and welfare of the people of that City, both in passing by what is past, and restoring them to the priviledges of all other subjects, and to the immunities of their City, will readily be condiscended un∣to by me: and to the end no time may be lost, I have here inclosed sent you the names of Commissioners, who upon the return of Hostages of equal condition, unto me, shall attend your Highness, sufficiently instructed to con∣clude on my part: Provided the said treaty be ended by nine of the clock this night. And to this I desire your an∣swer within the space of an hour, and remain Your Highnesse humble servant, Tho. Fairfax.
This answer being returned presently after Dinner by the same Trumpeter, he was detained till eight at night; and then he brought this answer from the Prince, or to this effect in writing. That he hoped his Propositions had been such as need∣ed no explanation: yet because some doubts were made, he was willing to have the exceptions set down in writing, and his Highness would return answer. Monday, September 8. The General returned a particular Answer to every Article: which as to the souldiery was very honourable, and could not but be very acceptable to the Citizens: for the offer was most fair to the Citizens to oblige them to us, in case the conditions offered them were but known to them, as we hoped they would. How∣ever we had used means by our Spies to convey the same to them. In the interim all things were prepared for the storm, every Commander viewing his Posts: the Trumpet was detained beyond the time appointed, yet afterwards retur∣ned with a deniall, but not positive. That night was ap∣pointed for the Army to fall on, but upon better conside∣ration it was held fit to put it off to another day, and only to alarm the Enemy. Tuesday, September 9. the Trumpet was sent in again to let the Prince know, that if he did not immediately ex∣cept what was offered, all that had passed should be as no treaty, requiring the Trumpet to return by 12 of the clock, but notwithstanding he was detained till 10 at night, and then returned with an unsatisfactory answer. Whereupon all things on our part were put in readiness for a storm. At 12 of the clock in the night the General went into the field to give order about the drawing out of our men, and ma∣naging the storm for the next morning. The Enemy being left inexcusable for refusing such ho∣nourable conditions as were offered; the whole Army Horse and Foot being set in a posture round the City, to fall on about two in the morning, September 10. the sig∣nall
was given to fall on at one instant round the City and Works, which was by setting on fire a great heap of straw and Faggots on the top of an hill, and the shooting off four great guns against Pryors-fort, from the place where the General was to recide all the time of the storm, which being accordingly given, immediately the storm began round the City, and was terrible to the beholders. Colonel Montague and Colonel Pickering with their Regi∣ments at Lawfords-gate entred speedily, and recovered 22. great guns, and took many prisoners in the Works, Ma∣jor Desborough advancing with the Horse after them, ha∣ving the command of the Generals Regiment, and part of Colonel Graves's. Sir Hardresse Wallers and the Generals Regiments, commanded by Lieut. Colonel ackson, entred between Lawfords-gate and the river Froom: Colonel Rains∣borough and Colonel Hamonds Regiments entred near Pry∣ors-fort: Major-General Skippons, and Colonel Birches en∣tred nearer to the river Froom: and the Regiment com∣manded by Lieut. Colonel Pride was divided; part assign∣ed to the service of Pryors-fort, and the rest to alarm the great Fort, and afterwards they took a little Fort of Welch∣men. The Sea-men that were at first designed to storm by water (the tide failing) assisted in storming the Line and Works. The Horse that entred here, (besides the Forlorn-hope) so valiantly led on by Captain Ireton, were in seve∣ral parties commanded by Major Bethel, Major Alford, and Adjutant-general Flemming, being of Colonel Whalyes, Colonel Riches, and part of Colonel Graves his Regiments. And after the Line was broke down with the Pioneers, and a gap made in the same, our Horse with undaunted courage entred, and within the Line met with a party of the Enemies Horse, put them to a retreat, mortally woun∣ded Colonel Taylor (formerly a Member of the House of Commons) of which wounds he died, and took divers prisoners. This so disheartned their Horse, (perceiving withall our Foot to be master of the Line, and their men beaten off) that they never came on again to give one
charge; but retreated and stood in a body, under the fa∣vour of the great-fort, and Coulstons-fort. In the mean while Pryors-hill-fort very obstinately held out, playing fiercely with great and small shot upon our men for two hours af∣ter the Line was entred; our men all that time in like manner plying them hard with musquet-shot in at the port-holes, untill they brought up Ladders to the Fort; but it being an high Work, many of the Ladders proved too short, through which fault, some that got up were beaten down again. Notwithstanding, this disheartned them not, but up they went again upon greatest danger and disadvantage; some at last creeping in at the port-holes, and others got on the top of the Works, Captain Lagoe, of Lieutenant Colonel Prides Regiment, being the first man that laid hold on the Colours; and in the end we forced the Enemy within to run below into the in∣ner rooms of the Work, hoping to receive quarter; but our souldiers were so little prepared for to shew mercy, by the opposition that they met withall in the storm, and the refusal of quarter when it was offered, that they put to the sword the Commander (one Major Price a Welchman) and almost all the Officers, Souldiers, and others in the Fort, except a very few, which at the entreaty of some of our Officers had their lives spared. By that time the Fort was gained the day began to break. And most happy it was that the storm began so timely, for otherwise had the Enemy had day-light when we first entred, we could not havestood upon any ground to have attempted Pryors-hill∣fort; in regard the Great-fort, and Coulstons-fort on the one side, and the Castle on the otherside, might have cut off our men as fast as they had been drawn up, but being in the dark, they durst not shoot for fear of killing their own men; their Horse (during the storm) being drawn in a body, between the Great-fort and Coulstons-fort. But in the mean time the success on Somersetshire side was not an∣swerable unto this, on this side, our forces there being put to a retreat, though they went on with much courage: the
Works on that side were so high, that the Ladders could not near reach them, and the approach unto the Line of great disadvantage. The Horse designed to enter the line, in case it had pleased God to give us here also successe, were, Lieut. General Cromwels Regiment, commanded by Major Huntington, Colonel Sir Robert Pyes, and Colonel Sheffields, both which Colonels in person attended the storm, being impatient they had not fair opportunity of entering the Line, such was their zeale to the service. And lest during the storm, the Prince (in case he see the Town like to be lost) should endeavour to escape with his Horse; to prevent the same, Commissary General Iretons, Colonel Butlers, and Colonel Fleetwoods Regiments of Horse, were appointed to be in a moving body upon Durdam-Down; that place being the most open way, and most likely for the Prince to escape by: besides part of those Horse did alarm that side of the Line and great-fort, towards Dur∣dam-Down, and Clifton, during the storm, as likewise to se∣cure the Foot; Colonel Okeyes Dragoons alarming Brandol∣hill-fort, and the Line towards Clifton. About 4 houres after the taking Pryors-hill-fort, a Trum∣peter came from the Prince to desire a Parley, which there was reason enough to refuse: but considering the Enemy had fired the City in severall places, in so much as it was probable the whole City would have been consumed, if the fire had gone on; The General sent the Prince word that he would embrace a Parley, provided he caused the fire to be quenched immediately, which was done accordingly, and so the treaty proceeded on, and by seven at night it was concluded of according to these Articles: That his Highnesse Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Officers, Gentlemen, and Souldiers, and all other persons whatsoever, now residing in the City of Bristol, and Castle, and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said City, Castle, and Forts thereof, with Colours, Pikes, and Drums, bag and baggage. The Prince his Highness, all Noble∣men, Gentlemen and Officers in commission, with their
horse and arms, and their Servants with their horses and swords, and common souldiers with their swords; the Prince his Life-guard of horse, with their horse and arms, and two hundred and fifty horse besides to be disposed by the Prince, and his life-guard of Fire-locks with their arms, and each of them one pound of powder, and a proportion of bullet; and that none of the persons who are to march out on this article, shall be plundered, searched or mo∣lested. That such Officers and Souldiers as shall be left sick or wounded in the city, castle or forts, shall have liberty to stay till their recovery, and then have safe-conducts to go to his Maiesty, and in the interim to be protected. That the persons above mentioned, who are to march away, shall have a sufficient Convoy provided for them to any such garrison of the Kings as the Prince shal name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristol; and shall have eight dayes allowed for their march thither, and shall have free quarter by the way, and shall have two Officers to at∣tend them for their accommodation, and 20 waggons for their baggage, if they shall have occasion to use the same. That all the Citizens of Bristol, and all Noblemen, Gen∣tlemen, Clergymen, and all other persons residing in the said city & suburbs of the same, shalbe saved from all plun∣der and violence, and be secured in their persons and e∣states from the violence of the Souldier, and shall enjoy those rights and priviledges which other Subjects enjoy under protection and obedience to the Parliament. That in consideration thereof, the city of Bristol, with the castle, and all other forts and fortifications thereof, and all the ordnance, arms, ammunition, and all other furniture & provisions of war, excepting what is before allowed, shall be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, to morrow, being Thursday the 11. day of this instant September, by one of the clock in the afternoon, without any diminution or im∣bezlement; His Highnesse Prince Rupert then name∣ing to what army or garrison of the Kings he will march.
That none of the persons who are to march out on this agreement, shall plunder, hurt, or spoile the Town, or any person in it, or carry any thing but what is proper∣ly their own. That upon signing these Articles, Colonel Okey, and all persons now in prison in the city of Bristol, the castle or forts of the same, shall immediately be set at liberty. That sufficient Hostages be given to Sir Tho. Fairfax, such as he shall approve, this night, who are to remain with him untill the City be delivered. That neither the Convoy nor Officers sent with the Prince, shall receive any injury in their going or coming back, and shall have seven dayes allowance for their return. That upon the delivering of the Town, sufficient Ho∣stages be given for the performance of the articles on both parts. Signed by us the Commissioners on the behalf of his Highnesse, Prince Rupert; Iohn Mynne. W. Tillyer. W. Valvasour. Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the be∣half of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax. Edw. Montague. Tho. Rainsborough. Iohn Pickering. That which moved the General to give such favourable conditions, was meerly the preservation of the City, which otherwise would have been consumed by fire, if the Ene∣my had been driven to a desperate condition. God, to shew the watchfulnesse of his Providence over the General, and Lieutenant-General, brought them into some danger, and delivered them out of the same graci∣ously, during the time of the Parley: For while they were both sitting on the top of Pryors-hill-Fort, a peece of Ord∣nance was shot thither from the castle, and the bullet grazed upon the Fort within two hands breadth of them, but did them no hurt at all. This day, the well-affected Countrymen of Gloucester∣shire,
to the number of about 3000. with some 30 Colours, appeared, expressing great forwardnesse to serve the Parli∣ament; but the service being over, they returned to their own homes. In this Storm we lost severall Officers, both of Horse and Foot, and had many wounded; Major Bethel was shot at entring the Line, whom I have never occasion to mention, but greatly to his honour: Of this wound he shortly after dyed. Captain Ireton, who led on the Forlorn hope at the storm, was shot with a brace of bullets in the arm (and it broken thereby) but after enduring great tor∣ture and pain for many moneths, he is through Gods bles∣sing happily recovered. Major Cromwel, a valiant and dis∣creet Gentleman, (Major to Colonel Inglesby) was wound∣ed in the Storm, whereof he afterwards dyed. Lieutenant-colonel Purefoy, of col. Fortescues regiment, a very stout man, was slain upon the place. Captain Hill, of Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiment, slain at the storm. Major Reade, Colonel Inglesbies Brother, and divers other Officers wounded. Thursday, Septemb. 11. The Prince, according to the Arti∣cles, marched out of the great Fort, as also many Ladies and persons of quality, who had convoyes appointed them according to agreement. In the Prince his marching out, the General himself attended him about two miles. The Prince, after he was out of the Fort, declared which way he intended to go, and propounded Oxford; whither, ac∣cordingly, he, and all his company were safely convoyed: And because he feared the rising of the Club-men upon him, and not being secure enough in his Convoy, as he concei∣ved; he desired the General to let him have 1000 Arms for his Foot, engaging himself upon his honour, they should injure no man therewith, only to make use of them (if need were) to keep themselves from the violence of the people, and to return them back again: which according∣ly was allowed him, and so many as kept their arms, re∣stored them again; but the greatest part of them in their march running away, many of the arms were lost. Divers
persons of quality that were in the town, desired liberty to stay a while longer, till they could provide themselves with Horses and necessaries to march away, which civility the General did not deny them. A great appearance there was of the Countrey to see the marching away of the Prince, and extreamly cryed they out against the Prince, Give him no Quarter, Give him no Quarter. The goodness of God to the Army during this siege, in preserving them from the sickness was very remarkable: For when the Army was resolved to march from Sherborne to Bristol, one main objection there against it at that time was, least the plague should be thereby brought into the Army, but every mans conscience and judgement being satisfied that the designe was good, and most for the ad∣vantage of the publick, and feazable in their opinion; they resolved to trust God what he would do with them, as to the sickness that was much spread in those parts. And whereas when the Army came before Bristol, as likewise for many weeks before there dyed within the City above an hundred a week of the sickness: nor could we quarter our forces in any town or village but the sickness was in it: Yet during all this time not one Officer or Souldier in our Army dyed of the plague, that we could hear of, but one. What ordnance, arms, ammunition, and provisions we found in the Forts, City, and Castle, I shall give you in the words of Lieutenant-General Cromwels Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons: wherein also the Reader may finde, not only a confirmation, but an amplification of this Story, by some other particulars not yet mentioned; which Letter followeth. It hath pleased the General to give me in charge to re∣present unto you, a particular account of the taking of Bristol, the which I gladly undertake. After the finishing of that service at Sherborne, it was disputed at a counsell of war, whether we should march
into the West, or to Bristol. Amongst other arguments, the leaving so considerable an Enemy at our backs, to march into the heart of the Kingdom; the undoing of the country about Bristol, which was exceedingly harassed by the Prince his being but a fortnight thereabouts; the correspondency he might hold in Wales, the possibility of uniting the ene∣mies forces where they pleased, and especially the drawing to an head the disaffected Club-men of Somerset, Wilts, and Dorset, when once our backs were towards them. These considerations, together with the taking so im∣portant a place, so advantagious for the opening of Trade to London, did sway the ballance, and beget that conclusion. When we came within four miles of the City, we had a new debate, Whether we should endeavour to block it up, or make a regular Siege? The latter being over-ruled, Colonel Welden with his Brigade marched to Pile-hill, on the south side of the city, being within musquet shot there∣of, where in a few dayes they made a good Quarter, over∣looking the city. Upon our advance, the Enemy fired Bedminster, Clifton, and some other Which they did purposely to disaccom∣modate the Army in point of quarter. villages lying neer to the city, and would have fired more, if our unexpected com∣ming had not hindred. The General caused some Horse and Dragoons under Commissary Gen. Ireton, to advance over Avon, to keep in the Enemy on the North side of the town, untill the Foot could come up; And after a day, the General, with Col. Montagues, and Col. Rainsboroughs Brigades, marched over at Kensham to Stapleton, where he quartered that night: The next day, Colonel Montague (having his Post assigned) with his Brigade, was to secure all between the rivers From & Avon, he came up to Lawfords Gate within musquet shot thereof: Col. Rainsboroughs Post was neer to Durdam Down, where the Dragooneers and three Regiments of horse made good a Post upon the Down, between him and the river Avon, on his right hand, and from Colonel Rainsboroughs quarters to From river, on his left. A part of Col. Birch, and Major gen. Skippons regiment were to maintain that Post. These Posts thus setled, our
horse were forced to be upon exceeding great duty, to stand by the Foot, lest the Foot being so weak in all their posts, might receive an affront. And truly herein we were very happy, that we should receive so little losse by Sallies, con∣sidering the paucity of our men to make good the posts, and the strength of the Enemy within: By sallies (which were three or four) I know not that we lost thirty men in all the time of our siege. Of Officers of quality, only Colonel Okey was taken, by mistake, going to the Enemy, thinking they had been friends; and Captain Guilliams slain in a charge. We took Sir Bernard Astley, and killed Sir Richard Crane (one very considerable with the Prince.) We had a Councel of war, concerning the storming of the town, about eight dayes before we took it; and in that there appeared great unwillingnes to the work, through the unseasonablenes of the weather, and other apparent difficulties. Some inducements to bring us thither, was the report of the good affection of the Townsmen to us, but that did not answer expectation. Upon a second considera∣tion, it was over-ruled for a Storm; which no sooner concluded, but difficulties were removed, and all things seemed to favour the designe: And truly, there hath been seldome the like cheerfulnesse to any work like to this, after it was once resolved on. The day and houre of our storm was appointed to be, Wednesday morning the 10th. about one of the clock: We chose to act it so early, be∣cause we hoped thereby to surprise the Enemy; with this resolution also, to avoid confusion, and falling foul one upon another; that when we had recovered the Line, and Forts upon it, we could not advance further untill day. The Generals signal unto storm, was, the firing of straw, and discharging four peece of canon at Priors-hill-fort: the signal was very well perceived of all, and truly the men went on with great resolution, and very presently recovered the Line, making way for the Horse to enter. Colonel Montague, and Colonel Pickering, who stormed at Lawfords-gate, where was a Double-work, well filled with men and
canon, presently entred, and with great resolution beat the Enemy from their works, and possessed their canon: their expedition was such, that they forced the Enemy from their advantages, without any considerable loss to them∣selves: They laid down the bridges for the horse to enter, Major Desborough commanding the horse, who very gal∣lantly seconded the Foot: then, our Foot advanced to the city wals, where they possessed the Gate against the castle∣street, whereinto were put an hundred men, who made it good. Sir Hardresse Waller, with his, and the Generals Regi∣ment, with no lesse resolution entred on the other side of Lawfords-gate, towards Avon river, and put themselves into an immediate conjunction with the rest of the Brigade. During this, Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonel Hamond attempted Priors-hill-fort, and the Line downward towards Froom; and the Major-Generals Regiment being to storm towards Froom river, Colonel Hamond possessed the Line immediately, and beating the Enemy from it, made way for the horse to enter. Colonel Rainsborough, who had the hardest task of all at Priors-hill-fort, attempted it, and fought neer three houres for it, and indeed there was great despair of carrying the place, it being exceeding high, a ladder of thirty rounds scarce reaching the top thereof; but his re∣solution was such, that notwithstanding the inaccessible∣nesse and difficulty, he would not give it over. The Enemy had four peece of canon upon it, which they plyed with round, and case-shot upon our men: his Lieut. colonel Bowen, and others, were two houres at Push of pike, stand∣ing upon the Palizadoes, but could not enter. Colonel Hamond being entred the Line, and captain Ireton with a Forlorn of col. Rich his Regiment, interposing with his horse, between the Enemies horse, and col. Hamond, received a shot with two Pistol bullets, which brake his arm: by which means, the entrance of col. Hamond did storm the Fort on that part which was inward; by which means, col. Rainsborough and col. Hamonds men entred the Fort, and immediately put almost all the men in it to the sword.
And as this was the place of most difficulty, so of most losse to us on that side, and of very great honour to the undertaker. The Horse did second them with great reso∣lution. Both these Colonels do acknowledge, that their interposition between the enemies Horse, and their Foot, was a great means of obtaining of this strong Fort, with∣out which all the rest of the Line to Froom river would have done us little good: And indeed, neither Horse nor Foot would have stood in all that way in any manner of secu∣rity, had not the Fort been taken. Major Bethels were the first horse that entred the Line, who did behave himself gallantly, and was shot in the thigh, had one or two shot more, and had his horse shot under him. Colonel Birch with his men, and the Major-Generals Regiment, entred with very good resolution where their Post was; possessing the Enemies guns, and turning them upon them. By this, all the Line from Priors-hill-fort to Avon (which was a full mile) with all the Forts, Ordnance and Bulwarks, were possessed by us, but one, wherein there were about an hundred and twenty men of the Enemy, which the General summoned, and all the men submitted. The success on Colonel Weldens side did not answer with this. And although the Colonels, and other the Offi∣cers and Souldiers, both horse and foot, testified much re∣solution as could be expected; Col. Welden, Col. Inglesby, Col. Herbert, and the rest of the Colonels and Officers both of horse and foot, doing what could be well looked for from men of honour; Yet what by reason of the height of the Works, which proved higher then report made them, and the shortnes of the Ladders, they were repulsed with the losse of about an hundred men: Col. Fortescue's Lieutenant col. was killed, Major Cromwel dangerously shot, and two of Col. Inglesbies brothers hurt, with some Officers. Being possessed of thus much as hath been related, the Town was fired in three places by the Enemy, which we could not put out; which begat a great trouble in the
General, and us all, fearing to see so famous a City burnt to ashes before our faces. Whilst we were viewing so sad a spectacle, and consulting which way to make further ad∣vantage of our successe; the Prince sent a Trumpet to the General, to desire a Treaty for the surrender of the town: to which the General agreed, and deputed Col. Montague, Col. Rainsborough, and Col. Pickering for that service, authori∣sing them with instructions to treat and conclude the Arti∣cles, which are these inclosed; for performance whereof, Hostages were mutually given. On Thursday, about two of the clock in the afternoon, the Prince marched out, ha∣ving a convoy of two Regiments of horse from us, and making election of Oxford for the place he would go to, which he had liberty to do by his Articles. The Canon which we have taken, are about 140. mounted, about 100 barrels of Powder already come to our hands, with a good quantity of Shot, Ammunition and Arms; we have found already between two and three thousand Muskets. The Royal Fort had Victuals in it for one hundred and fifty men, for 320 dayes, the Castle victu∣alled for neer half so long. The Prince had Foot of the garrison, as the Major of the city informed me, 2500. and about 1000 Horse, besides the Trained bands of the town, and Auxiliaries, 1000. some say 1500. I heare but of one man that hath died of the Plague in all our army, although we have quartered amongst, and in the midst of infected persons and places: We had not killed of ours in this storm, nor all this siege, two hundred men. Thus I have given you a true, but not a full account of this great busines; wherein he that runs, may reade, that all this is none other than the work of GOD: he must be a very Atheist that doth not acknowledge it. It may be thought that some praises are due to these gallant Men, of whose valour so much mention is made: Their humble suit to you, and all that have an interest in this blessing, is, That in the remembrance of Gods praises, they may be forgotten. It is their joy, that they are Instru∣ments
of Gods glory, and their Countries good; It is their honour, that God vouchsafes to use them. Sir, they that have been imployed in this service, know, that Faith and Prayer obtained this City for you: I do not say ours only, but of the people of God with you, and all England over, who have wrastled with God for a blessing in this very thing. Our desires are, that God may be glorified by the same spirit of faith by which we ask all our sufficiencie, and have received it; It is meet that He have all the praise. Presbyterians, Independents, all have here the same spirit of faith and prayer, the same presence and answer; they agree here, have no names of difference; pitty it is it should be otherwise any where. All that believe, have the reall Vnity, which is most glorious, because inward and spirituall, in the body, and to the head. For being united in Forms, commonly called Vniformity, every Christian will, for peace sake, study and do as far as Conscience will permit. And for Brethren, in things of the mind, we look for no com∣pulsion, but that of Light and Reason; in other things God hath put the sword in the Parliaments hands, for the terror of evil dors, and the praise of them that do well. If any plead exemption from it, he knowes not the Gospel: If any would wring it out of your hands, or steal it from you under what pretence soever, I hope they shall do it without effect. That God will maintain it in your hands, and di∣rect you in the use thereof, is the prayer of Your humble Servant, Oliver Cromwel. Bristol, Sept. 14. 1645. This night the General removed from his quarter at the Farm-house, where he had been all the time of the siege extreamly ill accommodated by reason of the littlenes of the house, which yet he contented himself withall, in re∣gard it lay so conveniently upon any Alarm. But this night, He, and the Lieutenant-General removed, and went to Bristol; which they found so unlike what it had been formerly, in its flourishing condition, that it looked now
more like a Prison then a City, and the people more like Prisoners then Citizens; being brought so low with Taxations, so poor in Habit, and so dejected in counte∣nance; the Streets so noysome, and the Houses so nasty, as that they were unfit to receive Friends, or Free-men, till they were cleansed. Besides the publique mercy to the Kingdome, in the Re∣covery of Bristol; The Vindication of Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES (once Governour thereof) seems to have been also particularly designed by Providence. The General, with the Lieutenant-General (sitting upon Priors-hill-Fort after the Storm) and most of the chief Officers of the Army, upon a view of the place; comparing the present strength of it, with what it was when he delivered it, and other circum∣stances; freely expressed themselves, as men abundantly satis∣fied, concerning the hard misfortune that befell that Noble Gentleman. And indeed, whosoever shall compare both the Defences together, according to this ensuing Paralel, must needs confesse, That if Prince Rupert deserved to be ac∣quitted, (as he was by the King, and a Councel of war, at Newark) the former Defence deserves to be commended: For; Prince Rupert, in this latter, had the advantage of the former, 1. In the Line, which was so much stronger (then the former) by the addition of a Fort-Royall, & many other Works. 2. In the numbers of Men for defence, which were Prince Rupert had be∣tween 4 and 5000 horse and foot; Col. Fiennes; but 1700. of all sorts. more then double, & 1200 of them Horse, (wch nūber of horse was a thing of great consider∣ation in so large a line) 3. In a place of great strength for Viz. the Fort-Royal: which though it be twice rec∣koned in this Paralel, yet it is in a different respect; viz. here, as a place of retreat; but above, as it did flanker the Line, and so strengthen it much. Retreat. And lastly (which is as consider∣able as any thing) in a probability of Relief, the This appeareth in Pr. Ruperts Apologie; and that the designe of his Relief, was laid very probably to have succeeded. King having promised it, and being resolved to have performed it in his own person, with all the force he could have drawn together. Yet he, in the defence, slew not 200. (in all) of our Men; Embraced a Parley, so soone as ever the Town was entred; and concluded the Surrender, upon no better Articles than the former Governour had.
On the other hand, Col. Fiennes (in the former) tho he had a Prince Rupert, in his printed Declaration and A∣pologie, alleadgeth, That the Line he had to defend (being about 4 miles in compaise) was generally but 3 foot thick, and 5 foot high; the Graft commonly but 6 foot broad, & where it was widest but 7. But 4 footdeep, & wher it was depest, but 5. And that in the opinion of all his Colonels & Officers, it was not tenable upon a brisk and vigorous assault. Line (full as large,) lesse strong & te∣nable, and in that part where the enemy entred, his Works not finished, nor half so many to defend thē; tho the Royal fort was not then built, nor any thing but a weak & rotten Castle to retreat unto, which by the judgment of the The Officers exprest themselves so. Officers of this army, could not hold out 48 houres against a strong Battery, much less till Relief could reach it, whereof there was no likelihood; nay, the Col. Fienes sending to the Earl of Essex for re∣lief, his Excellency wrote to the Lord ay, That the Army was not in case to relieve him, nor (He thought) ever would. Governor having sent severall times, received no answer; but by intelli∣gence wch he had, he understood He could expect no relief. Yet (to the utmost improving the means he had) 1. He slew 1200. of the Enemy (among whom divers prime Officers & Commanders.) 2. Disputed the Suburbs a long while after the Line was entred. 3. Entertained no Parley, till all endeavours that could be used (by promise of money, or other∣wise) were not able to get 120 men together. And at length purchased as good Conditions as the latter, and (in some As may appear by com∣paring the Articles together. substantiall points) better. However all wise men would have saved me this pains; (The sense of the Honourable House of Commons, im∣mediately upon the reduction of Bristol, calling Col. Fiennes to his former state of Honour and imployment; being be∣yond all that can be said.) Yet these Considerations are not in vain; for that they serve as well to the commendation of the goodnesse of God, in the assisting and bearing forth this Army through this undertaking; Which, by how much the ods between the means & preparations for this latter defence were beyond the former, carried so much the greater de∣monstration of the more immediate presence of GOD, and his power with our Army (in this Reduction of Bristol) than the Enemy could boast of, when He took it.
ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY. PART. III. CHAP. I. The Devizes and Laicock-house surrendred: Berkley-Castle, after in part stormed, surrendred: With an account of the Counsels that did lead these actions. THE face of GOD now shining again upon Bristol, and the Generall having through the improvement of a short stay there, viewed the severall Forts a∣bout the City, and given order con∣cerning the setling thereof in a safe con∣dition: A councel of war called. On Saturday, September 13. A Councell of War was called, to advise what was fit next to be done (so agreeable was action to this Army) whe∣ther to pursue the motion made after the taking of Sher∣borne, to march presently for the relief of Plimouth, and fur∣ther parts of the West, or to clear those garrisons that did interpose between the West and London; which latter was very necessary, for that if those garrisons were not reduced,
The obstruct∣ing garrisons between the West and London resol∣ved to be at∣tempted. they would hinder correspondency between London and the Army, except at high rates, of very excessive trouble and charge to the Army, by convoyes upon every occasion. This was a businesse of great undertaking, yet (after all things weighed) it was resolved for the present to attempt the taking in of Berkley, and the Devizes, as those that were the nearest; deferring further resolution, as to the rest, to the opportunities providence should administer. Colonel Rainsborough, for that purpose, was commanded to march with a Brigade (consisting of Major Gen. Skippons, Colonel Herberts, and Lieut. Col. Prides Regiments) for the taking in of Berkley-Castle (already blocked up by Horse) the on∣ly garrison considerable left in the County of Gloucester, in∣terrupting the passage between Bristol and Gloucester. About this time was the Castle of Car∣diffe (with 16. pieces of ord∣nance, and 400 arms) reduced. Lieu∣tenant Gen. Cromwell was designed by the Generall with a∣nother Brigade (consisting of Col. Montagues, Col. Picker∣ings, Sir Hardresse, Wallers, and Col. Hamonds Regiments) for the taking in of the Devizes, and Laicock-House. On Tuesday following, the Generall having but the over∣night newly finished the whole business for the setlement of Bristol, & dismissing of those of the enemy that were to be then gone (except some few persons of quality, who had leave to stay a while in the Town) removed his quar∣ters that night to a friends house, whilest the Army march∣ed according to former orders. Wednesday, September 17. His Excellency marched to Bath, and rested there some four or five dayes, for the bet∣ter recovery of his health (as was need) having been much wearied out, and spent with that great business of Bristol. Lieut. generall Cromwel set down before the Dvizes. During which time, Lieut. Gen. Cromwel sate down be∣fore the Castle of the Devizes, which commanded the County of Wilts, and was placed in the road of traffique between the West and London: It was a place of great strength, having been an old fortification, raised on a huge Mount of earth; the Governour Sir Charles Llyod: a good Ingineer had added to the strength of its naturall scituati∣on, what Art could do, having cut out of the main Earth
severall Works commanding one another, and so strong, that no Canon could pierce them; besides, that being pallizadoed, and stockadoed in most places, it was a mat∣ter of extream difficulty to storm it: Notwithstanding, the Lieutenant-General (not discouraged thereat) sate down close to it, and having conveniently planted his Ca∣non and Mortar-pieces; on Sunday at one of the clock he sent in to summon the castle. The Governour sent forth word, That the King his Master put him in trust, and he desired ten dayes time to send to him, in the mean time he would keep it for the King. The Lieutenant-General wished him not to let slip such an opportunity: or if he were otherwise resolved, in much civility, he gave leave to send forth his Lady and such other Gentlewomen that were in the Castle; and further let him know, that none were more fitting to keep strong holds, Forts, and Castles, then the Parliament for the use of the King: whereupon the Governour re∣turned, Win it and weare it. Upon receipt of this answer, the Lieutenant-General having put all things in readiness for a storm, gave command to the Canoneers presently to give fire, and also to play the Mortar-pieces, which was accordingly done, and some of the Granadoes breaking in the midst of the castle (being open above) kill'd severall of their men, and much endangered the blowing up of the Magazine; which so startled the Enemy, that on Monday about eight of the clock in the morning, the Go∣vernour sent forth for a Parley, and sent out two of his Captains, Captain Challinor, and Captain Garroway. The Lieutenant-general sent two Captains into them, and about eleven of the clock the Lieutenant-general sent them in these Propositions following, viz. 1. That all Commanders and Gentlemen should march to any garrison the King had within thirty miles, with their horse and armes; and that all private souldiers should march away leaving their armes behinde them, but not to go to the same garrisons the Commanders marched to.
2. That all Gentlemen in the Castle should have liberty to go to their own homes or beyond the seas. 3. That all souldiers that have been formerly in the Parliament service, should be delivered up to the Lieutenant-general; and all souldiers that would take up armes in the Parliament service should be entertained. To these Propositions the Lieutenant-general desired his speedy answer, that so they might march away by four of the clock in the afternoon, to which the Governour agreed (saving in point of time) and delivered up the castle on the morrow at ten of the clock, at which time they marched out. The Devizes surrendred. The Governour and his Officers with their arms, and his foot without arms, having the liberty of three carriages, and a safe Convoy to Worcester. The num∣ber of souldiers that marched out were about 400. In the castle was found a very plentifull Magazine of victuals, and good store of ammunition, and two piece of ord∣nance. The Devizes thus happily reduced, the General march∣ed thither Tuesday 23. from Bath, and the Enemy marched out the same day towards Worcester, according to the Arti∣cles. And as the wheels of gracious Providence were now upon a nimble motion, so God was pleased to carry forth the Army to a most full complyance with the same. Col Pickering sent to reduce Laicock-house. No sooner was the Devizes gained, but the same day colonel Pickering, with his own and two Regiments more, was commanded to Laicock-house, a garrison of the Enemies, kept by col. Bovile; who considering, that neither Bristol nor the Devizes were able to hold out against our force, did easily resolve, that a Poore house was much lesse able; (though in truth there were good works about it) accor∣dingly therefore upon the first Summons, he came to con∣ditions of surrender, and had honourable tearms granted him; upon which he marcht out the next day towards Excester, viz. himself, his Officers, and Souldiers, with their arms and baggage; the General himself adding to the so∣lemnity by his own presence, who went from the Devi∣zes
on purpose to view the garrison, and see the Enemy march forth. Barkley-Castle stormed by col. Rainsbo∣rough. The same day col. Rainsborough with his forces before Barkley-castle stormed the out-works and the Church, which were the main strength of the castle, with Scaling-ladders, performing the service with so much resolution & gallantry (both Officers and Souldiers) as quickly made them masters of the place; wherein were taken 90 priso∣ners, besides 40 put to the sword, amongst whom were a Major and a Captain. This was such a terror and discou∣ragement unto the Enemy within the castle, to see the re∣solution of our souldiers, and the execution done upon theirs in the Church and out-works, that the Governour, Sir Charles Lucas (who returned answer to the first Sum∣mons, That he would eat horse-flesh before he would yield, and mans flesh when that was done: and upon a second Summons sent as peremptory an answer;) yet now perceiving the planting of our ordnance against him upon his own Works (which we had newly gained) whereby we had a great advantage to play into the castle; and sen∣sible what he was to expect if he came not to present terms, was glad to sound a Parley, which was yielded to, and Commissioners sent out to treat, and the Castle was surrendred upon these Articles. Barkley-castle surrendred. The souldiers to march out without arms; the Governour, Sir Charler Lucas, with three horses and arms, and not above 50. l. in money; eve∣ry Field-officer with two horses, and but 5. l. in money; Foot-captains with swords, but no horse; the souldiers with not above 5 s. a piece. This Castle was a place of great strength, well victual∣led and manned; the Governour thereof Sir Charles Lucas, a souldier of reputation and valour, confident to hold it out against any force should appear before it that Winter. There were taken in it eleven pieces of Ordnance, pro∣vision of victuals for six moneths (afterwards sold for a good value, for the use of the souldiery:) In this service we lost only one Captain, not many common souldiers
(though many wounded:) colonel Herbert, as he valiant∣ly led on his men to storm, was shot through the Hat (narrowly escaping a greater danger:) there marched out of the castle above 500 Horse and Foot: the County of Gloucester not a little satisfied with the reducing of this Ca∣stle, being a totall clearing of their County. How this high hand of God lifted up, and stretched forth against the Enemy, wrought upon them, I shall give you in some instances. A Lieut. col. of Sir Charles Lucas's, when he saw the garrison was surrended, could not hold, but brake forth and swore to col. Rainsborough, He could be content to go to Hell, and be a Major there to plague the Roundheads; advancing in his hellish Dia∣lect in this latter speech, but proportionable to his Essay in a former speech after the first Summons, when he said, God dam him he would go quick into hell, rather then yield the Castle to the Roundheads. Another of their Of∣ficers in the same castle said to a captain of Horse in our Army, He thought God was turned Roundhead, the Kings forces prospered so ill. These ought to be the greater engagements upon us, to sanctifie that name of God which he proclaimes a∣mongst us in these successes: from whom else shall God have his glory? CHAP. II. The counsels whereby the Army steered their course imparted. The Redu∣ction of Winchester. A counsel of war (the fore∣mentioned garrisons re∣duced) advi∣sing of the next action. AND now came into consideration, in what way for the advantage of the kingdoms service, the Army should be disposed of, as to the ensuing Winter (it being then the latter end of September) the taking in of some of these garrisons of the Enemies, viz. Winchester, Basing, Dennington, Farrington, and Wallingford, which to∣gether with Oxford, like Vipers in the bowels infested the
midland parts, seemed with much reason to invite the Army (especially being so neer them) to attempt them; which if, by Gods blessing, they should happily succeed in, they might (to the best advantage) make their winter quar∣ters about Oxford, whereby that garrison being straitned, would probably fall into their hands by the Spring, for want of provisions. On the other hand, many a sad look towards the West (where the most considerable visible strength of the Enemy then was; which if let alone all winter, might possibly prove very formidable in the Spring, and in the mean while overpowering Major gen. Massies forces then about Taunton, might advance their quarters into the midland parts, and make all our new conquests unserviceable to the Kingdom) did strongly in∣cline the Army that way; but that which most of all distracted them, was, that they were not able at once to grasp both the West and Midland parts (as was their great ambition) yet resolving to assay what they were able to both; Their resolu∣tion. Lieutenant-General Cromwel was sent with the fore∣mentioned Brigade, and three Regiments of horse, for the taking in of the garisons of Winchester and Basing, which was the rather attempted, because it conduced much to the absolute freeing of a passage from London into the VVest, whither the General with the rest of the army, according to a resolution then taken, was immediately marching. About this time was Far∣leigh castle in Somersetshire surrendred to the Parlia∣ment. And about the same time, Sandal castle in Yorkshire was surren∣dred to col. Overton. Col. Rainsborough his work at Berkley-castle being done, was commanded to advance to the General, who resolved to halt with his Forces about Warminster, till he came up to him. Accordingly, Saturday, 27. the General marched to Warminster with the Army, and there continued till Tuesday the 30. On which day the Army marched towards Shafts∣bury, and were mustered in their march; the General con∣tinuing still at Warminster, choosing so to do, not only for the forementioned reason, but also till he might heare that the treasure for the Army was at least on the way from London, the Souldiers being so out of money, that they were all inforced to take free quarter, which they had not done
till then. During his Excellencies abode at Warminster, the good news of the Kings forcs being routed at Routon-Heath neer West-Chester, by Major-General Pointz, was brought to the Army. Wednesday, Octob. 1. the Army marched to Middleton, and thence the next day to Dorchester, and thence, Saturday Octob. 4. to Beauminster, where they rested the Lords day, (only the Train that was in the Rear, marched that day up to the Van of the Army) and thence on Monday to Chard; About this time was Chep∣flow town and castle in Mon∣mouthshire re∣duced by Col. Morgan gover∣nour of Gloucester. And on Wednesday the 8. the General went to Lyme, where he was honourably entertained by the Governour, Col. Cely, and stayed there that night. It was wonderfull to think, considering the scituation of the place, & the mean∣nesse of the Works about it, that it should possibly hold out as it did, against such a force as laid siege unto it. This day passed not without bringing forth some good tidings to the Army; for news came this morning to the General, that Winchester was agreed to be surrendred to Lieutenant-General Cromwel: the Terms whereupon, and other particulars concerning the same, I shall present you withall in the words of the Lieut. Generals Letter, and Mr. Peters his Relation made to the House of Commons. The Letter followes: SIR, Lieutenant-gen Cromwels Letter of the taking of Winchester. I came to Winchester on the Lords day, being the 28. of Sep∣tember, with Cololonel Pickering, commanding his own, Colonel Montagues, and Sir Hardresse Wallers regiments. After some dispute with the Governour, we entred the Town; I summoned the Castle, was denied, whereupon we fell to prepare our Batteries, which we could not perfect (some of our Guns being out of order) untill Friday following. Our Battery was six guns, which being finished, after once firing of them round, I sent him a second Sum∣mons for a Treaty, which they refused, whereupon we went on with our work, and made a breach in the wall neer the Black tower, which after about 200 shot, we thought stormable, and purposed on Monday morning to attempt it. On Sonday night about ten of the clock, the Governour beat a Parley, desiring to treat: I agreed
unto it, and sent Col. Hamond, and Major Harrison in to him, who agreed unto these inclosed Articles. Sir, This is the addition of another mercy; You see, God is not weary in doing you good; I confesse, Sir, his favour to you is as visible, when he comes by his power upon the hearts of his enemies, making them quit places of strength to you, as when he gives cou∣rage to your Souldiers to attempt hard things. His goodnesse is, in this, much to be acknowledged; for the Castle was well manned, with 680 Horse and Foot, there being neer 200 Gentlemen, Of∣ficers and their servants; Well victualled, with 1500 weight of Cheese, very great store of Wheat and Beere, neer 20 Barrels of Powder, 7 Peeces of Canon, the Works were exceeding good and strong. It is very likely it would have cost much blood to have gain∣ed it by storm; we have not lost 12 men. This is repeated to you, that God may have all the praise, for it is all his due. Sir, I rest, Your most humble servant, Oliver Cromwel. Mr. Peters his Report made to the House of Commons, containing some other particulars concerning Winchester. Mr. Peters his relation of the taking of Win∣chester. My commands (from the Lieutenant-General) are to give this honourable House a further Narrative of the Castle of VVinchester, being upon the place, and a spectator of Gods good hand in the whole work; as also to present his humble request to the House in some particulars. And before I speak to either of them, if Gratitude it self were not sometimes unseasonable, I would in my own name, and in the name of many thousands, return this honour∣able House most humble thanks for our Lieutenant-General, in that you suffer with patience the vacancie of his place in this House: My wish is, that his spirit, and that pub∣lique English spirit of Hampden, Pym, and Strowd, may be doubled upon your new elected Members. For our Lieutenant-General, this I may say: That Judge∣ment and Affections are in him striving for the mastery: I have rarely seen such heights, and depths concent in one
man, That when I look upon the two Chiefs of our Army, I remember Gustavus Adolphus, and Oxenstern, and I wish that our hopes in these may not be so short∣lived, as the Germans hopes in them were. More I might say concerning him that sent me, who is so far above the world, and lives so little upon the States pay, and minds himself so little; but that he hath enjoyned silence to all his friends, in any thing that might turn to his own praise. For the Castle of Winchester, we begun our Batteries upon Saturday morning, which wrought so effectually, that a breach, wherein 30 men might go abrest, was made; the Enemy sallied out, and beat our men from our guns, which were soon recovered again: We plaid then with our granadoes from our Mortar-peeces, with the best effect that I have seen, which brake down the Mansion house in many places, cut off a Commissioner of theirs by the thighs, the most austere and wretched Instrument in that country, and at last blew up their Flag of defiance into the aire, and tore the Pinacle in peeces upon which it stood. Summons being sent as we entred upon this work, was refused by the Lord Ogle their Governour: And an∣other Summons God sent them, in the middle of their Battery; his Lady, to whom our Lieutenant gen. had given leave to come forth, and had gone some miles out of the town, died, by whom the Governour had during her life 1000. l. a yeare, now lost by her death. The chiefest street of the Town the Enemy played up∣on, whereby divers passenges were wounded, and some killed, in which street my quartrs were, I have that cause to blesse God for my preservation. The Lords day we spent in preaching and prayer, whilst our gunners were battering, and at 8 a clock at night we received a Letter from the Governour for a treaty, which I have brought with me. Colonel Hammond, and Major Harrison were sent into the Castle on our party. Sir Edward
Ford, and a Major of theirs were sent to us; The whole night was spent about it, our men standing upon some speciall terms with them, and very desirous were we to accept Sir Edward Ford, and Bennet, to be our prisoners. By eight of the clock on Monday morning, it was agreed they should depart out of the Castle at five of the clock, according to these Articles. Articles agreed upon, the 5. of October 1645. Between the Right honorable VVilliam Viscount Ogle, governour of the garrison of the Castle of VVinton, of the one part; and Col. Robert Hammond, and Major Thomas Harrison, on the behalf of Lieutenant gen. Oliver Cromwel, of the other party, for the surrender of the said Castle. 1. That the Lord Ogle shall deliver up the Castle of Win∣chester, with all the arms, ordnance, ammunition, provision, and all function of war whatsoever, without any imbezelment, waste or spoile, unto that Officer or Officers as shall be thereunto appointed by the said Lieutenant gen. to morrow, being Monday the 6. of October, by three of the clock after Noon. 2. That the said Lord Ogle shall have his own Colours, and one hundred fixt Arms for his guard, and one hundred men to carry them. 3. That the Lord Ogle, and all the Officers in commission, shall march out of the said castle with their own horse and arms, and their own proper goods unto Woodstock, whither they shall be safely conveyed. 4.That there shall be allowed to the Lord Ogle and his Officers six carriages for the transporting of their goods aforesaid. 5. That all Officers, Gentlemen, Clergie-men, and inhabitants of the city of Winchester, and all Officers within the guards (desiring it) may be at their own time, free from all violence and injury of the Parliaments forces. 6. That the Lord Ogle shall give sufficient hostages for the performance of the Articles here constituted on their part to be per∣formed, also for the safe return of the Convoy.
These Articles being concluded on, I was forth with sent into the Castle to take a view of it before my depar∣ture, where I found a peece of ground improved to the best advantage; for when we were entred by battery, we had 6. distinct works, and a Draw-bridge to passe through, so that it was doubtlesse a very strong peece, and well appointed, as may appeare by this ensuing note of the ammunition and provisions we found there. Viz. 7 Peeces of Ordnance. 17 Barrels of Powder. 2000 Weight of Mus∣quet bullet. 800 Weight of Match. 38 Hogsheads of Beefe and Pork. 15000 Weight of Cheese. 800 Pound of Butter. 140 Quarters of Wheat and Meale. 3 Hogsheads of French wine. 10 Quarters of Salt. 20 Bushel of Oatmeale. 70 Dosen of Candles. 30 Load of Wood. 40 Quarters of Charcoale. 30 Bushels of Seacoale. 14 Sheep. 4 Quarters of Fresh beef. 7000 Weight of Biskets. 112 hogsheads of strong beer. The Castle was manned with 700 men, divers of them Reformadoes; the chief men I saw there, were, Viscount Ogle their governour, Sir Iohn Pawlet an old souldier, Sir VVilliam Courtney, and Colonel Bennet, also Doctor Curle the Bishop of Winchester, who came forth to our quar∣ters in the morning, with whom I spent an houre or two, who with tears and much importunity desired the Lieut. Generals favour to excuse his not accepting the offer that he made unto him in his first entring the town; He desired of me a guard to his lodging, lest the Souldiers should use violence to him and his Chaplain, who were in their long Gowns and Cassocks, and he was accord∣ingly safely conveyed home. I do verily believe that they will hardly bring to VVoodstock 200 men. It did much affect us to see what an enemy we had to deal with, who themselves being Judges, could not choose but say, that
our God is not as their God. And this is the nineteenth garri∣son son hath been taken this summer, through Gods good∣nesse; and he that will not take his share in this common joy, is either stupid, or envious. The fruits of what is already done, are great; amongst the rest, what I saw upon the way, all sorts travelling upon their occasions freely to their own homes, with Carriages and Wains, many Innes filled with guests, the former face of things returning upon us in several kinds; yea, now we may ride with safety from Dover to the middle of Devonshire. Lieutenant gen. Cromwel stayed but one day, after Sir VVilliam Ogle the governour of Winchester, and the rest of the garrison were marched out to Oxford, to settle that place; but immediately took his march towards Basing, for the reducing thereof. A remarkable piece of justice by way of sa∣tisfaction to the Enemy. Thus far Mr. Peters. But before I leave VVinchester, I cannot but observe a remarkable peece of Justice done in satisfaction to the Enemy, for some injury they had su∣stained at their marching forth of VVinchester, by Plunder, contrary to the Articles, which was done by some Troop∣ers; who being apprehended, were afterwards tried by a Councel of war, and condemned to die; and after lots cast for their lives (being six of them) he whose lot it was to die, was brought to the place of execution, where with a demonstration of great penitence (so far as the be∣holders did judge) he suffered death for his offence; which exemplary justice made a good impression upon the Soul∣diery: The other five were sent with a Convoy to Oxford, (together with a full account of this proceeding, to the Governour there, Sir Tho. Glemham) to be delivered over as prisoners, and to be put to death, or otherwise punished as he should think fit: Which was so well received by the Enemy (to see so much right was done them) that Sir Thomas Glemham returned the prisoners back again, with an acknowledgement of the Lieutenant-Generals Noblenesse, in being so tender in breach of Articles.
CHAP. III. The several Motions and Actions of the Army unto Tiverton. The stor∣ming and taking of Bazing-house fully related. BUt now to return to his Excellency, who on Thurs∣day the ninth, came back from Lyme to Chard, where he received intelligence, that Goring intended to break through with his Horse: whereupon a Letter was sent to the Committees of the county of Somerset, to have the countrey in a readinesse to rise (if occasion should be) for the making good of the Passes. The General rested at Chard, till the treasure (so long ex∣pected) was come up thither, which was on Saturday the 11. and the Army was paid that night, having been ever since the taking of Bristol without pay. On Monday 13. The Army being paid, part of it ad∣vanced to Axminster, on which day a Captain of the Lord Gorings came in to us with a Troop of Horse, as also one Colonel Connocke, late Governour of Tiverton. But for this latter, the General understanding of his cruel carriage to the countrey (whilest he was Governour of that place) in torturing people, by burning them with matches, and otherwise cruelly using both men and women (in such manner as is not fit to be mentioned) he was required to depart the quarters of the Parliament, or to be proceeded against as a Spy. Goring inten∣ding to break through, expe∣cted by our horse. This day his Excellency had further intelligence by his Spies, That the Lord Goring intended to break through with the Horse, or beat up our quarters that night; and that he had advanced most of them on this side the River Ex, for that end, (being himself at Poltimore with about 1500 horse) whereupon Commissary-General Ireton gave strict orders for the keeping of the guards, and also that all the horsemen that were in quarters should have their hor∣ses ready sadled, in case there should be an alarm: and our
caution in this point was no more then needed; for this night, the Lord Goring, Lord Wentworth, Lord Miller, and most of their bravest Cavalrie, came from their quarters neer Excester, & passed through Hunniton about 12 at night. and so came on to Black-Down, Goring by some advan∣tage surprising our guards. and knowing the country well, by an obscure and unusuall way passed our Out-guards (the extreme darknes of the night favouring them) and got between the Main guard and our Quarters, and falling into some of the Dragoon and Foot quarters, took about 40 Foot, and 20 Dragoons, and returned immedi∣ately, fearing lest the Army should have taken the alarm; but so nimble were they in that action, that they were gone before the alarm was received. Our Army lying in the field, to pre∣vent the Ene∣my breaking through. Tuesday, the 14. The General and the Army marched from Chard to Hunniton, by the way of Axminster; and that night, our Horse, and much of the Foot lay in the field a∣bout Hunniton, lest the Enemy should break through (we pressing so hard upon them) to joyn with the King, which was (in the opinion of the General, and all understanding men) the best game they had to play, and most disadvan∣tagious to our proceedings; as that, that would have en∣abled the King to make incursions into the Eastern Associa∣tion, and divert a great part of this Army, who desired to compleat the service of reducing the West, before they re∣turned. But the Enemy attempted it not that night; and had they not (upon advertisement that our Forces were come to Hunniton) removed their quarters from St. Mary Autree, Poultimour (and those parts) beyond the river Ex, (as they did) they had certainly been beaten up, (Parties being sent out for that purpose.) Our army ad∣vancing, and the Enemy gi∣ving way. Wednesday, 15. The General and the Army marched from Hunniton to Colampton, where the Lord Miller was with 300 Dragoons, and some Horse, who upon our approach quit their Barracadoes and the Town, left their Turn-pikes standing; strong Parties pursued them, and took some prisoners, who confessed their Party were gone towards Tiverton. Whereupon a Councel of war was that night
called, Major gen. Massey sent to besiege Triverton-castle. and Major-General Massey was desired to go with his Horse, and the Brigade of Foot under the command of Colonel Welden, to possesse the Town of Tiverton, and be∣siege the Castle, which accordingly he did. About this time, Pr. Rupert and Maurice, as they were going from Banbury & those parts (with a convoy of Ban∣bury horse) to the King at Newark (in the mood) to take their leave of him, were set upon by Col. Rossiter, and sore put to it. Thursday, Octob. 16. There came in some Officers from the Enemy; a Lieutenant-colonel, and two Captains, who declared their unhappiness to be engaged on that side, desiring a Passe to go to the Lord Inchequine, to serve in Ireland against the Rebels. The enemy quitting Broad∣nix, upon the approach of our army. The General went this day to Broadnix, where the Ene∣my kept a guard with a Commanded party of foot, and some horse; but upon the approach of our forces, they quit the town, and the General returned back to Columpton, The enemies notorious brags to keep up their repu∣tation, com∣ming to no∣thing. where information was given by the Inhabitants of good repute, that the Enemy had boasted the day before our comming into the town, That Goring had cut Fairfax in peeces neer Chard, and routed his whole Army; took drink upon it, and wished it might be their poyson, if it were not true. This course the Enemy took, to make their party believe they were great conquerours; whereas in∣deed what they did was very inconsiderable, and as to the reducing their affairs into any tolerable condition, scarce worth the mentioning. And on this occasion may be noted (though it might be mentioned in a more fit place afterward) that this small businesse neer Chard was the only affront the Enemy put upon us during the Armies being in the West of England; But with what iterated af∣fronts our Forces have recompenced them in their quar∣ters, the action at Bovy-Tracy, and divers other places here∣after mentioned, will manifest. Friday, Octob. 17. A Councel of war was called for advise, whether to march towards Excester, and so towards Pli∣mouth, or to take in Tiverton, in regard it lay upon a Passe, and might much annoy the Army to leave it behind them unreduced, or at least unblockt up; and if once taken, might be a Magazine, and place of strength and conveni∣ency,
encie, either to secure any thing in, or to retreat unto upon occasion: Tiverton resol∣ved (upon a Councel of war) to be at∣tempted. Memorand. That Col. Fryes regi∣ment was (before this) sent to se∣cure Tiverton whilst the Gen. marched West∣ward. whereupon it was resolved to make it their work to take in that place, and the rather, to inforce Gorings horse to keep to the other side of Ex; for the Army being once possessed of that Passe, would be the better able to keep the Enemy before them, from breaking through. The General with some forces march∣ing to Tiverton Whereupon this day towards noon, the General marched towards Tiverton with a great part of the Army, leaving some Horse and Foot at Broadnix, Silverton, and Columb-Iohn, within 4 miles of Excester, and accordingly as was desired, it succeeded, in that the Enemy was inforced to draw all over Ex. The relation of the storm∣ing & taking of  house by Lieut. gen. Cromwel. But before I proceed in this story, I must give you a Relation of the taking of Basing, a place of great concern∣ment, and which had been a great annoyance unto the Country, and the City of London, in hindering Trade. This business, as it was managed by Lieutenant gen. Cromwel, who in person Commanded in the reducing of that place, and Winchester, and managed the same with much prudence and resolution; so I shall give you the particulars of the action, in the words of his own Letter, and Mr. Peters his Relation. Lieutenant-General Cromwels Letter, to the Honourable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the honourable House of Commons. SIR, The Lieut. generals let∣ter of that bu∣sinesse. I thank God I can give you a good accompt of Basing. After our Batteries placed, we setled the severall Posts for the Storm: Colonel Dalbier was to be on the North side of the House next the Grange, Colonel Pickering on his left hand, and Sir Hardresse Waller's, and Colonel Montague's Regiments, next him. We stormed this morning, after six of the clock; the signal for falling on, was, the firing four of our canon, which being done, our men fell on with great resolution and cheerfulnesse; we took the two Houses without any considerable losse to our selves; Col. Pickering storm∣ed the New house, passed through, and got the Gate of the Old
House; whereupon they summoned a Parley, which our men would not heare. In the mean time, Col. Montague's, and Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiments assaulted the strongest Works, where the Ene∣my kept his Court of guard, which with great resolution they re∣covered, beating the Enemy from a Whole-Culverin, and from that Work; which having done, they drew their Ladders after them, and got over another Work, and the House-wall, before they could enter: In this, Sir Hardresse Waller performing his duty with honour and diligence, was shot on the Arm, but not dangerous; We have had little losse; Many of the Enemy our men put to the sword, and some Officers of quality, most of the rest we have prison∣ers, among which the Marquisse, and Sir Robert Peak, with di∣vers other Officers, whom I have ordered to be sent to you: we have taken about ten Peece of Ordnance, much Ammunition, and our Souldiers a good encouragement. I humbly offer to have this Place slighted, for these reasons: It will ask 800 men to man it, It is no Frontier, The Country is poor about it, The place exceedingly ruined by our Batteries and Mortar-peeces, and a Fire which fell upon the place since our taking it. If you please to take the garrison of Farnham, some out of Chi∣chester, and a good part of the Foot which were here under D'Al∣bier, and make a strong Quarter at Newbury, with three or four Troops of Horse; I dare be confident, it would not only be a curb to Dennington, but a Security and Frontier to all these parts, and by lying there will make the Trade most secure between Bristol and London, for all Carriages: And I believe, the Gentlemen of Sussex and Hantshire will with more cheerfulnes contribute to maintain a Garrison on the Frontier, then in their bowels, which will have lesse safety in it. Sir, I hope not to delay, but march to∣wards the West to morrow, and to be as diligent as I may in my Ex∣pedition thither. I must speak my judgement to you, That if you in∣tend to have your work carried on, Recruits of Foot must be had, and a course taken to pay your Army; else believe me, Sir, it may not be able to answer the work you have for it to do. I intreated Col. Hamond to wait upon you, who was taken by a mistake, whilst we lay before this garrison; whom God safely deli∣vered to us, to our great joy, but to his losse of almost all he had, which the Enemy took from him.
The Lord grant that these mercies may be acknowledged with all thankfulnesse; God exceedingly abounds in his goodnesse to us, and will not be weary, untill Righteousnesse and Peace meet, and that He hath brought forth a glorious work for the happinesse of this poor Kingdome. Wherein desires to serve GOD, and You, with a faithfull heart, Your most humble Servant, Oliver Cromwel. Basingstoak, Octob. 14. 1645. Mr. Peters Relation to the House of Commons, was as followeth. Mr. Peters re∣lation, supply∣ing divers particulars. That he came into Basing-house some time after the Storm, on Tuesday the 14. of October, 1645. and took a view first of the Works, which were many, the circum∣vallation being above a mile compass; the old house had stood (as it is reported) 2 or 300 years, a nest of Idolatry, the New house surpassing that in beauty and stateliness, and either of them fit to make an Emperours court. The Rooms, before the storm (it seems) in both hou∣ses, were all compleatly furnished, Provisions for some years, rather then moneths; 400 quarters of Wheat, Bacon divers rooms full (containing hundreds of flitches) Cheese proportionable, with Oatmeal, Beef, Pork, Beer divers cellars full, and that very good. A Bed in one room, furnished, that cost 1300. l. Popish books many, with Copes, and such Utensils, that in truth the House stood in its full pride, and the Enemy was per∣swaded that it would be the last peece of ground that would be taken by the Parliament, because they had so often foiled our Forces that had formerly appeared be∣fore it. In the severall rooms, and about the house, there were slain 74. and only one woman, the daughter of Doctor Griffith, who by her railing provoked our Soul∣diers (then in heat) into a further passion. There lay dead upon the ground, Major Cuffle (a man of great ac∣count amongst them, and a notorious Papist) slain by
the hands of Major Harrison; (that godly and gallant Gentleman) and Robinson the Player, who a little before the Storm, was known to be mocking and scorning the Parliament, & our Army. Eight or nine Gentlewomen of rank, running forth together, were entertained by the Common souldiers somewhat coursly, yet not uncivilly, considering the action in hand; the plunder of the soul∣dier continued till Tuesday night: one Souldier had 120 peeces in Gold for his share, others Plate, others Jewels; amongst the rest, one got 3 bags of silver, which (he being not able to keep his own counsel) grew to be common pillage amongst the rest, and the fellow had but one half crown left for himself at last. Also the Souldiers sold the Wheat to Country people, which they held up at good rates a while, but afterwards the Market fell, and there was some abatements for haste. After that they sold the houshold-stuffe, whereof there was good store; and the Country loaded away many Carts, and continued a great while fetching out all man∣ner of houshold-stuffe, till they had fetched out all the Stools, Chairs, and other Lumber, all which they sold to the Country people by peece-meale. In all these great houses there was not one Iron bar left in al the windows (save only what was in the fire) before night. And the last work of all was the Lead, and by Thursday morning they had hardly left one Gutter about the house. And what the Souldiers left, the Fire took hold on; which made more then ordinary haste; leaving nothing but bare wals and chimnies in less then 20 houres, being occasioned by the neglect of the Enemy, in quenching a Fire-ball of ours at first. We know not how to give a just account of the num∣ber of persons that were within; for we have not three hundred prisoners, and it may be an hundred slain, whose bodies (some being covered with rubbish) came not to our view; only riding to the house on Tuesday night, we heard divers crying in Vaults for quarter, but our men
could neither come to them, nor they to us. But amongst those that we saw slain, one of their Officers lying on the ground, seeming so exceeding tall, was measured, and from his great toe to his crown was 9 foot in length. The Marquis being pressed by Mr. Peters arguing with him, broke out, and said. That if the King had no more ground in England but Bazing-house, he would adventure as he did, and so maintain it to his uttermost, meaning with these Papists: comforting himself in this disaster, That Bazing-house was called Loyalty. But he was soon silenced in the question concerning the King and Parliament, only hoping that the King might have a day again. And thus the Lord was pleased in a few hours to shew us what mortall seed all earthly glory grows upon, and how just and righteous the wayes of God are, who takes sinners in their own snares, and lifteth up the heads of his dispised people. This is now the 20. garrison that hath been taken in this Summer by this Army; and I believe most of them, the answer of the prayers and trophees of the faith of some of Gods servants. The Commander of this Bri∣gade having spent much time with God in prayer the night before the storm, and seldome fighting without some text of Scripture to support him. This time he rested upon that blessed Word of God, written in the 115 Psal. v. 8. They that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusteth in them; which, with some verses going before was now accomplished. Whereas the House had ordered that the countrey peo∣ple should carry away those buildings, God Almighty had decreed touching that beforehand, nothing remain∣ed but a blast of winde to blow down the tottering wals and chimnies: Doubtless this providence of God hath a double voice, the one unto the Enemy, and the other unto us; the Lord help us with skill to improve it. I hope by this time the State hath a penny-worth for a penny, and I hope they will have full measure and running over.
I wish that the payment and recruiting of this Army may not be slighted: It is an easie matter to grieve God, in our neglects towards him; and not hard to weary one another. What if the poor Souldier had some remem∣brance, though small, to leave as the acceptance of this service, which is already begun by a Mr. Maynard. worthy Member of this House, who hath appointed some Medals to be made of gold to be bestowed upon those that ventured on the greatest difficulties. Mr. Peters presented the Marquisses own Colours, which he brought from Basing, the Motto of which was, Donec pax reddit terris; The very same, King Charles gave upon his Coronation mony, when he came to the Crown. But our onely GOD doth usually temper such plea∣sant Cups unto us; for in the close of this glorious victory, the Death of Major Bethel was brought unto us, shot at Bristol; and tyred through want of sleep, he is gone into the bosome of the Lord Iesus, whom he loved so deerly whilst he lived. I wish he may not go unlamented to his grave, who was so full of God, and the fairest flower of the City amongst us; Lived without Pride, and dyed full of Faith. The ARMIES Teares over Major BETHEL. A copy of Verses on the losse of Major Bethel. Thou gallant Charger, do'st thou wheele about To sable shades? Or dost thou rather post To Bethel, (Bethel) there to make a shout Of the great Triumphs of a scorned Host? Or (blessed Soule) was it unworthy We, That made thee weary with such Dust to be? Or, tyred with our New reforming pace, Tasting some sips of Heaven, do'st therefore haste To fuller draughts of that Eternal grace, Fearing thy Spirit might be here imbrac'd?
Farewell, deare Soule; thy great deserv'd Arrears We'll pay in others Blood, or our own Tears. Only let all Ages, when they tell The unexampled tale of Forty five; Yea, when these Records to their glory swell, And be compleated by the Saints alive: When Naseby, Langport, Bristol nam'd they heare, Let them all say, Sweet Bethel, he was there. B eare a part in these Laments, E very Soul that longs for Peace; T ruly, who with GOD indents H ere to have thereof a Lease, E nters with himself a warre: L ean on things that truly are. CHAP. IV. The cheap reduction of Tiverton-Castle, by a strange Providence. The surrender of Langford-House. BUt to return to my Story. The work of reducing Ti∣verton, close followed. Saturday, Octob. 18. Much of the time was spent in raising of Batteries against Tiverton Church and Castle: The General, with Major gen. Massey, oftentimes that day viewed the Works, Castle and Church, for the ordering of the Batteries and Approaches. A Spy out of Tiverton castle taken. A Spie was this day from the castle let down in a rope; and being taken by our Guards, threw his Letter by the water side; but being threatned, discovered where the letter was; which being found (where he had thrown it) was read; it was directed to Sir Iohn Berkley Governour of Excester; it discovered the resolution of Sir Gilbert Talbot, to hold out, but yet he desired relief of Sir Iohn Berkley.
The storming of Tivrton re∣solved on by a councel of war Lords day, Octob. 19. The General went early to see to the batteries, and the Ordinance being ready planted, a Councel of war was called, wherein it was agreed to storm the Church, Castle and Works; The Storm prevented, and Tiverton gain∣ed by a won∣derfull provi∣dence. and being in debate of the manner of the storm (which was that afternoon to be put in execution) our Ordinance playing hard against the works and castle, the Chain of the Draw-bridge with a Round shot was broken in two, whereupon the bridge fell down, and our men immediately without staying for Orders, possessed themselves of the bridge, and entred the works, and possessed the Churchyard, which so terri∣fied the Enemy, that it made them quit their Ordinance, and some of their Posts and Line, and instantly fled into the church and castle; our men got over the rest of the bulwarks and line, and pursued the enemy into the church and castle, where they cried out in a lamentable manner for quarter, our Souldiers crept in at the Church∣windows (they having made fast the doors) and made all within prisoners, plundered them, and stript most of them to their shirts, yet gave them their lives. The Governour, who had formerly received a Summons, but peremptorily refused to hearken to any treaty of surrender (though he despaired of any relief) shut himself up into his chamber in the castle, and hung out a white flag for a Parley; but being now too late, it would not be hearkned to (such was the fury of the Souldier) yet when they got into the castle, and came to the place where he was, they gave him fair quarter. A notable in∣stance of a righteous hand upon a false man. There was much Plunder found in the Castle (besides provisions) There was taken one Major Sadler, who for∣merly served the Parliament, and ran to the Enemy, and had privately sent and made overtures, what service he would do, if he might be pardoned: but his offers were rejected, and he falling into our hands, was called to a Councel of war, and condemned to suffer death for his former treachery; who, to save his life, broke prison (after he was condemned) and escaped to Excester, where he
was (by his own side) called to a Councel of war, for en∣deavouring to betray their cause, after he had undertaken it; and was therefore adjudged to die, and suffered death accordingly: it being alleadged against him, that he trea∣cherously quit his Posts in the late service of Tiverton. Besides him, who escaped us, (but not Justice) there was taken prisoners in this place, Sir Gilbert Talbot (the Gover∣nour) 4 Majors, and about 200 more Officers and Souldiers. Langford-house surrendred to Lieut. general Cromwel. This day intelligence came, That after Lieut. general Cromwel had taken Basing, he immediately marched to∣wards Langford-house (neer Salisbury) faced the same with part of his Brigade, sent in a Summons; and that the Go∣vernour, upon the experience that Basing and Winchester were not able to resist the Force that was come against that place, (conceiving his condition desperate) hearkned to a Treaty, and surrendred the place upon these ensuing Articles. The Articles of Langford. 1. The Commanders in chief of the said garrison, to surren∣der the said house and garison to the said Lieutenant gen. Cromwel, on the morrow by twelve of the clock, being the 18. of October then instant. 2. All arms and ammunition in the said garrison, to be delivered to the use of the Parliament, without any imbezelling of them. 3. The Commanders in chief, to march away with horse and arms, and the private Souldiers without arms to Oxford, within ten dayes, and to have a Troop of horse for their guard the first day, and a Trumpet with a Passe the rest of the way. 5. The rest of the Gentlemen, not exceeding 14 more, to march with their swords and pistols, and horses, if they should lawfully procure them. 6. The Commanders in chief, to have a Cart or Waggon allowed them, to carry their goods to Oxford. 7. If any Gentlemen of the said garrison had a desire to go to any other garrison or army of the Kings, to have Passes to that purpose. 8. The goods remaining in the said garrison, to be delivered to the severall Owners thereof, upon demand, within two dayes next following the date hereof.
9. Lieut. col. Bowles and Major Frye to be left Hostages, untill these Articles should be performed. CHAP. V. Excester straitned in order to a Siege; with severall Debates and Resolutions thereabout. THese 6 Garrisons, of the Devizes, Laicock-house, Basing, Winchester, Langford, and Tiverton, (besides Berkley-castle) being reduced since the taking of Bristol, there was no garrison in the way between Excester and London, to interrupt the passage, so that a single man might travel without any fear of the Enemy, (all the obstructing garri∣sons being cleered) except Corf-castle neer the Sea-coasts, (which yet was securely blockt up by the Governour of Poole, and Col. Pickerings Regiment, sent thither for that purpose.) A Councel of war called. Monday, Octob. 20. The General and the whole Army marched to Silverton and the parts thereabouts (within five or six miles of Excester) where a Councel of war was called to consult what was fit next to be done, whether to ad∣vance further West (before Excester was reduced) or to march up to the Enemy, and relieve Plymouth. After a long and serious debate, it was held fit, in regard of the season of the yeare (winter being comming on) and the Souldier already very sickly, and much wearied out by their conti∣nuall marches and hard duties; Excester resol∣ved to be straitned. rather to make it their work to straiten Excester, then to march further West for the present, and to leave so considerable a garrison upon their backs, wherein were 1000. horse at that instant, besides 4000. Foot, that might annoy the Eastern parts of the Country, as well as the Army in the Rear, if they ad∣vanced further. This resolution was not so acceptable to the Gentlemen of those parts, (who would fain have had the Army advance further into the West) and desirous e∣nough was the General to comply with them; but his
judgement did not lead him to it at this time, for the reasons before mentioned. Wherefore Tuesday 21 Octob. the General went in person with a small party to Stoake, and so on towards Excester, till he came within lesse then a mile of the town, viewed that part of the city, and returned back that night to Silverton. A counsel of war was againe called, wherein it was concluded, that one part of the Ar∣my should march over Ex, by the way of Tharverton, and the other to Stoake-bridge, and parts thereabouts. Wednesday, October 22. the General with a great part of the Army marched to Newton Siers, with an intention to have gone that night to Affington; but the wayes being narrow, and the dayes short; was inforced to take up their quarter that night at Newton Siers, where his Excellency received intelligence that Goring went the night before from Excester towards Okehampton, with the greatest part of the thousand horse before mentioned. Thursday October 23. the Army marched early from Newton Siers to a Rendezvouz, at the Beacon, within three miles of Excester, with intention to go to Affington that night: but such was the extremity of wet and unseasona∣ble weather (which it pleased God to send) that in a few hours rain the wayes proved unpassable for our carriages; besides that, the narrowness of the wayes (however repre∣sented by some Gentlemen of the countrey with the Army) was found upon conferring with others, to be such, as was altogether incomplyant with the Armies march, and would necessitate them to go many miles about; where∣by it was not possible in any seasonable time to get to Affington that night. Whereupon unexpectedly the Head-quarters were appointed that night to be at Crediton, some six miles from Excester, where several of the Enemies horse came in to his Excellency; informing him that Goring was gone from Okehampton towards Tavestock. Friday October 24. the Army rested at Crediton (horse and man being much wearied out with the extreame wet wea∣ther, and their carriages broken) a counsel of war was cal∣led,
whether it was fit to pursue the former resolution of straitning Excester on both sides. Whilest the business was in debate, Lieutenant-general Cromwel happily came in; and the forces that were sent under his command to Ba∣sing and Winchester, were by that time come to Hunniton. The good news of Digby and Langdale routed at Sher∣born. This night the Army received the good news of the Lord Digbies and Langdales being routed at Sherborne. The sum whereof was, that the Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, marching from Newark, by the Kings appoint∣ment, with some 1600 horse, to joyn with Montrosse in Yorkshire: As they passed by Doncaster, and so onwards, they beat up our quarters in several places, and near Sher∣born took 800 of our men (that drew out there to oppose them) laying their Arms on a great heap in the street of Sherborn, till they could get carriages to carry them a∣way: but before they were so provided, Colonel Copley, Col. Lilborne, and other Commanders of Yorkshire, mar∣ching with all speed, came upon them, and routed them; recovered all our arms and men, took 400 of their men, 600 horse, many Commanders and persons of quality; slew 40. amongst whom were Sir Francis Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton; took Digbies Coach, and therein ma∣ny Letters and papers of great consequence, divers colours, with much rich pillage. A councel of war called. The subject of the debate. Saturday, October 25. the business that was in debate the day before at a counsel of war, was reassumed, and after much dispute, it was resolved, to march back with all our forces, on the East of Ex, to possess Topsham, and settle strong quarters on that side, before they advanced any fur∣ther West to relieve Plymouth. Not, but that the General and his Officers had that place much in their thoughts, but conceived it not fit to attempt it at this season. The Reasons of the resolu∣tion. The reasons inducing to this resolution, were chiefly these, That nothing could be of that concernment, nor so conducing to the advantage of the Kingdom, as the pre∣serving of this Army in an entire and healthful state, for the future service thereof. And such was the sickly
state of the Army at this time, as called rather for some relaxation, then such extream hard duty, as the relief of Plymouth would have put them upon, especially if they should have staid by it to make it good when they had done. Only to march thither and relieve the Town which (the Enemy had blockt up by divers regular and strong forts, well manned and furnished) was such an enterprize, as certainly required a more strong and healthy state of the Army. And when the Army had done this, should they have come back again for winter-quarters? The Enemy so easily raised, might as quickly have sat down again, and so the relief of Plymouth would not have been one jot advan∣ced. Or should the Army have taken up their winter-quar∣ters in an Enemies countrey? (surrounded with strong gar∣risons both before and behinde them, besides a potent Enemy in the field, judged (upon the best intelligence) to be equall, if not superiour to them in number of horse) it is equally evident to what an eminent hazard the Army must have been exposed thereby. And what need was there to put that toile upon the Army? when his Excellen∣cy and the counsel of war well understood (though much was suggested to the contrary) that such was the condition of Plymouth, that they wanted not either men, ammunition or victuals, (having received plentiful provisions sent them by sea) only were impatient to be set at liberty for trade. This day a party of horse was sent out towards Oke∣hampton, to discover where the Enemy was gone, who returned with intelligence, that Tavestock was their head-quarters. Lords-day Octob. 26. the General in pursuance of the re∣solution for Topsham (after the forenoon Sermon at Credi∣ton) marched with the Army back to Silverton; Some Regi∣ments advan∣cing to Top∣sham. two Re∣giments went to Stoake, and those two Regiments that were at Stoake advanced that day to Topsham, and three Regiments of horse with them. This day intelligence came of the taking of Carmarthen by Major-General Laug∣horne; the gaining of which town proved the reducing of
that County; and that Major-general Laughorne had treaty concerning the associating of three Counties more, and had brought the same to good perfection. Monday October 27. the General and Army reached Top∣sham; and that night the Enemy fired the houses in the Suburbs of Excester, to the number of about 80. which sent many out of the city, complaining of the cruelty of the Enemy: guards were kept that night within two miles of the city. A counsel of war called. The subject of the debate. Tuesday October 28. a counsel of war was called to ad∣vise whether to put over forces (on the other side the river Ex) to Affington, and to make a bridge over at Topsham, the better to hold a mutual correspondency between both sides, and what forces should be sent thither: The resoluti∣on and rea∣sons of it. great dis∣pute was about the same, but at last it was resolved (though much against the minde of those Gentlemen, whose suf∣ferings made them earnestly desire a siege on both sides) to wave the putting over of forces to the other side, and the making of a bridge, which (as appeared) would be ex∣treamly difficult; and first to secure all on the East of Ex, before such time as they possest any quarters on the other side; for to divide the Army at that season of the year (to lye near so great a garrison upon duty when already a sickness was amongst our souldiers) was in the opinion of the General and the rest of the Commanders apprehended likely to ruine the Army; Towards the latter end of this moneth of Octob. was Shelford-house, (not far from New∣ark) storm∣ed and ta∣ken by Ma∣jor Gen. Pointz. and therefore it was resolved to make several garrisons, first on the East side of Ex (along the Clysses river within three miles of Excester) which being once finished, a few men might keep them, and hinder provisions from going into the city, and the whole Army might thereby be at liberty to go on the other side to do the like afterwards: neither could the Bridge have been defended, had it been made, with lesse then 2000 men that must have quartered at Topsham, and gone near a mile to do duty at both ends of the Bridge (besides those other little bridges that must have been made upon the watery places beyond the river) wch would have been such a duty
in the winter time (especially where the Enemy could not be hindred of his choice, with a great force to fall upon the one side, or the other, which he pleased) as might have hazarded our forces. Accordingly, Bishops-clysse, Poultimore, and Stoak were pitcht upon to be made garri∣sons. Sir Iohn Bampfield, a worthy Member of the House of Commons, first giving his consent that his house in Poultimore might be made a garrison, in regard it was so much for the service in hand, in the reducing of Excester. An Engineer was sent to Bishops-clisse to draw a Line for fortifications about Bedford-house. The Lyme-Regiment had the charge of these two garrisons, and Col. Hamonds Regiment was to secure and fortifie Stoake. Wednesday, 29. It was debated where the head-quarter should be this winter, whilst the Army stayed on the East side, whether at Topsham, or not? and upon debate, it was held fit to wave making Topsham a quarter at all, and that upon the same reason that moved the General to decline the making a Bridge, and putting over Forces on the other side: therefore upon this resolution (waving Topsham) the General having viewed the Fort at Exmouth, (which stands upon the sands, and commands the passage at the mouth of the River) sends away the Train of Artillery to∣wards St. Mary Autree, and followes after himself, resolving to refresh his Army, who never stood in more need of it, by laying them in the best and most convenient quarters he could. This day his Excellencie heard from Captain Moulton, of the taking of Monmouth (a considerable garrison) and to∣wards evening, received intelligence by our Spies, that Gorings horse, being near 5000. were come into the South-Hams, quartering at Totnesse, Newton-bushel, and as neer as Chidley, (the Hams being the only plentifull and unharassed part of Devonshire.) As also, that Greenvile was come with some fresh Foot out of Cornwal, to Okehampton. A letter to his Excellency, from the Pr. of Wales his Highnesse. At Autree, a Trumpeter came to his Excellency from his Highnesse Prince Charles, with a Letter, desiring a Passe
for the Lord Hopton, and Lord Culpepper to go to the King, upon a designe of a mediation of Peace between the King and both Houses of Parliament; The scope of it. which being a matter of great concernment, the consideration thereof was put off to the next day, when the Trumpeter was re∣turned with a Letter from the General to the Prince; inti∣mating, The summe of his Excellen∣cies answer. That it was no wayes proper for the General to intermeddle with any Propositions touching an accom∣modation between His Majesty and the Parliament. And therefore had sent his Letter to the Parliament, from whom his Highness must expect an answer. The Parlia∣ment acknow∣ledging their General. In the interim, a fair Jewel, set with rich Diamonds of very great value, was presented unto the General, by Mr. Ash, and some other Members of Parliament, in the name of both Houses, as a signal of that great honour which God had done him, in the great service which by Gods assistance he performed for this Kingdome at Naseby-Battel; and according to the commands of the Parliament, they tyed it in a blue Ribband, and put it about his neck. The happy news of a se∣cond defeat of Digby briefly inserted. About this time arrived at the Army certain intelligence of a second defeat given the Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale; who, by killing of an hundred men, and the taking of 200 horse and many prisoners, among whom divers Commanders, by Sir Iohn Brown, were reduced to so much lesser number; And were yet further extenuated, as they fled towards Beeston-castle, by Colonel Brigs, who took 200 more of them: About this time also were the se∣verall gar∣risons of Worton Wi∣verton, and Welbeck surrendred to valiant, and active Major gen Poyntz. And yet farther, for the ease of the Ferry-boat that carried Digby to the Isle of Man, reduced to the number of 20. (besides some few Great ones that escaped with him) by Major-general Vandrusk, who took 180. of them flying through Westmerland. And here is the end of 1600 of the Kings prime horse. And with this came another peece, of the Enemies be∣ing routed, Nevemb. 1. by Lieut. colonel Iones, and Adjutant Louthian, where were above 100. slain, and about 400. taken prisoners, among whom divers persons of quality; few of ours wounded, scarce any slain.
CHAP. VI. Severall passages between the Prince, and his Excellency; and between his Excellency, and Goring. Concerning Pouldrum. The Enemies preparations to relieve Excester; and Ours to meet them, &c. An overture of a meeting made to his Excellency, from the Lord Goring, Sir Iohn Berkley, and others. MOreover, during the Armies stay at Autree, the General was acquainted by a Person of credit, with a desire of the Lord Goring, Sir Iohn Berkley, and others, to give his Excellencie a meeting: which was taken into consideration; and after consultation with the Mem∣bers of Parliament then present, and divers Officers, the General the next day thus expressed himself to the Gentle∣men that had signified the former desire; His Excel∣lencies answer That if any thing came in writing from the Lord Goring, or Sir Iohn Berkley, to the aforesaid purpose, he would afford a meeting. Upon this intimation, the next day came a Trumpeter from the Lord Goring, with a Letter to the General in these words: SIR, A letter from Goring there∣upon. I have understood by a Person of honour and quality, of your readines to have a meeting with some of the Generall Officers of both Armies, and some others; wherein there will be a necessity of setling some circumstances, for the avoiding of all mistakes. I have instructed Colonel Scroop, and Colonel Philips, in the particulars thereof; and therefore shall desire that you will be pleased to grant them a Safe-conduct for themselves and two servants, to go to your Quar∣ters, and return. Your humble servant, Geo. Goring. Excester, Novemb. 12. 1645. His Excel∣lency advi∣sing there∣upon. This did put both the Officers, and Members of Parlia∣ment there, upon serious deliberation afresh; and in issue, this answer was returned by the General: My Lord, The answer his Excellen∣cy returned. According to your Lordships desire, I have sent you herewith a Safe-conduct for Colonel Scroop and Colonel Philips to come to
my head-quarter, where I shall be ready to receive them to morrow. I am, Your Lordships humble servant, Tho: Fairfax. The reasons of his Excel∣cies entertain∣ing the mo∣tion. One main and principal reason inducing his Excellency (and approved by those he consulted with) to grant the Safe-conduct, was, For that it might likely increase the discontent (or jealousie at least) between Grenvile, and the Lord Gorings faction, if it were noysed that Goring came out to treat, without the privity of Grenvile, For, any bet∣ter effect of the Treaty was not expected, His Excellencie understanding privately, that which they intended to offer, was in such a nature as was not proper for the Army to meddle with. Col. Scroop and Col. Philips, upon this Safe-conduct, the next day came to the head-quarter at Autree; but comming somewhat late, had not accesse that night to the General, but were entertained by some of the Colonels of the Army untill the next day, when they were presented to the Ge∣neral, who (before such time as they began to say any thing of their errand to him) declared himself to them, to this effect: The effect of the meeting. That if they had any thing to say concerning the surrender of Excester, or the disbanding of Armies, or any thing else which was belonging to the General as a Soul∣dier to take notice of, he would hear them, otherwise he could not. And this was no more then was intimated unto them, before they came by Com. gen. Treton, Col. Pickering, and the Judge-Advocate: whereupon they answered, That the Instructions that they had, were in order to a general Peace: To which was replied, That that was proper to the cognisance of the Parliament; therefore the General, as a Souldier, (and the Parliaments servant) without their leave, would not say any thing to it. Whereupon the next day they returned back unto Excester, much unsatisfied. The General easily perceiving the drift of their intentions was, To have had both Armies engage themselves to force both King and Parliament to Conditions.
His Excellen∣cie acquaint∣ing the Parlia∣ment with the whole procee∣ding. And no sooner did the General satisfie himself in the scope of these Overtures from the Prince, and the Lord Goring; but, by an Expresse sent up to the Parliament, and the Committee of both Kingdoms, he was most carefull to give them an account thereof, and how he had enter∣tained the same; which it seems was but needfull, This Army not wanting enemies every where, to give an ill re∣presentation of their actions. But to return from whence I have digressed. From Saturday Novemb. 15. to Tuesday Decemb. 2. the General continued at Autree, riding about sometimes, to see the finishing of the Works at Broad-clisse and Poultimore, and disposing of the quarters for the Foot, who were sick in most places, there dying of Souldiers and Inhabitants in the Town of Autree, 7, 8, and 9, a day, for severall weeks together, insomuch that it was not held safe for the head-quarter to be continued there any longer. Col. Pickering, that pious, active Gentleman, that lived so much to God, and his Country, and divers other Officers, dyed of the New disease in that place; Six of the Generals own family were sick of it at one time, and throughout the Foot regi∣ments half the Souldiers: The Army unworthily censured by some. yet notwithstanding, at this very time did the Army undergo very hard censures by some, for not being in action. But so long as Conscience and Judgement was satisfied, that if the season of the year, and the abilities of Mens bodies would have admitted a March, it should have been most willingly imbraced; and that it was only the Divine providence that had awar∣ded otherwise: The Army had the less cause to take no∣tice of other mens opinions, especially when the Parlia∣ment had (by Vote) left the General at liberty to dispose of his Army as he should see cause. But whosoever would have me proceed in my story, must give me leave first to weep a while this sorrowfull Verse, over deer Colonel Pickerings Hearse.
Anagr. IOHANNES PICKERING. IN God I RECKON HAPINES. Vain all our profer'd Ransoms are, There's no discharge in the Graves war: Well (i) Proffer∣ed ranfomes. They may shew, yet they cannot, What a brave Captive Death hath got. Only, t'amuse our discontent, (For Passion kils, that has no vent:) Might thy wisht presence find excuse, (Of whom we made too little use) Wee'ld ask, (swift Poster) whose He had done the Kingdome great service, by riding be∣tween Eng∣land and Scot∣lan̄d before these troubles. great haste Was ne'r before the Kingdoms waste:) Why posts thou from's? Because we The Army rested then some time at Auirce. rest, Which suited not thy active brest? Did that Antiperistasis Fire thy fine Spirits to thy blisse? Must thou be scaling Heaven alone, For want of other action? Would thou hadst took that leisure-time, To visit some responsal-Clime. Or, must hard The Army was unwor∣thily censured at that time, as is observed before in the Story. Censures, (voyd of love) Be expiate by thy remove? Or, Covetous, couldst thou not stay For wages, till the end o'th day? Or could no vantage mend thy He was a little man, but of a great cou∣rage. stature, (To see our triumphs) under Nature (i) the Heavens. Nature? But 'tis in vain to ravel more, Whave nothing but thy Name t'adore: That Oracle gives the best guesse, Wherein we heare thee thus professe, IN God I RECKON HAPINES.
The Enemy was much encouraged by the sickness of our Army, and was confident (as by their Letters which afterwards were intercepted, did appear) it had in a great measure weakned, and would consume the Army to no∣thing: whereupon they were much animated to raise new Forces under the command of his Highness Prince Charles (the Lord Goring having some few dayes before taken shipping at Dartmouth for France, to fetch over some fresh forces against the Spring, leaving the command of his Horse, in his absence, to the Lord Wentworth) The Prince raising Corn∣wal & Devon. and to that purpose sent out Proclamations for the Counties of Cornwal and Devon, to rise in arms, and to go in person with the Prince, for that his Highness was resolved to march in person upon the head of them, making no que∣stion (as by their Letters we did understand) to make our Forces rise from the East side Excester, and inforce our Retreat. And indeed, his Excellencie had certain intelli∣gence, that the Enemy had an Army very considerable, having drawn severall Foot and Horse from their quarters before Plimouth, whereunto they received some addition in Foot from Dartmouth & Barnstable, which with the con∣siderable Recruits of Foot that Greenvile, with most extrem and industrious cruelty had raised and brought out of Cornwall, did make a body of nine or ten thousand horse and foot, then quartering about Tavestock, and upon the edge of Cornwall, and also at Okehampton, where were 2000. of their foot (besides horse) commanded by Sir Richard Greenvile. Yet a few dayes the Generall continued at Autree, but resolved forthwith to remove (in regard the disease in∣creased so fast) to Tiverton, which place was agreed on to be an head-quarter, which resolution was actuated on Sa∣turday, the Generall having first received intelligence from Captain Farmer, of a Bark loaden with commodities of good value, going for France, from Excester, taken by him between Topsham and the Fort. A councell of War called. Lords-day December 7. A councell of War was called,
where it was propounded; that in regard the garrisons of Nutwell, Broad-Clisse, Poultimore, and Stoak, were now made tenable against any suddaine assault of the Enemy, and possessed by the forces of Lyme, some foot of Major-Gen. Massies, and some new raised Regiments of the County, whereby Excester was perfectly straightened upon the East side, (being by those garrisons made incapable, either to annoy the country, or relieve themselves on this side,) and in regard that now it would be convenient to remove our foot beyond the river, in order both to the straightening of Excester on that side, and to the hindering the Enemies recruting of his forces, which at this instant he was strongly indeavouring; The Proposi∣tion and re∣sult. that some Regiments should be sent to Cre∣diton, a place that stood in a good aire, which likely would much conduce to the health of our souldiers, and lay con∣veniently for a strong quarter upon the West side of the ri∣ver: Some for∣ces sent un∣der Sir Hardresse Waller to possesse Crediton; and the blocking up of Excester on that side the River, committed to him. which force was sent under the command of Sir Hardresse Waller, a Gentleman faithfull, and well able and ready to undergo that charge; but lest the Enemy upon the advance of our foot thither, should fire the towne (as they had often threatened) a party of Horse and Dra∣goones were sent all night to get possession of the town, till the foot could get up to them. Some Dra∣goons sent to possesse Cre∣diton before hand. The next morning be∣ing Munday December 8. the Dragoones were there by day break, but by reason of the extremity of the weather, the foot could not get to Crediton till-Tuesday December 9. on which day the Horse and Dragoons gave them possession of the town; which within two or three dayes after, be∣came the more usefull to us, by the Generals going thither to order a designe in hand against Pouldrum House, by water and land; which being on Friday December 12. was immediately put in execucion, only one day intervening; which brought intelligence of the taking of Latham-house, in Lancashire, with eight pieces of Ordnance, six murther∣ing pieces, five hundred Arms, and proportionable Am∣munition: As also of the Kings Propositions to the Par∣liament for peace, and of his Letter at the same time to Prince Rupert against peace.
A design up∣on Pouldrum-house. The design against Pouldrum-house was this, and thus carryed, Lords-day December 14. nine of the clock at night, Captain Deane (the Comptroller of the Ordnance) was commanded over Ex with 200 foot and dragoons, to pos∣sesse Pouldrum-Castle, but the enemy had some few houres before got 150 men into it, unto those that were there be∣fore, which our men not discovering before they had land∣ed, would not return without attempting something; the Church at Pouldrum (being not far distant from the Castle) they resolved to possesse, and make the best of it, and ac∣cordingly did so, and the next morning they got provisi∣ons from Nutwell-house unto them into the Church, and began to fortifie the same; the enemy at Excester much startled hereat, fearing the Castle would be lost, as well as the River blockt up by the fortifying of this Church; Our party in Pouldrum-Church ac∣quitting themselves gallantly. sent therefore on Monday the fifteenth, a party of five hundred foot, who joyning with two hundred from the Castle, as∣saulted our men about seven at night, threw in many hand granadoes amongst them, and so continued storming till ten, but were beaten off with much losse, leaving their dead on the place, and carrying with them many wound∣ed, as appeared by the Snow, that was much stained with their blood as they retreated. In this service Captain Farmer (Captain of Dragoones) commanded our men; who as they were beyond expecta∣tion happy in their successe, (not one man being lost in the storme) so they were resolved to continue in their duty; About this time was Hereford surprized and taken by a most gallant stratagem. and notwithstanding the extremity of the cold, by reason of the great frost and snow, and want of all meanes to re∣sist or qualifie the same in the church; having no firing there, they would not quit the same till they received or∣ders so to doe: which hard service (hard in every respect) although they were not immediately discharged of; yet the next day, Sir Hardresse Waller marched from Crediton with a strong party to Exminster to alarm the Enemy, that he might not make a second attempt upon them, till they had fortified the place, or were recalled; which action
of Sir Hardresse Waller took that effect as was desired: the Enemy being so amazed, that they durst not march out that day, as they had purposed, to attempt the church again, lest our men should get between them and home; and God having blessed the meanes to their preservation hither∣to: The Generals noble care to bring them off. The Generall considering further the bitter coldness of the weather, and the hardness of the duty they would ne∣cessarily be put unto, if they should make good the church; sent orders to them to draw off, which that they might do with the more safety; two Regiments were appointed to draw downe, and alarm the Enemy on that side Excester, while they made good their retreat over the River; by meanes whereof on Wednesday December 17. The Comp∣troller, and Captain Farmer brought off the men very safe, with their armes and ammunition; the Enemy making no sally out of the Castle upon them, though otherwise they had a faire opportunity to have fallen on them. And these souldiers thus happily delivered, and thus honorably come off, were rewarded with proportions out of the prize, taken by Captain Farmer below Apsham, at the Generals command. More force sent to Sir Hardresse Wal∣ler to Crediton. But the Enemy drawing more force to Okehampton, two Regiments more were sent to Crediton, December 18. to assist those that were placed there before; Col. Okey an∣noying the enemy at the Lord Chiche∣sters house. the same day Col. Okey with a party of Dragoones fell upon the Enemy at the Lord Chichesters house, took a Captaine, 12. prisoners, 19. horses, and returned back to his new formed garrison at Fulford House, without the losse of a man.  Mr. Davis his house at Ca∣non-teene garrisoned for the Parliam.. Also informa∣tion being given that the house of one Mr. Davis at Can∣non-Teen, (being within four miles of Excester) stood con∣venient for a garrison, and might beare an usefull propor∣tion towards the blocking up of Excester, and hindering of provision from the Southams; some more of Col. Okeys Dragoones were ordered thither to possesse the same, who accordingly went and fulfilled their orders, December 21. and were no longer in the house, Assaulted by the enemy. but Munday December 22. in the morning, the Enemy sent a force against it, who
stormed the house, burnt the out-houses; The Enemy repelled. yet Captaine Woggan who commanded the Dragoones, behaved him∣selfe so gallantly, that he beat the Enemy off, killed four, desperately wounded a Lieutenant-Colonel, and took di∣vers prisoners. Severall Intel∣ligence of the Enemies pre∣parations to releive Exce∣ster. Tuesday, Dec. 32. His Excellency had intelligence of the Enemies intention to march with their Army to relieve Excester; and of their preparation of provisions to that end. Decemb. 25. or thereabouts, his Excellency had animadver∣sion from the Committee of both Kingdoms, of incursions made by the Kings horse from Oxford into the adjacent parts, doing much mischiefe thereby; whereupon the Re∣giment of Colonel Rainsborough (then before Corfe-Castle) was commanded to march from thence to Abingdon, and Col. Fleetwood with the Generals, his owne, and Col. Wha∣leys Regiments, and six troopes of Dragoones was sent also to lye about Islip, to attend the motion of the Kings horse, and guard the Associated counties, as also in relati∣on to the straightening of Oxford. Fryday December 26. The Generall had advertisement from Plymouth, of the Enemies actuating their intentions, advancing in a great body towards the releife of Excester, (as they conceived) which Intelligence was also confirmed by several of our Spies: The Army re∣solved to be in readinesse to receive the Enemy. whereupon a Councel of war was called, wherein it was adjudged expedient to be in a fight∣ing posture, to receive them, if they advanced; and accord∣ingly such resolution was taken up; to which they saw the more cause to adhere, by another Spie which came to them the next day with tidings to the same effect; particularizing moreover, that the Prince was to be in person in the head of the Army, to countenance the Cornish, and that they would put all upon this Cast of relieving Excester. The Army advancing to∣wards the E∣nemy. Most of the enemies horse were sent the next (being the Lords) day, to Okehampton, which quickened the Army unto a re∣solution of a Rendezvouz between that and Crediton on the Monday, which was made good accordingly. The horse and some foot being drawn up at Cadbury-hill, some foure
miles from Crediton: but upon assurance there that the Enemy did not stir from Okehampton, and for that the weather was bitter cold, and the ground so slippery, that horses could not well march, (and for other causes) it was held fit to take up quarters thereabouts: Yet it was observed that this readines and motion of the Army checkt the Ene∣mies further advance; the Army took time to make provi∣sions for a continued march, by carriages on horse-back, these parts admitting no other. Tuesday, passed with the good news of the surrender of Skipton-castle in Yorkshire; the same day the Enemy ap∣pointed a Rendezvouz again; but the extream hard wea∣ther rendring it impossible for our horse to march (unless they were all frosted in an extraordinary manner) kept us still in our quarters. A messenger of the Princes taken. The next day was delivered into our hands a messenger of the Princes, going to Excester for Arms for the Prince his person, who was come to Dartmouth, when also his Excellency had intelligence that some Forces for his Maje∣sties service were to be sent over by the Lord Goring out of France, and to land at Dartmouth. Sir George Chidley's house garrisoned for the straitning Excester. Saturday, Ian. 3. The blocking up of Excester was so much further endeavoured by the addition of Sir George Chidley's house at Ashton, to the garrisons which were pos∣sest by our forces, the better to stop provisions from going into Excester. The next, being Lords-day, brought good news from Plymouth, viz. That they had taken two Works, and a Church from the Enemy, at St. Budeaux, and therein 105. prisoners, besides 20 Officers: but withall, That the Ene∣my intended to demand satisfaction for the same of us, and were for that end advancing with a considerable strength to relieve Excester.
CHAP. VII. The slackening of the siege of Excester, by the Armies advance to meet the Enemy, (leaving only a Force to block up the City) With their great successe in those two actions. The Defeat of the Enemy at Bovey-Tracy, and the taking of Dartmouth; with a particular account of their Marches, and lesser Passages. VPon this certain, & renewed intelligence; on the mor∣row, (viz. Monday Ian. 5.) a private consultation was had, & divers Officers of the Army sought councel of Heaven that day (keeping it as a private day of humiliation) in answer whereto, God inclined their hearts to resolve of an Advance. The Army (by a councel of war) resol∣ved to advance towards the Enemy. The next day, a publique Councel of war was called, and (that the former resolution might appear to be the answer of God) it was in this publique Councel resolved, Nemine contradicente, to advance into the South-Hams, where the greatest part of the Enemy lay. The Dragoons from Canonteen were before-hand with this Re∣solution, who this day fell into the Enemies quarters, took a Captain, 9 men, and 20 horse. And that this purpose to advance might finde the less interruption; The same day, the Stockings and Shooes (which the poor Foot had so great need of, and had so long expected) came to Tiverton most seasonably, to fit them for a March; wherewith they were so well satisfied, as that they shewed much for∣wardnes to march, without staying for Cloaths, which they had great need of also, being many of them all to tatters, and the weather was extream cold to boot. While he Army was preparing to march, some of our Dragoons from petty garrisons, on Wednesday, snatcht at the Enemy at Huick, took a Lieutenant, 10 prisoners, 22 horses, and one of their Colours, with this Motto, Patientia victrix. The Army ad∣vancing ac∣cording to former reso∣solution. Thursday Ian. 8. All things being prepared in readi∣ness for a March, the Horse and Foot (with their Ammunition on horse-back) set forward to Crediton; and at the same time, Sir Hardresse Waller with two Regi∣ments
marched from Crediton to At this place, Sir Har∣dresse Waller was enga∣ged with a party of the Enemies horse and dra∣goons, where he slew many of them, took 60 prisoners, 40 horse, and gave an Alarm to the Enemy on all that side the country, whilest the Army in the mean time did the following action at Bovey-Tracy. Bow, as if the Army had bent towards Okehampton, (where the Enemy had both horse and foot) when as indeed, it was only to amuse them; For at the same instant, a Brigade of horse and foot march∣ed that night to Crediton, and the next day (though very cold, and much snow upon the ground) the same Brigade marched to Bovey-Tracy (then the Enemies quarters) Lieut. general Cromwel going in person with them, who about six at night fell into their quarters at Bovey, (where part of the Lord Wentworths Brigade then lay) took about 400 Horse, seven Colours, one of them the Kings colours, with a crown, and C. R. upon it. Lieut. gen. Cromwell bea∣ting up the enemies quar∣ters at Bovey-Tracy. The Enemy in Bovey were put to their shifts; yet through the darkness of the night, most of the Men escaped, except a Major and some few Officers more, and about 50 prisoners. It was almost supper time with them when our men entred the Town, most of them at that instant were playing at Cards, but our Souldiers took up the stakes for many of their principal Officers, who being together in one room, threw their stakes of mony out at the window, which whilst our Souldiers were scrambling for, they escaped out at a back-door over the river, and saved their best stakes. In the mean time his Excellency with another part of the Army was advanced from Tiverton to Morton, within three miles of Bovey; but part of the Carriage-horses with the Ammunition, by rea∣son of the Frost, could get no neerer then Fulford. The former successe im∣proved, by pursuing the enemy from place to place. The next day (the weather still extream bitter cold) the forces at Morton, & at Bovey-tracy, had a rendezvouz near Bovey, whereat intelligence was brought by the country, that about 120. of those that escaped in the night, were got into Ellington church: whereupon a party of horse and foot were cōmanded after them, wch the Enemy in the church understanding, fled away. The Army marched that night towards Ashburton, the Enemies head-quarter the night before. A party of horse was sent to see if the Enemy had
quit the town (as his Excellency had intelligence they had done) who finding the enemy at the towns end, were en∣gaged with them, beat the enemies Rearguard through the town, took nine men, and twenty horse, and inforced the rest of their horse to flie severall wayes, being two Re∣giments of the Lord Wentworths Brigade, (that were left of five) three of them being taken at Bovey-tracy. Lords day Ianuary 11. The Generall, after that by Spies he had sent Intelligence to Plymouth, of the retreat of the Enemy, marched with the Army to Totness (where the Ene∣my had a foot quarter, but upon our advance quitted it) leaving one Regiment at Ashburton. This Totnesse seemes to be one of the finest of an Inland town in Devon-shire, and many of the Inhabitants rich; a party was sent from hence towards Dartmouth, to discover what scattered for∣ces of the Enemies might be gone that way; this party brought in some Officers prisoners, who seemed to be well apaid with their lot; saying, it was well they were ta∣ken, for they had no where to go to, but the Sea. About this time those Regiments of Foot under Colonel Hamond, that were assigned to quarter at the town, which was scarse able to afford them Victuals (having caught little Fish of six weeks before) was by a wonder∣full, and indeed, no lesse then mira∣culous providence supplyed, and fur∣nished to thē by such great draughts of Mullets which God was pleased to send in, in that abundance at that time, as the like had not been known before; whereby both Town and Army was plentifully provided for. Munday Ianuary 12. The Generall taking speciall care to uphold the courage of Plimouth, having sent (for more surety, lest the former Messengers should fail) another Messenger, to give them notice of the Enemies retreat; gave orders for two Regiments to be drawn before Dart∣mouth. And at the same time strong par∣ties of horse were sent towards Tave∣stock after the Enemy, which the enemy apprehending to be the Van of our Ar∣my, supposing our Army following af∣ter them, with great distraction and fear, quit the siege before Plimouth, lea∣ving their Forts undemolished, with seven pieces of Ordnance, and four barrels of Powder, ma∣king great hast over the River Tamar into Cornwall. A Summons sent in to Dartmouth. In the mean while a Summons was sent in to Dartmouth, honourable conditions offered in the same, but rejected by
the Governour; forces were commanded upon the guard within half a mile of the Town all night, who encountred with extream bitter cold weather and snow, yet were most cheerfull upon duty, as they went readily unto it. The next day, the General and the Officers went to take a more particular view of the Town; it was the joynt opinion of them all, that they might carry the same by storm. The Enemy, according to their wonted manner, not sparing to take or destroy any thing, whereby they might advan∣tage themselves, and disadvantage us; burnt Mr. Plumley's house, and therein 400 bushels of Corn threshed, and as much unthreshed. In order to a Storm, more Forces were ordered to march to assist those before Dartmouth. By lying three or four cold dayes before it, we lost nothing but a little time; for by that stay, Captain Batten (being desired by the General) was come before the Haven with a Squadron of ships to assist by sea, and to keep any of their ships from going out of the harbour, while we stormed by land. Thursday the 15. the Country (upon orders) brought in Ladders: the Comptroller was sent aboard Captain Batten for some Sea-men, received 200. and allotted them a Post to do duty. Friday the 16. The General himself took an account in what readines things were for a storm; More particular intelligence (to that which came before) was given out of the town, what condition they were in there; good Guides were sent for from Plymouth, that were Captain Roopes men, and had been formerly inhabitants of Dartmouth, to direct our men the best way into the town upon the storm. Saturday, 17. the General went again to view the Town; all things were concluded on for a storm, and Lots cast for every man, who should fall on first, and who to come on as Reserves; the Officers of all the Regiments viewed their severall Posts, and every man provided his guides. Lords-day, 18. Mr. Del, in the morning, and Mr. Peters, in the evening, exhorted the souldiers to their duty; (For Mr. Bowles, who had formerly attended the service of the
Army, being called to his charge at York, had taken his leave of his Excellencie, Mr. Del succeeding in his room) The souldiers were all drawn out; about seven at night Forlorn hopes were set; the evening very milde as at Midsomer, the frost being newly gone: the Word was given, God with us; the signal of the Souldiers was, their shirts out before and behind. Dartmouth stormed, and taken. About 11. a clock at night, the storm begun; and after the Enemy had discharged once, our Men got under their Canon, and quickly pos∣sessed them, and turned them against the Enemy; for the Army had no Peeces at all of their own, the way and weather not admitting any to be drawn against that place, where there were an hundred Peeces ready mounted a∣gainst them, (a strange and unparalleld undertaking) The Commanders of every Party possest those places they were designed unto: Lieut. colonel Pride, who led on Colonel Harlowes Regiment, possest Mount-Boon, wherein were 22 peeces of Ordnance; Colonel Hamond possest the West gate, wherein were 4 Peeces of ordnance, and two in the Flanker: Colonel Fortescue gained Tunstal-church, with 12 Peeces of ordnance, and so we became masters of the whole Town, and the old Castle, in which were 5 great Iron guns which commanded the River. In all, our men possessed themselves of about 60. peeces of Ordnance in the storm, among which one Brass Demi-canon. And such was even the miraculous goodness of God in this storm, that we lost but one man, and had very few wounded, notwithstanding they plyed most fiercely both great and small shot upon our men from the Forts. The storm succeeding so well, the Comptroller of the Ordnance was sent to summon two Men of war which lay in the River, which no sooner received the Summons, but they yielded immediately. There were two great Forts, wherein were about 34 Peeces of ordnance, which stood a mile from the town, not taken with the rest, that beat a Parley three houres together before they were heard; but in issue, Sir Henry Cary, who was in one of them, had
conditions to march away, He and his Officers with arms; the Governour, and Lord Newport, &c. being in the other Fort, were refused the like conditions, and submitted them∣selves to mercy. I should have enlarged the more upon the action of this storm, but that I finde a Letter of the Generals to the House of Peers concerning the same, which is more wor∣thy to be heard it self, as followeth. My Lords, His Excellen∣cies Letter to the House of eers concer∣ning the take∣ing of Dart∣mouth. After my comming to Totnes, the Enemy rising in great disorder from their siege at Plymouth, leaving their guns and some ammu∣nition behind them, I considered with those about me, of attempt∣ing upon Dartmouth; and it being concluded affirmatively, I caused two Regiments of Foot to march to Ditsam, and two to Stoke-Flemming, being on the West side of Dart river. I having summoned the place before, resolved upon Sunday night to attempt it by storm, which was agreed to be done in three places; The first Post was on the West-gate, by Colonel Hamond; On the North∣end of the Town, by Lieut. colonel Pride; and on Tunstal Church and Works by Col. Fortescue: The time resolved upon was in the evening; Our men fell on with great resolution, to whom Colonel Lamberts Regiment was a Reserve, and to alarm the Enemy elsewhere. Colonel Hamond enred the West-gate, where foure guns were planted, and two upon the Mill-poole, upon his Flank, (the Enemy firing his great guns but once) His men that had the Forlorn-hope did very gallantly (as indeed they did all) and went freely on, and beat off the Enemy, and possessed one Fort after an∣other, viz. Mount-Flaggon, the West-gate, Paradice-Fort, and beat off the Main guard, where were taken four Lieut. colonels; And so possessed the Town, from the West-gate, to Little-Dartmouth. In the interim, Lieut. colonel Pride attempted the North part of the Town, called Harnesse; where beating off the Enemy, he entred, and took about 80 prisoners in it, and by it pos∣sessed all the North part of the Town, unto the Draw-bridge, which divided the North part from the rest of the Town; where Colonel Hamonds men, and his, met. Colonel Fortescue with his men
attempted Tunstal Church, which was very well manned, with above 100. men, and having in it 10. guns: His men, after some dispute, with good resolution entred the place, and possessed it. So that by this time the Enemy was beaten out of all, except the great Fort on the East side of the River, called Kingsworth-Fort, and the Castle, with the Fort that lay over the Castle at the mouth of the Harbour, called Gallants-Bower; to which last, the Governour, and the Earl of Newport, and as many as escaped us, fled. After they were forced from their Strengths out of the Town; the Governour comming back from the Castle, to see in what posture the Town was, had a remarkable shot, as he was in the Boat: A Musquet-shot was made at the Boat, which pierced the Boat, and both the thighs of one that sate next to him, and about three inches into his own thigh; whereupon he retreated to the Castle. Our Dragoons, with 2 companies of our Firelocks, and some Sea-men, were only to alarm Kingsworth-Fort, wherein was Sir Henry Cary with his Regiment, having in it 12 Guns, and 12 Barrels of Powder, and convenient proportion of Ammunition. This was a very strong Fort, with about four good Bulwarks, strong enough to make a troublesome resistance: But the Enemy came willingly to Terms; and to save time, I willingly condescended to let Sir Henry Cary march away, with the rest, leaving the Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition, with all Provisions in the Fort, to Me, and All engaging themselves never to take up Arms more against the Parliament; which was accordingly performed. Next morning, being thus Master of all, but the Castle, and Gallants-Bower, I summoned that: The Governour was willing to listen unto me; but I held him to those terms, upon which after some dispute, he yielded; which was, To deliver himself, and all Officers and Souldiers, upon Quarter. He sent me out Colonel Seymour, and Master Denham, for Hostages, with whom came out the Earle of Newport, and all was this day per∣formed accordingly. In this Fort and Castle were eleven Guns, with proportion of Ammunition and Provisions: We have taken in the Harbour two Men of war; one belonging to the Governour of Barnstable, with 12 guns, Burthen 200. Tuns; the other belonging to Newcastle, formerly Captain Johnsons, of 10. guns.
In the Town, One hundred and three Peeces of Ordnance, and about six hundred Prisoners, and one hundred Horse, with good proportion of Arms and Ammunition, an exact particular whereof I am not able to give your Lordships at present. There being many of the town, Souldiers in Plymouth, and some Officers; and understanding that that Town hath Two thou∣sand five hundred in garrison, besides Townsmen, I have sent thither for Five hundred Foot for this place, who quickly will in∣crease to more: And to this I desire your approbation; for having found more work to do, I held it not fit to weaken my Army, especi∣ally considering the Recruits designed by you, I doubt will be too long before they come. I have given your Lordships a brief account of this Service; which I desire may be accompted a sweet mercy of God, in a fitting season, and only ascribed to Him, who (truly) did direct and act it, and made all the preparation to it, both in the ordering our hearts, & giving Health to the Army, who laboured two moneths ago ex∣tremely of Sicknesse, but is now in good disposition generally to health. I can say, I find it to be in the hearts of all here, in all in∣tegrity to serve you; And that it is so, is still the mercy of GOD: For surely, the successe of your Affairs only depends upon the order∣ing of a Gratious Providence; which is no lesse visible in your Councels, (which we congratulate) then amongst us; That being the common root and spring of all, and which can and will carry you through the greatest difficulties, and us in serving you, untill God hath finished his own work. Wherein to professe the obligation and readines of my self, and the Army, by the same good hand of GOD, is all the undertaking of Your Lordships most humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX. Dartmouth, Ian. 20. 1645.
Prisoners taken at DARTMOUTH. Sir Hugh Pollard, Governour. Earl of Newport. Colonel Seymour. Lieutenant-Colonels, 4. Majors, 2. Cap∣tains, 15. Lieutenants, 14. Ensigns, 9. and one Cornet. Besides many Country-Gentlemen, Ministers, and Inferior Officers. All the Common-souldiers, being betwixt 800. and 1000. were set at liberty to repair to their dwellings. Ordnance, about 120. mounted; and 2 Men of War in the Harbour. After our men were entred the Town, they had extream wet weather, which continued so the next day, that it much hindred the setling of the Town. Monday, 19. Sir Henry Cary marched out of the Town, with all his Officers and Souldiers, leaving the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein, to us. Some time was spent this day in the disposing of the Prisoners. The Engineer, being a Papist, (as the Implements that he had about him did declare, viz. the Masse-book, Cope, Hood, and Surplice, which were found in his chamber) was in danger to have been torne in peeces by the Women of the town, for his cruelty in burning of houses, and other villanous acts. Tuesday, 20. the Guns were cleered. The General went aboard Captain Battens ship, where he was Nobly entertained. The noble usage of the Cornish (though enemies) All the Cornish-men that were prisoners, were set at liberty, and had two shillings a man, to carry them home; That the Cornish might see, we had forgot for∣mer injuries, and respected them as much as any other County. Commissioners were appointed to dispose of the Prize-goods taken in the Town, towards the reparation of the Well-affected of the Town, that suffered at the Storm, who had the greatest part of the Goods distributed amongst them.
And now the General, having reaped so great and happy an advantage by his digression from the siege of Excester, (though he left sufficient Force also to block it up) The next day, without any more delay, returned to Totnes; Issued out Warrants to four Hundreds, to ap∣peare there on Saturday at nine of the clock, in order to the service of the Kingdome, and particularly for the good of those Parts.
ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY. PART IV. CHAP. I. The Army returning to the Siege at Excester: Pouldram Castle sur∣rendred: A French Vessell struck into Dartmouth, wherein Letters of consequence from the Queen: How far the reducing of Excester was endeavoured before a second diversion. HIS Excellency and the conduct of this Ar∣my (in all their motion attending Provi∣dence) having answered the call of God in rising from Excester, and meeting the Ene∣my (wherein they found that great assi∣stance and successe that hath been related) now dis∣cerning no further advantage offering it selfe against the Field-Enemy at present, his Excellency, with the advice of his Officers, resolves with all speed possible, to return with the Army to the Siege of Excester, and to improve the advantage of that further reputation their late suc∣cesses had given them, in vigorous endeavours against that place; and in the meane time, till the other Forces could follow, some Regiments martched toward Excester, a Summons was sent to S. Edmund Fortescue, Governor of Charls-fort at Salcomb; from whence a refusal of surrender was returned, & consultation was had about Barnstable. Saturday Jan. 24. The Country according to appoint∣ment of his Excellency, appeared at Totnes, in number about 3000. out of whom, upon consultation with the Committees, a Regiment was to be raised of such as were willing, under Colonel Fowell: which done, the General
martched to the Lady Reynolds her house, whence on the Lords day after forenoons Sermon, his Excellency martch∣ed to Chidley, endeavouring first to take a view of Poul∣dram; before which place Col. Hammond was set downe with some force: Pouldram Ca∣stle surren∣dred. But night comming on (whilest he had yet two miles thither) he was forced to returne to Chid∣ley, whithout viewing the Castle, which ere the next day was happily put out of a capacity of being viewed by him (but in a new Relation;) for about twelve at night the newes came to him of the surrender thereof, and therein five Barrels of Powder, Match and Bullet pro∣portionable, and four pieces of Ordnance. A French Ves∣sell (by a good Providence) strucke into Dartmouth upon a mi∣stake. Monday 26. Tidings were brought the General of a French Vessel that came from France with a Packet from the Queen, which was struck into Dartmouth, presuming it to have still been in the hands of the Kings Forces: and indeed little likelihood was there that it should be in any other, especially so sodainly, and at a time of yeer so un∣seasonable for action or storm, but that God encouraged the Army to undertake it, and his strong Arm prospered them in their attempt. The Packet of Letters (which were of no small conse∣quence) strong∣ly recovered. The Vessel being thus delivered, by immediate Providence, into our hands, the Packet of Letters was yet more strangely preserved and recovered out of the Sea, wherinto it was thrown, when they knew their mistake (according to the Queens directions) but God provided a Wave to bring it to the Boat that was sent out to seek it, and so it was brought unto his Excel∣lency; wherein was found Letters from the Queen, Lord Goring, Lord Jermin, Davenant and others, intercepted: Some of the Contents were these. The speciall and most ob∣servable Con∣tents of the Letters. The Queen by her Letters in answer to some for∣mer Letters she had received, touching the King's in∣tentions of transporting the Prince to Denmark, ut∣terly dislikes it, and neither approves of Holland or Flan∣ders; adviseth the bringing of him into France: And as touching his Marriage with the Duke of Orleance his Daughter, which seemed to be an objection against
it, Shee replyed, That they knew she was engaged els∣where; and what if he should marry her? the Dutchesse of Orleance so far exceeding them in Riches and potent Alliances might be of great assistance to the King: But desires, That he may be disposed of any whither, rather then to come into the hands of the Rebels: touching the Scots affairse, she had this expression; That she had sent William Murray fully instructed with her mind about it. The Lord Goring in his Letter to the Lord Wentworth and Sir John Berkley, gave them assurance, That now the Negotiation with France was happily concluded by the industry of the Lord Jermin. In his Letter to Sir Hugh Pollard the Governour of Dartmouth, he doth assure him, That by the first of March he should have five well appointed Men of Warre, of the second rank, the least bearing above thirty pieces of Ordnance, to be solely under his command, so that he might grow rich upon the spoile of the Rebels, or else put them to the charge of keeping an whole Navy be∣fore him. The Lord Widdrington, not so well satisfied with the preparations of France, used this expression in one of his Letters; That he gave all hopes for lost, for ever re∣turning to his owne Country again, except the businesse of the Scots took effect. A Summons sent into Ex∣cester. But as to the Siege of Excester, our Forces being drawn neer unto this side of the City, a Sūmons was prepared, wherein honorable conditions were offered them; which Summons was sent in the next day, being January 17. The Enemies Answer. Whereunto on the morrow an Answer was returned very faire to this purpose, That in honour they could not surrender upon the termes offered, while they were in no worse condition, and had such probable hopes of reliefe from the Prince. His Excellen∣cies Reply. Thursday 29. A Reply was returned, the conditions re-inforced, and further urged, by undertaking in the be∣halfe of the Parliament and General, that what they pro∣mised
in the Summons should be made good: and this is as farre as they proceeded at this time; being a second time diverted by other action;  The grounds of this second diversion from the Siege of Excester. for newes came this day to the Army, that the Enemies Horse from Oxford were come neer Corfe Castle, and the Lord Gorings Forces were advanced up neer Barnstable, portending a designe to joyne together; to prevent which, the General went from Chidley to Tiverton to give order about that point, sent Colonel Cook from thence with three Regiments of Horse of Major General Massies Brigade, to attend the Enemies motion, and the next day some Regiments of Horse and Dragoons martched from these parts to a Randezvouz toward the North of Devon, though upon second advice they were recalled to Quarters. The feare of another diversion from the Siege of Ex∣cester, had almost driven the Army to a resolution of stor∣ming it, insomuch that Warrants were issued out to all the Hundreds round about Excester for Ladders, and also a dispatch to Plymouth to send their Scaling-ladders for that purpose: which disposition of the Army, what in∣fluence it might have upon the Enemy, I know not: but the Lords day Febr. 1. a Lieutenant and ten Horse well armed, came in to Sir Hardresse Waller from the Enemy, and that night the Plymouth Regiment took a Major and twenty Horse neer Barnstable; and Tuesday following a Lieutenant-Colonell and fifteen men more with their Armes, came in from the Enemy; The General in the meane time being returned to Chidley. Thursday 5. Upon intelligence of the Enemies Horse being gone towards Dunster; Colonel Cook who had Or∣ders to martch somewhat further Eastward, in order to the Oxford horse, that by information from the east, were to be in Dorsetshire, had Orders to returne. Friday 6. Came newes that a Party of Horse of the Enemie (computed by the countries information, fifteen hundred) had put some small reliefe into Dunster, taking that opportunity when those Forces that attended ther∣about
were drawn toward Corfe Castle: in their retreat the Country, with the assistance of Colonel Blakes For∣ces, that were not able to oppose so great a Body, and therefore during Reliefe secured themselves in a strong house, fell upon their Rear, slew some, took others pri∣soners, and disarmed more. The same day the Army re∣ceived the good newes of Belvoyr surrendred: And now followes, to discourse how the hand of Providence led us first into the north of Devon, and then into Cornwall: Onely first celebrate that good newes of the surrender of Westchester, after a long Siege, by that faithfull and indefatigable Commander Sir William Brereton, which newes came to the General on the Lords day, Feb. 8. CHAP. II. Our Army a second time diverted from the Siege of Excester; with a particular account of the reasons thereof: and the Motion and Acti∣ons of the Army occasioned thereby A Counsell of Warre called. LOrds day, Feb. 8. A Counsel of Warre was called to consider of martching with part of the Army into the north of Devonshire, towards Torrington and Barnstable, for the straightning thereof, and for the bet∣ter conveniency of Quarter, the Army being much straightned for provisions where they were, as also to possesse those parts, and thereby dispossesse the Enemy, who had some parties of Horse there, which miserably oppressed the Country: whilest they were in this Con∣sultation, certaine intelligence was brought by Spyes, That the Enemy, who had been labouring as for life, to raise the Cornish, and had brought a considerable number to Launceston, to re-inforce their Army (being in all about four thousand Foot, besides their Horse) were once more with all their strength martching over the River Tamar towards Torrington, and as the Spyes informed, would be there on Tuesday night: likewise Letters from the Lord Wentworth to Sir John Berkley Governour of
Excester, being at the same time intercepted, encourag∣ing him to expect Reliefe shortly. Upon this, Orders were given for the drawing of most of the Horse and Foot to a Randezvouz the next day. A Counsell of Warre called. The subject of their debate. Monday Feb. 9. A Counsel of Warre was called, to advise what to doe, and in issue it was resolved to ad∣vance towards the Enemy with part of the Army, hav∣ing already with the residue perfectly blocked up Exce∣ster on the west side also, by setling Guards and Quar∣ters at Affington, Barley house and Reymouth-house, with∣in a mile of the City, and a Garrison kept at Powdram; be∣sides that some of the Foot under the command of Co∣lonel Shapcoat, blocked up the Fort at Exmouth; by which meanes Excester was now compleatly straightned and blocked up on both sides. Accordingly Orders were im∣mediately sent to the Horse and Foot to prepare for a martch, and the Forces designed on both sides of Exce∣ster to straighten that place, were commanded to receive Orders from Sir Hardresse Waller, to whose care and judgment the management of that businesse was recom∣mended, whilest the rest of the Army advanced to the Enemy. The Army on heir martch owards the Enemy. Tuesday Feb. 10. The General and the Army begun their Martch, and that day martched from Chidley to Cre∣diton the head Quarter, where the Army rested a day, till the Treasure (that was at Dartmouth) was come up, and other Forces that were to martch from other Quarters were drawne up to them: The while fresh intelligence was brought to his Excellency, that the Enemy with five thousand Horse, and four thousand Foot, were come to Torrington, expecting a thousand Horse and Foot from Barnstable to joyne with them, all under the command of the Lord Hopton, who by a new Commission was made Commander in chiefe, (the Lord Goring being in France;) who had used much expedition in his martch, having martched in one day from Stratton to Torrington, being eighteen large miles; they brought along with
them much Cattle and Sheep, which with salt and other provisions that were to come from Barnstable, were for the Reliefe of Excester: This Intelligence fully resolving the Army in the Motions and Intentions of the Enemy, engaged them yet deeper in their Reso∣lutions to make speed towards them, and not passing one or two dayes intervened their martch: In this interim tydings were brought the Army, that Warham and the Committees there being surprized by a party of Horse from Oxford, was by Colonel Cook regained, he being with fifteen hundred Horse then about Shaftsbury, and that Colonel Cromwel, who commanded the Kings party, was by him taken prisoner, that the Horse were escaped and fled into Corfe Castle, not apprehended by our Guards through the darknesse of the night: More∣over that Mr Murrey and Sir David Conningham were ta∣ken coming out of France. Saturday, Feb. 14. The Army martched from Crediton to Chimleigh, being ten miles, the Weather wet, and the way dirty; the Enemy but a little before our Forces came, were in the Towne, and were beaten out by the Plymouth Regiment, Lieutenant-colonel Wicks and others taken prisoners. Here his Excellency received intelligence, that the Enemy continued at Torrington, and were a considerable Army: upon which, Sunday Febr. 15. the Army martched early from Chimleigh, and had a Randezvouz two miles off in the way to Torrington. Our Horse brought in divers prisoners to the Randez∣vouz, who confest that the Lord Hopton was in Torring∣ton, and that he had sent out parties by three of the clock that morning to discover our motion; also one of our Spyes came thither out of Torrington that morning, assu∣ring his Excellency, that the Enemies whole Army was in and about Torrington, not expecting our being so neer. The Army was drawn to the Randezvouz, with inten∣tion to martch to Torrington, but the weather proving so bad, & the bridges being broken down by the enemy, and
besides, the day being far spent, put the General upon re∣solution to order his owne Regiment of Foot, and a par∣ty of two hundred Horse, under the command of Cap∣taine Berry, to advance three or four mile in the way to Torrington to amuze the Enemy, and himselfe with the rest of the Army to return to Chimleigh. A party of Colonel Butler's men that were upon the Guard, tooke fourteene men, and seven and twenty Horse (part of the Enemies Guard) and brought them to Chimleigh, being most of them of Goring's Life-guard; who being brought before the General, confest they heard of our advance. Cattaine Berry, who was sent (as before) toward the Enemy, returned with his party of two hundred Horse, informing the General, that they had met with a party of the Enemy about the same number, that the Enemy charged him, but he had, by the assistance of God, routed them, and sore wounded Lieu∣tenant colonel Dundasse, who led on the party, and brought him and others away prisoners; but Dundasse was so sore wounded, that he was forced to be left at a country Village upon his Parolle, to render himselfe a prisoner if he recovered; which accordingly he very punctually performed; and the General in commisera∣ton of his condition, being disabled for service by rea∣son of his Wounds, up∣on his tender, to engage himselfe never to beare Armes against the Parlia∣ment, granted him his li∣berty. It should be remembred here, that upon the Armies advance to Torrington, Colonel Cooke, who al∣wayes readily received, and punctu∣ally observed his Orders, was sent with Major-General Massie's Horse to lye before Barnstable, and upon that part of Devonshire, to be in a posture to interrupt the Enemies Horse, in case upon the Armies ad∣vance into Cornwal, they should at∣tempt to break through. Monday, February 16. The Drummes Beat by four of the clocke in the Morning; The generall Randezvouz of the Army was appointed to bee at Rings-Ash, about three Miles from Chimleigh; where accordingly by seven of the clocke in the Morning,
the whole Army was drawne up in Battalia, Horse and Foot, on the Moore, five miles short of Torrington, and so martched in order ready for a present engagement, in case the Enemy should attempt any thing in our martch through the narrow Lanes; the Forelorn-Hope of horse, commanded by Major Stephens and Captaine Moleneux, being advanced towards Stephenston (Master Rolls his house neer Torrington) his Excellency understood, that the Enemy had two hundred Dragoons in the House, whereupon a commanded Party of Horse and Foot were sent to fall on them, but upon the advance of our Forces towards them, the Enemy quit the place; yet our Horse martching fast, engaged their Reare, took severall of their Dragoons prisoners, and afterwards the Forelorn-Hope of Horse on both sides were much engaged in the narrow and dirty Lanes; at last, we beat them from Ma∣ster Rolls his house all along the Lane almost to Torring∣ton. The Army en∣gaged with the Enemy neere Torrington. About five of the clock in the Evening the Van of the Army was drawn up in the Park, the Forelorn-Hope of Foot was drawne out neer the Forelorn-Hope of Horse in the mid-way between Master Rolls house and Torrington, and there lined the Hedges to make good the retreat of the Horse, the Enemy likewise drew out of the Towne four or five Closes off, and lined the Hedges with Musquetteers within a Close of ours, and flankt their Foot with Horse; whereupon good reserves were sent to second our Forelorn-Hope of Foot, least the enemy knowing the ground, and we being strangers unto it, might suddenly encompasse us (it being by this time dark night, and the whole Army being then come up, having martched ten miles that day;) about eight at night the Enemy drew off from some of the Closes they formerly possest; whereupon we gained the ground they quitted, & a Counsel of war being called, whether it was advisable it might engage the Enemies Body then in the town, who were ready with the best advātages of ground & Barricado's to receive us; it was the general sense of the
Counsell to make good our ground and double our Guards till the next morning, that we might the better take view of the places where we were like to engage; whereupon the General and Lieutenant-General went from Master Rolls his house to see the Guards accord∣ingly set, but hearing a noyse in the Towne, as if the Enemy were retreating, and being loath they should goe away without an affront, to that purpose, and that we might get certaine knowledge whether they were go∣ing off or not, a small Party of Dragoons were sent to fire on the Enemy neer the Barricadoes and Hedges; the Enemy answered us with a round Volley of shot, there∣upon the Forlorn-Hope of Foot went and engaged themselves to bring off the Dragoons, and the reserve fell on to bring off the Forlorn-Hope: And being thus far engaged, the General being on the Field, and seeing the generall resolution of the Souldiery, held fit, that the whole Regiments in order, after them, should fall on, and so both sides were accordingly engaged in the dark, for some two hours, till we beat them from the Hedges, & within their Barricadoes, which were very strong, and where some of their men disputed the entrance of our Forces with push of Pike, and butt end of Musket for a long time; at last it pleased God to give us the Victory, our Foot first entring the Towne, and afterwards the Horse, who chased the Enemy through the Towne, the Lord Hopton bringing up the Reare, had his Horse shot dead under him in the middle of the Town; Their Horse once facing about in the street, caused our Foot to re∣treat, but more of our Horse comming up pursued them to the Bridges, and through the other Barracadoes at the further end of the Towne, where we had no sooner pla∣ced Guards at the severall Avenues, and had drawne our whole Army of Foot and most of our Horse into the Towne, but the Magazine of neer eighty barrels of Powder, which the Lord Hopton had in the Church, was fired by a desperate villaine, one Watts, whom the Ene∣my
had hired with thirty pounds for that purpose, as he himselfe confessed the next day, when he was pul'd out from under the rubbish and timber; and the Lead, Stones, Timber and Iron-work of the Church were blowne up into the Ayre, and scattered all over the Towne and Fields about it where our Forces were; yet it pleased God miraculously to preserve the Army, that few were slaine besides the Enemies (that were prisoners in the Church where the Magazine was blowne up) and most of our men that guarded them, who were killed and bu∣ried in the ruines: And here was Gods great mercy unto us, that the General being there in the streets, escaped with his life so narrowly, there falling a web of Lead with all its force, which killed the Horse of one Master Rhoads, of the Life-guard, who was thereon next to the General in the street, but doing neither him nor the General any hurt. There were taken in the Towne about six hundred prisoners, besides Officers, great store of Armes (the Lanes and Fields being bestrewed with them) all their Foot were scattered, their Horse fled that night towards Cornwal in great confusion; the pri∣soners we took confessed they had about four thousand Foot and four thousand Horse at least: the service was very hot, we had many wounded, it was stoutly main∣tained on both sides for the time. If any particular be omitted in this Relation, let the Generals Letter to the Speaker of the House of Com∣mons supply the same, which here followeth, with a List of the slaine and taken in this fight. To the Honourable William Lenthall Esquire; SPEAKER of the Honourable House of COMMONS. Master Speaker, His Excellen∣cies Letter concerning the Fight at Torrington. PLymouth being set free, and Dartmouth taken, I sent Colonel Hammond with part of the Foot to possesse part
of the houses neer Excester for the blocking of it up on the West side of the River, as formerly I had done on the East, and lay with the rest of the Army, so as to countenance both that Work, and the raising of some Forces in the Southams to lye about Totnes for the securing of that Country, and to keep the Enemy from comming of that side of Devonshire againe, when the Army should remove to the other: These two things, with the continuall foule weather at that time, and the absence of Colonel Cook, with so many of the Horse, occasioned my stay thereabouts above a fortnight; in which time the houses being competently fortified, and the Forces raising in the Southams in good forwardnesse, I drew the Army up towards Crediton, with purpose to advance into the North of Devonshire also, either by the taking of Barn∣stable, or by blocking of it up, and raising a Force in that wel affected corner to keep it in, so as having all cleer or made fast behind me, I might the better follow the remaining Field Forces of the Enemy into Cornwal. And to continue the blocking up of Excester on the West side, I left Sir Har∣dresse Waller with three Regiments of Foot and one of Horse of this Army, and advanced with five Regiments of Horse and seven Regiments of Foot, and five Troops of Dra∣goons, the rest of the Horse and Dragoons being absent with Colonel Cook in Dorsetshire, but then sent for to come up, when I was resolved upon my advance this way. The Enemy at the same time advanced out of Cornwal with all the Foot to Torrington, about which their Horse did lye before, and began to fortifie the Towne: Their intentions therein, as we conceived, and doe since further find, were by the advantage of this place and their Garrison of Barnstable so neer it, to make this part of Devonshire more surely theirs, and more difficult for us to come into, and lying so much the neerer to Excester (against which they supposed this Army wholly engaged) to take their best advantages from hence and from Chimley, which they meant also to have possessed, to relieve Excester on the North side, or disturb us in the Siege; and it is probable they might have a further purpose in their po∣sture
here, to secure the landing of Irish or Welsh supplies so much the forwarder towards the East. On Saturday last, I advanced from Crediton to Chim∣leigh, where by many prisoners I was informed, That the Lord Hopton had hereabouts foure thousand Horse, and three thousand Foot; Wee beleeved them to be about two thousand Foot or upwards, and three thousand Horse; the extreame foulnesse of Weather that day and the next, occasi∣oned me not to advance from about Chimleigh, for the next night, save only one Foot Quarter and an Horse Guard ad∣vanced to Ring-Ash, three miles towards the Enemy, to se∣cure a Randezvouz so much the neerer to them; for the day following I understood by the best Intelligence, that the Enemy was resolved to make good their station, and set their rest upon it to fight us there if we would come up to them; and truly men in their condition could not hope (al things consider∣ed) to have more for it, their Horse for nūber superior to what I brought up with me, their Foot, as I find since, not much in∣feriour; and if they could with all their force make good this Towne, and put us to lye in the Field, there being no Villa∣ges neer it that could shelter the Army, the wet weather con∣tinuing, which was then most likely, would have forced us to draw back and make our fire Armes little usefull, either for assault or defence; and besides, we were like, for matter of provisions, to be forced to draw off first, they having both by their posture, with the plentifull Country of Cornwal be∣hind them, and a River at their backs, securing also a good part of Devonshire unto them, and by their strength of Horse, much advantage for longer subsistence then we; and we by the barrennesse of the place where we must have lyen before them, especially for Horse meat, their Garrison of Barnstable lying partly behind us, their Horse more nume∣rous then ours, which might with stronger parties cut off our supplyes, had little possibility to subsist long before them. These Considerations we had in our eye to discourage us from going on, as I beleeve they had to encourage them to stand; yet on the other side, finding that by reason of the barrennesse
and long exhausting of our Quarters behind us, we could nei∣ther keep our Horse so close together as to lye safe so neer the Enemy, nor indeed find subsistence for the Army, either where we were, or in any other Quarters more backward, where we could lye so as to secure the Siege of Excester from reliefe, and upon all considerations conceiving the affaires of the Kingdome did require us, and God by all did call us to make a present attempt upon the Enemy; Wee resolved to goe on, to try what God would doe for us, and trust him for weather, subsistence and all things. Accordingly, on Monday morning I drew out the Army to an early Randezvouz at Ring-ash, within six miles of the Enemy; the weather still continued very wet, and so by all signes was like to hold till we were advanced from the Ran∣dezvouz; but suddenly, when we were upon Martch, it, be∣yond all expectation, began to be faire and dry, and so conti∣nued, whereas we had scarce seene one faire blast for many dayes before. The Enemy (as we understood by the way) had all their Horse drawne together about Torrington, and with their foot prepared to defend the Towne, which they had fortified with good barricadoes of earth cast up at eve∣ry avenew, and a competent line patcht up round about it, their Horse standing by to flanke the same, and some within to scoure the Streets. Our Forlorne-Hope had order to ad∣vance to Stephenson Parke, about a mile from the Towne, and there to stay for the drawing up of the Army, there being no other place fit for that purpose neerer to the Towne on that side we came on. But when we came neere, we under∣stood that the Enemy had with two hundred Dragoons pos∣sest the House in the Parke, and were fortifying it, being of it selfe very strong; but upon our neerer approach, their Dragoons quitted the House, and our Forlorn-Hope falling on them, took many prisoners, and pursuing them neer the Towne, were engaged so far as they could not well draw back to the Parke, which occasioned the sending up of stronger Parties to make them good where they were, or bring them off; and at last, there being some feare that the Enemy
would draw about them and hem them in, Colonel Ham∣mond was sent up with three Regiments of Foot, being his owne, Colonel Harlowes, and mine, and some more Horse to lye for reserves unto them; by which time the night was growne on, so that it was not thought fit, unlesse the Enemy appeared to be drawing away, to attempt any thing further upon the Towne till morning, in regard none of us knew the ground, nor the advantages or disadvantages of it; but about nine of the clock, there being some apprehension of the Enemies drawing away, by reason of their drawing back some Out-guards, small Parties were sent out towards the Townes end to make a certaine discovery, which going very neer their Works, before the Enemy made any firing, but be∣ing at last entertained with a great Volley of shot, and there∣upon supposed to be engaged, stronger Parties were sent up to relieve them, and alter them the three Regiments went up for reserves, till at last they fell on in earnest; after very hot firings, our men comming up to the Barricadoes and Line, the dispute continued long at push of Pike and with butt ends of Muskets, till at last it pleased God to make the Enemy fly from their Works, and give our men the entrance: After which our men were twice repulsed by their Horse, and al∣most all driven out againe, but Colonel Hammond with some other Officers and a few Souldiers, made a stop at the Barri∣cadoes, and so making good their re-entrance, rallyed their men and went on againe, Major Stephens with their For∣lorn Hope of Horse comming seasonably up to second them, the Enemies Foot ran severall wayes, most of them leaving their Armes, but most of their Officers, with the assistance of Horse, made good their owne retreat out of the Towne to∣wards the Bridge, and taking the advantage of straight passages, to make often stands against our men, gave time for many of their Foot to get over the Bridge; Their Horse with∣out the Towne, after some attempts at other Avenues, to have broken in againe upon us, being repulsed, at last went all away over another Bridge, and at severall other passes of the River, and all fell Westward; the ground where their
Horse had stood and the Bridge they went over lying so be∣yond the Towne, as our Horse could not come at them but through the Towne, which by reason of straight passages through severall Barricadoes was very tedious, by meanes wereof, and by reason of continued straight lanes the Enemy had to retreat by after they were over the River, as also by the advantage of the night, and by their perfect knowledge of the Country, and our ignorance therein, our Horse could doe little execution upon the pursuit, but Parties being sent out seve∣rall wayes to follow them, as those disadvantages would admit, did the best they could, and brought back many pri∣soners and Horses, we took many prisoners in the Towne, who being put into the Church where the Enemies Maga∣zine lay, of above four score barrels of Powder, as is report∣ed, besides other Ammunition, either purposely by some de∣sperate Prisoner, or casually by some Souldier, the Powder was fired, whereby the Church was quite blown up, the Prisoners and most of our men that guarded them were killed and over∣whelmed in the Ruines; the houses of the Towne shaken and shattered, and our men all the Town over much endangered by the stones, timber and lead, which with the blast were carried up very high, and scattered in great abundance all the Town over, and beyond; yet it pleased God that few of our men were slaine or hurt thereby, save those in the Church, onely our losse of men otherwise in this service was small, though many wounded, it being a hotter service then any storme this Army hath before been upon, wherein God gave our men great resolution; and Colonel Hammond especially and other Officers engaged with him, behaved themselves with much resolution, courage and diligence, recovering the ground af∣ter their men were twice repulsed: Of Prisoners taken in this service about two hundred were blowne up, two hun∣dred have taken up Armes with us, and about two hun∣dred more common Souldiers remaine Prisoners; besides many Officers, Gentlemen and servants, not many slaine, but their Foot so dispersed, as that of about three thousand, which the most credible persons do affirme they had there,
and we find by a List, taken among the Lord Hopton's Pa∣pers, themselves did accompt them more, we cannot heare of above four hundred that they carried off with them into Cornwal, whither their Horse also are gone, being much broken and dispersed as well as their Foot. By the Conside∣rations and circumstances in this businesse, which I have here touched upon, you will perceive whose hand it was that led us to it, and gave such successe in it; and truly there were ma∣ny more evident appearances of the good hand of God, there∣in, then I can set forth, let all the honour be to him alone for ever, being desirous, as God shall see it good, and further en∣able me, to improve the advantage of this successe to the ut∣termost: The next day having sent some Regiments of Horse and Foot to advance unto Quarters up towards Holsworthy to set the Enemy more home into Cornwal, and with more terror upon them, I sent also one Regiment of Foot, with some Horse, back towards Barnstable to possesse the Earl of Baths house at North-Tavestock, about a mile from Barnstable on this side the River, whereby that Garrison will be easily kept in on this side, and I shall try what will be done upon it otherwayes, whilest the Army takes a little rest hereabouts, which the unseasonable Martches, miserable Quarters, & hard Duty both Horse and Foot, for many dayes, have been put unto, doe necessarily require: But I conceive that so soon as the Army can be fitted for the purpose, it would be best to fol∣low the Enemy home and throughly into Cornwal; the break∣ing of that Body of Horse that's left there being the likeliest meanes to prevent or discourage the landing of any Forraign Forces in these parts, or the raising of any more out of Corn∣wal: In order to which I must earnestly recommend to your care two things especially; The one, to provide by the dispo∣sall of your Forces in the Mid-land parts, that by excursions from Oxford hitherward, I may not be diverted from pro∣secution of the Work in Cornwal, to send againe that way, nor the Sieges of Excester and Barnstable disturbed when I am engaged further West: The other, That money may be speeded, if any ways possible, but for a moneth or six weeks to
enable the Horse as well as Foot to pay Quarters in Corn∣wal, whereby the oppositions that People might make would in all likelihood be taken off, and their affections or good opi∣nions gained, to make them helpfull to us against their pre∣sent oppressors. There came unto me this day a young man from Truro, who certifieth me, That Sir Walter Dudley came very lately from France, to let those about the Prince know, that if there were an absolute necessity they could bring over their men with a faire wind from France to be here by the middle of the next moneth; expressing, that they had neer 8000. Foot, and a thousand Horse in readinesse, and three months pay provided for them, besides ten thousand pound in bullion daily expected, a Mint being ready to coyne the same, but yet intimated a conveniency in the giving a little more time for their comming over; whereupon Sir John Culpep∣per was to goe in all haste to France upon Friday last, as is supposed, on purpose either to hasten al, or a good part of those Forces over; I think it will be very good that as much Ship∣ing as may be obtained be hastened into those parts; I shall upon this Information, and the good successe God hath been pleased to give us, so dispose of the Army, as may most effectually conduce to a speedy and through settlement of these Westerne parts of the Kingdome; therefore I desire you againe to have a speciall care, that the Forces about Oxford be not permitted to range into these parts, when the Army is like to be engaged so far West, lest it occasion the division of our Forces, and hinder the accomplishment of that we de∣sire to effect. I remaine Your most humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX. Great Torrington Feb. 19. 1645. More particularly there was taken here, Lieutenant-Colonel Wood, eight Captaines, Commissary Boney, six Lieutenants, one Cornet, three Ensignes, one Chirur∣gion, four Serjeants, two and fifty Troopers, one hun∣dred seven and twenty Gentlemen, and about two hun∣dred
common Souldiers, in all, four hundred three and thirty, whereof two hundred have taken up Armes, be∣ing (as they said) forced in by the Enemy; neer three thousand Armes (broken and whole) most of their Am∣munition blowne up in the Church, eight Colours brought in, whereof one the Lord Hopton's owne, with this Motto, I WILL STRIVE TO SERVE MY SOVERAIGNE KING. Slaine, Major Threave, Captaine Frye, and divers Officers, two hundred Souldiers, besides those two hun∣dred blowne up in the Church, the Lord Hopton and Lord Caple wounded, besides divers others of quality; the Lord Hopton's Commission to be General under the Prince, Sir George Digbye's to be Governour of the For∣ces before Plymouth, and other Papers of consequence taken, and about four hundred or five hundred pounds in Money taken at the Lord Hopton's Quarters, with much plunder left in Portmantles there, and in other pla∣ces behind them. Tuesday Feb. 17. The General rested at Torrington, that day being spent in securing the prisoners, and taking Lists of the names, and sending some Forces towards Barnstable; and that the Enemy might be kept in a con∣tinuall alarum and feare by our pursuing of them, a Par∣ty were sent towards Holsworth, to fall upon their Quarters; whereupon they quit that place, and the Country informed, that their Horse were all fled into Cornwal, & that a great terror was upon them; and those few scattered Foot that escaped in the dark at Torring∣ton, who all of them both Horse and Foot (as his Excel∣lency understood the next day) drew into a Body in Cornwal, to whom were now joyned the Princes Regi∣ment, of about eight hundred Horse, which with some other Cornish Horse, not before joyned to them, mae up a Body of five thousand Horse, much superiour in number to ours: with this body of Horse, and about a thousand Foot (most Cornish) they kept Guards on the
other side of the River Tamar, and this day there came by twenty and forty at a time of their Foot (being most Devonshire men) that were scattered the night before, out of the Woods, some with their Armes, and others without them, and listed themselves in the Army; ex∣pressing, that they onely waited for an opportunity to get to us; so that this last defeat was in a manner, the very ruining of all their Foot. Commissary General Ire∣ton sent to view Barnsta∣ble. About this time MaJor-General Laughorne ob∣tained great successe a∣gainst the E∣nemy at Car∣diffe in Gla∣morganshire, abou 400 of them slaine and 500 taken prisoners. Thursday Feb. 19. Commissary-General Ireton was sent with a Party to view the Garrison of Barnstable, and what places were fit to make Quarters and to keep Guards about the same, whereupon one Regiment was sent to the Earle of Bathes at Tavestock to possesst it for Quarters: That day there were three Ships in Biddiford which struck in thither, thinking it had been in the Ene∣mies power, their burthen was small; the Vessels were afterwards, upon Petition, released, the owners being persons that had not voluntarily contributed against the Parliament. This night the General returned back to Master Rolls his house at Stephenson, in regard the Quar∣ter at Torrington was inconvenient, the Windowes sha∣ken in pieces, and the houses so shattered with the great blast, that they could not performe a convenient shel∣ter from the raine, it being a time of extreame wet weather. CHAP. III. His Excellency with the Army advancing into Cornwal, driving the Enemy before them, and possessing their Quarters: A gallant piece of Service performed by Colenel Butler and his Party neer Stratton. Prince Charles giving all for lost by his Excellencies pressing so hard upon them, betakes himselfe to Scilly: An advantage to the Parliaments Cause by a Packet of Letters from Ireland, taken at Padstow. FRiday 20. It was taken into consideration, how far forth it was expedient to move towards Cornwall
with the maine Forces, to improve the advantage we had upon the Enemy: which businesse was also further advi∣sed on the next day A Counsell of War. Their Resolu∣tion, and the Reasons ther∣of. At a Counsel of Warre, where it was resolved (ne∣mine contradicente) to martch into Cornwall: The Rea∣sons inducing them to that Vote, were first, To prevent the landing of any Forces out of France; of which the Letters taken at Dartmouth gave an intimation: Second∣ly, to destroy the Field-enemy, and by consequence set∣tle the West: Thirdly, Excester and Barnstable would not probably hold out if the Field force were once sub∣dued; whilest that stood, they could not in honor yeeld, and therefore it was thought fit rather to follow the Enemy into Cornwal to subdue them, then to stay to re∣duce Excester and Barnstable, and then to pursue them, for that those Garrisons would be dying for want of provisions, whilest the Army should be in pursuit of the foresaid intentions. Lords day Feb. 22. Orders were given to bring up some small quantity of Money that was at Tiverton to the Army, that upon their martch into Cornwal, there might be supply. The Army martching in∣to Cornwall. Monday Feb. 23. Part of the Army martched from Torrington to Holsworthy, being twelve long miles, dirty way; and the rest from Biddiford, Tavestock, &c. to Tor∣rington, being fifteen miles, and the wayes deep: Before the Van of the Army got into Holsworth, Colonel Butler was commanded before with a Party of Horse and four hundred Dragoons, to force his passage over the River Tamar, and if conveniently he could, to fall into the Enemies Quarters; and Captaine Woggan, who was be∣fore sent with a small Party of Dragoons, took five and twenty Horse and some Prisoners, and brought them to Holsworthy. A considera∣ble perform∣ance of Colo∣nel Butler. Wednesday 25. The Army had a Randezvouz neer Tomerton, where Intelligence came, That Colonel Butler had fallen upon the Enemy, and taken between three and
four hundred Horse and eighty Prisoners, and put Ma∣jor General Web, with the Forces under his command to flight, (this service was performed neer Stratton;) and thereupon our Forces entred Stratton, where the people were much taken with their civility. This day the Army martched to Launceston, ten long miles, being twelve at night before the Rear came up within two miles of the Towne, three Scouts were taken, who informed of Co∣lonel Bassets being in the Towne with five hundred Foot of Colonel Tremayne's, and some Horse: a Forlon Hope was sent before to demand the Towne, the Gates were shut upon them, the Enemy resisted, two of them were slaine, about an hundred taken, at last the Enemy was put to flight in great disorder, by the darknesse of the night, narrownesse and steepnesse of the wayes, most of them escaped; and our men possessed the Towne which had been garrisoned by them. Thursday 26. The head Quarter continued at Laun∣ceston, the Foot being much wearied out with the two dayes martch before: The General viewed the ancient Castle of Launceston, scituated upon a Mount, raised very high, but not fortified: the Works and Mounts on the top of the Hill the Enemy left standing undemolish∣ed. Many Cornish were taken prisoners in the Towne the night before, who being brought before the Gene∣ral this day, had twelve pence apeece given them, and Passes to goe to their homes: the Townes people in Launceston were much affected with such mercifull usage. The Army in their martch into Cornwal, thus far had much cause to observe the peoples frights, quit∣ting their Habitations in feare of the Army; the Enemy having insinuated such an ill opinion of it into them, endeavouring to make them beleeve by Oaths and Im∣precations, that no Cornish was to have quarter at our hands; of which prejudice and misprission, after the peo∣ple were undeceived, they frequented the Markets again as in former time.
This day a Letter was sent to Plymouth for the Cor∣nish Gentlemen there to hasten to the General to Laun∣ceston; the Rear-Guard of our Horse were appointed to quarter along the River Tamar, the better to prevent the breaking through of the Enemies Horse, an evill which his Excellency had ever a watchfull eye upon to prevent; Messengers were sent to Colonel Cook, who was left before Barnstable with Major-General Massies Horse (all except the Lyme Regiment) to keep good Scouts out, to fall on the Flank of the Enemy, in case they attempted to passe by; Captaine Farmer was sent with a Company of Dragoons to possesse a House neer Camelford, to gaine intelligence, and the more to amuse the Enemy, touching our advance after them; and thereupon to enforce them to keep their Horse in a Body, that they might not take Quarters, and so to weaken and discourage them from breaking through. Friday the 27. The Head Quarters continuing still at Launceston, the Plymouth Regiments of Foot were sent unto, to come from Tavestock thither, and the residue to lye on the passes upon the River, the more effectually to interrupt the Enemy, if he attempt∣ed to break through. Saturday the 28. His Excellency had intelligence, That Salt-Ash was quit by the Enemy, and their Works left undemolished; that the Governour of Mount-Edg∣combe was resolved to conclude upon a Treaty negotia∣ted by Master Peeters: The Army was ordered this day to Quarters, and advanced four or five miles towards Bodman, that the Rear of our Horse might quarter with more conveniency, and closer together; and to the end, the next day all the Army, both Horse and Foot, might martch close in a Body, in regard of the continued ex∣pectation that was of the Enemies Horse breaking through, upon the advantage of a very open way much of it being Downes;) other Messengers were sent also to Colonel Cook, for more surety and caution, to be in
readinesse in case the Enemy should attempt to break through; for to prevent that, still was the greatest care of the General, knowing that if the Horse got East and joyned with the Kings force, it might prolong the War, and much disturb the peace of the Mid-land Counties; likewise a Post was sent to Colonel Whaley to draw from Oxfordshire towards Wiltshire with some Regi∣ments of his Horse that he had before Oxford, the better to encounter with the Enemies Horse, that would be to purpose harrased out with their martch (in case they did break through) by a hard pursuit of them, which his Ex∣cellency intended. About this time Abbing∣ton like to have bin sur∣prized by a great Force from Oxford, was gallantly defended. Lords day, March 1. It happened to be a bitter cold frost, the Randezvouz of the Army was that day about six miles from Launceston, upon the Moores; a Party of Horse being sent out, discovered the Enemies Scouts, and not farre from Saint Blisland, took eight of them be∣longing to a Guard of three hundred Horse, which they kept but a little before our Army; the Scouts confest they knew nothing of our approach that day, but expe∣cted us the next; that the three hundred Horse they had upon the Guard (they thought) were drawne off; we had no sooner advanced a little farther but the Van of our Army discovered their said Guard, who faced about; our Army made an halt till our Reare was come up; the Evening drawing on, and having four miles yet to Bod∣man, it was held fit to quarter the Body of the Army in the Field, about Saint Blisland, which was the head Quarter (a very poor Village;) and this was done both for security to lye close together, being so neer an Ene∣my; and for expedition, to be the readier for a martch the next morning. Besides, it was held much advantage for the Army to lye close this night whereby they might keep good Horse Guards, the better to discover and check the Enemy, if he should seek to break through. A little before they took the Enemies Scouts, Intel∣ligence came, that our Dragoons under Captaine Far∣mer
and Captaine Woggan were engaged with the Ene∣my as they were martching from the House they possest to joyne with the Army; whereupon a Party of two thousand Horse were commanded under the Lieutenant General to fetch off our Dragoons, but before the Horse came up, they had acquitted themselves well, the Enemy was retired, and they were comming on to the Army. That Party of the Enemy was commanded by Sir James Smith, and had they not taken the nick of time and gone away when they did, they had been all taken in their retreat by our Horse, which came so instantly after them, that they had like to have gained the passe. The Enemy retreating. This night his Excellency had intelligence, that the Enemy had quit Bodman about ten at night, Horse and Foot re∣treating yet further West, Whither Hop∣ton went. and that the Lord Hopton (otherwise Sir Ralph Hopton) brought up the Reare, most of the men (poore creatures) being drunk when they went away, to mend their hard fortune. His Excellen∣cy advancing after them. About this time Ashby-de-la-Zouch, a Garrison in Northamp∣tonshire, sur∣rendred to the Parlia∣ment. Monday early in the morning, the Army following them, martched towards Bodman, and had a Randez∣vouz on the Downes on this side Bodman; from thence part of the Horse and Foot were commanded to Ware-Bridge, being a passage that was suspected very conveni∣ent for the Enemy, in case they intended to break East∣ward; likewise Guards were commanded to Pad∣stow, for caution, lest there the Enemy should get over the River; and also the better to countenance the Townes-men that stood upon their guard against the Enemy. Two actions little lesse then miracu∣lous. This day four Troopers pursued a party of two and forty Musquetteers of the Enemy beyond Bod∣man, with their Muskets laden and matches lighted, and after the rate of a miracle brought them away prisoners, such feare was upon them (from Heaven certainly;) likewise six Troopers pursued the Enemy on the left hand as farre as Lestithel, made them quit their Guards there, and hearing that Ammunition was going to Foy in Wane loads, pursued the Convoy thither, forced
them to leave the Ammunition, and so brought back four Wane loads of Match, Powder, Bullet and barrels of Muskets, and safely convoyed the same to the head Quarter in Bodman: the Troopers that did this action were rewarded; but who is able to acknowledge the goodnesse and power of that God by whom they did these exployts! Moreover, a Party of our Horse this day took Sir John Greenvils Lieutenant-Colonel and others. Tuesday March 3. The Army rested at Bodman. Con∣sultation was had, what course was to be taken to keep the Enemy still before the Army, their head Quarters then being at Truro, their neerest Quarters about Saint Columb, Grampond and Tregny, between which Townes and Truro they lay then quartered, keeping their maine Guard of Horse at Castle ô Denisse: All the passes from the North Sea to the South Sea, were taken into consi∣deration, and Guards of Horse and Foot disposed unto them, and the Country were enjoyned to barricadoe up the Lanes, and keep men upon the Foards. Prince Charles gone to Scilly. Wednesday March 4. His Excellency had certaine in∣telligence, that the Prince was imbarqued and set sale for Scilly with his Lords and Gentlemen, giving all for lost, and so evidently irrecoverable did their condition ap∣peare to all, that their refuge of lyes failed them, and they did not stick to say in desperation at their depar∣ture, That all was lost. The discou∣ragement it was to the E∣nemy. The Prince his flying much dis∣heartned the Enemy; and what a work should it have upon us? It might become us here to stay and pause a while, I cannot but run upon that Scripture in my mind, Isaiah 51. 12, 13, 14. verses. Who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of a man, that shall dye, and of the son of man, which shall be as grasse? and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that hath stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and hast feared continually every day, because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the Oppressor? The cap∣tive
exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not dye in the pit, or that his Bread should faile. The poor Cornish, like the captive exile, hastened to be delivered, lest they should dye in the pit, and therefore took up Armes on any side to make an end of the Warre, and re∣store a peace of any fashion, for the fury of the Oppres∣sor; and where is the fury of the Oppressor? A Ship hath embarqued them, a strong wind hath carried them away, Scilly hath opened her Armes and received them, &c. but I must remember my story. The conditions for the surrender of Mount-Edgcomb, a place of great strength and consideration, were this day presented to the General by Master Coriton, Master Lower, Master Glanvile, and Master Trevisa, Gentle∣men of the Country, who were glad of the opportuni∣ty to present themselves to the General for his favour; The Propositions were ratified by his Excellency, and Letters of recommendation were agreed unto, to be drawne and sent on their behalfe to the Parliament; their seasonable comming in was a good service, and Ma∣ster Peter's industry in this Negotiation was great and worthy all acceptation and acknowledgment. A Sūmons was this day sent unto some few Hundreds of the Country, to appeare on Friday following upon the Downes at Bodman, and strong Parties were sent out to see if they could meet with the Enemy; who meet∣ing with some of their Guards forced them to retreat beyond Saint Collomb. This night the General had intel∣ligence, that a Ship was come into Padstow from Ireland, that the Townes people seized on't, and stood on their guard against the Enemy, and sent to our Dragoons, who quartered neer them, for their assistance. Thursday 5. The Dragoons comming to their assi∣stance, boarded the Vessell, some of the men were put to the sword, others sore wounded, Captaine Allen of Waterford an Irish Rebel, had his life spared, to the in∣tent to make use of his Confession; the Townes people
were violent against them; the Packet-Letters they brought were throwne over Board; yet by the diligence of the Officers of Dragoons, were found floating upon the water: which being brought to the General, there was found amonst them, Letters from the Earle of Gla∣morgan, that six thousand Irish were ready to be trans∣ported, and four thousand more should be ready by the first of May; That three hundred speciall Irish were ap∣pointed for the Prince his Life-guard, but Allen confest, that an hundred of them were to be put into the Monnt, an hundred into Pendennis, and the other hundred to be about the Prince, in case he should approve of this dis∣posall. There were Letters also of the Lord Digbies ta∣ken in that Packet, being a narrative of his proceedings against the Earle of Glamorgan, expressing how swim∣mingly he had carried his Body in that businesse: Also Letters from the Earle of Ormond. The Letters from Glamorgan to the King were not found. Master Coriton and the rest of the Gentlemen who came from Mount-Edgcomb, being so opportunely here when the Packet came, had the Original Letters shewed unto them, which gave them such satisfaction, as that they freely exprest themselves, that what force they could raise in the coun∣try should be assisting to the Parliament for the oppo∣sing of all Irish, or any Forraigners whatsoever, that should be brought over. CHAP. IV. His Excellency with the Army driving up the Enemy into Cornwal: A Summons sent to Sir Ralph Hopton and his Forces to come in, with the severall transactions of that businesse untill the disbanding of all his Forces, fully related, &c. IT was intended, that the Army should advance on the morrow, but upon consultation it was held fit to stay that martch, and to consider of a Summons to be sent
unto the Lord Hopton; which was accordingly prepa∣red, and sent away by the General's Trumpet; which Summons followeth in these words: Sir, The Sum∣mons his Ex∣cellency sent to Sir Ralph Hopton. THrough the goodnesse of God to his people, and his just hand against their enemies, your Forces being reduc't to such condition, as (to my sense) the good hand of God con∣tinuing with us, wherein alone we trust, they are not like either to have subsistence or shelter long where they are, or to escape thence, nor if they could, have they whither to goe to have better: I have thought good, for prevention of more bloodshed, or of further hardship or extremity to any, but such whose hearts God shall harden to their owne destructi∣on, to send you this Summons, for your selfe and them to lay downe Armes, and withall a tender of such conditions (upon a present surrender and engagement, never to beare Armes against the Parliament) as may be better then any thing they can rationally expect by further standing out. First therefore, to the Souldiery in generall, English and Forreigners, I shall grant liberty either to goe beyond Sea, or to their homes in England, as they please; and to such English as shall choose to live at home, my protection for the liberty of their persons, and for the immunity of their estates from all plunder or violence of Souldiers, and all to goe their wayes with what they have, saving Horses and Armes; but for Officers in Commission and Gentlemen of quality, I shall allow them to goe with Horses for themselves and one servant or more, suteable to their quality, and with Armes befitting Gentlemen in a condition of peace; and such Officers as would goe beyond Sea for other Service, to take with them their Armes and full number of Horses answerable to their Offices. To all Troopers and inferiour sort of Horse-Officers bringing in and delivering up of their Horses and Armes, twenty shillings a man in lieu of their Horses to carry them home: To English Gentlemen of considerable estates, my
Passe and Recommendation to the Parliament for their mo∣derate composition. Lastly, for your selfe (besides what is before implyed to you in common with others) you may be assured of such me∣diation to the Parliament on your behalfe, both from my selfe and others, as for one whom (for personall worth and many vertues, but especially for your care of, & moderation toward the Country) we honour and esteem above any other of your Party, whose error (supposing you more swayed with prin∣ciples of honour and conscience then others) we most pitty, and whose happinesse (so farre as consistent with the pub∣licke welfare) we should delight in more then in your least suffering. These things (not from any need or other ends then hu∣mane and Christian) having offered, I leave to your conside∣ration and theirs whom they concerne, desiring your and their speedy resolution, which I wish may be such as shall be most for the honour of God, the peace and welfare of this poor Kingdome, and for your and their good, so far as may stand therewith. And having herein discharged (as I conceive) the duty of an honest man, a Souldier and a Christian, if God shall see it good to let your hearts be hardened against your own peace, I shall (though with some regreet for that ill that shall ensue to any, yet with cheerfulnesse and rejoycing at the righteous judgement of God) pursue my charge and trust for the pub∣lick in another way, not doubting of the same presence and blessing which God hath hitherto vouchsafed in the same Cause to the weak endeavours of T. F. March 5. 1645. Instructions were likewise prepared for those that were to offer something to the Country that should appeare the next morning. Friday March 6. His Excellency had intelligence, the Enemies Horse began to draw together, as if they were
resolved to break through, for now was the time for them to doe it, or never; for one dayes advance more, would drive them into so narrow a compasse, that it was in vain to think of it afterwards. This was made known to the Country people, at their meeting upon the Downes, whereupon there were above a thousand of them exprest much willingnesse to assist in the blocking up of all passages and wayes, that might prevent the Ene∣mies breaking through; and the Irish Letters being shew∣ed and read unto them by Master Peters, did much heighten their resolution to aide and assist the Parlia∣ment against the Forreigners; and not onely so, but the forwardnesse they exprest to assist against the present Enemy in their Country, with the great joy and content they shewed at the Armies being come thither for their reliefe, (saying they had not seen such a day this three yeers) was beyond expectation: and certainly there was the great hand and good providence of God in the op∣portune bringing in of this Packet of Letters thither, whereby the Country was so much wonne unto us. The happy event of this day had a further accession by the news of the taking of Corfe Castle by a stratagem and storm, managed by the discretion of that worthy & pru∣dent Gentleman, Colonel Bingham, Governour of Poole. Strict Orders were given to all our Forces upon the Guards to be very vigilant this night, and on the mor∣row a martch was intended for the whole Army. Accordingly March 7. The Army martched early to a Randezvouz, some four miles from Bodman, towards Saint Collombe, but the weather proving extreame wet and the place they desired to reach that night being a long martch, it was held fit to take up quarter in the Villages thereabouts for as many as the places could re∣ceive, and the General with the rest of the Army return∣ed back to Bodman. But to keep the Enemy waking, that they might not refresh their Horse by any rest in their Quarters, Colo∣nel
Rich was sent with a thousand Horse and Dragoons to fall on the Enemies Guards and Quarters, and to bring in what prisoners he could light upon; which ac∣cordingly he did neer Saint Columbe, beat the Enemies Out-Guards to their Maine Guard, their maine Guard being about six hundred (most of them the Princes Life guard and Gentlemen) then commanded by Major-Ge∣neral Pert, who seeing no hopes of retreat, drew out to give a Charge, and gave a good home-charge to our first Division; Maior-General Pert himself charged through, but being shot, was taken prisoner; instantly the Ene∣my was put to the rout before the rest of our Divisions could come up: That Division of ours that was com∣manded by Quartermaster-General Fincher, who first charged them, had the pursuit and execution of the Enemy for three or four miles, wherein many were wounded and slaine, about an hundred taken prisoners, and about three hundred Horse. But by reason the General and part of the Army re∣treated back this day to Bodman, the Malignants began to rejoyce, upon presumption that the Army was af∣fronted, and hereof they were so confident, that they conveyed it up with much expedition to Oxford, where it is certaine, they had publick rejoycing for the great Victory obtained against FAIRFAX his Forces in Cornwal. Lords day March 8. Though the day were very rainy, the Army marched to other Quarters, within six or se∣ven miles of Truro, to Saint Stephens, Saint Blase, and other parts: Major-General Pert was brought to the head Quarters sore wounded, he was a proper, stout, gallant man; all meanes was used for his recovery, if it might have been. He satisfied divers there, that those men that were so routed were the Princes Regiment, (most of them Gentlemen and Reformadoes:) That the Summons sent from the General to the Lord Hopton was not published: The Copy of the Summons being
read unto him, he said, that the conditions therein men∣tioned would be readily accepted by the Souldiery, and if it were once published in the Army, and refused by the Officers, it would break them to pieces. In Major-Ge∣neral Pert's pocket there was found a Letter intended to be sent to the Lords that were about the Prince, to this purpose: That the Kings condition is so low, is not our fault; we are not able to break through the Enemy, nor strong enough to fight them, therefore are resolved to compound for our selves, and leave you to doe what you please, This day the Lord Hopton returned back the Gene∣ral's Trumpet without Answer to the Summons, onely with this Apology; Viz. By Co∣lonel Rich his beating of their Guard. That by reason of the interruption the last night, he could not send a particular Answer to the Ge∣neral, but would send one very shortly: Which that he might vindicate from a delatory excuse, he made haste; and this day towards the Evening an Answer came from the Lord Hopton, wherein he seemed willing to fancy the King and Parliament into a Treaty and Cessation, and desired to know if it were not so; as the Answer it selfe will shew, the Copy whereof followeth. Sir, Sir Ralph Hoptons an∣swer to his Ex∣cellencies Summons. I Received yours, bearing date the fift of this Moneth; wherein I must acknowledge much kindnesse from you, and a very Christian consideration of sparing blood: But one thing there is, I am confident you have too much honour to ex∣pect from me; which is, that to avoid any danger, or to enjoy any worldly advantage, I will renounce my Masters House, to whom I am both a sworne Subject, and a sworne Servant; That I must professe I am resolved to undergoe all Fortunes with him, and, if there shall be cause, to suffer any thing, rather then in the least poynt to taint my honour in that par∣ticular; and I hope there is not a man of any consideration in this Army under my command, that is not so resolved: yet in all honest and honourable wayes, to procure the peace of this Kingdome, and the sparing of Christian blood, I
take God to witnesse, I am, and still have been most desirous: And I heare from good hands, that our gracious Soveraigne is at present so farre advanced in a Treaty with the Parlia∣ment, as that he hath promised to passe four of the principall of their Bils proposed, whereof the entrusting of the Militia for seven yeers, in hands agreed between them, is one. I de∣sire you to deal freely with me in that particular; for if that be so, it will spare the labour of further Treaty, being for my part, ready to obey whatsoever his Majesty shall agree to. God hath indeed of late humbled us with many ill successes, which I acknowledge as a very certaine evidence of his just judgment against us for our personall crimes: Yet give me leave to say, your present prosperity cannot be so certaine an evidence of his being altogether pleased with you. It is true, we are reduced to a lower condition then we have been in, yet have we a gallant Body of Horse, that being preserved to a generall accord, may be for good use against our common Enemies; and being otherwise prest, I may say it without vanity, want not a resolution, at lest, to sell our selves at a deare rate against any oddes. Your Propositions, though they be not wholly consented to, yet if a generall accord, much more desirable, be not in a likely forwardnesse to prevent them, I shall be willing that eight Commanders of ours, with three Country Gentlemen, give a meeting as soon as you please, to any equall number of yours, at any indifferent place, to consult of this great businesse, and to conclude of some Propositions that may be reasonable and honourable for both Parts; wherein I hope God will so blesse our cleer in∣tentions, as may produce a probable inducement to a generall Peace, according to the unfained desire of Your Servant RALPH HOPTON. March 8. 1645. But this Art would not do, my Lord Hoptons Magick is not strong enough to condense the meer ayre of his
owne fancy into a Cessation before our Armies, as by the Generals Reply to this Answer, the Reader may sa∣tisfie himselfe; which here followes. My Lord: His Excellen∣cies Reply. I Should most truly and freely informe your Lordship the best I could, in any thing that might lead you to a right un∣derstanding of things, in order to the peace of the Kingdome, or the reall good of your selfe and those with you, so farre as may stand with my trust and duty to the publick, to what I conceive your more certaine knowledge of that your desire to be informed in concerning the Kings offers to the Parliament, would not be prejudiciall: But the truth is, I can give you no other satisfaction or assurance therein then this: That the King hath made some offers to the Parliament; and amongst them, one concerning the Militia. Something to the purpose, as you say you have heard; but the just certainty what his last overtures are, or how far they are advanced to a generall accord, I cannot at present certifie. I do not heare they have proceeded so farre as to a Treaty; And I beleeve, that as the Parliament may be discouraged from the way of Treaty by former experiences of the fruitlesnesse thereof, and the ill use the same hath been designed or driven unto, viz. onely to gaine advantages for Warre, without reall intentions for Peace; so the late overtures that way are the lesse like to be succesfull, by reason of the cleer and certaine discoveries the Parliament have had, That his Majesty at the same time was and is labouring by Agents in all parts to draw in Forraigne Forces, and especially that the Earle of Glamor∣gan by Commission from his Majesty, had concluded a Peace with the Irish Rebels, on tearmes extreamly dishonourable and prejudiciall, upon the onely condition of sending over Force under the command of that Lord, to invade England; whereof I presume you cannot but have heard. And though his Majesty did in a Letter to the Parliament, disavow any such agreement, and pretended he had given order to the Lord Digby for the attainting and impeaching the Earle
of Glamorgan of high Treason, for what he had done there∣in: yet by late discoveries to the Parliament, and especially by Letters intercepted the other day at Padstow, from the Lord Digby, the Earle of Glamorgan, and others, to Se∣cretary Nicholas, your selfe, Sir Edward Hide, the Lord Culpepper, and others, it is most cleer and evident, that the arresting of the Earle of Glamorgan was onely for a present colour to salve reputation with the people, and con∣tinue their delusion till designes were ripe for execution; for the same peace is fully concluded with the Rebels, the King to have the ayde conditioned upon the same agreement, and the Earle of Glamorgan at liberty againe; and to command that Force in chiefe. Now for the overture of a meeting, to treat further about the Propositions I sent, though I know nothing materiall that I can adde or alter, except in circumstances, yet I shall not refuse or decline such a meeting, or ought else that probably tends to the saving of blood, or further misery to any, Pro∣vided, the meeting be speedily, and number of persons not to exceed four or five. But, my Lord, when you consider what I have before related concerning Forraigne supplies, which I have reason to think you know & beleeve; you see what cause I have to be jealous of advantages sought by delayes; and not to intermit any time, or omit any opportunity, to prosecute the service I have in hand: And that there may be no colour of your expecting that forbearance on my part, which you offer on yours, I doe the more hasten back my resolution to you: In pursuance whereof, I doe not despise nor shall insult upon your present condition. I question not, nor yet shall, I hope, be much moved with the resolution of your men; I presume not on former successes nor present advantage in fleshly pow∣er, but desire to trust in God alone, whose favour and blessing to this Army above others, I doe not account in what is past, or expect in future, to be for any precedence in merit or good∣nesse of ours, whereby we should be more pleasing to him then others, but from his owne Free grace and goodnesse towards his people, whose welfare, with the common good of the
Kingdome, we seek and desire with all faithfulnesse and inte∣grity to pursue. And so committing the issue of all to his good pleasure, J remaine Your humble Servant THO. FAIRFAX. March 9. 1645. Moreover, besides the proportion this Answer might beare to the better information of the Lord Hopton, his Excellency (to satisfie him more fully) commanded some of the Regiments to advance this day to Tregny (an ill signe of a Cessation) and the next day the Army advan∣ced two severall wayes, part of it following to Tregny, (the head Quarter that night) another part of it to Pro∣bus, and those parts. But such was the force of the Lord Hopton's imagination upon his owne Souldiers, that they instead of asking, acted a Cessation; when our Forlorne of Horse comming neer theirs, not far from Probus, they did not endeavour to put themselves in order to receive us, nor did they make any tesistance, but stood still: our men much wondring thereat. And what was the cause? but a Cessation between the Armies (as they be∣leeved, or would seem to beleeve) for so soon as our men came neer, they cryed, A Cessation, a Cessation: ours cryed, No, no, there was none: and much adoe had Com∣missary-generall Ireton, and other Officers, to perswade them there was none; notwithstanding, since they were so possessed and deluded, we wisht them to be gone, and we would take no advantage of them. The Enemy expressing much sorrow (that there was not a Cessation as they were informed) retired, seeming also to be somewhat affected, that they had so noble and ingenuous an Enemy, that took not this advantage to do them any hurt, as we might have done, there being no Ces∣sation. The Lord Hopton seeing his stratagem would not take, but he must beg a Cessation if he would have it,
and that his men were so startled at the advance of our Army, The Lord Hopton sends for a Treaty. sent this night about twelve of the clock, for a Treaty, naming the place, Tresillian-Bridge, if his Ex∣cellency approved of it: The Trumpet was returned about three in the morning, That the General did heark∣en to a Treaty, and would appoint Commissioners to meet at the place proposed by the Lord Hopton. Here∣upon Commissioners on both sides were nominated to meet at nine the next day, being Tuesday morning (March 10.) But the General being unwilling to lose time, gave Orders for a martch: accordingly the Army that Tuesday advanced by breake of day, and martched to a Randezvouz within two miles of Truro by ten of the clock, where the Lord Hopton's Trumpeter brought a safe Conduct for our Commissioners, and they having received the like from us, a Cessation was agreed to; but withall, a Message was sent to the Lord Hopton from the General, That he intended to quarter his Ar∣my at Truro and Saint Allen that night, which he thought fit to give him notice of, that none of his Forces might be left in the Towne when our Souldiers entred. This much disrelished with the Lord Hopton, and his Com∣missioners that he sent, had much reluctancy against it. The General, upon conference with the Commissioners, was content to let them have Saint Allen for their Quar∣ter; his Excellency reserving still Truro (the prime Quarter) to himselfe. And here we had the Enemy in a pound, so that he had but six miles bredth to break through, if he attempted it. And now we having the Passe at Truro, the Lord Hopton drew his Forces to quar∣ter more Westward, and the Treaty was adjourned till next Morning, and a Cessation observed on both Sides. Wednesday the 11. The Commissioners on both sides met againe, but could not make any great progresse in∣to the Treaty; the Cessation was continued for a day longer: about one hundred and twenty Musquetteers
came in this day with their Armes, and Colours flying, being of Colonel Trevanian's Regiment: also divers Colonels, Knights and Gentlemen of quality, sent to the General, making knowne their desires, to be recei∣ved into the protection of the Parliament; which so dis∣heartned Colonel Trevanian, then with his Regiment at Perin, that late that evening he sent unto his Excellency, desiring he might be included in the Treaty with the Lord Hopton, and have the same conditions that other Officers were to have. These things so operated with the Governour of Saint Mawes Castle, a principall Fort that had a great command of the Haven at Falmouth, that he sent to the General to be received into favour: And although Arrundell the Governour of Pendennis, sent to command him to come into the Castle of Pendennis, he fearing some evill intended against him, refused and per∣sisted in his former desire: whereupon the General sent him conditions, with a Summons; which were accepted, and he agreed to surrender. By reason of the Cessation, our Troopers mixed with the Enemies; and upon this bruit abroad (though with∣out ground) that the Enemies Troopers should lose their Horses, they to make some advantage of them, coursed good store of their best Horses to our men. By twelve of the clock this night, all the materiall poynts of the Treaty were concluded, matters of circum∣stance onely remained, which yet were so necessary to be concluded, in order to the perfecting of the Treaty, that the next day was allowed (and the Cessation continued) for the finishing thereof. When the Treaty was fully ended, and Hostages appointed, the same day Saint Mawes Castle was surrendred, and thirteen pieces of Ordnance in it (whereof two great Brasse Pieces, of about four thousand weight apiece) and our Foot were sent to possesse it. The Treaty being thus ended, with great joy did the Enemies Officers receive our conditions, and wisht they
had sooner known our intentions towards them. Those that seemed most discontented, were the common Troopers that were to be dismounted, who therefore to mend their conditions, had changed away their best Horses, for advantage, before the disbanding. And it is not to be credited, how much our Army did get into the Enemies esteem during the Cessation, and what sor∣rowfull expressions many of them did make, that they han been so deluded concerning our carriage; ingenuous∣ly confessing, that the civility of our Army had been ever till now concealed from them. Officers and Souldiers unanimously desired imployment for Jreland; being wil∣ling to take the Sacrament Oath (for that they propo∣sed) or to enter into what other Obligation should be thought fit, That as they would never beare Armes against the Parliament in England, so that they would not, if they were imployed in Jreland by the Parliament, desist from pursuing of their commands against the Jrish Rebels, upon any countermand or other invitation of the Kings: affirming, that they had sufficiently smarted already for being enticed by him. Saturday was appointed to be the day of disbanding, which yet of very necessity was put off till the next day; in the meane time one hundred and twenty more of the Enemies Foot, with Colours, came in; and now all things being agreed, the Commissioners of both sides supt this night with the General. The next day, which was appointed for the Disband∣ing, was the Lords day, in which the Army would have been glad to have rested, but in regard time was preci∣ous, and the country suffered so much by the Enemies Forces that lay upon them, they by good warrant pre∣ferred mercy and necessity before sacrifice, and the French Regiment, under the command of Monsieur Laplane, which was to be the first disbanded, was that day brought to the place appointed for Disbanding. Their Horses were very poore, they having before, by
private contracts, put off the best of them. There were about three hundred dismounted; but they having made their markets before, most of their Horses (as was but just) were turned back upon their owne hands, as not worth the twenty shillings an Horse, which they were to receive according to the agreement. In the space of five dayes more was the work finished, and the whole Field force of the Enemy in the West of England disbanded; viz. On Monday two Brigades of Horse. Tuesday 17. the two Brigades of the Lord Cleveland's and Major-Gene∣ral Web's. Wednesday 18. part of the Lord Wentworth's, Colonel Bovile's Brigade, Lord Hopton's Life-guard, and Sir Richard Greenvil's Life-guar'd. Thursday two Brigades more, of which the Lord Goring's was one, and the Princes Life guard. Friday 20. the two last Troops of all the Cornish Horse were disbanded. The number of Brigades in all that were disbanded, were nine; viz. the French Brigade, consisting of three Regiments: The Lord Wentmorth's Brigade, consisting of four Regi∣ments: Sir James Smith's Brigade, consisting of three Regiments: The Lord Cleveland's Brigade, consisting of four Regiments: Major-General Web's of three Re∣giments: The Lord Hopton's Brigade, commanded by Colonel Bovile: The Lord Goring's Brigade, of five Re∣giments: The Princes Life-guard, consisting of nine Troops, being seven hundred men, armed: Sir Richard Greenvil's Reformadoes. The men that were dismount∣ed are proper and lusty men. To the Honourable William Lenthall Esquire; SPEAKER of the Honourable House of COMMONS. SIR, WHilst I lay at Bodman for the necessary refreshment of the Army, and to block up the Passages from Bod∣man to the North and South Sea, I sent a Summons, with
Propositions, to Sir Ralph Hopton, and the Army under his command (A true Copy whereof I have here inclosed) being encouraged thereunto by some of the Enemies Officers and Souldiers, who came in to me, and informed of their in∣clinablenesse to Conditions; and hoping thereby either to bring them to such termes as should be to your advantage, or would distract and weaken them; and withall understand∣ing by the intercepted Letters I sent you, that an Irish In∣fantry was ready to be shipt for England, I thought fit to try all meanes which in probability might break their Body of Cavalry upon the place. When I had dispatched these Pro∣positions to the Enemy, J advanced upon Monday with all the Army from Bodman towards Truro, being then the Enemies head Quarters, and to Tregny, where I quartered that night. Sir RalphHopton sent a Trumpeter to me with a Letter, desiring to have Commissioners apointed on both sides, to meet at Tresilian-Bridge the next day, with power to treat and conclude, which I assented to: The Treaty accord∣ingly began, the Commissioners meeting about four a clock in the Afternoon, and J in the meane time advancing the quar∣ters of the Army to Truro and Saint Allen: After some time spent between the Commissioners, this agreement was made, a Copy whereof I have here also enclosed; and in ex∣ecution thereof, this day we began to disband the French Brigade under Colonel Lapland: To morrow we proceed with three other Brigades, they having nine in all; and shall endeaveur to shorten this work as much as may be. Truly Sir, this must needs be acknowledged for an admirable mer∣cy from the same gracious hand of providence that hath hi∣therto gone along with you, that so considerable a force as this should be so baffled, first at Torrington, and after∣wards should put themselves, as it were, into a Net; where∣by they were necessitated to take termes, to the tter Ruine of so great a Bodie of Cavalry; which according to all our in∣formation, and the confession of our Enemies, was not lesse at the time of the Treatie, then four or five thousand Horse. The Articles of Agreement will speak the mercie, and needs
no comment; yet I hope I may make this observation upon them, that thereby not onely so great a Body of Cavalry is broken, but so many both Officers and Souldiers disobliged from taking armes against you, and this at such a season when a Forraigne Aide so ready, as the Earle of Glamorgan's Letters sent up formerly (and now sent you) speake at large, the timely freeing of us for other services that remaine, with discouragement put upon the Enemies Garrisons in these parts, which we hope will cause them the more speedily to come in, we trust will be good consequences of this work: It's the desire of us all, the praise of all may be returned to God, to whom it is onely due. The reputation of this hath already produced a surrender of Saint Mawes Castle, wherein we found about thirteen Guns, and good proportion of Ammunition; which place gives you a better interest in Falmouth-Harbour, then the Enemy hath: For by the advantage hereof, you may bring in Shipping with∣out hazard, which they cannot. It hath also occasioned the comming in of between three hundred and four hundred Foot of the Enemies, with their Armes, to me; and given the Countries such heart against them, That in Peryn (a Towne formerly not very well affected) and in Saint Ive they stand upon their Guards against the Enemy: For fur∣ther particulars concerning this businesse, I referre you to Master Peters, who since he came into this County (where he was borne) hath very much furthered the ser∣vice, in the bringing of the Country in so freely to the pro∣tection of the Parliament: I remaine Your most humble Servant THO. FAIRFAX.
TRURO, March 14. 1645. Articles of Agreement concluded betwixt Commis∣sary Generall Ireton, Colonell John Lambert, Colonell John St. Aubin, Commissary Generall Stane, Captaine Edward Herle, and Richard Deane, Comptroller of the Ordnance, Commissioners appointed on the behalfe of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Knight, Ge∣nerall of the Parliaments Army, on the one part: And Colonell Charles Goring, Colonell Marcus Trevor, Co∣lonell Thomas Panton, Colonell Jordan Bovill, Sir Ri∣chard Prideaux Knight, and Major Goteer, Commissio∣ners appointed on the behalfe of the Right Honourable the Lord HOPTON, Generall of his Majesties Army, on the other part; as followeth: I. IT is concluded and agreed, That no person in the Lord Hopton's Army, not formerly by name excepted by the Parliament from pardon, shall be excluded from the privilege of this Treaty, either as being a Forreigner, or for having formerly served the Parliament; but shall equally have the benefit of what shall upon this Treaty be granted to other persons of that quality that they are of in the Army: And for any persons by name ex∣cepted by the Parliament, they shall have present liber∣ty (if they desire it) to goe beyond Seas, with like re∣commendation and equipage as others of like quality; or if they desire to live at home in England, to make their addresses to the Parliament, for that, or other pur∣pose, they shall have leave and reasonable time so to do, and the General's protection to live quietly and at li∣berty in any place they shall nominate and chuse within the Parliaments Quarters, untill they have received the Parliaments Resolution; And if the Parliament shall not think fit to grant such their desires, they shall then have leave and Passes to goe beyond Sea, as before, or to
any of the King's Armies or Garrisons, as they shall think fit. II. That the Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, shall within six dayes after the date hereof be wholy disbanded and discharged by the Lord Hopton, and the Generall Officers, Colonels, and other Officers under his command according to the severall charges in manner hereafter expessed. III. That all common Troopers, Corporals of Horse, Farriers and Sadlers, that are mounted, being of, or belonging to the Forces under the command of the right honourable the Lord Hopton, shall bring in and de∣liver up their Horses, with their Bridles and Saddles, and all their Armes, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or unto whom he shall appoint to receive them, in man∣ner, time and place, as is hereafter exprest; Provided, that all Corporals, and such common Troopers as shall appeare Gentlemen of worth, and such other Troopers as shall goe beyond Sea, shall be allowed to keep and carry away with them their Swords. IV. That upon performance hereof, they shall re∣ceive twenty shillings a man, or keep their Horses, and shall have their Passes to goe to their homes in England, or beyond Sea, with their Bag and Baggage, which they shall have leave to carry with them, or dispose of them as they please; and those to whom Swords are allowed, as before, to passe with their Swords. V. That the Commission-Officers of Horse under the Lord Hopton, for their severall Troops respectively, shall cause the said Horses and Armes to be duly deliver∣ed in without changes, spoyling or imbezlement among themselves, according to the effect of the first Article before-going. VI. That this being performed, all the said Commission-Officers of Horse in present command, and all Trumpe∣ters belonging to them, shall have liberty to goe away, either to their homes in England, or beyond the Seas,
with their Bag and Baggage: And also, they shall have such number of Horses and Equipage, as is hereafter al∣lowed, according to their severall qualities: That is to say, First, For those that shall chuse to goe beyond the Seas, the full number of Horses and Fire-armes, if they have so many of their owne. To Trumpeters one Horse a piece, and their Trumpets. To Quartermasters two Horses and one case of Pistols. To Cornets three Horses and two case of Pistols. To Lieutenants four Horses and three case of Pistols. To Captaines, Majors and Lieutenant-Colonels, six Horses and four case of Pistols. To Colonels eight Horses and six case of Pistols. To the Adjutant generall six Horses and four case of Pistols. To the other Adjutants of Brigades, three Horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To the Scoutmaster-generall six Horses and two case of Pistols. To the Quartermaster-generall six Horses and two case of Pistols. To the Marshall-generall four Horses and one case of Pistols. To the Deputy Quartermaster-generall two Horses. To the Deputy Scoutmaster one Horse. To the Major generall twelve Horses and six case of Pistols. To the Commissary-generall of Horse provisions, three Horses and a case of Pistols. To the Commissary-generall of Victuals, three Horses and one case of Pistols. To the Chirurgion generall three Horses. To Quartermasters of Brigades three Horses and one case of Pistols. To Chirurgions of Regiments two Horses. To all these, except Chirurgions, their desensive Armes, and Swords for themselves and their servants; and to every Field Officer one Carabine, and Chirurgions their swords.
Secondly, Those that shall chuse to abide in Eng∣land, with the General Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his Protection, and to live at home, shall have their Proportions as followeth. The Trumpeters one Horse a piece and their Trumpets. To Quartermasters one Horse a piece. To Cornets and Lieutenants two Horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To Captaines three Horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To Majors four horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To Lieutenant-Colonels five horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To Colonels six horses a piece and two case of Pistols. To the Major-generall ten horses, three case of Pistols. To the Adjutant-generall six horses, one case of Pistols. To the Adjutants of Brigades one horse a piece and one case of Pistols. To the Quartermaster-generall six horses, one case of Pistols. To the Marshall-generall three horses, one case of Pistols. To the Deputy Quartermaster-generall two horses. To the Scoutmaster-generall four horses, one case of Pistols. All these to have Swords for themselves and their Servants. To the Commissary of horse provision, two horses and a case of Pistols. To the Commissary of Victuals, two horses, a case of pistols. To the Deputy Scoutmaster one horse. To the Quartermasters of Brigades two horses. To the Chirurgion-generall two horses. To Chirurgions of Regiments one horse. To Chaplaines two horses. All these, except Chaplaines, to have Swords for themselves and their Servants. VII. That the precedent Articles concerning the sur∣render of Troopers Horses. &c. being performed; if any
Officer in command that chuseth to live at home, shall appeare to have more Horses of his owne, then what he is before allowed by the last precedent Article, the Com∣missioners of Sir Thomas Fairfax his part, will recom∣mend it to his Excellencies favour, that they may enjoy the benefit of such Horses of their own, to the same num∣ber as Officers of like quality that are to goe beyond the Seas. VIII That of the Reformadoe Officers that chuse to live at home in England, Reformadoe Quartermasters shall have the same conditions as Coporals in command; Cornets and Lieutenants shall goe away with one Horse a piece; Captaines, Majors and Lieutenant-Colonels with two Horses a piece, and Colonels with three Horses a piece, if they have so many of their owne, and one case of Pistols: those Reformadoes that desire to goe beyond Seas, to have halfe the proportion of Horses and Arms allowed in that case to Officers of the like quality in present command, if they have them of their owne, and all of them to goe with Swords, Bag and Baggage, or dispose thereof at pleasure. IX. That all Gentlemen of quality in Armes or not in Armes, but living under the protection of the said Ar∣my, shall have liberty either to goe to their own houses, or beyond the Seas, with Bag and Baggage, and Equi∣page according to their severall qualities, as followeth; That is to say, A Knight with four Horses, three Servants, one case of Pi∣stols, and their Swords. An Esquire with three Horses, two Servants, one case of Pi∣stols, and their Swords. A Gentleman with two Horses, one Servant, one case of Pi∣stols, and their Swords. A Gentleman of lowest rank, with one Horse for himselfe, and a Sword. Schollers and Clergymen to have one Horse at the least, or more, according to their different degrees, at the Generals discretion.
X. That to all those who according to the effect of these Articles shall chuse to goe beyond the Sea, Passes shall be granted from the General Sir Thomas Fairfax accordingly, and to those who being English, shall chuse to live at home, Passes for that purpose, and pro∣tections for the liberty of their persons, and also for the freedome of their Estates from all plunder and vio∣lence of Souldiers; and that such Gentlemen, or others, that have considerable Estates, may have the General's Letters of Recommendation to the Parliament (if de∣sired) for their moderate composition. XI. That after the performance of these Articles so farre to disbanding and delivering up of what is to be delivered, All Officers and Souldiers that shall, ac∣cording to these Articles, chuse to goe beyond the Seas, shall have sufficient Quarters assigned them by Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, neer convenient Ports for their transporta∣tion; and that they shall have twenty eight dayes al∣lowed to stay in England, from the day of their seve∣rall disbanding, and that the charge of quartering their Horses be discharged by themselves after the first four∣teen dayes for the time of their further stay; That the Generall will appoint men to take care that Shipping shall be provided for transporting their Persons, Armes, Bag and Baggage, they paying the accustomed rates. XII. That a certaine number of Officers of the Lord Hopton's Army, not exceeding forty, upon the Lord Hopton's Commissioners request, shall be permitted to have passes for themselves, and their Servants, Horses and necessaries to goe to Oxford; Provided, that their Servants exceed not the number of two, their Horses three, to every one respectively. XIII. That the Lord Hopton shall be allowed for his owne use, all his Horses; Provided, they exceed not the number of forty; and Armes for himselfe and twelve men; and that the Lord Wentworth shall have all his Horses; Provided, they exceed not five and twenty, and
Armes for himselfe and eight men, and places assigned them for conveniency of Quarters. XIV. That such English men as shall chuse to abide in England at their homes, and all Forreigners of the said Army, shall engage themselves by promise, in such forme as is herewith agreed on, not to beare Armes any more against the Parliament of England, nor to act any thing wilfully prejudiciall to the Parliaments affaires, without first rendring themselves prisoners to the Parliament: And likewise all such English as shall chuse to goe be∣yond Sea, shall engage themselves in the like promise for three yeers next ensuing the date hereof, or otherwise shall lose the benefit of these Articles, excepting the Lord Hopton and Lord Wentworth, and the number of Officers allowed to goe to Oxford in the twelfth Article before-going, who are by the intention of these Arti∣cles left free from such engagement. XV. That all Horses, Armes and Furniture of Warre belonging to, or in the hands of any person in the said Army, not allowed in the precedent or subsequent Ar∣ticles, to be carried away, shall be delivered up to such persons, and at such places neer Truro, or Sir Thomas Fairfax his head Quarters, as his Excellency shall ap∣point, within six dayes after the date hereof, without spoyle or imbezlement, at the care as well of the Gene∣ral's Officers of the said Army, and all Commanders in their severall charges, as by the persons themselves to whom such Armes or Furniture of Warre do belong, or in whose custody they were. XVI. That whosoever shall after the conclusion of this Treaty, purposely break, spoyle or imbezle any of the Armes, Horses or Furniture, agreed and concluded to be delivered up in this Treaty, shall forfeit the bene∣fit due unto him by any Article in the Treaty. And if any of the said Army after the conclusion of this Trea∣ty, shall plunder, or wilfully do any violence unto any Inhabitants of the Country, he shall give satisfaction un∣to
the persons so wronged, or lose the benefit of the Treaty; and that the Commissioners of both parties, or any three of them, whereof one or more to be of Sir Thomas Fairfax his party, and one or more to be of the Lord Hopton's, shall have power to heare and determine all such cases accordingly. XVII. That the said Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, from the time of the con∣clusion of this Treaty, untill the time of their drawing out to be disbanded, as in the ensuing Articles, shall be quartered in such places Westward from Truro, as Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, which shall be large enough for their accommodation, and that the Cessation of Armes, and of all Acts of Hostility betwixt the two Ar∣mies shall continue unto the time of the compleat dis∣banding of the Lord Hopton's Army. XVIII. That for the disbanding of the said Forces, and delivering up of Horses, Armes, &c. In performance of the precedent Articles, Every Brigade and Regiment under the Lord Hopton's command, shall by their respe∣ctive Commanders be drawne out into such places of Randezvouz, within two miles of Truro, or Sir Thomas Fairfax his head Quarters, and upon such dayes as Sir Thomas Fairfax shall for them joyntly or severally ap∣point, notice of the same being given to his Excellency in writing sixteen hours beforehand, under the Com∣missioners of the Lord Hopton's part, or any of them, two or more of whom shall for that and other purposes con∣tinue at Sir Thomas Fairfax his head Quarters, untill the disbanding be finished, and that the Quartermaster ge∣neral, or Adjutant of the Lord Hopton's with one Hors∣man from every Brigade, shall also be there with them, and that none of the said Brigades or Regiments shall be drawne out of their Quarters (which shall be assigned to them as before) otherwise then upon, and according to such notice from Sir Thomas Fairfax as before, except to and for their ordinary Guards.
XIX. That to, or before the drawing out of the se∣verall Brigades or Regiments to such Randezvouz as before, the chiefe Commanders of them respectively, shall deliver unto whom Sir Thomas Fairfax shall ap∣point, a true and perfect List of the Regiments and Troops in the severall Brigades, and of all Officers and Souldiers in their severall Troops, expressing by name which of them do chuse to goe beyond Sea, and which do goe to live at home; as also who are Reformadoes, and in what degree of command they have served: and that at the same times and places, the Horses, Armes and Furniture, by vertue of the precedent Articles to be de∣livered up, shall be delivered up accordingly; and all the Officers and souldiers disbanded and discharged, and there shall receive their passes, with Warrants for quar∣ters by the way for one night in a place, and be conveyed towards their severall homes, as farre as Chard, if they goe so farre, or unto Quarters assigned them for their transportation, according to the precedent Articles. That for the further performance of these Articles, two Colonels of each Army shall be mutually delivered and kept as Hostages. H. Ireton. Jo. Lambert. Jo. St Aubin. William Stane. Edward Herle. Richard Deane. Charles Coring. Marcus Trevor. Thomas Panton. Jordan Bovill. Richard Prideaux. Jean Goteer. There came in to the General during the Treaty, ma∣ny Lieutenant-Colonels, Serjeant-Majors and Cap∣taines. Many Gentlemen of quality. Ninety and six common Souldiers from Peryn with Armes. Twelve more followed them.
One hundred more with their Arms and Colours, of Colonel Trevanian's Regiment. One hundred Officers and souldiers of Colonel Cham∣pernoon's Regiment, Falmouth by this means, and the sur∣render of St Mawes, was ours on one side the Harbour. Now having given you the Narrative, give me leave to make some few observations on this succesfull progresse, even to the Lands end, which may well be the subject of greatest admiration and thankfulnesse: The hard task the Army had in forcing up so great a Body as 5000 of the Enemies Horse, into such a narrow neck of land, through a Country so cragged, in such a season of the yeer, the ground all covered over with Snow, the wayes so slip∣pery, and the Weather so bitter cold, by a hard frost of that continuance, as had not been knowne for many yeers before, may well be compared with Hannibal's for∣cing his passage into Italy through the frozen Alps with Fire and Vinegar. That five thousand Horse and more should be forced to capitulate and yeeld themselves to an Army comming short of that number in Horse, is that which History can hardly paralell, and Posterity will scarce beleeve. And the benefit is as great as the wonder: For had this Body of Horse escaped into the Mid-land parts, they might in probability have much protracted the Warre: and if they, the Lord Ashlye's Foot, and the Kings other Forces about Oxford had joyned together, they would have been very considerable in the Field, and so would necessarily have occasioned the diversion of the Army from the work they had in hand, viz. the Re∣duction of the West, which was of that vast importance to the Kingdom, considering the Negotiations that were in France & Ireland, for the present bringing over Forces thither (as by the intercepted Letters from those parts severally did appeare) that nothing could be greater: But by this good hand of God upon us, this Body of the Enemy is secured, their joyning prevented, and all the
mischiefe that would have ensued thereupon, and Corn∣wal reduced: Which last particular, that you may see what a considerable summe (alone and by it selfe) it amounts unto; cast it up and consider it, as it was a Country having convenient Ports & Harbours both for France and Ireland, whose naturall scituation was very strong and apt for defence, being all very mountainous, and enwrapt with the Sea on all sides, except toward Devonshire, and there bounded by the River Tamar, which in a right line, runs almost from Sea to Sea. From which advantages, it hath been in ancient times, one of the last places of retreat in the Kingdome, and hath ever made saving conditions for it selfe in those overflowing inundations both of Saxons and Normans. Since the be∣ginning of our late Warres, it and its Forces have been more then once fatally disastrous to our former Armies, and had ever been from the beginning of the Warres in the possession of the Enemy, the people more generally disaffected to the Parliament then any other part of the Kingdome, from whence the King, as from a never fail∣ing Spring, was constantly supplied with a choyce and able Infantry. All which particulars whosoever doth consider, will acknowledge, that the reducing of this County was as difficult as desirable: And this is another happy fruit of the disbanding those Horse, and not only the redu∣ction of that County of Cornwall, but the absolute conquest of the West of England; most of the Ene∣mies Garrisons there onely waiting to see what would become of these Horse, upon whom they depended for reliefe. All which considered and put together, this service may well live a lasting Monument, to the glory of God, and the honour of the Instruments. Moreover, during this space, while the Enemies For∣ces were disbanding, as an additionall to the occurrences of these five dayes, Monday 16. another Packet of the
Lord Glamorgan's taken at Peryn, was brought to the General, being a Duplicate of those Letters taken at Padstow, (another Vessell being newly landed there out of Ireland, not knowing but that it was still in the Kings hand) and that evening was Peryn possest by our Foot, who were received with much joy by the Townes people. Tuesday 17. Lieutenant-Colonel Ingoldsbey (a stout and valiant man) going to view Pendennis Castle, recei∣ved a shot from some of the Enemies Musquetteers behind the Mud-walls, of which he dyed within three hours. Wednesday, The General went to view Pendennis, and possessed Pennycome-Quick; also Dennis Fort with twenty six pieces of Ordnance, and thirty barrels of Powder was the same day surrendred to the General; and Pensans and Saint Ives stood upon their guards against Goring's Forces. Thursday, Above an hundred men came with their Armes from Michael's Mount, and tendred themselves to serve in the Army. CHAP. V. The Army returning to the Siege of Excester, with all the particulars of the Treaty, and surrender of the same. THe whole Field-Force of the Enemy being thus happily reduced, Orders were given out immedi∣ately for the Army to martch back Eastward: Saturday 21. the General accordingly martched from Truro to Bodman, and the rest of the Army to other Quarters, where they rested the Lords day. Monday 23. Consul∣tation was had with the Gentlemen for the settlement of those parts. The Lord Mohune and others came to his Excellency that day. Tuesday 24. Further debate was had concerning the ordering of the disbanded Horse, who
plundered the Country as they went, and they were all called over by the List at the Bridges they were to passe over, to see that none had more Horse with them then were allowed them at the disbanding place. Wednesday 25. The General and Lieutenant-General and some of the generall Officers, went to Plymouth and viewed the Forts and Works, whilest the Army martched another way, by Launceston: The Governour and the Towne entertaining the General very honourably, three hun∣dred pieces of Ordnance discharged to welcome him thither. Thursday 26. The Parliament-men, and other Gen∣tlemen of the Country met the General at Plymouth; conference was had concerning the defensive posture of that County, and the speedy sending over of the French that were disbanded; and accordingly Ships were pro∣vided. Friday 27. The General martched from Plymouth to Oakhampton, four and twenty miles, by Tavestock, and the Army martched from Launceston that day within five miles of Oakhampton. Saturday 28. His Excellency had newes of Sir Jacob Ashleys being taken, and of the routing of his Army by the Forces under the command of Colonel Morgan, Sir William Brereton, and Colonel Birch, and of Sir Charles Lucas being taken by Colonel Fleetwood, who with his Horse hindred the conjunction of all the Oxford Horse with the Lord Ashley. The General rested this day at Oakhampton till the rest of the Army came up. Lords day, March 29. They martched from Oakhamp∣ton to Crediton, fourteen miles; some part of the Army went that night to Newton Siers, being eighteen miles: Orders were given to possesse Heavytree, a Village lying within halfe a mile of Excester, lest the Enemy should sally out, and burne those Villages upon the approach of the Army. Monday, March 30. The General resting at Crediton,
some more Foot advanced close to Excester; a Summons was prepared to be sent in. Tuesday, March 31. The General drew all his Army round the City within Musquet shot; and as be passed by them, at every post, our men that lay there gave a volley of shot and a great shout; and so on the other side the River, there being Bridges made over; and present∣ly after his Excellency sent in a Summons, and came to quarter that night at Colomb John, the rest of the Army to Silverton and other parts. The Summons being pre∣pared, was sent in; and ran thus. SIR, BEing returned with my Army from the West, where God in his wisdome saw it good to bestow a dry and bloodlesse Victory, upon me, to the great peace and quiet of those parts, and conceiving it my duty likewise to endeavour the good of this County, which by the occasion of your Garrison is necessa∣rily obstructed, I thought fit once more to send you a Sum∣mons to deliver up to me the City of Excester, with the Ca∣stle, Forts, Armes, Ammunition, and Magazine belonging to the same; beleeving that by this time you are satisfied of the reliefe from the Princes Army, and may equally be of all reliefe to come from any other place, if your intelligence and knowledge were the same with ours: There is nothing more induceth me hereunto then an unfained zeale toward any bloodshed, and, as much as in me lyes, to preserve that City, which hath already suffered deeply in these unnaturall di∣stractions, from further or greater misery: Though I shall not boast of my numbers or strength, yet I must needs tell you that I doubt not but the same power which hath formerly made difficult things easie, will answer this, and will acquit me from being accompted the occasion of those inconveni∣encies and miseries which necessarily will ensue upon your refusall. Sir, I shall expect your speedy and positive Answer herein, and rest Your Servant THO. FAIRFAX. March 31. 1646.
Wednesday, April 1. Sir John Berkley returned this Answer to the Summons. SIR, UPon your Summons I called a Counsel of Warre, where after some debate, it was determined to treat with you, or with whom you should appoint, and to conclude upon just and honourable termes: And to that purpose, I desire a safe Conduct for these persons to repaire to your head Quarters, with their servants, on Friday morning, and to returne at their pleasure: I remaine Your Servant JOHN BERKLEY. April 1. 1646. Those first named by Sir John Berkley were, Sir Henry Berkley. Mr. Wil. Ashburnham. Sir George Cary. Mr. Jo. Weare. Colonel Godolphine. Capt. Fitz Garret. Mr. Robert Walker. Mr. Thomas Knight. Mr. Thomas Kendal. Mr. Thomas Foard. Whereupon Thursday, April 2. his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax returned this Answer. SIR, I Have received yours, whereby I understand, that in pur∣suance of my demand in my Summons, you have determi∣ned to treat with me by Commissioners; and in order to that have sent a List of ten Gentlemen, which you desire for Com∣missioners on your behalfe, of which there is none in parti∣cular that I take exceptions unto; yet because I desire to carry on the Businesse with cleernesse and expedition, which by so great a number cannot be so well effected, I thought fit to propound unto you the number of six, that being as many as conveniently can be used in a businesse of this nature: Ʋpon
your consent hereunto and Answer, I shall, according to your desire, send you a safe conduct for a proportionable number of Commissioners; and in the mean time shall rest Your Servant THO. FAIRFAX. April 1. 1646. I agree the time to begin on Friday next, according to your desire; the place Poultymore-house: I have sent a List of the Commissioners on my part. Lieut. Gen. Hammond. Col. Sir Hardresse Waller. Col. Lambert. Col. Harley. Col. Fry. Commissary Stane. Thursday Apr. 2. Commissioners were appointed, and a safe conduct granted: Friday 3. the Treaty began at Poul∣tymore, S. Jo. Bamfields house. This day his Excellency had the newes of the surrender of Deniston: Saturday, Sun∣day, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, the Treaty conti∣nued, sitting close at it every day, and the most part of the night, till they had concluded it. That which most re∣tarded the proceding, was some high demands and fruit∣lesse quaeries, in behalfe of the Clergy, viz. the Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, and other Cathedrall men there, wherein our Commissioners held them up to what was reasonable; and after much time consumed therein, they were willing to accept of what we were willing to grant, and so on Thursday, April 9. the Articles were signed by Sir John Berkley, in the presence of our Commissioners, and by the General in the presence of their Commissio∣ners; which Articles were as followeth. Onely, first, let it be remembred, that after there was an entrance upon the Treaty at Excester, and that it was probable to come to a good conclusion, his Excellency losing no time, sent Commissary-general Ireton, with his owne Rgiment, and Colonel Riche's, and some other Regiments of Horse, to Oxford, to hinder Provisions
from going in thither, and to take all advantages against the Enemy: His Excellency intending to make all speed himselfe after the work done at Excester, to lay Siege thereto. Articles of Agreement concluded on by Thomas Hammond, Lieutenant-general of the Ordnance, Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Colonel Edward Harley, Colonel Lambert, Commissary-general Stane, and Major Wat∣son, Scoutmaster-general, Commissioners on the behalfe of the right Honourable his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, General of the Parliaments Forces, on the one Party: And Sir Henry Berkly, Sir George Cary, Colonel Ashburnham, Colonel Godolphin, Captaine Fitz-Gerald, Master Jo. Weare, Master Robert Wal∣ker, and Master Thomas Knight, Commissioners on the behalfe of Sir John Berkley Knight, Governour of the City of Excester, on the other Party, touching and con∣cerning the Rendition of the said City and Garrison as followeth: I. THat the City and Garrison of Excester, together with the Castle, and all Forts and Mounts, places of defence, of, or belonging to the same; with all Ord∣nance, Armes and Ammunition, Provisions and Furni∣ture of Warre belonging to the Garrison (excepting what shall be excepted in the ensuing Articles) shall be delivered unto Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Par∣liaments Forces, or to any whom he shall appoint to re∣ceive them, for the use of the Parliament, on Monday next after the date hereof, being the thirteenth of this instant April, by twelve of the clock at noon. II. That if any Officer, Souldier, or any person in∣cluded in these Articles, wrong or plunder in Person or Goods (in their martch away, or before) any Citizen or Couutry man, or any person whatsoever, shall as far as he is able, give satisfaction to the persons so inju∣red,
at the Judgment of his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax. III. That if any Officer, Souldier, or any person (included in these Articles) shall, after the date hereof, wilfully break, deface, spoile or imbezle any Armes, or other Provisions of Warre whatsoever, by the prece∣dent Articles to be surrendred as aforesaid, shall lose the benefit of the ensuing Articles. IV. That the Princesse Henrietta and her Governesse, with her Houshold, shall have full liberty to passe with their Plate, Moneys and Goods, within twenty dayes after the conclusion of this Treaty (when she shall desire) to any place within the Continent of England or Domi∣nion of Wales, at the election of the Governesse, and there to remaine untill his Majesties pleasure be further known touching her setling; and that the Governesse shal have liberty to send to the King, to know his pleasure herein, accordingly to dispose of her Highnesse within the aforesaid limitation of places, and that fit and con∣venient Carriages be provided for their passage, at rea∣sonable rates. V. That the Cathedrall Church, nor any other Church within the City shall be defaced, or any thing be∣longing thereunto spoiled or taken away by any Souldi∣er or person of either side whatsoever. VI. That the Governour, together with all Lords, Clergy-men, Gentlemen, Captaines, Officers, Troop∣ers and common Souldiers, shall martch out of the City on Monday next, the thirteenth of April, by twelve of the clock at noon, with their Horses, full Armes, Bag and Baggage, and their Goods, Colours flying, Drums beat∣ing, Matches lighted, Bullets, full Bandaliers, with suffi∣cient convoyes unto Oxford, or unto Helston in Cornwal, at their severall elections, and in case the Governour of Oxford shall refuse to receive the common Souldiers that shall martch thither, they are there to deliver up their Armes to the convoy, and have passes to repaire to
their severall homes, and those that martch unto Helston are there to he disbanded, and to have Passes to their se∣verall homes. That all Troopers and common Souldi∣ers which martch not as aforesaid shall deliver up their Armes, except their Swords, and have liberty to goe to their owne homes with Bag and Baggage, and shall not be compelled to take up Armes against the King; provi∣ded also that all Officers and Gentlemen that shall chuse to goe to Oxford, and not taking up Armes, shall repaire into the Parliaments quarters within forty dayes after the date hereof, and shall enjoy the benefit of these Ar∣ticles. VII. That all those which shall martch to the Garri∣sons aforesaid, shall have free quarter in their martch, and not be obliged to martch above ten miles a day, and that such other Souldiers as are Inhabitants in the City, shall receive free liberty to martch out, or remaine therein, without being compelled to take up Armes against the King: And if any Souldiers fall sicke upon their martch, that convenient carriages and Accommodations shall be provided for them. VIII. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergy-men, Chaplaines and Officers, that shall chuse to goe beyond the Seas, shall martch away with their full Armes for their owne use; and that all common Souldiers shall martch away with their full Armes, with a sufficient con∣voy unto the Port which they shall chuse for their transportation: Which Armes they shall there lay down and deliver unto the Governour of the next garrison belonging to the Parliament; the said Governour pro∣viding for their safety during the time of their abode there, where they shall be assisted for the procuring Ves∣sels and Shipping for their transportation at the accusto∣med Rates, and shall have free Quarter for one and twenty dayes allowed to provide for their passage. After which time shall be expired, the same Officers and Souldiers paying for their Quarters, shall have liberty
to stay untill Shipping be provided, and weather season∣able; and that during their stay, or before, it shall be permitted, that any two of them may goe to London, to treat with any Forraigne Ambassadour or Agent, for a Commission to be entertained beyond the Seas. IX. That neither the Officers, Souldiers, nor any person whatsoever, in their going out of the City, shall be reproached, or have any disgracefull speeches, or affront offered to them, or any of their persons wrong∣ed, rifled, searched, or their goods seized, or taken away from them by any person whatsoever. X. That the Governour, Lords, Gentlemen, Cler∣gy-men, Chaplaines, Commanders, Officers and Soul∣diers, comprized in these Articles, shall be allowed and assisted in, of providing sufficient Carriages at reasonable Rates to carry away their Bag, Baggage and Goods; and that care be taken by the future Governour of the said City, for the curing of such sick or wounded Officers and Souldiers as shall be left in the City, and that upon reco∣very, they shall have Passes to repaire to their own houses respectively. XI. That the Parliament Forces come not into the City untill the King's Forces be martched out, except one hundred and fifty Foot, and one Troop of Horse, with their Officers. XII. That no Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy¦men, Chaplaines (excepting those, who are by name ex∣cepted by Parliament from pardon and composition) Officers, Citizens, and Souldiers, and all other persons comprized within these Articles, shall be questioned, or accountable for any Act past by them done (or by any other by their procurement) relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt his Majesty and Parliament, they submitting themselves to reasonable and moderate com∣position for their Estates, which the General Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall really endeavour with the Parliament, that it shall not exceed two yeers value of any mans
reall Estate respectively, and for personall, according to the ordinary rule, not exceeding the proportion afore∣said; which composition being made, they shall have in∣demnity for their persons, and enjoy their Estates and all other Immunities, without payment of any fifth or twentieth part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, ex∣cept what shall be hereafter charged upon them in com∣mon, with other Subjects of this Kingdome, by autho∣rity of Parliament. XIII. That all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Cler∣gy and Chaplaines (excepted in the precedent Articles) shall have liberty to goe unto any of the King's garri∣sons, and to have a safe conduct for themselves and ser∣vants, to goe unto the Parliament to obtaine their com∣position for their Estates, and Indemnity for their per∣sons; which (though it prove ineffectuall) yet never∣thelesse they shall have four moneths time next after the date of these Articles, to endeavour their peace, or to goe beyond the Seas, and shall have Passes for that purpose. XIV. That all Horses, Armes, Money, and other goods whatsoever, taken as lawfull prizes of War, before or during the Siege, now in the City, be continued in the possession of the present possessors. XV. That al Officers, Gentlemen, Citizens, Inhabitants, Clergy-men, Chaplaines, Souldiers, and all other persons within the City, during the time of their making their composition, shal have free liberty either to inhabit with∣in the same City, or shall have free liberty at any time to depart with their Families, goods and Estates, unto any part of this Kingdome in the Parliaments Quarters; and before composition made, the Merchants and Trades-men to enjoy their Merchandizing and Trades; and after composition made, all others (now prohibited by Ordinances of Parliament) to enjoy and exercise their professions, or goe beyond the Seas; and they, and every of them, shall have power to dispose and sell to
their owne uses, either by themselves or others, whatso∣ever part of their Goods or Estates they shall not carry or convey away with them: And all Inhabitants, which did inhabite within the City, within seven moneths past, having made their compositions as abovesaid, shall en∣joy the benefit of this and the twelfth and the two and twentieth Articles. XVI. That all Charters, Customes, Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, Lands, Estates, Goods and Debts, of the Major, Aldermen, Bayliffe, Commonalty, as a Cor∣poration, and all other Corporations of the said City, shall be enjoyed by them, and that the ancient govern∣ment thereof remaine as formerly. XVII. That if any persons or Inhabitants which are comprized within these Articles, shall break any of them; That such breach shall onely touch and concerne such persons, and they to make such satisfaction for the same as the cause doth require. XVIII. That all persons comprized within these Articles, shall have a certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the future Governour of the City, that such persons were in the City at that time of the surrendring thereof, and are to have the be∣nefit of these Articles. XIX. That his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax give assurance; That all Officers and Souldiers in the Parlia∣ments Army, and all others under his command, shall duly and exactly observe all Articles aforesaid: And that if they, or any of them, shall directly or indirectly vio∣late or infringe the same, upon complaint thereof, Ju∣stice may be done, and reparation made. XX. That the Inhabitants of the City shall be eased and freed from all free Quarter or billet of Souldiers, except in cases of urgent necessity, other then for lodg∣ing, and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of the Major or his Deputy. XXI. That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation or
Subscription (relating thereunto) shall be imposed up∣on any person whatsoever comprized within these Ar∣ticles, but onely such as shall bind all persons afore∣said, not to beare Armes against the Parliament of Eng∣land, now sitting at Westminster, nor wilfully doe any Act prejudiciall unto their Affaires, whilest they remain in their quarters; except the persons aforesaid shall first render themselves unto the Parliament, who shall cause them to be secured if they think fit. XXII. That for the further and cleerer understand∣ing of the precedent Articles, it is hereby declared, that the true meaning of them is; That all persons compri∣zed within these Articles, shall quietly and peaceably enjoy all their Goods, Debts and Moveables during the space of four moneths next ensuing, and be free from all Oaths, Covenants and Protestations, and have liberty within the time of the said four moneths, in case they shall not make their composition with the Parliament (and shall be resolved to goe beyond Seas) to dispose of their said Goods, Debts and Moveables allowed by these Articles, and to depart the Kingdome, if they shall think fit, and to have passes for that purpose, or otherwise to stay in the Kingdome. XXIII. That Mount-Radford, and the Ward in St. Thomas Parish, with the provisions of Warre thereunto belonging, be delivered unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint to receive them, in assurance of the performance of the precedent Articles, to morrow by six of the clock in the afternoon, being the seventh of April; and that four such Gentlemen or Officers as his Excellency shall approve of, shall be de∣livered at the same time as Hostages for the performance of the foregoing Articles on the one part, and two Ho∣stages, such as Sir John Berkley Knight, Governour of the City of Excester shall approve of, and appoint to be received for performance on the other part. XXIV. Lastly, that these Articles be ratified and
confirmed mutually by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax on the one part, and Sir John Berkley Knight, Go∣vernour of the City on the other part. I doe hereby ratifie and confirme the Articles abovesaid, agreed on by the Commissioners on my part. THO. FAIRFAX. April 9. 1646. The conditions it is confest are honourable for the Enemies acceptance, yet no way dishonourable for Soul∣diers to grant, considering the consequence of the time∣ly surrender of that place. The time for the surrender of the Towne was not till Monday, they desiring that time to put up their Baggage, and prepare themselves to martch forth: The General thinking it not fit to lose so much time, as to stay till Monday (though the weather was unseasonable) martch∣ed away that night, after the Articles were signed, to Tiverton, designing his martch for Barnstable. CHAP. VI. The Particulars of the Treaty and surrender of Barnstable; and the Resolutions and Motions of the Army after the Reduction thereof till they came to Oxford. FRiday the 10. The General came before Barnsta∣ble, Summoned the Towne, and received a civill Answer from the Governour, inclining to a Treaty; which began the next day, and held all that day, and part of the day following, which was the Lords day, (when it was concluded, much upon the same Articles in effect with those of Excester) and the Castle and the Towne was delivered into our hands, as a security for surrender of the Fort at eight dayes end; Colonel Shef∣field
being appointed by the General to stay till the sur∣render, and see the Articles performed. This Treaty was carried on and concluded by Com∣missary-General Stane, who was sole Commissioner for his Excellency, a Gentleman of great fidelity, who for this, and sundry other actions of advantage to this Ar∣my, well deserves an honourable mentioning. Upon the concluding of Barnstable Articles, two Re∣giments of Foot were commanded from before Barnsta∣ble, to martch to Dunster, and to face the Castle, whilest the General's Summons was sent in to the Governour; who embraced a Treaty: and after some time spent in capitulations, Surrendred the Castle to Colonell Blake. Monday the 13. The General set his face toward Ex∣cester, desirous to have been there to have seen their martching forth, that the Articles might not be viola∣ted; but the weather proved so unreasonable wet, that he came short: But such was the vigilancy of the Lieu∣tenant-General and the Officers, and indeed such was the temper of the Army, that there was not the least vi∣olation of the Articles. I shall conclude this Narration of Excester with the commemoration of the great diligence, faithfulnesse and industry of Sir Hardresse Waller, who being left in trust by the General (when he martched into Cornwal) with the command of the Forces on both sides of Excester, to straiten the Enemy, and hinder them of provisions, and keep the Enemy from making incursions into the Coun∣try, performed therein the part of a gallant Gentleman, and an experienced Souldier. Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, the 14, 15, 16, and 17. of April, The General stayed in Excester, setled things in order, to the safety of that place; and for the ease of the Country, and that he might keep his own Army entire for more publick service, reduced three Country Regiments of Foot into one, viz. the Regiment
of Colonel Shapcoat, who had done good service at Ti∣verton, and the Fort at Exmouth; and the Regiment which Colonel Frye had very readily raised for the then present service of the West; and the Regiment of Co∣lonel Weare, which had been likewise imployed in the same service. These three Regiments formed into one, was ordered for the defence of the Garrison of Excester, under the command of Colonel Hamond, whom the Ge∣neral appointed Governour of the Garrison. Saturday April 18. The General began his martch toward Oxford, and Quartered that night at Chard (be∣ing eighteen miles from Excester;) the Foot and Train having had Orders two dayes before to advance forward. Severall Informations came from our Forces before Ox∣ford, That it was common talk in Oxford, that the King would escape thence; others said, That he would come into this Army; and others conjectured (that which since hath fallen out) That he would goe another way: all care was taken by our Forces thereabouts (as you may well think it concerned them) that this prize, at last, might not escape them. Sunday the 19. The General martched to Dorchester, where most of the Army quartered that night: Monday the 20. the General martched from Dorchester to Salis∣bury, the Traine and Foot to Blandford: the Generall stayed at Salisbury, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, the while the Army and Traine of Artillery were come up, and till all that were behind were come up from their severall Quarters: Sundry Complaints were brought thither unto his Excellency, of the viola∣tion of Excester and Cornwall Articles by the Com∣mittees, of severall Counties, taking from divers their Horses and Armes, and other necessaries, which by the Articles they were to carry away with them: an act of so much incivility to the General, as well as injustice to the sufferers, as deserves to be noted Nigro Carbone, but that I know his Excellency desires not such revenge:
But so many Barbarismes of this kind were there, as were they particularly related, would make such a Volume, as would scarce be imagined. Friday the 24. Part of the Army martched to Ando∣ver, whither the General also purposed to have gone that night; but Providence ordered it otherwise, detaining him at Salisbury till next morning, and then he went to Andover, where the head Quarter was that night: Lieu∣tenant-General Cromwel was two or three dayes before gone for London, at the Generals desire, to give the Par∣liament an account of the state of the West of England, which God had now so happily reduced to their obe∣dience. Sunday the 26. The General rested at Andover, where he received the newes that Woodstock was surrendred up∣on Treaty, unto Colonel Rainsborow, who had gallantly attempted it by storme some few dayes before, wherein he received some losse. Monday the 27. The General martched to Newbery, where the next day he received Intelligence of the Kings being escaped out of Oxford, in a disguised manner, with his Lock cut off, or tyed up at lest, his Beard shaved, and in the habit of a Serving-man, —In a distressed time 'Tis safe for Kings like poorest men to seem; Therfore how much livs he thats truly poor, Safer then Kings?Positisque insignibus Aulae, Egreditur famuli raptos indutus amictus, In dubiis tutum est inopem simulare Tyrāno, Quāto igitur mūdi dominis securius aevum Verus pauper agit? Luc. Pharsal. lib. 8.  with a Cloke-bag be∣hind him, waiting upon Master John Ashburnham: great doubting and questioning there was, Whither his Ma∣jesty was gone, but within few dayes after, it was re∣solved by certaine intelligence, that he was received in∣to the Scots Army, being first entertained at the Quar∣ters of the French Agent, who not long before had been in Oxford. It is much to the honour of his Excellencies Army to be mentioned, and to the honour of those Officers in
particular, to whom, being then about Woodstock, pri∣vate Overtures were made by some from Court (pre∣tending the Kings privity and consent thereto) for re∣ceiving his Majesty, who was minded to cast himselfe upon them: but to their great honour be it knowne and published, such was their tendernesse and faithfulnesse in that point, that conceiving it derogatory to the ho∣nour and power of the Parliament (for his Majesty to wave that highest Court, and addresse himselfe to any others in such a nature) & therfore inconsistent with their trust and duty, being the Servants of the State, to owne or entertain any such thing; they certified the Parliament thereof, and understanding this to be their sense also, they absolutely refused to be tampered with concerning that matter. The King on the other hand was as little to be wrought upon, to addresse himself to his Parliament, the issue wherof was that precipitate resolution and disposall of himself, as is related before. And now O England take up a Lamentation over your King, that to all his Errors he should contract such obstinacy and irreconcilable pre∣judice against his Parliament, and that he should be so farre mistaken as while he seeks to avoyd the surmized prejudice and dishonour, of referring himselfe to his Par∣liament, to run himselfe on a reall dishonour in seeking a shadow under their Servants: Unhappy greatnesse, that Priviledges Kings from hearing of their faults plainly as meaner men, and splits them on the shelfe of self-willed obstinacy, rather then it wil suffer thē to amēd or acknowledge them. But tis not my work to Cōment but to relate, onely to set a character on the integrity of this Army. I have said thus much; it may be thought too much nicenesse and scrupulosity in them to refuse such a proffer, but whosoever shall consider what is hinted be∣fore, must approve of their doing; if others had done the like, they had done but their duty. Thursday the 30. His Excellency martched to East-Hondred: this day the Duke of Lenox, Earle of Lindsay
and others came from Oxford to Woodstock, and rendred themselves to our Forces there: also Sir William Vaughan, Sir George Strowd, Sir Phillip Mountaine, Sir John Cans∣field and divers others, came in to Commissary-general Ireton, with about three hundred Horse, after the King had given them the slip, much about the same time. CHAP. VII. The Siege of Oxford, the Particulars of the Treaty, and surrender thereof; with the influence of the fate of Oxford upon the remain∣ing Garrisons. OXFORD, the King's royall Garrison, the place of the King's ordinary residence and retreat, hath, like a Parenthesis, included all the Action of this Ar∣my, between the two Sieges of it; being first in intenti∣tion and attempt, though last in execution and re∣duction. May the 1. Being that day twelve-moneth that this Ar∣my first martched into the Field, the General with his Army came before Oxford (wherein was Prince Ru∣pert, Prince Maurice, and a great part of the Nobility and Gentry of England) with intention to sit downe be∣fore it, and lay Siege to it. The Army was drawne to a Randezvouz between Abington and Garsington; the head Quarter was that night at Garsington: At the Ran∣dezvouz Major-general Skippon, who ever since the Battle at Naseby had laine under the cure of his wounds, and had suffered divers incisions, by reason of a piece of Armour which was lodged in the wound, being now (by the blessing of God) well recovered, came to the Army, and was received with much joy, and many accla∣mations of the Souldiers. May the 2. There was a generall Randezvouz of the Army, Horse and Foot, upon Burlington-Green, and thence the Forces were distributed to severall Quarters, to
at Heddington, Marston, and the Townes thereabouts. The third of May, The General with the Officers of the Army, took a survey of Oxford, which they found to have received many materiall alterations and additions of advantage since their last being before it; & though it was alwayes justly accounted a place of great strength, yet now it was made incomparably more strong then ever; [which is very easie to be beleeved, if you doe but consi∣der, It had been from the beginning of the Warres the King's head Quarter and Garrison, his chiefe place of residence and retreat, where his Counsel, and most of the Nobility that had left the Parliament attended him: its place being almost in the Center of the Kingdome, gave it no small advantage for the sending out of Par∣ties upon any designe. Besides that, it was surrounded about with many small Garrisons of the Kings, as Rad∣coat, Farrington, Wallingford, Sherborn-house, Borstal, which were as so many out-works unto it;] the scitua∣tion of it, in reference to the ground it stood upon, rendred it very apt for defence, being placed betwixt the two Rivers Isis and Charwel; upon the west side of it ran severall Branches of the River Isis, some of which running close by the Towne wals, was a great defence to it; upon the East side ran the River Charwel, which by making Locks at Clements Bridge, they had caused to overflow the Medowes, so that round the Ci∣ty, to the extent of three parts of it (all except the north side, that was somewhat higher ground) was surround∣ed with water, and absolutely unapproachable: To this the Line about the City (newly finished) they found to be very high, having many strong Bulworks so regularly flanking one another, that nothing could be more exact∣ly done: round about the Line, both upon the Bul∣works and the Curtin, was strongly set with storm-poles; upon the out-side of the Ditch round the Line, it was strongly Pallisadoed, and without that againe, were dig∣ged severall pits in the ground, that a single Foot-man
could not without difficulty approach the brink of the Ditch: within the Towne there was five thousand good Foot, most of them of the King's old Infantry, which served him from the beginning of the Wars, and withall they were well stored with a plentifull Magazine of Vi∣ctuals, Ammunition and Provisions for War; in a word, whatever art or industry could doe to make a place im∣pregnable, was very liberally bestowed here. All which strength being apprehended and considered by the Ge∣neral, he concluded, that this was no place to be taken at a running pull, but likely rather to prove a businesse of time, hazard and industry: Whereupon, at a Counsel of Warre at Heddington, it was resolved to fix our Quarters: our first Quarter to be upon Heddington Hill, where was ordered to be made a very large and great Work, or Intrenchment, of capacity to receive and lodge three thousand men: as also, that a Bridge should be laid over the River Charwel close by Marston, that another Quarter might be gone in hand withall between the Ri∣vers, wherein it was intended most of our Foot should be lodged, that being all the ground we had to approach on: Warrants were sent out unto the Country round about for Spades, Pick-axes, &c. for that purpose; as also, a Letter to the Committee for the Army to hasten more Ammunition, with all Requisites for the Siege, as Tents for Souldiers, &c. from London: Which were no sooner come from thence, but the great Work upon Heddington Hill was instantly falne in hand with∣all, and finished in three or four dayes time, to admirati∣on▪ the souldiers being paid so much by the rod for work∣ing thereat: This Work was committed to Major-General Skippon. In the meane time, the Bridge in∣tended was made over the River Charwel, neer Mar∣ston, where another Quarter was possessed, and a Line drawn from Isis to Charwel, and a great Work made on that side the Water: Colonel Rainsborough commanded this Work, there was a third under the command of
Colonel Lambert, the fourth of Colonel Herbert; and a Line was begun to be drawn from the great Fort on Hed∣dington Hill over against Saint Clements. The management and carrying on of these Works, Lines and Approaches, was recommended to the care and skill of Major-general Skippon, who went through the same with much dexterity. By the intelligence of divers that came out of the City his Excellency was further satisfied and confirmed con∣cerning the Enemies great strength within, and provisi∣on for to hold out. So soon as the severall Posts were assigned to the Ar∣my before Oxford, severall Forces were taken forth and designed for the blocking up of other Garrisons, viz. some for Farringdon, under the command of Colonel Sir Robert Pye; others for Radcot, under the command of Colonel Cook; and others for Wallingford, under the com∣mand of Colonel Paine, and Colonel Barkestend on Berk∣shire side, and Colonel Temple on Oxfordshire side: others for Borstal-house; and as many Horse as could be spared were sent towards Worcester, for the straitning of that garrison, till such time as the Army were at liberty to ad∣vance thither: An account of all which severally shall be given in due place. But before I proceed any further, an account of the surrender of Banbury Castle comes next to be given in. The Relation of Banbury. Banbury, once a great and faire Market-Towne before the late troubles (but now having scarce the one halfe standing to gaze on the ruines of the other) was ever till now unfortunate in all meanes and endea∣vours used for its recovery, having laine under the pos∣session and tyranny of the Enemy from the beginning, without almost any intermission, which happened to it partly through the commodiousnesse of its scituation for the Enemie, as lying but eighteene miles North from Oxford, and in such a convenient place as gave it a command into divers other Counties, viz. Northampton∣shire,
Warwickeshire, &c. from out of which it gathered large contributions for Oxford; The sweetnesse that the Enemy tasted in the fruits and effects they reaped by this Garrison, made them, that upon all our attempts to re∣duce it, they still were ready with great Forces to relieve it: But yet I cannot but also look upon, and observe therein, a speciall hand and intimation of God against that professing place, where in a manner judgment be∣gan, as at the House of God, and was removed with one of the last, I pray God sanctifie it to them. The strange sights that were seen over that Towne sixteen yeers agoe, in the night time, when as the ap∣pearance of fighting, pikes pushing one against another, was discerned in the Ayre, &c. whereof I was an eye-wit∣nesse, with many others, might portend the sad fate that hath since befallen that miserable place, and the parts thereabouts. The Forces imployed in the reducing of that place were about 1000 Foot, and some four Troops of Horse, all under the command of that approved Gentleman Colonel Whaley: They lay eleven weeks before the Castle; so soon as they came before it, they entrencht themselves by a Line drawn round the Towne, for their better security from any force without: which done, they sapt up towards the Castle, ran over severall Gal∣leries, over the outmost Mote, and so wrought into the Enemies Works; the Enemy countermining them, sprang one Mine upon them, but through Gods mercy did no great hurt; and also flinging downe stones upon them, and hand Granadoes amongst them, rendred their duty very hard and hazardous; yet through the goodnesse of God, and the courage of the Souldiers, we wrought so farre into the Enemies Works, as put them out of all hopes of keeping the Castle, which constrained them to a parley and surrender of the Castle, Armes, Ordnance, Ammunition and Victuals, upon these ensuing Ar∣ticles.
Viz. I. The Governour Sir William Compton, and Sir Charles Compton his Brother, to martch forth with one Horse and Armes a piece, two servants attending them, and to have two moneths liberty to goe beyond Sea. II. All Captaines to martch forth with one Horse apiece and their Swords. III. All the rest to martch forth without Armes, to be disbanded a mile from the Towne, to have Passes to martch to their severall homes, or to goe beyond Sea, and to have free Quarter martching ten miles a day. IV. All both Officers and Souldiers to leave halfe their moneys behind them. There were found in the Castle eleven pieces of Ord∣nance, eleven barrels of Powder, and foure hundred Armes. This Castle, though decayed through time, yet was re∣covered and revived by art and industry, unto an incredi∣ble strength, much beyond many places of greater name and reputation, & often had our Forces bin defeated be∣fore it; & but that now was Gods time and season for the rendition of it, no other successe could have been expe∣cted by these Forces, the Castle standing in its full pride and strength, being well recovered of all its wounds and batteries received in former assaults; and having im∣pregnible Works about it, and great variety of inventi∣on bestowed upon it. But to returne from whence I digressed, to the siege of Oxford. Our four Quarters being setled under their Canon shot, and a Line begun to be drawne from the great Fort on Heddington Hill round Saint Clements (lying without Magdalen Bridge) his Excellency sent in a Sum∣mons to Sir Thomas Glenham Governour of Oxford, re∣quiring the surrender of that Garrison: The Copy whereof followeth. SIR, I Doe by these, summon you to deliver up the City of Ox∣ford into my hands, for the use of the Parliament; I very
much desire the preservation of that place (so famous for learning) from ruine, which inevitably is like to fall upon it, except you concurre: You may have honourable termes for your selfe, and all within the Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I desire your Answer this day, and re∣maine Your Servant THO. FAIRFAX. May 11. 1646. The same day also his Excellency sent a Summons to the Governour of Borstal-house, to the same effect for the substance; the copy whereof followeth. SIR, I Doe by these, summon you to deliver up the Garrison of Borstal-house into my hands, for the use of the Parlia∣ment; you may have honourable terms for your selfe, and all within your Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I de∣sire your Answer this day. THO. FAIRFAX. May 11. 1646. As also the like to Radcoat. And the same to Wallingford. These four Summons were sent to the severall Gar∣risons May 11. Sir Thomas Glenham Governour of Oxford, returned Answer to the Summons the same day, as followeth. SIR, I Have received your Letter, summoning me to surrender the City, which was given me in trust for his Majesties use; but in respect there are many persons of Eminency, I must desire you to receive for Answer a Request, that you will be pleased to send a safe Conduct for Sir John Moun∣son, and Master Phillip Warwick, to repaire unto you at
such a time and place as you shall appoint, by whom you shall understand what for the present is desired, I remaine Your humble Servant THO. GLENHAM. May 11. 1646. According as was desired, passes were granted for Sir John Mounson and Master Phillip Warwick, to come out of Oxford that day, and meet our Commissioners, Colonel Rainsborough, Colonel Harlow, and Colonel Lambert, who were ready to receive them at the time and place appointed: That which they had in commissi∣on, was a desire from the Governour Sir Thmas Glen∣ham, of liberty to send to the King to know his pleasure, upon signification whereof from his Majesty, they would returne a positive answer to his Excellency im∣mediately. Our Commissioners endeavoured to perswade them the vanity of any such desire, and the Generals impati∣ency of any such delay, advising them rather to take the present opportunity, least they afterwards fell short of these termes they might now have by present compli∣ance. But Sir John Mounson and Master Warwick (it seems) were so bound up and limited in their Commissions, that at present, they could not undertake any thing in answer hereto, but returning to Oxford, took time till the mor∣row, promising more then. One of the Generals Trum∣peters was appointed to goe with them into Oxford, to bring their Answer the next morning. On Tuesday May 12. The Trumpeter returned with a desire from Sir Thomas Glenham, that in regard there were, besides the Duke of Yorke and the two Prin¦ces, many other persons of eminency, Lords, Knights and Parliament men (otherwise Juncto men) and other Gentry and Clergy, besides the Inhabitants, all concern¦ed in the businesse (to whom things could not possibly
be represented fully in so short a time) that further time might be granted by his Excellency. Whereupon, that what time would be lost that way, might be saved the other, all things went on for the siege, the dispatch of the Line was hastened, and order was given for the drawing up of the Batteries. The same day Prince Rupert, and with him neere an hundred Horse, went forth of Oxford on Colonel Rains∣borough's side, to take the aire; (Prince Rupert riding without Boots, only in his Shoos and Stockings) a Party of our men martched up towards them, and fired upon them; in which skirmish Prince Rupert had a shot in the right shoulder (but pierced no bone) whereupon they retreated to Oxford, where all sorts were very busie that day and the two following dayes, consulting and ad∣vising. But in issue, Thursday 14. the Governour of Oxford sent to make knowne his desire to treat by Commissio∣ners, which was accepted of; and a counsel of Warre be∣ing called, it was concluded of Master Crook's house at Marston should be the place, and on Monday following the Treaty to begin. May 15. The Enemy made another sally out of Ox∣ford, and a Party of ours skirmished with them; we lost two men. Lords day, May 17. The Governour of Oxford sent forth the names of the Commissioners for Treaty on his behalfe, desiring his Excellency to returne the like number. The names of both were, On Sir Tho. Glenhams part. On his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax part. Sir John Mounson. Lieut. Gen. Hamond. Sir John Heyden. Colonel Ireton. Sir Thomas Gardner. Colonel Lambert. Sir George Bynion Colonel Rich.
Sir Richard Willis. Colonel Harley. Sir Stephen Hawkins. Scoutmaster-Gen. Watson. Colonel Gosnold. Major Desborough. Colonel Tyllier. Major Harison. Doctor Zouch. M. Herbert. Thomas Chisley, Esq. M. Waller. M. John Dutton. Four more to be named afterwards. M. Jeffrey Palmer. M. Phillip Warwick. Capt. Robert Mead. Upon the receipt of the names of the Oxford Com∣missioners, Sir George Bynion was excepted, as being exempted from pardon by the Parliaments Propo∣sitions. Much about this time also, was brought to the Army the newes of the surrender of Newark; it had been long besieged on the one side by Major-General Poyntz, and on the other side by the Scottish Forces: It was yeelded to the English Forces, commanded by Major-General Poyntz, who had given abundant demonstration of no lesse faithfulnesse and diligence, then expert Souldiery in his attendance on that service. The Scottish Forces pre∣sently upon the Kings comming to them, retreated back in great haste from Newark northward, before the Town was delivered, or the Articles signed, pretending the cause of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army advancing toward them; whereof there was little likelihood, they being engaged before Oxford, nor did so much as a Horse stirre that way. But to returne to the Siege of Oxford. A Treaty being resolved and accepted on both sides, and to begin Monday the 18. Sir Thomas Glenham sent to the General, desiring, that in regard it was usuall at all Treaties to have a Secretary on each part, That Master H. Davison his Secretary might have a Passe to come
forth with their Commissioners, which was  un∣to; and Master William Clark was appointed to assist the Commissioners on our part. The Commissioners on the behalfe of the Governour and Garrison of Oxford, made their demands, which his Excellency sent up to the Par∣liament by Colonel Rich, and Scoutmaster-General Watson, two of the Commissioners for the Treaty, on his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax part, putting off the Treaty till the pleasure of the Parliament were knowne concerning them. The heads of some of the principall of them were these. Viz. 1. To have liberty to send to the King, to know his Maje∣sties pleasure, Whether they shall surrender or not? 2. That Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice have pro∣tection to remaine in any part of this Kingdome, to have no Oath posed on them, to be at liberty, to do as shall seem good unto them at any time hereafter. 3. The Governour and all Officers and Souldiers to martch out in as full equipage, as any since these Wars; with six Guns, ten barrels of Powder, and to have thirty days time to know the King's pleasure how he will dispose of them. 4. The Privy Seale and Great Seale to goe to the King. And such as these The House of Commons upon reading of them, con∣ceived them so high, that they thought not fit so much as to debate them, but referd it to the General in what way he thonght fit to prosecute the reducing of that place. May 24. or within a day sooner or later, was Radcoat house surrendred, after it had endured great extremity by our Granadoes, one whereof falling on the top of a Tower, made fearfull work, tearing it into a thousand pieces, and sending it severall wayes, and at last falling into the Cellar, let out all their Beere: There were an hundred men in it, who were to goe to their severall homes, leaving their Armes behind them. His Excellency upon the forementioned returne ftom the Parliament, prepared Propositions to offer to the
Garrison and sent them into Oxford on Saturday May 30. Whereupon at the desire of the Enemy, the Treaty (which upon their flying so high in their demands, had been discontinued, if not broken off) was renewed againe, they being willing to treat upon his Excellencies Propositions, submitting therein (as themselves said) to the ate of the Kingdome, rather then any way distrust∣ing their owne strength, or the Garrisons tenablenesse. During this Treaty, a Captaine of the Garrison of Oxford was taken (in a Fishermans habit) carrying Letters to the King from Sir Thomas Glemham and Secretary Ni∣cholas; relating the condition of the Garrison, and how long probably they could hold out. A few dayes before the Treaty ended, when the Ene∣my peceived it was like to succeed, they played with their Canon day and night into our Leaguers and Quar∣ters, discharging sometimes neer two hundred  in a day, at randome, as was conceived, rather to spend their Powder then to doe any great execution, though they shewed good skill, in that they levelled their pieces, so as they shot into the Leaguer on Heddington-hill (and on that side Lieutenant-Colonel Cotsworth was slaine with a great shot) and likewise into the Leaguer on Colonel Rainsboroughe's side, where they killed with their shot a Sutler and others in their Tents: Our Canon in recom∣pence, playd fiercely upon the enemy, and much annoyed them in their Works and Colledges, till at last, a cessa∣tion of great shot was agreed to on both sides. Upon Saturday, June 20. The Treaty for the surren∣der of Oxford was finished between the Commissioners, and concluded upon the ensuing Articles. The same morning that the Treaty for Oxford was concluded, Farrington Garrison sent also to capitulate, the Governour thereof Sir George Lisle, being then in Oxford, and to be briefe, surrendred upon condition to have the benefit of Oxford Articles; and so they were in∣cluded in the same Agreement.
Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed June 20. by the right honourable Sir Richard Lane Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Francis Lord Cottington, Lord high Treasurer of England, William Marquesse of Hertford, Edward Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesties honorable Houshold, Tho∣mas Earl of Southampton, Francis Earl of Chichester, Francis Lord Seymor, Sir Edward Nicholas Knight, one of his Majesties principall Secretaries of State, all of them being of his Majesties most honorable Privy Coun∣cel, and Sir Thomas Glenham Knight, and Governour of Oxford, on the one party; And his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised for the Parliament, on the other party, for and concerning the rendring of the Garrison of Oxford, as followeth: THat the Garrison of Oxford, with the Castle, Forts, Mounts, and places of Defence whatsoever, With all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and Provi∣sions of War, with all Magazines and Stores thereunto belonging, exceping what is allowed in the ensuing Ar∣ticles, shall be delivered to the General Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, or whom he shall appoint, without wilfull spoyl or embezlement, upon Wednesday the 24. of this instant June 1646. at Ten of the Clock in the Morning, or thereabouts. II. That his Highnesse the Duke of Yorke shall have an honorable Convoy to London, where other of his Ma∣jesties Children are, attended by his Officers and Ser∣vants, and sitting accommodation for the removall of His Houshold and goods thither; And shall have an Ho∣norable provision besitting his Dignity, appointed for Him by the Parliament, and to remaine there untill His Majesties pleasure be knowne, touching His setling there or elswhere; and then to be disposed accordingly to any place within fourscore miles of London, and shal have such
Officers and Servants to continue about him as the Par∣liament shall approve. III. That their Highnesses Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, shall have liberty and Passes for themselves, with their Servants, Horses, Armes and Goods (the number of their Horses for them and their Traine, not exceeding seventy) to repaire to any place within fifty miles of London, so it be not within twenty miles of London, without leave from the Parliament, nor in any Garrison, and there to abide for the space of six moneths after the Rendring, free from any molestation by imposition of Oaths, or otherwise; and shall have Passes to goe be∣yond the Seas at any time within the said six moneths, with their said Servants, Horses, Armes and Goods, they engaging themselves upon their Honours, not to use the liberty hereby granted in the meane time to any Hostility against the Parliament of England sitting at Westminster, or any way wilfully to the prejudice of their Affaires. And they are to have the benefit of such the ensuing Articles as may concerne them. IV. That the Seales called the Great Seale, Privy Seale, Signet, and the Seales of the Kings Bench, Exche∣quer, Court of Wards, Dutchy, Admiralty and Prero∣gative, as also the Sword of State, shall at such time, and in the presence of two such persons as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, be lockt up in a chest, and left in the publick Library: and if any of the afore∣named particulars shall not be then accordingly produ∣ced, the default thereof shall not be charged upon any other person then such as hath the custody thereof, and shall wilfully detaine or imbezle the same. V. That Sir Thomas Glenham Knight, &c. Gover∣nour of Oxford, with his Servants, and all that to him belongs, and all Officers and Souldiers of Horse and Foot, and of the Traine of Artillery (as well Reformed Officers and Souldiers as others) with their Servants, and all that pertains unto them, shall martch out of the City
of Oxon. with their Horses and compleat Armes that pro∣perly belong unto them, proportionable to their pre∣sent or past commands, flying Colours, Trumpets sound∣ing, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet in Their Mouthes, and every Souldier to have twelve Charges of Powder, Match and Bul∣let proportionable, and with Bag and Baggage, to any place within fifteen miles of Oxford, which the Gover∣nour shall choose, where such of the common souldiers as desire to goe to their owne homes, or friends, shall lay downe their Armes, which shall be delivered up to such as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint to re∣ceive them. And all Officers and souldiers, as well re∣formed as others, that shall desire to goe to their homes or friends, shall have the Generals Passe and protection for their peaceable repaire to, and abode at the severall places they shall desire to goe unto, and shall have free Quarter allowed them in all their martch from Oxon. to those several palaces; the Officers, as well reformed as others, to passe with Equipage of Horses and com∣pleat Armes, answerable to their present or past com∣mands, and common Troopers with their Horses and swords only; and all to passe with Bag & Baggage as afore∣said. And that all other Officers and souldiers (in case there be any such) that shall desire to take Entertain∣ment from any Forreigne Kingdome or State, shal have free Quarter allowed them for twenty eight dayes from their martch out of Oxon, and shal have Passes for their Officers, not exceeding ten, with their Horses and two servants apiece to goe to London to treat with any For∣reigne Embassadour or Agent for Entertainment: And all of them shal have Liberty and Passes to martch (the Officers with their compleat Armes and Horses propor∣tionable to their present or past commands, and the common Souldiers with their Armes, and all with Bag and Baggage) to the Quarters neer to Harwich or Ports∣mouth, or to any Port between them, to be transported:
Which Armes (except Officers compleat Armes and Horses, and Swords for the common Souldiers, which they my transport) they shall there lay downe and deli∣ver to such as the General shall appoint, or unto the Governour of the next Garrison belonging unto the Parliament, who shall take care for their safety during their abode there, and until Shipping can be provided, and weather seasonable, they paying for their Quarter after the said twenty eight dayes expired, and shal assist them for procuring Vessels and Shipping for their trans∣portation at the usual Rates accustomed for Fraight; the Officers and Souldiers and others before transporta∣tion engaging themselves by promise, not to returne into this Kingdome in Hostility against the Parliament in Bodies as they goe, or in conjunction with other For∣ces, or in command of any Forces invading this King∣dome: And no Oath or any other Engagements of this or the like nature to be, during their said stay, or at their transportation imposed upon them, saving an engage∣ment by promise, not to doe any act of Hostility, or of wilful prejudice against the Parliament, during their said stay in England. And it is declared, That those of the three Auxiliary Regiments consisting of Gentlemen and their Servants, Schollers, Citizens and Inhabitants, who are not properly of the Garrison in pay; and such reformed Officers and Souldiers who shal not be willing to martch forth, shal not be forced to martch out upon this Article, but shal have the benefit of the following Articles, to remove, or remaine in Oxford, and in all things else which may concerne them; and those also who shal martch forth, shall have the benefit of the en∣suing Articles in all things, except for remaining in Oxford. VI. That the Governour shal be allowed and assisted in the procuring a sufficient number of Carts, Teems and Boats and other necessaries, for the carrying away all Goods allowed in these Articles, belonging to any Offi∣cers
or persons of quality now residing in the Garrison, they paying the accustomed Rates: And that such per∣sons as cannot presently, through want of Carriages or otherwise, convey them away, shal be assisted with Car∣riages at any time within three moneths for the disposing thereof. VII. That no Officer or Souldier, nor any person whatsoever comprized in this capitulation, shal be re∣proached, or have any disgraceful speeches, or affronts offered to them, or be stopped, plundered, or injured in their Marrch, Randezvouz or Quarters, Journeys or places of abode: And if any such thing shal fall out, satis∣faction shal be given at the judgment of any two or more of the Commissioners, they being equall in number of each party; nor shal the persons aforesaid nor any of them be inticed or compelled to take up Armes against the King; nor be imprisoned, restrained, sued or mole∣sted for any matter or cause whatsoever before the Ren∣dring of the Garrison, be it of publick or private interest, during six moneths after the rendring thereof: And if any Officer, Souldier or person be sick or wounded, that they cannot at present enjoy the benefit of these Arti∣cles, that such persons shal have liberty to stay until they be recovered, and fit accommodation and subsistence shall be provided for them during their stay, and then to enjoy the benefit of these Articles. VIII. That all Horses, Armes, Money, and other Goods whatsoever taken as lawful prize of Warre, be∣fore or during the Siege, and now remaining in the City, be continued in the possession of the present pos∣sessors. IX. That these Articles shall extend to the use and and benefit of all strangers of any Forraigne Kingdome or State residing within this garrison, together with their Wives, Children, Servants, Horses, Armes, Goods, Money and Debts. X. That all persons included within these Articles,
without exception of any (other then the Souldiers, that are to martch out upon the fift Article) shal have liberty during the space of three Months after the rendring of the Garrison, either to remaine in Oxford, or to remove themselves with their Families, Goods, Horses, and all things that properly belong to them or to their disposi∣tion: And all Noblemen, Gentlemen and persons of quality, with their Armes and other equipage, to their Houses or Friends, without any prejudice to their Friends for receiving them. XI. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergy-men, Offi∣cers, Souldiers, and all other persons in Oxon, or com∣prized within this capitulation, who have Estates reall or personal under or liable to Sequestrations according to Ordinance o Parliament, and shal desire to com∣pound for them (except persons by name excepted by Ordinance of Parliament from pardon) shal at any time within six moneths after rendring the Garrison of Oxford be admitted to compound for their Estates: which com∣position shall not exceed two yeers Revenue for Estates of Inheritance: and for Estates for Lives, yeers, and other reall and personal Estates, shall not exceed the proportion aforesaid for Inheritances, according to the value of them. And that all persons aforesaid, whose dwelling-houses are sequestrated (except before except∣ed) may after the rendring of the Garrison, repaire to them, and there abide, convenient time being allowed to such as are placed there under the Sequestrations for their removal: And it is agreed, That all the profits and Revenues arising out of their Estates (after the day of entring their names as Compounders) shal remaine in the hands of the Tenants or Occupiers, to be answered to the Compounders, when they have perfected their agreements for their compositions, and that they shall have liberty and the Generals passe and protection for their peaceable repaire to, and abode at their severall Houses or Friends, and to goe to London to attend their
Compositions, or elswhere upon their necessary occasi∣ons, with freedome of their persons from Oaths, Engage∣ments and Molestations, during the space of six moneths, and after, so long as they prosecute their compositions, without wilful default or neglect on their part, except an Engagement by Promise, not to eare Armes against the Parliament, nor wilfully doe any act prejudicial to their Affaires, so long as they remaine in their Quarters: And it is further agreed, That from and after their com∣positions made, they shall be forthwith restored to, and enjoy their Estates, and all other Immunities, as other Subjects, together with their Rents and Profits, from the time of entring their names, discharged of sequestra∣tions, and from fifth and twentieth parts, and other pay∣ments and impositions, except such as shall be generall and common to them with others. XII. That no Lords, Gentlemen, Clergy-men, Schollars, Officers, Souldiers, Citizens, nor any other persons included in this capitulation (except the persons mentioned before to be excepted from pardon) shall be molested or questioned for any thing said or done, in, or concerning this War, or relating to the unhappy diffe∣rences between his Majesty and the Parliament, they sub∣mitting to composition, as in the preceding Article; and that the persons before mentioned to be excepted from pardon, shall have the benefit of this Article, during the space of six moneths, from the Rendring of the Garri∣son, and after, if they be admitted to, and agree for their compositions. XIII. That the persons mentioned before to be ex∣cepted from pardon, shall have liberty, and the General's Passe and Protection for themselves, Families, Horses, Goods, and all things that properly belong unto them now in Oxford, to goe unto, and abide at their owne Houses or their Friends, for the space of six moneths af∣ter the Rendring of the Garrison, and within that time to repaire unto London to endeavour composition for
their estates, and indemnity of their persons, and to make their peace; and if they cannot obtain it, shall have Pas∣ses to goe beyond the Seas at any time within the said six moneths; and that no other engagement shall be put up∣on them, save by promise, not to bear Armes against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their Affairs, so long as they remain in their Quarters. XIV. That the Chancellour, Masters and Schollers of the University of Oxon, and the Governours and Stu∣dents of Christs-Church of King Henry the eighth his Foundation, and all other Heads and Governours, Ma∣sters, Fellowes and Schollers of the Colleges, Hals and Bodies corporate, and Societies of the same University, and the publick Professors and Readers, and the Orator thereof, and all other persons belonging to the said Uni∣versity, or to any Colleges or Hals therein, shall and may according to their Statutes, charters and customes, enjoy their ancient forme of Government, subordinate to the immediate authority and power of Parliament: And that all the Rights, Privileges, Franchizes, Lands, Tene∣ments, Houses, Possessions, Rents, Revenues, Heredita∣ments, Libraries, Debts, Goods and Chattels belonging to the said University, or to Christ-church, or to any Colleges or Hals in the said University (except such rents and Revenues as have been already taken and received by Ordinance of Parliament) shall be enjoyed by them respectively, as aforesaid, free from Sequestrations, Fines, Taxes, and all other Molestations whatsoever, for, or under colour of any thing whatsoever relating to this present War, or to the unhappy differences between his Majesty and the Parliament: And that all Churches, Chappels, Colledges, Hals, Libraries, Schooles, and publick Buildings, within or belonging to the city or University, or to Christs-church, or the severall Colle∣ges or Hals thereof, shall be preserved from defacing and spoyle: And if any removall shall be made by the Par∣liament of any Head or other Members of the University,
Christs Church, Colledges or Hals, that those so remo∣ved, shall enjoy their profits during the space of six moneths after the rendring of Oxon, and shall have conve∣nient time allowed them for removall of themselves and their Goods from their Lodgings: Provided, that this shall not extend to retard any Reformation there in∣tended by the Parliament, or give them any liberty to intermeddle in the Government. XV. That the Major, Bayliffe and Commonalty, and all Corporations within the City, shall enjoy their ancient Government, and their Charters, Customes, Franchizes, Liberties, Lands, Goods and Debts, and all things else whatsoever which belong to them as Corpo∣rations subordinate to the immediate authority and power of Parliament, and shall not be molested or que∣stioned by colour of any thing before the rendring of this Garrison, done, or ordered by them in the capacity of Corporations, relating to the differences between His Majesty and the Parliament. XVI. That the Citizens and Inhabitants of the Ci∣ty, shall not be charged with free quarter, or billet of Souldiers, other then for lodging (except in urgent time of necessity) and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of the Major, or his Deputy; and that in all Pub∣like Taxes they shall be charged proportionably with the County: And that no Scholar, Citizen, or Inhabi∣tant in the University and City of Oxford, shal be trou∣bled or questioned for taking up Arms in the Garison by expresse Command during the time it was a Garison, for the defence therof: And that the Scholars, Citizens and Inhabitants shall the benefit of this Capitulati∣on, in all things that may concern them. XVII. That no Officer, Souldier, or other person who by the Articles are to martch out of the City or Suburbs, or to martch in, shall Plunder, spoyl or injure any Scholar, Citizen, or Inhabitant, or other person in Oxford, in their person, good, or estate, or carry
away any thing that is properly belonging to any of them. XVIII. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other women now in Oxon, whose Husbands or Friends are ab∣sent from thence, may have passes and protections for themselves, servants and goods to goe to, and remaine at the houses of their Husbands or at their Friends, as they shall desire, and to goe or send to London, or elswhere, to obtaine the Allowances out of their Husbands or Parents Estates, allotted them by Ordinance of Par∣liament. XIX. That such of his Majesties Houshold-Servants who shall desire to goe to his Majesty, may have free li∣berty and passes to goe accordingly, at any time within one moneth next after the rendring of the garrison: And that His Majesties Houshold-stuffe, and other his pecu∣liar goods which are now in Oxford, may be carried to His Majesties House at Hampton-Court; and his Servants under whose charge or custody any of them are, shall be allowed and assisted in the procuring of Carts, Boates, and Carriages for the removal of them thither, and there to remaine till His Majesty shall otherwise dispose of them, and then to be sent or disposed accordingly. And that such of His Majesties Servants who are not able for the present to goe to Him, shall have liberty, passes and protections to goe to, and remaine at his Majesties said House at Hampton-Court, and have liberty to attend the Committee for his Majesties Revenue, to procure a competent Allowance out of his Majesties Revenues for their subsistence, until his Majesty shall otherwise pro∣vide for, or dispose of them. XX. That all Clergy-men now in Oxford, who shall not upon composition or otherwise, be restored to their Church-livings, shall have liberty to goe to London, to ob∣taine some fitting allowance for the livelihood of them∣selves and their Families. XXI. That it is Intended, Declared and Agreed,
That all persons comprized within these Articles, shall peaceably and quietly enjoy all their Goods, Debts and Moveables allowed by these Articles, during the space of six moneths after Rendring the Garrison: And that they shall be free from all Oaths, Engagements and Mo∣lestations, except an Engagement by promise not to beare Armes against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their Affaires, so long as they remaine in their Quarters. And that they shall have liberty with∣in the space of six moneths (in case they shall be resolved to goe beyond Seas) to dispose of their Goods, Debts and Movables allowed by these Articles, and depart the Kingdome, if they think fit; And to have passes for their transportation, or otherwise to stay in the King∣dome. XXII. That if any of these Articles shall in any point be broken or violated by any person or persons in Oxford, or cōprized within this capitulation, the fault and punishment shall be upon him or them onely who made the breach or violation, and shall not be imputed to, or charged upon any other not assenting thereunto, or not an actor in it. XXIII. That the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Lindsey, and their Servants that came forth with them, shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles in whatsoever may concerne them. XXIV. That the Garrisons of Farringdon shall be rendred to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Governour, Gentlemen, Souldiers, and all other of what quality soever within those Garrisons, shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles in every particular which may concerne them, they rendring the Garrison accordingly as Oxford. XXV. That all persons comprizedin these Arti∣cles, shall (upon request) have a certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the future Governour of the city, That such persons were in the
City at the time of the surrender therof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles. XXVI. That the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall give a Passe to one or two Messengers, with their Ser∣vants, to goe unto the King, to give Him an account of the proceedings upon this Treaty, and conclusion there∣of, and to returne and receive the benefit of these Ar∣ticles. On Wednesday the 24. of June, the day appointed, the Towne was accordingly surrendred: The Enemy martched out about twelve of the clock; a Guard of our Foot was appointed for them to martch through, which extended in length from Saint Clements neer Maudlin-Bridge, to Shotover-Hill: Our Horse were drawne up into severall Bodies in severall places in the Reare of the Foot: There martched out in a Body well Armed, with Colours flying and Drums beating, about three thousand, who had not the least injury or affront offer∣ed them in their martch through our men, which the Governour Sir Thomas Glenham hath since acknow∣ledged, much to the honour of the Army: Besides that Body, there went forth that day before and after them about five hundred, most of them Horse men and private persons engaged in the Siege. There likewise martched forth this day at the North gate, all those that went to Yorkeshire and Gloucestershire and those parts, who had a Convoy for that purpose, being a considerable number: those that martched forth when Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice went forth on Monday, and those that followed them on Tuesday (when other Gentlemen of quality left the City) were in all about three hundred persons, most of them men of quality, and their Attendants. After his Excellency had possession of the Towne, it was the con∣tinuall imployment of some, to make Passes for those that were yet left behind, and not martched out of the Towne with the Body; there were above two thou∣sand
Passes made after the forementioned Forces were gone, as by a particular List of every mans name was reckoned, whereof many were Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen of quality, the rest Officers and Reforma∣does, and some Schollers. Likewise after his Excellency had the Garrison, the three Regiments of Auxiliaries, consisting of two thousand men, were disbanded, and their Armes brought in: Those that martched out upon Wednesday, about nine hundred of them laid down their Armes when they came to Tame, and received Passes to goe to their severall Houses, and their Armes were brought into Oxford: One thousand one hundred of them listed themselves for Forraigne service. There were found in the Magazine seventy Barrels of Powder; be∣sides, they had two Mils which supplied them daily with Powder. There were in the Towne thirty eight pieces of Ordnance, whereof twenty six were Brasse: For provisions of Victuals, by what was found in the Stores, and by what was informed they had in the Stores before they sold it to the Townesmen, during the Treaty, to raise Moneys to pay their Souldiers, there was not lesse then six moneths provisions. The Souldiers were much discontented, and much ado there was to keep them from doing violence to the Lords, for no other cause but for being the occasion, as they said, of delivering up the Towne; a fault which alas they could not help; the strength of the Works about the Towne was found to be such, as resolved it in the minds of all understanding men, to be much for the Parliaments service that the town was taken by conditions, especially considering what un∣seasonable weather followed; that if the Siege had con∣tinued but to the day of surrender, we must have been forced to have quit some of our leaguers, the fields being overflown with water. The Citizens were provided till Christmas with Provisions, and did make no question but of Corne, Beef, Bacon, Salt, Butter and Cheese, there was plenty for the said time: fresh meat for the great
ones, being the onely thing complained of as a want, and yet was found some store of that at the surrender. Somewhat in Vindication of the Articles of OXFORD. SUch is the delicacy of the spirit of man, that when Mercies flow richly and fully in, we grow curious to please, and God must come in to us then as we would have him, or we shall scarce thank him for any thing he gives, like some that returne full from feasting, with whom an ordinary dish finds no acceptance: thus it was in the businesse of this surrender, because the Conquest came not up to every point of expectation or humour; therefore it must not be acknowledged by some, as if men would give Lawes to Providence, and Armies must conquer just as we appoint, and we must draw lines for successe to move in, and unlesse God save us by our own card and compasse, we scarce allow such a businesse a place in our Calender. The House of Commons ap∣proving the a∣greement with Oxford. The House of Commons in much honour and justice upon receiving and reading the Agreement for Oxford, which his Excellency by an Expresse sent up to them, did by Vote approve and ratifie the same; but others, whether from ignorance or prejudice, or what other cause, I say not, seemed not to be so well satisfied there∣with, exclaming against the Army, and questioning their honour and integrity in this proceeding. The Delin∣quency of the Oxonians ex∣traordinarily garrison'd. I would gladly demand of such, How Delinquency and offences, so Garrisoned and Fortified against Law, as those in Oxford were, could well have been brought to an higher degree of suffering and expiation, without sta∣king a treble value of men, and of successe, and running an hazard of bringing all the glory of so much conquest back againe, and with danger of reversing all the successe we had; and for my part, I think those Victories most glorious that are cleanest from Blood, and that Warre most Christian, that (the common safety, which is the end of Warre, provided and secured) is as little stained or pur∣pled
as may be; and there is more of God and of Israel, where Cities fall at the breath of Trumpets (as of Rams Horns) and the Summons overcome more then the slaugh∣ter; and thus hath this army prevailed, by taking in the In∣habitants before the Cities, and mens hearts before their persons. The Relation of Oxford to learninh re∣spected in the Armies pro∣ceeding by Treaty. And I would demand one thing more of any that have either love or learning, How Oxford a place of Books and Colleges, could have been reduced into its Gowne and Peace, but by a motion as calme as peaceable, as little destructive, and as suitable to the ingeny of such a place of Arts; but this is the least in the Ballance with the other considerations. The Vindica∣tion of the A∣greement held forth in the light of the entire transa∣ction. And because men are rationall, and would be rather argued then perswaded to beleeve: I shall hold out the whole businesse in the intirenesse and transaction of it, that all may be rather convinced and engaged by ar∣gument and truth, that things were faire and just, and highly advantagious, then meetly desired or entreated to beleeve so. His Excellency appearing with the Army from the West before this City (leaving behind him no remem∣brance of an Enemy, but dayes of praises for victories) was not without its advantage to the surrender. His Excellen∣cy with the Army appear∣ing before Ox∣ford, observa∣bly the very day twelve moneth that he first martch∣ed forth. The first day of May he appeared before Oxford, being that day twelvemoneth he martched into the Field, which perhpas might be safely observed (without superstition) to be of Providence, as if the same day which was for be∣ginning, must be for finishing of the work; A Christian may soberly observe those Conjunctures which the supersti∣tions adore. The Quarters setled. The head Quarter was at Garsington, three miles from Oxford; it was the sixt of May before the Quarters about the City and the severall Posts were appointed, and the Leaguer designed in order to a close Siege, the Souldiers casting up  Trenches (to secure their Leaguers) Lines, Works and Approaches, with the great Work up∣on Heddington Hill.
These things I mention, because they are in some or∣der to the procuring of the Treaty; for the appearance of the Army in this way of digestion and approach, did ripen the Enemy to treat; and this close and orderly management of things without, was not without its in∣fluence upon those within. The Garrison summoned. May 11. His Excellency summoned the Garrison: and as the Leafes of some Trees move easily at a gentle wind, so some in the Garrison at the ayre of this Sum∣mons, were in motion to answer it by a Treaty: so as by this the pulse of the Enemy were observed at that di∣stance, to beat towards a surrender, which could not but a little engage his Excellency to a further pursuit of this meanes, being so providentially corresponded with in the first designe of it. The Treaty begun. The Oxford Commissio∣ners  in heir demands And now after the Summons for surrender, the Treaty begins, the Commissioners on both sides meet∣ing at Master Crook's at Marston: but the Oxford Com∣missioners were so high in some demands (one of which was to be free from all Sequestration) His Excellen∣cy thereupon putting off the Treaty, and acquaint∣ing the Parli∣ament with  Enemies demands. that his Excel∣lency thought it not fit to proceed with them, but ac∣quainred the House of Commons therewith (as still de∣sirous to move as much as might be in the wisdome and sense of that Counsel that first entrusted him) and ma∣king them by such a pause and refusall, to know them∣selves a beleaguered Enemy: These were advantages not to be forgotten in this work: A Spye out of Oxford taken ith Letters. but before the Trea∣ty brake off, a Spye was taken with Letters to his Ma∣jesty from Sir Edward Nicholas and Sir Thomas Glenham; which Spye was a Captaine in the Garrison, that freely casheered himselfe into a Fishermans habit for a time to do that work; the Fisherman was caught himselfe with his Letters, after he was got on his way as farre as Banbury: Which Letters opened one Mystery of the Garrison, Which was divided Counsells and De∣signes of the Lords and Souldiery, and how able they were to Defend the Place, And how the
Lords had overpowred them into a Treaty, because of his Majesties power committed to them at his depar∣ture; The advan∣tage by inter∣cepting those Letters. so as here were some more advantages gained; a knowledge how much a Treaty did divide and unclapse them, who else had been at unity for their owne preser∣vation, and a discovery of their strength and resolutions, which were so considerable, as it appeared, that a Trea∣ty was the best and safest argument to obtaine the place, and to disperse the Enemy into more Faction by offer∣ing conditions, who were at as much distance as could be within the same Wals, by this way of proceeding against them, and made Enemies to one another, who else had been all as one Enemy against us; and now they were already disbanded in Counsels, a good preamble to the disbanding of their Garrison. His Excellen∣cy preparing and sending in Propositions of his owner. The Treaty being thus broke off, upon occasion of the Enemies high demands, and their Propositions being wholly laid aside, other Propositions were prepared and digested by his Excellency and the Commissioners on our part, which were not framed without much de∣bate, and taking the affaires of the Kingdome according to their then present posture, into prospect and consi∣deration, as they stood in relation to this Businesse. These Propositions were sent into the Garrison, and the Treaty was reinforced on both sides; yet now his Excellency treated as one who rather gave Lawes, then took any reciprocally from them: having sent them such Propositions, as by advice with his Officers, were just and honourable, and as from which he could not vary (save in point of circumstance or explanation.) His Excellen∣cy not so en∣gaged to a Treaty, as to agree to dis∣honourable termes, but rather advi∣sing how to reduce it by force. In this renewed Treaty, there appeared yet much dif∣ficulty and aversnesse on the Enemies part, I meane in their Commissioners. Whereupon a Counsell of War was held by his Excellency, to consider yet of reducing the Garrison by force, if the Enemy should flye off in the Treaty: This was the fullest Counsel since this Ar∣my martched, consisting of the General, Major-General,
Lieutenant-General of Horse, Commissary General, Lieute∣nant General of the Ordnance, The General Officers of Horse and Foot, besides the Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels and Ma∣jors of the Army. I observe this to take off all aspersi∣ons of dark and private proceedings by parties and facti∣ons, and to strengthen the reputation of such intelli∣gence, such Counsels and grounds, as were received and proceeded on. At a Counsel of WARRE held at Marston, at the Leaguer before Oxford, June 9. 1646. Present, The General. Major Gen. Skippon. Lieuten Gen. Cromwel. Lieut. Gen. Hamond. Commis. Gen. Ireton. Colonel Sheffield. Col. Sir Hardresse Waller Colonel Graves. Colonel Lambert. Colonel Ingoldesby. Colonel Herbert. Colonel Rainsborough. Colonel Harley. Colonel Okey. Comptroler of the Ordn. Colonel Pindar. Judge Advocate. Colonel Bulstrod. Adjutant-Gen. Evelyn. Adjutant-Gen. Gray. Scoutmaster-General. Qu. mast. Gen. Fincher. Qu. mast. Ge. Gravenor Lieut. Col. Bowen. Lieut. Col. Ewers. Lieut. Col. Hewson. Lieut. Col. Ashfield. Th. Herbert Esq Com∣missioner of Parl. Major Desborow. Major Alford. Major Horton. The Resolves of the Counsel were, first, That there were four thousand Foot and three hundred Horse, by their best intelligence, in that Garrison for Defence. The second was, That they might hold out six months
before they wanted provisions of Victuall and Ammu∣nition. The third was, That it was not adviseable to storme Oxford. The fourth was, That the most probable way was re∣ducing it by approaches, in case they could not close by Treaty. The City now appearing in this Reputation of consi∣derablenesse, we shall look over into particulars of its strength, Souldiery, Ammunition and Victuals. The strength of the Garri∣son. For its strength, it was surrounded on all sides, but the North, with Rivers and Meadowes overflowne, so as it was onely approachable on the North side; and this way was onely approved on by the Counsel of Warre, and yet this way there were two Lines and Works, which in Reasons of Warre would have stood in no little cost and Blood; for against every Port of the second Line, were Colleges (which however once pla∣ces of Books and Peace, yet now served as petty Castles of defence;) which thing was worthy to be considered, not so much out of tendernesse to them, or indulgency to the Blood of this Army, but out of providence to the Kingdome, whose Guard it was: As for them, it is well knowne they were never such Husbands of their Blood, when the State stood in need of it. The store of Ammunition. For Ammunition and Victuall, it was well stored, there being Amunition which well husbanded might have served them six moneths, and Victual for as long (so as themselves and their Artillery would have both lived and determined together.) The numbers of Souldiers very conside∣rable. For the Souldiery, there wanted no numbers for that businesse, four thousand, according to the best intelli∣gence (and as afterward by passes did appeare) above three thousand, beside Reformadoe, Scholars, Townes-men; who, though a Miscellany, yet would all have been men of Warre, and of one profession in a time of defence.
And beside all this, we had the name and reputation of the Governour Sir Thomas Glenham to take in, who hath been knowne into places, that had been otherwise of a dejected fortune, to put life and spirit; witnesse his performance at York, which (after the totall routing of the Kings Army before the wals of that City) being be∣leaguered by the three Generals, with greatest advantage possible, stepping immediately from the Victory to the Leaguer, he yet defended till he obtained honourable conditions. And after that despaired of no lesse at Carlisle, where he endured ten moneths siege, submittig to eat dogges and horseflesh, before he would yeeld without honou∣rable conditions. So as according to this account, consider what ex∣pence of time and blood would have issued in carrying on the approaches for the reducement by force; Decem∣ber being a moneth they might very well have reached unto, which must necessarily have engaged the Army in∣to so much winter, water, cold and difficulty, as that the issue might (in reason of Warre) have proved as sad for the Besiegers, all things considered, as for those in the City; three moneths time would have been the least; and when all things had been ripe for enforcing, the hazard of how many honest, gallant men against earth and wals, against Lines and Colleges? But surely we flow not so with good men in the King∣dome, that we should be so indifferently prodigall of those we have, if Victories may be purchased cheaper, and at an easier rate, beside the spoyle and firing of Col∣leges, and it may be, of that famous Library, which how it would have stood with the Reputation of this State, to destroy places of Arts so freely, let others judge. The particu∣lar grounds of concluding the Treaty up∣on such Arti∣cles. A Treaty therefore being judged the best and most counselable way, His Excellency and the Commissioners resolved to enforce it, and that not onely in respect to the Army upon the forementioned considerations of the
difficulty, danger and tediousnesse of other wayes, but also with reference to the State of the Kingdome, and divers other considerations. As First, in relation to the many other Garrisons of the Enemy yet unreduced, as Worcester, Wallingford, Rag∣land, Farringdon, Borstall, with divers others, which did all beare up in the existence and being of this, and were linked to this, as to the Head and Garrison-royall of all the Enemies, that like members of one body, they could not but live and dye together, so as this Cities surren∣der would shake all the other into a Treaty, and the ta∣king in of this, would take in the rest, being all threded upon one string of dependency. Secondly, the Negotiations of the King in Forraigne parts for assistance, particularly in France, as is cleer by the French Agent, who received his Majesty first in his Quarters, and Negotiated with him at Newcastle, and by Ashburnham's dispatch into France (notwithstanding the Parliaments demand of him) all which put together (though we would rather quench then cherish any sus∣pition of such a Neighbour State) yet it cannot but be judged well beseeming his Excellency and his Counsell, wisely to provide, and put cases of things to come, and occur and prevent (if it may be) dangers possible, being well assured we deale with an Enemy, who hath lost neither Wit, Friends, Activity nor Resolution, to play his Game once more over, if he knew at what Card to begin. Thirdly, the suspitions and jealousies that were kin∣dling towards some in our Brethrens Army, upon the sodaine Alarum of his Majesties reception there, and some other passages from the North; not that the Army did conclude a doubt or suspition of them, but rather hasten to be upon such a free and strong interest and dis∣engagement, as might sooner put all things into better correspondency, while both Armies are fairly at liberty in their owne interests, and upon equall bottomes,
whereby a third designing party (I meane the Kings) might not work upon the inequality of the other two; Temptation and Opportunity being the worst Enemies that honest men have. Fourthly, the Treaty in Ireland for a peace with those there, and to make that peace a way of watage over for some new supplies into England; which though then was but by divine intelligence discerned, yet now things are cleerer and more certaine. Fiftly, the arming the Parliament with a free and un∣engaged Army (as came to passe by the surrender of this City) so as now they might treat or capitulate, as a Kingdome upon its owne interest and bottome, with the more honour, and with no more condiscention, then love and justice would perswade them; surely they that know the difference betwixt a State, attended on by a free and entire Army in times of designe and distraction and beginnings of settlement, and betwixt a State ser∣ved by broken Regiments, and an engaged Force or Ar∣my, cannot judge the freeing and disingaging this Army so soon from the attendance of Oxford, to a meere atten∣dance upon the State in a time of such high concern∣ments, to be lesse then a Counsel both of necessity and of advancement to the Kingdome. And now I shall fairly remove some Objections, which may be moats in the eyes of some, and hinder their dis∣cerning the fairnesse of this proceeding. First, that of permitting excepted persons to goe un∣punished; but I cannot grant this Objection so farre, that they did goe unpunished, unlesse all justice and righteousnesse runne downe onely in the blood of the Offender: Indeed the State of Israel fought by such Lawes against the Nations, as in the case of Agag; but how farre such Lawes are rules to the State of Christi∣ans, who are not under that judiciall policy and speciall precepts, I leave to be disputed: but surely those six excepted persons went not unpunished, they received
losse of all (one of them an Estate worth an hundred thousand pounds) and if yet nothing but life be justice, they lost that too; I meane, their life in this Kingdome, being never more to live in this State, so as in a manner they are dead to us, though not unto themselves; nor could their life be so easily come at, without the losse of many, it may be, more deare and precious; and had the approaches and storme gone on, who can undertake those few, those six excepted persons, might not have escaped? and then how had this assay of justice succeed∣ed? surely justice is not all of one colour, all purple, there is punishment by banishment, and confiscation as well as death; and suppose after the losse of many an honourable spirit to purchase six men, they had been ta∣ken and delivered up, there are wayes of escape from States as well as Armies. For that other Objection of the exemption from the Oath or Covenant for six moneths; why should it be a crime to his Excellency now, which was none to the Lieutenant-General of the Scots Army, who at Carlisle granted that Article, To be excepted from any Oath whatso∣ever (as by referring to the said Articles may appear) and our General grants but an exemption for six moneths; how is it that offences are more fairly interpreted in Scotch then English? And it is not amisse to consider Red∣ding, once a Garrison of the Enemies, yet surrendred upon honourable conditions, to the Earle of Essex, his Excellency, then General, Oxford and Redding differing but in three things: First, Oxford was more considerable and Redding lesse: secondly, the Delinquents of Redding martched out of the Towne, and those of Oxford out of the Kingdome: thirdly, Redding had but four Barrels of Powder when they capitulated, Oxford a plentifull Ma∣gazine. After all these things, I wonder how any can find fault with this Army or Souldiery, for dispatch of their work so soon; and never till now (and now by what Law I
know not) was it an offence to have Warre soon ended? Let me aske what hath this Army done ill in this busi∣nesse? Hath it not done justice upon Offenders? it may be not justice of our very fashion, according to such a very patterne of some, because they could not conquer just by a rule, but as necessity of State and Warre would suffer them: Hath this Army by this surrender failed of that plunder and rich spoile they might have had in the storme? This was a fault wherein the Souldiery were more conscionable then covetous: and me thinks we should easily pardon them in this, That they had rather end the Warre to the Kingdomes, then their owne ad∣vantage. Hath this Army by this surrender been more free, en∣tire, and at liberty, to guard both State and Parliament? me thinks this should be onely the griefe of our Enemies not of our Friends. Hath this Army by this surrender brought in so many other Garrisons, as follo in this Story, &c? surely such wayes of fighting as leave the Enemy scarce an interest in the Kingdome, is a new kind of failing, and an offence not heard of till our times, wherein ingratitude and re∣proaches are by too many thought good pay for greatest services. Hath this Army by this surrender and disingagement, awed and affrighted the gatherings of new Parties to in∣crease the old? this is indeed a mischief; but to whom? even to every one that is not a lover of the Kingdomes safety. Hath this Army by a spirit more Almighty then their owne, brought home an Olive to this State, after such overflowings of War and Blood, and shall not the Dove be taken into the Arke? shall there be no preservation for them that preserve others?
CHAP. VIII. The Siege and Surrender of Worcester and Wallingord. AFter the Surrender of Banbury Castle, Colonel Whaley was sent with some few Troops of Horse to Worcester, for the better keeping in of the Enemy; Colonel Morgan who was before such time attending that service with the Glocestershire Forces, was ordered by the General to Ragland, to command in chiefe those Forces that should be imployed for the reducing of that place, if upon the Summons sent into Worcester the Ene∣my stood off and would not treat; which accordingly falling out, the Enemy in Worcester returning a very high and presumptory Answer upon the Summons that was sent into them, and making higher demands then were granted to Oxford. Colonel Morgan according to his Orders, martched to Ragland, leaving Colonel Wha∣ley (to attend the service before Worcester) who with the Forces of the Counties of Worcester and Shropshire, together with some Forces of Newport-pagnel, Warwick and Northampton, lay before it, so as to keep off reliefe and hinder the Enemy from getting in provisions from the Country: But there was a great want of Foot for a regular and close Siege, which when the service of Oxford was over, and that Garrison surrendred, was instantly supplyed, Colonel Rainsborough being sent with a Bri∣gade thither, who no sooner came before the Towne, but he laid his Foot Quarters close to the Enemies Works, and in two or three nights (according to much judgment and resolution) raised a Work, which much annoyed the Enemies great Fort: whereupon they came to a capitulation, and being much distracted with the surrender of Oxford, and fearing if they neglected their opportunity, they should have no conditions at all, ex∣pecting the whole power of the Army to come upon them, They came to conditions as followeth:
Articles of Agreement for the Surrender of the City of Worcester, and the Forts belonging thereun∣to, concluded July 19. 1646. between Colonel Tho∣mas Rainsborough, on the behalfe of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, and Colonel Henry Washington, Go∣vernour of Worcester. THat the City of Worcester with all Forts, Ordnance, Armes, Ammunition, Stores and Provision of War thereunto belonging, shall be delivered, without wil∣full spoyle and imbeazlement, unto his Excellency Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, or to such as he shall appoint to receive them, upon the 22. of this instant July at ten of the Clocke in the morning, in such manner and with such exceptions as are con∣tained in the ensuing Articles. II. That on the 23 of July the Governour and all Offi∣cers and Souldiers of the Garison, with all other persons therein that will, shall march out of Worcester with their Horses, Armes, and Baggage belonging to them, to any place within one mile of Worcester, which the Governour shall chuse, where all their Horses and Armes, except what allow∣ed in the insuing Articles, shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint. All the Souldiers shall be disbanded, and all such both Officers and Souldiers, and others, as shall ingage themselves by promise never to beare Armes any more against the Parliament of England, nor doe any thing wilfully to the prejudice of their affaires, shall have the benefit of these ensuing Articles. III. That all such as shall desire to goe to their owne homes, or private friends, shall have the Generals Passes and protection for their peaceable repaire to and aboad at their severall places they shall desire to goe unto; The Go∣vernour to passe with all Horses, Armes, and Baggage pro∣perly belonging to him, and each Colonel to passe with three Horses, and each Lieutenant Colonell and Serjeant Major
with two Horses, each Captain, Lieutenant and Cornet with one Horse, and every person not under the degree of an Es∣quire with three Horses, and all of them with their Armes and goods properly belonging to them to be carried on their Horses, and all Souldiers with their Swords and such Bag∣gage as properly belong to them, which they carry about them. IV. That all persons which are to have the benefit of the preceding Articles, shall, if they desire it, have Passes to goe beyond Seas, provided they depart this Kingdome within two Months after the surrender of the Town. V. That the City and Garison of Worcester, and all the Inhabitants thereof shall be preserved from all plunder and violence of the Souldier. VI. That Sir William Russell, now residing in Worce∣ster be excepted from any benefit of these Articles. HEN. WASHINGTON. Signed and Sealed July 19. 1646. When the forementioned Forces were sent unto Wor∣cester, another Brigade was sent to Ragland, and the Ge∣nerals Regiment, with Colonel Lilburnes, were sent to assist our Forces before Wallingford; by whose accession the Siege being strengthned, presently a Summons was sent into the Castle; the Governour perceiving new Forces to face the Garrison, (and that by so fatall an oc∣casion and disaster to them as the surrender of Oxford) came to a Treaty, which took effect, and was concluded upon these Articles. Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed by his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one Party; and Col. Tho. Blag, Governor of Wallingford, on the other Party: for and concerning the rendring of the Garison of Wallingford Castle and Town, July 22. 1646. I. THat the Castle and Towne of Wallingford, with all the Ordnance, Armes, Ammunitions, Stores and
Provisions of War thereunto belonging, shall be delivered up without wilfull spoile or imbezlement, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or such as he shal appoint to receive the same, upon Wednesday the 29. of July, 1646 by nine of the clock in the morning, in such manner, and with such excepti∣ons as are contained in the ensuing Articles. II. That on the said 29. day of July the Governour and all Officers and Souldiers of the Garrison, with all other persons therein (that will) shall martch out of Walling∣ford with their Horses and Armes properly belonging to them, (proportionable to their present and past commands or imployments) with flying Colours, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet in their mouthes, and every Souldier twelve Charges of Pow∣der, Match and Bullet proportionable, with one piece of Ordnance, with equipage, and with Bag and Baggage, to any place within ten miles of Wallingford, which the Gover∣nour shall choose, where (in regard his Majesty hath no Garrison left open, nor Army neer) all their Horses and Armes, except what are allowed in the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint; all the Souldiers shall be disbanded, and all such, both Officers, Souldiers and others as shall en∣gage themselves by Promise, never to beare Armes against the Parliament, nor to doe any thing wilfully to the preju∣dice of their Affaires, during their abode in the Parliaments Quarters, shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles; That is to say; III. That all such as shall desire to go to their homes or pri∣vate Friends (who shall not be prejudiced for receiving them) shall have the Generals Passe and Protection for their peace∣able repaire to, and abode at the severall places they shall so desire to go unto; The Governour, Officers and Gentlemen to passe with Equipage of Horses and Armes answerable to their present and past commands or qualities; and all both Officers, Souldiers and others, to passe with Bag and Baggage, and the Troopers only with their Swords, and their Bag and Baggage.
IV. That all such (if there be any) who shall desire to take entertainment for Forraigne Service, shall have Passes for their Officers (not exceeding four) with their Horses and two Servants apiece, to goe to London to treat with any Foraigne Ambassadour or Agent for entertainment, and all of them shall have liberty and Passes to martch (the Offi∣cers with Equipage of Horses and Armes properly their owne, and answerable to their present past and commands, the common Souldiers with their Swords, and all with Bag and Baggage) to the Quarters neer unto Harwich or Southamp∣ton, or to any Port between them, to be transported, where they shall be assisted in the procuring of Vessels and Shipping for their transportation, at the usuall Rates accustomed for Fraight, by the Governour of the next Garison or Port Towne, who shall also take care for their safety and accom∣modation with Quarters, untill Shipping be provided and Weather seasonable, they paying for the same after twenty eight dayes from the Render. V. That all the persons now in Wallingford (not being of the Souldiery of the Garison) shall have liberty and pro∣tections for their Persons and Goods to stay in the Towne of Wallingford one moneth after the Rendring (if they desire it.) and then to have the Generals Passe and Protection, as others going out at the Rendring, upon the like engagement; and that any person whatsoever (who being sick or wound∣ed, cannot at present Remove) shall have liberty to stay till they be Recovered or able to goe away, and shall have fit accommodation and subsistence provided for them during such their stay, and then shall enjoy the benefit of these Ar∣ticles. VI. That no person whatsoever comprized in this capi∣tulation shall be Reproached, Reviled, Affronted, Plunde∣red or Injured in their Martch, Randezvouz or Quarters, Journies or places of abode, by these Articles allowed, nor shall be compelled to beare Armes, nor be Imprisoned, Re∣strained, Sued, Molested or Damnified for any matter whatsoever, of pulick or private concernment, Relating to
the present War, the matter or grounds thereof, arising be∣fore the Rendring of the Garison, during the space of six moneths after the Rendring thereof, nor be compelled to take any Oaths or other Engagements then what is mentioned in the second Article, during the time of six moneths, and to have liberty during the said time, to travell about their law∣full affaires. VII. That all Horses and other Goods now in Walling∣ford, taken as lawfull prize of War, or properly belonging to the Governour or Officers of the Garison, before or during the Siege, shall be continued in the possession of the present posses∣sors, except such as are to be delivered up by the Tenor of these Articles. VIII. That such Houshold-stuffe and Goods now in Wallingford, as shall appeare to the General, or such as he shall depute for that purpose, to have been borrowed by any Officer or Gentleman in the Garison, for their use and ac∣commodation in the Garison, shall be restored back to the Owners. IX. That if any person or persons shall wilfully violate these Articles in any parts, the guilt thereof shall be imputed to such person or persons onely, and shall not prejudice any other, not acting or consenting to the same. X. That the Governour and three more such Officers and Gentlemen as he shall name, shall have Passes from the Gene∣ral for themselves, with two Servants a piece, their Hor∣ses, Swords, Pistols, and necessaries, to goe to the King to give him an account of the said Garison, and to returne to their homes, or Friends: And that five weeks shall be al∣lowed for this Journey, which shall not be reckoned any part of the six moneths mentioned in the sixth Article, but he and they shall be allowed six moneths after the end of the said five weeks. XI. That no Officer, Souldier, or other person, who by the Articles are to martch out of the Castle or Town of Wal∣lingford, (or shall martch in) shall plunder, spoile, injure any Inhabitant or other Person therein, in their Persons,
Goods or Estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging to any of them. XII. That all persons comprized within these Articles shall peaceably and quietly enjoy all their Goods, Debts and Moveables, during the space of six moneths after the Ren∣dring, and shall have liberty within the said space (if they shall resolve to goe beyond the Seas) to dispose of their said Goods, Debts and Moveables, and to depart the Kingdome with the same, as they shall thinke fit and desire, and shall have Passes for their Transportation accordingly from his Excellency. XIII. That all persons comprived in these Articles, shall, upon request, have a Certificate under the hand of the General, or such as he shall appoint, that such persons were in the Castle and Towne of Wallingford at the time of the Rendring thereof, and are to have the Benefit of these Articles. XIV. That the Townsmen and Inhabitants of the Town of Wallingford shall not be troubled or questioned for any thing said or written by any of them, nor the Corporation thereof prejudiced for any thing done by any of them by ex∣presse command, since it was a Garison, and that they shall have the benefit of these Articles in all things that may con∣cerne them. XV. That Master John Chamberlaine of Sherborne, shall have the benefit of these Articles. THO. FAIRFAX. After the Articles were Signed and Sealed, and the day of surrender agreed upon, a Party of Officers and Souldiers, upon some discontent, mutined against the Governour, and dividing themselves from the rest, came in a threatning way, presenting their Muskets at him, if they might not have their wils and demands granted. Whereupon the Governour was necessitated privately to send for the Passes, and to deliver the Castle a day
sooner then intended, and Lieutenant-Colonel Jackson was enforced to draw in his Regiment into the Towne between the two Parties (the Mutiners and the Gover∣nours Party) to enforce an orderly delivery of the Gar∣rison: The tuition of this Garrison was by his Excellen∣cy committed to that vigilant and faithfull Commander Adjutant Evelyn, Adjutant-General of the Horse. CHAP. IX. Of the Reduction of Ragland Castle and Pendennis. OXford Garrison having run to its period of obsti∣nacy against the Parliament, and being now redu∣ced, many other Garrisons that attended its fate fell with it, even like ripe fruit, with an easie touch: But these two Garrisons of Ragland and Pendennis, like winter fruit, hung long on. Ragland Castle, a strong hold in Wales, Garrisoned for the King under the command of the Mar∣quesse of Worcester, scituated conveniently to command all the parts of South-Wales, being straightned by some Forces of Sir Trevor Williams and Major-General Lang∣horne, before Colonel Morgan was ordered from Worce∣ster thither, to command in chiefe the Forces that were, and should be sent before it, was at length formidably and closely besieged: The same Captaine-Engineer that gave so good demonstration of his skill at Banbury, at the reduction of that Castle, Captaine Hooper, was im∣ployed here; and so soon as he could get Spades and Sho∣vels, he went most dexterously to work against this Castle of Ragland; Colonel Morgan at first had but fifteen hundred men to carry on the designe; the Enemy was eight hundred strong within in Horse and Foot, and made divers desperate sallies upon Colonel Morgan, who received him as gallantly, and in every of them was per∣sonally engaged, with great hazard to himselfe in parti∣cular: In one sally, the Enemy took a Colour of ours,
the Cornet lost his life withall; In exchange whereof, a Major and Captain of the Enemies was slaine, and divers wounded on the Enemies part: But at length, by the addition of two thousand more to Colonel Morgan from his Excellencies Army, after Oxford was over, as is noted before: the Enemy in the Castle was reduced to more caution, and taught to lye closer. And especially when his Excellency in person was come thither from the Bath to put life into the Siege, which was by that time in a good forwardnesse, both for their Works and Approaches: Who being come, sent in this Summons into the Castle. MY LORD, BEing come into these parts with such a strength as I may not doubt, but with the same good hand of providence that hath hitherto blessed us, in short time to reduce the Garrison of Ragland to the obedience of the Parliament; I have in order therto thought good to send your Lordship this summons; hereby requiring you to deliver up to me for the Parliaments use, the said Garrison and Castle of Ragland, which as it onely ob∣structs the Kingdomes universall peace, the rendition may beget such tearms, as by delay or vain hopes cannot hereafter be expected. I remaine My Lord, Your Lordships most humble servant, THOMAS FAIRFAX. Leaguer before Ragland, Aug. 7. 1646. which Summons begat an intercourse of many Messa∣ges from one side to the other; with the copies whereof I shall continue that part of the Story. SIR, ALthough my infirmities might justly claime privi∣ledge in so sudden an answer; yet because you de∣sire it, and I not willing to delay your time to your letter of summons to deliver up my House, and the one∣ly
house now in my possession to cover my head in; these are to let you know, that if you did understand the con∣dition I am in, I dare say out of your judgement you will not thinke it a reasonable demand, I am loath to be the Author of mine owne ruine on both sides, and therefore desire to have leave to send to his Majesty to know his pleasure, what he will have done with his Gar∣rison. As for my House, I presume he will command nothing, neither am I knowing how either by Law or conscience I should be forced out of it. To this I desire your returne, and rest Your Excellencies humble servant, H. WORCESTER. MY LORD, TOuching your sending to his Majesty, it is that which hath been denied to the most considerable Garrisons of England, further then an account to his Majesty of the thing done upon the surrender, which I doe also freely grant to your Lordship: And for that distinction which your Lordship is pleased to make, it is your House; If it had not been formed into a Garrison, I should not have troubled your Lordship with a Sum∣mons, and were it dis-garrisoned, neither you nor your House should receive any disquiet from me, or any that belong unto me. This I thought good to returne to yours, and there∣by to discharge my selfe before God and the world, of all extremities and sad consequences that will ensure up∣on the refusall of the rendition of your Garrison, upon my Summons. I remaine yours, THO. FAIRFAX. SIR, I Doe so much confide in your Honour, as that being at stake, concerning leave to send to his Majesty, I will at this time forbeare to make further motion in it: Onely one thing which is extraordinary, I offer to your
consideration for the just cause, besides my Allegeance of my reasonable request: which is, That upon his Ma∣jesties promise of satisfaction, I am above twenty thou∣sand pounds out of purse, and if I should doe any thing displeasing unto him, I am sure all that is lost, and no benefit to the Parliament. If you knew how well known I was in Henry Earle of Huntington's time, unto your noble Grandfather at York, I am assured I should receive that favour at your hands that safely you might afford. God knowes, if I might quietly receive my meanes of subsistence, and be in security with the Parliaments ap∣probation, and freed from the malice of those Gentle∣men that are of the Committee within this County, I should quickly quit my selfe of the Garrison, for I have no great cause to take delight in it. I have that high esteem of your worth, noblenesse and true judgment, that knowing you will offer nothing ignoble or unwor∣thy for me to doe, as the case stands with me, I desire to know what Conditions I may have, and I will returne you present answer, and in the meane time I rest, Your humble servant H. WORCESTER. MY LORD, ACcording to your Lordships desire, I have return∣ed you conditions, such as may be fit and satisfacto∣ry to the Souldiery. To your Lordship and Fami∣ly, I have granted quiet and security from all violence of any that belongs to me: I would perswade your Lordship not to fear any ill or disrespect from the Com∣mittee of this County (I shall easily reconcile that Party) or that they will doe any thing, but as they shall receive order from the Parliament. By this meanes you are at liberty to send to the Parliament, and upon a present surrender and submission to their mercy and favour, your Lordship cannot but think to receive better termes for your selfe, then if you stand it out to the last extremity;
when besides the hazard of your person, and of those in your Family (which I do presume are deare to you) and the spoyle of the Castle, which cannot be avoyded in ex∣treame undertakes against it. Your Lordship hath no reason to expect better then the Marquesse of Winchester received; who in making good Basing-house to the last, narrowly escaped in his owne person, lost his friends, subjected those that escaped to great frights, and hazard his House and Estate to utter ruine, and himselfe to ex∣tremity of Justice. Touching your Lordships twenty thousand pound, your Lordship hath liberty to solicite about that, by the same hands your Lordship shall give an account of the surrender to his Majesty. I desire your Lordship upon receipt of these, to dismisse my Trumpe∣ter, and to returne Answer by one of your owne. THO. FAIRFAX. SIR, THe difficulty of resolution by the Souldiers and Officers (other then I thought) causeth my request for your patience in not giving you full answer to the conditions you sent me yesterday; but as soon as I shall obtaine it, you shall not be long without it. But one thing, and that of moment, I desire to be satisfied in; whether if any conclusion should be made, that af∣terward I shall be left to the mercy of the Parliament for alteration at their will and pleasures; and if it be so, I shall endeavour in vain to study more about it: For ex∣ample, in my Lord of Shrewsbury his case, and divers others, how conditions have been broken, doth a little affright me: I know by your will and consent if should never be; but Souldiers are unruly, and the Parliament unquestionable, and therefore I beseech you pardon my just cause of fear, and I will rest, Your humble Servant H. WORCESTER. MY LORD, I Have perused your Letter of this eleventh of August. As to your scruple wherein you desire to be satisfied
(so far as I understand it) I can onely give you this reso∣lution, That wat I grant, I will undertake shall be made good: As to the instance you give in my Lord of Shrews∣burie's case, the actors in that breach (who were none of my Army) have received their censure, and by this time I beleeve the execution. But here, if any conclusion be made while I stay, I dare undertake there shall be no such thing, or if any, there shall be reparation. THO. FAIRFAX. SIR, FOr the better accommodation of these unhappy dis∣ferences, if you please that there may be a cessation of Armes and working, and to engage your Honour for the returne of my Commissioners to morrow by ten of the clock, they shall wait upon you in your Leaguer, where they shall vindicate me for being the onely ob∣struction of the generall peace: So in expectation of your sodaine Answer, I rest, Your humble Servant, H. WORCESTER. MY LORD, HAving not yet received in any of your Letters a di∣rect answer to the conditions I sent you; I have no grounds or consideration for such a cessation of Armes and working, as in your Letter you desire; but if it be your purpose to returne your answer by Com∣missioners, I shall by the hour you mention, appoint Commissioners of mine owne to receive the same in the Leaguer, as you desire, and engage my selfe for the safe returne of yours, not exceeding six Commissio∣ners, and as many servants: And in order to this, I shall be content there be a cessation of Armes and working from nine of the clock to morrow morning till two in the afternoon. Yours, &c. THO. FAIRFAX.
SIR, HAd I not thought you had been in the Leaguer, to the end that Propositions from the place in answer to yours, might have been first presented unto you, and to avoid delayes, which I thought your side would best like of, it was resolved to send Commissioners to∣gether with our Propositions; but considering it was otherwise, I have sent you such as I am advised unto, to take into your consideration, and because there is some addition to yours, I would have been glad you had heard the just reasons thereof, to the end you might not have been perswaded to slight them without just cause; your pleasure for the ordering of businesse, I at your lei∣sure expect, and if you please, the dismission of this Mes∣senger; and so rest Your humble servant, H. WORCESTER. MY LORD, I Have perused the Propositions sent out by your Commissioners, which I find such as deserve no an∣swer: I have offered your Lordship and the rest con∣ditions which you may yet have if you accept in time: if there be any thing in them obscure, needing explanati∣on or wanting circumstantials, for the better performing of the things intended therein, I shall be willing to ap∣point Commissioners on my part to treat with yours to that purpose, upon those Propositions of mine, provi∣ded you send Commissioners instructed with power to treat and conclude, and returne your resolution herein by six of the clock this evening. Yours, &c. THO. FAIRFAX. August 14. 1646. In the meane time our Approaches went on towards the Castle, our maine Work was some sixty yards from theirs, we had planted four Mortar-pieces in one place, and two Mortar-pieces at another, each Mortar-piece carrying a Granadoe shell twelve inches diameter.
August the 14. His Excellency (who was every day in the Trenches) appointed a new approach, which the Engineer, Captaine Hooper, had so farre proceeded in as to throw up approaches of an hundred yards in circuit, making, exacting running Trenches, so secure, as if they were Works against a storm, comming within sixty yards of their Works. August 15. The Marquesse sent forth his desire to treat, upon the Generals Propositions; whereupon the Treaty was appointed at Master Oates his house (about a mile and a halfe from Ragland,) to begin at two of the clock that afternoon: His Excellencies Commissioners were Colonel Morgan, Colonel Birch, Master Herbert, one of the Commissioners of Parliament, residing in the Army, Quartermaster General Gravesnor, Lieutenant-Colonel Ashfield, and Major Tulida. By Monday August 17. The Treaty was concluded (the Marquesse casting himselfe upon the mercy of the Parlia∣ment) according to the ensuing Articles. Articles concluded and agreed upon betwixt his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one part: and the right honourable the Marquesse and Earle of Worcester, Governour of the Castle and Garrison of Ragland, on the other part: for and concerning the surrender of the Castle and Garrison of Ragland. I. THat the Castle and Garrison of Ragland, with all the Ordnance, Armes, Ammunition, and provision of War thereunto belonging, shall be delivered up without wilfull spoyle, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or such as he shall appoint to receive the same on Wednesday next, being the nineteenth day of this instant August, by ten a clock in the forenoon, in such forme as shall be expressed in the ensuring Articles. II. That upon the said nineteenth day of August, the
Officers, Gentlemen and Souldiers of the Garison, with all other persons therein, shall martch out of the said Garison with their Horses and Armes, with Colours flying, Drums beating, Trumpet sounding, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet in their mouthes, and every Souldier with twelve charges of Powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, and Bag and Baggage, to any place within ten miles of the Ga∣rison, where the Governour shall nominate: Where, in respect his Majesty hath no Garison in England, nor Army any where within this Kingdome and Dominion of Wales, their Armes shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency shall appoint to receive them, where the Soul∣diers shall be Disbanded; and that all both Officers, Gen∣tlemen and Souldiers shall have the benefit of these ensuing Articles, except persons excepted from Pardon and Com∣position, they engaging themselves not to beare Armes hereaf∣ter against the Parliament, nor doe any thing during their abode in the Parliaments Quarters, prejudiciall to their Affaires. III. That all such as desire to gae to their owne homes, or to their private Friends, shall have the General's Passe and Protection for their peaceable repaire to, and abode at the severall places they shall desire to goe unto, the Officers and Gentlemen to passe with their Horses and Armes; also such Officers or Gentlemen, Reformed or not Reformed, that want Horses, shall martch with their Arms; and all Officers, Gentlemen, Souldiers and others shall passe with Bag and Baggage. IV. That all Officers, Gentlemen and others, com∣prized within this present Capitulation, shall have three moneths time allowed them to remaine in any place with∣in the Parliaments Quarters, for the endeavouring their Peace and Composition, and all Gentlemen that desire to goe beyond the Seas, shall have their Passes for them∣selves and their Servants, and all other Necessaries to any Sea Port to Ship themselves, they paying the usuall Rate; Provided, They goe within three Moneths after the
said surrender; and that all Gentlemen, Officers and others as shall desire to take Foraigne entertainment, shall without exception have Passes for themselves and servants to goe to London or elswhere, to treat with any Ambassadour or other to that purpose, with their Bag and Baggage, to martch to any Sea Port to be transported whither they please, they likewise paying the usuall Rates accustomed. V. That such as are wounded or sick, shall either have liberty to stay in the Castle, or be removed to such other pla∣ces as the Governour shall choose for their Recovery. VI That no Officers, Gentlemen or Souldiers during these three moneths, shall be questioned for any word spoken or acts done, Relating to this War, since the commencement of it; That no person comprized within these Articles be Re∣proached, Affronted, Plundered or Injured in their martch, quarters or places of abode, or any person that shall Receive them, shall be molested, or suffer any prejudice therefore, but shall have liberty during the limited time to passe about their lawfull occasions; Provided, they act nothing to the prejudice of the Parliament; and in case any of these Arti∣cles be broken by any particular person, that the punishment extend no further then the party so offending, and that all these Articles may be faithfully observed, according to the true intent thereof, without any cavil or mental Reservation to infringe them or any of them. On Wednesday August 19. The Castle was surrendred (according to agreement) to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the use of the Parliament; the Enemy was no sooner martched forth, but his Excellency entred the Castle, took a view of it, had some conference with the Marquesse, and afterwards went that night to Chepstow, where he was nobly entertained by the Committee there; from whence on Thursday 20. he returned to his Quarters at Bath. This Castle of Ragland was a very strong piece, having a deep Mote encompassing it, besides the River running
by it; there were delivered up with i twenty pieces of Ordnance, onely three Barrels of Powder, but they had a Mill, with which they could make a Barrell a day there was found great store of Corne and Man t, Wine of all sorts, and Beere; the Horses they had left were not many, & those that were, almost starved fur want of Hay, of which they had none left, & not many Oats, so that the Horses had like to have eaten one another for want of meat, and therefore were tyed with chains: there was also great store of Goods & richFurniture found in theCastle, which his Excellency committed to the cure and custody of Master Herbert Commissioner of the Army, Mr. Roger Williams and Major Tuliday to be inventoied; and in case any of the welaffected of the country could make a just claime to any of them, as being violently taken from them, of they compelled to bring them in thither, they should have them restored. There martched out of the Castle the Marquesse of Worcester, the Lord Charley the Marquesses Sonne, the Countesse of Glamorgan, the Lady Jones, Sir Phillip Jones, Doctor Bayley, Commissary Guilliam, four Colo∣nels, eighty two Captaines, sixteen Lientenants, six Cor∣nets, four Ensignes, four Quartermasters, fifty two Es∣quires and Gentlemen: Not any that martched forth had the least incivility offered them by our Souldiers, but the Articles punctually observed to them. After the Reduction of Ragland, his Excellencies For∣ces being at liberty, and there being three or four Gar∣risons in North-Wales yet unreduced, before which Ma∣jor-General Mitton was with some Forces, his Excellen∣cy sent to Major-General Mitton, offering him, for the more expeditions reduction of those places, to send him either Foot, Horse or Artilery. But his Excellency understanding from him, that he had more Forces from the country then he could well maintain, his Excellency commanded the Forces intend∣ed that way, to martch to Quarters neer Oxford, leaving
the work of reducing those Garrisons wholly to Major-General Mitton, who had given so great testimony both of his ability and faithfulnesse in former actions. And now to Pendennis. Pendennis castle, a strong Hold in the utmost parts of Cornwal, standing upon the Sea, commanding in a great part the Harbour of Falmouth, where Ships that Trade to the East frequently put in, Garrisoned for thc King under the command of John Arundel of Trease Esquire, was blockt up by part of his Excellencies Army, under the command of Colonel Fortescue by land, and by Cap∣taine Batten (Viceadmiral of the Parliaments Ships) by Sea: about the latter end of July the Enemy made a sally by Botes to fetch in reliefe, but were forced back with losse. About ten dayes before which a Summons was sent them, but they, in hope of Reliefe by Ships from Saint Mallowes, returned a deniall; and after those Ships were by contrary windes beaten to Morleys, yet the Enemy persisted in his obstinacy, expecting a propitious blast to bring their Reliefe to them; nor could the fate of Ox∣ford, Worcester and Litchfield surrendred, comming to their eares, work them to any other resolution then to hold out, without his Majesties speciall Warrant to sur∣render, whom the Governour was very earnest to ob∣taine liberty to send unto; or if not to the King, at lest to the Prince, and would faine have perswaded Colonel Fortescue to condiscend thereto, as but a common curte∣sie, but could not prevaile, he not understanding it so: by a Lieutenant of ours, whom Colonel Fortescue ex∣changed another of theirs for, he understood that a Shal∣lop had gone forth about the 26 of July to the Prince his Highnesse, to certifie him of their condition, unable to hold out many dayes without Reliefe. Captaine Batten kept ten large Boats and Barges well manned, before the mouth of the Harbour every night, within command of the castle, drawing them off in the
morning: One morning when he was newly drawne off, a Shallop got in by stealth, which caused great tri∣umph in the Castle; but 'twas conceived (and Colo∣nel Fortescue was so informed by good hands) that lit∣tle Reliefe was in it, save a Hogs-head or two of Wine. Some Overtures were made to the Enemy within, to goe for Flanders, an Agent from the King of Spaine came for that purpose, desiting to speak with some of the Souldiers in the Castle, while some of ours should be by; which being granted, he made an Overture to some Papist Officers of entertainment in the King of Spaine's service in Flanders; they desired to be satisfied of the Agents authority, and to see the conditions; which being readily condiscended unto and performed on the Agents part, they answered him, That at present they were engaged, but should they be once free, next to their present Master they would serve his Majesty of Spaine: This curtesie was taken well from Colonel Fortescue by the Enemy and the Agent; and certainly any thing belonging meerly to civility, without invol∣ving danger in its consequence, was never denied by him. The Enemy in the Castle kept fires all night, for di∣rection to any Reliefe that should make towards them. They were very prodigall of their powder, making two hundred great shot in the space of three dayes at our men, but without any great execution, only three of our men being slaine thereby: The Work of keeping them in so straitly from Reliefe, was very great, and was not performed without very hard duty to our Souldiers, the Enemy within being so numerous, which therefore re∣dounds as much to the honour of the Besiegers: and Captaine Batten with his Ships by Sea was no lesse care∣full and vigilant, though indeed he wanted Shallops and Pinaces for the service. Some dayes after the forementioned Shallop, there
came in another to the Castle, but it was conceived not much more Reliefe in that then in the former, and that because the Governour sent about the same time a Let∣ter to Colonel Fortescue, to know if he had power to treat with him, and whether he could make good the conditions he should grant; alleaging, that otherwise it would be a dishonour to him to treat, and the agreement to be contradicted by any other: Colonel Fortescue re∣turned answer, He had power to treat and to make good the agreement: Whereupon the Governour took two dayes time to conider, and in issue, embraced a Treaty; Commissioners were named on both parts. The time appointed for the Treaty to begin was Mon∣day, August 10. when accordingly the Commissioners on both sides met, the Enemy making his demands, ours offering their propositions, which held them till Wednes∣day noon, when their Commissioners brake off, and went away in great discontent at the tearmes that were offer∣ed them; but on Friday 14. the winds were laid, and the the Treaty (by Colonel Fortescue's art) came on againe, and by Saturday night the 15. all was concluded, save the time of surrender, which was agreed the next day, and the Articles signed, which were as followeth. Articles agreed on the 16. of August, Anno Dom. 1646. between Sir Ahraham Shipman, Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Arundel, Colonel William Slaugh∣ter, Colonel Charles Jennings, Colonel Lewis Tre∣maine, Nevil Bligh, and Joseph June Esquire, Lieute∣nant-colonel Anthony Brocket, on the behalse of the Honourable John Arundel of Treacise Esquire, Go∣vernour of the Castle of Pendennis, of the one Party: And Colonel John S. Abin Esquire, high Sheriffe of the county of Cornwal, Sir John Ayscue Knight, Colonel Robert Bennet, Lieutenant colonel Edward Herle, Lieutenant-colonel Thomas Fitch, Leiutenant colonel Richard Townsend, Major Thomas Jennings,
and Capt. Walter Mainard, on the behalfe of the ho∣nourable Colonel Richard Fortescue, Commander in cheif under his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, of all the Forces of Horse and Foot within the County of Cornwall, and the honourable Captaine William Batton, Vice Admirall and Commander in cheife of the whole Fleet imployed for the Service of King and Parliment, on the other party. THat the Castle of Pendennis with al Fortresses, Forts, Fortifications therunto belonging, the Ship and all other Vessels lying under the Castle, with the Furniture and Pro∣visions unto them appertaining. All Ordnance of all sorts, with their equipage, and all Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, and all other Implements of War, Necessaries, and Commodi∣ties of, and belonging to the said Castle and Garison (except what otherwise shall be disposed by these Articles) shall with∣out any manner of diminution, spoile or imbezlement, be deli∣vered upon Munday, the seventeenth day of this instant August, at two of the clock in the afternoon, into the hands and custody of the two Commanders in chiefe by Sea and Land respectively, or such person or persons as shall be by them appointed for the receiving of the same. And that immediately upon signing the said Articles, the said persons shall be admitted into the Castle to see the just performance of the Premises, and Hostages given for the due observance of them. II. That John Arundel of Trecise Esquire, Gover∣nour of the said Castle of Pendennis, with his Family and Retinue, and all Officers and Souldiers of Horse and Foot, and all the Traine of Artillery, and of the Ships, as well Re∣formado'd Officers as others. And all Gentlemen, Clergy-men and their Familyes and Servants, shall martch out of the Castle of Pendennis, with their Horses, compleat Armes, and other Equipages according to their present or past commands and qualities, with flying Colours, Trum∣pets sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both
ends, Bullets in their mouthes, and every Soudier twelve charges of Powder, with Bullets and Match proportionable, with all their owne proper Goods, Bag and Baggage, with a safe convoy unto Arwinch Downes: And because His Ma∣jesty hath neither Army nor Garison in England to our know∣ledge, they shall there lay downe Armes (saving their Swords) unlesse such who are Officers inCommission, who with their servants are to retain their arms according to their qualities. CountryGentlemen and their Servants their Swords only, Ensignes their Colours, where such Persons as Colonel Fortescue shall appoint are to receive them. And as many as desire it are to have Let-Passes from the Commanders in chiefe to passe to their severall Dwellings, or to such other places under the power of the Parliament, or beyond the Seas, as they shal desire, and not be plundered, searched or injured in their March, or after, they not doing any thing to the preju∣dice of the Parliments Affaires; and no man to be prejudiced for giving any of the persons comprized in the said Articles entertainment in their houses: And that the old garison Souldiers who have houses in the Castle, shall have 28. dayes after the surrender, for the removing and disposing of their Goods. III. That the Princes Servants with their Arms, and al Com∣manders, Officers, Gentlemen, Ladies, Gentlewomen, Clergy-men and all others with their retinue that desire it, shall ave liberty to passe with their Bag and Baggage, and what else is allowed in the Articles beyond the Seas, and to that purpose, there shall b provided by the Vice-Admiral a suffi∣cient ber of navigable Vessels, with a safe convoy for their safe transporting from the Haven of Falmouth, within 28. dayes after the surrender of the saidCastle, to be landed at Sat Maloes in France: and in the meane time to be signed free Qarters at convenient places by Colonell Fortescue Commander in cheif; and during the said time that they be not Plundered, or Injured, they acting nothing prejudiciall to the Parliament affaires. IV. That Colonel Wise and all Officers and Souldiers
of his Regiment, or as many of them as desire it may be ship in Falmouth Harbour in Vessels, to be provided by the Vice Admirall, and landed at Swansey in Wales: And that such are of the County of Cornwall to be shipt and landed at Looe, and those that be of Devon, to be landed at Yalme; and all to be shipt with Bag and Baggage, and such Armes as formerly allowed them, nor to be Plundered nor Injured in their passage. V. That whereas by reason of the long siege of the Castle of Pendennis, many of the Officers and Souldiers of the said garison are growne into great nessity of all such things as might enable them to martch to their severall Dwellings, many sicke and wounded: And to the intent they may be sup∣plyed with necessaries for their accommodations within the time limited to them by these Articles. It is promised and consented unto by the Commissioners for the Leaguer, to and with the Commissioners for the Castle, that five hundreth pouuds sterling shall be delivered into the hands of the Com∣missioners of the Castle, or any three of them, at eight of the clocke to morrow morning at Penrin, to be distributed vmong the Officers and Souldiers aforesaid, as they shall thinke fit. And they are not to take any free quarter in their martches. VI. That all Goods taken from any person for the accom∣modation of this Garison or any person therein, shall be resto∣red to their proper Owners, or such as they shall appoint; and all Goods now in the Castle that properly belong to any other persons, shall be restored to the Owners thereof. And if any person carry away any Goods not properly belonging unto him, & deny to deliver them upon demand in presence of any Officer in Commission, he shall loose his Bag and Baggage, and have such punishment as the now Governour of the Ca∣stle and the Commanders in cheife, or any two of them shall thinke fit. But all persons may retaine whatsoever was taken from persons in Armes, as lawull prize of War. VII. That the Governor and all Field-Officers with their severall retinues shall be allowed cariage by Sea or Land to
carry away their said Goods to any Place within their County. VIII. That no Officer, Souldier or other person comprized in these Articles, shall be reproached, or have any disgrace∣full words or affronts offered, or be stopt, Searched, Plundered or Injured in their martches, Rendezvouz, Quarters, Jour∣neys, places of aboad, or passages by Sea or Land; and if any such thing be done, satisfaction to be made according to the judgement of any two Commissioners or more, being of equall number of each party; nor shall any of the persons aforesaid be compelled to take up Arms against the King, nor be impriso∣ned for any cause of publick or private concernment during the space of twenty eight dayes after the surrender of the said Castle, nor for any cause of publique concernment, or twenty eight dayes after the said twenty eight dayes are ended. IX. That if any person within the Garison be sicke or wounded, that they cannot take the benefit of the Articles at present; they shall have liberty to stay, and be provided for at convenient places untill they recover, and then they shall have the fruit and benefit of these Articles. X. That all persons comprized in this capitulation shall enjoy their Estates reall and personall, they submitting to all Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and shall fully en∣joy the benefit of these Articles. XI. That all Prisoners of Warre, of either side, be set at liberty, and that liberty be given immediately after the surrender of the said Castle to the Governour thereof, to give notice to their friends of the surrender of the said Castle. And that no Vessell comming with reliefe within ten dayes after the surrender shall be made prize. XII. That if any of these Articles shall in any point be broke or violated by any person or persons in Pendennis or comprized within this capitulation, the fault and punishment shall be upon them or him onely who made the breach or vi∣olation, and shall not be imputed or charged on any other not assenting thereunto or acting therein. XIII. That all persons comprized in these Articles, shall
upon request have certificate under the hands of the Comman∣der in chiefe respectively, that such persons were in the Ca∣stle at the time of the surrender thereof, and were otherwise to have the benefit of these Articles. XIV. That the Commanders in chiefe respectively shall give Passes to one or two Messengers with their Servants not exceeding six, to goe to the King by Sea or Land from the Governour, to give an account to Him of the proceedings of this Treaty, and conclusion thereof, and to returne and receive the benefit of these Articles. XV. That Commissioners be appointed on both sides for the performance of the Articles, and places appointed for the accommodation of sick men. XVI. That confirmation of all the precedent Articles shall be procured from the Parliament, or from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax within forty dayes after the signing of these Articles. Neere to Pendennis is the Mount in Cornwall (omitted to be mentioned in its just order) which was surrendred to Colonell Hamond, who lay before it with some of the foot of this Army, and obtained the surrender of it some few dayes after the surrender of Excester: The Governour of the Mount was Sir Arthur Basset; the Mar∣quesse of Hamilton was in it, fifteene peeces of Ordnance, with great store of Ammunition and Provisions were gained with it. It is a place of great strength, the Tyde flowing about it twice a day, which rendred the reduction of it a service of great difficnlty and consequence, and Redoun ding much to the honour of Colonel Hamond, who un∣derwent the same; whose Merits also in that singular Ser∣vice of setling Quarters on the West-side of Excester at Saint Thomas Hospitall, &c. within halfe Musket-shot of the Enemy; afterwards martching to Torrington with his Regiment, deserves a speciall note to be put upon it. Besides this of the Mount, there is one Service more
omitted to be mentioned in its proper place, viz. The reduction of Borstall-House, which was some few dayes before the surrender of Oxford, agreed to be surrendred upon conditions. And thus yon have a true (though plaine and briefe) account of the Actions of this Army, which God reserved for such a time as our lowest estate, when his season was to deliver us. It was once intended, the Story should have broken off at Oxford, but you see it is cōtinued to the last piece of Service performed by this Army, though somewhat more briefly then the former Actions; which was for want of those Materials of Observaiions and Col∣lections, which were furnished me in the compiling of the Story till then, by One, to whom all that reap any satis∣faction by this Story, owe great thanks for his diligence and faithfulnesse therein. And now there being no Enemy either in Field or Gar∣rison, his Excellency after sowe smal time of refreshment and rest from his continuall wearinesse and action, was by the Parliament Ordered from Oxford into the West, there to disband Major-General Massies Brigade; whi∣ther accordingly he immediately martched, viz. to the Devizes, where in the space of eight dayes, his Excel∣lency disbanded the whole Brigade, consisting of two thousand five hundred Horse; whom (to give them their due) he found for the most part, prepared to obey the Ordinance of Parliament; which was the more com∣mendable, in respect that of many moneths Arreares which were behind, they received but six weeks pay, which yet is not wholly to be reckoned to the ingenuity of the men, but in a great part to the carefulnesse and prudence of Major-General Massie, Colonel Cook, and the rest of the Officers: Divers of the Disbanded come from very remote Countries, and had Passes some for Egypt, others for Mesopotamia and Aethyopia. This work was no sooner over, but it pleased God to visit the General with a sore fit of the Stone: Saint
Paul needed a Thorne in the flesh; and by thirst and lack of water Sampson (after his great Exploits) might know himselfe to be a Man. This fit continued on him for ma∣ny dayes together; so soon as he was recovered, he made a Journey to London: This was the first time of his visi∣ting London since he martched forth with the Army, ha∣ving a small desire to see that place till he could bring an Olive branch in his mouth, choosing rather to hasten Peace, then spin out the War, which made a humble Tent more acceptable to him till he had attained his end, then a glorious City. His Excellency comming to Loudon Novemb. 12. while he was yet some miles off the City, he was met by the Mliitia of the City: He who had so often encountred a Militia of Enemies, is now embraced by a Militia of Friends, who had no other Errand but to thank him, who had done so much, as that he had left nothing for them to doe, but to fetch in this Man of War, who had converted them to Men of Peace, who through his Watch fulnesse and Valour had excused them from stirring out of their city to fight a Battell; onely now in the interest of their owne honour, they were drawne out to bring in the Prize of so many Battels, even Englands Peace. Many wel-affected Citizens also went forth with the Militia, upon this Expedition, and the hearts of thou∣sands ran and met him, whose persons were not seen there. No sooner was he come to Town, but (the next day) both Houses of PARLIAMENT were in motion to acknowledge their GENERAL, and make a congra∣tulatory Visit to him, communicating their sense the one House to the other therein, and making these re∣pective ORDERS thereupon.
DIE VENERIS, Novemb. 13. 1646. ORdered by the LORDS Assembled in PAR∣LIAMENT, that it is left to the SPEAKER of this House, what to speak to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX from this House, upon these severall Heads, viz. To Congratulate his comming to this Towne, and to acknowledge his good Service done to the Parliament and Kingdome. JOHN BROWNE. DIE VENERIS, 13. Novemb. 1646. ORdered by the COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, That Master SPEAKER and the whole House doe to Morrow at ten of the clcck, give a Visit to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, General of the PARLIAMENTS FORCES, and returne him the Thanks of the COMMONS of England, and an Acknowledgment of the great Blessings of ALMIGHTY GOD upon his faith∣full Services, wise Conduct and great Valour in the whole discharge of the great TRUST com∣mitted unto him, and reducing the distracted Af∣faires of this KINGDOME to this happy con∣dition and Issue. H. ELSYNGE Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Thus those that honour God, God will honour, and those that seek onely, and are content with that honour that is of God, shall (sometimes) perchance have the ho∣nour that is of Men last into the Bargaine. On Saturday, November 14. Both Houses actuated their Orders and Intentions; and first, the Right honou∣rable EDWARD Earle of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Lords, pro tempore, accompanied with the Earl of Northumberland, Pembroke, and divers other Peers of the Kingdome, went together in their Coaches to his Excellencies house in Queenstreet, to congratulate his Excellencies Successes and happy returne, according to the Order of their House, which the Earle of Manchester enlarged with divers Expressions of gratitude and ho∣nour to his Excellency; The Con∣tents of the Earle of Manchester's Speech. In the Name of the House of PEERS, giving his Excellency Thanks for all his Care and Paines, in the defence of the Publick, expressing their great Esteem of his memorable Services, and faithfull Perfor∣mance of the Trust reposed in him, which their Lordships should alwayes have in remembrance, and be ready upon all Occasions, to expresse their Gratitude unto him. And when they had done, and were gone (with never a jot lesse Honour, I trow, for that which they had left upon his Excellency) the House of COMMONS also attended their SPEAKER on the same Errand; where WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire, Speaker of that House, delivered himselfe to this Effect: SIR, I Have a very hard Taske to performe to present the Respects of the House of Commons accor∣ding to your Excellencies Merit, and their desires to effect this accordinly, I should have informed my self from Histories that have preserved the memories of the famous Worthies of former Ages and should
have taken the Dimensions of the largest Coronts and Trophies wherewith they are made Glorious, and even those would rather straighten then enlarge the Temples of yours Excellency; or else I should have consulted some of the most Learned and Elo∣quent Oratours, who have set forth the glorious Gests performed in former times, whereby I might have insisted on some Paralell for your Wisdome, Piety, Justice and Valour; but I conceive the Ver∣tues and Successe which God hath bestowed upon you, were very hardly to be matcht, and rather needed more Industry and Memory to Enumerate, then Oratory to Polish. Heretofore when I read the Histories of the Acts of famous Princes and Warrious, in this or other Nations, it was not without some Jealousie, that in them there was some mixture and glosses of Ora∣tory and Art, the more to set off, and give Lustre to the Acts, as Arguments of Emulation, for others to follow the Foot-steps of their Vertues; but the Acti∣ons of your Excellency will adde Lnstre and Beliefe to them, being all verified in you: And (indeed) here, considering the swift Martches, and the Ex peditions in these grand and difficult Attempts, which were prosecuted and effected by your Excel∣lency, I may say, The Almighty came Riding on the Wings of the Wind, for these were nothing else but the Magnalia Dei, acted in and by you his Instrument. It was the Custome of the ancient Romans, after
a glorious and succesfull Prince, to derive his Name to Posterity, in memorie of his Vertues, as after that great Prince JULIUS CAESAR, his Suc∣cessors retained the Name of CAESARS, as AU∣GUSTUS CAESAR, TYBERIUS CAESAR. &c. Thus hereafter all Famous and Victorious suc∣ceeding Generals in this Kingdome (if the time shall prove so unfortunate) will desire the addition of the Name of FAIR FAX. And surely the Honour of the late Lord General was not, whiles he lived, any way eclipsed by the succession of your Excellency in his Command, but rather augmented, whiles each retained the bright∣nesse of his owne Honour, having both Rayes enough to enlighten a Kingdome, then overset with Clouds and thick darknesse. I shall need to say no more but this, That the Wold will admire your Excellencies Worth, Posterity will honour your Name; and that the whole House of Commons, in the Name of the Com∣mons of England, doth returne you Thanks for your faithfull and memorable Services; the beginning, continuance and effect whereof, I must solely attri∣bute to the Almighty (the Lord of Hosts and Vi∣ctories.) But never had JuliusCaesar the honor in those Civil wars when he came to Rome as a Conquerour; one poor Metellus confronts him and gives check to his Victory, sweld spirit, breaking up the Doors of Saturnes Temple: Indeed there is a manifest cause of difference; Caesar did not plead the
Senates cause did not fight for the Roman Liberties. The Senate fled when Caesar drew neare, but his Excellencis Warre was the Parliments Peace; by his Motion they sat still. Happy man may I say of him that is able to Engage Kingdomes and Parliaments in such Respects and Dutyes, and happy Kingdome and Parliament also, for whose Ex∣streame and low Condition God Reserves such a chosen Vessell. To all which his Excellency made a very modest re∣turne, Expressing, How much he Esteemad himselfe Honou∣red by the great Respects of the Houses towards him, and that he accounted it his greatest Happinesse under God to be in the least kind Instrumentall for theirs and the Kingdomes good. So great was the benefit and Obligation of his Excel∣lencies Services, that the Lord Major and Aldermen in their owne and Cities interest, feeling the same, particu∣larly could not discharge themselves in their Consciences to acknowledge to their General in their representive the Commons of England. but on the Tuesday following came with a Train of Coaches to his Excellencies house, in the name, and on the behalfe of the City, to render Thanks unto him, by whose watchfulnesse this famous City, so much longed for by the Enemy, was preserved from be∣ing sackt and plundered, as well as the Kingdome recove∣red: Master Glyn the Recorder was their Mouth, to this effect: SIR, I Am to declare unto you, in the behalf of ihe Lord Major, and the whole City, that they in the first place, blesse Almighty God for the great Victories and Successes wherewith it hath pleased God to Crowne your faithfull Endeavours: And next,
they give your Excellency hearty Thanks for your great and incomparable Services, whereby you have setled the City and whole Kingdome in so peaceable a Condition, as it is at this day. To which his Excellency gave a very modest Reply in way of Thankfulnesse for that Visit, and the Respects of the City towards him: And in close, the Recorder further gave his Excellency to understand; That the City intended very shortly to make a further acknowledgment of their Thank∣fulnesse, and to give a greater Testimony of the high Esteeem tey had of his Excellency. And thus I have brought his Excellency to Towne, and here I could be glad to leave him, Pacem te possimus omnes, but I must carry him Forth againe, but 'tis not to War nor Battell, 'tis to discharge Armies and Souldiers, that England may, if it be the Will of God, be a quiet Habitation againe, and the noyse of War not heard in it. His Excencellency had not long staid at London but he was Ordered to provide a Convoy to goe with the two hundred thousand pounds for the Scottish Army, upon their martching out of England. His Excellency living more to the Publick Service and Commonalty then his owne Ease or Accommodation: On Thursday Decemb. 18. went from London towards Northampton, having be∣fore ordered most of his Forces to advance to those parts, and appointed three Regiments of Horse, viz. Colonel Sir Robert Pye's, Colonel Grave's and Colonel Rossiter's, and three Regiments of Foot, viz. Major-General Skippon's, Colonel Lilburnes, and Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller's, to martch under the command of Ma∣jor-General Skippon, as a Convoy to the said Money to Newcastle upon Tyne; a tedious Winter martch, being
neer two hundred miles from the place where some of them received the Money; yet the better to be under∣gone, when it ends not in fighting, as many tedious Martches of this Army have done. And thus you have an account of six Regiments, how they are disposed, the rest of the Army I leave in their Quarters, to practice Saint John Baptists Lesson, Doe vi∣olence to no man, and be content with your Wages. And would to God I might here set Finis to our English Troubles, as well as to this History: Times and Issues are in the Hand of God; we can∣not know what is to come, let us look over and re∣count with thankfulnesse what God hath done for us, who for his Works sake among us, is glorious in the Eyes of all Nations; yea, in the Conscien∣ces of our Enemies, who cannot but confesse, our Rock is not as their Rock; if he be not glorious in our Eyes, tis the least can be said, his Mercies have been ill bestowed upon us. It may be expected here, I should conclude with a Panegyrick of the Army, and a Paraenetick to the Kingdome, to Love and Honour them: but me thinks there should be no need of that, the whole Story proclaimes their Worth and Merit; their Name is Engraven by God himselfe, as with the Poynt of a Dyamond, on the Gates and Wals of many of our chiefe Places; Yea, they have Sown a Name to themselves in the Earth, and Watered it with their Blood in many places of this King∣dome: and if all those great Works God hath done
for the Kingdome by them, have not yet prevail∣ed for a Precious and honourable Esteem of them, in vaine should I attempt to be their Advocate: Onely I shall take the Boldnesse to say (knowing within what compasse I speak) that they who think such men not sit to serve a State, they must (un∣doubtedly) question whether it were for the Ser∣vice of the State, that which they have done; for they who shall acknowledge the Reducing the Kingdome to its Peace, and to the Parliaments Obedience, by Vanquishing their Enemies and Strengths, to be good Service, must needs acknow∣ledge those that did it to be good Servants, and worthy of all Honour and Acceptation therein: And they that would perswade otherwise, it is not because they know how to have the State better served, but because they think it is served too well, and are not so much Enemies to these particular men as to the Commonwealth; and were all of their mind (which God forbid) should we be served with such as would take our Money, and doe little for it, that would spin out and protract the Warre, as these have contracted it; that would serve us in Stewes and Tavernes, and drink away the King∣domes Cares and Sorrowes, yea the Kingdomes Blood in Bouls of Wine, and fight with God (in∣stead of his Enemies) by Oaths and Blasphemies, and all horrible Wickednesses, we were well served. If such as these be good Souldiers and Servants
a State, I confesse this is not the Guise of this Ar∣my: But if Valour and Faithfulnesse, Prudence and Activity be the qualifications of good Souldiers, these will obtaine a Name among the First; or if tedious Martches and vehement Battails, and fierce storming of impregnable Strengths, be any demon∣stration of these things, we want them not. But tis time to Retreat; let us be thankefull to God, and we shall not be unworthy to his Instru∣ments. I shall only adde a Character of the Army, that those who have approved themselves so we in their Actions may be better knowne to us in their Spirits and Principles, and then I shall leave them to the Acceptance of God and the Censure of the World.
A CHARACTER OF THE ARMY. First, of the General Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. I Shall here passe over his Extraction, Education and contract, as having been toucht upon before, and now to begin with him as General, which He began to be in as little a copy and proportion as hath been knowne, setting out with an Army scarce large enough for his title; so as he began as all true naturall growths and encreasings, from seeds and small beginnings, and so grew up more naturally then artificially into compleatnesse, rather by providence then violence, rather by course then wonder; as if God rather then men should make him and his Army grow. His way of steerage and conduct at first, was amongst men in reputation for Religion, as if the best place he could find for counsel and action was there where God was; and he prospered accordingly, as if Providence would let him see, there is the best Policy where there is the best Piety. He wanted one thing, and yet had the more by such a want; and that was a Privado or Favourite of passion, as if providence had intended him for men, and therefore would keep him from man: Men were rather his Friends then his Favourites, and his Judgment was rather enamou∣red of men, then his Affections; Religion and the Publick being the best lines for great men to live and love by. He never discovered passions abroad in counsels or actions, what he had at home in himself, he (not others) knew; and this was of advantage, both to what was ad∣vised and what was done; for the businesse of War is best managed by peace at home, and those counsels that are least troubled themselves, bring over most trouble to the
Enemy, and the Steersman that sits at Helme, had not need to have the palsie in his hand. In counsels for action, he was ever ready to let those reasons that had most appearance of God prevaile; as if he had observed Faith to be of more successe in these Bat∣tailes, then Reason. His carriage in this Warre hath beene constant action, diligence and vigilance, being never lesse in title, then when any thing was to do, as if to be Ge∣neral raised him onely to do more, not to be more then others. He was not without love, clemency and meeknesse, by which he kept his Army lesse stained in the Blood of his Enemy; but not lesse Victorious; for by this he only drew lesse blood, but more men to him. In the midst of our Troubles in Religion, he was thus farre in Peace, that he could beare the different opinions in their unity to the publick, seeing the Work goe on as well as if all had been of one mind, and weighed men (as we hope) by love to God, and to the publick, and by this he kept cleer from dashing against God and good men, in pretence of opinion: and thus the work hath been done with as much appearance of God, as hath been seen in many Ages. He was still for action in Field or Fortification, esteem∣ing nothing uneasible for God, and for man to doe in Gods strength, i they would up and be doing; and thus his suceesse hath run through a line crosse to that of old Souldiery, of long Sieges and slow approaches; and he hath done all so soon, because he was ever doing. For his love to Religion, that is a businesse as well of the heart as of the hand, of power as of forme, and we hope he is that to God that he is to others; if we may judge mens pietie by their practice, he is not wanting in Religious duties, in reading, in exercises; but God and not men must commend him in this. For his personage, he is tall, yet not above just
proportion, yet taller (as some say) when he is in the Field, then at home, as if Victory were in his spirit be∣forehand, and raised him higher then his ordinary sta∣ture. His body is not without its infirmities, as of Rheums and Distillations, which sometimes cause an impediment in his speech: Thus Providence pitches him in a Tent, something crazy, in a Body weakned by War and Watch∣fulnesse, that he may live humbly, and know himself to be but man in the hands of God, and be a man as well of infirmity as of glory. Thus I have writ him over, I hope, in truth to those that know him, but rather for those that know him not but by Pen or Picture, yet with this clause, That what is good in him, we may not know to be his owne, but his that gave him it; even his who is the Author and Fi∣nisher of all our good. THE Officers of this Army, as you may read, are such, as knew little more of War, then our owne unhappy Warres had taught them, except some few, so as men could not contribute much to this work: Indeed I may say this, they were better christians then souldiers, and wiser in faith then in fighting, and could beleeve a Victory sooner then contrive it; and yet I think they were as wise in the way of Souldiery as the little time and experience they had could make them. These Officers, many of them with their Souldiery, were much in prayer and reading Scripture, an exercise that Souldiers till of late have used but little, and thus then went on and prospered: men conquer better as they are Saints, then Souldiers; and in the countries where they came, they left something of God as well as of Caesar behind them, something of piety as well as Pay. They were much in Justice upon Offenders, that they might be still in some degree of Reformation in their
Military state. Armies are too great Bodies to be sound in all parts at once. The Army was (what by example and justice) kept in good order, both respectively to it selfe, and the coun∣try: nor was it their pay that pacified them; for had they not had more civility then money, things had not been so fairly managed. They were many of them differing in opinion, yet not in action nor businesse; they all agreed to preserve the Kingdome; they prospered more in their unity, then uniformity; and whatever their opinions were, yet they plundered none with them, they betrayed none with them, nor disobeyed the State with them, and they were more visibly pious and peaceable in their opinions, then many we call more orthodox. They were generally constant and conscientious in duties, and by such sobernesse and strictnesse conquered much upon the vanity and loosnesse of the Enemy; many of those fought by principle as well as pay, and that made the work goe better on, where it was not made so much matter of merchandize as of conscience: They were little inutinous or disputing commands; by which peace the Warre was better ended. There was much amity and unity amongst the Offi∣cers, while they were in action, and in the Field, and no visible Emulations and Passions to break their Ranks, which made the publick fare better. That Boat can goe but slowly where the Oares rowe severall wayes; the best Expeditions is by things that goe one way. The Army was faire in their martches to Friends, and mercifull in Battaile and successe to Enemies, by which they got some love from Enemies, though more from Friends. This Army went on better by two more wheels of Treasurers and a Committee; the Treasurers were men of publick spirits to the State and Army, and were usu∣ally ready to present some pay upon every successe,
which was like wine after work, and cheered up the com¦mon spirit to more activity. The Committee which the House of Commons formed, were men wise, provident, active and faithfull in providing Ammunition, Armes, Recruits of men, cloathes: And that Family must needs thrive that hath good Stewards. Thus you have a Copy of our Army; we will not say they have no faults, but those they have, we wish rather reformed then read by the World. A LIST of the Names of the OFFICERS in chiefe of Foot and Horse, the Train of ARTILE∣RY, and other Officers, under the command of His Ex∣cellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX; As Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors and Captaines, &c. GENERAL OFFICERS. HIS Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax General. Major General Skippon, Major General to the whole Army. Lieutenan Gen. Cromwel, Lieut. Gen. of Horse. Lieut. Gen. Hamond, Lieut. Gen. of the Ordnance. Commissary-Gen. Ireton, Com. Gen. of the Horse. The TREASURERS at Warre, viz. Sir John Wollaston Knight. Thomas Adams Esquire. John Warner Esquire. Thomas Andrewes Esquire. George Wytham Esquire. ALDERMEN. Francis Allien. Abraham Chambrelan. John Dethyck. ESQUIRES. Captaine Blackwel, Deputy-Treasurer at Warres.
Commis. Gen. Stane, Commis. Gen. of the Musters Major Watson Scoutmaster Gen. to the Army. Quartermaster Gen. Spencer, Quartermaster Gen. of Foot (now Quartermaster Gen. Gravesnor.) Quarterm. Gen. Fincher, Quarterm. Gen. of Horse Colonel Pindar. Harcourt Laighton. Thomas Herbert. Capt: Potter, slaine at Naseby (now Capt: Vincent Potter, Esq) Commissioners of Parlia∣ment residing in the Ar∣my. Captaine Flemming. Captaine Evelyn. Adjutants Gen. of Horse. Lieutenant-Col: Gray Adjutant Gen: of the Foot. Captaine Deane comptroller of the Ordnance. John Mi's Esquire, Judge Advocate. John Rushworth Esquire, Secretary to the General and Counsel of Warre. Master Boles Chaplaine to the Army. Commissary Orpin, Commissary Gen: of Victu∣als, (now Commissary Cowling.) Capt: Cooke, Commissary Gen: of Horse-Provisi∣ons, slaine at Naseby (now Commissary Jones.) Master Richardson Waggon-master General. Doctor Payne. Doctor Strawhill. (since Dr: French.) Physitians to the Army. Master Web, Apothecary to the Army. Master Winter Chirurgion to the Generals owne Person.
Captaine Wykes, Marshal-General of Foot. Capt: Rich: Lawrence, Marshal-Gen: of Horse. Mr: Fran: Child, Markmaster-Gen: of the Horse. Master Robert Wolsey, Assistant to the Quar∣termaster-Gen: of Foot, (wounded at Naseby.) M: James Standish M: Rich: Gerard Deputies to the commissary-Gen: of Musters. M: Thomas Wragge M: William Clarke Clerks to the Secretary. M: Richard Chadwel M: Constantine Heath Messengers to the Army For the Foot. Sir Thomas Fairfax, Col. His owne Company com∣manded by Capt: Forte∣scue, since Capt: Aidley. Lievtenant col: Jackson. Major Cook, dyed before Bristol. Capt: Gooday, now Maj. Capt: Boyce. Capt: Musket. Capt: Maneste (dead) Cap. Wolfe. Capt: Highfield. Capt: White. Capt: Bland, since Capt: Leigh. Major Gen. Skippon. Lieutenant-Col: Frances, slaine at Naseby. Major Ashfield, now Lieu∣tenant-colonel. Capt: Samuel Clark, now Major. Capt: Streater. Capt: Harrison. Capt: John Clark. Capt: Bowen. Capt: Gibbon. Capt: Cobbet. Capt: Symonds. Sir Hardresse Waller, Col. Lieutena-col: Cottesworth slain before Oxford, now Lieutenant col. Salmon. Major Smith. Capt: Howard. Capt: Waade. Capt: Hill, slain before Bri∣stol, now Capt: Aske. Capt: Gorges. Capt: Clark.
Capt: Thomas. Capt: Hodden. Colonel Hamond. Lieutenant-col: Ewre. Major Sanders. Capt: Disney. Capt: Chara Capt: Smith Capt: Johu Boyce Capt: John Puckle Capt: Stratton Capt: Rolfe. Colonel Harley Lieutenant-colonel Pride Major Cowell Capt: Goff Captain Gregson, wounded at Rerkley Capt: Sampson, wounded at Bridgewater Capt: Hinder, wounded at Bristol Capt: Forgison Capt: Mason Capt: Lago. Colonel Mountague, since colonel Lamberts Lieutenant-collon. Grimes Major Kelsey, since Major Rogers Catain Blethen. Captain Nunney Captain Biscoe. Captain Rogers. Capt. Wilks, slain at Basing. now Capt. Cadwel. Capt. Thomas Disney. Capt: Sanders. Colonel Lloyd, slaine at Taunton, since Colonel Herbert. Lieutenant-colonel Gray. Major Read (now Lieute∣nant-colonel) wounded at Taunton, now Major Waade. Capt: Wilks, slain at Taun∣ton. Captain Gettins, dyed in Gloucestershire, now Capt. Lundy, wounded at Berkley. Capt. Wigfal, slain at Berk∣ley-castle. Captain Melvin, wounded at Bristol. Captain Spooner. Captain Short. Colonel Pickering (dyed at Antre) now Colo. Hewsons. Lieutenant-colon. Hewson (now Colonel.) Major Jubbs (now Lieute∣nant-colonel.) Capt. Axtel (now Major.) Capt. Husbands (now Capt. Grimes.) Capt. Jenkens, slain at Far∣ringdon, after Capt. Tom∣kins, slain at Naseby; now Captain Toppington.
Capt: Carter. Capt: Silverwood. Capt: Gayle, slain at Bristol Capt: Price. Colonel Fortescue. Lieutenant-colo. Richbell slaine at Taunton. Lieutenant-col: Dursey slain at Bristol, Lieuten: col: Ingoldsby slaine at Pendennis, now Leute∣nant-col: Cobbet. Major Jennings. Capt: Gettins, now Capt: Farley. Capt: Fownes, slain at Ti∣verton. Capt: Young. Ca: Gollidge, slain at Taun∣ton Capt: Whitton. Capt: Bushell. Colonel Ingoldesby. Lieutenant-col: Farringdon now Lieut: col: Kelsey. Major Cromwel, slaine at Bristol, since Maj: Ducket Capt: Henry Ingoldesby. C: Gibson, now C: Stephens Capt. Allen. Cap: Ward slain at Bristol, since Cap: Williams, since Capt: Tho: Ingoldesby. Capt: Mils. Ca: Bamfield, now C: Wag∣shaft. Capt: Grimes. For the Traine. Lieutenant-Gen: Hamond, Lieu: gen: of the Ordnan. Capt: Deane, Comptroller of the Ordnance. Master Hugh Peter, Chap∣laine to the Traine. Peter Manteau van Dalem, Engineere-General. Capt: Hooper, Engineere Extraordinary. Eval Tercene, chief Engin: Master Lyon. Mr: Tomlinson Engineers Master Francis Furin, Ma∣ster-Cunner of the Field. Master Matthew Martin, Paymaster to the Traine. Colonel Rainsborow. Lieutenant-col: Bowen. Major Done, slain at Sher∣burn, Major Crosse slain there, Major Edwards. C: Crosse, slain at Sherburn Capt: Edwards. Capt: Drury. Capt: Dancer. Capt: Creamer, wounded at Sherburne. Capt: Sterne, slaine at Bri∣stol Colonel Weldon, now Co∣lonel Lilburne. Lieutenant-col: Kempson. Major Masters. Capt: Peckham. Capt: Fenton. Capt: Franklin slain at Ex∣eter, now Capt: Holmes.
Capt. Dorman. Capt. Tolhust. Capt. Munday, dead in the West, now Capt. Welden Capt: Kaine. Master Phips, Commissary of Ammunition. Mr. Tho. Robinson, Com. of the Draught-Horse. Firelocks. Capt. Lieutenant Desborow Capt. Lieutenant Brent. Capt: of Pioners. Captaine Cheese. For the Horse. Sir Thomas Fairfax, General His Troop commanded by Captaine Gladman. Major Desborow. Capt. Lawrence. Capt. Browne Capt. Packet Capt. Berry. Colonel Butler. Major Horton. Capt. Foley. Capt. Gardner. Capt. Pennyfether. Capt. Perry, dead, now Capt. Bethel. Colonel Tho. Sheffeild. Major Fincher. Capt. Robotham. Capt. Rainsborow Capt Martin. Capt. Evelyn. Col. Fleetwood. Major Harrison. Capt. Coleman. Capt. Selby slain at Naseby, now Capt. Laughton. Capt. Zanchy. Capt. Howard. Colonel Rossiter. Major Twisleton. Capt. Anthony Markham. Capt. Jo. Nelthrop. Capt. Peart. Capt. Henry Markham. Lieutenant-Gen. Cromwel. Major Huntington. Capt. Jenkins. Capt. Middleton. Capt. John Reynolds. Capt. Bush, slain at Naseby, since Capt. Blackwell. Colonel Rich. Major Alford. Capt. Nevil. Capt. Ireton. Capt. Dendy, now Capt. Husbands. Capt. Bough, now Capt. Hawys. Colonel Sir Robert Pye. Major Tomlinson. Capt. Margery. Capt. Knight. Capt. Barry. Capt. Rawlins. Colonel Whaley. Maj. Bethel, slain before Bri∣stol.
Capt: Swallow, now Major Capt: Groves. Capt: Cannon. Capt: Evanson. Colonel Graves. Major Scroop. Capt: Fleming (Adjutant-General.) Capt. Lord Calfield. Capt: Barton. Colonel Ireton, commissary General. Major Sedascue. Capt. Guilliams, slaine at Bristol, since capt. Pretty Capt: Gibbons Cap: Holkins, slain at Nase∣by, since capt: Cecill Capt: Bury now cap: Mor∣gan. His Excellencies Life-Guard Capt: Doyley, now Capt: Hall. Dragoones. Colonel Okey. Major Moore. Capt: Farmer. Capt: Mercer. Capt: Abbots. Capt: Farre. Capt: Bridge. Capt: Woggan. Cap: Skirmager Capt: Turpin, since Capt: Neale. A Journal of every dayes Martch of the Army under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; with the names of the Townes and Villages where the Head Quarters have been; the distance of miles, and how many nights the Quarters continued in each Towne or Village.   Towns and Villages. Counties. mi. ni. 1645.         April 30 From Windsor to Reding. Berksh: 12 1 May 1 to Theale   4 1 2 To Newbery   11 2 4 To Andover Wiltsh: 12 1 5 To Salisbury   15 1 6 To Sixpenny Hauley Dorsetsh. 10 1 7 To Blandford   7 1
8 To Wichampton.   7 1   The same day a Party martched West∣ward to relieve Taunton.       9 To Ringwood. Hampsh. 10 1 10 To Rumsey.   14 2 12 To Alresford.   14 1 13 To Whitchurch.   10 1 14 To Nebwury Berksh. 10 3 17 To Blewberry.   10 2 19 To Newnam. Oxon. 9 1 20 To Garsington.   2 2 22 To Marston and the Siege of Ox∣ford.   4 14 June 5 To Mars Gibbon. Buckinghamsh. 9 1 6 To Great Brickhill.   12 1 7 To Sherrington.   8 2 9 To Stony Stretford.   4 2 11 To Wotton. Northamptonsh. 8 1 12 To Killingbury.   4 1 13 To Guilesbury.   6 1 14 To the Battaile at Naseby, and from thence to Harborough, Leicestersh. 6 1 15 To Kibworth, to great Glin.   7 1 16 To Knighton, and Leicester Siege.   6 2 18 To Leicester.   1½ 2 20 To Lutterworth.   10 1 21 To Lillington. Warwicksh. 10½ 1 22 To Warwick.   2 1 23 To Clifford. Gloucestersh. 7 1 24 To Campden.   6 1 25 To Norledge.   14 1 26 To Lechlade.   8 1 27 To Wambro. Wiltsh. 7 1 28 To Marlingbury.   7 2
30 To Ambersbury.   14 1 July 1 To Burchalk.   11 1 2 To Blandford. Dorsetsh. 12 1 3 To Dorchester:   12 1 4 To Beamister.   12 1 5 To Crookhorne. Somersetsh. 4 2 7 To Evill.   8 1 8 To Ivelchester.   3 1 9 To Long Sutton.   4 1 10 To the Battaile at Langport, and to Midlesey.   9 1 11 To Weston and Bridgwater siege.   2 15 21 Bridgwater stormed, part taken.       22 Bridgewater yeelded.       26 To Marcock.   13 2 28 To Wels.   15 4 30 Bath surrendred.       Augu. 1 To Queen Cammel   12 1 2 To Sherborne: Dorsetsh. 4 17 15 Sherborne Castle taken.       18 To Castle Carey. Somersetsh. 8 1 19 To Shepton Mallet.   6 1 20 To Bishops Chew.   12 2 22 To Canesham.   5 3 25 To Stableton. Gloucestersh. 4 17 Sept. 10 Bristol Stormed, some of the Works and Line taken.       11 To Bristol surrendred.   2 5 15 Farley Castle surrendred. Somersetsh.     16 To Bath.   10 1 17 To Trubridge. Wiltsh. 7 1 18 To Devizes.   7 8 23 Lacock-House surrendred.         Vize-castle surrendred.       26 Barckle, the castle taken. Gloucest.    
26 To East-Lavington   4 1   A Party martched towards Winchester and Basing-House.       27 To Warmister.   8 3 Sept. 30 To Shaftsbury. Dorsetsh. 12 2 Octob. 2 To Midleton.   15 1 3 To Dorchester.   8 1 4 To Beamister:   12 2 6 To Chard. Somersetsh: 8 8 14 To Hunniton Devonsh: 12 1 15 To Cullumpton.   7 2 17 To Tiverton:   4½ 3 19 The Castle of Tiverton taken.       20 To Silverton.   5 2 22 To Newton Syer.   5 1 23 To Crediton.   3 3 26 To Silverton.   8 1 27 To Topsham.   8 5 Nov. 1 To Poultimore and Broad Clisse.   5 1 2 To Wimple.   3 2 4 To Mary Antre.   3 32 Dece. 6 To Tiverton.   12 33 Jan. 8 To Morton.   20 1 9 To Bovy Tracy, took three or four hun∣dred Horse.   6 1 10 To Ashburton.   6 1 11 To Totnes.   5 8 19 To Dartmouth, stormed and taken.   7 2 21 To Totnes.   7 3 24 To Newton Bushel.   7 1 25 To Chidlay.   5 16   That day Poulderham Castle taken.       Febr. 10 To Crediton.   12 4 14 To Chimleigh.   9 2 16 To Stephenston, master Roules his house, that night faced Torrington, and entred.   8 8
24 To Houlsworthy.   10 1 25 To Launceston. Cornw. 10 4 March 1 To Blisland.   16 1 2 To Bodman.   4 5 7 To a Randezvouz at Lanevet, and back to Bodman.   6 2 9 To Tregny.   15 1 10 To Truro.   6 11   Goring's Army of Horse surrendred and disbanded.       21 To Bodman.   20 5 1646         26 To Launceston (the General to Plymouth)   20 2 28 To Okehampton. Devonsh: 15 1 29 To Crediton.   14 2 31 To view the Siege at Excester, and to Collumb-John.   13 13 Apr. 13 To Excester surrendred.   4 5 18 To Chard. Somersetsh: 24 1 19 To Dorchester. Dorsetsh. 22 1 20 To Salisbury. Wiltsh: 32 4 25 To Andivor.   15 2 27 To Newbury. Berksh. 13 3 30 To East Hendred.   12 1 May 1 To Garsington. Oxon: 9 1 2 To Heddendon.   3 53 June 24 To Oxford, surrendred.   1 0
The Contents of the severall Chapters. PART I. CHAP. I. COntaining by way of Poeme and Introduction, a gene∣rall account of the miserable condition of this King∣dome, before this present Parliament; The occasion and Instruments of calling it; The snare laid for us in a for∣mer Parliament. The Quarrell between the Royall party, and the Parliament, stated: And shewing how the Command of the Parliaments Forces came to be devolved to Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, their present Generall. CHAP. II. Wherein a briefe Character of the General and Lievte∣nant-General; The framing of the New-Model; The be∣ginning of their Action at Issip-Bridge, Blechington-house, Bampton-Bush, &c. And the effect these things had on His Majesty at Oxford. CHAP. III. The General with the Army matching into the West; Vpon after advice recalled, and a party only sent to Taunton; Their good successe in the relief of Taunton. Lievtenant General Cromwell defending his Quarters against Goring. CHAP. IV. The Army imployed to besiege Oxford: How far they pro∣ceeded therein. Severall Garisons thereabouts besieged, and some taken. The losse of Leicester, and the Discontents and discouragements that ensued thereon. With a modest en∣quiry into the cause of our low condition at that time. CHAP. V. The Army commanded to rise from before Oxford; Their severall Martches till the Battaile at Naseby, with all the particulars thereof, fully related. CHAP. VI. The Victory at Naseby improved by pursuing the Ene∣my, who fled into Wales: Leicester (not long before taken
by the Enemy) summoned, and after preparations for Storm, urrendred upon Articles, found to be unjust, and the charge retorted on them. An Instance of the Enemies desperate pro∣phanenesse, joyned with Barbarous and Inhumane Cruelty. PART II. Chap. I. His Excellency with the Army, martching Westward to relieve Tauton the second time; taking in Hiworth Gar∣rison by the way: Curbing the Clisbmen, the retaking of Il∣chester, and the brave Fight at Langport. CHAP. II. The Particulars of that gallant Service, the storming of Bridgwater. CHAP. III. The taking of Bath. The Club-mens Reply, and his Ex∣cellencies Rejoynder, in two considerable Actions defeating them. The impregnable Castle of Sherborne taken by Storme. CHAP. IV. The Siege of Bristol, the taking of it, with the Actions that intervened, viz. the taking of Nunny Castle, &c. PART III. Chap. I The Devizes and Laicock-House surrendred: Berkly Castle, after in part stormed, surrendred: With an account of the Counsels that did lead these Actions. CHAP. II. The Counsels whereby the Army steered their course im∣ported. The Reduction of Winchester. CHAP. III. The Motions and Actions of the Army unto Tiverton, The storming and taking of Basing-House fully related.
CHAP. IV. The cheap Reduction of Tiverton Castle, by a strange Providence. The surrender of Langford-House. CHAP. V. Excester straitned in order to a Siege; with severall De∣bates and Resolutions thereabout. CHAP. VI. Severall Passages between the Prince and his Excellen∣cy; and between his Excellency and Goring. Concerning Poul∣drum. the Enemies preparations to relieve Excester, and Ours to meet them, &c. CHAP. VII. The slackening of the Siege of Excester, by the Armies advance to meet the Enemy, (leaving onely a Force to block up the City) With their great successe in those two Actions. The Defeat of the Enemy at Bovey-Tracy, and the taking of Dartmouth; with a particular account of their Martches and lesser Passages. PART IV. Chap. I. The Army returning to the Siege at Excester: Pouldram Castle surrendred: A French Vessell struck into Dartmouth, wherein Letters of consequence from the Queen: How farre the reducing of Excester was endeavoured before a second Diversion. CHAP. II. Our Army a second time diverted from the Siege of Ex∣cester; with a particular account of the Reasons thereof: and the Motions and Actions of the Army occasioned thereby. CHAP. III. His Excellency with the Army advancing into Cornwal, driving the Enemy before them, and possessing their Quar∣ters: A gallant piece of Service performed by Colonel Butler and his Party neer Stratton. Prince Charles giving all for lost by his Excellencies pressing too hard upon them, betakes himself to Scilly: An advantage to the Parliaments Cause by a Packet of Letters from Ireland, taken at Padstow.
CHAP. IV. His Excellency wit the Army driving up the Enemy into Cornwal; A Summons sent to Sir Ralph Hopton and his Forces to come in; with the severall transactions of that Bu∣nesse untill the disbanding of all his Forces, fully related, &c. CHAP. V. The Army returning to the Siege of Excester, with all the Particulars of the Treaty, and surrender of the same. CHAP. VI. The Particulars of the Treaty and surrender of Barnsta∣ble; and the Resolutions and Motions of the Army after the Reduction thereof, till they came to Oxford. CHAP. VII. The Siege of Oxford; the Particulars of the Treaty, and surrender thereof; with the inluence of the Fate of Oxford upon the remaining Garrisons. CHAP. VIII. The Siege and surrender of Worcester and Wallingford. CHAP. IX. Of the Reduction of Ragland Castle and Pendennis. FINIS.
A Table of the Motion and Action of the Army under the Command of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, From April 15. 1645. To August 19. 1646. VVherein is exprest what Battels were fought, what Places of strength were taken, whether by Storm, or Surrender, the number of Slain, of Prisoners, what Ordnance, Arms, and Colours were taken: The name of the Commander in Chief, the day of the Moneth when, the COUNTY where the ACTION was done. The Moneth, and Day The Yeare. Battels fought. Places Relieved, Taken, and particul. ingagements The manner How. Daies of the siege & time of fight. Number of slain in fight or siege. Number of priso∣ners ta∣ken. Number of Ord∣nance taken. Number of Arms. Number of Co∣lours. The chief Commander of ours in each designe. Commanders of the Ene∣mies. The County. Horse. April 15 1645 Rout at Islip By a party of horse. 2 houres 60 200   400 The qu. & 3 others. Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Ear. of Northampton Oxfordshire 500 April 16 1645 Bletchington hous By a party of horse and dragoons. 4 houres   150   450 3 Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Col. Windebanke Oxfordshire 72 April 26 1645 neer Farringdon By a party of horse. 2 houres 10 40   50 3 Col. Io. Fienes   Berkshire 150 April 27 1645 Bampton-Bush By a party of horse. 2 houres   230   200   Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Col. Sir W. Vaughan Oxfordshire 60 May 11 1645 Taunton relieved the first time. By part of the Army. 54 200 slain in the siege. 200   260   Col. Welden General Goring Somersetshire 30 May 22 1645 Oxford foot and horse Routed. By a party of horse.   3 200   200 1 Adjutant Flemming Capt. Gardiner Oxfordshire 12 May 24 1645 Godstow-house quitted   2 10   30   General Fairfax   Oxfordshire 6 June 1 1645 Gaunt-house yielded 3 2 82   100   Col. Rainsborough   Oxfordshire   June 14 1645 Naseby Battell fought in 2 houres 800 4500 12 and two Mort. pices 8000 112 Gen. Fairfax King Charles, Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice. Northamptonshire 200 June 18 1645 Leicester town yielded 3 6   14 2600 8 Gen. Fairfax Lord Hastings Leicestershire 300 June 27 1645 Highworth garris yielded 3 houres 4 70   180 2 Gen. Fairfax Major Hen Wiltshire 12 July 3 1645 Taunton Relieved the se∣cond time. 5 weeks 1000 of the enemies. 400   400   Gen. Fairfax Lord Goring Somersetshire 460 July 8 1645 Ilchester garrison quit 1       18   Gen. Fairfax Col. Phelips Somersetshire   July 1645 Ilmore Fight By a party of horse. 2 houres 50 200   300 9 Major Gen. Massie Lord Goring Somersetshire 300 July 10 1645 Lamport Battell, Lamport Garrison. Fought and quit. 1 60 1600 2 2500 32 Gen. Fairfax Lord Goring Somersetshire 1200 July 13 1645 Burrough hil fort yielded 4 8 151   200   Col. Okey   Somersetshire   July 23 1645 Bridge water stormed 11 30 1600 44 3000 9 Gen. Fairfax Col. Windham Somersetshire 200 July 30 1645 Bath City yielded 1   140 6 400 2 Col. Rich Sir Thomas Bridges Somersetshire 11 August 4 1645 A Club-Army on Hamil∣ton-hill. routed 1 houre 60 400   600 12 Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Master Bravel of Compton. Dorsetshire   August 15 1645 Sherburne Castle Battered and stormed. 16 200 of ours. 340 19 600 2 Gen. Fairfax Sir Lewis Dives Dorsetshire 30 August 20 1645 Nunny Castle yielded 2 5     100   Col. Rainsborough Capt. Turbervile Somersetshire   August 28 1645 Portshotpoint Fo. yielded 6 3   6 140 1 Lieut. Col. Kempson   Somersetshire   Septemb. 10. 1645 Bristol City stormed 18 160 of ours. 200 151 6000 8 Gen. Fairfax Prince Rupert Somersetshire, and Gloucestershire. 20 Septemb. 23 1645 Devizes Castle yielded 7 5   2 400   Gen. Fairfax Sir Charles Lloyde Wiltshire   Septemb. 24 1645 Laicock house yielded 2           Col. Pickering Col. Bovill Wiltshire   Septemb. 25 1645 Barkley Castle stormed 9 40 90 11 500   Col. Rainsborough Sir Charles Lucas Gloucestershire   October 8 1645 Winchester Castle yielded 6 4   7 500   Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Lord Oagle Hantshire   October 14 1645 Basing house stormed 6 40 300 11 500   Leiut. Gen. Cromwel Marq. of Winchester Hantshire 80 October 18 1645 Langford house yielded 1           Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Sir Barth. Pell Wiltshire   October 20 1645 Tiverton castle stormed 6 4 200 4 400 2 Gen. Fairfax Sir Gilbert Talbot Devonshire 20 January 8 1645 Near Barnstaple, quarters beaten up. By a party of horse.     80   100 2 A Captain of the Plimouth Regiment. Sir Allen Apsley Devonshire 80
January 1645 Bowe fight by a party 3 houres   60   100   Sir Hardresse Waller   Devonshire 40 January 9 1645 Bovy-Tracy quarters beaten up. By a party of horse and foot.   12 60   200 one of the K. with C. Lieut. Gen. Cromwel Lord Wentworth Devonshire 350 January 16 1645 Plimouth siege raised. By the advance of the Army.     22 5 left in the works. 80   Gen. Fairfax Major Generall Sir John Digby. Devonshire   January 19 1645 Dartmouth stormed 7 20 800 106 1600 14 Gen. Fairfax Sir Hugh Pollard Devonshire 60 January 25 1645 Poulderhamcastle yielded 1     2 300   Col. Hamond Sir  Meredith Devonshire   February 16 1645 Torrington stormed   60 400 80 ba of powd. fired 1600 9 Gen Fairfax Lord Hopton, Lord Wentworth, Lord Capell. Devonshire 70 February 24 1645 Engagement of horse near Stratton. by a party   12 40   250 4 Col. Butler Major Gen. Web Devonshire 300 February 25 1645 Launceston quitted after dispute. 2 houres 3 160   200   Gen. Fairfax   Cornwall 30 February 28 1645 Saltash garrison quitted       3 left in the works.     Gen. Fairfax   Cornwall   February 29 1645 Lisard Town quitted       3     Gen. Fairfax   Cornwall   March 3 1645 Mount Edgcomb yielded       5     Gen. Fairfax Col. Edgecombe Cornwall   March 3 1645 Foy Town quitted     60 10 140   Gen. Fairfax   Cornwall   March 1645 Castle-Dennis engagement of horse. by a party     100   300   Col. Rich Major Gen. Pert Cornwell 300 March 14 1645 Treaty at Truro Horse disbanded         2000 Colours of horse Gen. Fairfax L. Hopton, L. Wentw. Cornwall 4500 dis∣banded. March 16 1645 Exmouth Fort yielded 46     16     Col. Sir Har. Waller Col. Arundell Devonshire   March 16 1645 Dennis Fort yielded       22 200 2 Gen. Fairfax   Cornwall   April 1646 Corfe castle By stratagem and storm. 48 11   5     Col. Bingham Major Laurence Dorsetshire   April 13 1646 Excester city yielded 180 100 40 75 1500   Gen. Fairfax Sir Iohn Berkley Devonshire   April 15 1646 S Michaels mount yielded 15     15 400   Col. Hamond Sir Arthur Basset Cornwall   April 20 1646 Barnstaple Town, Castle, and Fort. yielded 30 20   35 400   Gen. Fairfax Sir Allen Apsley Devonshire   April 1646 Dunster Castle yielded 150 20   6 200   Col. Blagge Col. Windham Somersetshire   April 1646 Woodstock gar. yielded 20 40   2     Col. Rainsborough Capt. Fawcet Oxfordshire   May 1646 Salcomb Fort yielded 50     8     Col. Welden Col. Fortescue Devonshire   May 1646 Banbury Castle yielded   8   9 600 8 Col. Whaley Sir William Compton Oxfordshire   May 1646 Radcot Fort yielded 15 6   2 140   Col. Saunderson Col. Palmer Berkshire   June 10 1646 Borstall House yielded 18     5 300   Gen. Fairfax Sir William Compton Buckinghamshire   June 24 1646 Oxford City yielded 55 60   300 2000   Gen. Fairfax The Lords of the privy Councell, and Sir Thomas Glemham. Oxfordshire   June 24 1646 Farringdon house yielded 55 40   4 500   Sir Robert Pye Sir William Courtney Oxfordshire   July 22 1646 Worcester City yielded   20   25 1500   Col. Rainsborough Col. Washington Worcestershire   July 27 1646 Wallingford cast. yielded 65 5   7 800 7 Gen. Fairfax Col. Thomas Blagge Berkshire   August 17 1646 Pendennis castle yielded   17   94 860   Col. Fortescue Col. Arundell, and Sir John Digby. Cornwall   August 19 1646 Ragland castle yielded   20   23 500   Gen. Fairfax Marq. of Worcester Munmouthshire   Place this Table between folio 334. and 335.
