S6114A 12165934 55316
A Succinct DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE, Wherein is a CHARACTER OF THE People, Customs, &c. OF THAT KINGDOM. Sent by a Gentleman now Tra∣velling there, to his Friend in England. Dedicated to that Eminent and Learned Physician, Dr. MARTIN LISTER; and may serve as a Supplement to his Journey to Paris. Printed in the Year 1700.
TO THE LEARNED Dr. Martin Lister. SOme ill natured and unthinking Ani∣mals having imbib'd an Opinion that your only Design in publishing your Journey to Paris, was to flatter the French and disparage the English, they made, you know, very undecent Reflections upon that Treatise, represented your Worship as a short sighted, prejudiced Observer, and one that had a greater Esteem and Veneration for Paris than the famous City of London: Which in respect of its healthful and pleasant Situa∣tion, splendid and uniform Buildings, Houses and Shops richly Furnished, wealthy Mer∣chants and Tradesmen, and excellency of its
Government, is Celebrated as a Non-Pareil through the Christian World. But, Sir, as Ignorance is the Parent of Misunderstanding, so they were unhappily led into this Mistake for want of Brains to comprehend your Method in commending and dispraising. For your Abilities in Hi∣story, like the other parts of your great Learning, lying very deep, and out of the Vulgar Track, it is not discernible to every Pur-blind Eye: Whereas better illuminated Apprehensions easily perceiv'd your Inclina∣tion was to give the Preference for London and English-men; for when you spake of the French City and People, your Elogies were Satyrs, your Panegyricks Lampoons, and you always unluckily brought in something that disparag'd what you seem'd to advance, and clouded all the Glory that was thought you intended them in the publication of your Journey. 'Tis true, you say the French Gentry are ve∣ry Civil and Obliging, and I believe no less, though you are pleased to say, They value themselves upon their Courtship, and in making a Leg and Bow better than the rest of Mankind: Building and Dressing mostly for Figure, and that their principal Diversions are only to see and be seen; and this I think, Sir, your Enemies will allow to be no extraordinary Chara∣cter.
You acquaint us, Sir, That their Houses are richly furnished; for they have generally from five to ten distinct Families under every Roof, that the Inhabitants are wealthy in Pictures, and have the Curiosity and Ingenuity to Ruin themselves in that kind of expensive Furniture: Which would be thought a vanity in others; but this, Doctor, is your peculiar knack in com∣mending their Oeconomy. The Buildings in Paris, you say, are very fine, built with rough Stone, Plaister'd over, and Colour'd to make them look like Brick; but at longest, will not stand above five and twenty Years, and then they have the pleasure of building new ones, which must needs be a great satisfaction to the Proprietors. Paris in your Opinion, Sir, is more Popu∣lous than London, but it seems 'tis only in ap∣pearance, because the Palaces and Convents have eat up the Peoples Dwellings, and crowded them so excessively together in the Trading parts of the Town, that they seem more numerous than they are; whereas the Artists and Tradesmen in Lon∣don and Westminster have purchased the No∣blemens Palaces, and converted them into Shops and private Dwellings. The lower Windows in Paris are grated with strong Iron Bars before 'em. But are excelled in that particular also, if you had thought upon't by the two stately Houses over the two West Gates of London. You say also That Paris is a beautiful and convenient
City but the Streets are very narrow, extreamly dirty, and the Passengers on foot no way secured from the hurry and danger of Coaches. Above all, You say their Gardens are very cu∣rious things, and well they may be so, for you are pleased to add as a Character of their Gal∣lantry, That as soon as a Frenchman gets any thing by Fortune or Inheritance, he will lay it out upon a Picture, or an Ornament for his Garden: Though many Utensils and Conveniencies of Life are wanting to him which are common in En∣gland. Their Food in general, you say, Is course Bread and Lettice, but that indifferent Aliment is sup∣ply'd with plenty of Sauce, for you tell us they have abundance of Onions, Leeks, Garlick, Sor∣rel, Shallot, Rocombo's and Mushrooms. Their Hackney-Coaches and Chairs are the most nasty and miserable Voiture [Carriage] that can be, and yet are as dear again as in London; but that misfortune you say, is supply'd by a worse, viz. The Vingrette, which is a Coach with two Wheels, dragg'd by a Man, and push'd be∣hind by a Woman or a Boy, and sometimes by both, which you truly say is a wretched business in so magnificent a City. Their Bishops, say you, make the best Figure in the Town in their Equipages and Liveries, but not in respect of their Learning; for you are pleased to add, That Learning is not so necessary a Qualification there, as with us in England.
Their Churches are numerous, but not big, and very few of them have either Towers or Steeples, though they are the Glory of a Prospect; but at length, Sir, you are pleased to credit the French, and gratifie your Enemies, in saying, They have more manners and Religion than the English; for which, some of your Country-men are resolv'd never to forgive you, though I think they justly ought, for the Characters you bestow on their Monks. Who wear, say you, the Rustick Habits of old Times, without Shirts, or other Linnen Orna∣ments of the present Age. That wantonly Perse∣cute themselves to do violence to Christianity. That feed upon sowre Herbs, Fish, and such kind of Trash, and lie worse, always rough and upon Boards; go bare foot in a cold Country; deny themselves the Comforts of this Life, and wear out their days in a slavish and fruitless Devotion. And this I think may at one for what your Back Friends call an odious Comparison. Thus far, dear Doctor, I have been your Compurgator, and clear'd you from the su∣spicion of being more a French-man than an English-man, which might have been prejudi∣cial to your Practice: And now am become an humble Suitor to you, that since a Friend that is gone a long Journey has oblig'd me with a Succinct and Pleasant View of some parts of France; and largely Supplies in Words at length, where you mince the Mat∣ter, that you would please to take it into
your Protection, and give it the Honour of being Bound up as a Supplement with your Journey to Paris, and you will much oblige, SIR,  Your Humble Servant, Philo-Patriae.
A Succinct Description OF FRANCE, &c. Dear SIR, THE notice of a happy Peace after so tedious a War, tempting our Curi∣osity to take a view of France, of which we have had such different Relations; my self, with several other English Gentle∣men, embark'd at Dover in May, the pleasan∣test Month of the Year, with a fair South West Wind, which had it continued in that Point, would soon have wafted us to the Galick Shoar; but a little toward Night it veering more about to the West, and the Tide not befriending us, our Passage became tedious and troublesom to such Fresh-water Sailers, and we had leisure to see the swelling Waves, by an inbred Ambition, strive which should be the highest; while our Vessel by
a violent agitation of the Wind danc'd a nimble Galiard on the Billows; but that which made the generality of the Passengers in a very uneasy condition, and the Deck and Cabins look like so many Hospitals fill'd with diseased Persons; made the Scaly Inhabitants of that Watry Kingdom sport them∣selves on the surface of the Waves, and dance about our Ketch as if she had been a mov∣ing May-Pole, and acted their Measures with such a delightful Decorum, as if they had been taught to Caper by the best of French Dancing Masters. The next Ebb brought us within sight of the Sea Coast of Normandy; A Descrip∣tion of Norman∣dy. a Shoar so evenly composed and levelled, that it looks like the work of Art, and not of Nature. The first Inhabitants of this Country came Anno 800. Originally from Norway, Soldiers of For∣tune, and so terribly spoil'd the Maritine Coasts of England, France and Holland, that, A furore Normannorum was inserted into the Letany; but now being Conquer'd by the French, and enslaved under that Monar∣chy, they are utterly crest fallen, have lost both their Courage and their Liberty, and nothing remains among them now of their Progenitors, but a penurious Pride, and an ungovernable Surliness. The next Tide landed us at Deipe in Nor∣mandy. The Town of Diepe. A Town seated on an Arm of the Sea, between two Hills, which are a Security to the Harbour, and a Strength to the Town; but avail'd them little against the Courage of the English, and the Force of their Bombs, whose Injuries they were now Repairing. The
number of the Inhabitants were formerly ac∣counted about 30000, whereof 9000 of them were of the Protestant Religion; and the Church of Argues, a Village about two Miles from Deipe was allowed them for the Exercise of their Religion; but since the Persecution they are all dispersed, and the want of them greatly Lamented. Here we were Eye Witnesses of the Idola∣try of the Papists, Popish Ido∣latry. in paying divine Honour to things Inanimate: We saw the Hoast or Sacrament carried through the Streets, by a couple of Priests, under a Canopy, usher'd by two or three Torches, and followed by a Com∣pany of Idle Boys and old People: Before it, was carried a Bell continually Tinkling, to warn the People that their God was carrying by, and expected their Reverence, which was paid by all that met it, by falling on their Knees, Raising their Heads, and giving it Honour: Tho' methinks not with so much Devotion, as I should have done, if I had be∣lieved it, as they do, to be the Body of my Saviour. But I find its the Common practice of this Country, Their Tra∣velling Chariots and Horses. for the Laity as well as the Clergy to impose upon Mens Eyes and Understandings; for we designing to Travel towards Rouen, and Horses being not to be had for Money, and the War between the two Nations, and the Ruins of Deipe, were so fresh in their Me∣mories we could not expect them for Love, we were forc'd to make use of the common Conveyance, and that was in a Cart; but for fear of Offending, forsooth, in spite of our Teeths, tho' we saw it was a Cart, we must
call it Une Chariot, and to please them so we did, tho' we thought it fit for no Tri∣umph, but that of a French-man. To this Cart (Chariot I mean) were fastened three things, that had been Horses in their time, but were now skelitoniz'd into Carcases, or Images of Horses, without life or motion. When we were mounted they began to Crawl, for go they could not, however it convinc'd me they had life, tho' I thought it would hold out no longer, than to carry them to the next Pack of Hounds. Thus ac∣commodated A la mode de France, we took our leaves of Deipe, and wagg'd so slowly towards Roven, that we thought our Journey was a perfect Emblem of the motion of the Ninth Sphere, which was Forty Nine Thousand Years in finishing; but this was not all our Calami∣ty; the Rain fell on us through our Tilt, which for the many Holes in it, might more truly have been call'd a Net. The Dirt broke plenti∣fully upon us, through the Rails of our Chariot, and the unproportionable pace of it, started al∣most every Bone of our Bodies. I wonder how a French-man, that commonly carries the Disease of his Country about him, durst ad∣venture his crasy Carcass in it. Thus we endu∣red all the infelicities of a Journey, and escaped three several Deaths, Drowning, Choaking with Mire, and Breaking of the Wheel; besides the fear of being Famish'd before we came to our Inn, which was six French Miles from us. Not to mention the Beggarly Villages we dragled through, The Town and the Inn at Tostes. we came at last to Tostes, the place destin'd for our Lodging; a Town like the Worser sort of our Market Towns in
England. There our Chariotier brought us to the Ruins of a House, an Alehouse I would scarce have thought it, but in complement to the Nation, it must be cald an Inn; yes, and an Honourable one too, as Don Quixots Host told him. Despair of finding in this Nasty hole, either Bedding or Victuals, I was in the Mans mind that chose Hanging, rather than Marry a foul Queen that Beg'd him; and was often ready to say, Drive on Carman. The truth on't is, I fell out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire. A Course Fac'd Tatterdemalion belonging to the House, The Cham∣ber. brought us into a Room as Dark and as Damp as a Charnel-House; only toward the Orchard there was a Melancholy kind of a Hole, which in Days of Yore, had been a Window, but now both Frame and Glass were vanish'd: However by the Light that came in, I could easily perceive I was not in England. In the Chamber were three Beds, The Bedds and Sheets. if it be Lawful to call them so, that were bottom'd with Straw, so closely squeez'd together, that the Wool-Packs, in the House of Lords, in respect of these were Swans-Down. On this Straw Huddle lay a Medly of Flocks and Feathers, sewed up in an English cast Hop-Sack▪ so ill ordered, that they stuck up like the Knobbs of a Crab-Tree Cudgel, and we were obliged to our Flesh, that one Nights Lodg∣ing did not wear our Bones out. The Sheets they brought us, were so Course, that in my Conscience, a Sailer would have refused them for a Hammock, and I heartily wish'd I could have exchang'd them for an English Horse-Cloath;
the Coverlid so course and Bare, that if a Man would have undertaken to have counted the Threds, he need not have miss'd One of the Number. The Table Linnen was of the same Com∣plexion, The Table Linnen. so Foul and Dirty, that I could not think it had been wash'd above once, since it grew in the Hemp ground, and yet the poor things had as brisk a French Air, as if they had been promised for the next whole Year, to escape a Scouring. By this Description of an Inn, you may guess Sir, at all the rest in France. Some are not altogether so wretch∣ed, yet the alteration is almost insensible. Let us now walk into the Kitchin, The Kitch∣ing and Provision for Supper. and see what's for Supper, and here, Sir, we found a most terrible Execution, committed upon the body of a Pullet. Our Hostess, cruel Woman as she was, had cut the Throat of it, and without plucking off the Feathers, tore it into pieces, and then took off the Skin and Feathers together, as we strip Rabbets in Eng∣land, clapt it into a Pan, and Fricasized it into a Supper. After which Repast we had a Sight of our Hostess, Our Hostes and her Daughter. and her Daughter, at which we blest our Souls, and march off, lest the fulsom in∣terview should have brought up what we had eaten; for such a couple of dirty Queans was never seen in England, unless in a Dust Cart, or among the Gold Finders at Mid∣night. Horace's Salutation, O mater pulchra filia pulchrior, was never so seasonable as here. Not to honour them with a fairer Character let this suffice, that their Persons kept so per∣fect a Decorum with the House and Furniture,
that 'tis pitty they should be parted. But this is not the luck of the Women of Nor∣mandy only, for through all France their Faces and their Linnen are the best Guards of their Chastity: They are all forc'd to be contented with a very little Beauty, and she which with us would be slighted as an Antidote, or a meer dirty Doudy, would pass with them for a Beautiful Princess; but more of the Women when we come to Paris. In their Habits the Normand Women dif∣fer from the rest of France. The Womens Habits in Norman∣dy. The Attire of their Heads, hangs down their Backs like a Vail, and looks like a Superannuated Dish-Clout, turn'd out of Service, or the corner of a Table Cloath, that never had been wash'd. Being ready to leave our Quarters in the Mor∣ning, we found our selves in a throng of Ill Faces, all Whining out Pour les Servantes, and our bounty was like giving a Dole, at a Rich Mans Funeral, you could not say when you had done giving, there were so many of them; and herein only was our Advantage, that their Ambition reaches no higher than a Sou a penny, and he that gives more over∣bids their Expectation, and shall be counted a Prodigal. But of all the Gallantries of France, The Men Servants. com∣mend me to the Men-Servants in their Inns, the Raggedst regiment that ever Eyes beheld, their cloths full of Patches, or open to their Skins, and by the habits of the Attendants, a man would be tempted to think he had been lodg'd in a Goal. Bid one of them give you a Cloth to wipe your hands, and he will reach you the Curtain of the Bed: Bid him wipe
the Table, or your Bootes, he has still recourse to the Curtains, and they perform all their Offices, with their Hats on their Heads to which French Custom I profess my self an open Enemy; for tho' Jack speaks French, I can∣not allow Jack to be a Gentleman. Now we set out for Rouen: Rouen de∣scribed. The whole journey was six French Miles, and our Cart was Ten hours in dragging us thither: Excellent speed; and would have wore out the patience of the Mad Duke, that undertook without. Staff, Whip, or Goad, to drive two Snails from Milan to Mosco.. Rovenis scituate in a plea∣sant Valley on the River Sein; the Houses are high, in some places Wood, in others Stone, and some of both, without uniformity or or Beauty. What remains of the Bridge is a fine piece of Work, and the River is about the breadth of the Thames at Fulham. Be∣tween the Town-Wall, and the River is their Exchange, a place paved with smooth Pebble-stones about a hundred yards long, in breadth twenty, and is a fine walk in Fair-Weather, and in Wet, you must seek another. In this Town are Thirty two Parish Chur∣ches, besides Abbies, and Religious houses, of which the most beautiful is that of St. And Ooven, the Seat and Church of the Arch Bishop is Nostre Dame, more gorgeous on the out side, than Beautiful or Rich with∣in. Behind the High Altar is the Remains of the Duke of Bedford's Tomb, sometimes Regent of France, which was Defaced out of pure spight to his memory long since his Death, that made all France tremble when he was alive. East ward of this Church is
our Lady's Chappel, a pretty neat piece of Work, but disfigur'd within by Lying Imagery. The House of Parliament is in the form of a Quadrangle, a very stately and graceful Pile of Building; that at Paris is but a Chaos, or Bauble to it; and the Palace of the Loure, has nothing in it comparable to this goodly Edifice. In our Journey from Rouen we were bet∣ter accommodated than when we came thi∣ther; we were preferred Ab Asinus ad Equos, Our Jour∣ney thither, and how ac∣commoda∣ted. from a Cart to a Waggon, the French call it a Coach, by the same Figure that they call'd a Cart a Chariot. These Waggons are the common Conveniences for Travel, and are like a Gravesend-Tiltboat, seldom without a Knave or a Gilt in them. A Man might here be very merry, in a mixture of all Sexes, Na∣tions, Qualities and Languages, if the Fears of catching the Itch, or being Lowsy, did not disturb it. Through a pleasant and Plenti∣ful Country of all things but Vines, and through many a miserable Village, we came that night to St. Clare, Ten French Miles from Rouen. A Poor Town God wot it is, St. Clare, and the Po∣verty of the People. and has no∣thing in it Remarkable, but the extream Po∣verty, and miserable Slavery of the People, who Reap the best Wheat, and yet eat the blackest Bread, who make the best Syder and Perry, and yet are forc'd to drink Water; for the King's Taxes, and their Lord's extorted Rents, eat up all the Fruits of their Labours, and leave them nothing but Hunger and Nakedness.
On the Road I counted Threescore and Fourteen Persons barefoot, before I saw one that had Shooes on, and they were made of Wood too, which made me often cast a mournful look towards Old England, for lea∣ving it, and think how happy we were in respect of this miserable People. In our further Progress we had leisure to behold Mante, Mante, and the ad∣jacent Coun∣try. and the Vines about it: They are Planted like our Hop Gardens, and grow up by the help of Poles, but not so high. They are kept with little cost, and yeild pro∣fit to the Husbandman, sufficient to make him Rich, had he neither King nor cruel Land∣lord. The Wine made here is very harsh and unpleasant, and differs as much in sweetness from the Wines of Paris and Orleans, as their Language does in Elegancy. The Town of Mante, might be thought strong before the Invention of great Guns, having a Ditch, a Wall, and at every Gate a Draw-Bridge, and are still strong enough to Guard their Pullen from the Fox, and secure their Houses in the night from foreign Burglaries. The last Town of Normandy towards Paris is Pontoise, Pontoise, once belong∣ing to Eng∣land. one of the strongest Bulwarks in France, as being a Frontier. In it are two fair Abbies, Maubuisson and St. Martin: Six Parish Churches, of which Nostre Dame is the most Beautiful. This Country was once in the possession of the English, by a better Title than that of the Sword. William the first, Annext it to England, and it continued an Appendix to that Crown, from the Year 1067, till 1204.
Having pass'd through Pontoise and cross'd the River, we entred into France, The Isle of France de∣scribed. so call'd by Meroveus, Grandchild of Pharamond, and first King of the Francones, who in the Wars between the Romans and the Gothes took it, and made Paris the Seat of his Empire. This Isle, or Portion of Gaul, was the Seat of the Franks at their first coming thither, the rest of Gallia is rather subdued by the French than Inhabited: Conquest having taken in those Countries they never planted, for the least part of old Gallia is in the hands of the French, the Normans, Britans, Biscaines, Gas∣coines, Goths, (of Languedock and Provence) Burgundians, and the Antient Gaules of Poictou, retaining in it such ample possessions: So that the French only possess some part of Old Gallia, and are Masters of the Rest. But that which seems very Strange is, that tho' the old Gauls be in a manner worn out, their Survivors should inherit their humors and conditions, being composed of so many several Countries and Originals. The present French are nothing but the old Gaules moulded into a New Name, The Chara∣cter of a French Man. and are as Rash, Hairbrain'd, and Hedstrong now, as when Julius Caesar wrote his Commentaries. A Nation that may be won with a Feather, and lost with a Straw. At first sight a French∣man is as Familiar with you as your Sleep, or the necessity of breathing. An hours Con∣ference Endears him to you, in the second you open his breast, and the third you pump out all his Secrets as faithfully, as to his Fa∣ther Confessor; and then you may lay him aside, for he is no longer serviceable; If you
retain him longer, he himself will make a Seperation: He has said over his Lesson to you, and now must find out some body else to re∣peat it to; and Fare him well, for he is a Gar∣ment, that if you wear above two Days to∣together, he will grow Scandalously Thread∣bare. He has a good opinion of himself, and thinks he has as much Wit as he wants, and more than all the World besides, and this and the shallowness of his brains makes him so Exceptious, and Touchy, that upon the least distast he draws his Sword: In a Minute puts it up again, and then if you beat him into better Manners, he takes it with a bundance of Patience, and cries out Vostre Serviteur tres humble. In this one thing they too much re∣semble the Devil; Submission makes them Insolent, and Resistance makes them Recreants, for they always Grin like Wolves, or Fawn like Spaniels; and the Spark is nothing but a Puff-past vanity, in a New Antick Fashion. His Table at a Feast, His Table. is loaded with large Dishes of Porrage, but very scarce of Meat. I speak not of the Paisant, for they know not what it is, but of the Gentleman. Their Beef is cut into Chops, and that which passes there for a great Dish of Meat, would be thought with us but a Three-penny-cut, or a Sisers Commons. A Loin of Mutton, makes three Substantial Roastings, besides a large Pipkin full of Pottage, made of the Rump and a Single Trotter. Of Fowl they have great Plenty, viz. foul Houses, foul Dishes, foul Wo∣men, and foul every thing.
The great Skill of their Cooks consists in spoiling their Meat, and making High Sauces: Their Cooks, and Cook∣ing. Famishing the Belly to gratify the Pallat, and the Slovenly usage of their Butchers Meat, will at any time give an English Man a Dinner. 'Tis now time to sit down, and whisper your own Grace to your self; for private Graces are as fashionable here, as private Masses, and from thence I suppose they learnt them. That done, fall on where you like best; they observe no method in their Eating, and if you expect to be Carv'd for, you will rise fasting. When you are Risen, if you can digest the Sluttishness of the Cookery, which is abomi∣nable at first sight, till hunger has forc'd you to it, you may be trusted in a Garrison, for nothing afterward will be Nauseous. The French Lauguage is indeed very Smooth and Courtly, it is cleared of all harshness, The French Language. by cutting off the Consonants, which makes it fall from the Tongue very Volubly; yet, in my opinion, 'tis rather Elegant than Copius; and therefore is much embarass'd for want of Words to find out Periphases. It is express'd very much in Action: The Head, Hands, Body, Shoulders, and Grimace, all concur in a Modish Pronunciation, and he that would speak it with a Bonne Grace, must have much in him of the Mimick. It is enrich'd with a great number of Significant Proverbs, an ex∣traordinary help to the French Humor of Scoffing, and is very full of Courtship, if they did not Debase it by prostituting their Com∣plements in too familiar a use of them; for the poor Village Cobler has all his Cringes, and his Eau benist de Cour, his Court-Holy Wa∣er,
tas ready, and in as great Perfection as the Prince of Conde. In all their Passado's of Courtship, Their Court∣ship and Comple∣ments. they com∣port themselves with much variety of Gesture, and 'twould be worth your Patience, were it customary among Gentlemen of other Nations; but the Affectation of it is bauld and Ridicu∣lous: Besides they undervalue their Courtship, in bestowing the highest Titles upon persons of the meanest condition: The Begger begets Monsieurs and Madams to his Sons and Daugh∣ters, as familiarly as the King of France, and he can scarce put up the Affront, not to be thought a Gentleman. His Discourse commonly runs on two Wheels, Their Dis∣course and Gallantry! Treason or Ribaldry: In the first he Abuses his Prince, and the Court, and in the other himself, in boasting of the many Women he says he has Prostituted. Foolish Braggadocia's, by whom each Debauchery is twice committed, in the Act, and in boast∣ing of his Filthiness. By themselves they measure others, accounting them Idects and mean Soul'd Wretches, that don't Unman themselves in these Beastialities. This brings me to speak of the French Wo∣men, The Cha∣racter of French Woman. who are generally of an Indifferent Stature, their Bodies Strait, and their Wasts small, but whether of this shape by Nature or Art, I am not able to Determine, for their Shoulders and Backs are so broad, that they hold no Proportion with their Middles. Their Hands are the best Ornaments of their Bodies, long white and Slender, and were their Faces agreeable, an English Eye might think them tolerable; but here I meet with a Contra∣diction,
for the Hand that is the best part of the Structure, in the generality of Maids that we saw, and their Wrists, were so over run with Scabs, that you would have thought them Leapers. Their Hair is black even to a Fault, their Faces become their Hair, as a Field Argent does a Sable Bearing, and Don Quixot did not so meritoriously assume the Name of the Knight of the ill favour'd Face, as these Damo∣seiles do; which confirm'd me in the opinion, that England was not only a Paradice for Wo∣men in respect of their Privileges, but also a Paradise of Women, in Respect of their Per∣fections. You cannot collect a better Character of a French-woman, Continually Babling. than from her continual Pra∣ting and Babling, which is tedious, trouble∣some and infinite, and you will sooner want Eares than she a Tongue. Horace's Eternal Bab∣ler, in his Ninth Satyr, was but a Puny to her. Had Aristotle been acquainted with her, it would have saved him a great deal of Labour in searching after a Perpetual Motion, and it would have freed him from a Heresy which still infects his Doctrin, and that is Quicquid movetur, ab alio movetur; for their Tongues moves themselves, and make their own oc∣casions of discoursing. When they are going they are like a Pendulum Watch, you need not Wind them up above Once in Eight and Forty Hours, for so long will the Chain of their Clacks be Unwinding. A Madam of Paris came with us in a Waggon from Rouen: Fourteen hours were we together, of which time, I'le be sworn upon a Book, her Tongue fretted away Eleven hours and Fifty seven
Minutes; such Everlasting Talkers are they all, that they will want Breath sooner than Words, and are scarce Silent in the Grave. As they are Endless in their Talk, Their Dis∣course, Fa∣miliar and Smutty. so are they regardless of the Company they Speak in, Stranger or Acquaintance, 'tis all one to them; tho' indeed no man is a Stranger to them, for in the first hour they ever saw you, they will be as familiar and merry with you, as if they had been at your Mother's Labour. Some of them I believe are Chast, but you will hardly think so by their Behaviour. They abound with Laughter and Toying, and are never without Smutty Songs, which they chant in all Company whatsoever; insomuch that you would think Modesty had never been there, or was quite banished the Country. Maids and Wives are both sick of this Disease, tho' not both so desperately. The Ladies of the Court, I am told, as far exceed them in Gamesomness, as they do in the Dignities of their Places, and, I hear, if Modesty were the best Apparel for Women, many Court Ladies would be Thinly Cloath'd, or else go Na∣ked. They Rail at the Custom of Saluting English Women with a Kiss, Their Rai∣lery at Eng∣lish Womens being Salu∣ted. and say, A Woman that will be Kiss'd, is half Whored; which makes them very sparing of receiving such Kind∣nesses; but this is only a dissembled Un will∣ingness, for these Damoiselles will hardly re∣fuse a Man's Bed, tho' Education has taught them to fly from his Lips; Night, and the Curtains may conceal the one, the other can obtain no Pardon in the Eye of such as happen to observe it. Upon this ground
your French Traveller, that perhaps may see his Hostess kiss'd at Dover, and see a Gentle∣man salute a Lady in the Streets of London, relates at coming Home, strange Chymera's of the English Modesty. To encourage this Opinion, French Boasting, and being Bubled. he tells his Comrades what Merchants Wives he enjoy'd at London, and with how much familiarity he was entertain'd by a Lady at Westminster, when all is gross Slander, and the Fop was Bubled: For when the Monsieurs come over with their Pockets full of Lewis d' Or's, the French Pimps in London that wait for such Booties, grow into their Acquaintance, and promise the Heated Fops the Embraces of such a choice a Beauty in the City, or of such a Lady of the Court; but as Ixion expected Juno, and embraced a Cloud, so those beguiled Wretches, instead of the Eminent Persons named to them, take into their Bosoms a com∣mon prostituted Crack of the Town, and are cheated by their own Country Pandors. I return again to the French Women, The Liberty allowed to French Women in being Courted. and tho' I must not kiss them, which every one that sees them will have good cause to bless his Starrs for; yet they are at Liberty to be Courted, and have a greater Freedom in this, than a moderate Wisdom would allow them. Five Meals a day, and being Courted at Church, and even in the presence of her Husband are her Jura Conjugalia, and they will walk Arm in Arm about the Streets, or in the Fields, with their Privado, without the least Suspicion, or Imputation; which, considering their Consti∣tutions, is a Liberty somewhat of the largest, and yet they enjoy it both Maids and Mar∣ried
Women. And so I take my leave of the French-men and Women so much extold, for all those Graces that may Enoble and Adorn both Sexes, by some of our English Travel∣lors; for my part I can discern nothing in them, or about them to be Admired, or En∣vyed them, but their Country. As soon as we were over the Brigde of Pon∣toise, The Isle of France. we entred into the Isle of France, upon the Plain of a Mountain; but such a Fruit∣ful one, as is not to be equall'd by any Val∣ley out of France; for if ever Nature was Pro∣digal of her Blessings, or scattered them with an over plentiful hand, it was in this Island. For three Miles together the Vines grew up in an equal Height, and afford better Wine than Normandy, or Gascoin, indeed the best on the Continent, Orleans excepted; and yet this was but a Scrap to stay our Stomachs, lest we should Surfeit in the Valley. Where we beheld Nature in her chiefest Glory. The Valley of Mont∣marancy. The Fields interchangeably planted with Wheat and Vines, beautified here and there with Cherry-Trees, which gratified the Eye, with such a pleasant Object, and a de∣lightful Mixture of Colours, that no Art could have expressed it self more delectably. To which I may add that the River Seine here di∣vided it self into lesser Channels, to make it look like the Garden of Eden. It is call'd the Val∣ley of Montmarency, which gives a Name to the Town, and the Duke of Montmarency, the An∣tientest House of Christendom, who stile them∣selves the First Christian, and the Eldest Ba∣ron of France, and has yielded more Consta∣bles,
Mareschals and Admirals to this Crown, than any three others in the Kingdom. The most eminent place in this Isle, Mont Mar∣tyr. is Mont Martyr, about a Mile from Paris, where, when Gaul was Heathen, many of the Faith∣ful were Martyred, and from thence derived its Name. Among others, which here re∣ceived the Crown of Martyrdom, none more famous than St. Denis (said to be Dionysius A∣reopagita) the first Bishop of Paris, under the Reign of Domitian, whose Crime was refu∣sing to Bow before the Altar of Mercury, and not offering Sacrifice to that Idol, at the com∣mand of Hesubinus, Governour of Paris. Of St. Denis, the Patron, St. Denis and his Mi∣racle. or Tutelary Saint of France, the Legend relates strange Won∣ders, as namely, when the Executioner had struck off his Head, he took it up in his Arms, and ran with it down the Hill, with as much speed as his Legs could carry him. Half a Mile from the Place of his Execution he sate down, rested, and did so nine times in all, till he came to the place where the Church is now built that is Dedicated to him, and there he fell down and dyed, which is about three En∣glish Miles from Mont Martyr, and there he was Buried, together with Rusticus his Arch-Priest, and Elutherius his Deacon, who not being able to go so fast as he did, were brought after by the People. O Impudentia admirabilem, & vere Romanam; and yet so far was the succeeding Age poison'd with a be∣lief of this Miracle, that in the nine several Places where he is said to have rested, so ma∣ny handsome Crosses of Stone are erected to perpetuate this Ridiculous Story.
To the Memory of this Saint, St. Denis's Church by whom Con∣secrated, Dagobert built a Temple, after Ages added a Town to it, and some of the succeeding Kings of France encompassed it with a Wall, but so dispro∣portionable, that it looks like a Spaniards lit∣tle Face with a two handed Ruff about it. The Temple being finish'd, a Bishop was sent for in all hast to Consecrate it; but our Sa∣viour came the Night before with the Apo∣stles, Angels and Martyrs, and Blessed the Church himself, cured a Leper that lay in it, and bid him tell the Bishop that the Church was already Consecrated. Auditam admissi Ri∣sum teneatis? You may laugh at it if you please, but I assure you this is the Story, such Ridiculous Stuff did the Monks and Fry∣ars of those Times invent to please and blind the People, and so prone were our Ancestors to believe as Oracles whatsoever was deliver∣ed by these Impostors. Now Sir, The Relicks in St. De∣nis's Church. I should shew you the Relicks, but you must have patience till the Clerk has put on his Surplice; for I perswade my self, that the Surplice without the Clerk, could Marshal the Relicks as orderly as the Clerk without the Surplice. As soon as he was Sad∣led and Equipt for his Journey, he put him∣self into the Road, and march'd on so nimbly, there was no keeping of him Company. His Tongue run so fast, that the quickest Eye was fain to give him over in plain Ground; the Fellow that shews the Tombs at Westminster, being no more to be compared to him for the Volubility of his Chops, than a Capouchin to a Jesuite. Yet as we learn'd of him after∣ward
when he was out of his Road and For∣malities, they were thus disposed. On the right hand of the Altar are said to be kept One of the Nails that fastned our Sa∣viour to the Cross. Secondly, a piece of the Cross it self. Thirdly, some of the Virgin Mary's Milk. Fourthly, the Arm of St. Simon set in a Case of Gold; and Fifthly, the Relicks of St. Lewis reserv'd in a little Chappel of Gold also. On the left hand was shew'd us the Head of St. Denis, and part of his Body; or rather the Pourtraiture of it in Gold; for the Head was said to be within it. A Reve∣rend Old Man he appear'd to be, tho' I can't believe that the rich Crown'd Miter that he wears there now, was the same he wore when he was living. One Relick is there, to which I hope, they won't allow Adoration, and that was Judas's Lathorn when he went to apprehend his Master. A pretty one I con∣fefs it is, Studded with Chrystal, through which the Light cometh, the Substance be∣ing not Transparent. Had it been shew'd me in the first Century, I might perhaps have been Fool'd into a belief of it; for I am consident it can be no older. However, I will believe it to be a Lanthorn, though I cannot believe it ever belong'd to Judas; but more of Relicks when we come to Paris. From the Relicks of Martyrs let us proceed to those of their Kings, The Relicks of French Kings in the same Church. and among those there is nothing that will long detain an En∣glish-man. He that has seen the Tombs at West∣minster will think the best of these to be but Trifles. The chief of these mean ones are those of Henry II. and Katherine of Medices,
his Wife, in a little Chappel of her own building, both in full Proportion in their Royal Habiliments. Here is also a neat Tomb of the same Henry, all of Brass, supported by four Brass Pillars, his Statue of the same Mettal in a Praying Posture; but the chief beauties of the Church are in the Treasury, as the Sword of Joan the Virgin, Charles the Great, Rowland his Couzen, and that of Hen∣ry IV. when he was Crowned, with his Boots, Spurs and Scepter. Here is also a Cross of pure Gold three Foot high, a Crown, Scep∣ter and Golden Ball, given by Pope Adrian to Carolus Magnus. A Crown of Gold set with Diamonds and Precious Stones, given by Charles Martell, after his Victory over the Sa∣razens. A fair Chalice all of Gold, in which St. Denis is said to have Consecrated the Sacra∣mental Wine. The other of lesser moment I omit, and take my leave of St. Denis's Church, and walk on to Paris. There is a great bussle among ancient Au∣thors, Paris its Names and Scituation. from whence this name Paris is deriv'd, which I shall not waste time about, for I find the names of great Cities are as obscure as those of their Founders, and the Conjectural Deri∣vations of them are sometimes rather plausible than probable, and sometimes neither. The other name of this City is most Ancient, and most proper, as taken from its Scituation, and call'd Lutetia, from Lutum, Dirt, as being seated in an exceeding clammy, dirty Soil, but in a very Fruitful Country, and the River Seine, by Transporting Merchants Goods in Boats from the Ships, which lie fifteen Miles distant from the City, does much enrich it.
It is in Compass about ten Miles, or scarce so much, Circular in its figure, and is a fair and goodly City, yet nothing like the mira∣cle that some would make it; for was the fi∣gure of London altered, and all the Houses cast into a Ring, as it is a much Sweeter, so it would be a more Magnificent and better City than that of Paris. It lies Commodiously in a Plain, flat and level, where are no Hills to annoy it, and therefore might be made impregnable. As for the Fort near St. Austin's Gate, The Bastile cal∣led the Bastile, said to be built by the English when they were Lords of Paris, 'tis too little to Protect the Town, and too low to Com∣mand it, and serves only for a Prison to the better Sort that have no more Wit than to be Taken. Paris is no strong Place, and if Hen∣ry IV. lay so long before it with his Army, it was not because he could not take it, but be∣cause he would not. He was loth as the Lord Biron advised him, to receive the Bird naked, which he expected ere long with all its Fea∣thers, and this Answer he gave the Lord Wil∣loughby, who undertook to force an Entry into it. The Streets are of a competent breadth, The Streets of Paris. well Pitch'd under Foot with fair large Pebbles by Philip Augustus, Anno 1223. before which time it was miserable Dirty, and almost un∣passable, and as it is now, every little Rain makes it very stippery and dangerous, and a continuance of warm Weather makes it stink horribly, and becomes very Poisonous, but whether it proceeds from the nature of the Ground, the Sluttishness of the People in their
Houses, or the neglect of the Scavengers, or from all of them, I will not determine. This I am confident of, that the nastiest Lane in London or Westminster, is Frankencense and Juniper to the sweetest Streets in Paris. The ancient By-word was, It stains like the Dirt of Paris; but had I power to make a Proverb, I would change it into, It stinks like the Dirt of Paris, and then the By word would be ten times more Orthodox; for though I have said something of the strength of the Town, and its Fortification, without doubt, the Venom of the Streets, and the Sluttery of the People, is a greater security to the Town, than all the Ditches, Forts, Towers and Bulwarks that be∣long to it. 'Twas therefore not injudiciously said of an English Gentleman in Railery, The strong∣est City in Europe. that Paris was the strongest Town in Europe, alluding to the noisom smells, for it is a Place of such strange Qualities, that you can't live in it in Summer without danger of being Suffocated with stink, nor in Winter without myring. The Buildings, The Houses and Signs in Paris. I confess, are Handsom and Uniform to the Streetward, but London is much finer, and the Houses better furnish'd and contriv'd, Their Houses are distinguish∣ed by Signs, as with us, and under every Sign is written in Capitals what Sign it is, nor is it more than needs, for to tell that this is a Cock, and this a Bull, was never more requi∣site in the Infancy of Painting, than now in this City; for so hideously, and without Re∣semblance to the thing signified, are most of their Signs, that I may without danger say, if a Hen would not scratch better Pictures on a
Dunghill, than they hang out before their Doors, I would send her to my Hostess at To∣stes to be Executed. The chief Artists in Paris. The Artificers in Paris are a slovenly Generation in their Trades, as well as in their Houses; and Barbers, Fidlers, Dan∣cers and Taylors, are the only fine Fellows a∣mong them. Their most curious Artists are Makers of Combs, Tweezers, Tooth-Picks and Comb-Brushes. Their Mercers are but one de∣gree above Pedlers, and Lumbard-street has more Goldsmiths in it than this whole City and Suburbs. Merchants they have not many, nor wealthy, and that one should give twenty thou∣sand Pound with a Daughter, as in England, was never heard of in this Kingdom. The Town subsists by the King's Court, How the Town sub∣sists. and the great Resort of Advocates and Clients to the Chambers of Parliament, and without these two Crutches, Paris would get such a vile Halting 'twould scarce be able to stand. If you credit their Apparel, Their Riches. and judge of their Estates by their Cloths, you would think them worth Millions; but alass you don't know them, for when a French-man has his best Cloths on, he is in the middle of his E∣state, and carries his Lands and Tenements a∣bout him. Paris is divided into four parts. La Ville, Paris con∣sists of four Parts. the City, lying on this side the River Seine. La Universite, and that which they call the Cite, situate between both the Streams, in a little Island, and the Suburbs, which they call the Faux Bourgs, severed a pretty distance from the City, and are distinct Bodies from it. The greatest part of the Houses in them are Old and without Uniformity. The Faux
Bourg of St. Jaques is indifferent, and excel∣led by that of St. Germain. The Faux Bourg of St. Martin is commended for the great Pest-House in it, built by Henry IV. Quadran∣gularly. 'Tis large and capacious, and at a distance, (for it is not safe venturing nigh, or within it.) It looks more like a King's Palace than the King's Palace it self. The best of all the Suburbs is St. Germain's, and has a good Abby in it that maintains 120 Monks. 'Twas built by Childerick, Anno 542. and Dedica∣ted to St. Vincent, but since, has chang'd its Name to St. Germain, from a Bishop of Paris, who was buryed in it; besides this, there is in it a Magnificent Palace, scarce to be fellow'd in Europe, 'tis called Luxenbourg Palace, and another call'd the Prince of Conde's Palace. In the Ville, The Govern∣ment of Paris. or Town of Paris, are Thir∣teen Parish Churches, Seven Gates, and is Govern'd by two Provosts. The Provost de Paris, and le Provost des Merchands, and the place of Judicature is the Grand Castolet, and l' Hostelle de Ville. The Provost of Paris has to his Assistance three Lieutenants, the Criminal, the Civil, and the Particuleir, which supplies in the absence of the other; besides other Officers more than a good many. The Pro∣vost of the Merchands, whose business is to preserve the Privileges of the Citizens, is assi∣sted by the two Eschevins, as Sheriffs, twenty four Counsellors, and a Procurator, like the Common-Council and Recorder of London, whose Habits are half Red, and half Sky-Colour'd. This Provost is generally belov'd by the Citizens, as the Conservator of their Liberties, and the others fear'd and hated, as
the Judges of their Lives, and the Tyrants of their Estates. In this Ville is also the Kings Arsenal, The Arse∣nal. or Magazine of War, begun by Henry II. and finish'd by Charles IX. to which has been ma∣ny considerable Additions since. Here is also the Place Royal, The Place Royal. built in form of a Quadrangle, every Square being seventy two Fathoms long, the Materials Brick of di∣vers Colours, which makes it very pleasant, but less durable. It is Cloister'd round like the Royal Exchange of London. It is situate in the old Tilt Yard, a place famous and fatal for the Death of Henry II. who was slain there with the Splinter of a Launce, as he was Tilt∣ing with the Earl of Montgomery, a Scotch∣man. The University of Paris is seated on the fur∣thermost Branch of the Seine, The Uni∣versity. is little inferiour to the Ville in bigness, but all its Learning is not able to free it from the Noisomness of the other. It has but six Parish Churches, and eight Gates, but many Religious Houses. It was Founded by Charles the Great, Anno 792. at the perswasion of Alivine an Oxford man, Scholar of Venerable Bede, who brought with him Rabanus Maurus, John Duns, Sir∣named Scotus, and Claudus, who was also cal∣led Clement, three of his Con-disciples, who were the first Readers there, and to these four does the University of Paris owe its Original and first Rudiments of Learning. Nor was this the first time that England was the School∣master of France, for we lent them not only their first Doctors in Divinity and Philosophy, but from us also did they receive the Myste∣ries
of their Religion, when they were Heathens, as you may read in Julius Caesar Com. 6. which is an unquestionable Authori∣ty, and it had been well for them if they had writ after the same Copy to this Day. Colleges they had none, Their Col∣leges. till Joan, Queen of Navarre, Wife to Philip the Fair, Built that 1034. which is still call'd the College of Navarre, and is the fairest and largest of all the rest. This good Example invited French Kings and Subjects to erect more, till they had increased the number to fifty two Col∣leges, which it still enjoyeth, tho' the odd forty are little serviceable to Learning, for in twelve of them only, is there any publick Reading, either in Divinity or Philosophy. Every College has its Rector, but his Mainte∣nance is very scanty, arising only out of Chamber-Rents, like the Principal of a Hall in Oxford; and the Building of the Colleges are as mean as their Revenues are poor, and indeed all France labours under the want of Encouragements to Learning. The College of Sorbonne is the Glory of this University, The Sor∣bonne. built by Robert de Sorbonne of the Chamber of Lewis IX. None can be ad∣mitted into this College but Divines, nor none under the Degree of Doctors. Their number is about Seventy, their Allowance is a Pint of Wine, (which is almost our Quart) and a Quantity of Bread daily. Meat they have none allow'd them, unless they pay for it. These Doctors confer Degrees, and in their several turns read six times a day, three in the Forenoon, and as many in the Afternoon. Three Doctors with the Parlia∣ment
of Paris, are the Pillars of the French Liberties, and indeed are very jealous of the least Circumstances in which the Privileges of their Nation might be endanger'd, and on all occasions will shew they disapprove what they can't remedy. This University is Governed by a Rector, a Vice-Chancellor, four Proctors, as many Intranta, and the Regent Masters. In publick exercises of Learning, Precedence. the Re∣ctor of Sorbonne takes place next the Princes of the Blood, before the Cardinals; but at o∣ther times gives them Precedence, but at no time will give it to Archbishops, or Bishops; of which there was some time a remarkable In∣stance. The King having summon'd an As∣sembly of twenty five Bishops to consult a∣bout Church Affairs, they chose the College of Sorbonne for their Senate-house, and the Doctor that was to Preach before them be∣ginning his Oration with Reverendissimi Rector & vos Amplissimi Praesules, the Archbishop of Rouen interrupted him, and commanded him to invert his Style, which he no sooner obey'd, but the Rector presently rises up with Impono tibi silentium, which is an Injunction within the compass of his Power. Upon this, the Preacher being Tongue ty'd, the Contro∣versy grew hot between the Bishops and the Rector, both Parties eagerly contending for Priority, till a Cardinal, wiser than the rest, desired the Question might be laid aside for that time, and that the Rector would permit the Doctor to deliver his Sermon without a Prae∣ludium. To which the Rector consented, and the Dispute for that time was ended.
But Salus Academiae non vertitur in istis. The Stu∣dents in this Uni∣sity. It would be more for the Honour and Advan∣tage of the University, if the Rector would be less mindful of his Dignity, and more careful in the Discharge of his Office; for certainly the Eye and utmost Diligence of a Magistrate was never more wanting, than in this University. Penelope's Suitors never be∣haved themselves so Insolently in the House of Ulysles, as the Academicks do in the Streets and Houses of Paris. For an Angel given them to Drink, they will Arrest whom you please; double the Sum, and they will break open his House, and run him into a Jayle. I ne∣ver heard they could be hired to commit a Murder, tho' nothing is more common a∣mong them than Killing, except it be Steal∣ing, in which they have their Captains, who command them in their Night-walks, and dispose of their Purchases. To be a Gipsie and a Student of Paris, In what time they take De∣grees. are almost Synonymous; an Ungovernable Rabble, whom to call Scholars, were to prophane the Title, for they omit no Out-rages which possibly can be committed, in a Place which consists meerly of Privilege, and nothing of Statute. Two Years sees them both Novices in the Arts, and Masters of them. So that by their Degrees they enjoying an abso∣lute Freedom before the Follies and Violen∣ces of Youth are subdued, they become so Unruly and Insolent as I have told you. These Degrees are conferred by the Chancel∣lor, who seldom asks any other Questions than his Fees. Those being paid, he presents the Rakes to the Rector, from whom they re∣ceive
their Letters Patents, which is the main part of the Creation in this ill managed Uni∣versity. The Isle of Paris seated between the Uni∣versity and the Town, The City. commonly call'd la Cite, is the lesser, but much the sweeter and the Richer part of Paris. It contains thir∣teen Churches, it is joined to the main Land and the other parts of this Metropolis by six Bridges. The Principal Church is Nostre Dame, Nostre Dame Church. ad∣orn'd with a beautiful Front, and two To∣wers seventy yards higher than the rest of the Church, which is an hundred seventy four long, and sixty broad. At your first entrance on the right hand is the Effigies of St. Chri∣stopher with our Saviour on his Shoulders, and the Mason, as well as the Legend has made him, of a Gigantick Stature, tho' of the two, the Mason's Workmanship is the more admi∣rable; his being cut out of one fair Stone, and that of the Legendary being patch'd up of many Fabulous and Ridiculous Stories. It hath four Ranks of Pillars, thirty in a Rank, and forty five little Chappels or Mass-Closets, built between the outermost Range and the Walls. This Church is now the Seat of an Archbi∣shop, a Preferment rather Intellectual than Real, for the Dignity is too unweildy for the Revenue, which is but 600 l. a Year. As at Deipe I saw the Papists Idolatry, The Super∣stition of the Papists. so here I observ'd their Superstitious use of Holy-Water, an Invention of Pope Alexander VII. Bishop of Rome. The Citations of Scripture upon which this Foppery is grounded, are all taken out of the Vulgar Latin Translation,
attributed to St. Jerom; whereas there was no such Translation in Alexander's time, nor was St. Jerom Born till above three hundred Years after him. It is compounded of Salt and Water Conjured together by a Priest, for so the Words run, Exorcizo te creatura Salis, and afterwards, Exorcizo te aquae, &e. This done, the Salt is sprinkled Cross wise into the Water, and put into a Cistern standing at the Entrance into their Churches, and the People coming in, dip their Fingers into it, and make the Sign of the Cross upon their Fore∣heads, and think themselves sufficiently bless'd for that Day. On the Top of one of the Towers you have the best Prospect of Paris, The great Bell, and use of it. and the Valley round about it. In one of these Towers is an ordinary Ring of Bells, in the other but two, the biggest of which, is said to be great∣er than that at Rouen, which is eight Yards and a Span in compass, and two Yards and a half deep. The Bowl of the Clapper being a Yard and half about, and requires thirty Men to Ring it, which is never done but in a very great Thunder, to allay the noise in the Ele∣ment. Not far from the West-gate of this Church, The great Hospital. is the great Hospital of Paris, Founded by King Lewis, Anno 1258. and has since that time been very much enlarg'd by several Be∣nefactors. In this Hospital are numbred al∣most a Thousand Beds, in every Bed two Persons, besides those for the Officers of the House, and in truth, is kept so cleanly, it is sweeter walking here than in any Streets of Paris.
Next to these is la Sainte Chapelle, The Holy Chappel, and its Re∣liques. situate in the middle of the Palais, Founded by Le∣wis IX. Anno 1248. The excellency in the Painting of the Glass-windows, and the cu∣rious Workmanship of the Organ-Case is wor∣thy Admiration. In it are abundance of Re∣licks, as, the Crown of Thorns, the Blood which ran from our Saviour's side, his Swad∣ling Clouts, a great piece of the Cross, the Chain wherewith the Jews bound him, a great piece of the Stone of his Sepulcher, some of the Virgin's Milk, the Head of the Launce which pierced our Saviour, his Pur∣ple Robe, the Sponge, a piece of his Shroud, the Napkin wherewith he was girt when he washed his Disciples Feet, the Rod of Moses, the Head of St. Blase, St. Clement and St. Si∣meon, and part of St. John Baptist's. It was with some difficulty we procur'd the sight of these, they were too Holy to be seen by Pro∣testants; but when they consider'd our Mo∣ney was Catholick, we were admitted to view them; and Venerable Relicks we should have esteem'd them, if they could have fool'd us into a Belief that they were all sixteen hun∣dred Years old, and yet neither the Blood nor Milk dry'd up, nor the rest of the Trinkets never the worse for wearing. Without this Chappel is the Burse, The Burse, or Exchange. la Gal∣lery de Merchands, a rank of Shops, in shew, but not in Substance, like those in the Ex∣change at London. Next and adjoining to these, The great Palace. is the great Pa∣lais, within the Verge of which are the seven Chambers of Parliament, of which le Grand Chamber is the finest, and in it is the Throne, or
Royal Seat of the King, Cloath'd with Purple Velvet when they expect him, and at other times naked. This Court of Parliament was Instituted for the preservation of the Rights and Privileges of the People, and was anci∣ently of great Authority, but now is dwindl'd into nothing in that respect, and they now only sit to dispatch what the King com∣mands them. The King's Palace is seated on the West∣side of the Ville of Paris, The King's Palace, or the L'Ou∣vre. hard by Port Neuf, and the new Bridge, built by Philip Augus tus, Anno 1214. and intended for a Castle. It is call'd the Louvre quasi l' Ouvre, or the Work, by way of excellency. The French Writers have rais'd it to a Miracle, but for my part, I never saw any thing more abus'd by a good Report, or that more scandalizes the Rumour that is made about it. I expected to have seen some Prodigy of Architecture, which would have put me into such a Passion, as to have cry'd out with the young Gallant in the Comedy when he saw his Mistress; Hei mihi qualis erat? talis erat, qualem nunquam ego vidi? But I was balk'd in my Expectation, and could find nothing in it to Admire, much less to Envy. The Fable of the Mountain which was with Child, and brought forth a Mouse, is questionless a Fable, and this House, and the Fame it has acquir'd in the World, is the Mral of it; for if you carefully examine it in parts, it will appear so disagreeable to it self, and the Rules of Art, that the whole does not merit the Character that is given it. The Draw-Bridges, and the three Gates, are unsightly at your entrance. In the Quadran∣gle
are several Fashions of Buildings of three or four Ages ago, and as Inartificially and Immethodically joyn'd, as if they had been jumbled together by an Earthquake. The South and West parts, the Work of Francis I. and his Son Henry, are Prince like, and when the rest of the House is cast in the same Mould, it may deserve the Character of a stately Pile of Building. The Inside is worse than the Outside, and so cluster'd with many little Rooms, that it looks more like a Tavern than a King's Palace, especially when you consi∣der, tho' the Chambers are well built, they are but very indifferently furnish'd. The first of the two Galleries is curiously adorn'd with Pictures of the Kings and Queens of France, the Tables all of a just length, The fine Gallery: in∣comparably Painted, and contain a perfect History of the State and Court of France in their several Successions; for under each of their Kings Pictures are those of the Lords who had Signaliz'd themselves in Honourable Actions. And under each of the Queens the lively Pourtraitures of the Principal Ladies who had honour'd the Court with their Beau∣ty and Virtue. A witty Invention, and as happily express'd by the Artists. The Long Gallery is about five hundred Yards in length, The long Gallery. and of breadth and heighth not unproportionable. A Room built rather for Ostentation than Use, and has more in it of the Majesty than the Grace of its Founder. The principal Beauty, (if I might judge) of the Louvre, is la Salle des Antiques, The Hall of Antiqui∣ties. the Hall of Antiquities, a low, plain Room pav'd with Brick. without any Hangings, and yet
in my mind, the best furnish'd of all I saw in France. It has five of the most Ancient and Venerable Pieces of all the Kingdom; but herein I shall be thought a mean and un∣fashionable Soul by the Monsieurs, who are re∣gardless of Antiquity, both in the Monu∣ments, and in the Study of it, and are all for new things, especially Cloths, as oft as they can get them. The five Pieces above nam'd, are the Statue of Diana, which was Wor∣shipped in the Renown'd Temple of Ephesus, of a large and manly proportion, all naked but her Feet, and what Modesty commands to be cover'd. Another was the Statue of one of the Ethiopian Gods, as black as his People. Next to that grim Deity, was the Effigies of Mercury, with a Pipe in his Mouth, and all naked but his Feet. The fourth was the Pourtraiture of Venus quite naked, in her hand her little Son Cupid sitting on a Dolphin: And last of all, Apollo in the same naked Po∣sture, except that contrary to the Mode of France he had Shooes on, but whether they were made of Leather or Wood, I am not able to determine. All these are said to be given to the King of France by his Holyness of Rome. A pleasant exchange for the Pope to give him the Gods of the Heathens, who had given himself to the Idols of the Romans, and I believe upon the same Terms the now King of England might have all the Relicks and Ruins of Antiquity in Rome. Not far from this Room, The House of Bour∣bonne and the Tuil∣leries. on the other side of the Louvre, is the House of Bourbon. On the Tuilleries. I have nothing to say, but that they were built by Catharine of Medices, Anno
1564. and took name from the Lime-Kilns and Tile-pits there, before the Foundation of the fine House and Gardens. The present King of France is the Son of Lewis XIII. by the Lady Anna, The King. Infanta of Spain, at whose Marriage, the Spaniards un∣willing to fall under the French Obedience, which might very well happen, she being the eldest Sister of the King, they inserted a Clause in the seventh Article of Marriage, That neither the said Infanta, nor the Chil∣dren born by her to the King, should be capa∣ble of Inheriting any of the Estates of the King of Spain; and in the eighth Article, (be∣ing Marry'd at eleven Years of Age) she is bound to make an Act of Renunciation under her own Hand Writing as soon as she came to be twelve Years old, which was accord∣ingly perform'd. Lewis XIV. now Reigning, was born Aug. 26. 1638. succeeded his Fa∣ther in 1643. was Crown'd by the Archbi∣shop of Rheims, June 7th 1654. and Marry'd Maria Theresia, Daughter to Philip IV. King of Spain, by whom he had only a Son, Lewis, Sirnam'd the Hardy, the present Dauphin, born November 1. 1661. He Marry'd Maria Anna Christina, Daughter to the late Elector of Bavaria, by whom he has three Sons, Lewis, Duke of Burgundy, born Aug. 6. 1682. Phi∣lip, Duke of Anjou, born November 19. 1683 and Gaston, Duke of Berry, born Aug. 31. 1686. But of this great King, his Court and Government, I shall say nothing till I am out of his Dominions, and then, Sir, you may expect his History.
Having wearied our selves with the sight of Paris, Madrid. we went to see some of His Majesty's Houses in the Country; and here we passed by. Madrid, so call'd from the King of Spain's Palace at Madrid, after the Form of which it is built. The Founder was Francis I. A well contriv'd House it seem'd to be, but our Jour∣ney lay beyond it. A League further is Rual, Rual. a little Town be∣longing to the Abby of St. Denys, in which is a pleasant Summer-house, adorn'd with a∣bundance of retir'd Walks, and a curious variety of Water-works; for besides the Forms of divers Glasses, Pillars, and Geo∣metrical Figures, all form'd by the Water, there were Birds of sundry sorts, so Artifi∣cially contriv'd, that they both deceiv'd the Eye by their Motion, and the Ear by their Melody. Somewhat higher, in the midst of a pleasant Garden, are two Fountains of ad∣mirable Workmanship. In the first is the I∣mage of Cerberus, the Boar of Calidon, the Nemaean Lyon, and in the Navel of it, Hercules killing Hydra. In the other only a Crocodile full of wild and unruly Tricks, sending from his Throat a Musick not much differing from that of Organs, and had your Eyes been shut, you would have thought your self in a Ca∣thedral Church; for the Melody of the Cro∣codile and the Birds, exactly counterfeited the Harmony of a well order'd Quire. And now we are come into the Grove, a place so sweet∣ly contriv'd, that it would even entice a Man to Melancholy, because in them Melancho∣ly would be delightful. The Trees so inter∣changeably folded, that they were at once a
shelter against Wind and Sun, yet not so sul∣lenly closed, but that they afforded the Eye a Prospect over the Vines and the Verdures of the Earth that were imprison'd within them. It seem'd a Grove, an Orchard, and a Vine∣yard, so variously interwoven, as if the Artist had design'd to make one fall in love with Confusion. In the middle of the Wilderness is the House, environ'd with a Moat of Run∣ning-water; the House pretty, and therefore little, built rather for a Banquet than a Feast. It was built and thus enrich'd by M. de Ponte, the King's Taylor, and was without question, the finest Garment he ever cut out in his life. Dying, he gave it to Mr. Landerbon, and the Queen Mother taking a liking to it, bought it, giving in exchange, an Office in the Trea∣sury worth 400000 Crowns to be sold. Two Leagues from Rual, St. Ger∣main en Lay. is the King's House of St. Germain en Lay, where the late King James now Resideth, seated on the top of an Hill like Windsor, with the Town of St. Germain lying about it, and the River Seine, like the Thames, running below it. This Royal Seat is divided into two parts, the Old and the New, and the whole composes a Ma∣jestical Palace. The Louvre so much fam'd, is not to be nam'd the same Day with this, in respect of the Spaciousness of the Rooms, and the Curiosity of the Paintings, and other Ra∣rities. In a stately large Walk vaulted over head, The Water-Works. are the Water-works, and the first thing you encounter, is the Effigies of a Dragon, just against the entrance, which vomits upon all that come nigh him. At the end towards the
right hand is the Statue of a Nymph sitting before a pair of Organs. Upon loosing one of the Pipes, the Nymph began to singer the Keys, and made excellent Musick. Unto the Division run by her Fingers, her Head kept time, jolting from one Shoulder to the other, like an Old Fidler at a Country Wake. At the other end toward the left hand we saw a Shop of Smiths, another of Joiners, and the Backsides full of Sawyers and Masons all idle; but upon a motion of the Water they all fell to work, and ply'd it lustily. The Birds every where by their singing, saving the Artificers the labour of whistling; besides, upon the drawing a Wooden Curtain appear'd two Tritons riding on their Dolphins, with each of them a Shell in his Hand, which interchange∣ably serv'd for Trumpets. Afterwards follow'd Neptune sitting in his Chariot, drawn with four Tortoises, grasping his Tricuspis, or threefold Scepter in his hand, the Water un∣der them representing all the while the Sea somewhat troubled. Thirty six steps from the Front of the Mansion-House we descended into this Water-house, and by sixty more we descended into a second of the same fashi∣on, but not so long as the other. At the right hand of this, is the whole Story of Perseus and Andromeda, and the whole acted very lively, the Whale being kill'd, and the Lady loos'd from the Rock; but withal was so cunning∣ly manag'd, and with such mutual change of Fortune between the Combatants, that one that had not known the Fable, would have been sore afraid, that the Knight would have lost the Victory, and the Lady either her
Life or Honour. At the other end of the House was shewed us Orpheus in silvis positus, silvaeque sequentes. the resemblance of Orpheus playing on a Vio∣lin, the Trees moving, and the Wild Beasts Dancing in two Rings about him; an Inven∣tion that could not but cost King Henry great Summs of money, fince 'tis reported that the breaking of one Fiddle-String cost King Lewis, his Son, fifteen hundred Livres. Another Door opening, we saw divers Representations and Conceits, which would have been more Graceful, if they had not had so much of the Puppet-Play and Punchanello in them. By thir∣ty Steps more we descended into the Garden, and by as many more into a Green, where was the Statue of a Horse in Brass, of that Bigness and Beauty, that he is scarce to be march'd in Europe. On the other side of Paris up the River, St. Vin∣cent's. we saw another of the King's Houses call'd St. Vin∣cenas, beautified with a large Park well stock'd with Deer. In this House died Philip the Fair, Lewis Hutin, and Charles the Fair; but none so much to be lamented, as that of our Illu∣strious Henry the Fifth, cut down in the flower of his Age, and in the midst of his Victories. A Prince truly Brave, Wise and Valiant, and the Alexander of his Time, whose remem∣brance return'd us sorrowful into Paris. Here we rested a while, A French Servant. and being desirous to entertain a French Servant, we had soon our choice of many, but generally such Grim and familiar Scabs, that nauseated an English Eye; but at length so many making Addres∣ses to us, for fear the Government should
think we were Listing a Regiment, we pitch∣ed upon one that lookt the Modestest of all the Fry, and enquiring into his Qualifications, he told us with a brisk French Air, that he was Un Maistre de Fence, Un Maistre de Dance, and Squire of the Toilet, but seeing by our Countenances we were nei∣ther Fighters, Fops, nor Dancers, he told us in Broken English, he could do any thing be∣longing to an accomplish'd French Serviteur. He could Drive de Caroch, or Squire de Lady, Dress de Horse, make de Pottage, or Cook de Fricasy, Ride de Menage Cheval, Mend de Breech, Foot de Stocking, Shave de Beard, or make Clean de Shooe after the best and newest Fashion A le Cour; and under this Character we took him. Having now seen the King's Court, The Clergy of France. of which you may expect a more particular Ac∣count in my next Packet, or when we shall meet in happy England, suffer me here then to skip over that and give you a short, but true Account of their Clergy, and of their Church Revenues, which must needs be un∣accountable, since it maintains so great a num∣ber of Idle, Ignorant Mass Mumblers; for not reckoning the Jesuits, which shall have a Line by themselves, which are none of the poorest, and daily encrease like Locusts and Caterpillars, nor any of the Clergy in their New Con∣quests, there are numbred in France twelve Archbishopricks, an hundred and four Bi∣shopricks, five hundred and forty Arch-Prio∣ries, one thousand four hundred and fifty Abbies, twelve thousand three hundred and twenty Priories, sixty seven Nunneries, seven hundred Convents of Fryars, two hundred
fifty nine Commendams of the Order of Malta, and one hundred and thirty thousand Parish Priests, besides Lay Officers and Atten∣dants upon all the several Orders. To maintain this large Wilderness of Men, Their Main∣tenance. the Statesmen of France, who have propor∣tioned the Country, do allow to the Cler∣gy a fourth part of the whole; for supposing that France contains two hundred Millions of Arpins (a measure somewhat larger than our Acre) they have allotted to the Church for its Temporal Revenue forty seven Millions of them. A pretty Competency. To give you a taste for the whole. The Archbishoprick of Aux in Gascoin, is valued at forty thousand Pound English communibus Annis. The Bishop∣rick of Alby in Languedoc, is reckon'd at fif∣teen thousand Pounds Annually. The Abbot of Cluniac, in the Dutchy of Burgundy, is valued at fifty thousand Crowns yearly, and the Pa∣rish Priest of Estiennes, St. Steven's in Paris, re∣ceives Yearly no fewer than 8000 Crowns. As for the Vulgar Clergy, they have but little Tythe, and less Glebe, The Inferi∣or Clergy. most part of that Revenue being appropriated to Abbies and other Religious Houses, and they live only upon the Baisemens, the Church Offerings of the People, at Marriages, Christenings, Burials, Dirges, Indulgences, and the like, which is thought to amount to as much as the Temporal Estate of the Church, and would maintain them well, if it were not for the greatness of their number; for generalty every Parish has no fewer than four Priests, which are too many to be Rich, and there is little hopes of their Rising, while they see the best of their Church
Preferments given away before their Faces to Boys and Children, which disheartens them in their Studies, and exposes them to De∣bauchery and scandalous Courses. Notwithstanding their Wings are thus clipt, Their Mo∣rals. and that Shame and Fear does somewhat Reform them; yet they will often give Na∣ture a Fillip, and allow themselves in some good Fellowship, and to say truth, I think them the best Companions in France on a Journey, but not for an Acquaintance. They live very merrily, and keep a better Table than consists with their Vow, and yet far short of their former Affluency when Church Prefer∣ments in France were only at the Pope's dispo∣sal, tho' much Ease and very little Study, keeps them still plump, and in good liking. I once Travel'd with three of these mortified Sinners, two Augustins, and one Franciscan, the merriest Crickets that ever chirped. When we came to a Vein of good Wine, they would cheer up themselves and their Neigh∣bours, with Vivamus ut bibamus, & bibamus ut vivamus, and would Toy with the Wenches like young Kitlings, with their Tails or a Feather. The Common-Priests of France are as Dull and Blockish as flitting Beetles, Their Learning. and for Learn∣ing, can truly say with Secrates, Hoc tantum Scimus, quod nescimus, we only know this that we know nothing which their Superiors know, and therefore in the last Roman Missal, every Syllable is diversly mark'd, whether the Word must be pronounc'd long or short. When I had lost my self in the Streets of Paris, and wanted French to enquire my way to my
Lodging, I would apply my self to some of this Reverend Garb; but you might as soon expect Sence from the next Mule, as a word of Latin from any of them; nor is this the Disease of the Vulgar Mass Mumblers only, it has also infected the Right Worshipful of the Clergy. In Orleans I had business with a Canon of St. Croix, a Dignitary that wore a Lawn Sur∣plice laced with great Decorum, and for the comeliness and capacity of his Cap, he might have been a Metropolitan, perceiving me to speak to him in a strange Tongue, (for it was Latin) he very Learnedly ask'd me Num po∣testis loqui Gallica. I answering, No; he burst out into another Interrogatory, viz. Quam diu fuistis in Gallice. To conclude Sir, having read over my Letter with two or three deadly Pangs, and six times rubbing his Tem∣ples, he dismissed me with this comfortable Saying, Ego negotias vestras curabo; a strange Beast in a Biggin, and one of the greatest Prodigies of Ignorance, that ever I met with∣all in Mans Apparel. Now, Our Journey towards Orleans. being almost choak'd with the noi∣somness of Paris, we took our Journey to∣wards Orleans. The Day was fair, and not so much as dispos'd to a Cloud, save that a∣bout Noon they began to spread like a Cur∣tain, to defend us from the Injury of the Sun, and the Wind rather sufficient to fan the Air than disturb it. You would have thought it, Sir, a Day meerly fram'd for that great Princess Nature to take her pleasure in, and that the Birds which cheerfully gave us their Voices from the neighbouring Bushes,
had been the Musick of her Court; in a word, it was a Day solely consecrated to a pleasant Journy, and he that did not put it to that use mis-spent it. Having cram'd our selves into our Wag∣gon, we took a short farewel of Paris, joy∣ful that we liv'd to see the beauty of the Fields again, and to enjoy the happiness of a free and clear Heaven. The Country is like the Isle of France towards Normandy, only the Corn-fields were more large and even. On our left hand we had a side Glance of the Royal House at Boys, and the Castle of Bifectre. Four Leagues from Paris is the Town of Mont l' Herrie, Mont l' Herrie. wherein was nothing obser∣vable but the Carcass of a Castle, and a Plain about it, where was fought that memorable Battle between Lewis XI. and Charles the Har∣dy, Duke of Burgundy, where each Army run away, leaving the Field empty of Forces, and yet neither of the Princes Victorious. Some scour'd away out of fear to Die, and some out of hope to Live, that it was hard to say, which of the Soldiers made most use of their Heels in the Combat. Two Leagues from Mont l' Herrie, Chastres. is the Town of Chastres, seated in the fairest An∣gle of France, where it confines to La Beauss, a Town of an ordinary size, somewhat bigger than for a Market, and too little for a City. It has a Wall and a Ditch, but neither further serviceable than to resist the Enemy at one Gate, while the People run away at the other. Over a little River which might be easily mistaken for a Ditch, Estampes. lies the Country La
Beauss, through which we Travel'd till the same Night we came to Estampes, a Town situate in a plentiful Soil, and water'd with a River of the same Name, which affords the best Crevices. It seems to have been a Town of some consideration formerly, as we might read in its Ruins. Without the Town is a fine green Meadow, where they use their Re∣creations. At my being there, Sir, the Sport was Dancing, an Exercise the French much delight in, and it seems this Natural Inclinati∣on is so rooted in them, that neither Age not the absence of a Fortune can prevail against it. On this Dancing Green were assembled not only Youth and Gentry, but Old Age and Beggary. Old Wives that could scarce set Foot to the Ground without a Crutch in the Street, here taught their Feet to amble, and you would have thought by the cleanly Conveyance and Carriage of their Bodies, they had been troubled with the Sciatica, and yet were so eager in the Sport as if their Dan∣cing days would never be over. Some were so Ragged, that a swift Galiard would almost have shak'd them into Nakedness. To have attempted staying them at home, or perswad∣ing them to work when they heard the noise of a Fiddle, had been a Task too unweildy for Hercules. In this mixture of Age and Con∣dition, we observ'd them in their Pastimes, the Rags being so interwoven with Silks, and wrinkl'd Brows so intermingled with their fresh Beauties, that you would have thought it a Mummery of Fortunes; as for those of both Sexes which were altogether past Acti∣on,
they were brought thither in Chairs, and trod the Dancing Measures with their Eyes. The Inn we lay in was just like those of Normandy, Another way of Beg∣ging in an Inn. and all the difference we found was in the Morning; for there we were not troubled with such importunate Begging as in that Country. These had learn'd a more Neat and Compendious way of getting Mo∣ney, and Petition'd, not our Ears, but our Noses, by the Rhetorick of a Nose-gay, and by presenting us with a Tuft of dead Flowers, seem'd rather to Buy than Beg our Bounties. A sweeter and more generous kind of Cra∣ving than used in Normandy, and such as im∣ply'd a lucky Contradiction; for what is it else, that a Maid should offer her self to be Deflowr'd without prejudice to her Modesty, and raise a Fortune for her future Husband by the Usury of a Kindness? Refresh'd with these Favours, Anger∣ville. we took our leaves of Estampes, and the Dancing Miscella∣ny, jogging on through many a beautiful Field of Corn till we came to Angerville, which was six Leagues distant. Here was nothing memorable, but that the Town had been taken by Mountacute, Earl of Salisbury as he went this way to the Siege of Orleans, The same Fate befel Touray, a Place not much beyond it in strength or bigness, only it had more confidence (as Mr. Savage, an English Gentleman once said) in the Walls of Bones that were within it, than in the Walls of Stones which were without it. This Town stands in the midway betwixt Estampes and Orleans, Our Enter∣tainment at Dinner. and therefore a fit Stage to Act a Dinner on; and to it we went.
By that time we had clear'd our Selves of a great platter of Pottage, there entred upon us three odd kind of Fellows with their Hats on their Heads like cover'd Dishes. As soon as I saw them, I cast one Eye upon my Ri∣ding-Coat, and the other upon my Whinyard, not knowing what use I might have of my Steel to secure my Drapery; but when I had Survey'd their Apparel, I quickly altered that Opinion, and look'd upon them as the Excre∣ments of the next Gaol. Deceiv'd alike in both my Jealousies, on a nearer view I per∣ceiv'd their divertising parcel of Man's Flesh, in good truth, were neither better nor worse than errant French Fidlers, which in England we should have thought unworthy of a Whip∣ing-Post. Without asking Leave, or paying any Reverence to the Company, they fell a scrap∣ing in as harsh a Tone as the Courting of Cats at Mid-night, and as if that had not been Punishment enough, they abused our Ears with one of their Songs. By that little French I had, and the Simpering of a Fille de Joy of Paris, that Travelled in our Company, I perceiv'd it was Baudy, and to say the truth, Ranker than could be endur'd by any thing but a French-man; but what could I do? I had not French enough to call them Rogues handsomly, and the Scoundrels were below a Beating. A Gang of Rascals so infi∣nitely inferior to the Dignity of a Statute, that to Hang them, had been but to cast away a Rope, and disparage the Reputation of the Gallows. After their smutty Song was ended, one of the Hanging-look'd Company, which after∣ward
appear'd to be Master of the Mis-rule, pull'd a Dish out of his Codpiss ,and sets it upon the Table before us, into which, according to the French Custom, we must cast in our Bene∣volence. Prescription Time out of Mind, has allow'd them a Sou for each Man at the Table, more they don't expect, and will take no less; no great Sum I confess, but 'twas richly worth the Musick, which was meerly French, Lascivious in Words, and Unskilful in the Playing. We are now, The City of Orleans. Sir, come into the Country of Orleans, which, though within the Limits of La Beauss, will be thought to be a Pro∣vince of it self. 'Tis a pleasant and plentiful Country of Corn and Vines, and may be call'd the Epitome of France. The Town is situate on the Declivity of a Hill, with a Bridge, a Wall, and Turrets capable of ma∣king Resistance to an Enemy. It is very Po∣pulous, the delicacy of the Air, and the com∣modiousness of the River, inviting the Nobi∣lity and Gentry to Cohabit in it, and they ac∣cept it, and are a more Humane and Courte∣ous sort of People than the Parisians, or any other in France that I have yet conversed with. The Buildings are like themselves, the Streets large and well kept, and give no Offence to the nicest Nostril. It has 26 Churches besides the Cathedral of St. Cross, and divers other Religious Houses. The Wine of Orleans is the greatest Riches of it self, and the Country about it. And in my Opinion, are the best in the Kingdom, in respect of the Delicacy of the Tast. I have heard of a Dutch Gentle∣man that tasting a Wine in Italy, called La∣chrymae
Christi, Christ's Tears, broke out into this pathetical Ejaculation, Dii Beni, quare non Christus Lachrymatus esset in nostris Regionibus? Why did not our Saviour weep in our Coun∣try? This Dutch-man and I were for a while of the same mind, and I thought I had a fair Quarrel with Nature for giving us none of this Liquor in England; but we were soon reconciled, when I perceiv'd it was offen∣sive to the Brain if not well allay'd with Wa∣ter; for which Reason it is said that the pre∣sent King hath banish'd it from his Cellar, no doubt to the great Grief of his Drinking Courtiers, who may therefore say with Mar∣tial, Quid tantum fecere boni tibi pessima Vina? Aut quid fecerunt optima Vina mali? This is a great Trading Town, Offices sold. and espe∣cially for Offices, which are here, as well as in the rest of France, saleable for great Sums of Money, which they squeeze again out of the Purses and very Blood of the Peasants, saying with our Serjeants of the Counter, that being forc'd to buy the Devil, they are allow∣ed to sell him at as hard a Bargain as they can. Twenty Years purchase, is said to be no extraor∣dinary Rate, and I have read that only by the Sale of Offices, one of the Kings of France, that shall be nameless, raised in twenty Years, one Hundred and thirty nine Millions of Li∣vres, which is about seven Millions Yearly. Of all ways to get Money the most ungene∣rous and mischievous, for the Sale of Offices necessarily draws after it the Sale of Justice.
As this Town is sweetly seared in respect of the Air, The Palle-Malle and Recreati∣ons there. so it has the conveniency of ma∣ny fine Walks, the best of which is of the East side of the City, called the Palle-malle, from a very Gentleman-like Exercise much used in this Kingdom. In this Walk, which is of a very great length and beauty, in a clear Evening you shall have all the Town appear, the aged People borrowing Legs to carry them, and the younger Arms to guide them. If any young Madamoiselle or Mon∣sieurs walk thither alone, they will quickly find a Companion, tho' perhaps, such with whom they have yet no familiarity. Thus do they measure and remeasure the length of the Malle, not minding the shutting in of the Day, till darkness has taken away the sense of Blushing. At all hours of the Night, if it be warm and dry, you may find them thus coup∣led, and if at the Years end there be found more Children in the Town than Fathers, this Walk and the Night are shrewdly suspect∣ed to be Accessaries. There is another Walk in this Town, L'Estappe cal∣led L' Estappe, which is principally frequent∣ed by Merchants, to Confer about their Tra∣fick and other Negociations. It reaches to the Cloister of St. Cross, the Cathedral Church, of the Building of which I could never yet read or hear any thing but what is Fabulous, and not worth relating. Of the Town there is nothing more remarkable than the great Siege that was laid before it by the En∣glish, and was at last Relieved by Joan de Arc, Maid of Vancoleure in Lorrain, whom they called La Puelle, of whom you have an ac∣count
in our own Chronicles. Some Pro∣claim her a Saint, and others regard her but as a Sorceress: For my part, I will not flatter the best Fortune of my Country to the pre∣judice of Truth, nor will I think otherwise of this Female Warriour but as a Noble Captain. In Orleans is also an University, The Uni∣versity of Orleans. Founded by Philip de Belle, King of France, 1312. for the Profession of the Civil Law, and was the first of that kind on this side the Mountains. It has four Professors, and the Place in which they Read their Lectures, is call'd Les Grandes Escoles; but rather ought to be called an old Barn converted into a School, by the Addi∣tion of five Ranks of Forms, and a Pew in the middle; you never saw any thing so se∣verely mock its name. Their Principal Go∣vernour is the Rector, which every three Months descendeth to another; so that once a Year every one of the Professors hath his turn of being Rector. They Read each of 'em in their turns, an hour every Morning in the Week, except Holy-days and Thursdays, their Hearers taking of them their Lectures with their Tables. They are very Liberal in bestowing their Degrees, Conferring Degrees. and deny no Man his Grace that is able to pay his Fees: Legem ponere is more powerful with them than Legem dicere, and the Blockhead that has but his Gold in his Hand, shall have a sooner Di∣patch than the best Scholar upon Tick in the University.
Ipse licet venias Musis comitatus, Homere, Si nihil attuleris, ibis, Homere, foras. It is Money that disputes best with them. The Exercise that is performed before the Degree is taken, Their Ex∣ercises and Library. is very little and as trivially perform'd. When you have chosen the Law you would defend, they Conduct you into an old ruinous Chamber, which they call their Library; for my part, I thought it the Ware-House of a Second-hand broken Bookseller in Duck-Lane. Those few Books which were there, were as old as Printing, and amongst them all a Man could scarcely make up one Cover to resist the Depredations of the Rats. They did not stand Endwise, but lay one upon another, and were joyn'd together with Cob∣webs instead of Strings. He that would e∣ver guess them to have been look'd into since the long Reign of Ignorance, would have Condemned his own Charity, for I could not believe that the three last Centuries of Years had ever seen the inside of them, but that the poor Paper had been troubled with the Dis∣ease we call Noli me tangere. In this unlucky Room do they hold their Disputations, and after two or three Arguments urg'd, they commend the Sufficiency of the Respondent, and pronounce him worthy of his Degrees. That done, they cause his Authentick Letters to be Sealed, and in them tell the Reader with what Diligence and Pains they have sifted the Candidate: That it is necessary to the Com∣mon-wealth of Learning, that Industry should be Honour'd, and that on this ground
they have thought fit: Post angustias solamen, post vigilias requietem, post dolores gaudia; for so as I remember runs the Form, to recompence the Labours of N. N. with the Degree of Do∣ctor, or Licentiate, with a great deal more of the like formal Foolery. Et ad hunc modum fiunt Doctores. Next in this City of Letters, The Ger∣man Col∣lege. as the French Writers call Paris, is the German College, where those of that Country Study, and for Decency, Order, and good Government, ex∣ceed all the rest of the University. A very hearty, good natur'd and loving Nation they are to all Men; but especially to the English. Only I could wish, that in their Speeches and Compliments, they would not use the Latin-Tongue, or else learn to speak it truly. Of these Ingredients is the University of Orleans compounded, and may pass for a Learned A∣cademy among those that never saw one. It could scarce be called an University, till the Jesuits came among them, but rather a School of Law; but they having brought with them those Branches of Learning, which before, were wanting in it, it may better deserve that Appellation. The Jesuites, I say, have a College here, The Je∣suits Cal∣lege and Schools. and in it apply themselves with all imaginable Diligence in the Study of good Letters, and make such good Proficients in it, that they exceed all other sorts of Orders in the Roman Church, as having better Teachers, and more leasure to learn. That time which others spend at their High-Masses, and Canonical Hours, these Men bestow upon their Books, being exempted from these Duties by their
Order. They trouble not their Heads with Crotchets in Musick, nor Chanting their Services, but imploy their Brains upon Mat∣ters of State, supporting their Friends and ruining their Enemies. To this advantage of Leisure, Their me∣thod in Teaching. they add an exact Method in their Teaching, which in∣deed is so excellent, that Protestants often∣times send their Sons to their Schools to have them prove Exquisite in the Arts they Teach. To them resort the Children of the Rich as well as the Poor, and that in such great numbers, that wheresoever they settle other Schools be∣come desolate, or frequented only by those of a more heavy and phlegmatick Constitu∣tion. In their Schools are eight Classes. The lowest is for Grammar, the second for making Themes, the third for Poetry, the fourth for Oratory, the fifth for the Greek Grammar and Com∣positions, the sixth for Poetry and Rhetorick in that Language, the seventh for Logick, and the eighth and last for Philosophy. To each of these Schools or Classes, there is a several Reader or Institutor, who only intends that Art, and the perfection of it, which for that Year he Teacheth. The Year ended, he re∣moves himself and his Scholars with him, in∣to the Class or School next above him, till he has brought them through the whole Stu∣dy of Humanity. In the last Form, which is that of Philosophy, he continues two Years, which being expired, his Scholars are made perfect in the Universality of Learning, are Manumitted from their Tutors, and permit∣ted to follow their private Studies, but that
which is their greatest Art in Teaching, and fittest for their purpose, is, That they do not only teach their Scholars an exactness in those parts of Learn∣ing which they handle, Their obsti∣nate Hu∣mour. but endeavour to breed in them an obstinacy of Mind, and a sturdy eagerness of Spirit, that may render them hot and fiery Prosecutors of their own Principles, and impatient of Contradiction. This I have observed makes all of their Edu∣cation to affect Victory in all their Contro∣versies of Wit and Knowledge, and manage it with such a Violence, that even in their Grammatical Disputations, little Boys will maintain their Arguments with such a fierce∣ness and impatience, as surmounts their ten∣der Years. And all this pains the Jesuits take for nothing. The poor Peasants Son having the same Instructions with that of the Noble∣mans, and this procures the Society, Honour from the Great, and Love from the Poor, for the liberal Education of their Children, and gives them their choice of Wits to supply their Fraternities. Thus do they promote their own Interest in all their Undertakings, insomuch, Destructive to all o∣ther Reli∣gions. that Men of Wisdom and Judgment have been of Opinion, that the planting of a College of Jesuits in any place of the World, is a sure way to Re-establish the Religion they profess, and in time, to Root out any other. This was the effectual Method proposed by that Society, and their great Patron to the late King James, to exterminate Protestancy, and was follow'd by planting a Society of Jesuits in the Savoy, and setting up many private
Schools to teach Peoples Children Gratis: and you, and I Sir, who love the present English Government, have often lamented the great Numbers of that sort of Incendaries that yet remain in our Metropolis, since in the single Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, there is more than twenty Jesuits. In the Year 1554. Their first Entrance, Banish∣ment, and Return. notwithstanding the great opposition made by the Sorbonists, and all other Orders, they first got footing into France in the College of Clermont; and in the Year 1594. John Chastel, a Novitiate of that Order, having wounded King Henry IV. of France, in the Mouth, they were Banished this Kingdom, and were not admitted again till 1604. and then upon Limitations more strict than ever. Now in this University they have many Houses, besides their Colleges and Monastery, and in short time 'tis believ'd that all France will be too little for them. Out of these Trojan Horses issue out those Fire brands and Incendiaries which put the Affairs of Christendom into Combustion, and there are forged all the Stratagems which threaten Protestant Countries with Desolati∣on; there they are at the Head of all Affairs, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and what you in Eng∣land may expect from such Counsels, is no difficulty to determine. I have now done with Orleans and the Je∣suits, Our Jour∣ney back to Paris. and am preparing for my Journey to Paris. We went back the same way we came, though we were not so Fortunate to enjoy so good Company as we brought hither. Instead of the accepable Society of one of the French Nobles, some Gentlemen of Germany,
and two Friars of the Order of St. Austin, we had the perpetual vexation of four Trades∣men of Paris, two Filles de Joy, and an old Woman. The Artizans were so slovenly and greasily Apparel'd, Two Trades∣men and an Appa∣rator. that a modest Apprehension would have thought them raked out of a Scullery. One of them by shewing his Ink-horn, would have made us believe he was a Notary, but by the thread of his Discourse, we fond him to be an Apparator, so full of Ribbaldry it was, and smelt so rankly of the French Bawdy Court; but this we need not wonder at in the Summer, for it is the vanity of every French∣man to appear greater than he is. The rest like  in London, were always babling about who were the fittest Men in the City to be Eschevins, Sheriffs for the Year ensuing. Of the two Wenches one was so extreamly impudent, Two Gilts. that an immodest Ear would have abhor'd her Discourse, and of such a shameless Deportment, that her Behaviour would have frighted Lust out of the most Debauch'd Man living. Since I first knew Mankind and the World, I never observed so much impudence in general, as I did then in that young nasty French Whore, and I hope, I shall never be so miserable as to suffer two Days more the Torment of her Conversation. In a Word, she was a Gilt born to shame all the Fryars she had Traded with. The other Female, for I dare not call them Women, was of the same Profession, but not half so Rampant as her lewd Companion; for in re∣spect of her, a Charitable Stranger would have thought her Honest. An old Wo∣man. The old Woman
was so very old, that 'twas a Question whe∣ther she had ever been young or not. It was well I had read the Scripture, otherwise I might have thought her one of the first pieces of the Creation, that by some mischance had escap'd the Deluge. Her Face was like that of the Sybil Erythraea in some old Print before a Ballad, or one of Solomon's two Harlots in a Painted Cloath over the Chimney in a Coun∣try Ale-house, or like one of the Relicks of the first Age after the building of Babel, for her Complexion was a more dreadful Confusi∣on than that of Languages. But of this Com∣panion, and the rest of the Coachful, our arrival at Paris, has at last deliver'd us, a Mercy we can never be sufficiently thankful for. Having thus Survey'd as much of this Coun∣try as opportunity would afford us, Amiens. Mr. N. by whom I send this, having a strong desire to return into England, we resolv'd to accom∣pany him to Calais, and taking our Journey thither in a Coach of Amiens, better accompa∣ny'd than when we came from Orleans; for here we had Gentlemen of the best Quality, and in my Opinion, more Ingenious, and better Condition'd than any I had met with in all the Acquainance I had contracted in this Nation, and which appear'd wonderful, we had no vexation with us in the shape of a French Woman to torment our Ears with her impertinent Discourse, or punish our Eyes with her Complexion. Thus Associated, St. Loup. we wagg'd on toward St. Loup, where that Night we were destin'd to be lodg'd. As we pass'd by Water
from Amiens to Abbeville, in our Boat were two French-Gentlewomen, one of which per∣ceiving me to be English, ask'd me my Reli∣gion. I answer'd, as I justly might, that I was a Catholick, and she, for her better satisfa∣ction, offer'd me the little Cross on the top of her Beads to kiss, which I should have chose to have done rather than her Lips, and did as she desir'd me: Upon which the rest of the Company pronounc'd me, Un vrai Chri∣stien & ne point un Hugonet, a true Chistian, and not a Hugonet. But to proceed on our Jour∣ney. The same day we parted from Paris, we passed through Luzarch and St. Loup, and came into Picardy, where the first Town of Note for nothing, is Clermont, from thence to Bretaul, where we were harbour'd, and our Entertainment such as in other Places, as Sluttish as Inconvenient. The next day about ten, The City of Amiens, we had fight of the fair and goodly City of Amiens A City very Capacious, and for that reason has been often honour'd with the Persons and Reti∣nues of many great Princes. Suburbs it has none, because a Town of War, nor Terri∣tories, because a Frontier; yet the People are indifferent Rich, have a good Trade, be∣sides the benefit of the Cathedral. A strong Garrison, The Garri∣son. which in times of Peace maintains five hundred Soldiers, though the Cittadel being seated on a Hill in the lower part of the Town, it seems fitter to command than defend it, or to recover it being taken, than to save it from taking. Those that have seen it, and understand the Art of Fortifica∣tion, say it is Impregnable, nor am I able to
contradict it; for besides that it is a skill be∣yond my Profession, we were not allow'd to go within it. A commendable Policy in this Nation, and upbraids the Folly of the English, who for dozen of Ale, will shew a Foreigner the Curtain of Portsmouth, and let him mea∣sure the Sconces and Bulwarks, and for a Shilling more, he shall see the Provision and Ammunition, and walk the Round too. A French Crown fathoms the Walls of Dover-Castle, and Sounds the Peer, and for a Pint of Wine one may see the Block house at Tilbury in Essex; which is breaking open the Fences and Inclosures of our Nation, and ex∣posing our nakedness to Strangers. Another Circumstance that Ennobles this Town, is, that it is a Visedamate, and gives Honour to one of the Nobility, who is called Visedame of Amiens. In relation to the King, it has a Military Governour, and as a Corporation the chief Governour is a Mayor and Sheriffs, besides those of the Common-Council. Another thing which adds to the lustre of Amiens, The Church Nostre-Dame. is the Church of Nostre-dame, a Name by which most of the principal Churches in France are known; for they give every where more Honour to our Lady than our Savi∣our, to Mary than to Jesus, and for one Pa∣ter-Noster that the People are enjoyn'n to re∣hearse, there are ten Ave-Marias, and to re∣compence one Pilgrimage to Christ's Sepul∣chre at Jerusalem, you shall hear of two hun∣dred taken to our Lady of Loretto, She has four times more Holy Days assign'd her, set Forms of Prayers prescrib'd in the two Books, one called the Office, and the other the Ro∣sary,
whereas her Son must be contented with the Orisons in the Common-Mass-Book. Her Shrines and Images are more glorious and magnificent than those of her Son, and in her Chappels are more Vows paid than be∣fore the Crucifix. Leaving our Lady, let us take a view of her Church, The Church compared with West∣minster Abbey. which is questionless one of the most glorious Piles of Building under Heaven. The whole Body is of most curious polish'd Stones, supported by Buttresses of excellent Composure, that add to the beauty as well as strength of the Fabrick. The Quire is fairer than the Body, thick set with dainty Pillars, most of them reaching to the top, in the fa∣shion of an Arch, I am not able to judge whe∣ther this or the Quire of the Chappel of King Henry VII. at Westminster, is the more exqui∣site piece of Architecture, though I am per∣swaded that the most discerning Eye can find but little difference between them, and that difference rather subtile than sound; for if such Perfection may receive the word more, it may be said that of Amiens is more Majesti∣cal, and that of Westminster more Lovely, and yet neither disparage the other. The Front which presents us with two Towers and three Gates, is incomparable, The Front and Inside. and all the Sacred Stories are so lively Engra∣ved, that you would not think them Carv'd, but Acted, and is infinitely above the ambi∣tion of Imitation. Nor is its Glory (like Nostre-Dame in Paris and Rouen) all on the outside, for as soon as you enter in, you would think the Materials were all of Gold, and that the Glory of Solomon's Temple next
to the Description in the Holy Text is best read in this Church, of which it seems to be a well drawn Copy. Jupiter's House in Hea∣ven that the Poets have built him, was never half so Gorgeous, and that imaginary Palace of Ovid is verified in this Mansion. Hic Locus est, quem si verbis audacia detur, Haud timeam magni dixisse Palatia Regis. The Partition between the Body and the Quire is so overlaid with Gold, that the acu∣test would apprehend no other Substance. On the top of it is the Statue of our Lady in the just height and proportion of a Woman, with a Child in her Arms, all either of Gold or ex∣traordinary Gilded. The Glass of all the Windows are most curiously Painted, and the four Rows of Pillars with Tables on the top of them, containing the Pictures of Men of the better Quality of the City and adja∣cent Country, are exquisite pieces of Art and Admiration, and to view the beauty of the whole Structure, you would wish your self all Eye and Contemplation; and the only trouble of an ingenious Man is, to see the whole abused to Idolatrous purposes. In this great Church are twenty four little Massing-Closets, Massing-Chappels. and in that of St. Peter hung an Indulgence granted by Pope Gregory XV. Anno 1612. that gave an Exemption from the pains and place of Purgatory, to those who upon the Feast of All-Souls, and the Octaves of it, would pay their Devotions and Money in that Temple. At first, I thought this Charter a very Impolitick contrivance,
for in time it would empty the Popes Treasu∣ry, and at last put an end to Purgatory it self; but I soon perceiv'd my Error, for his Holy∣ness had restrain'd it in his Bull, only to the Natives of that Diocess, and left all the rest of the World in danger of those fansied Fires. Here I had the Mortification not to see the Head of St. John the Baptist, Of St. John Baptist's Head. which is said to be here entire, but I recover'd upon the remem∣brance, that in my Life-time I had seen it whole in more than an hundred of their Churches, besides pieces of it in double that number, and to believe them all to be true ones, is nothing, Sir, to what I find I must believe before I leave this Country, and I think in the complaisant humor I have taken up here, I shall not differ with them more a∣bout it, than with Pimper le Pim at Epsom, nor the famous Juglers at Tunbridge, which de∣ceive my Eyes while they Pick my Pocket. In a Boat like an English Lighter, Pignini, and the Story of it. we went down the River Soame towards Abbeville, with thirty other Persons of different Nations, Lan∣guages and Conditions, but all as true Catho∣licks as ever Woman groan'd for; though, many of them, by the more than ordinary Civility they shew'd to us, I perceiv'd were but of the last Edition, whom I pity, but dare not keep them Company, for fear of what may follow, which is here too severe and true to make a Jest of. The first thing, we saw observable, was the Town and Ca∣stle of Pignini, a poor beggarly Place, which they make remarkable fora Victory they here obtain'd over the English, but in whose Reign, and under whose Conduct they could not
tell us; but add, that the English were disco∣vered from other Nations confederated with them, and all put to the Sword for mispro∣nouncing the word Pignini, which it seems then was no fitter for an Englishman's Mouth than Shiboleth for an Ephraimite's, or a Fiddle for the Mouth of a Friar; but this is all Ro∣mance, and that which has caused it to be mention'd in our and their Histories, was an Interview between our Edward IV. and their Lewis XI. upon a nine Years Pacification. The next Place which the Water convey'd us to, was the Town and Castle of Pont d' Armie, Pont d' Armie. now scarce visible in its Ruines. Three Leagues down this River is Abbeville, Abbeville. conveniently seated on the River Soame, which runs through it. 'Tis bigger than Amiens, but not so beautiful nor populous; for the Houses are of an old Impression, and there is much waste Ground within it. A Castle it once had, but now that defect is supply'd by Mounts and Bastions large and capacious, which, if well Man'd, need nor yield upon the first Summons. Without the Wall it is diversly strengthned, in some places with deep Ditches full of Water; the others only by a Boggish, Marish, Fenny Level, more dangerous to an Enemy, and serviceable to the Town than all the rest of its Fortifications, and therefore never guarded by the Soldters of the Garrison. They only keep Guard at Port de Boys, and Port St. Valery, the first looks towards Hesden, a Frontier Town of Artois, and the other towards the Haven of St. Valery, from which Places most danger was fear'd.
July the last, we took Post-Horses, Our Jour∣ney to Bul∣logn on Post-Horses or things very like them, for Bulloign; as lean and poor were the Steeds, as Envy in the Poet, Maries in corpora tota was their Chara∣cter; for you might not only have counted their Ribs, but the Spur-galls had made such Casements through their Skins, that you might have Survey'd their Intrails, and given a better Account of the position of their Guts and Piping Lungs than Le Grey, or Mark∣ham in their Master-Pieces. A strange kind of Cattle in my Opinion they were, and such as had neither Flesh on their Bones, Skin on their Flesh, nor scarce Hair on their Skins. Sure I am, they were no Kin to Ovid's Horses of the Sun, nor could we say of them, Flam∣miferis implent hinnitibus auras. For all the Neighing we could hear from the Proudest of them, was only an old dry Cough, which they brought from the late Campagne in Flan∣ders, which in earnest, was a great comfort to me, for by that noise I perceived there was some Life in them. Upon such Skeletons of Horses, or heaps of Bones did I or my Com∣panions never see our selves before; and yet the Monsieurs that Travel'd with us, thought themselves well Mounted, and cock'd and look'd as great as the little Gentleman that Rides in Triumph before the Bears and Bag-Pipes in London, and almost scratched their Behinds as often. When we expected, however to find some∣thing of the Post in them, having Brib'd them on both sides, they began to move in an Al∣derman's pace, or like Envy in Ovid.
Surgit humi pigre, passuque incedet inerti. and out of this Melancholy Gravity no per∣swasion could urge them; the dull Jades were grown insensible of the Spur, and to hearten them with Wands would in a short time have distressed the Country for want of Wood. Now was the Cart at Diepe thought a speedy Conveyance, and we envy'd the hap∣piness of those that were blessed with a Wag∣gon, though it came with the hazard of the old Wife, and the two smutty Wenches. If good Nature or a Fright in the Journey did ever put any of them into a pace like a Gal∣lop, we were sure to have them Tire in the middle of our Stage, and put us with our own Feet to measure out the rest of our Jour∣ney. Weary of this Trade, I made bold to dismount the Postilion, and ascended the Trunk-Horse, where I sate in such a Magni∣ficent Posture, that the best Carrier in Paris would have envy'd my Felicity. Behind me I had a good large Trunk and a Portmantle, before me a bundle of Cloaks, and a parcel of Books. So that if my Stirrups could poize me equally on both fides, I could not fall backwards nor forwards. Thus preferred, I encouraged my fellow Travellers, who cast many an envious Eye upon my happiness, and there was not one of them that might not just∣ly have said of me, Tu as un Millieur temps que le Pape, Monstre∣ville and its Garri∣son. Thou hast a better time on't than the Pope in all his Grandeur. On the Right Hand, and almost in the Midway between Abbeville and Bulloign we
left the Town of Monstreville, which we had no leisure (than our Horses) to visit. It is conveniently seated either for command or resistance, being built upon the top and de∣clivity of a Hill, well Fortified with Bastions and Ramparts on the outside, and within has a good Garrison of Soldiers. And indeed it concerns the King of France to look well to this important Place, being a border Town, within two Miles of Artois, and the taking of it would cut off all Intercourse between the Countries of Bulloign and Calais, with the rest of France, and of the like consideration are the Towns of Abbeville, Amiens and St. Quintin. We are now come to the Country of Bullin∣nois, which, though a part of Picardy, Bulloign. dis∣dains to be counted so, and will be esteemed as a Country of it self. It comprehends Bul∣loin, Escapes, Neuf-Chastel, and divers little Villages, and consists of Hills and Valleys af∣ter the manner of England. Nor is it only a Country of it self, but in a manner a free Coun∣try; for it is held immediately of the Virgin Mary, who without Question is a very Gra∣cious Land-Lady, for her Tenants enjoy a per∣petual Exemption from many Tributes and Taxations, with which the rest of France are miserably afflicted. Amongst others, from that of Salt, by reason whereof, and the goodness of their Pastures they make the best Butter in all the Kingdom, and a Firkin of it is a very acceptable Present at Paris. The Town of Bullorgn is divided into the Upper and lower, distant from one another a∣bour a hundred Paces. The lower Town is
bigger than the Upper, which is called the City, better built, the Streets larger, and the People richer, most of the Merchants inha∣biting here for the conveniency of the Ha∣ven. The Upper Town is environ'd with deep Ditches, a strong Wall, a treble Gate, and two Draw-Bridges; a little Town it is, not above a flights shot over in the widest Place, and has but one Church in it besides Nostre-Dame, which is the Cathedral. The Streets not many, and those narrow, except in the Market-place, where the Corps du Gard is kept. What the Out-works are, or whe∣ther it hath any, I cannot tell, for though it be a time of Peace, and they very fond of it, their Jealousie would not permit me to walk upon the Wall, either within or without the Town, and I wish that we were not inferior to our Neighbours in the greatness of their Care, since we are equal to the best of them in the goodness of our Country. On Monday the 28th of August, Mr. N. took Shipping for England with a fair Wind, I wish him a good Voyage, and these Papers safe in your Hands, with assurance that while I continue in France, you shall have a further Account of what occurs here, to SIR,  Your Humble Servant, Eugenius Philo-Patriae. FINIS.
