S6264 12567979 63388
THE WORKS OF GEORGE SVVINNOCK, M. A. CONTAINING These several Treatises. VIZ. The Christian Mans Calling, First Part. Wherein a Chri∣stian is directed how to carry himself in Religious Du∣ties, Natural Actions, Particular Vocation, Family Di∣rection, his own Recreation. Second Part, The Christian directed to perform his duty, as Parent, Child, Husband, Wife, Master, Servant; and in the conditions of Prosperity and Adversity. Third Part, Directing a Christian to perform his duty, in his Dealings with all men, in the Choice of his Compa∣nions, in Evil Company, in Good Company, in Solitude, on a Week-day from Morning to Night, in Visiting the sick, on a Dying Bed. Heaven and Hell Epitomized, or the true Christian Characterized. Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration. Fading of the Flesh, and Flourishing of Faith. A Valedictory Sermon, on Act. 20. 32. Men are Gods, on Psal. 82. 6,7. LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the hree Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap side, over-against the great Conduit. 1665.
CLARISSIMO VIRO, RICHARDO HAMPDEN, DE Hampden, in Comitatu Bucks, Armigero; SVPREMI SENATVS Regni Anglicani Membro Dignissimo: NEC NON, NOBILISSIMAE DOMINAE, LAETITIAE HAMPDEN, Conjugi Pientissimae; In perpetuum Summae gratitudinis monumentum, Debitae observantiae testimonium, Sinceri amoris symbolum, Hanc tertiam, de nobili  exercitio, partem D. D. D. Georgius Swinnock. Obnixe rogans , ut in illos & omnigenam felicitatem in praesenti, &  in futuro seculo conferre velit.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. SUch is the beauty of Holiness, the ex∣cellency of Divine Nature, and the reasonableness, and righteousness of the Service of God; as also the ne∣cessity of Mans devoting himself wholly to it, that were not his understanding, which is the Sun in the lesser world, strangely uffled with clouds; his will, which as the Moon, borroweth its light from it, full of spots and changes, and desperately bent upon evil; his af∣fections as stars of malevolent influence, brutishly enslaved to his sensual appetite; and his whole nature deplorably vitiated, it were impossible for him, to turn his back upon the authority, commands, and threatnings of his Maker; to
trample on the bowels, and blood, and intrea∣ties of his Redeemer; to despise the motions, and perswasions, and assistance of the holy Spi∣rit, in order to his recovery out of that bot∣tomless gulph of misery, into which he hath plunged himself, and his restauration to a state of purity and eternal happiness; and there would be no such need of calling so frequently and fer∣vently, and of crying so urgently and earnestly to him, to exercise himself unto godliness. As he that is an Atheist in his principles, and denyeth the being of such a thing as Religion, must deny his very senses, since his eyes, and ears, and taste, and feeling, do all loudly Preach a deity to him; So he that is an Atheist in his practices, and denyeth the making Religion his business, must deny his reason, and debase him∣self into a Beast; for common understanding, notwithstanding its great loss by the fall, will in∣form him that he is made for higher things then the service of a brutish flesh, and the pursuit of earthly fading enjoyments, and that the worship of his God (the Fountain of his being, and well-spring of his happiness) as most sutable to his spiritual nature, as most conducing to his own advancement, interest and perfection, is most worthy of all his heart, and soul, and strength, and of all his time, and care, and labour. But alas the sad fruit of mans apostacy, in the depravation of his nature, abundantly manifest∣eth it self to every eye that is not stark blind. As an old disease, doth not onely afflict the part
of its proper residence, and by its habitual abode there, make a continual diminution of the strength; but also makes a path and Channel for the hu∣mours to run thither, which by continual de∣fluction, dig an open passage, and prevail a∣bove all the natural power of resistance: So hath Original sin debauched the mind, and made it think crooked things straight, and straight things crooked, loathsom things lovely, and lovely things loathsom; perverted the will, and made it as a diseased stomach, to call for, and eat unwholsom meat, against his own reason; en∣thralled his affections, to sensuality and brutish∣ness; chained the whole man, and delivered it up to the law of sin, and laid those strengths of reason and conscience in fetters, by which it might be hindered in its vicious inclinations, and course of prophaness. Hence it comes to pass, that neither the beauty of grace, nor equity of living to God, nor the absolute necessity of mans exercising himself to godliness, will pre∣vail with him. So great is the glory and amiableness of the New Creation, that not onely the Saints who are in∣dued with wisdom from above, and can judge a∣right, esteem it above their honours, and riches, and relations, and lives, and rejoyce in it as their peculiar priviledge and highest dignitie; but even Angels, behold it with admiration, and look on their own purity, and conformity to the divine nature and pleasure, as their greatest per∣fection. Nay, God himself, whose being is the
pattern, and whose will is the rule of holiness, is ra∣vished and enamoured with it, as that which is the travail of the soul of his dear son, the immediate work of his own spirit, and the end, and glo∣ry, and master-piece of all the works of his hands; Yet this heavenly off-spring, this divine image, this supernatural beam of light, this resemblance and picture of Gods own perfections, this royal attire of the celestial Courtiers, which rende∣reth the poorest and meanest Christian, more noble and excellent then his highest, and richest, ungodly Neighbour, and makes him more glo∣rious then a clear skie, bespangled with the shi∣ning stars, or an imperial Diadem, sparkling with the richest Diamonds, is the scorn and de∣rision of the blind unworthy world; That as Sal∣vian complained in his days,Salv. l. 4. De gub. di. Tert. Apol. Si honoratior quis∣piam religioni se applicuerit, illico honoratus esse desistit; si fuerit sublimis, fit despicabilis, i splen∣didissimus, fit vilissimus; si totus honoris, fit totus injuria, &c. If a noble person betake himself to religion, he is presently degraded, and all his for∣mer fame, and honour, and renown, turned in∣to disgrace, contempt, and contumely; and men are forced to be vicious, lest they should be counted vile. Foolish wormes, pretended Christians, are like persecuting Pagans, who could think and speak well of some of the Saints, onely their Religion they judged, like Coperas, tur∣ned all their Wine into Ink, gave a dash to all their vertues and excellencies. Bonus vir Cajus
Sejus sed malus, tanquam quod Christianus, was the Heathens voice in Tertullians time. Blind Beetles, men admire fancies, shadows, nothings, and tram∣ple on true worth and real excellency; As the E∣gyptians, if they met with a Cat or Crocodile, bowed down to it, and worshipped it, when they passed by the great Luminaries of Heaven without admiration: So these beholding the poor mean treasures, and fleeting honours of this world, bow down the knees of their souls to them, and worship them, but pass by the beauti∣ful Image of the blessed God, the unsearchable riches in Christ, and the glory to be revealed, without any respect or regard. So reasonable and righteous is mans devoting himself to the worship of the blessed and most high God, that he cannot without manifest injustice, as well as ingratitude and folly, deny the exer∣cising himself to godliness. Unless man were his own Maker he cannot have any title to become his own Master, Psa. 119. 73. The Redeemers title to us is certain, and clear, and unquestionable, whether we own it or no, and all the while we keep any thing from him, or deny subjection to him, we rob him of his right; Ye are not your own, but ought with a price, therefore glorifie God in your bodies, and spirits, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. ult. The Slave is not his own man, but his who redeemed him, though his proud and stubborn spirit may re∣fuse to acknowledge it. Man is not in the condi∣tion of those persons who are servants by compact and agreement, for a year, or so long as they
think fit, and upon their own terms; but like those whom the Romans took in War, over whose persons and estates they had an absolute domini∣on, as well as a right to their works and service. Though the Commands of Christ, are all holy, just, and good, as profitable for man, as honou∣rable for himself, yet he hath absolute authority over man, and all that he hath, and may com∣mand him what he pleaseth. As Laban said to Iacob, These daughters are my daughters, these sons are my sons, these cattel are my cattel, and all thou seest is mine: So the Redeemer, by vertue of the price he laid down, his most precious blood, may say to every man, This soul is my soul, this body is my body, this estate is my estate, these children and friends are my children and friends, this name, and credit, and interest, is mine, and all thou haste is mine. Yet alas, men o will give their Relations their due, strangers their due, ene∣mies their due, nay, according to their Proverb, the very Devil his due, and far more then his due, will not give Iesus Christ his due; but against all ju∣stice and righteousness, rob and wrong him of that which is his own, and dearly bought too, Rom. 14.7, 8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord; whether therefore we live or dye, we are the Lords. For to this end, Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. So absolute is the necessity of mans making Reli∣gion his business, that upon his diligence or negli∣gence herein, his eternal salvation or damnation
doth depend. If any man will be Christs Disci∣ple, he must deny himself, disclaim all title, and disown all right to himself, have nothing more to do with himself, as upon his own account, and make an unfaigned, unreserved dedication of himself, and all that he hath to the honour and interest of his Redeemer. Sanctification is a se∣paration from all common to sacred uses, and this must be done with all the heart, and soul, and strength, in the whole course of the life, by all that will escape the wrath to come; God com∣mandeth men to strive to enter in at the straight gate, to work out their salvations with fear and trem∣bling, to be holy as he is holy, in all manner of con∣versation; and his word is like the Law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be altered. He hath en∣joyned nothing but what his infinite wisdom saw fit, and he is resolved not to vary the least tittle, not to abate the least farthing of the price he hath set. Foolish men are so besotted by their deceit∣ful hearts, and befooled by the Devil, that they complement with Religion, and onely give it an outside formal salute, instead of cordial embra∣ces, and real entertainment. They deal with re∣ligion, as Anacharsis saith the Athenians dealt with money, using it for no other end but to number and cast up accounts with, whereas it might have served them for excellent purposes. So they use Religion onely for a shew, for fashion, for custom, and are satisfied with an hypocritical way of Wor∣shipping God, and think to put God off there∣with, whereas it would serve them for high and
honourable ends, it would if entertained in the power and life of it, elevate the Christian above this beggarly world, enable him to combat with, and conquer his sturdy stubborn lusts, and the power and policy of Hell, help him to a conversa∣tion in Heaven, to converse and communion with the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, and dress his soul for a blessed eternity. Reader, If thou art unacquainted with this high and honourable, this worthy and noble Calling of Christianity; I shall appeal to thy reason and con∣science, in the tender of some questions, possibly one or other of them may prevail with thee to bind thy self Apprentice to it. As a Fowler, according to the different nature of his game, contrives and appropriates his stratagems, that some he catcheth with light, as Larks with a glass and day nets; some with baits, as Pigeons with pease; some with frights, as Blackbirds with a low-bell; some with company, as Ducks with decoy fowl. So I shall endeavour to suit my questions to thy temper, whatever it be, that if either the light of reason, or the bait of unconceiveable and infinite profit, or the frights of dreadful threatnings and commi∣nations, or the company of Christ the captain of our salvation and all his followers and Souldiers, who marched to Heaven in this way, will win upon thee, I may perswade thee to make Religion thy business. O that being crafty, I might catch thee with holy guile! To this end I beseech thee to weigh the questions, again, and again, as thou readest them, and to dart up thy prayers to Heaven for a
blessing on them, that thou mayst not reject the counsel of God against thy own soul, but hearken to counsel, receive instruction, and be wise for thy lat∣ter end. 1. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, upon which the true comfort and joy of thy life, during thy whole pilgrimage doth depend? Comfort is the cream, the top of life, joy is the flower, the honey, the life of life; Life without comfort, without de∣light is a living death. If the body be disquieted with diseases, and aches, and pains, the soul as a tender Husband sympathizing with his bride, though the patient be heir of a Kingdom, and comman∣der of large dominions, yet all creatures to him are unsavoury morsels, and as an aguish pallat, he can taste, can rellish nothing; Iob in distress speaks in such a mans dilect, Why is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? Job 3. 20. Light is one of the most excellent things that God hath made, and is therefore used by the Holy Ghost to set out not onely the Word of God, and the Work of Godliness, Psa. 119. 105. 1 Iohn 1. 7. but also Christ, and Heaven, and God himself, 1 Ioh. 9. 1 Colos. 12. 1 Iohn 1. 5. Life is the Apex, the highest stair, the top-stone, the choisest of all tem∣poral mercies; There is no flower in natures garden for beauty or excellency comparable to it; there∣fore men if brought to the pinch will part with all to redeem this; Skin for skin, all that a man hath will he give for his life. The loss of life is the chiefest outward loss, and esteemed the greatest satisfacti∣on to justice or nature. The desire of life is in∣deed the greatest earthly blessing, the most loyal
people can desire for their loving Prince; Let the King live; but light and life as precious pearls as they are, become burdens most toylsom and tedi∣ous to men without comfort. Joy to life, is as the form to the matter, which animates and actuates it, and makes it spightful and lively; Why is light given to one in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? Now Reader, It is Religion that is the com∣fort of thy life, by bringing thee to him who is the life of all thy comforts. Other things can never sue, and so can never satisfie and therefore can never truly refresh or rejoyce the soul of man; The body may sooner be fed and preserved with Air and Wind, as the soul filled with the whole world. They who swim down, with a full stream of outward good things, who have waters of a full cup wrung out to them, and have more then heart can wish, though they be Masters of hidden and bottomless mines, as the Spanish Ambassadour boasted of his Soveraigns treasures in the Indies; though they have thou∣sands and millions of heads bare, and knees bowing to them, and are mounted to the loftiest pinacle of honour, and fame, and renown; though their garments are of finest silk, sented with the sweetest perfumes, embroydered by the most skilful Artist, and enamelled with the richest jewels, though their food be the most choice and luscious delicates, the most mellifluous Nectar, that earth, air, and water can afford, and though their bodies be in the most perfect state of health, and thereby enabled to extract the quintessence of all this, and so rellish it in the highest degree, yet all this is not able to give
them the least dram of true delight, the smallest crum of true comfort. In the midst of their suffi∣ciency (such Monarchs) are in straights; They may possess much, but enjoy nothing; Their faces sometimes are featured with laughter, when at the same time their souls are in little ease; In the midst of mirth their hearts are sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. As some Plumbs that are sweet and luscious in the outward part, but have bitter kernels; so the most rich and honourable sinners, in the midst of their mirth, and gigling, and sports, have inward gripes, which like Leaven, sowreth the whole lump of their enjoyments. Haman, though exalted to the highest seat next the Throne in the Persian Court, and had the command of him who commanded one hundred and twenty seven Pro∣vinces, yet had an aking heart, and a worm gnaw∣ing his inwards, that he cryeth out, All this avails me nothing, &c. The Worlds greatest darlings, whom she dandleth most upon her knees, and to whom she granteth her sweetest kisses, are but at best like a curious marble chimney-piece, glorious and shining without, but full of soot and blackness within. God did at first for mans fall judge the earth to bring forth Briars and Thorns, and all the fruit it beareth will be piercing and paining, what ever men fancy to themselves. But Reader, though the curse of the earth be Thistles and Thorns, yet the blessing of Heaven is light and joy. Though the World be empty and vain, and vexatious; yet Religion is full, and filling the soul with content and comfort. Observe the very formal nature of it; The Kingdom of God
(i. e. Religion) consisteth not in meats and drinks, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom. 14. 17. Peace and joy is the heart-chearing wine which groweth upon this vine; A good conscience is a continual feast; Natural things must be brought to their center before they can enjoy rest; and how can it be expected that spiritual beings can enjoy true repose, but in their centre the Father of spirits! That peace which passeth all understanding, that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory, are the true and legitimate children of the power of god∣liness. Outward things and formes, like Glow-worms, may be glistering, but they are not warming; Tis the power of Religion, like the Sun, that brings refreshing light, and enlivening heat along with it. The wicked is snared in his wickedness, but the righteous sing & rejoyce. 2. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, in which thou hast to do with an insinite, glorious, and jealous Majesty? If men are serious about the con∣cernments of a Father, or Master, or Noble-man, or King, how serious should they be about the concern∣ments of a God? I must tell thee Reader, that thou hast every moment of thy life to do with the great God. Whether thou art eating, or drinking, or walk∣ing, or buying, or selling, or ploughing, or sowing, or reaping (as well as when thou art praying or hearing, or reading, or meditating) thou haste still to do with God. In all companies, in all thy relations, in all natu∣ral actions, in all civil transactions, at all seasons, thou haste more to do with God then with any creature, then with all the creatures; And is his work to be slighted or dallied with, or slubbered over? Is it good playing or toying with his interest and concerns, in
whose hand is thy breath, and life, and all that thou hast? Dost thou not know that his eyes is ever upon thee, that his arm is able to reach and revenge him on thee when he pleaseth; that he looks on himself as worthy to be observed and pleased, in all thy thoughts, and words, and deeds? and wilt thou dare him to his face, and provoke him before his eyes, and cast him behind thy back, as not deserving to be minded or re∣garded? Is his fury so light a burden, or his favour so little a blessing, that thou art so indifferent unto ei∣ther? Ah didst thou but know what a God thou hast to deal with, in every part, and passage, and moment of thy life; how sweet his love is, far better then life; how bitter his wrath is, more dreadful then death; didst thou know how great a good, how blessed a friend, how high an honour, how choice an happiness, how rich a cordial, how vast a trea∣sure he is to them that make his service their busi∣ness; didst thou know how powerful an enemy, how intolerable his anger is, what a Lion geedy of his prey, what a consuming fire he is to them that do his work by halfes and negligently; didst thou know him as the saved in heaven know him, to be an hive of sweetness, a river of pleasure; or as the damned in hell know him, to be a sea of wormwood, meeting thee as a Bear robbed of her whelps: O what wouldst thou then think of mak∣ing religion thy business! speak Friend in thy con∣science; wouldst thou then live without him in the world, and leave him out as one unconcerned in the several passages of thy conversation? Wouldst thou then put him off with the skin, and shell, and car∣kasse of religion, as if he were an Idol, and had
eyes, and saw not; and ears, and heard not; instead of an hearty dedication of thy self, and all thou hast to his service? Wouldst thou then eat or drink, or buy, or sell, or do any thing without ask∣ing his leave, and begging his blessing, and obser∣ving the rules and commands which he hath pre∣scribed thee? Or wouldst thou not rather do all things as in his presence, according to his precepts, and as may be most for his praise, believing that he is not a God to be dallied with? 3. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which is the end of thy being and preservation, and of all the mercies that thou enjoyest, and of all the cost and charge which the Great God is night and day at with thee? For what end dost thou think the Great and Glorious God formed thy body so couriously in the womb, and animated it with an heaven-born soul? but that thou mightst be made capable of admi∣ring his excellencies, adoring his perfections, and obeying his precepts. Canst thou be so foolish as to think that he created thee to despise his domi∣nion, and break his laws, and dishonour his name, and walk contrary to him in thy conversation? Wherefore dost thou imagine God doth preserve thee in thy being, afford thee health, and strength, and sleep, and food, and raiment, and friends, and respect, and protect thee in thy outgoings, and incom∣ings, and defend thee from invisible enemies, who are continually waiting to destroy thee, and have power enough to drag thee into hell every mo∣ment, bt are onely restrained by his almighty arm; but that thou mightest by these streams be led up∣ward to the fountain, imploy these talents as a faith∣full
Steward for the honour of thy Master, and by these gifts, tokens of his love be perswaded to own and acknowledge the giver? Canst thou b so sot∣tish as to think that he bestoweth these favours upon thee, that thou shouldst walk after the flesh and embrace the present world, or to strengthen thee in thy treasons, and rebellions against him? To what purpose dost thou imagine, he bestoweth on thee his Gospel, his Ministers, his Sabbaths, his Ordi∣nances, many golden seasons of grace? but to help and enable thee to draw nigh to him, to seek out after him, to desire him, and delight in him, as thy onely happiness and heaven? Surely thou canst not be so brutish, as to conceive that he giveth thee all this (as women give babies to children) to play and toy with; or (as the Dutch are reported to have sent powder and shot for money to the Spaniards) to fight against him with? Doth not the Husbandman who takes care by dunging, and ploughing, and sowing, and harrowing to manue his ground, expect that it will bring forth the greater crop, and so recompence his cost, that the profit which he shall receive by it at harvest will answer all his pains? When a Father is at a great charge in the nurture and education of his child, provi∣ding him Tutors, or sending him first to some consi∣derable Schools for a good while, next to the Uni∣versity, then to the Inns of Court? is it not his rd that his Son may be an honour to him, contin his name with credit, and be a prop and suppo to his family? And canst thou think that the only wise God, to whom all Men are absolute, and Angels comparative fools, is at such infinite cost and charge
with thee upon any other account, then that thou mayst be serviceable to his interest, advance his king∣dom, and make his praise glorious; by a pious, graci∣ous, and exemplary conversation, and by making his service thy business? 4. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which is the elevation, and advancement, and perfe∣ction of thine heaven-born immortal soul? The ad∣vancement and restauration of a Prince, and one nobly born to his kingdom and birth-right, is much more deserving our care, and pains, and treasure, and blood, then the exaltation of a beggar from the dunghil. The soul of man is royally descend∣ed, begotten of God; holiness is its restauration to its original glory, and primitive perfection, which it lost by the fall, and therefore is worthy of all our cost, and care, and study, and labour. Thy soul Reader, is of unconceivable value and excellency; 1. As it is immediately created by God, without any pre-existing matter. 2. As it is of an immaterial and spiritual nature. 3. As it is capable of the image, and life, and love, and fruition of God himself. 4. As it is immortal, and of eternal duration; though years, and ages, and generations, and time have an end, the soul hath no end. 5. As it is the bottom in which the body and its everlasting good is embarqued. 6. As it is the standard and measure of all our outward excellencies; as friends, and health, and food, and life, and riches, and honour, and mini∣sters, and ordinances, are more or less worth, as
they are more or less serviceable to the soul. Now grace and godliness is the honour, and elevation, and excellency of the soul; it is soul-beauty, Cant. 4. 1. it is soul-wisdom, Prov. 4. 7. it is soul-riches, Luk. 12. 21. it is soul-glory, soul-comfort, soul-food, soul-raiment, soul rest. O how worthy is that form which animates, and elevates the soul of man, as its subject and matter! He that addeth honour to a puissant King, must be high and honourale in∣deed. That which is the form of our form, and the soul of our soul, that exalteth and honoureth so noble a piece, must needs deserve to be our only business. 5. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which was the great design and end of the blessed Re∣deemers birth, life, death, burial, ascension and inter∣cession? No man, unless worse then distracted, can possibly conceive that the glorious God, whose wis∣dom is unsearchable, and love to his Son unquestion∣able, would send his onely begotten Son out of his bosome; or that Christ in whom were all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, would give himself to be born so meanly, to live so poorly, to die so pain¦fully, to be disgraced, reviled, buffetted, scourged, crucified for any thing that was not superlatively eminent, and deserved to be the main work, and business of every man in this world. The great∣ness of the price, the blood of God, doth to every rational understanding fully speak the preciousness of the pearl. Now how clear and plain is it in the word of truth, that the Redeemer gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purifie unto him∣self a peculiar people, zealous of goodworks? Tit. 2. 14.
That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him in holiness and righteousness all our days. Surely Reader, that which the Son of God, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, thought worthy the taking on himself the form of a ser∣vant, and the suffering, the spite, and malice of men, the wrath and rage of devils, and the frowns and fury of his father, to purchase for thee, doth deserve to be minded and regarded by thee, as thee onely thing thou followest after, and setst thy self about during thy pilgrimage. Alas, All the pains, and labour, and watching, and working, and time, and strength, and lives of all the men in the world, are not equivalent to one drop of the blood of Christ, or the least degree of his humiliation; and wilt thou deny to make that thy business, for which he shed so much blood, and laid down his life? 6. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which is the peculiar work of the Holy Ghost, and for which the Spirit is infused into the hearts of men? The worth of the Father doth speak the desert of the Child. Though men who pretend to honour the Father for his work of Creation, and to admire the Son for his work of Redemption, blasphemously deride and wretchly, slight sanctification, which is the work of the Spirit, yet undoubtedly the work of the Spirit is no whit inferiour to either; nay, is the beauty and glory both of Creation and Redemption, as being the end and perfection of both. The Fa∣ther created the world in order to the new crea∣tion by the Spirit, as that choice work man ship
which he resolved should bring him in the largest revenue of praise and honour. Tis the new heavens wherein dwelleth righteousness, that doth most de∣clare the glory of God and the Firmament (of spark∣ling graces) that sheweth forth his most choice and curious handi-work. Sanctification is the travel of the Sons soul, a spiritual sacred life, the great end of his death; The Son redeemed man from slavery, to sin and Satan, and unto the service of righteous∣ness, by layino down the price thereof, his own most precious blood. One of the Sons main works, was to purchase the re-impression of Gods Image on man; the actual performance of which, is the peculiar office of the Spirit; hence he tells us, Ioh. 14. I go away that the comforter may come, and again, Ioh. 6. The Spirit was not yet given, (i. e. so plentifully and universally) because Iesus was not yet glorified. And therefore we read, that in few days after his ascension, to acquaint us what was one main end and fruit of his death and suffering; he powreth down the holy Ghost in an extraordinary manner and measure. So that Creation, the work of the Father, doth as it were provide the matter, the wax. Redemption the work of the Son, buy∣eth the Image of God; the Seal and Sanctification, the work of the Spirit stampeth it on the soul. Now Reader, doth not the Sanctification of the Soul deserve to be thy main business, when it is the curious work of the holy Spirit; as that which the Fathers eye was chiafly on in thy Creation, and the Sons in thy Redemption. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which addeth a real worth to every thing, and without
which nothing is of worth or value? Every one will grant, that what is so richly excellent, as to enno∣ble and add an intrinsick value to whatsoever it is affixed; and the lack of which maketh every thing (be they in other respects never so precious) low and mean, must needs deserve to be our business. Truely Friend, such is holiness; it makes the word of God a precious word, more to be embraced then gold, yea, then much fine gold. The Ordinances of God, precious Ordinances; the people of God, a preci∣ous people, the excellent of the earth. What is the reason that some, in the account of him who is best able to judge, though they be never so rich or beautiful, or high and honourable in the world, are called Dross, Chaff, Stubble, Dust, Filth, Ves∣sels of dishonour; and counted Dogs, Swine, Ver∣mine, Serpents, Cockatrices, but want of holiness? What is the reason that some, though poor and de∣spised, and mean, and houseless, and friendless, are esteemed (by him who can best discern true worth) The glory of the World, the glory of Christ, a Royal Diadem, a Royal Priesthood; higher then the Kings of the earth, more excellent then their Neigh∣bours; Princes in all lands, such of whom the world is not worthy? but because they are godly persons, an holy people. Why are some Angels advanced to the highest Heavens, waiting always in the presence of the King of Kings, honoured to be his Ministers and Deputies in the Government of this lower world; when other Angels are thrown down into the lowest Hell, for ever banished the Celestial Court, and bound in chains of darkness, as priso∣ners to the day of execution? but holiness in the for∣mer, and want of it in the latter.
8. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which will and can refresh and revive thee in an hour of death, and enable thee to sing and triumph at the approach of the King of terrors? The Master of Moral Philosophy tells us, that its worth the while for a man to be all the time he lives, learning how to dye well. The unerring spirit of God acquaints us, that it ought to be our great work to be wise for our lat∣ter end. Doubtless it must be a rich costly cordial indeed, and deserves not a little time and pains, and charge to prepare, which can keep a man from fainting in such a day of extremity; wherein our honours, and treasures, friends, wives, children, nay, our flesh and hearts will fail and forsake us. That cannot be of mean worth, which can make a man encounter his last enemy with courage and conquest; at the sight of which, Kings, and Cap∣tains, and Nobles, and the greatest Warriers have trembled, as leaves with the wind, and their hearts melted as grease before the fire. Now Reader, Godliness is that wine which will cause thee to sing at the approach of this Goliah, and enable thee as Leviathan, to laugh at the shaking of his spear; when whole hosts of others, without Godliness, flie like Cowards before it, and would give all they are worth to avoid fighting with it. Heark what a challenge the godly sends to this ad∣versary, daring it to meet him in the field; O death where is thy sting! O grave where is thy victory! the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; But thanks be to God, who hath given us the victory through our Lord Iesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57, 58. The Naturalists tell us of a precious stone called Ce∣raunias,
that glisters most when the Skie is Cloudy, and over-cast with darkness. Godliness friend, will cast the greatest lustre on thee, and put the greatest comfort in thee, when thy time of trouble and day of death is come. This, this is the friend that is born for the day of adversity; Therefore the sweet singer of Israel having this with him, promi∣seth; Though he walk in the valley of the shadow of death, he will fear none ill, Psal. 23. 9. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which will help thee to comfort and confidence at a dreadful day of judgement, and cause thee to lift up thy head with joy, when thousands and millions shall weep and wail. The day of judgement will be a terrible day indeed; the judge will come in flaming sire, a fire devouring before him and behind him, a flame burn∣ing. His tribunal, will be a tribunal of fire; Out of his mouth did proceed a fiery Law, and by that law of fire he will try men for their eternal lives and deaths. The earth at that day, will be consumed with fire, and the elements melt with fervent heat. If the cry of fire, firè, in the night now, be so dread∣full, and doth so afright and amaze us, though it be but in one house, and possible not very near us; how dreadful will that day be, when we shall see the whole world in a flame, and the Judge coming in flaming fire to pronounce our eternal dooms! Who can abide the day of his coming! or who can stand when he appeareth! Then the Kings, and Captains, and Nobles, and Mighty Men will call to the rocks to fall on them, and to the hills to hide them, from the face that sitteth in the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 15.
O Reader, of what worth is that which will help thee, as the three Children, to sing in the midst of so many flaming fiery furnaces, and preserve thee from being hurt, or so much as toucht therewith! Truely Godliness will do this for thee, it will turn this day of the perdition of ungodly men into a day of redemption to thee; As true Gold is not consumed by the hottest fire, and the Salamander can live in the greatest flames; so the godly man, in the midst of all those fires and flames, will live and flourish though millions of ungodly ones are scorched and tortured. As he is a King now reigning over his stubborn lusts and unruly passions; that will be his Coronation day, wherein he will appear before the whole world in all his glory and royalty. As he is a Husbandman now sowing to the Spirit; that will be his Harvest-day, wherein he shall reap the fruit of all his prayers, and tears, and watchings, and fast∣ings, and labour, and sufferings. As he is compared to a Virgin, betrothed to Christ, now keeping his garments white and clean, and devoting himself to the service and honour, and commands of his Lord; that will be his Marriage day, wherein he shall be arrayed in fine linnen, the righteousness of the Saints, adorned with the jewels of perfect graces, and solemnly espoused to the King of Saints, the heir of all things, and the fairest of ten thousands, the Lord Jesus Christ. As he is a servant, now do∣ing not his own, but the will of his Master in Hea∣ven, and finishing his work; that will be the day wherein his Indentures will expire, and he shall en∣joy the glorious, liberty of the Sons of God. As he is a Son, now yielding reverence and obedience to the
Father of Spirits, that will be the day wherein he shall be declared to be of full age, and enjoy his portion and inheritance. As he is a Souldier now fighting the good fight of faith, warring a good war∣fare, enduring much hardship as a good souldier of Iesus Christ; that will be the day wherein he shall be called off the guard, discharged of those tire∣some, toylsome duties, incumbent on him in this life, and receive his garland, a Crown of everlast∣ing life. Little dost thou conceive Reader, the worth of Godliness at that day. Godliness will then be ho∣noured and admired, not onely by them that have it, and rejoyce in it; but also by the most pro∣phane and carnal wretches, and those who now despise and deride it. Then the blind world who now shut their eyes and will not see, and the athei∣stical world who harden their hearts and will not believe, shall return, and discern, and see, and be∣lieve a difference between the godly and ungodly; between them that fear the Lord, and them that fear him not. O friend, what wouldst thou give at that day, that godliness had been thy business at this day! Godliness will make the judge the Lord Jesus Christ thy friend; the Father, by whose authority he fits the King of all Nations, thy friend; the Iustices who will be upon the bench (for he shall come with thousands of his Saints) thy friends; Godliness would make the law, by which thou art to be tryed, thy friend; Godliness would make thy conscience, which is to be brought in as the evi∣dnce, thy friend; Godliness would strike dumb all thy accusers, Satan, thy corruptions, and suffer
none of them to hurt thee as thy foes. And is not Godliness worthy to be made thy business which will do all this for thee? 10. Is not that worthy to be made thy business which will do thee good to eternity? The fool is for good for many years, but a wise man is for goods that will last to eternity. In worldly matters we value those houses and goods highest which will last longest; We will give much more for the fee-simple or inheritance for ever of a dwelling or lands, then for a term of few years, or for a lease for life, though we can enjoy them but during life. O why should it not be thus in spirituals! Why should we not set the greatest price, and take the most pains, for that which is not for years, or ages, but for ever; for that which we may enjoy, and have full solid comfort in to eternity? No good that is eternal can be little; if it be but an humane friend whom thou lovest, to enjoy him for ever, or a bodily health to enjoy it for ever, or near relations to enjoy them for ever, will infinitely ad∣vance the price and raise the value of them; but to enjoy a God for ever, the blessed Saviour for ever, the comforting Spirit for ever, fullness of joy for ever, rivers of pleasures for ever, and exceeding weight of glory for ever, a crown, a kingdom, an inheritance for ever, which is the fruit of Godliness, what tongue can declare, what mind can apprehend the worth of these! Alas, frailty is such a flaw in all earthly tenures, that it doh exceedingly abate their value, and should our affections to them. Who would esteem much of that flower which flourisheth and looks lovely in the morning, but
perisheth and is withered at night? How little are those things worth which are to day mine, and to morrow anothers, which make themselves wings, and as birds flye away, are no sooner in sight, but almost as soon out of sight? Though all the works and creatures of God are excellent, and admirable in their degrees and places, yet some are of far more worth then others, because of their nearer relation to our spiritual souls, and their eter∣nal duration. When I look upon honours, and ap∣plause, and respect in the world, methinks its worth is little; for I can see through that air; it is but a breath, a blast that quickly passeth away. When I look upon houses, and lands, and silver, and gold, I may well judge their price low; for there is a worm that will eat out and consume the strongest timberd-dwelling, and gold and silver are corrupt∣able things. Riches are not for ever. When I look upon my Wife and Children, in whom I have through mercy much comfort and contentment; yet their value, as natural relations, is small; for so they shall not be mine for ever; and therefore they that have wives, are commanded to be as though they had none. But when I look upon grace, upon godliness, upon religion, upon the Image of God; O of what innite worth, and price, and value are they, because they are lasting, they are everlasting, they are mine for ever! When honours, and crowns, and robes, and scepters are but for a few days; when stately pallaces, and costly mannors, and treasures, gold and pearl are but for a short time; when the most lovely, and loving wives, and hus∣bands, and sons, and daughters, and friends are
frail and fading, The fear of the Lord is clean, en∣during for ever. Godliness is the good part that (when thy relations, and possessions, and all the good thing of this life shall be taken from thee) shall never be taken from thee. Reader, what an argument is here to provoke thee to spend, and be spent, to imploy all thy time, and strength, and talents, to sell all for this pearl when it is of so great price; that when all other priviledges, excellencies, royal or noble births, high breedings, preferments, favours with Great men, riches, pleasures, will onely as brass of lea∣thren money, be currant in some Countries in this beggarly earth, it will enrich thee and enliven thee, refresh and rejoyce thee for ever! 11. Is not that worthy to be made thy business, which all men, even the greatest enemies to it, will sooner or later, heartily and earnestly wish had been their business? We have an usual saying, that what one speaketh, may be false and light; and what two speak may be false and vain; and what three speak may be so; but what all speak and agree in, must have something of truth and weight in it. And again we say, Vox populi est vox dei, The voice of all the peo∣ple is an oracle; Though as Christ said of himself, so I may say of Godliness, God himself beareth witness of it, and his witness is true, and it needeth not testimony from man; yet as he made use of the testimony of Iohn to convince the Jews of their de∣sperate wickedness and inexcusableness, in not sub∣mitting to his precepts, and accepting him as a Sa∣viour: So may I improve the witness of the whole world on the behalf of Godliness to convince
thee (Reader) of thy folly and sinfullness in neglecting it, and to shew thee how inexcusable thou wilt be found at the day of Christ, if thou dost not presently set upon it, and make it thy business? Its evident that many men, whose hearts are full of opposition to the ways of God, and whose lives are a flat contradiction to his Word and Will, do yet in their extremity seek him early, and cry to him earnestly, and flie to Godliness as the only shelter in a storm, and safest anchor in a tempest. The most prophane and atheistical wretches, who have in their works defied God himself, and in their words blasphemously derided godly men and god∣liness; when they have been brought low by sick∣ness, and entred within the borders of the King of terrours, and have some apprehensions upon their spirits that they must go the way of all the earth; then (as Naturalists observe of the dying Cuckoe) they change their note, send for godly Ministers, godly Christians, desire them to pray with them, to pray for them, hearken diligently to their seri∣ous instructions, wish with all their hearts, and would give their highest honours, and richest trea∣sures, and imperial diadems, and kingdoms if they have any, and all they are worth, that they had made Godliness their business; and promise if God will spare them, and lengthen their lives but a few days upon earth, that they will have no work, no calling, no employment, no design, but how to please God, and obey his counsel, and submit to his Spirit, and follow after holiness, and prepare their souls for heaven. O then Godliness is godli∣ness
indeed, and grace is grace indeed. Then they call and cry as the foolish Virgins to the wise, Give us of your oyl, for our lamps are gone out. O give us grace, give us godliness in the power of it, for all our formal, out side, lazy serving of God is come to nothing. The Serpent that is crooked all her life time, when dying stretcheth her self straight. As Dionisius on his death, when he heard Thales discoursing excellently about the nature and worth of Moral Philosophy, Cursed his pastimes, and sports, and foolish pleasures that had taken him off, and di∣verted him from the study of so worthy a subject: So these lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, whose lives are little else then brutish de∣lights in a circle, or a diversion from one pleasure to another; whose business now is to mock at pie∣ty, and persecute the pious, when they come to be thrown by a disease on their beds, and their con∣sciences begin to accuse them for their neglect of Godliness, and to convince them of its absolute necessity; and they have some fears to be over∣thron by death; then they curse their hauks, and hounds, and games, and cups, and companions, and sensual delights that hindered them from mak∣ing religion their business. Experience testifieth this frequently in many parts of the Nation, where the consciences of dying sinners are not seared with a red hot iron. Some wish this whilst they live, either under some great affliction, or on a dying bed; nay, I am per∣swaded, that most wicked men that live under the Gospel in their prosperity, even when they have
the world at will, in the midst of their sensual delights, have inward conviction that the course they take will prove cursed in the end, and have some velleities or weak desires (though overruled by carnal head-strong affections) that they could leave those vanities, and make religion their busi∣ness: But all wicked men after death, when they come into the other world, will wish in earnest, with all their hearts and souls, that they had minded no∣thing but the service of God, and exercising them∣selves unto godliness. There, there it is, that the whole world that now lyeth in wickedness, and will not believe the word and wisdom of their Maker, will all set their hands and seals to the truth of that which I am now endeavouring to evince. When God sends his Officer, death, to arrest sin∣ners, for the vaste summs which they owe to his justice for their breach of his laws, and this Ser∣jeant according to command from the King of Kings, executes his writ, and delivers his prisoner to the Divels, Gods Iaylors; and they seize as so many roaring Lions on the poor trembling prey, and hale them to their own den, hell; that dungeon of eter∣nal darkness, where sinners see and are assured that all their meat, must be flakes of fire and brimstone; and all their drink, a cup of pure wrath without mixture; and all their Musick, howling, and weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; and all their rest, torments day and night for ever and ever; and all their Companions frightful Devils, and a cursed crew of damned wretches, and all this to come upon them for not making religion their business
whilst they were on earth; Then O then they will wish with all their souls and strengths, again and again, that they had minded the Christian mans cal∣ling, and made religion their business whilst they were in this world! though they had been slaves, or beggars, or vagabonds, and had lived in pover∣ty, and disgrace, and prisons, and fetters during their whole pilgrimage. Now Reader, if the witness of one enemy be a double testimony, what is the witness of all the ene∣mies of God and Godliness, on the behalf of the Lord, and his ways against themselves? Shall it not prevail with thee to set speedily, and diligently about the work of Christianity? Ah how dumb wilt thou be struck another day, if thou wilt not believe either God, or good men, or thy conscience, or thy companions, or all the world? 12. and Lastly, Is not that worthy to be made thy business, upon which thine eternal life or death, salvation or damnation doth depend? Consider it friend, here is salvation and damnation before thee; eternal salvation, and eternal damnation; and they depend upon thy making religion thy business, or neglect of it. O what weight is there in these few words! Make religion thy business, and thou art eternally blessed; be formal and careless about it, and thou art cursed for ever; upon the one and the other turneth thine eternal estate. The Almighty God hath under his own hand, set down this mak∣ing religion thy business to be the onely terms up∣on which heaven shall be had; and it is impossible to alter or abate his price, Ioh. 6. 27. Mat. 6. 33. Philp. 2. 12. Canst thou be so foolish as to think
that Christ, and happiness, and eternal life can be obtained upon easier conditions, whea he must make God a liar, and the Gospel a lie? (which the Di∣vel himself is not so wicked as to think possible) who arriveth at the port of bliss without exerci∣sing himself to Godliness? The promises ever since the world was, had the same conditions, and ever will whilst the world shall endure? The Gospel is therefore called the everlasting Gospel, because it will continue without the least change or alterati∣on the same for ever. Thou mayst be confident that God doth not as some indiscret Citizens, ask much more for his eternal glory and life men then he intendeth to take. I say again ponder it, for this argument hath more in it then thine understanding can possibly conceive or imagine. Is not that worthy to become thy business, and main work in this world, upon which thine ever∣lasting weal or wo, thine endless estate in the other world doth depend? Reader, if that doth not deserve all thy time, and pains, and soul, and heart, and infinitely more, upon which unchangable joy or eternal torments hang, then I am sure nothing doth. Alas all the things of this world, whether about food, or rai∣ment, or houses, or lands, or wives, or children; nay, and life it self, are but toys, and trifles, and shadows, and nothings, to an everlasting condition in the other world. O that thou wert but able to conceive what it is to be eternally in fullness of plea∣sure, or eternally in extremity of pain, to be frying in flames for ever, or bathing in rivers of delight for ever! To enjoy God in his ordinances, though
it be but imperfectly, and in a low degree; one hour, one day, how sweet is it? His tabernacles are highly amiable upon that account, One day in thy Courts is better then a thousand elswhere: But to en∣joy God fully, immediately, and for ever too, O how superlatively, how infinitely pleasant and delightful will it be! To be in Gods lower house, though but a little time, under some pious powerful Minister, how reviving, and refreshing is it? But to dwell in his upper house for ever, O blessed are they that dwell in that house, they always praise thee! The eternal presence of God will cause an eternal absence of all evil, and an eternal confluence of all good. O Reader, who will not work hard, labour much, exercise himself to Godliness night and day? do any thing that God commandeth, suffer any thing that God inflicteth, forbear any thing that God forbid∣deth, to be saved eternally, to be infinitely blessed in the fruition of God for ever? Surely its worth the while, to obey the counsel of God in order to ete∣nal salvation. On the other side, eternal damnati∣an, how dreadful is it! if it be but the scratch of a pin for ever, or a little ach of the head. for ever, it wold be very doleful; but a violent head-ach or tooth-ach, or fits of the collick, or stone for ever, oh how intolerable would they be? But ah! how terrible is the wrath of God for ever, darkness of darkness for ever, the fire of hell for ever, to which all the wracks and torments in this life are next to nothing? Ah who can dwell in everlasting burnings? I suppose thou woulst avoid thy wicked compa∣nions, and forbear thy sinful courses, do any thing thou couldst, rather then to boyl in a furnace of
scalding water for a thousand years; nay, one year; and wilt thou not make religion thy business, when otherwise God himself hath told thee, thou shalt boil in a furnace of scalding wrath, infinitely worse then scalding lead for ever, ever, ever? Consider what thou hast read, and the Lord give thee un∣derstanding that thou mayst be wise to eternal sal∣vation. Reader, these twelve Questions being proposed, I desire thee to answer them to him, before whom thou shalt answer ere long, for all the motions of thy heart, and passages of thy whole life; and I shall not detain thee longer in the passage, though it be much larger then I intended when I first put pen to paper about it. If thy soul receive any pro∣fit by it, I shall not repent of my pains, only beg thy prayers; that thou mayst, is the desire of Thine and the Churches Servant in the blessed Saviour, GEORGE SWINNOCK.
Reader, The Authors absence from the Press, hath caused many mistakes in the English, Latine, and Greek, both in the Margin and Body of the Book; the most material of those that are in the Body of the Book are corrected to thy hand, thy Pen must correct or Candour excuse the rest. Vale. ERRATA. PAge 3. l. 30. for of the, r. and the. p. 7. l. 19. add is unrighteous. p. 60. l. 6. for the, r. thy. p. 64. l. 13. add to the honour. p. 116. l. 11. for chattered, r. clattered. p. 118. l. 2. add of. p. 122. l. 24. for detectable, r. delectable. p. 123. l. 4. r. grace, l. 5. for pain to r. paint. p. 125. l 22. r. did not stir. p. 130. l. 25. guest, r. grief. p. 187. l. 13. conversation r conversion p. 195. l. 14. for nor any, r. and any. p. 232. l. 5. r. indirect. p. 227. l. ult. For Iero∣boam, r. Rehoboam. p. 286. l. 23. for sweetness, r. sweetned. p. 462. l. ult. for rege∣nerate, r. vegetative. p. 519. l. 2. adorned, r. adored. p. 595. l. 10. Haman, r. Heman. p. 606. l. 3. ends, r. friends. p. 641. l. 29. for desired, r. deser∣ved. p. 653. l. 31. r. insperaam. p. 656. l 24. for one, r. none, p. 721. l. 32. For conscience, r. confidence. p. 748. l. 16. for monstrous, r. menstruous. p. 769. l. 31. r. . p. 816. l. 15. for promises, r. premises.
There is extant of this Reverend Au∣thors these following Treaties. The Christian-mans Calling; or, a Treatise of making Religion ones Business, wherein the Nature and Necessity of it is discovered; as also the Christian directed how he may perform it in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his particu∣lar Vocation, his Family Directions, and his own Recrea∣tion; to be read in Families for their instruction and Edifica∣tion. The first Part. The second Part, Wherein a Christian is directed how to perform his duty in the Relations of Parents, Children, Husband, Wives, Masters, Servants, and in the Condition of Prosperity and Adversity. This third Part, Diecting a Christian to perform his du∣ty in his Dealings with all men, in the choice of his Compa∣nions, in Evil Company, in good Company, in Solitude, on a Week-day, from morning to night, in visiting the sick, and on a dying bed, with Means Directing, and Motives per∣swading thereunto. The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regenera∣tion; or a Treatise containing the Nature, Necessity, Marks and means of Regeneration, as also the duty of the Rege∣nerate. Heaven and Hell Epitomized, or the true Christian chara∣cterized. The Fading of the Flesh; and Flourishing of Faith; or one Cast for Eternity, with the only way to Trow it Well; as also the Gracious Persons incomparable Portion. Te beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition of the 82. Psalm, where in set forth the necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty and Morality of Magistrates.
1 TIM. 4. 7. But refuse Prophane and old VVives Fables, and exercise thy self unto God∣liness. [And Exercise thy self unto Godliness.] The Preface. THe life of Man is not seldom in the Word of God compared to a Walk;Psalm 39. Ambulare He∣braica phrasi significat cr∣sum vitae insti∣tuere. The womb is the place whence he first (in the morning of his age) sets out, and his actions are the several steps, by which he is alwayes hasten∣ing to his journeys end, the Grave, that common Inn of resort. The life of a Christian is called a walking in the light, a walking in the Law,1 John 1. 6. Psa. 119. 1. because his motion is regular, and his whole race by rule. He must have a divine word for all his works, and a
precept from God for all his practices; Scripture is the Compass by which he steereth, and the square by which he buildeth; Hence he is said to walk with God, because he walketh according to his Com∣mands, and his example; he doth not walk  as Man, 1 Cor. 3. 3. but  according to his measure, as God willeth, and as God walketh. Further, the holy life of a Saint is compared to an or∣derly walking in these two respects. Est motus pro∣gressvus.First, In regard of his gradual proficiency; He doth not stand still, but gets ground by his steps. They go from strength to strength, Psa. 84. 4. From faith to faith, Rom. 1. 17. He is ever going forward in Heavens way, and never thinks of sitting down till he comes to his Fathers House. Sometimes indeed he is so straightned that he can onely creep; at other times he is inlarged that he can run, but at all times he is going on towards perfection. The light of his holiness,Ambulare in Chrsto duo de∣notat. Prgre∣di & perseve∣rare in doctri∣na & fide Chri∣sti. Dav. in Col. 2. 6. though at first but glimering, is always growing, and shines brighter and brighter till perfect day. Pro. 4. 18. Est mtus per∣petuus.Secondly, In regard of his uniforme perseve∣rance. It is not taking a step or two in a way, which denominateth a man a Walker, but a continued mo∣tion; It is not one or two good Actions, but a good conversation which will speak a man to be a right Christian.Bis de Enoch dicitur (Ambu∣lavit cum deo) ad explican∣dum quod ab inente aetate, profecit in via dei, & perseve∣ravit, profiti∣endo in eadem semper. Cjrer. A true beleiver like the heavenly Orbes, is constant and unwearied in his motion and actings. An Expositor observeth of Enoch, that its twice said of him, He walked with God, Gen. 5. 22, and 24. to shew that as he first began to walk and profit in Gods path, so he alwayes continued profiting to the end. No man is judged healthy by a flushing
colour in his face, but by a good complexion. God e∣steemeth none holy for a particular carriage, but for a general course; A sinner in some few acts may be very good; Iudas Repenteth; Cain Sacrifiseth; The Scribes Pray and Fast; and yet all were very false; In the most deadly diseases, there may be some intermissions, and some good prognosticks. A Saint in some few acts may be very bad: Noah is Drunk; David defileth his Neighbours Wife; And Peter denyeth his best frind; yet these persons were heavens favourites; The best Gold must have some grains of allowance. Sheep may fall into the mire, but Swine love night and day to wallow in it. A Christian may stumble, nay he may fall, but he gets up and walks on in the way of Gods Comman∣dements; the bent of his heart is right, and the scope of his life is straight, and thence he is deemed sincere. It is the Character of the Christian to be constant in his gracious course. If you would speak with the Tradesman, you may meet him in his Shop; The Farmers usual walk is in the Fields; He that hath business with the Merchant, expecteth him in his Counting-house, or amongst his Goods; And he that looketh for the Christian, shall not fayl to finde him with his God.Ambulare est vivere. Hac lo∣quendi formu∣la admonemur, Christianum esse in perpetuo itinere versus caelest in patri∣am, ne{que} un∣quam esse illi subsistendum in via, sed perpe¦tuo ambulan∣dum & prgre∣diendum. Dav. in Col. Whether he be alone or in com∣pany, abroad or in his Family, buying or selling, feeding himself, or visiting others, he doth all as in his Gods presence, and in all aimeth at his praise. As the Sap of a Tree riseth up from the root, not onely to the body, but also to the branches of the smallest twigs; so grace in a Saint springeth up from his heart, and floweth out not only in his spiritual and higher, but also in his civil and lower actions.
How the Saint may make godliness his business, in Religious Actions (as in praying, hearing, receiving the Lords Supper, and Sanctification of the Lords day) in natural Actions, in his recreations, in his particular calling, and in the government of his family, I have largely discovered in the First Part of The Christian-Mans Calling. The Second Part will help believers in the Relati∣ons (of Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants) and in the Conditions of Pros∣perity and Adversity. Reader, The design of this Treatise is to direct thee further in this continual exercise of Piety; it di∣videth it self into these particulars. I shall herein First, Endeavour to discover wherein the nature of Godliness consisteth; 1. In thy Dealings with all men. 2. In all Companies, whether Good or Bad, and therein I shall speak both to thy Choice of Compani∣ons, and Carriage in Company. 3. In Solitariness. 4. On a Week-day, from morning to night. 5. In Visiting the sick. 6. On a Dying Bed. Secondly, I shall offer thee some Means which will be helpful to thee in this business. Thirdly, I shall annex some Motives to stir thee up to this high and gainful Calling. I begin with the first.
CHAP. I. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godli∣ness in his Dealings with all men. As also a Good Wish about that Particular. FIrst, Thy duty is to make Religion thy business in thy Dealings with all men. True Godliness payeth its dues to men, as well as its duty to God, nay it cannot do the latter without the former; Upon these two poles all Religion turnes, and upon these two feet it walketh. That Mans holiness is lame; which always keeps home and doth not walk abroad and visit his Neighbours. Its a sign of a sickly tem∣per for a man to sit always brooding in a Chimney-Corner, and not to dare to stir out of doors. Sure I am, thy Religion is of a sad distempered constitution, whatsoever hopes it may give of healthiness in Fa∣mily duties, if it goeth no farther, and doth not appear in the open air of thy converses with stran∣gers. Religion bindeth the Christian to his good be∣haviour towards all men; True holiness will pro∣vide things honest, not onely in the sight of God, but also in the sight of all men, 2 Cor. 8. 21. The Kings Coin hath his superscription without the ring, as well as his Image within it. The Saints civil as well as his spiritual actions have divine impression stamped on them, and he is walking with God in his trading with men. As thy heart must be pure, so thy hands must be clean, or thou canst never reach heaven, Psa. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? He
that hath clean hands, and a pure heart. To be voyd of conscience in thy civil actions, speaks thee to have no right to the beatifical vision; he that comes short of Heathens, must needs come short of Heaven. And truly to be careless in making Godli∣ness thy business in them, will very much hinder thy progress in holiness; If all the passages of the body be not open, there is no thriving in health. The Ostrich is very swift, and said to outrun the horse.Job. 39. 18. He mocketh the Horse and the Rider; but what is the reason? truly this, he hath two helps of speed, his Wings and his Feet, whereas other crea∣tures have but one; the Hawk hath wings, the Hare and Horse have feet, but he hath and useth both Wings and Feet, and hence is so nimble in his flight. The right Christian maketh haste and runneth the way of Gods commandments, because he doth use not only the wings of Religious perfor∣mances for that end, but also the feet of his ordinary actions. When some are only for holy duties, and others onely for honest dealings, he outstrips them all, marrying them both together, and making them like Husband and Wife, serviceable each to other. Tis true, his piety is the Husband which hath the command and dominion; but his dealings with men as a dutiful wife, further his weal by their obedience and subjection. No Christian ever made more haste in Heavens way then Paul,1 Cor. 15. 10. I laboured more abundantly then they all (saith he) but how came it about? VVhy, through divine assistance, he exercised himself to keep a conscience void of offence both towards God and towards all men.Acts 14. 16. The stream must needs be the swifter for the meeting and uni∣ting
of the waters of grace out of both those chan∣nels. The bark which covereth the tree, seemeth to be of little worth, compared with the body of the tree; yet if that be peeled off, the tree dyeth. Though righteous dealings seem to be but the bark and outside of Religion, yet if once thou castest them off, thy Religion, as thriving as thou thoughtst it to be, will quickly wither and come to nothing; the heart-blood of thy godliness may be let out by a wound in thy hand. I shall lay down a Motive or two to quicken thee to conscienciousness in thy dealings with all men, and then acquaint thee wherein it consisteth. SECT. I. FIrst,Motives, 1 Tis a sign of hypocrisie to be unrighte∣ous in our dealings. Consider, Its a sure sign of Hypocrisie to be unrighteous and careless in civil dealings, how consciencious soever thou mayst seem to be in sacred duties. He that seems righteous towards men; and is irreligious towards God, is but an honest Heathen; and he that seems religious towards God, and un∣righteous towards men, is but a dissembling Chri∣stian. To make Conscience of one duty, and not of another, is to make true conscience of neither. The soul that ever had Communion with God above, comes down like Moses out of the Mount, with both Tables in his hands, the second as well as the first, and the first as well as the second. One stone in a Mill, one oare in a Boat will do little good; there must be two, or no work can be done. A per∣fect man consisteth of two essential parts, a Soul and a body; though the soul be the principal, and doth
specificate the compound, yet the body is so necessa∣ry, that without it none can be a compleat man. A Christian that is (evangelically) perfect, is also made up of these two parts, Holiness and Righ∣teousness; though holiness be the chief, as that which doth difference the Saint, yet righteousness is so re∣quisite, that there can be no true Christian without it. The holy Apostle argueth the purity of his con∣science, from the honesty of his conversation.Heb. 13. 18. We trust that we have a good conscience, in all things, will∣ing to live honestly. The goodness of the Fruit will commend the Tree. 1. Their honesty was visible, to live honestly; not onely to mean well, and think honestly, or to talk, but to live honestly. 2. Their honesty was universal; In all things (not in one or two particulars) willing to live honest∣ly. Visibility, and universality, are Popish marks of a true Church, and Protestant marks of a true Christi∣an. An Hypocritical Iehu may do some things; a Murderous Herod may do many things;Non est vera religio quae cum templo relinquitur. Lactant. but an up∣right Paul is in all things willing to live honestly. A Ship that is not of the right make, cannot sayl trim; and a Clock whose Spring is faulty, will not always go true; so a person of unsound principles, cannot be constant and even in his practices. The Re∣ligion of those that are inwardly rotten, is like a fire in some cold climates, which doth almost fry a man before, when at the same time he is freezing behind; they are zealous in some things, as holy duties, which are cheap; and cold in other things, especially when they cross their profit or credit; as the Mount Helga is covered with Snow on one side,
when it burneth and casteth out cynders on the other side; but the holiness of them that are sound at heart, is like the natural heat, which though it resort most to the vitals of sacred performances, yet as need is, it warmeth, and hath an influence upon all the outward parts of civil transactions. It may be said of true sanctity, as of the Sun, there is nothing hid from the heat thereof, Psa. 19. 5. When all the parts of the body have their due nourishment distributed to them, its a sign of an healthy tem∣per. As the Saint is discribed somtimes by a clean heart, Psa. 73. 1. Mat. 5. 8. so also sometimes by clean hands, Iob. 17. 9. because he hath both; the holi∣ness of his heart, is seen at his fingers ends; He is as the Ark pitched within and without with the same; as he is sometimes characterised by sacred duties, Psa. 24. 6. and 119. Rev. 1. 3. so at other times by righteous dealings, Psa. 15. Isai. 58. be∣cause he mindeth both; if either be separated from the man, you kill the Christian; for though he may be a man without either, he cannot be a Christian without both. The Greek Word for Sincerity,  is very elegant, and signifieth (quasi ) such a trial as is made of things by the Sun∣light: as the Eagle, according to Aristotle, bring∣eth her young to the Sun, to try whether they are Spurious or Legitimate; so the actions of a sincere Christian will endure the open Air, the light of the Sun; He is as the street of the New Ierusalem; transparent glass, all one without, and within, you may see through him. He dares appeal both to God and men for the holiness and righteousness
of his conversation; Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly we have had our conversation in the world, 1 Thes. 2. 10. Reader, never please thy self in the name of a Christian, if thou hast not the nature of Christia∣nity, which giveth God and Man their due; Tis not the great sound of a Professor, nor the loud noise of holy performances, that will speak thee sin∣cere, if thou makest not conscience of thy carriage towards thy Neighbours. The Sadduces derive their name from Zeduchim or Zadducaeus a just man; but the worst men saith the Historian, got the best names. The Alcaron of the Turks, hath its name from brightness (Al in the Arabick being as much as Karan in the Hebrew, to shine or cast forth a bright∣ness) when tis full of darkness, and fraught with falshoods. Twill be little comfort to thee, though the world commond thee for a holy man, if God condemn thee for an Hypocrite; Doth not the word of truth tell thee, that they who are par∣tial in the Law, have no part in the Gospel; and that none are justified by Christ, but those that are just towards Christians? Do not think thy spi∣ritual constitution to be sound, if plague-sores break out on thy body. The Gods, saith Aristotle, do not so much respect the costliness of the Sacrifice, as the conversation of the Sacrificer. Sure I am, the true God rejects those prayers, seem they never so glorious, where the Petitioner is unrighteous; All thy Oblations will be vain, if thy conversation be vici∣ous; the sweetest Incense is unsavoury, if the hands that offer it be filthy; Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abomination to me; the New
Moones, and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Tour new Moons, and your solemn Feasts my soul hateth, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them; And when ye spread forrh your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; Yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear. But what is the reason that all these Ordinances which were of Gods own appointment, are thus rejected? Your HANDS are full of blood, Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15. An unclean hand tainteth whatsoever it toucheth. Secondly,Motive, The Credt of Rligion is much engged in our dea∣lings with o∣thers. Consider, The Credit of Religion is en∣gaged in thy publique dealings. More eyes are upon us when we walk abroad, then when we are at home, and therefore it concerns us to be handsome in our habits, and very circumspect in our carri∣age. A Professour may be rotten-hearted in holy duties, and the world never the wiser, they are ignorant of it, and so do not disgrace Religion for it; but if he be once unrighteous in his dealings, the whole Country will quickly ring of it, and cry him up for a Cheat, and his Religion for a cozen∣age. God indeed looks most to our hearts, whether they be sound, and accordingly esteemeth of our performances; but men look onely to our hands, whether they be clean, and accordingly judge of our profession. If the servants of religion behave themselves unseemly, their Mistress shall be sure to bear the blame. When David had defiled Bath∣sheba, the name of God was blasphemed. A Saint cannot do evil before men, but he occasions sinners to speak evil of God. If there be any spots on a Christians Coat, the world will soon spie them, and
be ready in scorn to ask Christ himself, as the Pa∣triarchs did Iacob, See whether this be thy Sons coat or no? To look high by thy profession, and live low and basely in thy practices, will betray both thy self and the Gospel to scorn and derision. Augustin confessth there were many such in his time, who professing the Christian Religion, did by their li∣centious lives give great scandal, and with them the Maniches were wont to reproach the whole Church of Christ, though the Church did disown them; and though she could not reclaim them, she did disclaim them. Aug. de moribus Ecclesiae. Cap. 34. The wicked first watch for a godly mans fall, and then are big with blasphemy against Godliness; Like Miners, they work hard, though unseen, to blow up a Saints name. The Psalmist tells us, They compassed us in our steps, they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth, Psa. 17. 11. Its an allusi∣on to Hunters, who go poring on the ground, to find the print of the Hares claws, when their Dogs are at a loss in their sent. So Satans agents go with their eyes bowing down, marking the Saints foot∣steps, to find out if it be possible, where they have slipped or stepped awry, that their blood-hounds may follow both their persons and their profession with loud cryes, and fresh noise; The baggage world is both desirous and industrious to scarr that face, and to spie the least blemish in it, that is fairer then her self. If the Christian be once defiled, Christianity it self will quickly be defamed; Though sins in secret duties have their aggravations, yet sins in our pub∣lique dealings do in a three-fold respect exceed them.
1. These are scandalous to the good, which those are not; The children of God weep bitterly, when they hear that others walk disorderly. Their hearts bewail their brethrens wickedness; now wouldst thou sadden the Spirit of a Saint? Alas, they have grief enough from their enemies, and shall they be wounded in the house of their friends? 2. They are infectious to the bad,Scandalum est dictum, aut sactum, quo alius redditur deterior. Paraeus, in 1 Cor. 8. 9. which secret sins are not. Thy sins are like St. Pauls in London, on high for the gaze of the World; but thy vertues as St. Faith under ground, they do not note them. How soon will the World plead a Christians sinful act, to excuse and justifie their own sinful habits! They are like ravenous birds, that flie over sweet and plea¦sant flowers, and pitch onely upon unsavoury car∣casses; they take little notice of thy graces, but will be sure to mind thy vices; The Philosopher saith, that the Fleeces of such Sheep as are killed by the Wolf, are most apt to breed Lice; one of Christs Sheep, foiled by Satan, in the eyes of men doth much mischief. Now will it not trouble thee that these unclean fowles should pick that from thee, which will feed and nourish their filthy natures? Alas, they move fast enough towards Hell with the tide of their own evil hearts, and shall the wind of thy example make them sayl more swiftly? 3. Thy open sins, occasion the wicked to speak ill of God, which secret sins do not. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, saith the Apostle, to the Romans, Rom. 2. 24. Christians ought to be shields to ward off those blows of reproach, which would fall on the name of God; how unchristian are they then that are
swords in the hands of the wicked, wherewith the name of God is wounded. Truly, an unrighteous pro∣fessour is such a one; If thou studiest to do thy God disservice, and to bring on his blessed name disho∣nour, thou canst not do it sooner then by unjust actions, under the livery of an high profession. The Divel himself cannot dress a man in a more ri∣diculous habit, to make both him and his Master the scorn of the Company, then by putting on him a coat patcht up of divers peices, and contrary colours; a glorious name of a Saint, and the unrighteous works of a reprobate. Friend, beware how thou behavest thy self in the world. The Snow makes a fair shew to the eye, but being melted it makes a dangerous flood. They who make a fair shew in the flesh, by walking offensively may cause such a de∣luge as may drown the souls of others, and give many a dash at the name of God himself. The In∣dians would not hear of Heaven, when they were told that the Spaniards (whom they had found to be barbarous and bloody,) went thither; The Iews are hardened in their emnity against Christ, by the evil lives of pretended Chistians. Epiphanius saith, that in his days many avoided the Christians com∣pany, because of the looseness of some mens con∣versation. When some beasts have blown on grass, others will not eat of it for a good while after. ts no wonder that Religion finds so few greedy of her service, when her work is so much disparaged by those that already seem to be her servants. Men will easily be discouraged from travailing in that rode which is haunted with Theeves and robbers. Either walk up to thy calling, or lay thy calling
down; why shouldst thou give conscience cause to say to thee truly (what Michael did to David falsly) thou hast made thy self like one of the vile and base fellows of the earth? SECT. II. AS to the exercising thy self to Godliness in thy dealings with all men, it consisteth partly in the manner of thy dealings, partly in the principle of thy dealing, and partly in the end thou pro∣poundest in thy dealings. First, Be careful in thy carriage towards others as to the maner of it, that it be righteous, meek and courteous. 1. Be righteous in thy dealings with all men. Righteousness strictly taken is a vertue, which gui∣deth and ordereth the whole man for the good of his neighbour, as the understanding to conceive, the Will to chose, the affections to love and desire, and the whole man to act and do what may tend to the welfare of others. This righteousness is of so great concernment to godliness, that it is sometimes put by a Synechdoche for the whole of Religion, 1 Ioh. 3. 7. He that doth righteousness, is righteous; so Rom. 6. 17. And the Christian is denominated from this part of Christianity, Gen. 7. 1. And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the Ark, for thee have I seen righteous before me; so Psa. 5. ult. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous. The Moral Philosophers tell us that justice is the sum and Epitome of all vertues; the Divines will inform us that righteousness (largely taken) is the
string upon which all the graces hang; if that be broken or snapt asunder, they all fall off and are lost. I must tell thee (Christian) that civil righte∣ousness is as really necessary as sacred. He that see∣meth righteous towards God, and is unrighteous towards men, is unrighteous both to God and Man. I say, be righteous in thy dealing with all men. Viz. Let thy righteousness be real and universal; Commntative & Distributive. Be righteous in thy action, expressions, and towards all persons. 1. Be righteous in thy works or Actions. Deal with men as one that in all hath to do with God. If thou art a Christian, thou art a Law to thy self, thou hast not onely a Law without thee (the Word of God) but a Law within thee, and so darest not transgress. Thy double hedge may well prevent thy wandring. Alas, what do those unruly beasts get, whom no fence can keep in, but a more speedy slaughter! Its said of an unrighteous man, his own counsel shall cast him out, Job 18. 7. Unjust men think by their craft to cast others down, but their own counsel will cast themselves out; Out! out of what? Out of their houses; for such dwellings are built upon powder, and a spark of wrath sooner or later will blow them up, Psa. 37. 9, 10 Out of their lands and possessions,Quod quasi & siccos madesa∣ceret, & expri∣meret humen∣tes; because he did ad∣vance and wet them well when dry, and press them hard when wet. Tacit. for some providence or other (as Flaius Vespasianus served his proling Offi∣cers) will press such Spunges hard, and squeeze out all their impure water, which they have so greedily sucked in. Out of their Shops and all earth∣ly comforts, for such wealth is bt like the flesh which the Eagle fetcht from the Altar with a coal in it, which fires and consumes the whole nest,
Hab. 2. 9. And which is worst of all, their counsel will at last cast them out of heaven; God himself hath lockt the gate of bliss against them, and with all their craft and counsel they shall not be able to pick it open. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the un∣righteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. It w as a true saying of Bishop Latimer, when one told him, The Cutler had cozened him, in making him pay as much more for his Knife as it was worth; No (saith he) he hath not cozened me, but his own conscience. That Knife cut deep into the poor Cutlers soul, and made wider gaps then he was aware of; O how foolish is man to conceive that by fraud he shall keep himself up, when God him∣self saith, that his own counsel shall cast him down! Reader, If thou art one that like Balaam lovest the wages of unrighteousness, bethink thy self spee∣dily; for thy wealth unjustly gotten, will like A∣chans wedge of Gold, cleave thy soul in sunder. Righteousness in thy works must appear both in buy∣ing and in selling. Be righteous in buying. Take heed lest thou lay∣est out thy money to purchase endless misery. Some have bought places to bury their bodies in, but more have bought those commodities which have swal∣lowed up their souls. Injustice in buying, is a Canker which will eat up, and waste the most durable wares. An unjust Chapman, like Phocion, payeth for that poison which kills him, and buyeth his own bane. A true Christian, will in buying as well as selling use a conscience. Austin relates a story of an Histri∣onical Mountebank, who to gain spectatours, pro∣mised
if they would come the next day, he would tell them what every ones heart desired. When they all flocked about him at the time appointed, ex∣pecting the performance of his word, he told them, This is the desire of every of your hearts, to sell dear and buy cheap; but its a sign he was an Emperick by the falseness of his bill; for a good man would buy as dear as he selleth. His buying and selling are like two scales, that hang in an equal poize. In buying do not work either upon the ignorance or the poverty of the Seller. Do not take advan∣tage by the Sellers ignorance. This would be as bad as to lead the blind out of the way, 1 Thes. 4. 6. Let no man go beyond, or over reach another in any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all-such. Mark, Reader, Those that over-reach men, are within the reach of a sin-revenging God; Some persons will boast of their going beyond o∣thers in bargains, but they have more cause to be∣wayl it, unless they could go beyond the line of Gods power and anger. Its an ordinary saying, but sinful,Iustm preci∣um, quod mul∣to amplius e∣rat, nec opinan∣ti dedit. Aug. de Trin. l. 53. c. 3. A man may buy as cheap as he can. Austin tells us, A certain man (himself I suppose he meaneth) was offered a book by an unskilful Statio∣ner, at a price not half the worth of it; he took the book, but gave him the just price, according to its full value. Sure I am, those wares which are half bought, through a cunning Chapmans out-witting the silly tradesman, are half stolen. It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer, but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth, Pro. 20. 14. but hath more reason to weep, for his subtle words,
how cheap soever he buyeth, will make it an hard pennyworth in the end. He makes the best Mar∣ket, that like holy David payeth the full just price. Nay (saith he, of Ornans threshing floor) but I will buy it for the full price, 1 Chron. 21. 22, 24. Ahab never bought a dearer purchase then Naboths Vineyard, for which he paid not one penny. Do not work upon the Sellers poverty. This is to grind the faces of the poor, and great oppression; It is no mean sin in many rich Citizens, who take advantage on the necessity of poor trades∣men. The poor man must sell, or his Family starve; the rich man knoweth it, and will buy but at such a rate, that the other with all his labour shall not earn his own bread. God made the rich to releive, but these (I must be bold to say) rob the poor. Its an ill way for any to raise themselves higher in the world by trampling poor men under their feet. God hath sometimes made their houses, (as high and as firm as they were) to fall down up∣on their heads, who have thus sucked out the blood of poor mens hearts. Some will tell us, They do no wrong herein; for if poor men will not take their money, they may let it alone, they do not force them. Reader, if thy soul be died with this crim∣son sin, I shall onely ask thee this question; Is this to love thy Neighbour as thy self? If thou hadst a Wife and several small Children, and the provi∣dence of God had called thee to this poor mans condition; wouldst thou be contented to work hard a whole week, and when thou wast compelled to fell thy wares to buy food for thy family, to receive (the money for materials deducted) but six pence
or twelve pence for all thy pains? Let thy own con∣science be judge in this ease: Is not this, for men to live like fish, the greater devouring the lesser? I have heard a Country Mercer say (who is now in heaven) that several times, when poor men have brought lace, or ribands, or other ware to him, he hath tried how low he could beat the price, and because of their necessities, he hath brought them to allow their commodities for less then the very materials cost them; but after he had so done, he durst not but give them a just equitable price; his conscience would not suffer him to make them suf∣fer, because their poverty necessitated them to sell. And truly where men act otherwise, though their consciences may be quiet, because asleep, yet they have no true rest, and the time will come that con∣science will awake to their wo. When some of the Jews had bought Lands and Vineyards of their brethren at an under rate, they being forced to Mortgage them to get bread, Nehemiah rebukes them severely for working upon others extremity; and desires God to shake every man out of his possession, who did not make restitution, Nehem. 5. 2, 3, 4, 12, 13. Such wealth to a man, is like Ionah to the Whale; though he swallow it down, yet he will finde it too hard a Morsel to digest, and have no ease till he hath restored and vomited it up again. Be righteous in thy payments. Pay what thou agreest, and pay it in good money. Pay what thou contractest for. If thou buyest wares with an intention not to pay, thou stealest them; and truly such wealth will melt away like Wax
before the Sun. Such ill gotten goods, will as com∣modities in a damp Cellar, moulder and come to nothing. He that hath any such riches, saith Chry∣sostom, must speedily away with it, or else he locketh up a Theif in his Counting-house, which will carry all away, and if he look not the better to it, his precious soul also. He is notoriously unrighteous, that like the Harpie (which hath its name in Hebrew from injustice) seizeth upon all he can meet with as prey. Mark, Reader, how pious honest Iacob was in this particular; when the Patriarchs had bought Corn in Egypt, and given their money to them that sold it, yet when upon their return he found the money in their sacks; Take (saith he) the money that was brought again, in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hands; peradven∣ture it was an oversight, Gen. 43. 12. How many would have concealed the money, stopt the mouth of their consciences with the first payment, and have kept it now as lawful prize; but Iacobs consci∣ence was more tender mouthed. Let thy payments be in good Money. Its Treason against the King to make bad money, and its Trea∣son against the King of Kings (knowingly) to pay brass money; If thou dischargest thy debt in adul∣terate coyn, thou contractest a greater debt on thy soul, and defilest thy conscience. He that put∣teth God off with false service, is a spiritual Hypocrite; He that puts men off with false sil∣ver, is a civil Hypocrite; Such a mans conscience is farther from being currant then his Coin. And Abraham weighed to Ephron, the silver which he had named in the audience of the Sons of Heth, four hun∣dred
shekels of silver, currant money with the Mer∣chant, Gen. 23. 16. He that makes light payments, may well expect heavy judgements. SECT. III. Be righteous in selling. Be careful whilst thou sellest thy wares to men, that thou dost not there∣with sell thy soul to Satan. Believe it, thou wilt follow thy calling to sad purpose, if thou for∣goest thine inward peace for a little outward profit. Be righteous in the substance of what thou sellest, and that in regard of its quality and quan∣tity. In regard of its quality; Put not bad ware for good into any mans hand. God can see the rottenness of thy stuffs and heart too, under thy false glosses, and for all thy false lights. Thou sayst, Caveat emp∣tor, Let the buyer beware; but God saith, Caveat venditor, Let the seller be careful that he keep a good conscience. To sell men what is full of flaws and defective, for what is sound and suffici∣ent, will make a greater flaw in thy conscience then thou art aware of; If thou partest with thy goods and thy honesty together, though for a great sum, thou wilt be but a poor gainer. Thou wilt ask possibly whither every man be bound to reveal the faults of what he selleth, supposing that he know∣eth them. I Answer, that every man is bound, either to discover them, or else to take no more for his wares or beasts then they are worth (at a Market-price) with those defects. Its clear, that
its sinful to use tricks and arts to hide those faults from the eyes of the Chapman; for such deeds are done purposely to deceive. I would also know Reader, whether thou dealest herein, as thou wouldst willingly be dealt with; Wouldst thou be glad to pay double, or half as much more as a com∣modity is worth? Be righteous in the substance of what thou sel∣lest, in regard of its quantity. We have a com∣mon saying; Weight and Measure are Heavens treasure. Its certain, A false ballance is abomination to the Lord, a just weight is his delight, Prov. 11. 1. The righteous Lord, hateth unrighteous∣ness, but his countenance beholdeth the just. They wrong themselves most, who rob others of their right; He hatcheth a Cockatrice egge, who sits brooding on ill-gotten goods, and (like Agrip∣pina to Nero) bringeth forth and gives life to that which will be his death. The jealous God is very punctual in this particular. Ye shall do no unrigh∣teousness, in Iudgement, in Mete-yard, in Weight, or in Measure. Iust Balances, just Weights, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall e have; I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt, Lev. 19. 35, 36. God is pleased to count up all in his command, that they might not have the least colour of excuse for cozening in any thing. Nay, he loatheth so much, false Weights and Measures in their hands, that he will not allow them to be in their houses. Thou shalt not have in thy bag, divers weights, a great and a small. Thou shalt not have in thy house, divers Measures, a great and a small. But thou shalt have a
perfect and just weight; a perfect and just measure shalt thou have, Deut. 25. 13, 14, 15. Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers Weights; in the He∣brew it is a stone and a stone, because the Jews did not make their weights of Iron or Lead,Mimony Treatise of Thefr. Cap. 7. or any Mettal that would canker and wax too light, but they made them of the clear stony Rock, or of Glass; They might not have an unjust Weight or Measure in their Houses, because some not know∣ing them to be defective, might use them, and de∣ceive others. The face of Ephraims sin was visible, under all the Masks which he used to hide it; He is a Mer∣chant, the ballances of deceit are in his hand, he loveth to oppress. And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance; in all my labour they shall finde none iniquity in me, that were sin, Hos. 12. 7, 8. Here is 1. His Calling, that was Honourable. He is a Merchant; When some accused a young Gentle∣man for staining his Family by his employment, and dishonouring the Noble house of which he de∣scended: Apollonius stood forth in his defence; Ye talk (saith he) of a dangerous Trade, and truly such is the life of Merchants, they travail into for∣raign parts, run great hazards, make many ill bar∣gains, and sometimes are bought and sold them∣selves, and all this they venture to serve their Country, and ought they not to be highly esteemed? Ephraim was a Merchant; but how unsutable were his practices, to his high and honourable Professi∣on? for observe. 2. His Cozenage, that was abominable. The bal∣lances
of deceit are in his hand, he loveth to oppress. When a buyer comes for a commodity, he weigh∣eth it out fairly in the ballance, but he hath a de∣ceitful bag of weights, or a deceitful beam. He dares not cozen openly for shame, but he doth co∣vertly with the sleights and mysteries of his calling; but to rob by fraud in a Shop or Ware-house, is as bad as to rob by force upon the road. Both are Thieves, and the former in some respect the greater, as more dissembling in their dealings, and more frequent in their thefts. These Cheats that do it cunningly, as Rabbits, making holes under ground, and so think themselves secure, will at last be fe∣reted out and slain. 3. His Case and Cover of his sin. I am become rich, I have found me out substance; in all my labour they shall find none iniquity; As if his riches did prove him to be righteous, and his prosperity had argued him free from all impiety. Whereas God suffereth many like ravenous birds, to build their Nests on high with stollen materials, intending at last by some fierce blast of providence to bring them down, and destroy the whole brood. Thieves sel∣dome finde joy in their new purchases, but ne∣ver stability. Geese, say some, if they chance to take hold of a root with their bill, they will bite and pull so long to have it, that many times they break their necks before they leave their hold. So unjust men, by their greediness to inrich, usually ruine themselves; such goods are like the Fox which Plutarch mentions the Lacedemonian boy to have stollen, and rather then he would be discovered, put it into his breeches, but it quickly did tear out his bowels.
Be religious in the manner of thy selling.Be righteous in the manner of thy selling. The Seller may not exact upon the Buyers necessity, but sell by the rule of equity. I am not bound to sell cheap, because I buy cheap, neither may I sell dear because I buy dear. Not my buying or selling, so much as the price of the Market should be my standard. Though I conceive a Market rate to be most righteous, yet its wicked by keeping in com∣modities to raise the Market. He that with-holdeth Corn, the people shall curse him, Prov. 11. 26. Such a man like a corrupt imposthumated member, would draw all the nourishment to himself, and cares not though the other parts of the body perish, but the people shall curse him. This Oak which will suffer no small trees to thrive neer it, will in time fall with the breath of so many curses. Probably you would know whether a Trades∣man, that knoweth such and such commodities will fall very much (by Letters which mention several Ships comming home laden with them, or some other way) may not sell off his own wares at the present price, and hide his news from his Country Customers? Reader, I shall answer it with a question not much unlike it in an Heathen Author, expecting that Christians should not be excelled by Heathen.Tull. de Offic. A man brings a Ship of Corn from Alexandria to Rhodes (saith Cicero) in a time of great Famine, he may have for it what prie he pleaseth; he knoweth of many more Ships which will be there the next day, may he conceal this from the Rhodians? No, saith the Orator. And what sayest thou Reader?
In all thy Contracts, Purchases, and Sales, cast an eye upon that golden rule, mentioned by our Saviour, Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatso∣ever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Pro∣phets; This is the Royal Law, the golden Rule, the Kings High-way, and the standard of all righteous∣ness. Whatsoever in a well ordered judgement thou wouldst have others do to thee and thine, do the sam to them and theirs, supposing conditions alike; for this is the sum and epitome of all that is delivered in the Law and the Prophets, concerning thy carri∣age towards others. Hierom commended this saying to a holy woman, to be written on her heart, as an abridgement of all righteousness. Lactantius saith, Its the root and foundation of all equity. Se∣verus the Emperor had often this saying in his mouth,Quod tibi non vis, alterine se∣ceris, Sever. and caused it to be proclaimed by the Cryer, as often as he punished a Souldier for in∣juring any other. Its very profitable for a Christian in his dealings with others, to make frequent ap∣peals to his own Conscience. Would I be dealt thus with, were I as this man is, or as this woman? Would I be willing to have this measure measured to me or mine? Would I be glad to be served so as I serve others? Is this to love my Neighbour as my self. Reader, such serious Soliloquies may pre∣vent much unrighteousness. Though Charity be∣gins at home in regard of order, yet not in re∣gard of time; for a man no sooner loves himself a∣right, but he loves his Neighbour as himself. That Proverb came from the Devil, Every man for him∣self, and God for us all. For God saith, Let no man
seek his own, but every man anothers wealth: And again, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self, 1 Cor. 10. 24. Gal. 5. 24. He is but a beast that preyeth for himself alone. Inanimate creatures are beneficial to others; Fire, Ayr, Earth, Water, are all serviceable to others beside and more then to themselves. How soon would the frame of nature be dissolved, if every thing should be confined within the narrow compass of self! Water moveth downward, Fire upward naturally, yet both will cross their own nature to prevent a Vacuum, and pre∣serve the Vniverse. Besides, I must tell thee that the Subjects house, as well as the Kings Throne, is preserved by righteous∣ness; That speech of Nevessan the Lawyer, is contrary to Scripture, He that will not venture his body, shall never be valiant; and he that will not venture his soul, shall never be rich. Righteousness, not Robbe∣ry, is the way to Riches. He goeth the farthest way about, that endeavours to increase his strength by sucking others blood, or to get an estate by in∣justice. Nay, he takes a contrary course, for he pulls down on his head the Divine curse; which like an Hectick Feaver, will cause an irrecovera∣ble Consumption of all his comforts, both tem∣poral and spiritual. Such treasures and owners are like the Canaanites to the Land; the Land will groan, till it spue them out. Treasures of wick∣edness profit nothing, Prov. 10. 2. Observe Reader, 1. The Excellency of these Comforts in them∣selves; they are Treasures, that is, heaps of out∣ward good thing; the word includeth a multi∣tude; for one or two will not make a treasure; and a
multitude of precious things for an heap of sand or coales or dust, is not a treasure, but of silver or gold, or some excellent earthly things. It is here in the plural, Treasures, Noting the greatest confluence of worldly comforts. Note, 2. The impiety of the owners, they are treasures of wickedness. The Purchaser got them by sinful practices. They were brought into his house slily at some back door; He was both the receiver and the theif. Treasures of wickedness, because gotten by wicked ways, and imployed to wicked ends. There is an English Proverb, which too many English men have made good; That which is got over the Devils back, is usually spent under the Devils belly. When sin is the Parent that begets riches, it many times hath this recompence, that they are wholly at its service and command. 3. The vanity of those treasures, they profit no∣thing; Treasures of wickedness profit nothing. They are unable to chear the mind, to cure the diseases of the body, muchless to heal the wounds of the soul, or to bribe the flames of Hell. Alas! they are so far from profiting, that they are infinitely preju∣dicial. Such Powder-Masters are blown up wih their own ware. These loads sink the bearers into the un∣quenchable lake. The Philosopher tells us of the Sea-mew, or Sea-Eagle (called in Greek ,Arist. Hist 9. Animal c. 24 be∣cause she seeketh for her prey in the waters) that she will often seize on her prey, though it be more then she can bear, and falleth down headlong with it into the deep, and so perisheth; This Fowl is a fit embleme of the unrighteous person, for he gras∣peth those heavy possessions which press him down
into the pit of perdition. They that will be rich (that resolve on it, whether God will or no, and by any means, whether right or wrong) fall into temptations, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and per∣dition, 1 Tim. 6. 9. They that will be rich. Men that scrape an estate together unjustly, are fre∣quently said in the Word of God, to get it in haste, to make haste to be rich, because such will not stay Gods time, nor wait in his way, till he send them in wealth, but must have it presently, and care not though it be unrighteously; But as we say; Matches made in haste, are repented at leasure; So truly, riches got in haste, are often lamented for ever. Its most true here, The more haste the less speed; Food hastily eaten, is seldom so well di∣gested as what is eaten leasurably; He that maketh haste to be rich, shall not be innocent; He that maketh haste to be rich, hath an evil eye, and considereth not that poverty shall come upon him, Prov. 28. 20, 22. Sometimes God suffereth a cruel hand, to pluck the stolen feathers of this unclean Bird, and then he is left bare whilst he liveth; sometimes he is hurried away in the prime and pride of his age to Hell, from his goods which he got in haste; As the Li∣zards eggs are hatcht in six moneths, and yet the old one never liveth to see them, saith the Naturalist. Festina Iente. Illud adagium arridebat duo∣bus Imperatori∣bus facile lau∣datissimis, Aug. & Tito. Eras. Adag.Fair and softly goes far. None thrive so well as those that stay Gods leasure, and expect wealth in his way. Titus Vespasian stamped in his Coin a Dolphin and an Anchor, with this Impress, Sat cito, si sat bene. Soon enough, if well enough. A Dolphin outstrips the Ship, that's soon enough; And an Anchor
stayeth the Ship, that's well enough; So both toge∣ther make, soon enough, if well enough; And of this Prince it is reported, Abstinuit alieno si quis unquam. If ever any was free from injuring others, he was the man. None are more guilty of unrighteous∣ness, then those that huddle up riches in haste. They are most harmless who are contented to live in hope, and to wait patiently on God. That wealth which is gotten well enough, is gotten soon enough; All other is worse then an abortive birth, that comes before the time. That fruit which is soon ripe, will be soon rotten. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed, Prov. 20. 21. As Hony over liberally eaten, though it be sweet and pleasant at first, yet after∣wards, causeth strange vomitings and sad gipings in the stomach and belly; so an estate overhastily gotten, though it may cause a smile in thy counte∣nance, and rejoyce thy carnal part at the begin∣ning, yet will afterwards cause dreadful gripings in thy conscience, be a Vulture gnawing at thy heart, and its latter end be cursed to thee and thine. I have read of a Philosopher, who bought a pair of shoes upon trust, the Shoe-maker dieth, the Pythagorean rejoyceth, and thinks his shoes clear gaines; but a while after, his conscience twitches him, and will allow him no rest, because of his robbery; he repaires to the house of the dead, and casts in his money, saying, There, take thy due; Thou livest to me, though dead to all besides. He that carrieth such luggage on his back all day, must expect to find his conscience galled to purpose at night. O Friend, take heed of setting thine inestim∣ble
soul to sale for a little corruptible silver. If it will not profit thee to gain the whole world and lose thy own soul; surely, twill not advantage thee to gain a small pittance of it, and lose thy soul. Thou rakest, and runnest, and it may be cozenest and cheatest, to leave thy child a considerable e∣state; I must tell thee, thy Son is little beholden to thee for leaving him a gay knife to cut his Throat with; a gaudy suit with the Plague in it; a great stately dwelling haunted with Divels; a large por∣tion with the curse of God: No man in his wits would give one hair of his head to be made thine heir, wert thou worth thousands. The Devil him∣self, though he will thank thee for getting it so un∣justly, yet he would not thank thee, if thou shouldst bequeath him all thy ill gotten goods; No, he doth not love the curse of God so well: Thou wouldst shew thy self a more loving Father, in leaving thy Son a Bottle and a Basket to beg with from door to door, then the greatest heap of such riches. Besides, What comfort will it be to thee, for thy Son to live in honour, and bath himself in car∣nal pleasure, with that wealth which thou hast un∣justly scraped together, when thou art frying in unquenchable flames for thy injustice! Thy Chil∣dren are rejoycing with thy silver, and the Devils are revelling with thy soul at the same season; Canst thou think that the contentment of thy posterity, will in the least abate thy torments? It may be thou pleasest thy self with an intention of giving somewhat in thy Will to the poor, and so to pay thy debts to God, with the Devils goods, with
that coyn which hath the Image and Superscription of the Prince of darkness on it; and art thou so mad as to think that it will be acceptable? I tell thee,Isa. 618 God hates robbery for a sacrifice, and thy stollen goods for a burnt Offering. The Great Sultan, as giddy as he was, with the noysome fumes of Mahomets Al∣choran, was yet so well in his wits, as to tell his Bashaw (who perswaded him to build an Hospital with the wealth he had unjustly taken from the Per∣sian Merchants) That to despose his money to releive the poor, would not please God; but to restore it to the right owners, would be acceptable; Will a King thank that man who robs his honest Subjects of an hundred pound upon the road, and then thinks to make amends, by paying half a Crown out of it towards his service. Thou canst not grounded∣ly hope, that thy unrighteousness should be remit∣ted, until thy Mammon of unrighteousness be re∣stored by the Law of God, as well as of men Debts must be paid first, and then Legacies; Iustice must be first minded and then Charity. It may be thou chearest thy heart with the thoughts of an honourable burial; it delights thee to think, how when thy Will is open, people will applaud thee for the large provision thou makest therein for thy children, with what a great Company thou shalt be attended to thy grave, and what a costly Mo∣nument shall be erected to thy Memory. Well! since thou art so much joyed with a curious Tomb, I shall take the pains to write thine Epitaph (and if thou hast a spark of true love to thy soul, thou wilt think of it whilst thou livest) Here lies Inter∣red, one that to make his Children Gentlemen on
earth for a few days, made himself a Beggar in Hell to all eternity. He was one that to gain a little earthly treasure, of which he hath now taken an ever∣lasting farewel; sold his precious soul, and the end∣less blisseful fruition of the blessed God. Did ever fool buy so dear, or sell so cheap! O look on him, and learn to be righteous. SECT. IV. SEcondly, Be righteous in thy Words and Expressi∣ons,Be righteous in thy words and expressi∣ons. as well as in thy Works. The Christians tongue should be his hearts interpreter, and reveal its mind and meaning; and the Christians hand should justifie his tongue, by turning his words into deeds: Though the right Christian is not a worshipper of Mercury, to whom tongues were on∣ly offered in sacrifice; yet with the Athenians he doth speak well, as with the Lacedemonians do well. The Burgesse of the new Ierusalem is known by this livery; He walketh uprightly, worketh righte∣ousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart; He sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not, Psal. 15. 2, 4. First, He speaketh the truth in his heart; His speech is the genuine and natural off-spring of his heart; there is a great resemblance between the Child and the Parent; That language which is con∣fused, and not to be understood, speaks not a Citizen of Sion, but a builder of Babel or Baby∣lon. When the words are spurious, and not the hearts own; like Abimelech, they destroy the Fa∣mily of which they descend; sometimes that
tongue cuts the owners throat. The getting of treasure by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death, Prov. 21. 6. The de∣ceitful tongue seeketh death, though not inten∣tionally, yet euentually; The Saints words and thoughts are univocal, they speak as they think; and are like clarified honey, clear to the bottom; his heart is the Mine, his mind frameth the matter, and his tongue is the shop that exposeth it to publique view. Secondly, He sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not. His hand will make good his lawful promises, how much soever they shall be to his prejudice. There is a Symmetry between his hand and his tongue; he is slow to promise, not hasty to enter into bonds, but being once engaged, he will be sure to perform. He dares not falsifie his word, knowing that his God was an earwitness. It was the saying of Lysander, That if the Lyons skin would not serve (to cozen with) the foxes must be sowed to it, and that Children were to be decei∣ved with toyes, and men with Oaths; but this Fox himself was at last taken in a trap, and slain at the foot of the Theban Walkes. The Justice of God will some time or other seize upon such unjust men; False conceptions are as dangerous to the souls of men, as to the bodies of women. The Romans built a Temple to the Goddess Fi∣delity, and offered sacrifice to her image, so high∣ly did they esteem of faithfulness. Attilius Regulus, their General against the Carthaginians, being taken Prisoner and sent to Rome with conditions of peace, upon his word to return, if the Terms
were not accepted, judging the conditions disho∣nourable,Tul. de. Offic. he disswaded the Romans from embra∣cing them, and went back to his enemies accor∣ding to his promise, though he knew beforehand, that upon his return they would presently put him to death. The Prisoner that got from Hanni∣bal by eluding his Oath, was by the Senate appre∣hended and sent back again, saith Livie. Attica des, was free, or sure hold; and Atticus testis, one that keeps touch, because the Athenians were so faithful to their words. What a shame is it then for Christians, to regard their Promises and Oaths no more then their old cloaths, which they throw by, when they have made what use of them they desire. Such men do much wound their Credit (that after a little knowledge of such Nullifidians, none will trust them) but much more their consci∣ences. The deceitful and bloody are joyned together, Psa. 5. 6.Vsus frandis in bello geren∣do laudabilis, in aliis actionibus dtest ibilis. Machiav. He that is deceitful to others, is bloody to himself; he may rase others skin, but he wrongs his own soul, and draweth his own heart-blood. Machiavel as bad as he was, would not allow fraud to lodge, save in Souldiers Tents. The jealous God hath made himself known to be a God of truth in accomplishing his threatings on those that have affirmed and attested such lyes. One Ann Averies Widow (in the days of Queen Eliza∣beth) having bought six pound of Tow in a Shop in Woodstreet, falsly said that she had paid for it, and swore to it, but she presently fell down and dyed to the terrour of all such unrighteous and perjured persons. The trade indeed of lying, hath crept almost into all trades, as if it were the on∣ly
way to get a livelyhood, when it hath deprived some of their lives, Act. 5. 7, 8. A lying tongue is one of the six things which the Lord hates, Prov. 6. 17. The Scripture speaks of such persons, that their own tongues shall fall upon them, meaning to destroy them, as Benaiah fell on Ioab, and Da∣vids Souldier on the Amalekite; for so the Phrase is frequently taken, Psa. 64. 8. 1 King. 2. 29, 30. 2 Sam. 1. 15. Reader, Be so true to thy own soul, as to put away lying, and to speak the truth to thy Neigh∣bors, Eph. 4. 25. Do not delude thy self with men∣tal Reservations, or Iesuitical AEquivocation, but let thy words and thoughts joyn in consort. A Chri∣stian should be like Chrystal, the same all over, and visible throughout. As our cloaths represent the pro∣portion of our bodies, so should our words, the pro∣portion of our minds; Twas an unpolitique pre∣cept which Lewis the eleventh of France gave his Son, when he charged him to learn no more Latine then what would teach him to dissemble; Deceit is a gin that men set often to catch serpents, which when they have caught, sting themselves. Cleomenes, King of Lacedemonia, who making Truce with the Argives for seven days, and fell upon their Quarters in the night, was repelled by the Argive Women, and afterwards banished into Egypt, where he miserably slew hiself. Promises are (as it were) the Connection and Ligaments of the several parts in the body Politique; if they be once broken asun∣der and losed, the whole will quickly be dissol∣ved. Such men are like to some fruits, which by their luscious smell, and delightful colour, in∣vite
a man to eat, but prove unsavoury and un∣wholsome. He that had onely natures moonlight to see by, could say, Perditissimi est hominis, fal∣lere eum, qui laesus non esset, nisi credidisset; None but the most villainous will deceive him, who had been safe if he had not trusted, saith Cicero. Thy righteousness must extend to all, according to their several places and relations. That righte∣ousness which is real, will be universal; Render therefore to all their due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custome, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour, Rom. 13. 7. He that is just in his Actions, hath a due respect to all persons, whether Superiors, or Equals, or Inferiors. He who is righteous to his fellow-Subjects, and wrongs his Soveraign in his Custom or Tribute, is a Rebel against the Crown and Dignity of Iesus Christ. He is undutiful to the King of Nations, who payeth not his due to the King of that Nation in which he liveth. Render (saith Christ) to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God, the things that are Gods. Hierom on that place doth well observe, that the name of Caesar is not proper, but Appella∣tive, because from the first Roman Emperor, Iulius Caesar, all his Successors were so called; Hereby Christ intimates that Tribute belongs to every per∣son cloathed with the supreme power; And Gerrhard in his Harmony saith, that our Saviour doth par∣ticularly in that Text understand Tiberius, that monster of men, enjoyning payment of Tribute to that persecuting Prince. How great then is their crime, who cheat a King that is a Christian? Such unnatural Members must expect to fare the worse
for impoverishing their Head. The wealth of a Political Father, is both a credit and support to his Children. If the Root be kept without water, the branches must needs wither. The Ancients emblemed a just man, by one with a pair of ballances in one hand, a sword in another, and both his eyes shut, to dispense impartially to all Iustice, both commutative and distributive; A Magistrate must distribute justice to every one a like. He may see a difference in causes, but no difference in persons. When righteousness reigneth, its said to run down like water, and as a mighty stream Amos. 5. 24. Now water is as free for the poor as the rich, the stream runs down by the meanest Cottage, as much as by the Princes Court; Righteousness must be as common as water, as universal as a stream; David reigned over all Israel, and executed Iustice, and judgment to all his people, 2 Sam. 8. 15. His righteousness was as large as his realm, to all his people. SECT. V. SEcondly, As to the manner of thy dealings,Be Courteous in thy deal∣ings. thy duty is to be courteous as well as righteous. Some men soil the lustre of their justice, and hinder the honour it might bring to the Gospel by the crabbed∣ness of their carriage. A rugged unhewn piece of Timber disgraceth, when a neat smooth one credi∣teth the building. One end of our dealings with men (as I shall shew by and by) most be to gain them to mind godliness, which end will be much furthe∣red by an affable conversation. Men delight not
to walk in rugged ways, nor to deal with rugged men; As curious Flowers draw the eyes, and rare Musick the ears, so doth courtesie allure the hearts of men after it. He that pleaseth all men in all things (indifferent) is the likeliest to save some, 1 Cor. 10. ult. It was the affable carriage of Titus amongst other things, which made him the delight of mankind. Its said of Iulius Caesar,Benigniate a∣deo praeditus, ut quos armis sugerat, cle∣mentia magis vicerit. Solin. that he over∣came their affections by his humanity, whose persons he had before subdued by his power and policy; He gloried in nothing so much as in pardoning his Ene∣mies, and gratifying his friends; saith Austin. They who durst speak to Caesar saith Marius, were ignorant of his greatness, and they which durst not, were ig∣norant of his goodness. We may gain their love by soft words,Austin. Epist. 5. who would hate us, if we went a∣bout to ravish them, or to lay violent hands on them. Alexander won the love of his Souldiers by calling them Fellow-Footmen; Courtesie, like the loadstone, will draw even Iron to it. Pharoah an Heathen was full of Courtesie, and though a King condescended much in his carriage towards Iacob, Abraham is noted not onely for his faith in God and holiness, but also for his discreet familiarity, and affable behaviour towards men, Gen. 47. 8, 9. Gen. 23. 7. Our blessed Saviour is therefore said to come eating and drinking, because of the sweetness and attractiveness of his conversation. This Lord of Glory in all his converses, had a comely and win∣ning grace. They who are truly noble, are ever affa∣ble; those that like the Persian, keep up state, are but according to the French dialect (of their haughty upstarts) gentle Villains. Contempt or arrogancy is a
weed that ever groweth in dunghils; Tis from the rankness of the soyl, that it hath its height and haughtiness; They are but windy Spirits, that bubble thus above others; tis the froth onely that gets always to the top of the water. Its a Divine Command, Be Courteous (1 Pet. 3.8.) the word signifieth, Friendly-minded, Co∣mis, Affailis, Humanus & ad vitae consue∣tudinem facilis commdus{que} Eras. studious to do such things as are grateful to others. Obedi∣ence to this command is cheap, and costeth nothing, which whosoever denyeth, will certainly never obey those precepts which will put him to charge; He who denyeth men a good look, will not at Gods call,Tanquam , Qui sapit ami∣ca, i. e. Qui studet facere ea quae alteri sunt amica & grata. lay down his life for the Gospel. The Romans, beause they would not have any defrauded of civil respect, retained Admonitors (called Nomenclatores) who should suggest the name and quality of every one they encountered, that so he might be saluted in a conformable stile. We read in Scripture frequently of Salutations sent to and from the Saints, Rom. 16.Comitas (alias dicta humani∣tas, affabilitas) est virtus in conversatione mediocritatem servans, ne quis juste offenda∣tur. Praetor. p. 2. Theat. Eth. Sect. 13. God ne∣ver intended that when men put on Christianity, they should put off civility. Those Quakers who like Idols, have eyes and see not, moths and speak not, are so far from being invested (above others, as they pretend) with the divine nature, that they are even divested of the humane nature. The very Turks salutation to him they meet, is Salaum aleek, Peace be to thee; and the reply is,Blunts Voyage Aleek salaum, To thee be peace also. When Boaz came into his field, The Lord be with you, saith he to his Reapers; The Lord bless thee, say they to him.Ruth 4. 2. Indeed, Christ commands his Disciples, Salute no man, Luk. 10. 4.
But the occasion of this prohibition is considerable. The Disciples were sent about business of impor∣tance and expedition; and the salutations Christ speaks off, are in the nature of those which we call Complements, a filling up of precious time with needless toys and trifles. As if Christ had said, Your work is of weight, and requires haste, do not therefore loyter, by standing to talk with any by the way, but mind your business. It is not intended by a Master who gives his Servant such a charge, that therefore he must not put off his hat, or bid any Good Morrow, or ask their Neighbours how they do, for ever after. The same Law-giver doth command Salutations by his on mouth; Into what house ye enter, say, Peace be to this house, Luk. 10. 5, 6. and also commends it to us by his Mini∣sters, 1 Cor. 16. Col. 4. 10, 14. We may not bid them God Speed, whom we see imployed about the Divels designes, least we be partakers of their evill deeds; but if we know not their actions to be bad, our charity must hope the best. He that hath but common Humanity, must needs be a Civilian. Though nature be a Crab-stock, yet if she be but graffed by education, this will be part of her sweet fruit. Be meek in thy dealings with men.3. As thy duty is to be righteous and courteous, so also to be meek in thy dealings with men. Cour∣tesie is a good Servant to wait upon meekness as its Master; both together are no small credit to a Professour: He that is highest in godliness, is fullest of meekness; the purest Gold is soonest mel∣ted, and they are usually the best blades that will bend well; the Lion of Iudah for courage, was a
Lamb for condescension. The Saint must learn of his Saviour to be meek and lowly in heart. The passio∣nate man is one of Lucifers Disciples, and follow∣eth him in his fall from Heaven.Mansuetudo est virtus quae me∣diocritatem servat circa iram. Golius. l. 4. Eth. c. 5. Mansuetudo est virtus quae hominem ita tractabilem fa∣cit in communi conversatione, ut non praeter aequum & bo∣num exapere∣tur aliorum ineptiis, moro∣sitatibus & peccatis leio∣ribus etiam in suam injur am∣tendent. hus. Dav. in Col. 3. 12. This meekness (I speak of it in relation to man as its object) is a vertue by which we moderate our passions, and keep them in subjection, least we should wrong our Neighbours; Patience is sister to meekness, and humility is its mother. The Passions of our minds are like the winds in the air, if they lye still, the Ship must lie still too, or at least make but small speed; if they be too boysterous, they endanger the dashing the vessel upon a Rock, or casting it upon the Quicksands; but when they blow moderately, between a still calm, and a violent storm, they are most helpful to the Mariners. Our affections are of no use if they be suffered to sleep, and do not rise at all; for then though the name of God himself be shot at, they will not hear the murdering piece; Such meekness is worse then mopishness; God did not give the soul these wings in vain. On the other side, if our affections are tempestu∣ous, and rise too high, they threaten to overturn both our selves and our Neighbours. A passionate man, is like the torrid zone, too hot for any to deal with him, or to dwel neer him. The work therefore of meekness, is to keep the affections within their bounds; so to moderate this fire, that it may warm, not flame out to burn it self and o∣thers. He that is inebriated with passion, is unfit for any action; like Sampsons Foxes, he scattereth fire-bands abroad to the hurt of all that are neer him. Alexander in his anger flies upon his best friend;
Parmenio himself must perish by that Wild-fire; Catos best Emperor was he qui potuit imperare affectus, that could keep his own passions in subjection. When one said he was a wise King, that was kind to his friends, and sharp to his enemies; another said, He was a wiser Prince, that could retain his Friends in love, and make his enemies like them. The Spirit of God gives us a mark to know a wise and no∣ble man by; Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? Let him shew out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3. 13. Two particulars offer themselves to our view out of this verse. 1. That meekness is a sign of a wise man. The world counts them onely the brave spirits, that scorn to suffer the least affront, and who will repay a single injury with double interest; but these in Gods accounts are fools. What a fool is he that suf∣fereth (his passion) that which should be his servant to become his master, and to tyrannize over him? What a fool is he that perceiving a Musket dischar∣ged, will not stoop a little, or fall down a while to avoid the Bullet, but keep his place and height, to the loss of his life? Truly, such a fool is he that will never yeild to anothers wrah. Is not he a fool, that seeing a fire in his neighbours house, anger in his Neighbours heart, is so far from help∣ing to quench it by the water of mildness, that he throweth more fuel on it, and increaseth its flame, even to the burning down of his own? is not he a fool, that ventureth his inestimable soul, at every trifling cast, and runneth headlong upon the greatest
hazards? Surely 'tis not without reason, the wise man speaks so often of a fools wrath, and that Anger resteth in the bosome of fooles, Prov. 27. 3. and 17. 12. &c. A wise man deferreth his anger, least it burn with too hot a flame; Prov. 29. 11. He will draw back the brands, least the fire ex∣ceeding its bounds, should consume him; How many have been thrown, nay utterly over-thrown, by laying the reins upon the neck of their brutish passions, when their persons would have been safe, had but their passions been curbed? Charles the sixth, King of France, was mad for anger, and desire of revenge on the Duke of Brittain. Excess of wrath cost Ajax his life, if the Poet may be beleived. Sylla in the height of fury vomited up his blood and his breath together,Ovid Metamor. Plutarh. saith the Historian. When such winds blow, they raise black and dark clouds. A furious man hath few friends; like Ismael, his hand is against every man, and every mans hand is against him. The Herons name in Hebrew signifieth to be an∣gry, and its observed, scarce any fowl hath so many foes; the Eagle preyeth upon her, the Fox catcheth her in the night, the Hawk destroyeth her eggs; How foolish is the Bee that loseth her life, and her sting together, she puts another to a little pain, but how dearly doth she pay for it? The greatest conquest is to overcome our selves, and the vilest bondage to be our own slaves, Prov. 16. 32.Infirmi animi est exigui{que} voluptas Vltio; continuo sic Collge, quod vindicta Nemo magis gaudet quam faemina. Juvenal. Sat. 6. He that is most mild, is most manly. It sullied the glory of all Caesars valour and victories, that he was his own vassal. It is the glory of a man, to pass by offences. Those Dogs which were presented to Alexander, by the King of Albany, were counted
the best in the world,Noilssimum genus vindictae est par ere. and upon this account, be∣cause they were so noble as not to stir at all, when small beasts were brought to encounter them; and through an overflowing of courage would never fight, save with Lions and Elephants.Contemnere o∣prtet injurias & quas injuri∣arum umbras dixeim, contu∣melias sive me∣rto mihi acci∣t, sive imme∣rito. Si merito, non est contu∣melia, sed judi∣cium; Si imme∣rito, illi qui in∣justa facit, non mih. erubesen∣dum est. Senec. in Sap. non cad. injuria. Those men, without question, are far from true worth, and most ignoble, who upon every supposed petty wrong, flie to the common Law, or Civil War for revenge. By the Laws of England a Noble man hath this privi∣ledge, that he cannot be bound to the peace, because its supposed that a Noble person will scorn to engage himself in quarrels, but keep the peace without a Bond. It is the base and vile bramble, the fruit of the earths curse, that teareth and renteth what is next it. Plutarch reports of a falling out between two famous Philosophers,If Injuries be shameful, it is  to him that doth the wrong, not to him that suffe∣reth the wrong, saith Scrates. Aristippus and AEschines, and how after some time, Aristippus went to AEschines, saying, Shall we not be friends before we be a Table∣talk to all the town? Yea, with all my heart, saith AEschines. Remember then (saith Aristippus) that thrugh I am your Elder, yet I sued for peace. True replieth the other, I acknowledge you the better and worthier man; for I began the strife, but you the peace. In this Pagan glass, many Christians may see their own deformities; for even Heathen agree with Scripture in this first particular, That they are most wise and prudent, who are most meek and peace∣able. 2. The other which floweth from the forementi∣oned verse, is, That the Christians meekness must be mixt with wisdom. The Apostle calls it meekness of wisdom; meekness opposeth fury in our own
quarrel, not zeal in Gods cause. The same Spirit that appeared in the forme of a Dove; appeared also in the form of fiery tongues. It may be my duty to be silent when I am wronged; but its sinful, not to speak when God is reproached. Though I may compound for my own debts, yet I have no power to compound for anothers. Its a singular mark of a Saint, to be wet Tinder, when men strike fire at himself; and touch-wood, when men strike at God; The meekest man upon the face of the earth, was the fullest of fury in the cause of Heaven, Numb. 12. 2. Exod. 32. A skilful Musitian knoweth when to strike a string of a lower sound, when of an higher. A wise Christian knoweth when to abate, when to in∣crease his heats. Naturalists observe of Bees, that they will ordi∣narily suffer any prejudice, when they are far from their Hives, and their own particular is onely con∣cerned; but when they are neer their Hives, that their Common wealth is engaged in their combats, they are furious and will lose their lives, or con∣quer. Thy work O Christian, is not to abate the least of Gods due; but to pocket up many private injuries, and to forgive thy personal debts. Be not like some, as cold in Gods cause as if they had neither sense nor life; and as hot in their own, as if their work were to make good the opinion of Democritus, that the soul is of the nature of fire, nothing else but an hot subtle body, dispersing it self into fiery atomes. Excess of fury, is a spi∣ritual frenzy, and its ill for them who come within the biting of such mad beasts. I have reast of Themistocles, that having an House
to let, he pasted on the Door, Here is an House to be hired, that hath a good Neighbour; Its a great comfort to dwell by a pious and meek person, but no small cross to live neer the peevish and passio∣nate; A meek man is a good Neighbour in these respects. For 1. He is so far from wronging others, that he will forgive those that wrong him. He is not onely contrary to them, who like furious Curs, fall upon every one that passeth by, without the least cause, but also if he be wronged, he never studieth re∣venge, though he may seek sometimes for Iustice. The world hath learned of the Divel to offer in∣juries, and he hath learned of God to suffer inju∣ries. He dares not usurpe Gods Throne, but leaves his cause to the Judge of all men, Lev. 19. 18. He knoweth also that good men must have their grains of allowance; and Children of the same Father, are too prone to quarrel; therefore he beareth both with the bad, and the good; with the former for Christs sake; with the latter, because they are Christs seed. Now such a one is a good Neighbour; Calvin said,Sae dicere so∣litus sum. Eti∣amsi me Luthe∣rus diabolum vocaret, me ta∣men hoc illi honoris habitu∣rum, ut insig∣nem dei ser∣vum agnos∣cam. Cael. Bu. though Luther should call him Satan, yet he would honour Luther as a faithful servant of God. Its reported of Cato, that when a rash bold fellow struck him in the Bath, and some time after, came to ask him pardon, he had forgot that he had been injured, Melius putavit non agnoscere, quam ignos∣cere, saith Seneca. He scorned to approach so neer revenge, as acknowledge that he had been wronged. Its below a generous Moralist to take notice of petty affronts; He kils such slimy wormes, by trampling on them. The Christian upon a better consideration,
destroyeth those vermine with the foot of contempt. He hath experience what millions of pounds are for∣given him by God, and therefore out of gratitude cannot but pardon some few pence to man. Forgiving one another, as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you, Ephes. 4. 32.Hierom obser∣veth upon Ephes. 4. 32. that the Apo∣stle saith,  that is, saith he,  rather then  free∣ly forgiving your selves. Nam quod be∣ne in alium fit, magis ei repo∣nitur qui praestitit, quam cui datum est. He knoweth that he needeth fa∣vour from others for his offences against them; he doth not always walk so carefully, but some time or other he hath bespattered those that went neer him, and its but just that he should allow that pardon which he expecteth,Hanc veniam petimus{que} damus{que} vicissim, Horas. Non vivitur inter perfectos & bonos, sed inter illos qui saepe ex infirmitate, & inscitia peccant; quod & nos ipsi etiam facimus. AEquum est igitur peccatis veniam poscen∣tem, reddere rursus, Cav. ibid. Eccles. 7.21,22. Tit. 3. 2, 3. Shewing all meekness towards all men; for we our selves were sometimes foolish, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. The Lace∣demonians were wont to pray in their publique ser∣vice, that the Gods would enable them to bear pri∣vate wrongs with patience. 2. A meek person will part with much of his right to buy his peace. Where he may not wrong his family too much, nor dishonour his God, he will yeild far to preserve or purchase a friend. Though his pri∣viledge be superior, yet he can be contented to hold the stirrup to others, and give them place; Abraham was the Elder and the Nobler man, yet he offereth Lot his choice of the Country, and was wil∣ling to take what he would leave.
SECT. VI. Look to thy principle in thy dealings.SEcondly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness in thy dealings with all men, look not onely to the manner of thy dealing, but also to the principle. Thy righteous, courteous, and meek carriage must proceed from obedience to Gods command. Many of the Heathen (as thou hast heard) were just in their contracts, they would as soon die as deceive; Now how wouldst thou know whether thou exceedest them, but by a principle of Conscience, from which thou actest. If Pagans and Christians be found travelling in the same path, the onely way to difference them, i to enquire, whence they both sat out, and whither they are going; what is the principle from which they act, and what is the end of their journey? According to the principle of a man, such is his end; If the Barrel of the Musquet be crooked, it will never carry the Bullet right; therefore thy principle must especially be minded. There be ma∣ny things that move orderly, and yet their moti∣on is not from a principle of life; as a Mill moveth by reason of the water, yet is no living creature. An outward principle of custome or fashion or glory, may make a man just and patient in his act∣ings; many do the things commanded, not be∣cause they are commanded, but upon some sini∣ster account. Morality and Christianity, differ specifically; the Moralist worketh from nature, a little refined by study or education; the Christian from nature, throughly renewed by the Holy
Ghost. Where this spring is wanting, no motion can be true; be the fruit never so fair to the eye, if the root whence it groweth be not good, it will be unpleasant and distastful. Laban at the last, was just in his agreement with Iacob, but shame, not conscience, was the curb that held him in. Such dealings like fruits which are ripened by art and force, are not kindly, neither be they accep∣table to the heavenly taste. Indeed, all such righteousness is unrighteousness, and all such per∣sons, though they are just to men, and do them no wrong, yet are unjust to God, and deprive him of his right. The true Christians righteousness towards men, proceedeth from the fear of his God. The for∣mer Governours (saith Nehemiah) were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine; besides, forty Shekels of silver; yea, even their Servants bare rule over the people; but this did not I, because of the fear of God; Nehem. 5. 9, 15. The dread of the most high, was the hedge which kept him within his bounds. Look therefore friend to the ground of thy deal∣ings. Nothing will be commendable in Gods eye, which doth not flow from his awe; if the desire to keep up thy name, or to please thy Neighbour (whose good word thou valuest) be the main reason of thy righteousness, thou servest thy self, but not thy God. He is a false servant, who pay∣eth the debts his Master appointeth him, but more in his own name, and lest he should be counted a Cheat, then because of his Masters command. Thou art a true servant, if therefore thou darest not de∣ceive
men, because thou dreadest the just and jea∣lous God. Ioseph encourageth his brethren to ex∣pect fair dealings from him upon this ground; Do this and live, for I fear God, Gen. 42. 18. i. e. Ye need not fear unrighteous actions at my hands, since the fear of God is in my heart. As long as this guard is set upon me, I shall do violence to no man.Plutarh. It was a prety answer of Xenophons, when Laelius told him that he was a timerous fellow, because he durst not play at Dice with him; Very timerous indeed, and fearful to do evil. Thirdly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness in thy dealings with men,Let thy end and aim in thy dealings be good. let thine end and aim in thy dealings be good. Have an eye in them, not onely to thine own temporal good (this is low and mean) but chiefly to the glory of God, and the spiritual good of thy self and others. Christi∣ans must not deal together as Indians, meerly for trade and outward advantage; Its but a beggarly cal∣ling to trade onely for the dirt and pebbles of world∣ly profit; but its high and honourable to be a Mer∣chant for the Diamonds and Pearls of spiritual riches. The Heathen and the Christian both, may meet in the manner of their dealings, but they part in their ends. The Thief and the honest Country∣man are both found riding in the same road, but they have different ends therein, and that distinguish∣eth them. He is a Dwarf indeed, and looks very low, whose eye in such actions is wholly upon earth. True Saints sore aloft, and have more noble de∣signes in their ordinary dealings, Mat. 5. 16. Like the Moon, they enlighten others with their borrowed brightness, and endeavour to their
power to reflect their beams back to the Sun, the Fountain of their light. How ungratefully doth he slink away, that dieth and returneth no glory to his Father, neither rais∣eth up any seed to his elder Brother; I seek not mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved, saith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 33. He hath cause to fear his own going to heaven, who would go thither alone. True favourites desire their King may have many Loyal Subjects; Every crea∣ture almost is of an assimulating nature; Fire turneth what comes neer it into fire. Earth changeth what we commit to it, into Earth. Water moistens what it meets with. Stones grow, and spread in the veins of the earth; Even Flowers and Hearbs will be scattering their seed for the increase of their kind. Good men cannot but desire & endeavour that all they converse with might be like themselves in goodness. The first blessing which God bestowed on man after his creation, was this, Be fruitful & multiply. How industrious are Christs enemies to spread their poison,Turk Hist. 1332. and draw men from their allegiance to him! I have read of a Jew who turned Turk, how shortly after, in buying Grpes, he fell out with a Turk, and beat him soundly; Whereupon a certain Jew asked the abused Turk, why he would suffer himself to be so much wronged. The Turk answered, You shall beat me as much, if you will turn Mussul-man; Its too visible, that Romes agents are also sufficiently active to make Proselytes to their idolatries; and wilt thou sit still and do nothing towards the gaining of subjects to thy Lord and Saviour? Holy David was more diligent
to enlarge the borders of Christs, then of his own kingdom;1 King. 5.7. 2 Cron. 2. 11, 12. He would blaze Gods honour and power before the highest, and not shrink for shame, Psa. 119. And the success of his industry is conside∣rable. Though great Fish are seldom caught by such Angles, yet King Hiram came to be converted to God by his converse with David. Its likely Reader, thou dealest with sinners; thy first care must be that thou mayst not partake of their sins. Its reported that at Belgrade in Hungary, Danubius and Sava,Sir Henry Blunts Voyage into the Le∣vant. two famous Rivers, the one pure, the other filthy meet, and yet their waters mingle no more then water and oyl, not that either float above the other, but both joyn unmixed, so that neer the middle of the River, saith my Au∣thor, I have gone in a Boat and tasted the Danow, as clear as a Spring, and putting my hand an inch further, I have taken of the Sava, as troubled as a street channel, tasting the gravel in my teeth; thus they run together unmingled sixty miles. So shouldst thou in thy contracts and dealings with the wicked, keep thy self pure and undefiled. Thy next care must be, to make them better; A meek gracious carriage may win them to Christ. Some Fish have been caught with a Golden Hook; Some∣times by parting with a little of thy right, by losing a little silver, thou mayst gain a precious soul; He that always stands strictly and stifly upon his right, may thereby wrong both God and his Gospel. Heavenly mindedness, shining in a Christians deal∣ings with prophane men, hath such a beauty in it, that it attracteth at the first sight the eyes of every beholder, like the sudden appearance of a Candle
in a dark room. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, Gal. 6. 10. An opportunity to do good to others, is a great mercy to our selves. The Oyl of grace like the Widows, 2 King. 4. 6. increaseth by powring out; an opportunity is a spe∣cial season, which God affordeth us, for the be∣nefit of our own and others souls; When time and helps meet and marty, their off-spring is opportu∣nity. Thou dealest with those at one time, whom thou mayst never see again; possibly their hearts being big with sin, they bring forth in thy pre∣sence, either swearing, or slandering, or mocking at holiness; now God gives thee an opportunity, by a prudent affectionate reproof, and by serious savoury advice, to kill those brats of Hell, as soon as they are born, and to make the Parents barren in regard of such a cursed brood for ever after, which if thou neglectest, thou shalt never have again. The Bird of opportunity is usually upon the wing, she flieth away of a sudden, and we never fee her again; therefore whilst thou hast her, make the best use of her. Thou thinkest (it may be) that thy counsel to such men would be but cast away, as pure water in a nasty sink; but do thy work, which is to endavour their conver∣sion, and leave the success, which is Gods work to him. Benhadads Souldier drew a Bow at a venture, and his Arrow pierced within the joynts of the Harness, and slew Ahab; the man shot the Arrow at he knew not who, but God levelled it at the King, amongst all the company. Do thou draw the Bow, according to thy duty, and God may so direct the Arrow of admonition, as to
make it enter the sinners heart, and let out the very life of his sin.Repentinis re∣sponsionibus & consiliis meli∣or, quam medi∣tatis, Aurel. Vict. Sometimes things are done best on a sudden; Tiberius was happier in his extempore speeches, then those which he made up∣on study and premeditation. Thou mayst as Philip to the Eunuch, fall in with a person on a sudden (whom thou never sawest before, nor shalt ever see again) and by seasonable counsel be instru∣mental to his eternal comfort; It may be thou meetest with such as do believe; then thy care must be to build them up; Saints must be Land-mark to direct others in the way to life. Apollos was a stranger to Aquila and Priscilla, but coming in∣to his company, they expounded to him the way of God more perfectly, Act. 18. 25. The members of the mystical body must be helpful to one ano∣ther. Christians, with whomsoever they converse ought to endeavour either their gaining to, or growing up in Jesus Christ.Plut. Alexanders body was of so exact and rare a constitution (saith the Histo∣rian) that it perfumed every place where he came. The gracious soul being it self filled with spike∣nard and Calamus, and Cassia, and all sweet spi∣ces, may well leave a sweet savour among the persons with whom he converseth. They are dead and withered grains of Corn, out of which there doth not one ear spring up.
A Good Wish of a Christian in Relation to his dealings with all men, wherein the former Heads are applied. THe Living and Eternal God,The Intro∣duction. whose I am, and whom I am infinitely bound to serve; whose unquestionable dominion over me, calleth for univer∣sal subjection from me; having commanded me in his word, to be holy as he is holy, in all manner of conversation, and to walk by rule in my com∣merce with men, as well as in my immediate conver∣ses with his glorious Majesty; I wish in general, that I may make Religion my business, not onely in my sacred duties, but also in my civil dealings; that I may trade with God in divine performances, as if men saw me, and traffique with men in humane af∣fairs, as knowing that God beholdeth me, and herein dayly exercise my self to keep a conscience void of offence towards God, and towards all men.Act. 24. 16. I Wish in particular, that my earthly actions may never clash with, or incroach upon my heavenly calling, that I may not endanger the loss of Religi∣on in the throng and crowd of outward dealings; but may be so limitted and directed therein by Gods Law, that all my works may be orship, and when I am labouring for my body and family, I may be furthering the good of my soul, and my eternal feli∣city; that as my chief natural quality, Reason, com∣mandeth in my lower actions of eating and drinking; so my supernatural excellency, Religion, may bear sway in every passage of my life. Lord, who hast given me a perfect rule, and appointed me to order my life
in all things according to it; be pleased to write all thy laws in my heart, that I may be tender of both Tables; love thee with all my soul and strength, and love my Neighbour as my self, for thy sake. If one link of the golden chain of thy commands be broken, the whole is dissolved; they love one ano∣ther too well to part company; where one precept is wilfully despised, all are disobeyed; Thou hast said it, He that breaks one, is guilty of all. O en∣able me to be as universal in my conformity and duty, as thou art in thy mercy and bounty; for then shall I not be ashamed, when I shall have respect to all thy Commandements.Psa. 119. Motives to mind Religi∣on in civil dealings. 1. Its a sign of hypocrisie to be careless herein.I Wish that the soundness and integrity of my heart, may appear in the cleaneness and purity of my hands; The sound will speak what Mettal the Bell is of; the Flowers that shew themselves above ground, will declare the nature of the root, which lieth hid; How often doth the face discover the faults of the vital parts? If my tongue and speech be double, my spirit cannot be single; If my actions be unrigh∣teous, my inward man must needs be irreligious; How grossely do I delude my self, if I presume that I am holy, because I mind the first Table, if I be dishonest, and live in the breach of the second? when there is so much Religion in the duties of the second Table, that there can be no Religion without them; My deceitful heart is apt to suggest that its but a small matter, If I should supplant my Bro¦ther, and that there is no such need of care in my ordinary outward carriage: But my Soveraign, to whom I have sworn Allegiance, hath told me in the word of truth (Mat. 23. 23.) that justice and mercy
are the weighty matters of the Law, and hath commanded me, (Micah. 6. 8.) to do justly, and to love mercy throughout my whole life. O that I might never allow my self in the breach of those pre∣cepts, which in the worlds blind judgment are the least of his commands; and by my pattern teach men so, lest I be found at last, the least in the King∣dom of Heaven. Lord, thou hast enjoyned me, to keep thy Law as the Apple of mine eye (Prov. 7.) I know, a small thing will pain, a little dust will offend mine eye; but thy Law is infinitely more ten∣der; thy Word forbids and condemneth the smallest wandring, the very conception of sin, in a vain thought; much more its birth in an unrighteous action, is abominable and odious to it; Thou hast comman∣ded me to keep thy Precepts diligently; O that my ways were directed to keep all thy Com∣mandements! Though I abound, and am never so strict in thine Ordinances, if I be careless and loose in my Contracts with men, thou canst espie the e∣vil constitution of my soul, notwithstanding such painting; Thou canst see the rottenness of my heart, in the rottenness of my wares, under the false gloss I put upon them; And if thy moral precept find not obe∣dience with me, my spiritual performances will ne∣ver find acceptance with thee. The Pie, a speckled Bird, whose Feathers were white and black, was unclean. Should I seem pious in those duties which con∣cern thy worship, and yet be perverse in my dealings with men, I am in thy judgement a wicked person. Thou hast said of such, Shall I count them pure with the wicked ballances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? Micah. 6. 11. If there be iniquity in my
hands, there is hypocrisie in my heart; How clearly doth a person that picketh and chooseth his food, (liking this, and loathing that, though neer so wholsom) prove a foul stomach; and how fully do I demonstrate secret filth in my inward parts, if I pick and choose amongst (the food of my soul) the precepts! When the soul is clean and sound, every command will be sweet; if my heart be sincere, all my dealings will be square. O let me never be like those Pharises, who made long prayers for a cover, that they might prey the more closely upon their Neigh∣bours; but let thy spirit in my heart, send up the sap of grace into every branch of my life, that all the passages thereof may abound in the fruits of righte∣ousness, and I may esteem all thy precepts, con∣cerning all things, to be right. I Wish that the glory of Religion may be so dear to my heart,Motive, the honour of Religion. that I may render it amiable to the eyes of others, by walking every way sutable to my profession; The name of my God is holy and reve∣rend, and shall I offer it to reproach? Some write that the Iews would not foul their mouths with that unclean word of blaspeming God, but always ex∣pressed it by a contrary word of blessing God; If it were so execrable that they hated to speak it, shall I be so vile as to act it? It were a sin to wrong a man of his good name; what is it then to rob my God? If I dress my self in the livery of Christ, and in that habit wallow in the mire of unrighteous dealings, I give up the blessed Redeemer to the scorn and derision of the world. Every one that nameth the name of Christ, should depart from iniquity. The colours of Christ which I wear, cause many
to look upon me; Every professor is like a City on an Hill, visible to all; Spots are sooner seen in scarlet, then in sackcloth; Blots appear fouler in a strict professour, then in a loose and prophane per∣son. None wonders to see swine dirty; but to see the Ermins beautiful skin bemired, is prodigious. How watchful are the wicked to observe my wandrings! All my familiars watch for my halting, they mark my steps when they watch for my soul, If they can sinde the least tincture of falseness in my words, or colour of unfaithfulness in my works, they soon make it much greater, looking on it through the Spectacles of malice. How quick do they post it a∣broad, and publish it amongst their companions! I hear the defaming of many, fear on every side; Report, say they, and we will report it. What a shame was it, that the Great Turk should take the violated Covenant of the Hungarian King, out of his bosoe, and present it to the blessed God, as the act of those that wore his livery, and prosest them selves his servants? When those that should be the beauty of Israel, are slain in the high places, and (those that by their profession are) the mighty, fall in the streets, they soon tell it in Gath, and pub∣lish it in Askelon; the Daughters of the Philistines rejoyce, the Sons of the uncircumcised triumph; then the banks of blasphemy are broken down, and the floods of scoffs and scorns come pouring in. And when they went among the Heathen, they prophaned my holy name, when they said to them;Ezek. 36. 20. These are the people of the Lord. How doth the World conclude, Surely the Parents are very bad, whom their own Children discommend so much! Cer∣tainly
there is little love or power, or faithfulness in their Father, when his own Sons dare not trust him for a little food, but go up and down to steal and filch from others! O how ordinary is it for the prophane to throw the dirt of professours sins on the face of their profession! None give such wounds to the credit of the blessed God, as some who pretend to be his own children. The higher the place is whence a stone fals, the deeper it pierceth No blows more mortal then those of a Thunder-bolt. My profession is high; if my practices be vile and base, I strike religion to the very heart; O let me never be so vile a Traytor, as by my sordid courses (like Judas) to betray the holy Iesus to the buffetings and mockings of his adver∣saries; Why should I harden the bad by my sinful shifts in their wickedness? Shall I be the Divels broker to put off those rotten wares for him, of cozening and cheating, which otherwise might lie upon his hands? Why should I sadden the good? Shall I cause them to hang down their heads with sorrow as the Patriarchs did theirs, when the cup was found in Benjamins sack? Lord, thou art ten∣der of the Reputation of thy chosen, and hast many a time wrought wonderfully for their renown and credit; When the wicked world hath blown upon their names, endeavouring to blast them and make them unsavoury, thou hast magnified thy power to vindicate their honour; And shall I make thy glorious name contemptible, when thou makest my vile name honou∣rable? Can I be so void of love to thy Majesty, as to tread upon that name of thine, that is more worth then Heaven and Earth? Besides, Many a season I have pleaded thy name in prayer, and that with
success. My voice hath been in the behalf of my own soul;Psa. 25. and 31. 13. For thy names sake pardon mine iniquity, for it is great; Thou art my Rock and my Fortress, therefore for thy names sake, lead me and guide me: When thou haste answered me,Isa. 48. 9. Behold I, even I am he that blotteth out thine iniquities, for my names sake; I will defer my anger for mine names sake, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off. O how many a blessing hath thy name been, both the Oratour to procure, and the Messen∣ger to bring! when many others have treated to little purpose, that, that hath been the undeniable Am∣bassadour to prevail for peace and pardon. Thy name hath been by shelter in many a storm, and my sup∣ply in many a straight; and shall I be an enemy to that which is so great a friend to me? Can I be so unworthy as to cause others to trample this great favourite at heavens Court under their feet? Hath not the polluting thy name been the argument which I have sometimes used for the perdition of thine enemies! I have cried to thee, Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name; and shall I be guilty of that which I plead as a reason for others ruine! Again, My dayly prayer is, Hallowed be thy name, and shall my practices give my prayer the lye, and prophane it! Should I cheat and cozen as the men of the world, my great profession would cause my sin, like a Cart heavy laden, to make deep furrows, into which many might trip and fall. How ordinary is it for Egyptians to follow the dark side of the Israelites Pillar to their perdition? Foolish man that I am, is not the burthen of my own sins al∣ready
intolerable, and shall I add to them by being partaker of other mens sins! Is the River of wrath due to me, so low, so little, that I must invite streams from every place to swell it into an Ocean! O that for my own sake, for the sake of other men, and especially for thy sake, I may order all my ways by thy word! Lord, preserve me by thy Spirit, that I may never lay a stumbling block before the wicked, nor as the unbeleiving spies, by my distrust of thy providence, and using indirect courses to releive my family, bring an ill report upon the good Land. Assist me that I may look not onely to the power of Religion, but also the honour of Religion; Let thy grace ever accompany me, and enable me to keep a conscience void of guile before thee, and a con∣versation so void of guilt before men, that whereas they speak against me as an evil doer, they may be ashamed at this day, and may by my good works, which they shall behold, glorifie God in the day of visitation. In our deal∣ings; we must exercise our selves to god∣liness. First, In re∣gard of the manner. 1. Act Righ∣teously. Jer. 22. 12.I Wish that I may look to the righteousness of my actions, as well as to the righteousness of my person, and never think that my house can be firm, if it be built upon the rotten foundation of injustice. My God hath said, Wo be to him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his Chambers by wrong. As high as my house is raised, and as sure as it is seated, the breath of this curse will blow it down. Though my estate seem never so fair, yet how easily and how speedily may this scorching curse cause it to fade,In thy works. and to wither in my hand as a flower! Have not mine eyes beheld the ruines of some stately dwel∣lings, which have been built upon rapine! Unrigh∣teousness,
like Rabbits in some Countrys, hath un∣dermined the foundations, and overturned the buildings; and shall mine escape? Whether I will be∣lieve it or no  My God hath spoken, that unjust gain will prove my own loss, and he will see it ac∣complished. Whatsoever fine terms I may call my cheat∣ing by, as an Art in my Trade, or the Mystery of my Calling, yet my God counts it Theft, and me for it but a Thief. Though I may put a fair co∣lour upon my false dealing, yet he forbids it un∣der the plain censure of stealing; Thou shalt not steal. And O how great a Theif am I, if I be guilty of this in my ordinary dealings! I wrong my Neigh∣bours that trade with me, and that most Hypocri∣tically, under the pretence of doing them right. To kill a man in the field by force is wicked; but to poison him at my Table by fraud is worse, because in this latter I pretend friendship. To rob on the High-way by open power is greivous; but to rob in my Shop by this hellish policy is more odious, for I wrong one that is my friend, and in such a way, that he hath no means to help himself. The Righteous God saith,Isa. 1. 15. My hands are full of blood, not onely when I murther a mans person, and take away his life, but also when I injure a mans por∣tion and take away his lively-hood. Such unjust per∣sons must expect sore punishments; The Law of man punisheth Cheats in some measure; but the Law of the jealous God, is more severe to such Iuglers as endeavour to unglue the whole worlds frame, knit together onely by commerce and contracts. I rob my own family as well as my Neighbours. He that is greedy of gain, troubleth his own
house. False dealing like Fire consumes what comes near it. My Children were better be left beggars, then heirs of those riches which I have got by rob∣bery. What is well gotten, will fae the worse for the Neighbourhood of my ill gotten wealth. This as a rotten sheep will infect the sound flock. Whilst I am digging deep, to lay the foundation of my house sure, I do but lay in barrels of powder to blow it up. I rob my own soul most of all by my unrighte∣ousness; How ill is that gain which causeth the loss of my God! How cheap do I sell those wares with which I buy endless and intollerable wo! How dear do I buy that silver, for which I sell my inestimable soul and salvation! Ah what an ill Market doth he make; that puts off his soul at any price! If it be un∣profitable to gain the whole world and lose my own soul, what a fool, what a mad man am I to set my soul to sale for a very small part of the world! Into what a miserable Dilemma doth my deceitful dealing bring me! Either I must repent and vomit it up, which will tear and wrack my very heart, or else I must burn for ever in hell! O that I might never e so bereaved of my wits, as to touch or med∣dle with such distracting wealth.Psa. 37. 16. Prov. 16. 8. Lord, thou hast informed me, that, A little which the righteous man hath, is better then the possessions of many wicked; that better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without right. I know that the comfort of my life doth not depend upon a con∣fluence of outward good things, but upon thy love and good-will towards me; Let me rather choose the greatest want, then riches from Satans hands and
in Hells way; Be thou pleased to sparkle my little with the precious diamond of thy love, and then twill be better indeed then the riches of many wicked; yea, more worth then all the World. I Wish that in my buying and selling, I might ever have an eye to the ballance of the Sanctuary. My person must be tried by Scripture at the last day, for my everlasting life and death; and shall not my actions be squared by it at this day? How sad a bar∣gain should I make, if I should buy my own bane? What a dreadful trade should I drive, to sell (like that Son of Perdition) the incomparable Saviour for a little corruptible silver? Is that wealth worth getting, which will make way for eternal want? Though my heapes swell never so much by unlawful means, yet tis but like the swelling of the dropsie, a presage of death. O my soul, what will it avail thee to be rich here, and to be a beggar hereafter, and that for ever? Thou pretendest to purity, but thy God tells thee that holiness and righteousness are like Husband and Wife, joyned by him together, and none may part them asunder. Thou art unsound in all thy sacred duties, if thou art unrighteous in thy civil dealings: When the unjust dealer is cast into the unquenchable fire, what will become of the great Professour? What is the hope of the Hy∣pocrite, though he hath gained, when God shall take away his soul? Iob 27. 8. When the Thief is taken and carried to the Goal, all the money he hath stollen is taken from him. When Death seiseth thee, and sendeth thee to the Prison of Hell, all thy ill gotten goods must be left behind. When thou art lost eternally, what will become of thy unjust
gains? Thy Children may be ranting with it on Earth, and thou art roaring for it in Hell. Ah! what dear contracts dost thou make, to sell thy pre∣sent peace, and thy future endless joy, for a little perishing pelfe? The comfort of thy life now consist∣eth in communion with thy God; but he that saith, He hath fellowship with God, and walketh in darkness, is a lyar? 1 Ioh. 1. 6. Thy God hates to taste of those Waters which run out of such musy Vessels; Muchless will he suffer any of such rotten hearts, and stinking breaths, to draw neer to him in Heaven; Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6. 9. No such Cattel shall ever come into the Cele∣stial Court. Unrighteous Heathens shall be shut out of Heaven; and surely then unrighteous Chri∣stians shall be cast into the lowest Hell. O let the fear of thy God ever possess thee, that the love of this World may never pollute thee; Manifest thy love to thy Saviour, by loving thy Neighbour as thy self. Blessed God, who lovest righteousness, and hatest iniquity, the Scepter of whose Kingdom is a righteous Scepter, who wilt render unto every man his righteousness; and who hast appeared to me by that grace which teacheth me to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live righ∣teously in this present evil world; Let thy good Spirit fill me with all the fruits of righteousness; Do thou so lead me in the paths of equity, for thy names sake, that I may follow after righteousness, and inherit a ure reward. I Wish that I may be righteous in every relation wherein I stand, and towards all persons with whom
I deal, that I may give to Superiours the things that are theirs, to Inferiours the things that are theirs, lest by denying either I rob all; My God is no re∣specter of persons, but just in all his ways, and righteous in all his works. When shall I imitate his blessed Majesty? He tells me, Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that doth righteousness at all times;Psa. 106. 3. If I expect the blessing propounded, I must mind the righteousness enjoyned, and that is to be righteous at all seasons. O my soul, what encouragement hast thou to do justly upon all occasi∣ons! thy righteousness shall have a large recompence. Thy Children may fare the better; The just man walketh in his integrity, and his Children are blessed after him: Nay, thy whole Family; The voice of joy and Salvation is in the Tabernacle of the righteous;Pov. 12. 7. Whereas thou mayst fear that thy plain dealing may bring thee and thine to poverty; thou bast his promise, that he will make the ha∣bitation of thy righteousness prosperous:Job 8. 6. Above all, thou thy self wilt have the greatest solace. Thy righteousness shall answer for thee in time to come; and whereas the dishonest wealth of others is a corroding worm to gnaw their consciences; thy ju∣stice will afford thee present comfort. In the trans∣gression of an evil man there is a snare; but the righteous doth sing and rejoyce, Prov. 29. 6. Ah! who would not sow righteousness, when he shall certainly reap so much mercy! Though others, as if they had pitchy hands, take to themselves whatso∣ever they touch, to the defiling of their own souls, and like whirlpools suck in all that comes neer them, to their own destruction; do thou mete out all thy
dealings by that royal measure; Whatsoever thou wouldst that men should do to thee, do the same to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. When thou art buying, or selling, or about any bar∣gain with thy Neighbour, reflect upon thy self; Would I be glad to be thus dealt with? Were I in this mans case, would I be willing that he should serve me as I serve him? Am I as plain-hearted, as true, as just in my carriage towards him, as I would desire him to be in his trading with me? Would I be contented to be defrauded? should I take it well to be defamed? Is this action of mine such, as I could be contented to receive the like? Do I in this business love my Neighbour as my self? Lord, who hast promised that the righte∣ous shall be had in everlasting remembrance in this world, and shall shine as the Sun in the other world;1 Tim. 3. 2. and who hast put the unrighteous and lo∣vers of themselves in the front of that black list, which is for the unquenchable fire; do thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies,Luk. 1. 73. that I may serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. Act righte∣ously in thy words.I Wish that I may mind righteousness in my words, as well as in my works, and not dare to hide deceit∣ful and foul intentions under fair and fawning ex∣pressions. To say what is true, and to be true to what I say, is the property of a true Christian;Titus 1. 2. My God is a God that cannot lye; his people are a people that will not lye. Isa. 63. 8.If I therefore be found a lyar, how unlike am I both to God and his people;Prov. 12. 22. Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are his delight; Though lying
lips may be perfumed with sweet words to men, yet God smells the stench and loatheth the ill savour of those rotten inwards whence they proceed. And though truth may beget hatred from men, such sweet breath is his love and delight. He is the God of truth; His Law is the truth;Psa. 119. 142. His Gospel is the word of truth; His Son is the true and faithful Witness. O that truth of heart, truth of words,Colos. 1. 5. and truth in deeds,Rev. 3. 14. may be all in me, which are so agreeable to the true God, and so acceptable to the God of truth! Can that tongue lye so loud to men, which even now called so loud on God? Shall those hands be filching in my Neighbours pocket, which were so lately lifted up to Heaven in prayer? Is my speech given me for my glory, and shall it be the driveling of a Divel that father of lyes? Lord, let me in all my dealings chuse rather to be a loser then a lyar; and let that be my character which thou hast given of the Citizens of Sion,Psa. 24. 3. and 15. 2. that I may never lift up my soul to vanity, nor swear deceitfully, but walk uprightly, work righteousness, and speak the truth in my heart. I Wish that I may be Courteous as well as Righ∣teous, towards all with whom I converse;Manner. Deal Courte∣ously. Huma∣nity is a debt which I owe to all mankind; why should I therefore as some proud men, dam up, and contract my civility into so narrow a compass, that it shall swell into flittery towards my Superiors, and not suffer one drop to descend towards Inferiors! I would not as Formalists in fashion of habits, or outward Vesture, discover the lightness of a carnal mind; Nor like Hypocrites, by composed actions, or artificial gesture, manifest the looseness of a frothy
spirit; but as a prudent, yet serious Christian be so affable in my carriage, that I may be the more ac∣ceptable in my counsel, for the good of others souls. Humanity doth cast a lustre, to attract the eyes and hearts of others. Courtesie is commendable, and an adorning adjunct to sanctity. Holiness is honoured by the attendance of this Hand-maid. Grace is rendered more lovely, when tis accompanied with a kind nature. Tis pity that Jewel should not ever be in this soft Velvet Cabinet. One end of my trading must be to commend to others the excellency of spiritual wares, and to encourage them to buy the truth; but if my behaviour be morose and unkind, I shall fright men from being my customers; and in∣flict on my self part of Nebuchadnezars penalty, se∣parate my self from amongst men, by forcing them to withdraw from me. If my language be fierce, and my looks frowning, I may deter men from my company, but shall never allure them to Christ. Where the car∣riage is sowre and pouting, the Counsel will never be sweet and prevalent. O that I might never dis∣advantage Religion by any rugged disposition, but by the kindness of my nature may do a real kindness to grace, and become all things to all men, if by any means I might save some. Yet I would not be so courteous to others, as to be discourteous to my self; I mean, be so courteous to sinners, as to comply with them in their sins; Tis far better that the World should count me uncivil, then the Lord should esteem me un∣godly. Let me be an enemy to their corruptions, when I shew my self most friendly to their persons, and never be so much a Courtier, as to forget that I am a Chri∣stian. Lord, who hast commanded thy people to be
kindly affected one towards another, teach me to shew the true affection of my heart, in the kindness of my tongue and hand; courtesie is as salt, and dry∣eth those ill humours which are distastful to others, and will make my counsel the more savoury; Thine An∣gels themselves used salutations in their occasional converses with Mortals; give me to do thy will on earth, as it is done by those Noble Courtiers in Heaven; for I believe that they were in Heaven, when they were discoursing with thy chosen on Earth; Grant me so much gracious good manners, as by my prayers to send the next man I meet, even all I deal with, to thee. Let me bestow the almes of some hearty ejaculation, as well as the outward expressions of The Lord be with you, upon them: Yea, let me for thy sake be kind and gentle to all men, that I may draw them to thy self: Yet suffer me not to be so friendly in my words, as to have fellowship with any in their wickedness, but helpe me to dispence even my ci∣vilities by a standard measure, least what I intend as shy Net to take others souls, prove Satans trap to catch mine. I Wish that I may be both so just as not to offer inju∣ries to others, and also so meek as to suffer with pa∣tience what others offer to me.Manner. Deal meekly. The world will ne∣ver leave its old haunt of persecuting them that are holy. Its natural for Wolves to hate and devour Sheep; If I were of the world, I should be one of its darlings, for the World loveth its own. My God hath called me from it, and chosen me out of it, therefore it hates me. I need not marvail at its malice, when it did spit its venome at the Author of its being, and took away life from him, who gave life
to it. The Servant is not above his Master, nor must the Disciple look to fare better then his Lord. If the soft Pillow of meekness be not laid on my back, I shall never bear the burthens of their calumnies, and cruelties with the least comfort; What pain doth such Vinegar cause, when it meets with the raw wound of an impatient spirit! The more mad the world is, the more meek I had need to be, if I would enjoy my self. Besides, there may be al∣lings out amongst the best friends. Good men are not all of the same stature, nor all of the same temper. Some are like broken bones, if but toucht they fret and fling. How full are some of jealousies and suspi∣cions, which would soon be increased by my passions; and that spark which might be extinguished by my le∣nity, is blown into a flame by my fury! Some are sickly and in constant pain, others are under some smarting providence; some offend me upon mistake, and though others should do it out of malice, yet even they also call for my pity, more then my passion: The best have need of pardon from man, as well as God; and shall I, who want it more then others, not allow it to others? Alas, what harme do I get by others heats? The Air when beaten is not inju∣red, no not so much as divided, but returnes to its place, and becomes thicker then before. The sharpest words cannot wound me, if I do not put my hand to the weapon. All those tongue-squibs of reproach which the malevolent world throw at me, will go out alone, and die of themselves if I do not revive them. My well-grounded patience will as a walking staff; preserve me from many a fall, whilst I travail in rug∣ged ways.
The distracted world indeed judgeth him the bra∣vest fellow, that will not pocket up the least affronts; but the wisest man that ever was; nay, the onely wise God, tells me. The patient in spirit is better then the proud in spirit;Eccles. 7. 3. O my soul, whom wilt thou believe? the world that long since hath lost its wits, and must ere long for its phrensie be fettered with the chains of everlasting darkness,Job 4. . in the Bride∣wel of the bottomless pit; or that God to whom An∣gels themselves are comparative fools! O be not hasty to be angry, for anger resteth in the bosome of fools.Eccles. 7.4. What a fool art thou to break thy own bones, to give another a smart blow! A furious man is like Tamar, who to be revenged of her father in Law, defiled him and her self with incest. Revenge is a Thief that steals away a mans estate for the Law∣yers. It is of the nature of the Viper, and eats out the bowels of that wealth which gave it birth. What a fool am I to defame my self! That rancour and spleen which I spit at others, is like his that spits against the wind, driven back into my own face, to the besmearing of my credit amongst all that are judicious. What a fool am I to destroy my own grace, my own peace! What flowers of holiness will grow where such locusts abound? What fruits of righteousness can thrive in such a scorching Cli∣mate? What good work can be done within doors, if the house be in a flame? How unfit is a man in a passion, to go to God in prayer? surely, no more then a person that comes reaking and sooted from a kell, is for the presence of his Prince. I must not expect to meet God in a duty, if my spirit be in a fury. A righ∣teous man falling down before the wicked, is like a
troubled Fountain, Prov. 25. 26. I seldom fall down more fouly before wicked men, then when I render reviling for reviling, and revenge for re∣venge; but then how unfit am I to fall down in holy duties before my God! for I am as a troubled foun∣tain; and if men will not drink of the water of a fountain, (though in it self pure and wholsom) when it is troubled and muddy; can I think that my God will drink of that vessel that runs thick! O that I might never, because others are my enemies in defa∣ming me, become my own enemy in defiling my own soul, and hindering it of that comfort which it might have in divine communion. Lord, who art the God of peace, let me be known to be one of thine, by being a Son of peace; Enable me to pass on like a wise Travailer, in the way of thy Commandements, and not to be stirred at the barking of those Dogs that pursue me with open mouth. My confident neg∣lect will soonest make them quiet; let me never break the peace, but in the quarrel of truth; Give me for peace sake sometimes to part with my right, but never with my righteousness; Let the same mind be in me, which was in Christ Jesus; Teach me from him to be meek and lowly in heart, and yet to be eaten up with the zeal of thy house. Make me willing to suffer, but not to have thy name suffer. Grant me to follow peace with all men, and holiness. O bestow on me that wisdom from above, which is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and (though hardly provoked, yet) easie to be in∣treated. The princi∣ple must Le¦grciou.I Wish that those beautiful children of righte∣ousness, courtesie, and meekness in my carriage,
may have the Spirit of God for their Parent; I mean, that the fear of my God may be the princi∣ple from which they flow. I shall lose the race, how well soever I run, if I do not set out at the right place. Men look onely to my practices, and accor∣dingly judge of my principle; if my life be without fault, their charity tells them that my heart is with∣out fraud; but Gods eye is on my principle, and ac∣cordingly he judgeth of my practices; if my affections be not gracious, he knoweth that my actions cannot be righteous. My God knoweth me thorough and thorough; He spieth the rottenness and crawling vermine, that are in the bowels of a painted Se∣pulchre. If I be like a Peach with a craggy stone in my heart, under the cover of a velvet Coat, he understandeth it altogether; I may cozen the dark eyes of men, who when they behold the inoffensive∣ness of my life, and the height of my profession, are ready to cry out of me, as Samuel of Eliab, when he saw the comeliness of his countenance, and the height of his stature, Surely the Lords annointed is before him;1 Sam: 16.6.7. but I cannot deceive God; he seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the out∣ward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. Alas, if I have no more to shew for my title to Heaven, then a fair outside, what have I more then an Hypocrite, nay then some Heathen! A few flourishes in a Paper or Parchment, is but a poor evidence for an inheritance. How many be there in the World, who as some revelling Gallants, by their gay cloaths, and gaudy attire, speak that they are worth thou∣sands, when they have not a penny in their pockets; who by their outward conversations seem to be rich
in grace, when indeed like Laodicea, they are poor and miserable, and blind and naked! O that all my fruits of righteousness, might grow upon the root of holiness, and spring from a renewed nature! then and not till then, they will be acceptable to my Saviour; then my beloved will come into his Gar∣den, and eat his pleasant fruits; I would be mind∣ful of these moral duties, because my God comman∣deth them, and as knowing that I canot be religi∣ous, if I be not righteous. Though the sensitive soul may be without the rational, as in Beasts; yet the rational soul is never without the sensitive; Though righteousness towards men may be without holiness; yet holiness before God is never without righteousness before men. Lord, thou expectest and commandest that I should act both for thee, and from thee; Thou valuest the Vessel, not by the bal∣last of a few good actions, which an Heathen may ga∣ther up at any Port, but by the fraught of a sancti∣fied heart, which is peculiar to thy chosen; Let my obedience to the second Table, arise from my Consci∣ence of the first table; that whilst the righteous, friendly and meek carriage of others, that runneth along a∣mongst those with whom they converse, is little better then puddle water in thine esteem, because it pro∣ceedeth from the sinks of their natural and defiled hearts, justice may not onely in my actions run down like water, and meekness in my conversation, like a mighty stream, but be so fed with and flow from the Spring of thy holy Spirit, dwelling in my heart, that it may be delightful, and of worth in thy sight. I Wish that I may design somewhat for my God
in all my dealings with men,The end in our dealings is to be minded. and carry my self the more sweetly and circumspectly, that I may gain their affections, and thereby win them to the greater love and liking of Religion. Christianity is my cal∣ling, and where-ever I go, my duty bindeth me to be always furthering it. It was one Article which I sealed to, when I first entred my self Christs servant, to endeavour the making others Proselytes to his ser∣vice; and if I neglect it, I am unfaithful to my Ma∣ster, and forfeit my Indenture. My Pattern may with some be very prevalent. If I shine with a vertuous life, I am as a light-house set by the Sea∣side, whereby Mariners sail aright, and avoid dan∣gers; but if I pretend high, and walk loosely, as a false Lanthorn, I shipwrack those that trust me. My holy life is a good Lecture of holiness to others, which if written in a fair character, will invite those with whom I converse, both to read it, and to learn it; My advice may to others be very advantagious. If in the morning I sw the seed of some savoury coun∣sel, and in the evening with-hold not my hand; though carnal reason tells me it is cast away upon barren earth, which will make no return, yet my God can cause it to spring up richly. Possibly other particular callings may depend on mine, and there∣by many persons for their lively-hoods, under God on me; Now what an opportunity of doing them good, of serving my Lord, and of furthering my own account is put into my hands! How willing are these who have their dependance on me, to model themselves to such a form as will best suit my temper! Though they are as hard as Rocks to others, they are as soft as Wax to me; and shall not I labour to imprint
the Image of my God upon them! O that by those cords which bind their civil interest; I might draw them to a consideration of their spiritual estates, and let them know that there is but one way of approving themselves to God and me? How false am I, if I do not improve the ground I have got in the hearts or hands of any for the honour of my Master? In∣lightned souls are all liberal to disperse their rays for the good of others. How busie are most men to propagate that quality which is predominant in them! The Scholar would have his companion learned; the Courtier his associate handsom in his carriage; the Souldier his Comrade Valiant; and shall not I en∣deavour that my friends be vertuous? Nay, how diligent are the Devils Agents, to spread the poy∣son of vice amongst all with whom they converse? Though they find sin already thriving, yet they think it not enough to nourish those ill weeds which grow so fast of themselves, but even sow new seeds of oaths and cozening, and prophaness, as if their mutual commerce did oblige them to diffuse their venome to each other, and as if it were a dishonour to the Tradesman, to go to Hell without his Customers and Chapmen, O my soul! dost thou not blush at thy own backwardness in bringing souls to thy God, hen the Emissaries of Hell are so forward? Do they devise wickedness continually (Prov. 6. 14.) search out iniquity; yea, accomplish a diligent search (Psa. 64. 6.) leave no means untried, no ways unattempted, but study and search narrowly for fit seasons, when they may convey their infecti∣ons to others, and communicate their plague-sores with the greatest success; and wilt not thou as a
liberal man, devise liberal things, sit down and contrive how thou mayst give counsel to poor sinners, administer comfort to poor Saints, to the best advan∣tage of their souls? Shall Satan go about, seeking whom he may devour, and wilt not thou go about seeking whom thou mayst recover out of the snares of the Devil? Though grace sets bounds to thy Con∣science, yet it doth not to the Love of thy God. If the love of thy God be without limits, will not thy desires and endeavours to exalt him be as large? Its his favour to trust thee with any Talents for his honour. Opportunities of doing him service (which now and then he affordeth thee) are precious; the stump of time remaineth, when the branches of op∣portunity are lopt off. In times of scarcity, men pick up all the grains of corn that none be lost; he that in a dearth gives his corn to his beasts, is him∣self a brute. Seasons for the advancement of thy Saviour, and the soul advantage of thy brother, are rare, and wilt thou throw them away upon vain talk, and needless toys? David could say, Is there none left of the house of Saul, to whom I may shew kindness for Ionathans sake? And mayst not thou say, Is there none left of the houshold of fith, or be∣longing to it, though now aliens from it, to whom I may shew kindness for Jesus sake? Ah Lord! whence is it that my soul is so backward in sen∣ding beggers to thy gate? Am I ashamed to let the World know how much I am indebted, and what bountiful almes I have there received? Art thou so bad a Master, that I should blush to tell others to whom I belong; or affraid that if I should
commend thee to them, and send them to thee, they would find me false? Surely to sit at thy feet, and to wait at thy Gate, is infinitely more honourable and comfortable then to sit on the highest worldly throne, and to be waited on by the greatest earthly Princes. What then are the fetters that hinder me from running to invite o∣thers to thy Gospel-feast? Do I fear that thy house will not hold us all, or that the inheritance of thy Saints, being divided amongst so many, the lesser share will fall to me? No, I beleive that in my Fathers House are many mansions; that there is room enough and to spare for all thy righteous ones; and that my sight of thee, the true Sun, will never be the less pleasing and refreshing, though millions of worlds should enjoy thee. If ever it be true, twill be there, The more the merrier. An innumerable company, which all thy creatures cannot number, may draw water with joy out of the Well of salvation, and yet there not be one drop the less. Where still is the fault, that I am so unfruitful, and do not encourage others to enter themselves in thy family? Am I the fig-tree which thou hast cursed and said to, Never fruit grow on thee more? Or, Is it not rather my wicked heart of unbeleif that tells me, Godliness is grown with most but a dead commodity, and if I offer to put it into my Chapmans hands, my own wares will go off the worse? How often hath it suggested to me, that to commend truth to my customers, will be the way to lose my trade; that I must not follow holiness too close at the heels, lest it dash out my brains; that it is to no purpose to
perswade men to godliness, and that I do but lose my labour in all my counsels and admonitions to others! This unbeleif, Lord, is the traytour which is such an enemy to the Crown and Scepter of thy dear Son; O let it please thy Majesty to execute it speedily. Why should this Worm lye gnawing at the root, and hinder my soul from glorifying thee, by bringing forth much fruit? Is not my soul a Vine of thine own planting? Thou broughtest her out of Egypt, a state of bon∣dage and slavery to Sin and Satan and she is come up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved. Why doth this Boar of the Wood waste her, and this Wild Beast of the field devour her, even this evil heart of unbeleif, whereby she de∣parts away from the living God? Return I be∣seech thee O God of Hosts, look down from Heaven, and behold, and visi this Vine, fence it by thine Almighty power, prune it by thy pro∣vidence, water it with the showres of thy grace, and so quicken it with the beams of thy favour, that it may bring forth much fruit to thy glory. I Wish that I may like Enoch,The conclusi∣on. walk so with my God in all my actions, whilst I walk amongst men, that in thy good time my soul may be translated, and I may not see death, either as the wicked in this World do with terrour, or as the damned in the other World do, in torment to their everlasting woe. Lord, thou art Jehovah Tsidkenu, the Lord my righ∣teousness; be pleased to cloath my person with the robe of thy Sons imputed righteousness, that my nakedness may not appear before Men and Angels, to my eternal shame; let all my actions be cove∣red
with the garment of thy Spirits imparted righ∣teousness, that they may be acceptable and amiable in thine eye. Let thy grace so fill my heart, that godliness may be visible in my hands, and I may thereby draw others towards Heaven. Thou hast said, Behold I make all things new; what wilt thou then do with this old corrupt nature of mine? O Re∣new that, or nothing will be new to my com∣fort. O God create a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit within me. I know the time will come that thou wilt create new Heavens and new Earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness. My body is the Earth, and my soul is the Heaven which thou hast already made; but might thy servant prevail with thy Majesty to create my soul thy new Heavens, and my body thy new Earth, wherein may dwell righteousness, how infinitely should I be bound t thy distinguishing mercy! Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me; O give me understanding, that I may keep thy Comman∣dements; Were my soul bespangled with the glo∣rious stars of thy graces, and my body embroydered and curiously wrought, so as to be the Temple of thy Spirit, then indeed thou mightest relect upon what thou hadst made with complacency; for behold it would be very good: Hast thou not made the great World for man, and the little World (Man) for thy self? When shall I be so pure as to invite thy presence, and so sanctified, as to be set apart (from all others, and to be) only for thy service? O make it appear that I am thy workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which tho hast before ordained that I should walk in them. If
thou pleasest to set forth this Heaven and Earth, this little Epitome of the creation, in a new edition, I know it would be done in so fair a Character, as to delight thine eyes, and to ravih the hearts of all that behold it. Tis confest the Copy was perfect when it came out of thy hands; there was no unrighteous∣ness or impatience, not the least blot or blemish in it; but my Parents who transmitted the book to the world, through their unfaithfulness, filled it from the beginning to the end with errors. Adam begat a Son in his own likeness, after his Image. The first sheet went off the press (through his cursed falseness and negligence) imperfect,Gen. 5. 3. and full of faults, and the many millions that followed, have still retained the same defects. Yet Lord, since thy Son was at the cost of a new impression; Let it please thee for his sake to be at the pains of correcting this volume so effectually, that those who look into it, may read righteousness, courtesie, meekness, faith, humility, patience, heavenly-mindedness, printed in so large a Letter, free from the former er∣rors, that they may so like it as to embrace and imi∣tate it. O then I shall be assured that at the general Resurrection, when thy last hand shall pass on me, and I shall be published in the newest and last editi∣on, none of those blots and blurs wherewith I have defiled it, shall be found in it; but thy Image shall be printed on me in such a lovely Character, and in so perfect a manner, that thou wilt delight in me, and I in thee, for ever and ever, Amen.
CHAP. II. How Christians may exercise themselves to Godli∣ness, in the Choice of their Companions. Siquis est-qui congressus, & societates ho∣minum erre non possit, ant nullo egeat, quod seipso con∣tentus sit; i pofecto in par∣te civitatis non est haben∣dus; a vel Deus putandus. Arist. l. 2. de Repub. c. 2.SEcondly, Thy duty is to make Religion thy business, and to exercise thy self to Godliness in relation to thy Company. Man (saith the Great Philosoper) is , natures good-fellow (as one Englisheth it) a creature in love with Company. Cosmographers ob∣serve, that the farthest Islands of the World are so seated, that there is none so remote, but that from some shore of it, another Island or Continent may be discovered; as if nature hereby invited Countries to mutual commerce. God never intended that the World should be a wilderness, nor the chief in∣habitants thereof, as barbarous Beasts, to live a∣lone lurking in their Dens. Monks and Nuns, and Hermits, who under pretence of Sanctity, seque∣ster themselves from all society, are so far from more holiness, and being better Christians then o∣thers, that they seem to have put off the very humane nature, and not to be so much as Men. Vnclean, nasty persons, love to be always private, and by their good will, would neither see  nor be seen of others. Birds of Prey flye always alone; and Ravenous Brutes come not abroad till others are retired, Psa. 104. 23. Our very senses speak that God would have us sociable; nay, its the na∣tural voice of our tongues; for our speech, and hearing, and sight, would be in a great degree
lost, and our Makers end in giving us those Organs and Instruments for converse much frustrated, if every man should immure himself in his own Cell. The graces and spiritual riches of Saints, would in some measure be useless, if they did not deal with some to whom they might distribute them. The Law of man condemneth ingrossers of external goods; and the Law of God condemneth ingrossers of spi∣ritual good things. They who study to Monopolize all to themselves,Nullus rei¦sine socio ju∣cunda possissio. Non magu uti∣litati est ager cum redditibus amplis, quam vicinus aequalis cum moribus bonis. Senec. Epist. 11 undo others. As the World shall never want poor men, that the wealthy may always have objects of Charity, and opportunities of lay∣ing out, and improving those talents which are committed to their trust; so the world shall never be without needy Christians, that those who are rich in grace, may have fit objects, and occasions of imploying their gifts. The Moralists axiom is right, Omne bonum quo communius eo melius; Every good thing is so much the better; as it hath many sha∣rers in it. In this sense there is a truth in that;Amicitia est omnium hu∣manarum di∣vinarumque rerum benevo∣lentia & cha∣ritate summa consensio, qua quidem haud sio, an excepta sapientia, qui∣quam melius homini sit a diis immorta∣libus datum Cicero de Amicitia. It is not good for man to be alone. Not that it was a formal evil, but inconvenient. Infinite wisdom hath so dispenced his gifts and graces, that no man is so sterile, but he hath something where∣with to profit others, nor any man so furnished and fruitful, but he standeth in need of others help; The Head cannot say to the Foot (much-less the Foot to the Head) I have no need of thee. The King himself, who seemeth to have least want, cannot subsist without the meanest workmen, even them that grind at the Mill; The King is served by the field, Eccles. 5. 9.
Company is both comfortable and profitable. The Fellican avoideth other Birds,Comes jucundus in via pro vehi∣culo est. Senec. and keeps alone, but her tone is always sorrowful. Christians walk more merrily in the way of Gods commandments, when they have many fellow Travellers; Christian discourse doth so inchant the hearts of the passengers, that Gods statutes are their songs in the house of their Pilgrimage. A Partner, though it be in misery, is a mercy; and to have one to sympathize with us in our sufferings, is no small ease. The way to pre∣vent the flying in peices of these Vessels, filled with the most piercing sorrows, is to give them vent, by opening our selves to others. This made David be∣wayl the want of such friends; My lovers, and my friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off. Heman sings, or rather sighs to the same doleful Tune; Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness, Psa. 38. 11. and 88. ult. Besides, there is as much pro∣fit as comfort in Companions. The Vulgar read that which we translate Company, Job 16. 7. The mem∣bers of my body; because Associates as members of the same body, are serviceable to one another, as the several parts of the same building, they help to bear up each other in their proper places, which if divi∣ded, would all fall to peices. They never walk long, being soon weary, whoever walk alone. Ma∣ny Houses in the City have such weak walls, and are so slightly built, that if they stood seeral in the open fields,Societas est ad∣nati homi∣num ad ali∣quid perficien∣dum. Aquin. they would not stand a year, an high wind would easily tumble them down, which now standing in streets together, receiving support from, and returning it to others, continue many scores
of years. Thus many Christians would be easily o∣verthrown by the storms of temptations,Solem è mundo tollunt qui tol∣lunt amiciti∣tiam. Amb. de Amicitia. c. 7. were they single and solitary, who resist them with courage, and come off with Victory, being assisted with their Companions. But this benefit ariseth not from every Companion; Some are like Coals, which instead of warming us, do black, nay burn us. Its better to travail alone, then with a Thief; Better is a blank, then an ill filling; bad humors infect the blood, and evil men infect the soul; Its better (though it be melancholy) to travail alone, then with them who lye in wayt for our blood; He is no better then distracted, who knowingly goeth with them that will lead him into by-paths to his ruine. Though God did not like that Adam should be alone, but intended him a Companion, yet it was such a one as was a meet help. Beasts were no fit Compani∣ons for Adam, nor those whom God calleth and counteth Beasts for Christians. Cato being desi∣ted by a voluptuous wretch, that he might live with him, answered,Plut. Cum eo vivere non possum qui pa∣latum magis sapit quam cor, I care not for living with him that hath more skill in his meat, then in his mind. Therefore Reader, I shall 1. Speak to the Choice of thy Companions. 2. To thy Carriage in Company. In order to the first particular, I would offer thee some Motives, that I may quicken thee to care in thy Choice, and then direct thee about it.
SECT. I. FIrst, Consider, Of what concernment the choice of thy Companions is to thee; They will either be great helps, or great hindrances, according as thy choice is right or wrong. Antisthenes wondered at the folly of those who were curious in buying but an earthen dish, to see that it had no cracks, and care∣less in the choice of friends, to take them with the flaws of vice. A friend is called, the friend of our bosom; A Companion is taken into our bosom; and surely men had need to be wary and wise, what they take into their bosomes; whether Saints or Serpents, a Disciple or a Devil.Vix dici potest quanto libenti∣us imitamur eos quibus fa∣vemus, Quin. lib. 10. cap. 2. We can converse freqently with nothing, but it is insensibly assimu∣lating us to its own predominant quality. Waters vary their savour according to the veins of the soil through which they slide; Brutes alter their natures answerable to the Climates in which they live.Vt nummum exploras, num sit adulterinus, priusquam eo sit opus. Sic amicus proba∣dus antequam eo fit opus. Plut. Moral. Men are apt to be changed for the better or worse, ac∣cording to the conditions of them with whom they daily converse; the election therefore of our Com∣panions is one of the weightiest actions of our lives, our future good or hurt dependeth so much upon it. Its an excellent speech of Chrysostom, If men good and bad be joyned together in a special band of soci∣ety, they either quickly part, or usually become alike. This made the Mother of Alexander, the twenty sixth Emperour of Rome, keep a guard of men continually about him, that no vicious persons might come to him to corrupt him. If thy Choice be bad, thou art in a double danger of sin and suffering.
1. Thou art in danger of being drawn to sin. They who dwell in AEthiophia, quickly change their skins into a black colour. Its ill and unwholsom for our souls to breath in an Infectious Ayr. Looking-glasses that are very clear and clean, are quickly obscured and dimmed with the foul breath of such as blow upon them. The River Hypanis, famous for the sweetness of its water, by receiving the bitter waters of the Fountain Erampes is poysoned. Ioseph learned the Court phrase, to swear by the life of Pharoah, by his living amongst them whose tongues were tipt with such language. David was brought to feign himself frantick, and to dissem∣ble, as if he could have fought against Gods Fa∣vourites, and sheathed his Sword in the bowels of his friends,Amicitiae ut pares quaerunt, ita & faciunt. Amicitia pa∣rem aut facit, aut accipit. Hierom. in Mich. Proph. by associating with uncircumcised Achish. If Peter needlesly thrust himself amongst the High-Priests servants, how soon is he taught even with a Curse and an Oath to deny his Master? Men like Children, come in time to speak the wicked language and cursed dialects too of the Country and Company in which they dwell.Rerum natura sic est, ut quo∣ties bonus ma∣lo conjungitur, non ex bono malus meliore∣tur, sed ex ma∣lo bonus conta∣minetur; dier∣sitas enim re∣rum nunquam potest habere concordiam, & multos sollici∣tat societas ne∣fanda, Chrys. in Math. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shalt not go, saith the Wise man: But Mark Reader, his Reason, lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul; The love of friends may quickly breed a love to their faults; and so by getting a friend, thou gettest a snare to thy soul, Prov. 22. 24, 25. If thou wouldst a∣void the contagion of sin, avoid all needless com∣munion with sinners. He who walks much in the Sun, is tanned insensibly. Wicked men will be likelier to make thee worse, then thou to make
them better. Israel could not bring Egypt to Worship the true God, but Egypt brought Israel to offer sacrifice to their false God. Twas from them that the Jews sucked that poison which cost both them and their posterity so dear; The golden Calf was first fashioned in the Iron furnace.Corpora Corpo∣ribus jungebat mortua vivis. The Ty∣rant Mezentius tied the living bodies of the Cap∣tives to the dead; the dead stunk up the living, but the living could not quicken the dead. Lewd men are continual weights, pressing down others to wickedness. How few live in Venice but grow lecherous? or in Spain but become proud? or in France, and are not fantastick? or among the Dutch and do not drink in both their deceitful∣ness, and their drunkenness? Its natural for men to put on the fashions, be they never so wicked, of the Country or Company wherein they abide. Its said of Rome, He that goeth thither once, shall see an evil man; if he like so well as to go a second time, he shall gain his acquaintance; but if he go a third time, he shall bring him home with him.Ante ignem consistens, eti∣amsi ferreus sis, aliquando dissolveris; proximus periculo diu tutus non erit. Per assi duitatem cito peccat homo. Saepe samiliaris impllavit, saepe occasionem peccandi de∣dit, saepe quod voluntas non potuit assiduitas speravit. Isiodor. lib. 2. Soliloq. The mind like Iacobs Sheep receiveth the tincture and colour of those objects that are presented to it. Sin is a Gangreen, which if it seiseth one part, quickly spreadeth and infecteth the other parts which are near it, 2 Tim. 2. 17. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, whether it be the leaven of error, or of scandal, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Gal. 5. 9. Sinners are plague-Sores, (as the 70. read  pests, Psa. 1. 1. which we translate scor∣ners) that convey the Contagion to all their Com∣panions. A little wormwood will imbitter much
hony, and one sinner destroyeth much good, Eccles 9. 18. Of a certain Prince of Germany tis said, Esset alius si esset apud alios; He would have been a better person, if he had but been with better Companions. An unclean Leprous person under the Law, tainted whatever he touched; therefore God would have him distinguished by his bald head,Levit. 13. his torn habit, and his habitation apart, that all might avoid him. And what is the Gospel of it, but that men should avoid the scandalous infectious sinner, lest they be defiled with his sin. The Nicopolites so hated the braying of an Ass, that for that cause they would not endure the noise of a Trumpet. Reader, if thou hatest every false way according to thy duty, if ever sin be loathsom to thee, I doubt not but thou wilt be far from loving the cup in which this cursed potion is, I mean the sinners company. Those that company much with Dogs, may well swarm with fleas. God tels Israel, Thou shalt not make a Covenant with them (meaning the Canaan∣ites) they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me; Exod. 23. 32, 33. There is great prevalency in evil patterns; Evil precepts per∣swade, but evil patterns compel men to sin; lest they make thee sin against me. The Pelagian error is, that no sin came in by propagation, but all by imitation; but it is an experienced truth, that sin is much spread and increased by example. Its common to sin for company, and that Cup usually goeth round, and is handed from one to another. At least, evil Company will abate the good in thee. The Herb of grace will never thrive in such a cold soyl. How poorly doth the good Corn grow, which is compassed
about with Weeds! Cordials and Restoratives will do little good to the natural body, whilst it aboun∣deth with ill humours. Ordinances and duties are little effectual to our souls, whilst Christians are distempered with such noxious inmates. Its said of the Mountain Kadish, that whatsoever Vine be planted near it, it causeth it to wither and dye. Its exceeding rare for Saints to thrive near such pull-backs. Its difficult, even to a miracle, to keep Gods Commandments, and evil Company too; there∣fore when David would marry himself to Gods Commands, to love them, and live with them, for better for worse, all his days, he is forced to give a Bill of Divorce to wicked Companions, knowing that otherwise the match could never be made. Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, for I will keep the Commandments of my God, Psa. 119. 115. As if he had said, Be it known unto you, O sinners, that I am striking an hearty Cove∣nant with Gods Commands, I like them so well, that I am resolved to give my self up to them, and to please them well in all things, which I can ne∣ver do unless ye depart; ye are like a strumpet which will steal away the love from the true Wife; I cannot as I ought, obey my Gods precepts whilst ye abide in my presence; therefore depart from me ye workers of iniquity, for I will keep the Command∣ments of my God. Sometimes Saints are ashamed to shew themselves whose Servants they are, some∣times they are afraid of giving offence to their Friends, or Neighbours of the Synagogue of Satan; some snare or other, the great Soul-hunter catch∣eth them in, when he finds them amongst his own,
that they shall refrain their mouths from all  while the wicked is before them, Psa. 39. 3. They who touch the fish called Torpedo, lose their senses, and finde their Members so benummd for a time that they cannot stir them. How often hath spi∣ritual sense been taken away, and grace been as it were in a swoon by the noisom vapors, and filthy exhalations that have arisen from ungodly com∣panions! How many of them like the Pine-tree with their shadow, hinder all other from growing near them! A Conjurer in Tindals presence, could not shew his Cheats, but confest there was some godly man in the room that hindered him. A Chri∣stian who thrusteth himself into vain fellows Com∣pany, cannot do the good, shew the grace he should, and may acknowledge ungodly persons to be the cause. A tender person used to warm chambers, coming into the open air, finds his members chilled and unfit for action. O what a damp hath many a Christian found to come upon his spirit, by his conversing with those that are wholly carnal! Antisthenes would frequently say, I was a great oversight in men that would purge their Wheat from Darnel, not to purge their Common∣wealth from lewd persons. 2. Further, thou art in danger of suffering, as well as of sinning with them. The Wheat hath many a blow, for being amongst the Chaff.Josh. 23.12, 13 The Gold would not be put into the fire, if it were not for the dross with which it is mingled. God loves his Saints so well, that he sometimes saveth sinnrs temporally for their sakes; Holy Paul was the plank upon which all that sailed with him got
safe o shore; the grass in the Allies, fares the bet∣ter for the watering which the Gardiner bestoweth on his flowers in the banks; Israel is a blessing in the Land of Assyria, Isa. 19. 24. The whole world will stand the longer, because Christians bear up the Pillars thereof; but God hates sinners so much that even his own people being amongst them have suffer∣ed temporally with them. Lot chose wicked Sodom for a pleasant habitation;In the Wars against the A higenses, when the Po∣pish Army took the popu∣ous City of Beziers, they put to the Sword above sixty thousand, amongst whom were many Catho∣licks, their own friends, who suffered for being a∣mongst their enemies; the Popes Legat being Gene∣ral, commanded it, and gave this reason, Caedite eos omnes; novit enim deus qui sunt ejus. but what did he get by it, when he was captivated with its inhabitants, and afterwards forced to leave that wealth (which drew him to love it) to the destroying flames? Iosiah though peerless for his piety, was not spa∣red when he joyned with the Assyrian, but his League with them cost him his life. When two are parties in a Bond, though one be the principal, both may justly be cast into Prison. Its ill being in a Felos company, when the Officer of justice over∣takes him; he may come to suffer for the Treason, who habours and abetteth the Traytor.Irenaeus ad∣vers. . eres. lib. 5. cap. 3. A Compa∣nion of fools shall be destroyed, Prov. 13: 20. The Apostle St. Iohn (saith the Ecclesiastical Historian) finding Cerinthus a blasphemous Heretick in the Bath, and some others as bad as he, departed a∣way presently, lest divine vengeance should finde them together. Nay, the very Heathen had some sense how unsafe it was to associate with vicious men. When Bias was in a ship amongst a wicked crew, and a storm arising, they cried aloud for mercy,Pigen. Laert. in vit. he had them hold their peace, and not let the Gods know they were there, lest the Ship should
be sunk, and all perish for their sakes. When the great Ordnance of wrath shattereth a wicked man in peices, the force of it may strike down those that are next him. We command you brethren, saith the Apostle, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every bro∣ther who walketh disorderly, 2 Thes. 3. 6. The word withdraw is an allusion to Mariners heedfulness to a∣void Rocks and Sands, Verbum sump∣tum est a nau∣tis qui flexo cursu decli∣nant scopulum aut periculum, Eras. Psa. 143. lest they should be ruined by them. They who would not shipwrack themselves, must decline both sinners courses and company. The Psalmist would not eat of their dish, lest he should pay their reckoning; Let me not eat of their dainties, nor drink of their cup. He durst not be so familiar as to feed with them, lest he should afterwards fare as they. Friend, as thou wouldst not suffer with sinners, take heed of sitting with them. Its enough to bring a man into suspicion at Court, to be intimate with one whom the King hates.Bishop Hall. Intireness with wicked persons (saith one) is one of the strongest chains of Hell, and binds us to a participation both of sin and punishment. When the Deer pierced with the Arrow, and pursued by the hounds, runneth to the Herd for shelter, they will not admit her amongst them, out of a princi∣ple of self-preservation, lest the Dogs in fetching her out, should fall on them. If thou wouldst not have divine judgements to attach thee, beware of being found amongst them who are markt out for vengeance. Come out from her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Twas dangerous being near those who were to be cast into the
fiery furnace (which Nebuchadezzer had made,) the men that took them up were scorched to death. Clemens Alexandrinus tells it as the Worlds saying, If a Fish that is taken break the snare and get away, no other of that kind is taken that day. How ma∣ny that through mercy have been given to ill com∣pany, and broke the snares, have told us the mis∣cheif thereof afterward; Let their example make thee fearful of such nares. Some tell us that Swallows would not flie into Thebes, because their walls were so often beleagured; and wilt thou run into that company, which is always besieged with Gods thundering curse? O take heed with whom thou strikest friendship; for when the breath of Gods anger overturneth the house of the Drunk∣ard, or Swearer, the houses of their next (though best) Neighbours may fare the worse for its fall. Let me give thee the same advice which Physitians do their friends, touching persons infected with the plague, Cito, Longe, Tarde; speedily shun their company; Flie far away from them, let it be long (even till their sores be healed) before thou returnest to them again; for it may be truly said of evil companions, what one saith of Rumny Marsh; Its bad in Winter, hurtful in Summer, good never. If thy Choice be good, it will redound very much to thine advantage; Its no small happiness to have him for thy friend, who is a favouite in Heavens Court. Elisha offered it as a great kindness to his courteous Host, Shall I speak for thee to the King? This favour thou mayst expect in a greater measure from thy Christian friend; He will speak for thee to the
King of Kings; and send many a rich venture for thee into the other World, whence the return will be certain, and the gain superabundant. O tis good to have an interest in that heart, which hath an interest in Heaven. The great Apostle begs hard, as upon his knees, for a share in the Saints prayers; Seldom haste thou heard a star∣ving beggar so importunate for a piece of bread, as he is to be a partner in their joynt stock, Rom. 15. 30. I beseech you brethren for the Lord Iesus Christs sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together in your prayers to God for me. And whas the reason? Truly Paul knew that united force was stronger, that such persons prayers would be prevalent Ambassadours to obtain the errand they were sent about. The Father who denyeth or de∣layeth a single child, when several of them toge∣ther desire favour, granteth it speedily. Its hard to turn stones into bread, to fetch meat out of the eater, affliction; yet the Saints prayers have been helpful to do it; I know that this (i. e. great tribulation) shall turn to my salvation through your prayers, Phil. 1. 19. A good Companion is a rare jewel, and of great value. Its observable that Moses proceeding by degrees, ascendeth at last to the highest step of persons that may win upon us, and nameth friends as the top of all, and dearer then all Relations; If thy Brother, or Son, or Daughter, or Wife, or Friend, which ly∣eth in thy bosome, which is as thine own soul, Deut. 13. 6. A godly friend is a choice book, out of which we may learn many excellent things, and a precious treasure, whereby our souls may be inriched
with vertue. He that walketh with the wise, shall be wise, Prov. 13. 20. They who walk with them that are strong-sented with grace, must needs re∣ceive somewhat of its savour. The very sight of that holiness which shineth brightly in their works, will kindle thy spirit, and enlarge thy mind with an honest emulation of their worth. If (as some credibly relate of Persina the Ethiopian Queen, by seeing the fair Picture of Perseus and Andromeda, she was delivered of a fair Child,) the frequent view of a fair Picture, hath such an operation upon the body, as to cause an AEgyptian Woman to bring forth a beautiful Child; Surely thy constant beholding the amiable Image of the blessed God, in thy pious companion, may have such an energy on thy soul, as to assimulate thee to its own na∣ture, and help thee to bring forth a lovely issue, a Iedediah, whom the Lord loveth. The ground is the more fruitful, which is near such Trees of righ∣teousness, for the dunging and dressing which the good Husbandman bestoweth on them. When a friend of Phocions would have cast himself away, Phocion suffered him not, saying, I was made thy friend for this purpose. Amabalis soci∣us omnibus est officiosus, & nulli onrosus, quia divotus ad deum, be∣nignus ad proximum, so∣brus ad mun∣dunt. Domini servus, proximi socius, mund dominus, superiora habet ad gaudium, aequa∣lia ad consortium, inferiora ad servitium. Hugo. lib. 3. de Anima.Reader, If thou hast any truth of grace, thou wilt above all things in the World value Gods pre∣sence; but if thou wouldst find him, it must be amongst his people; they are his habitation where he always resides. Ioseph and Mary sought Jesus amongst his Kindred. If thy soul have any long∣ing
after the holy Jesus, the best way to find him is amongst his Disciples, for they onely are his kindred; He stretched forth his hands towards his Disciples, saying, Behold my Mother and my Bre∣thren; For whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother, Mat. 12. ult. Luk. 2. 44. Secondly, Consider; The choice of thy Com∣panions will discover thy condition; Its a Spanish Proverb, Dime con quiem andis y dezirte he quiem eres; Tell me with whom thou goest, and I will tell thee what thou art.Plut. in vit. Syll. Sylla shewed the vileness and viciousness of his disposition, by his companions, which were, Roscius, a maker of Common Plays, Sorax, a Prince of Scoffers, and Metrobius a sing∣ing man. Its easie to know to what house some persons belong, by their usual walking with those of the same family, either Children or Servants. It will be manifest to others, whether thou apper∣tainest to the Houshold of God, or the Syna∣gogue of Satan, by those with whom thou delightest to associate. The Sheep of Christ do not love the Company of unclean and unsavoury Goats. Au∣gustus Caesar found out the temper of his two Daughters,Sueton by observing their company at a publique shew, where much people were present; at which time his Daughter Livia discoursed with grave and prudent Senatours, and his Daughter Iulia joyned with loose and riotous persons. The Lacedemoni∣ans enquiring after the dispositions of their chil∣dren sent abroad to school; onely demanded of their Masters to what play-fellows they were linked, whether those who were studious and serious, or
such as were wanton and vicious, not doubting but they were sutable to them in their natures, whose fellowship they fancied. Many if they walk∣ed alone, would be thought by reason of their rich cloaths, men of better estate then they are, and others meaner then they are, by reason of their mean attire; who yet both are discerned of what rank they be by thir companions. Dulce quidem dulci se adjungit, amara{que} amaris, Acre perinde acri accessit, salsum quo{que} salso. Its said of the Apostles, that being dismist from the Council, they went  to their own, or to their proper and peculiar (friends,) so the O∣riginal; we translate it, to their own company, be∣cause Saints are a select Corporation by themselves, their priviledge or Charter is peculiar, and so are their Companions, and the persons interested in it. The Citizens of Sion are a distinct company from the rest of the World, and when they can get loose from their Persecutors, they go to them of their own livery. The Disciples were amongst the High-Priests and wicked men, by constraint, and to their greif; but amongst their own onely, out of choice, and with their good-will. Birds of a Feather will flock together. Servants of the same Lord, if faithful, will joyn with their fellows, and not with the servants of his Enemy. Abraham sojourned in the land of promise as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles (not with the Canaanites, the Natives, though he dwelt amongst them, but) with Isaac and Iacob, the heirs with
him of the same promise, Heb. 11.9. When a man comes into an Inn, you may give a notable guess for what place he intends, by the Company he in∣quires after; His Question, (Do you know of any tra∣vailing towards London? I should he heartily glad of their company,) will speak his mind and his course; If he hear of any bound for another coast, he regards them not; but if he know of any honest passengers that are to ride in the same road, and set out for the same City with himself, he sends to them, and begs the favour of their good compa∣ny. This World is an Inn, all men are in some sense Pilgrims and Strangers, they have no abiding place here; now the Company they enquire after, and delight in, whether those that walk in the broad way of the flesh, or those who walk in the narrow way of the Spirit, will declare whether they are going towards Heaven, or towards Hell. A wicked man will not desire the company of them who walk in a contrary way, nor a Saint delight in their society who go cross to his journey. Can two walk together except they be agreed? They who walk together, are supposed to have one will, be∣cause they are seen to have one way, Amos 3. 3. When Elihu would prove Iob to be bad, this is his argument, He goeth in Company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with wicked men, Job 34. 8. If Job did not follow their ungodly calling of work∣ing iniquity, or acting sin with art, as the word signifieth, you would not find him so much in their Company; His doctrine was true, though his ap∣plication of it was false;Qui aequo ani∣mo malis im∣miscetur, malus est. A godly man may fall into wicked company by chance, but he never walks
with such out of choice; He may be necessitated to dwell with them, but he cannot delight in them. To Associate with the prophane, is proper to the prophane; As soon as Paul was sanctified, this was almost one of the first signs it appeared by, And Paul assayed to joyn himself to the Disciples, Act. 9. 26. He that before was for the company of the High-Priests, and Persecutors of the Saints, when once converted, is for the company of the Saints, though persecuted. He who before as one mad with rage, breathed out nothing but prisons and slaugh∣ter against them; being now inlightned to see the beauty of their persons, and the excellency of their communion, assayeth to joyn himself to them. The young Patridges hatched under a Hen, go for a time along with her Chickens, and keep them company, scraping in the earth together; but when they are grown up, and their wings fit for the purpose, they mount up into the Air, and seek for Birds of their own nature. A Christian before his conversion is brought up under the Prince of darkness, and walketh in company with his cursed Crew, according to the course of the World; but when the Spirit changeth his dispositi∣on, he quickly changeth his Companions, and de∣lighteth onely in the Saints that are on earth. He that would not be found amongst sinners in the other World, must take heed that he do not frequent their company in this. Those whom the Constable finds wandring with vagrants, may be sent with them to the House of Correction. Lord, said a good Woman on her death-bed, when in some doubt of her salvation, Send me not to Hell
amongst wicked men, for thou knowest I never loved their Company all my life long; David deprecates their future doom upon the like ground, and argu∣eth it as a sign of his sincerity, I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers; I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with  wicked; O gather not my soul with sinners, Psa. 26. 4, 5, 9. i. e. Lord, I have not lo∣ved the wicked so well as to sit with them for a lit∣tle time, and shall I live with them for ever? I have not layn amongst them rotting on the earth; and wilt thou gather my soul with those sticks for the un∣quenchable fire of Hell? Lord, I have been so far from liking, that thou knowest I have loathed the Congregation of evil doers; Do not I hate them that hate thee? Yea, I hate them with perfect hatred; and shall thy friend fare as thy foes? I appeal to thy Majesty, that my great comfort is in thy chosen. I rejoyce onely to be amongst thy Children here, and shall I be excluded their company hereafter? O do not gather my soul with sinners, for the Wine-press of thine eternal anger. Marcion the Heretick, see∣ing Polycarp, wondred that he would not own him; Do you not know me Polycarp; yea, saith Polycarp, Scio te esse primogenitum Diaboli; I know thee to be the first-born of the Devil, and so despised him. SECT. II. THirdly,Motive. Consider that there can be no true friendship betwixt a Godly and a Wicked person; therefore it concerneth thee to be the more wary in thy choice. He that in factions hath an eye to power,
in friendship will have an eye to vertue. Friendship, according to the Philosopher, is own soul in two bodies, but how can they ever be of one soul, that are as different as Air and Earth; and as contrary as Fire and Water? All true love is, motus animi ad fruendum Deo propter ipsum; se & proximo propter Deum; A motion of the sa, towards the enjoyment of God for himself, himself and his neigh∣bours for Gods sake;In deo diligere non potest qui deum non dili∣gt. Bernard. so that he can never truly love man, who doth not love his Maker. God is the onely foundation upon which we can build friendship, therefore such as live without him, can∣not love us in him. That building which is loose without this foundation, can never stand long. A wicked man may call that profession he maketh to to his Brother, by the name of love; but Hea∣thens can tell us that vertue alone is the hand which can twist the cords of love; that other combinati∣ons are but a confederacy, and all other conjuncti∣ons in Hypocrisie. Tis impossible that vitiated na∣ture should move any other way then the princi∣ple of self carrieth it, which is directly opposite to true friendship;Hominum cha∣ritas gratuita est. Cicero de Natura. deor. lib. 1. Unfaigned love, saith Aristotle, is a benevolent affection, willing good to another for his own sake. How then canst thou expect the com∣fort of a friend from him who steereth wholly by the compass of self? He saith he loves thee;Humanitas ve∣tat. Superbum esse apud scii, vitat avarum verbis, reus, aectius com∣munem si ∣lem{que} omnius praestat, nullum alienum malum putat, bonum autem suum ideo maxime quod alicj  bo∣num faturum essamat. Senec. Epist. 11. I am sure his lust hath more of his heart then thou hast; either then thou must love the Dog, his brutish lust, or he will tell thee shortly thou dost not love
the Master. If ever thou happenest to touch on his sore place, to tell him of his fault (which thou art bound to do, if thou wilt be faithful to God, to him, and to thy own soul) he will soon kick up thy friendship, and publish to the World, that thou art an uncivil, sawcy, and unintolerable person; Such are like unwholsom meat, which can neither be de∣tained in the stomach without danger of diseases nor cast up without pain. By patching up a friend∣ship with a carnal man, thou bringest thy self to this miserable plunge, either thou must turn Caterer for his flesh, purvey for his sensual appetite, and provide the air of flattery (a more hellish wind then any the Laplanders sell) to feed the Camelion of his pride, or else snap the bones and ligaments of friendship in sunder, which will not be done without some pain and regret on each part. Cardan tells us that he would never rend a false friendship in peices, but fairly pick the threads by which it was sown together; but this is hard to do. O what folly is it to make choice of him whom thou canst not keep (for thy friend) without Gods dis∣favoru! Reader,Inter dispares mores firma, non potest esse amicitia. Aug. de Amcitia. cap. 14. If thine end be good in desi∣ring Companions, thou wilt be wholly frustrated in it, unless thou art wise in thy choice. Canst thou think that he can love thee sincerely,Omnium societatum, nulla praestantior est, nulla firmior est, quam cum viri beni mo∣ribus similies sunt familiari∣tate conjunct. Sen. Epist. 11. who is Hypocritical in his love to his own soul? Ionathan was a true friend, and loved David as his own soul. So tis said of Basil and Nazianzen, Ani∣ma una inclusa, in duobus corporibus; A wicked man quickly love thee as his own soul, but not
in Ionathans sense; He loved David as his own soul, according to a renewed and spiritual light, as one that saw the worth of his soul, and his eye affected his heart; but a wicked man hath no love to his own soul in this sense; he loveth (or rather seem∣eth to love it, by carking and caring to please and pamper it, for indeed he hateth) his dying flesh, but he careth not at all for his everliving spirit, mindeth not whether it sink or swim for ever; Now is it likely that he should be a faithfull friend to thee, to direct thee in thy doubts, reprove thee for thy faults, who is such a cruel enemy to himself; Such a one may scare Birds, but he will never secure a Christian; As the Dolphin in a calm Sea, he is never from the sides of the Ship; but if a tempest arise, he is gone; He may indeed shroud his private aims under the cloak of friendship,Sen. Epist. 9. but this the very Moralist will tell thee, non est amicitia, sed mercatura, is onely to make a trade and mer∣chandise of one another. There may be fire in the Pan, when there is none in the Barrel of the piece; there may be a profession of love in his words, but there is no love in his heart. I cannot more fitly com∣pare such a mans friendship,Amicus est qui amat, & reda∣matur, Arist. lib. 2. Rhet. then to some plants in Rivers, which have broad leaves at the top of the water, but scarce any root at all. He may make a great shew of love, and tell thee, you shall never know what I will do for you (and then he speaks true) but his high building hath no bases, his great profession hath no root, and therefore is rotten. To be brief Reader, thou wilt easily grant that there can be no true friendship betwixt a man and a
beast, their natures being so differing; I must tell thee, tis more impossible for true friendship to be betwixt a true Christian and a carnal person;Vera illa amicitia, & Christi glutino copulata, quam non utilitas rei fami∣liaris, non praesentia corpo∣rum tantum, non subdola & palpans adulatio, sed dei ti∣mor, & divinarum scriptu∣rarum consiliant studia. Hierom. in Epist. ad Paulin. for their natures are more differing. The beast and a prophane man differ indeed, yet are not contrary, nay they are so much alike, that the sensual appetite is the predominant quality and commander in cheif in both; onely beasts are in∣nocent Subjects to it, as breaking no Law thereby; but man, by being a Slave to that Usurper, is a Traytour to his supreme Lord, and to his Viceroy within him. Reason; but a Saint and a wicked man are contrary, consider them from head to foot, they stand both in defiance against each other. Their understandings are contrary; the one is light, the other is darkness; the one judgeth sin to be the greatest and most abominable evil, the other judg∣eth it to be a pleasant eligible good. Their wills are contrary,Mos uit inter reges bar∣baros, quotis in societatem coirent, applicare dexteras, pellices{que} inter se vincire, no∣do{que} constringere & ubi mox sanguis in artūs extremos pervenisset, levi vulnere cru∣orem eliiebant, at{que} invicem habebant, id{que} aedus arca∣num, quasi muto cruore sacratum haberi solitam. Tacitus. the one is a resolved Souldier under the Captain of his salvati∣on, fully set to lose his life, before he will give up his cause, or leave his colours; the other is a sworn Officer under the Prince of the powers of the Air (an impla∣cable enemy to the former General) and stoutly bent to dye, nay be damned rather then desert him; Their affections are con∣trary; the affections of the on as fire ascend up∣ward, are set on things above; the affections of the other, like earth, tend downwards, and are set on things below; what the one loves above his life, the other hates unto death; what the one forsakes
as worse then Poyson, the other followeth after as his onely portion. Are these two Reader, like to agree, and to be (as friends should) of one heart, and of one soul? Idem velle & idem nolle est vera amicitia, saith the Oratour. Tis true friendship to Will and Nill the same things;Some tell vs that two who desired to become in∣timate riends, came into Vulcans Shop, begging this boo of him, that he would bat them on his Anvile, or melt them in his Furnace, both into one, the which he granted. what kind of friend∣ship must that be then between those that always will and nill contrary things? Let thy own reason be judge; if likeness be the ground of love, what love can there be amongst them that are wholly unlike? O let no any carnal interest sway thee to choofe Sodom for the place of thy habita∣tion, much less to accept of Gods Foe to be thy bosome friend; for what communion hath light with darkness? or what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that beleiveth with an infidel? 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. Like as the Elements, according to Empedocles opinion, are always at strife together, but specially those that are neerest; so godly and evil men are always at odds, but those especially that are nearest. The Horse hath a na∣tural emnity against the Camel, and the Camel against the Horse; Therefore Cyrus being to fight with the Babylonians, who excelled in Horses, used as many Camels as he could get. The sinner is like the Horse, altogether unclean; the Christi∣an like the Camel (that cheweth the cud, though he divideth not the hoofe) is parly clean, partly unclean, now there being an enmity betwixt these, there can never be any society. The Feathers of
Eagles, say Naturalists, will not mingle with the feathers of any ohter Fowls. Many complain of the treachery of their friends, and say (as Queen Eliza∣beth) that in trust they have found treason; but most of these men have greatest cause (if all things be duly weighed) to complain of themselves for making no better choice; He is right served in all mens judgements, who hath his liquor running out, which he puts into a leaking Vessel, or riven Dish. SECT. III. I Come now to shew wherein the power of godli∣ness consisteth, or how a man maketh Religi∣on his business in the choice of his Companions. First, Be as careful as thou canst,Non sunt fide∣les in anticitia, quos manus, non gratia co∣ulat, nam ci∣to deserunt, nisi semper ac∣cirnt.  enim quae munere glrinatur, dm suspenso disslvitur. Isid. lib. 3. de Sum. bon. that the per∣sons thou choosest for thy Companions, be such as fear God. The man in the Gospel was possessed with the Devil, who dwelt amongst the Tombs, and conversed with Graves and Carcasses: Thou art far from walking after the good spirit, if thou choosest to converse with open Sepulchres, and such as are dead in sins and trespasses. God will not shake the wicked by the hand (as the vulgar read, Iob 8. 20.) neither must the godly man. David proves the sincerity of his course, by his care to avoid suc society; I have walked in thy truth, I have not sat with vain persons, Psa. 26. 5. 6. There is a twofold truth; 1. Truth of Doctrine. Thy Law is the truth, free from all dross of corruption, and falshood o error.
2. Truth of affection, or of the inward parts; this may be called thy truth, or Gods truth (though man be the subject of it) partly because it proceed∣eth from him, partly because it is so pleasant to him, in which respect a broken heart is called the sacrifice of God, Psa. 51. 6. As if he had said; I could not have walked in the power of Religion, and in integrity, if I had associated with vile and vain company; I could never have walked in thy precepts, if I had sat with vain persons. Observe the phrase, I have not sat with vain persons. 1. Sitting is a posture of choice; its at a mans liberty, whether he will sit or stand. 2. Sitting is a posture of pleasure; men sit for their ease, and with delight; therefore the glorified are said, to sit in heavenly places, Eph. 2. 6. 3. Sitting is a posture of staying or abiding, 2 King. 5. 3. standing is a posture of going, but sitting of staying; The blessed, who shall for ever be with the Lord and his chosen, are mentioned to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 8. 11. David in nei∣ther of these senses, durst sit with vain persons; He might (as his occasions required) use their Company, but durst not knowingly choose such Company; They could not be the object of his e∣lection, who were not the object of his affection; I hate the congregation of evil doers, saith he in verse 7. As sitting is a posture of pleasure, he did not sit with vain persons. He was sometimes a∣mongst them to his sorrow, but not to his solace. They were to him, as the Canaanites to the Isra∣elites, pricks in his eyes, and thornes in his sides.
Wo is me, for I dwell in Meshech, and my habi∣tation is in the Tents of Kedar, Psa. 120. 5, 6. It caused grief, not gladness, that he was forced to be amongst the prophane. Again, He might stand amongst them, but durst not (unless necessitated, as a Prisoner kept by force in a Prison) sit with them. A godly man may go to such persons as we do sometimes to felons in a Gaol, about business, but he likes not to stay in such a nasty place. Its said of the Ly∣zard, an unclean Bird, that she liveth in Graves and such places of corruption; But the Dove a clean creature, loves to build and lie clean. Though he sinner, like Satan, delights in herds of Swine; the Saint disesteemeth a vile person, and honoureth them that fear the Lord, Psa. 15. 4.One gave his friend this ad∣vce, Have communion with few, e intmate with one, deal just∣ly with all, speak evil of none. The Burgess of the new Ierusalem (saith one upon that Text) repro∣bos reprobat, & probos probat, he rejecteth the vici∣ous, and though they may be great and high, coun∣teth them but vile, Elisha was so far from be∣stowing his love, that he thought an evil King not to deserve a look. As the Lord liveth, were it not that I regard the presence of Iehosaphat the King of Iudah, I would not look towards thee, nor see thee, saith the Prophet to the King of Israel, 2 King. 3. 14. That unerring pattern, our bles∣sed Saviour, did not judge wicked Herod worthy of one word. Then Herod questioned with him in many words, but he answered him nothing, Luk. 23. 9. But the true Christian honoureth them that fear the Lord, though he disesteemeth the wicked. Saints are Gods jewels, and therefore must needs be of great price with them that have any judge∣ment.
Ingo an antient King of the Draves, at a Feast,Convictor delicatus paula∣tum enrvat & emollit, ne∣sse est aut imiteris, aut ode∣vis utrum{que} autem devi∣andum est ne aut similis ma∣lis fias quia multi sunt, ne vel inimicus multis quia ds∣similes. Cum his conversare, qui e meliorem facturi sunt; illos admitte quos tu pores facere melres. Senec. Epist. 11. sets his Pagan Nobles in his Hall below, and entertained a company of poor Christians at his own Table in his Presence Chamber, in the most Royal man∣ner, and with the costliest chear that might be; and when this different dea∣ling was wondered at by his Peers, he gave them this Reason, I do this act, not as King of the Draves, but as King of a∣nother World, where these poor men shall be my Com∣panions and fellow-Princes; David was a great Soveraign, yet the Saints onely were his Associ∣ates; Let them that fear thee, turn unto me, and such as keep thy righteous judgements. They who but touched the carcasses of men (and wicked men are but moving carcasses) were unclean seven days, Numb. 19. 11. The flesh that toucheth any un∣clean thing, shall not be eaten, Levit. 7. 19. God commanded the Jews, Thou shalt not let thy Cat∣tel gender with a diverse kind; Thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled Seed; neither shall a Gar∣ment mingled of linnen and wollen come upon thee, Lev. 19. 19. This indeed taken literally, was ce∣remonial to them, and is vanished with their Com∣monwealth; but taken mystically, there is some∣thing in it which is moral, and binding to us, name∣ly, that God abhors mixtures of good and bad persons, more then of different things, and the Apostle appli∣eth it to the same purpose. Reader, if God hath opened thine eyes, thou seest that Saints are lovely, though low; and preci∣ous, though poor; I am black but comely, O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem, as the Tents of Kedar, Cant. 1. 5. Kedar signifieth black, and the Tents of Kedar were of hair-cloth, (made of Goats hair,) wherein they dwelt. Here the Church (which else∣where is called the Tents of Iacob, Jer. 30. 18.) is for her persecutions, and pilgrimage, and poverty com∣pared to the Tents of Kedar, saith Aynsworth; but I suppose there is one thing more in it, and that is as the Church did resemble the Tents of Kedar in her outward condition, so also in her inside. The Tents of Kedar were stored with gold, pleasant odours, and jewels within. O how glorious is the Kings daughter within! her inward ornaments are infinitely more worth then wrought, then choice gold. Dost thou not behold the Saints vertues under their vail, their beauty under their black Cypress? How they are a Crown of Glory, a Roy∣al Diadem, Princes in all his Lands, higher then the Kings of the earth, more excellent then their richest, wisest, and most honourable Neighbours, the Lords portion, his peculiar people, his Privy-Councellors, his Children, his Love and Delight, and doth not thine understanding prise them, thy will choose them, and thy affections cling and close with them? Surely such persons are worthy to be thy Com∣panions. Christians must resemble the Loadstone, to attract that only to them, which is of some worth; and not like the Iett, draw stubble and hay and straw, to which wicked men are compared. To the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, saith that man after God own heart.
Further, Its thy interest to choose them only for thy friends. Others will one time or other prove false. Those men will stick closer then a brother; Greet them that love us in the faith, such love will be firm, Tit. 3. 15. Ungodly men may be about us as Mice in a Barn, whilst something is to be had, but when all the Corn is gone, they are gone too; If thou ceasest to give, they will cease to love. When the weather is foul (as Swallows, though they chatterd about our Chimneys, and chatterd in our Chambers) they will take their flight, and leave nothing behind but dirt and dung, as the pledge of their friendship. Hamans friends, who when he was in favour were ready to kiss his feet, no sooner saw the King incensed against him, but they are as ready to cover his face, and help him to an Halter. There is no faith in that Man, who hath no fear of the great God. SECT. IV. SEcondly, If thou wouldst manifest godliness in the choice of thy Companions, thy care must be not onely to choose such as are godly, but also to choose them, because they are godly. As Godli∣ness must be a ruling quality in them that are chosen, so it must be the ground of thy choice. A man may keep company with godly men, because they live near him, or because they are related to him, or because they are wise, learned, or ingenuous per∣sons, or because they may do, or have done him a courtesie, and yet not put forth the least grain of godliness in it. When Gods grace in them is the
onely ground of our choice, and Gods Image on them, the cheif Loadstone of our love, then we exercise our selves to godliness in the choice of our Companions. If I love my Neighbour, and like his company, because he resembleth me in his feature, or in his nature, or because he is a mild, meek, peaceable man, or because I expect some kindness from him; herein I shew my love to my self, but none to my God, and therefore nothing of godliness. Laban delighted to have Ia∣cob with him, and would by no means hear of his departure, he sets him to be chief over his flock, he bendeth and boweth to him, he flattereth and fawneth on him, though his servant and un¦derling, and who so much as Iacob in his books! but mark the ground of all: And Laban said un∣to him, I pray thee if I have found favour in thy sight, tarry; for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake, Gen. 30. 27 He loved Iacob fo himself, or rather loved himself in Iacob; he courted him not because he was a good man, but because he was a good servant; herein was nothing of Religion; As the Jews followed Christ, not for the miracle, but for the meat, Joh. 6. Such men love others for the outward goods they bring to them, not for the grace or godliness they see in them; for if they were not holy, they would desire their Company; This is faigned, and not the love the Apostle speaks of, 1 Pet. 1. 22. , the unfaigned love of the brethren, or love without dissimulation. The voice of a world∣ling in the choice of a friend, is much like that of Ioram to Iehu; Is it peace Iehu? Is it wealth?
Is it honour? Is it power? then be thou my friend. But the voice a Christian, is like that of Iehu to Ionadab; Is thy heart right as mine is? Is there the fear of God, truth of grace in thy heart? then give me thy hand, come up into the Chariot, be thou my friend. The Choice of a Christian must flow from ano∣ther fountain then worldly profit; namely, the amiableness of the Image of Christ in the person. The heat and light of a wicked mans love, as a lamp is fed with, and floweth from some earthly sub∣stance, and is extinguished when that is denyed; but the heat and light of a Saints friendship, as the solary rays, springeth from an heavenly cause, and therefore will continue. The Apostle speaketh of love out of a pure heart, 1 Tim. 1. 5. That i pure love, a pure stream, which ariseth from a pure heart, a pure spring; that is, not onely the grace of God,Amicos secun∣dae res ptime parant, adver∣sae certissime probant. Sen. secret in a Christian, but the grace of God, seen in his Companion whom he loveth. It is clearly visible, that many associate with Chri∣stians, not for their vertues, but at a venture, they were possibly the first they fell in league with, or upon some other respect; for they know others as high in holiness whom they slight, nay possibly hate, whereas he that loveth grace in one, loveth grace in all. Its an infallible sign of a crooked nature (saith Cicero) to be affected with none but Praetors and great men. Its little sign I am sure of grace, to joyn onely wih those Saints that are rich or high in the World. If thou admirest holiness in scarlet, and robes, and contemnest it in sackcloth and russet; I must tell thee thou art grosly deceived; for thou
admirest the Scarlet, and honour, not the holiness at all. I do not deny but amongst Christians, a man (that hath the opportunity) may choose out some, rather then others to be his most intimate compa∣nions; Christ, though he loved all his Disciples, yet had one especially, the beloved Disciple, who leaned on Iesus bosome; Amongst all the Apostles, he vouchsafed to three onely the favour of his extra∣ordinary friendship. When he raised up the Rulers daughter, he suffered none to go in, save Peter, Iames, and Ioh. When he was transfigured, he took up with him, onely Peter, Iames and Iohn; In his bitter and bloody Agony, these three were taken out from the rest. Luk. 8. 51. Mat. 17. 5. and 26. 37. But if I might advise thee Reader, in such a Choice, I would give thee these two Cautions. First, That thou prefer those whom God prefers; I mean such as have most grace; Its a sign of a Coward to choose a weak enemy, and its a sign of little grace to choose the weakest Christian friends; He that hath most of Gods heart, deserveth most of thine; I am ready to think, that Peter, Iames, and Iohn, that had more of Christs love then the rest, had more of his Likeness and Image then the rest. I confess some respect in the choice of a bosome friend, ought to be had to his pru∣dence. Some men (though holy) are indiscreet, and in point of secrets are like Sives, can keep nothing committed to them, but let all run thorough. A blab of secrets, is a Traytour to society, as one that causeth much dissention. Its good to try
him whom we intend for a bosome friend, before we trust him;Diligentes A∣gricolae terram prius notulis quibusdam de∣prehendunt, & explorant, pri∣usquam illi credant semen∣tem. It a explo∣randus amcus antequam com∣mittas arca∣num. Erasmus. As men prove their Vessels with Water, before they fill them with Wine. If we finde them leaking, they will be useless as to that purpose; Too many are like the Dead Sea, in which nothing, saith Aristotle, sinks to the bot∣tom, but every thing thrown into it, swims at the top, and is in sight. Nakedness in mind, is as well a blemish, as nakedness in body. Its wonderful folly, which some persons manifest in stripping themselves naked before every one, and unbosom∣ing themselves whoever stands by. Pictures that have no Curtains before them, gather much dust, and so do those minds that are ever open and ex∣posed to every mans view. Others are like the Sea, full of wealth and worth, of great abilities in spiritual things, but there is no coming at it, they are so concealed, that none is ever like to be the better for it. Those golden Mines that are never known, enrich none. There are a middle sort of Christians between these, that like a secret box in a Cabinet, is not seen without some difflculty, but as occasion is, it is opened, and then many jewels of rare value appear.Tu omnia cum amico delbera. sed de ipso pri∣us. Senec. de benef. l. 6. c. 24. The Bow that is hardest to bend, doth the most service, for it sendeth forth the Arrow with the greatest force. The Nut that is hard to crack, hath the best kernel. These Christians may as likely as any, be thy bosome friends. Though some respect I confess may be had to sutableness of dis∣position in him whom thou choosest for an inti∣mate friend. As in marriage, so in friendship, its best when there is some equality and likeness
in pairs, as of Tongs, or Gloves, there must be a parity; Such friendship founded both in grace and nature, is like to be lasting. 2. That in prefering some, thou castest no con∣tempt upon others. The smallest piece of peal is worthy of esteem, the little violet is pleasant. The poorest Christian, he that hath the least grace, deserveth our love and observance. Christ takes notice of two mites, of a little strength, of some good thing, and shall not we? Math. 12. 43. Rev. 3. 8. 1 King. 13. 14. Babes in Christ being unable to help themselves, have most need of good Nurses; Weak Saints, who can hardly go alone, do most want an helping hand. A Saint that is mean, as well as a mean Saint, must be countenanced. Its good to countenance godliness in the rich, but its evil not to encourage it in the poor. Our love must like the oyntment, powred on Aarons head, which ran down, not onely to his beard, but to the very skirts of his garment, be drawn out to the highest, and fall down on the lowest Saints; David by this shewed the life and truth of his love. I am a Companion of all that fear thee, and keep thy Statutes, Psa. 119. 63. Of all. None that hath thy fear, but shall find me their friend. Though I am their King, and above the highest, yet for thy sake I can chearfully be Companion to the lowest. SECT. V. THirdly, In thy Choice have respect to spiritual ends, and accordingly improve it. Attend, and
intend thy own and thy Companions soul-good in it. Fiendship hath a key to the heart, which it may use, nt only to let it self into its secrets, but also to intro∣duce its own conceptions. He hath a great advantage of perswading another to, and encouraging him in holiness, who is already entertained as his friend into his heart. Where the person is so acceptable, the instruction will be the more welcome; We car∣ry others sometimes along with us, to our friends houses, and they are kindly entertained for our sakes. Now to improve this interest, any other way then on Gods behalf is sacriledge. How a∣bominable were it then to use this key for the bring∣ing in of theivish lusts, and murderers upon him! There is no nearer union then of intimate friends, they are one soul; he then that loves himself, and knoweth grace to be his own greatest per∣fection,Non est vera amicitia ubi est fallax adula∣tio, Amb. de Offic. lib. 3. must needs endeavour that his friend may have a large portion of it. Persons of quali∣ty have a great delight to adorn and beautifie the places where they inhabit, and loath to live in dirty fies, or nasty dungeons.Solatium hujus vitae est, ut ha∣beas, cui pectus tuum aperias, cui arcana communices, ut colloes tibi fi∣dlem virum qui in prosperis gratuletur ti∣liin tristibus compatatur; facilis vox & commu∣nis, Tuus sum totus, sed pau∣cioris est effe∣ctus. Amb. de. Offic. lib. 3 True Friends dwell in each other; the soul is (saith one) not so much where it liveth, as where it loveth; how delecta∣ble then must it needs be, for them to seek the embellishing and embroydering those hearts with holiness, in which they have taken up their abode? Love is apt to transport us, so far as to imitate the errors of those whom we affect, like un∣skilful painters, who express onely the wrinkles and blemishes of a face, not being able to reach its beauty; Without Question, this love if right∣ly improved, would be more prevalent to make
thy friend ambitious to resemble thee in vertue, in regard of the amiableness of vertue in it self, and its great advantage above error; Tis clear, that grace hath a much more ravishing and delectable ap∣pearance then vice, in all her paint, and dawbe∣ry even when she is lookt upon through the Divels Opticks. A good friend in this respect is of much worth; therefore Alexander, when one desired to see his treasure, shewed him not , but , not his Talents of Silver, but his Friends. And Menander counted him a happy man, that had but the shadow of one. Though fortune hath shewed me many favours saith Plutarch,In Vit. that de∣serve I should be thankful to her for them, yet there is none that maketh me so much bound to her as the love and good will my brother Timon doth bear to me in all things. God hath caused many wants and weaknesses in us, that we may be needful to one another; and purposely given diversity of gifts and graces, that we may be helpful to each other. No Nations have all the commodities they use of their own growth, but need trading with others for their supply. Be∣leivers cannot keep house well without borrowing from their Neighbours. There is that which every joynt supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, Ephes. 4. 10. If our Christian communion be not imployed for this end, we are slothful servants, hiding our Talents in a Napkin; if to a contrary end, we are miserable Alchymists, and extract Poison out of a Cordial. Countries that are joyned together in a strict league,
often grow rich by mutual traffique; Christians have found by experience, that mutual commerce well imployed, hath brought them in very great gains. Paul himself, that was of a great spiritual estate, and much given to Hospitality, and feed∣ing hungry Christians, yet expected sometimes to be entertained at his poor Neighbours Tables. He writes to the omans, that he hopes to be filled with their Company, Rom. 15. 24. Filled or feasted with some heavenly repast, by their Company. O tis lovely and happy when two friends are like Moses and Aaron; He shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou to him instead of God, Exod. 4. 16. Where their love is shewn by edifying and building up one another in holiness. This were some prelibation of Heaven, where those lines of love which stretch themselves to every port of the Circumference do all meet in God, as their Centure. But I shall speak more to this in the fourth Chapter. I shall conclude this particular with an answer to two Objections. Object. 1. Christ commandeth us to love our ene∣mies,Mat. 5. 45. Gal. 4. 10. and what love do we shew, if we turn our backs always upon them, and banish them our Company? Besides, we are commanded to do good to all, I am bound to seek my wicked Neigh∣bours salvation, and to love my Neighbours as my self, Lev. 19. 18. which how can I do if I always shun him? Again, If I should avoid all that are carnal, I must untie the bonds of my relations, which God and nature forbid, and cast up my calling, which I am commanded to mind.
Answ. In Answer to these things, I shall first lay down one or two Distinctions, and then some Positions. 1. Distinct. There are sinners of several formes in Satans School. Some that learn too much the lesson he sets them, but quarrel not with the Scholars of a contrary Master; though they are ungracious, yet they are not out-ragious, these are wild Beasts in a Cage, or in Chains, that a man may sometimes take notice of without any hurt. Others do not onely study the lectures he sets them, be they never so full of blasphemie and debaucherie; but seek to make Proselites, and cast scorn and contempt upon all piety, and rail at those that will not learn their black art; these are in his upper form, and have proceeded from standing in the way of sinners, to sitting in the seat of the scornful, and will be ready in a short time to be sent to Hell, the onely Academy to which he prefers his Scholars; these are worse then the Dogs of Egypt, they when the Israelites marched towards Canaan, not stir their tongues, but these bark at all that sets out for Heaven. Many who had risings and spots in the skin of the flesh, were not to be judged unclean, and shut out of the Camp, but those that had the scab spread∣ing much in the skin (typifying those whose sinful courses were gaining and growing upon themselves or others, Levit. 3. 3, 4, 8.) they were to be thrust out of the Camp. 2. Distinct. It is one thing to come into wicked mens company, as a mans occasions or relations re∣quire, and it is another thing to choose such com∣pany;
David was frequently amongst the bad, but his delight and joy was onely amongst the good. An Acquaintance is one thing, and a Com∣panion is another thing. Acquaintance is the Herd; A companion is the particular one, culled out of it for a special friend. Its one thing to have in∣timate familiarity, and another thing to have common and civil commerce with such men. 1. Position. To love my Neighbour as my self, doth not infer an equality, but the quality of my love. A Christian must love all men truly, but is not bound to love all men equally. The greatest degree of our love is limited by God himself (next to his blessed Majesty and our selves) to these two objects, the houshold of faith, and our own houshold, not excluding others, but preferring these, fo even within our selves, there is a difference in our love; we love our head, and heart, and other vital parts, with a closer affection then those outward integral parts that are not of so great concernment to us. I may therefore love every man as my self, and yet love some above o∣thers, and my own soul above all. Exemplar potius est exemplato. The example is before the thing exemplified. If a man is bound to love another as himself, he must needs love himself first, and more then another. Thy love to them, may cause thee to hope that thou mayst convert them, but thy love to thy self should make thee fear lest they should pervert thee. 2. Position. A Christian is bound to avoid all need∣less society with wicked men. Mark, I say need∣less; When our Relations command it, as amongst
Husbands and Wives, and Parents and Children, or our Vocations call for it, then it is necessary. Those precepts that enjoyn us to forbear their company, are to be understood when we have no call to it. We may Trade with wicked men, we must perform all moral duties to our Kindred, and acts of courtesie and charity to the worst of our enemies, so we be careful to keep our selves from their corruptions, and use their company no longer then the discharge of those duties doth require. When by admitting their persons, we cannot avoid their vices, we must deny both. 3. Position. Christians should as God gives them opportunity, if there be any hope of doing good, endeavour to reform men, before they wholly reject their company; Nay, and pray for their welfare after they have refused them for Companions. Its small kindness to shut up a man that hath the plague, lest he should infect others, and to use no means for his own cure. If I finde that a man is desperately bent in wickedness, that Religion is the object of his laughter, and to give him any serious counsel, is to cast Pearl before Swine; I must judge such Ishmaels and Esaus, unworthy of humane society; but its a very hard case to shut a man up in a Coffin, and bury him before he be quite dead Sometimes vicious men are in distress, and a godly man hath a call from God to do him some charita∣ble office; here the Christian may have less fear of receiving hurt from them. Afflictions are bonds, and these beasts in Chains are not so unruly; Pauls Viper benummed with cold did not sting him; Here a Christian hath also more hope of doing good to
them. The hard mettal, when in the fire, may receive impressions. Men will take that Physick willingly in their sickness, which they refused in health. 4. Position. A Christian may love a wicked man sincerely, though he wholly shun his society. He may affect him with a love of pity, though not of complacency; He may shew his love by powring out his heart in petitions to God for him. Though a Saint deny a scandalous sinner his presence, yet he doth not deny him his pity, nor his prayers; Nay, our Non-Communion may be a means of their conversion; If any obey not the word, have no company with him; that he may be ashamed, 2 Thes. 3. 14. Shame and Confusion, is a good step towards Conversion; A wicked mans presence burdens a Saint, and a godly mans presence hardens a sinner. Surely thinks he, I am, if not praise worthy, yet tolerable, and not very bad, since such a good man is so much with me. They who did eat and drink in Christs presence on Earth, wondered much to be excluded from his Heavenly Banquet, Math. 7. 23. Hymeneus and Alexander were excluded Christian society, that they might learn, not to blaspheme, 1 Tim. 1. 20. This wounding is the way to healing, t makes prophane men bethink themselves; when sober per∣sons avoid their presence. Object. 2. Did not Iesus Christ accompany with wicked men? Can I follow a better pattern? or can any pretend to more purity? Is not Christ up∣on this account called a friend of Publicans and Sinners?
Answ. 1. I Answer, More generally. All our Saviours actions are for our instruction, but all are not for our imitation. Christ indeed hath left us an example, that we should follow his steps,1 Pet. 2. 2. but not in all the prints of his feet. Christ did nothing amiss, but he that shall undertake to do in all things as he did, will follow him too close, and do many things amiss. It may be commendable to imitate my Soveraign, but it is possible enough to do it so far as to be guilty of treason by it. Some of Christs actions were done by him as man, others were done by him as Mediatour, or God-man; In many of these latter we cannot imitate him, in others we may not. Who can work Miracles, forgive Sins, &c. as Christ did? Who may appoint Apostles, constitute Laws for the Church, &c. as Christ did? Answ. 2. More particularly, Christ had a Call, which all others have not, to go amongst wicked men. Where should a Physitian be, but amongst his Patients? to deal with such is his calling. Christ came to call sinners to repentance, to heal their vitiated natures, and therefore it was neces∣sary he should associate with them. He went amongst them, not as a friend to their sins, but as a Phy∣sitian to their souls; How should he otherwise have cast out Devils, cured their sicknesses, and proved his Deity to their faces? An Ambassadour being commissionated by his Prince, may do that, which if an ordinary Subject should do, may cost him his life. Abraham might (having liberty from God) stand still and behold Sodom flaming, when Lot might not so much as cast an eye, or have a glance towards it. Christ was sent to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and so he went to them in discharge of his Errand and Mission; He had also a Com∣mission under his Fathers Hand and Seal, Luk. 4. 18. Iob. 6. 27. Answ. 3. Christ had no tinder about him to take fire, being conceived without sin; but we are little else then dry tinder, and therefore have cause to avoid the least spark. The Prince of this world cometh, saith Christ,Joh. 16. ult. and findeth nothing in me. He cometh with his baits, but there is nothing in me, that will be nibling at them. Besides, his Deity was a perfect Antidote against all infection; As the beams of the Sun, he could be in filthy places, and amongst defiling persons, and not re∣ceive the least pollution; when we have such un∣healthful souls, that we are ready to receive the contagion from the least infectious breath; Our corrupt nature is like fire, which if there be any infection in the room, draweth it straight to it self. Answ. 4. Christ did not choose the Company of Publicans and Sinners, though he was often amongst them. A Physitian is not in a Pest-house wih de∣light, though his own pity, and their misery may call him thither. Sinners were the guest, Saints onely the delight of Christ; wicked men had his company, but the Disciples onely were his Compa∣nions; He was intimate with none but beleivers; others were his care, they his comfort. It was to them he said, I have not called you servants, but friends; for the servant knoweth not what his Lord doth, but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of the Father, I have made known unto you, Joh. 15. 15, 16.
To Conclude, Reader, Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them. Charity forbids the former, and Christianity the latter. Love to them must preserve thee from envy, but love to thy self must keep thee from keeping them company. When ever providence calleth thee a∣mongst them, make them thy fear, not thy fami∣liars; For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief, Prov. 24. 1, 2. 1. Society in evil we may not hold, no not with the best men, Ephes. 5. 7, 11. Si cum malis, non tamen in malis, Psa. 141.4. 2. Society in good (i. e. in sacris) in the Wor∣ship of God, we may hold with the worst men, Math. 23. 1, 2. and 21. 12, 13. 3. Society in things indifferent we may have with all men, as in civil commerce, and Offices of humanity, Gen. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 27. A Good Wish of a Christian; about the Choice of his Companions, wherein the former particulars are Applied. THe blessed and glorious God,The Intro∣duction. the Father of mer∣cies, and fountain of all communion, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, who hath sufficiently evidenced the good of Compani∣ons, in saying, It is not good for man to be alone, and who hath sanctified society by his own example, in creating Angels and Men, not onely for mutual comfort, in the fruition of each other, but also that his sacred Majesty, and those Heaven-born spirits might have fellowship together, as intimate friends,
and especially in that infinite complacency which he had in his beloved Son, and his Son in him from all eternity, who was dayly his delight, rejoycing al∣ways before him. Having made me rational, and thereby meet for converse with men; Religious, and thereby capable of communion with Christians; I Wish that I may never abuse his kindness by shutting up my self as Monks and Nuns in Cells or Cloisters, or as some melancholy persons, in a Closet or Chamber; but may know both how to be alone, and how to be in company, and be so sensible of his love in affording me fellow-travailers, that my journey to my Fathers house may be the more pleasant, that I may accept it thankefully, and improve it faith∣fully to his own praise. My God suffereth my spiritu∣al wants, that I may look for help (under him) from others wealth, and he affords me spiritual riches, that I might be able to supply others poverty. Its his pleasure, that none of his Children (though to some he gives liberal estates, to all a compe∣tency) should be able to live without being beholding to their Neighbours. Though privacy hath fewer incitations to evil, company hath more provocati∣ons to good, by so much s doing good, is better then not doing evil. Let me prefer society before solitariness; Yet Lord, let me never be a good-fellow in the Worlds sense, to joyn with all sorts; but let my fellowship be with them that have fellowship with thee. Though I may have bad acquaintance, let me not have a bad Companion, whatsoever com∣merce I may have with sinners, let my communi∣on be onely with thy Majesty, and thy Saints. O let them that fear thee, turn unto me, and such
as keep thy righteous judgements, Psal. 119. 79. I Wish that the consideration of the great influ∣ence which Companions will have upon me,Motives to care in the choice of Copanions, 1 Motive. The influence that Company hath on us, to daw us to the evil of sin. to hin∣der or help me in the way of holiness, may make me the more prudent in my choice. Though there be some quicksets of grace in the soyl of my heart, yet these evil weeds may endanger their death, at least will prejudice their growth. How often hath ill company, as an East-wind, nipt and destroyed those buds, which gave hopes of becoming in time, good and wholsom fruit? If the fire of my godliness be not extinguished (no thanks for that to my self) yet its sure to be abated by these waters. My spiri∣tual life is maintained onely by that provision which my God is pleased daily to send me in, and can I expect that he should send supplies into his enemies quaters? What man will send goodly Furniture into his house, untill the dust and rubbish be cast out? With what reason can I look for succour from Heaven, when I run my self into the jaws of Hell? Though others that are found out by their grand foe, may receive help from God, and come off with con∣quest, yet if I go to seek out the temper (for where can I sooner find him, then in his house?) amongst his own Children, I shall have little pity, and may well expect to be foiled in the fight. Again, How doth Familiarity with what is evil, make it less frightful! Children are much startled at some creatures, which when they are accustomed to, they are not at all afraid of. Possibly my anger against sin at present is very hot, but evil company is a drugge that will much allay the heat of that Simple. The filthiest disease, is not so loathsom in a Wife, or
Child, as in a Stranger; nor in an intimate friend, as in another. If there be not a due distance betwixt the isive faculty and the object, there can be no true sight; If the sin be too near me (in a friend that lyeth in my bosome) I cannot behold its ugliness and deformity, its hainous, hateful nature. I doubt not but that poysonous Apple which had eternal death at its core, would have been far more loathsom and detestable in Adams eyes (much less would it have been so lovely and acceptable) had he seen it in any other hands, then of his dearest and onely Compa∣nion on earth. O that since he was wounded by the hand of his nearest and most intimate friend, who had the breastplate of compleat righteousness, and per∣fection of grace for his shield; I might never dare to thrust my self amongst such enemies, who am (com∣pared with him) wholly naked and unarmed. I am apt to think that I can secure my self against their shot; but alas the long and often playing of the Can∣non, will batter the strongest wall. A continual drop∣ping will pierce a stone. Doth not experience tell me that its no hard matter to give such a weakling as I am a fall? And is it likely that I should stand fast in so slippery a place? My God asketh me, Can a man take fire in his bosome, and his cloaths not be burnt? Can one go upon coals, and his feet not be burnt? My cloaths (notwithstanding all my care to the contrary) will smell of the Coals, and my feet will blister with the fire. My God tells me, that sin is a Canker, a Gangreen; and experi∣ence teacheth how spreading and infectious sinners are, 2 Tim. 2. 17. I may think to make them better, but they are more likely to make me worse. Sickness
is catching, but not health; the rotten sheep infect the sound, but the sound sheep do not cure the rot∣ten. Solomons bosome Companions, drew his heart from his God, but I read not of any one of them, whose heart he drew to his God. If Pitch be but toucht it desileth, but Fullers-Earth doth not so soon cleanse. If Israel once joyn themselves to Baal-Peor, they quickly eat the offerings of the dead, and bow down to their Idols. Its as ordinary to put on other mens faults, as their outward fashions. One Corah did but kindle the fire of rebellion, and presently two hundred and fifty Captains brought wood to in∣crease its flame, to their own destruction. If I know of any that have infectious diseases, love to my body will not suffer me to drink of their Cup, or to sit at their Table; and when I know of them that have such contagious spiritual sicknesses, shall not love to my soul move me to forbear their society? Lord, my prayer hath often been, Lead me not into tempta∣tion; shall I run into temptation? thou knowest how prone I am, should I walk with wicked persons, to walk in their wicked paths; and hast therefore laid thy strict command upon me, Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away (Prov. 4. 14, 15.) keep me from hazar∣ding this frail Potsherd (my flesh) upon the Rock of evil company, from venturing amongst those vipes, lest I be stung. Enable me to avoid the Congregati∣on of evil doers, and keep me from going with the wicked, lest I learn their ways, and get a snare to my soul.
I Wish that I may be the more fearful of joyning with sinners,Evil Compa∣ny may make a Christian to suffer. lest my God joyn me with them in their sufferings. It is evil and woful to be found in that house, which is all over in a flame; The an∣ger of my God, is worse then a consuming fire, and shall I associate with them that are always under his fury? When a City is taken by storm in the night, the sword makes no difference (amongst the Inhabitants) betwixt friends and foes. What safety can I expect in being near them that are far from Gods Law and Love? Wicked men are dross, they have no good mettal in them; they are neither fit vessels to serve, nor currant mony to inrich me; but though I be Gold, if mingled with such Dross, I must look to be mel∣ted. If the Stork accompany the Cranes, its no won∣der if she be taken in the fame Net. Jehosaphat was a good man, yet for joyning with the wicked; wrath came upon him from the Lord (2 Chron. 19. 2.) If I follow him in his sin, shall I be free? All that sailed in the Ship, fared the worse for one disobedi∣ent Jonah; his company cost them the loss of their lading, and was like to have cost them their lives. The whole body of Israel fell before their enemies, be∣cause wicked Achan stood amongst them. O my soul dost thou think then to afford such thy presence, and not to share in their punishment? Consider with se∣riousness what thy God saith; Depart from the Tabernacle of these wicked men, and touch no∣thing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in their sins. Wouldst thou for any carnal profit, be found amongst those persons who are every moment in danger of the bottomless pit? The Earth clave asunder that was under them, and swallowed them up, their houses,
goods, and all that appertained to them. O what man, unless bereft of his wits, would be one hour contentedly in the company of these Corahs, that are always liable to Gods curse? Let the great use thou makest of such dreadful Doctrines be, not to partake of their sins, so much as by thy presence, that thou mayst not partake of their plagues. And they that were round about them, fled at the cry of them; for they said, Let us be gone quickly, lest the earth swallow up us also, Numb. 16. 26. and 31. 34. Lord, Thine Enemies enjoy many mercies, through their Neighbourhood to thy Friends; thou art so loving a Father, that the servants of sin, whom thou countest no better then Dogs, do fare much the better for that bountiful Table which thou keepest for thine own Children; the Dogs have eaten the crums which fall from the Childrens Table; The Tares continue the longer in the field, and the sickle of thy justice doth not yet cut them down for the unquench∣able fire, because the Wheat is amongst them; but thy Saints have suffered much outward misery, for their nearness to sinners; thou art such an holy jealous God, thine hatred of sin is so infinite, that when the fire of thv wrath hath consumed unbelei∣vers, some sparks of it have lighted on their best Neighbours; when the hand of thy fury hath fallen heavy on the workers of iniquity, thy Chosen sitting by them, have been sensible of the blow. My prayer hath often been, Remove thy stroke away from me; and my Complaint, for I am consumed by the blow of thine hand; I tremble to think of the frownes of thy face; but surely the weight of thy hand would sink me indeed. O guard thy servant so powerfully
by thy grace, that I may avoid all appearance of evil; As I would avoid thy batteries, let me avoid the Camp of thine enemies, and keep me from giving them the least countenance, that I may not be wrapt up in their vengeance. The great good to be got by a good Companion.I Wish that the great gain which I may get by good Companions, may make me the more diligent to find them out. Though its no small unhappiness to be joyned to them that are ever standing under the spout of the Lords fury; yet its blessed to be near them that are always under the dropings of divine favour. Christ is always present with his people, and there∣fore I may say with Peter, It is good to be there. When a King comes to visit one of his Peers, all the family oftentimes tasteth of his bounty, but the Noblemans Relations of his grace and love; he con∣verseth with them, and they with him. If Sinners are the better for the Neighbourhood of the Saints, and for their sakes, God lets his Enemies experience his goodness; surely Beleivers shall be the better for the Neighbour hood of their Brethren, and shall have experience of special good-will. I cannot conceive the kindnesses which may be done for me by these Friends at Court. Their interest is great in the blessed and glo∣rious Potentate; The King is not he (as was once said in another sense) that can deny them any thing. Whatsoever they ask the Father in Christs name, he will do it for them; When guilt flieth in my face, and I dare not appear, or when through the preva∣lency of temptation, I cannot pour out a prayer, they will appear for me, put up my suits, and that with success; If I be dull, they may quicken me; If I am in doubts, they may resolve me; If I wander,
they will be faithful in acquainting me with my faults to reduce me; If I walk uprightly, they will be helpful, by administring Heavenly Cordials to encou∣rage me. A faithful friend, will be my second self, and love me as his own soul. When I faint he will endeavour to revive me; When I fall he will do his utmost to recover me; He will rejoyce with me in my joys, and sympathize with me in my suffe∣rings, in every condition to his power be a futable conso∣lation. O that the value and vertue of this Pearl, may make me esteem it at an high price, and the more wary that I be not cheated in my Choice! Lord, thou hast ordained the communion of Saints to be for mutual comfort and counsel, let me choose those for my friends, that will be faithful to their own, and to my soul. I Wish that I may manifest to my own conscience,Moive. A mans Com∣panions wll discover what he is. the truth of my conversion by my Companions, and that I am passed from death to life, because I joyn with, and love the brethren. Beasts flock together; Sinners joyn hand in hand; and Saints are of the same heart, and walk together towards the same Heaven. My Associates will discover my nature, whether Vertue or Vice be my Master; My Comrades will speak to what Captain I belong. If I joyn with the black Regiment of the Prince of Darkness, its a sign I am an enemy to the Lord of Hosts. The members of Christs Mystical Body go in company; Its presumed they are unchast Women, who company with known Harlots; and its supposed they are dishonest men, who are familiar with Theives; If Christ and grace be predominant in me, I cannot like and love their enemies; An holy soul
cannot delight in prophane sinners. Melted gold will unite it self with the substance of gold, but not incorporate with dross; An heart truly good, cannot brook those that are evil; All creatures desire to joyn with such as are of the same nature; Fish, Fowls, Birds, Beasts, all, every one strive to be with them that are of the same species; Confede∣racy in sin, is the livery by which the black guard of Hell is distinguished from the rest of the rational creatures; True friendship is the Cognisance of true Christians; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. Love is the badge of the houshold of faith, which witnesseth to what Lord they appertain. Where love is in truth to their persons, there will be a delight in their pre∣sence; For what is love, but a motion of the soul towards, and its complacency in the object be∣loved; In vain do I pretend my self a Disciple with∣out sincere love, which is the life of a Disciple. Love to my God is the soul of Religion, which keeps it in being, in motion; without this, the whole body of it decayeth and dyeth; All my performances, if this be lacking, are but as an unsavoury Corpse, without either loveliness or life. Love to my brethren, is the sign of Religion, which ever sheweth it self at the door, where the substance is within. He that loveth him that begetteth, must needs love him also that is begotten; The Child is acceptable for the Fathers sake; The Picture is amiable, because of the Person it representeth. O how grossely do they delude their souls, that think they love the Head, when they hate and despise the Members; that say they affect and prize Christ above their lives, when they reject
and persecute Christians to the very death. Lord thou hast told me, He that loveth not his Brother, abideth in death. All thy Children are my Bre∣thren, they have the same Father, the same Mo∣ther; O suffer me not to give conscience cause to witness against me, that I am in a state of death, of damnation, for want of this brotherly affection; but grant that the hot beams of thy love may so warm my heart, that I may be always reflecting back love to thy self and thy Saints, as an evidence of my eternal salvation. I Wish that I may consider whom I choose for my Companions,Motve. There can be no true friendship amongst wicked men; nor between a godly and a wicked man. least I be disappointed in the ends of Company, My God intendeth society to be helpful to his people in the best things; But they are never likely to further me in holiness, who walk in the broad way that leadeth to Hell; Satans Servants will not teach me to do the Lords work; That friendship is ill made, which is soon broken; no band can hold him who is a stranger to Religion; Where there is no fear of God in the heart, there can be no true friendship; They who are two in disposition, will scarce be one in affection; Where there is no true likeness, there can be no true love; Can two walk together, unless they be agreed? Grace is the onely Cement which conglutinates hearts, and maketh true friends; A brutish Sinner and a Be∣leiver are contrary each to other. An unjust man is abominable to the just; and he that is upright in his way is abominable to the wicked; the Eagle hath perpetual emnity with Serpents, and Dragons, and their seed; So hath the Eagle-eyed Christian with the seed of the Serpent; Beasts hate fire, and
so do those whom God calleth Foxes, and Lions, and Bulls, the fire of grace that burneth in a Saints heart, and flameth out in his life; Lambs and Wolves, Doves and Ravens, cannot unite. Jerusalem and Babylon, Sion and Sodom, can never be compact and at unity togeher. Can I expect love from that person that hath none for his own soul, nor for the blessed God? Can contraries meet, and not fight? Is there any hope of an amicable conjunction be∣twixt them that are not onely differing but opposite? I am born of God, he is of his Father the Devil; My work is to do the will of my Father in Heaven; his work is to do the lusts of the wicked one. Self is the Byass by which he moveth; Scripture i the Compass by which I sail; I am travailing towards heaven, he is hastening to hell; and is it possible for us to have one heart? O that no worldly advantage might make me ever strive to strike a Co∣venant with them, to whom I am thus contrary. They must needs be false to me, that are made up of unfaithfulness. A true friend is another self; a vicious man cannot be a true friend, because he is never himself. Sometimes he is drunk with passion, and so loseth his guide, and leaveth the dictates of rea∣son; those servants are often in rebellion, and thn like the troubled Sea, he casteth up mire and dirt; In his fury he will strike at friends or foes, and dis∣cover what he knows, and more many times; Passi∣on is an high Feaver, wherein men talk idly; therefore the wise man gives a special Caution against such Companions;Prov. 22. 24. Make no friendship with an an∣gry man, and with a furious man thou shalt not go. Sometimes he is overcome with wine, and then the
Beast in him, puts the curb into the mouth of reason, and hath the command of it. A Drunken man, hath Nebuchadnezzars brutish heart, and is fit onely to graze with Cattel; Clitus is killed by his drunken Master, and such a one speaketh and doth he knows not what; He speaks what he should forget, and forgets what he hath spoke. The Drunkards mind and stomach are alike, neither can retain what they receive. Solomon likewise sets a brand at this mans door, to discourage every sober man from coming there; Be not amongst Winebibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh. Always he hath some lust or other lording it over him, and according as their interests lead him, so he acteth, that his friend must expect no more of him, then they can spare, and is such a person like to prove a Cordial friend? He may abound in frothy words, but I must expect no faith∣ful deeds from him, if ever I come to sufferings; like a Drum in a Battel, he may make a great sound, but will act nothing for my succour; like a Cipher, though now in my prosperity he stands for thousands, in my adversity he will stand for nothing; Such a friend will be like a familiar Devil, which forsakes the Witch when she is in Fetters; How much shall I miss of my expected help from him, when I am brought into hardships! As a Lemon, he may be hot without, but is altogether cold and cooling within; O that I might never manifest so much folly, as to choose him for my friend, whose princi∣ples will teach him to be false; He so often changeth his dwelling for his own end and interest, that I shall not know where to find him, when I stand in most need. As a Flie, he will tarry no longer in
the Kitchen, then there is grease to feed him; I am but his Pond, which he will use whilst there is any water; but when dry, I shall hear no more of him. Lord, how far would thine end of society be frustrated, and my hopes of comfort in companions be disap∣pointed, should I choose him who is ruled neither by Religion nor Reason? I beseech thee let my lot fall amongst those persons that are filled with the fruits of thy Spirit, for they onely will be faithful to the true and holy ends for which thou hast ordained friendship. Preserve me from walking in the coun∣sel of the ungodly, and standing in the way of sinners, lest being found in their Company, I come to inherit their curses. Choose god∣ly men for thy Companions.I Wish that I may like Paul, joyn my self to the Disciples, and be in League onely with them who are joyned to the Lord, in an everlasting Cove∣nant, never to be forgotten; I profess my self to be a follower of God; My God hath set apart him that is godly for himself, (Psa. 4. 3.) If the godly man be the object of my Gods choice, he may well be of mine. If he be separated for his service, he is without question worthy of my society? Surely there is some value in those vessels, which are meet for the Masters use. Common and ordinary things are not fit for a Princes Table; Neither is every person meet for a Kings presence. They are specially qualified with parts and abilities, that stand before Great men. Pharoah would have none but men of activity to serve him, in tending his Cattel. Nebuchadnezzar would have Children in whom was no blemish, but well-favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding sci∣ences,
and such as had ability in them, (Dan. 1.4.) to stand in the Kings Palace; What manner of men are those then, whom the glorious God hath chosen to wait upon him? There cannot but be rare perfections in them that are set a part to shew forth all his praise. He is infinitely wise, and would not honour them so much that are not of eminent worth. O my soul, what a Loadstone is here, to draw forth thy love towards the Saints! Thy constant, thy loving, thy best friend, sets an high price upon them. All the world bsides, is a wild Wilderness to him; they onely are his Garden wherein he delights, and wilt not thou walk there with him, amongst such fragrant Flowers, and pleasant Fruits? He esteems others but as dust, they are his jewels. Observe what he tells thee, The heart of a wicked man is little worth, but the tongue of the righteous is as choice silver. The heart of man includes the understanding, will, and affections, the soul, and all its faculties, and is the noblest part of man, it is the fountain of life, the spring of motion, the seat of his Empire and Regiment; nay, the Commander in chief, that ordereth and disposeth of all at pleasure; yet this heart, which is the most excellent part, in a wicked man is of small price, it is little worth, nay, is worse then naught; but the tongue (a far inferiour member) of the righteous, is (no mean mettal) as choise silver, and makes a most delightful sound. Wilt not thou joyn thy self to these excellent ones? If their tongues be as choice silver, surely their hearts do infinitely excel fine gold? Nay, are more pre∣cious then rubies; The Topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal them, neither shall they be exchanged for
jewels of fine Gold? Who would not be greedy of acquaintance, with men of such surpassing eminence? It would bewray extream want of wisdom, not to be ambitious of communion with persons of such worth. Besides, Should I joyn with others, I choose them that are my Gods enemies. It is not onely ingrati∣tude, but treason, to countenance them that are traytours against the Crown and Dignity of Iesus Christ. Twas a sharp and cutting reproof, which Jehu gave to King Jehosaphat; I Wish I may ne∣ver give cause for the like to me; Shouldst thou help he ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? My God counts my enemies his enemies, and hates them that hate me, and shall I esteem his ene∣mies my friends, and love those that hate him! Wicked men are a generation of Vipers, they hiss at godli∣ness, and spit their poison at God himself. They stretch out their hands against God, and strengthen themselves against the Almighty, Iob 15. I shew but small kindness to the God of all my comforts, if I take his foes to be my friends. Once more, I disgrace my birth, my breeding, I dishonour my profession, my Prince, if I accompany with wicked persons. Its below a great Heir to company with beggars. Its a discredit to a King, to be taken up with Porters. A Companion of riotous men, sha∣meth his Father on Earth Prov. 28. 7. A companion of vicious men shameth his Father in Heaven. It speaketh his education to be very mean, and his expectation to be low, both which reflect upon his Father. O that I might never disgrace my Gods good∣ness, in the cost and charge he hath been at with me, by choosing the scullions and filth of the World, to
be my companions, nor disparage my own judgment in refusing the excellent of the earth, and them that are Princes in all Lands; Lord, thy people are thy portion, Jacob is the lot of thine inheritance, they are precious in thy sight, and honourable, for thou hast loved them, they are fair in thine eyes, and altogether lovely; Help thy poor servant to resemble thy Majesty; Give me spiritual eyes to see their beauty, and let my soul be so ravished with that com∣liness in them, which thy Spirit hath put upon them, that those which are a Royal Priesthood, a chosen generation, a peculiar people, higher then the Kings of the Earth, the glory of Christ, and a Royal Diadem in thine hand, may be the delight of mine eyes, the joy of my heart, and my fellow-travailers towards that house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. I Wish that the Commands of my God may be the warrant of my election;Choose them because they are god∣ly. and the beautiful Image of my God, may be the onely Motive of my affection to his chosen; Should I shew favour to the Saints, and not with respect to the fear of my God in them, I manifest no sanctity; It is possible for me to love the man, and yet hate the Christian in the same person. How frequent is it to love men that are god∣ly, and yet not to love godliness? Potiphar re∣spected Joseph, a good man, but not for his good∣ness sake; he preferred him as a good servant to him, not as a good Subject to God. The Children of Heth honoured Abraham for the sake of his riches, or courtesie, not upon the account of his righteousness, and piety. Abimelech struck a Covenant with Isaac, as a good Neighbour, not as a Believer.
It is one thing to love peace, and another thing to love purity; this latter is proper to a Christian, the former competible to Heathen; O that my love might never as Labans o Jacob, be mercenary, car∣ried out towards any of Gods people, more for the good I get by them, then for the good that is in them. How unsuitable is such a love to the Divine nature, and how unworthy of my profession? If I love them for their wealth or their bounty, I love their riches not them, or rather, I love my self, and neither them nor any thing of theirs. This is self-love, not Saint-love; If their persons were stript of those Ornaments, wherewith they are now cloathed, such love would languish and dye. Should these be the wheels, upon which my love moves, when they are wanting, my love will stand still; such friendship is but like a fire of straw, which burns brightly whilst it hath matter to feed upon, but that being neglected, it is extinguished and turned into ashes. O my soul, consider what foundation thy love is built on, lest it appear to be feighned; If thou lovest men for their parts, or for thy own profit, thou dost not love thy Saviour in them, but thy car∣nal self, and thereby dost evidence thine Hypocrisie more then thy sincerity. It is not all kindness to Saints, nor all joyning with Christian society, which is a act or sign of sanctity. The Baptist had fair re∣spect from Herod, and yet the King could take off his Head. The Barbarians shewed great courtesie to Paul and his companions, but not the least Christi∣anity. Thy God commandeth thee to love the bro∣therhood, that is, to love them as brethen, not as kind, or wise, or great, or wealthy; and to
love the whole fraternity and brood of thy Father, not this or that brother. O do thou in the choice of thy familiars, look over those natural or civil ex∣cellencies, which ininite wisdom bestoweth onely up∣on some, and mind chiefly that super-natural quality, which is truly praise-worthy, and inherent in all. Thy God hath chosen the poor of the World, and he is no respecter of persons. O do thou follow his honourable pattern, and let the poor, the mean, the lowest members of Christ be lovely and amiable in thine eye. Choose godliness in all, and then thou wilt refuse none, but choose all that are godly. Though the holiness of some be but as the smoaking flax, do not thou choak but cherish it. Lord,Mat. 18. 6. Rom. 14. 1. thou hast a tender respect for thy little children and babes in Christ; it is thy pleasure that thy little ones should not be offended, tht such as are weak in the faith, should be received; cause thy servant to love all thy Saints, and to be able to say, with that man after hine own heart, I am a Compani∣on of all that fear thee, and keep thy Satutes, Psa. 119. 63. I Wish that my end in the Choice of my Compa∣nions may be principally to further my own,The end must be good. and their everlasting peace. If I use any company upon other accounts, I frustrate my God, I cozen my own soul; For me and others to unite in sin, would be a conspiracy against Heaven, and too lively a resemblance of those Governours of Hell, whose only work is to draw others to, and to encourage them in wickedness. For us to joyn in gratifying the flesh, and purveying for our appetites, and passing away the time, that it may be less tedious, would
be a confederacy against the Spirit, and but a more cleanly and neat acting of the part of Beasts, who understand no other happiness, then to feed and sport together; For us to accompany onely about worldly imployments, to get an insight into commodities, and callings, that we might be wiser to buy and sell, or to hear and tell news, this would become a Turk, and were but a cutting [time] the most precious com∣modity of all to waste. For us to associate, barely to increase our knowledge, and widen the windows of our understandings, or to quicken and raise our fancies, and enlarge our natural parts and endow∣ments, even this would be but a transcript of the lives of the most refined Heathen, who were igno∣rant of the true weight and worth of eternal con∣cernments; But to meet together as Christ did with his Apostles, to discourse about the things apper∣taining to the Kingdom of God, to provoke one another to love, and to good works, to admonish, advise, encourage, and comfort, and to build up one another in the most holy faith, this is a work worthy of a Christian, and becoming them that are called to be Saints. O that my Gods end may be much in my mind, when I converse with any of his chosen, that all our conjunctions may be fruitful in holiness; Christians are choice Tutors, and rare Masters, by whom many precious things may be learned; my God hath lent them me for a little while, and intendeth shortly to send for them home; why should I loyter or trifle with them, when such excellent Lessons are given me by them! Lord, I know within a few days I shall be deprived of these and all other helps; O help thy most unworthy crea∣ture,
in that little time that he doth enjoy them, to make the most, the best improvement of them, to love them as my own soul, and to do them the greatest service I can; enable both them and me to be fellow-workers, and fellow-helpers unto thy Kingdom, that when we come thither, they may bless thee for me, and I may bless thee for them, and all of us may bless thee for thy dear Son, and thy blessed self, for ever and ever. Finally, I Wish that I, who am a Pilgrim and stranger in this earth, may joyn my self not with the natives, the men of the World, whose por∣tion is in this life, by whose company I am sure to contract either guilt or greif, but with my fellow sojourners, who are travailing with me towards the same Heaven. Though I love the wicked with a love of pity, I would love onely the Saints with a love of delight. Let my choice be of them now, with whom I would choose to be for ever. O let me joyn with those on earth, and that in discoursing of thy gracious word, and glorious works, with whom I hope to joyn in Heaven, in admiring thy boundless perfections, and giving thee everlasting praise. Lord, if there be such comfort in thy chosen, and their voices be so lovely, and their faces so comely here below in the estate of their minority, when they are black with the worlds calumnies and cruelties, and besmeared with their own corruptions, what de∣light will there be in them above, when they shall come to their full age, be parted from all their de∣filements, and be perfectly adorned with thine I∣mage? How lovely will their voices be, when they shall joyn with thy Celestial quire, in singing Hal∣lelUjahs,
and in running division on thine infinite attributes and excellencies? How comely will their faces be, when they shall be freed from all the freckles and spots of sin, and so see thee, as to be fully like thee? O if grace in its infancy be so ravishing, what will it be in its maturity? If the morning of holiness be so glorious, how glori∣ous will it be in its noon-day lustre? Lord, if my soul rejoyce so much in thy Saints, who shine onely as stars, in their several Orbes, with a bor∣rowed light, what joy may I have in thy self, the true Sun? O cause thy servant so to glorifie thee in my choice of Companions, and in my carriage in all Companies, that I may come at last to enjoy im∣mediate communion with thy beautiful Saints, and thy blessed Majesty, World without end, Amen. CHAP. III. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godli∣ness, in evil Company. Malorum con∣sortia fugere debemus, quoad privatam con∣suetudinem, non quoad pub∣licam conver∣sationem; corde, non corpore, Amb. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 20.HAving spoken to the Choice of Compa∣nions; I proceed (Reader) to thy Car∣riage in Company, and first in evil Company. Though evil men are not to be the object of a Christians choice or delight, yet he must some∣times fall into their Company, or go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5. 10. Our Relations, or Vocations,
or Offices of Charity, which we owe to the worst of men, will command our presence now and then amongst them; Civil commerce with them is lawfl, though intimate communion be sinful. Its certain, the less we have of their society, the more of safety; but because civility, and our ne∣cessities require us sometimes to be with them,A malis corde semper disjun∣gimini, ad tem∣pas caute cor∣pore copule∣mini. Aug. l. de Salut. do∣cument. Christianity must help us (as a glass-window, to let in the light, and keep out the rain,) to get what good we may, and to prevent the hurt they intend. God in the first creation separated the light from the darkness, and so must the god∣ly man amongst wicked persons. Swine will be cleanly in a fair Meadow; Sinners civil sometime in the society of Saints; but Christians must keep their garments unspotted, when they walk in dirty places, and amongst defiled persons. God∣liness will be thy best armour to ward off those blows, and hinder those wounds, which those sons of violence and villany would cause in thee. A wise Physitian, whatsoever diseased Patients he goeth amongst, will take some preservative, but if he be to go into a Pest-house, an Antidote. It will be a sign of an excellent complexion, if thou canst walk (as occasion is) in the Sun, and not be tanned. The Romans had a Law, that every one, where ever he went, should wear a badge of his profession, or trade, either on his garment, or in his hat, that he might be known. Christia∣nity must be owned in every company, as that which is our great and worthy calling. The No∣bleman carrieth his Garter, or George with him in all places, because he esteems them his gory
and honour, and if he be of the blood royal, he desireth that all may take notice of it. O what an honour and happiness is it to be a Christian, to be related to Iesus Christ, and how willing shouldst thou be to own and acknowledge it as the badge of thine honour, amongst all persons He is a base servant that is ashamed of his Lords livery. Its said of the Teal, a certain wild Beast i AEthiopia,Plin. Nat. ist. l. 8. c. 21. that he hath two hornes of a Cubit long, which he moveth as he pleaseth, either both for∣ward to offend his enemy, or both backward to de∣fend himself, or one forward, and the other back∣ward to both uses at once. A Christian in evil company should be as wise as a Serpent, that he do not bring himself into suffering, but yet as innocent as a Dove, that others do not draw him to sin. Walk as prudently as thou canst, onely walk piously. Use as much caution as thou wilt, but be sure thou keepest a good conscience. The Apostle gives a special precept for our pious carriage in such Company, Walk wisely to∣wards them that are without, Col. 4. 5. In which words the qualification of the act, and the specifi∣cation of the subject are considerable. 1. The qualification of the act, walk wisely, that is, graciously, Grace is Wisdom. To fear God is wisdom, and to depart from evil is under∣standing; He who walketh in the Law of the Lord, and according to the rule of the word, is the wise walker, Job 28. 28. Psa. 119. 1. Gal. 16. 16. Whatsoever our company be, we must walk by precept, not by pattern; He may be a good Cour∣tier, but he is a bad Christian; that alters and or∣ders
his carriage according to his company; If like Musicians, we play no lessons, but what the company calls for, and what pleaseth them, our musick will be harsh and jarring in Gods ears; If I please men, saith Paul, I am not the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. He walks foolishly, that to please a few weak dying Men, displeaseth the jealous and Almighty God; He walks wisely, who will be sure who ever be offended, to please him, upon whose favour his life and all his comforts depend. 2. The specification of the Subject; towards them that are without. Wicked men are said to be without; 1. Because they are visibly without the Church; scandalous sinners proclaim to the world, that they are not so much as visible members of Christ. What have I to do, to judge them that are with∣out? Do not ye judge them that are within? but them that are without God judgeth, 1 Corinth. 5. 12, 13. 2. Because they are really without God and Christ; God may be in their mouths, and they may call him Father, but he is far from their hearts, and will never own them fo his Children; That at that time ye were without Christ, and with out God in the world, Ephes. 2. 12. 3. Because they shall go at last without Heaven. This followeth from the former; They being visibly without the Church, and really without God and Christ, must needs be without Heaven. Without are Dogs, Children onely are within doors, Rev. 22. 15. Luk. 13. 25. The manner of the A∣postles
expression is worth our observation, he saith not, Walk with them; No, they ought not to be our Companions, but walk wisely towards them; Let them be the object of your caution; as if he had said, I know your callings, or relations, or some occasions or other will bring you into the Com∣pany of many that are not Members of the Church Militant, and shall be excluded the Church Trium∣phant; but take heed to your selves, that ye keep good consciences in such company, that ye defile not your own souls, by being partaker of their sins; be watchful that ye give no offence to them, and that ye take no infection from them. Walk wisely towards them that are without. SECT. I. FRiend, to quicken thee to the greater caution, I shall offer thee these two thoughts. First, Consider that evil Company is very infecti∣ous;Motve. Evil Compa∣ny is infecti∣ous. Wicked men like the Crocodile, slime the way to make thee fall, and when thou art down suck out (as it were) thy blood, and with it, fatten their insulting envy. Thy experience tells thee, that they are industrious to make men wicked and wretched. Such is the corruption of our nature, and the nature of our corruption, that we are sooner polluted by the wicked, then they purified and amended by us; as the good Corn is rather soiled by the bad, then the smutty made bright by the good. The fresh waters run into the Sea, yet they do not sweeten, but are made brackish by it. Our sinful hearts, as Onions, if there be any infection in the
room, are apt to draw all to themselves; We may hope to save them, when they may destroy us. How many have leaped into the waters to save others from drowning, and been drowned with them? Wholesom Planets, if in conjunction with those that are malevolent, are of bad influence; Its recorded by the Holy Ghost, concerning the Israelites, They were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their ways, Psa. 106. 35. They who joyn with wicked persons, are prone to learn their wicked practices; Evil men are as Mildew to the good Corn, which makes it black. Its an encou∣ragement to men, to walk in bad and by-ways, when they have Company with them. Sinners are compared to dust, that breeds vermine in houses; to Sepulchres, which send forth noisom vapours; and to thorns and briars, that pierce and pain such as meddle with them; can they be too wary then that handle them? Luk. 15. 8. Rom. 3. 13. Heb. 6. 8. The Owl is a Night bird, and altogether for darkness, but they that Hawk for Birds, make a Stale of her, and whilst the silly Birds are won∣dering at her, catch and kill them. The Divel, who makes it his work to take and destroy souls,Melius est, ha¦bere malorum odium quam onotium. Siut ona muta habet ommunis vita sanctorum, sic plurma mala affet societas malorum. Isi∣odor. l. 2. Solil. doth often make use of ungodly men as Stales to fur∣ther his defignes. Sampson was too hard for the Philistines when they opposed him by force, but when they procured Delilah, a wicked companion to tempt him, by that fraud they prevailed against him. The reason (according to some) why our Saviour forbad the Disciple to go and bury his Fa∣ther was (not out of aversness to civil, much-less to natural respect, but) left his corrupt Kindred,
who might be present at the Funeral, should cor∣rupt him again, and so he should dye with them. When the Raven went out of the Ark, it retur∣ned not again, meeting (as is supposed) with some dead carcasses by the way. The Caprimulgus or Goat-sucker,Arist. Hist. Am. l. 6. c. 19. flieth upon the Goats and sucketh them, that their milk drieth up, and they are af∣terwards blind. I write these things Reader, to make thee more careful in such company. If thou wouldst keep thy graces lively and flaming a∣mongst such damps, and waters of wickedness, thy watchfulness must be more then ordinary; The more stones lie in thy way, the greater must thy caution be if thou wouldst not stumble. A Common Pilot may serve in a Calm Sea, but he that would steer a Vessel right in a Tempestuous Ocean, amidst Rocks and Quick-sands, had need to be eminent both for skill and care. Secondly, Consider it is possible for thee, not onely to keep thy self from waxing worse, but to be the better for evil company. I speak not this to encourage thee to cast thy self into temptations, but to qicken thee to the more care, when God calleth thee among them. The Weesel is an un∣clean creature, and many ways hurtul, yet it de∣voureth Mice (whence its named in Latine Mustela) and so is usefl. Unclean sinners, that are inten∣tionally pernicious, may be providentially profitable to the Saints. Some creatures can draw nourish∣ment from hard bones; A Saint may suck honey out of dry and bitter herbs. The wise God would not send evil things (as afflictions) but for the good of his chosen, nor suffer evil persons, but for
their profit. Pluck not up the Tares, lest the Wheat be pulled up also, Math. 13. The good Husband∣man makes an hedge of unfruitful Plants, as Briars and Crab trees, and other barren Trees, to de∣fend the Vineyard from Cattel, and the good Trees in it from harm; The Lyon, as cruel as he was, defended the old Prophets body. God left some Canaanites amongst the Iews, lest the Beasts of the Field should over-run the Country, Exod. 23. 29. God leaves some wicked ones amongst his chosen in this World, to keep under their brutish lusts, which otherwise might undo them. The Lees are helpful to preserve the Wine; and the Chaff is useful to preserve the Corn; Vermine are good against the Iaundise; The Taunts and Scoffs of evil men, have sometimes been instrumental to cure good men of their spiritual diseases; The Sword of an enemy may let out thy rank blood; Iason had his Imposthume opened, and so healed, by a blow that he received in the Wars from his enemies, which his friends the Physitians could not cure. Those tongues which have been as sharp as Razors, piercing the Christians good Name, have proved instrumental to heal their depraved natures; The more the wicked twit thee with thy weak∣nesses, the more they may quicken thee to watch∣fulness. Thou wantest (possibly) a faithful friend to admonish thee, therefore God sendeth thee furious enemies to cast thy falts in thy teeth, and if now thou dischargest thy duty,Sicut amici a∣dulantes per∣vertunt, sic inimici liti∣gantes ple∣run{que} corri∣gant. Aug. Confess. 9. thou mayst hope that their malice shall be a Medicine to increase thine inward health and welfare. A Fool loseth the im∣provement of his Friends, but a Wise man can make
an advantage of his enemies. As the Herb called Ros Solis, though the heat of the Sun lye upon it all day, yet the hotter the Sun is, the moyster it is; So the Christian is the more softned and tender, when others are hardened, and bitter against god∣liness. SECT. II. I Proceed now, to shew wherein the Exercise of Godliness in evil Company consisteth. First, if thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godli∣ness in evil society, Labour to keep thy self unspotted from their sins: Ungodly men are called filthy, and compared to Swine, that are apt to defile all that have to do with them; They (as the Night) are dark and full of unwholsom vapours; it concerns thee therefore to be well fenced, that thy spiritual health may not be impared by them. Be careful that they hurt thee not either inwardly or outwardly. Thou art in a double danger amongst sinners; thou art in danger of having thy soul wounded, and also of having thy name and estate blasted. There is a necessity therefore of a double guard; of a guard upon thy soul, that it may not be wronged, and of a guard upon thy tongue, that thy outward comforts may not be ruined. I say, 1. Be watchful over thy soul, that thou contractest no guilt. Its hard to be near those that are dirty and defiled, and yet to keep our Garments unspot∣ted and clean. Wicked men as Diers and Painters, who use colours, are usually besmeared themselves in their hands and habits, and they also besmear others. The Lake of Sodom is called Asphaltides,
or the Dead Sea, because of the venemous vapours which arise out of it, insomuch that Birds which flye over it, fall down dead, and beasts that drink of it sicken and dye. Some men have found evil soci∣ety as poisonous to their souls, as brutes have found the Dead Sea to their bodies. Pope Nicholas the thirds Concubine, by looking on a Bear frequently, was brought abed of a Monster. Thy frequent vision of their wicked actions, may cause too great a likeness in thy conversation. But the Saint should resemble the Carbuncle, which being cast into the fire, is nowhit defiled or impaired thereby, but therein shines most brightly; If it be closed fast (say some) in a ring of Lead, and cast into the fire, we may see the Lead molten, but the Carbun∣cle not so much as mollified, or in the least ble∣mished Thy watchfulness (friend) must be great, if thou wouldst keep thy self unspotted from the World, Jam. 1. ult. Rust will fret into the hardest steel, but not into the Emerald; Sin will fid speedy ac∣ceptance with a prophane sinner, but not with a preciou Saint. Ioseph kept his Chastity, though often in the company of his wanton Mistress; Lot did not lose his sanctity, though he dwelt amongst ungodly Sodomites; The Arch-Angel disputed with the Arch-Divel, yet was not infected by his poiso∣nous breath; Satan did set upon the blessed Savi∣our, but could not fasten the least sin upon him. Naturalists tell us, that the Diamond if true, will lie in the ire and not consume; the Herb Narcissus, or Yellow Crowbellies, flowreth in February, and keepeth its Flower under the Snow. The Olive
Tree, in the midst of the Flood, kept its branches green. The Christian ought so to converse with the wicked, that his grace may neither waste, nor his conscience be wounded. Thy Duty is, as Cloaths well dyed, to keep thy colour in all Weathers; and as a good constitution, to retain thy spiritual health, in the most unwholsome Aires. The Apostle writes to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Not to company with any that are called brethren, and are fornica∣tors, or covetous, or idolaters, or railers, or drunk∣ards, or extortioners.Idem in 2 Thes. 3. 14. . Ne Commer∣cium hbete. Beza. Ne Commisea∣mni. Vulg. The word in the Original is , both in the 9, and 11. verse, which signifieth, not to mingle with them. They may be amongst them, but they may not mingle with them; that which mingleth with any filthy thing, receiveth of its filth, and though it were pure before, is pol∣luted thereby; The people of God ought not in this sense to mingle with the world, but to keep themselves, though not untoucht, yet untainted. Its storied that the Rivers of Peru,Abbots Geogr run into the main Sea, twenty or thirty miles, and yet are not mingled with the Sea, but continue fresh water; So the River Rodanus, is said to run purely through the Lake Lemanus without mixture of waters;Cambd. Britt. Its also reported of the River Dee in Merionithshire in Wales, that running through Pimbe Meer, it remaineth entire, and mingleth not with the wa∣ters of the Lake. Thus should the people of God, those Chrystal streams (though they are necessita∣ted sometimes to meet with,) keep themselves en∣tire, and not mingle with the puddle water of unclean persons. Pliny reports of a Family near Rome, that could walk on live coals and not be
burnt. Its honourable to keep thy self pure among them that are evangelically perfect; but to preserve thy self from pollution amongst them that are pro∣phane, is Heroical; Its the excellency of a Christian, to hold on his course without slipping or falling, when many rubs and hinderances are laid in his way; And its the glory of grace, to keep its beauty and lustre, notwithstanding the attempts of the World, and the Wicked one to soil it. It was a notable speech of the Souldier that Erasmus speaks of, who being told of a numerous Army coming against him, answered, Tanto plus gloriae referemus, quanto sunt plures quos superabimus; The more famous our opposi∣tion, the more illustrious our Conquest; That Great Commander had never been so renowned, if he had not eaten his way over the Alpes, that were sup∣posed inaccessible. The greater our difficulties, and the more greivous our enemies, the greater our va∣lour, and the more glorious our victory. That ex∣pression concerning Asia, hath some worth, Though it be no praise, never to have seen it; yet to have lived soberly and temperately in it, is praise-worthy in∣deed. The Holy Ghost giveth thee wholsom counsel, Be not partaker of other mens sins, keep thy self pure, 1 Tim. 5. 22. It may be Reader, thou art called sometimes amongst Swearing, Drunken, and Un∣godly persons; Well, thou art in more danger then in a Pest-house; therefore look well to thy self; Satan thinks, though he could not conquer thee amongst the Saints, that now he hath caught thee amongst a Company of venemous Serpents, one or other of them will sting thee, and then he hope
to overthrow thee; Watch thy self narrowly, if thou wouldst be safe; Be not partaker of other mens sins; It may be as bad to have communion with others sins; as to commit sin in thy own person; He that is Surety for another, is as liable to the debt as the Principal, and we count him most foolish that takes anothers debt upon himself. In∣deed, Satan hath this for his comfort, that here∣by he hath the more in bonds to the Laws Curse. Three ways thou mayst partake of those sins which are committed in thy Company. I shall not speak of thy commanding men to sin; so David was guilty of Vriahs death, though the Sword of the Ammonites slew him,  Sam. 12. 3. Nor of coun∣selling men to sin; so Ionacia was guilty of Ammons incest, 2 Sam. 16. 21. Nor of comending others for sin; so a man may be accessory  the fact, Rom. 1. 32. Psa. 10. 9. Nor of setting others a bad ex∣ample; so Ieroboam was guilty of the Idolatry of the Iews; but of those ways, whereby Christians are usually guilty of others sins, when they are amongst the wicked. 1. By Compliance; If when thou seest or hearest others sin, thou dost inwardly approve it, thou art partaker of it. He that consents, though but in his thoughts to anothers fraud, is before God a Felon. Paul before his conversion, was consenting to the death of the Protomartyr, Act. 8. 1. and after his conversion, he pleads guilty of the Murder, Act. 22. 20. It may be Reader, when thou hearest lascivious stories, or sinful witty jestings, or tales of slie subtile cheats, or the like, thou dost secretly applaud and approve them; I tell thee thou art par∣taker
of them; If thou hast an heart in the sin, thou hast an hand in the sin; Thy affecting it, makes thee as really guilty, as if thou didst act it. Nay, I must tell thee, the greatest guilt ariseth from the fullest consent of the Will. Its possible for the approver to be more guilty then the actor. 2. By Silence, or not reproving sin. A man may sin by speaking, and he may sin by silence. This si∣lence, when sin is comited, speaks thy consent to it. It was a speech , That he had often repented of speaking, but never of holding his peace; but there is a sinful holding the peace, as well as a sinful speaking; Its bad to hold the breath long. Nicodemus, though he was at first fearful,Consnire est sile em ar∣guere pssis, Bernard. and wore the badge of his profession under his cloak (out of sight) yet when he was amongst the enemies of Christ, he took courage, and would not by his silence betray his Saviour, and wrong his own soul, Ioh. 7. 50, 51. Its a sign of little love, to see men wounding by Oaths and Blasphemies, or Scoffs and Jears our best friend, and not to wish them to forbear, and do our utmost to take them off. Dion writes of Severus, that he was careful what he did, but careless what he heard; but the good Christian is careful of the latter, as well as the for∣mer; knowing that sin may enter in at that Case∣ment, and remembring that the Cannon Bullet which split the Vessel, in which all the hopes of mankind were embarqued, was shot in at that Port-hole. The Crocodile, because he hath no use of a tongue, living always in the waters, hath none; but God hath given Man a tongue, and calls it his glory, Psa. 16. 9. with Act. 2. 26. partly
because speech is one thing, wherein men excel Beasts; Brute creatures can make a noise, but man onely articulate his voice, partly because it is given him to glorifie God withal; It is pity he should ever open his lips, whose mouth will not shew forth Gods praise. Thou canst usually no way better clear thy self, then by condemning the sin to the very face of the sinner. As the World thinks of God when he is silent, and doth not destroy them with the breath of his mouth; so the wicked think of the godly, when they are silent and do not open their mouths to reprove them; These things thou didst, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, Psa. 50. 21. Silence in the presence of sin, implyeth a liking of it; though thou sayst not Euge (saith Austin) yet if thou sayst not Apage,Aug. in Mat. 16. there is a mutual approbati∣on; Nay, he goeth farther and saith, Pejor es tacen∣do quam ille convitiando, thy silence is more dange∣rous to thee then his sin to him. But I shall speak more largely to this duty of reproving, before I con∣clude this Chapter. 3. Thou mayst be partaker of others sins, by Pro∣voking them to sin. Our Lord is said to be crucifi∣ed at Rome, Rev. 11. 8. because he was sentenced by a Roman Iudge, executed by Roman Souldiers, and put to death by authority of the Roman Empire; yet the Murder of Christ is all along in Scripture charged on the Iews. Peter preaching to them saith, whom by wicked hands ye have taken and slain; and Stephen expresly, Of whom ye have been the Betray∣ers and Murderers; because, though the Execution of it was from the Romans, yet the Provocation to
it, was from the Iews, Act. 2. 23. and 7. 52. That which is committed by our Instigation, is ours by just Imputation. I fear many good men are parta∣kers of others sins in this sense, either by stirring up others that are passionate to anger, or by inciting some that have been guilty of handsom (in the worlds judgment) cheats, to relate and boast of them; For its little difference whether men hold the sack open, or fill it, both are guilty. SECT. III. SEcondly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness in evil Company, Do not needlesly ex∣pose thy self to sufferings; He is but a fool, that will lay his life in anothers lap without a call; Christ did not commit himself to the Iews, because he knew their hearts; and we are not lightly to commit our selves to any, because we know not their hearts. Set a watch before thy tongue, lest it make thy throat thy Sepulchre, a Grave to bury thy estate and out∣ward comforts in. Its a sin in many Christians, that they know not when to be silent. The wise man tels us, there is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence, Eccles. 3.7. This is a great part of Christi∣an prudence, to understand when to keep silence; Its much harder to learn to be silent, then to learn to speak. Though we must not as some Turks, be always dumb (perpetuum silentium tenent ut muti) yet we ought sometimes to hold our breath in. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence, for it is an evil time, Amos 5. 13.
1. Their cross was weighty; It was an evil time,Non turbatur navis quae Petrum habebat, sed turbatur lla que Iudam habebat; et∣si multa illorum discipulo∣rum merita naufragabant, tamen adhuc perfidia prodi∣toris agitabatur; in utraque Ptrus; sd qui suis meritis fimus est, turbatur alienis. Caveamus igitur perfidum, Caveamus proditorem, ne per unm plurimi fluctuemus. Amb. super. Luc. lib. 4. a time of much danger and difficulty; Sin abounded, Sinners were enraged, God was provoked, and the Godly oppressed. 2. Their carriage was wise; They shall keep silence. The words may have a two fold ex∣position; 1. If they be taken in relation to God (as some think) they speak the patient sub∣mission of the faithful, in that evil day, to the divine providence and pleasure. 2. If they be taken in relation to men (as others expound them) they speak the prudent conversation of the gracious in that day of persecution; they shall not causlesly throw themselves into greater mi∣series, but shall keep all due silence to avoid need∣less sufferings. Indeed thy care must be to own Christ ever, and to profess him publiquely when thou art called to it; but as thy policy should not eat up thy zeal, so thy zeal must not eat up thy wisdom; I would not discourage thee from con∣fessing the Lord Jesus; yet I must tell thee that thou art not bound to proclaim in all companies, of what judgement thou art, nor what Church Go∣vernment thou wouldst choose, not what society thou meetest in, &c. Nay, thou art bound to the con∣trary. He that hath a good mixture of zeal and prudence, is like a fire on the hearth, of much use and service; but zeal without discretion, is like fire on the top of the Chimney, which often doth much mischief. Zeal to a Christian is like an high Wind lling the sails of a Ship, which unless it be ballasted with discretion, doth but the sooner over∣turn
it. Abdias a Bishop, raised a dreadful storm of persecution by his intemperate zeal; I doubt not but the whole company of beleivers in some Na∣tions, have suffered through the indiscreet heats of some particular persons. Zeal in a man, is like wings to a Bird, or mettle to an Horse; but the bridle of discretion is requisite, as the Poes fable that Minerva put a golden bridle on Pegasus, lest he should flie too fast. Bernard hath a good saying, Discretion without Zeal is slow-paced, and Zeal with∣out Discretion is heady; let therefore Zeal, spur on discretion, and Discretion rein in Zeal. Paul was full of heavenly fire; its said of him, when he came to Athens and beheld their Idolatry, that his spirit  was stirred within him, Act. 17. 16. yet it is worthy our observation, though he preached much against Idols in general, yet he pleads not at all against Diana in particular, the Goddess of whom the Athenians were so foolishly fond; his zeal moved him to oppose Idolatry to his power; but his prudence directed him to forbear particular invectives against Diana, and to do it in such a way as might be (in probability) most profi∣table for them, and least dangerous to himself; The rash zeal of some godly persons, hath set others at a further distance from piety. When every unskilful Phaeton takes upon him to drive the Chariot of the Sun, tis no wonder that the whole World be in a flame. Geese (say some) when they flie over Taurus, keep stones in their mouths, lest by their gagling they should discover themselves to the Eagles which are amongst the Mountains, waiting there to take
them. It were well for some persons, if they could keep their mouths with a Bridle, whilst the wicked are amongst them, who wait and watch to destroy them. Reader; I would be understood rightly, I do not intend by any thing I have writen, to incite thee to take all courses, good or bad, to avoid suffe∣ring, but to diswade thee from bringing thy self in∣to suffering; Grace may teach thee not to choose sin, and both grace and nature teach thee not to choose suffering; Follow the Lamb wherever he goeth, and whithersoever he calleth thee; but take heed of going before him, lest he leave thee to suffer at thy own charges; He that will take a Bear by the Tooth, or a Mad Dog by the Ear, may thank himself if he be well bitten. Its too ordinary for some Christians, when wicked men give them a few good words, and pretend a little good-will, to open their minds fully and freely to them, even to the hazard of their own liberties and lives; but such do not consider the Counsel which God gives them; Trust ye not in a friend (muchless in an enemy, as every wicked man is to the godly) put ye not confidence in a Guide (though he may be full of power, and policy, and promises) keep the door of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosome, (lest as Sampsons Wife, she tell all to thy undoing) Mich. 7. 5. Every smooth face, and smiling counte∣nance, is not to be trusted; Kisses do sometimes betray us. When the tongues of some cry Ave, they threaten a Vae, saith Austin. They come (Psa. 118. 12.) about me like Bees, with honey in their mouths and a sting in their tails; As Butchers, they claw
the Ox about the ribs, that they may have the fairer blow at his head; The Pellican swalloweth shell-fish, and warmeth them in her stomach, but it is to make them gape, that she may pick them out of the shels (where they are safe whilst they are shut) and devour them. Thus some ungodly men frequently warm Christians with fltteries, to make them ( according to Aristophanes expression of a fool) Gapers, and to utter all they know and think; that they may make a prey of them. Friend, Do not onely look on wicked men as gins to intangle thy soul, but also as snares to intrap thy livelihood and life. It was the complaint of Luther, A fal∣sis amicis plus est mihi periculi quam a toto Papatu, That he was in more danger by reason of false friends, then by the Pope and all his Hierarchy. As Conies, those unclean creatures, are dangerous about the places where they lurk; The Island Majorica was over∣thrown (according to Historians) by the digging of Conies; So unlean men, even by their crouching under thee, may undermine and overthrow thee. Consider their hatred of thee (notwithstanding all their shew of love) is real and inward; and of all wounds, those which rancle inwardly are most to be feared. The Devil confest Christ, yet hated him to the death; and his children do all take af∣ter him. Its aid of Antoninus Geta, that he would always shew most love, where he intended to be∣reave of life; therefore men were more afraid of his favour, then of his anger. Antigonus kept a Priest on purpose to pray and offer up sacrifice to the gods, that they would preserve him from his seem∣ing friends. There may be some profit of that Ita∣lian
Proverb, The Lord deliver us from our friends, we will watch our selves over our enemies, that they do not hurt us. Solomon gives thee a good caution, in his Character of a fool and a wise man; A Fool uttereth all his mind, but a Wise Man keepeth it in till afterwards, Prov. 29. 11. And those words of Hugo Victorinus have much weight in them, and are somewhat near Solomons,Est tempus quando nihil, est tempus quando ali∣quid, nullum autem tempus in quo dicenda sunt omnia. There is a time when nothing is to be spoken, there is a time when something, but no time when all things are to be spoken. Espe∣cially if thou hast found a man false once, beware of him the second time; He deserves to break his shins, that stumbleth twice at one stone. That Pro∣verb of the Italians is worthy of consideration; If a man deceive me once, it is his own fault; if a se∣cond time, it is my fault; He had need to sit sure, who backs that Horse which hath once cast his Rider. Thirdly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness in evil company, Be sure thou dost not disown thy profession, and deny Iesus Christ. Though it behoveth thee to walk wisely, because sinners lye in wait to destroy thy life; yet be careful thou dost not walk wickedly, for sin lyeth in wait to de∣stroy thy soul. It may consist with grace, not al∣ways openly to proclaim thy profession, yet is a graceless part at any time to deny it. Twas a blot to Nicodemus, that he was a Night-bird. If the honour of Christ be engaged, and by thy silence the Gospel will suffer, then not to publish what thou art, is a sin. The light of Religion ought not to be carried in a Dark Lanthorn, and to be shewn onely, when thy own interest will permit, and
at other times to be hid; Christ tells us, Whooever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 10. 33. Not to confess Christ openly when thou art called to it, is to deny him. And expect the same measure from Christ in the other world, which thou givest to him in this; How justly will he be disowned for a ser∣vant hereafter, that was ashamed to own so Noble a Master here? And how dreadful will his condi∣tion be, whom Christ shall deny before his Father! All thy happiness depends upon his confessing thee; If he disclaim thee, Divels will lay claim to thee, and theirs thou shalt be for ever. It concerns thee therefore to confess Christ, how dear soever it may cost, and to own Religion in all companies; for thou mayst truly say what an honest man did (being occasionally in a Pyrates Ship when twas searcht, and the Pyrates cryed out, Wo be to us if we be known, (he said) Wo be to me if I be not known. There are a sort of men, that like Mercury, the Good-fellow Planet, are according to their company, good if with the good, bad if in conjunction with bad; but the true Christian hath not so learned Christ. He who like the Mariner, changeth his course upon the change of the weather, is but an unsound Profes∣sour. We read of some that feared the Lord, and served graven Images, 2 King. 17. 41. They divi∣ded themselves between the true God and Idols; As the Jewish Children, which spake half Hebrew, and half in the language of Ashdod, (Nehem. 13. 24.) and as some Gentlemen that speak Italian, when they are amongst Italians; French amongst French men; and order their language answerable to their
associates. So some that would be called Christi∣ans, change themselves both for words and deeds, into the nature of their Companions. Amongst the godly they own God, but amongst the wicked they deny him; They alter their colour as the Sole (say Naturalists) according to that which is nearest, and expose the Name of God, rather then their own, to contempt. Beza saith of Baldwinus, that he had, Religionem ephemeram, A Religion for every day; Some men have a deportment sutable to all with whom they converse, resembling such as are sinful, and dissembling with them that are holy. These are either ashamed or afraid of Christ, both which are unreasonable. 1. Some will not own him out of shame, though he be the glory of his people Israel; The Paint of wo∣men in some Countries, is the Dung of the Croco∣dile, and their sweet powder the excrement of a Cat; yet people can esteem these their honour; The Drunkard can boast of his strength to drink; The cunning Cheat of his deceitful doings; And alas many Christians are ashamed of Christ. O how unworthy is it, that wicked men should glory in their shame, and good men be ashamed of their glory! that the scum of Hell should be prided in, and the Soveraign of Heaven be esteemed a disgrace! that some should with brows of brass, boast of the ugly Monster, begotten of Satan; and others not dare to own the fairest of ten thousands, and the onely begotten of the Father! Its reported of Ari∣stotles Daughter, that being asked what colour was best, she should answer the blush colour; Diogenes was wont to say, that Blushing was the colour of
vertue. How ever this colour may be commenda∣ble on other occasions, its abominable in the cause of Christ; David saith, I will speak of thy judge∣ments before Kings, and will not be ashamed, Psa. 119. 46. Neither the greatness of their power, nor the brightness of their splendour, shall make me bash∣ful and ashamed to own thee. Shame doth excel∣lently become sin, but its wholly unbecoming the blessed Saviour, Rom. 6. 21. Mark. 8. 38. 2. Some will not own Christ out of fear; As an Owl peeps at the Sun out of a Brn, but dares not come near it; So some peep at the Sun of righ∣teousness, but stand aloof, as if they were more afraid to be nigh God then the Devil; This made Peter deny his Master; How daunted have many been, to look danger in the face; He who had sometimes courage enough, to take a Lion by the beard; lost his colour, and changed his behaviour before wicked Achish. Slavish fear is a great foe to Godliness;Arst. Hist. Anim. . 2. c. 1 The Great Philosopher gives this reason why the Came∣lion changeth colour so frequently; he being a fearful creature, swelleth by drawing in the air, hereby his skin is pent in and made smooth, and more apt to receive the colour of those objects that are next him. They who are fearful of suffering, will easily if their compa∣ny require it, change their colour, and disown their Saviour. Timerous creatures will run into any unclean places for shelter, when a magnanimous spirit in a good cause will defie death it self. He who fears his skin, is no friend to his soul, but will defile the latter to defend the former. Fear surprising the heart, takes it away, and makes the Christian weak; and then 'tis no wonder if the smallest blow conquer him, and
like a Reed he bend with the least blast of wind; but how unreasonable is it that any should be afraid to own the blessed Saviour, when in sticking close to him is their only safety! Nothing can hurt thee but sin, tis that alone which exposeth thee to in∣juries and miseries; if thou fearest that, thou nee∣dest fear nothing else. What a foolish bargain dost thou make, by denying Christ to make wick∣ed and weak men thy seeming friends, and the jealous God thy real enemy? Is not he distracted, who to avoid the scratch of a pin, layeth himself open to the shatering of a Cannon? And art thou not worse, if to avoid the fury of poor Mor∣tals, thou incurrest the wrath of the Almighty? Remember that the fearful are the first in the black list for the eternal fire, Rev. 21. 8. and do not play the Coward as Furius Fulvius, to sound a retreat, when thou shouldst as a man of courage sound an Alarm. The Mulberry tree is esteemed the wisest of all Trees, because it onely bringeth forth its leaves after the cold frosts be past; but in Christi∣anity he is a fool, who dares not profess himself a Christian till dangers be over.Aug. Conf. l. 8. St. Austin in his Confessions, relates a story of one Victorinus, who being converted, because he had many great friends that were Heathens, durst not own Christ publiquely, but went to Simplicianus and whispered him in the ear, I am a Christian; but Simplicianus answered him, Vix credo, nec deputabo te inter Christianos, &c. I do not beleive it, nor will count thee a Christian, till I see thee profess it openly. Victorinus at first deri∣ded this answer, but afterwards considering the words of our Saviour, Mark 8. 38. he acknow∣ledged
it openly. It is very dangerous to walk in the dark. Saints are children of the light, and should have their light shining before others;Qui nescit dissimular, nescit regnare. Phil. Com. Lewis the eleventh of France, was better at carnal politicks, then real piety, who desired his Son might learn no more then this, He who cannot counterfeit, must not wear a Crown. SECT. IV. FOurthly, Labour to get some good by such as are evil; The precious stone Amyanthon, being cast into the fire, is made the more clear and pure; A skilful Naturalist, will make some use of the most venemous Hearbs and Serpents; A gracious person may improve the vilest sinners company to his own spiritual profit. As wicked men are helpful to the temporal good, so often to the eternal good of Gods people; Like Leaves, though they are no∣thing worth in themselves, yet they keep the good fruit from blasting, and hereby are instrumental to its further Growth and Ripening. Ismenias the The∣ban Musitian, taught his Scholars, not onely by shewing them such as struck a clean stroak, with, Do so, but also by shewing them such as bungled at it, with, Do not so. Antigenidas thought men would like better, and contend the more for skil, if they heard untuneable notes. Satan intendeth wicked men as dirt and earth, onely to besmear and defile them, but God outshoots him in his own bow, and makes them as Fullers-earth, to purge and purifie them; As poisonous as they are in their own nature, through the Correctives of the Spirit, they
become not only not hurtful, but helpful to the be∣leiver. Ungodly men are compared to dung and filth, which we know, being applied to the good Trees, makes them more fruitful. That slime and mudde, which the overflowing of Nilus carrieh a∣long with it in the Summer Solftice, causeth Egypt to bring forth abundantly. The Graces of Saints have increased, even by the abominations and oppositi∣ons of sinners. Lots hatred of sin was the greater, by viewing the unclean conversations of the Sodo∣mites. The Serpent Tyrus, saith Brittenbacchus, is so venemous, that there is no remedy against its bitings, but by cutting off the member; yet even of this there is a Treacle made, which serveth for ex∣cellent purposes. Though the flesh of the Vulture (saith Pliny) be unwholsom and unmeet for meat, yet it is most medicinable; an Oyntment made of the fat of it, is specially strengthning to the sinews. Though ungodly men are ill food, and not fit to be our ordinary constant diet, yet they may be good Physick and profitable, when necessity compelleth us to use them. A deboice, lewd Master may teach a Scholar many good lessons; If God send us to School to the Beasts of the field, Job 12. 7. Ask the Beasts, and they shall teach thee; I know no reason but much good may be learned from these brutes in the shape of men. Some tell us that gold was extracted out of Ennius his dung. Thou mayst Reader, through the help of the Spirit, get that which is better then Gold, out of these noysom and loathsom persons. The smell of Trefoil, is often stronger in a moist and cloudy dark season, then in fair weather; So should the savour of a
Saints graces, be most fragrant amongst evil Com∣panions. 1. Let thy zeal be the more inflamed; zeal is the heat or intention of the afections; It is an holy warmth, whereby our love and anger are drawn out to the utmost for God and his glory; Now our love to God and his ways, and our hatred of wickedness should be encreased, because of ungodly men; cloudy and dark colours in a table, make those that are fresh and lively to appear more beautiful; others sins should make God and Godliness more amiable in thine eyes. Thy heart should take fire, by striking on such cold flints;Quemadmo∣dum siquis margaritam in luto concul∣cet, jus ampli∣us demonstrat pul hrtudi∣nem. Sic vir∣tus sanctorum, quomque eam projeeris, de∣clarat suum splendorem, in servitute, in carcere, in prosperitate. Chrys. Hom. 62. in Genes. David by an holy Antiperistasis, did kindle from others coldness, Psal. 119. 39. My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy word. Cold blasts make a fire to flame the higher, and burn he hotter: A true child hearing others speak faintly, is the more fervent in the commenda∣tion of his Father; Because the wicked forsake thy law; therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above much ine gold, Psa. 119. 127. Do others in thy presence declare their loathing of Gods precepts? do thou love them the more. Do they tram∣ple them under their feet? do thou prize them at the greater rate; Truly, the more they dishonou God by their swearing and scoffing at Godliness, the more reason thou hast to honour him. Phineas is Sainted in Gods Calendar, for being zealous in Gods Cause; as Varnish addeth a lustre to all co∣lours, and makes them amiable, so zeal addeth a beauty to all our services, and makes them the more acceptable. The Spirit of God works like fire, and if it dwell in thee, twill make thee fer∣vent
in Spirit. How little sign have they of their Saintships, who can hear sinners belch out their blasphemies against God, and tear the precious body of Christ in peices with Oaths, and yet are as sensless as stocks and stones as if they had no relation to God and Christ? The redeemed of the Lord are a zealous people. Tit. 2. 14. Thou art but false in thy profession of friendship, if thou canst behold others abusing thy friend and sit still. Ah, what true Christian can see hellish lusts embraced publiquely, and the glorious Lord disowned openly, and not loath the former, and love the latter the more for it! The Grecians would bring their children to hate drunkenness, by shewing them Drunkards wallowing in their vomits, what loathsom persons they were in such conditions. Good examples are provocations to holiness, Mal. 3. 8. Bad examples may work a detestation of vice, Deut. 18. 9. Ephes. 4. 17. Wise men have more to learn of fools, then fools of wise men, said Cato. That Trumpet which is filled only with wind, may encourage and awaken a living man to the battle; That person who is dead in sin, may rouse up a sleepy, yet living Christi∣an, and raise his affections more towards God. 2. Let thy heart be the more inlarged in thank∣fulness; Dost thou behold the prophane, glorying in their pollutions? Dost thou see sinners abusing Gods creatures? Dost thou discern ungodly ones making a mock of sin; jearing at holiness, and ri∣ding post to Hell; how should thy heart be raised in thankefulness to thy dearest Redeemer, that thou dost not run with them to the same excess of riot, and in the same road of eternal ruine? Every time thou
comest into such company, and observest their wicked courses, thou mayst well pity such deluded souls, and praise thy gracious Saviour. Mayst thou not think thus with thy self; Lo here are those that play with the eternal fire, and sport with the Al∣mighties fury, that dance merrily over the bottomless pit, and take pleasure in the way to endless pains, that are wholly regardless of God and Christ, and Heaven, and their unchangeable estates in te other world; I was as bad as the worst of them, or at least, I had slept as deep into that mire of prophaness, and equalled or exceeded them in all manner of impiety, if free grace had not with-held and prevented me. I have the same root of bitterness, and had doubtless brought forth the same cursed fruits, if the hand of mercy had not new grafted me; What thanks do I owe to my Redee∣mer, who makes me to differ, and what cause have I to love and laud, to please and praise him, world without end! O friend, if the Israelites blessed God for their preservation from those waters in which the Egyptians were drowned; hast not thou cause to give thanks for preservation from that wickedness in which others are damned? 3. Thy care and watchfulness should be the more increased. The falls and failings of others, should be Sea-marks, and give thee warning to avoid those rocks and shallows, if thou wouldst avoid ship∣wrack. Thou hast the same poisonous seed, therefore take heed, lest thou committest the same sin. These things (saith the Apostle) were written for our example, to the intent we should not lust after evil things as they did, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 16. All these things happened unto them for examples, and they
were written for our admonition. As the sins and suf∣ferings of others are recorded for our instruction, so God lets them be acted before our eyes for our admonition. If he that walketh before me falleth and breaketh his neck, I have the more reason to ponder the paths of my feet; If a fire break out in one house, every wise man will look the more to his own. If enemies be near the walls, the Gar∣rison will be the more diligent to keep watch and ward. Ah how foolish is that Mariner, who behol∣deth a Ship before him, cast away upon some Rock, and doth not steer his course with the greater care? Thus the Sword of Goliah, may be serviceable to a David, and those weapons of unrighteous∣ness, which are designed for our destruction, may be helpful to our preservation. Those Kites that destroy Chickens, do also eat up offals of Beasts, and many noisom things, which otherwise would infect the Air; whence, say some, its a Law in England, that near a Market Town they should not be kill'd. Unclean Beasts are serviceable to men, and unclean men may be helpful to Christians. SECT. V. FIfthly, Endeavour their reformation. Thy duty is as a good Physitian, to loath the noisom dis∣ease, but to pity and strive to recover the Pati∣ent. What difference is there betwixt thee and a carnal person, if thou sufferest him to die, and offerest not thy help for his cure! Thy Father doth good to all, he causeth his Sun to shine on the just,
and on the unjust. O Remember that thou art his Son, and that his pattern is worthy of imitation.Christus omni∣bus onia factus est, paper pauperi∣bus, divesd vi∣tibus, —Cum Maria lt. cum Apostis pulatur, &c. Amb. Sup. Luc. lib. 4. That piece of Iron, which is rub'd with the Load∣stone, will draw another peice of Iron; We read of Magnetical Rocks in some Islands, that draw all Ships to them, which have Iron Pins, and hold them so fast that they are not able to stir. Shew that thou hast been toucht with the Spirit, that the Spirit of God dwelleth in thee, by thy endea∣vours to draw others to God. Christ never sat at Table with any sinners, but he made better chear then he found; If he sat with the prophane, he did convert them; if with the pious, he did confirm them, Luk. 7. Be not discouraged at the weakness of thy gifts, or the small degree of thy graces, but consider that the event of the enterprize depends upon him who sets thee a work, and that its all one to him, whether he have great means, or small means, or no means. A poor contemptible Flie, may hin∣der an Elephant from sleeping; a poor upright Christian, may awaken great sinners out of their spiritual sleep and lethargy. A little Boat may land a man at a large continent. A weak believer may help a soul to Heaven. Endeavour to reform them these three ways. 1. By wholsom Counsel. Every place thou comest into, should be like Libnah, in which the Israelites pitcht, a place of Frankincense, perfumed by thy presence. The breath of a man serves him both to cool his broth when hot, and warm his fingers when cold; The breath of a Christian should serve to put some warmth into them that are cold Hea∣ven-ward,
and to cool and slack them that are hot Hell ward. An wholsom tongue is a Tree of life, Prov. 15. 12. Thy tongue should be like the Tree of life in Eden, of which he that did eat was to live for ever, Gen. 3. 22. or like that Tree of life in the midst of the street, which bare twelve manner of Fruit, and the Leaves of the Tree were for the heal∣ing of the Nations, Rev. 22. 2. I have read of a person who led a dissolute life, and was so wrought upon by the Counsel of a good man,Ant. Duralt. Spculum ex∣emplorum. that he turned over a new Leaf; and when his Companions asked the ground of that change, which they soon ob∣served in him, and why he would not walk along with them in his old wicked ways; he answered them, I am busie, meditating and reading in a little book, which hath but three leaves in it, so that I have no leasure so much as to think of any other business; In the first leaf, which is red, I medi∣tate on the passion of my Lord Iesus Christ, and of that precious blood which he shed for the remission of my sins; In the second leaf, which is white, I me∣ditate on the unspeakable joys of Heaven, purchased for me by the death of my Redeemer; In the third leaf, which is black, I meditate on the intolerable torments of Hell provided and kept in store for the wicked and ungodly. Prudent and pious advice, may bring wandring sinners home to Christs fold. There is a special art in baiting the hook aright, so as thou mayst take sinners ere they are aware, I being crafty, caught you with guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16. Its possible hou art amongst men that are moral and civil, yet unsanctified; by commending civility, yet discovering its insufficiency, thou mayst beat
them out of their rotten holds, and cause them to run to Christ for help, Mat. 5. 20. It may be thou meetest with those that are openly prophane; by bringing in wisely an example of Gods judgements on such persons, thou mayst fright them from such lewd practices. Sometimes thou mayst turn earthly discourse by degrees into heavenly, and spread a Table, and set a running banquet before them, which they never thought of. Do they ask (for ant of other discourse) what news? After some prudent preface, answer them, that thou canst tell them good news from a far Country, which is worthy of all acceptation, namely, That Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Do they ask how such and such do? acquaint them concerning their bodily welfare; and if it may be done conveniently, that the health of the soul is most to be enquired after, as that which is of greatest weight and worth. Do they ask into the price of Commodities? thou mayst thereby raise their hearts to the Wine and Milk which is to be bought of Christ, without money and without price. This is true Alchimy, and will turn all into Gold. What heavenly fruit did our Re∣deemer gather from such earthly trees? When the Pharises spake of eating with defiled, that is, un∣washen hands, he told them of inward defilements, and what danger there was in unwashen hearts, Mat. 15. 20. When the Woman of Samaria came to draw Water, how soon doth he lift up his dis∣course to living Water, of which whosoever drink∣eth shall never thirst! John 4. 21. When the mul∣titude followed him for the Loaves, he improves that occasion to quicken them to labour for the
meat which endureth unto everlasting life, John 6. 25, 26, 27. Thus thou mayst Reader, distil cordial water out of dregs and lees. 2. Endeavour to reform them by thy gracious car∣riage in their Company. A Christian is Gods Iewel (Mal. 3. 17.) and should always cast a radiancy and lustre before the eyes of others; but especially a∣mongst them that are wicked: He is double guilty who lks disorderly amidst his Masters enemies. Saints ould like Diamonds, sparkle gloriously in a Ditch, and as Stars, shine the brighter in cold nights; Be blameless and harmless, without rebuke, shining as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse Genera∣tion, Phil. 2. 15. Beleivers should, like lights hung out in the City, shine so brightly, as to prevent others wandring and stumbling; a  lumen, &  servo, quod receptum lmen servat; significat tale quid quod lu∣men ex se emit∣tit, ut Sl, Luna Stella. The word is , such lights as the Sun, Moon, and Stars are, which do not keep their light to themselves, but com∣municate it to others. This gracious conversation is often profitable to the conviction of others. They who as the Atlantes, are ready to curse the Sun, because it scorcheth them with its beams, to hate the light because it discovereth their deeds of dark∣ness, may nevertheless in their consciences be so convinced of its beauty and glory, that they may turn Persians, to admire and adore it.Sicuti caeli lu∣minaria ac si∣dera in firma∣mento caeli à Deo collocata, cunctis indesinenter quae sub caelo sunt, fulgent, & omnibus quae super terram sunt, per tempora, ac tempora, per generationes ac generationes, mirabiliter relucet; alia quidem per noctem di luna & stellae, alia nihilominus per dem, ut solis speciosissimi radii: Sic & sanctorum virtutis insignia at{que} beatissimi eorum agones, omnibus in perpetuum singulariter fulgent omnibus in aeternum bonorum formam tribuunt, omnibus sub sole pictatis exemplum ostendunt. Orig. Homil. 1. in Job. Shew thy self a pattern of good works, that he that is of the con∣trary
part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you, Tit. 2. 7, 8. 1 Pet. 3. 15, 16. Grace doth powerfully, though silently, oppose and overthrow Prophaness; It forceth reverence from its bitterest enemies. The righteousness of Noah condemned the old World; The holiness of the Baptist, did obtain respect from wicked Herod; How did the Magnani∣mous Sanctity of the three Worthies, triumph in the conscience of Nebuchadnezar? and the innocen∣cy of Daniel in the soul of Darius? Many a sinner hath been struck dumb, by the exemplary and hero∣ick faith and patience of the Saints. Such a gracious carriage is sometimes helpful to the conversation of others. They who stood out against the Word of God, have been won by the Works of Men. Sanctified actions are unanswerable Syllogismes, and effectual demonstrations. Though the ears have been shut against pious precepts, the heart it self hath been opened to a gracious pattern. Ab∣stain from fleshly lusts, and have your conversations honest, that whereas they speak evil of you as evil doers, they ma by your good works which they behold, glorifie God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. Good works are a means, not onely of silencing, but even of sanctifying evil workers; and hereby those who spake evil of the children, come to glo∣rifie the father. An holy life is a real confutation of unholy lusts;Viva lectio est vita sancto∣rum. Greg. Moral. 24. and whereas counsel may perswade, this compelleth the sinner, either to embrace sanctity, or to live condemned of himself. Lewis the twelfth of France, hearing ill of the Waldenses, sent some to observe and pry into their lives, who returning, told the King, That they were free from all scandal,
sanctified the Sabbath, baptized and chatechised their children; Whereupon the King their enemy swore that they were better men then himself, or any of his Subjects. The Church of God is compared to a Vineyard, Luk. 20. 9. Pliny tells us that the smell of a Vineyard is such, that it drives away all Ser∣pents and venemous creatures. The lives of Gods people should be spotless and exemplary, that their enemies, as in Tertullians days, may honour them for their holiness. Of Bueer it was said, He so lived, that his friends could not sufficiently praise him, nor his enemies justly blame him; So should every child of God. SECT. VI. 3. ENdeavour to reform them by faithful repre∣hension. Reprehension is like a Dam, which though it cause the waters to swell, stops its violent course; As Thunder, it purifieth the air, which otherwise would putrifie. When thou comest amongst vicious persons, thy spirit as Pauls amongst the Ido∣latrous Athenians, must be stirred within thee, and thy zeal must appear in reproving the offendors, or else as a Pearl in a Toads ead, it will be of no use. Servetus condemned Zwinglius for his heat and harshness;In altis man∣suctus ero, in blasphemiis in Christum non ita. Epist. ad Server. but he answered, In other things I will be meek and mild, but not in blaspemies against Christ. Good blood will not belie it self, but when occasion is offered, shew it self; The zeal of Gods house did eat the Redeemer up, and he whipt the buyers and sellers out of the Temple;In vita ejus per Anomy. In the cause of God, saith Luther, I am and ever shall be stout and
stern; herein I take upon me this Motto, Nulli cedo, I give place to none. That expression of Austin hath weight in it, Qui non zelat non amat, He hath no love to God, who hath no zeal for God; and truly he hath little love to his Neighbour; Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy Neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 9. 17. First, Here is no priviledge as to persons, either reproving, or offending. 1. Reproving, Thou shalt rebuke; Its to be done in our own persons, and not by a proxy. 2. Offending, thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy Neighbour; All are our Neighbours, made of the same earth (bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh,) capa∣ble of the same heaven. God excludes none, but offers both his grace and glory universally. Whoso∣ever will, let him, &c. Rev. 22. 17. Secondly, No dispensation granted as to crimes. Thou shalt not suffer sin upon him; If it be a sin, it must not be suffered. Thirdly, No pleading of any excuse; thou shalt in any wise rebuke him, and not hate him.Non omnis qui parcit, amius est; nec omnis qui verberat, inimicus. Me∣lius est cum severitate dili∣gere, quam cum lenitate deci∣pere, Aug. Confe. 9. To suffer any in unholiness, is a sign of hatred; and such seeming charity is the greatest cruelty; Besides, whilst we let such men alone in their prophaness, we pro∣voke God against our selves. Iohn the Baptist re∣buked Herod; Nathan reproved David; and Latimer Henry the eighth; though the offendors were potent and high, yet the ministers of God would not fear their faces, but freely tell them of their faults: Nay, some Heathen have had cou∣rage enough to check the greatest for their crimes.
How plain was Seneca in reproving Nero;Magis amat objurgator sa∣nns quam adulator disi∣mulans. Ide in Epist. ad Mart. Mi aliquan∣do arguee per∣missam, ti nunquam pe∣care. Amb. Diogenes in reproving Alexander, and Zeno Nearchus! Its said of Suetonius, that in writing the lives of the twelve Caesars, he took the same liberty in declaring their vices, which they took to commit them; and shall not Christians be as bold to check sin, as o∣thers are to act it? Reader, what love dost thou show to thy Neigh∣bour, if thou seest him wounding and piercing his inestimable soul, and thou dost not endeavour (though against his will,) to hold his hand? If thou shouldst see him take a Knife to stab himself at the heart, thou wouldst not stay to ask his leave, or fear his anger, but do thy utmost to hinder him; and canst thou see him destroying his soul, and not seek to prevent him? That pity without question is the best, which relateth to the better part. There was a barbarous Law among the Lacedemonians,Plut. Moral. That no man should tell his Neighbour any ill news that befel him, but every one should be left in process of time to find it out himself. Alas, what will be∣come of poor sinners, if none should tell them what they are doing, whither they are going, till they come to find it in the place of torments! Were love burning in our hearts (as fire was in the Temple) or were our faces towards one another (like those Cherubims which covered the Mercy Seat with their wings) we should not onely, not lie in sin our selves, but also endeavour that others should not die in their sins; That person who refused to smite his Neighbour, when commanded in the name of the Lord, was slain by a Lion, 1 King. 20. 35. If we refuse to smite sin, Gods wrath will smite us.
Because this duty is of such concernment, I shall give thee some few brief directions.Tot quotidie occidimus, quot ad mortem ire tepidi & tacen∣tes videmus. Greg. 1. Be sure that which thou reprovest be a sin, and not a lawful or indifferent thing. Some shew much heat, but little holiness in keeping a great stir about nothing. The Israelites raised a great Army to fight against their Brethren, upon a supposition that they had built an Altar for sacrifice, Iosh. 22. 16. Eli was mistaken in chiding Hannah for drunkenness, and thinking she was not sober, because she was almost overwhelmed with sorrow, 1 Sam. 2. Tis dangerous to apply corroding medicines, upon sup∣position that the person hath a festered sore; or to cut a man for the stone, who is not troubled with that distemper; It were better by much to be silent, then to cry out against that which we can∣not by Scripture prove to be sin. He that reproves the deed, will do more hurt then good, if he be not able to convince the doer, Tit. 1. 9. To some it may be said, as Iob to his friends, who accused him of Hypocrisie, because of his calamity; as if the stick could not be straight,Cum vera ob∣jurgas, sic ini∣mice juvas. Auson because twas brought to the fire; How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? Job 6. 25. Right words have great weight; naked truth will be too hard for armed error; but what power have mistaken or misapplied arguments? what doth such arguing reprove? Such arguings seldom reprove any but the arguer, and him they always reprove. 2. Reprove seriously; Reproof is an edged tool, and must not be jested wih; Cold Reproofs are like the noise of Cannons a great way off, nothing af∣frighting us. He that reproves sin merrily, as one
that takes a pride to shew his wit, and make the com∣pany laugh, will destroy the sinner instead of the sin. There are those that spit out their friends with their tongues, and laugh them into enemies; Sharpness and acuteness doth ill in sportful festivals, but it becomes purging potions: Lightness is com∣mendable is nothing, but worst in things that are weighty; A vain jesting admonition is like rubbing a person with a poisoned Oyl, which spreads the more for being put into such a fleeting suppleness. The Areopagites banished Stilpo, for proving by his Sophistry that Minerva was no Goddess, alledging this for their reason, that it was not safe for any to dally with things that were Divine. Reproof is strong Physick, and worketh many times to pur∣pose, and therefore is not to be given in jest; Sin, which is the object of it, is not to be played with; nor Hell its consequent, a jesting matter. Titus 1. 13. The Apostle enjoynes Titus to reprove sharply; the word is  cuttingly,  that they may be sound in the faith; He that mindeth his Patients health, will not toy or trifle, or play with his mortal diseases; the flesh must feel the plaister, or it will never eat up the corruption in it. Shouldst thou apply an healing plaister to skin the wound aloft, when there is need of a corrosive to take away the dead flesh, thou wouldst be false and unfaithful to thy friend. When the water was bitter,Regat ds∣plin vigor manstudi∣nem, & man∣suudo ornet vigorem, & sic alterum commendetur ex altero ut nec vigor sit rigidus, nec man∣suetudo dissolua. Greg. lib. 5. Moral. and the ground barren, Elisha cast a cruse of Salt into it, and it healed both.
Reproof like Salt, must have in it both sharpness and savouriness; Alas, how fierce is that wrath, how hot is that fire to which poor sinners are liable? and wilt thou sport with their souls, and joyn with them in making a mock of sin? Saints must be zea∣lous, not onely in good works, but also in repro∣ving evil workers. The Command is, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and shew my people their trangression, and the house of Jacob their sin, Isa. 58. 1. This belongs in some sense to every member, as well as to the Minister. They must reprove sin powerfully; cry aloud, lift up thy voice as a trumpet; particularly, shew my people their trans∣gression, and the house of Jacob their sin; Admoni∣tion without serious Application, is like an Arrow with too many Feathers, which though we level at the Mark, is taken by the Wind, and carried quite from it. Some men shoot their Reprehensions, like Pellets through a Trunk, with no more strength then will kill a Sparrow; those make sinners beleive that sin is no such dreadful evil, and the wrath of God no such frightful end. He that would hit the mark, and recover the sinner, must draw his arrow of Reproof home. Reproof must be powerful; the hammer of the word breaks not the heart, if it be lightly layd on; If the flesh doth not feel the plaister, it will hardly be healed by it. It must also be so particular, that the offendor may think him∣self concerned. Some in reproof will seem to aim at the sinner, but so order it, that their arrows shall be sure to miss him. As Domitian, when a Boy held for a mark afar off, his hand spread,
with his fingers severed,Set. in vita. he shot his arrows so, that all hit the empty spaces between his fin∣gers; Be the reproof never so gracious, the Plaister never so good, it will be ineffectual if not applied to the Patient, 2 Sam. 12. 7. Act. 2. 36, 37. 3. Reprove seasonably; Reprehension is not ne∣cessary or convenient at all seasons; Admonition is like Physick, rather profitable then pleasant; Now the best Physick may be thrown away, if a fit time of giving it be not observed; Some unskilful Phy∣sitians have wronged their Patients, in admini∣string sutable potions out of season; Its a great part of Christian prudence, to discern the fittest time of lancing spiritual sores; if they be taken when they are ripe, the corrupt matter may be all let out, and the party be the healthier whilst he liveth; but if before they be ripe, it will not be so well. A fool will always be talking, and is ready to burst if he may not have vent; but a wise man will keep a word for afterward, Prov. 29. He will neither run before an opportunity,There are two cases wherein Re∣proof may be omitted. 1. When there is dan∣ger of bring∣ing more dis∣honour to God by speaking then by for∣bearing, Mat. 7. 6. 2. When we can see no likelyhood of doing good by our Reproving. Hildersham on Psal. 51. Lect. 9. Vide Plu. ibid. nor neglect to follow after it; many a fair child is spoiled by an untimely birth; and good duty, prejudiced by an unseasonable performance. Sometimes a sudden reproof, upon the commissi∣on of the sin, hath reformed the sinner; but this is not always safe. When men are rebuked before their Companions, their hearts are usually enraged against the Reprover, suspecting him to intend their
disparagement rather then their amendment.Qi non corri∣git resecanda committit, & facientis cul∣pam habet qui quod potest cr∣rigere, negli∣git mendare. Greg. Besides, when their spirits are hot, and their minds drunk with passion, they are apter to beat the Christian, then to hear his Counsel. When a person is in a violent Fever, its not good to give him Physick, its safest to stay till the fit be abated or over. Abigal would not tell Nabal of his danger till he was sober. Some small fish are twicht up with the violence of a sud∣den pull, when the like action would break the line whereon a great one hangs. But I would not be understood Reader, to en∣courage thee in the least, under pretence of defer∣ring it till a fitter day, to omit the duty; if there be no probability of a better season, nor any hope of doing good, after some ejaculations to Heaven for assistance and success, take the present opportu∣nity. Fabius conquered by delaying, but Caesar over∣came by expedition. Though its not ordinarily so good to sow Corn when the Wind is high, yet the Husbandman will rather do it in such weather, then not at all, or then to want his harvest. As the Bird often flieth away, whilst the Fowler still seeks to get nearer and nearer her; so doth a season of advantaging our brethrens souls, whilst we wait still for a fitter; Its thy duty therefore to take hold of the present, where thou hast no likeli∣hood of another, and to improve the first good opportunity, rather then to adventure the loss of all, by expecting a better. 4. Reprove prudently; A Christians wisdom in the matter of his reproof, will very much further its work∣ing. As an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover to an obedient ear, Prov. 25. 12. A
wise reprover is a credit to the Reproved. Its an ho∣nor to be wounded thus by one that is wise. Some men would receive blows with more patience, if they were given them with more prudence; None so likely to find an obedient hearing, as they that are wise in reproving; the best ear will hardly brook foolish speaking; there is a way to make men take down their bitter potions before they are aware. The recovering of a fallen sinner, is the setting of a bone in joynt, which requireth much skill and dexterity; Every Mountebank is not fit to under∣take this ask. First, Have respect to the person whom thou re∣provest. Secondly, Have respect to the crime for which thou reprovest. First, Respect is to be had to the person, both as to his condition and his disposition. 1. To his condition and quality; Though the sins of Superiours may, nay must be reproved, by those that have a call to it, yet not in that bold manner which is allowable to our equals, nor without some acknowledgement of that reverence which is due to their Callings and Conditions; Rebuke not an Elder, but intreat him as a Father, 1 Tim. 5. 1. When Daniel was to interpret Nebuchadnezzars dream, and to ac∣quaint him with his danger, observe with what re∣spectful language he cloatheth his dreadful message, Dan. 4. 19, 24, 27. The Prophets that spake so boldly to their Princes, were commanded & commissioned by God what to say; Though Superiors ought to be re∣proved, yet they ought not to be reviled. Paul (as I conceive) acknowledged his passion, when he had
spoken irreverently to the high Priest, I wist not brethren, that he was the High Priest; I did not con∣sider as I ought, to whom I spake, Act. 23. 5. It will not excuse us to give ill words, though we receive ill wounds from Magistrates; Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are un∣godly? Job 34. 18. Though this Text doth not si∣lence all from acquainting Kings with their faults, muchless justifie any that shall daub them with their flatteries, 1 King. 18. 18. 2 King. 3. 13. yet it proves that Princes must be spoken to respectfully, because of their places. Superiors may be amended by exhortation, equals by friendly admonition, in∣feriors by severe reprehension. Secondly, Respect is to be had to the disposition of the offendor some in their fainting fits are re∣covered easily, with throwing some cold water in their faces; others must be beaten or rubbed very hard; Some men are like Briars, you may handle them gently without harm, but if you grasp them hard they will fetch blood; Others as Nettles, if dealt with roughly, do the less wrong; Iude 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a diffe∣rence, and others save with fear; Some are like tiled houses, that can admit a brand of fire to fall on them, and not be burnt; yet some again are cove∣red with light dry straw, which with the least touch will kindle and flame about your ears. By scruing strings moderately, we may make good Musick, but if too high we break them; All the strings of a Viol are not of equal strength, nor will endure to be wound up to the same pitch; we may sooth a Lion into bondage, but sooner hew him in peices,
then beat him into a chain. A difference ought to be observed between party and party; an Exhor∣tation will do more with some, then a severe Com∣mination with others; The sturdy Oak will not be so easily bowed as the Gentle Willow; Elisha reco∣vered the dead Child with a kiss, but Lazarus was restored to life with a loud strong voice; Reproof must be warily given; for tis like a Razor, whose edge is keen, and therefore the sooner rebated; Its dangerous to give a medicine stronger then the disease and constitution of the Patient require; A gentle fire makes the best distilled waters. Respect is to be had also to their faults; Wise Physitians will distinguish between a Pimple and a Plague-sore; Those that sin of infirmity, are to be admonished more mildly then they that sin obstinate∣ly; who would give as great a blow to kill a Flie as to kill an Ox; Old festered sores must be handled in a rougher manner then green wounds, Phil. 3. 15. Tit. 3. 10. Ordinary Physick will serve for a distemper newly begun, but a chronical disease must have harsher and stronger Purges; Some offend ig∣norantly, others out of contumacy; Some offend out of weakness, being overborn by a sudden pas∣sion; others of premeditated contrived wickedness and perverseness;Iuvenes ple∣run{que} severitas admonitionis ad prosectum dirigit; Scues vero ad melio∣ra opera depre∣catio blanda companit. Greg. some sins are of a lower nature, of lesser moment and influence upon others; other sins overthrow the foundations of Christianity, and devour the vitals of Religion; Now according to the nature of the disease, and constitution of the Patients, must the prescription be for their cure. Though all sins have one price for their satis∣faction, yet not one way for their reprehension;
If the Linnen be but a little foul,Qui blando verbo castiga∣tus non corri∣gitur, acrius neesse est ar∣guatur cum do∣lore snt ab∣scindenda, quae leniter sanari non possunt. Isid. l. 3. de somno. c. 46. ordinary rubbing may serve; but if it be died with dirt, it must have the more. Our Saviour called Herod, Fox; the Ma∣ster of the Synagogue, Hypocrite; the Scribes and Pharises, Vipers. St. Stephen calls the Iews, Traytours and Murtherers; cutting reproofs are for notorious offenders; a weak dose will but stir up, not purge away their noxious humours. 5. Reprove compassionately; Soft words, and hard arguments do well together.Plus proficit a∣mica correctio quam accusatio turbulenta; ill pudorem incu∣tit, haec indig∣nationem mo∣vet Amb. in Lucam. Passion will heat the sinners blood, but compassion heal his consci∣ence; our reprehension may be sharp, but our spi∣rits must be meek; The Probe that searcheth the wound, will put the Patient to less pain, and do the more good, if covered with soft lint. Those who oppose themselves, are to be instructed in meekness, 2 Tim. 2. 25. There is a rigid austerity, which is apt to creep into, and corrupt our reproofs; Mollifying Oyntments are oft instrumental to abate great swellings; The Iron of Napthalies shooes were dipt in Oyl. Reproof should be as Oyls or Ointments, gently rub'd in by the warm fire of love. The Chirurgion that setteth the bone, stroketh the part; If love do not play its part in this Scene, we do but act a Tragedy. The more thou canst perswade him of thy affection, the better will he take thy reprehension; The sweetest kisses of an enemy are rejected with disdain, but even the wounds of a friend are received with applause, Prov. 27. 6. Such as in reproving shew their anger more then their love, rather exasperate then heal; Of all seasons the Chirurgion had need to be sober, and farthest from being drunk with passion, when
he is to cut off a gangren'd member. The Repro∣ver should have a Lions stout heart, or he will not be faithful, and a Ladies soft hand, or he is not like to be successeful; Holy Paul, speaking of his coming to reprove some delinquents amongst the Corinthians, tells them, And lest when I come a∣gain, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many who have sinned, 2 Cor. 6. ult. He that would gather fruit, must pluck the Bough gently towards him; if too hard, he may break it; A Reprover is like one that is taking a mote out of his brothers eye; now this must be done very ten∣derly. For this purpose it would be convenient (where it may be) that reproofs be given privately. We administer Physick to persons in their Chamber; He that proclaims anothers crimes up and down the Country, wrongs his own soul, in walking contrary to the command (first tell him his fault between him and thee, Mat. 18. 15, 16.) and he wrongs his Neighbour in hardning him hereby in his sin; for this man thinks the sinner designeth to reproach, not to reform; therefore he throweth the reproof with indignation back in his face. So∣crates at a Banquet,ig. Laert. in vit. Socrat. falling out with one of his friends, twitted him with his faults, How much better had this been done in private?Quicquid lace∣rato animo dixeris, unien∣tis est impetus, non charitas corrigentis; diligo, & dic quiquid vales. Aug. de fin. Vbi peccatum moritur, ibi moriaur. said Plato; And had you not done better to have told me so privately? said Socrates. Qui peccant coram omnibus, coram omnibus corripiendi sunt, ut omnes timeant. Qui secreto pecavit in te, secreto corripe; Nam si solu nosti, & eum vis coram aliis arguere, non es cor∣rector, sed Proditor, Aug. de verb domini. If thy brother offend thee, saith Christ, tell him of it
between thee and him, Mat. 5. Others crimes are not to be cried at a Market;Vbi malum oritur, ibi mo∣riatur. Private reproof is the best grave to bury private faults in; The Plaister should not be larger then the sore; Our Saviour did not tell the woman of Samaria of her wickedness whilst the Disciples were with him, but when he had sent them away, Ioh. 4. For this end it is also fit that reproof be given,Secrete admone amicos, palam lauda. Sen. de Benif. with as little reflection as may be on the person re∣proved. If there be any thing in him worthy of praise, do not pass it by; We take Pills the better when they are well guilt; Children lick up their medicines the more freely, when they are sprinkled with a little sugar; A faithful Historian, will relate mens vertues, as well as their vices. They are of a dunghil brood, that fasten onely upon galled backs, and ulcerous sores, and take no notice of the sound flesh; Wise Commanders, when their Souldiers are making a dishonourable Retreat, do not pre∣sently upbraid them with cowardise, but often by mentioning their former heroick courage, or their Ancestors noble carriage, inflame them with a de∣sire to continue their repute and credit. Good Nurses, when children fall first, help them up, and speak them fair, and then chide them; This were an excellent art to draw them to God, whom thou couldst not drive; shame will not let such be angry with those that deal so equally the rod and crown. Sometimes indirect reprehension hath wrought much good. A man may by a Parable, or an History pertinent to the purpose, convince a sinners conscience, and not openly injure his credit. Paul in his Sermon to Felix, seemed to shoot at
random, not naming any, but his Arrow pierced that unrighteous Prince to the quick. The Sun keeps the world in good temperature by moving in an oblique circle, not directly with the highest heavens, nor directly contrary, but fetching a compass a lit∣tle over-thwart. The Saint may keep the Sinner from that heat and rage, which is apt to boil under reproof, by fetching a little compass about. The reproof may sometimes be given in our own persons, and declaring how ill it would have been for us to have run into such riotous courses; So the Apostle Paul reprehended the Sectmakers in Corinth, by transferring it to himself and Apollo, 2 Cor. 4. 6. A wise Reprover, in this is like a good Fencer, who though he strike one part, yet none that stand by could perceive by his eye, or the carriage of his arm, that he aimed at that more then the rest. We esteem it a singular commendation in a Chirur∣gion, when he can cure a wound in the face, and leave no scar behind; Indeed, some wounds are so great that this cannot be done, yet a good Chirurgion will always endeavour it, and leave as little a scar as possibly he can. Pliny tells us of one Martia, who had the Child in the womb kill'd by lightning, and yet she her self was unhurt. Its excellent when a Boanerges can so cast forth light∣ning, as to kill sin in his conscience, and not hurt the sinner in his repute. To avoid this, it was ordain∣ed among the Lacedemonians, that every trans∣gressour should be his own corrector; for his pu∣nishment was to compass the Altar, finging an in∣vective made against himself. Its a singular credit to the Christian, if he can open, and so heal mens
sores, as not to leave any brand upon their per∣sons: We read that God appointed Snuff-dishes, as well as Snuffers, for the Lamps of the Tabernacle, and both to be of pure gold, Exod. 37. 23. The Snuffers noted, that those who check any fault in others, should be free themselves; The Snuff∣dishes noted, that those crimes which we reprove, we should forgive and remit. The Rbbies say, that those Snuff dishes were filled with Sand, to bury the Snuffs in; He who snuffs a Candle, and throws the snuff about the Room, gives offence to more by the ill savour he makes, then content by his care and diligence. There is hardly any work of Christianity, which requires more wisdom then this of Admonition. The temper and quality of the persons, the nature and difference of the crimes, the manner and way of delivering the reproof, the fittest season for it ought all to be seriously and diligently considered. The rebuke of sin is aptly resembled to the fishing for Whales; the mark is big enough, one can hardly miss hitting; but if there be not Sea-room enough, and line enough, and a dexterity in letting out that line, he that fixeth his harping-iron in the Whale, endangers both Himself and his Boat. Reproof strikes an Iron (as it were) into the con∣science of the Offendour, which makes him struggle and strive to draw the Reprover into the Sea, to bring him into disgrace and contempt; but if the line be prudently handled, and not pull'd too strait nor too qick, the sinner may be drwn to the Reprover and saved.
I confess this duty of reproving, is an hard and unpleasing task,Molestus est medicus su∣renti phrenetco, & pater indisiplinato filio; ille in lgando, iste caedendo, sed am∣bo diligendo. Si autem istos negligant & perire permit∣tant, ista potius falsa man∣suetudo crudelis est. Aug. ad Bonif. because truth ordinarily begets hatred, but its far bet∣ter that men should hate thee for the dis∣charge of thy duty, then that God should hate thee for the neglect of it; Its much easier to endure their rage for a short time, then the Lords wrath for ever. If the per∣fons reproved, have any true love to them∣selves, they will love thee; and truly that mans love is little worth, who hath none for his own soul. Therefore Reader, obey Gods precept, and leave the event to his providence; Have no fel∣lowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but ra∣ther reprove them, Ephes. 5. 11. If thou canst ad∣vantage and gain their souls, they will give thee thanks;Remedia statim moruent vel offendunt, postea confe∣runt salutem vel volupta∣tem; Ita salubria monita nitio sunt non nihil amara postea correcto jucundissima. Plut. in Moral. if not, thy God will; and surely his thanks are not to be esteemed at a low rate. It hath many times been experienced, that faithful reprehensions have procured (though present ill-will, yet) respect afterwards. Dean Colet, for delivering his conscience, by way of reproof, be∣fore Henry the eighth, at the siege of Tourney, was questioned by the Privy Counsellors, but within a short time he got a large interest in the Kings heart, by the discharge of his duty.Prov. 9. 8. He that re∣buketh a man, shall afterwards find more favour then he that flattereth with his tongue, Prov. 28. 23.Nihil probat spiritualem virum, sicut peccati alieni tractatio; quum liberationem eju potius quam insultationem, potius auxilia quam convitia medita∣tur, & quantum facultas tribuitur suscipit. Aug. sup. Epist. ad Gal. The sick patient, who at present wrangleth with
his Physitian for his bitter potions, doth after∣wards (when he findeth the happy effect of it in his healh and recovery) both thank and reward him. Though thou meetest with an ungrateful return in his passion, yet thou mayst when that cloud is dispersed, expect a more serene and plea∣sing requital; However the best way to lose a friend (if thou canst not keep him and a good conscience too) is by seeking by thy love and faith∣fulness to save him. Sixthly, Mourn for those sins which thou canst not amend; Those sins which thou canst not beat down with a stream of truth, do thou overcome with a flood of tears; When others kindled a fire of lust, David drew water and poured it out be∣fore the Lord; Rivers of tears run down mine eys, because the wicked forsake thy law, Psa. 119. 135. Mark the intension of Davids passion, upon the disobedience of wicked persons; Sighs are an or∣dinary sign of grief, but tears a far greater; What sorrow was then in Davids heart, when not onely tears, but rivers of tears, ran down his eyes? Srely the Fountain of sorrow was very full and deep, when the streams did run so fast and freely. Others guilt calleth aloud to thee for grief. Do they wound their souls by sin? do thou wound thy own soul with sorrow? Alas! how is it possible thou canst be amongst them that dishonour the blessed God, grieve his holy Spirit, and break his righteous Commands, and not have thine heart broken? Lot vexed his righteous soul with the un∣clean conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 8. Unless thou hast lost thy spiritual sent, thou canst
not endure the stench of their filthy unsavoury breath, without much perplexity and trouble. I remembred the transgressors, and was greived, be∣cause they kept not thy Law, Psa. 119. 158. He that hath any part of the new man in himself, must needs be offended at the old man in others. Its presumed he is of a dishonest mind, who is not of∣fended at the cheats and thefts of others; Every creature is disturbed at that which is contrary to its own nature. If grace be the object of my joy and delight, sin must needs be the object of my grief and sorrow; My soul shall weep in secret for your pride, saith Ieremiah, Jer. 13. 17. Reader, If thou lovest thy God with all thine heart, thou cast not but mourn that others should hate him, and walk contrary to him. We grieve as truly for wrongs done to those whom we sincerely affect, as for injuries done to our selves. When one of Darius his Eunuches, saw Alexander the Geat,Diodor. Sicul. l. 17. setting his foot and trampling upon a Table, that had been highly esteemed by his Master, he fell a weeping; Of which when Alexander asked the reason, he answered, I weep to see that which my Master esteemed at so high a rate, made thy foot-stool. A gracious person cannot hear, or see the Son of God, the Word of God, and the People of God, which his God prizeth at an high rate, vili∣fied, trampled under foot, and slighted by wicked men, but he falls a weeping. My tears have been my meat day and night, while they say unto me conti∣nually, Where is thy God? Psa. 42. 3. The dishonour of his God went nearer to his heart
was very sad at that season. Because others did eat the bread of violence, and drink the wine of deceit, he did eat his bread with tears, and mingle his drink with weeping. As when they were sick he fasted, so when they sinned he prayed and mourned. Hasten out of evil company, if thou hast no hopes of doing good. That Company may well be to thee as the torrid Zone, where wickedness sits in the chair, and Religion is made a foot-stool. Though thou mayst pass through such a Climate as thy occasions require, yet its not safe to dwell in so unwholsom an air; Men that are forced to walk by unsavoury carcasses, hold their breath, and hasten away as soon as they can. Its ill being an Inhabitant in any place where God is an Exile. A little before the destruction of Ierusalem, there was a voce heard in the Temple very terrible, Mi∣gremus hinc, let us go hence; That were a good Motto for Christians in ill-company; Let us go hence; Let such men know, as Manlius Torquatus told the Romans, that as they cannot bear thy strictness, so thou canst not endure their looseness sake heed of staying in any place needlesly, out of which thy God is gone before thee; Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge, Prov. 14. 7. Running away, was the means Ioseph used against the wicked allurements of his Mistriss. Its not cow∣ardise, but true courage, to turn the back upon sin and sinners. It doth often reflect upon our credits to be amongst wicked men (AEschinus in the Comaedian, blusht when he saw his Father
knock at the door of an infamous woman) but it will reflect upon our consciences to continue a∣mongst them when our business with them is done.Terenc. Adel. The Apostle Peter with many words did exhort and testifie saying, save your selves from this un∣toward generation, Act. 2. 40. It appears to be a business of no small concernment and weight, that the Apostle should use so many words about it. Wise men will not spend their time or breath in vain; they do not send more messengers about any work then the consequence and worth of it requireth; Besides, as Beza observeth upon the place, he interposeth Gods authority, and char∣geth them in his name to save or guard them∣selves from such ill Companions. What hast thou to do with them that scorn to have any thing to do with God? The King may well frown on those, and deny to converse with them that converse with Traytours in no relation to his service. Rebeccah must leave her Fathers and Brothers House, if she will be joyned to Isaac; Hearken O Daughter, and consider, ad encline thine ear, forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers House; so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, Psal. 45. 10, 11.
A Good Wish concerning a Christians carriage in evil Company; Wherein the former heads are applied. THe Mighty Possessour of Heaven and Earth,The Intro∣duction. who governeth the World with infinite wisdom, and allotteth to all the Children of men, their seve∣ral Callings and Habitations; having permitted the chaff to continue amongst the Corn, and appointed the tares to remain amongst the wheat till the great Harvest day; and calling me sometimes by his pro∣vidence, to deal with prophane and vicious persons: I Wish I may be so sensible how difficult it is to be safe amongst such defilers and destroyers of souls, that I may walk with the more caution, when ever I walk in such company, and make them my fear, not my familiar, and rather my care then my Compani∣ons. I know that I must go out of the world, if I will go away from the wicked. Ill humours will be amongst good in the body; Sins will be amongst graces in the soul, and sinners will be amongst Saints on this Earth. I am but a stranger here, they are men of the world; I must therefore expect, as Lot in Sodom, to be both vexed with their unclean conver∣sations, and tempted to their violent corruptions; my God calleth them Foxes for their craft, Lions for their cruelty, and a generation of Vipers for their rage and venome; In what danger therefore is my soul of being deceived and devoured by them? How certainly will these ravenous beasts tear me in peices, unless I stand upon my guard, and the Keeper of Israel undertake my protection! Lord,
since it is not thy pleasure to free me from their Com∣pany, grant me such help from thy good spirit, that I may be free from their contagion; Though I may sit at the same table with them, as my occasions or relations require, let me never eat of their dish, nor feed on their dainties; I pray not that thou shouldst take me out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep me from the evil; keep me from the snares which they lay for me, and from the gins of the workers of iniquity;Psa. 141. Let the wicked rather fall into their own Nets, whilst that I withal e∣scape. Motives to quicken to care in evil company. 1. Our danger in evil com∣pany.I Wish that the sense of my danger may keep me from being secure, and make me the more sedulous in the discharge of my duty; Sound eyes are apt to fall a watering, by beholding and looking on sore eyes. Dry Flax is not more apt to take fire, then my vicious nature to be inflamed; the wet sheet of watchfulness is a good preservative; He had need to have much grace, who would not learn others vice. Its hard to touch pitch and not be defiled; Vngod∣ly men are Satans blood-hounds, with which he hunteth my soul. How many hath he drawn into the pit of perdition by such Cart-rope? They are his strongest chains wherewith he binds men now to his own work, and at last (as their wages) hales them to Hell. Fruits of hotter Countries, transplanted into colder Climates, do not seldom die, through the chilling nips of the air, and the unsutableness of the soyl wherein they are planted; there may be grace in my soul ready to flame heavenward, which may be soon quenched, by the putrid fogs of evil companions; I know my God can keep mee (as he did the three
Children in the fiery furnace) amongst them that are set on fire of Hell, from being sienged, or so much as having the sent of the fire on me; but I know also, that then I must keep his way and be watchful; O that I might keep my heart with such diligence, that as the Christal, I may touch those Toads, and not be poisoned; yea, that as a true Diamond in a ditch, I may sparkle with holiness, and shine brightly amongst defiled persons. How natu∣ral is it to resemble their faults, whose faces I am wholly unlike? I am apt like a Snow-ball, to carry away the dirt I am rolled upon, and as an Ape, to imitate those amongst whom I am, in their folly, and to sin for company, rather then to be singular. But though the Loadstone can draw Iron, yet it cannot draw gold; Lightning may smite the dead Oak, but not the green and fresh Laurel; though corrupt nature follow a multitude to do evil, yet grace through the help of the Spirit is invincible. Why may not my soul, like Moses bush in the midst of fire, be kept from consuming; and as Gideons fleece, be moyst, when all the earth about it is dry; O that I might as Fish, retain my freshness in the saltest waters; and never savour others vices, or follow their steps, who depart from the Commande∣ments of my God. Lord, whose promise is to thy Disci∣ples, They shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, (Mark 16. 18.) Is it not thine own hand writing? and canst thou fail of fulfilling it? O let thy powerful pre∣sence accompany me, whithersoever thy providence cal∣leth me; Let thy preventing grace preserve me from receiving harm, and thy quickening mercy enable me
to do good, that whereas thine enemies are apt to speak evil of me as an evil doer, they may be ashamed, who falsly accuse my good conversati∣on in Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Motive. Its possible to be the better.I Wish that I may be so far from receiving preju∣dice, that I may be profited by the worst of those with whom I associate. As my God created nothing in vain, so he permits nothing, but to some good purpose. Tis true, wicked men are Dogs, (Mat. 7. 12.) prone to faun on me, that they may defile me; but even of Dogs there may be a good use; The Flock is the more safe from Wolves, and the House from Theives through their watchfulness. They are dust, apt to breed vermine, but some creatures live upon it as their Aliment, and in it as their Element, and the basest rubbish, may be serviceable about the foundation of a building. The Guts and Garbage of some beasts are food to others. Doth not experi∣ence teach us, that many Fowls draw nourishment from unclean and filthy Carcasses? Why may not my stomach be so good, and my spiritual constituti∣on so strong, as to concoct such unwholsom food? Lycurgus taught the Lacedemonians vertue, not onely by the pattern of their Sober Ephori, but also of the drunken Helots their slaves; Poisons are as necessary as the best diet, if they be in the hands of him who is able to improve and prepare them. Beer is the better, the more lively and brisk for the grouns that are in the same vessel with it. O that my graces might be the more quick and active for the lees of others vices; that their sins might increase my sancti∣ty; both in making me more thankful to him who maketh me to differ, and more watchful over my
self, lest I fall from my own stedfastness. The Mariners are directed in their sailings by Rocks and Shelves, as well as by the Northern star; My God instructeth Jonah by the shadow of a Weed. Go to the Pismire thou sluggard, consider her provident ways, and be wise to follow them. Observe the men of this world; O my soul, consider their wicked ways, and be wise to avoid them. Ask these beasts of the earth, and they will teach thee, nay shame thee. How unwearied are they in the pursuit of the world! how diligent about their works of darkness! how often do they lose their sleep to do mischief, and neglect their food and callings to indulge their fleshly lusts, whilst thou, whose Master is the Lord of Glory, whose service is the onely freedom, and whose re∣compence will be infinite, art loytering and lazing upon the bed of security! O that thou mayst learn in∣dustry about the concernments of heaven and eterni∣ty, from others industry about the affairs of this earth for a few days; and take shame to thy self, that Satans Servants should be more forward to gratifie their Soul-destroyer, then thou art to please the blessed Saviour! Lord, it is thy prerogative to cause light out of darkness, and to bring good out of evil; teach thy servant to gather figs from these thistles, and to be the better because others are so bad; Be∣cause the wicked forsake thy law, therfore let me love thy commandements above gold; yea; a∣bove much fine gold. I Wish that though in pursuance of my calling, I do afford my ompany to sinners,Wherein the exercising our selves to godliness con∣sisteth. 1. Take heed they do not make thee partaker of their sins. I may never bear them company in their sins. True Gold will not change its colour or nature for the hottest fire. The Rock
keeps its place, and is immoveable, notwithstanding the continual dashing of the water. The earth is not hurt, either by the heat of Summer, or cold of Winter; Though much dirt be flung at a post well oyled, it will not stick. My God hath enjoyned me; Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; Whence I learn these three things; 1. That sin is a work of darkness; The Prince of darkness is its Father; Its his natural off-spring, therefore called the work of the Devil, Iohn 8. 44. A dark heart is its Mother, there its conceived, thence its brought forth; In dark holes these vermine breed and swarm (Ephes. 4. 18. Hos. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 4. 4.) Its portion is utter darkness, blackness of darkness for ever; all its inheritance lieth in dark∣ness, and the shadow of death. 2. I learn that the works of darkness are un∣fruitful; The sinner makes a sad market of all his wicked wares; He soweth vice, and reapeth vanity; promiseth himself much pleasure, and sindeth it wholly unprofitable; What fruit had ye in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death; O what a frightful monster is this miscreant; It hath fruitlesness in the beginning, shame in the middle, and death in the conclusion. 3. I learn that I onght not to have fellowship with these unfruitful works of darkness; Indeed, I have little reason, if I consider the two former par∣ticulars, yet how prone am I to it, either by my si∣lence when they sin; or by my secret complyance with them in their sin! My corrupted heart is like Touch-wood, ready to take fire by the least spark.
When others are bold to blaspheme God, I am apt through an ungodly bashfulness to hold my peace, lit∣tle considering that I must one day answer as well for my sinful silence, as for every idle word. Its my duty to hold the jewel of my faith fast, lest Satan steal it from me; to hold my profession to the end, lest by leaving my Colours, I lose my Crown; but not to hold my peace in the quarrel of truth, lest by suffe∣ring sin in others, I wrong my own soul; Where is my love to others, if I stand still whilst they destroy themselves? It may well break the strings of my tongue (as of the Son of Cyrus) when sin (like the Per∣sian) is ready to kill my Father, or Brother, or Neigh∣bour; Evil men are like Traytours, with whom if we act, or conceal, we are guilty. Where is my love to my self, if I take others intolerable burthens on my own back? Sin is a load, too heavy for the stoutest, for the strongest to carry. Should I by my silence give consent to others Oaths, or Lyes, or Ieers at godliness and godly men; I become a party in their bonds, and liable to make satisfaction for their debts, and may expect every moment when di∣vine justice should Arrest me for them. O my soul! what answer dost thou give to these Arguments? Wouldst thou for all the World be one moment under the guilt of the least sin! Didst thou never feel its weight, and water thy couch with tears by reason of it? Hast thou not sighed out mournfully to God, There is no rest in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor quiet in my bones, because of my sin? And wilt thou for fear of mens displeasure, incur the infinite Gods anger? and to avoid (at most) a raze in thy flesh, admit a wide gash in thy conscience? O that
I might have more love to my self, and more respect for my neighbour, then to suffer sin upon him, through my cowardly silence, or to joyn with him by any in∣ward complyance, lest both be involved in the same vengeance. Lord, the supplies of thy Spirit is the onely preservative against all infections; be pleased to afford it to me, that I may keep my self pure in the most prophane society, and no way be partaker of other mens sin. Do not needlesly ex∣pose thy self to suffering.I wish that I may always make the choice of Mo∣ses, rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a sea∣son; yet that I may never, through my rash zeal, or indiscreet medling with others matters, or im∣prudent opening my mind to every seeming friend, bring my self into suffering. I have trials and troubles enough from others, I need not be the pro∣curer of any to my self. I am every way surrounded with foes, and shall I not be my own friend? The World is my profest and dangerous enemy, for his sake who hath chosen me out of the world; because it cannot reach the Master, it wrangleth with, and abuseth his servants; He that is not its child (but born from above) must not expect to be its darling, but rather to be assaulted with its rage and revenge; The Devil is my sworn and deadly adversary, always ready to put forth his utmost power and policy for my ruine. His Empire is large, his Subjects all at his service, and all his forces shall be used to make me suffer. Besides, my God is pleased sometimes, for the trial of my graces, and the purging out my cor∣ruptions, to cast me into manifold tribulations; since I have then, so many assaults and afflictions from
others, I have small cause to afflict my self. I de∣sire that I may try before I trust, and not unlook the Cabinet of my heart before all, lest some prove Thieves. Its too ordinary for wicked ones, like Ex∣ecutioners, with one hand to embrace a man, and with the other to pluck out his bowels; They may creep, and cringe, and fawn, and flatter, and as Crows, peck out my eys with praises, that they may after∣wards more securely make a prey of me; They as the Spies sent by the Scribes to Christ, feign themselves to be good men, that they might entrap him in his talk, Luk. 20. 20. Should I believe all that may pretend love, I may quickly be bereaved of my lively-hood and life. Companions of my secrets, are like locks that belong to an house; whilst they are strong and close, they preserve me in safety; but weak and open, they expose to danger, and make me a prey to others. My foolish freedom of declaring my mind, may, like the Devil in the possessed person, cast me some∣times into the fire, and sometimes into the wa∣ter. Though many seemed to believe on Christ, he did not commit himself to them, because he knew all men (Ioh. 2. 21.) Though many seem to affect me, I may not commit y self to them, because I know no man. They who as Moses rod, seem at present to be a staff to support and stay me, may by and by prove Serpents to sting me. O that I might imitate my Saviour in his Politicks, as well as in his Piety, and not through my folly, put my outward comforts into the hands of them that hate me, and lay my self at their mercy. I would as my God cal∣leth me, own my Saviour in every company, and never deny him, who witnessed before Pontius Pilate
a good confession for me; but I desire that the feet of my zeal may always be directed by the eyes of knowledge and discretion, lest the faster and the farther they carry me, the more I wander to my wo. My God tells me, He that keepeth his mouth, keep∣eth his life; but he that openeth wide his lips, shall be destroyed, Prov. 13. 3. Bees, though en∣gaged in hot skirmishes with other nsects, use not their stings ordinarily, but when they are transported with rage, and blinded with passion, then they use them to their own certain ruine and destruction. No less injurious is the fire of zeal to my self and others, where it is not bounded by wisdom. I fear many servants of God have felt the wrath of some men (in a greater degree then they otherwise would,) through the immoderate heats of some few Saints. If under colour of hatred against sin, I fall foul upon persons, or instead of reproving sin the work of the Devil, revile Magistracy, and the Ordi∣nance of God, I may expect to suffer, and with lit∣tle comfort, because as an evil doer. Zeal is like Granado's, and other fire-works, which if not well lookt to, and ordered, they do more hurt to them that cast them, then to te enemy. O that I might behave my self wisely in a perfect way, and be∣have my self prudently in the path of piety, that I may never be so foolish, as with the silly flye, to burn my self in the candle of wicked mens power, nor yet so unfaithful as to forsake my Captain, when he calleth me to fight the good fight of faith; Let my ambition be, to be high in my Gods favour, and to have a large share in that eternal weight of glory above; Let my care be here below to study peace, and
to meddle with my own business (O how much ly∣eth upon my hands every day in reference to my ever∣lasting concernments) to affect rather quietness from the World, then acquaintance with it, and to pass through it as a Pilgrim and stranger, with as little noise and noice as I can. Lord, whatsoever tri∣bulation I meet with in the world, give me peace in thy Son; make me as wise as a Serpent, as innocent as a Dove, that those who watch either to defile me in spirituals, or destroy me in civils, may be dis∣appointed; Let me not trust in man, whose words may be softer then Oyl, when war is in his heart, but let my whole confidence be fixt on thy self; how freely may I unbosome my self to thee, without the least fear! How willing art thou to hear! How able to help! How true to all that trust thee! thy faithfulness never faileth; Thou art good, a strong hold in the day of adversity, and knowest them that trust in thee I Wish that I may Confess Christ, whatsoever it may cost me,Disown not Jesu, Christ in the worst Company. and though not thrust my self into danger, yet never betray my cause, or break through any Command, to avoid the cruelest death. Its com¦mon with the Hypocrite, as the Snail, to look what weather is abroad, and if that be stormy, to pull in his horns and hide his head. The Hedghog al∣ters his hole according to the wind; The swallow changeth his nest according to the season. The Bird Piralis takes the colour of any cloth on which she sits. There is a Tree (say some Naturalists) which opens and spreads its leaves when any come to it, and shuts them at their departure from it. The flies will abound in a sunshiny day, but if once it be
cloudy, they vanish. When Christ rides to Jerusalem in triumph, many cry Hosanna, who when he is ta∣ken and tryed for his life, cry Crucifie, Crucifie. The Jacinct is changed with the Air; in a clear sea∣son its bright, but if the air be overcast, its darksom. The unsound Christian is often sutable to his Com∣pany; if they own godliness, it shall have his good word; if they disrelish it, he can spit in the face of it; But pure Coral keeps its native lustre, and will receive no colouring. The upright soul is constant in his profession, and changeth not his behaviour according to his Companions. Oh that I might never through shame or fear, disown him who hath already acknow∣ledged me. Alas! I have that in me, which he might well count a disgrace to him; I am his crea∣ture, and so infinitely his Inferiour; The vilest beg∣gar is not near so much below the most potent Em∣perour, as I am in this respect to the Great God, and my Saviour; The whole Creation is to him as nothing; yea less then nothing, and vanity; what then am I poor silly worm, that lie groveling in this earth! I am a sinner, and thereby his disparage∣ment and dishonour; If a sober Master be ashamed of a deboice drunken servant; much more may the holy Jesus, be ashamed of me an unholy wretch, and trayterous rebel, against his Crown and Dig∣nity; yet for all this distance, for all his diffe∣rence, he is graciously pleased to acknowledge me, and shall not I own him? Either out of shame.If I be ashamed of him, I am a shame to him. But why should I be ashamed of Christ? The object of shame is some evil which hath guilt or filth in it; but he knew no sin, though he was made sin for
me, that I might become the righteousness of God in him; He was a Lamb without spot and blemish; None of his malicious enemies could con∣vince him of sin; He is so far from being the object of shame, that he is infinitely worthy to be my boast and glory; He is the Prince of life, the Lord of glory, the King of Kings, the Fountain of all ex∣cellency and perfection; The highest Emperors have gloried in being his Vassals; Angels count it their honour to serve the meanest of his Servants; and shall I think it a disgrace to be one of his At∣tendants? O that I might be ashamed of my sins, loath my self for all my abominations, be often con∣founded, because I bear the reproach of my youth; but in no company, be it never so great or prophane, be ashamed of him who is the blessed and onely Po∣tentate, and the glory of his people Israel. Again,Of fear. Why should I out of fear disown my Saviour? Is there any safety but in sanctity? Whilst I travail in the Kings High-way, I have a promise of protection, but if I leave that upon any pre∣tence, I run my self into peril and perdition. Those that when called to fight, flie from their colours, die without mercy. What can I expect, if I leave the Captain of my Salvation, but Marshal Law, even eternal death? I may, possibly, by my cowardise, keep my skin whole, but I wound my conscience; I sink my soul, to save my body; as Lot, prostitute my Daughter, my dearest off-spring, that will abide with me for ever, to save my guests, which lodge with me for a night, and will be gone from me in the morning. What is it I fear, that I should be guilty of so hainous a fault? Is it the
worlds frowns and fury? Why, Its kindness is kil∣ling, and therefore its cruelty is healing. If my God see it good, he can and will defend me from the worlds cruelty, without my denying Christ, and in direct courses; and if it be his will, that I suffer for well-doing, I may commit the keep∣ing of my soul to him, as to a faithful Creator. Certainly there is nothing to be gotten by the Worlds love, and nothing (worth ought) to be lost by its hatred. Why then should I seek that love which cannot help me, or fear that hate which cannot hurt me? If I should be so foolish as to love it for loving me, my God would hate me for loving it. Do not I know that the friendship of the World is enmity against God; If I loath it for hating me, it cannot injure me for loathing it. Let it then hate me, I will forgive it, but if it love me, I will not requite it; for since its love is hurtful, and its hate harmless, I may well contemn its fury, and hate its favour; Lord, thou hast commanded me, neither to love the worlds smiles, nor to fear its frowns; I acknowledge that its allurements have been too prevalent in gaining my love, and its af∣frightments too powerful in causing my fear; O that thy exceeding rich and precious promises, might make me despise all its glorious proffers; and faith in thy threatnings, stablish my heart against all its childish bug-beares; The fear of man bringeth a snare, but he that trusteth in thee is sure; Let the dread of thy Majesty swallow up (as Moses rod the Egyp∣tians) all fear of men. And since thy truth hath no need of my lye, thy power hath no need of my sin to preserve me safe, let me never break over the hedge
of any of thy precepts, to avoid an afflicting provi∣dence, but in a way of well-doing, commit my ways unto the Lord, and my thoughts shall be esta∣blished. Suffer me never to say, a confederacy to them, to whom thine enemies say, a confederacy, neither to fear their fear, but to sanctifie thee the Lord of Hosts, and to make thee my fear continu∣ally. I Wish that since my God intends in all his pro∣vidences, my spiritual and eternal good,Lbour to get some good amongst them I may gain something by those that are most graceless; and though Satan purposeth my defilement in my conver∣ses with them, yet they may prove my profit and advantage; That blowing which seems to disperse the flames, and trouble the fire, doth make it burn the more clear; The waters of others opposition, may increase my spiritual heat; A dull Whet-stone may set an edge upon a Knife; A mean, vile Porter, may bring me a considerable present; Black coals may scour and make Iron Vessels bright; Ashes cast upon fire, put it not out, but are helpful to preserve it all night against the morning, which would other∣wise be consumed. Why may not my soul find some Pearl in the Heads of these Toads, and get some spirital riches, by trading with them for temporal? Naturalists tell me, its wholsom for a flock of Sheep, to have some Goats amongst them, their bad sent being Physical to preserve the Sheep from the Shakings; Surely then, the presence of ungodly men, may sometimes be profitable for me, and prevent that lightness and vanity which I am too apt to discover in every company; Though I am loose amongst my friends, and it be my sorrow, I had need to be se∣rious
amongst mine enemies, lest I become their scorn. Frankincense put into the fire, giveth the greater perfume; Civet doth not lose its savour, but is the sweeter in a sink; O that my soul might draw the nearer to God, because others depart farther from him; and do him the more service, and be the more diligent at his work, because they are so unworthy and wicked. Executioners and Hangmen are helpful to a Country, to free them from those Felons and Murderers that would destroy the Inhabitants; My sins may receive their deaths wounds, through the hands of them who have no true love to me. My Pride may well be abated, because of their prophaness; Free grace alone makes me to differ; I had been as bad as the worst of them, if infinite mercy had not preserved me; I shall be as bad, if boundless love do not prevent me: to God a∣lone therefore belongs the glory. Possibly, they may sometimes twit me with my faults, and herein they may prove my friends. Every man hath need of a Monitor; My friends too often are cowardly, and afraid to tell me my errors, lest they should give of∣fence; my enmies will speak their minds freely, if they know any thing amiss by me, and so do me a great kindness; Myrrhe though bitter, may heal wounds, and preserve from putrefaction; so may the taunts and gibes of ungodly men, cure my inward sores, and make me watchful against future wandring. Twas a worthy speech of the Macedonian King Philip, when he was told that Nicanor spake evil of him, I believe he is honest, and I fear I have deserved it. I may also be the better for wicked mens counsel as well as their carping, if I have but the wit to
follow it so far as it is good; Evil Joab gave good counsel to David, and had he desisted upon it from numbring the people, it might have saved the lives of some thousands; It is ordinary indeed to value the advice by the person, and thereby it becomes un∣profitable; But is silk the less precious, because its spun by vile worms? Are Roses the less sweet, be∣cause they grow amongst briers and brambles? Silver and Gold are not the worse by being taken out of the lowest element, the Earth. That Wine may strengthen and refresh my nature, which is drawn out of a wooden or wormeaten caske. O that I might take the counsel of the worst, in that which is good, and refuse the counsel of the best, in that which is evil! Lord, thou canst command that these stones of wicked men be made bread to nourish my soul; teach me by their falls to walk more humbly with thee, and to cleave more fast to thy Son, through whose strength alone I stand; Blessed be thy justice, which hath made them examples to me, and blessed be thy mercy, that hath not made me an example to them. I Wish that whilst my God calleth me among them,Endeavour to reform them. I may do good to them, as well as receive good from them, that I may as Musk, cast a fragrancy amongst such course and foul linnen. Though I hate their sins, yet I am bound to love and pity their souls. Tis true, they are vile and vicious, they work iniquity, they walk after the flesh, they walk contrary to God, and bid him depart from them; But may I not say, Father forgive them, they know not what they do! Did they know him, they would not by their sins crucifie afresh the
Lord of glory. Its no wonder that blind men should wander out of the right way, that those who have been kept in Dungeons all their days, should be contented with the poor Rush-candles of creature comforts, and never desire nor enquire after the Sun of Righteous∣ness. Alas, the God of this World hath blinded their minds, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. He knoweth, that did they but see the grace they abuse, the love they despise, the excellency and certainty of that Salvation which they neglect, and the extremity and endlesness of that misery which they are hastening to, they would quickly turn about, and mind the things which concern their everlasting peace; therefore he holds his black hand over their eyes, and so they are alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them. O what pity should I have for such ignorant persons, as are running hoodwinkt to Hell! If to him that is afflicted pity should be shewn, what pity doth he call for who is all over infected with sin, and every moment in danger of everlasting death? Can I be troubled to behold the blind, or the lame, or the sick, and have I no bowels for those souls that lye weltring in their blood! Besides, the time was, that I had as low thoughts of God and his ways, and as high thoughts of the flesh and the world as they; I was once in their condition, a servant of sin, an heir of wrath, and therefore I owe them the more compassion. Those that have been sensible of the Stone, or Gout, or Tooth-ach, are the more pitiful towards them that are affected with the same pain. My God bids me to be gentle, shewing all meekness towards all men,
(Tit. 3. 2, 3.) Because I my self was sometimes disobedient, deceived, and serving divers lusts and pleasures. When I was wallowing in my unclean∣ness, and priding my self in my pollutions, the heart of my God was turned towards me, and the hand of mercy open to me. O my soul, shall not that infinite perdition to which thou wast obnoxious, and that in∣finite compassion of which thou hast tasted, prevail with thee to pity others! O that thou wert so affected with the misery thou hast deserved, and that rich love and grace which thou hast received; that thou mightest seriously and studiously endeavour by thy affectionate counsel, pious carriage, and prudent admonition, that others may be partakers of the same mercy and grace; if my carriage be unblameable, my counsel and reproof will be the more acceptable; wholsom meat, often is distastful, coming out of nasty hands. A bad liver cannot be a good counsellor, or bold re∣prover; such a man must speak softly for fear of a∣waking his own guilty onscience. If the Bell be crackt, the sound must needs be jarring. I desire that I may be as bold to reprove as others are to commit sin; yet that I may be so prudent, as never to reproach the sinner when I reprove the sin, lest I break their heads instead of their hearts, and make them flie in my face, instead of falling down at Gods feet; Bone-setters must deal very wa∣rily, and Physick is given with great advice, and in dangerous diseases not without a consultation. I would distinguish between crimes, and not fall upon any (as the Syrians did on Gilead, Amos. 1. 3.) with a flail of Iron, when a small wand may do the work, nor (as Jeroboam threatened Israel) chastise
them with Scorpions, who may be reformed with Whips. It was not the heat, but the cool of the day, when my God came down to reprove Adam; The wrath of man workeh not the righteous∣ness of God; Its in vain to undertake to cast out Satan with Satan, or sin with sin. I must turn anger out of my nature, but I must not turn my na∣ture into anger. Yet, let me be serious, not light in all my admonitions; Its ill playing or jesting with one that is destroying and damning himself; Would it not stick close to me another day, should I laugh at them at this day, that are going into the place of weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? My frothy carriage would as Hazaels cloth dipt in water, instead of recovering, stifle my brother to death. Physick works best when its warm; I must love my Neighbour as my self. True self-love will throw the first stone at its own sin. I may not suf∣fer sin in my self, therefore not in my neighbour. Lord, thou hast commanded me in any wise to re∣buke my neighbour, and not to suffer sin upon him. I confess, its an unpleasing work to rake into sores and ulcers; If I lance festred wounds, I make the Patients angry by putting them to pain; and O how averse is my wicked heart to such a task! I am prone to fear their ill-will more then thine, and rather to let them rot in the hony of flattery, then preserve and save them by faithful admonition. How backward is my cowardly spirit to undertake the work? how many excuses will it plead for its neglect? When through grace I have overcome those lets and hinderances, how flatteringly and unfaithfully do I go about it? rather stroaking the sinner, then strik∣ing
the sin. O pardon my omissions of this duty, and all my falseness in the performance of it! Let thy Spi∣rit so encourage me, that I may not fear the faces of men; so direct me, that affectionately, prudently, and zealously I may admonish them that go astray; and O do thou so prosper and bless, that I may bring them home to thy flock and fold. I Wish that I may unfaignedly bewail others wickedness,Lament those sins which thou canst not pre∣vent. and lament that dishonour to my God, which I cannot hinder. Its an ill sign of my Sonship, for others to blaspheme the name of my father, and me to be insensible. Adoption is ever accompanied with filial affection. If I expect the priviledges, I must en∣sure the properties of a Child. Nature will teach me to be troubled for affronts that are offered to the Fa∣ther of my flesh, and will not grace enable me to be greived at the dirt which wicked men throw in the ace of the Father of Spirits. Again, I must not look for freedom from others sufferings, unle I lay to heart their sins. The mourners in Sion, are those that in a common calamity are markt for safe∣ty, Ezek. 9. The destroying Angel will take me to be as gulty as others, if it fixd me without grief, and so wrap me up in their punishments; my God him∣self, judgeth me infected with those sins, for which I am not afflicted; and can I then think to escape? O that my head were water, and mine eyes foun∣tains of tears, that I might weep day and night, for the iniquity and misery of dying gasping sin∣ners! Lord, thou canst fetch water out of this rocky heart, and open the sluces of my eyes; Break my heart, because others break thy Commands; When others kindle the fire of thine anger, help thy servnt
to draw water, and poure it out before thee. Let me be so far from seeing others provoke the eyes of thy glory without sorrow, that when ever I remem∣ber the transgressours I may be greived, because they forsake thy statutes; Let rivers of tears run down mine eyes, when the wicked forsake thy Law. Conclusion.I cannot for my life so carry my self, but I shall sometimes fall amongst wicked men. Whilst I am a∣mongst them I endanger my soul, either by comply∣ing with, or conniving at them in their evil acti∣ons. There is no safety in evil society. Such Pitch is apt to defile my conscience; Who can expect to come off without loss from such Cheats and Juglers? It is the peevish industry of wickedness to find or make a fellow. Besides, they are Children of the world, whose friendship is enmity against my God; they are Children of disobedience, therefore contrary to my new nature, and so must needs be uncomfortable to me; Children of the Devil, therefore Traytors against Christ, and so abominable to my God. I cannot be certain, not to meet with evil companions, but I will be careful not to be their consorts. I would willingly sort my self with such as should ei∣ther teach me vertue, or learn of me to avoid vice. And if my Companion cannot make me better, nor I him good, let me rather leave him ill, then he should make we worse. Though if I depart from hem, the world will judge me proud, yet should I stay with them needlesly, my God would count me prophane; and is it not better that men accuse me falsly, then God condemne me justly? What need I care what men think, so God approve! Tis to his judgement
that I must stand or fall for ever. It is likely that those who cannot defile my conscience, will injure my credit, and publish to their fellows that I am a precise fool; But this is my comfort, there is a time com∣ing, when innocency will cause the greatest bold∣ness; and freedom from sin, will do me more ser∣vice, and be infinitely more worth, then the highest renown that ever mortal acquired. Lord, thy people in this world, are as Lillies among Thorns; The Ca∣naanites of the Land, are Thornes in the eyes, and Pricks in the sides of thy true Israelites. Wo is me that I dwell in Meshech, and my habitation is in the Tents of Kedar; My soul hath long dwelt with them that hate peace. They like not me, because I am not like to them, and count my Company not good, because it is not bad, and I dare not sin with them. They are mine enemies, because I fol∣low the thing that good is! O how black are their tongues with railing, and their hearts with rage, a∣gainst them who dare not provoke thee as much as themselves! I am ready to say now, upon the view of their abominations, and the hearing their Oaths and Curses, and Blasphemies; Cursed be their anger for it is fierce, and their rage, for it is cruel; O my soul, enter not thou into their secrets; mine honour be not thou united unto them; for in their anger they seek to destroy souls, and in their self-will they dig pits to cause others to fall. Because they cannot defile the brethren, they defame the brother-hood, and disgrace them whom they cannot deceive. Let the heat of their lust increase my longing after that place where there is no Judas among thine Apostles, no Demas among thy
Disciples, where all the Society will be of one mouth and mind, of one heart and way, where all the Company will joyn in consort, and the whole Cele∣stial Qire tune their strings and raise their voices to the highest pitch in sounding thine excellencies, and singing thy praises without sin or ceasing. There will be no Tobias, to indict thy children of Treason against men, for their faithfulness to thee; There will be no Ahab to accuse thy best servants, as trou∣blers of the state, for reproving the Idolatries and enormities of the Church; There will be no Balaam trying his hellish tricks, to make thy people a prey to their bodily foes, and a provocation by their sins to thy Majesty; There will be no Tares in that Field, no Straw in that Barn, no Vessels of dis∣honour in that House; Into it can in no wise enter any thing that defileth, or is unclean. The Company there will be (not tempting me to wick∣edness, or taxing me with preciseness, but) part of my felicity. O what an happy day will it be, when all prophane Esaus, and scoffing Ishmaels, shall be cast out of the House, and I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and with none but the holy of the Lord in the Kingdom of Heaven! Holy Father, let the skirt of thy mercy cover all my iniquities and failings in evil company, and grant that my carriage amongst such persons (whilst I am through thy providence forced to be amongst them) may be so pious and gracious; that at that great Har∣vest-day, when thou wilt separate the chaff from the good corn, and burn it up with unquenchable fire, I may be wholly free from their vicious infections, and vexatious presence; and associate with the Spi∣rits
of just men made perfect, an innumerable company of Angels, the General Assembly and Church of the first born, and enjoy them all in, and with thy blessed self, for ever and ever, A∣men. CHAP. IV. How Christians may exercise themselves to God∣liness, in good Company; With a Good Wish about that Particular. HAving dispatched the Christians carriage in evil, I proceed to his behaviour in good Company. The Communion of Saints is the most desirable and delectable society that the whole creation affordeth. God himself is pleased to de∣light in the Assembles of his people; He loveth the gates of Zion (where they met together) a∣bove all the dwellings of Jacob, Psa. 87. 2. The evil spirit is for solitariness, he walketh in solitary pla∣ces, seeking rest, Mat. 12. But God is for society, he dwelleth among his children, and bestoweth his choicest comforts upon the Congregations of his poor. The Father provideth the greatest cheer, and maketh the best feast when many of his Children come together to wait upon him, though each com∣ing singly is welcome to his Table. The Spirit of God fell down in an extraordinary measure upon
the Primitive Christians, when they were gathered together in one place, and with one consent, Act. 2. 1, 2. Naturalists tell us that strife and quarrelling among the Bees, is a sign that the Queen-Bee is a∣bout to leave the Hive and be gone. Its plain, that when the Disciples were scattered, every man to his ow  the Lord su ws leaving them but when they were met together with one accord, then he came unto them and said, Peace be unto you, receive ye the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20. God cannot affect contentious spirits; he would not appear in a blustring wind, or in an earth∣quak, but in a still low voice; when the difference between Abraham and Lot was over, then God ap∣peared to Abraham, Gen. 13. 14. As God delights in the company of his Children, Isa: 62. 4. Thou shalt be called Hephzibah, i.e. my delight is in her, so the Saints delight in communion with one another; things of like Nature, desire to be joyned together. Love the consequent of likeness, hath an attractive power, and covets the presence of the party beloved; Balm put into the Bee hives, causeth the Bees to come together, and others to come to them. Grace like fire, soders together those that before differed. Hence, Saints are like Doves, they flie in troops to their win∣dows, Isa. 60. 8. Though the Pellicane be a me∣lancholly Bird, and naturally inclineth to desarts, yet when they remove their places, they go in companies, and the first stay for the last, as they flie over the Mountains, Isa. 34. 11 Eph. 2. 14. Though Saints love sometimes to be solitary, as having secret business with their God, yet they do not
forsake the assembling themselves together. That verse, Psa. 84. 7. which we read, they go from strength to strength, every one of them in Sion ap∣pearing before God, Iunius reads it, and so it is in the Hebrew, They go from Company to Company; as they went up to Jerusalem, they went in troopes and companies; Possibly we translate it strength, because much of our safety consisteth in good so∣ciety. He that travails alone, is eaily made a prey, , One man is no man; Even Counties that have been large, have drawn themselves into Associations, for mutual and common defence. Hebron, which was a type of the Church, takes its name from Cabar, to accompany, and thence Chebron or Hebron, a pleasant or delectable society. The Saints are all Gal. 6 10. One Family, One Houshold,Ephes. 3.6. One Body,Joh 10. 4 16. One Sheep-fold,1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. One Brother-hood,Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22. One Building, one Vine-yard, one Army, one Spouse; to shew that one∣ness which ought to be in affection among them. Christ tells us of his Spouse, Cant. 6.9. My Dove is one, the onely one of her Mother; Hence the Primitive Chri∣stians, though some thousands, are said to be of one heart, and of one soul; of one heart in unity of affection, and of one soul in unity of judgement, Act. 4. 32. In Tertullians time the Heathen admired the Christians for their love, saying, Look how the Christians love one another.Phil. 2. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Jerusalem is a City compact together, at uni∣ty within it self, Psa. 122. 3. Babel was confounded by diversity of tongues; and the Citizens of Zion are confirmed by being of the same mind and mouth, by speaking all the same thing. O how many arguments doth the Spirit of God use to perswade them to oneness and unity. He tels them,
they have one Father, Rom. 8. 14. One Mother, Gal. 4. 26. that they are begotten by the same immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. and nourished by the same milk, 1 Pet. 2. 2. He calls them co-workers in the same labours, co-heirs of the same life, Rom. 16. 3. and 8. 17. Stones of the same building, then which there cannot be a more firm connexion; and branches of the same Vine, then which there cannot be a more inherent inoculation. How Pathetically doth the loving Redeemer exhort his Disciples to love and oneness! He giveth them his precept; A new Commandement give I unto you, that ye love one another; not but that it was an old du∣ty, but because envy and malice had prevailed so much among the Jews, that to love was a new thing. Again, This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as if there were nothing else that he required but this, or as if this of all the Commandments was that which Jesus loved best. He sets before them his own pattern, As I have loved you, so ought ye to love one another. The love of Christ should prevail with Christians to lay down their lives for him, and shall it not pre∣vail to lay down their strifes among themselves? Fur∣ther, How affectionately doth he pray to his Father to bestow this blessing upon them? That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. And the glory which thou hast gi∣ven me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them as thou hast loved me, i. e. Father, did we ever fall out?
was there ever any discord between us? why then should they that are thine and mine, disagree! Ioh. 17. 21,22,23. Mark these three particulars about this prayer. 1. The Petitioner, that is Christ, who was the wis∣dom of the Father, in him dwelt the treasures of wis∣dom and knowledge: He fully understood what re∣quest would be most advantagious for his people. Besides, he was the Head and Husband of his Church, naturally caring for her welfare as his own, and so his love would prompt him to desire what his wis∣dom saw most conducing to her happiness. 2. The repetition of his petition; He begs the same boon of his Father four times in three verses; He had the Spirit without measure, and so could not be guilty of vain tatologies. Surely then that which Christ (whose wisdom was unsearchable, and whose love to his beyond all compare) doth press with so much earnestness and instance, must needs be of very great weight and consequence. 3. The particular season of this petition, for uni∣ty, or the subject of it. He had in the former part of his prayer confined himself within the narrow compass of the Apostles; but in the 20. v. having made a perfect transition from them to all believers, to all that should believe on him through their word he is im∣portunate with his Father for their union and unity. When the dearest Redeemer puts the whole com∣pany of believers together both Jews and Gentiles, that were at that present, or ever should be in the world, he pitcheth upon this as the most eminent petition he could put up for them. It is not That they all may be enriched, or honoured upon earth; nay it
is not That they all may be adopted, sanctified and saved; but, That they all may be one as we are one; as if the whole Kingdom of Grace and Glory did con∣sist in this, and as if this once obtained, all were done that was needful for them. Besides, he makes this the visible character of their Christianity, that badge which would publish to all they met their relation to Christ; By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another; this is the livery which will speak to what Master ye belong. By this, not by casting out Devils, but by casting out Discord; not by releiving one another occasionally, but by loving each other fervently, shall all men know ye are my Disciples. The differences amongst Christians can never be sufficiently lamented; That they who are all near to God, should behold one another afar off; and they who are all acquainted with Christ, should be unacquainted among themselves. Iob laments this fault in his three friends, These ten times have ye reproached me; are ye not ashamed that ye have made your selves strange unto me? Job. 19.3. That they who are brethren, begotten of the same Father, born of the same Mother, fed at the same Table, educa∣ted under the same Tutor, attended with the same Servants, arrayed with the same Garments, and heirs of the same Inheritance, should be strange to one another, is a great, a gross shame. Many hun∣dred Devils can agree together in one man, and yet in some parts not ten Christians can agree to∣gether in one house. One of the Fathers was so much affected with the divisions of Christians that he profest himself ready to let out his heart blood to cement them together. Both the honour of Reli∣gion
and our own interest do both command us to unite. It was no small reflection on Christians that Mahomets great champion should have cause to say, I shall sooner see my fingers all of a length, then Chri∣stians all of a mind. Tis true, till we have all one eye, we shall never in all things be of one judgement; but must a small difference in opinion cause such a distance in affection? Must we make the Devils and enemies of Christ musick by our discords? when the foes of God and our own souls are in sight of us, shall we be fighting to make them sport, and to give them an opportunity to destroy us? The wick∣ed of the world warm themselves by that fire of di∣vision which the heats of some weak Christians kindle. It is observable that the Spirit of God, men∣tioning the contention between the herdsmen of A∣brahams cattel, and the herdsmen of Lots cattel, immediately subjoyns in the same verse, And the Canaanite and the Perezite dwelt then in the land, Gen. 13.7. Some think to shew the occasion of the difference betwixt them, their cattel increasing so much, and those Nations dwelling among them, they had not sufficient room and therefore wrangled. Others think that latter clause is inserted, to shew the hainous aggravation of their sin: It had been bad enough to have quarrelled where none but Saint had been in company and spectators of their strife; but its much worse to fall out in the midst of their enemies; hereby they expose their profession to derision, and their persons to destruction. Plu∣tarch observes that Dion calmed the boisterous spi∣rits of his mutinous Souldiers, by saying Your ene∣mies yonder (pointing to the Castle of Syracusa,
which he then besieged) behold your mutinous be∣haviour: And shall neither the eyes of men nor Angels, nor of God himself, which always observes the strifes and contentions amongst his children, pre∣vail with them to put a way envying, and variance, and emulation, and wrath, and perswade them to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace! The foolish Cranes by fighting beat down one another, and so are taken: Civil dissentions make Christians a prey. Neither men nor devils (which God hath used as his Officers and Constables to punish them) had ever had such power over them, had they but kept the King of Heavens peace. Surely, for the di∣visions of Sion there ought to be great searchings of heart. O when shall we see the day that those glorious Gospel-promises and Prophesies shall be accomplished! The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, the Calf, and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down to∣gether; and the lion shall eat straw with the Ox; And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand to the Cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord, Isa. 11.6,7,8,9. Isa. 65. ult. One would think that heart-sprung pathetical ex∣hortation of the Apostle should sound a retreat, and call Christians off from their violent and virulent pursuit of each other; If there be therfore any con∣solation in Christ, if ny comfort of love, if any fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, Ful∣fill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord, of one minde, Phil. 3. 1. 2. Reader, I shall give thee two or three Motives to quicken thee to mind and frequent the Company of good men; then acquaint thee wherein the ex∣ercising thy self to godliness in such Company con∣sisteth. SECT. I. FIrst,Motives to frequent good compa∣ny. The good of good Com∣pany. Consider the extraordinary good of Christi∣an society. The Children of God are like Amber∣greece, sweetest in composition. When Flower is added to Flower, and many tyed together, the Posie is the more pleasant. Company is in it self eligible; Banishment is esteemed a civil death, and counted a punish∣ment but one remove from a natural death. Hence, how much hath it been bewailed, not onely by a Cain; Thou hast driven me this day from the face of the earth, Gen. 4. 14. but even by a David; I am like a Pellican of the Wilderness, I am like an Owl of the Desart; I watch, and am as a Sparrow alone upon the house top, Psa. 102. 6, 7. But how much worth is the society of the Saints? Christian soci∣ety is like an Arch-building, wherein every stone upholds its fellow, which if it should not, the whole would suddenly fall. One hand, saith Euripides, can make but weak defence; but as our Latine Proverb is, Multorum manibus grande levatur onus, Many hands make light work. Seve∣ral Horses may draw that weight with ease, which one is not able to stir. Saints help each other, as the several parts of the building; the Foundation
bears up the Walls, the Walls bear up the Roof, the Rafters bear up the Laths, the Laths bear up the Tiles; Hence it is esteemed a priviledge to a Town or City to be made a Corporation. And Mer∣chants manage their callings, not onely more or∣derly, but also more successfully, when they are once made a company. Surely Paul would never have sent some hundred miles for Timothy, if his company had not been of great value. Dr. Taylor blessed God that ever he came into Prison, to be acquainted with that Angel of God John Bradford. One sinner is a Devil to another, tempting and provoking each other to wickedness; Therefore the Philosopher, seeing two vicious persons together, cryed out; See how the Viper is borrowing poison of the Asp! But one Saint is an Angel to another, per∣swading and encouraging one another to holiness. They take sweet counsel together, and go to the house of God in company. The Patriarchs removed their Habitations for the benefit of water-springs. Every Saint is in some sense a Well of living water; and did men but know their worth, they would delight more to be with them. Sure I am, he that hath such a good Neighbour, shall never want a Good-morrow. As a Pomander Ball cast into a Censer, will fill the whole house with its pleasant savour, so a Christian will endeavour to perfume all that come near him. How pleasant then is the favour arising from many Christians in company together! The society of the Prophets is able to make e∣ven a Saul to prophesie; The Pleiades, which are the seven stars, joyned in one constellation, (Canst
thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades? Job 38. 31.) help one another in their work, which is to bring on the Spring, the best season of the year; Christians in consort are an abridgement of Heaven, shining like a Firmament of bright Stars, not one malevolent aspect among them, and they all conspire together, to further a spring and new shoot of grace, the best of blessings in each others hearts. As Sincerity is the heart of Religion, so society is the breath of Religion, it helps to preserve it alive. The spiritual life of the Philip∣pians, did upon their first quickening, appear by this, and twas also very helpful for their continu∣ance and increase, Phil. 1. 5. No Christians are so full, but they stand in need of their fellows; He that had as large a stock of grace as any since Christ, yet could not live with∣out commerce with others, Rom. 15. 24. The goodliest house may want a shoar. The Shunamite, though she told the Prophet she dwelt among her own people, and therefore needed not any to speak for her to the King, was glad to receive that kindness by the hands of the Servant, which she denyed to accept from his Master. I shall mention the advantage of good Compa∣ny, in five particulars. First, By good Company, sinful souls have been converted. A crooked Bough, joyned to a strait one, groweth strait; Latimer was converted from Popery, by the good Company and Conference of Master Bilney. The Daughters of Ierusalem, came to be in love with the Bridegroom, by being in com∣pany with his Bride; by being acquainted with the
Church, they became enamoured with Christ. At first they wondered at her fondness of him, that she was so impatient till she had found him (Cant. 5. 8, 9.) but they had not been long with her, before the heat of her love had warmed them with the same earnest desire and longings. Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee! Cant. 6.1. They that come where oyntments and sweet spices are stirring, carry away some of the savour. One live coal may set a whole stack on fire; Evil Company, like the River Melas in Baeotia, makes all the sheep that drink of it black;Fulk. Meteor. lib. 4. but Good Company, rather like Clitumnus in Italy, makes them that drink of it white. Saul, by being in Company with a wise Ser∣vant, was brought to hear of a Kingdom; He that walketh with wise men, shall be wise, Prov. 13. 20. This made Algerius the Italian Martyr, say, I had rather be in Prison with Cato a wise man, of whom I might learn some good, then in the Senate-house with Caesar. As one Circle caused by a stone thrown into the water, begets a second, and that a third; And as one Rain-bow begets another, and they two to∣gether beget a third; so one Christian helps to be∣get another to Christ, and they two joyning, turn more from the errors of their ways. Holi∣ness like an Elixar, by contraction, if any dispo∣sition in the mettal, will render it of the same property. The Indians were brought to embrace the Christian faith, by the holy conference and company of Edesins and Frumentius, two private Christians.
Secondly, By good company pious souls have been confirmed. Whilst Latimer and Ridley lived, they kept up Cranmer by intercourse of letters. Christi∣an conference is a great help to perseverance. The staff of bonds was the Jews beauty and safety, Zach. 11.14. Company causeth courage; the beams of joy are the hotter for reflection. Ipse aspectus viri boni delectat, saith the Moralist, The very countenance of a good man makes us chearful. Our sight of him is reviving to us. When Paul saw the brethren, he blessed God, and took courage, Act. 28. 15. When many Mariners pull at a rope together, they strive with the more alacrity; therefore Christ sent his Disciples by two and two, Mark 6.7. When Iona∣than went against the Philistines, he would take his Armour-bearer along with him. The blessed Jesus going into the Garden to his bitter, bloody Agony, chose Peter, Iames and Iohn to accompany him. The great Apostle expected comfort from the Romans company, and hoped to confirm them by his; For I long to see you, that I might impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established. The closer the stones of the Edifice are joyned toge∣ther, the stronger is the Building; That I might be comforted together with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me. Grace is the Oyl of gladness, and the more of this oyl, the more of gladness; when Pauls faith and the Romans met in one channel, such a river of oyl would be a river of pleasure: The uni∣on of such flames could not but become a good fire, to refresh and rejoyce their hearts: Iob. 41.16. As its said of Leviathan, that his scales are his pride, i.e. his strengh in which he boasteth; and the
reason of it is rendred, One is so near to another that no air can come betweeu them; They are joyned one to another they stick together, that they cannot be sun∣dred: So it may be said of the people of God, Their unity will be their security; when one is so near to another that no enemy can come between them, when they are joyned one to another and stick toge∣ther that they cannot be sundred, then it may be said of them as of him, In their neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before them, ver. 21. Secondly, By good company erring Saints have been recovered. Holy David lay sleeping in his sin till his good friend Nathan jogged and awakened him. Many a one hath been roused out of his spi∣ritual lethargy by private admonition. Hence saith Solomon, Two are better then one, because they have a good reward for their labour. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but wo to him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to help him up, Eccles. 4. 9, 10. Men that are troubled with the Falling-sickness, are sometimes carried away and die with their distemper, it seising upon them when none is with them; but when they fall amongst company, by rubbing and chaffing them they often come to themselves again. Every scandalous sin especially is a kind of Falling-sickness, very dangerous to the soul; its ill therefore for them that are overtaken with it and have none with them by serious admo∣nition to recover them out of it. I have read of a Minister that in the night had a sudden motion to go visit a certain neighbour, and though he argued with himself the unseasonableness of the time, and his ignorance of any cause for such an
action; yet the impulse upon him was so strong that he could not withstand it; so going to that friends house late in the night, he found none at home save the Master of the house. Truly, (saith the Minister to him) I am come to your house thus late, but I know not to what end, nor for what purpose. Yea (saith the man of the house) but God knoweth; for I have made away, through my pro∣phaneness, so many childrens portions, and here is the rope in my pocket, with which I was going to hang my self. But what, replied the Minister, if I can tell you of one that made away with more por∣tions, and yet was saved? Who was that? said the Neighbour. Adam, saith the Minister, who as a publique person, was intrusted with the stock of all his posterity, and prodigally wasted them, yet was saved. Thus by his serious and seasonable counsel, he stayed the man from his purpose, and was, pro∣bably, instrumental for much spiritual good to him. Fourthly, By good Company, dull Christians have been quickened. Two cold things, steel and flint, smitten together, send forth fire. When two lye together they have warmth, but how can one be warm alone? Eccles. 4. 11. When David was old, and his natural heat decayed, they got a young damsel to lye neer him, and to put some warmth into him; Cold Christians have been heated, by being near others that have been glow¦ing coals. When Silas and Timothens came from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in Spirit; before, he was warm, but then in a light flame, Act. 18. 5. Some men of weak stomachs, have fed the more
for seeing others fall so heartily to their meat. As Iron sharpeneth Iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend, Prov. 27. 17. Some in∣terpret the words thus, Rub Iron against Iron, and it giveth an edge unto it; so if a man lye often gra∣ting upon his friend, by unkind usage, it will shar∣pen his countenance to discontent, and make his spirit keen and angry; and to make good this ex∣position, they observe, that the wise man doth not say, so a friend sharpeneth, &c. but, so a man; because, by his unworthy carriage, he puts off the nature of a friend, and therefore doth not deserve the name But I rather incline to the o∣ther interpretation; As Iron sharpeneth Iron; Rub one file against another, and though before they were dull and blunt, they both become thereby bright and sharp; So friends that are heavy and backward, and over-run with rust, for want of use, by mutual conference and communion, they become lively, quick, and keen, about spiritual things. Christian society, like rubbing Iron a∣gainst Iron, takes away that rust which made them so dull and unactive, and sets a spiritual edge upon them. Vrbanus Regius, an eminent Dutch Divine, meeting with Luther about Goburg, he spent a whole day in conference with him,In vit. of which himself writeth, that he never had a more quickening, comforting day all his life time. Fifthly, By good Company, much sin hath been prevented; Christian society is like the pulse, which ariseth from the heart, and hath a double Moti∣on, of contraction, and dilatation, both for the expelling of noxious fumes, through the insensible
pores of the flesh, and for the drawing in of cool air to refresh the heart and vital parts. Its useful to increase grace; Sothern-wood groweth best in Gardens where its first planted; Grace shoots up most in Gods Vineyard, amongst his Plants; The out-lying Dear, that leave the Herd, seldom thrive. Those parts dye that are severed from the body. Its useful to prevent vice. That deformed Harlot hath been ashamed to appear in such honest Com∣pany. The Romans durst not call for their obscene Plays in Catos presence. When David was like to be slain, Abishai came and rescued him; good company hath prevented the Christians falling from Christ. Peter confest Christ among the holy Apostles, though he denyed him among the ungodly Servants of the High Priest. If one prevail against a man, two shall with∣stand him, and a threefold cord is not easily broken, Eccles. 4. 12. Two streams united into one channel, may bear up a Vessel of some burthen. Iunius being much tempted to Atheism, profest himself very much helpt against it, by discoursing with a plain Countryman near Florence. Naturally, saith Chrysostom, A man hath but one head to advise him, one tongue to speak for him, two hands to work, two feet to walk, and two eyes to see for him. Now, saith he, had a man that skill and cunning, to make that one head many, and that one tongue many, and so his eyes, and feet, and hands many, he would hardly be circumvented by any carnal policy. Good Company doth this, it makes that one head many, that one tongue many, those two hands,
eyes, feet, many; for Saints study for others good as well as their own; their eyes, their tongues, their hands and feet are always imployed for the benefit of their companions. Now in many Counsellours there is much safety. He that hath many eyes to watch for him, is likeliest to be kept from falling. No Vessels are in such hope of security, and to be de∣fended from Pyrates, as those that sail with so strong a Convoy. As God hath set conscience to watch over the inner man, and by reason of that help we avoid much unholiness; so God hath set Christians to watch over one anothers outward man; and truly, these eyes being over us, may prevent the commission of much evil. The society of Saints, is sometimes in Scripture compared to a Garden; It hath fruits and drugs in it, of all sorts, some for food, some for Physick, some for corrosives, some for Cordials, some to warm the frozen Saints, some to cool the fiery sin∣ner, some are profitable for one purpose, some for another; For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office; So we being many, are one body in Christ, and we all members one of another, Rom. 12. 5, 6. A com∣pany of Christians, is a great Fair, where all sorts of provision, both for necessity and delight, is to be had. Hence Satan is so busie and diligent, if it be possible, to prevent Christian Communion, I was coming once and again, but Satan hindered me, 1 Thes. 2. 18. And his servants have learned this of their hellish Master. Iulian the Apostate, and the Heathen Emperours banished Christians into Islands where they could not have access one
to another, being suspicious that their mutual com∣munion would tend much to their mutual comfort and confirmation. Bradford was accused to do more hurt in prison, by his Letters and Speeches, then in the Pulpit by his Preaching. One Chri∣stian cometh to another, as Paul to his Romans, with the fulness of the blessings of the Gospel of Christ. Therefore as Cato would often make division a∣mongst his Servants, judging their union to tend to his disadvantage; so Satan soweth discord amongst Christians, knowing their concord would tend to the throwing down his Kingdom. Surely, of all fellowships, this is the onely good fellowship; Next to communion with God, there is no communion like the communion of Saint The World doth but catechrestically name their rabble of drunken, swearing, and riotous wretches, In the same sense that the Poet speaks, Ari sacra fa∣mes; or as mons is so cal∣led, a non mo∣vendo. Good Fellows; No otherwise then the Atheistical Popes are termed Pii, the greedy cormorants called In∣nocents, and the earthly Muck worms Caelestines. The conjunction of sinners, is a combination with Di∣vels; The Prince of darkness is the head of their league, and they all wear his black colours. But the communion of Saints is a fellowship with God, he is the foundation of their union; These things write I unto you; that ye may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and Iesus Christ his Son, 1 Joh. 1. 3. What fellow∣ship can in any respect compare with theirs, who have fellowship, not only with Christians, the highest and most excellent of Men, or with An∣gels, the noblest and most honourable of crea∣tures, but even with God himself, the Fountain
and Ocean of all honour and perfection! O how happy is that company which hath his presence! how amiable is that Council which hath such a Pre∣sident! and how desireable is their amity, who are united under this blessed and glorious Potentate! May it not be said of such Companions, what Zeba and Zalunna spake of Gideons brethren, Each one resembled the child of a King? Judg. 8. 18. Their Parentage is so great, their society is so gra∣cious, and their priviledges are so glorious, that if a man purchase his freedom of a Company in one of our Cities, at so dear a rate; what should he not give or do to be free of this Corporation? He that hath but an eye of faith to see the glory nd magnificence of this Society, may well express himself, as Titus the Emperour, when he saw the remainder of the Sanctum Sanctorum, Now I well perceive that this is none other then the house of God, and the dwelling of the God of Heaven; neither was it for naught that the Iews stood so earnestly in the defence thereof; For great is the glory of this Tem∣ple; The splendour thereof is without compare. SECT. II. Motive. Wicked men joyn together.SEcondly, Consider, Wicked men joyn together to advance the Kingdom of Satan, and to pro∣voke one another to lewdness and wickedness; and shall not Saints unite to exalt the interest of Christ, and to provoke one another to love and to good works? There is so much monstrous emnity in the hearts of carnal ones, against God and holi∣ness, that when the tide of their own lusts, and
the stream of their headstrong passions would car∣ry them swiftly towards Hell, yet as if this were too little, they hoise up sail and help one another forward with the strong winds of provocation. They encourage themselves in an evil matter, they com∣mune of laying wait privily, Psa. 64. 5. As Samp∣sons Foxes, they joyn tayl to tayl, with their fire∣brands to burn up the good Corn; As Simeon and Levi, they are brethren in iniquity, the instruments of cruelty are in their habitations; Shall they as Ananias and Saphira, agree together to tempt the Spiit of the Lord? and shall not Saints agree to∣gether to please the Spirit of the Lord? Surely, if sinners have their Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us all have one purse; Saints may well ave their, Come let us go up to the House of the Lord, Come let us walk in the light of the Lord, sa. 2. 5. Come let us joyn our selves to the Lord, in a Covenant not to be forgotten. It is confiderable, that though sinners differ never so much amongst themselves, yet they can unite against the Lord and his chosen. Herod and Pilate, before at odds, can comply as friends, and joyn together against the Lord Christ. As Dogs of differing colours, disagreeing bigness, and of several kinds, that sometimes for bones and scrap fight and mangle and tear one another, can with one voice, and cry, and consent, pursue the poor innocent Hare; So the Kennel of Sathans Hell-hounds, though sometimes they quarrel a∣mong themselves, about the honours and riches of this world, and are ready to rent one another in peices, yet can, with open mouth, and full
cry, all joyn to persecute the harmless Lambs of Christ. We read of such different mettal, such a speckled rabble gathered together against Israel, that one would think the diversity of their Coun∣tries, Constitutions, Customes, Languages, Lusts, should have kept them from melting and running into one piece; Yet, Lo, they all unite against Gods people; They take crafty counsel against thy people; They consult against thy hidden ones; They have said, Come let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance; For they have consulted together with one consent, they are confederate against thee. The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, the Philistines, and the Inhabitants of Tyre, Assur also is joyned with them, and they have holpen the Children of Lot, Psalm 83. 3, to 9. Shall such a cursed crew agree together to pull down Sion, and not the blessed Company of Gods Children unite to build it up? O! how shameful is it, that Satans black Regiment, should with one consent watch for us, as the Dragon for the Man-child, to devour us; And as Herod for the Babes of Bethlehem, to destroy us; And that we should not watch over one another for our safety and defence! It may well be our grief, that the Children of this World, are wiser in their Generation then the Children of Light.
Tis true, the combination of wicked men is no true union: but rather a conspiracy against God, and against their own souls. Satan serving them, by drawing them into this league, and making them to be of one hellish heart, infinitely worse then Scyron and Procrustes, famous Robbers in At∣tica, served the poor Travellers, why by cutting short the taller, and stretching out the lesser, brought all to an even length with their bed of brass; Yet such a confederacy may well move us to pity such distracted ones, and doth too much reflect upon us for our dissentions. Thirdly,Motive. The back∣wardness of our own hearts. Consider the backwardness of our own hearts to any good, and the need we have of all helps to quicken them towards heaven. How averse are our souls to any thing that is spiritual! How many excuses, pretences, delays will they make! To sin man needs no Tutor; he can ride post to Hell with∣out a spur; but how backward to do that work which he must do or be undone for ever! The stone is not more untoward to flye, nor lead to swim, then our carnal hearts to exercise any grace, or perform any duty incumbent on us: Our head-strong passions hurry us, our worldly interests byass us, and our desperately wicked hearts draw us from God and Heaven. If the wood be green, there is need of con∣stant blowing, or the fire will go out; when the iron is so dull, it must go often to the Whetstone, or little work can be done with it. Its no wonder that the Spirit of God useth precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and there a little, when man is like the wilde Asses colt, so blockish and
dull to understand Gods way, and so backward and heavy to walk in it. How much are we in the dark about the ways, and Word, and Truths of God! and how apt through mistakes to stumble and fall, calling evil good, and good evill! and do we not want their company who carry a light, a lanthorn with them? How often do we flatter our selves that we are rich in grace, and in the favour of God, when its little so, looking on our selves through the false specta∣cles of self-love? and doth it not behove us to be much in their society who will set before us a true looking-glass, wherein we may behold the native countenance of our souls without any fraud or fals∣hood? We are full of doubts, and want counsel; and Physitians that are able themselves, will in their own cases ask advice of others. We are liable to many sorrows, and want comfort; and who can give it us better then those who fetch all their cordial waters out of Scripture? We are apt to slumber and nod, and neglect our spiritual watch; the flesh is drowsie, and the cares of the world fume up in∣to our heads, and incline us to sleep; what then will become of us if we have none to jog and a∣waken us? It will go but ill with the new man, if whilst he hath so many enemies to hurt him, he hath never a friend to help him; Exhort one ano∣ther daily, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. I have somewhere read of a King, that having many servants, some wise, some indiscreet, some profitable, some unprofitable, was asked why he would keep those foolish unprofitable fellows.
To which he answered, I need the other, and these need me, and so I will have them all about me. I am sure weak Christians need the strong; its ill for a tottering house to have no prop; and strong Christians may need the weak; That knife which is best mettal, may sometimes need a dull Whetstone; The smallest wheel, nay, pin in a Watch is necessary; and so each needing the other, there is great need they should hold together; While there is flesh and spirit combating within us, and the worse so potent and likely to conquer, we shall want all manner of Auxiliaries to relieve the better part. Fourthly,Motive. The evil of neglecting Christian Communion. Consider The evil of neglecting Chri∣stian Communion; I know the Children of God must sometimes be solitary, there are some duties which cannot otherwise be performed, and some callings which cannot otherwise be followed; but as there are seasons for solitariness, so also for society; to forbear the society of Saints without a necessary cause, is a sin, and bringeth great dis∣advantage, both upon our selves and others. 1. Upon our selves, we lose those helps which God hath afforded for the edification of our souls. Fire laid abroad, qickly abateth, nay, goeth out, when if it be raked up together, it continueth and increaseth. I suppose the Spirit of God is so exact in registring the absence of Thomas from the Apostles company, when Christ vouchsafed them his personal and gracious presence, and the sad fit of unbelief which he fell into upon it, partly, as a warning to all Christians, that they
lose not such seasons, as they love their immor∣tal souls, Ioh. 20. 24, 25. But Thomas one of the twelve, was not there when Iesus came; The other Disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands, the print of the Nails, and put my fin∣gers into the print of the Nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. Had Thomas been present when the Lord appeared, how strongly might he have withstood Satans assaults against his faith! His senses had been sufficient to have confuted the father of lies, and helpful to have quencht his fiery darts; but by his absence how dangerously was he shaken in that fundamental truth! Satan hath a wonderful advantage of that per∣son whom he meets (without any warrant from God) alone. If I travail alone between Sun and Sun, I have the Law for my protection, that if I be robbed, I may recover my loss of the Country; but if at other times, it is at my own peril. If I be alone at the call of my God, either when secret duties, or my particular calling re∣quire it, and my grand enemy set upon me, I may expect help from him whose work I am a∣bout; but if when he commandeth me to asso∣ciate with his people, I needlesly wander from them, and any hurt befal me, I must thank my self, and look for no reparation at his hands. It is observable, that the house of Iobs Eldest Son, which was the grave wherein all his children were buried, stood alone; otherwise the wind from the Wilderness, could not have smote the four
corners thereof. O tis dangerous to be solitary, when God requires thy company amongst his chosen. There is a wo to him that is alone, such a man shall be sure to have Satan for his companion. He is ever ready to assault, when none is neer to assist. Eve was tempted with too much suc∣cess when she was alone, without her Husband; Dinah gadding from her fathers house, was de∣filed; Ioseph was then assaulted, when the whole Family was gone, save the instrument of the as∣sault; How soon are straglers snapt up, when those that march with the body of the Army are safe! Pyrates lye skulking to find a Vessel sailing alone, when those that sail in company are a convoy to each other; They who separate, are soon seduced. The Cormorant, or Sea-Eagle hath this property, that she will not seise upon the fish in the water, when they are in sholes, but when single she makes them her prey. Solitude is not more hurtful to the body then to the soul, and to nature then to grace. When David was an exile from the society of the Israelites, and wandred abroad, he fell into diffi∣dence and distrust, nay, into hard and blasphe∣mous thoughts of God; as if he had forgotten to be gracious, as if he himself had cleansed his heart in vain; He then said, in his haste, that all men (even Samuel who had anointed him to the King∣dom, and promised him from God, that he should be King) were lyars. It is a disadvantage to others. When Saints do not meet together, their love cooleth, nay, con∣tentions frequently follow, to the hardening of
the wicked, and the discouraging of the weak. The Temple or body of Christ is not built up with blows and Schismes. The parts of the Temple were framed and squared in Lebanon; at the rearing of it up in Zion, there was no noise either of Axe or Ham∣mer; Babel it self could not be built by divided tongues, muchless Sion by divided hearts. When Christians divide and separate, weak beginners know not what to do, whom to follow, but are ready to say with Cicero, when Caesar and Pompey were at odds; Quem fugiam scio, quem sequar nescio; I know whom to flie, but I know not whom to follow. O how dreadful are the consequents of such civil wars! Discord is not without cause de∣scribed by the great Italian to be cloathed with a garment of divers colours, made up of patches, and they rent, cut, and torn, her lap fll of writs, citations, processes, and arrests, attended onely wih Clarks, Scriveners, Atturneys and Law∣yers; but she was followed with bitter clamours, and diswal howlings. Melancthon perswading the Protestants in his time to peace, tells them a parabolical story of the Dogs and Wolves, who were meeting to fight one against another; The Wolves sent out their Scout to know the strength of their adversaries. The Scout returns, and tells the Wolves, that in∣deed the Dogs exceeded them in number, but they need not fear them; for he had observed, they were not like one another; Besides, they marched as if they were offended rather with themselves, then their enemies, grinning and snarling, yea, biting and tearing one another; therefore let us not be discou∣raged,
but march on resolutely. Dissention amongst men, brings destruction on men. A Kingdom di∣vided against it self, cannot stand. They who im∣bodied toher, may be able to overcome thou∣sands, divided and taken singly may be over∣thrown by a very few. The hardest Adamant, if once broken, flieth into such small dust, that its scarce discernable, and so cometh to nothing. The people of God have not seldom made them∣selves a prey to Persecutours, by their heart bur∣nings and divisions; When the Town is once set on fire by the Granadoes shot in from them that besiege it, the enemies hope to take it with the more ease. Naturalists tell us, that a Punice stone, cast into the waters, though it be never so big, whilst it remains entire, and the parts hold together, twill swim above the water, but break it once in peices, and every part sinks to the bottom. Truly, such often times is the state of the faithful. They, who holding together are safe, and as a bundle of stves, not to be bowed, when parted and taken singly are easily broken. It is the Shepherds observa∣tion, that when Sheep Butt one against another; its a sign of foul weather, and of an approaching storm; We have too much cause to fear that the Schismes and Contenions in the Church of God at this day, do portend some heavy judgement to hang over our heads.
SECT. III. Take heed of thoe sins which good mn are prone to, when they meet toge∣ther.I Shall now direct thee Reader, how  xercise thy self to godliness in Christian Company. First, I must give thee a Word of Caution; Take heed of those sins which Christians when they accom∣pany together are most prone to. Saints are apt to be secure, as thinking themselves safe, when they are as they imagine, among none but themselves; But truly, seeming honest men, may deceive us sooner then known cheats, because we are apt to conide in the former, when we fear and take heed of the latter. The Plague may soonest be con∣veyed through perfumed linnen. Satan tempted Eve in the forme of a Serpent; but when he sets upon Christ, whom he knew hard to be conque∣red, he sets upon him in the shape of a Dove; None so fit as a Peter to perswade him to pity himself. As God can send us a Pearl in a Toads Head, bring light out of darkness, and enable us to get good by polluted persons; So Satan like Hanibal can con∣vey poison through a gold ring, bring darkness out of light, and make us the worse for the Company of the best Christians. The society of the godly, is like the Shop of an Apothecary, in which there are many Cordial Iulips, Purging Potions, and Wholsom Drugs, but also some poisonous, which need strong correctives, and therefore they must be the object of our caution, as well as of our choice. There are two or three things which Christi∣ans when they meet together, too frequently erre in, against which I would advise thee; In mis∣spending
time, censuring the good, ad back∣biting the bad. 1. Take heed of mispending that season;Mispending time. Time is in it self of great price, and ought to be redeemed; but Opportunity is of greater value, and tis infi∣nite pity to cut such a precious commodity to waste. Its ordinary, even with good men when they meet, though it relate nothing to their callings or concernments, to be talking chiefly of corn and cattel, and markets, and fayrs, and forraign trans∣actions, as if they had not a God, a Christ, a soul, an eternal estate to be minding each other of. Our words are the servants of our reason, and to send more then will performe our business, or to send them upon unnecessary and trifling errands, argu∣eth vanity and folly. Have we not the country to which we are all travailing, the purity and plea∣santness of the way thither, the excellency and cer∣tainty of our reward there to talk about? St. Ber∣nard complained that in his time, Christians were faulty in this particular, Nihil de scripturis, nihil de salute agitur animarum, sed nugae & risus, & verba proferuntur in ventum; Not a word of the Scriptures, nothing of your eternal salvation, but trifles and laughter, and words as light as the wind take up the time. Some spend their time in nice Questions, as what Christ disputed of amongst the Doctors? where Pa∣radise stood? in what part of the world is local Hell? What became of Moses body? how many or∣ders and degrees of elect Spirits? These curious persons, the further they go, the nearer they ap∣proach a Sun that blinds them. Others in circum∣stantial
cntroversies, when in the interim the es∣sentials of Religion are laid by; Such talk is but a wasting time, and those that sweat at it, are but laborious loyterers, like those that take great pains to crack or cleave a date stone, which when they have done, affords them no Kernel. Would it not be counted a peice of great folly, for a man that had a wound neer some vital part, to be very busie in laying a plaister upon his scratcht finger, while the other lay unregarded? Were it not a peice of strange madness, when the enemy is at the walls, and the town every moment in dan∣ger of being stormed, the Bullets flying thick about the streets, for the people within to be sitting still and consulting, whether a Musquet would carry fur∣ther then a Trunk, or whether more are killed with Bullets or Arrows? Truly, such folly, such mad∣ness, is it to imploy our selves about needless dis∣course about the world, or superficial circum∣stantial things, when our inestimable souls are conti∣nually in danger of being surprised and slain. The Apostle reproveth such as spent their time about fables and endless genealogies (that is things frivo∣lous, and besides our work of Christianity, though not false or directly opposite to it) which minister Questions rather then godly edifying, 1 Tim. 1. 5. To prevent this, Reader, Offer some serious dis∣course, either by way of Position or Question. Thy profit by good company, doth very much depend upon thy self. Thy Question or Position is the fire which draweth out, either the quintessence or dregs of things. It may be there is one in thy com∣pany rich in grace, in gifts; these are the trea∣sure
of the soul, but if ever thou wouldst be the better for it, thou must open it by the Key of some savoury question or sentence. An ordinary per∣son by some practical question, may lay the foun∣dation for a goodly fabrick of rich and excellent discourse. A little water poured into a Pump may fetch up many Buckets full. A small Lacquey may call us to a costly Banquet. Ferus on Matthew affirmeth, that it was the practice of the Monks, to meet together once in a week, and to acquaint each other with their temptations, the means of resistance, and the issue thereof; I believe, if Christians were more open∣hearted, in declaring to one another the state of their souls, their experiences in point of loss or gain in spirituals, and sense of Gods favour or anger, &c. it would much tend, not onely to the honour of God, but also to the defeating of our great enemy, and our own mutual advantage. Satan hath many wiles where-with to wrong and destroy souls; he proceedeth many times in the same method with several Christians; now when one acquainteth another with the snares he laid to catch him, and the way he took to avoid it, hereby the other is fore-warned and fore-armed; fore-warned to expect that such a trap should be laid for him, and fore-armed how to avoid it. An Almanack, Calculated for London, without any sensible error, may serve the whole Kingdom. That which hath been one Saints condition or temptation, may be any Saints; and that way which one hath taken to escape a peril, or improve a provi∣dence, may be useful and helpful to any of the Saints.
Some tell us the Art of medicines was thus per∣fected. When any one met with an Herb, and discovered the vertue of it by any accident, he did post it up in some publique place; and if any were sick or diseased, he was laid in some com∣mon passage, that every passenger might communi∣cate the best Receipt he knew for that distem∣per; and so the Physitians skill was compleated, by a collection of those posted Experiences and Receipts. I cannot but think that our souls would be more safe, and our spiritual sicknesses less dangerous, if Christians were more free in revealing what means have, through the assistance of the Spirit, been in∣strumental for their recovery out of their inward distempers, and the preservation of their health. In censu∣ring the good2. Take heed of censuring the good; This is ano∣ther sin, that even good men are guilty of when they meet together; Some no sooner creep into the Cradle of Profession, but immediately they leap out of it, into the Chair of Censure; If a Christian do stumble, he saith he falls, and so carrieth it up and down; He always greatens others, and les∣sens his own sins. Things in a mist, seem bigger to us, then in a fair day, by reason of the indis∣posedness of the air or medium; He looks on the sins of others, through the mist of envy, and so makes them bigger then they are; He beholds his own sins, as God doth himself afar off, or as things on a Steeple, which seem small and little. Because some persons are not of his party, there∣fore they are in the bond of iniquity, saith the Censorious man. Thus the Romans judged others not Saints, because they were not exactly of their
own size, Rom. 14. 3. If good men are brought to the fire of affliction, it is, saith he, because they bear not good fruit, and are fit for nothing but fuel. Thus Iobs friends judged him an Hy∣pocrite, and without armour of proof, because he was the Mark at which the Arrows of the Almighty were levelled, Job. 4. 5, 6, 7. If a good man step awry, he tells others positively that his whole way and course is wrong. From his failing in one action the Censurer condemneth his whole conversation, as feigned and fraudulent; as if the best gold did not need some grains of allowance, and the brightest burning Taper had not some smoke with it; He judgeth according to appearance, and doth not judge righteous judgement; When an action is doubtful, and admits of a good or bad constru∣ction, to be sure he will take it in the worst sense. He never meets with an ambiguous text, but he makes a bad comment on it. If Christ associate with Zacheus (though not for communion with him in his sins, but for the conversion of his oul,) he will presently cry him up for a Wine-bibber, a Glutton, and a friend of Publicans and Sinners; In this, and in all the rest he judgeth without judgement; For indeed it is from want of judge∣ment, that the heaviest judgement comes. O how sad is it, that those who believe a day of judge∣ment, should walk so contrary to the rule of their Iudge! Mat. 7. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Jam. 3. 1. The Dogs were kinder then such Men, for they licked the sores of honest Lazaru; but these rub and fret the sores of Godly men, by publishing them to others. Its our duty to mourn for the sins of
good men; Lest when I come, my God will hum∣ble me, saith Paul, for them that have sinned; how contrary are they to Christianity, that are glad they have somewhat to talk of! I cannot esteem them Christians, that think their feast wanteth musick, unless the Baptist Head be brought in a Char∣ger at the first course; A desire to disgrace others, never sprang from grace; Its ill to enquire into o∣thers actions, that we might have matter to draw up a bill of Indictment against them; Like those who in reading Books, mark onely the faults; or such as take more pleasure in beholding a Monster then a perfect Man, such is a censorious person; But it a swinish property to feed upon excrements. They have too much affinity to the old Serpent, that can pick nourishment out of poison. Have not all men business enough of their own, with∣out raking into others graves; But as the Fish Sepiae darken the waters, that they may escape the Net; so they darken the credit of others, that they may escape the net of censure, which is due to themselves. These men are usually eagle-eyed abroad, but as blind as Moles at home; The most vicious, are ever the most suspicious; As Galileus looked through his Prospective-glass to find Mountains in the Moon,Qui judicat fratrem, tan∣tum crimen elations incur∣rit, ut Christi tribunal sibi videatur assu∣me, & ejus judicium prae∣enire. Ans. in Rom. 14. so these examine others lives, and search their actions as narrowly as Laban did Iacobs stuff, to find matter of accusation. But as its Fabled of old Lamia, that she had eyes like unto spectacles, which she might take out and put in at her pleasure, and that as soon as she came into her house, she al∣ways locked them up in her coffer, and sat down
to spinning as blind as a Beetle, and that when she went abroad, she put them into her head, and would very curiously behold what other men did. So the Censurer is so quick-sighted abroad, that he can see the moats in others eyes, but so blind within doors, that he cannot see the beam in his own.Luther gives the Character of wicked men. Tanquam famelii pori immergunt se in sterora no∣stra, & ex iis delicias aci∣unt, cum infir∣mitatem no∣stram exemple maldict. aperiunt & traducunt. Lut. in Gen. 9. Some of these men have a fine way of censuring and condemning others by commending them, that you will not easily discern their envy or ill-will, because of the throng and press of their subtle praises. They will set forth a Christian, eminent for grace, with many and large flourishes of com∣mendation, but after all, in two or three words, dash out all they had spoken, and leave a blot in the room; As the Holy Ghost saith, truly of Naaman; He was a Mighty man, Captain of the Syrian Host, but a Leper. So they of a Saint, whose worth they cannot for shame deny; He hath great parts, many excellent guifts, large abilities, but I wish the root of the matter were in him, or, but he knoweth them too well, or, but he is covetous or proud; as the Smith that shoeth an Horse, and pre∣tendeth therein to do him a kindness, but pricks him in shooing him, and therefore had better have let him alone; This one flie of But, &c. mars the whole Pot of Oyntment. The Censurer with that short Knife, stabs his Neighbours fame to the heart. Reader, I beseech thee, both for thy own sake, and the Gospels, to be tender of the repute and credit of Saints; A good mans name, is like a Milk white Ball, which exceedingly gathers soil
by tossing, and therefore is to be sparingly talked of; Words reported again, have another sound, and many times another sense; Besides, one Dog sets many others a barking. Talk of his failings as low as thou wilt, the world is quick of hearing, and they take the size of all Christians cloaths, by the measure of the weakest; Thy charity should clap a Plaister, supposing there be a real wound, and cover it with the hand of privacy, to keep it from the open air. The Egyptian who carried something wound up in a Napkin, answered discreetly to him that asked, What it was? It is covered, to the end that no man might see; Truly, if we know of o∣thers failings and infirmities, we should hide them with the mantle of love, and not shew them to any, but in relation to the offendors good and recovery; for why should a fallen brother have cause to complain, I am wounded in the house of my friends, had it been an enemy I could have born it, but it was thou O man, my friend, mine equal, and my acquaintance! Apelles drew Antigonus, who had but one eye, half-faced, whereby that blemish was hid, so should Christians their brethren. The wise man tells us, the worth of a good name is above all wealth, Eccles. 7. 1. A good name is better then precious Oyntment. What a great theif is he then, that robs his Neighbour of it! Our rash judging others, like the Rams-horns before Iericho, may blow down that with a blast, which we cannot build up again while we live. An ill report is soon raised, but not so soon laid; It usually like the Crocodile, groweth whilst it con∣tinueth. Our tears should be the grave to bury
our Neighbours failings in, and not our mouths a grave to bury their names in. That one act of Alexander, merits eternal memory, who having read a Letter with his favourite Hephestion, where∣in his mother calumniated Antipater, he presently took his Signet from his finger, and oppressed He∣phestions lips with it, conjuring him (as it were) to seal up his lips, and not once to open them, in revealing anothers disgrace. Suppose the person I censure be really evil, yet my duty is to do what I can to amend, not to divulge his errors; But if he be good, I dishonour God by disgracing his Friend, and shall be sure to pay for it, either in tears or torment. How shall I be able to stand in that day, when men shall give an account of all their hard speeches? and what shall I answer, when God shall ask me as once he did Aaron and Miriam, Wast thou not afraid to speak against my Servant Mo∣ses? 3. Take heed of back-biting the bad. When Men speak evil of others that are absent, before ma∣ny, purposely to defame and disgrace them, this is back-biting and condemned by God, though what we speak of them be true; Doeg spake nothing but truth of David and Abimelech; yet the Scri∣pture calls him a lying and deceitful tongue, Psa. 52. Somtimes it may be a duty to reveal others deeds of darkness, as when these two things concur. 1. That we have cause for it. When what we mention is naked truth, and the sin not any ways rendred more ugly and deformed, by miscon∣structions or aggravations; And,
2. When we have a call to it, as when we are desired to mention what we know of others, by them that have good ground to enquire after them, or when through ignorance of such things, others may be deceived in them, or when we are lawfully required before a Magistrate, to testifie our know∣ledge of such persons or actions; I may add a third, and that is, When our desires and ends are purely to get our hearts affected with the dishonour that is done to God by their wickedness, and the danger and misery of their own souls; This is supposed to be the subject matter of the Saints discourse, Mal. 3. 16. when in evil days they spake often one to another. But for men to make it their business to publish others prophaness, this is prophane; Thou shalt not go up and down as a Tale-bearer among thy people, Lev. 19. 16. The word for Tale-bearer in the He∣brew, is Bakel, and signifieth a Pedlar, which fitly sets forth the property of a Back-biter; The Pedlar goeth up and down the Country offring his wares at every door, very willing to put them off; he takes them up at one place, and never ceaseth travailing till he hath sold them at another. So the back-biter catcheth up an evil report of a man at one house, and cannot rest till he is at some other house to tell it again, offering to vend it at a very low rate, to any man that will take it off his hands; Nay, he is so full, that he is ready to burst, if none will allow him vent. He is bigg with child, and can find no ease, till anothers ears be the Midwife to deliver him of such a deformed Mon∣ster. But this is opposite to the rule by which we
should walk, Tit. 2. 3. Our God commandeth us, Speak evil of no man; Not of good men, for they are Gods portion; not of bad men, for so is Gods precept; This unchristian course of some profes∣sors, hath procured them many a mischief, and brought up an ill report upon them all. The sin∣ner is apt to say of such, as Ahab of Micaiah, I hate him, for he never speaks well of me. And thus instead of saving their neighbours souls, which ought to be the work of every Christian, they harden them in their sins, and help to deepen their con∣demnations. Without doubt, that time which men spend in reporting others wickedness, would be far better imployed, in confessing and be wail∣ing their own; It will prove at last but an evil means to raise our own names higher, by pulling down o∣thers, and building on their ruines; and to re∣late their vices as a foil to render our vertues more beautiful and glorious; Let not the evil speaker be established in the earth; Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him, Psa. 140. 11. He that plot∣teth to pluck up others names, doth it with an in∣tent to plant his own the surer; but he shall not be established in the earth, saith God. He judgeth him∣self safe, because others cannot stand before him, or are disabled by reason of the disgrace he hath brought on them to oppose him; But evil (like a pack of ravenous hounds) shall (with open mouth) bunt (this butting Stagg) and (sooner or later) overthrow him. It was wise counsel which Diogenes gave the Emperour; Take heed, saith he, of two sorts of beasts in thy Court, both which bite dangerously,
the tame Beast, the Flatterer; and the wild Beast, the Back-biter: Well might he call them Beasts; for a Man-like Spirit scornes to be so brutish, as to claw the itching eares of others with flatteries, and hates to be so currish and cowardly, as to bite them behind their backs; David would have no such to be his Servants, Psa. 101. 6, 7. The Back-biter hath this sad unhappiness, that he wounds three with one Arrow of his viperous tongue, Himself, his Hearer, and his Neighbour he speaks of. 1. Himself; for such weapons recoyl and flie upon him that dischargeth them. The Holy Ghost compareth a back-biting tongue to a sharp sword; and indeed, like Sauls sword, it may be the death of the owner; God joyns this sin with Murder, Lev. 19. 16. to note, saith one, that the Back-biter is a Man-slayer, and surely such a one shall not escape vengeance. 2. His Hearer; The Receiver is as bad as the Thief. If there were no Tale-hearer, there would be no Tale-bearer; Some are fitly compared to Brass Pots, though they are great, you may carry them by the ears, which way you please. Its an ex∣cellent expression of Solomon; As the North-wind drives away Rain, so doth an angry countenance a Back-biting tongue, Prov. 25. 23. Its a memora∣ble saying of Bernard;Detractor & ubens aditor uter{que} diabo∣lum portat; alter in ore, alter in aure, Bern. The Detractour, and wil∣ling hearer of it, do both carry the Divel abot them; the one carrieth him in his tongue, the other in his ear. It was the wish of Plautus, that there were a Law for the hanging of Tale-bearers by the Tongue, and Tale-bearers by the Ears.
3. The Person he speaketh of; He that takes a∣way a mans name, leaves him little for this world worth keeping. This evil tongue is fitly compared to an arrow, for it wounds a man even afar off. As secret poison works incurable effects, many times before it is discerned, so doth a back-biting tongue. A man were better, like him one of the Antients mentions, carry a stone in his mouth three years, to prevent much babling, then be guilty one hour of back-biting. SECT. IV. SEcondly, If Christians would exercise themselves to godliness,Be service∣able to others they must be serviceable to the good of each other. The Temple was built in Solomons time, by men of all sorts; There is not the meanest Christian, but may do somewhat in his place, to∣wards the building of the Spiritual Temple; The Communion of Saints, consisteth in three things. 1. In a mutual Communication of their graces and gifts; Grace is given us, not onely for our selves, but also for the good of the Saints, 1 Cor. 12. 5, 6. There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; differences of administration, but the same Lord; diversities of operation, but the same God, which worketh all in all; But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. The water of life is like a common stream, for the benefit of many. 2. In a mutual joyning in the ordinances of God, Act. 2. 43. The Servants of the same Lord, wait upon him, sometimes singly, sometimes in compa∣ny. There are set seasons, wherein they all meet
together to attend him, though when they are par∣ted they are all about his business; And the same day there were added to the Church three thousand souls; And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles, Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayer. 3. In mutual serviceableness each to other. Every man is a Steward to manage his abilities for others good, and to improve his Talents for his Masters glory; Now if our stock were our own, that we were the Proprietors, to let it lie still would argue us guilty of much folly; but when it is altogether anothers, and we are but factours for him, to neg∣lect the improvement of it, speaks us arrant theives, and guilty of unfaithfulness;Ephes. 4. 16. As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Its but an ill property of the Swan, that she cannot endure the Goose should come neer her, to take part of her food. Though it might be a fault in the Church of Syracuse, what Hilary mentions, that by a Law there was a community of outward goods; yet I am sure it is none, that there should be a community of spiritual gifts. Wicked men are said to be of the night, but Saints of the day; now as the day enlightens and warms all it shines on, calls them to their work, to their walk, and helpeth to prevent their fals and wandring; even so should the Saints, In love serve one another, Gal. 5. 13. Such a man is of the earth (is right earth, that standeth on its own center) who is wholly for himself. All things that have af∣finity with the Heavens, move upon the Centre of
another which they benefit. The Bramble which receiveth all good, and keepeth it to it self, piercing instead of pleasuring those that come neer it, will be cast ere long into the Fire. It is said of one, as all the encomium could justly be given him, Sibi natus, sibi vixit, sibi mortuus, sibi damnatus; He was born to himself, he lived to himself he died to himself, and he was damned to himself. We have a common saying, He that is not good to himself; is good to no body; and its as true again, He that is good onely to himself, is as good as no body; It was the voice of a cursed Cain, Am I my brothers Keeper? The voice of the blessed Apostle, Consider one another, to provoke to love; Exhort one another whilst its called to day; Let no man seek his own, but every one his brothers good, to edification, Phil. 2. 4. Heb. 10. 34. A Company of Christians, like the Plants in Paradise, should impart an aromatical savour each to other; A friend must shew himself friendly, saith Solomon, Prov. 18. But how? By endeavouring to make his friends better. It was a commendable property, which some mention in Socrates, That he always studied how he might better the minds of his Familiars. And Seneca, when the Scholars of Theophrastus had shewed him two men, that were intimate friends, whereof the one was very rich, and the other very poor, he said to them, If they be friends, how comes it to pass that the one is so poor, and the other so rich?Si amici sunt, quo sm alter ita dives, alter ita pauper. en. Epist. 8. Intimating, that had there been any true friendship, the rich man would have imparted of his goods to the poor man. As true love cannot stand without communicating of
our temporal riches, so neither without imparting of our spiritual, for the supply of others neces∣sities; If there be love in feasting one anothers bodies, there is much more in feeding each o∣thers souls; And if to distribute and communicate of our earthly treasures we must not forget, for with such sacrifice God is well pleased; then to di∣stribute and communicate of our heavenly treasures we must be more forward, because with such Sacri∣fice God is better pleased. Besides, it is an encouragement to Christians, that they do not diminish,Quanto plus prosundimus fluentorum bo∣norum spiritu∣alum, tanto nhi & fluen∣ta sunt auctio∣ra. Non enim in hac causa contingit, sicut in pcuniis. Illic enim quanto plus ex∣pendit, tanto plus pssidet pe∣cuniae, hic au∣tem plane secus agitur Chrys. Hom. 8. in Gen. p. 37. but increase their spiritual stocks by trading. He were not a man that would not do another a courtesie, when by doing it he should do himself no injury. How bad is he then that will not benefit his Neighbour, when thereby he doth a real kindness to himself? Money laid up, rather wasteth with rust, then increaseth; but Money laid out, brings in considerable profit. To him that hath shall be given. When the Servant that had received five Ta∣lents, traded and gained five more, Take the Talent, saith Christ, from the unprofitable servant, and give it to him that hath gained five; our Communication to others, is no diminution, but an addition to our selves. Live coals are made the hotter for those near them, which they enlivened. The truth is, there is no Vsury so law∣ful as of spiritual riches, nor is there any so profitable; Our use upon use, which almost doubleth the principal in seven years, is nothing to this; O Christians, there∣fore lose not a tide, a market, an opportunity, if possible; hereby, though your beginnings be small, your latter end shall wonderfully increase; Many that have begun with very little, have by trading thus, come to dye worth thousands.
Before I come to shew wherein Christians should be serviceable each to other, I must a little explain my self, lest I should seem to allow that which the Word of God forbids, namely, that every private Christian ought to be a Preacher: Such a tenent would cut asunder the nerves and ligaments of this society, which is Order. Every star must give light in its own and proper sphere. 1. There is an authorative, publick counselling, ad∣monishing, &c. which belongeth only to Pastors law∣fully called. Observe what the holy Ghost saith, Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Pastors? Are all Teachers? No, all are not gifted for it. It would much reflect upon the King of Heaven to send ser∣vants upon such weighty errands, that were unfit for them, and did rather render their business ridi∣culous. Its no easie thing for a person to be quali∣fied for a publick preacher: The great Apostle cry∣eth out, Who is sufficient for these things? though the voyce of ignorant men is, Who is not sufficient for these things? Besides all are not called to it. It is not gifts and parts that will make a Subject an Offi∣cer at home, or an Ambassador abroad, but a Com∣mission from his Prince; Let no man take this honour upon him, unless he be called of God, as was Aaron. There be many works which private Christians may not meddle with, as to consecrate things, to constitute Ecclesiastical laws, to excommunicate, to receive in those that are cast out, to administer the Sacraments, &c. But those works which they may and ought to do, as, to exhort, advise, admonish, comfort, &c. they must do them as private members, not as publick Officers in the name or stead of
Christ, and to private members, not to the Church. 2. There is a private charitative counselling, com∣forting, admonishing others; this may belong to any Christian, so he keep within his own place, and carry himself therein according to Divine com∣mands; for God hath made no man a Treasurer, but every man a Steward of those talents with which he is intrusted. Hence the Apostle frequently com∣mandeth believers to mind these duties, Gal. 6.1. Heb. 3. 13. 1 Peter 4. 11. But in these Christians must keep within their bounds; as fixed Stars give light to others, continuing still in their own orbs; and not as Planets (according to some) wander up and down out of their places. The members of the bo∣dy do not intrude into each others office. Vzzah's upholding the Ark, when shaken, though question∣less out of a good design, yet was the cause of his death, and instead of furthering it, hindred its march towards the place of its rest. Private Christians ought to be serviceable to each other in these particulars. 1. In instructing the ignorant; Among Christians there are many who have but ignorant heads, though they have holy hearts; though for the time they have enjoyed the means, they might have been teachers of others, yet themselves had need to be taught the first principles of the oracles of God; Now the work of knowing men must be to instruct such; though they be dull and heavy, we should bear with them, and condescend to them. St. Austin said he would speak false latine if his bearers understood it better then true. By many blows we make a nail
enter into an hard board; by precept upon precept, and line upon line, we may beat truths into the heads of them that are very dull. Iobs friend tells him, Behold thou hast instructed many, Job 4. 3. In this sense Iob was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame; eyes to prevent their wandring in a wrong way, and feet to prevent their stumbling in the right way. David was no Priest yet he would teach others Gods precepts; When he had once tasted Gods love, others should taste some honey drop∣ping from his lips; Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee, Psal. 51. It is a noble Work for Christians that have abili∣ties and understanding to take some pains to teach and instruct them that are ignorant. They cannot worship God as they ought because they are unac∣quainted with his Word and Will. How can a ser∣vant please his Master that doth not know his plea∣sure? They cannot do the good they should, because they know not their duty: They who are almost quite blinde will do but little work. They are more open to temptation both from evil men and the evil one, because of their ignorance. Its as easie to give a child poison as wholesom milk, because it hath not wisdom to discern the difference: Its not hard to put the poison of error into their mouths, who are but babes in understanding. When the quick-sighted walk steadly, these dark-sighted per∣sons walk stumblingly in the way of Gods command∣ments. O do what thou canst Reader to inform such poor creatures in the truths of God; for as the Eunuch said to Philip, How should they understand unless some one guide them? We count it worthy
and honourable to teach others some curious Art, or high calling; sure I am there is a day coming, when to have taught one poor Christian how to serve God better, and to honour him more, will cause more comfort, and bring more credit, then the in∣structing thousands in the greatest and deepest my∣steries of Nature or Art. 2. By quickening the slothful. The Eagle loveth her young, yet when they are ready for flight, and lye lazing in their nest, she will pierce and prick them with her claws, to make them flye abroad: Love to others souls should stir us up to rouze drow∣sie Christians out of their spiritual slumbers, and lethargies. One Bell man that is stirring at mid∣night, by crying Fire, Fire, awakens hundreds that were fast asleep in a short time: One lively active believer, acquainting men with the jealousie and justice of God, and his severe proceedings against secure persons, who neglect their spiritual watch, may quickly call them from their beds to their watch and work. Consider one another, saith the Apostle, to provoke one another to love and to good works, Heb. 10.24. The Greek word , is, Con∣sider ne another into a Paroxysm, a violent heat of an Ague or Fever, to make each other fer∣vent and fiery in love and good works. Consider one anothers backwardness and dulness, and pro∣voke one another to your duties and that with di∣ligence. Consider one anothers states and conditions, and provoke one another to a sutable seriousness in working out your salvations. Consider one anothers hinderances, and temptations, and weaknesses, and provoke one another to love and to good works.
Christians should say to one another, as Iudah to Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that I may fight against the Canaanites, and I will go up with thee into thy lot: Help me by jogging and awakening me if I sleep, and I will do as much for thee, Iudg. 1.13. And encourage one another as Ioab his brother Abishai, 2 Sam. 10. 11,12. And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me; but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and the Cities of our God: And the Lord do that which seemeth him good. Thus the children of God should bespeak each other, If the world be too hard for thee, I will endeavour to assist thee, by discovering the va∣nity of its shallow allurements, and the foolery of its skin deep affrightments; If the Devil or Flesh be too hard for me, thou shalt do thy utmost to succour me in withstanding their batterie, and repelling their poiso∣nous and fiery darts. Onely let us be of good courage, let us watch, stand fast in the faith, quit our selves like men for our God, and our Redeemer, and our souls, and our eternal salations, and the Lord will be found faithful, who hath assured us that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able. 3. By comforting the sorrowful. Christians should have a Cordial in store for them that are fainting; a cup of wine for the heavy in heart, and be able to speak a word in season to him that is weary; Comfort the feeble; i. e. the sick at heart, such as are ready to sink under the weight of sin, and are frighted with the apprehension of the eternal fire, 1 Thess. 5. 14. Amalek is branded with a mark of
infamy, and was followed with a curse and slaugh∣ter from God, for falling upon the faint and feeble ones of Israel, Deut. 25.18. God cannot endure it, he cannot bear it, that his weak sickly ones should be wronged. He is tender of them himself; he car∣rieth his lambs in his arms, Isa. 40. 11. and others must do so too, or he will make them rue it. The world doth as the herd, push the wounded Deer out of their company; but Saints endeavour to bind up the broken in heart, to comfort them, as Paul commands his Corinthians, lest they be swal∣lowed up of too much sorrow, 1 Cor. 2.14. The Husbandman doth mind his young tender trees in a special manner above them that are grown up and strong, because such are in more danger of breaking, and bruising, and other hurt then grown trees; so that besides the wall or common fence about the Orchard, he makes a special fence with bushes and stakes about these, and gives them more choice nourishment, and more frequent watering; God is most choice of his little ones, his weak chil∣dren. When Israel was a child I loved him, I drew him with the cords of love, and with the bands of a man, Hos. 11. 1, 3. Christians must imitate God in this and be followers of him as dear children. Where∣fore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, Hebr. 12.12. The Martyrs in prison, by dis∣coursing on the promises shook off their carnal se∣ters. Holy Bradford made his dark dungeon by this means lightsom to his fellow-prisoners. Luther profest Melancthon very helpful to him against his inward doubts, as he was to Melancthon against his frights about the publick state of the Church. A
friend is born for the day of adversity:Prov. 17. 17. And tis pity he was ever born, that denieth to do that for which he was born. It appertaines especally to the of∣fice of a friend, saith Seneca, to asswage his friends grief by speech; to drive away his sadness by chear∣fulness; and to refresh him with his very presence. When women travail they carry frequently with them strong waters, and if one fainteth or is sick, she that hath those cordial waters prayeth her to take some for her ease and comfort. The Apostle prepareth for the Christian, choice and rare cordials in 1 Thess. 4. about the six last verses, and then wish∣eth them to make use of them for their mutual good; Wherefore comfort one another with these words. 4. By admonishing the sinful. Saints, like Clocks made up of curious wheels and engines, are soon discomposed, and therefore often want some work∣man to set them in order again. A good man if his friend follow vertue, will be a Father to encourage him; if he be full of doubts, will be a Minister to di∣rect him; but if he follow vice, will be a Magistrate to correct him. Christians must allow one another for their infirmities, but not allow one another in their infirmities. If a brother be overtaken with a fault, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. Which words are very emphatical, and point to us. 1. The nature of his fall; he is overtaken with a fault, he doth not overtake the fault. He is rather passive of it, then active in it. A sinner like Ahab, sells himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord; but a brother, like Paul is sold under sin. Its proper to the wicked to be voluntiers
in this unholy war against God. Saints fight not, ex∣cept they be prest. The Christian is drawn to ini∣quity by cords of vanity, the other draweth ini∣quity with cords of vanity. 2. The duty of his friend, restore such a one. Its , an allusion to Chirurgions, who set bones out of joynt, though they put their Pati∣ents to pain, and make them angry at present. So must Christians endeavour the joynting of their brethren, whose souls are out of order, though at present they have little thanks for their labour. This courtesie we owe to our brothers Ox or Ass, much more to his Soul, Exod. 22. 4. Its a strict command, warn the unruly, 1 Thes. 5. 14. though most men draw back, when they are called to this burthen, that fallen brethren lie under the same misery that Travellers do, to find many Hosts, but few Friends, and may cry out, as Lewis the eleventh of France, I have plenty of all things, but such as will tell me my faults. 3. The manner how this friendly part must be per∣formed, with the spirit of meekness; The bitterness of reprehension is much sweetness, by the pleasing∣ness of our expressions. Gentle sores are but anguisht with too hard a pressure. Though Swine are dri∣ven with violence, yet Children that wander, are gently led home.2 Thes. 3. 11. According to the wound must the plaister be more or less searching. Christ reproves Martha mildly, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but he rebuked Peter sharply, Get thee behind me Satan. The Apostle writing to the Romans, commen∣deth them highly, that they were able to admonish
one another, Rom. 15. 14. They had piety and grace enough to perform the duty, notwithstand∣ing the arguments of ill will, or loss in estate, or other evils which the flesh suggested to the con∣trary; and they had prudence and discretion enough to perform the duty, so as it might most probably be profitable: But how unlike are Christians in our days, to those in the Primitive times! Admo∣nition is a Lyon which few dare come near, for fear it will tear them in peices; We carry our selves rather like Machiavels Scholars, who taught his followers, if their friend were up to the knees in water, to lend him their hand to help him out, and so if he were up to the waste, but if he were up to the chin, then to lay their hand on his head, and duck him under, that he rise no more. How many that should reprove others, have their mouths stopt, as the Dogs by the Thief,Perrigit pa∣nem ut ilat. with a piece of bread, some kindness or other! Or else as Erasmus saith of Harpocrates, they hold their finger in their mouths, and are affraid of giving offence; they are rather like the reflection of a Looking-glass, ready to imitate others sinful gestures and acti∣ons, then rebuke them for them; There is no re∣prover in the gate. Nay Heathen exceed in this many of us; The Great Philosopher tells us, That is true love, which to profit and do good to us, feareth not to offend us; and that it is one of the chiefest offices of friend∣ship, to admonish.Vt malus ser∣mo inducit in peccatum si malum silenti∣um relinquit in peccato August. Euripides exhorts men to get such friends as would not spare to displease them, saying, Friends are like new wines, those that are harsh and sowr keep best, the sweet are not lasting.
Phocian told Antipater, Thou shalt not have me for thy Friend and Flatterer too. Diogenes when men called him Dog, for his severe kind of reproving; would Answer, Dogs bite their enemies, but I my friends for their good; And are we so hardly drawn to this duty? O how justly might the Lord reprove us cuttingly, and set our sins in order before our eyes, to our comdemnation, for our backwardness to reprove others to their humiliation.In Quat. Noviss. We have most of us cause with Reverend Mr. Robert Bolton, to confess and bewayl our neglect herein. SECT. V. FIfthly, By bearing each others infirmities. Chri∣stians like the clearest fire, will have some smoak, whereby they are apt to offend each others eyes, and to cause anger. The best and most pious, may sometimes be peevish. Those brethren that love sincerely, may too often quarrel; True Members of the same body, may by some accident be dis-joynted; Though contentions argue them to have flesh, yet they may arise where there is spirit. Therefore the Holy Ghost commandeth, Bear one anothers burthens, and so fulfil the Law of Christ; Here is the Commandment enjoyned, and the Argument whereby it is enforced, Galat. 6. 2. First, The Precept; Bear one anothers bur∣thens. There is a threefold burden that Christians must bear for each other.
I. The civil burthens of their miseries and suf∣ferings; Have a fellow-feeling with them in their afflictions; Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is afflicted, and I burn not?Rom. 12. 15. saith holy Paul. Herod and his men of War, will set a persecuted Christ at naught; The Chief Priests and Elders will mock him when he hangs upon the Cross, Luk. 23. 11. Mat. 27. 4. Edom rejoyced in the day of Ierusa∣lem's trouble, they cryed Aha, so would we have it; But the true seed of Iacob, sigh for others sorrows, they weep with them that weep;Heb. 3. 3. Re∣member them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity; If one part of the natural body be in pain, the other parts are sensi∣ble of it; When one branch of a Tree is torn and mangled in Summer, the other branches are affected with it, and out of Sympathy (as it were) will not thrive so well as formerly. If one person of a family be sick, how much do his relations from a principle of nature, lay to heart his pain and ill∣ness! Christians are all members of the same body, branches of the same vine, children of the same fa∣mily, and it would be monstrous and unnatural for them, not to feel each others miseries, and suffer in each others sufferings. II. The Spiritual burthen of their iniquities and sins; Whether more immediately against God. Though we must not bear with them in their sins, yet we must help to bear their sins with them. We ought to sit on the same floor with them that are fallen down, and to mourn with them, and for them, and to bear some of the weight; This temper was so eminent in Ambrose, he would so plentifully
weep with the sinning party, that a Great Com∣mander under Theodosius beholding it, cried out, This man is onely worthy the name of a Bishop. As Stags when they swim over a River, to feed in some Meadow, they swim in a row, and lay their heads over one anothers backs, bear∣ing the weight of one anothers horns, and when the first is weary, another taketh his room, and so they do it by course. So Christians must be willing to bear each others weight, whilst they are passing through those boistrous waters, till they land at their glorious eternal harbour. Or whether their sins are immediately against our selves; If the teeth bite the tongue, that seek∣eth no revenge. When the feet through their slip∣ping, throw the body upon the ground, it riseth up, and all is well. Some Christians are of such weak stomachs, that they can digest nothing that looks like an unkindness or injury; But its the glory of a man to pass by offences. Cyprian saith, to bear with affronts, is a ray of Divinity. A noble-spirited man will disdain to take notice of pety dis-respects, he will over-come contempt by con∣tempt. But an heaven-born Christian hath higher principles, and more sublime motives to forgive his offending brother. I Paul, the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meek∣ness, with a long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, Ephes. 4. 1, 2. And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you,Cyprian de pa∣tent. verse ult. It is reported of Cosroes the Persian King, that he
caused a Throne to be made for him, like Heaven, with the Sun, Moon, and Stars, artificially placed above it, and under his feet thick and black clouds, and high winds and tempests. He that would have an Heaven here, I mean, enjoy God, and him∣self, must of necessity trample these under his feet. It is good advice which Bernard gives in such a case; Dost thou hear that a brother hath said or done somewhat that reflecteth upon thee, or is injurious to thee? then saith he; 1. Be hard to believe it. He should have a loud tongue, that can make thee to hear such a report. I would give him little thanks (in case the honour of God were not concerned) that were the mes∣senger to bring me such a sowr present; his pains would deserve but a poor reward, that brought me tidings of a discourtesie to rob me of my cha∣rity. The evidence shall be very clear, or I will write Ignoramus upon his Bill of Indictment; But if the thing be so plain that it cannot be deny∣ed, then saith he, 2. Excuse his intent and purpose. Think with thy self, Possibly he had a good end in it. He spake as he heard, or he did what he did upon some good ground and account. Though the action seem to savour of injury, yet certainly in his in∣tention there was no evil. Had I his eyes, I should see his end was right and honest; But if there should be no reason for hope, that his purpose was good, then saith he, 3. Think he did it ignorantly; that had he known the consequence, he would not have been guilty of such a crime. Surely the man thought no hurt,
he spake on a sudden, such words came out of his mouth before he was aware, or he would ne∣ver have spoken them; I my self in an heat, might have been as harsh. When high winds blow, storms will follow. 4. If thou canst not be perswaded but the in∣jury was wittingly offered, then think, He was o∣vercome with some great temptation. There were ex∣traordinary fumes at that instant flying up into his head, which made him talk idly, and of which now he may be repenting before the Lord. The strong man was too hard for the weak Christian. Flesh and blood was easily conquered by Principali∣ties & Powers; I may well forgive him, his sin will cost him sorrow enough before his Father smile on him. III. The Natural burthen (as I may call it, though it hath a relation to spiritual, but not fully in the former sense) of their infirmities. Some by rea∣son of bad instruments, are but bunglars at their work; They have naturally understandings very dull to receive, and memories very slow to retain spiritual things. They have ill constitutions of body, and thereby the worse frames of soul, and the more apt to be peevish and fretful; Now we exhort you brethren, that ye support the weak, and be patient towards all men, 1 Thes. 5. 14. All the persons in Gods family, are not of the same height and strength: though some are Old Men and Fa∣thers, and others are Young and strong; yet some are little Children, Babes in Christ; some can go alone, or with a little help, if you hold them but by their leading-strings; but others must be carried in arms, and will require much love and patience
to overcome their childish frowardness. Christ winks at their weaknesses, who hath most reason to be mo∣ved with them; though his disciples were raw, and dull, and slow to believe and understand, yet he bears with them. Nay, though when he was watching for them, and in his bloody sweat, his whole body being in a goar blood, under the weight of their and others sins on his back, and they lay slee∣ping and snoring, and could not watch with him one hour, he doth not fall fiercely upon them, but calmly asketh them, Could ye not watch with me one hour? and afterwards excuseth it for them, First, From the natural cause; There heads were full at that time of fumes; Their eyes were heavy with sorrow. They were full of grief for their dear Master, and their sorrow hindring the digesti∣on of their food, filled them with vapours, which ascending to their brains inclined them to sleep. Secondly, From the Moral cause; they would, but they could not. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak; there better part would move more swiftly, and do any thing at my call and command, but their flesh draweth back, and makes them drive heavily. Its no wonder that their pace is so slow, when like the snail, they have such an house, such an hinderance upon their backs; The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Who can think of this infi∣nite grace of the blessed Redeemer in making such an Apologie for them, whom he had such cause to be full of fury against, and not be incited to imitate so admirable a pattern! There is another famous instance in the Old Te∣stament, and that is Gods patience towards pee∣vish
Ionah, by which all may see how much he bears with his froward children. First Ionah runs from his business; God sends him to Niniveh, he will go to Tarshish; here was plain rebellion against his Soveraign. One would have ex∣pected that the jealous God should have given him a Traytors wages, and when he was at Sea have suf∣fered the Ocean of waters to have swallowed up his body, and the Ocean of fire and wrath, his soul; but loe, he cannot permit his Ionah to perish; he will rather whip him to his work, then let him wander to his ruine. But how gentle is the rod? God cannot forget the love of a Father, though Ionah forget the duty of a childe, but will rather work a miracle, and make the devourer his Saviour, then Ionah shall miscarry. Tis true, he was tossed with a violent tempest and thrown over-board, but God provided him a shelter before the storm, and prepared a Whale to swallow him down, not for his destruction, but his deliverance; And the Lord spake to the fish, and it vomited up Jonah upon the dry land. Well now, the childe is brought home, you will look that he should make some recompence for his former disobedience, by his faithfulness and diligence for the future; that the danger he had been in, the death he had so narrowly escaped, the miracle which had been wrought for him, and the extraor∣dinary mercy he had so lately received, should have melted him wholly into Gods mould, and have made him, like Abraham, to have come up wholly to Gods foot. But alas he addeth sin to sin, and neither mercy nor misery prevail with him to know him∣self. Indeed he undertakes the journey and mes∣sage
he was called to upon a second command, but as unwillingly as the Bear goeth to the stake. After he had pronounced a sentence of death upon the Ni∣nivites, and shewed them a warrant under the high Gods hand and seal for their speedy execution; how ill doth he take it, that upon their humble petition a Reprieve should be granted them? he frets in∣wardly against God, and through the exceeding heat of his heart his tongue blisters with casting Gods mercy in his teeth. He was wrath for that in which he had cause to rejoyce: His love to his brethren might have made him glad of their escape, and his love to his God should have quieted him in all his wise and holy proceedings; But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry, and he prayed unto the Lord: O Lord, was not this my saying in my Country? for I knew that thou art a gracions God, &c. Therefore O Lord take away my life. He quarrels with Gods providence, and he doth as it were twit God with (that which is the glory of all his Attributes and actions, and the best friend the poor children of men have) his Grace and Pity, desiring rather the destruction of above sixscore thousand persons, then that himself, by the blind ignorant world, should be reckoned a false Prophet. Behold impatience in its largest dimensions! Ionah will dye, because so many thousands are allowed out of infinite kind∣ness to live. O what a nest of vermine was in the womb of this disobedience! Here is pride both in preferring his own will before Gods, and in his un∣willingness to suffer a little in his repute in the eye of the people: Here was passion to the height, and that against God himself: Here was murmuring
against sparing mercy, and the Divine pleasure: Here was unbelief, as if God could not repair his name, and repay him for the loss of his credit: Here was uncharitableness and want of love towards the poor Ninivites, whose condition called for the deepest compassion. What answer can be judged tart enough to such a passionate prayer? What language can be too harsh, what carriage can be too heavy towards such a cross-grain'd child? Its abo∣minable for any man to contend with his Maker. Its bad for servants to strive with their Master; or children to resist their Father, though both these are their fellow-creatures: But for any to contend with God, whose dominion over us is unquestionable, and their dependance on him indispensable, between whom and them there is an infinite distance, is in∣finitely worse: But for Ionah, not onely a man, but a new man, a child of God, a Prophet of the Lord, that should have taught others by his precepts and by his pattern, to submit to the severest Divine pleasure, one that had been signalized above others with eminent and distinguishing favours, both for this and the other world, to flie thus in Gods face, is worst of all. Surely, no punishment can exceed the desert of such peevishness, such passion: Some dread∣ful thunder cannot but be expected, as the conse∣quent of such hot weather. But hear O heavens, give ear O earth, and be astonished at the calm milde voyce of the Great God; And the Lord said unto Ionah, Ionah, dost thou well to be angry? Mark what love sounds in this language? Such an affecti∣onate voyce after such gross disobedience might make even marble to weep; and as that voyce from
heaven, turn a Saul into a Paul. Could the fondest and most indulgent Father in the world be more meek, more milde in his expression! He appeals to Ionah's conscience whether such behaviour was an∣swerable to his Oath of Allegiance; Dost thou well to be angry? Is this passion sutable to that submission which thou owest to me and my Providences! Eli said as much to his wicked sons; It is not a good report which I hear of you my sons, &c. when God was so incensd against him for his mildness, that he sends him an ear-tickling and an heart trembling mes∣sage: And yet God himself is so favourable and compassionate to one whose sin admitted of greater aggravations in some respects then those of Eli's sons, (Ionah sinned after such a miraculous salvation, and that against chusing, calling, pardoning, saving love, which Eli's sons did not;) nay, and when the Malefactor upon the reading of this gentle Indict∣ment to him, instead of pleading guilty, and begging a Psalm of mercy, had stubbornly and obstinately justified himself; God who might have awarded judgement against him according to law, still forbear∣eth him, and when his pathetical words would not reclaim him, he trieth if a miraculous work will re∣duce him to his allegiance. O the tenderness of God towards his froward Children! I have some∣times wondred at his infinite patience towards so disobedient a Prophet; but alas, I experience it daily in his superabundant grace and goodness to∣wards my own soul, notwithstanding my greater provocations. Reader, by all this thou mayst see what cause thou hast to bear with thy fellow-Christians, when God
beareth with his creatures, notwithstanding those multiplied affronts and dis-respects, which they offer to his glorious holy and infinite Majesty. Secondly, We may observe in the foregoing Text, the prevailing Argument to this Precept; And so fulfil the Law of Christ. This was the great Law which Christ commanded so frequenty, so affecti∣onately, and the Apostle mentioneth it here, as if it were the onely Law, or all the Law, because this love is the fulfilling of the whole Law; As if he had said, O my Galathians, if ye have any love to Christ, and would evidence it to your selves and others, let there be no bitterness, nor envyings, nor heart burnings amongst you, but love your Neigbours as your selves, suffer with them in their sufferings; let their sore eyes and tears for sin, set your eyes a watering; pardon them, though they may offend and provoke you; bear with them, notwithstanding their passion and peevishness; for hereby ye will obey that great Law, which is indeed the whole Law contain∣ing your duty toward your brother, or that Law which the heart of Christ was so infinitely set upon, that he will have it called his Law, the Law of Christ; his is my commandment, that ye love one another. Though he was the Churches onely Law-giver, and so all the commandments enjoyned her were his; yet as amongst all the Disciples there was one that had most of his heart, and was called the Disciple whom Iesus loved; so possibly amongst all the com∣mendments, that of love had most of his heart, and may fitly be called the commandment which Iesus loved. My commandment; the Law of Christ.
O how sweet is the musick, when Saints joyn thus in consort! and how harsh is the sound of jarring strings! a mutual yeilding and forbear∣ance is no small help to our peace and safety. There is a story of two Goats, which may excel∣lently illustrate the benefit of this duty. They both met on a narrow bridge, under which a very deep and fierce stream did glide; there was no going blindly back, neither could they pass forward for the narrowness of the Bridge; Now had they fought for their passage, they had been certain both to perish; this therefore they did, they agreed that the one should lye down, and the other go over him, and by this means both their lives were pre∣served. Whilst Christians are fighting like some small chickens, they are a prey to Kites, and o∣ther ravenous creatures. In quietness shall be their strength (Isa. 30. 15.) is true in this, as well as other senses. SECT. VI. THirdly,Christians must receive good in good company. Christians ought in good Company, not onely to do what good they can to each other, but also to receive what good they may from each other; God sets up such candles, not for us to play, but to work by. The strongest Christian may gain by the weakest; A small brimstone match, may help to light a great Torch; A servant may sometimes think of a way to inlarge his impri∣soned Master, when his Master dreams not of it. Every loop or pin was helpful to the Tabernacle; An homely digger that is poor, doth sometimes dis∣cover rich Mines, which wealthy Merchants took no
notice of. Apollo, one mighty in the Scriptures, is con∣tent to learn of an Handy-craft man; Cordials are not to be refused, because brought to us in a wooden spoon. Who ever sent away silver or gold, because brought to him in a bag of Leather? The Moon though she be but small, and seated in a lower Orb then the stars of the first magnitude, and though she hath her spots and imperfections, yet she lends an useful light to men, prevents their stumbling and wandring out of their way, and pro∣duceth here and there a motion subordinate and obedient to an heavenly influence; when those luminaries that are above her in place, are below her in use and service: Proud men disdain to take poor Saints advice, as if wisdom had forsaken all commerce with inferiour persons, and taken up her abode onely in stately Palaces.Sir W. Rwl. Hist. World, l. 4. c. 4. Upon this score Darius (instead of the thanks which he owed) payed Charidemus with no less then death for his good counsel; But its the folly as well as the arrogancy of some, rather to ascend to a dange∣rous height, then descend at the call of one below them;Prov. 29. 1. O how mad is he that will rather run on in hazardous paths to his ruine, then turn back and retreat at the desire of one that is his inferiour! And such proud Christians have this usually for their reward of God, that when the humble that will stoop to take up jewels at the feet of the meanest are enriched, they get nothing by godly conference. We give no relief to them that go gor∣geously attired, and brag of their own large revenues. There lieth a great deal of wealth and worth in some obscure and neglected Christians; men do
not more usually trample upon the golden veins of earth in America, then conceited persons trample on the spiritual riches in poor Christians; but a wise man will better himself by his enemies, much more by his godly friends, both in taking their coun∣sel and receiving their admonition, if occasion be. 1. In Taking counsel; It was said of Demosthenes, that he was better at praising vertue, then practi∣sing it. We must write by that Copy which we set others. It was the speech of a Philosopher, That its the easiest thing in the world to give good counsel, and the hardest thing to take it. Iobs friends, though falsly, taxed him as guilty of this crime, Iob 4. 3, 4, 5. Behold thou hast instructed many, and strengthened the weak hands; Thy words have up holden him that was falling, and thou hast strengthned the feeble knees; But now it is come upon thee and thou faintest, it toucheth thee and thou art troubled. Doctor Preston confessed on his death-bed, that he found it difficult to take that Physick which he had often administred to others. But all Christians must and will endeavour it; Solomon makes it the mark of a prudent man; The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he that hearkeneth to counsel is wise, Prov. 11. 15. When out of self-conceit we refuse others advice, we bewray our own pride and folly. Quintilian said of some, They might have proved excellent Scholars, if they had not thought themselves so already; this is true of too many in our days; They might have proved excellent Christi∣ans, if they had not thought themselves too good to learn; He that every day layeth up something, though but little, will in time have a good stock.
2. In Receiving admonition. The stomach of man naturally riseth against this bitter Physick, though it conduceth so much to his health; Faithful reproof is the awakening a man out of sleep, and such are very apt to be angry. The Hedg-hog brusleth up her prickles, and will pierce if it be possible those that come to take hold of her. There are two things that cause men to rage a∣gainst reproof. 1. Guilt of the sin objected. Guilt makes men angry when they are searched, and like Horses that are glled, to kick, if they be but touched. They hate, saith the Holy Ghost, him that reproveth in the gate. The easiest medicines, and mildest waters, are troublesome to sore eyes. Praxaspes having reproved Cambyses for his drunkenness, did so exasperate him, that he shot the Son of the Re∣prover through the heart, to confute the Father by shewing the steadiness of his hand. Though you stir one that hath a boyl never so gently, yet he will fret and fume. Ahab conscious of his own filth and wickedness, hates Michaiah for telling him the truth. There is sarce a more probable sign, that the crime objected is true, then wrath and bitterness against the person that chargeth us with it. Children that have cankers, will not suffer honey to come near their mouths, as sweet as it is. Though men are bold to sin, even to the face of God, yet they are so proud, that they would not have it visible to the eye of a man; therefore when by their admonitions they find that they are discovered, they wrangle and quarre.
2. Love to sin makes men impatient under re∣proof. Twas Davids fondness of Absolon, that made him so strict in his charge to his Captains concerning him, Deal gently with the young man Absolon, for my ake. Tis love of lust, that makes us so desirous it should be spared, and so passionate when it is pierced by a reproof. A man may gather that sin to be his Dalilah, which he will suffer none to hurt. Eglebert King of West Saxons, slew Earl Cambra for telling him of his faults, but it was because his sin was dearer to him then his soul. When a persons sin is to him as the apple of his eye, no wonder if he be offended at any that shall touch it. Solomon calls reproofs ear-rings; I am sure they are ill bestowed on such uncircumcised ears, Prov. 25. 12. But Grace will teach a Christian contentedly to take those potions that are wholsom, though they be not toothsom. It is holy Davids expression, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oyl; it shall not break my head, Psa. 141. 5. Faithful re∣proof is a token of love, and therefore may well be esteemed a kindness. Such wounding of a friend is healing, and so David might well call it an excellent Oyl. And he did not onely say so, (which is easie and ordinary) but acted accor∣dingly; He did not as the Papists, who highly com∣mend holy water, but turn away their faces, when it comes to be sprinkled on them. When he had by sin, and continuance in it, so gangrend his flesh, and corrupted himself, that he was in danger of death, he suffered his sores to be
throughly searched without regret. Nathan was the Chirurgion whom God imployed to search that wound which had divers months been festring in his soul; and truly he did not dally with his pa∣tient, though he were a Prince, but thrust his in∣strument to the bottom; yet whatever pain it put him to, he took it patiently, and was so far from being angry with the Prophet, that he made him one of his Privy Council. Tis a sign of a polluted nature, for a man like a Serpent, if he be but toucht, to gather poison, and vomit it up at the party.Pov. 21. 24. Rebuke a scorner and he will hate thee; Re∣buke a wise man and he will love thee. Pride scorns a corrector, and thinks it a disgrace to amend upon anothers desire; hence it hates him that endeavours it: Amos for reproving the golden calves was accused by Amaziah, the chief Priests of the Idols of Bethel, and struck by Vriah the son of that Amaziah with a spear on the head, whereof he died, saith Buntingus Itenerar. Sacr. But reprove a wise man and he will love thee. Austin notes it as a sign of grace in his friend A∣lipius, that he received his reproof so well. Paul rebuked Peter sharply, and that before a consider∣able Company of Peters friends, yet he loved not Paul the less for it; for in his Epistle which was written some time after that contest, and after the Epistle to the Galathians which records it, he makes honourable mention of Pauls writings, and of that very Epistle among the rest (2 Pet. 3. 15, 16.) and calleth him his beloved brother. As they who love their sins, hate the reprover; so they that hate their sins, love him. When Isaiah had de∣clared
from God a dreadful threatning against He∣zekiah for his pride, he doth not flie out into a passi∣on against the Prophet, but submits with Good is the word of the Lord, which thou hast spoken. Tis said of Gerson the great Chancellour of France, that he re∣joyced in nothing more then a friendly reprehension. And it is storied of our Richard the first, that he would be admonished by a poor Hermit. Alphonsus King of Arragon, being asked what company he liked best; answered, Books, for they, saith he, without fear and flattery, will tell me my faults faithfully. Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are de∣ceitful.Prov. 27. 6. A loving reproof is a wound in love, the wound of a friend; and therefore we must bestow our anger upon our faults; that deserve the reproof, not upon our friends that give the reproof. How foolish is he that breaks his own head, & then rageth at his friend for endeavouring to cure it. Ahab quarrels with Elijah, as the Incendiary of Israel, for reproving their Ido∣latries; when alas like AEtna, that flame arose out of their own bowels, which threatned to reduce them to ashes. Some of the Heathen were so sensible of their proness to erre, and to be partial in their own cases, when they had erred, that they both kindly accepted reproofs, and earnestly desired a Re∣prover. It is reported of Alexander, that having had a Philosopher a long time with him, he should say to him, Recede a me; prorsus consortium tuum nolo, quod cum tanto tempore, mecum degeris nun∣quam me de vitio aliquo increpasti; Be gone from me, I will have none of thy company, for thou hast lived long with me, and couldst not but observe some fail∣ings in me, yet thou hast not reproved me of any.
And Augustus Cesar for this cause did much lament the death of Varro, because thereby he was depri∣ved of one that would deal faithfully with him when he offended. Yet as they say, some roses are too tender to en∣dure the strength of the smell of Wormwood; so some Christians that its hoped are sound, cannot without wry mouths, and angry faces, drink down this bitter liquor. Asa was a good man, yet time was when he imprisoned a Prophet for bringing him an admo∣nition from God. One would have thought that the King would have bid the servant welcome for his Masters sake; but truly a prison was all the re∣ward he had for his pains. It was the speech of a wise and experienced Christian, That he never was acquainted throughly with any one, but first he displeased him by admonishing him of his faults: But as light stuff and rubbish kindleth sooner then solid and more substantial wood; so they are the weaker and less wise Christians that are so soon fired into a pet and passion, if but told of their errors. Tis childishness to be unwilling to take bitter medi∣cines. A prudent person will rather permit cup∣ping-glasses and corrosives to be applied to his body, then suffer his distemper to reign and kill him. The sharpest fruit is most profitable and wholsom. The Lemon is more tart, yet is more excellent then the Orange, which delighteth the taste. Reader, is it not better to be awakened by a rou∣sing reproof, then to sleep the sleep of death? and wilt thou be angry with thy friend for doing thee that courtesie? Is it not better for thy familiar companion to tell thee meekly of thy miscarriages,
and call thee to repentance, then for God to re∣prove thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes? When God uttered his voyce, the Heavens thundered, the mountains smoaked, and Moses him∣self trembled. The voice of the Lord is powerful, the voyce of the Lord is full of majesty; the voyce of the Lord break∣eth the Cedars, yea, the Cedars of Lebanon; the voyce of the Lord shaketh the wilderness, yea it shaketh the wil∣derness of Kadesh; How wilt thou then endure the thundring of such a Cannon, a reproof for thy sins from the Almighty God, at whose rebuke the earth quakes, the rocks are rent in pieces, and the foun∣dations of the world are moved! The Israelites said unto Moses, Speak thou to us, and we will hear; but let not God speak, lest we dye, Exod. 20. 19. Tru∣ly so mayst thou say to thy companion, Speak thou to me of my offences, deal plainly with me about any thing that thou seest amiss in me, and I will hear thee; but let not God speak to me lest I dye, lest his voyce strike me down, strike me dead. There is an absolute necessity of thy sense of, and sor∣row for thy sins. This ordinarily must be wrought in thee, either by admonition from man, or by some severe rebuke from God. Consider serious∣ly therefore, whether it be not easier to take a faithful check from thy fellow creature, then to be called to repentance by some dreadful judgement from the jealous God. O tis a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; for our God is a con∣suming fire. One thing more Reader is considerable; It is not enough to take a reproof with patience, but also to be awakened by reproof to repentance. Its a
dreadful aggravation of sin to continue in it after thou art convinced of it. Such impudence is follow∣ed with fearful vengeance. He that being often re∣proved heardeneth his heart, shall suddenly be destroy∣ed, and that without remedy, Pro. 29. 1. Christians should rejoyce in each others graces.Fourthly, Christians if they would exercise themselves to Godliness in good company, must re∣joyce in each others grace and good. True love will rejoyce in the welfare of another, as its own; Peter beholding those eminent Graces in Paul, did not repine that a brighter star was risen which would eclipse his splendour, but glorified God in Paul, and gave him the right-hand of fellowship. Its a prophane Esau that hates a Iacob for having ob∣tained his Fathers blessing beyond himself. Envy is from the evil one. Saul who was without God, eyed and hated David for slaying more of Gods ene∣mies, and obtaining thereby greater renown then himself could. Yet alas, the spirit which dwel∣leth in the best, lusteth to envy: Corrupt nature will shew it self if it be possible at this window. There are some Countries, as Candie, that have (Naturalists tell us) no poison; but there is not any Christian without a spice of this sin. Ioshua is ready to envy them that seemed by their light to darken his Master. Cantharides a venemous worm, usually breedeth in Wheat when it is ripe; the highest Christians, as the greatest Favourites at Court, are usually the greatest objects of envy. But O tis a sign of a weak eye not to behold the sunshine of others holiness without pain. The holy Apostle is enlarged in
thanksgiving to God for the faith, and love, and patience of the Thessalonians, and their grace was  strong cordial to revive him in his sorrows and di∣stress. We give thanks to God for you all; Remem∣bring without ceasing, your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Iesus Christ. We were comforted over you, in all our afflictions and distresse by your faith. Nay, he was so far from grieving at others graces, that he professeth the joy of his life did very much depend upon their perseverance in piety; For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord; As if he had said, Our life will be but a death in regard of sorrow and grief, it will be so doleful a being, that it will not de∣serve the name of a life, if ye should once be loose and wandring from the Lord, 1 Thes. 1. 2, 3, 4. 2 Thes. 3. 6, 7, 8. 1 Colos. 12. Grace cannot but desire and delight in its like. He that truly loves his God, will rejoyce in his brothers graces, be∣cause they tend to his Fathers glory; and he that truly loves his brother, will be glad at his grace, because it tends so exceedingly to his brothers good. Pedaretus when he could not be admitted to be one of the three hundred, among the Spartans,Plutarh went home, rejoycing that his Country had three hundred better men then himself. Surely then, Christians when they behold others sparkling with grace, and shining as lights in the World, should rejoyce that the blessed God hath some that can do him more service, and bring him more glory then them∣selves.
Good Wish about a Christians Carriage in Good Company, wherein the former heads are ap∣plied. The Intro∣duction.THe Father of mercies, and onely wise God, who hath appointed he way in which I should walk, du∣ring the time of my Pilgrimage, and understandeth the multitudes of rubs and hinderances that I shall en∣counter with, the power and policy of those enemies which will beset me therein, as also how weak I am, and unable to hold out; how weary I shall soon be, and ready to give over if I should travail alone, ha∣ving out of his boundless grace and goodness, called me to the communion of Saints, that I might be di∣rected by their counsel, and encouraged by their com∣pany, notwithstanding all opposition, to run the ways of his commandements: I Wish that I may esteem his precept herein as my glorious priviledge, improve their society to the greatest advantage, both for my own welfare, and my Gods honour and delight, to converse with those brethren here, with whom I hope to dwell in my Fathers house for ever; What an in∣estimable dignity doth my God invest me with, in im∣posing on me so sweet a duty! How wretchedly ungrateful should I be, if his paths should not be the more pleasant to me for such companions! The worth and riches of this society, may well invite me to trade with them, and give me hopes of profiting by them. All the companions on earth, of the highest Callings, are but a rabbel of Cennel-rakers, to this noble society. The Prince of this Senate is the Heir of all things, the blessed and glorious Potentate;
such a Soveraign, whose dominion is universal, from Sea to Sea, whose Kingdom is eternal, throughout all Generations, and even the highest have gloried in being his Subjects. The Charter and Priviledges of this Society, are the inestimable Covenant of Grace, exceeding great and precious Promises, wherein pardon of sin, peace of conscience, new na∣tures, adoption, justification, the love of the blessed God and eternal life are granted to them, and en∣tailed on them for ever. The Servants of this Cor∣poration, are all the creatures, in their several places, striving which shall do them the greatest kindness; They are in league with the stones of the field; and the beasts of the field, (though never so ravenous by nature) are at peace with them; The glorious Angels pitch their Tents about them, and count it their honour to wait upon them, both living and dying. The Livery in which this com∣pany is attired, is the Royal Robes of Christs righ∣teousness, which renders them without spot or wrinkle, and far more beautiful and amiable then Adam in his estate of unspotted innocency. Their Garments smell of Myrhe, Aloes, and Cassin, and for their richness infinitely surpa that cloathing which is of wrought gold. Their food is hidden Manna, such meat as endureth to eternal life, the bread that came down from Heaven, the flesh of the Son of God, which is meat indeed, and the blood of the Son of God, which is drink indeed. Their inheritance is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, a Crown of life, Rivers of pleasures, an eternal weight of glory. Some Societies have boasted, that Kings and Lords have been Free of their Company;
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is both Freee and Head of this Society; they are his Heph∣zibah, his delight; his Segullah, his peculiar trea∣sure. Ah! who would not have communion with them whose communion is with the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son! Lord, let my ambition be to be enrol∣led a Citizen of Sion, and to walk amongst them, worthy of that vocation wherewith thou hast called me, since the communion of thy Saints here, is some weak resemblance of Heaven, where all thy chosen shall glorifie and worship thee without fault and faintness; teach me to hallow thy name, by do∣ing thy will on earth, as it is in heaven. Motives to mind the Communion of Saints. 1. The profit of Christian Society.I Wish that the gain which I am sure to reap by joyning with Christians in their common stock, may make me more diligent at this spiritual trade. The greatest priviledges are granted to Corporations, not to particular persons; The greatest victories are obtainted by Regiments and Brigades, not by Soul∣diers engaged singly against their enemies. That Oynt∣ment which yeilded so grateful a savour as to delight God himself, was compounded of several spices, Exod. 30. 23, 24, 25. My God hath ordained the communion of the faithful, for the building up one another in their most holy faith; and if I ex∣pect his blessing, it must be in his own way. The body thrives best when all the members concur to per∣form their distinct and proper offices, for the good of the whole. Men make the most ravishing musick, when many joyn in consort. The two Disciples tra∣velling together, found the blessed Jesus to make a third, and to warm their hearts with the fire of his heavenly Doctrine. How many vessels going in com∣pany
have returned in safety, richly laden with the unsearchable riches in Christ! If I am in doubts, good Companions will advise and direct my feet in the ways of peace. If I fit in darkness, and see no light, by their counsel and comfort, I may learn the way out of the mist. If I am perplexed in any labyrinths, they may help me to unty that knot of which I have been labouring long in vin to find an end; If I be falling, they will be props to support me; if I wander, they will be guides to reduce me; if I be dull, they will be whet-stones to quicken me; if I do well, they will be fathers to encourage me; whatever my want be, they will endeavour to supply me; and whatever my condition be, they will be like-minded, both weeping with me in my sorrows, and rejoycing with me in my joys; Be¦sides, if I expect the presence of my God, who is rich in mercy, and the God of all consolations, where can I find him sooner then in his Temple! they are the Temple of God, and I will dwell in them.1 Cor. 6. . His Saints on Earth, are his lesser Heaven, wherein he takes up his abode. O my soul, what an Argument is here, to perswade thee to fellowship with the Saints! Theirs is the onely good fellow∣ship; Their Communion is a Conjunction in the ser∣vice of thy God, and tendeth abundantly to thy spiritual advantage and edification; Thy Redeemer calls them the light of the world, and they will guide thee in the way which he hath cast up; The salt of the earth, and they will preserve thee from corruption; Their conversations are living Com∣mentaries upon that word which is thy rule, and so will both plainly teach thee thy duty, and power∣fully
provoke thee to do it. Their expressions will by savoury, and help thee to learn the language of Canaan. The tongue of the just is a tree of life, and beareth excellent fruit. The lips of the righteous feed many; Besides, amongst these Chil∣dren, thou mayst be sure to meet with the everlast∣ing Father. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, I will be in the midst of them. Though but two or three, that the wicked despise them for their paucity though two or three; never so low and mean, that the world scorns them for their poverty; yet if gathered together in his name, they shall not fail of his presence; Surely nothing will prevail more with a faithful Spouse, to joyn with any company, then this, She shall meet with her beloved Husband amongst them. O, of what great price is this one promise, I will be in the midst of them! His presence like the nearer approaches of the Sun in the Spring, will refresh their hearts with the warm beams of his love, when they are chill, and almost dead with the cold of frights and fears, and cause in their souls a new shooting of grace, that notwithstanding any foregoing winter of barrenness, they shall now abound in the fruits of righteousness. What can they, or thou, O my soul, want, which his presence will not supply? Art thou laden with sin? he can give thee rest; art thou full of sorrows? he is the conolation of Israel; art thou poor in grace? with him is durable riches and righteousness; art thou dull and dead in spirituals? he is the Lord of life, and can quicken thee; He hath power enough to subdue all thy lusts, he hath wisdom enough to resolve all thy doubts, he
hath grace enough to pity all thy weaknesses, and mercy enough to pardon all thy unworthiness; He is able to save to the uttermost; Nay, thou hast not only his Promise to meet thee in his Garden, amongst his people, but thou hast also his Performance of it, for thine encouragement; Then the same day at even∣ing, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assem∣bled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so said, he shewd unto them his hands and his side; then were the Disci∣ples glad when they had seen the Lord; Then said Iesus unto them again, Peace be unto you; As my Father hath sent me, so send I you; And he breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. O the value of those Jewels which are lockt up in this Cabinet! All the Crowns and Scepters of the world, had they been thrown in amongst the Disciples, could not have caused the thousandth part of that comfort, nor have brought any degree of that profit, which the Disciples had by the presence of the holy Jesus. Consider his words, Peace be unto you; peace be unto you. Never did sweeter words, or more melodious musick, ever sound in humane ears. What tidings could be more welcom to them that had known the terrors of an angry God, and felt the curses of his righteous Law? Didst thou never see a poor debtor arrested by se∣vere Serjeants, and hailed to the Goal (in which nasty miserable place he was like to continue whilst he lived) with wringing of hands, and watering of cheeks, and doleful screeches, and afterwards upon
the payment of his debts by some loving Surety, with what clapping of hands, and gladness of heart he was enlarged! If so, thou hadst some poor re∣semblnce of that exuberancy of joy which the Disci∣ples felt when they saw the Lord, and heard those blessed words, Peace be unto you. They were all liable every moment to the arrest of divine justice, for those vast sums which they owed to the Holy and Jealous God, and in continual danger to be hurried by Divels his Officers to the Prison of Hell, whence they could never have come out. Now his appearance to them did evidence that the Law was satisfied, that all their debts were discharged, in that the Surety who took upon him the payment of them, was by order of the Iudge released. What news could find more acceptance with those that dreaded the fury of the Lord more then death, and esteemed his favour far before life, then that which did speak him reconciled to them! And farther, observe the work of the blessed Redeemer; And he breathed on them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; As if he had said, I know your unbeleiving hearts will think the news of a reconciled God, and of peace with him, too good to be true; behold therefore his love-token; Receive the earnest of his favour, his holy Spirit, who knoweth his mind fully, and was at the Council-Table of Heaven, when all your names were engrost in the book of life, and all the methods of grace and good-will towards poor sinners were debated and concluded, and is sent to you on purpose to reveal them to you, and assure you of them, and therefore is an un∣questionable evidence that he is at one with you.
This O my soul, was the blessed Heavenly Banquet, which the Redeemer entertained his Disciples with when they met together; and wouldst thou miss such a feast for all the World? Lord, thou lovest the Assemblies of thy Saints; they are the habitations of thy glorious Majesty, and the place where thine honour dwelleth; There thou makest the largest dis∣coveries of thy self, and grantest the fullest com∣munications of thy grace. O let me take sweet coun∣sel with thy people, and go to serve and honour thee in their company. I Wish that the Confederacy of the wicked in sin,Motive, Wicked men joyn toge∣thr. may provoke me to a league with the Israel of God, for a free trade and commerce in holiness. Shall they whose lusts are often contrary, and set them at variance, unite against God and his holy ways! and shall not we, whose graces are ever a∣like, and of a cementing nature, not joyn together for God and his Worship? Do they conspire to defile and destroy each others souls, as if vitiated nature did not lead them fast enough to sin, or as if they could not run singly quick enough to Hell! and shall not we encourage one another in the Worship of the living God, and provoke one another to love and to good works? O how much do the servants of Satan by their conjunctions in evil, shame the Chil∣dren of God for their backwardness in good. Their Master is the Prince of darkness, a cruel Tyrant, a roaring Lyon, that goeth about, seeking whom he may devour; Their work is far worse then any Turkish slavery, its bondage to corruption the service of unrighteousness; the diversity and con∣trariety of their Lords, their lusts tearing them as
it were in pees, for the promoting of their particu∣lar interests; Their wages is the vengeance of the eternal fire, the worm that never dieth, and the fire that never goeth out, after all their vassallage to their barbarous Masters, and hardships which they have been put to, in making provision for, and gra∣tifying such opposite furies, they are recompenced with extremity, and eternity of torments; yet they can unite their hearts, and hands, and heads, for the advancement of so hellish a Lord, about the prosecuti∣on of so base and divelish a work, and to earn so mi∣serable a reward; when the Souldiers of Christ, whose Captain is the Lord of Hosts, the most courteous and compassionate General, whose combats and con∣tests which they are called to, are Noble and Hero∣ick, and whose Crown and Garland will be beyond all comparison and apprehension, blessed and glori∣ous, do rather fight against themselves, then against their enemies, or for their endless happine! Ah foolish Christians, who hath bewitched us! May we not well blush that Satan should even out-boast the living God, in the unity of his Subjects, that the children of this world should be wiser in their generation then the children of light! Alas, is it a time for Mariners to be quarreling, when their enemies are joyned in discharging their Cannons a∣gainst them, and the Bullets flie thick amongst them! Is it a time for Christians to be wrangling, when their Adversaries are united in a confederacy to de∣stroy them all! Lord, thou hast promised that thy people, in the days of the Gospel, shall no more envy one another; that the Wolf and the Lab shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like
the Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents meat; that they shall not hurt nor destroy in all thy holy mountain. Thy dear Son, when leaving an un∣grateful World, left Peace as one legacy to his Chil∣dren, not onely peace with thee, but also among themselves, thou knowest how much his heart was set upon it, when he begd so hard, so earnestly, so affectionately of thee this blessing, a little before he went to lay down the price of it; Let it please thee for thy Promise sake, to make all thine of one heart, and one way; for because thou hast spoken it, therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer before thee this day. Let it please thee for thy Sons sake (whom thou hearest al∣ways) to take away all envyings and wrath, and emulation, and strife, out of the hearts of thy people, and heal thy Sion in its breaches, for thou seest it shaketh. I Wish that the injury I do my self by unneces∣sary solitariness,Motive. The evil of needless soli∣tariness. may make me the more in love with good society; My God hath told me, Wo to him that is alone; David was alone, when Satan drew him to defile his Neighbours Wife. Whilst the Sheep flock together, they are safe, as being under the Shepherds eye; but if one stragle from the rest, its quickly a prey to the ravenous Wolf; Its no hard matter to rob that house that stands far from Neigh∣bours. The cruel Pyrate Satan, watcheth for those Vessels that sail without a convoy. The order is observable in the narration of Demas his Apostacy, Demas hath left us, and hath embraced this pre∣sent World. He first left the Company of the faithful, and then openly denyed the faith. Chri∣stian
conference is a good help to perseverance; but they that forsake the communion of Saints, will quickly disown the profession of sanctity. If Rab∣bits keep within the Pales amongst their fellows, there is Law to secure them against the violence of strangers; but if any wander from the Warren, they are a lawful prize for any man, and prey to any Dog. What an ill case is he in, that travelling in a dark night falls, and hath none to help him up; that wanders, and hath none to shew him the right way; that is set upon by Theives and Murderers, and hath none near him, to defend and secure him! Such is the condition of those that neglect the com∣munion of Saints. Hence it is that our great and sworn enemy raiseth the dust of dissention and strife amongst Christians, to make them keep aloof from each other, knowing that much of their wel∣fare and safety doth depend upon their keeping to∣gether; He knoweth its best fishing in troubled wa∣ters. O my soul! Now thou beholdest in these wick∣ed days the high winds of divisions and passions amongst the Children of God, how ready they are to Martyr one anothers names, and its to be feared to Murther one anothers bodies, if infinite power did not over-rule and prevent it, thou mayst gather assuredly that Satan was the Conjurer to raise them. I have read of a Tree, that if some of the boughs of it be cast into a Ship, they cause a mutiny be∣twixt the Passengers and Mariners, to the ruine of both. Dost thou not think that Satan hath cast some such branches into the Vessel of the Church at this day, that instead of uniting their strength a∣gainst him and his Kingdom, and instead of joy∣ning
their power to improve every gale for their fur∣therance towards their blissful Haven, they might fall together by the ears, destroy one another, and save their enemies a labour! O that for the divisi∣ons of Sion I could have great searchings, great sorrows of heart! Lord, thy Saints in the Primi∣tive times, were famous for their love to each other. Their very enemies would with admiration cry out; See how the Christians love one another! Thy Jerusalem heretofore was a City compact together, at unity within it self; Why is it now divided, and the walls broken down, and the inhabitants all in all in an uprore, that all that go by waste it, and laugh at it, saying, Is this the beautiful City! Is this the Church of Christ! Aha! so would we have it. O look down from Heaven and pity mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell. Should thy children fall out by the way, to the gratifying thine enemies, dishonouring thy name, and woun∣ding their own souls? Should the members of the same body, cut, and lance, and tear each other? Though Dogs and Wolves, the wicked of the world, tear out one anothers bowels, yet the Sheep of Christ should live together in love. How long shall it be, before thou biddest (with a word of power) thy people return from pursuing their brethren? Shall the Sword devour for ever? Thou knowest it will be bitterness in the end. For thy names sake unite the hearts of all thy chosen, not onely by faith to thy dear Son, but also by unfaigned and forbearing love, each to other.
I Wish that my great coldness and backwardness to what is good,Motive. The back∣wardnes of our hearts. may invite me to associate with them who will warm and quicken me. How averse is my flesh to every work of Christianity? how weak is my spirit in their performance? how untowardly doth it enter upon them? how formally doth it go through with them? my carriage in them is wholly unsutable to their weight and worth, and what need then do I stand in, of help from others? As in a material house the walls need support from the strong timber, and the timber needs even the nails and spikes to fasten it together: So in the Spiritual Tem∣ple, the weak Christians need the strong to sup∣port and uphold them, and the strong need the weak, if for nothing else, yet to call forth those gifts of counselling, and that grace of pity, and compassion which they owe to them. If the strongest want each other, that the eye, the most knowing Christian, cannot say to the hand, the most active, I have no need of thee; much more do those that are weak want supply and support from others. Na∣ture teacheth me this lesson; The weakest creatures amongst Fish, or Fowls, or Beasts, go usually in flocks and Companies. The Ivy and Vine, and Hop, not being able to bear up themselves, will by a natural instinct, ling about the Tree, or Pole, or Hedge, or Wall that is near them. Were I but as sensible of my own weakness as I ought to be, I should both earnestly desire, and heartily accept the assist∣ance of others. It is the Wisdom of my God, to let none of his Children have all things about them, or a sufficiency to live of themselves, without being beholden to their Neighbours; to invite and necessi∣tate
them to mutual commerce. Those that are very able to advise others, do yet in their own cases take advice from others. The Lawyer will not trust him∣self in a case of his own estate, nor the Physitian in a distemper in his own body, but will both de∣sire counsel and direction from their friends. A stan∣der by doth many times see more then an actor, and is more fit to judge the action then the Agent. We are too near our selves to see our own doings, and to be right in our judgements of our selves; Those that stand at a due distance from us, see more clearly, and judge more truly. Self-love so blinds us, that we judge those diseases not unplea∣sing in our selves, which we loath in others. O that I might be so affected both with my ignorance of the right way, and my proneness to allow my self in my wandrings, that I may make use of those Guides which free grace affordeth me. Lord, give me such sense of my unskilfulness in the wiles and devices of Satan, of the deceitfulness and desperate wickedness of my own heart, and of my inability to steer the vessel of my soul aright amongst those shelves, and sands, and storms, which I am sure to encounter that I may take up those Pilots which thou provi¦dest for me at every Port, and so at last arrive in safety at thy glorious City. I Wish that I may watch my self amongst the godly,Caution in good compa∣ny. as well as amongst the wicked, lest Satan do me that injury by a friend, which he could not by an enemy; Davids familiar frind conspired his ruine; the Son of David was betrayed with a kiss from his friend; and though my charity to my friends, forids me to think them as bad as either,
yet my charity to my self, commands me to stand upon my guard. Anglers for Fish, do frequently catch one fish with another, as the greater with the smaller. Sure I am, Satan is subtile enough to bait his hook with that which is most likely to take, and hath too often caught one Christian with another. The best friends are but men, and have flesh in them as well as Spirit; and what know I but the wicked one may tempt them to tempt me, as not ignorant of their prevalency over me! None was so likely to deceive the Prophet of the Lord, as the Old Prophet, that pretended a commission from the same power, and himself a Servant of the same Master. Who can so probably perswade me to a work of darkness, as he that is, or at least trans∣formes himself into an Angel of light! Besides, I am apt to be the more careless, when I am amongst (them that I judge) true Christians. In a crowd, where Cheats usually resort, and execute their hellish Trade, I look to my money; but when I am amongst them whom I suppose to be honest, I think that care needless, and so may the easier be deceived. Lord, thou hast commanded me to keep my heart with all diligence; I acknowledge I have been too secure, when amongst thy Saints, as beleiving their work to be onely to advance thine (not Satans) interest, in the World. O give me to Consider that when the Sons of God gather together, Satan is also amongst them, and he is both policick and active to de∣file me, that he may destroy me; that I may even amongst them, watch and pray, and so not enter into temptation.
I Wish that I may never spend my precious time amongst Christians,Beware of those sin that good men are too guilty of, when they meet toge∣ther. as the Athenians (who never un∣derstood the worth of that commodity, used to waste it) onely in telling and hearing of nws, but as Christ amongst his Disciples, in discoursing of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.In spending time vainly. O what pity is it, that a thing of such infinite value should be spoiled and laid out to little purpose! I sould befool him that should throw down pails of Bezer∣water, to wash common sinks or gutturs, which would serve for such excellent use as to comfort our vitals, and to refresh and revive drooping and fainting Spirits; Who would not abhor that vanity of Nero, in shooing his Horses with precious gold, and causing that costly mettal to be trampled under foot in the dirt, which was worthy to be the materials of a Crown, for the highest ead on earth! Am not I a greater fool then the former, and more vain then the latter, if I spend that time (which is infinitely more costly then gold or Be∣zer, as having relation to eternity) wholly in worldly talk, which might be imployed in declaring and admiring the boundless perfections of the blessed God, in furthering that curious work of grace, in my own and others souls, and in preparing us for our unchangeable bliss in the other World? My God hath not onely a book of remembrance for every good word, but also a book of observance and account for every idle word. Lord, within a few days, I shall go the way that I shall not return; thine Angel may say concerning me, That time shall be no more; Thou wilt never trust me with another life, nor afford me another day of grace; this is the onely time that I
shall have to provide against the coming of my Lord. Nay, whilst I live, thou mayst part me from thy people, and deny me that happy priviledge of their society that I now enjoy; For the Lords sake help me to work whilst it is day, and to walk whilst it is light, because the night is coming, wherein I can neither work nor walk. In censu∣ring the good.I Wish that my tongue may never be so set on fire of Hell, as to speak evil of those that are the Heirs of Heaven. It were better for me to be sick and solitary in my bed, then to be censuring or re∣flecting upon the Lords Servants. The Divels them∣selves (though for their own ends) could sometimes speak of righteous ones with a seeming awe and re∣verence. These men are the Servants of the most High God, and shew unto us the way of salva∣tion; And shall I at any time, be worse then a Divel at some times! Such impotency in my tongue would be too great a sign of impurity in my heart. Those that have a blemish in their eyes, judge the Skie to be ever cloudy. Caligula, who was a Mon∣ster of obscenity and uncleanness, thought there was never a chaste person in the World. Tis usual with the wicked (measuring others by themselves) to judge all to be ungodly; They render others to be defor∣med, that their own faces might be esteemed the more fair. Or as the Lapwing, they hope by their false cries against the godly, to divert strangers from finding the nest of their own filthiness. They would have all good men thought to be evil, that themselves who are fullest of evil might be thought good; But though the seed of the Serpent spit their poison against the seed of the woman, should I do
so who am one of their brethren? How bad is that Bird that defileth its own nest? How foolish, as well as sinful, is that Child that disgraceth and de∣fameth his own Family? If I speak evil of any of the Saints, I speak evil of my self, and of the Master whom they serve. Though Christ was not upon earth in Enochs days, yet he tells me that he will judge the slanderers of the Saints, as blasphe∣mers of himself; Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judge∣ment upon all, and to convince them of their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Iude, vers. 15. It is Satans title, to be the accuser of the Brethren; and my God cal∣leth such men as are guilty of it, by no better name then Devils, 2 Tim. 3. 3. Tit. 3. 2. Would I be willing to resemble the Prince of darkness, or can I do it and escape punishment! O tis dangerous to abuse the King of Heavens Favourites; Such Ar∣rows of slander and censure, shot out of Satans Bow by my hand against the Saints, would as a Shaft shot against a Stone, rebound upon me, and hurt not the Stone or Saint, but him that shot it; He that snuffeth a candle with his bare fingers, doth foul, if not burn his fingers, but makes the Candle to burn the more brightly; If I censure the Children of God, I defile my own conscience, but do not make them the less glorious. O my soul consider what thy God hath said, Cursed is he that smiteth his Neighbour secretly; And all the people shall say, Amen. Thou mayst smite thy Neighbour as really, and as dangerously with thy tongue, as with thy hand. The wages of both is a Curse from God,
from all the People; Surely the breath of so many, would blow down the strongest person, the strongest dwelling; Though the causeless curse shall not come, yet when God and Men both see cause for it, and say Amen to it, there is no way to avoid it. I may build upon my profession, as if that would secure me against such a stormy wind, but it will prove a rotten founda∣ion. My God hath told me, What hast thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth; Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit; Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother, and slan∣derest thine own Mothers Son; No pretence what∣soever can prevent my punishment; But I will re∣prove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee; If God once undertake to reprove, it will be cutting, it will be killing. O let me tremble to think of tearing the names of any of Gods people, lest my God tear me in peices, when there is none to de∣liver me! Psa. 50. 16, 17, 21, 22. How irrational as well as irreligious is it for me to spend my time in censuring others! If they be guilty of erring, they do but shew themselves to be Men, not Angels; Am I so foolish as to expect Heaven upon Earth, perfection in a polluted and polluting World! If I my self were without sin, then I might throw the first stone. The actions of the best are but a mis∣cellay of good and evil. Moses himself, like the Pillar that conducted him, had his dark side. The cleanest Corn, even after threshing and winnow∣ing, will have some soil in it. There is a tincture of corruption that stains all mankind; Otherwise there are some graces that would rust for want of use, and be given in vain. What wise man will
despise or deny a Mine to be Gold, because it hath some dross or bad earth with it? or will throw away a Beast, and say it is not good meat, because it hath guts and garbage in it? The Vermine of sin, may sometimes craul in a cleanly holy person, though they be not allowed there; One act will not prove an habit, nor a few bad actions a bad person. If every sin unsaint a man, Satan will challenge the whole race of mankind as his own peculiar. When I see the course rather good then evil, my charity commandeth me not to think the man other then a Christian; Besides, How frequent is it for the mali∣cious world to lay down false reports of the Saints, and shall I be their Pedler to take them up, and cry their rotten deceitful wares up and down the Country? The Priest under the Law, was not to judge presently of the Plague of Leprosie, but to shut the person suspected up seven days, and then to view him, and if the case were not clear, to shut him up seven days more, and after that, seven days more, before he was condemned; and what is the Gospel of this, but to condemn rash censuring of any, much more of the godly? Hath not my God told me, He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is a folly and shame to him? Prov. 18. 13. Lord, thou understandeth what an unruly member my tongue is, how hard to be kept within the bounds of sobriety towards my self, or charity towards others. O be pleased to undertake for me, and keep thou the door of my lips. It is not good to speak evil of those whom I know bad; but its much worse to speak evil of those who may prove good. Should I declare others failings upon certain knowledge, it sheweth some want
of charity, but should I publish their faults upon a bare supposition, it would argue a want of honesty. O let me rather erre on the right hand, in my cha∣ritable thoughts of those that are bad, then on the left, in my censorious opinion of those that are good; For though he may be evil that speaks good of others upon knowledge, yet he can never be good him∣self, that speaks evil of others upon suspicion. In backbi∣ting the bad.I Wish that I may be so far from speaking ill of them that are good, that I may rather be silent, then without a just cause and call speak ill of them that are evil. Though the wicked like Dogs, fall up∣on the Sheep of Christ with open mouth, and strive to bury their good names in the open Sepulchre of their wide throats; yet the Sheep of Christ do rather suffer their rage with patience, then render reviling for reviling. My God hath commanded me, to bless them that curse me, and to pray for them that despitefully use me; and how contrary am I to his Precept, if I pay them in their own coin, and open my mouth in backbiting them, because they are forward to slander me? It is enough for them that have not a God to undertake their cause, and revenge their quarrels, to do it themselves. If I be one of Christs members, he reckoneth all the wrongs offered to me, as done to himself, and he will one day vindicate his own honour and mine to the full, when the sinner shall answer for all his treasonable expressions, with Hell flames about his ears; The tongue that now is blistered with blas∣phemies against God and his people, at that day will be in a light flame, and beg in vain with Di∣ves, for a little water to cool it. I may therefore
be quiet in all such cases, and commit my cause to him that judgeth righteously. He that is rob∣bed, may not seek for reparation from the Country, if the Felon at the Assizes be Convicted and Ex∣ecuted. I need not fear but the Iudge of the whole earth, will at the general Assize, do justice upon those Thieves that steal away my credit and good name, and so in the mean time may well be con∣tented. He that is sure of double interest hereafter, may with the more comfort forbear his money at pre∣sent. Besides, by declaring his faults, onely to fill up a void space of time, I injure both him and my self, whether my report be true or false; if my re∣port be false, I wrong him, by slandering and mur∣dering his name undeservedly; and I wrong my self, by contracting the guilt of so great a sin: If the report be true, I walk contrary to Gods command, speak evil of no man, and so deile my own soul, and set him at a further distance from Religion, hardening his heart against any future re∣proof, as judging it to proceed from malice, and so I do what lyeth in my power to destroy his soul. Be∣sides all this, I may injure my hearers, and make them accessary to my sin. Lord, thou hast given me my tongue, that it might be a trumpet to sound thine honour, and that therewith I might speak good of thy name, and not to speak evil of others. O let my glory sing of thee, and not be silent; open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise; but let me prefer an unprofitable silence, before sinful speaking; Help me to take heed to my ways; that I offend not with my tongue, and to keep my mouth with a bridle, that I
may not wander from thy Commandments. Christians should be ser∣viceable to each other.I Wish that I may to the utmost of my power, be serviceable to the souls of my fellow-members. The members of the natural body, are not idle or un∣profitable, but give and receive nourishment for the increase of the whole body; They do not seek them∣selves, or their particular interests apart, but the good of the whole, and their own profit in relation thereunto; Nay, the eye watcheth for all the mem∣bers, and helpeth to adorn them, and not it self; the hands work to maintain and cover the whole, remaining themselves naked; Why should it not be thus in my Saviours mystical body? My God hath given me and others, graces and gifts for that pur∣pose, and commanded me, Occupy till I come; and should I suffer them to rust, for want of use, I should be found at last but an unprofitable ser∣vant. The several creatures, whether superiour or in∣feriour, do all instruct me by their patterns in this lesson of improving my talents, and forbid me to bury them in the grave of idleness. If I look up to the highest heavens, I may see with an eye of faith, those Sons of God, Angels, his diligent Ser∣vants and putting forth those abilities which they have received, both for the glory of their Creatour, and the good of their fellow-creatures. Though they are the eldest house, and (compared with us) the first born of the creation, yet they do not as the eldest sons of some men, plead that priviledge to patronage and cloak sloth and idleness; but as they have higher and more noble natures, so they are more active and industrious then others, as appears both by bearing their parts in the celestial quire, and in being ministring
spirits for the good of them that are heirs of sal∣vation. If I look to the natural Heavens, there with an eye of sense I may see the great Candle, and Luminary of the World, not folding up those rayes and cherishing vertues which he hath received, but communicating them freely for the warming and refreshing terrestrial bodies, though he gains no∣thing by it, but is many times requited with the darkning his glory by earthly vapours. If I look lower, I may observe the earth even wasting and wearing out her self to nourish and inrich others; She hath received a power of fructifying, and giving sap to that which groweth upon her, and loe like a ten∣der Nurse, how liberally doth she give that milk to all that hang on her breasts, though it tend to her own weakening? The various inanimate and irrati∣onal creatures, that are upon the earth are service∣able one to another in their places, and are in con∣tinual and regular motion to those ends for which they were designed. The most venemous creatures are useful, not onely to their fellows of the same rank, but to man their Master. Nay, if I descend lower, and look into Hell, I may believe the De∣vils not to be idle and unprofitable to each other but to conspire together in one, and to be at all times busie and stirring for the propagating of their poison; They go too and fro in the earth, seek∣ing how they may dishonour the name of the glorious God, and destroy immortal souls. O my soul, what sayst thou to these patterns, to these presidents! Shall irrational creatures advantage others, and wilt thou monopolize all to thy self? Dost thou not see how they are all in their stations profitable
to man, even to the worst of men? The Fish and Fowles, and some beasts feed him, the Sheep, and wormes and Bever cloath him, the Horse and Mule carry him; and wilt thou be worse then the Horse and Mule, which have no understanding? Shall inanimate creatures be helpful to others, and wilt thou live onely to thy self? The Fire consumes it self to warm others; the Candle destroyeth it self to en∣lighten others; Salt wasteth it self to season others; the Fountain sendeth forth its streams to refresh others; the Sun, Moon and Stars, exercise those powers with which they are endowed, to direct and enliven others; and shall these creatures which have neither reason nor sense, rise up in judgement to condemne thee? Do the best and highest of the creation count it no disparagement, but an honour and preferment, to serve the Spouse of Christ, and wilt thou shrink back, and not wait on her in thy place? Surely thou art dull indeed, if so many Masters cannot teach thee this lesson. Thou art blind to purpose, if thou dost not see thy duty, when its Printed in so large a Letter, in so many Volumes. Thou canst not open thine eyes, but thou beholdest this Precept, and that in the likeliest way of learn∣ing it, examples. Look upwards, the heavens are thy tutors, they are unwearied in their motion, for the good of the Vniverse; look downwards, and the Devils will teach thee not to jarr with thy fel∣lows, but to unie with them, and endeavour their comfort; look inwards, and the parts of the body may be thy Master, they conjoyn for the good of each other; the eye seeth, the ear heareth, the mouth eateth, the stomach digesteth, the hands work, the
feet walk, for the welfare of the whole; look out∣wards, and the earth may be thy monitour, that is fruitful, not for its own, but others benefit; And art thou not ashamed to be barren? Lord, it is thy will,1 Pet. 4. 10. that as I have received the gift, even so I should minister to others as a good Stewad of the manifold grace of God; Keep thy servant from ingrossing those spiritual riches to himself, which thou hast given him for the releif of thy poor.Chistians must be ser∣viceable 1. In instruct∣ing the igno∣rant. O let me never eat my morsels alone, but according to my estate, cloath thy naked ones, and feed the hun∣gry with good things. When I was blind, thou didst send an Ananias to me, saying, Brother, the Lord Jesus, that great Physitian, hath sent me unto thee, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost; And immedi∣ately the scales fell from mine eyes, and I saw the things that concerned my peace; and shall not I pity others ignorance, and with meekness instruct them in the way of life! How dull was I of understanding? how slow to conceive and believe spiritual things? yet thou didst bear with me patiently, and didst give me Precept upon Precept, and line upon line. Why should not I bear with my fellows, since thou didst bear with one infinitely thine inferiour! Thou hast enlivened me when I was dead; enlightned me, when I sat in darkness, and saw no light; suppor∣ted me in my weaknesses, and supplied me in all my wants and necessities. O strengthen me, that since I am acquainted with the sweetness of thy love, and the greatness of thy power, I may communicate my ex∣periences, and improve my gifts for the counselling, quickening and comforting of others.
In bearing with one ano∣thers inirm∣ties.I Wish that my God would so strengthen my back, that I may bear with patience the burthens of my brethren; I know unkindnesses will happen between the nearest relations, and between the dearest friends. Whilst there is flesh in us, there will be failings and fallings out among us; Till we come to that place where there is perfect purity, there can be no hope of perfect peace; But how contrary am I to my God, if I do not forbear and forgive them that offend me? Am I better then God? I unkindness to me, in any measure so hainous as un∣kindness to God? Their engagements to me, are no∣thing comparable to their engagements to God, and therefore the least wrong to God, is infinitely greater and more hainous, then the greatest that can be done to me; Yet my God winketh at the weaknesses, and passeth by the peevishness of his people; He seeth no iniquity in Iacob, nor transgression in Israel, though they offer daily affronts and disrespects to him, and that after their sorrow for former miscarriages, and promises of amendment, yet he doth not destroy, but is patient towards them; and shall not I be merciful, as my Heavenly Father is merciful? Besides, I have offended God, much more then my Brother can offend me. I need not say, according to the Worldlings vain pleas and pretences, The injury is great, therefore I cannot pass it by. My offences against my God, are of an higher nature, and a more bloody colour; yet I hope he forgiveth me. Or, This is not the first time, he hath often abused me thus; How often have I sinned against my God! my sins are more then the haires of my head, they are more then can be numbred, yet he
forgiveth me freely and frequently, he multiplieth pardons, as I multiply transgressions; Or, But this is expresly contrary to his duty; And is not my disobedience against God, contrary to that which I ought to do? is it not expresly against his dominion over me, and that Allegiance which I owe to him? Or, I am his Superiour. Surely, God is mine much more; O the infinite distance that is between the boundless Majesty of Heaven; and a poor slimy worm If the whole creation be nothing to him, what then am I to him! Or, But I will have nothing to do with him, I value not his favour, I live by him, not upon him. Doth thy God live upon thee? hath he any need of thee? is he any debtor to thee? wouldst thou be glad he should upon this reason say, He will have nothing to do with thee, to protect, or preserve, or pardon, or save thee, because he can live with∣out thee? When for all thy iniquities and offences a∣gainst him, and his soveraignty over thee, and indepen∣dence on thee, he beareth with thee, and forbeareth thee, oughtest thou not to forbear and forgive others? Again, Thou mayst put this question to thy self, Have not I wronged others? Doth not the righteous God now pay me in my own coin? May I not say, as Adonibezek, As I have done to others, so God hath requited me? Nay, possibly others offend me ignorantly unawares, or through some violent temptation, but I have offended others knowingly, wilfully, and upon weaker inducements. O what cause have I to forgive, who am so prone to offend! Lord, teach me to obey thy precept, in forbearing my bre∣thren that offend me, and so to imitate that blessed pat∣tern of thy Majesty, who art pleased daily to requite evil with good, that I may be able, comfortably to pray,
Forgive me my trespasses, as I forgive them that trespass against me. In comor∣ting the sor∣rowful.I Wish that I may, according to my poor abi∣lity, be helpful to the weak and tender members of Christ, by administring Cordials, sutable to their conditions. My duty is, not onely to counsel the doubtful, but also to comfort the sorrowful; If I saw a body fainting and drooping, I were bound to afford it what assistance I could, and not to hide mine eyes from mine own flesh; Doth not my Neighbours soul, as far more precious, call for more pity, and command my help to my power! If one Sheep be sick, many others will flock about him, and in an hot day, after their manner refresh him, by keeping the scorching Sun from him. The Sheep of Christ should have more sense of others misery, and more know∣ledge of the means relating to their recovery, and shall they be less diligent for others health? To him that is afflicted, pity should be shewn; if I deny this, I forsake the fear of the Almighty; How ten∣der was my Redeemer of broken bones, and sorrowful Saints! When he arose from the dead, he appeared first to mournful Mary, and then takes special care that penitent Peter have speedy notice of that blessed news, Go tell my Disciples and Peter that I am risen. They that have smarted with inward wounds themselves, have the more reason to compassionate others in their sorrows; Lord, the time hath been, that thou didst cast me into the deep, into the midst of the Seas, thy Floods compassed me about, all thy Billows, and thy Waves passed over me; I roared by reason of the anguish of my Spirit, under the sense of thy wrath, and the curse of
thy Law. The weight of my sins lay heavy upon my conscience, and I was even sinking under them into the bottomless pit. The sorrows of death compassed me about, the pains of Hell ga hold of me, I found trouble and sorrow; I knew not which way to turn, nor whither to go for any ease or releif; If I said, My Friends should help me, or my Possessions abate my grief, I soon found them all miserable comforters, and Physitians of no value; If I said, My bed should comfort me, and my Couch ease my complaint, then thou didst scare me with Dreams, and terrifie me with Visions. All the creatures were unable to afford me any suc∣cour; When I lay thus half dead, they all as the Priest and Levite passed by on the other side; they had neither pity enough for such dreadful wounds, nor power enough to work their cure; Then called I upon the Name of the Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul out of the belly of Hell, cried I unto thee, and hou didst hear my voice; For thou hast delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from fal∣ling. Thou wast the good Samaritan, that hadst compassion on me, that didst bind up my wounds, pouring in Oyl and Wine, and undertake my cure; Thou didst send a Barnabas, a Son of Consolation to me, to proclaim liberty to me a poor captive, and the opening of the Prison to me that was bound. How beautiful were his feet, that brought the glad ridings of peace to my poor soul? O that I might be able to support the weak, and comfort the feeble-minded, with the same comforts wherewith I my self have been comforted of God!
In repro∣ving the sin∣ful.I Wish that I may be both faithful and wise, to recover a fallen Brother out of his sin and error; Jonathan, a true friend of David, pro∣mised to tell him if there were any danger, and accordingly warned him, whereby he saved his life. I profess my self a lover of my Christian Companions, but I am false in my profession, if I suffer sin to lye upon them. Yet I confess it is a difficult work to perform this duty in a right manner. The best plaister may be ineffectual, if it be not fitly applied; I can seldom with Moses seek to unit quarrelling Christians, but one of them with the Hebrew, is ready to quarrel with me, and say, Who made thee a Ruler, or a Judge over us? Men are seldom more touchy then when their sores are searched; and therefore he that would not have their wounds to bring them into a Fever or Fury, must handle them with much wariness; I desire that Wisdom, Courage, and Love, may be the ingredients of which all my medicines may be compounded. Wisdom, that I may observe the qua∣lity and temper of the Offendour, the nature of his offence, and the sittest season and manner of admi∣nistring the reproof; the quality of the person, if he be my Superiour, that I may do it with reverence, rather exhorting and beseeching, the plainly re∣buking; The temper of the offendour; if he be of a fierce nature, that I may so manage my work with meekness, as when I am endeavouring to heal his distemper, I may not increase it; The nature of the offence, If the sin be small, that I may not make it great, by giving stronger medicines then
the disease requires; The season of reproving, that I may not give open rebuke for private offences, but observe my Saviours rle, If thy Brother offend thee, tell him his fault between him and thee. The presence of many, may make him take up an unjust defence, who in private would have taken upon him a just shame; The open air makes sores to wrankle; the more publique rebukes are for Ma∣gistrates and Courts of Justice to give. Possibly, it may be my suspicion more then any real fault, as in the case of the Blessed Virgin and Joseph, and then what wrong should I do him, to accuse innocency before a multitude? The manner of de∣livering it, that I may give him his due praise, as well us his deserved reproof; This will somewhat allay his passion, and make my reproof the more prevalent. The Iron when heated red hot in the fire, is bent and beaten afterwards without break∣ing which way the Smith pleaseth. When I have heated him hot with the fire of commendation, I may then beat upon him with reproof in greater hopes of success; I would desire courage also, that I may deal faithfully, and not skin over a wound that hath dead flesh at the bottom. Should I dally, I destroy the Patient; If the Ofendour be so bold as to dare God, why should I be so bashful as to fear him! Love, that he may discern my affection to his soul, in my detestation of his sin. If he suspect me to bear ill-will in my heart, he will throw my potion in my face; What man will take Phy∣sick from an enemy? Lord, shouldst thou suffer me to go on in sin, and not call me back though by a
severe admonition, it were a sign thou didst hate me. Thou didst never strike Ephraim worse, then when thou didst forbear to strike at all, but saidst, Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone; Should I not seek to pluck my brother out of the fire of sin, into which he is fallen, but suffer him to lye there, I hate him, and am in thine esteem a murderer. O deliver me from such blood-guiltiness, thou God of my salvation. Let thy good Spirit so strengthen and direct me, when ever thou callest me to this duty, that I may do it with zeal to thine honour, not da∣ring to jest with such an edged tool as sin is, and with love and wisdom, that if by any means, I may bring back a wandring sheep to thy fold. Christians should endea∣vour to re∣ceive what good they can from each o∣ther.I Wish that I may receive, as well as do good, by all my converses with those that are good. Christi∣ans are trees of righteousness, planted in Gods Vineyard, and its my own fault if I gather not some good fruit from them. My God tells me, The lips of the righteous feed many;In receiving counsel. if then I rise hungry from the Table, its a sign I am sullen and will not eat; My Father delights to see his Children di∣stributing their spiritual food (as the Disciples the Loaves and Fish to the multitude) amongst their bre∣thren, till they all are filled; He hath acquainted me, that its an argument of wisdom to receive, and folly to refuse counsel; Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser, teach a just man, and he will increase in learning, Prov. 9. 9. The holy Apostle, though high in the School of Christ, and in the uppermost Form, yet hoped to learn som∣what from those that were far meaner Scholars. He writes to the Romans, that he hopes to be filled
with their Company. They that are Dwarfes in Religion, may do service to the tallest, if they be willing to accept it. A Rush Candle may give me some light, if I do not wilfully shut mine eyes; A brazen Bell may call me to prayer as well as one of silver, if I do not stop mine ears. The smallest and meanest creatures, were serviceable to the Great God against the Egyptians; and shall my proud heart refuse the help of mean Christians, against the enemies of my salvation? Did a Damsel possessed with a Devil, bring her Master much temporal gain, and may not a poor servant, filled with the holy Spirit, bring me much spiritual gain? What? or, who am I? that none must teach me, but those that are eminent in grace and gifts? I am sure I have nothing (that good is,) but what I have re∣ceived, and this pride of my heart is too great an evidence that I am but poor in holiness. Those branches that are fullest laden, bend most down∣ward. Those trees that abound in clusters of fruit, do not disdain to receive sap from the mean earth, which every Beast trampleth on. Its no wonder if a soul decline in strength, that refuseth its food, be∣cause its not brought by the Steward, but by some in∣feriour person of the Family. If Satan can keep me in this proud humour, he doth not doubt but to keep me in a starving condition, and to hinder the effi∣cacy of all means for my growth in grace. When this Dropsie once seiseth upon my vitals, I may ex∣pect a Consumption of my whole body. Lord, it were my duty to hear thy voice, though it were through the mouth of a Balaam; thou hast sometimes con∣veyed the water of life through these Pipes of Lead,
and sent considerable presents to thy chosen, by con∣temptible messengers; O suffer me not to be wise i mine own eyes, and thereby to turn away mine ears from the words of them that are endued with spi∣ritual wisdom; but cause me to hear counsel, and receive instruction, that I may be wise for my latter end. In accepting a reproof.I Wish that I may be so much my own friend, as to esteem a bitter admonition better then the sweetest flattery, and never quarrel at any, for waking me out of my spiritual Lethargy. The World indeed is full of them that rage at such as would prevent their ruine, choosing rather to have their wounds fester, though they kill them; then be searched throughly to recover them; Their words to their Neighbours, are like the Jews to the Prophets, Prophesie not unto us right things, Prophesie unto us smooth things, Prophesie deceits, Isa. 30. 10. And their works are like theirs too; If a Stephen deal but faithfully with them, and tell them of their faults, they are presently cut to the heart, and gnash at him with their teeth; Their bones are so out of order, that the smallest disturbance makes them fret and fume. Like Owles, if any offer to lay hold on them, they soon make him feel their claws; Rebuke a scorner and he will hate thee; But I have not so learned Christ; Though Toads are no sooner toucht, but they swell and are ready to spit out their poison in the face of him that hind∣leth them, yet Sheep will be felt and shorn, and suffer their sores to be drest with patience. Though fools hate him that reproveth in the gate; yet, re∣buke a wise man and he will love thee, saith
God, Prov. 9. 8. O that I might never be so void of love to my fallen brother, as not to give him a se∣rious reproof, nor so void of love to my self, as not to receive a serious reproof. The nipping frosts, though not so pleasant, are as profitable as the Sum∣mer sunshine. I deceive my self, if I judge no liquor wholsom but what is toothsom. There is no probable way of curing some diseases, but by Blisters, and pping-glasses, and painful medicines; Is it not better for me to accept an admonition and amend, then to walk on in a wicked way to my destruction? Will it not be much easier for me to bear a rebuke given in love, and with meekness from my fellow-creature, then to provoke the Iealous God, with eyes full of fury, to take me by the throat, and ask me, what I am doing! How I dare thus slight his Laws, and contradict his Will! O how can my heart endure, or my hands be strong, in the day that he shall deal with me! Well might my God say, He that hateth reproof is brutish. Lord, let me never be so much a beast, as to lye snoring in a nasty kennel of filth, and when any come to wake me, flie in their faces; but let me pre∣fer a sharp admonition, before the smoothest deceits. When any praise me for the good in me, cause me to suspect my self; when any reprove me for the evil in me, let me accept it with thanks; Make me able to say with that sweet singer of Israel, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oyl, it shall not break my head. I Wish that I may by no means repine,To rejoyce in each others wlfare. but al∣ways rejoyce at the gifts and graces of others. If
the other members of the body thrive, the heart doth not grieve, but is glad at it. Its ordinary for younger brothers, to boast and glory in the large estate, and great possessions which their elder bro∣thers have left them by their Fathers. Why should not my soul be joyful at the great share of spiritual riches, which the onely wise God hath given some of my brethren? If a man love sweet smels, the greater degree of them he observeth in any place, the moe he is refreshed with them. He that delights in Pi∣ctures, if he see one in a room, exactly and exqui∣sitely drawn, above all the rest, that shall have more of his eye and his heart. Is not grace compared to sweet Oynments? and shall not I be comforted the more for the greatness of its savour? Is not the I∣mage of my God amiable in mine eye? and ought I not to delight most in that Copy which is nearest the Original? Surely, if I envy any their spiritual excellencies, I shew my self too like a Child of the Devil; There is hardly any worm that gnaweth that unclean spirit more painfully, then the grace which God gives his Children; Their sins are his utmost joy, their graces are his extream greif. Would I be found in Satans livery at the last? O that I might be so far from murmuring at that double portion of the Spirit, which my God bestoweth upon some of his people, that I might bless God heartily for it, and beg of God to add to it an hundred fold, how great soever it is. The pretty Birds sing the more merrily, the higher the Sun mounteth in the Heavens. I have cause to be the more chearful, the nearer any ascend to Heaven, and the higher they mount in holiness. My love to my God, to my Bro∣ther,
nay to my self, all command me to it. My love to my God; He that loves his Soverain, will rejoyce that he hath any Subjects eminent above others for duty and loyalty: They that have much spiritual strength, will do my God much spiritual service. The more grace they have, the more glory they bring to God; Its an honour to the Father of Spirits, when his Children keep open house, according to their e∣states, cloathing the naked, feeding the hungry soul, and relieving liberally such as are in want; I am no Christian if I be not tender of my Gods honour, and joyful when that is exalted in the World. Besides, Love to my brother should quicken me to this duty If I love him as my self, I shall both grieve at his soul-losses, and rejoyce at his spiritual gains; Love delighteth in the welfare of the party loved; The hotter the beames of grace are in the party beloved, the more they rejoyce the heart of the lover. Why should any mans eye be evil towards his Brother, because Gods is good to him? Have others the less, because some have so much? Or, is it not my own fault, that I am not as holy and gracious as he? God is a Fountain of grace, always running over, but he derives it to us according to our capacities; If I go to the Well of Salvation, and receive but little of the water of life, I may know the cause; my Vessel was no bigger. Nay, Love to my self, may make me glad at others gifts and graces. The greater the Saints estate is, the more he will reliev others; As the Earth; though it sucketh in so much water as will give her self a competent refreshment, con∣veyeth many springs through her veins, for the che∣rishing and refreshment of others. So the Saints do
not onely advantage their own, but also others souls; Lord, though in Hell there be little else but mur∣muring and repining at the good of thy chosen, yet in Heaven there is no emptiness in themselves, no envying at others; every Saint there hath his joy doubled for anothers joy, and is glorified in ano∣thers glory; Suffer not thy Servant to make his heart a little Hell, by filling it with grief at the good of thy chosen; But, O make it thy lesser Heaven; be thou pleased to dwell in it, and then I shall begin the work of eternity in time, magnifie and bless thee for thy love to them, and praise and bless them for their likeness to thee. The Conclu∣sion.Finally, I Wish that I may so carry my self, in all my converses with the Children of God here, that I may meet them in the Fathers house, and sit down with them at the Supper of the Lamb. Lord, if Communion with thy Saints be so pleasant and delightful on earth, how plea∣sant and delightful will it be in Heaven! Here my communion with them is imperfect, my flesh will not suffer me to receive the good I might from them, nor their flesh allow them to do the good they might to me; But there shall be no evil, no occasion of evil, no ap∣pearance of evil; no sin shall clog the chariots of our souls, no flesh shall fetter us from running to embrace and delight in each other; but all shall be free to re∣joyce and refresh one another. Every Saint shall be, as it were, a fountain of Communion in the sweetest manner and fullest measure; from every one shall flow Riers of water of life, and every one enlarged to rellish and receive. If Jonathan beholding a lit∣tle grace in David on earth, loved him as his own soul, how doth he love him in Heaven? Here our
Communion is much lamed by the defects in our bodily organs; we cannot impart our minds without our members, which being defective, make our Commu∣nion so; but there we shall be as Angels, seeing each other without eyes, hearing each other without ears, and embracing each other without hands; Here our Communion is interrupted, our particular cal∣lings, our eating, our drinking, our sleeping, our many occasions call us from it; But there is no calling but our general calling of worshipping and enjoy∣ing our God; no feeding but on the tree of life, that groweth in the midst of Paradise; no drinking but of the Rivers of Gods own pleasures; and no night, no sleeping, but that rest which remaineth for the people of God. O what darkness, what night can be there, where all the righteous shall shine infinitely brighter then the Sun in his noon day lu∣ste. Here our Communion is hindered by the diffe∣rences that frequently arise  like Children of the same Father, we quarrel and wrangle; but there they will all be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and one judgement; There indeed Jerusalem is a City compact together, and at unity within it self; There Pauls desire is granted, that they all speak the same thing, they are one in affection, one in opinion, aud one in expressi∣on; There Christs prayer is granted, Father, that they may be one as we are one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one in us; If it be so good and pleasant a thing for brethren here, to dwell together in unity, and it be as a precious Oyntment, and as the Dew which de∣scended upon the Mountains of Sion; where the
Lord commanded his blessing, even life for ever. How good and pleasant will it be for those to dwell together in perfect unity there, where the consola∣tion of Christ is perfect, the fellowship of the Spirit entire, the comfort of love compleat? no crying, no complaining, no angry word, no frow∣ning look, no suspicious thought; But as old Gry∣neus said, There Zwinglius and Luther are well agreed. Our Communion here is but with a few, we are acquainted but with few, and our communion is not so large as our acquaintance; we have seen but few, we have heard but of few, and we have discoursed with fewer. There are but few in the Counties, in the Kingdom where we live, and many of them are wholly unknown to us; But There is a glorious Company of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apo∣stles, a noble Army of Martyrs, a numberless num∣ber of Saints, of all Countries, Callings, Condi∣tions, Relations; a thousand thousand, are before him, and ten thousand times ten thousand, mini∣ster to him; If Peter when he saw but two of the Chil∣dren of God in glory with Christ on Earth, cryed out, Master, It is good to be here; How good will it be to be There, where there shall be a great multi∣tude, which no man can number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues,Rev. 7. standing before the Throne, and before the Lamb, cloathed with white robes, and Palmes in their hands, and crying with a loud voice, Salvation unto our God, that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever. O what a blessed time, or rather eternity will that be, when I shall fully understand what the Communion of Saints meaneth! If Solomon could
say of militant Saints, As Oyntment and perfume rejoyce the heart, so doth the sweetness of a mans friend by hearty counsel; How much better might he speak it of Saints triumphant? What is the sweet∣ness and joy of that society where every soul is a bed of spices, an Orchyard of Pomgranats, a Cabi∣net of perfumes, for their mutual delight and re∣freshment! If David was so taken with the beauty of the Church in this World, notwithstanding her blackness, by reason of corruption and affliction, that he saith, If I forget thee, O Ierusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Ierusalem before my chief joy; How much is he taken with the Spouse of Christ There, where it is granted unto her to be arrayed in fine linnen, pure and white, which is the righteousness of the Saints, not onely im∣puted, but also inherent, to be cloathed with the embroydered graces of the holy spirit, perfect know∣ledge, perfect love, perfect joy, and all the beauties of holiness, without the least spot or wrinkle, or any such thing! there indeed he pre∣fers Jerusalem before his chief joy, whlst he beholds her all fair, compleatly conformed to Christ, with such a peculiar resemblance of his glory, as if the name of Christ was written on her fore-head, and her spiritual affinity and kindred manifested thereby. Surely it is a lovely communion, when Saints sit down together at the Lords Table, in this world, and par∣take of his last Supper, when they see, and hear, and taste, the true pledges of their Fathers infinite grace, and read their Redeemers boundless love, writ∣ten
by himself in his own blood. Their hearts have many a time been so ravished therewith, that they have wished the ordinance might have lasted longer, and that Christ would have lain so all night between their breasts; But O how infinitely short is this Com∣munion, of that which hey shall have in glory, when they shall be called to the Marriage supper of the Lamb, when they shall eat of the hidden Manna, and drink of the new wine in their Fathers Kingdom! then, then indeed every one may say, I sit under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet unto my taste; without question that Com∣munion which Adam had with Eve, that short time which they continued in innocency, was exceeding sweet. She was to him as a Crown of glory, a meet help, and the delight of his eyes; What a air Bride was she whom God himself drest, and deckt with all the ornaments of grace! What joy must there needs be at that Wedding which was ce∣lebrated in Paradise, covered with the curious Tapestry of thse pleasant trees, which the very han of the most High had planted, and delighted with the raishing noats of those pretty Quitisters which Infinite Wisdom had taught to sing at the Marriage feast where there was a perfect likeness and love between the Maried Persons, where there was not the least evil, or shew of evil to allay their joy, and especiay where the God of all consolation was fully and fourably present, as Master of the Feast! Adam could not but esteem her his loving Hind, and pleasant Re, his sweet yoke-fellow, and pleasant play-fellow, the partner and sweetner of all his comforts, he could not but he satisfied with her breasts, and ra∣vished
with her love. But even this is far inferiour to the communion of the Saints above; There, in heaven are more glorious bands, and sweeter knots of loving fellowship; then that of Marriage, the attire of the Bride is far richer, the beauty of the Bride far greater, the wedding chamber is the heavenly Pa∣radise, the melody made there will be by celestial Courtiers, Angels themselves; and there the Foun∣tain whence all joy floweth will run more freely, and he will turn that water which Adam had be∣low into the richest wine. Lord, I acknowledge to thy glory, that I have sometimes been refreshed with the company of thy chosen in this world, I have seen thee in them, and heard thee by them, yet how little good have I got by them, in comparison of what I might and ought? Pardon all my weaknesses, and do thou so sup∣ply my spiritual wants, that I may both love more and improve better the society of thy Saints here, that so when thou callest me from this imperfect communion with some few, I may be carried to Abrahams bo∣some, and enjoy perfect fellowship with those thousands that are before thee, where thou art visible in all, every one being thy temple, and every heart being the altar, upon which the fire of thy love is ever burning. O let me praise thee in that great congregation, and my glory sing of thee before much people; for there shall those that mourned for Sion be filled with com∣fort, and rejoyce for ever with Ierusalem, they shall be born upon her sides, and dandled upon her knees, they shall suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation, they shall milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory, Amen.
CHAP. V. How a Christian should exercise himself to God∣liness in Solitariness; As also a Good Wish about that Particular. THirdly, Thy duty is to exercise thy self to Godliness in Solitude. A gracious person is not onely consciencious in company, but also when he is alone; His whole life is nothing else but a walking with his God. When I awake I am still with thee, saith David, Psa. 139. 18. He no sooner opened the eyes of his body in the morning, but he was lifting up the eyes of his mind to Heaven; When he was alone in his bed, he was in company with his God. As God was still with him, so he was still with God; Nevertheless I am conti∣nually with thee, Psa. 73. True sanctity is visible in secresie to him that is Omniscient. The Saint is many times most busie when he hath nothing to do, and may say more truly then Scipio the African, Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, I am never less alone, then when alone. The pulse of the body beats as well in solitariness, as in company, and so doth the pulse of the gracious soul towards his God and Saviour. Its said of Domitian, that he did one hour in a day sequester himself from all persons, to no purpose,Suetonius. for it was to catch flies, which was the original of that answer, to one that asked, Whether any body were with the Emperour, Ne musa quidem; No, not so much as a flie. A Be∣liever hath business of great weight, when he
withdraweth from the press of the world, it is that he might draw nearer to the Lord. Isaac go∣eth into the Fields to meditate of God, Christ go∣eth into the Mountain apart to pray to God. Da∣niel to the Rivers side; Peter to the house top; The Church to the secret place of the stairs, and all to enjoy communion with their God, Gen. 26. Mark 1. 35. Cant. 2. 4. Dan. 8. 2. and 10. 4. Act. 10. A Saint therefore sequestreth himself from the noise and clamour of company, and worldly busi∣nesses, that he might have the more free and in∣timate converse with his Redeemer. A forced ba∣nishment from Men, to dwell among Beasts, hath been bewailed as a great misery; but a free retire∣ment from creatures, to enjoy more of the bles∣sed God, is a great felicity. Woodrow, an hearb of an extraordinary pleasant smell, delighteth in dark and shadowy places. So the Christian, who in company refresheth others with the fragrancy of his graces, loveth sometimes to be obscure and in secret. Many of the Heathen were so affected with the vanity and vexation of the world, that they willingly left their pleasures and preferments in Courts, to live privately in the Country. Sylla Felix, laid a∣side his dictatourship, to lead a retired life. Dio∣clesians two and twenty years raigne, could not make him out of love with a solitary life, but he voluntarily left the Empire, and could not be prevailed with to reassume it, though he was threat∣ned to it. Demosthenes would shave his beard half off, and all his hair from his head, to necessitate
his stay within doors, and his abode amongst his Books. Thales left the affairs of state, that he might have time for Contemplation. Cato in his old age, wihdrew from Rome, to live as he used to say, out of the crowd of the world; And the Romans were so much convinced of his prudence herein, that as they passed by his house to which he retired, they would ordinarily cry out, Iste solus scit vivere; This man alone know∣eth how to live. Old Similis having lived long in the Wars, and afterwards for seven years devo∣ting himself to solitariness, when he died left this Epitaph behind, Here lieth old Similis, yet one that lived but seven years. Hiero the Tyrant of Syra∣cuse, gave over his Kingdom, to live a solitary life. Others out of a deep melancholly, have a∣voided all society, and delighted onely like the Shrick Owl and Bittern, in desolate places and Monuments of the dead, Zeph. 2. 14. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History (Lib. 4. Cap. 18.) speaks of some, so strangely averse to all corre∣spondence with men, that they have immuted them∣selves in Cels and Silence, for sixty and ninety years together, even as long as they lived. But Reader, I would not advise thee to such con∣tinued retirement, nor to any at all upon such low, mean grounds. Those voluntary sequestrations of deluded Votaries amongst the Papists from humane society, are I dare say, as unacceptable to God, as uncomfortable to themselves. Such solitary persons, bring little comfort to their own souls, little honour to God, and do no good at all to others. By how much as doing God great service, is better then doing him
little; as doing good to many, is better then doing good onely to my self, so much is Company before solitariness. But the most publique Christians have their times for privacy; Its no mean misery, to be either always alone, or never alone; He that is always crowded with Company, can neither enjoy himself, nor his God as he ought. SECT. I. I Shall first lay down some Motives, and then shew wherein we should exercise our selves to Godli∣ness when we are alone. 1. To quicken thee to exercise thy self to godliness in solitude.Motives. 1. The bene∣fit of solitude. Consider, The benefit of solitude; well im∣proved solitude is a good opportunity for godliness. Seneca was wont to say, that he seldom went into company, that he came not home worse then he went out. Society, as it hath much gain, so much perplexity; Solitude is a release to the soul that was imprisoned in Company. To be much in Com∣pany tires and wearies us; We are prone to count it a bondage, and the persons we associate with, our fetters; Retiring seasonably from them, sets us at liberty, and giveth us freedom to mount up to Heaven at our pleasure. Scipio would tell his friends, I have never better company, then when I have no company, for then can I freely entertain my own thoughts, and converse with all the learned that have been in former ages. Hierom speaks better, Sapiens nunquam solus esse potest abet; enim secum omnes qui sunt & qui fuerunt boni — & si bo∣minum sit inopia, loquitur cum Deo. A wise man can
never be alone, for he hath ever with him all the good men that are, or have been, and if he find any want of men, he can converse with God. It was a cu∣stome among the Indians, when their King went to bed, to pray with piping acclamations, that he might have happy dreams, and withal, consult well for the good of his Subjects; As if the silent, secret night had been a friend to wisdom. One of the best Kings that ever the world had, tells us, My reins instruct me in the night season, Psa. 16. 7. The sensual worldling is a stranger to such secrecy: It hath in some respects an advantage of society, it hath not those clamours nor distractions with it, which hinder us in our heavenly trade; As it hath fewer allurements to good, so it hath fewer im∣pediments of good, and fewer suggestions to evil, and truly the grand Argument to good, which is, instar omnium, is not wanting to it; It hath the presence of God. Every godly man may say in a sense, as Christ did, when his Disciples were to leave him alone, I am not alone, because the Father is with me, Joh. 16. 32. It is reported of Numa, that after the death of his Wife Tatia, he left the City, and gave himself wholly to walk in Fields and Woods, consecrated to the gods, and thence was said to enjoy the goddess Egeria, and that she made him her Husband. Plut. in vit. Num. Though such stories are fabulous, yet its true of the Christian, that he enjoyeth much of his God when he is out of the worlds crowd. Lovers give and return the sweetest kisses and embraces, when they are together in secret. Isaac and Rebeckah thought themselves in secret, when they sported
together. David had his Sweet-meats, and Hea∣venly Iunkets in the night, when the eyes of others were closed, and saw not the Charger which was sent from above, for his spiritual refreshment. His solitary meditations brought him more solace and comfort then the whole creation could, afford him; When I meditate on thee in my bed, and think of thee in the night watches; My soul is filled with marrow and fatness, Psa. 63. 6. Communion with God in secret, is an Heaven upon Earth; What food can compare with the hidden Manna? Some persons have excellent banquets in their Closets; That bread which the Saints eat in secret, how plea∣sant is it? Ah what stranger can imagine the joy, the melody, which even the secret tears of the Saints cause! Believers find rich mines of silver and gold in solitary places, they fetch up precious jewels out of secret holes, out of the bottom of the O∣cean, where are no inhabitants. Naturalists ob∣serve that those fish are sweetest which lye hid. Saints have often sweet joy and refreshment in secret, they have meat to eat which the world knoweth not of. The Fig-tree, Olive, and Vine, would not leave their sweetness, fatness, and chear∣fulness, to be Kings over other trees. They that know what it is to enjoy God in secret, would not leave it or lose it to be Kings or Commanders over the whole World, Iudg. 9. 11,12,13. One place where the Israelites pitched in their passage to Canaan, was called Iothatha, from Iatab and Batha, a pleasant Wilderness, or delectable De∣sart. A Christian hath many such stations in his travails to the Heavenly Canaan; When he is
in a Wilderness alone, out of the noise of Pha∣roahs Court, and free from the clamours, and complainings of Gods Israel, by reason of Epypti∣an Task-masters; he hath the Pillar, the extraor∣dinary presence of his God, which abundantly satisfieth and rejoyceth his soul. The highest Princes sometimes give their largest gifts to their favourites in private, to prevent that envy which publique notice or knowledge of them might oc∣casion. Some Saints give their largest almes in se∣cret, that their left hand scarce knoweth what their right hand doth; The great and holy God sendeth many a rich present, giveth many a large almes to his indigent friends when there is none by, to witness his bounty and charity. In the dead time of the night, when deep sleep seiseth on men, the earth receiveth many pleasant refreshing showres; The Children of God have many cost∣ly Collations, and much curious Musick, when no eye but their own seeth or tasteth the former, and no ear save theirs heareth the latter. The Prophet Hosea represents God thus, speaking of his people, Behold I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her, Hos. 2. 14. Gods method is marvellous, he brings his Church into a Wilderness, and then turns it into a Canaan, causing it to flow with Milk and Honey. By Wilderness some understand a sor∣rowful, and others a solitary condition; but then God appears to her, the God of all consolation, for he speaks comfortably to her. He that chid her when she was in the crowd of the world, saying as they said, and doing as they did; when he hath her
alone, reflecting upon her sins, and recollecting her self, will speak friendly and comfortably to her; In the Hebrew it is, I will speak to her heart; and sure∣ly his powerful satable speech will banish all her hea∣viness. This invisible trade, brings in visible profit and comfort. Secret correspondence with allies, is most difficult, but exceeding gainful and delightful. Some curious mysteries are like Mines sprung under ground, the less they are known, the more efficacious and effectual they are. The open air or breath of men would soil the beauty and lustre of exact pictures. Christ calls his Spouse out of the worlds view and light, when he intends her the fullest seals of his love; Come my beloved, let us go forth into the fields; let us lodge in the Villages, let us get up early to the Vineyards, there will I give thee my loves, Cant. 7. 11, 12. Mark, There in the Fields where no eye beholdeth the sweet meeting of our lips the close embraces of our armes, the inti∣mate conjunction of our hearts; there I will give thee my loves. Kings do not unbosome and open their hearts before a multitude. The fa∣vourite is acquainted with the richest secrets of state in private. O that I were (saith Iob) as in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was with my Tabernacle, Job 29. 4.Quando secrete dus erat in ta∣bernaculo. Vulgar. . Sept. As if he had said, (according to some) O that I were as in my former days, when God was secretly in my family, and gave me familiar visits, which the World took no notice of; when I had many reviving soliloquies about God, and refreshing colloquies with him.
The Egyptian Laws placed the Image of silence in all those Temples where the Image of Seapis their god stood, as if they might expect most of her favour, when they approached her privately, with as little noise as might be. Addresses to the true God in secret have been accompanied with great successe. Motive. The danger of neglect.2. Consider, If thou dost not exercise thy self to godliness in solitude, thou wilt be in great danger of running into sin, and contracting guilt on thy soul; The benefit of solitude rightly improved, may afford us comfort, but the danger of it commandeth our caution. A man in solitariness may be secure, because he seeth no visible enemies, but he is not therefore safe. We are no sooner alone, but armies of evil thoughts present themselves to us, and they will by force quarter with us, if the lodging rooms of our hearts be not taken up beforehand;Se. Epist. 10. When the Virgin is alone, then she is in most danger of be∣ing ravisht. In our solitude we should not be without fear of spiritual rapes; Our danger will appear, if we consider three particulars. 1. Our minds are restless, and will be employed either upon what is good or upon what is evil. The mind of man is as a Mill-wheel, continually turning about, and drenching in the waters; Our hearts are as a stirring child, that cannot endure to sit still. No Virgin hath so many Suitors for her love, as our minds for their thoughts. The Sun may as soon be stopped from his race, as the heart from its thinking. We are all in this respect like the Sea, which cannot rest, ever in motion; Is
not he a foolish miller, that turnes the water which should grind his Corn, into the High-way, where it doth no good? And is not he a foolish Christian, that imployeth those thoughts about needless oy's, which should help to provide him spiritual food? As the natural heat will be ever working; if it have not food to digest, it will prey upon the spirits, and destroy it self; so the mind of man will be always busie; if not in thinking of the excellencies of God, or the love of Christ, or the beauty and necessity of holiness, then in speculative wanton∣ness, or contemplative wickedness, in ambitious fancies, or revengeful desires; We are like a Boat swimming against tide, there is no standing still; if the Oar be left that we go not forward, the Tide will carry us strongly backward; If the ground be not sown with good seed, it will of it self bring forth evil weeds. 2. Satan is subtle, and will not be wanting to fight us, when he finds us alone, and without any seconds to assist us. The Raven, which is called the Devils Bird, is observed to haunt Deserts, and solitary places; When the Spirit of God would speak a City desolate, and without Inhabitants, he tells us, The Raven shall dwell in it.Isa. 34. 11. When Satan was to enter the List against Christ, and would try his utmost power and policy to overcome him, he takes him to a Mountain alone, Mat. 4. 8. The Scripture to shew the valour and strength of Christ, sets out his conquest and victory over the Devil on his own Dunghil in the Wilderness. When Christs Lambs are in the Desert alone, they may soon be a prey to this roaring Lion. Satan is a cunning suitor, and will
be sure to watch the time when the Parents are from home, to wooe the Daughter, and steal a∣way her affections. He that takes his leave of men, to withdraw himself, may be confident the Divel will come, though more bold then wel∣come, and sit with him. When we know of the coming of so bad a gnest, is it not good policy to forestal him, by fling the house before-hand with loving and beloved friends? 3. Our own arnal hearts will strive to improve our solitude to draw us to sin. The Wife that lyeth in the bosome, takes the opportunity of the night, when she is alone with her Husband, to draw him to her mind, and to bend him to her will; though she were afraid or ashamed to mention or motion her evil desires before others, yet in secrecy she hath courage enough to do it, and often with success. Our flesh is nearer to us then our wives, more inti∣mate with us, more powerful over us; how frequently doth it draw us to those sins in secret, which it dares not be so bold as to whisper to us in publique? They devise mischeif on their beds, Psa. 36. 4. When the good man is from home, and gone a journey, then the whorish woman commits adultery with strangers. Reader, thou canst no sooner be alone, but thy corrupt heart will send thee many in wanton and theevish thoughts to bear thee company; they will come as Lot daugters to him to the dead time of the night, and defile thy soul, and thou shalt like Lot, not know when they came in, nor when they went away. Thou little thinkest how subtle thy wicked thoughts are, how easily they will wind them∣selves into and out of thy mind, without giving
warning, or being taken notice of. As the Serpent crept into Paradise secretly, so do sinful thoughts into our hearts; They conspire together against us as the adversaries of Iudah, and do as good as say; They shall neither know, nor see, till we come in the midst of them, and cause the work (of exercising themselves to godliness) to cease, Neh. 4. 11. As Gods Spirit hath filled his Prophets with excellent Revelations and visions in the night or day, when they have been alone; so our flesh filleth us with loathsome atheistical blasphemous thoughts often∣times when we are by our selves. Children never dirty their hands and faces, or defile their cloaths more then when they get alone, from Parents and Servants. When thou art in solitude, thou hast no humane friend to watch over thee, and therefore haste the more need to watch narrowly over thy self. No Town hath such need of a Warder, no Peers gate of a Porter to keep out nasty beggers, as thy heart hath of watch and ward to keep out wicked thoughts. SECT. II. THirdly, Consider,Motive. It will be some evidence of uprightness. The exercising thy self to godli∣ness in solitude, will be a probable evidence of thy uprightness. Men are wih-held in company from doing evil by the iron curb of fear or shame, and provoked to do good by the golden spurs of praise or profit; but in solitariness there are not such rub in the way of lust to hinder our passage, nor such baits in the way of holiness to encourage our progress. The naked lineaments, and natural thoughts of the soul are best discerned in secret. The darkest night may afford us light enough to see our selves by; when outward objects and occasions do not interpose
to hinder our sight or discompose our souls. No mans temper can be discovered by his carriage in a crowd of affairs, no more then his countenance in a troubled water. When the mind is stated in a due repose, it bewrayeth her truest affections, which in the midst of business, she either doth not shew, or not observe. If many servants, and several masters be together, busie and active, we can hardly tell to what Masters the particular servants belong; but when the Masters be alone, and walk singly, their ser∣vants attend on them, and are known. Our Affecti∣ons are the servants of our souls, both rational, and sensual; whilst both these Masters are employed, as in company it sometimes falls out, and they wait, its not easie to judge which they serve; in solitude one takes upon it self the government, and then its visible what attendants it hath. As its said of grief, Ille dolet vere qui sine teste dole, He grieves truly, that weeps, without a witness; so it may be said of godliness, he is sincere in his god∣liness, who is godly in secret. The best characters, and truest pictures which can be drawn of the minds of men, are to be taken from the bent of their thougts, rather then from their works; Wicked men cannot do the mischief they conceive, for lack of the Mid∣wifery of fit instruments and opportunities to bring it forth; Good men are unable to act all the good they would, because they want power and ability for Ex∣ecution; As Paul acknowledgeth that he was better at willing then performing; but every man hath liber∣ty to devise and meditate, to study and contrive what he will Though a mans hand or actions may be over awed and over-ruled against his own will, yet
his heart and thoughts cannot. As he thinks in his heart (saith the wise man) so is he, Pov. 13. 7. Practice may be swayed by outward ends, but the thoughts are always genuine and natural. Violence may cause the former, but love carrieth the lat∣ter in its own way. Hence good men have been signalized for Saints, from the holiness of their thoughts. (They thought upon his name, they medi∣tate in his law day and night, and they have even appealed to God with comfort, upon their confi∣dence of their uprightness, from the goodness of their thoughts, Try me O God, and know my thoughts,) as being the purest and most unfeigned issues of the soul, Mal. 3. 17. Psalm 1. and such as have least danger of infection from forreign aimes. Its ob∣servable also, that wicked men are set forth by this secret mark, They devise mischief, they imagine wickedness; the thoughts and imaginations of his eart are evil; God is not in all his thoughts; because, as Adam begat a son after his own likeness, so doth the heart of every man beget thoughts according to its own likeness, whether it be spiritual or carnal. The Bowl runs as the Bias inclines it. The Ship moves as the Rdder steereth it; and the mind thinketh according to the predominancy of vice or vertue in it; The more the fire of grace burns clear in the soul, the more of these sparks will a∣scend towards Heaven. The more earthly a soul is, the more his thoughts will tend downward, the more he will mind earthly things, Philip. 3. 17, 18.
Naturalists tell us of the Gnomon, commonly cal∣led the Mariners needle, that it always will turn to the Northstar; though it be closed and shut up in a Coffer of Wood or Gold, yet it loseth not its nature; So the true Christian is always looking to the star of Iacob, whether he be shut up in a Pri∣son, or shut himself up in his Closet, he is ever longing after Jesus Christ. A true lover delights most to visit his friend alone, when he can enjoy privacy with him. Our blessed Saviour doth not without cause call the Pharisees Hypocrites, though they fated and prayed, and gave much almes, because they per∣formed those duties chiefly, if not onely in com∣pany, and to be seen of men. The applause of o∣thers, was the weight that set their clocks a going; when that was taken off (as when they were a∣lone,) they stood still. Therefore Christ adviseth his Apostles to take another course, if they would evidence the truth of their Christianity. Enter into thy closet, shut thy door, and pray to thy father in secret. One fervent prayer in secret, will speak more for our sincerity then many in publique, Mat. 6. it. When a Prince passeth by in the streets, then all, even strangers will flock about him, and look upon him; but his Wife and Children think not this enough, but follow him home, and are not satis∣fied, unless they can enjoy him there. A false Christian, and one that is a stranger to God, if he have but a superficial view of him in his Courts, is pleased; but the true believer, and one that is nigh to him in Christ, must have retired conver∣ses
with him in his Closet, or he is not con∣tented. SECT. III. I Come now to shew how a Christian should exer∣cise himself to godliness in Solitude.Wherein the exercising our selves to god∣liness in soli∣tude consist∣eth. 1. If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godli∣ness when thou art alone,In keeping away vain thought guard thy heart against vain thoughts; This is the first work to be done, without which all that I have to commend to thee will be in vain. Its to no purpose to expect that a glass should be filled with costly wine, when its filled already with puddle water. When the house before-hand was taken up by strangers, there was not room for Christ himself in the Inne. If such flies be suffered and allowed in our hearts, they will spoil our best pots of Oyntment. Some persons, though poor, when they are so∣litary, delight in the fancies and imaginations of great preferments, and pleasures, and riches, as if they were real; whereas they are the meer Chi∣mera's and Fictions of their own brains, and have no existence, but in their thoughts. No wonder our Saviour saith, , Out of the heart of man proceedeth madness, Mark 7.21,22. Such thoughts are distracted thoughts, and sutable to those that are out of their wits, who please themselves in thinking that their filthy holes in Bedlam, are stately Palaces, that their nasty rags are royal robes, that their iron fetters are chaines of gold, and the feathers stuck in their caps are imperial Crowns. As the Spanish Page, in an high distem∣per
of fancy, imagined himself to be some great Emperour, and was maintained in that humour by his Lord; so some foolish men build these Castles in the air, and then allow themselves a lodging in them. Others please themselves in the thoughts of sinful sports, or cheats, or unclean acts, and sit brooding on such Cockatrice eggs with great delight. It is their meat and drink to roul those sugard-plums under their tongues. Though they cannot act sin outwardly, for want of strength of body, or a fit opportunity, yet they act sin in∣wardly with great love and complacency. As Players in a Comedy, they act their parts in private, in order to a more exact performance of them in publique. Others entertain themselves with needless and useless thoughts, such as tend neither to the informing the mind, nor reforming the heart or life: Like vagrants, a man meets with these in every place, but can neither tell whence they come, nor whi∣ther they go; they have neither a good cause, nor do they produce any good effect. Such thoughts might be in a Davids heart, but they were the object of his hate, Psa. 119. 103. I hate vain thoughts; The best Christians heart here, is like Solomons ships, which brought home, not onely Gold and Silver, but also Apes and Peacoks; it hath not onely spiritual and heavenly, but also vain and foolish thoughts; But these latter are there as a disease, or poison in the body, the object of his grief and abhorrency, not of his love and compla∣cency.
Though we cannot keep vain thoughts from knocking at the door of our hearts, nor from en∣tering in sometimes, yet we may forbear bidding them welcome, or giving them entertainment. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jerem. 4. 14. Its bad to let them sit down with us, though but for an hour, but its worse to let them lye or lodge with us. Its better to receive the greatest Theives into our houses, then vain thoughts into our hearts. Iohn Husse seeking to reclaim a very prophane wretch, was told by him, that his gi∣ving way to wicked wanton thoughts, was the ori∣ginal of all those hideous births of impiety, which he was guilty of in his life; Husse answered him, That though he could not keep evil thoughts from courting him, yet he might keep them from marrying him; as (saith he) though I cannot keep the Birds from flying over my head, yet I can keep them from building their nests in my hair. Christian, be careful when thou art out of Company as well as in it, for these guests will visit thee as soon ever as thou art alone, and if thou shouldst not frown upon them, they will turn thy solitude into a crowd, as Hierom found Rome in a Wilderness. The Heathen Cicero, em∣ployed his solitude to better purpose then most seeming Christians. I being weary, saith he,Quid trles solitudo corpo∣ris, si non est solitudo cordis. Greg. of li∣ving amongst wicked men, with whom all places in a manner swarm, betake my self to solitariness, as much as I can; yet that none may think I trifle away my time idly, to say no more, let my Books speak how I employ my self. Yet alas, when many Christians are retired out of the crowd and throng
of worldly men, they suffer worldly things to crowd and throng so abundantly in their hearts, that as it was said of Ephraim, strangers devour their strength,Ho. 7. 9. earthly things, though tending to no profit, waste their time, and devour their thoughts, which as Reuben, are the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of strength. SECT. IV. In spiritua∣lizing natural things.SEcondly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness in solitude, labour to spiritualize earth∣ly things. I must say, this is one of the most ex∣cellent and enriching arts in Christianity; Though these occasional thoughts resemble lightning, as well in the suddenness of their journey, as the vastness of their way, being able to reach from one end of Heaven unto the other, yet such light gains, with quick returnes, make an heavy purse. He that hath learned this mystery, is the true Chymist, he leaves the dregs and lees of things, and extracts the substance and quintessence of them. He hath better then Midas Wish, he turns all he toucheth into better then gold. Many a great Scholar begs with rare notions of the nature of silver, and gold, and pearls, when some Mer∣chants who never saw Mine, or Furnance, or read Book concerning them, hath his Coffers full of them. The Rabbies of the world, were they able like Solomon, to speak of all plants from the Cedar to the Hysope; and of all Beasts and Fish, and Fowl, nay, and of all creatures
in a Physical and Philosophical way, are not com∣parable to the illiterate Countryman who can read his God in them, and improve them for his spiritual advantage. Luther relates a story of two Cardinals riding to the Council at Constance,Luth. Declam. Popular de Terti. Precept. Tom. 1. how by the way they heard a shepherd weeping and crying out sadly, upon which they turned aside to know what was the matter, and found the shepherd looking upon an ugly Toad: They asked him the ground of his lamentation; He answered, I cannot but weep to consider the goodness of God, that he did not make me such a loathsom creature, and my own unthankefulness, that I should be no more sensible of it. At which one of the Cardinals was so affected, that he fell from his horse in a swoon, and coming again afterwards to himself, told his Brother; Well said St. Austin, Indocti rapiunt coelum, &c. The unlearned take heaven by violence, whilst we with all our parts and learning wallow in the mire of the earth and flesh. Natural beings are as spades, wherewith we may open the mines, and dig out spiritual riches. He that hath a gracious fancy, may like the Bee suck honey from every flower in the garden of the crea∣tion, and climb up by the stairs of the meanest creature to the Supream and Infinite Creator. All objects to a wise Christian may be wings to mount him up to heaven. As the old Romans when they saw the blew stones thought of Olympus, so the holy per∣son by every work is elevated to admire some excel∣lency in the workman. There is a threefold aspect which men cast up∣on the Works of God, according to the differ∣ence
of their eyes, or the degrees of their under∣standings. 1. Ordinary and vulgar persons, who differ little from Brutes, and behold the face of nature as beasts do a picture, onely viewing the outside and sur∣face of it rudely and superficially, never considering any art or curiosity in it. As the Horse and Mule which have no understanding, they view and drink of the streams, but mind not the purity or clarity of the water or the fountain whence it floweth; these look on Gods works at best, but as passen∣gers on a clock to know the time of the day, but take no notice of the wheels and poises, and their se∣veral motions and contrivances. 2. Schollars and Philosophers, who go a step higher and view this picture somewhat exactly, as Artists contemplating its curious wormanship, its pro∣per colours, comely features, and rare composure of the whole with admiration. As Nicotratus that told the Country man who wondred at his wondring at the exact piece of Helena drawn by Zeuxis, If thou hadst my eyes thou wouldst be affected as I am. 3. Christians and spiritual men, who move above the Philosopher and most skilful Naturalists in their own sphere, these look on the face of nature with a spiritual eye, as a lover on the Picture of her belo∣ved, delighting more in the resemblance then the table; contemplating the matchless Power, em∣broidered Wisdom, and infinite Goodness of their God which appear in his creatures. These are the men that can turn the stones and dirt of the streets, yea the snakes and serpents of the earth into bread
for their souls; if they should be denied the Scri∣pture (which God forbid) they can fetch spiritual food out of the creature. The Heron findeth her food in lakes and rivers, and picks it out with her long bill where other birds can get none: So saith Hesychius, the Christian by meditation can get food for his soul, where others that understand not this duty starve. Our blessed Saviour teacheth us to see the face of heavenly things in earthly glasses,N est llum animalulum tam exiguum in quo non ls disere possimu quam in omni∣bus sultis pictis aut as simlabris. Lavat. and to make a ladder of the creatures whereby we may ascend to heaven in our thoughts. He hath set us a pattern that we should follow his steps: What ho∣ney of profit and pleasure doth he tach us to draw from all the flowers and weeds too that grow in the garden of the Creation! He in∣structeth his Disciples by Lillies growing, and seed sown in the field; by trees and vines in the Orchard and Vineyard, by pearls, treasure, tares, leven, mustardseed, water, bread, nets, fish, salt, oyl, lamps, and as at Cana in Galilee turns all this water into wine, as well for their imitation as informati∣on. A mean Scaffold may serve to rear up a goodly building; and an ordinary creature may afford mat∣ter for excellent meditations. God likens himself to many, to shew that there is something of him in all; He compares himself to a Builder, to a Buckler, to a Castle, a Captain, to a Fortress, to a Fountain of living water, to an helper, to health, to an Habitation, to Light, to Life, to a rocke, a refuge a reward, to a shadow, a shelter, a shield, to a Lion, an Eagle, a Leopard, a Bear, to fire, dew, a moth, the Sun, and why? but to teach us to read
him in his creatures; In Heaven the Christian shall know God and all the creatures in him, but on earth we must learn to know him by them. God hath given us three Books, which we ought to be studying whilst we are living. The Booke of Conscience, the Booke of Scripture, and the Book of the Creature; In the Book of Conscience we may read our selves, in the Book of the creature we may read God, in the Book of Scripture we may read both God and our selves. The great God sets us excellent lectures in the volume of the creation. Though this Book hath but three leaves in it, Heaven, Earth, Sea, yet it teacheth us many rare lessons; If we think of the visible Heaven, and behold those great lights of the world; how swiftly they move in their proper orbes; how unwearied they are in their perpetual courses; how they fail not a minute of their appointed time, nor wander an inch out of their designed way; how they divide the day and night, and the several seasons of the year; how they bless the earth with their smiling aspects, and keep the inhabitants of this lower world from finding it a Dungeon by their enlightning beams; we may therein discover the wisdom and power of its maker, and cry out with David, Psa. 19. 1. and 8. 2, 3. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy-works; When I consider the heavens, the work of thy singers, the Moon and Stars which thou hast made; What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou dost thus visit him? O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth?
and thy glory above the heavens! What rare fruit may a soul gather from these celestial trees! if the porch of Heaven be such a curious piece, the work of his fingers, i. e. an elaborate piece of em∣broidery, how curious is the Palace within! If the outward Court be so glorious, how glorious is the holy of holies! If light be so sweet, and it be so pleasant a thing to behold the Sun, how sweet is the light of my Gods countenance, and how pleasant is it to behold the Sun of righte∣ousness! O what a blessed day will that be, when the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of seven days, when all beleivers shall shine as the Sun in the firmament of their Father! Lord, thou speakest to the Sun, and it riseth not, to the Moon, and it standeth still; Why should not thy Servant be as obedient to thy command, even when it is against my natural depraved course! O speak but as power∣fully to thy poor creature, and he will as readily obey thy pleasure! If we look a little lower, to the clouds, and meditate on them in their natural cause; thin vapours exhaled by the Sun, in their principal use, to drop fatness on the earth, in the tenuity and smalness of their bodies, the weight and great∣ness of their burdens, the waters in them being like lusty children, encompassed onely with a tender film; how they are tossed too and fro, hurried hither and thither with tempestuous winds, and yet burst not in pieces through lack of vent, nor sink under the heaviness of their load, nor leak out one drop, till the hand of their Master
unstop their bottles; may well admire that infinite invisible power that upholds and governs them, and say as Eliphaz of their author; He doth great things, and unsearchable, marvellous things with∣out number; for he giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth water upon the fields, Job 5. 9, 10. What excellent water may I distil with the limbiks of the clouds! If the favour of a Prince, be as a cloud of the latter rain (Prov. 16. 15.) so refresh∣ing and comforting, what is the favour of the King of Kings! As the clouds mask the Sun from the ight of Mortals, so doth sin hide the smil∣ing countenance of my God from the view of my poor soul. As the Cloud is consumed and va∣nisheth away, so he that goeth down to the grave, shall come-up no more; If showres from above make the earth soft and fruitful; surely the showres of heavens grace would make my hard and barren heart both tender and abundant in holiness; Lord, whilst I am in my journey towards my heavenly Ca∣naan, let thy good spirit be my pillar of cloud to direct me; Suffer me not to be as a cloud without water; Do but say unto me, I have blotted out thy transgressions as a thick cloud, and I will bless thee for ever. If we look to the earth and view her well, though she hath been called, and counted the vilest and grossest of the elements, we shall finde her a glorious body, and not in the least degree a dis∣paragement or disgrace to her maker. Take her inside, and she is curiously and wonderfully made. Her Center like the heart is seated in the most con∣venient place, for the benefit of every part;
Her several channels under ground, as so many veins, do convey her pure, though pale blood, for the animating and actuating (as it were) every mem∣ber; Though her wealth lyeth deep, and much of it was never discovered to any mortal, yet what rare jewels, and rich mettals have been seen in her very guts and garbage; Take he side and that cloathing will be found better then of wrought gold; Her Garment is richer in any part of it, then Solomon in all his royalty; The fine linnen of Egypt, silks of Persia, and curious works of Turkey, are exceedingly inferior to her daily at∣tire; She is covered with the costly curious Aras of Hearbs, and Plants and Flowers; embroydered with variety of all sorts of colours, perfumed with the most fragrant and delightful odours; She is at∣tended by Birds and Beasts of several orders, that all in their proper ranks, move too and fro, ac∣knowledging their engagements to her; O who is like that God that hath made himself such a foot-stool! If his foot-stool be so glorious, how glorious is his throne! But besides all this, he that shall ponder the fruitfulness and fecundity of her Womb, her unweariedness in bringing forth, her wonderful care of her off-spring, in bringing them up, providing them all, though of different kinds, food sutable to each of their natures whilst they live, and receiving them kindly into her bosome and embraces when they die, and all else are weary of them, may well cry out by way of admiration; O Lord, the earth is full of thy good∣ness, The earth is full of thy glory! What rich mines may I dig out of the bowels of the earth? when
my God is angry, the earth shakes and trembleth, and the foundations thereof are moved; and shall not my flesh tremble for fear of the God of the whole earth, and my soul be afraid of his righteous judgements! His hand hath laid the foundation of the earth, and his right hand hath spanned the Heavens  when he calls they stand up together, and shall not I hear his call, and obey his command! Lord, if the earth be thine, and the fulness there∣of, the world and all that dwell therein; Whose then am I? Surely thine; O help me to disown all title to my self, to quit all my interest in my self, and to live as one that is not his own, but the Lords; the earth is full of thy riches, let my heart be full of thy righteousness, and that will turn earth to me into heaven, whilst I am full of thy likeness and thy love. If we consider the Ocean, that amazeth a be∣holder with its fierce countenance, and seems to have neither banks nor bottom; how it threatens the earth with its boysterous billows, as if it in∣tended to swallow it up in a moment, and yet when it hath swoln it self to the height of its pride, and its insulting waves have shewed their teeth, how soon it retreats, like a coward, as if it were afraid of the smallest worm, and had al∣ready outgone its bounds and commission! what innumerable Fish, both small and great, take up their chambers in the waters, and finde their food in the jaws of that devourer! what multi∣tudes of massy Vessels she fetcheth off from one Island, and carrieth upon her back as a Porter his burthen, and sets them down safe at another;
how she playeth with them, what frights she puts them in by the way, as men do little children, tossing them up to heaven, and then throwing them down again, as if her belly should be the certain place of their burial, and after all her frowns and fury, refresheth them with her smiles and favour, and doth but prepare them thereby to salute their harbour with the greater joy and gladness! how she sendeth out of her store-house provision, for the several families of the world, furnishing the several pipes and aquaeducts of the earth with fresh springs and streams, for the comfort of Man and Beasts; If we but confi∣der these things, what cause shall we have to say with the Psalmist, They that go down into Ships, see his wonders in the deep, and with those Mari∣ners, What manner of man is this, whom the Winds and the Seas obey? What manner of God is this, who gathereth the waters of the Sea together, and layeth up the Floods in store-houses, who shutteth in the Ocean with bars and doors, and saith, Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed, who puts a bridle in the jaws of such a monster, and when she threatens no∣thing but death and destruction puls her in, and makes her retreat to her own den without doing the least hurt? O what a God is this, whom the rugged blustring winds, and raging boistrous seas obey! What excellent conclusions may a Christian gather from such premises! Do the Winds and Seas obey God as stubborn and surly as they are, and shall not I obey him? Are they kept within their banks, and shall not I be kept within my bounds? Lord,
thou stillest the noise of the Seas, the noise of the Wa∣ters, and the tumults of the people; O why dost thou not quiet the headstrong passions in my breast?Every crea∣ture, sath Ber∣nard, hath this voyce, Q se∣cit m propter te, sit t pro∣pter se. Thou observest how they roar and make a noise continu∣ally, what frightful stormes they raise within me; If thou wouldst but say to them in their height and heat; Peace, be still, there would presently ensue a calm. O suffer not these high winds to overturn me, nor these swelling waters to overwhelm me; I am even ready to sink, save me Master, or I perish. Thus a Christian may consider the works of God either collectively or severally, both in their insides and outsides, to his marvellous advantage. As the Rabbies say of the Word, I may say of the Works of God, Turn it over, and over, and over again, for all is in it; Turn them over, and over, and over again, for all is in them. There is wisdom in them, in their variety, diversity of natures, subordination and ser∣viceableness each to other; O Lord, how marvel∣lous are thy works? in wisdom hast thou made them all. There is Power in bringing with a breath the whole Creation out of the barren womb of no∣thing; He spake and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast. There is Mercy in providing so boun∣tifully for every of his creatures, The whole earth is full of thy goodness. There is Faithfulness in uphol∣ding all things in their being; Thy faithfulness is un∣to all generations, thou hast established the earth, and it abideth; yea mercy and truth meet together. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens; and thy truth reach∣eth unto the clouds. Every of Gods works is so profitable, that as the Aromatick fruit, not onely
the kernel is a Nutmg, but the skin of it is Mace. As in a fair suit of Arras, though the hangings never appear to their full advantage, but when they are opened in all their dimensions, and seen together; yet a small shread may assure you of the excellency of the colours, and richness of the stuff; So though the Divine Perfections would appear most in their beauty and glory, if we were able at one view to behold the whole world in its several eminencies and beauties, yet a little part of it may speak the worth and richness of the whole. It was an ho∣nest speech of a Monk, who being asked how he could endure that life without the pleasure of books? answered, The nature of the creatures is my library, wherein when I please I can muse upon Gods deep Ora∣cles. The Egyptians were instructed by Characters and Hieroglyphicks; by something presented to the eye, notions were represented to the understand∣ing. Reader, it is thy priviledge that thou mayst per∣form this duty in any place: No sight, no sound but may afford matter for meditation. If thou walkest in thy garden thou mayst turn it into an Eden by delightful meditations; Dost thou behold the flowers standing in their ranks, what a goodly shew they make? thou mayst think what a lovely ight it is to see Christians contînuing in those se∣veral places and stations in which God hath set them. Some flowers open and shut with the sun; so doth the Christian observe the shining and with∣drawing of the Sun of righteousness. Some flowers dye, having a worm gnawing their root; so will all hypocrites wither and come to nothing, not∣withstanding
their gaudy shew. Flowers are ten∣der things, and must be charily lookt to, or they fade away, so Saints, if the Spirit of God were not choyce of them, and ever watchful over them, would perish. How lovely are flowers to the eye? how pleasant to the taste? how soft to the touch? what ornaments to an house? How amiable are the children of God to those that have eyes to see his image on them? how fragrant is the smell of their Spiknard, and Calamus, and Cassia? what a grace are they to any Family or Society? Dost thou walk into thy Garden to observe how thy flowers thrive?Cant 7. 11. so Jesus Christ goeth into his garden to see how his plants flowrish: Thou wilt not allow any weeds or barren flowers in thy Gar∣den; and Jesus Christ will not permit such wicked unprofitable ones in his Church. Flowers are love∣ly and beautiful one day, and withered and fallen off the stalk the next;Isa. 40.6. so man is a comely living creature one day, and a deformed corps the next. Thus a Saint may make every flower like the Gilly-flower, cordial to him. If thou walket by a River, thou mayst change the water there into spirits by meditation. How fitly may thy thoughts be raised by that object, to the cleansing, refreshing properties of the Word of God, to the water of life, to the Well of salvation, to the river, whose streams make glad the City of God, to the rivers of pleasures at Gods right hand for ever∣more! The same water, which being liquid, is pe∣netrated with an horse hair, will bear the horse himself when hard frozen: So those threats and judgements of God which penetrate deep into the
tender consciences of the regenerate, enter not at all into the hearts of carnal men, hardned by custom in sin; and hence thou mayst gather the reason whence the sword of the Word, that in some divideth the joynts and marrow, in others glanceth only, or reboundeth, not making the least din or impression upon their frozen adamantine hearts. If thou art eating and drinking, thou mayst feed thy soul as well as thy body, by meditating on the meat that endureth to everlasting life, on that flesh which is meat indeed, and that blood which is drink indeed. Thou mayst think, if my outward man need food, and without it cannot subsist, surely spiritual food is as needful for my inward man, and without it that will starve; If a famine of bread and water be so dreadful, that the tongues of men cleave under it to the roof of their mouths, and their countenances become as black as a coal, how dreadful is a famine of the Word of the Lord! If natural food be so pleasant and savoury to my taste, surely spiritual food is sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. If all the labour of man be for his belly, what labour doth the soul de∣serve? If the ordinances of my God now are so pleasant to me, that my soul is even filled as with marrow and fatness, and refreshed as with Wine on the Lees, well refined, what a blessed day will it be, when I shall eat bread in the Kingdom of Heaven, and drink new wine in my Fathers Kingdom! O blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. If thou beholdest thy candle, thou mayst con∣sider how that light which makes small shew in
the day, yeilds a glorious lustre in the night, not because the Candle hath then more light, but be∣cause the Air hath then more darkness; so that holiness and grace which in a day of prosperity and life seems of small worth and price, in a night of adversity and death, will be of infinite value: Or thus, I set up this candle to help and direct me about my business; so God sets up the candle of my life, and affords me the light of his word for me to work out my salvation, not to play by them: Or thus, this candle is spending it self for my good; so I should be willing to spend and be spent for the good of others souls: Or, this Can∣dle is always consuming, and will at last be quite wasted; so is my life daily wearing away, and ere long will be quite extinguished: The great Candles whilst they burn, make the greater light, but when they go ou leave the greater stench; So ungodly men, the greater they are, the more they shine with glory whilst they live; but when they die, leave the more stinking savour behind them. If thou art putting off thy cloaths, thou mayst ponder thy duty to put off the old man, which is corrupt according to his deceitful lusts, and to put off the works of darkness; as also that ere long thou shalt put off thine earthly tabernale. Art thou lying down in thy bed? thou mayst think of thy grave, wherein thou must shortly lye down, and never rise up till the morning of the resurrection. Is the night dark? thou mayst me∣ditate thence on the darkness of thy mind natu∣rally, of the works of darkness, of the blackness of darkness for ever. Ah! what a dark dungeon is
Hell, where not the least spark of light appears, though so much fire! My night will end, but sinners evening will find no morning. If a bed be so refreshing to my wearied body, how refreshing is a Redeemer to a wearied soul? How lovingly he inviteth me, Come to me all that are weary, I will give you rest! and how refreshing will tha rest be, which remaineth to the people of God! When thou wakest in the morning, thou mayst say with the Psalmist, When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness; or, When I awake I am still with thee; or, rouse thy self up with, Awake to righteousness and sin not; Awake thou that sleepest, arise and call upon thy God. When thou art rising, thou mayst meditate on the Churches garment of needle work, the fine linnen of the Saints righteous∣ness, thy putting on the new man, created after God, in righteousness and true holiness, thy put∣ting on that most excellent cloathing which is for warmth, for ornament, and defence, the Lord Iesus Christ. Dost thou look on the glass to dress thy self? think of the glass of Gods law, how necessary it is daily to look into it, for the dis∣covery of thy spiritual spots and filth. Dost thou wash thy hands? O wash thy heart from wickedness, and forget not that great laver of the blood of Jesus Christ. Doth thy stomach call for some food? think of thy spiritual appetite, and how savoury it will make the dainties of Gods house to thee. They did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and they did all drink the same spiritual drink; they drank of that spiritual rock that fol∣lowed them, and that rock was Christ. Art thou
to go about buying or selling, or worldly bar∣gains? take some thoughts of buying that one Pearl of great price, which the wise Merchant sold all he had to purchase, of buying that gold of grace, and fine linnen of the Saints righteousness, Mat. 13. 44. Rev. 3. 18. Amongst all thy gains and gettings, consider What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, or what will a man give in exchange for his soul! If the gaining a little silver or gold be worth so much time and pains, how much is holiness and heaven worth? surely ten thousand times more. Art thou in the day to take a journey, thou mayst consider, I am but a Pilgrim and Stranger in this earth; I am every day travelling towards my long home; I have no abiding City here, but look for one that is to come, whose Builder and Maker is God; O that I could prepare for it, and daily make some progress towards it. Art thou to spend the day in thy Shop, or fields, and a∣bout many businesses? think on that of Christ; Martha, Martha, Thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful, and Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall never be taken from her. This Reader, were an ex∣cellent improvement of thy time in solitude, by such occasional meditations, which are obvious to ordinary understandings. SECT. V. Mind so∣lemn and set meditations.THirdly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness in solitude; Mind solemn and set me∣ditation.
In the former head I advised thee to Oc∣casional, in this, to Deliberate meditation. Here∣by thou wilt not onely prevent those covetous, am∣bitious, lascivious thoughts, which otherwise might crowd in upon thee, and pollute thee, but also exceedingly further thy soul in holiness. Occasio∣nal meditations do some good, but these much more, as making a greater impression upon the soul, and abiding longer with it. They differ as a taste and a full meal, as a sip and a good draught. Occasi∣onal meditations are like loving strangers, that afford us a visit, but are quickly gone. Delibe∣rate meditations are as inhabitants that dwell with us, and are longer helpful to us. The former as the morning dew, do somewhat moysten and re∣fresh the earth, but quickly passeth away; The latter as a good showre, soaks deep, and conti∣nueth long. Because this is of great weight, I shall acquaint thee what solemn meditation is, and then give thee a pattern of it. Solemn meditation is a serious applying the mind to some sacred subject, till the affections be warmed and quickened, and the resolution heightned and strengthned thereby, against what is evil, and for that which is good. There are five things in this description. 1. It is an application of the mind; The un∣derstanding must be awake about this duty, it is not a work to be done sleeping. If the mind be not stirring, the affections will be nodding. The understanding in this, is (as it were) the Master-workman, if that be out of the way, or missing, the ser∣vants of the affections will be idle, and stand still. Tis by this Sun that heat is conveyed to the lower world
Darkness like the night is accompanied with damps and cold. The Chariot of light is attended with warming and quickening beams. 2. It is a serious applying the mind. Too quick di∣gestion breeds crudities in the mind as well as in the body, and doth often more distemper then nourish. There must be a retentive faculty to hold fast that which nature receiveth, until a through concoction be wrought, or little strength will be gotten by it. Hereby it differeth from occasional meditation, which is sudden and soon vanisheth; this calls at the door, salutes us, and takes its leave; that comes in and stays some time with us. Occasional medi∣tation is transient, like the dogs of Nilus, that lap and are gone; set meditation is permanent, it (as the Spouse beg'd of Christ) lodgeth all night between the breasts. This duty cannot be done unless the mind be kept close to it; the person that is negli∣gent, cannot do this work of the Lord. Things of importance are not to be hudled up in haste. Loose thoughts, as loose garments, hinder us in our busi∣ness. We need as much our hearts united to think of God, as to fear God. Short glances do little good, it is the abiding influence of the sun that turns the earth into silver and golden mettal. It is not once dipping the stuff into the Dy-fat, but frequent do∣ing it, that giveth the pure scarlet colour. The true Mithridate, which is so cordial and opening, is long a making. The yellow wax lyeth long in the beams of th Sun before it changeth its colour, and attaineth a virgin-like whitness and purity. He that rides post, though he wearies himself in travelling from place to place, is less able to give an account
of the Country through which he passeth, then he that is more slow in his course but more constant in his abode; Omnis festinatio caeca est, saith Seneca. Tis much blowing that makes the green wood to flame. 3. It is about some sacred subject. As good meat and drink breed good blood, so good subjects will breed good thoughts. There is abundant matter for our meditation; as the Nature or Attributes of God, the States and Offices of Christ, the three-fold state of man, the four last things, the vani∣ty of the creature, the sinfulness of sin, and the love and fulness of the blessed Saviour, the Divine Word and Works; out of these we may chuse som∣times one thing, sometimes another to be the par∣ticular subject of our thoughts, Exo. 15.11. Ps. 1.1. and 119.148. Pro. 6.22. 1 Tim. 4. 13. To undertake more then one at a time, will deprive us of the benefit of all. Too much food will rather destroy then encrease the natural heat: A little wood may help that fire to burn, which a great quaintity would smother. Whilst the Dog runs after two Hares, now after one, and presently after the other, he loseth both. Many subjects, as a press or crowd of people do but hinder one another. Those streams are strongest which are most united. Greediness of appetite, and receiving too much food weaken∣eth digestion. Simples are most operative, mix∣tures and compositions are often used to allay their force. When thou hast fixt upon the subject, meditate (if it may be) on its causes, properties, effects, titles, comparisons, testimonies, contraries, all will help to
illustrate the subject, and to quicken and advan∣tage thee; they do all as so many several windows let in those beams which both enlighten the mind and warm the affections: but they must be con∣sidered in their places and methodically. The parts of a Watch jumbled together serve for no use, but each in their order make a rare and useful peice. 4. It is that the affections may be warmed and quickned: Our hearts and affections should answer out thoughts, as the eccho the voyce, and the wax the character in the seal. If our meditations do not better our hearts, they do nothing: Whilst they swim in the mind, as light things floating on the waters, they are unprofitable, but when they sink down into the affections, as heavy and weighty things, making sutable and real impressions there, then they attain their end. Our design in medi∣tation must be rather to cleanse our hearts, then to clear our heads. Whilst I was musing the fire burned. We strike fire by meditation to kindle our affecti∣ons. This application of the thoughts to the heart is like the natural heat which digesteth the food, and turneth it into good nourishment. When we are meditating on the sinfulness of sin. In its nature, its contrariety to God, his be∣ing, his law, his honour; its opposition to our own souls, their present purity and peace, their future glory and bliss. In its causes, Satan the wicked one its Father, the corrupt heart of man its Mother. In its properties; how defiling it is, filthiness it self; how infectious it is, overspreading the whole man, polluting all his natural, civil, spiritual actions,
making his praying, hearing, singing an abominati∣on; how deceiving it is, pretending meat, and in∣tending murder. In its effects; the curse of God on all the creatures evident by the vanity in them, the vexation they bring with them, in the anger of God on sinners, apparent in those temporal punishments, spiritual judgements, and eternal or∣ments which he inflicteth on them; I say, when we meditate on this we should endeavour to get our hearts broken for sin, ashamed of sin, and fired with indignation against sin. O what a wretch am I (should the soul think) to harbour such a Traytor against my Soveraign! What a fool am I to hug such a serpent in my bosom! What sorrow for it can be sufficient! What hatred of it is enough! What watch∣fulness against it, what self abhorrency, because I have loved it, and lived in it, can equal its desert! O that I could weep bitterly for the commission of it, and watch narrowly for the prevention of it, and pray-fer∣vently or pardon of it, and power against it! How much am I bound to God for his patience towards so great a sinner! How infinitely am I engaged to Christ for taking upon him my sins! Twas infinite conde∣scention in him to take upon him my nature; but O what humiliation was it to take upon him my sins! What life can answer such love? what thankefulness should I render for such, grace such goodness! The close applying of our meditations to our hearts, is like the applying and rubbing in oyl on a benummed joynt, which recovers it to its due sense. He that omits it, doth as a chapman that praiseth ware and chea∣pens it, but doth not buy it, and so is never the better for it. David proceeds from meditation of
Gods works, to application of his thoughts, Psal. 8.2,3,4. When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, &c. What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou dost thus visit him? 5. It is a serious applying of some sacred sub∣ject that his resolutions may be strengthned against evill, and or good. The Christian must not onely pray his good thoughts, but practice them; he must not lock them up in his mind, but lay them out in his life. A Council of war or of State is wholly use∣less if there be none to execute what they determine. That Kingdom flourisheth best where faithful ex∣ecution followeth sound advisements: Therefore the Heathen pronounced that City afe which had the heads of old men for consideration, and the ands of young men for execution. Action with∣out consideration, is usually lame and defective, consideration without action is lost and abortive. Though meditation, like Rachel, be more fair; ex∣ecution, like Leah, is most fruitful. The beasts un∣der the law were unclean which did not both chew the cud, and divide the hoof. Ruminatio ad sapi∣entiam, fissa ungula pertinet ad mores; Chewing the cud signifieth meditation, dividing the hoof an holy conversation, without which the former will be unpro∣fitable, saith Austin. Reader, Hast thou thought of the beauty and excellency of holiness, in its nature, its conformi∣ty to the pure nature, and holy commands of the blessed God, in its causes, the Spirit of God its principal efficient, the holy Scriptures its instru∣mental; In its names, its the image of God, the di∣vine nature, light, life, the travel of Christs soul, grace,
glory, the Kingdom of heaven: In its effects or fruits; how it renders thee amiable in Gods eye, hath the promise of his ear, is entituled to pardon, peace, joy, adoption, growth in grace, perseverance to the end, and the exceeding and eternal weight of glory, and hast applied this so close to thy heart, that thou hast been really affected with its worth, and wished thy self enriched with that jewel, though thou wert a beggar all thy life; and resolved with thy self, Well, I will watch, and weep, and hear, and pray, both fervently and frequently for holiness; I will follow God up and down, and never leave him till he sanctifieth my soul! Now I say to thee, as Nathan to David, when he told him of his thoughts and resolution of building a temple; Do all that is in thine heart, for God is with thee, 2 Chron. 17.2. or as God to Moses, concerning the Jews; They have well spoken all that they have said; O that there were an heart in them to keep my commandments! Its well thou art brought to any good purposes; but it will be ill if they be not followed with perfor¦mances. Good intentions without suitable actions, is but a false conception; or like a piece charged without a bullet, which may make a noise, but doth no good, no execution. Indeed there is no way bet∣ter to evidence the sincerity of thy intentions, then by answerable actions. David was good at this, I thought on my wayes, there was his serious conside∣ration; and turned my feet to thy testimonies, there is his holy conversation. So again, I will meditate on thy precepts, and will have respect to thy testimonies. Tis in vain to pretend, that like Moses, we go into the mount of contemplation, and converse with
God, unless we come down as he did with our faces shining, our conversations more splendent with holi∣ness. This, saith the cheif of the Philosophers, will a man to perfect happiness, if to his contemplation he joyn a constant imitation of God in wisdom, justice and holiness. Thus I have dispatched those five particulars in meditations; The first three are but one (though for methods sake to help the Reader, I spake to them severally) and are usually called Cogitati∣on, the other two Application and Resolution; Co∣gitation provides food, Application eats it, Resolu∣tion digests it, and gets strength from it; Cogita∣tion cuts out the sute, Application makes it up; Resolution puts it on and wears it; Cogitation bet∣ters the judgement, Application the affections, and Resolution the life. Its confest, this duty of set meditation is as hard as rare, and as uneasie as extraordinary, but experience teacheth that the profit makes abndnt recompence for our pains in the performance of it. Besides, as Milstones grind hard at first, but being used to it, they grind easily, and make good flower; so the Christian wholly disused to this duty, at first may find it some what difficult, but afterwards both fa∣cile and fruitful. Reader, to help thee herein, I shall give thee an example, though I would desire thee to remember that the advantage of meditation is rather to be fel then read; He that can paint Spikenard, or Musk, or Roses, in their proper colours, cannot with all his Art, draw their pleasant savor, that is beyond the skill of his pencil.
Let us, O my soul, a little retire out of the worlds company,The Subject matter of me∣ditation; The word of God. to converse with the word of thy God. I cannot but hope the malefactour hath an high esteem for that Psalm of mercy, without which he had lost his life. I have reason to be∣lieve that thou hast no mean value for that Gospel of grace, and the graece of that Gospel, without which thou hadst lost thy soul, thy God, thy joy, thy delight, thine all, and that for ever; yet sure I am, the price thou sets on it, is far in∣feriour, to the worth of this Pearl, and besides, I have observed of late (wheher partly because of its constancy with thee, things common, though never so necessary and excellent, being less va∣lued then meaner things that are rare, or cheifly because of thy old seeming friend, or rather real enemy, thy flesh within thee, that never speaks well of it, because of its contrariety to the word, from which it hath received its deaths-wound, and therefore would die as the Thies on the Cross, spit∣ting out its venome and malice at it, or what ever be the cause, I perceive too much) thou be∣ginnest to decline in thy respect to it, what else doth thy backwardness to read it, thy carelesness in minding what thou dost read, and thy negle∣gence in practicing it signifie; Therefore let us take a turn or two together, and argue the case, lest it be argued against thee in an higher Court, to thy cost, and I charge thee before the dread∣ful God, at whose judgement seat thou art to stand or fall for ever, that thou attend to me seriously, and not dare to give me the slip, till the whole be debated, for it is not a vain thing, but i for thy life.
The first part of meditation; Cogitation of the word. First, In it; Cuses.What is this Word which thou art so prone to despise? Consider it, O my soul, First, in its Causes, and then tell me whether the child be not worthy of love and esteem in the superlative degree for his parents sake. Its princi∣pal efficient Cause; The Spirit of God.1. Its Principal Efficient cause, is the glorious and supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the Spring and Fountain of all excellency and perfection; All Scripture is given by inspiration of God. Its the Word of the Lord, the Breath of his Mouth, the Law of his Lips; whoever were the Pens or Scribes, his Mind indicted, and his Hand wrot eve∣ry sentence in it. What a word must that be, which is the result of infinite wisdom? How pre∣cious are those Tables which are the writing of God himself? How glorious is that beam of light which was darted from this Sun to whom a whole Fir∣mament of Suns were worse then perfect darkness? If the breath of a man be so sweet that his doctrine drop as the rain, and his speech distil as the dew; If the heart of a man can indict a good matter, and his tongue resemble the pen of a ready writer; O what is the speech of the tongue of a God! Never man spake as he spake, his enemies themselves being judges.John 7. 46. The Queen of Sheba came from the ut∣most parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and blessed those Servants that waited at his Table and heard his wisdom; But loe, O my soul! A greater then Solomon is here; How blessed are they that wait at his Gates, and that watch at the Posts of his doors! Its instru∣mental Cause; Eminent Saints.2. The Pen-men and Scribes of it were men of choice gifts and graces. Some of them were like Saul,
higher by the head and Shoulders then their bre∣thren in the fear and favour of God; As Moses the meekest man upon the face of the earth; David the sweet singer of Israel, a man after Gods own heart; Solomon, who excelled in wisdom all that were before him, or came after him; Isaiah of the Blood-Royal, an Evangelical Prophet, or Pro∣phetical Evangelist, whose prophesie is clean and clear, and curiously garnished with all kind of Rhetorick; Iohn the beloved Disciple that leaned on the bosome of Iesus; Paul who was wrapt up into the third Heavens, and as famous for active and passive obedience, as any in the world in his days; All of them were men extraordinarily inspired, and assisted by the Spirit of God. Not onely the notions, but the very phrases and words were imprinted on them, and infused into them by God himself. The writings of some Naturalists have been bought at a great price, and thought worthy to be presented to great Princes; but the best of them, (though the Prophesie of the Sy∣bills, which the Heathen so highly esteemed, be included) is but a bundle of folly and vanity to this book; Prophesie came not of old time by the will of men, but Holy Men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. O how excellent must that Scripture be, of which such incomparable persons were the Pen-men or Amanenses, and to whom the infinite wisdom of God, did dictate e∣very word? 3. The matter of them is heavenly and divine,The Mate∣rial Cause. the epitome of all equity and righteousness, the compendium of whatsoever is fit to be beleived or
practiced. The Scripture is a perfect rule, both for faith and manners; It informeth us fully in our carriage towards God, and towards men; how we ought to walk in all relations and conditions; it for∣biddeth evil, all evil, in the very thoughts; it commandeth good, whatsoever is good, in the whole course of our lives; It speaketh of such things as are far above reason, and yet nothing that is contrary to reason. The truths delivered in it, are many of them such as no humane or created capacity could have possibly invented, yet such as are all agreeable to a rational understanding. It would have exceeded the wisdom of an Angel to have thought of such a sweet mixture of justice and mercy, as is discovered in the Gospel, about the redemption of fallen man; It teacheth the na∣ture and excellency of God, the trinity of persons, the unity of essence, the immensity of all his at∣tributes, how he is infinite in his being, wisdom, knowledge, holiness, mercy, and faithfulness; how he is a pure act, without the least passion; a perfect being, uncapable of any addition; eternal, without either beginning or ending; immutable, without the least alteration; incomprehensible, be∣yond all coceptions; omnipresent, without any circumscription; It instructeth us in the person, and offices, and states of the blessed Redeemer, how he being the Son of God, was partaker of the humane nature, that the Sons of men might be partakers of the divine nature. How God and Man were united in one person, that Man and God might be united in one Covenant; How the eter∣nal God married our natures, that he might exalt
his boundless grace in marrying our persons; How man was the debtor, God-man the surety, who made satisfaction to God the Creditour. How he was born of a mean woman, that we might be born of the most high God; he was tempted, that he might conquer Satan for us, and succour us when tempted by him; what a life he led, filled with miracles and miseries; what a death he died, embittered with shame and pain, and all that we might be exalted to eternal honour and pleasure. How he triumphed over Death, the Grave, the Curse of the Law, Satan and Hell, in his Resurrecti∣on, and ascended into Heaven, leading Capti∣vity Captive; appears in his Fathers presence, plead∣ing his death, as the prise of his Chosens fafety and life, sitteth at his right hand, and ever liveth to make intercession for us. Its precepts excel all the commands, and Statutes, and Laws, that ever were in the World, in purity and justice, and goodness, much more then the Firmament of Stars, doth a Wisp of Straws; Its promises are exceed∣ing great and precious, of special efficacy, super∣lative excellency, and unquestionable certainty. In a word, the Scripture hath all in it, requisite either for counsel or comfort, for necessity or delight, for knowledge or action, for direction in life, or consolation in death. 3. The form of the Scripture renders it worthy my highest esteem,The formal cause of it. and hottest affection. 1. Its inward form is,Inward. That perfect correspondence and agreement between the commands and promises laid down in the word, and that infallible and cer∣tain truth of Gods own understanding. The books
of men are sutable to their minds, and their minds being but in part sanctified, their works must be answerably imperfect; but the Lords understanding being infinitely pure and true, his word must bear some proportion to it. God is truth, without the least shadow of error; holy, without the least tittle of mixture; hence his word is certain, with∣out the smallest colour for doubts; Thy law is the truth; pure, not admitting of the least sin or darkness; Thy word is very pure, therefore doth thy servant love it. Because of its exact conformity to the eternal will of God, its called his word. As a man maketh known his mind by his words, so doth God; hence its called the mind of God, Pro. 1. 23. The Word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 15. The counsel of God, Act. 20. 27. The Oracles of God, Rom. 3. 2. The Law of God, Psalm 1. 2. Not onely in regard of its Author, which is the divine wis∣dom, but also in regard of its matter, which is the divine will. Outward.2. Its outward form is both plain and difficult; according to Gregory, so shallow that lambs may wade in it, and so deep that Elephants may swim in it. Its stile is so plain as to encourage the most unlearned, and yet so difficult as to exercise the greatest Scholars, and most profound Rabbies. To those that are babes in understanding, the Scripture is milk; to them that are men in knowledge, the word is strong meat; Its therefore called light, the nature of which, is both to discover it self and other things also. Thy word is a light to my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths; Its a light that shineth in a dark place until the day dawn, and
the day-star arise in our hearts, Psa. 119. 105. 1 Pet. 1. 19. It is plain in regard of fundamentals and things necessary to be known and done. What we are to believe concerning God, the mediatour, our own estate of innocency, apostacy, recovery; what we are to practise in order to salvation, are all perspicu∣ous and clear to ordinary capacities. Though there be some whose eyes the god of this world hath blinded, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine upon them; yet all wisdomes ways are plain to him that understandeth, 2 Cor. 4.4. Pro. 8. 9. The Scripture sheweth the greatest simpli∣city, both in words and phrases and figures, that the weakest need not be afraid of searching into it. There is such obscurity also in things not ab∣solutely necessary to salvation, that the deepest understandings need not be ashamed of reading and studying it. Peter affirmes that in the Epistles of Paul, there are , some things hard to be understood. There are such abstruse texts in the word of God, that no man can make a certain comment on them. The Jews themselves confessed that in the latter end of Ezekiel, there are many things mentioned which are beyond all their ap¦prehensions, against which, and all other diffi∣culties in the Old Testament, they comfort them∣selves according to the expression of the woman of Samaria, Messias venturus est qui nobis annunci∣abit omnia; The Messias will come and tell us all things; Now the wise God seeth fit to let some truths in Scripture be dark. 1. To shame us for our ignorance, which is the
fruit of our fall from him. The pride and height of man is laid low, by the profound and hard places in the Word of God. 2. To quicken us to diligence, in reading and me∣ditating, and comparing Scripture with Scripture. The deeper a mine of gold lyeth in the earth, the harder we must labour to dig it out. 3. To raise our price of the Word of God; We are apt to slight things that are easie and ordina∣ry, and to value things at the highest, that cost us dearest. 4. To provoke us to pray to God, that he would give us his key, whereby we may unlock this ca∣binet of precious Jewels. He onely that made the Scripture can best acquaint us with his mind in the Scripture; therefore David intreated divine light, that he might understand the divine Law, Psa. 119. 18. Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law. The final cause. Joh. 7. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 6.4. The final cause of the word, will speak it full of value and worth. Namely, the glory of the great God, and the salvation of lost man. The ho∣nour of God shines more brightly then the Meridi∣an Sun, through the whole Heaven of the Scrip∣ture. The Scripture exalteth God in regard of his infinite nature and being, his transcendent excel∣lencies and perfections, his eternal decree, his works of creation and providence. It advanceth God in all his attributes, declaring to us, 1. His wisdom, how he is the onely wise God; the foolishness of God, is wiser then the wisdom of men; yea, that Angels themselves are fools to him. His understanding is infinite.
2. His Power, how he is mighty in strength, the Almighty God, to him nothing is impossible, doth what ever he pleaseth, can do more then he will do. 3. His mercy, how he is full of mercy, rich in mercy, the Father of mercys, hath multitudes of tender mercies, his mercy endureth for ever, hath an heighth, and depth, and length, and breadth in it which none can reach. 4. His Iustice, how he fails not the least in the performance of his promises, and accomplishment of his threatnings; how he will by no means clear the guilty, not the greatest of his favourites, not for the least of their offences; how he hath ma∣nifested his justice in the deluge brought on the old world, in the destruction of Sodom and Go∣morrah, in his carriage towards Apostate Angels, rebellious Israelites, his own chosen people, and the Medatour his own Son, when he took upon him mans sin; in the instruments of eternal death, which he hath prepared in Hell for sinners, and the solemn triumph which justice shall have at the great day, and to all eternity in the other world. 5. His holiness, how he loaths sin with the greatest abhorrency, cannot behold the least iniqui∣ty, shoots the arrows of his vengeance against its actours and authors; will be sanctified in (or upon) all that approach him, is terrible in his holy places, forbiddeth the least complyance with sin, though but in a sudden thought, and makes it his end in his providences, ordinances, the gift of his Son, his Spirit, to make men holy. I might shew how it exalteth him in all his properties, but I pass on.
It glorifieth him in every part of it. Its precepts and commands speak his purity and dominion, its promises and covenant speak his boundless mercy and compassion, its threatnings and comminations speak his justice and jealousie, its prophesies and predictions speak his wisdom and omniscience. The Scripture tendeth also to the eternal good of men. It is helpful to beget a soul to Christ; Of his own will begat he us again by the Word of truth. The Word of grace is instrumental for the convey∣ance of grace, Act. 2.37. Rom. 10. 14. It is help∣ful to build the soul up in Christ; as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Grace is increased by the same means, by which it is generated; as the same Sun that begets some living creatures is helpful for their growth. The Word of God, of stones raiseth up children to Abraham, and of Children maketh Young men and Fathers. It is so penned, that all sorts of persons, all ranks of Christians may be directed into the way of truth, and guided by it in the way of life. It is able to make us wise to salvation: To shew the path of life, 2 Tim. 3. 15. Psa. 16. 11. As Ioshua, it leads the Israelites into Canaan. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable. 1. For Doctrine, Where Scripture hath not a tongue to speak, I must not have an ear to hear. Scriptura est regula fidei, Scripture is the rule of faith; Hence the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is called a foundation, Ephes. 2. 20. 2. For reproof. It is the hammer of Heresies; Ignorance of Scripture, is one main cause of er∣ror;
Ye err not knowing the Scripture. By this sword of the Spirit Christ vanquished Satan, Mat. 4. 4. and the Jews, Ioh. 5.45. and Sadduces, Mat. 22.29. Lapidandi sunt haeretici sacrarum literarum argumen∣tis; Hereticks are to be stoned with Scripture argu∣ments, saith Athanasius. The Word of God his that unclean bird in the eye, and wounds it mor∣tally. 3. For correction of manners; The sword of the Word pierceth the sinners conscience; like Christ to the woman of Samaria, It tells him all that ever he did, and makes him smite upon his thigh, and say, What have I done? Scripture is a glass which sheweth him the spots that are in the face of his heart and life. 4. For instruction in righteousness. It is the way in which we should walk, the rule of our spiritu∣al race: What is written on some Psalms, may be written on every Psalm and Chapter in the whole Bible, Maschil, or Psalm for instruction. Its pre∣cepts teach us what to follow, its prohibitions tell us what to forsake; Its promises are to allure us to sanctity, its threatnings to affright us from sin; the good example of the Saints speaketh as Christ to Peter, Follow thou me; the wick∣ed actions and ends of sinners cry aloud, as Ab∣ner to Ioab, Knowest thou not that it will be bitter∣ness in the end? 5. For comfort: There is no such cordial for a fainting spirit, as a promise in the Word. The Go∣spel in the Greek, is glad tidings, and not without cause; This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word hath quickned me. When souls have been
ready to despair under the sense of their wicked∣ness, and to sink in deep waters, the Word of God hath held them up by the chin, and preserved them from drowning; Vnless thy law had been my delight, I had perished in mine affliction. 6. For salvation; the Word is called the King∣dom of heaven; partly because it revealeth Gods thoughts of such an inestimable happiness to the children of men. The celestial Canaan was terra incognita till that discovered it;2 Ti. 1. 9. He hath brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel; partly because it prepares the soul for heaven; the Word sanctifieth and so saveth precious souls. By filling us with grace, it fitteth us for glo∣ry, Rom. 1.16. Ioh. 17.17. Partly because it is the seed of heaven. As the Harvest is potentially in the seed, and a tall Oke potentially in an acorn; so heaven and eternal life is potentially in the Word of life. It is called The grace of God that bringeth salvation. It bringeth salvation to men, and it bringeth men to salvation. In its pro∣perties.Secondly, Consider it, O my soul, in its pro∣perties, they will also speak its preciousness. 1. It is pure and holy, there are some dregs that will appear in the exactest writings of the best men, when they have been shaken by a critical hand; but none could ever justly fasten the least filth upon the holy Scriptures. The Word of Christ is like the Spouse of Christ; There is no spot in it. The Alcoran of Mahomet, alloweth Polygamy, promiseth sensual pleasures as the reward of his servants; but the Scripture winketh not at the least
sin, no not so much as in a motion of the heart, or a glance of the eye, and its promises are also pure and spiritual. The Doctrine of the wisest Heathen, and Philosophers, were a mixture of good and bad; Theft was no fault amongst Lycurgus Laws, but if done slily commended highly; Aristotle permitted revenge, and obscene jesting, which Scripture expresly forbids; Thy word is very pure; The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times; There is not the least dross of evil or error in it; 1. Its principal Author is the original and exemplar of all holiness, his nature is the pattern, and his will the rule of purity, Exod. 15. 4. Isa. 6. 3. 2. The Scribes of it were holy men, moved and actuated by the Holy Ghost. 3. Its effect is to sanctifie and make holy, Ye are clean, through the word that I have given you. 4. The matter of it is holy; Its commanding part is holy; The Law is holy, just, and good, Rom. 7. 12. Its assertory part is holy, what it affirmes to be, is; what it denyeth to be, is not, Psa. 19. 7. Its promissory part is holy, both formaliter in its own nature, and effective in its end and fruit; Its Historical part is holy; other books are proper∣ly called prophane Histories, in distinction from this. The Scriptures expressions are pure, of the most impure actions; He knew her no more, men with men doing what is unseemly, Gen. 38. 26. Rom. 1. 27.
2. It is powerful; As fire it can melt the hardest mettal; As an Hammer, it can break the most stony heart, Ier. 23. 29. 1. It is powerful for Conviction; It sets mens sins before their eyes, and makes them behold their ugliness and deformity, whether they will or no; It tells the sinner as Elisha concerning the Syrian King, to the King of Israel, what he doth and saith in his bed-hamber, in the retiring room of his heart; It makes the spirit of the stoutest sinner to treble, as the leaves with the wind, and though he strives to put off his quaking fits by some humane cordials, yet he finds his soul-Ague still continuing upon him. Sturdy Murderers of Christ spring in trembling, and an earthly Felix quakes under the power of this word; This voice of the Lord is powerful, it hakes the Cedars of Lebanon. The batteries of the word have shaken the sensless conscience, and shattered the flinty hart in peices. 2. It is powerful for conversion; It is able to change the nature, and turn an heart of stone, in∣to an heart of flesh; It hath many a time inlightned dark minds to see the things which they never saw, enlivened dead souls, and enabled them to stand up from the dead. The law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul; It hath dispossessed the strong man, cast him out of his strong holds, wherein he had raigned many years, and subdued the soul to another Lord and Soveraign. What hath been said of God, may be said of the Word in the hand of the Spirit; Who ever resisted its will? How powerful is that word which can make
the proudest creature that scorned former reproofs and precepts, threatnings and judgements, to cry and weep bitterly like a child under the rod; that can create the new creature, the choicest of Gods works! By the word of the Lord are the (new) Heavens (wherein dwelleth righteousness) made, and all the (glorious) host thereof, (of sparkling graces) by the breath of his mouth. 3. Its powerful for conquering spiritual enemies; The noble victories atchieved by the Lords Wor∣thies, are most of them obtained by this sword of the Spirit; Whole armies of sins have been dis∣comfited and forced to flie before the face of this weapon. God hews these by his Prophets, and slays them by the word of his mouth. This word like the rod in the hand of Moses, worketh wonder∣fully for the destruction of such Egyptian enemies. Satan is another enemy of the Christians, but as powerful and as politique as he is, he falls down like lightening from heaven before the preaching of the word. This sword hath so wounded that Leviathan, that destroyer of souls, that he can never recover himself; They overcame him (i. e. the Devil) by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, Rev. 12. 11. In a word, it must needs be strong, for it is the power of God to sal∣vation; The rod of his strength, Rom. 1. 16. Psa. 110. 2. 3. It is perfect, It contains in it all that is necessa∣ry and sufficient for our eternal salvation. It is a full and compleat rule and measure both of things to be believed and practised; it will admit
no addition, because it is defective in nothing; it will suffer no diminution, for it is redundant in nothing; If any man shall add unto it, God shall add anto his plagues; If any man shall take away from the words of this book, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Jesus Christ, who was the great Teacher sent from God, was faith∣ful in his office, and gave his Church whatsoever Precepts or Doctrines were needful for her, in or∣der to her endless good. He tells us, Whatsoever I have heard of the Father, I have made known unto you, Joh. 15. 15. And his Apostle speaks to the same purpose, Act. 20. 21. I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God. Besides, it is able to make the man of God perfect, and throughly furnished unto every good word, which it could ne∣ver do, if it were not perfect it self. Nil dat quod non habet, Nothing can give that which it hath not in it self, either formally or virtually. Tradi∣tions are no way necessary to compleat the Canon of Scripture; Since God did reveal his will in writing, every age had that revealed to it which was sufficient for that age, to make such as then li∣ved wise to salvation; but as God was pleased to reveal more, the latter did assist us in the under∣standing of the former; herefore so long as any truth was necessary to be more fully known, he inspied holy men to do it, and the compleating of the divine Canon, was reserved for Christ and his Apostles, Ioh. 15. 15. and 7. 8. and 6. 13. Act. 20. 27. Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8. 4. It is true and certain. Not a tittle of it shall fail; It is caled truth, the truth, thy truth, the
Scripture of truth, the word of truth, the Gospel of truth, a more sure word, the comparative for the superlative, the most sure word; Christ prefers it before information from the dead, the Apostle before Revelation from Angels, or auy other way whatso∣ever.Psa. 119. 142. Joh. 17. 17 Dan. 10. ult. Eccles. 12. 10. Col. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 19 Gal. 1. 8 2 Pet. 1. 19 Luk. 16. 31 1. The Precepts of it are true, they are perfectly agreeable to the mind of the speaker, Thou art near O Lord, and all thy commandments are truth, Psa. 119. 5. The words of men may be true, but the word of God onely is truth; There is no error, no mixture in it, tis therefore called sincere milk, 1 Pet. 2. 2. 2. The Promises of it are true. They are accom∣plished to the least particle of them. Hence they are called the sure mercies of David. The Promises of God are unquestionable, because their speaker is unchangeable, and one for whom it is impossible to lie; They are sure hold, and will eat their way through all the Alpes of opposition; Not one good thing hah failed, of all that the Lord our God hath promised, Joshua 21. 45. 3. The Histories of it are true; Whatsoever is written in it of the first or second Adam, of any persons, or nations, is exactly true; here never was fuch an impartial historian as the inditer of the word. This is the Book which hath no Errata's in it. 4. The threatnings are true. The sinner shall as certainly feel them, as he reads or hears them. He shall as surely be damned, as if he were already damned, therefore he is said to be condemned already,John 3. lt. to speak its certainty.
He shall find the gnawing worm, and the eternal fire as unquestionably as if he felt them at this hour; hence God appeals to the consciences of the Jews whether though the Prophets died, his threatnings (which were denounced by those Prophets) did not live, and take hold of them, Zach. 1.5. 5 Its true in the Predictions and Prophesies. The predictions of the Israelties distress in Egypt four hundred years, and deliverance thence; of their possessing Canaan, of Cyrus birth, of the Jews re∣demption out of the Babylonish captivity, of the four Monarchies, and of Christs coming in the flesh, his mean birth, afflicted life, death, buriall, ascenti∣on, are all already accomplished: Those Prophe∣sies in Daniel and Revelation concerning the future estate of the Church, the ruine of Pope and Turk, the vocation of the Jews, and the glorious and pure condition of the people of God in the latter days, shall all to a tittle be fulfilled. Its observable therefore that some predictions that were or are future are set down in the present tense, To us a son is born; Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen; to assure us that they shall be as certainly fulfilled as if they were fulfilled already, Isa. 9. 6. Rev. 18. 6. It is the rule of all truth. Other Books are true no farther then they are agreeable and commensu∣rable to this. All other sayings and writings are to be tried by this touchstone; It is not what sense saith, or what reason saith, or what Fathers say, or what General Councils say, or what Traditions say, or what Customs say, but what Scripture saith that is to be the rule of faith and life. Whatso∣ever is contrary to Scripture, or beside Scripture,
or not rationally deducible from Scripture is to be rejected as spurious and adulterate; To the Law and to the Testimonies, if they speak not according to this it is because there is no light (no truth) in them. Isa. 8.20. 3. Consider it, O my soul, in its names,In its names and titles. and they will speak much to the excellency of its nature. What is this Word which thy thoughts are now up∣on? It is called John 10. 35. Scripture, or Matth. 22.29 Scriptures by an Antonomasie or excellency of phrase, as the most worthy writings that ever saw the light; It is call∣ed the 1 Pet. 1.15. Word of God, both in regard of its effici∣ent cause, which is the 2 Tim. 3.15. Spirit of God; the Ephes. 1.9. mate∣rial cause, which is the mind of God; the Ephes. 3.9. final cause, which is the glory of God; It is called Prov. 20.17. the Law of the Lord, James 1 25. the law of liberty, Rom. 3.27. the law of saith, Psal. 19.7. a perfect law James 1. 8. a royal law, Josh. 1.8. the book of the law, Isa. 34. 16. the book of the Lord, 2 King. 22.8. the book of life, Ephes. 1.16. the Gospel of peace, Rom. 1. 1. the Gospel of God, Acts 20.24. the Gospel of Gods grace, Acts 20: 27. the counsel of God, 1 Kings 2. 3. the charge of God, the Job 37. 10. breath of God, Jer. 9. 12 the mouth of God, Deut. 29. 12. the oath of God, Acts 7.38. the Oracles of God, Micah 6. 9. the paths of God, Prov: 8.14. the wisdom of God; Rom: 10.14 It is called a good thing Luke 10. ult. the good part, Matth: 16.19 the key of knowledge, Luke. 11. 52. the key of Heaven, Luke 2.10. ti∣dings of salvation, Isa: 52.7. glad tidings of peace, 1 Sam. 13. 23 a good way, Psalm 101.2. a perfect way, Matth: 7. 13. a narrow way. Many other tites it hath which shew the excellency of this Word of truth. 4. Consider it, O my soul, in its comparisons,In it com∣parisons. which will shew thee somewhat of its perfections; Whereunto is this Word resembled? it is resembled to light, to a lamp. Solomon tells us, The command∣ment
is a lamp, and the law is light. Tis likely he learned it of his father; Thy word is a light to my feet and a lanthorn to my paths, saith David, Prov. 6 23. Psal. 119. 105. 1. It is light for its clarity and beauty; Light is the ornament of the world, which is most incorpo∣real of all corporeal beings, therefore termed spiri∣tual. Though it discovers all the pollutions of the earth, yet it is not polluted therewith. The word is the glory of this lower world; The law is spiritu∣al, and its beauty is not faided, nor its purity stain∣ed by all the filth of false doctrines and heresies which have been cast into the face of it, from the beginning of the world to this day; The word of the Lord abideth for ever. 2. Light is pleasant and delightful; darkness is af∣frighting and dreadful, but light is refreshing and reviving; Light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to behold the sun, Eccles. 11.7. The word of God is sweet, and its a pleasant thing with the eyes of faith to behold the glorious sun of divine truths. The eye is not more affected with curi∣ous sights, nor the ear with ravishing musick, nor the pallate with rare meats, then a spiritualized understanding with spiritual truths. David found not onely delight in the singular, but delights in the plural number, all sorts and degrees of de∣lights in the word of God; Trouble and anguish have taken hold of me, but thy commandments are my delights. His delights in the Law of God were so rare and ravishing, that they quite extinguished all sensual delights, as the light of the day the light of a candle, and drowned the noise of all his crosses
and troubles by their loud and amazing melody. Chrysostom compares the Scripture to a pleasant Gar∣den, wherein every flower yeilds a fragrant savour. Ambrose to a feast, wherein every book is a dain∣ty dish, affording food both pleasant and whol∣som. 3. Light discovereth and maketh things manifest. The night conceals things, and the day reveals them; That which maketh manifest is light, Ephes. 5. 13. Light discovers things in their proper shapes and colours, whether beauties or deformities; When the Sun appeareth, we see the dust in corners, and dirt in Ditches, which before lay hid. The word of God maketh a discovery of an unknown world of sin in the heart of man, and the great mystery of iniquity which lay hid there. I was alive without the Law, but when the command∣ment came, sin revived, and I dyed, Rom. 7. 9. The faults, and spots, and defects of his duties, were visible by the light of the word; All things are naked and open before it; It is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. The word sheweth the beauty of holiness, the love and loveliness of the Redeemer. 4. Light directs us how and where to walk. In the night we wander and go out of the way, we stum∣ble and fall, but the day helpeth us both to see our way, and to walk in it without stumbling. If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, be∣cause he seeth the light of this world, Iohn 11. 9. The word of God doth preserve us from sin, and guide our feet in the way of peace, Luk. 1. 73. It is our Polestr as we are Mariners; our Pillar of
fire, as we are travellers; The Law of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide, Psa. 37. 31. Our feet by the light of the word are preserved from falling, and our steps from sliding, Psalm 119. 105. 5. Light scattereth darkness; As the Sun where it ariseth, and displayeth its beames, dispelleth mists and clounds, causeth an alterati¦on in the face of the Air, and makes the sha∣dows to flie before it, that they cry like Iacob to the Angel, Let me go, for the day breaketh; so the light of the word scattereth that dark∣ness which was before upon the minds of men. 1. It dispelleth the darkness of error, Mat. 22.29. Naked Truth, conquereth Armed Error; and Little David with his small stones out of the silver streams of the Sanctuary, the great Goliah of Heresie; With this, silly women have confuted and con∣quered profound Doctors, notwithstanding their deep and intricate arguments, and have wounded them as mortally as that woman without weapons, did Abimilech, that great Captain, with a Mil∣stone. 2. It dispelleth the darkness of ignorance. The word is the key of knowledge, and openeth the door that lets us into the treasures of wisdom and know∣ledge. It is that precious eye-salve, with which our blind eyes being anointed see. It is sent to open the eyes of the blind, and to turn men from darkness to light; When the word comes, the people that sat in darkness see a great light, Act. 26. 18. Mat. 4. 16.
3. It dispelleth the darkness of prophaness; this weapon of the word stabbeth lust under its fifth rib, and letteth out the very heart blood of it. The Devil puts off his rotten wares in the dark shops of Heathen and unbelieving and unchristian Christians; but where the word hath arisen upon any soul, it discerneth his cheat, and is too wise to be cozened by him. By what means may a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto accord∣ing to thy word, Psa. 119.9. The word is resembled to Rain, to Water, to Dew. Moses tells the Israelites, My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, and my speech distil as the Dew. Christ calls it the water of life, Joh. 6. 35. 1. Rain is from above. God keeps that key under his own girdle; Can any of the vanities of the Hea∣then cause Rain? Art not thou he? Jer. 14. 22. Man may speak long enough to the clods before they will distil one drop; but if God command those bottles, they are presently unstopped and poure down in abundance; He covereth the Heavens with Clouds, and prepareth Rain for the earth, Psa. 147. 8. Thus the Word of God came down from above; Every of the Pen-men of it, might have spoken as David, The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, 2. Sam. 23. 2. It did immediately inspire me what particulars to utter, and in what phrases to deliver them. That which is said of some of the Prophe∣sies, may be said of every Book, and of every Chapter and Verse in every Book; Thus saith the Lord; The word of the Lord, which came to Amos; The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. It is all one to say, The Scripture saith, and God saith. Com∣pare
Rom. 4. 3. and 10. 11. with Rom. 9. 25. and Heb. 4.3. and Gal. 3. 21. with Rom. 11. 32. Some observe that the word which Moses useth for Doctrine dropping like Rain, signifieth received Doctrine, because the Doctrine in the word, is received from God, not devised by men, Deut. 32. 2. I received from the Lord, that which I also de∣livered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 32. 2. Rain is mollifying and softning; When the earth hath been like Brass and Iron under our feet, by long drought, or hard frosts, a few good showres supple it, and make it tender; Therefore Da∣vid speaking of the earth, saith, Thou makest it soft with showres, Psa. 65. 10. So the heart of man is compared to a stone, to a rock, to a flint, to an ada∣mant, the hardest of stones, for its hardness hath been suppled and softned by the word. The Jews that had imbrued their hands in the blood of Christ, had cer∣tainly very hard hearts. The thought of such a mur∣der would have made a deep impression upon any conscience, that were not seared with a red hot Iron, yet this word preached, melted them as hard met∣tal as they were; When they heard these things, they were pricked to the heart; Peters Sermon, like Mo∣ses rod, fetcht water out of the Rock, Act. 2. 37. David upon the disorder and intemperance of his soul, in the matter of Vriah, had an hard swelling, which continued and increased upon him several moneths; yet when Nathan comes and gently baths it with this Oyl of the Word, it groweth soft and tender, as appeareth by the title of Psa. 51. A Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came to him, af∣ter he had gone in to Bathsheba.
3. Rain maketh the earth fruitful, therefore some call it the earths Husband, because it helps the earth to bring forth; He watereth the hills from his cham∣bers, the earth is satisfied with his works; he causeth the grass to grow for the earth, and hearbs for the ser∣vice of man, Psal. 104. 13,14. so Psal. 65.9,10,11,12. So the Word of God turns that heart which was as a barren wilderness into a fruitful meadow, 1 Pet. 2. 2. 4. Rain reviveth and refresheth the earth; when the earth is chopt and faint, when it gaspeth and is weary, a showre of rain recovers and refresheth it; the Psalmist tells us that upon such droppings from above the pastures and valleys shout for joy, they also sing, Psa. 65.13. Thus the Christian scorc∣ed with the apprehension of Gods wrath due to him for sin, draweth all his comfort and refresh∣ment out of those wells of salvation, the promises of the word. When conscience is sore and raw through the wounds sin hath made in it, and the weight of guilt that lieth continually grating up∣on it; He sendeth his word and health them, Psal. 107.20. David had experience what an healing medicine the Word was; In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. When Philip had preached the word to the Eunuch, he went away rejoycing. That milk which runs from the breasts of the two Testaments is never sucked with the mouth of faith without abundant satis∣faction; that wine which which is drawn from the pipes of the promises, rejoyceth the heart of man indeed: These things are written that your joy may be full. The Saint never sits at a fuller table of
joy, then when he is feasting on the dainties of the Gospel. O my soul, how many thoughts mightst thou spend about those several things to which the word is aptly and excellently resembled! It is compared to Armour, to a tree of life, to a portion, to milk, to strong meat, to pastures, to seed, to an ornament of grace, to rest, to a Crown of glory, to hidden trea∣sures, to gold tried in the fire, to a glass, to oyl and oyntment, all which as so many curious colours well laid, may help thee to admire and prize more the beauty of that face which they resemble and re∣present. Application.Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou Word of God: Many books have done vertuously, have acted famously for the overthrow of sin and Satan, for the advancement of Christ and holiness, but thou hast excelled them all. Thou hast changed Lions into Lambs, Ravens into Doves, Beasts into Men, and Men into Angels; thou hast subdued head-strong passions, mortified natural and riveted cor∣ruptions, tore up old and sturdy lusts by the roots, conquered Principalities and Powers, led captivity captive; and turned the world upside down. By thee wonders are wrought, the blind restored to their sight, the dead raised, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the Lepers are cleansed, and the poor have the Gospel preached to them, and are changed into the nature of it; where thou ridest conquering and to conquer, the whole world runneth after thee; Thy neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury, where∣in there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. Thy weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, and
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. By thee, poor, weak and con∣temptible men have subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of roaring lions, quenched the violence of hellish fire, escaped the edge of Hereticks and persecutors sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in sight, turned to flight Armies of the Aliens. Thou hast not onely like Saul, slain thy thousands, but with David thy ten thousands; thou hast broken the serpents head, destroyed the great Leviathan. tramplest on Scorpions and Vipers, and nothing can hurt thee. Thou bringeth heaven down to earth, and carriest earth up to heaven. Thou are the joyful message from a far country, the river whose streams make glad the City of God. Infinite Wisdom contrived thee, Infinite Truth proclaimed thee, and infinite Goodness discovered thee; The Father in∣dited thee, the Son confirmed thee, and the Spirit revealed thee to the children of men. The Coun∣tries and Kingdoms of the earth were overwhelm∣ed with worse then Egyptian darkness, till thou didst arise upon them, and with thy glorious beams enlighten and enliven them; by thee fools have been made wise, sinners made Saints, ignorant men have been instructed, wandring men reduced, weak ones confirmed, and lost ones saved. By thee the heavens were established, the foundations of the earth formed, the sorrowful are comforted, the scandalous reformed, the needy relieved, and
the righteousness of God revealed: Thou art eyes to the blind, and eet to the lame, and food to the hun∣gry, and rest to the weary, and physick to the sick, and life to the dying. The ablest Historian will infinitely fall short in describing thy heroick deeds; None can declare thy noble acts, or display half thy praise. Angels may well pry into thee with admi∣ration and astonishment, and make the contents of thy Chapters, the subject of their songs, and sub∣stance of their Halelujah to all eternity. When that heavenly host preached on earth, thou wert their Text, be thou their triumph in heaven for ever. O thou savour of life, thou living water, thou well of salvation, thou tidings of great joy to all Nations, thou ministration of righteousness, thou mystery of god∣liness, thou mine of unsearchable riches, thou way of holiness, thou word of the kingdom, that thou wert written on the tables of my heart, and graven with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond on that rock for ever! Thou wast once written on tables of stone with the hand of God himself; how preci∣ous was that book wherein every leaf was immedi∣ately of Gods making, and every line in it of Gods writing! My heart is an heart of stone (I find it by too much experience) but if thou wert engraven on it 'twould be a precious stone; its price would be far above Rubies, the Onyx, and the Saphire should not be valued with it; the Gold and the Chrystal should not equal it, neither should it be exchan∣ged for Coral or Pearls. O that I were manifest∣ly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, known
and read of all men. O that my soul were the house, and thou the inhabitant for ever. O that the word of Christ might dwell richly within me, that I were able to say with holy David, I delight to do thy will O God, thy law is within my heart, or in the midst of my bowels. Thou art the Oracles of God, all thy sayings are faithful and true, and worthy of all acceptation; when, O when shall I give it them! Thou art worthy of the eye; Blessed is he that readeth the words of this Prophesie, Rev. 1. 3. Thou art worthy of the ear; Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it; Thou art worthy of the heart; O that I could hide thee in mine heart that I might not sin against the Lord; Thou art a counsellor to the doubting, a comforter to the di∣stressed; Thou art health to the navel, and marrow to the bones, an ornament of grace unto the head, and a chain of gold about the neck; They that walk in thy ways are safe, and their feet do not stumble; Thou teachest in the ways of wisdom, and thou leadest in right paths; O that my ways were directed to keep all thy commandements, for thy steps tend to holiness, and thy Paths take hold of Heaven. O my soul, is it possible for thee to hear the excellency of Scripture, thus opened to thee, and not to burn in love to it! Hast thou been all this while in such an hot bath, and still cold and shive∣ring! Hast thou felt its power, tasted its savour, seen its beauty, often heard its awakening voice, and known its universal vertue, and dost thou yet doubt its divinity, or question its excellency! Surely, if ever thou shouldst again through un∣belief
belief ask it the same question, which the Scribes did Christ, when they beheld his miraculous acti∣ons; By what authority dost thou these things, or who gave thee this authority? thou mayst answer thy self in the words of the man born blind (and then seeing) to the Jews; Is it not strange, or, This is a marvellous thing, that thou knowest not whence it is, yet it hath opened thine eyes, Joh. 9. 30. Was there not a night of dread and horror with thee, when thou didst sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, till this sun did arise, with light and life under its wings. O cry out with the Psalmist, I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou hast quickened me. I was wallowing in my filth, weltring in my blood, rotting in the grave of corruption, till thou didst say unto me, Live; yea, till thou didst say unto me, Live: Thy voice is powerful, overcoming all opposition. The love revealed in thee is wonderful, far surpassing the love of woman. Thy promises are exceeding great and precious, more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold. Thy Maker may well prevail for thine ac∣ceptance. Who would not reverence the issue for the Authors sake; Surely, that coin deserves esteem, which hath that Kings Image and Super∣scription on it. The matter in thee merits respect; Thou art a Love-letter from God to his creature, revealing his eternal thoughts of good will, pub∣lishing his acts of grace and oblivion to all traytors and rebels in arms against his Majesty, upon con∣dition they will throw down their weapons, and become Loyal Subjects for the future; Thou art the Churches Charter, containing all the priviledges
which the blessed Jesus purchased for her. What wise man would not value the deeds and eviden∣ces which speak and give a right to pardon, love, grace, joy, peace, and the undefiled inheritance for ever! When thou comest to a soul, salvation comes to that soul; Thou art always attended with a rich train of all sorts of comforts; The good tidings thou bringest, and great blessings thou conveyest where ever thou comest, may well make thee welcome. I may well say uno thee, beholding the bracelets and ear-rings, wherewith thou adornest the Spouse of the true Isaac, as La∣ban to Abrahams servant; Come in thou blessed of the Lord, why standest thou without, I have pre∣pared lodging for thee? If I am bound to bless my God for the natural lights which he hath made, the greater to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night, because thereby it appears that his mercy endureth for ever, Psa. 136. 7, 8, 9. How much am I bound to bless him for the spiritual light of his word, that true, that marvellous light which shineth in a dark place, till the eternal day dawn! O what mercy, what mercy enduring for ever is there in every leaf, in every verse, in every line of that sacred Book! If Regeneration be a mercy, to be partaker of the divine nature, the stamping the lovely Image of the glorious God upon thee, then the word is a mercy, for that is the seal in the hand of the Spirit, which imprinteh it on thee, Iames 1. 18. Is faith a mercy, that shield of the soul, whereby it quencheth the fiery darts of the Devil, that Lad∣der by which the soul mounteth to Heaven, and
converseth daily with its Lord and Master? then the word is a mercy, for faith comes by hearing, the word is the door of faith, Rom. 10. 14. Act. 14. 27. If repentance be a mercy, those second and best thoughts of the soul, that recovery of the man to his wits and right mind, then the word is a mercy, for tis the voice of Christ in the word, that casteth the Devil of impenitency and sensuali∣ty out of the heart, (where it raigned and ra∣ged, sending out fire and flames, like AEtna, for many years) and makes the man like him in the Gospel (out of whom the Devil was cast) to sit at Iesus his feet in his right mind, bitterly weeping and mourning for his former folly and madness; Tis the hot beams of love that shine in the Gos∣pel, that thaw the frozen spirits. Is hope a mercy, hat Helmet of salvation which defendeth the head of Christians from Swords and Musquets, the souls of Saints from the darts and dangers of tempta∣tions, those Bladders of the soul, which keep it from sinking in deep waters? then the word is a mercy, for we through patience and comfort of the Scripture, have hope, Rom. 15. 4. Hope had never lookt out at the window, longing for the coming of its beloved, if the word had not come before as a faithful Messenger, and brought certain news that he was upon the way. Are pardon, reconciliation with God, adoption, growth in grace, yea, Heaven it self a mercy? then the word is a mercy; All those Jewels are lockt up in that Cabinet. Man durst not have presumed, he could not have con∣ceived that the glorious jealous God should ever have such infinite respect for such wretches and
rebels, if he had not found it written with his own hand in the word. Tis on the waters of the sanctu∣ary, that the Saint saileth safely through the Sea of this world to the Port of salvation. There was no visible bridge laid over the Gulf of Gods wrath, for sinners to pass into the Kingdom of grace here, and glory hereafter, till the Gospel erected one. O my soul, what honour can be high enough, what love hot enough, for the holy Scriptures! 1. Consider the preciousness of them in the eyes of good men, and the love they had for them. Iob preferred them before food, before his necessary food; Solomon before ornaments of gold, crowns of glory; Paul before all other Doctrines, though Preached by Angels; David before the honey, and the honey comb, great spoils, thousands of gold and silver, all riches; And when he ceaseth to compare, beginneth to admire is worth, Wonderful are thy testimonies; And his own fervent affection to it, O how love I thy law, it is my meditation all the day. 2. The price paid for it. It cost the blood of thy beloved; well may the Scriptures be called Testaments, they were both sprinkled with blood, and made valid by the death of the Testatour, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. And for this cause he is the me¦diatour of the New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of transgressions that were under the first Testament; they which were called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance; For where a Testament is, there must of necessity also be the death of the Testator; For a Testament
is of force after men are dead, otherwise it is of no strength at all whilst the testator liveth. 3. The pearl hid in it. The Lord Jesus Christ is the matter as well as the Author of it. Well may it be called the Word of Christ. Search the Scripture for they are they that testifie of me. He was the substance of the Law, and he is the sum of the Gospel: Thou hadst not known sin but for the Law, nor the Savi∣our, but for the Gospel. Resolution.When David considered the kindness he had re∣ceved from Ionathan, he said to his servants, Is there none left of the house of Saul that I may shew kindness to, for Jonathans sake. He could not but in gratitude study some return suitable to that good will of his dear friend. Great is the kind∣ness I have received from the Scripture; What wilt thou say, what wilt thou do, O my soul, for this Word of thy God! O swear unto the Lord, and vow unto the mighty God of Jacob; surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, I will not go up into my bed, I will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, until I inde out a place for the law of the Lord, and an habitation for the Gospel of the God of Jacob. Wilt thou not willing∣ly, O my soul, rather then this worthy guest should lie without doors, take it into thy heart! O that thou wert the ark wherein the two Tables, the two Testaments might be laid up for ever. Lord I will through thy strength ponder all thy sayings in my heart, and make them the rule of my life; I will delight inthy law, and meditate therein day and night. I will give diligence to reading, be frequent in hearing, and uniform and coustant in obedience to
it. I will teach it diligently my children, and talk of it when I sit in mine house, and when I walk by the way, when I lye down, and when I rise up, I will bind it for a sign upon my hand, it shall be as a frontlet between mine eyes; I will make thy statutes my songs in the house of my pilgrimage, I will rejoyce in thy testimonies more then they that find great spoils; I will chuse thy statutes as my heritage for ever, for they are the joy of my heart; I will delight in the law of God after the inner man. I will incline my heart to keep thy statutes always unto the end; I have sworn and I will perform, that I will keep thy righte∣ous judgements. But ah Lord, what do I say! I have even cast thy law behind my back, I have broken thy bands asunder, and cast thy cords from me: My carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; I can of my self break thy law, but onely through thy strength keep it; I have gone astray like a lost sheep, O seek thy servant and I will keep thy statutes. Be surety for thy ser∣vant for good, that I may observe thy precepts: I am a stranger in this earth, hide not thy command∣ments from me. Incline my heart unto thy testimo∣nies, and not unto covetousness. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I de∣light. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end. Gie me understanding and I shall keep thy law; yea I shall keep it with my whole heart. Thou art good, and dost good; O teach me thy statutes. Thy hands have made me and fashi∣oned me; O give me understanding that I may keep thy commandments. I will run the way of thy com∣mandments, when thou shalt inlarge my heart. O send
out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy hill, unto thy heavenly habitation. Then will I go into the presence of God, even of God my exceeding joy: Yea upon the harp will I praise thee, O God my God for ever. Fourthly, If thou woulst exercise thy self to god∣liness in Solitude, Accustom thy self to soliloquies, I mean to conference with thy self. He needs never be idle that hath so much business to do with his own soul. It was a famous answer which Antiste∣nes gave when he was asked what fruit he reaped by all his studies; By them, saith he, I have learned both to live and talk with my self. Soliloquies are the best disputes; every good man is best compa∣ny for himself of all the creatures. Holy David enjoyneth this to others; Commune with your own hearts upon your bed and be still, Selah, Psal. 4.4. Com∣mune with your own hearts; when ye have none to speak with, talk to your selves. Ask your selves for what end ye were made, what lives ye have lead, what times ye have lost, what love ye have abused, what wrath ye have deserved? Call your selves to a reckoning, how ye have improved your talents, how true or false ye have been to your rust, what provision ye have laid in for an hour of death, what preparation ye have made for a great day of account. Vpon your beds: Secresie is the best opportunity for this duty. The silent night is a good time for this speech. When we have no outward objects to disturb us, and to call our eyes (as the fools eyes are always) to the ends of the earth; then our eyes, as the eyes of the wise may be in our heads; and then our minds, like the
windows in Solomons Temple, may be broad in∣wards. The most successful searches have been made in the night season; the soul is then wholly shut up in the earthly house of the body, and hath no visits from strangers to disquiet its thoughts. Physicians have judged dreams a probable sign whereby they might find out the distempers of the body. Surely then the bed is no bad place o examine and search into the state of the soul. And be still: Self-communion will much help to curb your head-strong, ungodly passions. Serious consideration, like the casting up of earth amongst Bees, will allay in∣ordinate affections, when they are full of fury, and make such an hideous noise. Though sensual appetites and unruly desires, are as the people of Ephesus, in an uproar, pleading for their former priviledge, and expecting their wonted provision, as in the days of their predominancy, if conscience use its authority, commanding them in Gods name, whose officer it is, to keep the Kings peace, and ar∣gue it with them, as the Town-Clark of Ephesus, We are in danger to be called in question for this days uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this days concourse, all is frequently by this means husht, and the tumult appeased without any further mischief. Selah: This signifieth elevati∣on, or lifting up either the mind or voyce or both. For the matter of it, it importeth, 1. An Asseveration of a thing so to be.Answ. on Psa. 3. 2. Hence the Chaldee Paraphrast, and some other Hebrews have turned it For ever; The foregoing assertions are true, and shall be so for ever. 2. An Admiration at it; Such truths call both
for our assent and wonder. Selah is affixed by way of Emphasis, to note the excellency of the thing asserted, and the impression it should make upon our spirits. As David enjoyned this duty to others, so he practised it himself, Psa. 77. 6. I call to remembrance my song in the night, I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. He communed with his own heart, was not a stranger at home. Indeed, an Hypocrite, as the Philo∣sopher speaks of a vicious person, is not friends with himself, but endeavours more to avoid him∣self then any others, and is never in so bad compa∣ny, as when he is alone, for then he is forced to keep company with himself. Where conscience is an abused and incensed Judge, tis no wonder that a guilty malefactour would flie from its presence. The servant that hath rioted all day, is unwilling his Master should reckon with him at night; The Heathen (persecutors) would not hear the Chri∣stians, because their cause would have appeared so just that nature it self would have justified them. The ungodly will not for a contrary reason hear the indictments which conscience prefers a∣gainst them, because their cause will appear so bad, that they cannot avoid condemning them∣selves. It may be said of whorish hearts, as of the Harlot, Her feet abide not within her house. But the sincere Christian, that allows himself in no sin, delights to commune with his own soul, and when he is debating things with his own consci∣ence, esteems himself in good company. He had rather (Gods deputy) conscience, should admonish
him to contrition, then that God himself should do it to his confusion. According to the Apostles Doctrine, Every one of us must give account of himself to God; there∣fore every one of us, must take account of him∣self befare-hand. It will be but a sad account which some will give at the great Audit-day, when conscience shall confess against them, They made me keeper of others vineyards, but my own vineyard have I not kept; And it is but a poor trade that they drive at present, who make little use of their Shop-books. The greatest Merchants, and the most thriving, are much in their Counting-house. 5. In solitude, accustom thy self to secret ejacu∣lations and converses with God. Lovers cast ma∣ny a glance at each other, when they are at a di∣stance, and are deprived of set meetings. A little Boat may do us some considerable service, when we have not time to make ready a great Vessel. The casting of our eyes and hearts up to Heaven, will bring Heaven down to us; My me∣ditations of him shall be sweet, Psa. 104. 34. Secret ejaculations have meat in their mouths, and will abundantly requite such as entertain them. If they be much in our bosomes, as Abishag in Davids, they will cherish us, and put warmth into us. They are sweet, in the day, like the Black-bird, cheering us with their pleasant noats, and do also afford us wih the Nightingale, songs in the night. A true Israelite may enjoy more of his God in a Wilder∣ness, then in an earthly Canaan. Christians are nearest their heaven, when farthest from the Earth. What care I how much I am in solitude,
so I may but enjoy his desirable society. Ah how foolish are those persons that neglect the improve∣ment of this glorious priviledge! They that like swine, can look every way but upward, may well lie rooting in the earth, desiring no more then fleshly pleasures, because they know no better. Surely, the company of my God is of such weighty consequence and universal influence, that I need no other, I can have none to equal it. The so∣ciety of my best friends, for all their love to me, and tenderness of me, is but as the company of Snakes and Serpents, to the company of my God. They have not pity enough for the thousandth part of my misery, nor power enough to answer in any degree my necessities; Their hearts are infinitely short of my Gods (his love to me, like his being, is boundless) but their hands come far short of their hearts; though they are not un∣willing, they are unable to relieve me. How often have I told them of my doleful case, and di∣stressed condition in vain, when thereby I have rather added to their afflictions, then lessened my own? But my God is all-sufficient, both for pity and power, he hath bowels and mercy e∣nough for my greatest sufferings and sorrows; and strength and might enough for my support and succour; My best friends are waspish, and upon a small cause are ready to snap asunder their friendship, when my Gods good will ever∣lasting, and thongh he scourge me, he will is never remove his loving kindness from me; What need I those puddle streams, whilst I have this Well of living water? O let me enjoy him more, though
I never enjoy frend more. Because I shall have opportunity to speak more to soul conferences, and also to converse with God in secret duties, in other parts of this Treatise, I shall speak no more in this place. A Good Wish about the exercising our selves to Godliness in Solitude, wherein the former par∣ticulars are applied. THe blessed and infinite wise God,The Intro∣duction: who made my soul for himself, and knoweth it will never be satisfied without himself, commanding me in all compa∣ny to converse with his sacred Majesty, and calling me sometimes to solitude, that being freed from worldly di∣stractions, I might have more of his society; I Wish that my nature may be so sutable to his holy being, and my love so great to his gracious presence, that though his providence should cast me alone into a Prison, yet en∣joying his favour there, I may esteem it sweeter and plea∣santer then the stateliest Palace. It is both his precept and my priviledge, that in the greatest company I should be alone to him; and in my greatest solitude, in company with him. There is not the most solitary place I can come into, nor the least moment of my life, but I have still business with my God, and such as is neither easie, nor of mean concernment. All my transactions with men about House, or Land, or Food, or Cloaths, or the most necesary things of this present life, are nothing to my businesse with God about my unchangeable being in the other world. If they were all laid in the bal∣lance with this, they would be found infinitely lighter then vanity and nothing. My understanding
is ready to be overwhelmed with the apprehension of an endless eternal state. All my business with meat, or drink, or sleep, or family, or friends, or mercies, or afflictions, nay, or the means of grace, or ordinances themselves, is no more worth or desireable, then they tend to the furthering my everlasting good. All other things are but as passengers, to which I may afford a short salute, but it is my home, where I must abide for ever, that my heart must be always set upon; and it is my God, upon whom this blissful endless life de∣pends, that I have most cause to be ever with; O my soul, by this thou mayst gather with whom to deal, and about what to trade when thou art alone; tell me not henceforward, in the words of the lazy worldling, I am idle, for I have nothing to do; Hast thou pardon of sin, the Image of thy God, an interest in thy Redeemer, freedom from sin, the Law, the wrath to come, a title to life and salvation, to get and secure, without which thou shalt be a fire∣brand of hell for ever, and hast thou any while, any time to be idle? Hast thou that high, that holy, that weighty work of worshipping and glorifying the great God of Heaven and Earth, and of working out thy own salvation, and yet hast thou nothing to do! O that I might never hear such language in thy thoughts, much less read it in thy life, when thou hast so much business of absolute necessity to be done, lying upon thy hands, that if all the Angels in Heaven should offer thee their help, unless the Son of God himself do assist, thou canst not dispatch it in many millions of ages! Lord, I am thine, absolutely thine, universally thine; all I am is thine, all I have is thine; O when shall I live as thine! I have no business but with
thee, and for thee; O that I could live wholly to thee; I confess it is thine infinite grae to suffer such a worm as I am, to converse with thy glorious Ma∣jesty; that Heaven should thus stoop to earth, and the most holy condescend to so great, so greivous a sinner; O affect my heart with thy kindness herein, and so fill me with thy blessed spirit, that as thou art ever with me, whether I am alone, or in com∣pany, so when I awake, I may be still with thee. I Wish that I may esteem solitude,Motives to exercise our selves to god∣liness in soli∣tude. 1. The advan∣tage which a Christian may reap by soli∣tude. when my God calls me to it, a gracious opportunity, for more united and intimate converses with his Majesty. How often hath the company of men distracted my spi∣rit, and hindered me from having my conversation in Heaven! Their miapprehensins, and carnal inte∣rests, and predominant passions do frequently bring such prejudice to their associates, that none would be over fond of their honey, who hath once felt their stings. If I converse with wicked men, I hear their Oaths, and Blasphemies, and Ribbaldry, their Mocks, and Taunts, and Ieers, against God and his people; I see their intemperance and pro∣phaneness, and injustice, and oppression, and per∣secution of them that fear the Lord; I can read in their wicked language, and cursed carriage, their bit∣terness, and rage, and emnity against their Maker and Redeemer; I may behold the body of Christ woun∣ded, and his pretious blood trampled on, the law, and love, and worship, and honour, of the blessed God, scorned and despised, and such vileness and wicked∣ness committed in an hour, as shall be bewailed and lamented for ever. Such sights as these call for my
deepest sorrow, and the best that I can get by such company, is inward trouble, and abundant grief; but its many to one if they do not make me either directly or indirectly to contract real guilt. O what pleasure can I take to be in a room filled with smoke, which will certainly wring tears from mine eyes, and probably smut and defile me; If I converse with good men, though their company in many re∣spects be desireable, and I have found it to be pro∣fitable, and I would prize them whom God esteem∣eth, and love them that have his beautiful Image, and with whom I must live for ever; yet how many things are in them to allay the vertue and benefit of their society! Their peevishness, and pasion, and pride, and selfishness which are still too much in them; the difference of their judgements, and dispositions, causeth their company to be far the lss eligible and lovely; Besides, their readiness and activeness to propagate their errors, and their power and preva∣lency to draw others to joyn with them in their wan∣drings from the truth, doth not a little abate of that comfort and delight, which I might have in them; Again, their miseries, and wants, and necessities, which are many, and great, and urgent, which I am wholly unable to relieve or remedy, call me to tears and weeping; Once more, their slips, and falls, and weaknesses and back-slidings which I must ob∣serve, and reprove, and bewail, are far from be∣ing occasions of joy or pleasure to me. They are at best, as we say of Children, certain cares, and un∣certain comforts; Though they are roses, they have prickles, which offend, as well as their pleasant smell to refresh us; the truest friend I have, may occasion me
as much trouble as comfort. When I travail with a chearful good Companion, I promise my self much delight in my journey, but anon he falls and wounds himself, or tires, or proves sick and unable to go further, and instead of going forward, I must stay to attend on him, and thus instead of being my help, he becomes my hinderance. Indeed I have the more cause to bear with it in another, not know∣ing how soon it may be my own case; but however these accidents which too often fall out, as they speak the benefit of it to one, so also the perplexity and trouble of it to another. If I converse with great or rich men, what disdainful looks do they give me? at what a distance do they behold me? Its hard to obtain the liberty of speaking to them; but if I would obtain their favour twill cost me more then it did the cheif Captain for his Ro∣man freedom; Vnless I can gratifie their lusts, I must not expect their love. If I can drink, and swear, and curse, and roar at their hellish rate (it may be) they will afford me a good word; but alas what man in his wits, would pay for their best words so dear a price? Their friend∣ship can hardly be got without a breach with my God; and what wise man would lose the good will of the Lord for the gain of the whole world? When I have by many friends, and with much fficulty, and even danger to my soul procured their favour, how little am I the better for it! The most rotten tree is not so hollow; for as cun∣ning wrestlers, they will get within me to give me a fall; the wind it self is not more wavering then they are; ex∣cept I can be contented to be their foot-stool, that by their treading on me, they may be lifted higher in the world, I must expect to be quite cast by. Its possible wbilst they may make some use of me to decoy and trepan others, or to raise
and advance themselves, they may carry me upon their shoulders as men do their Ladders, when there is hopes thereby of climbing to their desired height, but when that is done, or if the Ladder prove too short, they will throw it upon the ground, If I will not always be some way or other mking provision for their flesh, I shall be dismist with the brand of an unwor∣thy fellow. If I converse with mean and poor men, I find but little comfort in their company, I see their poverty, and indigency, and hunger, and nakedness, which I cannot help or prevent, I heard their cries, and groans, and complaints, by reason of oppressing Landlords, or tyrannical revengeful Neighbours, or unfaithful Friends, or distempered Bodies, all which affect my soul, and grieve me to the heart, that I am ready to sit in the dust, and cry, and groan, and mourn with them; Let me go where I will to converse with any, in this wilderness of the world, I find little but briars, and brakes, and thorns, and thistles, and matter of sorrow and lamentation; but when I retire alone to converse with my God, I am freed from those distracting clamours and vex∣ations, cries and disturbing noise, and might, could I but leave an ungrateful unbelieving heart behind me, find in him an Heaven pon Earth; I may with Moses go up to Mount Pisgah, and take a view with the prospective glass of faith, of Palestine, and that goodly land flowing with milk and honey. I may enter into the suburbs of the new Jerusalem, taste some clusters of the Grapes of Canaan, and view as in a glass those celestial beauties and glories which I hope one day to see face to face, and to be partaker of O my soul, what needst thou care how
much the world scorns thy company, or to what place thy God see fit to banish thee! if thou canst but as Zacheus, when gotten out of the crowd, climb up into the Sycamore of meditation, and obtain a sight of thy Saviour; If he want no company who is with the King, surely thou mayst deny all the com∣pany on earth for the King of Kings! Look how lovingly he invites thee to take a turn or two with him alone in the fields; Come my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, there I will give thee my loves; Hast thou not many a time sighed out to him, O kiss me with the kisses of thy lips, for thy love is better then wine; Lo, he tells thee the place where he will answer thy petition; There will I give thee my loves. Thy bridegroom is bashful, and desirous to satisfie thy longings in secret; Isaac met his bride in the fields, and thou mayst meet thy beloved when thou turnest aside from the world, to entertain thy self in solitude. O how pleasant should solitude be to thee for his sake? What matters it, whether thou art driven, or who be the whips that drive thee, when thou art driven farther from men, to be nearer the Lord Iesus Christ! A loving Husband is instead of all company to a faithful Spouse. Is not Christ dearer to thee then all the world? be not thou dejected, though thou shouldst be turned as he was, into a Wilderness, but expect an Angel, even the Angel of the Covenant, to be sent from Heaven for thy comfort. Lord, it is my support, that wherever I am, thou art continu∣ally with me; O that I were able to say, I am con∣tinually with thee; I would willingly with Jacob, leave all my company to meet thee alone, so I might
but as he did weep in secret, and make supplica∣tion, so as to prevail with thee for thy blessing. Though I should sind cause to say with David, Lovers and friends stand aloof from me; and with Job, My friends scorn me; yet if thou pleasest, by parting me from them, to draw me nearer to thy self, and to afford me more of thy quickening, cheering presence, I shall account their absence a desireable advantage; The best society with∣out thee, is as a barren desart, and an howling wilderness; the greatest solitariness with thee, is as a fruitful Country and delectable Canaan; How precious are thy thoughts (my thoughts of thee) to me O God; Let me rather dwel alone in a Prison with thy company, then in a Pallace without thee. Motive, The danger of carelesness in solitude.I Wish that I may be the more careful of my car∣riage in secret, lest what I intend as an opportuni∣ty for my Gods service, should prove a season and ad∣vantage for Satan; The body must be lookt to narrowly, when it comes out of an hot Bath, lest the Poors being open, it should take cold. The soul must be carefully tended, when it comes from Chri∣stian communion, lest in solitude it lose what it hath gained in good company. When the Coun∣tryman hath been at Market and filled his Purse, he is in most danger of robbing as he goeth home a∣lone. The Tempter will be sure to be present with me, whoever be absent; He walks to and fro in the earth, and whilst I am in his Circuit, I must ex∣pect his company; Though he be more bold then wel∣come, and though I deny his desires, defie his works, and resist him, and sometimes foil him, yet he will
still attend to sollicite me to folly; wherever I go, he will find me out; and whatever I do, I must ex∣pect him at my elbow; he hath a double advan∣tage of me in solitude, partly in that I have no visible second to assist me; he hopes when I am alone, tis a good time to set upon me, and that he is strong enough by force to ravish and defile me; Partly, in that shame which restrains from sin in publique, hath no place, no prevalency in private. He will tell me that secresie may be a curtain to hide my sins from the worlds eye, of which I am so much afraid. As Josephs Mistress, he will cry, Come lie with me, be bold to sin, to take thy pleasure, for here is no man present to know it, or to reveal it to thy disgrace. And for God, he hath forgotten, he hideth his face, he will never see it; How shall God know? can he judge through the dark Cloud? Thick Clouds are a covering to him, that he doth not see, and he walketh in the circuit os Heaven. But O my soul, thy double danger calleth upon thee to be the more vigilant and diligent in minding thy duty. When thou hast no humane friend to watch over thee, thou art the more concerned to watch over thy self. They that live far from Neighbours, are the more liable to Thieves, and therefore if wise, will make up that want by extraordinary watchfulness, and a greater provision of armour and weapons; If one Devil be too hard a match for many secure Christians, how unable will one single Christian be, to encounter with many, with a Legion of Devils! Shouldst thou be idle in solitude, or suffer thy thoughts to wander, expect more then good Company, and such as
will employ thee about works of darkness. Besides, Consider, Though thy thoughts are mantled from the view of men, yet thy God knoweth thy thoughts a far off, long before thou thinkest them, and will judge the secrets of mens hearts, according to his Gospel; He that numbereth the stars of Heaven, numbereth all the thoughts of thy heart; I know the things that come into your mind, O house of Israel, every one of them, Ezek. 11. 5. And he that punisheth men for wicked deeds, doth not let them escape for their evil thoughts; Hear O earth, behold I will bring upon this people, the fruit of their thoughts, Ier. 6. 19. Nay, thy God will scourge men both for and by their thoughts; accusing thoughts are stinging vipers; That worm of conscience which will ever ever gnaw the sinners heart, to his unconceiveable misery, is bred in his thoughts; O therefore wash thy heart from wickedness, let not vain thoughts lodge within thee. Remember also O my soul, if thy most retired thoughts are legi∣ble to thy God, then thy secret actions are all open and visible to his eye. Never presume upon sin, in hope of secrecy; for though thou mayst cover the can∣dle of creatures with a bushel; yet thou canst not the glorious sun of righteousness; nothing is hid from his sight; There is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity can hide themselves. Lord, thou hast told me, There is nothing hid which shall not be revealed, nor secret which shall not be made known; I confess my wicked heart is apt to argue impunity from secrecy, and to think I am invisible to thee, because thou art invi∣sible to the eye of my sense; O affect my heart so
throughly with thine Omniscience and Omnipresence, that  may keep thy precepts, because all my ways (whether inward or outward) are before thee. I Wish that I may have this comfortable evidence of my sincerity, by the conscienciousness of my be∣haviour in secret.Motive. Tis a good sign of since∣rity. The lineaments and features of the body, are bet discovered in the night, when its stripped naked of those garments which in the day time covered it, and were not wholly answerable to the proportion of its several parts; The shape and countenance of the soul, is much better revealed when it retires from the world, and is freed from these objects and businesses which hurried it hither and thither (possibly) much differing from its own inclination. There is no right judging of the Pati∣ent by his water, till it is setled; nor true disco∣very of the state of a Christian by his heart, till it be quiet and composed. When men are busie upon the stage of the world, surrounded with spectators, they put on strange habits and act not their own, but the parts of others, and so are not easily known, who or what they are; but he that followeth them into the retiring room, where they undress them∣selves, may soon discover them. The frame and bent of my heart in private, to sin or holiness, will speak its temper, whether good or bad. The soul is not at such liberty to vent it self, and to manifest its genius and disposition in its outward actions, as in its inward motions and meditations; External acts, may flow from external principles, which as a Team of Horse, draw the Cart after it by force, but internal thoughts ever flow from an internal
principle, which as the natural and proper off∣spring of the mind, discover what its parent is; The Laws of men, the fear of punishment, the hope of reward may tye my hands in company; but its nothing but the fear of my God can bind my heart to its good behaviour in secret. My thoughts are not liable to an arraignment at any earthy Bar, nor my person to any arrest from men, or any tumult or disorder in them, because the Law of the Magistrate can take no cognizance of them, they being locked up from all humane eyes in the privy cabinet of my heart. Though I am limited in my words, not to speak what I will, and also in my works, not to do what I will, by reason of that shame, or penalty, or ill-will from friends or superiours, which dishonest actions, and unseemly expressions may bring upon me; yet my thoughts in this sense are free, I may think what I will, notwithstanding any of these conside∣rations. Again, outward actions, both good and bad, materially considered, are common both to Sinners and Saints. What good duties are there, but as to the matter of them, wicked men may per∣form them as well as the godly! Abstinence from gross sins, praying, fasting, hearing, reading, almes-giving, have been practised by some Hypocrites, in a larger measure then by some sincere Christians; On the other side. There are ew sins so great, but some of the Children of God, have at some time or other been guilty of them. Gluttony, Drunken∣ness, Fornication, Incest, Murder, &c. have been committed by them that were truly sanctified; where then lieth the difference between them, so much as in their usual and predominant thoughts? Once
more, my God judgeth of my actions by my thoughts, and therefore by them I may well judge of my spiritual condition, Isa. 10. 7. Gen. 22. 16, 17. Lord, I have often heard out of thy word, Where the trea∣sure is, there will the heart be also; I know every man will be frequent in thinking of that which he esteems his happiness and treasure. The Covetous wretch hugs and embraceth his wealth in his heart and thoughts, when it is out of his sight, and in other mens hands; the Adulterer pleaseth himself in the meditation of his wanton dalliances with his foolish Minion, when he hath no opportunity for the execution of his lust; the Proud man fancieth him∣self in a fools Paradise, whilst he imagineth multi∣tudes waiting upon him, in the Presence Chamber of his crazie brain with their bare heads, their ben∣ded knees, admiring and applauding the worth of his person, the vastness of his parts, and himself as the only epitome of all perfections. O give me that character of thy children, to meditate in thy Law day and night. Let my thoughts be conversant about those riches that are not liable to rust, those pleasures which satisfie a rational soul, and that honour which is from God; give me to know that my trea∣sure is in Heaven, with thy self, in thy Son, by having my heart, and my conversation there also. I Wish that when ever I sequester my self from world∣ly business,Wherein godliness con∣sisteth in so∣litude. I might leave all my finful and worldly thoughts behind me.By watch∣ing against sinful and vain thoughts. There can no work of concern∣ment be done in secret, unless these disturbers be ab∣sent. Should I entertain such guests, I forbid Christ
my Company. Vicious thoughts are his sworn ene∣mies, and he will not dwel in the same heart, in the same house with them; If I desire him to sit upon the throne of my heart, I must give him leave to cast down every imagination, and to bring every thought to the obedience of himself; Places that are full of vermine, are not fit for a Princes presence; Vain and unnecessary thoughts about lawful objects, are strangers, though not sworn enemies, and will give my best friend distast. Though a noble person should come to give me a visit, if he should hear me debasing my self to converse needlesly with in∣considerable impertinent fellows, I may look that he should passe by without calling in; Christ loves not to be entertained in a room full of dust-heaps and cobwebs. If vain thoughts lodge within, the blessed Jesus will stand without; Gold and Clay will not mingle; If these mists arise, and these clouds interpose, they will hinder my sight of the true Sun. Besides, My works will be answerable to my thoughts; if my thoughts be wicked or fruitless, so will my actions be. My hands are but the Mid∣wife, to bring my thoughts, the conception of my heart, into the world. My thoughts are the seed that lyeth in the ground out of sight; my works are the crop which is visible to others; according to the seed, whether good or bad, such will the crop be. If men be so careful to get the purest, the cleanest, and the best seed for their fields, that their harvest may be the more to their advantage; how much doth it concern me that my heart be sown with pure and holy thoughts, that my crop may tend both to my credit and comfort! Lord, there is no good seed
but what comes out of thy garner. I confess, the piercing thorns of vicious thoughts, and the fruitless weeds of vain thoughts, are all the natural pro∣duct of my heart. O let thy good spirit plow up the fallow ground of my soul, and scatter in it such seeds of grace and holiness, that my life may be answerable to thy Gospel, and at my death I may be translated to thy glory. I Wish that I may in solitude,Spiritualize natural things when I have no men to discourse with, converse with other creatures, and spell the name of my creatour out of them. It is my priviledge, that I may with Sampson, get honey and sweetness by occasional meditation, out of the carcass of every creature; The whole world is a great vast library, and every creature in it a several Book, wherein he that runs may read, the power, and goodness, and infinite perfections of its Maker; Every object is as a Bell, which if but turned, makes a report of the great Gods honour and renown. Some have compared the Creation to a musical instru∣ment; sure I am, every individual in it, is a string, which if toucht by serious consideration, will loudly and sweetly proclaim its Authors praise; He that hath much stock, may well trade high; They who by every sight, by every sound, by every thing felt or tasted, are minded of their Father and Foun∣tain, may well be taken up with frequent apprehensi∣ons and admirations of him; For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and God head, Rom. 1. 20. The Highest and Lowest, the Kings and Worms, the Sun and Stone, the Cedar and Hysop, the smal∣lest
inanimate & irrational creatures read to me dumb lectures of my Gods might and love; they are so many Masters to instruct me, though silently, in his greatness and wisdom. The world below is a glass, in which I may see the world above. The works of God are the Shepherds Calender, the Plow-mans Alphabet, the King of Heavens Divinity Professors, and why not my Ca∣tholique Preachers? Certainly those several varie∣ties, choice rarities, and excellent contrivances which appear in them, were made as well for my inward soul, as outward senses, and chiefly for my soul through my senses. The word of God is food for faith, and so may the works of God nourish faith by sense. Faith seeth God in himself, sense seeth God in his creatures, and thereby may be helpful to faith. Take a view O my soul of thy beloved in those pictures, which are al∣ways before thee, representing his glorious and emi∣nent perfections; Ah, how strange is it, that he who is so near to thy senses, should be so far from thy thoughts! Try a little what wholsom cordial wa∣ter thou canst distil out of these hearbs and flowers that grow in this earthly Eden, by the fire of medi∣tation; Ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee: and the Fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee; or, speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; or the Fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee; Who knoweth not in all these, that the hand of the Lord hath wrought this! Iob 12.7,8,9. Thou needst not judge the attributes and excellencis of God, or the work he requireth of thee, so mysterious that none but men of extraordinary parts can reach or teach them. Though the longest line of created understanding cannot fathom his bottomless perfections, & though his commandments
be exceeding broad, yet the meanest creatures do after a sort teach thee his wisdom and power, and thy duty and carriage; Ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee; As brutish as they are, they may in∣struct thee in many rare lessons. They will teach thee, 1. Gratitude and thankfulness to thy Maker and preserver; The Ox knoweth his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel doth not know, Isa. 1.2. If the dullest of Beasts, the Ox and Ass acknow∣ledge their Master, how shouldst thou thy benefactour? 2. Dependance on the Fountain of thy being; If they depend on him for provision, wilt not thou? Jezreel cryeth to the Corn, Wine and Oyl to nourish her; these cry to the earth, the earth cryeth to the heavens, the heavens cry to God, upon whom they depend, Hos. 2. 19. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou satisfiest the desire of every living thing; He giveth to the beasts their food, and to the young ravens that cry, Psalm 145. 15. and 147. 9. If the great House keeper of the world be so careful to fodder his Cattle, surely, thou mayst believe that he will not starve his children. 3. The dread and awe of thy God; When the Lyon roareth, all the Beasts of the Forrest tremble. What fear should possess thee, when thy God is incensed, and ut∣tereth his terrible voice in his threatnings! Thy flesh may well tremble for fear of him, and thou hast good cause to be afraid of his righteous judgements. 4. Providence and Diligence in thy place and cal∣ling; Go to the Pismire thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise; she provideth her meat in the sum∣mer, and gathereth her food in the harvest, Pro. 6.6,8. If she be so wise as to know her season, and to improve it, how inexcusable wilt thou be, if thou shouldst neglect it?
5. Innocency; The Sheep will suffer many inju∣ries and offer none. He went as a sheep to the slaughter, dumb before the shearer, and opened not his mouth. 6. Wisdom and Prudence; The Serpent will if possible, secure her head, what ever part of her be wounded; Now the Serpent was more subtil then any Beast of the field; The Christian must be care∣ful to secure his faith; be wise as Serpents; Ask the Fowles of the air, and they will tell thee; how many truths, O my soul, will the very Birds chatter out to thee? They will tell thee, 1. Concerning thy God, his goodness and mercy; Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing, and yet not one of them falleth to the ground, without thy Fathers providence, Mat. 6. His providence reacheth the meanest creatures. 2. Concerning the wicked one, his cunning and policy; As the Eagle, when she seiseth on the carcass, will first peck out the eyes, and then feed on its flesh; So Satan first blindeth the mind, and then leads them hood-winkt to hell; As the Eagle car∣rieth the shelfish into the Air, onely that he might break them by their fall, and devour them; so the Devil by his costly courtesie, advanceth many to their destruction, Pro. 1. 32. As Birds are caught with several baits by the Fowler, some with chaff, some with corn, some with day-nets, some with a lowbel, so the Arch-Fowler hath various ways to seduce and catch poor souls, ye are not ignorant of his devices. 3. Concerning thy self, they will tell thee, 1. That heavenly-mindedness, is the onely
way to chearfulness. Birds sing most, when they are got above the earth; The pretty Bed-brest doth chant it as merrily in September, the beginning of Winter, as in March, the approach of Summer. Thou mayst give as chearful entertainment to hoary frosts, as to warming beams, to the declining Sun of adversity, as to the rising Sun of Prosperity, if thy conversation be in heaven. 2. That simple souls are soon seduced and slain; when the Larkers day-net is spread in a fair morning, and himself is whirling his artificial motion, by the reflecting lustre of the Sun on the wheeling instru∣ment, not onely the merry Lark, and fearful Pige∣on, are dazeled and drawn with admiration; but stouter Birds of prey, the Merlin and Hobby are in∣vited to stoop, and gazing on the outward form, lose themselves. So when Satan spreadeth his day-net of pleasure and honour, he allures not onely Hea∣thens and Indians, but even unsound and secure Chri∣stians; As the Birds that are caught in the snare, so are the Sons of men snared in an evil time, Eccles. 9. 12. 3. That those that would conquer their spiri∣tual enemies, must be full of courage and valour. The Kite is, Andax in minimis, timidus in magnis; bold in dealing with tme fowl, as Chickens and Ducks, but cowardly in medling with wild ones, that will not yield. Give not place to the Devil; Resist the Devil and he will flee from you. 4. The misery and mischief of contention. The Hawk thinks constantly to make a prey of the Heron, but sometimes the Heron, when she cannot by any winding shifts get above the Hawk, nor by bemuting
his feathers make him flag-winged, resumeth courage out of necessity, and strikes the Hawk through the gorge with his Bill, and so have both been seen to fall down dead together. So rich men many times presume that they may oppress their inferiours at their pleasure; but the event of their strifes and law-suits (after all their turnings and winding Meanders in the Law, sought out to get above each other) hath proved the undoing of both. 5. The unreasonableness of diffidence and di∣strust. They will teach thee a lesson of faith, and help to banish our fears; Behold the Fowles of the Air, for they Sow not, neither do they Reap nor gather into Barns, yet your heavenly Father feedeth them; are ye not much better then they? Mat. 6. 28. 6. The observation of times and seasons. Its thy prudence to take notice of the stormes of judge∣ments, and sunshine of mercy. The Stork in the Heaven knoweth her appointed times, and the Turtle and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgement of the Lord, Ier. 8. 7. 7. The pains thou shouldst take for spiritual food; the fowles of the Air will flye far for meat; Where the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together. No labour should be thought too great for the meat that endureth to eternal life. 8. The regard thou shouldst have to the preservation and safety of thy self and Family; They build on high, and make their nests on the tops and small twigs of trees, and will spare it out of their own mouths, to feed their young. He who provides not
for his Family, is not onely worse then an Infidel, but also worse then the very Birds of the Air. O my soul, proceed farther, Speak to the earth and it shall teach thee, 1. A lesson of Humility. Thou art but breathing earth, enlivened dust, as vile as the dirt that every Beast of the field trampleth on. Behold, I have ta∣ken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and ashes! Gen. 18. 27. 2. A lecture of thy frailty, that thine earthly ta∣bernacle will ere long fall to the ground; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt return. 3. A lesson of fruitfulness; It bringeth forth thirty, forty, sixty, an hundred for one; And Isaac sowed in the Land, and had an hundred fold increase. 4. A lesson of faith and trust in God. The earth hangs on nothing, it hangs in the thin air, where an Hair-ball, nay a straw, will not stay without a support, Job 26. 7. He hangeth the Earth upon nothing. Once more, And the fishes of the Sea shall de∣clare unto thee. Though they are mute Masters, yet they are great Teachers; They declare unto thee, 1. The Affection and communion that ought to be amongst Saints; Fish of the same kind flock to∣gether in Sholes; The Greek word for Fish is, , which is derived as some think, from , to come, and  to be carried with force and vio¦lence, so the Fish swim in troops with great force. The safety of Saints consisteth much in their society. 2. The misery of want of government. The greater Fish devour the lesser; The Pike feed upon
Roach; Thou makest men like Fishes of the Sea that have no government, Hab. 1. 14. So Men without Magistrates, like Canibals, feed on each other. 3. The folly of men that take not warning by others. Silly fish are caught by the Angle or Net, and carried to the fire, yet they that remain are still greedy of the bait; Satan takes some sinners with the snares and baits of his temptations, jerks them out of the water of life, and casteth them into the unquenchable fire, yet those that survive are as ready to hearken to his suggestions, as if there were no such thing, Eccles. 9. 12. 2 Tim. 2. 26. For man knoweth not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them. That they may recover themselves out of the snares of the Devil, who are taken captive at his will. 4. The subtile malice of Satan; When thou seest the Fisher baiting his hook, thou mayst think of the policy of the Devil, who sugars over his poisoned hooks with seeming profit and pleasures. Eves Apple was candied over with Divine knowledge; Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. 5. The multitude of Believers that are begot∣ten by the Gospel; When the Psalmist speaks of the Sea, he saith, Wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great Beasts, Psa. 104. 25. The Latine, Piscis, cometh of the Calde word, Push, which signifieth, to multiply and in∣creae, for nothing multiplieth more then Fish; So
the great increase of Christians under the Gospel, is compared to the number of the fish of the great Sea, Ezek. 47. 9. And there shall be a very grea multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither, for they shall be healed, &c. 6. The duty of men to abide in their places. Fishes do not change their element; Birds are som∣times aloft in the air, sometimes below on the earth, but Fish keep always i the water; Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he is called, 1 Cor. 7. 20. 7. The benefit of abounding in holiness; Fishes are then sweetest and acceptable to the pallat, when they begin to be with spawn; The fruitful Christian is most pleasing to God; Herein is my Father glo∣rified, if ye bring forth much fruit, Ioh. 15. 8. 8. The noisomness of sin; Fish cannot abide any ill savour; When the Pump of the ship is emptied, they flie from the stench and smell of that nasty wa∣ter; hating the garment spotted with the flesh, Iude 23. 9. The necessity of faith and holiness; No Fish were counted clean, but such as had Fins and Scales; The Fins guide the fish, the Scales are a defence and ornament to them; Faith is a Christians guide, and good Works his garment. As the Fish by the Fins are raised from the mud to the top of the water, so faith lifteth the soul from earth to heaven; It is the evidence of things not seen; Good works are as Scales, a shield to a Christian, and are not unfitly called the Breast plate of righteous∣ness. Thus, O my soul, though thou couldst not read a line in any Printed book, thou mightest read
many good lessons in this natural book. Even things without mouths can Preach and speak thy Makers praise and pleasure; Their voices are heard in every language, and their words go to the end of the world, Psa. 19. 4. Wheresoever O my soul, thou goest, thou mayst by meditation get some steps nearer thine eternal weal; Art thou walking? Consider, thou art but a so∣journer and traveller in this world; thy life is a continued moion, thy way is the Son of God, thy home is the Fathers House, thy motion is painful, thy way is perfect, and thy home will be full of plea∣sure. Why shouldst thou wander and come wide, or loyter and come short of Heaven! O be sure to walk in the right way, and be content to travail hard, that thy sae way may find its end in solace, and thy painful walk make thy home more welcome. Art thou walking in thine Orchyard, thou mayst from every tree, as a Text, gather many profitable doctrines and inferences; Take a turn or two among the Trees, and thou mayst find much wholsom fruit on them. 1. Some Trees are profitable for one purpose, some for another, some to quench thirst, some to comfort and refresh the inward parts, &c. so the Children of God are diversly serviceable, according to the different gifts bestowed on them by the Holy Ghost. 2. Every living fruit tree, is in some measure fruitul; though some bring forth more fruit, some less, yet all bring forth some; All living Christians are thriving and bearing fruit, though some are more eminent for growth and proficiency in grace, yet all bring forth fruits worthy of repentance.
The Hypocrite like a dead stake in an Hedge, conti∣nueth at a stay, is without good fruit, nay groweth more rotten every moneth then other; but the true Saint, like the living Tree, the longer he continueth rooted in Christ, the more abundant he is in the work of the Lord. 3. The best Trees have a winter, wherein they seem to be dead and barren, yet they have their life and sap at that time remaining in the root; Christians under desertions and temptations may be judged by themselves and others to be dead and undone, but even at such seasons their life is hid with Christ in God; Though they may fall fouly, they cannot fall finally. 4. Fruit-trees are tossed and shaken by the wind, but there is no danger of their overturning or death, whilst their root remains firm in the earth. Saints may be stirred and tossed by the high winds of Sa∣tans and the worlds temptations, but can never be overthrown, because they are rooted in Christ. Grace may be shaken in, but never out of their souls. 5. The winter which the Trees suffer in frosts and snow, and the continuance of their sapunder ground, is profitable for them, and helpful to their greater growth in Spring; So the various and severest pro∣vidences of God towards his people, are serviceable to their good; and their seeming declensions, in order to their greater growth; As Children under a fit of an Ague, they may at present be weakened and stand at a stay, but afterward they shoot up the more.
6. The fruits of trees are harsh and little worth till they are grafted; so the fruits of all by nature are wild and unpleasant to God, till they are grafted into Christ. 7. Those trees that stand most in the Sun, bring forth the sweetest and the largest fruit; So those believers that live nearest God by an holy com∣munion, do the more abound in the fruits of righ∣teousness, and their fruits are the more acceptable, springing from a principle of love to God. 8. The more the boughs are laden, the more they bow down to the earth; so the more a∣bundant any are in holiness, the more humble and lowly they will be. 9. The Husbandman chuseth what plants he plea∣seth to bring into his Orchyard, and his grafting of them, and care about them, makes the difference between them and others; So God chuseth whom he pleaseth, out of the wilderness and waste of the world, and his grafting them by regeneration, and conduct of them by his Spirit, distinguisheth them from all the rest of the earth. 10. The Leaves drop from the Trees in the be∣ginning of Autumn; Such is the friendship of this world, whilst the sap of wealth and honour lasteth with me, and whilst I enjoy a summer of prosperi∣ty, my friends swarm in abundance, but in the win∣ter of adversity they will leave me naked; O how mise∣rable is that person, who hath no friends but of this world! How happy is he that hath the sap of grace, which will remain with him in the coldest winter! Thus, O my soul, whilst thou art walking with re∣generate creatures, thou mayst better thy spiritual
senses, and walk with thy Creator. O how may thy thoughts be raised to the trees that are planted in the house of the Lord, and flourish in the Courts of thy God, that are planted by the Rivers of waters, and bring forth their fruit in due season! Lord, I con∣fess thy goodness in giving me so many ushers, yet a∣las my dull and blockish heart, to this day hath not learnt those lessons which thou hast set me by them; Vnless thou, who art the chief Master of the Assem∣blies, undertake the work, all will be in vain; Thy creatures are as burning glasses, they cannot make the Sun to shine, but when it doth vouchsafe its heavenly beams, they help to increase both light and heat. Its thine own promise that all Sions Children shall be taught of God; Let it please thee to un∣dertake the tuition and instruction of thine untoward Scholar; O do thou spiritualize my heart, and then I shall spiritualize all the works of thine hand, do thou enlighten me so powerfully by thy blessed Spirit, that I may turn every spark into a candle and every candle into a star, and every star into a Sun; and by the light of all be enabled to see more of thy beautiful face, and blessed perfecti∣ons. I Wish that I may not onely taste by occasional,Be frequent in deliberate meditations. but make a full meal, by set and serious meditation of that food which may God provideth for my soul; If a drop, a little be reviving and strengthening, surely a good draught will yeild me more comfort and profit. If ever it be true its here, the best is at the bottom. That rare object which upon a transient view gives me some delight upon a perma∣nent vision, will afford more pleasure. If my meat
abide in my body, it will afford me the better nou∣rishment. Fluxes in the mind, as in the outward man, are arguments and authors of weakness; The milk must be set some time before it will turn into Cream; The longer Physick remains within me, te more operative it will be. The flame of Davids extraordinary affection to Gods Law, was kindled at the hot fire of his constant meditation. O how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. His love was hot burning coals; He speaks not barely by way of affirmation, I love thy law; and by way interrogation, How love I thy Law? but also by way of Admiration; O how love I thy Law! But his abiding thoughts on it were the warm beams, which beating constantly upon him, put him into such a violent heat; It is my meditation all the day. As the Hen by sitting on her eggs some weeks, warmeth them and hatcheth young ones, so may I by applying savoury subjects home to my soul, and brooding some considerable time on them, bring forth new affections and new actions. Though my affections seem as dead as the Shunamites son, by stretching my thoughts thus on them, I shall warm and en∣liven them. Many blows drive a nail to the head, many thoughts settle a truth on the heart. O that I might not onely at some times exchange a few words with the subject of my meditation occasio∣nally, as I do with a friend passing by my door, but also at set times invite it, as Lot did the An∣gels, to stay with me all night, being confident it will pay me bountifully (as they him) for my charges in its entertainment. Yet I would not onely have my affections renewed, but also my actions re∣formed
by my meditations. If I meditate what is good to be done, and do not the good meditated on, I lose my labour, and take much pains to no purpose; Cogitation is the sowing of the seed; Action is the springing of it up; the former is hidden and under ground, the latter is visible, and many are the bet∣ter for it; If the seed should still lye buried in the earth, it is but lost and thrown away, tis the spring∣ing of it up that causeth the Harvest; Meditation is the womb of my actions; action is the Midwife of my meditations; An evil and imperfect conception, if it hath the favour of a birth, yet the mind is but delivered of a monster, and of that which had bet∣ter been stifled in the womb, then ever seen the light. A good and perfect conception, if it want strength for its birth, perisheth and comes to nothing; like Ephraim, It playeth the part of an unwise Son, and stayeth in the place of the breaking forth of Children; Its pity that such conceptions should prove abortive, or such beautiful children be still-born. Lord, thou hast appointed me to meditate se∣riously on thy statutes, and those excellent subjects contained in them. I confess my heart is unwilling to this needful and gainful work, and apt to be un∣faithful in the management of this sacred duty; If thou pleasest not to lay thy charge upon it, and to use thy power over it, it will either wholly omit it, or perform it to no purpose; Why should it not dwell now upon thee by meditation, with whom I hope to dwell for ever! What unspeakable joy might I re∣ceive in and from thy self, could I but get above this earth and flesh! O who will bring me into that strong City not made with hands! Who
will lead me into thy holy hill of Sion by medita∣tion! Wilt not thou O God? Grant me thy Spirit I beseech thee, that my spirit which lives upon thee may be united in thinking of thee, and may live wholly to thee. An example o set medita∣tion.O my soul, now thou art spending thy self in Wishes, set upon the work, and turn thy prayers into practice for an example and pattern to others,The subject of meditaton, The Patience of God: and for thy pro∣fit. There is one Attribute of thy God to which thou art infinitely indebted and beholden for every moments a∣bode on this side the unquenchable sire, even his Pa∣tience and long-suffering. Ah where hadst thou been at this hour, had not that Attribute stood thy friend! Let the kindness thou hast received from it encourage thee to a serious consideration of it. Old acquaintance and former courtesies may well plead and prevail al∣so with thee to afford it entertainment for some time in thy thoughts. The nature of it.What is this Patience of thy God to whih thou art so much engaged? It is his gracious will, wherby he beareth long, and forbeareth his sinful creatures. It is that Attribute whereby he beareth their re∣proach, and forbeareth revenge. It is sometimes called slowness to anger, Psal. 103. . He is not easily overcome by the provocations of men, but striveth to overcome them by his patience: A small matter doth not incense him to anger; he is not pre∣sently put into a fury, and his wrath is not easily height∣ned into revenge. Thou wast a trangressor from the womb; for mine name sake I will defer mine an∣ger, and refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off, Isa. 48. 8,9. It is sometimes called long-suffering, Exod. 34. 6. He expecteth and waiteth a long time
for the repentance of sinners. He doth not onely pity our misery, which is his mercy, and notwithstanding all our wickedness and unworthiness load us with be∣nefits, which is his grace, but also bear many days, many years with our infirmities, which is his long-suffering. Men are transgressors in the womb, before they are able to go they go astray; yet after a thousand and thousand affronts from the womb to the tomb he bears with them; Forty years long was I grieved with this generation. Infants, or green wood, are fit fuel for the eternal fire, yet he forbears rotten Okes, and old sinners. They owe an infinite debt to Iustice, and are liable every moment to the prison of Hell; but Patience stoppeth the arrest of vengeance; He en∣dureth with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction Rom. 9.12. This Patience of thy God is amplified by considering,Patience am∣plified to∣wards sinners, 1 In that God hates sin. 1. How odious sin is to him; the evil of sin never obtained a good look from God; Thou art of purer eyes then to behold iniquity. He seeth all sins with an eye of observation, but he seeth no sin with an eye of approbation. Tis not out of any love to sin that he is so long-suffering towards sinners, for sin is the object of his anger and dislike; He is angry with sin∣ners every day. Sin is the object of his wrath, which is anger boyled up to its greatest heat; The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all unrighttous∣ness and ungodliness of men. Nay its the object of his hatred, which is the highest degree of detestation; Ha∣tred is abhorrency heightned to an implacability. Bare anger might be appeased, wrath might be pacified, but hatred is irreconcileable; The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hatest all workers of iniquity.
Six things doth the Lord hate, yea seven are an abomination to him. There is an antipathy in his nature against the smallest sin, as sin is contrary to his being, law, and honour; though he be so perfect a God, that no sin can be hurtful to him, yet he is so pure a God, that every sin is hateful to him. Therefore the Scripture speaking of God, after the manner of men, represents it as offensive to every of his senses. It grates his ears, and thence he complains of the cry of Sodom; It provoketh his eyes, and hence it is said, Evil cannot stand in thy sight, neither canst thou behold the workers of iniquity; It oppresseth his feeling, wherefore he s said to be pressed with in, as a Cart is pres∣sed with sheaves; It displeaseth his smell, and so he calleth sinners rotten carsses, open sepul∣chres, that send forth noisom savours. He proclaimes to the world the offensiveness of sin to his sacred Majesty by the names he gives it in his royal Law, where∣in e forbids it; He calls it dung, mire, vomit, filth, superfluity of naughtiness, filthiness, a menstruous cloth, a plague, an issue, an ulcer; And yet though sin be thus infinitely loathsom and odious to him, he bears with men that are all over infected with it in the highest degree. The co∣dition of sin∣ners.2. The condition of sinners. His patience is much heightned by considering who they are that distaste and provoke him with their sins; they are his creatures, the work of his hands. They rebel against him who were made, and are every day maintained by him. They forget him that formed them, and fight against the fountain of their beings. They are his obliged crea∣tures; such on whom he hath laid millions of engage∣ments:
They cannot speak a word, or think a thought, or fetch their breath without him; they live every moment wholly upon his mercy. Hear O Heaven, give ear O earth! he hath nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against him. He is daily multiplying mercies on them, and yet they are daily multiplying iniquities against him; they are creatures full of enmity against him; they sin against him out of hatred of him: The carnal mind is enmity against God; If it could lay a plot to take away the life of God, it hath malice enough to put it in execution. Hence there appears little rea∣son why he should pity or spare them. If a man find his enemy, will he let him go? yet God is patient towards them. 3. The multitude and greatness of sins and sin∣ners. He cannot look down from heaven but every moment he beholds millions of transgressors proclaim∣ing war against him, walking contrary to him, and provoking him before his face. The whole world is a field wherein the inhabitants are continually with drums beating, and colours flying with brazen fore∣heads and stubborn hearts, letting flie whole vol∣leys of sins and impieties against heaven. Their whole work is to stretch out their hands against God, and strengthen themselves against the Al∣mighty. From the highest to the lowest they disown his authority, deny his dominion, deface his image, dishonour his name, despise his laws, scorn his love, and mok at his threatnings. All sin, and come short of the glory of God. The whole earth is a kind of hell in regard of blasphemy and pollutions, and all manner of provoations. His pure eyes behold the
Devil-worship amongst Heathen, the Imposter-wor∣ship amongst Turks, the Idol-worship amongst Pa∣pists, and the belly and flesh-worship amongst Prote∣stants. He seeth in the Rich, oppression, atheism, swearing, cursing, pride, persecution of others; in the Poor, envying, murmuring, carnal-mindedness, drunkenness and ignorance; in the Young, head strong passions, uncleaness, youthful lusts; in the Ancient, im∣patience, covetousness, prophaness. He understand∣eth the several hearts of men, so many sinks of sin; and the several lives of men, so many treasons and conspiracies against his Being and Law; and so many men in the world, so many monsters of wickedness: Though he enjoyn them his Precepts, they cast them behind their backs; though he would allure them by his Promises, they scorn them as Babies to fool children withal; though he would affright them with his commi∣nations and threatnings, they laugh at the shaking of those spears, and look on all his words no better then wind. Though he endeavours by his works to reclaim them from their wickedness, sometimes loading them with his benefits, that his goodness might lead them to repentance; sometimes scour∣ging them in measure, that they might not be condemned with the world, yet they slight his fa∣vour, are not afraid of his fury, and by their impenitency, and continuance in sin dare him to his very face. He sendeth his Ministers to tell them of their dan∣ger, he sets up Conscience within them to mind them of their duty, he hangs up others before them as spectacles of his wrath, that they might take warning, and escape destruction; and yet they laugh at Ministers
for their weeping over them, check Conscience for its bold∣ness to check them, and think themselves wiser then to be frighted with the scarecrows of Gods judgements on others. They sin against is Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness, his Faithfulness, his Patience, his Providence, his Ordinances, his Son, his Spirit, his Law, his Gospel, their own Promises and engage∣ments, the voyce and cry of his Vicegerent within them, and that day after day, and this throughout the whole earth, and yet notwithstanding all these high affronts and notorious indignities repeated and continued every moment, he beareth with them. The meekest man in the world, no not all the men in the world have patience enough for one sin∣ner; what patience then hath God that beareth so much with a world of sinners! It is the saying of one,Mr Bolto If but any tender-hearted man should sit one hour in the Throne of God Almighty, and look down upon the earth, as God doth continually, and see what abominations are done in that hour, he would undoubtedly the next set all the world on fire. O how patient is that God that beareth with it so many years! The meek∣est man upon earth could not endure the roward∣ness of one people, and they the best people in the world; the peevishness of the Jews drove him into that passion, for which he was excluded the earthly Canaan. How meek and patient then is God who beareth the evil manners of all the nations of the world, the greatest part of which make it their work to spit their venome, and malice, and bla∣sphemy in his face every day! The whole world is a volume in every leaf, and in every line of which,
Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, Long-suffering, Forbearance are written in broad letters. 4. How he knoweth all their sins. He doth not forbear sinners from ignorance of their sins; he seeth and knoweth all things. All the ways of man are be∣fore the eyes of the Lord, and he pondreth all his goings. His eyes behold, and his eye-lids try the children of men. Men bear with others, because they know not their secret treasons, and heart-rebellions; but God knoweth all the wickedness that is committed in the world, He telleth man his thoughts. All se∣cret sins are publick to him: All men are naked and open to him. He knoweth every thought, word and action of every man as exactly as if he had none but him to mind. His knowledge is infinite; he knoweth all the sins of all men clearly; they are as visible to his eye as if they were written with the brightest sun∣beam on the clearest chrystal. He knoweth all the sins of men distinctly, not in a confused heap or lump, but one by one; knoweth all the sins of all men every moment. All the sins that are, that ever were, or that ever shall be, are continually in his eye and view. 5. How he is able to revenge himself every mo∣ment. David did bear with Joab because the sons of Zerviah were too hard for him: He was a ten∣der plant that was scarce rooted, and feared to be o∣verturned by their fury; but God beareth with sinners though he be Almighty, and can do all things. He can as easily turn the sinner into hell, as tell him of hell; he can blow the sinner with his breath into the bottomless pit: By the blast of God they perish, by the breath of his nostrils they are consumed. The most secret sin is within the sight of his countenance,
and the strongest sinner within the reach of his ven∣geance. This is wonderful indeed; he is infinite in patience, who is infinite in power: The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, saith the Pro∣phet, Nahum. 1. He that can in a moment speak the whole Creation into nothing, beareth many years with his rebellious provoking Creatures. The Lord looked upon the Egyptians and troubled them. Its an easie matter to look; especially for him that made the eye. A glance of his eye will overthrow the proud∣est, stoutest sinner. Men are great in anger, who are little in power; their hearts are good, I should say bad enough, speedily to ruine such as offend them; but their hands are weak and straitned, that we may thank their want of power, not their patience for our preservation; But God who is all power, is all patience; he that can spurn the whole world into end∣less wo, more easily then all the men of the world can spurn a foot-ball into the water, forbeareth them year after year. 6. He doth not onely forbear, but also do men good. His goodness towards them is positive as well as privative; he upholds them in their beings, pro∣tects them in their goings, supports them by his power, supplieth them by his providence, as well as forbear them by his patience. His enemies are hungry, he feeds them; they are thirsty, he gives them drink. He gives them that corn, and wine, and oyl which they bestow on Baal; he bestows on them those mercies with which they fight against him; he blesseth them with life, health, strength, food, raiment, sleep, rea∣son, friends, peace, liberty, riches, honours, the Gospel, Sermons, Sabbaths, offers of pardon and
life, whilst they persist in their provocations against him. He is at infinite cost and charge night and day, in sending provision into the camp of his enemies. 7. He woeth us to be reconciled. He doth not onely command and enjoyn rebellious man to throw down his weapons of unrighteousness, but even pray∣eth and entreateth him with much importunity, to accept of peace and pardon; As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, be ye reconciled to God. He is earnest and in∣stant by his Ministers, by the motions of his spirit, by the calls and convictions of conscience, that he might perswade miserable men to be happy, 2 Cor. 5. 15, 20. 2 Chron. 36. 15, Isaiah 65. 2. and 42. 14. I have stretched out my hand all the day long to a rebellious house, that have walked in a way that is not good. 8. He doth all this, without any expectation of advantage to himself; He gains not by our holiness, neither is he a loser by our wickedness; The arrows of sin are always too short to reach him, and he is so high that he is far above our highest service, our blessings and praises; infinite perfection admits of no addition; Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous, or is it gain to him that thou makest thy ways perfect? He begs as hard as if it were for his own life, but it is wholly for ours; He loseth not the least, if we be lost; he saves no∣thing by our salvation; Its all one to the Sun whether men open their eyes and are refreshed with its light, or shut their eyes and behold nothing of its glorious splen∣dour.
9. He forbeareth us, who is infinitely our Su∣perior; It were much for a King to bear with a af∣fronts from a vile Beggar; but its infinitely more for the King of Kings to bear with indignities and trea¦sons, and malice, and hatred, from his vile creatures. O the patience of a God! man cannot suffer a disre∣spect from his fellow; but God doth from them that are infinitely his inferiours. The Apostles were good men, yet upon a little disrespect from some of the same make and mold with themselves, they presently call for fire from heaven; what patience and goodness is then in God, who beareth with such innumerable and notorious affronts, from his Slaves and Vassals, from them that in comparison of him are much lesse then no∣thing! 10. He warneth before he striketh; He threa∣tens that he might not punish, and thundereth with his voice, that he might not overthrow us with his hand; He shoots off his warning peices, that he might spare his murthering peices. Men that are set upon revenge, are silent. When Absolon re∣solved on the destruction of Ammon, he spake not a word to him, either good or bad; but God tells men fully what is intended against them by his justice, that it might be prevented by their fitness for mercy. That bitterest cup of threatnings, hath the sweet of love at the bottom. 11. He punisheth temporally, that he might spare eternally; When he is forced to strike, he seth the rod, that he might not use the ax;1 Cor: 11. 31. We are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the world; He forceth tears in this world, to pre∣vent
eternal weeping; how many a mans way doth he hedge up with thorns, that he might not find the path to eternal death. 12. He is thus patient towards men, who did not wait at all on Angels; The Angels were more no∣ble creatures, and able to have done him more and better service then man; yet when they sinned, he did not wait a moment for their repentance; but he stretcheth out his hand all the day long to man; He that would not wait upon disloyal Courtiers, waits upon rebellious Beggers. Consider the causes of it. The moving cause, is his own gracious nature; Men forbear punishing Malefectours, sometimes be∣cause they are related to them, sometimes from hope of advantage by them, sometimes because they are afraid of them; but God forbears none upon any such grounds. His goodness is the onely string that tieth his hand from striking; Yea, many years didst thou forbear them, for thou art a gracious and a merciful God, Neh. 9. 30, 31. The Final Cause is manifold. 1. That he might exalt his great name; Its light straw, that upon the least spark takes fire; The dis∣cretion of a man deferreth his anger, and its his glory to pass by infirmities; Mean and low spirits are most peevish and passionate; Sickly and weak persons, are observed to be the most impatient;Rom. 9. 22. God makes his power known, when he endureth with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; He intendeth the advancement of his praise, in the lengthening of his patience; For my names sake will I defer mine anger; for my
praise will I refrain for thee, that I out thee not off, Isa. 48. 2. That sinners might amend; He is patient, that men might not perish; The Lord is not slack, as some men count slackness, but is long suffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish,2 Pet. 3. 9. but that all should come to repentance; He defers their execution, that they might sue out their par∣dons. The Lord waiteth (not that he might be bles∣sed in himself, but) that he may be gracious to sinners.Isa. 30. 18. 3. That impenitent sinners might be left with∣out excuse. If sinners that are turned out of the womb into hell, will justifie God; surely those upon whom he waited twenty, or thirty, or forty, or fifty years for their conversion, will condemn them∣selves; if all mouths shall be stopped, then they that tasted so largely of forbearing mercy, may well be silent. O how little will they have to say for themselves upon whom grace waited so many years, knocking hard at the door of their hearts for accep∣tance, and they refused to open to it, or bid it come in.Gen. 6. 3. 1 Pet. 3.20. How justly will they suffer long in the other world, to whom God was so long-suffering to no pur∣pose in this world, Rom. 4. 2. How fully,Testimo∣nies. Exod. 32. O my soul, doth the Scripture men∣tion this patience of thy God! The Lord passed by, and proclaimed his name, the Lord, the Lord God, gracious, long suffering. Though sinners trie his patience by their heaven-daring provocations, yet the Lord is gratious, slow to anger, and of great kindness;Palm. 103. 8. Oftentimes they do their utmost to kindle the fire of his anger, but many a time turned he
away his anger, and did not stir up all his wrath. What monuments of his patience, hath he reared up in his word! It is also written in broad letters in his works; He bore with the Iews, after their unparalleld murder of his own Son, above forty years. The old world had larger experiences of his orbearance; My Spirit shall not always strive with man, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. The Egyptians, though cruel perse∣cutors of his own people, that were as dear to him as the apple of his eye, yet were suffered four hun∣dered years; He beareth with men, till he can no longer forbear; The woman with child is forced, though she hold out long, to fall in labour at last; I have long time holden my peace, I have been still, and refrained my self; now will I cry like a travailing woman, Isa. 42. 14. Applicat.O thou dear friend of mankind, that thou wert imprinted in my thoughts, engraven in my heart, and always before mine eyes! O my soul, Consider this long suffering of thy God, till thou tastest some rellish of its sweetness; This name of thy God, is as oyntment poured out, which yeildeth a re∣freshing fragrancy; Hath it been all thy days so near thee, and done so much for thee, and wilt thou not give it some warm entertainment within thee? Hast thou not infinite cause to cry out, O the depth of the patience and forbearance of God! As soon as thou wast conceived, thou wast corrupted; before thou wast born, sin w brought forth in thee; thy God might have turned thee out of thy mothers belly, into the belly of hell; divels might have been the Midwife to deliver thy mother
of such a monster, and their dungeon of darkness the first place in which thou didst breath; yet he who might have caused eternal death to have trod∣den upon the heels of thy natural birth, spared thee. Had he then suffered the roaring lions, his executioners, to have dragged thee to their own den, he had got himself glory, and prevented much dishonour, which thou hast since brought to his name. As thou didst grow up, sin grew up in thee, and patience grew up with thee. Numberless ha thine iniquities been, and his advantages for thy destruction, yet he hath forborn thee. What hath he got by all his long-suffering towards thee? He might have ruined thee, to his eternal honour; but his forbearance hath seemed to impair the revenues of heaven. Wicked men question his power, and good men quarrel with his providence, and all be∣cause of his patience; When some sinners are hanged on Gibbets, as spectacles of his justice, others are kept in the more awe; but if judgement be not speedily executed, the hearts of the Sons of men are set in them to do mischief. The thanks that are usually paid him for his patience, are indignities and affronts; The sleeping of vengeance, occasioneth the awakening of sin. Besides, their thoughts of him are the more prophane as well as their actions; If he be patient towards the sinner, he is judged a party in the sin; These things thou didst, and I kept silence, thou thoughtst that I was altogether such a one as thy self; Because he is silent, they judge him consent∣ing; O my soul, may not thy God be well called, the God of all patience, when he aboundeth so much in it, though he be so great a loser by it! Was not
the patience of thy Redeemer on earth wonderful, in bearing such mockings, smitings on the cheek, spittings in his face, scourgings on his back; But thy Redeemer in Heaven endureth more affronts every moment against his divine nature, then he did all his time of abode in this world, against his humane nature; O why art thou no more war∣med with it, and wondering at it; Even a Saul was so affected with the forbearance of David, that he should spare his enemy when he had him in his hands, and might as easily have cut his throat as the skirt of his garment, that he lift up his voice and wept. And art not thou affected with the patience of thy God, in whose hand is thy life, and breath, and all thy comforts, who can with a glance of his eye, turn thee into the fiery furnace, against whom thou art an open traytour, and profest rebel, that he should spare thee so many years, and instead of heaping up judgements on thee, lade thee with his benefits! Consider, 1. He is not patient towards all men, as he hath been towards thee. Some have found justice arrest∣ing them immediatly upon their contracting of new debts, and haling them presently to hell, upon the commission of their sin. There are those of the Ser∣pents brood, that have been crushed in the egge, and others that have stayed longer, have been ripe for ruine, before they had attained their full age. Though the Creditour hath forborn thee five hundred talents, yet he hath not forborn some others five hundred pence; wrath hath sometimes followed sin so close, that it hath lodged where sin supped: Gehezis leprosie and lie were contemporary; Abso∣lons
life and treason against his Father expired together; A sudden Thunder-bolt from Heaven, hath struck some into Hell without any fore-runner to give warning of it, yet thy God hath spared thee. 2. He that forbore thee who hast so often offended him, did not forbear Angels a moment, after they had once offended; Behold the severity and goodness of God! towards Angels, the highest and noblest house of the creatures severity; towards thee goodness; He that stated those excellent natures in an irrecoverable condition of wo and misery upon their first fault, hath born with, and forborn thee after millions of af∣fronts. 3. He that spares thee, did not spare his own Son; The Son of God did no sooner stand in the place of sinners, but it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, and to make his soul an offering for sin. Though he were free from sin, he was a man of sorrows, and thou who art little else then sin, hast not so much as tasted what such sorrows are; Thy God hath forborn thee, a monster of rebellion and wicked∣ness, when he would not in the least forbear him who was a miracle of obedience and dutifulness; Nay, he did not spare him, that he might spare thee, and would not forbear him, because he intended to forbear thee. Wonder, O my soul, at this transcendent grace and goodness; Is it possible for thee to consider how a sudden Arrow hath shot others dead on thy right and left hand! how Angels themselves, upon their first breach of the divine law, were without any pity or forbearance reserved in chains of darkness, to the judgement of the great day! Nay, how the Son of Gods boundless love, who never offended
him, for becoming onely a surety for others sins, was without the least forbarance arrested and forced to pay the utmost farthing! and that thou who art a lump of lust, a sink of sin, an old enemy and traytour against the crown and dignity of the King of Heaven, after thousands and millions of provoca∣tions against Law and Gospel, Light and Love, Pre∣cepts and Promises, art to this day spared! Canst thou I say, consider all this, and not be transported into an high and holy passion of love and admiration, at such unparalled patience! Thou mayst well say with the holy Apostle, In me Jesus Christ hath shewed forth all long-suffering and patience, for an ex∣ample to them that should hereafter believe on him unto life eternal. O my soul, what dost thou think of these things! was ever patience represented in such lively, lovely colours? Thou mayst now fully satisfie thy self in the reason of thine abode so many years on this side the unquenchable lake. Dost thou ask, Why was I not cut off from the womb, and hurried through the light of this world, to blackness of darkness for ever? I answer, because thy God is patient. Dost thou ask, Though I was not as a poisonous viper, crusht to death (as soon as brought forth) with the foot of divine wrath, for the venome which was in me; yet when I put it forth to the injury of others, and did spit it in the face of God himself, why was I spared? I answer, because God is patient. Thou sinnest often, every day, every hour, in every thought, in every word, in every deed, and he spares as of∣ten, because He is patient. Thou readet of a sea∣son when the patience of the Saints doth especially
triumph, Here is the faith and patience of the Saints;Rev. 13. This world is the stage, and this life is the time wherein the patience of thy God doth act its part, to the amazement of all judicious spectatours; Here is the faithfulness and patience of thy God. O that I could affect and admire it, embrace and entertain it according to its worth! O that my heart were filled with its warmth, my tongue with its praise, and my life with its end! O thou that art so much in favour with God, and so great a friend to men, that thou wert engraven upon the palms of my hands, and thy walls were ever before me! O that thy noble deeds, and what wonders thou hast wrought for the children of men, were written for the generations to come, that the people yet unborn might praise the Lord! When, O when shall this patience of my God make a suitable impression upon my spirit! I live upon it, I live by it, I had been a fire-brand of Hell at this moment, had it not been for it, yet how great a stranger am I to it! It goeth with me when I walk abroad, it abides with me when I stay at home, it followeth me up and down day and night; I am beholden to it for my life and all my mercies, for my present enjoyments, and future expectations; yet alas how little am I affected with it! I wonder at the patience of some choice Christians, that hold their tongues when others revile them, and their hands when others assault them, and do not wonder at the patience of my God, when their injuries are nothing to his, either for nature or number; and their pa∣tience to his far less then the smallest Drop to the Ocean. O my soul, how wilt thou be able to answer for this sensless stupidity! Must the Candles of crea∣tures
be gazed at with amazement, and thy God a∣lone be neglected! Is a beam of the Sun worthy of such admiration, and not its glorious body worthy of much more? Wilt thou not value a pearl of such infinite price, and disesteem all the meekness and forbearance of men, in comparison of the patience of thy God? O where is thy judgement, that thou valest so little such unsearchable riches, that thou dost not cry out, O the height, and depth, and length, and bredth of the forbearance of God? Where are thy affections, that they do not cling about it, cleave to it, close with it, delight in its presence, and desire its continuance? Where is thy heart, that it doth not taste its sweetness, smell its savour, love its gracious Author, and meditate on its precious na∣ture, and pleasant effects night and day? Where are my spiritual senses, that they are not conversant a∣bout so worthy an object? I cannot open mine eyes, but I may behold it in every thing that is visible: The food, and raiment, and life, and health, and strength, and liberty, that I and others enjoy, pre∣sent the patience of God unto me. Every friend I converse with, every drunkard and unclean person and atheist, yea, every man I meet, tells me, God is patient. The Oaths, and Curses, and Murthers; and Adulteries, and Blasphemies, and Prophaness of wicked men cry aloud in mine ears, that God is patient. The persecutions, and oppressions, and prayers, and cries, and tears of good men, pro∣claim to my conscience, that God is patient. The Sabbaths and Ordinances, and seasons of grace, and offers of pardon and life, which both good and bad enjoy, speak plainly and distinctly, The Lord is pa∣tient.
O that mine eyes could see it, mine ears hear it, my mouth taste it, my mind discern it, and my soul rellsh it in all these! O thou beautiful beam, darted from the Sun of Righteousness, that callest poor mortals to life, when they are at the brink of death, thou that art the wonder of glorious Angels, and glorified Saints, be thou unto me as a bundle of myrrhe, and a cluster of camphire always un∣to me; let me love thee much for my own sake, because thou hast done so much for me, but most for the Lords sake, because he is all in all unto me. Well O my soul, how wilt thou requite the kindness thou hast received from this Patience of thy God! When Ahashuerus an Heathen had read and conside∣red how Mordecai had saved his life, by discovering the two trayrours that sought to lay hands on the King, he cried out, What honour hath been done to Mor∣decai for this? and could take no rest till he had given him some signal honour. Thou hast read (for thy whole life is a Book written within, and without with it) how the Patience of thy God hath saved thy life, the life of thy soul, when sin and Satan conspired toge∣ther to take it away; now wilt thou not say within thy self, What honour hath been done to the pati∣ence of God for this? and be unsatisfied till thou hast done it some honour, for this good office it hath done thee. What love doth that friend deserve who saves thy life! What esteem doth that hand of pity merit, that keeps thee out of the bottomless pit! What thanks is that Messenger worthy of, that brings thee (a condemned sinner) certain news of a reprieve, and great hopes of a pardon! Surely the respect thou
owest to the patience of God (which doth as much for thee as all this) should be very great, especially considering thy disrespects formerly to the God of Patience have been very grievous. Lord, I acknowledge I have for∣merly much abused thy patience, uing it as an en∣couragement to prophaness, and turning thy grace into wantoness; but now through thy strength, I will no longer despise the riches of thy forbearance, but be led through thy goodness to repentance. I know thou intendest it as a City of refuge to the peni∣tent, not as a sanctuary to the presumptuous. O let me never make it a pillow for an hard heart, but a plaister for a wounded spirit. Let this servant of thine, and friend of mine obtain his errand, and ac∣complish the end for which thou hast sent him. Thou sparest me here that thou might spare me hereafter; thou waitest upon me that thou mightst be gracious unto me; and art long-suffering, because not willing that any should perish, but that all might come to repentance. O that therefore I might wait upon thee in all thy providences and ordinances for grace, that so thy long-suffering may be unto me salvation! Thou hast told me, Though the sinner live an hun∣dred years, and God prolong his days, yet it shall not go well with the wicked. His preservation is but a reservation to the sorer and greater destructi∣on. Though thou sufferest long, thou wilt not suffer always; and when thou strikest impenitent ones, the slowness of thy pace will be recompenced in the heaviness of thy hand. The longer the child of ven∣geance is in the womb of the threatning, the bigger it groweth, and the more pain it will put the sinner to, when it cometh to the birth of its execution.
O how dreadful will my doom be, when thou comest to reckon with me for all thy patience, if I do not at this day prevent it by repentance! If thy patience do not now make me bend, hereafter it will make me bleed; Its a sweet friend, but a bitter ene∣my; No fury like that which is extracted out of abused patience. Twere far better to be sent from the Mothers breasts to everlasting burnings, then to live many years at the charge of patience, and then to die impenitent; If I cause thee to suffer long now in vain, thou wilt cause me to suffer long in the other world, and the more dreadfully for thy long-suffering in this. Since thou art gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, O take me not away in thy long-suffering; but give me to mind in this day of thy patience, the things that concern mine everlasting peace, that I may to eternity give thee honour and praise for thy won∣drous and boundless patience, Amen.
CHAP. VI. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godli∣ness, on a Week-day from Morning to Night. FOurthly, Thy duty is to exercise thy self to Godliness, every Week-day. I have spoken in the first part,Chap: 21, & 22 how a Christian may make Religion his busi∣ness on a Lords-day; I shall there∣fore in this place discover how he may do it on a Week-day. Every day with a godly man is an holy Sabbath to the Lord; Godliness is not his holy days, or high days, but every days work; and his exercise every part of every day; I have enclined my heart to keep thy statutes (not by fits and starts, but) al∣ways unto the end, Psa. 119. 112. The Flower called Heliotropium or Turn-sol, turneth its face towards the Sun from morning to night, so doth the true Christian towards the Sun of righteous∣ness. The Command of God is, Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long, Prov. 23. 17. And the carriage of holy men is answerable here∣unto; The twelve Tribes served God instantly day and night, Act. 26. 7. As the Angels, though they are imployed up and down in the world for the service of the Saints, yet they always behold the face of their Father; so the Children of God, though they are occupied about civil and natural actions, are called hither and thither as their oc∣casions
are, yet they pass the whole time of their sojourning here in fear.1 Pet. 1. 17. That Watch is naught that goeth onely at first winding up, and standeth still all the day after; that mans religion is little worth that, like Epraims goodness, is as a morning cloud or dew, which vanisheth away ere noon. The Ri∣vers run ever towards the Sea, notwithstanding that hills, and rocks, and mountains interpose and force them to their winding Maeanders; nay their compass about is not without profit, for they water those grounds in their passage through which they seemed to wander. The person that hath the li∣ving water of grace in him is always tending towards the Ocean of his happiness, notwithstanding his seem∣ing diversions, by his worldly actions, and particu∣lar vocation; nay he is doing good, and serving his God and his soul, as well as his family and body in those interjections. The wheel of a chariot, though it be in motion all the day, and turning a∣bout on the ground, yet its but a small part of it that toucheth the earth at one time, the greatest part of it is always above it; so the true Christian, though he be all the day busie about earthly affairs, yet its but his body, his lesser part that is employed about them; his soul, his affections, which are his greatest part are always about them. SECT. I. I Shall first offer thee two quickening Motives, and then acquaint thee wherein thy daily exercise to Godliness consisteth.
Motive. Every day may be our last day.First, Consider, Any day may be thy last day, and therefore every day should be an holy day with thee; I mean, not an holy day for play or recreaton, but for the work of Religion. He that knoweth not how soon his Master will come and reckon with him, had need to be always employed about his Masters bu∣siness: Because there is no time of life in which thou art secure from death, therefore every day of thy life thou oughtest to be about thy duty; Prov. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. Every day is big-bellied, and hath more in the womb of it then any man knoweth; he that salutes the morning with a smiling aspect, may bid the world good night for ever before the evening. The candle of thy life may be blown out on a sudden before its half burnt out. The Poets fable that Death and Cupid lodg∣ing together at an Inn exchanged arrows, whereby it hath since come to pass, that old men ote, and young men die. Death cometh up to the young and strong; old and weak men go down to Death. Thou mayst be called forth to that war in which there is no discharge, and not have an hours warn∣ing to prepare thy self for a march. Sturdy trees are overturned by an unexpected wind, lusty men by violent feavers, or outward accidents; our ene∣mies are strong, our earthly houses weak, the coming of our Landlord is unknown, the lease of our lives is uncertain, we are every moment lia∣ble to be ejected, and shall we not be so employ∣ed that our Lord when he comes may find us well-doing? I remember I have in some Author read, that the invention of clocks was not primarily to
mind us of the Suns posting in the heavens, but of our Lives passing on earth. It was Calvins reason for his unweariedness in his studies, when his friends urged against it the injury it did his body, Would ye have my Lord when he cometh find me idle? It will be woful for that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find doing evil, or doing nothing. But and if that servant say in his heart, My Lord de∣layeth his coming, and shall begin to beat the men-servants and maidens, and to eat, and drink, and be drunken; The Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him asunder, and will appoint him his portion with unbelievers, Luk. 12. 45, 46. In which words we may observe, 1. The sin of the unfaithful servant. 2. The severity of his Lord. In the sin, we may take notice; 1. Of the nature of; He bats his fellow-ser∣vants, and eats and drinks, and is drunken; He gives himself up to all manner of wicked∣ness; He is unrighteous to his fellow-servants, he beats them; and unfaithful to his Master, he a∣buseth his goods, he eats and drinks and is drunken. Sin doth not lie skulking in the ecret trenches of his heart, but appeareth boldly in the open field of his life. Tis a sign an enemy hath great power when he sheweth himself openly. 2. The occasion of it; His Plea for it; His Lord delayeth his coming; Because he hath not a speedy reward, he layeth aside all good works; because of Gods gracious forbearance, he argueth a gene∣ral
acquittance for all his evil works. He makes bold to riot, because he is not called to a speedy reckoning. We tremble not at the noise of those Cannons which we fancy to be a great way off. That which is lookt upon at a distance seems small, and so is despised, though the same beheld near appears great, and terrifieth us. In the severity of the Lord, we may read, 1. How sore his judgement is; He shall cut him asunder, and give him his portion among unbelei∣vers; These two expressions speak the dreadfulness of his doom, though no words can speak fully how woful it is; He shall cut him asunder; An allusion to some tortures then in use amongst the Heathen, to shew the exquisite pain which his body shall suf∣fer; And give him his portion among unbeleivers. Because the hottest Hell is reserved for such, (The wrath of God abideth on them, Joh. 3. ult.) to note the extream punishment which his soul shall un∣dergo. 2. How sudden it is; unexpected evils are most dreadful; The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him. Sudden frights overwhelm the spirits; Those miseries which seen at some distance, have been entertained with pa∣tience, surprising men on a sudden, have triken them into despair; Death comes sometimes like a Thief up into our windows; coming in at the door is ordinary, but coming in at the window is unlookt for, Ier. 19. 21. As the snare secretly and unexpectedly seiseth the silly Bird, so doth a day of death the simple Children of men, Luk. 21. 35. Our Saviour speaks of his coming in the second or
third watch of the night (which the Jews called, Intempestum & Gallietnium) not in the first and fourth) because saith Theophilact, they are the dead time of the night, when men are in their soundest sleep, to shew us how suddenly and unexpectedly he shall surprise most men, Luk. 12. 38. Reader, This present days work may be the last act of thy life, it behoveth thee therefore to do it well. When thou art in thy Closet, thou mayst think with thy self, I may possibly never pray more, never read the word of God more; how reverently, uprightly, graciously, should I therefore pray and read? When thou art eating or drinking, or re∣freshing nature, thou mayst consider, for ought I know, this may be the last time that I may use these creatures of God, how fearful should I be of abusing them? how should I eat my bread as be∣fore the Lord. When thou art in thy Shop, or a∣bout thy calling, thou mayst ponder this; Possibly my last sand is running, and I must this day bid adieu for ever to Wares and Shops, and Flocks and Fields, and all civil commerce; O how heavenly should I be about these earthly affairs! How spiri∣tual about these temporal things! Who would not do his last work well! Ah how holy should he be at all times, who hath cause every moment to expect the coming of an holy and jealous God, to call him to an account! Secondly,Motive. God obser∣veth us all the day long. Consider, Gods eye is all the day long upon thee, and therefore thou hadst need to be all the day long in his ae. It was a frequent speech of Seneca, Vbicun{que} eo, quodcun{que} ago,
Demetrium circumfero; Wheresoever I go, what∣soever I do, I carry Demetrius along with me; Thou mayst upon better grounds say; Whatsoever I think, or speak, or act, wheresoever I go, whither to my Closet, or Shop, or Field, or Neighbours Houses, I have an holy jealous God along with me. Thou mayst write over every room which thou en∣terest into, Thou God seest me, and call it by the like name which Hagar did the Well, Beerla-ha∣roi; The Well of him that liveth and seeth me: Thou hast in all the passages of the day, that God with thee, who takes notice of, and will reckon with thee for every passage; Thou mayst call every place thou comest into, Bethel, or Pe∣nuel, I have seen God in this house, or, God is in this place. He is not like Iupiter of Creet, whom some pictured without ears, and publish never to be at leasure to take notice of small matters. He is all eye, all ear; He observeth the greatest, the smallest things and actions; As the Optick vertue in the eye, he seeth all, and is seen of none; Cicero tells us, the King of Lydaea had a ring, which when he turned the head of it to the palm of his hand, he was invisible to others, and yet others were visible to him. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good, though none hath seen God at any time, nor can see him. As a well-drawn picture, which way soever you turn your self, it seems to have its eye still upon you, and to follow you; God doth that really, which the Picture doth seemingly; he beholds every person, and every action, with so direct a face, as if he beheld none or nothing else.
Reader, It concerns thee to be every day pious, who art all the day long in so holy a Gods pre∣sence; I have kept thy precepts, saith David, for all my ways are before thee, Psa. 119. 68. The Scholar will ply his Book when his Master is pre∣sent, though he play and prate in his absence. The Thief will not steal when the Iudge looketh on; He that was accused to force the Queen be∣fore the Kings face, had a Gallows for his end. If the eye of good or great men will prevail with us to be handsom and comely in our behaviour and carriage; how holy should they always be, that are ever in the presence of the infinite God, who is cloathed with Majesty, as with a garment, and who is so holy, that the Heavens are unclean in his sight! If a King sitting upon his throne, sattereth evil with his eye, how much more should the eye of a God! Prov. 15. The Sun locally in Heaven, is virtually on Earth; its light, heat, influence over-spreadeth the face of Sea and Land; He that shuts his eyes, and will not see the light of it, doth feel its heat and influence; Its presence scattereth Clouds, and Mists, and Fogs; Though Gods glorious and most joyful presence be in Heaven, his real, essential and gratious presence is on earth; they who put out the eyes of their reason and conscience, and will not see him, do yet feel him in their beings and bles∣ings, for in him they live and move and have their beings; Shall not his presence disperse those clouds of sin, which would obscure his glory, and hinder the light of his countenance from shining on us?
SECT. II. AS to the exercising thy self to Godliness on a week-day; though what I have write in for∣mer Chapters, in this and the two former Parts, hath much prevented me, yet I shall commend to the Reader, six particulars. First, Begin the day with God; Never expect a good day, unless you begin with a good duty; He hath the best good-morrow, who meets Ged first in the morning. Though some sunshiny mornings are overcast before night, yet the Heavens are usu∣ally all day clear to him that sets out early in the way of Gods commandements. The mind retains a tincture all day, of its first serious exercise in the morning. When the right Watch or Clock is wound up well in the morning, it will be regu∣larly going and moving all day after. He that loseth his heart in the morning in a throng of world∣ly affairs, seldom finds it to purpose in any part of the day; It was the honor of Rusticu, that though Letters were brought him from Caesar, he refused to open them till the Philosopher had done his lecture; Surely the worship of the blessed God is of more worth in it self, and of more concern∣ment to us, then any moral Philosophical Doctrines to him, or any affairs whatsoever, and therefore ought to be first minded and performed. As soon as thou awakest, lift up thine heart to Heaven; Great and Noble persons are usually first served. Though others that are our inferiours
wait out leisure, our Superiours have the prece∣dency of our time; Let the first Messenger thou sendest forth, be sent to the Lord of thy life, to present thy humble service and thanks to him for his providence over thee and the rest, and re∣freshment he hath afforded thee the last night. Thou mayst say with the Psalmit, I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for the Lord sustained me; For except the Lord keepeth the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. He giveth his beloved sleep, Psa. 3. 5. and 127. 1, 2. Be mindful also in some short ejaculation, to beg his guidance, protection, and blessing all the ensuing day. For 'tis he that can make an hedge about thee, thine house and all that thou hast; If he bless the work of thine hands, thy substance will increase in the Land, Iob 1. 10. This small taste of ejaculatory prayer, will quicken thine appetite after a full meal of et and solemn devotion; If thou canst after this keep thy mind intent, whilst thou art dressing thy self on some divine subject, thou wilt be much the more fit for thy secret duties, and in a fair way to walk with thy God all the day. The next thing I would advise thee to, or rather Crist enjoyneth; Enter into thy Closet, and when thou hast shut thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly: Here is, 1. A Precept to secret prayer, Pray to thy Father in se∣cret; The Priest was every morning to renew the Fire on the Altar, and to offer Sacrifice; And they offered burnt-offerings unto the Lord, even burnt-offerings mor∣ning and Evening; And they offered the daily burnt-offerings
offerings by number, according to the custome, as the duty of every day required, Ezra. 3. 3, 4. So also in Davids time, Asaph and his Brethren mi∣nistred before the Ark continually, as every days work required, 1 Chron. 16. 33. Solomon took after his Father, 2 Chron. 8. 14. And what is the substance of those shadows, but that Christians who are a spiritual Priest-hood, should every day have their solemn Morning and Evening addresses to God, and offer up holy sacrifices, acceptable to God in Iesus Christ. Davids purpose was to be early at prayer. O God, my voice shalt thou hear in the morning, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. And his practice was answerable; I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, Psa. 5. 3. and 119. 147. He was up before the day, and risen and at work before the Sun; Nay, he tells God, In the morning shall my prayer prevent thee; As if he would be at his prayer before God were stirring and going abroad; But surely we cannot rise so early but God is awake before us, for he that keepeth Israel, never slumbe∣reth nor sleepeth; His eyes are ever waking, who holdeth sometimes, our eyes waking; But David meaneth ra∣ther, that his prayers should prevent Gods servants, his severest or most solacing providences, not God him∣self; He would send a Messenger with Petitions or Thanksgivings to God, before God should send any Messenger with good or bad tidings to him; he would be too early either for crosses or comforts. 2. The Promise to secret Prayer; And thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly; God heard Paul in the Dungeon, as well as Peter on the House top; The Sun of Righteousness looks as
well into the narrow Closet Casement, as into the large Church Windows; Secret prayers are audible to him that made the ear; As he bottleth up our secret tears, so he registreth our secret prayers; Though the Ark was close on every side, that every man might not look into it, yet it had a Window open to Heaven. As the Flowers open themselves in the morning, to take in the sweet influences of the Sun, so should the Christian open his heart in the morning, to receive a blessing from the Father of lights. Mary went early in the morning, to the Sepulchre of Jesus, and had the honour and favour to have the first sight of him, after his resurrection; Ma∣ny a Saint hath had a blessed vision of the glori∣fied Saviour in a morning prayer.An nescis, O homo, quod pri∣mitias cordis & vocis deo debeas? occurre ergo ad sulis ortum; sol ori∣ens inveniat te jam para∣tum. Amb. in Psal. 119: Serm: 19: Knowest thou not, O man, saith Ambrose, that thou owest the first fruits of thine heart and voice to God? therefore meet the Lord at the Sun rise, that the Sun rising may find thee ready. Its reported of Cardinal Wolsey, that though he was Lord Chancellour, and had great and weighty employments, yet he would not go abroad any morning, before he had heard two Masses; I wish the Popish Mattin did not shame the Protestants for their sluggishness, and their frequent omissions. Tis much that some should be so diligent at their blind devotion, which comes to nothing, and others that have experience, how profitable their spiritual trade is, so backward to it, and careless about it. Gods mercies prevent us early, and therefore our prayers should prevent him. His going forth is pre∣pared as the morning, he satisfieth us early with his mercies, that we may rejoyce and be glad all our
days, Hosea 6. 3. Psa. 90. 14. If his mercies are renewed on us every morning, our acknowledge∣ments may well be renewed unto him. Every favour makes us debtors, and all the pay he ex∣pects is thanks; If any man should every morning send us (who have little of our own to live upon.) very considerable presents, we should esteem our selves very uncivil and unworthy, if we should not as often return him our service and thanks, and sense of his kindness. How great and how many are the mercies with which our God loadeth us every morning, and are we not sordidly un∣grateful if we neglect the acknowledgement of them! Our ordinary mercies are of extraordinary merit, and deserve hearty thanks. The damned (could we speak with them) would tell us, that life, a naked abode on this side Hell, were an infi∣nite mercy. The sik, and such as are troubled with continual Aches, or tortured with the Stone, or Gout, or Collick, would tell us that health is a great mercy. The Blind, and Lame, and Deaf, would tell us that Limbs and Senses are a great mercy; The Hungry, and Naked, and Houseless, and Friendless, would tell us that Food and Rai∣ment, and Habitations, and Friends, are great mercies; Poor Prisoners, and such as are vexed with cruel Wars, and forced to flie before their enemies, will tell us that liberty and peace are great mercies. The Saints in Heaven, could we speak with them, would tell us, the Patience of God, the Gospel of our Salvation, the tenders of Grace, are inestimable mercies, and do not all these, which every morning are (notwithstanding our notorious
abuse, and frequent forfeitures) renewed upon us, deserve our solemn and sincere thanks every morning? The Jews, some tell us, are bound to say over an hundred Benedictions every day, and among the rest these two, when they go out in the morning; Blessed be he that created the greater light, and when they come in at evening, Blessed be he that caused darkness; David was frequent at this duty, I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall be continually in my mouth. Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judge∣ments, Psa. 34. 1. and 119. 164. It is a Motto, say some, often repeated in Mercers Chappel, Think, and Thank. Our many wants and necessities, command us to be every morning at Heavens Gate for supply; We are needy indigent creatures, and must get our living wholly by begging; all the day long, we want forbearing, preserving, supporting mercy. It must be Divine power, that must enable us to follow our callings, to stir or move about our business, that must defend and protect us in our out-goings and incomings, and prosper and succeed our undertakings; God alone can shield us from spiritual and corporal enemies, that can supply us with inward and outward good things, and surely such blessings are worth asking. They who will have mercies that are not of the growth of their own Country, Earth, must send thither (to Hea∣ven) where they are to be had. Prayer, like the Patriarchs, and Solomons good House-wife, fetch∣eth our food from far; As the Merchants Ships, it supplieth us with commodities of all sorts, from
forraign Countries. No mercies hang on so low a bough, as to be pulled to us, and gathered by our own armes, therefore it behoveth us to beg, Give us this day our daily bread; Besides our dan∣gers and difficulties every day are many, and call us to be early and earnest at this duty. Our cal∣lings, every company, all earthly affairs are snares, and temptations to us, unless they are sanctified by prayer. Its not safe to drink of those streams wherein so many poisonous creatures dip their ve∣nemous heads, unless this Vnicorn hath healed them. They who walk abroad without prayer, may fear they walk abroad without Gods Protection; Oratio matutina clavis diei; Morning prayer is the key of the day, which openeth the treasury of divine bounty, and locketh the soul up in safe∣ty. A Prayerless person goeth all day unarmed, and may expect many wounds from that hellish crew, that lye always in ambush to destroy him; The neglect of this pass, gives Satan a great ad∣vantage to take the City; When Saul had left off calling at Heavens gate, the next time you hear of him is, knocking at (a Witches, at) the Divels door. Prayer is one of the great ordinances that batters down the strong holds of the Devil; hence he sets his wits at work, to divert men from it. It is the Souls armour, and Satans terrour; he that knoweth how to use this holy spell aright, need not fear but he shall fright away the Devil himself. The Lord Jesus, when he marcht out against the powers of darkness, and was to fight with them hand to hand, armed himself before∣hand
with prayer, (Luk. 3. 21, 22.) not onely for his own protection, but also for a pattern to us. Every day we walk in the midst of enemies, which are both mighty and crafty, and will watch all advantages to undo us; and should we go amongst them without prayer, we are sure to become their prey. Its too late to wish for weapons, when we are engaged in a Battel; Caesar cashierd that Soul∣dier, who had his armour to furbish and make ready, when he was called to fight. The moral of the Fable is good; The Boar was seen, whet∣ting his Teeth, when no enemy was near to offend him, and being asked the reason, why he stood sharpening his weapons when none was by to hurt him; he answered, It will be too late to whet them when I should use them; therefore I whet them before danger, that I may have them ready in danger. Another duty that concernes thee in secret, is to read some portion of the Word of God. The Work-man must not go abroad without his Tools. The Scripture is the Carpenters Rule, by which he must square his building; the Tradesmans Scales, in which he must weigh his commodities; The Travellers Staff, which helpeth him in his jour∣ney: There is no acting safely, unless we act scripturally; Bind it continually upon thy heart, and tie it about thy neck; When thou goest it shall lead thee, when thou sleepest it shall keep thee, when thou wakest it shall talk with thee; For the commande∣ment is a lamp, and the law is light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life, Prov. 6. 21, 22, 23. The Lawyer hath his Littleton or Cook, which
he consulteth; The Physitian hath his Galen or Hippocrates, with which he adviseth; The Scholar hah his Aristotle; The Souldier his Caesar; And the Christian his Bible, that Book of Books, to which all those Books are but as a course list, to a fine cloth, and scarce worthy to be wast paper for the Binder to put before this to shelter it; This will teach the Lawyer to plead more effectually then Cicero, when undertaking the cause of Quint Ligarius, one of Caesars enemies, he did by the power of his Oratory, make Caesar his Soveraign to tremble, and often to change colour; and when he described the Battel of Pharsalia, caused him to let his books fall out of his hand, as if he had been without spirits and life, and forced him a∣gainst his will, to set Ligarius at liberty; this will teach him so to plead, as to prevail with, and overcome God himself. This will teach the Physitian to work greater cures then ever AEscula∣pius wrought, to produce more strange and rare effects then the most powerful natural causes. The Weapon-salve, and most extraordinary cures that ever have been wrought, are nothing to the healing a vitiated nature by the spirit, and a wounded conscience by the blood of Christ, which have been frequently done by the Word of God. It hath opened the eyes of the blind, abated the dropsie of pride, softned the stone in the heart, stopped a bloody issue of corruption, healed the falling-sickness or back-sliding, and raised the dead to life, He sendeth his Word and healeth them, Psa. 107. 20. The waters issuing out of the Sanctuary, are healing waters; Ezek. 47. 9.
This will teach the Scholar, to know more then the greatest Naturalists, or then the Delphick Oracle could enable him to, though it told him his duty, even to know himself; It is a Glass, clean and clear, wherein he may plainly see the spots, and dirt, and deformity of his heart and life; It will teach him to know the only true God, and Iesus Christ whom he hath set, whom to know is life eternal; This will teach the Souldier how to war a good warfare, how to fight the Lords Bat∣tails against the Prince of Darkness, and all his adherents, and over all, to be more then a Con∣querour; There is no Guide, no Counsellor, no Shield, no Treasure (among all the Books that ever were written) comparable to the Scripture! It is reported, that a certain Iew should have poisoned Luther, but was happily prevented by his Picture,Melh. Adam. in it. Luth. which was sent to Luther with this warning, from a faithful friend, That he should take heed of such a man when he saw him; by which Picture he knew the Murtherer, and escaped his hands; the Word of God discovereth the face of those lusts in their proper colours, which lie ready in our callings in all companies, in our goings out, and comings in, to defile us, and which Satan would employ to destroy us; By them is thy servant forewarned, saith David, Psa. 19. 11. By reading and applying it, we may know their visage, and prevent their venome; by the words of thy mouth, I have kept my self from the paths of the destroyer. Cyprian would let no day pass without reading of Tertullian, nor Alexander without read∣ing somewhat in Homer; Shall the Christian let a
morning pass without an inspection into the Word of Christ! As God commanded Moses to come up into the Mount early in the morning, with the two Tables in his hand; So Reader, he commandeth thee to give him a meeting every morning, with the two Testaments in thy hand. After the refreshment of nature (about which I have given thee directions else-where, and there∣fore shall omit it here) it will be requisite that thou shouldst call thy family together,Christian m Calling. 1. Pa Chap. 23. and worship the blessed God with them; Our Relations, namely, Children and Servants have mercies bestowed on them, wants to be supplied, dangers to be pre∣vented, natures to be sanctified, souls to be sa∣ved, as well as our selves, and therefore must not be neglected. Some tend and feed the souls in their families on the Lords day, and starve them all the week after, but herein they are guilty of dishonesty and unfaithfulness; They rob God of the service which is due to him from all in their house joyntly; They wrong the souls in their fa∣milies, by not allowing them the liberty, at least by not calling and causing them to hear the voice, and seek the face of God with others; And they injure themselves most by being false to their trust. Should they feed the bodies of their Children and Servants on the Lords-days, and make no provi∣sion for them on the week-days, their consciences would flie in their faces and tell them, they were inhumane and unnatural; and yet they can omit all regard of their immortal souls, which are far more worthy of care and tendance, without re∣morse and sorrow. I must tell such persons, that
if Atheism had not the predominancy in their hearts, it would not bear such sway in their houses; Such men are like Swine with their Pigs (as if all their noses were nailed to the trough in which they feed) they look not up to the God of their food, and of all their comforts. Such Children and Servants will in the other world find cause to curse the time that ever they knew such Fathers and Masters. Others there are (some of whom I hope to be godly, though not in this particular) that pray in their families every night, but omit morning duties. As if God were the God of the night, and not of the day, as the Syrians blasphemously affirmed that he was God of the Hills, but not of the Vallies. These as Austin speaks of those that woship the Moon, are Atheists by day, as they that worship the Sun, are Atheists by night; The day is thine, the night also is thine, thou preparest the light and the Sun, Psa. 74. 16. Surely, though evening Sacri∣fice ought to be minded, yet there is as much, if not more reason for morning duties. A man at night in his Chamber, is like a Souldier in his Gar∣rison, subject onely to the unavoidable and more immediate hand of God, whereas in the day when he stragleth abroad from his quarters, to fetch in his supplies, he is then exposed to many unex∣pected casualties, and unthought of accidents. Family perils and dangers, every day call for fa∣mily prayers and duties every morning; Family favours and kindnesses, every night call for family thanks and acknowledgements every day. When many are joyned in a Bond, they go often toge∣ther
to see the money paid; All in a Family joyn in borrowing domestical mercies, therefore they must all joyn in paying hearty praises. Reader, if thou art Governour of a Family; Consider, that thou canst not faithfully serve God as a Commander, unless thou takest care that all the persons under thy power, do their duties in their places. The Lord of Hosts will never thank that Officer who is careful to sight for him in his own person, but suffereth his Company, through his carelesness, to fall away to the enemy. Do not pretend Servants are abroad, or scattered here and there about their imployments, and are not at leasure; but answer; 1. Art thou and thy servants contented to go all day without Gods protection and provision? Without question thou art most unworthy of them, that dost not think them worth asking. Surely, God may as well say he hath no leasure, he hath other employment then to defend, and feed, and pre∣serve thee, as thou, that thou hast no leasure to serve him. 2. Dost not thou, and do not thine, squander away more time idly and vainly, then need to be taken up in morning duties? 3. Do not Children and Servants come together every morning to feed their bodies, and why not to feed their souls? 4. If any man should make use of thy Goods, or Servants, of thy Time, without leave, thou wouldst take it very ill at their hands? Thou art Gods, and all that thou hast; may not God therefore take it unkindly that thou shouldst dispose of
thy self and thine affairs without his leave? 5. Is it not plain Atheism, and horrid disrespect to the blessed God, to put thy self or them under thy roof upon worldly imployments, without asking his providence and blessing? Is it not too plain a speaking, that there is no such need of him, that thou canst do well enough without him? 6. Thou wilt not say that thou and thine have no leasure in the morning to plough or sow, or buy and sell, o follow earthly affairs; and why not leasure as well to serve and worship the Lord? His worship is of greater worth, of greater weight; It is of more necessity, it concerns thine endless bliss in the other world; It will bring in the greatest profit; In the doing of his commands there is great reward. Dost thou not believe that he is a better pay-master then the world? 7. Art thou able to do any thing in any part of the day without his assistance? Dost thou not de∣pend every moment upon him for all thy motions and actions, and is he not worth acknowledg∣ing? 8. Wilt thou say Thou hast no time, no leasure to be saved, to escape Hell, and to attain Heaven? I must tell thee, if thou hast no time to serve God, he will have no time to save thee. 9. Wilt thou stand to this Plea at the day of Christ? When God shall ask thee; Why thou and thy Family went abroad prayerless, and drowned your selves in worldly affairs, and were taken and torn by snares and temptations, and disowned him and his laws, as if they were not worth re∣garding; Dost thou think it will be sufficient, then
to answer; Lord, I was a Knight, or a Squire, and though I had many servants, yet they had their se∣veral offices and employments, and could not spare time to pay that homage they owed to thy Majesty, to implore thy mercy, and to intreat an interest in the merits of thy son; We had other things to look after, then thy beautiful Image, and the blessed vision of thy face for ever. Or, suppose thou art of an in∣feriour rank, canst thou imagine it will be a com∣fortable Plea to say, Lord, early in the morning my Children and Servants were called to tend my Sop, or Flocks, or Cattel, or set upon some needful busi∣ness or other, that they could have no leasure to mind their inestimable souls, or to approach thy glorious Majesty in holy ordinances! O blush, Reader, if thou art guilty of morning omissions, and either cast away thy frivolous pretences, and set upon the duty, or else stand to thy foolish pleas, and try whether they will bear weight at the great and terrible day of the Lord Jesus; but remember in the mean time, that thou hast had one warning more. I have written somewhat largely about family duties, in the first Part, and therefore had inten∣ded onely to have saluted them in this place, and so to have left them; but observing how some fa∣milies, even where governous are judged to fear God, are without morning (though not without evening) sacrifices, I dwelt the longer upon it, to quicken them to this duty, that they might be able to say with Abijah; The Lord is our God, and we burn incense, and offer sacrifice every morning and evening unto him, 2 Chron. 13. 10, 11.
SECT. III. SEcondly, Spend the greatest part of the day in thy particular calling; He that mindeth not his Closet before his Shop, is an Atheist; and he that mindeth not his Shop after his Closet, is an Hypocrite; The world is Gods great Family, and he will allow none in it to be idle. Though he distinguisheth some from the common Mass, and maketh them vessels of honour, as Superiours and Officers in his house, yet to every one he committeth some Ta∣lent or other,Valer l. 6. c. 1. and commandeth them to trade till he come. The ancient Massilians would admit no man into their City, who had not a good trade, knowing what pests and plagues such are to the people among whom they dwell. He that is void of, or negligent in his calling, is at best as a snail ( according to the Septuag. Domiporta accor∣ding to the Latines) keeping house, and unprofita∣ble; But usually such a one is mischeivous, and may not unfitly be compared to Kites that flie la∣zing up and down, scarce moving their wings, making a querulous complaining noise, filching their food out of the shambles or warrens, or out of Childrens hands by force. Idleness is usher to murmuring and theving. He quickly learns to do ill, by doing that which is next to ill, nothing. The Air when still, corrupts and putrifieth. Wheat if not stirred, groweth musty and unwhol∣som for mans body. The earth if not tilled, breeds thorns; Milstones if there be no grist, wast and wear out themselves. The soul needeth ex∣ercise
as well as the body, to preserve it in health. Action keeps the soul sweet and clean. Tis no wonder that persons are almost choacked with the flegm of corruption, that deny themselves the benefit and advantage of Motion, that they do not thrive who refuse to trade. Its a worthy speech of holy Master Boultons,Drections for walking with God, p. 49. He is a cursed drone, a child of idleness, the very Tennis ball of temptation, most unworthy the blessings and benefits of humane so∣ciety, who doth not one way or other cooperate and contribute to the common good, with his best endea∣vours, in some honest particular calling. Iob saith, Man is born to labour; but how many Gentlemen sing the rich fools requiem to their souls; Soul, take thine ease, thou hast goods laid up for many years, till at last they come to his end, and that place where there is no ease day nor night for ever and ever; but as a bone out of joynt, so is a good man out of his calling. The Sons of the Husbandman in the Fable, be∣ing told by their Father on his Death-bed, that he had left much gold buried in his Vineyard, fell presently a digging and delving with diligence, whereby they obtained, though not the gold they sought for, yet a rich Harvest, by stirring the mold about the roots of the Trees. In all labour there is profit, Eccles. 5. Though the Christian doth not ever by diligence in his calling, reap that gold of outward profit (which is promised conditionally so far as God seeth fit for him) in this world, yet he reaps peace and comfort in the discharge of his duty, and prevents temptations, by being imployed about other things.
Its in vain for any to pretend that they are so busie in praying, and reading, and hearing, and holy duties, that they cannot attend their particular callings; for the same God that calls them to spiritual traffique, commands them their temporal trades, and hath allotted them sufficient time for both. He doth the Devil too great a courtesie, who makes the Commands of God to quarrel and clash one against another; If Satan can prevail with men to neglect their callings whole days together, and leave their families declining, and almost starving through their idleness, for private fasting and pray∣ing, he never fears the good such a man shall get by all that devotion, which is (as Paul speaks of himself) born out of due time; He knoweth God doth not usually send in blessings at such back∣doors, and that he is provoked as truly by lea∣ving our Shops, when our callings require our company, as by passing by our Closets, when he calls us in to speak with us there. The best food may prove unwholsom and burthensom to the stomach, if a fit season for taking it, be not ob∣served; Our best duties, like some Children, are utterly lost by being brought forth before their time. The Roman General said, Non amo nimi∣um diligentem, I love not them that are too dili∣gent; meaning them that leave their own callings, and are busie-bodies in others. God loves not such over-diligent, nor any negligent ones. As he commandeth our dependance on him for a bles∣sing, so he commandeth our diligence in our se∣veral places. But having also treated largely of the Christi∣ans
carriage in his particular calling, in the first part, how he should undertake it in obedience to the divine command, follow it with an heavenly heart, depend upon God for a blessing, I shall say no more here. Thirdly, Be watchful all the day long; If thou wouldst walk safely, walk as one that hath his eyes in his head; Ponder the paths of thy feet; Every man walketh every day in the midst of traps and gins, and rubs and blocks; now the secure person is as a blind man, stumbling at every stone. When a man goeth upon cords, straitned and fastned on high, it concerns him to look well to his footing, lest he totter and fall, and break his neck; There is no Christian but walks as dangerously as he that danceth on the ropes, it behoves him therefore to walk Watchfully. The Children of God are called to be Souldiers, to fight a good sight of faith un∣der Christ, the Captain of their salvation; but Souldiers must be upon their guard, especially such as are encompassed on all sides, at all times, with enemies of all sorts. Should they who are the mark at which the world and Hell are continually shooting their fiery darts to destroy them, give themselves to sleep? Watch ye, stand fast in the faith; Quit your selves like men, 1 Cor. 16. 3. The Divel watcheth to devour us, and he is po∣litique to insnare us, and shall we slumber? Ma∣chiavel saith, A Prince ought to know the tempers of men, that he may fit them with baits, and wind them to his own ends; Satan hath not waited on men, and observed them so long, but he know∣eth the length of their feet, and can fit them to
their will and wo; as Agrippina the wife of Clau∣dius, gave her Husband poison in that dish which he loved best; so he can give them that meat which they love, with poison for its sance; He is a Ser∣pent for his subtlety, and can bait his hooks answe∣rable to the love and liking of poor silly ish; We read of his wiles, of his devices; As the Camelion that lieth on the ground to catch Flies and Gras∣hoppers, changeth himself into the colour of the grass, whereby they are deceived and caught; So Satan can transform himself into any shape, even into an Angel of light, for a shift, that he may deceive and destroy. Though he appeared in the form of a Serpent to Eve, he appeared in the form of a Saint to the second Adam; If he should be quiet, yet our own flesh is free and for∣ward to pollute and pervert us. Were he at any time absent (though I fear he never is, but watcheth us night and day more narrowly then ever Keeper did his Prisoner, for whose escape he was to die) our own wicked hearts are his De∣puty to supply his place, and dispatch his business effectually for him. Occasion, and our own cor∣rupt natures seldom meet, but like two inordinate lovers, they sin and defile themselves together. The flesh is instead of a thousand traytours within the Garrison, conspiring to deliver it up into the enemies hands, who is resolved to give no quar∣ter; and is it not time for the Souldiers to be upon the guard, and to keep strict watch? Though both Satan and the flesh should grant a truce or cessation for a few hours (which they never did nor ever will) yet the world like an Harlot is al∣ways
watching, with her fair breasts of pleasure and profit, to allure us to folly. Like the Whore the wise man mentions, She is subtle of heart, and lieth in wait at every corner; She catcheth the careless sinner and kisseth him, and with an impudent face, saith unto him, I have deckt my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved work, with fine linen of Egypt;Prov. 5. 10, to the end. I have perfumed my bed with Myrrhe, Aloes, and Cynamon; Come let us take our fill of love un∣til the morning, let us solace our selves with loves; With much fair speech she causeth him to yeild, with the flattering of her lips she enticeth him. He go∣eth after her straight way, as an Ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the correction of the stocks; Till a dart strike through his liver, as a Bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life. O what reason hast thou, Reader, to watch, who hast so many and such crafty and mighty adver∣saries, every moment to encounter with! Watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation. Believe it, if thou sleepest, the enemy will sow tares. Watch thy self in thy Closet, good duties must not be done between sleeping and waking. Pray∣ing and Reading are not works that can be done nodding; Therefore Christ saith, Watch and Pray; and the Apostle, Continue in prayer, and watch in the same, Col. 4. 2. The Nightingale, that delights her self in hr night songs, knowing if she should fall asleep, she should be a prey to night-birds, she keeps a thorn at her breast to keep her waking. Watch in thy family among thy Relations; Thy Wife and Children may be Satans instruments to wound thee; Abraham caused Sarah to dissem∣ble;
Eve brought Adam to undo himself and all his posterity; The nearer the person is to us, that dischargeth a piece at us, the likelier to hit, and the more dangerous the Bullet. Watch in thy shop, Satan lieth in ambush in every corner, sin in e∣very counter, to defile and destroy thee. When thou art in company, when thou art alone, at bed, at boord, when thou goest out, when thou comest in, keep thy heart with all diligence, for under e∣very pile of grass there is a Snail, under every fig-leaf (as Cleopatra found to her cost) there is a poisonous Asp, in every place there is a snare. Watch against the Occasions of Sin; They who have a brand or a candle flaming in their hands, had need to beware of thatch and straw. If the flesh and opportunity, like Sechem and Dinah, meet together, they will not part (unless there be the greater watchfulness) before they are pol∣luted. Its ill to parle with the wicked one. The French have a good Proverb, When the Spaniards talk of peace, then double bolt the door. The greatest wounds that were ever made in conscience, had at first but weak beginnings; Davids horrid Mur∣ther and Adultery had their rise onely from a glance of his eye; keep thee far from an evil matter, Exod. 23. 7. The Crocodile, say Naturalists, is no bigger at first then a Goose egge, and yet groweth to thirty Cubits; An occasion of sin, embraced but a little, like a Thief in the Candle, insensibly makes sad work and waste. Watch especially against thy own sin; This is, as the Philstines said of Sampson, The great de∣stroyer of the Country; The great destroyer of thy
Conscience. Wise Governours of a Garrison besieged, will take care of every part of the wall, and repair the least decays thereof; but if one gate be more likely to be entred then another, or if one part of the wall be weaker then another, they will be sure to set the strongest watch in that weakest place. Our Soul is our Garrison, committed to our trust by the Lord of Hosts, to be kept for his use and service; Satan is our enemy that besiegeth it, to surprise it; Sin is the Wall or Gate, by which alone he hopes to enter and destroy us. Our beloved sins, the sins of our Callings, or Conditions, or Constitutions, (which we hug and cocker most, which none must touch or reprove, these) are the weakest part of the Wall or Gate, and so require a stronger Watch and Guard; Take heed and keep thy soul diligently, Deut. 4. 9. SECT. IV. FOurthly, Be careful to redeem time; Look up∣on time as one of the most precious talents which thy God hath intrusted thee with, and which he will reckon with thee for, and therefore not to be vainly spent, or needlesly squandred a∣way. They are worthy to be punished, that spend their gold and silver lavishly, and waste their estates prodigally; but of how much sorer punishment are they worthy of, that are prodigal and lavish of time, that is far more precious then gold and silver! Time is of inestimable value, in regard of its present use, and because when once lost it is irrecoverable. Friends lost may be reconciled,
an estate lost may be regained, but time lost can never be recalled. He is the best workman, that can cut his stuff to the least waste; and he is the best Christian who can contrive his affairs, and cut out his time to the least loss. Remember that time is given thee, not to squander away in need∣less visits, or idle talking, or long meals, or un∣necessary sleeping, but to get thy person justifi∣ed, thy nature sanctified, to secure thine interest in Christ, and the Covenant of grace and heaven; and surely things of such infinite weight, deserve all thy time, if thy life were lengthened to the age of Methuselah. Sleep robs us of much time; Friends, saith one, are the greatest thieves of time; Vain discourse, foolish sports and pastimes, idle company, sitting long at table, must all like lux∣uriant branches, be pared off, because they suck the sap and juice away from the good boughs; Walk not as fools, but as wise men, Redeeming the time, saith the Apostle, Col. 4. 5. Eph. 5. 16. Its an allusion to wise Merchants, or Tradesmen, who dealing for most precious commodities, make the most of their Markets, and buy their wares while a fit time of buying them serves; of  &  rursus emo. Metaphora sumpta a mer∣catoribus. Beza. and ha∣ving possibly had great losses formerly, or spent their time idly, do by their diligence seek to re∣deem, and (as it were) to buy back again the time that is past. The Lacedemonians were penu∣rious of their time, and spent it all about neces∣sary business, not suffering any Citizen either to play or be idle; When their Ephori heard that some used to walk in the afternoons for their re∣creation, they forbad it, as savouring too much
of pleasure, and commanded them to recreate their bodies by some manly exercise, which might breed them to be serviceable to the Common∣wealth. Labitur occulte fallit{que} volubi∣lis aetas, Ovid. Metam. l. 10.Reader, the time of thy life goeth post, thou art hastening to thy last stage; whether thou art eating or drinking, walking or sitting, buying or selling, waking or sleeping, death is always mak∣ing speed towards thee; the time of thy depar∣ture hence is concluded and resolved, beyond which it is impossible for thee, whether thy work be done or undone, to stay one day, no not one hour, nay, not one moment, and shouldst thou waste thy time upon toys and trifles, as if thou hadst nothing to do, no God to make peace with, no Redeemer to lay hold on, no soul to take care of! He that hath a great way to go, or much work to do, and that upon pain of death, and but a little time for it, hath little reason to laze or loy∣ter. When we have but a little paper, and much to write, we write small and thick. O how much work hath every Christian to do in this world, which if he neglect he is lost for ever, how many head-strong lusts to subdue, how many duties to∣wards God and men to perform, how many graces to exercise, providences and ordinances to improve, and can all this be done in a little time! The Candle of our lives burns low; if like foolish Chil∣dren we play it out, we may thank our selves if we go to bed in the dark, without the light of com∣fort to our graves. It is one of the most irrational, yet ordinary action of the children of men, especially persons
of estates and quality, to waste time in Dicing, or Carding, or hawking, or Hunting, or Cham∣bering, or Revelling, and yet to murmur that they want time, and tell us; Its pitty mans life is so short that it is not spun out to a longer thread. I must tell such, that they complain of God, when they should of themselves; He is not penurious, but they are prodigal in mispending it. I must ask them, Why would they have more time? Is it to be more riotous, and prophane, and vicious? The shortest moment is too much for the service of sin; He that sinneth but once, sinneth too much by once; If it be that they might honour God, and get grace; and lay hold on eternal life; why do they not set about it, and make it their business? Every one would accuse him of folly, that were condemned one Assize to be hanged, but was reprieved till the next, and had that time allotted to sue out his pardon, if he should in the interim give himself wholly to gaming and drinking, and take no care about his pardon, yet complain to all that came to him, that his time was short, and he had not e∣nough to get his pardon in, or prevent his Exe∣cution. Our days are sufficient for our duties, had we grace to number them, and to apply our hearts to wisdom; but there is no overplus of time to be abused to fleshly or worldly lusts, or to be la∣vished away in idle and unnecessary things. A good man that liveth all the day long in the fear of his God, and husbands his time to the best ad∣vantage of his soul, finds it so sufficient for his work, that he is always ready to be called to an
account, and when ever he dieth, he dieth full of days, and hath had his fill of living; but men waste their time in vanity and folly, sacrifice their youth to frowardness, and unprofitableness, their manhood to pleasure and passion, their old age (if they live so long) to earthly-mindedness and Atheism, nay, they will set down and contrive sports, or send for, or go into idle company, to pass away the time, and then complain that time is little, and life is short, and they have not enough to provide for death and eternity in. The Mora∣list observeth truly;Sen. de brevit. vit. cap. 1. Non exiguum temporis habemus, sed multum perdimus; It is not a little time that we have, but it is much which we waste. God i bountiful in allotting us time, but we are lavih of it, and then grumble that it is no more. The largest possessions in a Country, though worth thousands per annum, are nothing in the hands of a Prodigal Heir, who useth to throw away thousands at a cast, and must pay the Bills which Pride, and luxury, and gluttony, send him in daily; but a twentieth part of those revenues were a large estate in the hands of a frugal person. The vast incomes of Egypt, and all the Eastern Provin∣ces, were but a small sum, when they were ga∣thered to maintain the pomp and ambition of Antony; and the riot and fleshly lusts of Cleopatra; when some prudent provident Emperours have li∣ved freely and nobly a whole year, with less then they consumed in a day. Foolish men that are riotous and prodigal of their time, as if it were given them onely to sport, and play, and roar, and revel in, pine and whine at last that they are lost,
because their time is so short; but wise and graci∣ous persons that deny themselves, and crucifie the flesh, that can redeem time from toys and idle talk, and foolish sports, and unnecessary diversions, to pray, and hear, and read, and examine their souls, and bemoan their sins, and provide for heaven, these grow rich in good works, and find the days of their pilgrimage sufficient for them. SECT. V. FIfthly, Call thy self to an accauut at evening. Take a review of thy carriage the whole day, how thou didst behave thy self. Begin with the morning, con∣sider whether thou didst awake with God, what was the frame of thy Spirit in; closet and family duties in company, and solitude; Reflect upon thy actions, thy passions, thy speech, thy silence, thy behaviour at table, in thy shop, whether thy affections were heavenly above the world, when thy actions were earthly about the world, whether thou wast righteous in thy particular calling, and didst set upon it out of conscience to Gods precept, and with an eye to his glory; whether thou didst not lose an opportunity of advantaging thy brothers soul, and doing thy God service; whether thou hast not failed in thy thoughts, or words, or deeds, in thy demeanour towards thy relations, or neighbours, or strangers; whether thou didst in all walk according to that rule which thy God hath prescribed thee. This is the way to make the day more pious, and the night more pleasant. Conscience will be the more faithful all day, when
it knoweth before-hand that it shall be called to an account at night; and the more conscientious we are in the day, the more chearful we shall be at night. Seneca reports of Sextius the Roman Philosopher,Sen: de Irae. l. 3. c. 36. that every night before he took his rest, he would examine his soul;Desinet ira & crit moderati∣or quae siets i quotidie ad Iu∣dicem esse veni∣endum,—. Qualis ille somnus post re∣cogtionem sui sequitur? quam trinquillus? &c. Idem ibid. Quod hodie ma∣lum sanasti? Cui vitio obstitisti? In qua parte melior es? What evil hast thou this day healed? what vice hast thou resisted? in what part art thou bettered? and then he addeth, how sweet is the sleep which en∣sueth upon such a review! As the Shop-keeper hath his day-book, wherein he writes down what he buyeth, what he selleth, which he looks over in the evening; so must the Christian that would thrive in his general calling, at night reflect upon his well-doing, his ill-doings, his gains, his losses, left his books cast him up (as some find by experience) because he will not take the pains to cast them up. The Merchant findeth it a ready way to make his Factours and Cash-keepers faithful, to reckon with them frequently. When great persons neglect to account with their Stewards, they tempt them to be dishonest. Our consciences are corrupted, as well as other faculties,Idem ibid. and will be false, if not timely examined. Seneca acquaints us with his own practice, which may shame many Christians; Vtor hac potestate, & quotidie apud me causam dico. Cum sublatum e conspectu lumen est, & con∣ticuit xor moris jam ei conscia, totum diem me∣cum scutor, facta ac dicta mea remetior. Nihil mihi ipse abscondo, nihil transeo; quare enim quicquam ex erroribus meis timeam, cum possim dicere:
Vide ne istud amplius facias; nunc tibi ignosco. In illa disputatione pugnacius locutus es; —Il∣lum liberius admonuisti quam debebas; ita{que} non e∣mendasti sed offendisti. I use, saith he, this au∣thority, and daily plead my cause with my self; When the candle is taken away, and my Wife (acquainted with my custom) is silent; I search into the whole day, and review all that I have said or done; I hide nothing from my own scru∣tiny, I pass by nothing; For why should I fear any thing, by reason of my errors; when I can say; See that thou do it no more, and for this time I will pardon thee, &c. Pythagoras taught his Scholars to talk thus with themselves, ; What evil have I committed, what good have I omitted? Reader, let not them who knew not God, rise up in judge∣ment against thee. Put every night some brief Qeries to thy conscience, upon these few heads; How did I behave my self in Religious Duties, in Natural Actions, in my Particular Calling, in Re∣creations (if any were used) in Company, and in Solitude; Compare the carriage of thy heart and life, herein to the word and law of God, bring all to the touchstone. Hereby, 1. Sin will be prevented; The Child will be the more dutiful and diligent all day, who expecteth to be examined (by them that have power to punish or reward) for every part of it at night. The Christian will keep his heart as clean as the neat maid her house, who is ever in fear of a severe mistress.
2. Hereby, if sin be committed, it will speedily be repented of; The wound will be healed before it be festered; A disease is much more easily cured at the beginning, then when it is habituated in the body; Had David called his conscience to a serious account, at the close of that day where∣in he defiled Bathsheba, he had prevented both much sin, and much sorrow. 3. Our hearts will hereby be the better prepared for evening duties. The reflection upon the sins committed in the day past, will make the streams of our sorrow to run the more freely; Wounds when fresh, bleed most. Our Petitions also will be the more fervent for divine strength, when we are newly affected with the sad consequence of our own weakness; The more we feel our pain, the more urgent are our cries for a Physitian; A re∣view of the mercies newly received, will like∣wise enlarge our hearts the more in thankfulness. Divine favours, like flowers, affect us most when fresh and green. Old courtesies, as old cloaths, are too often cast by, and thought little worth. 4. Hereby our souls will be always ready for our great accounts, whenever God shall summon us to give it up. The keeping a diary of Receipts and disbursements, facilitates the Stewards annual reck∣oning with his Lord. They who make all even be∣tween God and their souls every day, need not fear calling to account any day. None will give up their accounts with such comfort at the great day, as they that cast up their accounts with conscience every day; Often reckoning will make long friends. He
that will not hear the warnings of conscience, must look to feel the worm of conscience. Sixthly, Close the day with God, in Praying, and Reading his word, both in thy Closet and Family. Our bed is resembled to our graves, sleep to death; its of worse consequence to go to bed before we have made our prayers, then to our Graves before we have made our Wills; God is the first and the last, and ought to be the beginning and ending of every day; Thou causest the out-goings of the mor∣ning and evening to rejoyce. Some understand the inhabitants of East and West, others the vi∣cissitudes of day and night, for which men rejoyce in God. David was mindful of the Word at night, I have remembred thy law O Lord in the night; and also of prayer, Evening and morning will I pray and cry aloud, Psal. 119. 55. Psal. 55. 17. The sins of the day call for our mournful confessi∣on. The mercies of the day call for our sincere thanksgiving. The perills of the night call for fer∣vent petitions, so that none can want matter for a nights prayer. Our wandrings and aberrations in the day may wellengage us to confession and contrition every night. They who do not paddle in every gut∣ter, or thrust their hands into every ditch, though they washed clean in the morning, find them durty at night. We cannot meddle with money, but we foul our fingers; nor about earthly affairs, but we defile our soul. Infirmity bewrayeth it self in all the actions of fallen man. We are steady in nothing but wantonness and wickedness. The feet of men limp at best, and are too slow to follow the Word of
God close at the heels. If we intend well in any action (like arrows that are shot in mighty winds) we wander from the bow that sent it, and miss the mark. Now whilst the Ship leaketh, the Pump must go. Whilst we sin daily, we must sorrow daily. He is unworthy of the least favour from his Creditor, who thinks much to acknowledge his debt. Austin had Davids penitential Psalms written by his Bed∣side, which at night he used to weep and read, to read and weep. Our daily infirmities and imperfections must not be passed over. Some have died of very slight wounds in their fingers or toes. Small sands may sink a great ship. Small drops of rain make the earth miy and durty. Vain thoughts, spending time idly, omission of doing good when a price hath been in our hands, are counted by us small sin, but such small drops will pollute our consciences to purpose, if not bewailed timely. The mercies and good providences of the day, deserve our acknowledgement at night. If God command his loving kindness in the day time; his loving kindness may well command our thanks∣giving in the night season. As David had his so∣liloquies in the day, so he had his songs in the night, Psa. 77. 6. All our success in our callings, and undertakings is the fruit of Gods providence; We may work, but God onely can prosper. Humane gains are from divine grace. The Tables that are spread for us like Peters sheet, wherein were all sorts of four footed Beasts, and Fowls, come down from Heaven. How many perils are we protected in? how many dangers are we delivered from?
How many evils are prevented, good things be∣stowed every day, and shall not our Sun and Shield be adorned! We may well every night speak in the words of the Psalmist, Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with his benefits, even the God of our salvation; Selah, Psa. 78. 19. The perils of the night, call for our prayers at night; If there were no fear of visible Thieves and Robbers, yet there is of invisible Devils; We cannot bolt our doors so fast, but they will find the way in. We never lye down to sleep, but those roaring Lyons are waking and waiting by our bed side to devour us. If God were not our guard, we could not sleep a moment in quiet. He that goeth to bed, before he hath gone to God, by humble and hearty supplication, lieth down before his bed is made, and may well expect to find it uneasie all night; nay, like a foolish Go∣vernour of a Fort beleagured with cruel and crafty enemies, he takes his rest, before he hath set his watch, and is liable to be called up at midnight, or to be kild in his bed every moment. Cyril speaks of a certain people, that chose to worship the Sun, because he was a day God, for believing that he was quenched every night in the Sea, or that he had no influence on them that lighted up candles, they were confident they might be Atheists all night. I fear, many who worship not the Sun, are too much of the minds of that people, in their night Atheism. Though they know not, but when they close their eyes, they may sleep their last, and never open them more, yet they will rather die intestate, then take the pains, by
fervent prayers to bequeath their souls into the hands of their dearest Redeemer. Reader, take heed of going prayerless to bed, lest Satan take thee napping. How unworthy art thou of Gods protection, if thou dost not esteem it worthy a petition? I have read of a Prince, that would walk abroad every evening in a disguise, and stand harkening and listening under his Subjects win∣dows, to understand what they said; Its true e∣nough, that the great God looketh down from heaven every evening; he is under thy window, and in thy chamber, to observe whether thou hast the manners or grace to bid him good night before thou goest to rest; Believe it, if thou for∣gettest him, thou wilt find sooner or later, that he will remember thee to thy cost. A Good Wish about the Christians carriage on a Weekday from Morning to Night; Wherein the former heads are applied. The Intro∣duction.THe Rock of Ages, and everlasting Father, to whom a thousand years are but as one day, ha∣ving out of his rich mercy afforded me a short time in this world, not to play or toy with temporal things, but to prepare my soul for my blessed eternity; I Wish that I may never waste that pecious season (which is given me for the working out my own salvation) about needless affairs, but mind the one thing necessary, and pass the whole time of my sojourning here in the fear of my God; Every day that I live, and do not improve for my eternal good, is lost; If I live to eat, and drink, and sleep, the beast liveth in
me, not the man; I do but act a brutish part in an humane shape. If I live to buy and sell, and in∣crease my heaps, the Heathen liveth in me, not the Christian; What do I more then an Infidel? Time is a silver stream, gliding into the Ocean; Eternity depends upon this poor pittance of time; As I use time well or ill, so eternity will use me; The ever∣lasting harvest will be sutable to the seed that is sown in time, whether Wheat or Tares. Its irrati∣onal to expect a crop of Barley, if I sow Thistles; or a crop of bliss for ever, if I now sow to the flesh; My life is given me, to dress my soul in for the com∣ing of my Bride-groom at death. Whatsoever I do, if it hath not relation and subserviency to my last end, and chiefest good, it is lost time, and waste strength; and though I may be so busie as to sweat about it, yet Christ may sayto me, as to him that stood in the Market-place; Why standest thou all the day idle? Lord, my time is not mine own, but thine; The day is thine, the night also is thine. It is thine by creation, and why not thine by a religious observa∣tion? It was thy favour that I was not turned out of the womb, into the unquenchable fire; I could Wish, that as soon as ever the Sun of my life arose, I had gone forth to my spiritual labour till the even∣ing of my death, that my childhood and youth had been employed in remembring my Creator; but since its impossible to recal those days and years which I have spent in folly and vanity; O teach me so to number my (remaining) days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom, and live (every day of my life) in the fear of the Lord all the day long.
Motives. Every day may be thy last day.I Wish that the uncertainty of my life, and cer∣tainty of my death, may quicken me to be religious every hour of every day. Every day may be my last, therefore every day should be my best. There is no part of my time, in which I am priviledged from an arrest, by the King of terrors. Am I young? yet I am old enough to die. Death observeth no order; Some drop out of the armes of their earthly Mothers, into the embraces of their Mother Earth, and do no sooner speak, but they are sent to the place of si∣lence. My Sun may set in the morning of my age, and death may tread upon the heels of life; Some have experienced those words of the wise man; There is a time to be born (so little to live that it is not mentioned) and a time to die. Am I strong? This Sampson of death can fetch meat out of the eater, and out of the strong, sweetness. Deaths har∣binger, sickness, which prepareth its way before it, will make me melt like Wax before the Sun, though my strength were the strength of stones, and my flesh as brass. Fresh Flowers are cropt in their pride and greatest beauty; The Autumn of death comes ordi∣narily before the winter of old age. Besides, I am liable every day to many sudden accidents, and un∣expected surprisals. How many die in their Shops or Fields, or in the Church or Streets, as well as others in their beds! All men do not go out of the world at the fore door of sickness, many at the back-door of a violent death. When my blood frisketh merrily in my veins, and light sparkleth gloriously in mine eyes, when my countenance is most fresh and lovely, and my senses are most quick and lively, even then, a my best estate I am altogether vanity. I may
draw a long line of life, because nature may afford radical moysture enough for it, when death lieth in ambush like a theif in the candle, and wasteth all on a sudden; Should I as the rich fool, reckon falsly to a million, when I cannot count truly to one, and promise my self many days, when my soul may be re∣quired of me this night, how gross is my delusion! Ah, how sad, how fatal is that error that can never be mended! The time past is gone, and never, never, to be cal∣led back. All my prayers and tears, all the revenues of the world, cannot regain the last moment; The time to come is Gods, not mine own. It is not in my hands, therefore I have no reason to reckon upon it; I am both foolish and dishonest, if I dispose of ano∣thers goods. Reversions are uncertain, and he may well be poor that hath no estate but what he hath in hope, or rather presumption. Lord, thou reckonest my life, not by ages, no, not by years, but by days; thou hast told me that my days are few, my time is little, though my work be great; I acknowledge my proneness to put far from me my dying day, whereby I gratifie my grand enemy, in drawing nigh to the seat of iniquity. O help thy servant to live every day, as if it were his last day; Grant that I may live well and much, though my life be little and short, be∣cause there is no day of my life in which I can promise my self security from the arrest of Death; let me ex∣pect it every day, and every hour of every day, that when ever my Lord shall come, I may be found well-doing. I Wish that since the eye of my God is ever on me,Motive. Gods eye is on thee all the day log. my eye may be ever on him, and I may be so pious as
to carry my self all the day long as in his presence. What ever I do my God observeth, whatever I speak my God heareth, whatever I think he knoweth; I may call every place I come into Mizpeh, The Lord watcheth and observeth; Ah how holy should he be, who hath always to do with so pure and jealous a Majesty! The Iews were to dig and cover the natural excrements of their bodies, because the Lord their God walked in the midst of their camp. Sin is the spiritual excrement of my soul, and infinitely more odious and loathsom to my God; O how watch∣ful should I be against it, who walk ever in his company! The Sun is said by some to be all eye, because it hath a thousand beams in every place, it filleth the largest windows, and peepeth in at the smallest key-hole, it shineth on the Princes Pallace, and the Poor mans Cottage; the Heavens above, the Earth beneath, and Air between, it looks on every person with so direct a countenance, as if it beheld none beside. The natural Sun is darkness to the Sun of righteousness; the whole world to him is a sea of glass, he seeth it tho∣rough and thorough; The Watch-maker knoweth all the wheels and pins and motions in the Watch; He that made me, cannot be ignorant of me, nor of any thing in me, or done by me. Whether I be in my Shop, or Closet, Abroad, or at Home, in Company, or A∣lone, the Hand of my God is with me, and the Eye of my God upon me; O that I could set him ever be∣fore me, and set my self ever before him; that I could always see him, who always seeth me, and like a Sun-dyal so receive this Sun in the morning, as to go along with him all the day; Lord, thou searchest and knowest me, thou knowest my down-sitting, and
uprising, thou understandest my thoughs afar off; Thou compassest my paths and lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways; For there is not a word in my tongue, but O Lord thou knowest it altogether; Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, and whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up to Heaven, tho art there; If I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there; If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me; If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me; Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee, but the night shineth as the day; The darkness and the light, are both alike to thee; O teach me to walk before thee, and to be up∣right. I Wish that the end of all my days,Wherein the exercising our selves to god∣liness on a week-day consisteth. may be the be∣ginning of every day, that my first thoughts in the morning may be of him, by whom alone I think. The Firstling under the Law, was to be the Lords, and why not the first fruits of every day under the Gos∣pel?In begin∣ning te day with God. Surely, the worthiness of the person, deserves precedency of dispatch. It is no mean incivility to let an honourable man wait our leasure; what impiety is it then to let the great God stay till the dreggy flesh or world be served? Ah, how unworthy (as well as wicked) is it, to put that God off, who deserves all I am, and have, with the leavings of his slaves! Be∣sides the soul usually walks up and down all day in the same habit, in which it is dressed in the morning. The day is usually spent well or ill, according to the mor∣ning employment. If Satan get possession in the
morning, twill be many to one but he keeps his hold all day. What youth is to age, that is the morning to the day; if youth be not tainted with vice, age is imployed in vertue; He that loves chastity, will not marry her that spent her youth in whordom. A man may give a shrewd guess in the morning, when second causes are in working, what weather will be most part of the day. If I set out early in my heavenly journey, I am the more likely to persevere in it all the day. As some sweet Oyls poured into a Vessel first, will cause what∣soever is put into it afterwards to taste and savour of it; So if godliness and the immediate worship of God do first in the morning possess my soul, my natural and civil affairs will probably rellish of it. Again, Mens hearts are generally upon that in the morning, which they esteem their happiness and portion. The covetous Muck-worm no sooner openeth his eyes, but his eart is tumbling in his heaps; The voluptuous beast, no sooner wakes, but he is sporting in sensual waters; The ambiti∣ous Peacock, no sooner is able to think, but his gay Fea∣thers, and gaudy dress for that day come into his mind; and why should not my heart send its first thoughts into Heaven? Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee? The Birds early in the morning, salute the rising Sun with their sweet notes, and shall not I the Sun of righteousness? Further, My wants, my mercies, call for morning duties; I walk in the midst of deaths, of dan∣gers every day, and shall I dare to travail without my defence? Men cloath their bodies against the sharpness of the weather, and why not their souls against the as∣saults of the flesh, the world, and the wicked one? There is no safety without this breast-work; If Satan take
me out of my trenches and strong holds, as Joshua did the men of Ai, it will be no wonder if he rot and ruine me. If I do not bless God in the morning, how can I expect that he should bless me in the day! Is a∣ny earthly Prince so prodigal of his favours, as to throw them away upon those that esteem them unworthy to be desired? If I do not serve the Precepts of God, I am presumptuous to look that his providence should serve me Should I undertake my affairs on earth, before I have dispatched my business with heaven, I am a no∣torious Cheat and Theif. I am a Theif to God, by robbing him of his glory, and that natural allegiance which I owe to my Maker. I am a Theif to my self, in robbing my self of that blessing which I might have on my callings and undertakings. O that prayer might be the girdle to compass in the whole body of my natural and civil dealings, and concernments. And that I could every day of my life forestal the worlds market, by setting early about closet and family duties. Suitors find it fittest to wait upon, and dispatch their business with great persons betimes in the morning. Lord, freedom of access to thy throne of grace, is an unspeakable favour; Access is hard to earthly Princes; No worldly Court is so open as to admit all comers. Those that with much difficulty present their Petitions, are often, against all reason denyed. Thy gates are o∣pen night and day, all that will may come and be wel∣come. Thou invitest souls to come into thy presence, and delightest to hear and grant their prayers. Thine eares are more open and ready to hear, then their mouths to ask. Thou pressest upon many undesired blessings, but denyest none who ask not stones instead of bread. Im∣portunity never angers thee, the more fervent and fre∣quent
my soul is with thee, the more prevalent. Thou fillest the hungry with good things, and dost not send any that desire thy grace empty away from thy gate. What care I how little notice or knowledge the Nobles of the earth will take of me, when I can speak so freely to their better, their Soveraign, and not fear a repulse. O teach me the right art of begging, and then I need not be afraid of poverty. If I be but skil∣ful to follow that trade, my returns will be both re and large. Thy mercies are renewed upon me every morning, so are my necessities. O let my prayses and prayers be as frequent and early. I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise hall be continually in my mouth; O God my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsteth for thee in a dry and barren Wilder∣ness, where no water is; My voice shalt thou hear in the morning; O Lord in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee and will look up. Spend the greatest part of the day in thy particular calling.I Wih that having done with the more immediae service of my God in Praying, and Reading, both in my Closet and Family, I may proceed to serve him in my Shop and Particular Calling. When God saith, Man is born to labour, I must not sing with the fool, Soul take thine ease. An idle person is like. Caterpillars and Mice, that devour Gods creatures, and do no good to others. Its pity he ever lived, the book of whose life is filled up with nothing but Cyphers; Nature ne∣ver intended men to be drones, to feed on others la∣bours; nor bats, to spend their lives in the company of sleep, the brother of death. My God, my soul, my family, my country, do all call upon me to be diligent in that calling whereto he hath called me. My God is a pure act himself, and hath capacitated all his creatures for acti∣on;
He created all men, but never made a sluggard; The idle person wholly degenerates from the end of his being, and receiveth his faculties in vain. The com∣mand for civil labour hath the same divine stamp, as that for sacred rest. I have also his pattern for my encouragement, as well as his precept for my war∣rant; Hitherto my father worketh, and I work. My soul also stands in as much need of exercise as my body; Idleness is the door at which diseases enter into both. Rust eats up vessels that are laid by and unused. The mind is never more bright then when it is in imployment; from doing nothing, we proceed to do evil. Idleness is not onely a vice it self, but also hath this unhappiness, to usher in all other. This is the least advantage of industry, that it gives the soul no leasure to play with sin, or to entertain the wicked one. Stan∣ding waters do not sooner putrifie then lazy souls; Tis action that preserves the oul in health; As Gats dance up and down in the Sun, and then sit down and sting the next hand they seize upon; So they who have no time to work, have much to imploy in slan∣dering and backbiting others; One sin never goeth a∣lone. Again, my Family may well rouze me out of the bed of laziness; If I expect supply of their wants, it must come in with Gods blessing at the door of di∣ligence. I am stealing from my wife and children, all the while I am loytering; The Heavens may cause seed sown, to ripen into a joyful Harvest, but un∣tilled land will afford no crop, save of weeds or stones. Once more, My Country commands me to my calling; I am but an ill member in the body Politique, if as a diseased part I take of its nourishment, but rather hinder its growth, then contribute to its health. A
jarring string is not more prejudicial to the rarest Viol in the hands of a skilful artist, then an idle person to the musick and composure of the uni∣verse. The most venemous creatures that nature produceth, are some way serviceable to their fel∣low creatures; O that I might never by filling up my life with laziness, be a Wen in the face of nature, serving no way to profit, onely to disfigure it. Yet I desire that my diligence in my particular, may be regulated by my duty towards my General calling. Oyl moderately poured in, feeds the Lamp, excessively drowns it; Alexanders Soul∣dier run so lightly upon the sand, that he made no impression with his feet; My duty is to give earthly things my hands, but my heart onely to the things of heaven; Lord, Its as well thy pleasure that I should work here, as thy promise, that I shall rest hereafter; Let ty grace be so operative in me, that I may ne∣ver give Satan advantage against me, by being neg∣ligent, or over-diligent in my particular calling. Suffer not the interposition of the earth, ever to cause an eclipse of holiness in my soul; But let thy word so limit me, and thy spirit guide me, that as one diligent in his business, I may come at last to stand before the King of Kings, to my eternal com∣fort. Be watchful all the day.I Wish that I may no part of the day, be so o∣vercharged with the cares of this life, by my parti∣cular calling, as to expose my self to wickedness, by neglecting my spiritual watch. If my heart be full of earthly vapours, they will fume up into my head, and make me drowsie; A drunken man is no sooner
set in his chair, but he is fast asleep; Sober and Vigilant are sisters in Scripture, 1 Thes. 5. Let us watch and be sober, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober and vi∣gilant. The immoderate love of the world will in∣cline me as effectually to spiritual slumbers, as immo∣derate drinking of Wine to bodily; If Satan can get me to take this Opium, he doubts not but to lock me fast to my bed, and to have me at what advantage be pleaseth. O how easie is it to destroy a sleeping body, to defile a sleepy soul! Noah, Lot, David, Solomon, walked in their sleep and dreams, in strange and sensual paths. When the eye of the souls watchfulness is hut, the soul is open to all dangers and assaults. Whilst the Husbandmen sleep, the enemy soweth Tares. Sisera's head was nailed to the earth, whilst he ly snoring on the ground. Epaminondas was not more severe then exemplary, when he ran the Souldier through with his sword, whom he found sleeping upon the Guard, as if he intended to bring the two Brothers, Sleep and Death, to a meeting. The Hare therefore (say some) being liable to many enemies, sleep∣eth with her eyes open, to see danger before it surprise her. I walk continually in the midst of powerful and politick adversaries. The Canaanite is yet in the Land (though not Master of the Field, yet) skulking in Holes and Ambushments, watching an opportunity to set upon and destroy me; There is not onely an Army of Temptations besieging me without, but also many Traytours conspiring within to open the gate of my heart to them, that they may enter and undo me.
My own heart is like Jacob, a Supplanter, and con∣spireth to rob me both of the birth-right and the blessing. Let me go where I will, I tread upon Lime-twigs, which the Arch-fowler layeth to intangle and insnare me. Saul sent messengers to Davids house, to watch him, and to slay him.1 Sam. 19. 11. Satan sendeth messengers af∣ter me in all places where I ome, to watch me, and to say me; The whole world is as the val of Siddim full of slime-pits, and without watchfulness; the a∣nointed of the Lord are taken in those pits, Gen. 14. 10. Lam. 4. 10. Sin is a slie theif, that steals upon the soul to rob it when tis asleep. O what need have I of the greatest watchfulness and circumspection ima∣ginable! As the eye-lids guard the tender eyes from harm, so doth watchfulness preserve the soul from wickedness; O my soul, canst thou not watch with thy Redeemer one hour, when he ever liveth to make intercession for thee? Tis but the short night of this life, that thou art commanded to stand enti∣nel; ere long thou shalt be called off the guard, and freed from that trouble. Lord, thou art ever watch∣ful over me for good, thou never slumberest nor sleep∣est, but thy seven eyes are ever upon me. Thou mayst say to me, as to thy Vineyard; I the Lord do keep it, I water it every moment, lest any hurt it I; keep it night and day. O since thou watchest to preserve me, let me watch to serve thee; Set a watch O Lord before my lips. Be thou the Governour of my heart; Lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death. Let mine enemies never find me nodding, lest they leave me dying. Thou hast told me, Behold I come as a Theif; Blesed is he that watcheth and keep∣eth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they
see his shame; Give me so to wake and watch now, that death may bring me a Writ of ease, and call me to my endless rest. I Wish that I may all the day long be even covetous of my time,Redeem time. as knowing it is allowed me not for the service of the flesh, but for the service of my God, and to dress my soul for Heaven. If I be lavish of my time, I am the greatest Prodigal in the World. If he be a spendthrift, that throweth away an hundred pound every day, he is a far greater that wasteth half an hour in one day; Time is more worth then the revenues of the whole world. He that can com∣mand millions of treasure, cannot command one moment of time; The Father of eternity hath the sole disposition of time; The value of this com∣modity, is not known to this beggarly world in a day of life. Now men study sports and pleasures, and com∣pany, and plays, to waste time; It lieth as a drug upon their hands, and they think themselves beholden to any that will help them to put it off; But when the King of terrors with his gastly countenance approach∣eth them, and summons them to a speedy appearance bfore the King of nations, to receive their eternal dooms, O then their judgements will be quite altered, and time will be precious indeed. Then they who play away their time, and give all to the world or flesh, will tell me that time was good for something else then to eat, and drink, and sleep, and trade; that it was good to feed an immortal soul in, and provide for an eternal estate. Then the Rich and Covetous, as well as they loved their wealth, though it be now dearer to them then their God and Christ, and Souls, and Heaven, will part with all they have for a little
time. Then the Swaggerers and Gallants of the world, who spend twenty hour in Taverns, to one hour in the Temple, and if it were not for Play-houses, and Ale-houses, and Whore-houses, and Hawks, and Hounds, and Cards, and Dice, could not tell what to do with their time; who mark all the days in the Kalender of their lives, for Festivals, and make them all Play-days, as if there were never a working day among them, that are as busie and tedious in dres∣sing their worm-eaten bodies, as Children in dressing Babies, and are more troubled at the smallest disor∣der in their hairs, then the greatest disorder in Church and State, would give up all, and much more if they had it, for a little time; Then the Nobles, and Kings, and Emperours of the world, will disesteem their honours and height, and trample upon their Robes, and Scepters, and rowns, for a little time. Then they who dally with their days of grace, and de∣lay the preparation of their souls for death and judge∣ment, as if time were at their command, and they could force it to attend their leasure, that live as if Death were their servant, and must wait on them till they thought fit to come to their graves, will find that time was time indeed; O my soul, of what worth will time be at that day, and wilt thou wate it at this day! Alas, how little is that time which thou hast to improve for thine unchangeable estate! My life is but a shadow, that is gone when the Sun hides his head; A Bubble that vanisheth when a small breath of wind appeareth; A day that is soon overtaken by a night, a span, nothing. Thou hast made my days as an hand-breadth, mine age is nothing unto thee. Wert thou able to secure a long life, though thou hs
work enough of infinite weight to imploy it all, yet thou mightest have more colour of reason for being lavish; but when thy time is little, and thy business of such consequence, what unspeakable madness is it to be wasteful of it! He that hath thousands of acres of Land, will spare some for a Park, some for a bow∣ling-green, some for a court-yard, some for pleasure and pastimes; but he that hath but a little land, up∣on which himself and his family must live, and by which they must be maintained, can spare none at all for vain pleasures, but must improve all to real profit. Man that is born of a woman, is but of few days; He comes up as a Flower, fleeth as a shadow, and continueth not; and wilt thou, O my soul, revel and riot away this poor pittance in which thou shouldst work out thy salvation! O that I could value this jewel in some measure answerable to its worth, and do the work of the day, in the day allotted me for work! Time rightly husbanded is acceptable time; a day well imployed is a day of salvation. Lord, though my journey be great, my time is little; Nay, how much of that little time have I lost? A considerable part of it hath been taken up with my Infancy and Child-hood, wherein I did little above a Beast. My youth hath been squandred a∣way in trifles and vanity, and too much of it in lust and iniquity. Much of what remains, if thou shouldst add a few more days to my life, must be spent in eating, and drinking, and sleep∣ing, and necessary natural actions; and shall I not redeem it to my power, for the service of my Saviour? O affect my soul throughly, how Eternity rides, upon the back of time, that
I may prize time highly, redeem it carefully, and improve it so faithfully, that eternity may be my friend, and when time shall have an end, I may en∣joy that joy which hath no end. Call thy self to ac∣count.I Wish that I may every day so cast up my ac∣counts, that I maybe always ready for the great Au∣dit-day. Wise Stewards do not write down great sums in gross, which they have disbursed for their Lords at several times, but set down the particu∣lars, whereby they are prepared for a general reckon∣ning, and enabled to justifie their accounts: My trust is more weighty then of any Princes Steward on earth, my Master will be more exact then the severest hu∣mane Lord; and am I not then concerned so to num∣ber my days, as to reckon every day what I receie from my Lord, what I disburse for my Lord, and at the foot of every day to write the total sum! How foolish is he that rejects his books, till his book reject him?  is it not better for me to look over the book of my conscience, and observe what blots and errors are there, whilst I have licence and liberty to correct them, then to neglect them, till those eyes which are purer then to behold iniquity, come to look it over and leave be denyed of ever amending what he finds amiss! O my soul, this evening now I am writing this page, I must send to thee Amaziah's challenge of Joash; Come let us see one another in the face? Why should we that are so near to∣gether, be such strangers to each other? I must ask thee, as Elisha did Gehezi, Whence comest thou? Where hast thou been? What hast thou done this day for God and thy self? Hast thou lived, or onely been: in the world this day? Doth thy soul work,
thine eternity work go forward or backward? Hast thou lived as if thou wrt going to die, and walked in the fear of the Lord all the day long? Hath the awe and dread of the divine Majesty all along pos∣sessed thee? Dost thou consider that thou hast one day less to live, and one day more to account for? Suppose God should come to thee this night, as he did to Belshazer, with a Mene, Mene, It is num∣bred, It is numbred; Thy days are told, God hath counted them up, and finished them, thou shalt not live to see a morrow. Thy days are extinct, the grave is ready for thee; Art thou ready for thy grave? If God should say to thee, as that Lord to his Ser∣vant, Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou shalt be no longer Steward? Are thy accounts and Gods even? Dost thou reckon as he doth? What do all the actions of this day stand for in thine ac∣count, Figures or Ciphers, somthing or nothing? What were thy first thoughts in the morning? Was he who came first to thee with his morning mercies, first served by thee? How didst thou pray in thy Closet, and Family? What sorrow accompanied thy confessions? Was thy heart broken that thou hast bro∣ken his holy laws? What faith and fervency did ac∣company thy requests? Was the heat of thy affections answerable to the weight of thy petitions? Didst thou present thy petition to the Master of Requests, the Lord Iesus Christ, by him to be delivered to the Fa∣ther? What spiritual joy and delight didst thou find in Thankesgiving? Didst thou wonder at that infinite cost which the glorious. God is at, with such an un∣worthy wretch? How didst thou rad the word this day? Did it come with power and authority to thy
conscience? was it mingled with faith? Didst thou hide it in thy heart? Hadst thou any resolution to make it thy rule and Counseller, and Comforter, and to order thy conversation according to it? How didst thou eat and drink this day? Didst thou feed with fear? Didst thou receive thy meat as in Gods pre∣sence, and hadst thou an eye therein at his praise? How didst thou behave thy self in thy Particular cal∣ling? Did it no way incroach upon thy general? Was thy conversation in heaven, whilst thy dealings were about earth? Wast thou diligent in the exercise of it, righteous in thy dealings in it, depending on God for a blessing on it? What was thy carriage in company? was thy life holy, spotless, exemplary, profitable to o∣thers? Mightest thou not in such a place have done thy God more service, and thy Brothers soul more good? May I not say to thee as God to Jonah? Didst thou well to be angry at such a time upon no cause? what were thy thoughts in solitude? how wast thou im∣ployed? Had God any true share in thy thoughts? hast thou watched thy self this day, and kept thy heart with all diligence? Hath none of thy precious time been la∣visht away on unnecessary things? Answer me faithfully to all these particulars, that I may be able to return an answer to him that sent me. O that I could but im∣ploy one half hour every day, with seriousness and up∣rightness, in such soliloquies. Lord, thou didst cre∣ate the world in six days, and thou wast pleased to lok back on every days work, and behold it was very good, and then ensued thy Sabbath. Cause thy ervant to be a follower of thee, as a dear child, in minding every day the work thou hast given me to do, that I may every night review it with comfort, finding it good in thy Christ,
at the end of all my days, looking back upon all my works, I may see them very good, through the accepta∣tion of thy grace, and with joy enter into my eternal Sabbath. I Wish that I may end every day,Mind even∣ing duties. with him who is the beginning and first born from the dead; That I may every night go to bed, as if I were going to my grave, knowing that sleep is the shadow of death; and when the shadow is so near, the substance can∣not be far off; Though lovers cannot meet all day, yet they will make hard shift but they will find an opportunity to meet at night; Should my devotion set with the natural Sun, I may fear a dreadful night of darkness to follow. That bed may well be as uneasie as one stuft with thorns, that is not made by prayer. If the soul lye down under an heavy load of sin, the body can have no true rest. Jacob could sleep sweetly upon an hard stone, having made his peace with God; when Ahashuerus could not, though on a bed of down; I cannot sleep unless God wake for me, and I cannot rationally expect his watchful∣ness over me, unless I request it. My corruptions in the day, call for contrition in the night; How many omissions, commissions, personal, relative sins, heart, life wickedness am I daily guilty of! and hould I lye down under their weight, for ought I know they may sink me before morning into endless wo. Whilst blood is in my veins, sin will be in my soul. The weed of sin may be cut, broken, pulled up, yet it will spring again. I shall as soon cease to live, as cease to sin. Though I should be free all the day long from presumptuous enormities, and onely defiled with ordinary humane infirmities, yet these, if not bewailed, are damning.
The smallest letters are most hurtful to the eyes, and far worse then a large Character. Those sins which are comparatively little, if not lamented, are far more dangerous then Davids Murther and Adultery, which were repented of. When the soul like Thamar, hath notwithstanding its utmost endeavours to preserve its chastity been ravished, and by force defiled, it must with her lift up the voice and weep. If the Sun may not go down upon my wrath against man, much-less may I presume to lye down under the wrath of God. Besides, how can sin be mortified, if it be not confessed and bewailed? Arraignment and Convicti∣on, must go before Execution. The favours of the day past, are not to be forgot∣ten, but to be acknowledged with thankefulness. I re∣ceive every day more considerable mercies then there are moments in the day; and when I borrow such large sums, the principal of which I am unable ever to satisfie, shall I be so unworthy as to deny the payment of this small interest, which is all my Cre∣ditour requireth? Whatsoever gain I have got in my calling, whatsoever strength I have received by my food, whatsoever comfort I have had in my Relations or Friends, whatsoever peace, liberty, protection, I have enjoyed all the day long, I must say of all,  Jacob of his Venison; The Lord hath brought it to me. Surely the hearer of my morning prayers, may well be the object of my evening prayses; A how unreasonable is it that I like a whirl-pool, should suck in every good thing that comes near me, and not so much as acknowledge it! Should any one be the thousandth part so much indebted to me, as I am to God, how ill should I take it, if he should not con∣fess
it? If a Beggar at my door receive a small almes from God, by my hands, I look for his thanks; How often have I complained of the baseness and unworthi¦ness of some that are engaged to me? O what tongue can express, what heart can conceive how much I am in∣debted to my God every moment, though I am less then the least of all his mercies; and doth not all his good∣ness merit sincere thankefulness! Lord, I confess there is not a day of my life, wherein I do not break thy Laws in thought, word and deed; Sin is too much the element in which I live, and the trade that I drive; I find continually a law in my members, warring a∣gainst the Law of my mind, and captivating me to the Law of sin and death; Ah wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! Since I am no day innocent, make me every night peni∣tent. As my sins abound, let my sorrow abound, and thy grace much more abound. Though I can never re∣quite thy favours, help me to admire and bless the foun∣tain of them. Suffer me never to go to bed, till I have first asked thee my heavenly Father blessing. Let the eyes of my soul be always open to thee in prayer and prayse, before the eyes of my body be shut. And, O be thou always pleased so to accept my confessions, petiti∣ons, thanksgivings, my person and performances in thy dear son, that I may lay me down in peace and sleep, because thou Lord makest me to dwell in safety. Finally, I Wish that every day of my life may be spent as if it were the day of my death,The Conclu∣sion. and all my time em∣ployed in adorning my soul, in trimming my lamp, and in a serious preparation for eternity. Whilst I am li∣ving I am dying, every moment my sand is running,
and my Sun is declining; I am as Stubble before the Wind, and as Chaff that the Storm carrieth away; I flie away as a dream, and shall not be found; my life is chased away as a vision of the night; The eyes which have seen me, shall see me no more, neither shall my place any more behold me. I must live now or never; If I die, I shall not live again; O that all the days of my appointed time, I could wait till my change cometh! Were I to take my leave of the world this night, and were my life to end with the day; how then would I spend every hour, every moment of it? Should I lavish away my time about this or that va∣nity? Would I play it away in vain company? Would I neglect my spiritual watch? or waste my talents upon trifles? should I dally about secret or private duties, or be careless of my carriage in my calling? would I starve my immortal soul, or cast off all care of eternity? No, but I should all the day long act by the square and rule of the word. How serious should I be in praying, in reading, in working for my soul, for my salvation? how diligent to do all the good I could, to receive all the good I might? how watchful to catch at, and embrace all opportunities of honouring and serving my Maker and Redeemer? because my time is short, and I must pray, and read, and work for eternity, now or no more, no more for ever. And why should I not be as holy, though I do not know that I shall die this night, when I know not but I may die this night? How foolish is he who neglects doing his work, till his work is past doing! Besides, Other creatures are constant, and unwearied in serving their maker, they are every day all the day long in their stations obedient to his com∣mands. If I look to Heaven, to Earth, to inani∣mate,
to irrational creatures, I behold them all as so many Souldiers, in their several ranks, exactly and continually subject to the orders which they receive from the Lord of hosts; and shall I be shamed by them? I am at present more indebted, more intrusted by God; I have a reward hereafter of joy to encourage me, of pain to provoke me to unweariedness in well doing, which they neither hope nor fear. Lord, I live every moment upon thee, why should I not live every mo∣ment to thee? My life is by thy providence, O that it were according to thy precepts! I would not be thine hireling to serve thee meerly for wages (thou thy self art my exceeding great reward) but I would be thy days-man, to work for thee by the day, every day, all the day long; O help me to live well in time, that I may live well eternally; Let every day be so devoted to thy praise, and every part of it so imployed in thy service, that I may be the more fitted to please and woip thee in that place where there is no night, yet all rest, no Sun, yet all day, all light, all joy, where I shall have no meat, or drink, or sleep, or shop, or flocks, or family, and which is best of all, no unbe∣leiving, selfish, carnal heart, to call me from, or hinder me in thy work; but I shall worship and enjoy thee with∣out diversion, without distraction, without interruption, without intermission, both perfectly and perpetually, Amen.
CHAP. VII. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godli∣ness, in visiting the Sick. FIfthly, Thy duty is to exercise thy self in visiting the sick; The Visitation of the sick, is a work of as great weight as any (injoyned us) relating to others, and as much neglected and slighted in its management, as almost any duty commanded. Sickness is so common, and Death so ordinary, that with most their frequency takes away the sense of them, and charity in many sickens and dieth as fast as others bodies. The generality of pretended Christians, like the Priest and the Levite, if they see a man wounded, both in his body and soul, though it be to death, pass on the other side of the way, not caring to meddle with any that are in misery. They tell us they are true members of Christ, but like a bag of suppurated blood, they feel nothing, nei∣ther have any communion with the body. Many on their dying beds, whose souls are worse and more dangerously sick then their bodies, may speak to their Minister or Neighbour (for the duty belongs to the People as well as the Pastor) almost in the words of Martha to Christ; Sir, If thou hadst been here, my soul had not dyed; Some visite the sick, but rather out of a complement, then out of con∣science, or to profit themselves more then their Neighbours. The Ingenuous Heathen Seneca,
will tell such; If a man visit his sick friend, and watch at his Pillow for charity sake, and out of his old affection, we approve it; but if for a Legacy, he is a Vulture, and watcheth onely for the carcass. The discourse of these is chiefly about worldly affairs, and nothing about the great concernments of eter∣nity. Others sometimes go about the work, but per∣form it so ill, administring Cordials, when there is need of Corrosives, sowing Pillows under their sick friends heads, that they may die easily; or if they tell them of their danger, they do it so coldly and carelesly, and by halves, that as he said, there is pls periculi a medicamento quam morbo, More dan∣ger from the Physick then the disease their soul-sickness is curable, but the unsutable medicines they take, make it incurable. It may be said of many a soul, as Adrians Counsellers said of him; Multitudo medicorum, &c. Many Physitians have killed the Emperour; Ah! How dreadful is it, when unskilful and unfaithful Mountebanks, undertake to tamper and trifle with immortal souls, that are just entring into their eternal estates; Father, for∣give them, they know not what they do. Galen saith, in respect of bodily Medicines, In medicina nihil exiguum, There is nothing small in Physick; E∣very thing in it is of great consequence; A little mistake may cause death; I may upon greater reason say, There is nothing little in spiritual Phy∣sick; A small error in our prescriptions to sick souls, may cause dreadful mischief; Instead of curing we may kill the patient; Hazaels wet cloth was not more deadly to his Masters body, then the discourse of most is to their sick neighbours souls.
Fear of displeasing, and a natural propensity to flatter, prevail with too many to sooth their dy∣ing friends into unquenchable flames. But surely there is more love (as well as more faithfulness) in frighting a sick person out of his spiritual Lethargy, then in fawning him into the eternal lake that bur∣neth with Fire and Brimstone. Some venemous creatures tickle a man till he laughs, even when they sting him to death, so doth the flattering Minister or Neighbour; he raiseth a sick man, void of grace, to the Pinnacle of joy, and highest hopes of Heaven, and thereby throweth him down into the Culph of irrecoverable sorrows, and leaves him to undeceive himself in hell. I shall first lay down two or three Motives to stir up the Reader to this work, and then direct him about it. SECT. I. Motive.FIrst, It is a duty commanded thee by God. Men are apt to think the visitation of the sick to be onely an act of Courtesie and Civility, which they may omit or perform at their pleasure; when it is an act of Charity and Christianity, which every Christian is bound to by a divine Precept. The Ministers of Christ are especially enjoyned this task; but every member of Christ also, when God gives him opportunity, oweth this debt to his Neighbour, Iam. 5. 14, 15. If any be sick, let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. The same word which commandeth the sick man to send, commandeth the Elder to
go. Indeed its a gross fault in many sick persons (and therein they are exceedingly their own ene∣mies) that they either send not at all for the Mini∣ster, or if they do, not till they have done with the Physitian; when their bodies are past all hope, then they look after some hope for their souls. But with∣out question it is a duty for the Elder sometimes to go uncalled; Its good manners to be an unbidden guest at a house of mourning. Our Master was found of them that asked not for him, and so should his servants. There are those that can invite them∣selves to their Neighbours Tables, who withdraw themselves from their Chambers. Some are drunk so often with their Parishioners whilst they are in health, that they are afraid or ashamed to discourse seriously with them when they are sick. God may speak to many, as to the Shepherds of Israel; Wo be to the Shepherds of England that do feed themselves; should not the Shepherds feed the Flock? ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the Wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flock; The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, Ezek. 34. 3, 4. None are more cruel to the Flock, then those that are most covetous of the Fleece. Oleaster on Lev. 14. 44. (Then the Priest shall come and look, and behold if the Plague be spread, &c. that being the third time the Priest was to visit the infected house) hath this useful observation; Si Sae∣cerdos toties invisat leprosam domum, cur tu non aegrum? If the Priest were commanded so often to vi∣sit the leprous house, why dost not thou visit the sick
person? The Plague in the heart, calls for more pity and help then the Plague in the House. This duty also belongs to private members, as well as to publique Officers. Every Christian should love his Neighbour as himself, which he cannot do, unless he have a sense of his sickness, and endeavour to im∣prove such an opportunity for his Neighbours Salva∣tion. True love, like fire, burns hottest when the wea∣ther is coldest. Histories make mention of one Vrius a Physitian, that being to die for the Gospel, and be∣ginning to waver, Vitalis a godly man stept to him, and though he knew it would cost him his life, encou∣raged him, saying, What, have you been so industrious heretofore, to preserve mens bodies, and will you now shrink at the saving your own soul! Be couragious; For which faithful counsel he was condemned and suffe∣red accordingly. Its our duty to assist them that die natural, as well as those that die violent deaths. To visit persons in their affliction, is one testimony of the truth of our Religion at this day. Holiness and Charity are like Father and Child. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the Fatherless and the Widows in their afflictions, &c. Jam. 1. ult. The fatherless and widows are expres∣sed (but the sick, and strangers, and captives are in∣cluded) because these are usually most afflicted and most neglected; Those that have received mercy, cannot but shew mercy. As visiting the distressed is a sign of it now, so it will be the test of Christia∣nity at the great day, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. Come ye blessed, &c. I was hungry, and ye fed me; naked, and ye cloathed me; sick, and ye visited me, &c. Works of mercy fill up the whole bill, as the evidence of the
Saints right to heaven. Whereof Luther gives this reason; because the consciences of the wicked shall justifie Christ as well in the absolution of the godly, as in their own condemnation. Though Christi∣ans do not give their almes, or visit the sick, to be seen of men, yet in doing many offices of love, and acts of charity, they are seen of men. So they who can witness the truth of Christians mercy, will be forced to acknowledge the equity of Christs sen∣tence. SECT. II. SEcondly,Motive. It is a special opportunity of doing and receiving good. 1. Of doing good; I think it the more necessary to speak to this Motive, because many are apt to judge all pains with sick persons to be to no pur∣pose. They are discouraged from endeavouring the conversion of prophane men upon sick beds, supposing that such mens repentance will be as un∣sound as their bodies, even when they are sick un∣to death. Though I would not give the least en∣couragement to any men to defer their turning to God, beleiving him worse then mad, who puts off the weighty business of his soul, because peradven∣ture God may grant him repentance hereafter; yet I must obviate this suggestion of the Divel, which hinders men from doing their duty; God may shew mercy to a soul at last; There is one example in Scripture, that none might despair. Sickness is with some men the tide-time of devotion. They who scorned godly men, and made a mock of god∣liness
in their health, will prize the Saint, and de∣sire his sanctity above all the world, when they lye upon sick beds, and consider what an holy God they are going to appear before. Sickness, as one saith, is, Officina virtutis, morum disciplina, The shop of ver∣tue, and the school of manners; Therefore King Alfred was wont to say, I ever find my self best, when worst; best in soul, when worst in body; the sick∣ness of my body, is physick to my soul; Experience daily informeth us that the Swaggerers and Gallants of the world (whose consciences are not seared with an hot Iron) though they gave themselves up to Drunkenness, and Gluttony, and Gaming, and Whoredom, and all manner of wickedness in their youth and strength, yet when they are weakened much with a disease, and have no hopes of conti∣nuing longer on earth, begin to wish that they had spent their time to more purpose, and are sensible of their neglect of God, and Christ, and their Souls, and Eternity; then many of them will desire the com∣pany of those that fear God, and beg their prayers, and hearken to their counsels, and would give all they are worth for a little of their grace and holi∣ness. Even Benhadad the King of Syria, an ene∣my to the Prophets and People of God in his health, will send a Prince to Elisha with a large present, and most submissive expressions (thy Son Benhadad) in his sickness, 2 King. 7.9. Sickness gives men a dou∣ble advantage for holiness. 1. It takes off their hearts from creatures, by teach∣ing them experimentally what a poor weak cordial the whole creation is to sick or dying men. When men are strong and lusty, they can taste and savour
earthly things; carnal comforts hinder their en∣deavours after spiritual; They take up with crea∣tures as Esau, and say, they have enough; but sick∣ness makes them know the emptiness of all sublu∣nary things. When men are sick, they cannot rellish the worlds dainties and delicates; The pre∣ferments, and riches, and pleasures of the earth, are all unsavoury and uncomfortable to them. They now see the vanity of those things which heretofore they so much idolized, how unable they are to re∣vive their fainting spirits, or to allay their pain, or purchase them the least ease, or procure them the least acceptance in the other world; and hence the price of the worlds market falls abundantly in their judgements. Bernard tells us of a Brother of his, that when he gave him many good instructions, and he being a Souldier, regarded them not, he put his finger to his side, and told his Brother; One day a Spear shall make way to this heart of thine, for admonition and instruction to enter. 2. In sickness conscience is usually allowed more li∣berty to speak its mind, and men are then more at leasure to hear it. In health their callings, or friends, or lusts, or sports, or some carnal comfort or o∣ther, take up their hearts and time, that consci∣ence must be silenced (as too bold a Preacher) for offering to disturb them in their pleasures, or if it will use its authority, and continue to speak in Gods name, and forbid their foolishness, and A∣theism, and sensuality and prophaness, they are deaf to its calls and commands, and drown its voice with the noise of their brutish delights; But in sickness they are taken off from their trades, and
pastimes, and merry meetings, and jovial compa∣nions, when their bodies are weak, their fleshly lusts are not so strong as formerly, whereby con∣science hath a greater opportunity to tell them of their miscarriages and wickedness, and they them∣selves are more attentive to its words and war∣ning. Reader, Its a special peice of wisdom to improve such a season for the good of thy Neighbours soul. When the Wax is softned, then we clap the Seal upon it, lest it harden again, and be incapable of any impression. When the hand of God hath by sickness made the heart of thy wicked friend or brother soft and tender, then do thy utmost to stamp the Image of God upon it; Paul would preach whilst a door was opened, and there was likelyhood of doing good. Its a great encouragement to work, when the subject upon which we bestow our pains, seems capable of what we prosecute, and probable to answer our labour. We have some heart to strike a nail into a bard, because there is hope it will en∣ter, but no list to drive a nail into a flint, because we despair of effecting it. The Smith strikes when the Iron is hot, he knoweth if he should stay till it is cold, his labour would be in vain; Friend, take the advantage of others bodily sickness, to further their spiritual health, lest they either die in their sins, or harden upon their recovery. Op∣portunity is like a joynt in some part of a fowl, which if we hit upon, we may easily carve and divide the fowl, but if the Knife fall on this side, or that side of the joynt, we do but mangle the meat, and take pains to no purpose. It is the
speech of Master Richard Rogers in his seven Trea∣tises, I have visited some persons that have been con∣demned to die, in whom (through the blessing of God upon his endeavours) I have found as good signs of saved persons, as of any that died in their beds, not having tasted of repentance before. 2. Its a special opportunity of Receiving good; We are taught more effectually by the eye then by the ear. The sight of a sick or dying person hath often a strange and a strong operation upon the beholder. When the Father heard of one that sinned notoriously, he cried out, I may be as bad as this man is; When thou seest one dangerously sick, thou mayst think with thy self, I must e as this man is, sick unto death, when none of my Relations or Possessions can afford me the least comfort, and O how much doth it concern me to prepare before∣hand for such an hour! If this mans work be now to do, when his life is ending, how sad is the condition of his precious soul? O that I were wise to consider timely, and to provide seasonably for my latter end. The sight of a dead man, was instrumental to the spiritual life of Waldus. The sight of others sickness may well quicken me to the greater industry and diligence after spiritual health. Do I behold my Neighbour, whose Sail formerly sweld with a full gale of worldly enjoyments, now wind-bound, chained to his chamber, or fettered to his bed, un∣able to rellish his food, or take any comfort in his friends? Do I see him full of Aches, and Pains, Tossings, and Tumblings, crying out in the evening, Would God it were morning, and in the morning, Would God it were evening, because of the anguish of
his Spirit? Do I behold his cheeks pale, his eyes sunk, his lips quivering, his loyns trembling, his heart panting, and nature striving and strugling with the disease to keep its ground, and yet at last forced to quit the field, and leave the victory to its adversary, how many excellent observations may I draw from such a Text? What a fool am I, to trust the world, which leaves this man in his greatest want? How mad am I in loving sin, which is the cause of all these crosses and miseries, and which makes death so mortal to poor souls? Of how much worth and value is the blessed Redeemer, who will comfort a Chri∣stian in such a time of need, and carry him through his last conflict with joy and conquest? How careful should I be to get and keep a good conscience, which in such a day of extremity will yeild me true courage and confi∣dence? The wise man doth not without cause tell us, It is better to go into the house of mourning (to the terming or charnel-house) then to the house of feasting, for that is is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart, Eccles. 7. 2. Men in a house of feasting, are apt to be forgetful of their duty to God, themselves, and their Neighbours, Isa. 22. 13, 14. Amos 6. 3, 6. Isa. 5. 11, 12. When the body is filled, the soul is often neglected. Iob was afraid of this in his Sons, Iob 1. 5, 6. It may be my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts, i. e. when they had been feasting at their elder Bro∣thers house, God gives Israel a special caution a∣gainst this, Deut. 8. 12, 14. Men in an house of mourning, are put in mind both of Gods Sove∣raignty, who draweth away their breath and they perish, Psa. 104. 29. and their own frailty, how
soon they are gathered and withered, even in their prime and pride, Psa. 39. 5. I am blind if I do not see mine own end, in the end of ano∣ther; and distracted if I do not provide for my last enemy, which I must necessarily encounter. Thus its a mercy to our selves, to be merciful un∣to others; and whilst we visit the sick, we visit our own souls. Who would not do his Neighbour good, when he may be confident it will tend to his own gain! I have but hopes by my visit, of ad∣vantaging a sinner; but I may be sure, if I be faith∣ful therein, of profiting my self. SECT. III. THirdly,Motive. It may be the last opportunity thou mayst ever have of advantaging thy sick neighbours soul. His sick-bed may be his death-bed, and then twill be too late to counsel or advise him. There is no Purgatory in the other world. Diseases both bodily and spiritual, must be purged away before death or never. He that is filthy at death, must be fil∣thy still, even to all eternity; All the tears in hell will not wash out the least spot in the soul; All the fire of hell, will not purge out the least dross; Therefore Christ took the opportunity of dropping good counsel into the heart of the Theif on the Cross, knowing that if he had omitted it a very few hours longer, the soul of the poor Theif had been lost for ever. Hadst thou a friend going to Sea, and never to return again, waiting at a Port for a Wind and then to be gone, and hadst busines with him of as great concernment to him as his life,
thou couldst tell him of a quicksand which he must beware of, or he will be cast away; wouldst thou not be quick and speedy to acquaint him with it, lest he should be under Sail before thou didst see him? would it not cut thee to the heart, if he should miscarry through thy negligence? The Application is easie; The soul of every Neighbour is, or ought to be dearer to thee then the body of thy nearest friend or relation. When thy wicked Neighbour is sick, his soul is launching for ought thou knowest, into the Ocean of eternity, whence he shall never, ever, re∣turn more. He waits onely for a wind, a word from God, and he is gone. The sick bed is the passage or path-way to the grave. Thou hast work to do with him, that is more worth to him then his life, that i of as great value as his immortal soul, and eternal salvation. Now thou mayst acquaint him while he is on the shore, with his danger, and the way of his delivery; but if once he launch into the Main; thou mayst call loud and long enough after him in vain; O will it not pierce thee to the quick, if his soul should be swallowed up in the boundless and bottomless Sea of divine wrath, through thy laziness or unfaithfulness! When the day drew near for the destruction of the Jews, the heart of Haman swelled with hopes, and Hester had then an opportunity to step in and preserve the lives of her Countrymen; Mordecai tells her, Who know∣eth whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? She made use of the season, and sa∣ved their lives with the hazard of her own; Had she delayed a little longer it had been too late, they had all been sacrificed upon the Altar of Hamans
ambition. When the hour of a wicked mans death approacheth, the heart of the roaring Lyon is big with expectation of his prey, and a Christian friend hath then possibly an opportunity to save the poor creatures soul; Now or never, there is no knowledge nor wisdom in the grave, whether the sick person is going. If he make use of the price God puts now into his hands, by serious, prudent, faithful and af∣fectionate counsel, he may help the inner to heaven; Who knoweth whether he be come by the Providence of God, into the sick mans Chamber for such a thing as this? I have but one thing more to commend to thee, and then I shall speak to the work it self. Before thou goest to thy sick Neighbour, go to God by prayer; intreat him to direct thee what to speak, and to succeed what shall be spoken. It is his own Ordinance, and therefore thou mayst the more com∣fortably beg and expect his assistance. Nehemiah would speak to God, before he spake to the King for the afflicted Jews; Hester prefers her Petition, first to her Maker, that her prayer might prosper, and then her Petition to her Husband, for the lives of her Countrymen. God is the Principal Agent, and if he be left out, all thy labour will be lost. Wherein the exercising thy self to Godliness in visiting the sick consisteth. 1. In endeavouring to benefit the soul of thy Neighbour. 2. In getting some spiritual profit to thy self. First, In endeavouring the spiritual good of thy Neighbour. We are enjoyned in the eighth Com∣mand,
to mind and further our Neighbours temporal wealth, but much more his spiritual welfare. Twas true which Bucers Physitian told him, when he ex∣pressed his eagerness to die, Non sibi sed multorum utilitati se esse natum, That he was not born for him∣self, but for the good of many others; Every Saint is to be as it were a common stock for the profit of many. He is born, and new born, not onely for himself, but for others benefit. The Lynx is a spot∣ted unclean beast, that knowing how his urine will congeal into a precious stone, and be profitable to men, maketh an hole in the ground when he pis∣seth, to hide it from them. Iob who knew the advantage that might acrue to others thereby, would not conceal either the word or works of God from them, Iob 6. 10. and 27. 11. To this end; 1. Labour to be acquainted with the state of the sick persons soul. Its dangerous to give either Pur∣ges or Cordials ignorantly, or at peradventure. The souls of men are of unconceivable value, and there∣fore not to be tampered or trifled with. Its a good step to the cure, to understand fully the disease, and the constitution of the Patient; therefore Phy∣sitians feel the pulse, view the urine, enquire of the sick person, or his friends, concerning his former course of life, diet, present digestion of his food, place of his trouble or pain, &c. that they may proceed up∣on good grounds, and give sutable and effectual advice. So shouldst thou Reader, in visiting the sick, inform thy self either by conference with some serious Christians of their acquaintance before∣hand, or by some searching prudent questions to the sick, concerning the condition of their souls.
The ignorance of a Physitian, may occasion the death of the Patient. Some practitioners in Phy∣sick, who intend much good, do much hurt, for want of judgement to find out the tempers and di∣stempers of the sick. A mistake in soul-cases, is of more hazard then in body-sickness. If I under∣take to humble a person who is already cast down sufficiently, and wants a Cordial, or to comfort one who is full of presumption already, and needs a Corrosive, how good soever my meaning may be, my acting is evil, and instead of releiving, I may destroy my Brother. The Eastern Churches did not without cause enjoyn the Minister, or such as were appointed to visit the sick, to continue with them seven days together, that in that space they might discover the man, before they applied them∣selves to him, either in a way of Admonition, or Counsel, or Consolation. Iobs friends when they came to visit him, spake not a word, either re∣proving or advising him, till they heard him open his mouth and curse the tongue that told the news of his birth. The knowledge of the sick mans spi∣ritual condition, is as it were, the foundation up∣on which we must build all our discourse with him, and prayers to God for him; or at least it is the rule by which we must build, and therefore its very dangerous to mistake in it. If the Foundation be laid ill, the superstructure will never stand well; If the rule be crooked, the building cannot be strait. A blind Archer may as soon hit the Mark, as one ignorant of his Neighbours state, advantage his soul.
SECT. IV. 2. APply thy self to him sutably to his condition; As the conditions of men are several, so must the Application be; that which cures one, may kill another; One medicine will as soon cure all diseased bodies, as one way all sick souls; In∣deed the Physick to be prescribed every Patient, is the same for substance; The blood of Christ; By his stripes we are healed; but there are several ways of tendering this to sinners, that they may be prepared for it, and give it all acceptation; that Physick which is given to one in a Potion, is given to another in a powder, to a third in an electuary, to a fourth in a pill, according as it will be most pro∣sitable and most acceptable to them. Its not easie so to write the bill, that the sick may receive, what is prescribed to his greatest content and advantage; For as many perish errore medici as vi morbi, by the error of the Physitian, as by the power of the disease. Though I judge it next to impossible, for me to set down exactly and fully, directions answe∣rable to the difference of sick persons condition, disposition, education, calling, guilt, &c. yet I shall speak to the most ordinary cases, and be careful not to omit the main work, namely, that which concerneth the conversion of graceless and Christ∣less persons, if on a sick bed, God peradventure will give them repentance. If the sick person be judged carnal and unrege∣nerate (for the Tree is known by its Fruits; Be∣sides, its no breach of charity, to fear the worst
of them, whose lives do not speak a positive holi∣ness, especially whilst we are endeavouring their good) then in general I would advise thee to speak. 1. To the depravation of mans nature, and the transgressions of life, with the sad aggravations there∣of. How holy man was by creation, how univer∣sally and desperately vicious he is by his fall from God, and what horrid unthankfulness he is guilty of in continuing in sin, notwithstanding the grace that is offered to him in the Gospel. Its fit to speak to the purity and equity of the Law of God, and to the difference and contrariety of his heart and life to it; to the sinfulness of sin, in its offensiveness and opposition, to the nature and word of an infinite∣ly Holy, Glorious, and Gracious Majesty, in its destru∣ctiveness to the present peace and future perfection of his own precious and immortal soul, and in that the stain of it is so deep, and the venome of it so great, that nothing beneath the blood of God could wash out its spots, or be a sufficient Antidote for its poison. Tell him of the folly of sinners in refu∣sing Heaven for Earth, Angelical Delights for brutish Pleasures, the blessed God for a base lust; and of his own madness likewise in running on so eagerly upon his own ruine against the counsels of men, the commands, threatnings, and intreaties of God, the convictions of his conscience, the calls and invitations of a loving Redeemer, and the mo∣tions of the holy Spirit. 2. Speak to the merit of sin, how it being com∣mitted against an infinite Majesty, deserveth in∣finite wrath and severity; Tell him that the Wages
of Sin is death, temporal, spiritual, eternal; Ac∣quaint him with the justice, holiness, and jealousie of God, how he will by no means clear the guilty, but hath threatned all manner of plagues and judgements on the workers of iniquity, and can∣not fail in the least of accomplishing his word; how he is resolved to make all the Children of Men feel sin to be an evil and bitter thing, either in broken bones on earth, or, broken backs, and endless tor∣ments in hell. Let him know his own obnoxious∣ness, by reason of his many and greivous sins, to the curse of the Law, the wrath of the Lord, and the vengeance of the eternal fire. Tell him that he is by nature a Child of Wrath, an Enemy to God, and an Heir of Hell; that it had been just to have cast him out of the Womb into Hell; that Gods patience in bearing with him thus long, will but increase his condemnation and endless misery, unless he prevent it by sincere conversion. This is the first thing requisite in order to the recovery of his soul. Till sin be discovered in its hainous nature, and bloody colours, it will never be lamented, nor the Saviour esteemed accor∣ding to the duty of the Sinner. The first thing usually, which the Spirit doth in the change of a sinner, is to convince him of sin, Joh. 16. 8. And this is also first in the Ministers commission, Acts 26. 18. The great neglect of this in Ministers and others, is one reason that so few Sinners are a∣wakened, the needful work of humiliation is so dan∣gerously slighted, that poor souls go sleeping and dreaming all is well, till they come to be undeceived in Hell.
3. Speak to his own inability to help himself, that no less then infinite power can recover him out of his miserable condition; Men are prone to act like Brutes, when they are wounded to undertake the licking themselves whole; as if it were an easie thing to renew a carnal creature, and heal vitiated nature, but alas the work is not so soon done. Its another manner of work to open the blind eyes, and liven the dead soul, then the secure careless worldling doth imagine. Its called a Resurrection from the dead, a new Creation, the Work of God, because nothing less then a Divine Almighty power can effect it, Revel. 20. 6. Ephes. 2. 10. Ioh. 6. 29. Ephes. 2. 6. 4. Speak to the necessity of a change in him, both of his disposition by Repentance, and of his condition by faith in Iesus Christ; That these are not works which may be done or left undone, but such as must be done, or he is undone for ever. Tell him the ne∣cessity of a change. 1. Of his Nature by Repentance, how God him∣self hath said; Except he repent he shall perish, and that it is not possible for the whole creation to make void Gods Word. That as he is a corrupted depraved creature, he is no way capable of Hea∣ven, for God hath shut him out, and bard the gate of bliss against him; Into it (i. e. Heaven) can in no wise enter any thing that defileth, or is unclean, Rev. 21. ult. And he hath shut himself out by his vicious nature; for spiritual pleasures are not sutable, neither can be enjoyed by depraved and ungodly creatures. Let him know that swinish dispositions cannot rellish heavenly delights, and
therefore if it were possible for him to get to Hea∣ven in a carnal estate, Heaven would be no Hea∣ven, that is, no place of joy or pleasure to him. Acquaint him especially wherein the nature of re∣pentance consisteth, not in a few sighs or sobs for sin, or in crying God mercy, or saying, I am sor∣ry I ever sinned, but in a real change of the heart and nature, that his mind must be changed to see the ugliness and deformity of sin, his will to refuse it as the greatest evil, his affections to loath it, and hate it above all things whatsoever,Job 42. 3. Jer. 31. 18. Ezek. 47. that he must abhor himself, and loath himself, and bemoan him∣self for all his abominations, if ever he would fid mercy; that he must in his whole man be altered, turned upside down, be contrary to what he is by nature, be converted and born again, or he can nevrr see the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18. 3. Ioh. 3. 3. Forget not also to discover the necessity of a change. 2. Of his state by faith in Iesus Christ, how the Son of God can alone deliver him from the wrath of God; that there is no name under heaven, by which he can be saved, but the name of Christ; that all his prayers, and tears, and duties, cannot satisfie the di∣vine justice for the least of his sins, or deserve the least favour on the behalf of his soul; that he must of necessity be united by faith to Christ, and submit to his guidance, and give up himself to his Government, or perish eternally; that though Christ died for him without his will, yet he will not save him against or without his will, but he must be heartily willing to accept Christ as his Sa∣viour and Soveraign, as ever he looks for salva∣tion
by him. Here it may not be amiss to ac∣quaint him with the fulness of Christs merits, and the freeness of Gods mercy to them that do sincerely repent and believe; How God commands, intreats, threatens, promiseth, and all to draw men to mind the things of their peace. 5. Speak to the shortness of his time, to do this weighty and necessary work in; that now there is no dallying, no delaying; for within a few hours it may be too late; that grace must be got now or ne∣ver; that Christ and pardon, and life must be ob∣tained now or never; that no sin shall be forgiven, no person shall be justified, no soul renewed or cleansed in the other world, that is not pardoned and sanctified in this; that Heaven and Hell are before him, and within a short time the matter will be determined which of the two he shall be in for ever; that he must now get a title to bliss, or miss it for ever; now prevent the unquenchable fire, or burn in it for ever; that he is now upon the shore, just stepping into the Ocean, either of Honey or Wormwood, Joy or Horror, and therefore it concerns him nearly to consider what he doth, and to be diligent to the utmost, if he would escape the endless company and torments of Devils and damned Spirits. Take heed of gi∣ving him hopes of recovery, which many do to please the sick or their friends; for hereby thou mayst ex∣ceedingly injure his soul, frustrating all the means used for his spiritual health. Think not much to be often with the sick person, in case thou hast op∣portunity. Let his misery move thee, and the love of Christ draw thee. When we fell an Oak,
thirty or forty of the first strokes seem to be lost, because the Tree stirs not, yet if we continue, it comes at last down, and sheweth the effects of the first, as well as the last strokes; If he be converted thou wilt be satisfied; however thy reward is with God. If this unconverted person be scandalous, then it may be sometimes convenient to hint at the horrid nature of such sins, being committed against common light, and abhorred by many of the very Heathen, and marked particularly for vengeance by the jealous God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Ephes. 5. 5, 6. Thou mayst have the more hopes of success in visiting such a one, because con∣science in this sinner, will probably prove thy friend, and joyn with thee in terrifying him for those sins, from which it could not (though it frequently at∣tempted) disswade him. If the unconverted person be one that liyed civilly and orderly in his outward conversation, paying eve∣ry man his own, keeping his Church, forbearing e∣normous crimes, &c. It will be then needful to com∣mend his civility, Iesus looked on such a man and loved him; but also to discover its defects and insufficiency, that there is one thing lacking; how his nature is uni∣versally polluted, and it must be throughly purified, or he is a lost man; that its one thing to have a wound hid, and another thing to have it healed; that many Inidels have been unblameable in their outward carriages, who yet perished, being without Christ; that the Scribes and Pharises went farther then most civil men, for they had not onely a negative holiness in denying gross sins, but a Positive holiness (in shew at least) they prayed, fasted, &c. yet he, to whom
it is impossible to lye, tells us, Mat. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the King∣dom of Heaven. It will be good also in dealing with such a person, to insist much upon the latitude and purity of the Law of God, how it forbiddeth (and condemneth for) the least sinful thought, and how nothing less then perfect obedience can an∣swer its demands, or satisfie the Law-giver, be∣cause such men are apt to judge themselves righte∣ous, comparing themselves with those that are notoriously vicious. They think all is well, their minds being darkned and unable to discern and dis∣cover the secret lusts which are hugd in their hearts; Besides, their consciences being defiled as well as other faculties, are not so true to them as to con∣vince them powerfully of that pride, hypocrisie, unbelief, impenitency, atheism, and ungodliness, which they are guilty of. And Satan hath a strict watch over them, to keep them asleep in sin, not caring, so men go to hell, whether they go thither in the dirty road of scandalous and crying crimes, or in the cleanly path, and through the fair Mea∣dows of Civility. Whether the person be scanda∣lous or civil, it will be needful to let in light at some crevice, and not to leave the sinner wholly in the darkness of despair; The good Samaritan poured Oyl as well as Wine, into the wounds of him that fell among Theives. A little hope may melt that heart which despair would harden. Sturdy Theives have wept at the news of a Reprieve, that have stormed and raged at the sentence of Con∣demnation; But this is wisely to be done, lest the
sinner be encouraged to presume. Lenity is to be joyned with Severity;Miscenda est lenias cum sevritate. sit amor, sed non emolien; sit rigor, sed non exasperans. Greg. Mor. 10. Let there be love, but not emboldening them to sloth; let there be terror, but not driving them into a fury, saith Gregory. If the sick person be one that is judged a true member of Christ, then speak to the excellency of Grace, and Christ, and Heaven, to the certainty and worth of those promises that are entailed on beleivers, to make his passage into the other world as comfortable as thou canst. It will be fit also to speak to those graces of Faith, Patience, Love, Heavenly-mindedness, and Ioy in God, which should be minded and exercised in a time of sick∣ness, how the time of affliction is the spring, the special time wherein those graces should shoot up and shew themselves, that God expecteth some service from him under his fickness, and that his last works should be better then his first. If he be under doubts and fears (for Satan will take the advantage of his sickness, to assault him with his fiery darts, and Saints are too apt to Que∣stion Gods love when they feel his hand; the weakness of the body, discomposing the mind, and denying it the free exercise of spiritual judge∣ment) then advise him to review his former ex∣periences of divine goodness, and trials of divine grace within him, to hold fast on Jesus Christ, and to consider that sickness is common to men, good as well as bad; that though they differ vastly in the other world, yet not at all in their passage thither; Singular Saints have been afflicted with the sorest sickness; Iob was a none-such for sanctity, yet full of sores; Its a question whether he were
more eminent for corporal distempers, or spiritual health; Hezekiah, David, Asah, Paul, Epaphro∣ditus, were all thus chastened of the Lord, but not condemned with the world. Whatsoever the sick person be, whether gra∣cious, or graceless, it will not be amiss to menti∣on the three great lessons which God would teach every one by affliction. 1. The emptiness of the world, appearing in its inability to afford the least ease to the body, or com∣fort to the soul of the sick; how little worth is that which fails a man in his greatest need! 2. The preciousness of Christ, and Grace, and the Promises of the Gospel, which can enliven and en∣courage a dying person; that can cause light in darkness, joy in sorrow, and life in death; that can enable a Christian to rejoyce in tribulation, and to welcome pain and sickness, nay, and the very King of terrors; and to look into the other world with comfort and confidence. 3. The sinfulness of sin, which is the original of all diseases, and aches, and greif, and separati∣on of friends, and losses, and miseries whatso∣ever. The Rabbies say, that when Adam tasted the forbidden fruit, his head aked; Tis clear, sin is the original of sickness; The body is the instru∣ment of unrighteousness, therefore the subject of diseases; For this cause many are weak and sick, 1 Cor. 11. 30. All the evil in this and the other world, are the issue and off-spring of sin; Ah! what a root of bitterness is that, which brings forth such bitter fruit! Be sure to take the thoughts of the sick off from resting in Physitians, or any means
used for their cure; Ths was the fault of good A∣sah, 2 Chron. 16. 12. Let them know that it is God that wounds, and he onely that can heal, and therefore he must not be tempted, either by despi∣ing those helps which his providence giveth, or by relying on them. Hippocrates gave this counsel to all Physitians, that when they went upon any oc∣csion to visit their Patients, they should consider first of all, whether there was not, divinum ali∣quod in morbo, something of God in the disease; if so, he held the Patient to be desperate, and his recovery impossible; Cujus contrarium verum est; If it were the hand of God that smote them, the same hand can help them; for with him nothing is impossible. Let them understand that sickness hath a supernatural as well as a natural cause. That all diseases are like the Centurions Servants, at the command of God; He saith to one, Go, and it goeth; to another, Come, and it cometh; to a third, Do this, and it doeth it. God would have the Israelites know, that not onely Sword, and Famine, and Captivity, but also Pestilence, Con∣sumptions, Feavers, and Burning Agues are sent from Heaven, Deut. 28. 21, 22. He causeth those stormes, and tempests, and quarrels, and contenti∣ons that are between the humours in our bodies, to their disturbance and destruction; therefore Moses beholding the whole body of the Jews (except two renowned members) corrupted, for he lived to see all that came out of Egypt besides to die, cryed out; Thou turnest man to destruction, and ayst, Return ye children of men.
SECT. V. 3. DEal closely and faithfully with him; Let not fear of giving distaste or hope of some ad∣vantage to thy self, make thee false to the soul of the sick. Do not play the part of a Mounte∣bank in using palliating medicines to allay the di∣stemper, or Anodynes to stupifie the patient, and neglect the root of the malady. Alas, carnal wretches are prone enough of themselves to de∣ceive and flatter their own souls, till it be too late for second thoughts, and the wicked one will be at their beds side, to hinder if it be possible, all means from awakening and undeceiving them; be careful therefore lest thou shouldst be any way accessary to Satans design; Sin is like the little Serpent Aspis, which stings men, whereby they fall into a pleasant sleep, and in that sleep die; sinners need all the rouzing and affrighting con∣siderations that may be; He that gives a potion, which instead of furthering health, procureth death, is a Murderer. The Flatterer is like the worm Terendo, mentioned by Pliny (in Nat. Hist.) as soft as Silk, in the feeling of the hand, but it biteth so hard with the teeth, that it eateth out the heart of the strongest timber. Flattery is to sin, what Oyl to Fire, it makes it flame the more. O tis dan∣gerous to speak peace, where God speaks war; shouldst thou do so, the blood of such a soul would be requi∣red at thy hands, Ezek. 33.8. Jer. 23. Faithful dealing will bring thee in most comfort at present, and most credit hereafter, as also be most advantagious to the
sick person. When the great day comes, the man that hated flattery, and scorned for a little profit or favour to disown his duty, or prove false to the soul of his Neighbour, will hold up his head with courage, but the cowardly and fear∣ful wil hang down their heads with shame, Rev. 21. 8. 4. Pray with him, and for him. Sick persons are often full of pain and grief, and are more then usually assaulted by Satan, whereby they are the less able to pray for themselves, and have the more need of the prayers of others. Its obser∣vable that though the Holy Ghost commandeth men in other afflictions to pray themselves; Is any afflicted? let him Pray; yet when he mentioneth sickness, he saith not; Is any sick? let him Pray; But, Is any sick? let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him; Jam. 5. 13, 14. i. e. A sick man is not so fit to pray himself, he wanteth others to pray for him, and with him. The soul sympathizeth in the sufferings of the body, and the inner man is seldom at rest, if the out∣ward man be distempered and disquieted. The mind is unfitted for duties, by the diseases of the flesh. Paul calls his bodily weaknesses a temptation, Gal. 4. 13, 14. Afflictions on the flesh, are temp∣tations to the spirit, and sickness is a piercing Ar∣row in Satans Quiver of temptations. If the person be carnal, what Motives hast thou from his misery to quicken thee to the duty! The poor creature is going to Hell, and knoweth it not. His destruction is near, and he is not aware.
How should the thoughts of that extremity and eternity of torments which he is every moment liable to, stir thee up to be earnest and instant with God on his behalf? It may be thou wouldst sit up a whole night to watch with him for the comfort of his body; Dost thou not know that the soul is infinitely more worth? O watch and pray, that he enter not into eternal condemna∣tion. Thou art not ignorant that God hath made promises of grace, as well as promises to grace, and canst not tell but that grace waiteth in heaven for the ick person; onely thy prayer must be the messenger to fetch it thence. God hath shewn mercy at the last, he can do it to this man, there¦fore thou mayst have the more hopes; Besides, it may be his sickness shall not be unto death, but onely to heal his diseased soul, and so to give him a new life, both natural and spiritual. The Que∣stion before thee, is, whether that poor sick crea∣tures soul shall be Christs or the Devils for ever, and wilt thou not plead hard with God that it may be thrown in to Christ, whose title is unquestio∣nable, and that the Grand and Arch-enemy of Christ and Men may be frustrated and disappointed in his expectation? Zeal to the advancement of thy Redeemers interest, and love to the soul of thy Neighbour, should actuate and animate thy re∣quests, and put life and fervency into thy Peti∣tions. If the sick man be godly, thou hast the more en∣couragement to pray. God hath promised as much to him, as thou canst rationally desire for him. He hath hopes to speed, that goeth to an honest
able man, and sheweth him his Bond for what he demands. God is infinite both in righteousness and power, so that there is no fear of a repulse, if you can shew his hand for your request. He de∣lights to hear his promises pleaded in prayer, and to see his Children so full of affection, as to be fervent in their petitions for each other. Thou mayst send the same message by prayer to Jesus, that the Sister of Lazarus did; Lord, behold he whom thou lovest is sick, and mayst be confident of the like gracious answer; This sickness is not unto death (eternal) but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. Next to thy endeavours for the good of thy sick Neighbours spiritual estate, it will be fit to advise him about his temporal estate, that he may dispose of his worldly affairs, and his wealth (if God have given him any) with wisdom, and set∣tle things so firmly, that his Relations may not be wrangling for his goods, when his body is at rest in his grave. Secondly, The exercising our selves to Godliness in visiting the sick, consisteth in getting good to our own souls by it.Deut. 18.11. Eccle. 5. 1,2. Though it be forbidden us to enquire of the dead, and ask their counsel, yet its commanded us to enquire of the dying, and to learn of them. Sick men may teach them that are in health many excellent lessons. Some say, that ground covered with Ashes, is made thereby the more fruitful. The Dust of the dead, falling upon a right soil, an honest heart, will make it
the more abundant in holiness. A Christian findeth walking in Hospitals or Church-yards among the sick or dying, much conducing to the health and life of his soul. He that was cast dead into his Grave, by touching the bones of dead Elisha, he was ravished to life; That which Elias said to Elisha, when he begged a double portion of his spirit; If thou seest me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee, may fitly be alluded to in this place. The sight of others sickness and death, and their departures from us, is a great means to increase the spirit in us, and to double our care and diligence in preparing for such an hour. 1. In laying to heart thine own frailty. He is but a cold clod of clay, and dead already, who doth not see his own death in the death of others. Sickness is but one remove from death; the sick bed is the way to the coffin; therefore when thou visitest the sick or dying, reflect upon thy self and consider; This will be my case, or a worse, a violent stroak; The same enemy that encountred my Neigh∣bour, is upon his march towards me, and will cer∣tainly overtake me; The feet of them that carry my friend to his grave, are ready to carry me also; what need have I to be always in a dying frame, and ready for death. The very next arrow that death shoots, may be levelled at me; and shall not I stand always upon my guard in expectation of it, and armed for it? O how deep will the head of that Ar∣row pierce me, if it find me naked! 2. In considering Gods mercy to thee, and blessing him for the health thou enjoyest. The pain of others, will tell thee that ease is a mercy; the racking sick∣ness,
and restless nights of others, do speak aloud in thine ears,Carendo potius quam frendo sapimus. that health and rest are mercies. O how shouldst thou adore that God who distin∣guisheth thee thus graciously from others! Mayst thou not think with thy self, Here is a person full of pain, the day is full of darkness to him, and wea∣risome nights are appointed to him; Lo his Wife and Children, and Friends are weeping about him, but cannot relieve or redress him; all the comforts of this life are unavoury to him; His aches and grief, and diseases, hinder him much in spiritual performances, and in the prosecution of a better life; how much a I bound to the Lord, that it is not so with me? I can rellih outward mercies, and am refreshed with bodily comforts; I have no such distemper or pain to take me off from prayer or Scripture, but I may be as frequent and as urgent as I will about my soul and eternal con∣cernments; Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all within me praise his holy name. Surely health is the Prince, the first-born of outward blessings. Though foolish men deprive themselves frequently of it, for the sa∣tisfaction of a sensual wanton appetite, yet its more worth then a thousand of those brutish transitory delights. A Stomach is of more value then meat, and a good digestion then raiment; Men think not much to part with much of their wealth in their sickness for a little health. O it deserves thy prayers to God for it with submission to his will when thou wantest it, and thy praysing of God for it with enlarged affections when thou hast it. 3. In observing the necessity of a timely repentance, and its difficulty on a dying bed. How unfit is a man to begin to live, when he is wracked with
pain, and going to die! The dolour and trouble of his body are great impediments to the good of his soul. When the outward man is in great di∣stress, and the inner man sympathizing with it, the best words are often wasted and thrown away, and the mind is unfit either to receive counsel or com∣fort. Further, How irrational is it to give Satan our prime, our health, or strength, and God our weak and consumptionate, and dying parts; to pre∣sent our enemy with our quick, and nimble, and active faculties and members, and to put off our best friend with a body full of sores, and a soul full of sin! Besides, the longer men continue in sin, the more difficult their conversion will be. He that hath wandred or travelled out of the right way all day, will hardly be perswaded to go back all the way, and set out again at night. Where Satan hath dwelt long, he will hardly be removed. A Ship, the longer it leaketh, the harder it is to be emptied. The frther a nail is driven in, the more trouble to get it out; The longer my soul continueth in disobedi∣ence, the harder it will be to bring it to repentance. The more sin is riveted and habituated in me, the more pains, and toyl, and grief, it will cost to get it subdued and slain. 4. In learning more the excellency of grace, and an interest in Christ, and God, which will do a man good in a day of ickness, and an hour of death; He is a friend indeed, that is a friend in a day of adversity. The sinners folly in neglecting durable riches, teach∣eth the Christian wherein true wisdom consisteth, and the worth of it; That it consisteth not in heap∣ing up such treasures, or getting such friends as will
be useless and unprofitable in a time of need, but in laying up a treasure in Heaven, and ensuring eternal comforts. Cold harp weather, sheweth the value of an healthy constitution. A storm will speak the worth of a sure Anchor, and a skilful Pilot. The excellency of grace, and holi∣ness, and Christ, and God, are not fully known till we come into the other world, where all sublunary comforts are wanting; But the more a∣ny condition in this world resembleth that, and the nearer we approach that, the more visible is the value of divine and lasting blessings. A Cordial is not esteemed till we come to fainting fits. A soul that in time of health, and wealth, and outward prosperity, made the fear and ways of God, and the estate of the godly, the object of his scorn and contempt, when he comes to be awakened by the alarum of death, and to look into the other world, will make them the object of his choice, and give a world (if he had it) for them. A Good Wish about the visitation of the sick, where∣in the former heads are applied. The Intro∣duction.THe righteous Lord, and God of all grace, who for sin afflicteth man with sickness, yet in the midst of judgement remembreth mercy, inten∣ding his instruction, not his destruction by it; ha∣ving designed such afflictions, as rods to whip men to himself, to make them out of love with sin, the spring of all their sufferings and sorrows, and to wean them from the earth, who otherwise would make it their Heaven; and hath also appointed men to be
the means through which these mercies shall be con∣veyed, and sicknesses sanctified to them. I Wish in general, that I may never omit to visit those Neigh∣bours with pity, whom God hath visited in fury; much∣less insult as the Edomites over the afflicted Israelites, and persecute them whom God hath smitten, draw∣ing blood from those wounds which are already blew with the blows of the Almighty; but may be faithful to the precept and purpose of my God in this particular, and adopt my second table duties into the Family of the first table, by visiting the sick, not out of com∣mon civility, but out of charity, and in obedience to the God of my health. It is my priviledge, that my Almes may become Sacrifice, my Courtesies worship, and in paying that debt of love which I owe to my Neighbour, I may pay that duty which I owe to my Maker. O that in all my common transactions, I might move upon principles of reason, and especially in works that have a tendency Godward, act upon grounds of Religion. Lord, thou hast an eye to my good, in all thy providences and dealings; why should not I have an eye to thy glory, in all my practices and actings? Cause thy fear so to possess my heart, that I may visit the sick out of conscience, and let thy grace so assist and accompany my endeavours, that thou mayst visit them to their eternal com∣fort. I Wish that the Command of my God,Motive, To visit the sick is a duty. may be a suffi∣cient Motive and warrant to make me set about the pra∣ctice of this work. It is my duty to visit them that are sick, as I am the Lords Servant; I disown his authority, I deny his Image, if I do not sympathize with others
in misery. Nature it self commandeth me to be af∣fected with the conditions of such as are afflicted. All creatures will commiserate those of their rank and or∣der, that are in misery; Bees will rather stay and starve with those of their kind, that are unable to flie to their Hives, by reason of the weakness of their wings, then stir from them, or forsake them. The Swine are so sensible of their fellows sufferings, that if one of the Company be lugd, all the rest will after their manner condole it. If a Beast be slain, and its blood spilt, others of that sort will hew their love and pity, by scraping earth on the blood, burying their fellow, and solemnizing his funeral with a kind of lamentation. Grace doth much more enjoyn me to be sick in others sickness, poor in others poverty, and to remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity, as being my self also in the body; David, speaking of his ene∣mies that sought his destruction, saith, But as for me, when they were sick, my cloathing was sack-cloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosome; I behaved my self as though he had been my friend, or bro∣ther, I bowed down heavily, as one that mour∣neth for his Mother, Psa. 35. 11, to 15. My God hath said, To him that is afflicted, pity should be shewn; Sickness is one of the greatest outward afflictions, it renders all the comforts of this life un∣comfortable; The largest Houses, Revenues, Honours, the most loving Acquaintants, Friends, Relations; are all unsavoury to them that are under great sickness. To visit the prosperous and healthy is courtesie, but to visit the distressed and sick is charity. The sweetest
showres should fall on the lower grounds. Lord, thou art the Father of mercies, and art afflicted in all the afflictions of thy Children; thy soul is grei∣ved for the miseries of Israel; How sutable is it for them who expect mercy another day, to shew mercy at this day! Make me a follower of thee, as a dear child, to put on bowels of compassion, and to be merciful in heart, tongue, and hand, as thou my Father in Heaven art merciful. I Wish that as a wise Merchant I may make the use of this price,Motive, Its a good oppor∣tunity for the doing of good which is put into my hand, for the furtherance of my own and my neighbours peace. Sick∣ness is a special opportunity, wherein I may advan∣tage others souls; The most poisonous Viper is at such a season benummed with cold, and so may be han∣dled without much danger. The strength of the body of sin, is much abated (at least in regard of act and exercise) by the weakness of the natural body. They who counted holiness a fancy, and holy ones Phana∣ticks, in their health and power, will beg hard for purity, and desire the Saints prayers in their sickness. The waters of those passions which in a Summer of prosperity did overflow their bounds, and threatned to over-whelm and over-throw all that was near, are frozen up in a Winter of adversity, and kept within their banks; There are many nicks in time, as we see in a Clock, which if they hit, the work goeth on well. The hardened hearts of sinners are often melted, when their persons are confined to their warm Cham∣bers; As Tinder when dry easily takes fire, by the least spark that falls on it; so when the souls of un∣godly men are made soft by sickness, and their thoughts
of the evil of sin in the pain it brings on their bodies, makes their affections combustible, it will be much the easier to kindle the fire of repentance in them; Affliction boareth or openeth the ear, and then its seasonable to drop some wholsom counsel into it. Though a load on the ground be hard to be stirred, yet a load on the wheels is easie to be drawn. The illness, and aches, and distempers of sinners bodies, do as it were set the work of conversion, and min∣ding the good of their souls, upon the wheel, and therefore such opportunities ought to be diligently im∣proved; Sickness is a good time when charity is in season. Tis a grace to have an opportunity for the service of my God, but a greater to improve it. The Eastern people do Plow and sow their grounds, when the former Rain hath softned it; and why should not I endeavour to Plow up the fallow ground of my Neighbours heart, and to sow in it the seeds of savoury instructions, when it is made tender by sickness? Lord, thou layest hold of every opportunity, to bless me with mercy answerable to my necessities; make me both wise to discern time and judgement, and faithful to make use of all such seasons to do thee service. I Wish that the opportunity I have thereby of doing good to my own soul,Its a good op∣portunity for the receiving of good. may move me to be the more care∣ful and consciencious in visiting the sick. It is the wise mans speech, It is better to go into the house of mourning, then to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to heart. It is better, as it is most sutable to my present state. Tis not proper for Pilgrims to spend their time in Pleasure. Sorrow is becoming
in a valley of tears. An house of mourning agrees well with the mourners in Sion. This world is a Sea, I am a Mariner, and Mariners rejoyce in the Haven, not in the Tempestuous Ocean. This life is a warfare, I am a Souldier; Tis too soon to be joyful whilst I am fighting; it will be time enough when all my Enemies are foyld. O how harsh is it for a child to be jocond, when he is far from home! Weeping is good language for them that sit down by the River of Babylon; How can I sing the Lords songs in a strange Land? Again, It is better to go into the house of mourning, as it is most profitable to my precious soul. Grace thrives best in a wet soyl; By the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. The inner man is best when clad in mourning. Trees planted by the water-side, hang with clusters, and bring forth fruit in due season. The sick bed is a Pulpit, and though there be a wick∣ed man in it, he may teach me rare instructions; If he be wholly silent, his condition Preacheth to me, that sin is the greatest evil, that the world is a cheat and impostour, and that grace is the most desireable created good. His dark chamber, weeping friends, watered couch, aking head, trembling heart, pale lips, quivering loyns, all call aloud to me to consider of, and prepare for such an hour. Abel, being dead, yet speaketh; My sick, my dead Neighbour speaketh; Prepared be, to follow me. Some have been raised to life by beholding the dead. O that I were wise to observe and improve the oppor∣tunities which free grace affordeth me, for my own and others welfare! If I lose a good Market for the furtherance of my outward estate, I befool and
bewail my self. Ah, why should I not be as much af∣fected with the loss of opportunities for my inner man. Sinners observe their seasons for the gratifying their Loves, and the satisfying their lusts. The Thief waiteth for the full Purse, till the Market is over, and commodities be sold. The Adulterer makes use of the dark night for his deeds of darkness. Satan watcheth every opportunity to insnare and destroy me; if I give him the least advantage by idleness or car∣nal security or running into occasions of sin, he doth presently lay hold on it to pollute me. All men in∣deed may shameme. The Mariner doth spread his Sails when the Winds blow. The Merchant observes his Exchange hours, when he may meet with many friends, and dispatch much business in a little time. The Lawyer minds his Terms. There is a time when Kings go out to Battel, 2 Sam. 11. 1. which Souldiers will not neglect. The Husbandman makes Hay whilst the Sun shines; Yet, Ah how foolish am I to let slip those golden seasons which my God giveth me,Eccles. 3. 11. and 9. 12. for working out my own salva∣tion! Lord, thou hast made every thing beautiful in its season; But poor silly man knoweth not his time.1 Chron. 11. 39 Grant me so much prudence, that is the men of Issacar, I may have understanding of the times, and so much piety as to serve the times, not as Worldlings, in altering my course according to the fashions and customes of men, but in embracing what is tendered in due time, for my own and others good, always adhering to the Commands of thee my God. Motive. It may be the last opportu∣nity.I Wish that the uncertainty of my sick Neighbours outward recovery, may make me the more care∣ful
and solicitous about his spiritual health. If he die, he is stated and fixed for ever and ever, and I am for ever deprived of all opportunities of profi∣ting or advantaging his soul. Now he is sick, he is nigh death, but one step from it. The sick stand upon the borders of the grave, upon the brink of the pit, nay, of eternity. Those that are in most perfect health, are inclining towards death; but they that are sick, are approaching the Chambers of darkness. Such a man may speak in the language of Haman, My life draweth nigh unto the grave, Psa. 88. 3. Should he depart this life in a natural estate, he falleth into the jaws of eternal death. All prayers for him will then be fruitless, and there is no giving counsel to him after death. I must now advise, ex∣hort, perswade, beseech him to mind faith and re∣pentance, or never do it; I must now put up hearty cries and groans to God on his behalf, or never do it. The loving kindness of God cannot be declared in the grave, nor his faithfulness in destruction.Psa. 88: 11 When he is wailing in Hell for the ungodliness of his heart and life, I may be weeping on earth for my neglect of him, or unfaithfulness to him, but both our tears will be in∣effectual, and our cries comfortless. O that the love of my Saviour, the command of my God, the worth of a soul, the weight of an eternal estate, the fear of losing such a season, and the impossibility of recalling or reco∣vering it, may all provoke me to be instant with the sick, to turn to God, and abhor and bewail their sins, and to be fervent with God, that he would crown my endeavours with success! Lord, I may speak thy Mind and Will to Men, but thou a∣lone, who didst make the ear, canst enable them
to hear, let it please thy Majesty so to affect my heart with a due sense of others misery, so to direct my tongue what to speak in order to their recovery, and so to prosper the undertakings of thy servant, that as often as I visit any unconverted person in his sickness, I may turn a sinner from the error of his ways, save a soul alive, and hide a multitude of sins. The matter of it. 1. Know his condition. I Wish that I may be solicitous to understand the spiritual conditions of the sick, that my prescripti∣ons may be profitable, being sutable to their several sores. The knowledge of the disease, must necessa∣rily precede directions for its cure. Its folly to un∣dertake their recovery, whose estates I am ignorant of. He works at the labour-in-vain, who goeth a∣bout to heal a wounded Patient, when he knoweth not the place or nature of his pain. The mistake of the Physitian may be as mortal and dangerous as the disease it self. It will be no wonder if a blind man shoot awry and miss the mark. This was the cause that Jobs friends, though holy men, and designing a good end, wandred exceedingly; and instead of administring comfort by their visitation, wounded him to the quick, and proved his greatest cross; The Sabeans and Chaldeans robbed him of his Cat∣tel; Satan wronged him in his body, but his three friends vexed his soul, and did break him in peices with words. Their ignorance was the ground of the hurt they offered, instead of the help they intended, Job 19. 2. A Friend may do that mischief upon a false supposition, which an Enemy doth out of malice. Though the Doctrine be true and right, if the Applica∣tion
of it be wrong, I may kill sooner then cure the person to whom I apply it. The Husbandman must know the nature of his ground, before he casteth in his seed, or otherwise he will miss of his expected crop. Lord, thou knowest the conditions and dispo∣sitions of all men, by immediate intuition, and needest not that any should testifie of man; thou knowest how needful it is for me to understand by ra∣tional discourse, who and what those sick persons are, how things stand betwixt thy Majesty and their souls, whose recovery I go about; O help me to find out their sickness, and to give such advice out of thy word, that thou mayst work their cure. I Wish that when the condition of the sick person is found out,Let thy Ap∣plication be sutable. neither fear nor flattery may make me un∣faithful to his soul. Those prescriptions cannot be pro∣fitable, that are not answerable to his estate. I am unfaithful to God, my Neighbour, and my self, if my Application be not sutable to his condition. My God commandeth me to proclaim War against the pre∣sumptuous, to preach Peace to the penitent; and if I act otherwise out of fear, or affection, I act contrary to my commission; I am false to my trust, if I keep not close to the will of my Lord. He that takes not his Masters Precepts for his rule, will at last be coun∣ted and punished as an unfaithful servant. I hinder also my Neighbours good, whilst I give him coun∣sel unsutable to his case. I may pretend love and re∣spect, but its real hatred to flatter him who is hasten∣ing to the unquenchable fire. How dreadful will his fall be, from the high Turret of presumption, into the infernal pit of perdition, and how little thanks
will he give me in the other world, for cozening his soul, by telling him all was well, till he came to see his own and my mistake in hell! Again, the guilt of such a crime would make a deep gash in my own conscience. Its ill slighting, or tampering with in∣estimable souls; His blood will be required at my hands; and if the blood of a slain body cry so loud for vengeance, what will the blood of a murdered soul do? Why should I to humour any mans lust, in∣jure his soul, hinder my own peace, and incur the anger of the Lord. O that no foolish pretences what∣soever, may keep me off from acquainting sinners with th il and end, the nature and danger of their sins. Its Gods order, first to cast the soul down, and then to lift it up. The ground must feel the Plow, be∣fore it receive the Seed. Sorrow must precede com∣fort, and they must sow in tears, who would reap in joy. God must shake all Nations, before the de∣sired of all Nations will come to him. We come to Sinai, the Mount that burneth with fire, and to blackness and darkness, and a tempest which makes even a Moses to fear and quake exceedingly, be∣fore we come to Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the Heavenly Ierusalem, and to Jesus the Mediatour of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things then the blood of Abel. The Law is a School-Master to drive us to Christ. Austere Iohn, with his Ax laid to the root of the Tree, threatning the fire to those that bring not forth fruit, prepareth the way for the sweet alluring Iesus; Mourning and Grief, is the Midwife of true mirth; Penitential tears are the streams that lead to the Rivers of Pleasures; Even
the doleful sound of the Trumpet attendeth the Iudge, when he is going to acquit a Prisoner by publique Pro∣clamation. Violence must be offered to corruption, or there will be no acceptance of the Lord Christ. The building of holiness is the more strong, for having its foundation of humiliation laid deep: The safety of the soul doth depend like Jonahs, upon his being cast over-boord, and utterly lost in his own apprehen∣sion. The blessed Iesus himself is brought into a desolate Wilderness, before Angels are sent from Heaven to comfort him. O that I might follow my God in his usual way, and never prophesie smooth things to rug∣ged and ed men, but endeavour to break their hearts on th, who have persisted in the breach of his holy Laws, that their backs may not be broken in Hell; Yet I would not instead of beating down the rotten Paper walls of presumption, drive any into the Dungeon of desperation; but as the good Nurse, have the breast of consolation, as well as the rod of correction in readiness for such Children. Moses and Christ met together upon Mount Tabor. The Gospel must be Preached to heal those wounds which are opened and discovered by the Law. The Lord sen∣deth me to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound. Lord, thou killest and makest alive, bringest down to the grave, and bringest up. Its easie and or∣dinary with thee to break those bones which thou intendest to rejoyce, and to perplex those Rams in Briars and Thorns, which thou intendest to accept of as a sacrifice. Teach thy Servant to know how to speak a word in season, both to the wicked and to the godly,
how to divide thy word aright, both in its minatory, and consolatory parts, that as occasion shall e, I may awaken the wicked out of their deadly slumbers, and quicken the godly to their spiritual watchfulness, and help to sweeten that bitter cup which thou hast put in∣to their hands. O that thy blessing might water my labours for both their welfares! Alas poor sick unre∣generate ones, are dropping into boundless and endless sorrows, and yet are without sense. Though they are dying they know not what they are doing, nor whither they are going; Their eyes are shut by the god of this World, that they see not that unspeakable misery to which they are liable every moment; their hearts are hardened through custom in sin, that neith reatnings nor promises prevail with them to feel their wounds and sores. O thou great Physitian, thou Lord of life, thou God of health, open their eyes, send some Ananias to them, that they may receive their sight, and be fil∣led with the Holy Ghost; enable them so to mourn now, that they may be comforted when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and help thy servant to deal so faithfully with those whom thou callest me to visit, that I may never give thy Maje∣sty cause to say of me as once of the Prophets of Israel, They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no peace. Be close and home in thy Applica∣tions.I Wish that I may be close and home in my Applica∣tions to sick persons, and speak what is proper to their estates with ardency and affection, to their very hearts; Its ill dallying with edged tools; O how sad is it to toy and trifle, to be formal or customary in counsel
or reproof, or comfort to immortal souls, that are launching into the Ocean of eternity. Death is a serious thing, and that which they never did before, nor shall ever do again. Sin is a serious thing, as the damned find in Hell by woful experience. Though there they are in blackness of darkness, yet they have light enough to see sin to be the evil of evils, and al∣together sinful. Christ was serious when he took up∣on him my nature, and therein did offer up himself a sacrifice for sin. God is serious in commanding faith and repentance, and in promising Heaven to the faithful and holy, and Hell to unbeleivers and atheists; And shall not I be serious and in earnest, when I am dealing about matters of eternal life and death, and about the concernments of God and Christ, and souls, and eternity! O with what ear∣nestness should I perswade the wicked, to turn from their wickedness and live! If ever their souls would draw near to the Lord of life, it concerns them to do it, when their bodies are drawing nigh to the Chambers of death; It is but a very few hours, and their condition will be past all amendment, all alteration. In this poor pittance of time, all must be done, upon which the Scales must turn, for their salvation or damnation. They are going to make that change which will admit them into endless joy or torment, and render their estates unchangeable. Their time is hastening, that they must struggle with dreadful pains, and strong distempers, and death, the King of terrors, and must review that life which is ending, and look back upon all that they have done, and judge their persons and actions imparti∣ally, whether they will or no, that they must take
their leave of all their friends, and food, and sleep, and lands, and houses, and honours, and pleasures, and riches, and step into eternity, and appear be∣fore God without their Relations, or Possessions, or any worldly comforts, to help or encourage them; that they must be tried by an holy Law, and an holy Judge, for their everlasting lives or deaths; and can my ex∣pressions be too full of weight and reason, or my af∣fections too full of bowels and pity, in my dealing and discourse with such men? Lord, thou knowest the poor silly children of men, are unable to judge of eternal affairs according to their weight; they are quickly lost, when in their thoughts they begin to launch into that boundless Sea; The ponderousness of the subject, is ready to affright and press them down, being so much beyond and above their shallow under∣standings; But wouldst thou please to enable them, though it were but to peep into the other world, and to behold, through some Crevice, what is doing and enjoyed there, both by thy friends and thine enemies, they would soon have other thoughts of thee and thy service, and other carriages when they are about thy work; the greatest seriousness would then be too lit∣tle, the greatest ardour would not be thought enough for thy worship; they would then indeed, be fervent in spirit when they are serving the Lord. O teach thy servant, though he cannot see into the other world with the eye of sense, yet so to look into it with an eye of faith, that he may transact the concerns there∣of with that diligence, faithfulness, and fervency, which thou acceptest, and whilst he liveth, be zealous of good works.
I Wish that my heart may be so affected with pity towards sick and afflicted persons,Pray with them, and for them. that I may often and earnestly remember them in my prayers. A little Captive, considering the Leprosie of her Master, was instrumental for his cure, by crying out, Would God my Lord were with the Prophet that is in Sa∣maria, for he would recover him of his Leprosie. I have more reason when I behold a Leprous soul, near its last gasp, to look up to Heaven with, Would to God that poor creature were with Jesus Christ, that great prophet of his Church, who is able and willing to enliven, and pardon, and sanctifie, and save; Would to God he would be perswaded to come to Christ, to cling to Christ, to close with Christ, for he would recover him; And what do I know but my prayers may be prevalent on his be∣half; Christ when dying, prayed for his enemies, for them that imbrued their hands in his blood; and shall not I pray for my friends when they are dying, and possibly ignorant whether they are going? My Prayers are a cheap courtesie, and diminish nothing of my estate, either spiritual or temporal. Their mi∣sery is an awakening motive to the duty. Never did they stand in such need of help from others, and wrastling with God on their behalves, as now that they are taking their journey into a far Country, and entring upon an unchangeable condition. They may say to me, as Nehemiah to Geshem; I am doing a great work, &c. I am going to die, to bid adieu to all the folly and vanity, and com∣forts of this world, to take possession of my long home, of the place wherein I must abide for
ever; O pray for us, that we may be pardoned, and saved, that we may repent and believe, that we may die in the faith, and obtain the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto life eternal. They have many distractions upon their own spirits, by reason of pains and bodily distempers, and the loss and lamen∣tation of their Kindred and Relations, that they can∣not poure out their hearts to God with that freeness and seriousness, and earnestness, which (probably) they desire. Their enemies, and assaults, and temp∣tations, at such a time are more quick, and strong, and violent, and full of rage, having but a short time. I must now pray for them, or never pray for them; Now beg mercy for them, or never beg mercy for them. When their life is gone, all tears, and cries, and groans for them are in vain. Davids greatest passions for dead Absolon were to no purpose. They are then gone the way they shall not return, and fixed in that place whence they shall never remove. Lord, I confess that my narrow heart hath not pity enough for afflicted, and sick, and dying souls, and my weak hands have not power enough to supply or support them in their sad estates, but thou hast both. O be pleased to look down from Heaven, the habita∣tion where thine holiness dwelleth; Behold their miseries, hide thy face from all their iniquities; out of thine infinite fulness, releive their necessities. Let the eyes of their souls be opened to see their sins and their Saviour, before the eyes of their bodies be clo∣sed. Give them patience and strength answerable to the burden thou layest on their backs; Enable them to do their last works well, and let them be better then their first; Open thou their lips, and let their mouths
shew forth thy praise, before they go to the place of silence. Stand by them in their last conflict with their enemies, Death and Devils, that they may over come both, be more then conquerours through him that loves them, and pass through the jaws of death, to the joys of a blessed eternal life. I Wish that my soul may be the more sound for every visit I bestow on sick bodies.In receiving good by them There is not so much danger of catching their outward diseases, as there is hope of increasing my spiritual health, if I am not wanting to my self. The sick and dying bed is a Pulpit, out of which I may be instructed more fully in many serious truths, though the sick or dying man be speechless. King Joash obtained three famous victories over the Syrians,2 King. 13. 14, to 20. by visiting sick Elisha, and might have gotten a compleat conquest over them, if it had not been his own fault. The sight of sick and dying men, may assist me in my conflicts with the three great enemies of my present purity, and future comfort and bliss. It teacheth e how vain it is to make provision for that flesh which will it self ere long, be provision for wormes; Ah how foolish am I to pamper and please that which instead of releiving or refreshing, will in my extremity pierce and pain me! It teacheth me that the world it self is the greatest Cheat and Impostour in the world. That though it laughs and smiles on men, dandling them on her knees, and hugging them in her armes, whilst they are in health, and promising all sorts of comforts and pleasures; yet in their sickness and mi∣sery she turns them off, and leaves them, as Ab∣solons Mule did him, to be hot through with the
heart-cutting arrows of eternal death; By discovering the emptiness and falseness of these two seeming ends, the flesh and the world, it helpeth me to over∣come my third enemy, and to repel the fiery darts of the Devil. The cup of temptation, which hath so often bewitched me to drink down his deadly poi∣son, had its prevalency from the worldly profit with which the out-side was guilded, or the fleshly plea∣sure with which the in-side was sweetned. Ah! could I but bid an hearty defiance to the World and the Flesh, and conquer them, I need not fear the wicked one; They are the powerful Advocates, by which Satan pleads, and too often prevails with the soul; By these Hand-maids he wooeth the Mistress. But the sick bed is a Book in which I may read their de∣ceitfulness and treachery, their perfidiousness and falla∣cies, and thereby learn to avoid them. Further, I may read the sinfulness of sin in others sickness. That Parent must needs be a deformed monster, that begets such uncomely and ill-favoured children. In the dreadful effects I may behold the poisonous cause. Man had never known sickness in his body, if he had not known sin experimentally in his soul; Tis the plague and stone of the heart, that causeth those in the flesh. When I behold the sick man labouring under his distemper, how he is chast∣ened with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain, so that his life ab∣horreth bread, and his soul dainty meat; How his flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his bones stick out; he is filled with tossings too and fro, unto the dawning of the day: When I behold his eyes sinking, his heart panting, hi
Wife and Children wailing and wringing their hands, his friends weeping, his tongue falte∣ring, his throat ratling, his breath failing, his strength languishing, his whole body in a cold clammy sweat, wrestling with his pain and disease; may I not well cry out, O what an evil is sin, which bringeth all this upon the poor Children of men! My Redeemer is therefore said to bear our sicknesses, because he bare our sins in his body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Mat. 8. 17. And in all his applications for the cure of the diseased, he had an eye to the root of the malady; To one that was diseased, he said, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; To another, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. When the Angel was smiting Israel with a Pestilence, holy Davids thoughts ran upon the procuring cause, I have sinned, I have done very wickedly; My God teacheth Israel the grievous nature of their defilement, in the greatness of those judgements which they brought upon them. Speaking of his severity towards them, he tells them, Thy way and thy doings have procured those things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart, Ier. 4. 18. Our bodies are full of natural corruption, because our souls are full of moral corruption. O how fitly may I therefore, when I behold the evil of affliction on others, abhor and bewail the evil of sin in my self! Once more, I may be instructed in the necessity of a timely preparation for such an hour of afflicti∣on; Can I think a ick bed a fit place, an hour of pain and grief a meet season to begin that great busi∣ness
of turning from sin, of loathing my self for all my abominations, and working out my own salvati∣on? Is it rationally to be imagined that trembling joynts, dazelled eyes, a fainting heart, failing limbs, a body full of aches and diseases, a soul sympathizing with it, and full of vexation and grief, should be fit instruments about such a work, which an angelical strength, and agility, and free∣dom, is little enough for? Ah, What wise man would build his eternal making and welfare, upon such a tottering and sandy foundation? The greatest strength, and longest time, and most vigorous health, is not in the least degree, too much for this needful and weighty business; and shall I put it off till my strength fails, my health is gone, and my time near its last sand? Lord, Beside all these, I may learn the excellency of thine Image, and thy favour; Sickness cannot waste them, nor death it self destroy them. Where the Curtains are drawn, and the windows close, in the darkest chamber of the dying man, the comeliness of thy likeness, and the sweetness of thy love, are most sparkling and glorious. The want of outward comforts, doth con∣vince the unbeleiving world of the worth of eternal blessings. When the flesh and world that made shew of such love to their deluded favourites, turn them off in their extremity, as the Jews did Judas (com∣plaining to them of his-folly and wickedness) What is that to us, see thou to that; Thou standest by and ownest thy servants, thou knowest their souls in their days of adversity; and how-ever thou dealest with them in their health, wilt be sure to tend and look to, to be both Nurse and Physitian to thy sick chil∣dren.
Thy grace is a reviving Cordial, and thy love will make even death it self a sweet and desireable dish. O help thy poor servant to gain much spiritual good by those natural evils which others suffer. As others sickness speaketh these things to mine ears, and their conditions make them visible to mine eyes, do thou write them in my heart, that all such provi∣dences of thine towards others, may make sin more ugly, the world more empty, thy graces and favour more comely and desireable, and that furthering my purity at present, they may further my eternal peace hereafter. Finally,The Conclu∣sion. I Wish that the sickness of others, may cause me to be the more industrious in a faithful im∣provement of my health, and take me wholly off from priding, and pampering, and making pro∣vision for that flesh, which is so apt to breed dis∣eases, and in its greatest beauty and strength is so near to death. The goodliest structure of body is but earth a little better wrought, or more curiously then usually moulded up, and with an ordinary dis∣ease is mard and defaced, and so calleth on me to be humble rather then lifted up. The Flesh that I provide for my flesh, is not more subject to corrupti∣on, or more perishing then the flesh for which it is provided. Within a few days I shall have an end both of food and feeding; O that I might waste that body in Gods service, which will ere long waste with sick∣ness! spend and he spent in his work, who gives me my health, and strength, and hath promised a boun∣tiful reward! Sure I am, I can never bring them to a better Market, nor put them off at an higher price. Is it not better to consume my flesh in doing good, in
glorifying my God, then with idleness and ease, or with distempers and diseases? Satans servants do not grudge to give their prime and cheif, their healh and strength to their lusts, and shall not I give mine to my Lord? Ah Lord, an unthankeful selfish unbelei∣ving heart, hath too much indered me from, and disturbed me in those excellent duties which thou callest me to; O deliver me from it for thy mercies sake! Strengthen me by thy good spirit, both to do good to, and receive good by such as thou chastenest with sickness; so to consider the poor and afflicted, and to visit others in my heath, that thou mayst visit me with thy saving health; strengthen me upon my bed of languishing, and make all my bed in my sickness, that my most mortal sick∣ness may not be unto death (eternal) but for thy glory, and my passage into endless bliss; yea, that in the other world, I may stand among thy Sheep on thy right hand, and hear that blessed heart-chearing voice, Come thou blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee before the foundation of the World; For I was hungry and thou gavest me meat, I was thirsty and thou gavest me drink, I was a stranger and thou didst take me in, I was sick and thou visitedst me; when my soul shall be above all sin, and my body a∣bove all sickness, and both blessed in thy favour and fruition, for ever, and ever. Amen.
CHAP. VIII. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness, on a Dying Bed. SIxthly and Lastly; Thy duty is to exercise thy self to Godliness (if God give thee opportunity) on a Dying Bed. The work of a Saint is to glorifie God, not onely in his life, but also in his death. The Silk-worm stretcheth out her self before she spin, and ends her life in her long wrought clew; The Christian must stretch out himself on his dying Bed, and end his life in the work of his Lord. Every Man by his death, payeth his debt to nature. He is earth in re∣gard of his Original creation, and must be earth in regard of his ultimate resolution; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt return, Gen. 3. 19. The Sinner when he dyeth, payeth his debt to Sin, Satan, and the Law; To sin, as he is the servant of unrigh∣teousness, and so must receive its wages, which is death; To Satan, as he hath sold himself to work wickedness at his will, and so must have his tempter to be his eternal tormentor; To the Law, as he hath violated its precepts and commands, and therefore must undergo its punishment and curse. The Saint when he dieth, payeth his debt to God, for he oweth him honour as well by his death, as by his life; Hence we read, not onely of their living in the Lord, and to the Lord, but also of their dy∣ing in the Lord, and to the Lord; (Rom. 14. 8.
Rev. 14. 13.) Which though some expound in that place of the Revelations, to the cause for which they died; they did not dye out of humour or obstinacy, or any carnal selfish interest, but purely as Martyrs at Gods call, and for Gods cause; They loved not their lives to the death for the testimony of Iesus; Yet the words may as clearly speak; 1. The state in whi they died. They died in the favour of God, reconciled to him through the death of the Mediatour. The Castle of their souls was not taken by storm or in a state of emnity and oppo∣sition, but by a quiet voluntary srrender, or in a state of peace and amity. 2. The manner of their deaths; They died in the fear of God; they exercised grace as well in sickness as in health, and when dying as when living; their spiritual motions were quick, when their na∣tural motions were slow. Plutarch reports of Lucius Metellus high Priest of Rome, that though he lived to a great old age, his voice did not fail him, nor his hand shake in his sacrificing to the Gods. Its said of Moses when he was a hundred and twenty years old and dyed, that his natural sight did not fail him, neither was his heat abated; So it may be said of the Christian, that though he die old, his spiritual sight doth not fail him, nor his divine heat abate. As Caleb, he is as strong in regard of grace, his inward strength, when he is entering into the promised Canaan, as he was when he first went forth as a spie by faith, to search the land flowing with milk and honey. The Heathen counted him happy that dyed either in the midst of the goods of fortune, (hence they say, if
Priamus had died a little before the loss of his Town, he had died the greatest Prince in all Asia,) or in the exercise of their moral vertues; Hence they so highly extol Seneca and Socrates, who seemed to dare even death it self, out of resolution and fortitude; Though those seeming vertues were but as Austin terms them, Splendida Flagitia, Famous Vices, and their confidence arose not from any grounded knowledge of their good estates, but from their blindness and ignorance of their depra∣ved, wicked, and woful estates. He is the happy man indeed, that dieth in the faith, that sleepeth in Iesus, that goeth to his grave in the exercise of grace. The Master of Moral Philosophy, com∣mendeth that Pilot whom a Ship-wrack swalloweth up at the Stern, with the Rudder in his hand. The most high God commendeth that person whom death seiseth, doing the work for which he was sent into the world. Even the blind Mole, if Natura∣lists may be credited, opens his eyes when he comes to dye; and the crooked Serpent stretcheth out her self straight, when she is going to fetch her last breath; and shall not the Saint be best at last? Reader, Observe how careful the Saints have been to do their last work well, and to go out of the world like some sweet spices, perfuming the room in which they fetch their last breath, with holiness, and leaving a sweet savour behind them. Jacob when dying, worshipped, leaning on his staff, Heb. 11. 21. What a Character doth he give of the Angel of the Covenant, and what blessings doth he pray for, and prophesie to come on his children, when he
was going from them? How was his heart enlarged in pantings after the Lord Christ? Gen. 48. 16. and 49. per tot. The living waters of his graces ran with the greater strength, when they were empty∣ing themselves into the Ocean of glory. Moses like the dying Swan sings most sweetly, being to go up to Mount Nebo to dye there. What excellent doctrines, reproofs, instructions, doth he deliver to the Israelites? How pathetically, rhetorically, divinely doth he dictate his last legacies to his Poli∣tical children? who can read and not be ravished with wonder and delight! Deut. 32. & 33. Ioshua like the morning star, shines brightest at last; He gives his people so strict a charge to serve the Lord, such gracious counsel, when he was going the way of all the earth, that it could not but be remembred many days after. Dying Ioseph will lay his bones at stake for Gods faithfulness, and that he will visit Israel and deliver them out of Egypt. Sampson did the Church of God much service, in slaying more of her enemies at his death, then in his life. Iulius Caesar among the Romans, and Olympia the Mother of Alexander among the Grecians, were famous for their care to die handsomely, and not to commit at last any ill beseeming action, where∣by their memories should have been rendred in∣glorious; But the Christians care hath always been, to die holily, and to do their God most service when they are going to that place where they shall do him no more in a proper sense. Philosophers tell us,Xen. l. 8. Plut. Apol. that the soul upon deaths approach is more divine and supernaturally inclined; certain it is, the soul of a Saint onely doth then more aspire heaven∣ward,
when its returning , to its original divinity, according to Plotinus his phrase of death. As his Saviour he brings out his best wine at last, and his last works are more then his first, Rev. 2. 19. The blessed Prince, and Lord of life, should be our pattern at death. He got his Father most glory, he did his Church most good, by his death, though he was eminently serviceable to both all his life time. Its said of him, He was obedient (Phil. 2. 7.) to the death; Which may import, 1. His continuance in well-doing; His obedience lasted to the last moment of his life; so should ours. Elisha would not leave his Master, till taken from him into Heaven, and we should not leave our Lord till taken to him into Heaven. Polycarp in his old age being urged by the Proconsul to deny Christ, answered, I have served him eighty six years, and he never once hurt me, and shall I now deny him? 2. His obedience in his death; His death was a Free-will offering in obedience to his Fathers com∣mand. Not onely his birth and life was an answer to his Fathers call; A body hast thou prepared, &c. Then said I, Lo, I come (to put on that body, to take upo  that nature, and thereby and there∣in) to do thy Will, O God; but also his death was in pursuance of his duty; This commandment received I of my Father; Thus the Christians death must be offered up as a sacrifice to God, in obe∣dience to his command. The Sinners soul is Prest to this War, in which there is no discharge; This night thy soul shall be required of thee. The Saint
understanding the orders from the Lord of Hosts, is a Voluntier; He gives up the Ghost; Into thy hands Lord I commend my Spirit. 3. The gracious manner of his dying. The Sun of righteousness, when setting, did shine most glori∣ously. Though at his death he had such infinite disadvantage, being to wrestle with the frowns of an incensed God, the fury of earth and Hell, and met with clouds, black, and thick enough to have obscured the graces, and hindered the holiness of any but himself, from shining at all, yet how brightly did they break forth in the midst of all those Fogs, and Mists, and Darkness! What holy counsel and comfort did he give his Disciples to prepare them for his departure, in his last (and one of his longest) Sermon! Ioh. 14, 15, 16. What an heavenly prayer doth he put up to his Father for them, and all his elect! to give them both a taste and a pledge of that intercession which he was going to Heaven to make for them. When he was hanging on the Cross, under such an heavy weight as the sins of the whole World, Grace was not depressed. His love to his Mother is observeable; Woman, behold thy Son; And from that hour that Disciple took her to his own house, John 19. 26. But his love to his membren though enemies, was wonderful; Father forgi them, they know not what they do. His Faith in his Father; Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. His pity to one of the Theives. His Patience in bear∣ing the scoffing words and taunts, more bitter then Worm-wood, of them that passed by, re∣viling him, as well as in suffering the wracking
of his bones, and whole body, and the anger of an infinite God, in his soul, without any mur∣muring, may well call for our admiration. Reader, he hath set thee a pattern, that thou shouldst follow his steps. Some tell us the Phoenix of Saba, in Arabia Faelix (so called from Phoenicea, or the Pur∣ple colour of her wings) liveth six hundred and six∣ty years, at the end of which time, she buildeth her a nest of Cassia, Calamus, Cinnamon,Plin. l. 9. c. 35. and o∣ther precious spices and gums, which the Sun by the extremity of his heat, and the wavering of her wings, fires, and she taking delight in the sweet∣ness of the savour, hovers so long over it, that she burns her self in her own Nest. Thus did the blessed Jesus, and thus ought his followers to ex∣pire in a Nest of sweet Spices, the exercise of the graces of the holy Spirit. It was a poor farewel to the world, which even Octavius Augustus gave when at the point of death he called for his Looking-glass,Suetonius. commanded to have his Head and beard combed, and his shriveled Cheeks smoothed up; then asking his friends if he had acted his part well; Cum ita responderint, vos omnes igitur inquit Plaudite. It is a dreadful conclusion which Pliny relates the Hyber∣boreans to make, who when they have lived to one hundred years or more, make a great feast, to which they invite all their friends, and after their jollity and mirth, throw themselves down a steep rock and so perish. Ungodly men are always worst at last; when they come to the bottom, they are flat and dead, and nothing but grounds and dregs. How often in the eyes of the world, do wicked persons go out
like a Lamp, leaving a stench behind them! The scandalous sinner, usually, like the Goats beard, or star of Jerusalem, closeth up the flower of his presumptuous hope at high noon, he is cast in his own conscience long before his death. The Hy∣pocrite ordinarily, as the Daysie and Dandelion, de∣clares the approach of the evening, by shutting up before its approach; If he be gold in the morning, and silver at noon, yet (as we say of Butter) he is lead at night. What is the hope of the Hy∣pocrite, when God shall take away his soul! As its storied of the Pardora, a people in India, that in their youth they have silver hairs, but in their age, their hairs are quite black; Or as the She Wolf hath a yearly defect in generation, the first time she hath five, the second time four, then three, then two, then one, then barren ever after. So the Hypocrite dclines and decreaseth in goodness, faster then the Moon in its last quarter, and is commonly worst at last. But the sincere Chri∣stian hath his best at the bottom, and hath his daintiest dish reserved to be served in at the last course Naturalists tell us of Honey, that that is the thickest and best Honey, which is squeezed last out of the Comb. O what excellent periods and endings, both in regard of the exercise of grace and comfort, have many of the Children of God made! The Death-bed to some Saints, hath been like Tharah to the Israelites in the Wilderness, where after many journeys growing near to the Land of Ca∣naan, they rested themselves, and it was called Tharah, from Roah and Tarah, which signifieth a breathing time. The Sun when it declines into
the West, hath even then much more light then any of the Stars; The meanest upright Christian when he is near setting, hath more joy and com∣fort then a specious Hypocrite any day of his life. When some asked Oecolampadius, lying on his death-bed, whether the light did not offend him, he answered, pointing to his breast, Hic sat lucis, Hre is abundance of light, of joy; He asked one of his Friends, What news? His Friend told him, None; Then saith he, I will tell you some news; I shall presently be with my Lord Christ. I shall give thee two or three quickening Mo∣tives, and then direct thee about the work of ex∣ercising thy self to Godliness on a Dying Bed; and because its the last time of a Christians working for his God, I shall in the third place annex some brief helps to this duty. In reference to the Motives, Consider, First, What a serious thing Death will be to every Man and Woman in the World. Its ill and dange∣rous for any to cozen themselves, and undertake to mock God in their health and life; but its worst of all, and desperate, for any to do this on a sick and dying Bed. The Heathen hardened in sin, and wholly under the power of Satan, ignorant of the evil of their hearts and lives, and of the sad consequence of a wicked end, made light of death. Flavius Ves∣pasian, none of the worst of the Roman Emperors, died (as Sir Thomas Moor,) with a jest in his mouth. Vt puto Deus fio.Sueton. Anrel. Victr. Methinks I am going and growing to be a God. Augustus Caesar esteemed
the best of them whose death the people so much lamented, that they said, Vtinam aut non nascere∣tur, aut non moreretur; Would he had never been born, or never dyed, went off the Stage of the World with a Complement; Livia, Nostri Conjugii memor, Vive & Vale; Farewel and Live Wife, mindful of our Marriage. Galba dyed desperately, crying out, Feri si ex re sit Populi Romani; Strike if it be for the common good. Tiberius dyed dis∣semblingly, of whose death Tacitus wittily, Iam Tiberium vires & corpus, non dissimulatio, deserebant; Now strength and life hath lest Tiberius, but not dissimulation. But Christians who understand the holiness and justice of God, the infinite demerit of sin, the certainty of an unchangeable condition in the other World, either in joy or torment, know that death is no jesting matter, that to dye is one of the most serious searching things, that they can possibly do. Two or three Particulars will shew what a serious thing death is. 1 Death will try men. When the Bridegroom comes, it will appear who have Oyl in their Ves∣sels, and who have none As soon as ever thou takest thy leave of temporal good things, thy spiritual riches will be known. A scorching Sum∣mer discovers what streams are fed with Ponds, and what with Springs. The Wind sheweth which Clouds have Rain in them, and which have none. Death will anatomize every soul, and reveal all that is in it; Conscience will then bring in a true Verdict, in despight of all those bribes and frights which formerly kept the Bill in suspense, or caused
it to write on it an Ignoramus. There are marks by which Saints and Sinners may be distinguished whilst they live, as great mens servants are by the Liveries that they wear but these characters; being most inward, and known to none but them∣selves, and the Lord they serve, it is their dying onely, that will reveal infallibly what they are, and to whom they belong. This World is as a common Inn, wherein all are lodged, and no difference is made between the good and bad, onely that the worst men have the best usage; but the very moment of mens dissolution makes a plain and vast distinction. Death is the way of all the earth, according to Ioshua's Periphrasis of it; but this way hath two turnings; one on the right hand to joy and bliss; another on the left hand to misery and horror; now as when the attendants of two Lords, travail together on the road, their servants cannot easily be distinguished, especially if the Servants of the one, counterfeit the livery of the other; but when they come to the Bivi∣um, the parting way, then its clearly known who belong to the one, and who to the other, for each then followeth his own Master, waits on him to his house, stayeth and abideth there with him; So though whilst men live, all pro∣fessing themselves Christians, and most for a shew at least, putting on the livery of Christ, it is not known who belong to the Prince of Life, and who to the Prince of the powers of the Air, but death will discover it to themselves, and the Elect Angels.
2. It will appear that Death is a serious thing, in that it stateth the creature for Eternity When thou diest, thy condition will be like the Law of the Medes and Persians, such as cannot be altered. At death thou goest the way that thou shalt never return. David speaking of his dead Child, saith, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me; And Iob by asking the question, denyeth it; If a man dye, shall he live again? God will never trust thee with a second life, or give thee leave for second thoughts, or better purposes, or more serious and sober actions, when thou art once lan∣ded in the other world. He will not offer thee a Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, when thou art gone from this earth. Think of it seriously; is not that work to be done well, which can be done but once? Shouldst thou not use thine ut∣most care, and strength, and diligence, to dye well, when thy everlasting making or marring dependeth on it? Ah Friend, If thou failest now, thou failest for ever; if thou dalliest now, thou art undone eternally; There is no wisdom nor knowledge in the Grave, whither thou art going, Eccles. 11. 7. 3. Death will appear to be a serious thing, in that all the powers of Hell, will then assault thee. Thou mayst say of it (in some respects, as Christ did) to wicked men, and the Wicked one; This is your hour, and the power of darkness. The De∣vil its observeable, is most busie at the conclusion of a duty, as of prayer, that the Christian might be hindered and distracted, when he closeth up all in the name of Christ, and so all his desires
be frustrated; so he is most busie in the conclusi∣on of our days, adding fearful dreams to our slumbers, strong distractions to our fancies, in∣creasing our pains with terrors, driving the good if possible, to despair, and intoxicating the bad with presumptuous conceits, and all because his time is little. The Devil is come down, having great rage, knowing that his time is short, Rev. 12. 12. At the approach of death, through pain of body, and perplexity of mind, men are least able to re∣sist, and therefore this cowardly enemy will then be most ready and fierce to assault; When the Christian is down, then if possible, he will ram∣ple upon him. The last persecutions of the Church under Dioclesian, and Maximinian, were the soa∣rest. The last messenger the Devil sent to Iob, concerning the sudden violent death of all his Children, pierced his heart deepest. The subtle serpent reserved that great Ordnance for the last, hoping the former small guns of the los of his Cattel, and Estate, and Servants, would have done some execution, in making some breach upon his faith and patience; and this great gun playing, when he was before tired in de∣fending, must needs shatter him in peices. He may fitly be called the Wolf of the Evening (Jer. 5. 6.) that devoureth. This roaring Lyon walk∣eth in the night to seek his prey. There have been few eminent Saints, but have found their Death-bed, a Bed of Thorns, in regard of temp∣tations. Mr. Knox said, when he came to dye, In my life time, the Devil tempted me to despair, casting my sins in my teeth; but now in my sickness,
he tells me, I have been faithful in the Ministery, and so have merited Heaven; but blessed be God, who brought those Texts into my mind; Not I, but the grace of God in me; What hast thou that thou hast not received? The Israelites never met with so much opposition, as when they were to take possession of the Land of Canaan, then all the Kings of Canaan combined together, and came out and fought them. When Satan was to be cast out of the possessed person, and never to enter into him more, he rent him, and tore him, that the people thought he was dead. Now Reader, What need hast thou to be se∣rious and holy on a dying Bed, to the utmost of thine ability, and to fetch in all the strength thou canst from Heaven, when thou hast such cruel powerful enemies to encounter with? Its was one of the most quickening prevalent arguments, that Alexander used to the Macedonians, before their third and last fatal Battel with Darius, That tey were to fight with all the strength of Persia at once. What an awakening argument should it be to thee, that thou art to fight with all the Powers of Hell at once? Secondly, Consider, Its a special season where∣in thou mayst glorifie God. A Saint by his death may bring God more honour then by all his life. The Actions and Speeches of dying men, make a deep impression on the hearts of those that are about them. The wicked themselves, who have mocked at the purity and strictness of the Saints lives, have admired their patience and chearfulness in their
deaths. Though they look on the beleivers words in health, as savouring of self and sinister ends, and humour, and so neglect them; yet when they hear a dying Saint commend the love and faithfulness of God, the pleasantness, and excellency of his ways and worship, and to bless the time, and pains, and strength, that ever they spent in his service, they esteem his language and begin to have other thoughts of Holiness and Heaven; for they consider, that surely now the man is entering upon the borders of eternity, he is serious and in ear∣nest. Hence the Patriarchs, knowing the preva∣lency of such words, urge Ioseph with Iacobs dy∣ing charge; Thy Father, when dying, said, For∣give I pray thee, the iniquity of thy servants, Gen. 50. 16. That Ruian that would live with his fellow Riotors, beholding the holy behaviour of Ambrose on his Death-bed, would chuse to dye with Ambrose. The enemies of Christ, beholding at the death of Christ how the Rocks were rent, dark∣ness covered the face of the earth, how the vail of the Temple was torn in sunder, the graves were o∣pened, the dead raised, were forced to cry out, Doubtless this man was the Son of God: So when the adversaries of Gods people, see them on their Death-beds, and behold their patience in bearing their sickness, their Faith in relying on their Sa∣viour, their charity in forgiving their enemies, their zeal for the honour and interest of their Master, their constancy in defending the Gospel they did before profess, they are compelled in their consciences to acknowledge, Doubtless these are the Servants, the Sons and Daughters of God.
Much more will a holy behaviour on a Dying-bed benefit such as fear God. It convinceth sinners, that they, whether they will or no, must have other thoughts of holiness and holy men then for∣merly, and it confirmeth Saints in their gracious practices, and makes them more diligent in their preparation. Mr. Bilny, the day before he suffered death, be∣ing told that though the fire was hot, Gods Spirit would cool it, to his everlasting refreshing, an∣swered, putting his hand in the flame of the Can∣dle, I feel by experience, and have known by Philo∣sophy, that Fire by Gods Ordinance is very hot; but yet I am perswaded by Gods holy Word, and by the experience of some spoken of therein, That in the flame they felt no heat, and in the fire no consump∣tion; and I constantly beleive, howsoever the stubble of this my body shall be wasted by it, yet my soul and spirit shall be purged thereby; a pain for the time, whereon followeth joy unspeakable. And then he most comfortably treated on Isaiah 43. 1, 2. But now, Thus said the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Which words he ap∣plied both to himself and his friends then present. Of which some reaped such fruit that they caused the words to be fair written on Tables; The com∣fort whereof, in several that were with him, was never taken from them to their dying day. O
tis very profitable to others, when a Saint so be∣haveth himself on his Death-bed, that he may say to his Friends and Relations, as Sir Robert Harleigh did to his Children,Woodriff Sime∣ons Song. Epist. Dedicat. I have formerly taught you how to live, and now I teach you how to die. Thirdly, Consider, Its the last opportunity that thou shalt ever have to do any work for thy God and Saviour, and thy own soul; When thou diest thou goest to the place where thou shalt receive thy reward, and shalt never never more have any season to sow to the Spi∣rit in, to serve thy Redeemer in, and to manifest thy thankfulness to him for his love to thee; I must work the work of him that sent me, whilst it is day, saith Christ, for the night cometh wherein no man can work, Ioh. 9. 4. Thou mayst when dying, say to thy friends, as the Crier of the Ludi seculares, which happened but once in a hundred years, did at Rome; Come see that which ye never saw before, nor shall ever see again. He that hath but one Arrow to shoot, but one throw to cast, but one oppor∣tunity left him to work out his salvation in, may well improve it to the utmost. A certain Martyr going to suffer, expressed his sorrow that he was going thither, Where he should do his God no more service. Our God is so good, that his work is de∣sireable, and were it possible for any grief in Heaven, saith Dr. Sibs, it would arise from a Christians conside∣ration, that he did no more for his God, and that it cost him so little pains and labour to be saved. When Sampson was nigh his death, and should have no more opportunities to exalt his God, and ad∣vantage his Church, he lifted up his heart to
Heaven; Assist me this once, that I may be avenged on the Philistines for my two eyes. So Reader, when thou enterest thy Chamber, and art betaking thy self to thy dying bed, what weighty reasons hast thou to poure out thy soul, and wrastle with God for Divine strength! Lord, I am now come, in my own apprehension, to the close of my days, after which, I shall never more enjoy a season to glorifie thy Majesty, or further my own account; I am going to do a great work, which I never did be∣fore, nor shall ever do again; I acknowledge that I have been guilty of too much slothfulness, and un∣faithfulness in my life, and have given these Philistines that are enemies to my soul, too much advantage a∣gainst me, and occasion to mock and deride me. O assist me now this once, that I may do thee and thy Church some eminent service, that I may be strong in faith, an example of patience, humility, heavenly-mindedness and charity, and be the death of those un∣circumcised ones, my cursed corruptions, and be a∣venged on them, for all the dishonour they have done to thee, though I dye with them. I come now to shew wherein thou oughtest to excercise thy self to Godliness, on a Dying Bed. First, In Commending God and his ways to others. The Words of dying men, are living Oracles, and do not dye with them. It is the unhappiness of world∣lings and wicked men, that when they come to dye, they cannot commend the work that they have fol∣lowed, the wages which they have merited, or the Master whom they have served; but its the privi∣ledge of Christians, that they have cause to praise
the sweetness of that love which they have tasted, the equity of those Laws which they have obeyed, the grace, and mercy, and bounty, and faithfulness of that Lord whom they have prayed to, and de∣lighted in, and worshipped, and the vastness, and richness, and certainty, and eternity of that reward which they are going to possess. The men of this earth, when they are dying, do often cry out and complain of the falseness and unfaithfulness of the world, and the flesh, how they have cozened, the cheated, and deceived them; and of their own folly and madness, in toyling, and moiling, and drudging night and day, to please and gratifie that which now in their extremity turns them off. O how should the Children of God extol their Father, and his care of them, and kindness to them, magnifie their Redeemer, and his passion for them, and affection to them, exalt the Word and Ways of the Lord, as those which they have found by experience to be the most comfortable and gainful ways. The last breath of a Saint, should be spent in his Gods ser∣vice. Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori, was Ves∣pasians Motto. Oportet Episcopum, concionantem mori, was holy Iewels Motto. Oportet Christia num glorificantem Deum mori, should be every Saints Motto. Dying Iacob will speak highly of Gods pro∣vidence, though he bring it in (as it were) in a Parenthesis. The God which fed me all my life long to this day, Gen. 48. 15. Dying Ioseph will praise the Lords faithfulness to his promise, and pawn his body for its performance; I die, and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land;
And Joseph took an Oath of the Children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence, Gen. 50. 24, 25. Dying Moses ascribes greatness to his God, tells the Is∣raelites, He is a Rock, his work is perfect, all his ways are judgement, a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he, Deut. 32. 3, 4. Dying Ioshua will appeal to the consciences of his hearers, whether God had not kept touch with them to the least title; I am going the way of all the earth, and ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one good thing hath failed, of all that the Lord our God hath spoken, Josh. 23. 14. As Moses and Ioshua did sound forth the praises of their God, so also, when dying, they did per∣swade and exhort the Iews to godliness, Deut. 32. 23. Iosh. 23. per tot. So Paul meeting with those Ephesian Elders, that should see his face no more, doth solemnly charge them to take heed to the Flocks, over which the Holy Ghost had made them over∣seers. I remember, saith Senarclaeus, concerning Al∣phonsus Diazius, his Friend and Bed-fellow, when He and I were at Newburg, the night before he was Murdered, he prayed before he went to bed more ardently, and somewhat longer then ordi∣nary; after which he spent a good part of the night in discourse concerning the Works of God, and exhorting me to the practice of true piety, and truly, I found my self so inflamed, when I heard him, that I thought I heard the Spirit of God speak∣ing to me.
Mr. Knox gave good advice to all his Visitors; among the rest, the Earl of Morton came to see him, to whom he thus spake, My Lord, God hath given you many blessings; Wisdom, Riches, and many great Friends, and now is about to pre∣fer you to the Government of the Realm; (The Earl of Mart, the late Regent, being newly dead;) In his name I charge you, use these blessings better then formerly you have done; Seeking first the glory of God, the furtherance of the Gospel, the good of his Church and Ministers; Be careful of the King, to procure his good, and the welfare of his Realm; If you do thus, God will be with you, and honour you; if otherwise, he will deprive you of all these honours, and your end shall be shame and ignominy. These words the Earl called to mind nine years af∣ter, at the time of his Execution; saying, that he had sound John Knox a true Prophet. Mr. gnatius Iordan of Exeter,Mr. Nicols in his relation of the life and death of Ign. Iordan. one famous in his generation for Godliness, was observed in his sick∣ness, to take all occasions to exhort others to con∣stancy in the truth, Zeal for God, and to make sure of Heaven; and when the Mayor of the City sent to visit him, he said to the Messenger, Remember me to Mr. Mayor, and tell him rom me, that he make sure of Heaven, be careful to do justice, and provide for the poor. We should when dying,1 Chron. 28.1. 8, 9. Vide in a special manner mind this work of commending God and Godliness to our Relations; They are more affected then others with our sickness, and so also with our sayings; Our Counsel may probably do them good, when we are turned into corruption; Iacob calleth his
Children together to bless them; David layeth a strict command on his Son Solomon; And thou Solomon my Son, know the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind. Cyrus upon his death-bed conjures his Sons to peace, lest they should lose the Kingdom he left his heir. The Saint must conjure his Children to purity in the first place, lest they lose their souls and the Kingdom of Heaven. Mr. Robert Bolton, on his Death-bed, called his Children together, Wisht them to remember the counsel he had formerly given them, and he verily beleived none of them durst meet him at the great Tribunal in an unregenerate estate. Fox. Martyr. Vol. 3. p. 138.Mr. Sanders a little before his death, in a Letter to his Wife, writeth thus, Dear Wife, riches I have none to leave behind me, wherewith to endow thee after this worlds manner, but the treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is unto hungry consciences' (whereof I thank my Christ, I feel part, and would feel more) I bequeath to thee, and to the rest of my be∣loved in Christ, to retain the same in sense of heart always. O how pathetically, how earnestly, should dying Christians, who know somewhat of the worth of grace and holiness, and of the evil and end of sin and sinners, perswade their Children and Relations to love and fear, and serve the Lord, when its the last time that ever they shall advise or counsel them! How hard should they woo, that the souls of their Kindred may be married to Christ! Secondly, In commending thy self and others to God by prayer. When the body breaths shortest, it
breaths quickest. Though the Christian on his death-bed may want strength for long solemn devotion, his short ejaculations should be both fervent and frequent. The first thing a Child of God doth, when new born, is to breath, to pray, Act. 9. 27. And its one of the last things he doth, Act. 7. ult. He ente∣reth praying into the place of praise. Paul the Her∣mit was found dead, saithe Ierom,,Hitr. in vit. with his hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven, that the dead corps seemed to pray. Demus operam ut moriamur in pre∣catione;Aug. de ve. invo. c. 33. Let us endeavour to dye at prayer, saith Austin. 1. The sick man should pray especially for himself; Lord Iesus receive my Spirit, saith Stephen; Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, saith Christ; Lord, saith dying Beza, Perfect that which thou hast begun, that I suffer not Ship-wrack in the Haven. Children desire to dye in their Fathers bosome, or on their Mothers lap. Mr. Perkins died begging re∣mission of sin, and intreating mercy at Gods hands. Bishop Vsher was often heard to desire the like end that Mr. Perkins had, which he obtained, for the last words which he was heard to utter, were; But Lord in special forgive my sins of omission, not long after which he expired. Luthers prayer a little before his death, or rather thanksgiving, was;Melc. Adam. Pater mi caelestis, Deus & Pater domini nostri Iesu Christi, ago tibi gratias quod filium tuum Iesum Chri∣stum mihi revelasti, cui credidi, quem sum professus, quem amare, &c. My Heavenly Father, the God and Father of my Lord Iesus Christ, I thank thee for revealing thy Son Iesus Christ to me, whom I have beleived, whom I have professed, whom I have loved.
Others must not be forgotten by us; but our own souls must in a special manner be remembred. Bellarmin tells us of a desperate Advocate in the Court of Rome,Bellar. de arte mor. l. 2. c. 19. who being exhorted on his death-bed to pray to God for mercy, made this speech, Lord, I have a word to say to thee, not for my self; Ego enim propero ad inferos; neque enim est ut aliquid pro me agas; For I am hastening to Hell, neither is there any thing that I would beg on my own behalf, but for my Wife and Children; This he spake, (saith Bellarmin, who was then pre∣sent) as boldly, as if he had been taking his jour∣ney onely to some neighbouring Village. 2. For his Relations. The more hot our affection is to any, the more fervent our petitions should be for them. Praying Parents are the most loving Pa∣rents; When dying, chiefly they should bless their Children in the Name of the Lord. So Isaac did, Gen. 28. 1. Thus Iacob, Gen. 48. 15, 16. Godly Parents may plead the Covenant made to them and theirs, unto God on their Dying Beds with comfort.I have read of one that used to pray, God bless my Fa∣ther and Mo∣ther, Brethren and Sisters, & none else; To whom one that heard him, answe∣red, It were better the De∣vil had thy fa∣ther, and mo∣ther, and bre∣thren, and si∣sters, and none else. They are best acquainted with their Childrens conditions, conversations, wants, weak∣nesses, and so fittest to open their cases to God, and to beseech grace on their behalves, that they may be an holy seed, a generation arising to shew forth his praise. Christ when nigh death, com∣mitted his spiritual Children to his Father, and earnestly begged his care of them, and favour for them; Holy Father, I come to thee; I am no more in the World, but these are in the world; Keep them thrugh thy name, keep them from the evil, sanctifie them through thy truth. So should a godly Father
or Mother when dying;Ruth. 1. 8. and 2. 19. 2 Tim. 1.18. Lord, I am leaving my poor Children in the midst of snares, and temptations, and miseries; I am coming out of the world to thy Majesty, where I shall be above all frights and fears, and beyond all malice and mischief; but my chil∣dren are in the world, and will dayly be environd with allurements, and affrightments, with assaults and batteries from their spiritual enemies; thou knowest the power and policy of the world and the wicked one, the treachery and deceitful∣ness of the flesh within them, and their weakness and inability to wrestle with, and overcome the flat∣teries of the World, and the suggestions of the Devil. O keep them through thy name, that they may look beyond the World, live above the World, and ex∣pect and eye their portion and happiness in a better World. Though they live in the World, let them not live as the World, but walk all their days as heirs of another World. Keep them from the evil of in, however it please thy Majesty to deal with them a∣bout the evil of Suffering. Give them the Shield of Faith, whereby they may quench the fiery Darts of the Devil. Let thy Covenant of grace be their portion, thy love their cordial, and thy Mansion-house their e∣ternal possession. Be thou their Father to direct, protect, govern, and provide for them, and give them a name in thy house, better then of Sons and Daughters; O sanctifie them through thy truth, that they may be saved, and may meet me with joy at the great day. Luther when dying, made this Will for his Wife, great with Child, and his little Sons, O Lord God I thank thee, that thou wouldst have me to be poor in this world; I have no House,
Land, or money, that I should leave them. Thou hast given me Wife and Children, I restore them to thee. Do thou O Father of Orphans, and judge of Widows, nourish, teach, keep them, as thou hast hitherto me. Si pro te solo o∣ras, pro te solus orabis; si pro omnibus rogas, omnes pro te rogabunt. Amb3. For the whole Church of God; Its good to pray by our selves, but its ill to pray onely for our selves; When we are dying, and going to the Church triumphant, we should be sure to put up some requests for the poor members of Christ, and the Church militant. Calvin was heard before his death often to sigh out; How long Lord, How long will it be ere thou avenge the blood of thy Servants The people of God are the purchase of Christ, and of the same family and body with the dying Chri∣stian, and therefore must needs be dear to him. Ruth 1. 8. and 2. 19.4. For his Benefactours, and those that have done good to him and his. Paul had received some kindness from Onesimus, he refreshed him in his bonds, and in the (2 Tim. 1. 8.) which was the last of his Epistles, and thought to be written but a little before his death, for he tells us in it, I am ready to be offered, and the time of my depar∣ture is at hand, how pathetically doth he pray for him! The Lord grant that he may finde mercy at that day. 5. For our enemies; This is to follow Gods pat∣tern, who doth good for evil; and to obey his Pre∣cept, who commandeth us to pray for them that de∣spitefully use us. Stephen when departing out of the World, intreats mercy for them who were cruel to him; Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7. 60. Our blessed Saviour dying, begs hard for their
eternal lives, who were the instruments and authors of his bloody death; Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luk. 23. 34. Thirdly, In an holy exercise of Faith, Courage, Repentance, Charity, and Patience. 1. Faith; Its the Character of Gods Children, that they live by Faith, and they dye in the Faith, Hab. 2. 6. Heb. 11. 31. The waters, say some, of the Pool of Bethesda (wherein the Priest washed the sacrifices before he offered them) was of a reddish co∣lour, to note that men must be washed by faith in the blood of Christ, before they are ready to be offered a Peace-offering to God by death. The dying Chri∣stian must expect strong assaults against the bulwark of his faith; but what-ever he let go, he must keep his hold on Christ. I know no grace that the Devil is such a sworn enemy to, as Faith; and I know no season that he is more diligent in to overthrow their faith, then when they are under some dangerous sickness; therefore its the observation of a good man, that he seldom seeth a sick Saint followed close with temptations, to recover of that sick∣ness; for Satan knowing he hath but a little time, useth all his craft and strength to separate the soul from the Rock of his salvation. Upon a dying bed, reflect upon former experienes of Gods love to thy soul, and recollect the former evidences of of thy title to Christ, and thereby to Heaven. I must tell thee, though the certainty of thy salvation depend upon the truth of thy Faith, the comfort of thy dissolution will depend on the strength of thy Faith. Faith is the shield of the soul, and
therefore above all (in thy encounter with thy great enemy Satan, and thy last enemy death) take the Shield of Faith, Eph. 6. 14. Epaminondas after his victory at Loctrum, wherein he was mortally wounded, understanding that his Buckler was safe, bid his Chirurgion, boldly to pluck out the Dart that stuck in his side, and died cheerfully. The Saint, the Souldier of Christ, who is wounded, even to death, and keepeth his Shield of Faith safe, may leave the world with courage. The Apostle Paul, who knew whom he had beleived (2 Tim. 1. 12.) rings a challenge in the ears of death; O death, where is thy sting! and sings a triumphant ditty at the approach of death; The time of my departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith; Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. When Iacob had be∣leived the report of Iosephs life, his heart was re∣vived; Is Joseph yet alive? saith he; I will go down and see him before I dye. When the true Israelite can firmely credit the testimony which God hath given of Iesus the Son of Ioseph, how he being an enemy, was reconciled to God by the death of his Son, and shall much more, being re∣conciled, be saved by his life, and by faith can cling on him, his heart, though dying, is then enlivened; O with what comfort can he take his journey into the other world! When Philip viewed his young Son Alexander, Now, saith he, I am con∣tent to dye. Old Simeon springs young again, at a sight of Christ, and having embraced his Savi∣our in the armes of faith, as well as in the armes
of his body, he begs a dismission out of this valley of tears, being assured thereby of an admission into fulness of joy; Lord, now lettest thou thy ser∣vant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.. Having with an eye of faith beheld Christ, he counts his life but a bondage, and desires to depart or be loosed from fetters, as the word signifieth, and is taken, Mat. 27. 17. We read of the Lords worthies, that by faith they stopped the mouths of Lions; Death is a fierce and cruel Lion, but faith will pull out its teeth, that it cannot hurt us; or stop its mouth, that it shall not devour us. This grace, like the Angel sent from Heaven, when Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, will save the Christian from be∣ing torn in peices. O Friend, The Robes of Christs righteousness, is the onely Coat of Male, which can defend thy soul against the shot of death. If thou canst with Moses go up to Pisgah, and take a view by faith of the Land of promise, thou wilt comfortably with him lay down thine earthly Tabernacle. Iob desired death as eagerly, as the Labourer in an hot summers day desires the shadow. Paul longed for it as vehemently, as the Apprentice for the ex∣piration of his Indentures, and all because they had first beheld Christ by faith. Its no wonder that many of Gods Children have called earnestly to be laid to bed, knowing that it would prove their everlasting happy rest, and when their bodies are carried by mortal men to their Mother Earth, their souls should be conveyed by glorious Angels to their Father in Heaven.
2. Courage; A Christian should be a Voluntier in death; Many of the Martyrs were as willing to dye as to dine; went to the sire as chearfully as to a Feast, and courted its pale and gastly counte∣nance, as if it had bee a beautiful Bride. When King Lysimachus threatned Cyrenaeus Theodorus with Hanging;Cic. quaest. Tusc. l. 1. Istis quaeso (inquit) ista horribilia mini∣tare purpuratis tuis; Thedori quidem nihil interest, humine an sublime putrescat; Threaten these terrible things to thy brave Courtiers, Theodorus cares not whether he rot in the Air, or on the Earth. Cyprian said Amen to his own Sentence of Martyrdom. Hierom reports of Nepotianus, that he gave up his life so chearfully, that one would have thought he rather walked forth then died. When Ignatius was led from Syria to Rome, to be torn in peices of wild Beasts, he often wished by the way, that he were in the midst of those Beasts that were to devour him, and that their appetites might be whetted to dispatch him; fearing lest it should happen to him, as to some others, that the Lyons out of a kind of reverence, would not dare to approach them, being ready, he said, rather to provoke them to fight, then that they should suffer him to escape. Bradford be∣ing told by his Keepers Wife, that his Chain was a buying, and he was to die the next day, pulled off his Hat and thanked God for it. When some wondered that Adam Damplip could eat his food so well when his end was so near, he told them, Ah Masters, Do you think that I have been Gods Prisoner so long in the Marshalsey, and have not yet learned to die? Yes, yes, and I doubt not but God will strengthen me therein. Ann Askew subscribed her
Confession in Newgate, thus, Written by me Ann Askew, that neither wisheth for death, nor feareth his might, and as merry as one that is bound towards Heaven. Indeed its said of a wicked man, that his soul is required of him, and that God takes a∣way his soul, Luk. 12. Job 27. 10. but of a godly man that he giveth up the Ghost, and he cometh to his grave, Gen. 25. 8. Job 4. ult. Nature will teach the Heathen, that death is the end of all outward miseries to all men, hence some of them drank of its cup with as much constancy and courage, as if it had been the most pleasant Julip; but grace will teach the Christian that death is not onely a re∣medy against all his bodily and spiritual maladies, as Sir Walter Rawleigh said of the sharp Ax that should behead him, this will cure all my infirmities, but also an inlet into fulness of joy and felicity; Reverend Deering said on his death-bed, I feel such joy in my spirit, that if I should have the sen∣tence of life on the one side, and the sentence of death on the other side, I had rather a thousand times chuse the sentence of death, since God hath appointed a separation, then the sentence of life. Tius Vespa∣tion, the mirror of mankind, being a stranger to Christ, was very unwilling o leave the world, being carried in an Horse-litter, and knowing that he must dye, lookt up to Heaven and com∣plained pittifully, that his life should be taken from him who had not desired to dye, having never committed any sin, as he said, but onely one. Socrates and some of the wiser Heathen comforted themselves against the fear of death, with this weak Cordial, that it is common to men, the
way of all the earth; Hence it was when the Athe∣nians condemned Socrates to dye, he received the Sentence with an undaunted spirit, and told them, they did nothing but what nature had before ordained for him. But the Christian hath a greater ground for a holy resolution, and a stronger Cordial a∣gainst the fear of death, even his hopes of eternal life, and surely if he that exceeds others in his Cordials, be excelled by them in Courage, he dis∣graceth his Physitian. Aristippus told the Saylers who wondred that he was not as well as they a∣fraid in the storm; Ye fear the torments due to a wicked life, and I expect the reward of a good one. Its no marvail that they who lived wickedly, should dye unwillingly, being frighted with the guilt of their past sins, and with the fears of their future torments; therefore the holy Ghost saith of such a one,Prov. 12. 52. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, as a Beast that is driven out of his den, to the slaughter, or as a Debtor driven by the Officers out of his house, where∣in he lay warm and was surrounded with all sorts of comfort, to a nasty loathsom prison; But that the righ∣teous who hath hope in his death, should even dye al∣most with fear of it before-hand, is matter of wonder. Lots soul is exceedingly vexed with So∣dom, yet he is loth to leave it. This world is a wilderness, a purgatory, a step-mother, a perse∣cutor to all the Saints, and yet some of them when called to leave it sing loth to depart, and would linger behind; partly from nature which dreads a dissolution, and partly from the weakness of grace; To fear death much, argueth sometimes wickedness, always weakness.
3. Repentance; Its said of St. Augustine, that he dyed with tears in his eyes, in the practice of re∣pentance; and Posidonius saith of him, that he heard him often say in his health,Posidon in vit. Aug. that it was the fittest disposition for dying Christians and Ministers. Laudatos (saith he) Chistianos & sacerdotes abs{que} digna & competenti paenitentia exire de corpore non debere. We dye groaning, i regard of our bo∣dies, why should not our souls sigh that ever they sinned against so good a God! Beasts bite their enemies with more venome and indignation, when they are ready to dye; Maxime mortiferi solent esse morsus morientium animalim. The Christian should give sin his most deadly bite, his greatest abhor∣rency, and grief, and shame, when he is dying, and shall never see sin, or sorrow, or shame more. As its noble and excellent to dye, forgiving sin∣ners, so also taking revenge upon sin. Moses a little before his death, is commanded to avenge the Children of Israel of the Midianites; and then he is gathered to his people, Numb. 31. 1, 2. Samuel takes vengeance on Agag, when he was old, and knew not the day of his death; David could not dye with comfort, till he had charged Solomon to execute that justice on Ioab which he had omitted. The last time the Judge seeth the Felon, he passeth sentence of death upon him. O how should the soul of a dying Saint be inflamed with anger against sin, when he considers the rich love that it abuseth, the glorious name that it dis∣honoureth, the blessed Saviour that it pierceth, and that vast happiness which he is going to possess, of which without infinite grace and mercy it had de∣prived
him! Some persons when they have been to take their last revenge on their enemies, have done it to purpose. The beleiver on his dying bed, takes his last revenge on sin, he shall never have another opportunity to shew his love to his God and Saviour in, his spite at, and hatred of sin; therefore then he should do it to purpose, as dying Sampson put forth all his strength, and beg divine help, that he may utterly destroy it, and be avenged on it, for all the defilement and bon∣dage it hath brought on his soul, and dishonour to his Saviour. Dying Iacob cursed the sins of his own Sons, Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their anger, for it was cruel; O my Soul, en∣ter not thou into their secrets. The dying Child of God should curse his passions, his pride, his un∣beleif, his selfishness, even all his lusts, for diso∣beying such righteous Laws, and displeasing such a gracious Lord. When David Chrytaeus lay a dy∣ing, he lift up his head from his Pillow, to hear the discourses of his friends that sat by him, say∣ing, I shall dye with the more comfort, if I can dye learning something. The Christian both by his pain∣ful sickness, and approaching death, may learn something of the evil of sin, and certainly he may dye with the more comfort (for godly sorrow and joy may be contemporaries, as the Heavens shine and showr at the same time) if he dye in a flood of tears for his unkindness to Christ. 4. Charity in a double respect. 1. In forgiving them that have wronged thee. If the natural Sun should not go down upon our
wrath, muchless should the Sun of our Lives. Its bad to bear anger or malice one hour in our hearts against any, but its worst of all to carry it with us into the other world. How can he expect to dye in peace with God, who dyeth in war with men, when God himself hath said, Except ye forgive others their trespasses against you, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses? Amilcar the Fa∣ther of Hannibal, when he was dying, made his Son take a solemn Oath to maintain a perpetual War with the Romans. Edward the first, adjured his Son and Nobles, that if he dyed in his expedition against Bruce, King of Scotland, they should not in∣ter his Corps, but carry it about with them, till they had avenged him on that Usurper; But cer∣tainly its a desperate thing to leave Children Heirs to the Parents wrath and rage, as well as to his riches; O how dreadful is his estate, who takes his enemy by the throat, when God by death is tak∣ing him by the throat, and ready to thrattle him for ever. If thou hast wronged others, either in name, or goods, or body, seek reconciliation, and make satisfaction, for this is righteous and just; If thy bro∣ther hath ought against thee, thou hast never more need of reconciling thy self to him, then when thou art approaching the Altar of death, there to offer up the last sacrifice to God in this world. If thy Brother have wronged thee in any sort, remit it, this is charity; to do otherwise, is to give place to the Devil, Eph. 4. 16, 17. and thou hast least cause to give him ground when his rage is greatest, and his barteries strongest, in thy last conflict with him. O! imitate that blessed Martyr Stephen,
and the incomparable Saviour, in begging Gods love for them who hate thee, Act. 7. 60. Luke 23. 34. 2. In remembring the poor and afflicted, if God hath made thee able; its best to be merciful in our life-time, to make our own hand our Executors, and our own eyes our Overseers; for the payment of our Gifts and Legacies to our spiritual Kindred, for such have a particular promise that God will make all their bed in their sickness, but its good to be charitable when we are dying; True friends show most love at parting. Though justice must be blind, not to see persons, yet charity must be quick-sighted, to pick out the fittest objects, viz. the poor, and the pious, poor in the first place. Our Goods will not extend to God, therefore they must to the Saints. When Ionathan was be∣yond the reach of Davids charity, he doth for his sake manifest it to his Son. God is beyond all our gifts, therefore for his sake we must bestow them on the Godly that are his Children; Make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when that faileth, ye may be received into the ever∣lasting habitations; Hereby men lay up a good foundation against the time of need. Godly Pa∣rents are ignorant how their Children may imploy the estate they leave, whether as fuel for corrup∣tion, or as oyl to keep the Lamps in Gods sanctu∣ary burning; its good therefore for themselves with prudence to dispose of what they may to Gods Ser∣vants and Service. Some men have estates dropping on them, out of the clouds, as it were, large inheritances, fair
patrimonies, like Canaan, both in regard of their fruitfulness, and abounding with all sorts of com∣forts, and in regard of their easiness of obtaining them without sweat or labour; they inherit, a the Israelites, Houses which they built not, Wells which they digged not, and Vineyards which they planted not, upon both these accounts, such persons are engaged to do good, and distribute, and to be rich in good works. God expects a return of his Talents with advantage; How liberal, nay, la∣vish, have many Papists been upon their death-beds, to Friars and Monks, even to the wronging their Wives and Children, that some States, as Venice, have been forced to make Laws to restrain men, lest the Church should in time swallow up all the revenues of the Common-wealth, and all this upon a foolish vain conceit, that they should the sooner pass through Purgatory? It is certainly a great disgrace to the Disciples of Christ, and no mean dishonour to Christ himself, that so many, and such large gifts, have proceeded from the false faith of Merit-mongers, when the faith of his most glorious Gospel doth not work the like in true beleivers; How will Christians answer it, that an idle Dream, and fancied Fear of an ima∣ginary Purgaory, should do more them the sure perswasion of the love of God, and the certain hope of eternal life? 4. Patience and Submission to the will of God, both as to our death or life, and also as to our pain or ease in sickness; As to our life and death we must know God is wise, and will never ga∣ther his fruit but in the best season. None, un∣unless
a fool, but will be willing God should chuse for him. Its excellent for a sickperson to be wholly at Gods disposal, as knowing that whilst he is here God will refresh him with the first fruits, and when he goeth hence, receive him into that place where he shall enjoy the whole harvest. It was the speech of dying Iulian, he that would not dye when he must, and e that would dye when he must not, are both of them Cowards alike. To desire to live when one is called to dye, is a sign of Cowardise, for such a one is afraid to enter the list with the King of ter∣rors; To desire to dye, when one is called to live, speaks a faint-hearted creature, for such a man dares not look an affliction or disaster in the face, therefore would take shelter in death Cato, Cleombrotus, Lucretia, shewed more cowardise then courage, in being their own Executioners; The Romans commended Terentius for his resolution to live, after his Army was routed by Hannibal. He is the most valiant person that can dye willingly, when God would have him dye, and live as wil∣lingly, when God would have him live. He that is weary of his work before the evening, is an un∣profitable servant, and is either infected with idle∣ness, or with diseases. When Dr. Whitaker was told, death was approaching, he answered, Life or Death is welcom to me, which God pleaseth. Mr. Robert Bolton, being told that it would be better for the Church of God, if God pleased to spare his life, said, If I shall find favour in the eyes of God, he will bring me again, and shew me both it and his habitation; if not, Lo here I am, let him do with me what he pleaseth. Another pious soul
in his sickness cryed out, Domine si tibi sim neces∣sarius, non recuso vivere; Lord, if I may be further serviceable to thee, I am willing to live. Lucius Cor∣nelius, Lieutenant in Portugal,L. Cornelius, legatus sub Fa∣bio Consule. Vi∣vidam natu∣ram & viri∣lem animam servavi; quo ad animam effla∣vi; & tandem desertus oe medicorum & AEsculapii Dei ingrati, ui me voveram, soda∣lem perpetuo suturum, si fil aliquantulum, optata pro∣lisset. Ep. taph. under Fabius the Consul, was infamous to following ages, for his impatience in complaining of his Physitian, and railing at Esculapius, for not accepting his vow and passionate desire, of having his life spun out to a longer thread. We cannot blame them who have their portion in this life, for their unwilling∣ness to leave it, and to become beggers in Hell for ever. Mori timeat qui ad secundam mortem, de hac morte transibit (saith Ciprian de Moral.) Let him fear death, who must pass from this death to the se∣cond death. To such a one indeed, death is a Mur∣derer, like Iehorams messenger, comes to take a∣way the life of his soul, and all his happiness, and therefore he may well call, as Elisha did, shut the door and keep him out. Many Saints who died violent and cruel deaths, yet gave their very enemies cause to admire their patience; They wearied out their bloody Persecu∣tors by their meekness and patience. Bonner said of the Martyrs in Queen Marys days, A vengeance on them, I think they love to burn. When that old Disciple Policarp came to the stake at which he was burnt to death, he desired to stand untied, saying, Let me alone, for he that gave me strength to come to the fire, will give me patience to endure the flame without your tying. Cassianus with admirable meekness, suffered a cruel Martyrdom from his own Scholars, who at the command of the bar∣barous Tyrant, became his Executioners, some
with their Pen Knives, pricking and lancing his flesh, others casting stones at him, till they had killed him. Eulaliae a chast virgin, of a noble Fa∣mily in Portugal, being for a time kept close by her Parents, for fear her bold Profession should cause her death; one night getting from them, and appearing before the Tribunal of Maximnus, she was for refusing to sacrifice to his Idols, Executed in this manner, first two Hangmen with all their might, rent her joynts in sunder, then her flesh was scratched from her sides, with the Talons of Wild Beasts, and hot burning Torches were set to her sides, which ended her life. A Christian should also exercise patience and sub∣mission to Gods will, under his pain; It is the rule of Hippocrates, that that sickness is most dangerous in which the sick man alters his countenance. Un∣doubtedly its ill and unbecomming Christianity, when men who in health are mild and meek, in sickness are altered to be peevish and passionate, that their relations and attendants who pity their pain, and pray for their ease, and watch, and work night and day to serve them, are requited with harsh words, and fretful returns. Cajus Marius, suffered the veins of his legs to be cut out for the cure of his Gout, and never shrunk for it. The Grecians were cowardly in their encounters with men, but valiant and patient in their conflicts with diseases. Master Ieremiah Whitaker, who on his death-bed had dreadful fits of the stone, bore them with ma∣vellous patience, often turning up his eyes to Hea∣ven, and saying, Blessed be God, this is not Hell. The Saint who is in covenant with God, and hath
engaged himself to God to submit to all his provi∣dences, and hath God engaged to him, to lay no more upon him then he will enable him to bear, may well with patience endure the divine plea∣sure. Vincentius a Spaniard, who was Martyred at Va∣lence, under Dacianus the President of the cruel Tyrant Dioclestan, was used in this manner; first he was laid upon the wrack, and all the joynts of his body distended till they crackt again; then all the members of his body were pierced and indented with deadly wounds; then they vexed and tore his flesh with Iron Combs sharply filed; then they laid his body on an Iron grate, and when they had opened his flesh with Iron Hooks, they seared it with fiery Plates, sprinkling the same with hot burning Salt; last of all, they cast him into a vile Dungeon, the floor whereof was first thick spread with the sharpest shells that might be gotten, his feet then being fast locked in the stocks, there he was left alone till he died, all which he endured without murmuring or complaining, and according to his name (Vincentius) was over all a Conquerour. And shall not Christians, who dye in their Beds in peace, with much less pain, be patient! Many who knew not God, did look on death as a favour, and one of the greatest which their Gods could bestow on them. Agamedes and Trophonius,Plu. ad Apol. having built the Temple of Apollo, asked of that God a reward for their service; They were answered; that within seven days they should be bountifully paid for their pains, at the end of which time they dyed in a sleep. One of Caesars crazed Souldiers,
desired the favour of the Emperor, to have leave to kill himself. Especially the thoughts of the happy issue of the most painful sickness and death to a Child of God, may as the wood thrown into the bitter waters of Marah, make them sweet unto him. Some chuse to be cut, rather then to be daily tortured with the stone, though they know that cutting will put them to much pain, because they hope that cut∣ting will cure them of their distemper. When a Gaoler knocks off a Prisoners Fetters and Bolts, though it puts him to much more pain then the constant wearing them, though every blow goeth to his heart, yet he flincheth not, he complaineth not, because he knoweth his future ease will make amends for his present pain. Christians are here fettered with sin and misery, which constantly grate upon their spirits. Death is the Gaoler to knock of their shackles, and let them into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, what though it put them to much pain, they may bear it with much patience, knowing that it will end in eternal pleasures. Though an Hypocrite like a piece of Brass, when stricken with the Hammer of Sickness or Death, maketh a sharp and irksome noise, with impati∣ence, and breaketh in peices, is undone for ever; yet the sincere soul, as a piece of Gold, when so smitten, may sound sweetly, and be pliable; True Gold may be stretcht out in length and breadth, in thin and fine leaves, as you please. Now Reader, that thou mayst thus glorifie thy God, credit thy profession, further thine account,
and advantage others by thy death, it is requisite that thou be always ready for it. The Qarter-day never comes amiss to him that hath always his Rent ready by him. The loving Husband, let him come when he will, is ever welcom to a faithful Spouse; The actual unpreparedness of some holy persons, hath caused their Petitions for a longer stay, when God seemed to call them hence, Psa. 39. 13. As a Nobleman who is a Loyal Subject, and affectio∣nately desires his Princes presence and company at his house, may wish that it may be defer∣red when his house is out of repairs, till it is in a better order. The habitual unpreparedness of sinners, I mean their predominant impenitency and unbeleif, hath made death cutting to them indeed. The Pismire fears not the Winter, having laid in her provision against that season; but the Grahopper being unprepared, is starved therein. Let thy whole life be but a preparation for death; He that would dye but once, I mean, escape the second death, must dye daily, live in a constant expectation of it, and preparation for it. Pliny calleth a sudden death, the greatest fortune of a mans life. Iulius Caesar, the day before his death, in discourse with Marius Lepidus, upon that point, what was the best end of a mans life, preferred that which was sudden and unlookt for, which was his fate the next day. Augustus his Successor, was of the same judgement, and desired, Mortem celerem, & insperatem; But the Christian findeth by experience, that death to be the best, which was most expected and prepared for.
Meditatio mortis, vita perfectissima, The Meditation of death, is the holiest life, aith the Father. Tota vita, meditatio mortis, & discendum est mori, The whole life is but a learning to dye, saith the Philoso∣pher. Wise Princes lay up ten years for one days Battel. A wise Christian will lay up every day somewhat for his last day, knowing that if he win that combat, he is made for ever. Invasions or Insurrections, like a sudden breach of the Sea, carry all before them, when pitcht Battels give equal advantage, and cause less terror on each side. Evils premeditated, are often prevented, always mitigated, the mind gathering reason and strength together, wherewith to encounter them. But unthought of troubles, like fire in the night, are most frightful, startling the secure sinner from his quiet repose. In order to this preparation, I shall mention two or three particulars, but briefly, having spoken to them else-where. 1. Keep a clear conscience in thy health; Remem∣ber that sin is the sting of death; therefore be a∣fraid of sin, if thou wouldst not be afraid of death. Twas Nero's answer to Seneca, when he advised him to desist his wicked courses, that he might please the Gods, Veror ego deos, cum talia facio, Do you think I fear the gods, who dare run upon such actions! But he who did not dread the Gods, found death dreadful to him; for the Historian observeth that he cried pittifully, like a Child, when he was called forth to be killed. Tis the righteous onely, that is bold as a Lion, because the rigte∣ous onely hath a conscience sprinkled with the
blood of the Lamb, and a conscience void of of∣fence towards God and Man.Hilarion morti proximus dix∣isse fertur, E∣gredere anim mea, Egredere; quid dubitas? septuaginta prope annis ser∣viisti Christo & mortem times? Hier. Epist. Fam. l. 3. & in vit. When Hilarion was nigh death, Depart my soul (saith he) depart, what dost thou fear? thou hast served Christ almost seventy years, and art thou afraid of death? Bernard ob∣serveth of Gerrard, I beheld him, exultantem in morte hominem, & insultantem morti, exulting in death, and insulting over death. St. Ambrose un∣dauntedly encountred his last enemy, saying, I have not so lived, that I am afraid to live any longer, neither do I fear to die, because we have a good Lord. The Testimony of a good conscience was the great Apostles comfort in the midst of his trials and troubles, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Tis guilt which makes us shie of a severe and Holy Gods pre∣sence. It is no marvail that Alexander the Conqueror was struck almost dead at the sight of Cyrus Tomb; that Sigismond when dying should forbid his ser∣vants to mention the word Death; that Lewis the eleventh should while in health, enjoyn his Cour∣tiers not to speak of Death, and when sick, pro∣hibit the naming it upon pain of death; I do not wonder that Saul upon the news of his approach∣ing danger and death, falls groveling on the ground, and hath no strength left in him, nor that Belte∣shazar upon the tidings of this Serjeants coming to arrest him, fell into an Ague Quaking, and Shivering, so violently that all the wine which he drank so plentifully in his golden Bowles, could not chear his heart, nor fetch blood into his cheeks. The Malefactour may well dread the thoughts, much more the approach of an Assize, knowing that
he is bound over to it, and must appear to be ar∣raigned, condemned, and executed. The entry of death may well be forcible upon them whom it ejects out of all their happiness, and whole lives have been made up of unholiness; Tis vice that paints death with such a formidable countenance, with a whip and flames in its hand. Friend, let thy conversation be pious, if thou wouldst dye in peace. Such as a mans life is, usually such is his death; An unholy life is ordinarily followed with an un∣happy end. A filthy Adulterer, mentioned by Luther, expired in the armes of an Harlot. So also Tigillinus, Cornelius, Gallus, Ladislaus King of Naples; one of the Popes died in the embraces of strange flesh; A great swearer when he came to dye, saith Mr. Bolton, swore apace, and as if he had been already in Hell, called upon the standers by to help him, with oaths; King Henry the second on his death-bed, cursed his Sons, the day where∣in he was born, and in that distemper departed the World, saith the Historian, which himself had so often distempered. We read of one who lived well, that died ill; and of but one in the whole Book of God, who lived ill, that dyed well. A sin∣ner may presume upon peace at death, and be∣speak in the language of Iehoram to Iehu; Is it peace Jehu? Is it peace death? or as the Elders to Samuel; Comest thou peaceably? but the Answer will be the same with that of Iehu to him, What peace can there be, so long as the whordoms of thy Mother Jezabel and her witch-crafts are so many? What peace can there be, so long as thy lsts and
atheism, and ignorance, and prophaness abound, and thy abominations are so many? Its no wonder that such persons, like Owles, are never heard but at night (the close of their days) and then they screech horribly. What shall we call a mocking of God, saith a learned person, if they do not mock him, who think it enough to ask him forgiveness at leasure, with the last drawing of a malicious breath? these find out a new God, make one a leaden one, like Lewis the eleventh of France. And again,Sir W. Rawleys Ep. Hist. World. Let us not flatter our immortal souls to neglect God all our lives, and know that we neglect him, trusting upon the peace we think to make at parting; for this is no other then a rebellious presumption, and a con∣temptuous laughing to scorn, and a deriding of God, his Laws, and Precepts.Idem l. 1. c. 2. Unquestionably such will be grosly mistaken at last, in falling from their heights into Hell. As the Daughter of Polycrates dreamed that her Father was lifted up, that Iupi∣ter washed him, and the Sun annointed him, but it proved to him but a sad prosperity; for after a long life, and large prosperity, he was surprised by his enemies, and hanged up till the dew of Hea∣ven wet his cheeks, and the Sun melted his grease. Reader, Let me bespeak thee, as Iotham did the men of Sechem; Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto you; Hearken unto me in this day of thy health and life, that God may hearken unto thee in the day of thy sickness and death. Make thy peace with God now, give a Bill of divorce to sin, strike an hearty Covenant with Christ, keep thy conscience clean every day, allow not thy self
in any known sin, if thou wouldst leave this world in favour with God, in the love of good men, and to thy eternal gain. Nihil est in morte, quod metuamus si nihil timendum vita commisit, saith the Antient; Death hath nothing frightful, but what a prophane life makes so. They who flie from the holiness of God in life, may well fear the justice of God at death. A sinner indeed, is every day carrying more Faggots to that pile in which he must burn for ever, and always twisting those cords with which Devils will eternally scourge him, and therefore the guilt of his wicked life, and fear of his dreadful wages, may well represent death to him in a fright∣ful vizard. But he who makes it his constant business to please his Maker, to mortifie his earthly mem∣bers, to crucifie the flesh, to serve the Wills of God in his generation, and to dress his soul a∣gainst the coming of the Bridegroom, shall finde his latter end comfortable, and the day of his death better then the day of his birth. O Friend, if thou wouldst dye comfortably, live consci∣enciously! An happy death is the conclusion of an holy life; God hath joyned them together, and none can part them asunder. Its reported of the Dardani, that they never Wash but three times, when they are Born, when they Marry, and when they Dye; The true Christian must be daily washing his soul by faith in the blood of his Saviour, and bathing himself in the tears of re∣pentance, and hereby his soul will be fit to be commended into the Hands of God by well dy∣ing.
2. Clear up thine evidences for Heaven. Be not contented to leave thy salvation at uncertainty; They who walk in the dark, are full of frights and fears; The comfort of thy death, will depend much upon the clearness of thy deeds and evi∣dences for eternal life;Vide more of this in Fading of the flesh. p. 85, 86, 87. The want of diligence about this, hath caused many of the Children of God to go crying to Bed, and wrangling to their eternal rest; They dye and know not how they shall speed in the other world; they fall into the hands of their enemy Death, as the Lepers into the hands of the Syrians, expecting nothing but cruelty and misery, trembling every step of the way, though they find good chear, and all sorts of comforts. 3. Dwell much in the thoughts of Deaths. Cicero said of Fencing, Fortissima adversus mortem, & dolorem disciplina; It was the strongest fence against the fear of death; So I may say of entertaining death frequently in our meditations, its a good guard against the terror of death; Custom dimi∣nisheth the dread of things which to nature are so frightful. Marius before he would bring out his Souldiers to fight with the Cimbres, caused them to stand upon the trenches, to acquaint themselves with the terrible aspect of those Savages, and so brought them to contemn them, which at first sight they so amazedly feared. When we are on a sud∣den surprized by an unexpected adversary, we want time to unite our strength to resist the as∣sault; but what we expect we provide for, and so are the better able to encounter with it. The old people that lived near the Riphaean Mountains,
were taught to discourse much of Death, and to converse with it, and to speak of it, as of a thing that will certainly come, and ought so to do; hence their resolutions were strengthned to under∣go it with patience and courage. As Cordials lose their vertue, so even Poisons their venome, by frequent use. Mithridates by constant use of it, made it so far from being mortal, that it was nourishing to him. Though Death in its own na∣ture be venemous, the Christian by frequent me∣ditation of it, and application of the blood of Christ to his soul, may make it profitable to him. 4. Wean thy heart from the earth. They who love the earth as their Heaven, will be unwilling to leave it, though for Heaven; Canst thou bear the loss of some worldly comforts, when God takes them from thee? if not, how wilt thou be able to bear the loss of all worldly comforts, in a dying hour? If running with Footmen weary thee, how wilt thou be able to run with Horse∣men? If a little loss, a little load be ready to break thy back, what wilt thou do under the weight of a great one? Paul was martyred in his affections, before he was martyred in his body; and dead to the world, before he was slain by the world; hence he came to dare even death it self, and to bid it do its worst; I protest by your rejoycing, which I have in Christ Iesus, I dye daily. Should a Messenger have come to Paul and told him, you must dye to morrow, and leave all the good things of this life; He might have said, That is not now to do, for I died yesterday, and
this day, and every day, and I have already taken my leave of this world and all its vanities.See more of this in, Fading of the flesh. p. 88. 89. Those that like Eeles, lye in the mud of worldly plea∣sures, are unfit to be sacrificed to God, as being unclean creatures, and unwilling to part with their present delights, though for those that are more excellent. The immoderate love of sublu∣nary vanities, makes men say, as Peter at Christs transfiguration; It is good to be here, albeit like him, they know not what they say. 5. Set thy house in order. After the heart is set in order, the next work is to set the house in order, according to Gods counsel, Isa. 38. 1. Abraham was careful before his death, to settle the affairs of his houshold, as appeareth by his pro∣viding a fit spouse for Isaac, and his giving gifts to the Children of his second Wife, and sending them away, Gen. 24. 1, 2. and 25. 6. This ought to be done in the time of our health and strength, partly because we are uncertain whether we shall have time and ability in sickness to do it or no. How many have died suddenly, and why not thou and I as well as others? Some who had a mind to make their Wills, have not had a tongue to do it with; Others who have had a tongue, have lost the use of their understandings; partly because in sickness we should have as little as may be to do with the World. All occasions of disturbance or distraction to our souls, should be pre∣vented. The disposition of what God hath given thee, must be with prudence for the maintenance of love among Relations, with plainness, that thy mean∣ing
may not be mistaken, and with judgement and ability for the preventing of all Quarrels and Law∣suits amongst such as are interested in it. Reader, If thou art careful and faithful in the discharge of these particulars, thy Funeral will prove a Festival, and the Sun of thy life will set, as the natural Sun, in a clear evening, not in a cloud, but in such a red skie as to prognosti∣cate the ensuing day to be fair, thy certain and com∣fortable resurrection to bliss and honour; Thy name will live when thou art dead, and thy me∣mory be blessed amongst all that fear the Lord. Tacitus makes one of the Sempronii, not wholly to degenerate from the honour of his house, onely for dying well. Constantia mortis hand indigna Sem∣pronio nomine. Nero did tacitly wipe Claudius the Emperour, though himself were the worst of the two, when in an ambiguous phrase he men∣tions his death; Desinit Morari, ha∣ving the first syllable short, signifieth to stay, and so the meaning is, Claudius ceased to stay amongst mor∣tal men; but take it as it is derived of the Greek  Stultus, and hath the first syllable long, in which sense Nero spake it, it importeth Claudius, hath now made an end of playing the fool a∣mongst men. Morari inter homines; Every sinner goeth out like a snuff; but the just shall be had in everlasting remembrance. By practi∣cing these duties thou shalt come to die in the Lord, to rest from thy labours, and to have thy works following thee to thine endless blessed re∣ward.
A Good Wish about the Christians exercising him∣self to Godliness, on a Dying Bed; wherein the former heads are applied. THe righteous God having appointed death to be the end of all the Children of men,The Intro∣duction. as the com∣mon road through which they pass into the other world, to receive according to what they have done in this life, whether it be good, or whether it be evil; I Wish that I may be wise to consider of my latter end, and so live that I may rather desire then be afraid to dye, that my last days may be my best days, and I may imitate my Redeemer in bring∣ing my God much honour, and doing his Church much service, when I am entring into my Masters joy. The evening praiseth the day, the last scene com∣mends the Act. The rivers, the nearer they draw to the Sea, the sooner they are met by the tide. Though to guide a vessel safely along in the Ocean, argueth much skill, and such a Pilot is worthy of praise; yet at the very entrance into the Haven, then to a∣void the Rocks, and to cast Anchor in a safe Road, argueth most skill, and deserveth most praise. Musi∣tians reserve the sweetest strain for the close of their lesson. Orators, though in every part of their speech they use great care, yet in the close of their speech they use the utmost of their Rhetorick, and put forth all their art and skill to stir up all the affections of their hearers, that they may leave at last the deepest impressions upon their hearts of those things which they would perswade to. My whole life ought to be nothing else but a pleading with my God for mercy
and a walking according to his word; but when I come to the period of my days, how powerful should my prayers, how pious my practices be? how lively my graces? how holy my whole conversation? that my God may say of me, as once of Thyatira, I know thy works and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first. Though violent Motions are slowest at last, as being farthest from that strength which forced them contrary to their own inclinati∣ons; yet natural motions, proceeding from an in∣ward principle, the nearer the centre, the swifter the motion; Though Hypocrites and such as have onely a form of godliness, grow worse and worse, and fill up the measure of their lusts with the measure of their lives; yet gracious persons and such as have the power of godliness, grow better and better, and compleat their task with their time; O that the long∣ings, the desires, the faith, the hope, the delight of my soul, like the approaches of a Needle, may be so much the more quick, by how much they draw nearer to their Load-stone Iesus Christ. Lord, thou hast an absolute dominion over me, both living and dying; Its thy word, None of thine liveth to him∣self, or dyeth to himself; But whether they live, they live unto the Lord, and whether they dye they dye unto the Lord; and whether they live or dye, they are the Lords. O help me to glorifie thee, both by my life and by my death. Let thy spi∣rit be strong within me, when my flesh is weak; When the Keepers of the house shall tremble, shew thy self the Keeper and strength of my heart. When the Grinders shall cease, because they are
few or weak, give me to feed on the Manna of thy promises, and that bread which came down from Heaven. When the Daughters of Musick shall be brought low, let me hear by faith the song of Mo∣ses and the Lamb, sung by the celestial quire; When they that look out at the Window are darkened, let the eyes of my soul be opened, to behold, with thy dying Martyr Stephen, Iesus sitting at the right hand of God; Let my hope and desire look out at the Windows, and say, Why is his Chariot (sent to fetch me to himself) so long a comming? Why tarry the wheels of his Chariot? Make hast my beloved, be thou like the Heart and Roe, upon the Mountains of spices. Whether I perish in the field with Abel, or in the Prison with the Baptist, or in my bed with Jacob, grant me thy gracious comfor∣ting presence, and then though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear none ill. O do thou undertake my conduct in my passage over the rough waters of this Jordan, into Canaan, and then there will be no danger of drowning; Assist me so to live by faith, that I may dye in the faith, and when my friends take my earthly body to their disposal, O do thou receive my Heaven-born soul into the armes of thine infinite mercy, for thou hast redeemed it, Lord God of truth. I Wish that I may frequently ponder what a seri∣ous solemn thing it is to dye.Motive. Death is a se∣riou thing. How ever light, or vain, or jesting, my life hath been, my death will be in earnest; I cannot dally or trifle with it; It will not dally or trifle with me; It can be done but once, and upon it my everlasting making or marring depends. It s so certain, that all must,
willing or unwilling, ready or unready, undergo it; Neither the policy of Achithophel, nor the strength of Sampson, nor the wisdom of Solomon, nor the beauty of Absolom, nor the piety of Abraham, nor the wealth of the rich Glutton, can prevail to avoid it; No time, no place, no company, no houses, no lands, no relations, no youth, no strength, no power, no preferments, can priviledge me against the arrest of death. God hath decreed it, Sin hath deserved it, and I must expect it. It is so searching that it will discover all the Children of men, both to themselves and Angels. Though ships are usually distinguished by their Flags, yet that is no sure sign; for Mariners when in sight and fear of their enemies, will ordina∣rily hang out the colours of other Nations, and say they belong to them, but when they come to their Ha∣ven to unload their vessels, it appears to what Coun∣try they belong: Though men are usually distinguished by their outward behaviours, yet many for their own ends put on Christs livery, who are of Satans family, but when they come to be searched and unladen at the end of their lives, twill be known to whom they belong. When I come to dye, then the great con∣troversie between Christ and Satan concerning my soul, will be determined, whose it shall be for ever. O my soul, that thou couldst but conceive what it will be to be sent by death into an unchangeable e∣state either of bliss or misery. If thou diest in thy sins, thou art killed with death. Shouldst thou now live without conscience, thou wilt dye without comfort, and remain comfortless for ever. Ponder a little with thy self the fearful death of a sinner, that thou mayst flie his wicked acts, as thou wouldst his
woful end. In the midst of his jollity and mirth, when he is in an eager pursuit of carnal pleasures, and posting in the way of worldly delights, and running to all excess of riot, he is on a sudden by deaths harbinger, sickness, commanded to stand, and proceed no further; This cuts him to the very heart. His former prosperity, like Oyl, hath suppled his body, and makes him more sensible of his present pain. And his immoderate love to those fleshly delights, doth a∣bundantly greaten his grief, and increase his loss. Now the man is thrown, whether he will or no, upon his sick bed, that must be his death bed; In this his extremity, his Companions, and Friends, and Wife, and Children, and Honour, and Places, and Prefer∣ments, and Silver, and Gold, and Houses, and Lands, and costly attire, and dainty fare, are all dry things, and unsavoury to him; no creature can afford him the least comfort. If he look into his Chamber, his Wife is weeping and wringing her hands, his Children are sighing, his friends are lamenting and wailing, but all this doth increase, not miti∣gate his vexation and misery. If he look into his Con∣science, he finds that taking courage, and telling him to his face, that though formerly he would not suf∣fer it to speak, yet now it must tell him the truth, that death, and hell, and wrath, are the wages of his ungodly works. It will bring to his mind, the time he hath mis-spent, the talents that he hath mis-im∣proved, the day of grace that he hath despised, the great salvation that he hath neglected; his secret, and private, and publick sins, the sins of his Child∣hood, of his youth, of his riper age; those sins which he had forgotten, and thought should never
have been remembred, are all set in order before his eyes; His heart which was before harder then the neather Milstone, is now pierced, though not with an evangelical contrition, yet with legal terrors and torments. His sickness will allow no rest to his bo∣dy, and his sins will afford no ease to his soul. In the evening he cryeth, Would God it were mor∣ning; in the morning, Would God it were even∣ing, because of the anguish of his spirit; His bones are filled with a painful disease, and his body with unquietness. The Arrows of the Al∣mighty are within him, the poison thereof drinks up his spirit, and the terrors of God do set them∣selves in array against him. His review of his past actions, his remembring of his slighting Christ for a brutish pleasure, or a little fading treasure, or a base lust, and provoking God, and continuance in sin, against mercies, judgements, warnings, the light of conscience, the motions of the spirit, are as so many envenomed Arrows sticking in his side, and piercing him through with many sorrows, but the thoughts of his necessity of dying, and his fore-thoughts of the consequent of death, how hell rides upon its back, and eternal torments attend it; how he must fry in unquenchable flames, and take up his ever∣lasting lodging amongst roaring Lyons, frightful Dragons, and the hellish crew sink him quite down. To add some more Gall and Wormwood to his cup of bitterness, the Devil now steps in, and sheweth him his sins in their black hew, in their bloody co∣lour and countenance, to make him hopeless and des∣perate. The poor creature in this miserable plight and plunge, knoweth not what to do, whether to go for releif.
Dye he would not, but must; live he would, but canno. Now he wisheth that he had prayed and served God, and minded his soul and salvation more, and gratified his flesh, and embraced the pleasures and honours of the World less; Now he de∣sireth that he might live a little longer, and thinks, O how would I redeem time, and follow after holiness, and walk with God, what would I not do and suffer to lay up some comfort, some cordial against such an hour! But whilst he is thus in the midst of his vain wishes, Death tells him by the violence of his distemper, that the time of his departure is at hand; His eyes now begin to sink, his speech to faulter, his breath to shorten, and his heart to fail him, and a cold sweat to seise on his whole body. He strives and struggleth with all his might to continue here, but Death like a Cruel Serjeant, drags him to the bar of God, whence he is immediately with frowns and fury dismist and haled to the dreadful and eternal Dungeon of Hell. O the howlings, the screeching, the groans, the grief which possesseth this poor soul, when he is attached by Devils, those merciless Officers, and carried by them to the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. The Spirit being now gone, the Body remains a cold lump of Clay, forsaken of its dearest friends, loath∣som to its nearest relations, sit for no company but the wormeaten congregation, amongst which it must abide till the last day, when it shall be joyned to the soul, and partake with it in unconceiveable and endless torments. Ah who can read such a souls estate with dry eyes! or think of such a condition without sorrow,
O my soul, what are thy thoughts of such a death! Wouldst thou for the most prosperous Worldlings life, dye such a death? Doth not thine heart ake whilst thou art musing on it? If thou wouldst not meet with the end of such men, avoid their ways; Lord, I confess my self a great sinner, and thou mightest justly leave me to walk in the counsel of the ungodly, and to go in the paths of the destroyer, that my feet should tend to death, and my steps take hold of hell, yet for thy sons sake, teach me thy way, and lead me in thy righteousness, that my soul may never be gathered with sinners, nor my life with bloody men, that I may die the death of the righteous, and my latter end may be like his. Motive. A dying me is a fit season to glorifie God in.I wish that I may look upon a dying Bed, as a Fit Pul∣pit in which I may preach my Makers and Redeemers praise. The speeches of dying persons are often highly pri∣zed, as savouring of most sincerity, and least suspected of selfish ends. They who scorned my counsel, and rejected my advice in my health and strength, as fearing it pro∣ceeded rather from interest then simplicity of heart, will if they have the least grain of charity, believe me in earnest, and my words to be the language of my soul when I am dying, and entering into my eternal estate. The worst of men have some reverence and respect for dying Christians. What thrusting and crowding, even to the prejudice of their bodies, hath there often been to hear the speeches and last words of dying men. The vilest Malefactour, who is cut off by the Sword of justice, is permitted with patience to speak, and at∣tended to with diligence at the Gallows. If enemies have some respect for dying Felons, and will hearken to them with meekness, what hopes may a dying
Saint have of advantaging the souls of his friends? O that I might greedily embrace such an opportunity of advantaging the interest and honour of my God, the service and good of my neighbours, and by my pious language, and gracious carriage at my latter end, make others in love with holiness, holy men, and the holy one of Israel! Sinners catch hold of every season to propagate their ungodly seed, and commend Satans rot∣ten wares to the men of the world; Why should not Saints be as vigilant as diligent for their God and Saviour? Lord, I know not in what manner, by what distem∣per it will please thee to call me to thy self. I beg if it may seem good in thy sight, that nothing may be∣fal me on my dying bed, which may render me un∣capable of commending thee, and thy ways, and worship to others. My chearfulness in bearing thy will, and activeness to extol thy work and reward, may through thy blessing perswade Satans drudges to forsake his slavery, and admit themselves thy servants. O that I might allure others to prepare for such a day, by lifting up my head with joy, when that day of re∣demption draweth nigh! The Apprentice makes merry when his time is expired, and he enjoyeth his free∣dom. The Bride hath a feast and musick, when her Marriage-day is come. This life is my time of ser∣vice, death sets me at liberty; In this World I am contracted to my dearest Saviour, my solemn mar∣riage is in the other world, into which I pass through death. Why should I fear that Messenger which brings such good news, and be troubled at that friend who will do me so great a courtesie? O enable me to live every day according to thy Gospel, that keeping my conscience clean, and my evidences clear, I may in
the day of my death, rejoyce and be exceeding glad; Give me to savour the sweetness of thy love, the plea∣santness of thy paths, to feel the powerful influences of thy spirit, the vertue and efficacy of thy word; so to rellish communion with thy self, and thy dear Son all the days of my life, that when I am going out of the world, and comming to thee; O Father, I may from my own experience quicken and encourage others to forsake earthly vanities, before earthly vanities forsake them; and to take thee for their chiefest good, and choicest happiness, who will never leave them nor forsake them. Motive. It is the last opportunity.I Wish that the nearer I draw to my reward, the more zealous and industrious I may be about my work, and that when my body droppeth and faileth most, my soul may be most vigorous and active in the exercise of grace. I am infinitely indebted to the blessed God, for his unspeakable grace to my pre∣cious soul, my engagements to the dearest Redeemer, for loving me and washing me in his own blood, are far beyond my apprehension. This is the last oppor∣tunity that I shall ever enjoy to testifie my thankeful∣ness, and to do my God, my Saviour, my soul, any service. O how diligent should I be to promote their interest, and improve this season! Nature in its last conflict with a disease, puts forth it self to the utmost, it draweth in those spirits which before were scattered in the outward parts, to guard and arm the heart, it rallieth all those forces which are left, if possible, to win the day; O why should not grace in its last encounter, muster up all its strength, and put forth it self to the utmost! Lust is strong to the last, when nature is weak and spent, and the sin∣ner
disabled from his unclean or intemperate acts, even then he can hug them in his heart, and roul them under his tongue, as a sweet morsel, and commit them over and over again, in his thoughts, and fancy, and affections. The dying Theif on the Cross, when his hands and feet were nailed, and by force kept in order, could yet find his tongue at liberty before his death, to rail at, and revile the Lord of life. Ah is it not a thousand pities that grace should be out∣vied by lust, and that those that are paid with such lamentable wages as everlasting burnings, should dye serving their cruel Master and enter into Hell, belch∣ing out their blasphemies, and spitting their poison in the face of Heaven; and that the Children of God should do their father so little service, when they are going to their blissful mansions, and can do him no more? love to my self, as well as to my God, may quicken me to labour with all my might, when I draw near my last hour. As I fall now, I lie for ever. My eternal estate dependeth more upon my death then my life. Its possible, (though rare) that a prophane life may be corrected by a penitent death; but a wicked death can never be amended. He that shoots off a piece, if he be not steady just at its go∣ing off, loseth his Charge, and misseth his Mark; He that dieth ill, dieth ever, he is killed with death. He that goeth awry when he goeth out of the world, shall never come back to recal or amend his steps. If I am a conqueror now, I am a conqueror for ever; if I am foiled now, I am foiled for ever. Cowards will sight desperately when they are in extremity, and must either kill or be killed. The Historian saith of Cn. Piso, a confederate of Catalines, that though he had an
heart like an Hare, yet he could sight like a Lyon, when he apprehended a necessity of fighting for his life. O that my pains, my diligence, may be answerable to my peril and my danger; Lord, when that day and hour draweth near, that I must go hence and be no more seen, do thou draw near in boundless mercy to my poor soul; When I must enter into the Cham∣bers of death, and make my bed in the grave, save me from the paws of Satan, and the power of Hell, that the bottomless pit may not shut her mouth upon me; and give me to triumph in that hour of tribulation, as knowing that neither tribulation, nor persecution, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor life, nor death, can sepe∣rate me from thy love, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord. The matter. 1. In Commen∣ding God and his ways to o∣thersI Wish that when I am going to the place of silence, I may speak the excellencies of my God, and make his praise glorious. It is the unhappiness of worldlings and wicked men, that they cannot when they dye commend the principles whence they have acted, nor the vain pleasures which they have minded and pursued. How many of them whose lives have been nothing but a bundle of false-hood and lies, when God hath called them to leave the world, have spo∣ken truth, and told their Friends and Relations, that sin is an evil and bitter thing, that carnal pleasures are guilded poisons, that the greatest and choicest of worldly comforts, though they may have honey in their mouths, have a sting in their tailes; and what a vain empty nothing the whole creation is? How often have they complained how the world hath deceived them, the flesh deluded them, and
Devil beguiled and destroyed them? It is my privi∣ledge as well as my duty, to extol my Master whom I have served, to commend the sweetness of his ways, the pleasantness of his worship, the reasonableness of his precepts, the richness of his promises, and the vastness of that portion which he hath laid up for his Children when they come to age. I have sometimes tasted his work and ways to be sweeter then the honey and the honey comb; I have viewed by faith his re∣ward to be vastly glorious, and beyond all apprehen∣sions excellent. O why should I not diswade others from their eager pursuit of foolish fading shadows, and perswade and encourage them to earnest endeavours after real substance, and durable riches! The sinner who hath wallowed all his life time in the mire of filth and wickedness, will when he comes to dye, and be∣gins to return to his wits, from his own experience of the emptiness and unprofitableness of his ungodly courses, and from the convictions of his natural con∣science, acknowledge a sober, sanctified conversation to be safest, and the ways of God to be most gainful; and upon these accounts advise his friends and rela∣tions to forsake and abandon the lusts of the world and flesh, and to follow after holiness, as they would be happy eternally. And have not I much more cause to shew my abhorrency of sin, and love to my Savi∣our and his image, when I am entering into my Fathers house? The sinner hath onely found at last a fleshly life, to be vain and fruitless, and is like to pay dear for his learning, but I have known the paths of piety to be paths of pleasantness, and re∣joyced more in them then in all riches; The sinner hath onely the dim light of nature to shew him the
loathsomness of vice, and the loveliness of grace; but I have the holy Spirit of my God to enlighten my mind in the knowledge of both; The sinner hath on∣ly a carnal love to his Neighbours and Kindred; he knoweth not what it is to love them in Christ, and for Christ; I have some knowledge of the love and Law of Christ, of the worth of their souls, of the price paid for them by the Lord Iesus, and their unchangeable conditions in the other world. O that my language to them, might be somewhat answerable to the love of Christ to me! Lord, It is unrighteous∣ness to die in debt to man, and not to endeavour to make them satisfaction according to my power; I am sure to dye in thy debt; for I am less then the least of all thy mercies, and unable to requite thee for the smallest of thy favours; It is my comfort, that all the recompence thou expectest, is a thank∣ful acknowledgement, and hearty acceptance of thy grace and good will. O what injustice and ingrati∣tude were I guilty of, should I deny thee so small a request! Be pleased to help thy servant in his last hours, both to accept unfeignedly of thy grace for his own good, and to acknowledge thy good will, and bounty, and faithfulness to thy glory, for the good of others. To com∣mend others to God.I Wish that my lost breath may be drawn Hea∣ven-ward; I mean, that I may enter praying into the house of blessing and praise. I am no Christian if I do not give my self to prayer whilst I live. It is one choice piece of my spiritual Armour, whereby I have often assaulted and conquered my soul-enemies; It is the Ambassadour which I have many a time sent to the heavenly Court, that always received a
favourable Audience, and obtained his errand. It is the Vessel which hath brought me food from far, and ever returned richly laden, if it were not my own fault. It is the element in which I live; the aliment by which I subsist; the pulse, the breath of my soul, without which it must needs dye. On my death-bed I have as much need of its succour as at any season; My adversaries will then imploy their greatest power and policy to rout and ruine me, I am but weak flesh and blood, altogether unable to combat with Principalities and Powers; and how can I ex∣pect supplies from the Lord of Hosts, unless I send this Messenger to intreat it? My wants and weak∣nesses at such a time will be more then ordinary. Faith must then be acted in spight of all the frights and fears which a malicious Devil, and an unbelei∣ving heart, from the number and nature of my sins, the strictness of the law, and the justice of God, may put me to; Repentance must then be exercised, and my sins lye nearer my heart then my sharpest dis∣eases; In patience I must possess my soul under all the pains and pressures which the wise God shall lay upon me. I must then chearfully submit to the di∣vine pleasure, and by my willingness to leave all the world to go to Christ, shew that I hate Father, Mother, Wife, Child, House, Lands, Life and all for Christ. Those graces and many other, must be put forth at suh a time, none of which I can do by my own power, and therefore have abundant cause to fetch help from Heaven by prayer. Besides, the distempers of my body will discompose my soul, and unfit it in a great measure for all holy service. Again, my Benefactors, my near Friends and Relations,
the poor afflicted Church of God, do all call aloud to me to pray for them, as the last kindness I shall ever do for them; I profess I love them, how can I manifest it better, then by commending them to God in prayer? Should I leave them thousands of silver and gold (if I were able) it would not all amount to the price of one fervent prayer. My riches might wrong them, through the deceitfulness of their hearts, and cause them to be contented short of Heaven; but my prayers cannot prejudice them, but may much further their eternal welfares. Men whose natures are crabbed and cruel, have granted the requests of their dying children, when they have been contrary to their own humours. How much more will God the Father of mercies, whose nature is Love, whose bowels are infinite, satisfie the desire of his dying children, when they fall in with his own design and desire? If Joab had hopes to speed in his supplication for Absolom, because he knew the Kings heart was more for it then his own, may not I be confident to speed when I beg that he would pay my debts in spirituals, with interest to those who have bestowed carnals on me for his sake; when I ask that my Children and Relations may love and fear, and worship his Maje∣sty, and be his workmanship, created in Christ Iesus unto good works; and when I intreat that he would accomplish all the great and good things which he hath promised to his Church, the purchase of his Christ, knowing that his heart is infinitely more for these things then mine can be! Lord, when I dye, I shall no more put up prayers for my self or other par∣ticular persons; My natural obligations to my Kin∣dred and Relations, my civil ingagements to my
Friends and Benefactours, besides my spiritual bonds to them and thy whole Israel, may well provoke me to be fervent and instant with thy Majesty at such an hour on their behalves. My Redeemer before his death, wrought hard at this duty; He offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying, and tears. Ah, how should I pray for my self and others, when I am taking my leave of prayer! O let thy spi∣rit of supplication be so poured down on me, that I may poure out my spirit in supplication unto thee for my own and others souls, through thy Son, with the greatest success. I Wish that the night of my death,In exerci∣sing grace. may shine glo∣riously with the sparkling stars of divine and hea∣venly graces. In particular, I desire that when the time of my combat with my last enemy, and my last combat with any enemy shall come, I may above all take the shield of Faith,Faith. whereby I shall be sheltered against the sting of death, and quench the fiery darts of the wicked one. The wise Mariner, perceiving a storm approaching, makes hast to fasten his Vessel with Anchors, that it may be steady, and not altogether at the mercy of the winds; I must expect the greatest tempest, when I am entering into my eternal Haven, then all the powers of darkness will conjure up their strongest winds if possible, to shipwrack the vessel of my soul; Ah how much doth it concern me to put forth this grace, the anchor of my soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that with∣in the vail, and thereby to fasten on the rock of A∣ges! If I fail in this, I fall, I miscarry for ever, God is a severe judge to condemn all guilty Male∣factours. Without his Son, I am cloathed with guilt,
and so under his boundless wrath. When Adam had disrobed himself of original righteousness, by diso∣beying the law, he fled from God, and dreaded the summons of offended justice. There is no appearing in the Fathers sight with acceptance, but in the gar∣ments of his Son. None can have boldness to enter into the holy of holies, but by the blood of Iesus. Its Faith onely that interesteth in this blood. I know that through the red Sea of this blood I pass may safely (though enemies pursue me hard) into the Land of promise. Lord, I confess, through an evil heart of unbeleif, I have many a time departed away from the living God; yet Lord, I believe, help mine unbeleif. O Lord of life, be not far from me, when Devils and death are near me. Help me with thy servant Stephen to see Heaven open (by faith) and the Son of man at thy right hand; Enable me to disclaim whatsoever duties I have performed, or graces I have exercised, and to rely alone on a cru∣cified Christ for pardon and life. Though thou kil∣lest me, let me dye trusting and clinging on, and cleaving to Iesus Christ; Let this Pilgrims staff of faith be never out of my hand till I come to my jorneys end. Thou art the Lord of Hosts, and the Captain of my salvation; O help me to put on the whole armour of God, grant me such skill to use it, that I may be able to stand in the evil day; Teach thou my hands to war, and my fingers to fight, that through thee I may do valiantly, and through thee may tread down mine enemies; Grant me so to finish my course, to fight the good fight of faith, that at death I may receive the crown of righteousness, which the righ∣teous judge shall give to all that love his appearing.
I Wish that my faith may ripen into full assurance,Courage. that thereby I may depart with joy, and an abun∣dant entrance may be ministred unto me, into the Kingdom of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Moses and Simeon could sing at their own funerals. The great Apostle could call to be put to Bed, expecting thereby his sweetest eternal rest. How many Martyrs have gone more joyfully to dye, then ever Epicure did to dine, and leaped when they drew near the Stake, believing that they drew near their home, their happiness, their heaven? What is it, O my soul, that makes thee start and flinch back at the sight of this bug-bear? What is there in death that is so dreadful to thee? Is it the sweetness of life, or the pain of death, or thy future estate after death? Consider them all seriously, and then judge rationally whether any of these should make the sigh, so loath to de∣part. First, The love of life need not make thee so backward to obey the call of death; If all thy time were made up of Holy-days, death would bring thee greater advantage. The Garlick and Onions of Egypt are nothing comparable to the Clusters of Canaan. But alas its far otherwise, thy whole life is a civil death. Thou art born to sorrow as the sparks flye upward. Thy days are few, but full of trouble. The earth to thee is a valley of tears; the cross is thy daily companion, which accompa∣nieth thee where-ever thou goest. The sufferings of thy flesh are neither few nor small. How many diseases in thy body, losses in thy estate?
how much disgrace, ignominy, slander, oppression, art thou liable to? The sufferings of thy spirit are more and greater; Thine own sins, the provocations of others, the dishonour of thy God, the wants, and weaknesses, and oppression, and persecution of the Church of Christ, do all give thee daily occasion to mingle thy bread with ashes, and thy drink with weep∣ing. What is this world that thou art so fond of it? Thy God calls it a Sea of glass, mingled with fire, Rev. 15. 2. A Sea for its turbulency; its never at rest, but ebbs and flows continually, though sometimes more, sometimes less; Its work is to bubble up mire and dirt, especially on them who are chosen out of the world. A Sea of glass for its fragility; All its pomp and pride on a sudden vanisheth. Glass is both easily and irreco∣verably broken in peices; A Sea of glass, mingled with fire, for the fiery and dreadful miseries that be∣fal men in it. All its apparent comforts are mingled with real crosses. In Heaven there is solace without the least grain of sorrow; In Hell there is mourning without the smallest dram of mirth; but on Earth there is no estate without mixture. The Saints have joy in God, but if need be they are in heaviness through manifold tribulations, 1 Pet. 1. 6. The merry sinners in the midst of their pleasures, have their hearts heavy; Some of the wiser Heathen, were so sensible of humane miseries, that one of them when Ancient, told his Scholar, that if it were offered him to be young again, he would not accept if. Saints of all men must expect a large draught of sufferings. The world is their enemy, and raiseth all its forces against them. If I be a Disciple I must look to follow my Master in bear∣ing his Cross: O my soul, why shouldst thou hug that
which hates thee, and doat on this world, which is neither a fit match for thee, as being unsutable to thy nature, nor (if she were, can be) faithful to thee, being made up of wavering and inconstancy! Or secondly, Is it the pain of death that thou art so frighted at? Surely the fear of it is the greatest torment; How many have felt greater pain in divers diseases, as in the Stone, or Strangury, or Collick, then in a dying hour? Some of Gods Children have felt very little pain in the judgement of those that have seen them dying; The waters of Jordan, though rough to others, have stood still when the Ark was to pass over. But though I were sure my pain should be sharp, yet I am as sure it shall be short. In a mo∣ment, in the twinckling of an eye, I shall be trans∣ported over the gulp of misery, into endless glory. My pangs will be almost as soon gone as come; Sorrow will endure but for a short night, joy will come in the morning; If I were assured of a great purchase made for me in Spain or Turky, which upon my first com∣ming over I should enjoy, would I not adventure a passage through the boistrous Ocean, to take possession? My Saviour hath made a larger, a better purchase for me in Heaven. He is gone before to prepare a place for me; My passage thither, though it may be more painful, is less perillous; Its impossible for me to miscarry in it. O why am I so slothful to go in and possess the good Land! Surely, the pleasures of the end, may well sweeten the ways to it, were they never so bitter. With what chearfulness do some women undergo their sharp throws, and hard la∣bours, supported with this cordial, that a child shall thereby be born to them? O how infinitely inferiour
is the joy of a man child brought forth into this world, to the joy of a sanctified soul, brought out of this world into Heaven! Again, I have a tender Father, who knoweth my frame, and will lay no more upon me, living or dying, then he will enable me to bear. He hath said it, I will never leave thee, nor for∣sake thee; O my soul, thou hast little reason to dread a contest with this enemy for this cause. Thou mayst contentedly undergo a little pain, to go to thy dearest Lord, when many a sin∣ner hath suffered greater to satisfie his hellish lust. Thirdly, Is it thy future condition that makes thee unwilling to dye? Dost thou not know that death is thy portal, through which thou shalt pass into the true Paradise? Its the straight gate through which thou shalt enter into life; Though its the wicked mans shipwrack which swalloweth him up in an Ocean of wrath and torment, yet its the Saints putting into harbour, where he is received with the greatest acclamation, and richest welcom imaginable. Travellers who have met with many dangers and troubles, in their journeys, rejoyce when they come near their own Country. I am a Pilgrim here, and used, or rather abused, as a stran∣ger, shall I not be glad when I come near my blessed home, my eternal happy habitation? Children in some parts, when they first behold the Stork, the messenger of the Spring, testi∣fie their joy with pleasant and loud shoutings; O why shouldst not thou lift up thy head with joy, when
sickness the fore-runner of death, is come to bring thee tidings that the Winter of thy misery, and cold, and hardships is past, and the Summer of thine eternal light, and joy, and pleasure, is at hand? Thy death may well be a Free-will-offering, considering that though the ashes of the sacrifice (thy body) fall to the earth, yet that divine flame (thy immortal spirit) shall ascend to Heaven. In death nothing dyeth of thee, but what thou mayst well spare, thy sin and sorrows. When the house is pulled to peices, all those Ivy roots in the wall, shall be destroyed. The Egg-shell must be broken, that the little chick may slip out; Thy body must be dissolved, that thy oul may be delivered; Yet thy body doth not dye, but sleep in the bed of the grave, till the morning of the resurrection. That outward apparel shall not be utterly consumed by the moth of time, but lockt up safe, as in a chest, to be new trimmed, and glo∣riously adorned above the Sun in his greatest lustre, and put on again, when thou shalt awake in the morning, never, never, to put off more. O that I could so live, that I might not only be always ready, but also when God calls me, desirous to dye. If I borrow any thing of my Neighbour, I pay it back with thanks. My life is Gods, he lends it me for a time. Why should I not when he calls for it, restore it with thanks, that he hath been plea∣sed to lend it me so long? Lord, thy Children love thee dearly, and believe that when they come home to thee thou wilt entertain them kindly, yet their flesh like Lots Wife, is still ankering after the Sodom of this World, and loath they are to leave it, though
it be for their exceeding gain; Give thy servant such true faith in thy Son, that I may neither love life, nor fear death immoderately, but as the heart of Jacob, revived when he saw the Wagons which Jo∣seph sent to fetch him to Egypt; so my heart may leap for joy, to behold the heavenly Chariot which the Son of Joseph shall send to convey me to the true Goshen. Patience.I Wish that I may with patience submit on my dying bed to the divine pleasure. It hath been far from some Moralists, to murmure, either at the ex∣tremity of their sickness, or the necessity of dying. By impatience I do not help, but rather kill my self before-hand. Its the general lot of mankind to sicke and dye; Am I angry that I am a man, that I am mortal? Because I know that I must be sick and dye, I know that I must submit. The knowledge of an approaching evil, is no small good, if improved. Though it cannot teach me to prevent it by all my power or providence, yet it may teach me to prepare for it, and to bear it with courage and patience. Discontent and quarrelling are great arguments of guilt, and a defiled conscience. The harmless sheep conscious of their innocency, do quietly receive the Knife, either on the Altar or in the Shambles, and give death entrance with small reluctancy; when the filthy loathsom Swine, roar horribly at their first handling, and with hideous cries are haled and held to the fatal block. The Children of God, and members of Christ, who are perfect, through their head, do often give up the Ghost, and desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; when the souls of wicked men are required of them, and they
are strangely passionate at the approach of death, and with dreadful screeches salute its Harbinger, sick∣ness. O that patience might have its perfect work in me, when I am taking my leave of it, and its work is near an end! Lord, my heart is too prone to be impatient under thy hand, though thou art infinitely wise as well as gracious, and knowest what is best for me. In my sickness turn mine eyes upon my sins, that my discontent may be at my self, for that which is the original of all my sorrows, and then I shall never repine or murmur against thee. I Wish that I may daily think of death,Means. A con∣tinued prepa∣ration for it in life. and wait, beleiving, and repenting, and working out my salvation, till my change shall come. My whole time is given me, that therein I might prepare and dress my soul for my blessed eternal estate; Why should it not be imployed for that end? The Child who hath all day been diligent about his duty, may expect his Fathers good word at night; But what Master will give a reward to him in the evening, who hath all the day long served his enemy? My life is the seed which will yeild a crop of horror, or comfort in an hour of death; If that be good, my Harvest will be glorious and joy∣ful; if that be sinful, my Harvest will be bitter and sorrowful; Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? The Grapes of comfort are not to be expected from the Thistles of corruption; nor the Figs of peace, from the thorns of impiety. I should blush to commit to the keeping of a cleanly and considerable person, a foul and filthy vessel; With what face can I commend to the holy and glo∣rious
God, an impure and polluted soul? O how dreadful will it be to meet with my dying bed, be∣fore I have met with the Lord of life, and to be going out of the world, before I have seriously consi∣dered why I came into it? My great work in this world, is to get my depraved nature healed by the blood and spirit of Christ; if I forget my business when I have time to do it, and trifle away my days in doing evil, or doing nothing, I lose my soul, am unfaithful to my Master, and deepen my judgement by the number of my days. That Traveller may well be agast and perplexed, who hath a long journey to go upon pain of death in one day, for which the whole day is little enough, and seeth the sun near setting be∣fore he hath begun his journey. How ill doth the even∣ing of my time, and the morning of my taske accord to∣gether? How justly may God reserve the dregs of his wrath for me, if I reserve the dregs of my days for him? What folly am I guilty of, in deferring my pre∣paration for death? If he be a ridiculous person, that having choice of lusty horses, should let them all go empty, and lay an extraordinary heavy load upon a poor tired jade, that is hardly able to go, much more foo∣lish is he that prodigally wasteth his youth, and health, and strength, in the service of the flesh and the world, and leaves the great and weighty affairs of his soul and eternity, to be transacted on a sick or dying bed; O my soul, what little cause hast thou to future or delay thy solemn provision for the other world? First, thy life is uncertain, thou hast not another day at thy disposal.Plut. There are some creatures, they say, in Pontus, whose life lasteth but one day; They are born in the morning, come to their full growth at noon, grow
old in the evening, and dye at night. What is thy life but a vapour, that soon passeth away? The first minute thou didst begin to live, thou didst begin to dye; Death was born when thou wast born, the last act of life is but the completing of death; As on thy birhday thou didst begin to dye, so on the day of thy death thou dost cease to live; How many out∣ward accidents, and inward diseases, art thou every moment liable to? May I not say to thee as Mi∣chael to David; Save thy self to night, for to¦morrow thou shalt be slain? Others have died sud∣denly, by imposthumes, or the falling-sickness, or vi∣olent means; and if thou promisest thy self a fair warning, before the fatal stroak, thou dost but co∣zen and cheat thy self. But secondly, If thou wert sure to see the evening star of sickness, before the night of death overtake thee, thou art not sure thy sickness shall not be such as may not incapacitate thee for the working out thy salvation. Extremity of pain, anguish of body, lack of sleep, the violence of a fever, may indispose thee, and distract thee, that thou canst not so much as think of God. Or, thy distemper may be such that the Physitian may charge thee not to trouble thy self with melancholy or sad thoughts, lest thou wrongest thy body, and yet the Minister commandeth thee to pull up those sluces of sorrow, if thou wouldst not lose thy soul for e∣ver. Or, cold diseases, as the Lethargy or Palsie may surprise thee, and incline thee to continual slumbers, till at last thou sleepest the sleep of death; O how sottish art thou, and how grosly doth the destroyer of souls delude thee to de¦fer that work of absolute necessity, of conversion
to God, upon which thine endless weal or wo depen∣deth, to a dying Bed, when thou art not sure to dye in thy bed, but mayst as well dye in thy Shop or Fields, or in the Streets; when thou art uncertain what disease, if thou shouldst meet with a dying bed, should send thee to thy eternal home; when thou art neither Master of thy time nor reason, nor of thy natural abilities, much less of supernatural grace, which is indispensably requisite to this great work! O that since I must dye once for sin, I might dye daily to sin! and as the Philistines, that they might the better deal with Sampson, cut off his Hair, where∣in his great strength lay; so that I may the better deal with death, I may by faith and repentance, daily cut off and destroy sin, wherein the strength of death lieth! May I not say to thee, O my soul, as Joshua to Israel? Prepare ye victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Iordan, to go to pos∣sess the Land which the Lord your God giveth you. Prepare the spiritual food, the flesh of Christ, which is meat indeed, and the blood of Christ, which is drink indeed; an heart weaned from the world, longing to be with God; for within a few days thou shalt go in, to possess the land of promise. Lord, I know nothing more certain then death. Sin hath deserved it, my brittle body inforceth it, thou hast decreed it, and none can prevent it; I know nothing more uncertain then the time when, or the manner how. Thou hast many ways and means to bring me to my grave; not onely ordinary distem∣pers of my body, but thousands of casual dangers; I cannot promise my self freedom from it, in any place or condition; Death may seise me abroad, at home, in
company, in solitude, at bed, at board. Why should I not always provide for that extremity, that enemy which I cannot avoid? Why should I not ever be ready for that which may come at any time, and will come at some time or other? Surely I do not hasten my death by preparing for it, but sweeten it exceedingly; I hall not dye a moment the sooner, but infinitely the better. Should death overtake me in my sins, alas where am I? what will become of me for ever? I may well salute it, as Ahab Elijah, with Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? for twill come to me, as the Prophet to that King, with doleful, dreadful tidings; Twill bring me news of a dismal dungeon of darkness, to be my habitation, of Lyons, and Scorpions, and Dragons, to be my com∣panions, of a never dying worm, an unquenchable fire, pure wrath without mixture, full torments without measure, to be my portion for ever and ever; O teach me so to live above this vain empty life, so to be crucified to this world, so to make my peace with thy Majesty, through the great peace∣maker, and Prince of Peace, my Lord Iesus, so to set my heart and house, my spiritual and temporal concernments in order, that I may be delivered from the paw of the Lyon, from the teeth of this monster, from the sting of this Serpent; and though my body be destroyed, yet my soul may escape, as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, and mount up to thy self, to enjoy that happy life which shall know no death. I Wish that all the days of my appointed time I may exercise my self herein,Conclusion. to keep a conscience void of offence towards God, and towards all men. There
are but two which can afford me real comfort in a dy∣ing hour, which always take the same side and joyn together; God and my conscience. Humane friends often stand afar off, when they should be most near, and I have most need; Some of them are loth to come to a sick mans chamber. Mournful objects must not disturb their jollity and mirth. They are sworn enemies to sorrowful occasions, and banih such foes their quarters, or themselves from such coasts. O∣thers if they come to visit me, love not to see my gastly countenance, like not to hear my deep and deadly groans. But be they never so full of pity, they can onely sympa∣thize with me, they cannot relieve, refresh me. The most they can do, is to accompany me to my grave, and there they leave me; But, O the comfort which a loving God, and a conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and purged from dead works, will afford me in a dying hour! The smiles of a God, and chearings of a good conscience, will be musick indeed, to welcom me to the shoar, after all my tumblings and tossings in this tempestuous Ocean. They will make my bed in my sickness, help me to lye easie, hearten me in my sighs and groans, be my feast at my funeral, bid me Be of good chear, for my sins are forgiven me; tell me that my Redeemer liveth, and because he liveth, I shall live also; lodge my body in a grave, as in a Bed of Spices, and convey my soul in∣to my Saviours Bosome and Embraces; when my Houses, Lands, Honours, Friends, Wife, Chil∣dren leave me, they will cleave to me: nay when my breath, life, heart, flesh forsake me, they will not fail me; yea, when faith, hope, patience, re∣pentance, shall bid me farewel weeping, as Orpah
did Ruth, these like Naomi will stick to me, go with me, and seek rest for me; O that my heart may be so upright in the service of my God, that when I hall receive the sentence of death, I may be able to say with good Hezekiah; Remember now, I be∣seech thee, O Lord, how I have walked before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. O my soul, what a friend shouldst thou be to thy God, thy conscience, how faithful to their warnings, now in life if thou wouldst have them thy friends at death! Hereby thou mayst be able to triumph in that hour of temptation, to defie death it self, and bid it do its worst. Though it be the common gate through which the sinner goeth into prison, where he meets with Chains and Fetters, and cold, and all sorts of mise∣ries, yet thou shalt go through it, into the Kings Pal∣lace, where thou shalt have rivers of pleasures, and  entertainment. If Jacob went down so joyfully  Egypt, when God had said to him, fear not to go down, for I will go down with thee, and I will bring thee up again. What needest thou fear to go down into the Grave, when thy God hath undertaken to go down with thee thither, and to bring thee up again? Thy body may be turned into dust, but thy God is in Cove∣nant with thy dust; and thy head, the blessed Redeemer, will not suffer one muscle, or nerve, or artery, or vein of any of his members to be lost. With what chearfulness mayst thou take thy leave of thy body; Farewel sweet body, thou hast been in some measure faithful to thy soul, in the service of thy Lord; Farewel, I must bid thee goodnight, till the morning of the resurrection. Be thou content to go to bed and sleep in the dust,
and rest in hope; for though after the skin, wormes destroy this body, yet in my flesh hall I see God; Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold him, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me; Though thou art sown in dishonour, thou shalt be raied in glory; though thou art sown in weakness, thou shalt be raised in power; though thou art sown a natural body, thou shalt be raised a spiritual body, and fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ himself; Thy dust shall live, and thou shalt arise and be joyned to this soul, and both joyn with the great assem∣bly of the sirst-born, in singing the praises of thy Master and Husband. The Souldier is glad when he is called to receive his pay, though the ways be deep and dirty through which he travelleth to the the place of Muster. The Husbandman rejoyceth when his Fields are white to Harvest, and with piping and shouting accompanieth his last load  the barn; O that my life might be so sanctified  devoted to my God, that at my death he may be my solace. Ah Lord, it matters not who be failing to visit me on my sick bed, so thou be present with me. Nay, though mine enemies come and say, When shall he dye, and his name perish? An evil dis∣ease cleaveth to him; now that he lyeth down, he shall rise up no more; If thou pleasest to visit me with thy saving health, I shall not be afraid when I walk in the valley of the hadow of death; O when the Sun of my life shall be setting, let the Sun of righteousness so arise upon me, that I may be deli∣vered from the power, curse, and sting of death, and may find it through his merits to be my haven
of rest, after all my foul weather; a bed of ease, af∣ter my sore labour, a release out of prison, and my Iu∣bilee to give me possession of an inheritance undefiled, incorruptible, that fadeth not away, which is reser∣ved in heaven for me! Amen. CHAP. IX. Means whereby Christians may exercise themselves to Godliness; A good Foundation: Lving by Faith: Setting God always before our eyes. I Come now to the second thing promised; namely, to lay down the Means, whereby Christians may come to make Religion their business. First, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godli∣ness, be sure that thou layest a good foundation in a re∣newed heart and nature. I begin with this, because it is the chiefest requisite, and the bais of all. God∣liness must first spring up in the heart, before it can overflow in the life. Other means are like those parts of the body, the want of which may be supplied by others; but this is like the heart, which if wanting, nothing can make up its want. A dead man will as soon arise and walk, as an unsanctified person make Religion his business. Every thing will act accord∣ing to that principle which is predominant in it: Though for a time it may by violence work contrary
to its natural inclination, yet it will endeavour the removal of that force, and return to its old course. Fire moveth upwards, and earth downwards, both strving to overturn what standeth in their way, be∣cause the place of fire is above, of earth beneath. A river may be stopped and hindred in its current, but it will never cease till it hath overborn the dam, and attained its former passage. Water that is naturally sweet, may be made brackish by the over-flowing of salt water; but it will not leave till it hath workt out that saltness, and returneth to his natural sweet∣ness; so every man whether good or bad, will act according to his nature, whether gracious or vici∣ous. A good man may be hindred in his holy course by temptations, and the violence of the flesh; but because his nature is gracious he will never be at rest till he hath forcibly broke through those impedi∣ments, and got into his former way of Godliness. An evil man may step into the path of piety through the example of others, or good education, or some slen∣der convictions of a natural conscience, but he will quickly be weary, he will not hold out in it; he will break through those obstacles, because his nature, the stream of his heart, runs another way. The Heart of man is like the Spring of the Clock, which causeth the wheels to move right or wrong, well or ill; Hence it is that Gods precept is to this, Make you a new heart and a new spirit; and his pro∣mise of this, I will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall never depart away from me. The fear of God in the heart will bind thee fast to God in thy life. If the heart be throughly drawn to him, the tongue
and hand will not depart from him. If the heart once set forward for God, all the members will fol∣low after; the mouth will praise, the ears will attend to him, the eye will watch him, the seet will go af∣ter him; all the parts, like dutiful handmaids, in their places will wait on their Mistris. There was a great Master among the Jews, which bid his Schollars to consider and tell him, What was the best thing, or the best way, in which a man should always keep: One said, A good Companion was the best thing in the world; another said, A good Neighbour was the best thing he could wish; A third said, A wise man, or one that could for esee future things; A fourth said, A good eye, that is, a liberal disposition; At last came one Eleazer, and he said, A good heart is better then them all. True, said the Master, thou hast compre∣hended in two words all that the rest have said; For a good heart will make a man both contented, and a good companion, and a good neighbour, and help him to foresee things that are to come, that he may know what is on his part to be done. Indeed without this there can be no godliness; all professions and per∣formances are but a shew, a shadow; and where there is this, there is all godliness in all manner of con∣versation. As the King of France said of Dover, that it was the key of England; and if his son, who then invaded the Britains, had not that, he had nothing; So it may be said of the heart, It is the key of the whole man; it opens and shuts the door to Godliness and Wickedness; and if grace hath not this, it hath nothing. The Philosopher when he would perswade the King to settle his residence in the midst of his Dominions, and thereby keep all his people the bet∣ter
in subjection, took a Bulls hide ready tanned, upon which when he stood on any side of it, still it rose up on the other; but when he stood on the middle, he kept down all alike. The onely way to subdue sin, is to do it in the heart; that commands all; otherwise though one unruly passion may be kept down, another will rise up. The Heart is the great Work-house where all sin is wrought, before its exposed to open view; Its the Mint where evil thoughts are coyned, before they are currant in our words or actions; Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Matth. 15.19. that is the nest in which those Hornets breed. The heart is the o∣riginal of sinful words, as well as sinful thoughts; Out of the heart proceed false witness, blasphemies, Matth. 15.19. They were in the heart before ever they were in the tongue. Its faid of the Weasel that it conceives at the ear, and brings forth at the mouth: Every sinner conceiveth at the heart, what he brings forth at the mouth. Such stinking breath comes from rotten inwards. The heart is the sel of poisonous liquor, the tongue is but the tap to broach it; Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. The heart is the Forge also, where all our evil works as well as words are hammered out; Out of the heart proceed murthers, and thefts, and adulteries, and for∣nicaions, Matth. 15.19. You will say that murthers and thefts are hand-sins, and that adulteries and fornication belong to the eye, and outward parts of the body; but alas, the heart is the womb wherein they are conceived and bred; the outward parts are but the Midwives to deliver the mother of those monsters, and to bring them into the world; An
evil man, out of the evil treasure in his heart, bringeth forth evil things: There is no sin but is drest in the withdrawing room of the heart, before it appear on the stage of the life. Apollidorus dreamed one night that the Scythians had taken him and flea'd off his skin,Plut. Moral. with an in∣tent to boil him, and as he was lifting into the Caul∣dron, his heart said unto him, Its I that have brought thee to all this. There is a real truth in this, that the heart brings men both to all their sins, and all their sufferings. As the Chaos had the seed of all crea∣tures, and wanted nothing but the motion of the good Spirit to produce them; so the heart hath the seed of all evil, and wanteth nothing but the motion of the evil spirit, and a fit opportunity to bring it forth. It is in vain to go about an holy life, till the heart be made holy. The Pulse of the hand beats well or ill, according to the sate of the heart, and the in∣ward vital parts. Our earthly members can never be mortified, unless the body of sin and death be de∣stroyed. The foul bird of sin must be killed in the nest, the heart, or it can never be thrown on the dunghil, die in the life. Therefore the Holy Ghost calls on men to take away the cause, if they would have the effect to cease. O Ierusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness. Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purifie your hands ye double-minded; first the heart cleansed, then the hands, Ier. 4.14. Iames 4.7,8. If the chinks of the ship are unstopt, twill be to no pur∣pose to labour at the Pump. It is not rubbing or scratching will cure the itch, but the blood, whose corruption is the cause of it, must be purified. When
the water is foul at the bottom, no wonder that scum and filth appear at the top. There is no way to stop the issue of sin, but by drying up the matter that feeds it. As Moses cast the tree into the bitter waters, and sweetned the Springs; And as Elijah cast salt into the fountain, and thereby healed the waters; so the salt of grace must be cast into the Spring, the fountain of the heart, or the streams of the life will never be sweet. Till trees are grafted, and their nature altered, all the fruit they bring forth is wilde and harsh, and little worth: Till the Chri∣stian is grafted into Christ, and a new and ano∣ther nature be infused into him, all his fruit is unsa∣voury and unacceptable to God, vain and unpro∣fitable to himself. Such a one is like a Cypress tree, fair to look on, but barren. Like a Painter, he may make a great stir about the colours and shadows of things, the form of Godliness, and shew all his wit, and art, and skill in expressing the outside, but wholly neglecteth the substance, and contemneth the inward parts, the power thereof. There be several things which may help to make the life fair in the eyes of men; but nothing will make it amiable in the eyes of God, unless the heart be changed and renewed. Indeed all the medicines which can be applied, without the sanctifying work of the Spirit, though they may cover, they can ne∣ver cure the corruption and diseases of the soul. The best man without this is like a Serpent painted as it were without, but poysonous within. As the herb Biscort, he may have smooth and plain leaves, but a croked root. Or as a Pill, be guilded on the out∣side,
when the whole mass and body of it is bitter∣ness; It is one thing to be angry with sin upon a sudden discontent, as a Man may be with his Wife, whom he loves dearly; and another thing to hate sin, as that which we abhor to behold, and en∣deavour to destroy. A filthy heart, like a foul body, may seem for a while to be in good plight; but when the heats and colds of temptations ap∣pear, twill bewray it self. Some Insects lye in a deep sleep all the Winter, stir not, make no noise, that one would think them dead; but when the weather alters, and the Sun shines, they revive and shew themselves; So though lusts may seem dead in an unregenerate man, they are on∣ly laid asleep, and when opportunity is, will re∣vive. Shame may hide sin, but it will not heal n; Corruption often lyeth secret in the heart, when shame hindereth it from breaking out in sabs and boches in the life. Some court holiness as hard in shew, as Saul did Samuel, to be honou∣red before the people, when like him, they hate it in their hearts. Fear may do somewhat to curb a vitiated na∣ture, but it cannot cure it; The Bear dares hard∣ly touch his desired honey, for fear of the sting∣ing of the Bees; The Dog forbears the meat on the Table, not because he doth not love it, but because he is afraid of the Cudgel; Many leave some sin, in their outward actions, as Iacob par∣ted with Benjamin, for fear they should starve if they kept it, who are as fond of it, as the Pa∣triarch of his Child. This inward love of sin, is indeed its life, and that which is most dangerous
and deadly to the soul. As an imposthume is most perillous for being inward; and private Rocks un∣der water, split more vessels then those that ap∣pear above water; so sin raigning onely in the heart, is oftentimes more hurtful then when it rageth in the life; Such civil persons go to Hell without much disturbance, being asleep in sin, yet not snoring, to the diquieting of others; they are so far from being jogged or awaked, that they are many times praised and commended. Example, Custom, and Education, may also help a man to make a fair shew in the flesh, but not to walk after the spirit; They may Prune and Lop sin, but never stubb it up by the roots. All that these can do, is to make a man like a grave, green and flourishing on the surface and superficies, when within there is nothing but noi∣somness and corruption. It hath often appeared that those means which the great Moralists have used to bridle their lusts and passions, have ra∣ther, like strong sents to Epileptick bodies, raised them, then recovered them. Indeed if the cheif fault were not in the vital parts, then outward applications might be effectual; but when the heart and lungs, and inwards are all corrupted, Plaisters applied to the face, or hands, or thighs, or sides, will do little good. When the fault is in the foundation of an house, it cannot be men∣ded by Plaistering or rough-cast. A Leopard may be flea'd, but he is spotted still, because the spots are not onely in the skin, but in the flesh, and bones, and sinews, and most inward parts. When the disease is accidental, as to lose the sight by the
Small-Pox, or the like, there the Physick of mo∣rality may be advantagious; but where the dis∣ease is natural, as in the man that was born blind, there Physick will do no good; a miracle alone must restore such a one to his sight. Unsanctified persons at best, act from themselves, and therefore for themselves. As the Kite, they may spread their wings, and soar aloft, as if they touched Heaven, when at the highest, their eyes are upon their prey upon earth. Lucullus told his guests, when he had feasted them liberally, and they had admired his bounty in their costly enter∣tainment; Something my Friends is for your sakes, but the greatest part is for Lucullus his own sake. An unconverted person may do something, some small matter for the sake of Religion, from com∣mon gifts of illumination, &c. but the most that he doth is for his own sake, for that credit or profit which he expecteth thereby. If any thing be enjoyned which thwarteth his interest, he will reply with Ajax, when commanded to spare Vlysses, In other things I will obey the Gods, but not in this. Reader, Make sure of this inward change; o∣therwise, though thy conversation may be speci∣ous, it can never be gracious, nor thy profession durable. If the house be built on loose earth, it will never stand long. When the principles are variable and uncertain, so will the practices be. If the arguments upon which thou takest upon thee the livery of Christ, and the grounds of thy engagement in his service, be not firm and con∣stant, the love of God, and hope of eternal
life, &c. such as the world and flesh cannot over-top, thou wilt throw up thy profession, and leave thy Master, when thou art offered in thy blind judg∣ment a better service, though it be but the plea∣sures of sin for a season, with eternal pains at the end of them, for thy soul, and Saviour, and eter∣nal salvation. How well may he prove a Bankrupt, who is worse then naught when he first sets up? I wonder not that many pofessors disown the Lord Jesus, when they were ignorant why they at any time owned him. He that takes up Re∣ligion on trust, will lay it down when it brings him into trouble. As the Celendine springeth and floweth at the comming of the Summer birds, but withereth at their departure; And the Corn that promiseth a good Harvest in the Blade, is blasted in the Ear, because its root is withered and naught; So the person that hath no sound foun∣dation, though he seem to look high, will never hold out. The Turnsel makes a shew for a time, with white velvet leaves, and yellow flowers, but fadeth away without bringing forth any fruit; Christ tells us, some which heard the word, though for a season they rejoyced in it, when tribulation came because of the word, were offended at it, because they had no root. To prevent that sad Apostacy which many are guilty of to their eternal undoing, Friend, con∣sider serionsly beforehand, what it will cost thee to be a Christian indeed. A foolish builder, that undertakes to raise a structure as high as Heaven, and pondereth not the charge thereof, gives over
before he hath half finished it, and so loseth all his expence and labour. As in marriage one that is wise, and considereth the person, his portion, and his precepts, with the cares and burdens that are incident to that condition, for such must have trouble in the flesh, and after this, upon mature de∣liberation, accepteth him for an Husband, will stick and cleave to him loyally and faithfully, whatever befalls him; whereas a foolish Maid that hudleth up a match in haste, hand over head, promising her self nothing but delight and plea∣sure, when she comes to suffer poverty or impri∣sonment, or disgrace with her Husband, repen∣teth of her bargain, and forsakes the guide of her youth; So the Christian that hath duly pondered the excellencies in Christ; his misery without Christ, absolute necessity of Christ; what love, and joy, and peace, and endless bliss, God offereth with his Son; what Christ expecteth from all that will be married to him, even the denyal of themselves, the taking up of their Cross, the contempt of Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Estate, Life, and all for him, and after he hath duly conside∣red all this, gives himself up to Christ, will be faithful unto death, and own the Lord Jesus Christ, whatever it may cost him, when the man that followeth Christ for the loaves, or for fashi∣on, or on a sudden strikes a league with him, expecting nothing but comforts and joy in his con∣tract, will quickly leave him, if called to suffer with him. He that followeth Christ, he know∣eth not why, will forsake him, he knoweth not how.
If thou art, Reader, to begin this work of entering thy self into Christs Army, I would ad∣vise thee to bethink thy self upon what grounds thou engagest in his quarrel; For Christians are not called to their spiritual war for love of fight∣ing, as Cocks that fall to it upon sight of each other. Consider, the enemies thou art to fight a∣gainst, how potent, and crafty, and cruel they are, continually seeking thy destruction; the Cap∣tain thou art to fight under, how wise he is to direct and command thee, how able to protect and defend thee; how faithful, and bountiful, to crown and reward thee; the excellency of the cause; it is for thy soul, thy God, thy Saviour, thy salvation; the dangers thou must encounter, and hardships thou willt be called to endure; the certainty of thy conquest; how impossible it is to miscarry in so just a quarrel, under such an Al∣mighty Captain, and then list thy self to fight the good fight of faith, and fear not but thou shalt be more then a conqueror, through him that loves thee. Secondly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness, Live by Faith. The life of Faith, its the onely life of holiness; and unbelief is the mother of all Apostacy. When God would perswade A∣braham to sincere and singular godliness, he doth it by offering him sure footing for his faith, I am God Alsufficient, or the Almighty God; Walk be∣fore me, and be thou perfect, Gen. 17. 1. knowing that unless his faith were firm, his steps could ne∣ver be even; If he had not beleived Gods power,
he could not be evangelically perfect. And hence that father of the faithful became so eminent in obedience, from the strength of his faith. Its said of him, Isa. 41. 2. that he came to the foot of God. That Child was dutiful indeed, that when his Father did but stamp with his foot, left what ever he was about, though it were never so delightful or gainful to him, and ran to his Fa∣ther, to know and obey his commands. Thus truly did Abraham, when God called him to turn his back upon his relations, and the place of his nativity; nay, to sacrifice his Isaac; the child of the promise, as well as of his love; he did not question Gods pleasure, nor quarrel with his pre∣cepts, but obeyed them presently, and all from his faith. His strong faith caused strong obe∣dience, Heb. 11. Its observable, that all the no∣ble and heroick acts of obedience of the Lords Worthies, mentioned in that little book of Mar∣tyrs, were performed under the conduct and com∣mand of faith. Faith is one of the best Antidotes against the poison of prophaness, and one of the greatest helpes to holiness; None are more faithful to God, then they who have most faith in God. They who beleive, will be careful to maintain good works, Tit. 3. 8. As the natural heat is the life of the bo∣dy, and as that increaseth with the radical moy∣sture, strength and health abound; So Faith is the life of the soul; as that is strong or weak, his godliness is more or less. He that is highest in affiance, is highest in obedience. This is the strength of the soul; According to a Mans strength, such
is his walk, either straight or stumbling; Accor∣ding to a mans Faith, such is his life, either even or crooked. 1. Faith destroyeth sin. 2. It enableth to live to God. 1. It killeth sin; If the Pulse of a Christian hand or life beat uneven, it is because his Faith, which is his heart, doth faulter. This is the shield of the soul, which secures it against all assaults and dangers; Other peices of the Christians Armour, are serviceable to defend particular parts of the new man, as the Girdle of truth, the loyns; rightous∣ness, the brest; the Gospel of peace, the feet; but Faith is a Shield, moveable at pleasure, and sur∣roundeth and guardeth the whole man; With fa∣vour wilt thou compass him, as with a Shield, Psa. 5. ult. Faith secureth the head from evilprin∣ciples. What sense denieth, and reason under∣standeth not, Faith beleiveth. Aristotle reading Moses concerning the Creation, is reported to say, Egregie dicis domine Moses, sed quomodo probas? Thou speakest nobly, but how dost thou prove it? The answer to him is easie, By Faith we believe that the world were made of God, Heb. 11. 2. Faith clears up the understanding, and scat∣tereth the mists of error. The pesence of this Sun disperseth those Clouds. Faith secureth the heart from evil purposes. Its the besome that sweep∣eth out such dust, and keeps the heart clean; Having their hearts purified by Faith, Act. 15. 9. Faith entertaineth the King of Saints into the heart, it sets him on the throne, and these tray∣tours flye before him; His presence makes these
Rebels to hide their heads. Who ever could find in his heart to hug sin, whilst he was viewing by faith his bleeding Saviour! Faith secureth the hand from evil practices. The Martyrs chose the flames, rather then the denial of their Master, and all be∣cause of their Faith. Those Worthies of the Lord, of whom the World was not worthy, through Faith stopped the mouths of Lyon-like lusts, quenched the violence of hellish fires, were tortured, not ac∣cepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection, Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35. By Faith we stand, 2 Cor. 1. 24. As a Souldier under the pro∣tection of his Shield, stands his ground, and doth his duty, notwithstanding the shot that are made against him; So a Christian under the protection of Faith, keeps his place, and mindeth his work, whatsoever opposition he meets with. Faith, like Ioab, stabbeth this Abner under the fifth rib, it wounds fin mortally. Hope, like Saul, hath slain its thousands; but Faith, like David, its ten thousands; Whole Armies of Lusts have turned their backs at the sight of this Warriour; By Faith the walls of Ierico fall down; Whilst un∣beleif liveth, no sin will dye; All iniquity shel∣tereth it self under the Banner of infidelity. If once the banks of Faith be broken down, a flood of wickedness will rush and flow in. What made Abraham deny his Wife, and expose her to such temptations and wickedness, but unbeleif? What made Isaac tread in his Fathers steps, and leave Rebecah to the Heathens luste, but unbeleif? What made David dishonour his God, by his uncomely carriage before Achish, and injure his soul by his
unholy language, that he should one day perish by the hand of Saul, but unbeleif? What made Peter deny and forswear his Master, but unbeleif? These tares were sown by the enemy, when the husband∣man Faith was asleep: had they believed the power and faithfulness of God to defend them in their dangers and distresses, without their lyes; and his grace and bounty to reward them largely for all their sufferings for his sake; had they believed that God when he called them to straights, would without any sinful means have brought them off safe on earth, or safe to Heaven, they would never have used such sinful shifts for their own safety. Faith would secure the soul against all those temptations, and prevent such sinister and sinful doings. He that beleiveth, maketh not haste. He will patiently wait Gods leasure, and submit to his pleasure, and not venture upon forbidden courses, and unlawful ways, to deliver himself out of distress. Vnbeleif is the dung which makes the soyl of corrupt nature so fruitful in the unfruitful works of darkness. Whence cometh such immoderate love of a perishing world, but from want of Faith and Beleif of that transcendent glory that is to be revealed? Whence cometh such dulness and dead∣ness in holy duties, but from unbelief, either of the holiness and jealousie of that God with whom we have to do, or of his goodness and mercy, that his reward will pay the charge of diligence in his work? Whence comes such cozening, and cheating, and over-reaching in dealings with men, that from distrust of Gods power and providence,
as if he could not, or would not spread a Table for his Children in the most barren Wilderness? Whence comes that impatience and murmuring in adversity, but from want of Faith, which would encourage the heart in the Lord his God, in the saddest estate, and when the Fig-tree doth not blossom, nor the Vine yeild its fruit, enable the soul to rejoyce in the Lord, and be glad in the Rock of his salvation. Whence cometh such pride and carnal confidence in prosperity, but because men beleive not the mean∣ness, and vanity, and emptiness of riches, and that divine mercy, not the merits of men are the origi∣nal of them? There is no sin so monstrous but unbe∣leif will venture upon it. He that beleiveth not, will never be allured by divine promises, nor af∣frighted at divine threatnings, nor obey divine pre∣cepts, nor submit to divine providences. As Cicero said of Parricide, I may say of Unbeleif, Its a tee∣ing vice, a well of wickedness; many sins are bound up in it. No wonder the Apostle gives such a seri∣ous warning, and so strict a charge against Infideli∣ty, as the mother and nurse of all Apostacy; Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbe∣leif, whereby ye depart away from the living God, Heb. 3. 12. The superstitious Pagans thought that their Idol Vibilia kept them from erring out of their way: The religious Christian knoweth by experi∣ence, that his faith keeps him within the limits of his duty. Faith ingrafts the soul into Christ, and in∣to the fellowship of his death, by which the old man is crucified, and the body of sin destroyed; that hence∣forth we should not serve sin, Rom. 6. 5,6,7,8. For therefore did Christ bear ou sins in his body on the
tree, that we might become dead to sin, 1 Pet. 1. 24. Faith enableth the soul to conquer sin by enabling it to overcome the three grand provocations to sin; The World, the Flesh, and the Wicked one. There is neither of these enemies but Faith hath wounded mortally. 1. Faith enableth to overcome the World; the World indeed hath conquered millions; the great∣est Souldiers have been slain by it. Alexander could subdue the Nations in it, but could not subdue his Affections to it; As great a conqueror as he was over it, he was its slave and vassal; for his ambition was still larger then his Dominions; But faith cloath∣ing the Christian with the Sun, helps him to tram∣ple this Moon under his feet, This is your victory over the world, even your Faith, 1 Joh. 6.4. The World hath two faces, the one ugly and deformed, toaffright the Saint; the other comely and painted to allure him to sin; but Faith seeth how pittiful (onely touching the body) her threatnings are; and how poor, onely skin-deep her promises are, and makes the soul to disdain both. It was by Faith, that Luther could say, Contemptus a me Romanus & favor, & furor, I scorn both Romes favour, and Romes fury; The worlds Furnace and Mu∣sick are much alike to a Beleiver; he is blind and deaf, nay, dead to both; The special object of Faith, is the Cross of Christ, whereby, saith the Apostle, I am cruci∣fied to the world, and the world to me. Tickle a dead man, or lance him, its all one, he is sensible of neither. As Fabricius the Noble Roman told Pyrrhus, who one day tempted him with Gold, and the next
day sought to terrifie him with Elephants, I was not yesterday moved with your money, nor to day with your beasts; So Basil when first offered preferment, and afterward threatened with imprisonment, if he would not deny Christ, and turn Arrian, to this purpose answered the Messenger, Such babies of preferment are fit to catch Children with, and such bug-bears of bonds and imprisonment, may fright your tender Gallants and Courtiers. Faith enableth the Christian to mount up to heaven, and there∣by secures him from the baits and shots, the snares and lime-twigs which attend him on earth. Homer, saith Vlisses, caused himself to be bound to the Mast of the Ship, and every one of his fellows ears to be stopped with Wax, that they might not hearken to the Songs of the Syrens, and so be drowned in the Sea. Faith fastens the soul to Christ, and so ravisheth is ears with the glad tidings of pardon, and peace, and eternal life, that it is deaf to the worlds musick. 1. Faith enableth the soul to overcome the af∣frightments of the world. Faith like blown blad∣ders, keepeth the soul from sinking in deep wa∣ters; Its a Target under which a soul is free from the hurt, though not from the smart of evil; Its the Ark wherein he rides triumphing, when the windows from above are opened and poure down, and the floods from beneath are broken up. In this strong Tower, the soul finds shelter; Faith, like Ioseph, layeth up in a time of plenty, against a time of scarcity; in a day of prosperity against a day of adversity, and so feareth it the less. Faith sheweth the Christian a place of refuge in
the time of trouble. He shall hide thee, saith Faith, in the secret of his presence (i. e. cover thee with the warm wings of his providence) he shall keep thee secret in his Pavilion; (An allusion to Princes retiring rooms, which are sacred and secure places for their Favourites.) Nature teacheth all creatures to run in distress to that which they count their defence; The Conies run to the Rocks, the Goats to the Hills, the Ravenous Beasts to their Des, the Child to his Mothers Armes. This grace discove∣reth to the soul, a Rock, a Refuge, a Fort, a For∣tress, an High Tower, which makes him fearless of the worlds threatnings and bugbears. The lame and the blind, those most shiftless creatures, when they had got the strong hold of Sion over their heads, scorned the Host of David, 2 Sam. 5. 6, 7. The Egyptians that dwell in the fens, are much troubled with Gnats, therefore they sleep in High Towers, whither those Insects cannot flye. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run unto it and are safe, Prov. 15. Such a soul is like a strong Tree, which no wind can shake; or like Mount Sion, which cannot be moved; Therefore he can sing when unbeleivers quake and tremble. Though the Earth be troubled, though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though the Waters roar, and the Mountains shake, yet we will not fear; The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, Psa. 46. 56. and 91. 2, 3. Faith is like the Cork in the Net, when the Lead wound sink the Net, the Cork keeps it above water. This Faith is the Anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfact, entering into that within
the vail, and so stayeth the Saint against all the winds and waves of affliction. Faith or beleif of the resurrection, and that happiness which then should be enjoyed, was that which enabled Paul to dye daily, and to fight with Beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 30. In the greatest distress, Faith can see deliverance; and when it is at the greatest distance, salute it, as Abraham did Christs day, afar off. When the weather is cloudy, it can see the Heaven begin to clear, and notwithstanding his present pain and poverty, cause the Christian to rejoyce in his hope of bliss and glory. The eye of Faith, looking to the recompence of reward, seeth afflictions with the Israel of God, much more eligible then the plea∣sures of sin.Drexel. Consid. AEternt. Symphorianus a Christian young man, after he was almost scourged to death, being draged to Execution at Augustodunum, met his Mother, not crying, or tearing her hair, but like an Holy Lady thus comforting him, Son, my Son, I say, Remember life eternal, look up to Heaven; Life is not taken from thee, but exchanged for a better; At which words of his Mother, he went on willingly to the Block, and exposed his Throat to the fa∣tal Ax; One of the Dutch Martyrs feeling the flame coming to him, said, O what a small pain is this, to Heaven! Our blessed Saviour had an eye to the joy set before him, and thereby was encouraged to endure the Cross, and despise the shame; Indeed, if Faith spring a leak, then the waters break in, and the Christian sinks apace, as we see in Peters denial of his Master.
As Faith in the Promises, so also Faith in the Threat∣nings makes the Christian a Conquerour over the worlds affrightments, where the World threatens Bonds, and Whips, and Dungeos, and Death, if the Christian will not sin against God, and be∣gins to stagger the soul. Take heed what thou dost, saith Faith, for God threateneth Fire, and Brim∣stone, and Chains, and Blackness of Darkness for ever, as the wages of all sin. Is the Wrath of an In∣finite God, not more to be feared then of weak dying Men? Is the pains of a violent death, which will quickly be over, and the most the World can do a∣gainst thee, comparable to the pains of eternal death? And thus Faith by the terror of this great Ordi∣nance, drowns the noise of those small peices, that the soul is deaf to their report. 2. Faith enableth the soul to overcome the al∣lurements of the world. If the world cannot terri∣fie the Saint with its fiery Furnace, to disown and deny his Saviour, it will seek to inchant him with its Musick, and thereby to make him deaf to the Call and Commands of Christ. Thus it served Ioseph; When it could not prevail on the left hand, by selling him for a slave, it tryeth him on the right hand, by setting a Dalilah to tickle him with pleasure; but by Faith he saw the Hook under the Bait, and durst not nibble at it, much less swallow it. Though the world like Iezabel, painteth her face, and tireth her hair, to render her amiable and lovely, and as a Srumpet, shew∣eth her naked Breasts of pleasure and profit, to entice the beleiver to go a Whoring after her; yet he vieweth by Faith the deformity of her per∣son,
under all her dawbery, and the dregginess and deceitfulness of her pleasures, notwithstand∣ing their shew of clearness, and so rejects them with scorn and disdain. Pliny saith of Cato, that he took as much pleasure in the Honours he de∣nied, as in those that he enjoyed. The beleiver can glory more in his refusal of glory for Christ, then unbeleivers in all their preferments. Indeed, if the Christian did consult with sense, or carnal reason, he would take the worlds present money, but the beleiver doth not consult with flesh and blood, like wise Abigal, knowing how much it will conduce to his advantage, he can part with his estae for God, and never make those Na∣bals privy to the design, lest they should hin∣der it. Besides, Faith discovers pure Rivers of plea∣sures, more noble and excellent delights, to be the portion of those that refuse to grate their teeth with such kennel water. As man is a rational creature, he would sell his wares to them that will give most. Now Faith sheweth how infinite∣ly God out-bids the world. Sense saith, The world offereth fair, it offereth comforts, sutable to thy flesh, such as they desire, and it offereth ready money, present possession: But saith Faith, God offereth thee better; The comforts he offereth are more excellent, being sutable, not as the Worlds, to a carnal brutish nature, but to an heavenly divine soul, and more durable, being eternal, when the pleasures of sin are but for a season. He that hopes for no better market, will take the present money offered him; But he that is assured of
greater gains, will refuse the lesser. An unbelei∣ver who expects no better bargain then what this life affords him, may well take up with present pay, what ever it be; but the Beleiver who seeth the glory to be revealed, and fulness of joy in Heaven, and is assured that if he be faithful unto death, he shall receive that eternal crown of life, turns his eyes off the honours and com∣forts of this beggarly world. Those stars of crea∣ture joys do all disappear in the presence of this Sun. Gold bears little sway with the soul that knoweth his title to the new Ierusalem, that is paved with Gold, in which gold is trampled un∣der foot; Those birds that flie aloft in the Fir∣mament, are not so easily snared by the Fowlers Gins; Though the things of this world were glo∣rious in his eyes, during his estate of unbeleif, yet now he hath discerned a world beyond the Moon, and sent Faith as a spie to search and coast that Country which hath brought word back, that its a good land flowing with Milk and Honey, and in it there is want of nothing, they have no glory, by reason of that glory that doth so infi∣nitely exceed. When a man is below, things a∣bove seem small; the great Stars that are bigger then the Earth, seem not so big as a bushel, and things below seem great: but when a man is a∣bove, as upon the top of a Steeple, then things below seem little, he beholdeth men like Gras∣hoppers. Were he conveyed to the highest hill in the World, men would not be discerned; great Kingdoms would be but small Cottages. Unbeleif sets a man below, here on earth, and so the things of
Heaven are little in his eye; but Faith soars aloft, it carrieth the Christian up to Heaven, and then the whole earth is but a small spot in his eye. Ioseph bids the Patriarchs, Regard not your stuff, for the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours: So saith Faith to the Christian, Regard not the lumber and rubbish of this world, for all the great and good things of the other world are thine. Faith gives the soul a taste, the first fruits of Heaven; And as no man, having drunk old wine, desireth new, for he saith, the old is better; So no man, having tasted the wine of Heavens pleasures, desires carnal delights. A Pilgrim travelling to Ierusalem (saith one) came to a City where he saw a goodly Training and Mustering, there he had a mind to stay, but that he remembred that was not Ierusalem. He came to another City, where he saw gallant sports and pastimes, there he had some good will to abide, but that he remembred it was not Ierusalem. He came to a third, where were goodly buildings, Fair Ladies, curious Musick, &c. where also he had some thoughts of setling, but still he re∣membred it was not Ierusalem: So the beleiver, when the world offereth him great treasures, high honours, &c. may through the subtlety of his flesh, have a mind to embrace them, onely seeing by Faith Ierusalem, where are greater treasures, higher honours, he slights and rejects them; By faith Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; esteeming the reproaches of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; for he had an eye to the recompence of reward.
Faith makes things future, present; it looketh intoHeaven and saith as David, before he had conquered those places, Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine; Heaven is mine, Eternal Life is mine, ful∣ness of joy is mine, that Kingdom in comparison of which this whole world is a dunghil is mine, because God hath sworn by his holiness, that he will not lye unto his David, and whilst the soul by faith seeth and is assured of these felicities for their sake, it can trample under foot the worlds largest offers. 2. Faith enableth the Christian to conquer Sa∣tan; Though the wicked one be full of power and policy, yet Faith makes him flee like a Coward. Its said of the Crocodile, that he flyeth if resist∣ed, but followeth those that fear and flee from him; Truly so doth Satan, Iam. 4. 8. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. But how must he be resisted? the Apostle Peter answers that question, whom resist stedfastly in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. The Crocodile cannot endure the sight or smell of saffron, therefore in Egypt they sow saffron to keep him away. Faith is this saffron, Cant. 4. 14. which drives away the Devil. Faith like little David, wounds the great Goliah of Hell. They overcame him (meaning the Devil) by the blood of the Lamb. The Wild Bull, say Naturalists, cannot endure a red colour, therefore the Hunter putteth on red garments, and standeth before a Tree, which the Bull runneth against with all his might, and the Hunter stepping aside, his hornes stick fast in the tree, whereby he is taken. The Christian by Faith in the blood of Christ, overcometh those infernal spirits who thought to overcome him.
This is the onely holy water, that will fright away the Devil. Our blessed Saviour in his speech to Peter, acquaints us how to subdue Satan; Peter, Peter, Satan hath desired to winnow thee as Wheat is winnowed, but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Which words imply, that whilst Peters Faith stood firm, he should not forsake Christ; whilst that was up, he could not be down; His Faith flagged before his courage failed, or he himself fell so fouly. A Tree is soon felled when the Root is once loosened; Faith roots the soul in Christ, and therein his safety consists; but as his Faith fails, so he is loosened from Christ, and thereby in danger of falling. The Christians strength lieth in his Faith, as Sampsons in his Hair; if the uncircumcised one can deprive us of this, he may make sport enough with us. Hence it is that Satans chiefest Guns are shot against the Royal Fort of Faith, knowing that that commandeth all; and if e can make a breach there, he fears not but to enter with success. The first mine which he ever sprang, to blow up the first Adam and his Wife, and in them the whole race of mankind, was by weakning their faith; Hath God said, In the day ye eat thereof, ye shall dye? When he came to the second Adam, he endeavoured to slay him with the same sword; If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones, &c. And without question, his aim was more at Iobs Faith, then his Cattel, or Servants, or Children; he had a greater intent to have blown down that house of Iobs conscience, then that wherein his Sons and Daughters were feasting.
Therefore Reader, Above all take the shield of Faith, whereby thou mayst quench the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephes. 6. 16. Goats in the Island of Creet, when they are stricken with a dart, do seek for the Hearb Dittany, which will cause the dart to fall out; Truly, such juice hath Faith, that it makes all the darts which Satan shoots at the Chri∣stian ineffectual. 3. Faith enableth to conquer the flesh. The great Apostle who lived by Faith, brought under his body, and crucified the flesh. Faith seeth the safety of the body to consist in its subordination to the soul, and that the onely way to save the life, is at Gods call to lose it; By faith Abraham left his Kin∣dred and Country, and obeyed, and went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11. 8. Indeed, the flesh is the worst enemy of the three, partly in that it is so near us, always about us, so that we can as well flye from our selves as from it. A Traytour in the Bed chamber, is much more dan∣gerous then one in open armes against us in the Field. A Snake in the bosome, is like to do more hurt then one under the grass; partly in that it knoweth our minds exactly, and so can temper its poison sutable to our Pallats; but Faith can dis∣cover its secret conspiracies, and prevent their execution. Though it dig its mines never so closely, and covertly, and craftily, Faith will find them out and countermine them. 2. Faith enableth (as to dye to sin, so) to live to God. The life of holiness doth so much depend on Faith, that its said to consist wholly in it. The just shall live by his Faith. Though he cannot live
by sense, that upon which he lives being invisible; nor by reason, because his food is supernatural; yet he can live by faith, and make a good living of it too. As the body lives by the soul, so Religion lives by Faith. A mortal wound in faith, lets out the heart blood of all holiness. Tis faith that actu∣ates and animates the new creature. Faith puts him upon high designs, and holy enterprises for God and his own soul. David saith, I beleive, therefore have I spoken; It may be said of a Christian, He beleiveth, therefore he speaks so much of God, for God, and to God. He beleiveth the unquestionable certainty, incomparable excellency, and eternity of that reward which is set before him, and therefore he prayeth, and watcheth, and readeth, and heareth, and denyeth himself, and worketh night and day that he may attain it. Ferdinando of Arragon, be∣leiving the report of Columbus, concerning the richness of the Indian Mines, and the likelyhood of his possessing them, was at great cost and charge in sending out men in Ships, and made them ven∣ture their lives, and labour hard to get those Gol∣den and Silver veins. Faith beleiveth the report which the Gospel makes of the glory to be revealed, and the unsearchable riches in Christ, and the like∣lyhood, nay, certainty of his enjoying them, if he will but strive and labour, and use those means which God hath appointed, and this puts the soul upon its greatest industry and integrity, in the per∣formance of what the word requireth, in order thereunto, and a resolution to obtain them, what ever it cost, or to dye in the undertaking.
Tis by the sap, which from the root is deri∣ved through the bark to the branches, that makes them fruitful. Tis from he strength which faith derives from Christ, that the Christian becomes so abundant in holiness; cut off the bark and the tree withereth. Take away faith, and no more good works. The extension of the branches, ariseth from the intension of the sap; and how shall that be conveyed but by the bark? Christ, like Ioseph, keeps the granaries, wherein is abundance of soul-food, and faith unlocks those Store-houses, and takes out supplies. As Pharoah when the Egyptians cryed to him for bread, said, Go ye to Joseph, and what he saith to you do: So God saith to Christians that call on him for Grace, Go ye to Christ by Faith, and he will relieve you. It pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell; Here is 1. Fulness, abundance, not a drop, or a small degree of living water. 2. All fulness, a redundance, the fulness of a spring, a fountain, not of a vessel. 3. All fulness dwelling, abiding there to eternity; running over, and running ever. But you will say, What is a Christian the better sor it? I Answer, Of his fulness, by faith, We all receive grace for grace. As a Pipe from the River supplieth the house upon all occasions, and the several offices therein with water; so doth faith supply the Christian with grace from Christ, answerable to his several exi∣gencies and necessities. Indeed, all the graces act valiantly in their several places, under the com∣mand of this General. Hence though fear, and
love and heavenly mindedness were specially ope∣rative in many of the Patriarchs actions and passions for God, yet still the crown is set upon the head of faith, under whose banner and conduct they fought, Heb. 11. per tot. When this Champion, like Goliah is vanquished, the other graces, as the Phi∣listines, are put to the rout. As dark clouds obscure the glorious stars, so doth unbeleif blemish the lustre of a Christians graces. If this shepherd, Faith, be smitten, other Graces, like heep, are scattered. If this grace keep the field, the rest always keep their ground. The length of the days depends upon the shining of the sun; as this shines more or less, so the days are longer or shorter: The degrees and measures of other graces depend exceedingly upon this grace. The branches blossom answerable to the sap which they receive from the root. Other graces bud and blow according to the sap which they receive from faith. For example sake; Repentance is more or less ac∣cording to the degrees of faith. Tis the fiducial ap∣prehension of divine love that mollifieth the stony hear None mourn so much as they who appre∣hend God a father. The hot beams of divine grace and favour by faith united in the soul, thaw the most iy heart; They shall see him whom they have pierced, (i.e. with an eye of faith) and mourn for him as one that mourneth for his onely childe. Peter saw Christs love in his look, and then went out and wept bit∣terly. 2. Humility; We are never lower in our own eyes then when faith assures us that we are high in Gods favour. The Centurions humility seems to
keep equal pace with his faith (though Christ saith of his faith, I have not found so great, no not in Israel) Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof; neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee. When Nathan brought David word that God had a great respect for him, and would build him a sure house for ever; He presently crieth out, What am I, and what is my fathers house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? &c. 2 Sam. 7.18. 3. Love; The fire of love flames more or less ac∣cording to the fuel which faith provides; To whom much is forgiven, the same loveth much. The know∣ledge of a pardon granted by such a Lord who hath all the reason in the world to loath the soul, turns it into a lump of love. 4. Ioy; Faith broacheth the pipe of the promises, and presenteth that wine which rejoyceth the heart of the new man; In whom beleiving, we rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.7. 5. Patience; He that beleiveth his bonds are good, that his estate is in safe hands, and that his forbear∣ance doth abundantly encrease it, will wait quietly for the day of payment; He that beleiveth, maketh not haste. None quarrel or fret but from want of faith: Run with patience the race set before you; Look∣ing at Iesus. If the Christian be weak, faith will give him the staff of the Word to lean on; if he be weary, faith will shew him his journeys end. Lo yon∣der is heaven, saith faith, hold out a little longer, your work is almost done. As the Eagle by stretch∣ing her self towards the Sun, through its heat hath her old feathers fallen off, new ones growing in their places, and her strength renewed; so the Christian
cleaving to Jesus Christ, the Sun of righteousness, by faith, reneweth his strength as the Eagle, runneth and is not weary, walketh and is not faint; Its reported of the Chrystal, that there is a vertue in it to quicken all other precious stones; when it touch∣eth them, it puts a lustre and brightness on them; Its true of faith, it hath a vertue in it to enliven and quicken all other graces. These stars have the greatest influence, when in conjunction with this Sun. As the Philosopher saith of water, , It is of all things the best, most soveraign and precious, because its of universal influence in the life of man; so I may say of faith, it is of all graces most excellent, in regard of the universa∣lity of its influence, upon all duties, graces, provi∣dences, ordinances. Tis by Faith that prayer becomes so prevalent; Whatsoever ye ask of the Father beleiving, ye shall receive, Joh. 16. 22. An unbeleiving prayer, is a Messenger without a tongue; no wonder if he dispatch not his errand, Heb. 11. 6, 7. Tis by Faith that Scripture is so powerful. This sword of the Spirit doth no Execution, save in the hand of Faith. The word did not profit them, not being mingled with Faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2. Tis by Faith that the Lords Supper becomes so nourishing and strengthning; This is the hand that receiveth that flesh which is meat indeed; this is the mouth that eats it, this is the stomach that di∣gests it; without this thou mayst receive the Ele∣ments, but not the sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26.
Unbeleivers like Waspes may sit upon the tops of these flowers, and seem to gather honey, but alas they are far from any such thing. Tis by Faith that Crosses are turned into comforts, and afflictions into mercies. This like Mithridates, can digest poison, and get strength from the wrath and rage of Men and Devils, 1 Phil. 19. Heb. 11. 38. Tis by Faith that Water is turned into wine, tem∣poral mercies into spiritual advantages; Faith worketh by love, and draweth men with the Cords of love. Tis by faith that men are so fruitful in their lives, Heb. 11. 32, 33. and so chearful in their deaths, Rom. 8. 37, 38. O Reader, above all thy gettings, get faith, and above all thy keep∣ings keep faith; For, it must be faith that must keep thee from falling in an hour of temptation, and from fainting in an hour of persecution. The unbeleiver is fitly called an unreasonable man, be∣cause its unreasonable that the God of truth should not be credited, and that he, to whom it is im∣possible to lye, should be distrusted; and also an absurd man, because its absurd for a workman to go without his tools, which he shall every moment have need of. Its said of the Serpent, that of all her parts, she is most careful of her head, well knowing that though she be mangled and cut never so much in her body, yet if her head be whole, that will cure the wounds of all her other parts; Let thy great work be to ecure thy faith, if that be whole all will be well, what ever decays there may be in other graces, this will help them to shoot forth again.
Thirdly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness, set God always before thine eyes; Sub∣jects will carry themselves handsomly and loyally when they are before their Soveraign; They who walk before God, will be upright. His eye is the best Marshal to keep the soul in a comely or∣der. Let thine eye be ever on him, whose eye is ever on thee. The eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good, Prov. 15. 9. Seneca perswaded his friend Lucilius for the keeping him within compass, to imagine that some grave man, as Laelius, did still look upon him; Reader, couldst thou walk ever as in Gods presence, thou wouldst keep close to his precepts. Consider, therefore that in all places, in all companies, at all times, the eye of God is on thee, and he takes exact notice of all thy thoughts, words and actions; that he knoweth thy natural parts; In his book were all thy members written, which in continuance were fashio∣ned, when as yet there was not one of them, that he knoweth all thy moral passages, thou under∣standest my thoughts afar off, and art acquaint∣ed with all my ways; There is not a word in my tongue, but thou O Lord knowest it altogether; There is no drawing a curtain between God and thee; He seeth thee thorough and thorough, far more perfectly then thou canst the clearest Chrystal. Dark∣ness hideth not from thee, but the night shineth as the day; to thee the darkness and the light are both alike. The darkness of the air may hide thee from men, and the darkness of thine understanding may hide thee from thy self; but there is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity
can hide themselves from him. Neither the ring of Gyges, nor the helmet of Pluto, can hide thee from Gods eye. Observe how strict God is in observing thy ways; Thou numbrest my steps, dost thou not watch over my sin? Job 14. 16. By steps is understood inward Motions, and outward acti∣ons, whatsoever is done either in the retiring room of the heart, or common hall of the life. To number the steps notes an exact account, we say of a man that goeth very leasurely and softly, Such a man telleth his steps. God is said to tell or number our steps, because he is so exact in his observation of, and so severe in his inquisition, into all our thoughts, words, and deeds. He is supposed to be void of shame, that doth not fear to sin before many witnesses; Though thou art in secret, consider, conscience is present, which is a thousand witnesses, and God who is a thou∣sand consciences. The Italian was somewhat con∣ceited, who wrote a supplication to Candle light, to disclose to him the secrets of his Kingdom. Its thought the light of the Candle seeth more wickedness then the light of the sun, but to God the day and night, darkness and light are both a∣like; he seeth all things, in all places, and at all times. A Reverend divine had this written in his study, Nol peccare manns videt; Angeli asant, Diaolus accu∣fab . Conscien∣tia testabitur, infernus cru∣abit.It was a prety fancy of one that would have his chamber painted full of eyes, that which way so∣ever he lookt, he might still have some eyes up∣on him, and he fancying himself according to the Moralists advice, always, Sub custode & Paedagogo, under the eye of a keeper, might be the more care∣ful of his carriage. And it was a wise answer of
Livius Drusus, when an Artist offered him so to convtrive his house,Tu vero  qui in te artis est, ita compone do∣mum meam ut ab omnibus conspici possit. Vellejus Pater∣culus. that he might do what he would, none should see him; No, saith Drusus, Contrive it so rather, that all may see me, for I am not ashamed to be seen. If the eyes of men, make even the vilest to forbear their beloved lusts for a while, that the Adulter watcheth for the twilight and they that are drunk, are drunk in the night; how powerful will the eye and presence of God be with those that fear his anger, and know the sweetness of his favour? Moses forsook the sinful pleasures of Pharaohs Court, not fearing the wrath of the King, for he saw him that was invisible. A good commander causeth good government in a Town or City. This truth wrought home, and set close to the heart, would cause good orders, good government in it. The thought of this Omnipresence of God, will affrighten thee from sin; Gehezi durst not ask or receive any part of Naamans Presents in his Ma∣sters presence, but when he had got out of Elisha's sight, then he tells his lye, and gives way to his lust;Turpe quid au∣surus, te sine teste time. Magum ne∣scio quid ma∣jus{que} quam co∣gitari potest numen est, cui vivendo opero∣ram demus; Huic nos ap∣bemus, nam ni∣hil prodest in∣clusam esse con∣scientiam pa∣temus Deo. Sene. Men never sin more freely, then when they presume upon secrecy. They break in peices thy peo∣ple, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. They slay the Widow, and Stranger, and murder the Father∣less; yet they say, The Lord doth not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it, Psa. 94. 5, 6, 7. Eliphaz, though falsly, accused Iob as guilty of the same crime, upon the same account, Iob 22. 5, 6, 7, 13, 14. They who shut God out of their hearts, shut him also out of the world, through their atheism, and then are at liberty
for all manner of wickedness; They who aboun∣ded in abominations, said, The Lord seeth us not, the Lord hath forsaken the earth, Ezek. 8. 9, 10, 12. The wise man diswadeth from wickedness, upon the consideration of Gods eye and Omniscience; And why wilt thou my son be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosome of a stranger? For the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prov. 5 20, 21. Ioseph saw God in the room, and therefore durst not yeild; but his Mistris saw none but Ioseph, and so was impudently alluring and tempting him to folly. I have read of two religious men, that took contrary courses with two lewd women, whom they were desirous to reclaim from their vicious course of life; One of the men told one of the women, that he was desirous to enjoy her company, so it might be with secrecy, and when she had brought him into a close room, that none could pry into, he told her, All the bars and bolts here, cannot keep God out; The other de∣sired the other woman to company with him openly in the streets, which when she rejected as a mad request, he told her, It was better to do it in the eyes of a multitude then of God. How doth the Adulterer, or Drunkard, or Theif, when they come abroad at midnight, for the satisfaction of their lusts, sneak and steal away, when they spye the watch, or any persons who would be witness of their vices? and shall not the presence of that God who hates sin, who is resolved to punish it with hell-flames, make us ashamed or afraid to sin, and dare him to his face?
2. The thoughts of this Omnipresence of God, will quicken thee to holiness. The Souldiers of Israel and Iudah were prodigal of their blood, in the presence of their two Generals, 2 Sam. 2. 14. Servants will generally work hard whilst their Master stands by and looks on. Its said of Alex∣ander, that his presence caused such courage in his Souldiers, Vt illo presente nullius hostium arma vel iner mes timuerunt, That when he was with them though they were unarmed, they feared not the wea∣pons of any of their enemies. Our blessed Redeemer exhorteth to prayer in secret, upon this conside∣ration, that God seeth and heareth it, Mat. 6. and to charity in secret, because, though the left hand knoweth not what the right hand doth, God knoweth what the right hand doth. Your Father which seeth in secret will reward you openly. There is a story of Bishop Latimer, that he having in a Sermon at Court, much displeased the King (Henry 8.) was commanded to Preach again the next Lords day, and to recant his former sermon; according to appointment he cometh up, and prefaceth to his Sermon in this manner; Hugh La∣timer, dost thou know this day to whom thou art to speak? even to the High and mighty Monarch, the Kings most excellent Majesty, who can take away thy life if thou offendest; therefore take heed how thou speakest a word which may displease, but (as if recalling him∣self, he proceeded) Hugh, Hugh, dost thou know from whom thou comest, upon whose message thou art sent, and who it is that is present with thee, and beholdeth all thy ways! even that Almighty God who can cast body and soul into Hell for ever; therefore
look about thee, and be sure thou deliverest thy message faithfully; and so he went to his Text, and confirm∣ed what he had spoken the day before, and urged it with the more vehemency then ordinary. The eye of God, as of the Sun, will call the Christian to his work. Those Countries that are governed by Viceroys seldom flourish or thrive so well as those Kingdoms where the Prince is present in person. Conscience, Gods Viceroy, may much quicken a Christian to holiness; but God the Prince himself much more; I have kept thy precepts, saith David, for all my ways are before thee. CHAP. X. Means whereby Christians may exercise themselves to Godliness; A constant wathfulness, Fre∣quent Meditation of Death, Daily performance of aored Duties. FOurthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness, Watch over thy self continually: This spiritual watchfulness is the Main-guard of the soul, which if once called off, we lye open to the shot of every enemy. This, like one of the Nethi∣nim, must stand continually Porter at the door of our hearts, Gods Temple, to keep out whatsoever i unclean Watchfulness is a diligent observation
of our selves in all things, and at all times, that we may please God always. He that watcheth hath his eyes in his head, according to the wise mans phrase, and seeth (as the Chineses say of themselves) with both eyes. David expresseth it fitly, I said I will take heed to my ways, Psa. 39.1. i. e. I will ponder my paths, and consider where I set my feet, lest I should tread awry. Without this wariness there is no safe walk∣ing. Secure Laish is made a prey to their enemies; and the secure soul is made a prey to his spiritual adversaries, Iudges 19.9,10. Soul-Lethargies are most dangerous, most deadly. Those that slept in the sweating sickness generally died. He who watcheth not is led about (like one in his natural sleep) by any temptation, he knoweth not how nor whether. When the Wolves in the Fable once pre∣vailed with the Sheep to part with the Dogs, they soon devoured them. If Satan can but get men to forgo this means of their safety, he will soon make them his prey. The old World was drowned in sleep before they were drowned in water. Sodom and Gomorah were secure when they were destroyed by fire. Its reported of the Dragon that whilst he sleepeth a jewel is taken out of his head. Noah lost the jewel of Temperance; David the jewel of Chastity whilst they were fallen asleep. If this eye of watchful∣ness be once shut the soul is open to all wickedness. When Argus, notwithstanding his hundred eyes, was by Mercury piped into a sleep, he was transfor∣med into a Cow. Reader hearken to Gods Watch-word; Ye are all children of light, and children of the day; we are
not of the night nor of darkness: Therefore let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober, 1 Thess. 5. 5,6,7. Sleep is not seasonable in the day of grace, nor sutable to a childe of light: They that sleep, sleep in the night, Rom. 13.11. The night is for sleep, there∣fore in it God draweth a curtain of darkness about us; as the Nurse when she would lay her babe to sleep, throweth a cloth over the head of the cradle. But the day is for watching, for working. He hath little reason to give himself to sleep who is every moment surrounded with mortal ene∣mies, which are neither few nor weak. Naturalists tell us that the bird Onocratulus, and the Pellican take their rest with their Beaks upright, expecting the Hawk; and that the Whale and Dolphin sleep with their heads erected above water, for fear of hurt. Though there were but that one text of Scripture 1 Pet. 5.8. relating to this duty, twere enough to a∣larm any wise man, and to call him to his arms; Be sober, be vigilant; for your adversary the Devil walk∣eth about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may de∣vour. If that voyce among the antient Romans, Han∣nibal ad portas, Hannibal is at the gates, were sufficient to make them leave whatsoever they were about, and run to their weapons, and stand upon their guard; what watchfulness should this voyce of the holy Ghost, The Devil is at the door, call thee too? Rea∣der, Take that verse a little in pieces, and see what a foe thou hast to fight with, and then tell me whether it doth not concern thee to watch. Con∣sider, 1. His Power; Your adversary the Devil: It is not a weak man, but a mighty Devil. Thou art not
called to wrestle with flesh and blood, but Princi∣palities and powers, Is man a match for a Devil? or a stripling nodding, fit to enter the Lists with Goliah? What is a Pigmie to a Giant, or a a dying creature to the Prince of the powers of the air? Had David been asleep when the Lion out of the wood came against him, the Lion had sooner tore him by the throat, then he had taken the Lion by the beard. The cobweb may as soon withstand the broom in the maids hand, and the dust oppose the force of a vi∣olent wind, as a nodding secure Christian the tem∣ptations of Satan. 2. His Policy; Seeking whom he may devour; Had our enemy strength without craft, there were not so much danger, nor cause of vigilancy; but when he hath seven heads as well as ten horns, and exceeds us in subtilty as much as in power, it concerneth us to be watchful. He that playeth with a cunning Fencer, will heed his wards the more. Reader, the Devil hath a shrewd guess what Dalilah is most like∣ly to entice thee, and deprive thee of thy spiritual strength; and if amongst all the uncircumcised there be any that will fit thee, thou shalt not want her. He hath not walked too and fro in the earth so long for nothing; but he knoweth what weeds will take best and thrive most in the soil of thy heart, & be con∣fident he will help thee both to the seeds and plants of them. The subtle serpent that could wind him∣self into Paradise, knoweth surely how to wind him∣self into thee. If he were too crafty for man when he was perfect, much more is he for man polluted; And can such a strong politick foe be resisted, when thou art lazing upon thy bed of security?
3. His Industry; Your adversary the Devil goeth about. He is a diligent servant never from your el∣bow; As Ioseph's Mistris, when denied, still solli∣cited; and Sampsons Harlot pressed him with con∣tinual importunity night and day, that his very soul was vexed unto death. So the Devil serveth men, he will never forsake them, but follow them with his darts and assaults, till they are safe in heaven from hi, or safe in hell with him. He is called the Prince of the powers of the air, and his Angels, spi∣ritual Wickednesses in high places; the air is the seat of his Empire; and truly as ravenous foul hover up and don in the air, to catch and kill little chickens, and though they be frighted away by any one, yet they lye near at the catch, and the person is no sooner gone, but they are descending to destroy them: So those infernal spirits are hovering up and down, walking too and fro to defile and destroy souls; and though they are resisted and foiled, yet they impudently continue their former endeavours to undo us. Now hath he any time for sleep that is every moment in such danger? 4. His Cruelty; As a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. The Lions of the Forrest have no pitty; Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, renting it in peices, Psal. 7.2. The Lions brake the bones of Daniels ac∣cusers before they came to the bottom of the Den: But the Lions of hell have much less pity; his tender mercies are cruelties indeed; it is not the loss of thy life, but of thy soul, and thy God, and thy Christ, and that for ever which he looks after. The racking of thy body, and renting thy bones, is nothing to the flames, and whips, and torments which he makes
men suffer, and that not for a day, or week, or year, or age, but to all eternity. Reader, is there not infinite reason for watchful∣ness? Had not the Apostle ground enough for his precept, Be sober, be vigilant, when our adversary is so strong a Devil, so sedulous going about, so cruel as a roaring Lion, and so crafty, seeking by all means whom he may devour? Yet alas, this is not all, Go where we will, we see abundant cause to look well to our feet. Every place we come into is a net to ensnare us; we cannot look out of our eyes, but we see a baited hook; nor open our ears, but we hear the Syrens songs; we cannot put forth our hands, but we touch pitch; nor set our feet, but in the midst of nets; every part of the body is a Iudas, a Traytor to the soul. Our crosses and afflictions, if we be secure, will be to us, as the Goal to a prisoner, filling us with Vermine: Our greatest earthly comforts if we be not watchful, prove but like traps set for ver∣mine, pleasant and killing. When the world sings most sweetly in our ears, she doth but like Orpheus with his pipe, endeavour to lead us by the ears into unquenchable flames. Theives with provender in their hands catch horses to steal them: The world allures our hearts by its pleasures and profits, and steals them from God. Our own hearts are Iacobs, Supplanters of us, deceitful and desperately wicked. As the water-foul in Friezland will decoy other wilde foul in a net, and then give a watchword to their Master to seise on them; so officious will our own hearts be to the Devil; And shall we not watch and pray that we enter not into tempta∣tion?
Sleep is the great Leveller, which makes all equal. The strongest Sampson is as liable in his sleep to be slain, as the smallest infant; When a deep sleep from the Lord had seised on Saul and his Souldiers, how easily might David if he had pleased, have kil∣led them? He took away Sauls Spear and Cruse of Water, to assure him that he could have taken away his life. Ah! how soon may the Devil, or World, or Flesh, defile, deceive, and destroy a sleeping soul! Bees, that have many enemies, Mice, Spiders, Drones, Hornets, Birds and Beasts, never dare, say Naturalists, to give them∣selves to security, but night and day have their Scouts, and Centinels, and Corp-du-guard, to keep watch and ward, lest some of their many enemies should on a sudden surprise them; The Christian may learn this duty from such creatures; Spiders weave their Cobwebs near the Flowers where the Bees use to gather, and also just over the passage out of their Hives, that so at their going out, but especially at their comming in, laden and weary, they may catch them, and make a prey of them. David saith, In the way wherein I walked, have they privily laid a snare for me. So mayst thou Reader say, In the way wherein I daily walk, doth Satan privily lay Baits to catch me, at my Table, in my Closet, in my Shop, in my Bed, in the Streets; in all places where I go, he hath laid snares for my soul. If there be a snare, and such danger in all things, then let me advise thee, if thou woulst avoid them, in the words of Paul to Timothy, Watch thou in all things, 2 Timoth. 4. 5.
Watch against sin, against all sin. The Gardiner doth not onely watch over his Flowers, to water and cherish them, but also watcheth all weeds, to pluck and root them up. Take heed lest there be any root of bitterness; Epiphanius tells us, when a dead corps was carried by any of the Israelites houses, they used to shut their doors and windows, intimating that men must be watchful against the sent and infection of sin; Its in vain for a Captain to guard one gate of a Castle, to prevent the enemies entring there, if he leave another open, when the whole Fort is beleagured, and surroun∣ded with mortal enemies. Watch especially against thine own sin. If a man have many wounds, whereof one is more dange∣rous then the rest, being near a vital part, though he will be mindful and careful of all, yet he will have a special care of that which is most dange∣rous; A Christian must watch against all sin, all soul-diseases, but principally against his own sin; that disease which is most dangerous; as a wise Go∣vernour will have a special eye upon that parti∣cular person in his Garrison, whom he knoweth to be a Traytour. Watch for the doing of good; For seasons of Prayer, and Hearing, and Christian Communion. The Country-man watcheth for the Bell ringing on the Market-day, when the sacks will be opened, that he may buy food for himself and his family. The Mariner watcheth for the Tide; The diseased folk watched for the moving of the waters, by the Angels. David watched as a Sparrow on the house top, where he might peck up some corn,
get some spiritual nourishment. An opportunity of worshipping God is a jewel, the Christian may well watch to take it up. Watch in duties; The Child must be watcht at School, or he will play and toy instead of getting his lesson. The heart must be watched in an Or∣dinance, or it will wander wholly from the bu∣siness in hand; continue in prayer, and watch in the same, Col. 4. 2. Take heed how ye hear; The Bible will drop out of the sleepers hand, and prayer is a wrestling with God, which is not a work to be done nodding; They who talk in their sleep, talk idly. Watch after duties. Running carelesly into the open air, immediately after the taking of Physick, is dangerous. When the Garden is drest, and the seeds sown in it, we must watch it, lest Hogs get into it, and root up all. Satan thinks to take the Christian at an advantage, after the duty is over; and though he could not beat him in the fight, yet to do it when the Saint hath laid by his weapons. It was a wise speech of Marcus Aurelius, after he had vanquished Popilion, General of the potent Parthians, and won the day, I tell thee of a truth, that I stand in greater fear of fortune at this present, then I did before the battel, for she careth not so much to overtake the Conquered, as to overcome the Con∣queror. Truly, Satan will be industrious to destroy both the conquered utterly, and to overcome the Conquerour. Watch thy senses; These are the Cinque-ports, as one calls them, of the Isle of man, which if not well garrisoned, will let in strangers and distur∣bers
of our peace. At these Havens much of Satans lading is taken in. Io made a Covenant with his eyes, he would not suffer them to gad and gaze at random, lest they should return de∣filed. Democritus walking abroad, would shut his eyes, lest by their wandring, his mind should be taken off from the contemplation of honest things. Acteon became, as the Poet fancieth, meat for his Dogs, by suffering his eyes to wander. Lusting hath often been the issue of looking, wit∣ness Iosephs Mistriss, David, Achan, the Israelites, Numb. 15. 39. Stratonice took Mithridates with a Song. The heart hath often been angled into sin by the ear, and led into temptation by the eye therefore Cassian relates that to preserve the clean∣ness of the heart, the Egyptian Masters taught that men must be Surdi, Caeci, Muti; Deaf, Blind, and Dumb. If those out-works be well guarded, the Royal Fort is in the less hazard. Shut up the five windows (i. e. guard the five senses) that the whole house may be full of light, according to the Arabian Proverb. Watch your affections; If those waves be tempe∣stuous, they will cast up much foam and froth, mire and dirt. He had need to make a strong wall, that would keep these raging waters within their bounds. Watch your Tongues; The Sea hath not more need of banks to keep it in, then the tongue of a bridle; The tongue is compared to a Sword, to a Razor, both which are keen weapons, and must be handled warily, Psa. 39. 1, 2. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue; I
will keep my mouth with a Bridle, whilst the wicked are before me. Watch your hearts; The heart is the Forge, the spring of life, and a wound there is mortal. Keep thy heart with all diligence (super omnem custodiam, above all keeping,Merito debt somper senare in aribus Vi∣gilate. Bucer in 13. Mark. Jun.) out of it are the issues of life. Watch over all things, watch in all things; This voice saith Bucer, should always sound in our ears, Watch, Watch. How frequent is Christ in his Precepts to this duty? as knowing fully the weight and concern∣ment of it; Watch ye therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man cometh. Watch and Pray, lest ye enter into temptation. What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. And he is as frequent in his promises to it, Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he cometh shall find watching; Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his Garments; and if he shall come in the second or third watch, and find him so, blessed is he, Luk. 12. 37, 38, 43. Surely, Blessedness is worthy our waking; Bliss is worth keeping our eyes open a few days for. Apollonius, held in his time for an Oracle, coming early in the morning to Vespasians gate,Philostr. in vit. and finding him (then a private person) up and at study, he said to his Companion, This man is worthy to raign and command an Empire, which af∣terwards came to pass; He that watcheth with Christ the short hour of this life, shall be counted worthy to raign with him in his Kingdom for ever. Sion, which is frequently put for the Church of God, signifieth a Watch-Tower, because from that hill, a man might see the Holy Land, and all
the Countries thereabout, but the spiritual signi∣fication of it may be this; that all the members of Gods Church must be like Souldiers in a watch-tower, observing who commeth in and who goeth out, lest Traytors should steal into the fort of the heart undiscovered. Fifthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to god∣liness, Think often of thy dying day, and of what price and value godliness will be to thee at such a time; There are few thoughts more terrible or more profitable then of death. Hence it is, that God commands man so often to remember his latter end, because the meditation of it is so gainful to him. The first day man was made, he was called to think of his last day; God minded him of death in the Tree of Knowledge, and the threatning annexed to the Prohibition, that he might thereby keep him from sin. Satan could not prevail with Eve, to taste of that killing fruit, till he had prevailed with her to distrust that threatning of death, ye shall not surely dye, Gen. 3. 4. After the fall, God reneweth this me∣ditation, by turning the conditional, into an abso∣lute commination; Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shalt return; and though the Holy Ghost omitteth many particulars about Gods carriage with the long-lived Patriarchs, and their holy conversation before him, yet he is exact in registring their deaths; And he died, and he died, of every one, Gen. 5. to quicken us to fear God, because we are but dying frail men. There is hardly any thing about which we deal, but God gives us by it a Memento of Death. Our Cloaths are all fetcht out of Deaths
wardrobe, our food out of deaths shambles; The Sun is an emblem of lifes posting, the night of the chambers of darkness; the year hath its autumn, the day its night. Our candles should mind us of the wasting of our days, the evening of the shadow of death; our undressing, of our putting off our earthly tabernacles, and our lying down in our beds, of our lying down in our graves. If thou wouldst make Religion thy business and main work, think often and seriously of thy death and departure of this world; He that guides and steers the ship aright, sits in the stern or hinder most part of it; He that would order his works, his way, according to God, must be frequent in the meditation of his end; The end of his days, must be at the end of all his thoughts. Zeno Cittiaeus, consulted with the Oracle, how he might live well, and received this answer,. If he would be of the same colour with the dead. Reader, if thou wouldst live much and well, get thy heart as much affected with godliness, in health, as it will be in sickness; Have the same thoughts of it, the same seriousness about it, the very same carriage towards it, whilst the world salutes thee with its smiling face, and bewitching features, which thou wilt wish thou hadst had, when thou shalt come to take thy leave of it, and lye upon thy dy∣ing bed. Be of the same colour with the dead. O what thoughts have the dead of godliness, and of making it ones business! The dead in Christ, and the dead out of Christ, have both other manner of thoughts of Religion, and making it ones occupati∣on, then thou canst possibly imagine.
Those who while they live delay repentance, and dally about Religion, minding it as if they minded it not, who neither in their dealings with men, nor duties towards God, nor in their relations nor vocations, make it their business, but mispend their precious time, misimploy their weighty talents, neglect God and their eternal welfares, as if they had not been made to mind either; when they come to dye and perceive in good earnest, that that surly Serjeant Death, will not be denyed, but a∣way they must go into the other world, and fare well or ill for ever, according as their hearts and lives have been, godly or ungodly, good or bad, here good Lord, what thoughts have they then of godliness? How hearty are their wishes, that they had made it their business? What Worlds would they give that Religion had been their principal work? What prayers and tears do they poure out for a few days to mind it in? What sighs, and sobs, and groans, that they have neglected it so long? What purposes do they take up, what promises do they make, if God spare them, to follow hard after holiness, and make it their onely business? A Philosopher asking Euchrites, which of the two he had rather be, Craesus, one of the richest and most vicious in the world, or, Socrates, one of the poorest and most vertuous; Eucrites answered, Craesus vi∣vens, & Socrates moriens, Craesus while he lived, and Socrates when he dyed. The Cuckoe when wearing away, changeth her noat. The worst men when they come to dye, alter and change ex∣ceedingly.
It is worthy our observation, that those who are greatest strangers to death, are most familiar with the works of darkness. No place abounds more in Wolves (no person in wickedness) then where this Mastiff is wanting; Jerusalem hath grei∣vously sinned, her filthiness is in her skirts, she re∣membreth not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully, 1 Lamen. 8. 9. Jerusalem hath grei∣vously sinned; hath sinned sin, Heb. Hath committed a great or greivous sin, so the Chaldee. Behold here the colour of her sin, is was not of an ordi∣nary dye, but of a black, a bloody, an heinous na∣ture; Her filthiness is in her skirts; Lo here, her carriage after her sinning; she made of it an open shew, so far was she from shame. It is a term taken from prostituted Strumpets, or monstrous women, saith Diodat. The outward looks of the former, bewray her inward lusts, and the marks of the latters defilement are visible on her gar∣ment; thus the shew of Ierusalems countenance, did publiquely evidence her crime. She did as clearly by her skirts proclaim her filth, as if it had been written on her face, and engraven on her forehead; Here was impiety in her practice, Ierusalem hath greivously sinned; and impudency to purpose, Her filthiness is in her skirts; But what dust was that which bred such vermine? what polluted seed was that which begat such a poisonous serpent. Rea∣der,Immunditiae suae in fimbrlis suis mercedem nondum recor∣data. Trem. if thou wouldst know the Mother which brought forth, and bred up this ugly Monster, She remembreth not her last end, therefore she came down mightily. It was her forgetfulness of death, which nourished and cherished her wicked deeds;
They who mind not their reckoning, care not how much they riot and revel. They who put far away the evil day, cause the seat of violence to come near, Amos 6. 3. The further we drive death from our thoughts, the nearer we draw to sin. They who fancy their foe to be very far off, will not prepare and make ready to fight. Men that are young, do not consider, that the old Ass often carrieth the skin of the young to the Market; that death comes like a Thunderbolt, and Lightning, and blasteth the green corn, and consumeth the strongest buildings; if they did, they would flee youthful lusts. He who seeth death at his door, will be most diligent about his duty; A serious consideration of the death of the body, will be a soveraign, though a sharp medicine to kill the body of death. The Naturalists tell us, that the ashes of a Viper, ap∣plied to the part which is stung, draweth the ve∣nome out of it. They who look on themselves as Pilgrims and strangers, will abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Who would make his Belly, his Gut, his God, who confidereth that every meal may be his last, or that thinketh, his dainty diet, his fine fare, doth but provide a greater feast for wormes? Who would give way to sinful wantons, who beleiveth that whilst he is unloading his lust, God may put a period to his life? He that is high in conceit of himself, little dreameth how low he must shortly be laid; Who would be proud of that body which shall ere long see corruption, be∣come such a noysom loathsom carcass, that the nearest and dearest relations will not endure the sight or
sent of it? He who loveth the world inordinately, forgetteth that he may leave it suddenly, and must leave it certainly; Would Haman have bragged so much of Hesters banquet, if he had known that his own corps should be served in for the last course? Would the Israelites have tempted God for meat, if they had thought that death should have been their sauce? Would Achan have coveted the gol∣den wedge, if he had mused of his so sudden depar∣ture into the other world? Without question, he would have forborn the Babylonish garment, if he had seen death at his back, so ready to strip him naked. Had the rich fool thought that his bed should that night have proved his grave, he would never in the day have prided himself in his goods. Who would not at Gods call vilifie that flesh which will be ere long a lump of filth; and be choice of that soul which lives for a more high and heavenly flight! It is reported of the Brachmans, that they use no cloaths but Bear-skins, no houses but Caves, no food but such as nature dresseth; When Alexan∣der came to them in his travails, he asked them the reason of this severe kind of living; They an∣swered him, We know we shall dye; whether to day or to morrow we know not; and therefore why should we take care, either for power to govern others, or for riches to live in pleasures, or for honour to be esteemed of? None are so loose to the world (that great hinderance of holiness) as they who ponder they must leave it. Travellers who look on them∣selves near their journeys end, care not to burden themselves with much baggage; Their moderation
will be known to all men, who believe, The Lord is at hand. Those who are most mindful of their deaths, are most faithful in their lives; Iob was eminent in grace, because Iob was daily conversing with his grave; All the days of his appointed time, he waited till his change came, Job 14. 14. That servant will follow his work most and best, who ex∣pecteth his Masters coming every moment. It is said of the Kite,Considerato mortis tan∣quam caudae ad vitam optime regendam confert. that by the turning of his tail, he directs and winds about his whole body; The same is reported of the Glede or Puttock. Fish also, say Naturalists, turn and wind about by the fins in their Tails. Reader, could I but prevail with thee to mind the end of thy life, it would help thee very much to order thy conversation aright; O (said God) that my people were wise, then would they consider their latter end, Deut. 32. 29. The Thebans made a Law, that no man should build an house for himself to dwell in, before he had made his grave. Several of the Philosophers had their graves made before their doors, that when ever they went abroad they might remember their deaths; If thou wouldst but in thy out-goings and in-comings, behold the place of thy burial, I doubt not but thou wilt be watchful over all thy ways. When thou art in the midst of thy delights (as Ioseph of Aritmathea) have thy tomb in thy gar∣den, and it may prevent thy surfeiting by those dainties; When thou sittest at Table, let the first dish set before thee be (according to Prester Iohns custom) a deaths-head, and then with what fear wilt thou feed, how thankfully wilt thou receive
the creatures, even as through the beloved Son? how soberly wilt thou use them, even as in Gods sight? If God raise thee to the height of prospe∣rity, and some friend do but (as Moses and Elias to Christ, when his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was as white as Snow, Luk. 9. 30, 31.) talk to thee of thy decease, which thou must shortly accomplish, it will abate thy love to the worlds withering vanities, and quicken thine endeavours after the eternal weight of glory. If God cast thee into great adversity, and thou dost but consider thy time here is but short, and therefore thy trou∣bles cannot be long, this will make thee conten∣ted in the saddest condition. When thou be∣holdest thy relations, and fore-thinkest that thine eternal separation from them is at hand, and that within a few days thou shalt never have another opportunity to help them heaven-ward, how will it stir thee up to do them all the good thou canst now, both by thy Precepts, Pattern, and Prayers? If when thou attendest on publique Ordinances, thou wilt but cast thine eye on the Graves in the Church-yard, as thou passest along, and meditate thus, Within a little time I must be laid in the dust, when I shall hear no more, pray no more, enjoy a Sabbath no more, when I shall never, never, more have a tender of a Saviour, never more have a sea∣son to beg mercy in for my poor soul. After such a∣wakening thoughts, with what attention wouldst thou hear? with what affections wouldst thou pray? with what intention and devotion? with what se∣riousness and uprightness wouldst thou perform every duty?
Some say that nothing in this world is so strong as death, because it subdueth the mighty, it con∣quereth the greatest conquerours, it overcometh all. Sure I am, that death hath great force and power over mens souls, as well as over their bodies. The thought of it hath raised some to a spiritual life. The consideration of death hath also caused others to live much in a little space; when they have sen the un of their lives near setting, and the night of their deaths approaching, they have in the day followed their work with the greater diligence; None will work so hard as they who think themselves near their everlasting homes. There were two Emperors, Adrian and Charles the fifth, that in their life time caused their Coffins to be carried before them, and their exequies to be solemnly celebrated, to this end possibly that considering they were but men, dying men, they might thence be righteous in their government, and virtuous in their actions. It is reported of Turannius,Sen. de brev. vit. cap. ult. that after he was ninety years old, he got leave of Caesar to retire himself from Court, and the old man would needs be laid in his bed, as one that had breathed out his last, and all his Family must bewail his death. Friend, do thou in earnest, what he did in jest; Suppose thou wert this day to bid adiew to thy Friends, Relations, Honours, and Possessions, and to travail into the unknown other world, to take thy leave of hours, and days, and months, and years, and time, and to sail into the bound∣less Ocean of Eternity; Suppose thou sawest death creep in at thy Chamber window, come up to
thy Bed-side, draw the Curtain, take thee by the hand, and tell thee that he is come from the In∣finite Almighty, jealous, most holy God, to fetch thee immediately into his presence, there to an∣swer for all thy thoughts, words, and deeds, and to receive either matchless and endless pain, or unchangeable and unconceiveable pleasures, ac∣cording as thy practices have been; What wouldst thou think at such a time of godliness? Good Lord, what a price wouldst thou set upon it, what wouldst thou not do or give for it! Then godliness will be godliness indeed, as little and as lightly as thou settest by it now. And why is it not worth as much now? Dost thou not see death like a Mole digging thy grave under thee? Dost thou not feel that worm within thee, which will ere long con∣sume thee? Beleive it, thy death may be nearer then thou dreamest, the glass of thy life may be almost out, though thou thinkest its but new turned; The Murdering-peice which kills thee, parting thy soul and body, may be discharged with white powder, give thee no warning at all. The next Arrow which is shot may hit thee; The next time the Bell goes, may be to tell others that thou art dead; The next time the Earth is opened, may be to receive thy body in; Thou seest some fall on thy right hand, some on thy left hand, some of thy very age, and of greater strength and health, and canst thou esteem thy self shot-free! Is not every carcass a cryer, and every Tomb a teacher, calling upon thee to number thy days, and apply thine heart unto wisdom?
Silly man is like the foolish Chicken; though the Kite comes and takes away many of their fellows, yet the rest continue pecking the ground, never heeding their owner, nor minding their shelter. Death comes and snatcheth away one man here, a second there; one before them, another behind them, and they are killed with death, undone for ever, Rev. 2. 23. yet they who survive, take no warning, but persist in their wicked and ungodly ways; They are destroyed from morning to evening, they perish for ever, with∣out any regarding it. Doth not their excellency which is in them go away, they dye even without wisdom, Job 4.20, 21. It is the saying of an Heathen;Muson apud Stob. Ser. 1. That it is im∣possible for a man to live the present day well, who doth not purpose to live it as his last. I may say to thee, Friend, It is impossible for thee to live the present day ill, if thou wilt but live it as thy last day. If thou dost but consider, Well, this place may be the last place I shall come into, shall I pollute it with sin? or shall I not rather perfume it with sanctity? This expression may be the last that ever I shall speak, shall it e tainted with vice, or shall it not rather be seasoned with grace? This action may be the last that ever I shall do, and shall it be a deed of darkness, or shall it not rather be a work of the day, of the light? This Sermon may be the last that ever I shall hear, and shall I now be heed∣less? After this I shall never more have a call from Christ, and hall I now be careless? This Prayer may be the last Prayer that ever I shall poure out to God; if God deny me now, I am damned and undone
for ever, and shall not my head, and heart, and will, and mind, and all be working, that it may be a prosperous, a prevalent prayer? This Sabbath may be the last Sabbath that ever I shall sanctifie; I may from henceforth and for ever be deprived of all such opportunities of getting and increasing grace, of serving and honouring my Saviour, and of work∣ing out my own salvation; If I sow not now good seed, I must never expect an happy harvest. If I buy not now, the market will be quickly over. Shall I lose any precious minute of this holy day? Is it time now to trifle about the affairs of my soul and eternity? Well, I will through Christ, take heed how I hear; I will hear in hearing, I will pray in praying, I will hear, and hearken, cry and call, with all my heart, and strength, and soul, and mind, that if it be possible, the Lord may not leave me without a blessing. When the Oratour think∣eth he is at the close of his Oration, then he useth his chiefest Art and Rhetorick, to move his Auditors affections, he would have his last part his best part. O Reader, if thou wilt but often wind up this weight of thine approaching death, it would keep thy soul in a quick spiritual, and regular motion at all times. As ashes preserve fire, and keep coals from going out; so the thought that we shall ere long be turned into ashes, will preserve the fire of grace alive, and in action. Sixthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness, Mind a daily performance of sacred du∣ties; He that hath nothing of his own, where∣upon
to live, must be frequently fetching in pro∣vision from the Shops or Market, where it is to be had. The Christians life is maintained, not by himself, but by what he receiveth from God; Not that we are sufficient of our selves; our suffici∣ency of God; therefore there is a necessity of daily converse with God by holy Ordinances, and of wait∣ing at his gate, as the beggar who hath neither a bit of bread, nor a penny to buy any, at the rich mans door for supply. Our spiritual strength is like Israels Manna, rained down daily; we are kept by a divine power, and allowed but from hand to mouth, that we might continually depend on, and resort to the Lord Jesus for our allowance. Paul speaks in some places of his great disbursements, how much he laid out for God and his people, that he laboured more then all the Apostles; but you must think, Whence had Paul such a spiritual stock, that he was able to outvy all others in his expences! he tells you, that the Son of God kept house for him, and that he was the Steward to spend of his treasure, and thence his disbursements were so large; I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life that I live in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. As the Plant Mistel, having no root of its own, both grows and lives in the stock or body of the Oak; So the Apostle having no root of his own, did live and grow in Christ. As if he had said, I live, I keep a noble house, am given to Hospitality above many, in labours more abundant, in watchings, in fastings more frequent, in perils, and dangers, and deaths often; but the truth is, I do all this at anothers cost and charge, not at mine
own, I am beholden to Christ for strength to do and suffer, whatsoever I am called to. He carrieth the purse for me, and gives out to me according to my necessities. I have not a farthing of my own, where∣with to buy the least morsel. I can do nothng of my self, but I can do all things through Christ strength∣ning me. Man is a weak creature, and so far from run∣ing, that he is not able to creep in the way of Gods commandements, unless Christ strengthen him; Without me, ye can do nothing, Joh. 13. 3. If Christ with-draw himself as the Sun, he carri∣eth the light of holiness along with him; The easi∣est duty is too hard, and the weakest enemy too strong for us, unless Christ assist us. 'Tis upon his wings alone that we can mount to Heaven, in an Ordinance, and through his power, that we do improve any Providence. It is not the standing Army of habitual grace, that will make the Christian a Conquerour, he must daily be recruted with Auxilaries from Heaven. The watch-man doth not onely make the watch, and set every wheel in its right place, but he or some other must wind it up daily, or it will stand still. Exer∣ciing grace is as requisite to our spiritual motion, as habitual grace to our spiritual being. The Ra∣zor, though it be never so sharp or keen at first, if it be used, must be often at the Whetstone, or it will grow dull. The Wife that hath frequent occasions for money, for provision for her Self, and Children, and Ser∣vants, and for Cloaths and all Family necessaries, and not a penny but what comes out of her Hus∣bands
purse, and he fearing she should be prodigal, lets her have money by driplets, but from hand to mouth, must be always going or sending to him, or otherwise starve. The Shopkeeper that drives a great trade in the Country, must go often to London, or abroad in other parts, to fetch in commodities. The Israelites in the Wilderness were maintained for water by the Rock. They drank of the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. The Rock followed them, they did not only drink of it at first, but had a constant mornings draught, and drank of it often in the day, it ran i a stream after them, and every day supplied them. Its no marvail the Apostle commandeth us, Pray continually, Pray without ceasing, Pray evermore, when he knew all our living was got by begging, that all our supplies must be from above, and we must expect nothing without asking; Ordinances are the food of the soul. As Cows afford us both Milk and Beef; so Ordinances are Milk to Babes, and Meat for strong Men. Our God is the Fountain of Spiritual, as well as of natural life. Its said most truly, in respect of a Natural life, In him (meaning God) we live, and move, and have our beings, Act. 17. 28. We live; Now as God hath made the heart the spring of natural life, and hath drawn from thence a multitude of arteries, to carry the vital spirits through the whole body, and disperse life through every part of it. So he hath made the Mediatour, the spring of spiritual life, and his Ordinances the Arteries, to convey life to every part of the soul. In whom we move; As God hath from the head de∣rived
manifold sinews, to carry out thence the ani∣mal spirits, and with them the faculty both of sense and motion over all. So the Lord, from Jesus Christ the Churches head, through the sinews of sacred duties, conveyeth spiritual sense and motion to all his members. And have our being; To preserve our being, he hath made the Liver a fountain of blood, and from thence drawn the Veins to convey it over the body, to the nourish∣ment of the whole; Ordinances are those Veins which convey and disperse gracious spirits over the whole new man; With him is the well of life, Psa. 36. Sacred duties are as needful every day for our souls, as food and raiment for our bodies. The body must continually be repaired with nourish∣ment, because it is continually consumed by our natural heat; Yesterdays bread will not keep the laborer to day in strength and vigor to go through with his work; he must have new diet, or he cannot hold out. Friend, I must bespeak thee, as the Angel to Elijah, Vp and eat, for the jour∣ney is too great for thee; Vp and be doing in Prayer, and Scripture, and holy Ordinances, that thou mayst feed and receive spiritual nourishment; for otherwise the business of exercising thy self to godliness, the du∣ties required of thee to be performed, the graces to be exercised, the temptations to be resisted, the deadly enemies to be conquered, will be too hard for thee, the journey will be too great for thee; The Amalekite by long fasting, grew faint and unable to go his journey. If the bringing stream be not as large as the running stream, the bottom will quickly be without water.
The greatest stock will lesson apace, if a man spend daily on it, though but in a small quantity, if he hath no way of getting. Those that are under-kept, and called to hard labour, can never per∣form what is required of them. The spirits daily are decaying, and if not daily renewed by proper nourishment, we perish. The Vessels that are al∣ways leaking, must stand constantly under the con∣duit to get what they lose. When Ionathan through fasting became faint, He tasted a little honey and his eyes were enlightened; How much more, said he, if happily the people had eaten liberally of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the Phi∣listines, 1 Sam. 14. 29, 30. The more a Christi∣an mindeth Divine Ordinances, in obedience to Gods precept, and affiance on Gods promise, the more strength he shall receive to conquer his spiritual adversaries, and to discharge the several duties incumbent on him. The truth is, our re∣ligious life, our heavenly flame is like a straw fire to mault, which must constantly be tended and fed with fuel, or it will go out. There is no more need of the Shepherds constant and daily tending his weak sheep in the summer season then of the Saints daily regarding his precious soul. As trees being well ordered with skill and diligence, they become abundantly fruitful, but being left to themselves, without culture and care they bring forth little or no fruit. So Christians by a diligent use of means abound in the fruits of righteousness, but neglecting ordinances they decline and decay.
The heart of man is, like Reuben, unstable  water, and is stablished with grace (Heb. 10.) which cannot be expected, but through the means of grace. The Viol that with every change of weather is apt to be out of tune, must be constantly hung within sent of the fire. Whilst we are in the care of this world, we are full of damps, and therefore need all means of quickening. Our hearts are like Clocks, twice a day at least, the Plummets must be pulled up, or their motion and course will be hindered. Indeed as God could preserve our bodies with∣out food or any sustenance, by his omnipotent power, as he did Moses and Elijah forty days to∣gether, but he will not where he affordeth or∣dinary means; So he could preserve our souls in life without ordinances, but he will not, where his providence giveth us opportunity to enjoy them. Reader, I must say to thee, as Iacob to the Patriarchs, Behold I have heard that there is Corn in Egypt, get you down thither and buy for us, that we may live and not dye. Behold thou hast heard there is spiritual food in Heaven; the Son of Ioseph hath his granaries full of Corn, go thou thither daily by sacred duties, that thy soul may live and not dye. There is a sensible decay of the strength in Husbandmen (whose work is great) upon one days abstinence. If tradesmen grow careless of their business, and neglect their Shops, they quickly decay in their estates. When Christians grow careless of duties, and neglect their Closets, tis no wonder that they decline in their spiritual stocks. When the Moon hath her
open side downward, she decreaseth, but when her open side is upwards towards Heaven, she increas∣eth in light. There is no growing in grace and holiness, but by conversing with Heaven. Grace, like Armour, may easily be kept bright, if it be daily used, but if it hang by the wall, it will quickly rust, and cost much time and pains to scoure. Much fasting takes away the stomach; and omission of Closet duties at one time, makes a man more backward to them, and dead about them another time. When a Scholar hath plaid the Truant one day, its difficult to bring him to School the next day; Fear and Shame both keep him back, when he comes thither he is the more untoward about his book. Our deceitful hearts after they have discontinued holy exercises, and are broken loose, are like horses gotten out of their bounds, not found or brought back with∣out much trouble. When an instrument is daily plaid on, its kept in order, but if it be but a while neglected and cast into a corner, the strings are apt to break, the frets to crack, the bridge to flye off, and no small trouble and stir is requisite to bring it into order again. We read of the Iews daily sacrifice, which was Morning and Evening, Exod. 29. 38. and 30. 7, 8. David was for Morning and Evening,Luk. 1. 10. and Noon-tide, Psa. 55. 17. Daniel was three times a day upon his knees, Dan. 6. 10. In the Morning the Saints were at their de∣votion, which is thought to be the third hour, when the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles,
Act. 2. 15. This is deemed to be our ninth hour. The midle or mid day prayer was termed the sixth hour, which is our twelfth, Ioh. 4. 6. At this time Peter went up to the house top to pray, Act. 10. 9. The evening Prayer was at the ninth hour, which is our three a clock in the After-noon; Now Peter and John went up together into the Temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour, Act. 3. 1. So Cornelius, Act. 10. 30. At the ninth hour I prayed in my house. Some think the Primitive Christians had these three hours in such regard and use, that thence they were termed Canonical hours. David tells us, Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgements, Psa. 119. 164.Psa. 119. 62, 164. 1 Thes. 5. 17. The more frequent a Christian is at holy duties (sup∣posing he doth not make the commands of God to interfere, and neglect his calling and family, when his presence is required in them) the more thriving he shall be in his spiritual trade. The oftener we go to the Fountain or River, the more water we bring thence. As Runners in a Race do daily diet their bodies, and use exercise to keep themselves in breath, that they may be more able and active when they run for the wager, whereas if they should neglect it, they would grow pursie and shortwinded, and unlikely to hold out, when they run for the Garland; So Christians who would hold out to the end, and so run as to obtain, must be daily feeding and dieting their souls, and renewing their strength by these means which God hath appointed.
As the Sun is the cause of life, and groweth in vegetables, so is the Son of God the efficient cause of motion and growth in Christians; where the Son is present in any soul, there is spiritual moion and growth budding, and blossoming, and bearing fruit, but when the Sun with-holds and with-draws, when this Sun departs, the soul is at a stand; Now Ordinances are the means where∣by the Mediatour conveys heat and life, and growth to men. CHAP. XI. Means whereby Christians may exercise themselves to Godliness; Frequent Meditation of the day of judgement; A daily Examination of our hearts; Avoiding the Occasions and Sup∣pressing the beginnings of Sin. SEvently, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness, Meditate much upon the day of Iudgement. They will prepare them∣selves best to the battel, who always hear the sound of the last trump in their ears. Zisea that valiant Captain of the Bohemians, commanded his Country∣men to flea off his skin (when he was dead) and to make a Drum of it. Which use (saith he) when ye go to battel, and the sound of it will drive away the Hungarians or any of your enemies. Could the
Christian, but with Ierom, hear the sound of the last trumpet in his ears at all times, it would en∣courage him in his spiritual warfare, and enable him to fight manfully, and to cause the enemies of his salvation to flee before him. He who can frequently by faith view the Judge sitting on his Throne of Glory, hear the last trumpet sounding: behold the dead raised, the books opened, the godly examined by the Covenant of grace, all their duties, graces, services, sufferings, pub∣liquely declared, approved, and rewarded, the wicked tried by the Law of works, all their na∣tural defilements, actual transgressions, in thought, word and deed, which ever they were guilty of, with their crimson bloody circumstances, openly revealed, their persons righteously senten∣ced to the vengeance of the eternal fire, and that sentence speedily without the least favour or de∣lay executed on them, will surely loath sin, as that which brings him certain shame and torment, and follow after holiness, which will be his un∣doubted credit and comfort at that day. The Apostle writing to the Iews concerning the terror of that day, how the Heavens must pass away with a great noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works therein burnt up, makes this use of it, Seeing then that all those things shall be dissolved; What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? And again,2. Pet. 3. 11, 14. Wherefore beloved, seeing ye look for these things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameness. He had need to be exact in his conversation, who must
undergo so strict an examination. Well may the time of judgement be called a day, for it will declare and manifest the worth of grace and holi∣ness, which in the night of this life is not ob∣served. Ah, who can conceive the value which the vilest wretch on earth will put upon holiness at that day! then grace will be grace indeed, and godliness will be godliness indeed. Then they who mock at Saints for their purity and strict∣ness, and look upon Sanctity but as Hypocrisie, and the acting of a part to cozen the world with, and think it is enough to put God off with a few prayers now and then, when their pastimes and lusts will give them leave, will call to beleivers as the foolish to the wise Virgins, Give us of your oyl, for our lamps are gone out; then the graceless Princes and Potentates of the world will throw their Crowns and Diadems at the feet of the meanest Christian, for a dram of his grace and holiness. The Apostle speaking of that day, puts the que∣stion, Where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? 1 Pet. 4. 18. Now indeed, those that coff and de∣ride and scorn at holiness, and holy ones, may ap∣pear before great men in many parts of the world with praise and applause; Now, they may appear in the Country, and be respected of their Drunken, Atheistical, Brutish Neighbours, and probably be the more honoured for their opposition to the Spirit of grace and holiness; but then, Where will the sinner and ungodly appear? Not in Heaven, for that is no Stie for Swine, no Kennel for Dogs, no Gaol for Ma∣lefactours,
no place for such unholy God-provoking per∣sons; Into it can in no wise enter that which is de∣filed or unclean. Such a Pallace is not fit for Beasts; Snakes, and Serpents, and Adders are more fit for the bosome and embraces of men, then such men for the bosome and embraces of God. Heaven cast out wicked Angels, and will not take in wick∣ed Men; Where shall they then appear? Not on Earth, for that will be burnt up with fire; Their Houses and places must know them no more for ever. The earth groaned under their weight whilst it bare them, but now is eased of such loads, and shall not be pestered with such Plagues again. But where shall they appear? Not before Christ the Iudge with any comfort, for him they have derided, buffeted, crucified, they have re∣jected his Laws, trampled on his blood, told him to his face, that they will not have him to raign over them. But where will they appear? Not before the Saints, for they have maligned, oppressed, im∣prisoned, persecuted them as a company of Cheats, and Hypocrites. O where shall the sinner and un∣godly appear? 1. Consider, The holiness of the Iudge; He is the holy Iesus. He loveth righteousness, and hateth iniquity, Psa. 45. What will the ungodly sinner do, when he shall be judged by the holy Saviour? Who can stand before this holy God? 1 Sam. 60. 20. His eyes are like a flame of fire, and so he know∣eth the most secret works of darkness. His Law is very pure, and observeth and condemneth the least spots, the least defilement, and how will unclean ones endure to be judged for their everlasting lives
and deaths, by such a Law? His throne is a white throne; and how will the black sinner do to stand before this white throne? Reader, Thou hadst need to be a faithful and loyal subject, if thou wouldst then be owned and acknowledged by thy Soveraign. How exact should he be in his life, who must be tried by so holy a Law? If thou callest him Father, who with∣out respect of persons, will judge every man according to his works, pass the time of thy sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. 2. Consider, The strictness of his proceedings; Every thought, word, and action shall be revealed, examined, and weighed in the ballance of the sanctuary; There is nothing hid that shall not be re∣vealed, nor secret that shall not be made known. The thoughts of thy heart shall then be as visible as the features of thy face. When God shall judge the secrets of mens hearts by my Gospel, Rom. 2 16. All thy words will then be as audible as if thou hadst had a voice to reach every child of Adam, both a∣live and dead; Verily I say unto you, that of every idle word, ye shall give an account at the day of Christ, Mat. 12. 36. Every action of thine will then be legible, not onely to God, as it is at this day, but also to Angels and Men; We must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ, to give an ac∣count of all things done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil; 2 Cor. 5. 10. All the works of darkness will then be brought to light; We must all appear,  not onely be present in person, and not by a proxy, but be laid open and manifest, be transparent, so the word signifi∣eth,
to give an account of every thing done, &c. to render a reason of every individual thought, word, and deed; what was the principle from which we acted, what was the rule by which we acted, what was the end for which we acted. When Benjamins sack was opened, the silver cup appeared. On that Fair-day, all mens packs will be opened, and then it will be known what ware they carry about with them. Hence some have conjectured that it will not be a short time, nor the judgement soon passed over. It is called a day, but not in relation to our natu∣ral, or artificial days, for Christ judging as man in his humane nature, by his divine power, will probably employ a far greater time in searching into, and publiquely revealing every mans condi∣tion and conversation.Per quot dies hoc judicium extendatur in∣certum st. Scri∣pturarum more diem poni so∣lere pro tempo∣re nemo nescit. Aug. de vit di l. 20. cap. 1. Though I am not of their opinions, who say, it will be precisely a thousand years because its said, A thousand years are in thy sight but as one day; Yet I judge it to be taken in∣definitely, and as Astin saith, That the day of judgement shall begin is certain; but when it shall end is uncertain. I find two Divines, eminent both for grace and learning in their generations, speaking; One saith, I humbly conceive that the day of judgement shall not be passed over in an in∣stant, but shall be of long continuance; sor if Christ should judge onely as God, he could dispatch it in a moment, but he judging as man, it must be after the manner of men, that the creature may understand, admire, and approve what is done. The other saith, It must take up some large quantity of time, to ma∣nifest all the secret sins of men, and therefore it
may be made evident, both from Scripture and rea∣son, that the day of Christs kingly office, in judging the world, shall last happily longer then the day of Christs private administration, now in governing the world. 3. Consider, The weight of the sentence; Its called the eternal judgement, because the sentence then pronounced, shall never be reversed, but stand for ever. In this world God judgeth men, sometimes mediately, sometimes immediately, which is the first judgement, from which men may appeal by repentance to his mercy-seat; but this the last judgement, once for all, once for ever, in which men receive their final, their eternal doom, Ioh. 11. 24. Here Iacob appeals from Laban, to an higher tribunal, Gen. 31. 53. And David from Saul, to the King of Kings; The Lord judge between me and tee, 1 Sam. 24. 12. Psa. 17. 2. And Paul appeals from Festus to Caesar, I stand at Caesars judgement seat, Act. 25. 10. But then there can be no appeal to an higher Court, no writ of error can be brought, no arrest of judgement, no second hearing obtained; The sinner condemned to eternal death then, is gone for ever; no pardon, no, not so much as a Reprieve can be procured for one hour. The Saint absolved and declared an heir of eternal life, is blessed for ever, he shall be beyond all fear, all doubts in himself, above all shot, all opposition from others; In this life, Niniveh was threatned, Niniveh repented, and Niniveh was pared; the sen∣tence pronounced was not executed, at least it was respited; but then every sinner will repent, weep and wail, but repentance will be hid from
the eyes of the Judge, all their tears will be in vain; when they are cast, then they are gone for ever. To provoke thee to holiness, 4. Consider, The felicity of the godly at that day; O, with what joy will they lift up their heads, when that day of their redemption is come! This life is the day of their oppression and persecution, but that day will be the day of their redemption. At this day they are troubled and vexed with a tempting Devil, and deceitful hearts, and false, proud, unbeleiving flesh; but that will be the day of their redemption from them all. No wonder they love the appear∣ing of Christ, and look and long for his appearing, when it will be the day of their redemption, and time of their refreshing rom the presence of the Lord. When thousands and millions shall howl and la∣ment; When the Oratour will be silenced, and have his mouth stopped; When the Souldier that durst venture into the mouth of the Cannon, and dare death it self, shall play the Coward, and seek for any hole to hide himself in; when the Captains, and Kings, and Nobles, shall call to the Rocks to fall on them, and the Mountains to cover them, from the presence of the Lord, and the wrath of the Lamb, even then the godly shall sing and rejoyce. 1. Their godliness will then be mentioned to their eternal honour; As God hath a bag for mens sins, (Thou sealest up mine iniquities in a bag) so he hath a book for their services; A book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name. Then all their prayers, and tears, their watchings, fastings, faith, love, zeal, pa∣tience,
almes, imprisonment, loss of goods, name, liber∣ty, life for Christ and the Gospel, will be manifested to their honour, and praise, and glory, at the coming of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Mat. 25. 34, 53. 2. Their names will be then vindicated; With the resurrection of bodies, there shall also be a resur∣rection of names. Now indeed, the throats of wicked men are open Sepulchres, wherein the credit of the godly is buried. Ioseph is an Adulterer, Ne∣hemiah a Traytour, Ieremiah a Rebel against the King, Paul a mover of sedition, a pestilent fellow, and one that turned Christian for spite, because the High Priest would not give him his Daughter in Marriage; but when the Sea, and Death, and Hell, shall give up their dead, then shall the throats, the open Sepulchres of wicked men, give up the names of the godly; Then their righteousness shall be cleared as the Sun, and their uprightness as the noon day. 3. Their persons shall be then publiquely acquitted; They shall be cleared by publique proclamation, be∣fore God, Angels, and Men. Hence it's said, Their sins shall be blotted out, when the time of refreshment shall come from the presence of the Lord. The sentence of Absolution passed in their conscience by the Spirit at this day is sweet, and puts more joy into their hearts, then if all the Crowns, and Scepters of this world, had befallen them; but O how comfortable will it be to be declared just by the Judge himself, before the whole world, at that solemn and imperial day! They may then ring that challenge, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Rom. 8. 33. And none will accept it, or take up the Gantlet. Who? Shall God, whose Children and Chosen they are?
No; It is God that justifieth. Shall the Iudge? No; It is his undertaken-work to present them to the Father without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing. He hath washed them in his own blood, and made them as white as innocent Adam or Angels; He was judged for them, and will not passe judgement against them; He cannot condemne them, but he must condemne himself, for they are his members, his body, his brethren, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Shall the Law? No, They have fully an∣swered all its demands, superabundantly satisfied it through their surety, both in perfect obedience to all its precepts, and undergoing its punishment: What the Law saith, either in regard of command∣ing compleat subjection, or cursing for the omission of it: it saith to them that are under the Law; but they are not under the Law, but under Grace. Shall Conscience? No; Next to God and Christ its their best friend: as Christ pleads for them to his father, so Conscience pleads for them to themselves. This is their rejoycing, the testimony of good Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity they had their con∣versations in this world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Shall Satan? No; The accuser of the brethren will be then cast down, and his place will be found no more in Heaven: then, then, those blessed promises will be performed, The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head: and the God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet. 4. The Saints happiness will be then perfected, and he shall never know more what sin or sorrow mean∣eth, or what want of Gods favour, or doubt of Christs love, or defect of joy and comfort meaneth: The Christian hath so much laid out upon him in this
world, Vocation, Adoption, Pardon, Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost, hopes of Glory, that in the worst condition that Men and Devils can plunge him into, he finds cause to say, Yet God is good to Israel, to them that are of a clean heart: but then when he shall enjoy all that is laid up for him, and know the full extent of Gods promises to him, the all of Christs purchase for him, and the utmost reward of his pie∣ty: then surely he will cry out with the Psalmist, O how great is that goodness which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men! Clemens Alex∣andrinus makes mention of a place in Persia, where there were three Hills; when people came to the first, they heard a clashing of armour; when they came to the second, they heard a confused noise; when to the third, nothing but songs of triumph. At the day of the Saints Conversion, he comes to the first hill, then he heareth a clashing of armour, listing himself under the Captain of his salvation, and pro∣claiming open war, against the world, flesh, and wicked one. At the day of death, he comes to the second hill, a confused noise, his friends are weeping and grieving, his wife and children are mourning and bemoaning their loss; though his soul be re∣joycing to think of the rest to which it's going, yet the flesh sweateth, panteth, is pierced and pained. At the day of judgement, he comes to the third hill, where he heareth nothing but songs of triumph, Victoria, Victoria, Hallelujahs, Salvation, Honour, Glory, Praise to the Lord, and to the Lamb for ever. At that day of judgement, the whole world shall see and say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous;
Then shall the wicked return and discern a difference between them that fear God, and them that fear him not. Then Grace will appear in all its embroydery and glory on that day of its coronation, when the worst in Hell shall admire and adore it. Now ho∣liness hath a wonderful disadvantage, partly by the persecutions, afflictions, bonds, and imprisonments, that attend it; and chiefly from the darkness of mens understanding, and the weakness of their eyes, they are not able to view the thousandth part of its comeliness; but then Holiness shall be freed from that black Guard of Hell that dogs her to destroy her; and then the eyes of all the world shall be strengthned so much as to behold her amiableness, then she shall be owned, honoured, acknowledged by God, Angels, and all the Chil∣dren of Adam; then she shall be attended, not with Mulcts, and Penalties, and Bonds, and Fet∣ters, but Crowns, and Scepters, and Palms, and Kingdoms; and then, O then, how lovely, how beau∣tiful will she be indeed! 5. To affrighten thee from sin, Consider, the misery of sinners at that day. Its called the day of perdition of ungodly men. Sin will be sin indeed at that day. When sin shall be stripped naked of the favour and countenance of great men, of the preferments, and advantages, and riches, and honours, and offices, with which it is cloathed here below, and instead thereof be invested with fire, and flames, and brimstone, and blackness of darkness, and whips, and serpents, and unconceiva∣ble and eternal torments, what an ugly loathsom strumpet will she be, even in the eyes of them
that now dote on her, commit whordome with her, and sacrifice their strength, and time, and estates, and souls, and God, and Christ, and Heaven, and all to her? Then the Drunkard will find his liquor more bitter then wormwood, when he shall have a cup of pure wrath without the least mixture of mercy brought to him, and he forced to take it down, though there be eternity to the bottom. Then the Persecutor of Gods people shall find that it had been better to have been rot∣ting in a ditch, or boyling in a furnace of lead, then to have spent his time in wronging the poorest meanest member of Christ; when God shall recom∣pence tribulation to them that persecute his people, and to them that are persecuted rest and peace; Then every sinner will believe and feel what now, though God himself tell him, he will be an infidel in, that it is an evil and bitter thing to depart away from the living God. The wicked is reserved (as the Beast for the slaughter-day) to the day of destruction, he shall be brought forth (as the condemned Malefactour on execution-day) at the day of slaughter; Ah how dreadful will the sinners doom be then! The tri∣bunal of the Judge, will be a tribunal of fire; He shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance, &c. The Law by which he will try them, shall be a Law of fire, or a fire of Law, Deut. 33.2. The Judge himself to them will be a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28. And the judgement which he will denounce a∣gainst them, will be, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels for ever; Ah who can dwell in everlasting burnings! who can abide devouring flames! Who can imagine the shame
that will cover their faces, the horror that will fill their hearts, the terrors, and tortures, and tor∣ments that must seize them for ever? If Iudas was so ashamed when he saw Thamars signet and staff, the remembrances of his sin? how will they be con∣founded, when all their revellings and roarings, their chambering and wantonness, their cursing and swearing, and all their sins shall be opened be∣fore all the world? If Herod was so afrighted when he supposed that John was risen from the dead, that the Baptists ghost by walking in his conscience rob∣bed him of all comfort; what afrightment will possess them, to see the Saints whom they have nick∣named, disgraced, imprisoned, and it may be mur∣dered, risen from the dead, owned and honoured by the Judge, and the chief Favourites in the Heavenly Court? If Saul was so troubled when he did hear Christ call to him out of Heaven, that he fell to the ground; what trouble, what tribulation will possess them, whom he shall curse with a bitter curse, and call to Devils to seize on, and associate with, and prey upon for ever and ever? The Saint shall find mercy, the sweetest mercy in that day of judge∣ment; but the Sinner shall have judgement, the sorest, the most cutting, killing judgement, with∣out the least drop of mercy. If the day when God gave the Law was so dreadful, full of thundrings and lightnings and fearful noises, that the people cryed out, Let not God speak to us, lest we die, and Moses himself did exceedingly quake and fear; and if the day were so dreadful, when the Son of Gods infi∣nite love bare the curse of the Law, that the rocks were rent, the earth trembled, the Sun was darkned; how
dreadful will that day be, when God shall make in∣quisition into, and deal with the vessels of wrath for the breath of the Law? Who can abide that day of his coming? Who shall stand when he appeareth? Well may it be called the great and terrible day of the Lord Iesus; Well might the wise man, when he had seemingly laid the reins on the young mans back, and given him leave to run on in the way of his own heart and eyes, pull him in with this Curb; Re∣member that for all these things God will bring thee to judgement. When Sapores King of Persia, had raised a violent persecution against the Christians; Vsthazanes an antient Nobleman, and a Christian, who in the Kings minority had the Governmen of the People, was so terrified, that he denied the Faith; but sit∣ing at the Court Gate, when Simeon an old Bishop, and holy person was leading to prison, he rose up to salute him; but the good Bishop frowning on him, turn'd away his head with indignation; upon which Vsthazanes fell a weeping, went into his chamber, put off his Courtly attire, and burst out into this speech; Ah how shall I appear before the great God of heaven, whom I have denied, when Simeon but a man will not endure to look upon me! If he frown, how will God frown, when I come to appear at his Tri∣bunal? Upon these considerations, he repen∣ted of his Apostacy, assumed courage, and be∣became a glorious Martyr for Christ. If Felix an Heathen trembled, when Paul reasoned of judge∣ment to come; nay, if the very Devils so far believe that day, as to tremble at the thoughts of it, well may the consideration of that day make Christians
tremble at the thoughts of sin, and not dare there∣by to treasure up wrath upon their heads, against that day of wrath, and the declaration of the righteous judge∣ment of God. Reader, At this day think much of that day of judgement, hereby thou wilt be stirred up to judge thy self, to repent of sin, to ensure an interest in Christ the Judge, to keep a good conscience, and so to think, speak, and act, as one that must be judged by the Law of liberty, 1 Cor. 11.31. Act. 3.19. and 17. 31. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Eccles. 12. ult. Iam. 2. 12. Act. 24. 16. Eighthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to God∣liness; Call thy self often to account. This is a special help to holiness; I considered my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies, saith David, Psa. 119.5. A man that goeth out of his way, will continue wandering, if his mind be occupied about other things, and he con∣sider not what he is doing, and whither he is going. The Christian that is careless of his carriage, and sel∣dom compareth his heart and life with the divine commands, to observe how they agree or disagree, will never order his conversation aright; When a clock is out of order, we take it to peices, and search where the fault lyeth, knowing that one wheel amiss may hinder the going of the whole Clock. Our hearts are every day out of order, our work must be to take them to peices by Examination, and to see where the great fault is. Seneca's sober young man, Ita laborat, ita ludit, ita caenat, ita potat, ita lo∣quitur, ita vivit, ut qui ephemerides Patri est approbatur so labours, so playeth, so eateth, so drinketh, so speak, and so lives, as one
that is daily to be accountable for all to his Father. He that would keep his spiritual estate, must keep his Account-books well; The neglect of this, hath been the breaking of many Tradesmen. When Shop-keepers live high, far above their incomes, and for want of searching into their Books, are ignorant whether their gains will allow such large expences, it is no wonder if they prove worse then naught. They who expect the coming of great and severe strangers, who will observe narrowly how their house lyeth, and how their vessels are kept, and publish it either to their credit, or dis∣credit, according as they find; will keep their houses in order, sweep them clean, have their pewter bright and clear, and all things exactly in their places. When the Christian looks every night for the coming of Gods Deputy, his conscience, to spy and search into his heart and life; how clean and ho∣ly both have been kept all the day, it will be a spe∣cial means to make him watchful over his ways, and exact in his carriage and conversation. Bee-Masters tell us, that they are the best hives which make the greatest noise; So that conscience is the best, which makes the greatest noise in daily reasonings and de∣bates before its own bar. Examination is the quickest way to bring the erring sheep home to the fold. Honest men will examine their weights and measures by the standard, that if they be defective they may be mended. The honest heart will examine its thoughts, its words, its actions by the Royal Law, that their unsutableness to its strictness and latitude may be repented of, and to the utmost of its power reformed, Let us search and try our ways;
For what cause? What will be the issue of such a scrutiny? And turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3.39. What man will seek to a Physitian, or accept his advice, or take his prescriptions, who doth not know himself distempered, and feel his disease? Tis examination of our hearts and lives, by the holy and pure Law of God, that gives thee know∣ledge of our spiritual sickness, and helpeth us to feel it, to prize our Physitian, and thankfully and heartily to accept his directions for our cure. Its observed of the Dutch-men, that they keep their banks (notwithstanding the threats of the in∣sulting Ocean) with little cost and labour, because they look narrowly to them, and stop them up in time; If there be but; a small breach, they stop it presently, and hereby save much charge and trou∣ble. Frequent examination will do this courtesie for the Christian, it will maintain his peace with little charge and trouble comparatively; As soon as any breach is made by sin, that Arch-make-bate, between God and the soul, it will help the Chri∣stian to run presently to Christ to heal and make it up in Heaven by his merits; and in the soul, by his purifying and pacifying spirit. The counsel which the Philosopher gave the young men at Athens, may sutably and profitably be applied to Christians; That they should often view themselves in a glass, that if they were fair and well featured, they should do such things as were beseeming their amiable shape; but if soul and ill-favoured, that then they should labour to salve the bodies blemishes, by the beauties of a mind, accoutred with the ornaments of vertue and good literature.
Examination is a special preservative against sin; No Children are more bold to defile themselves, and to play with dirt, or rake in kennels, then those who know their Parents are so foolishly fond (like David of Adonijah) that they never displease them at any time, in saying, Why hast thou done so? The Child that expecteth to be reckoned with at night, will be careful how he dir∣tieth his cloaths in the day. Examination will help the Christian, if not to hin∣der a coming disease, yet to prevent its growing and increase. The Ship that leaketh, is more easily emptied at the beginning then afterwards; The Bird is easily killed in the Egge, but when once hatcht and fledged, we may kill it when we can catch it. A frequent reckoning with our selves, will pluck sin up before it is rooted in the soul. Examination will help the Christian that hath fallen and bruised himself, to heal the wound whilst it is fresh, before it is festered; This one advan∣tage, if there were no more, is extraordinary. As the sting of a Bee, though the Bee be fled, works it self into the flesh deeper, and diffuseth its venome more strongly, causing the greater pain, that every man, unless foolish, will speedily pull it out, lest he encrease his own anguish; Truly so doth sin, though the honey, the pleasure of it be gone, yet the sting remains, and the longer it is before it is pulled out by Faith and Repentance, the deeper it works it self into the soul, and the more sorrow it will put us to in this or the other world.
Tis examination at night, that brings the soul to mourn for, and repent of its failings in the day; Tis like the tree which Cesias speaks of, in describing India, that besides fruit, distilleth certain tears, of which are made Precious Amber; or as the drops of the Vine, its excellent against the leprousie of sin. Ephesus would never repent till they examined and considered whence they had fallen. When sin is admitted into the soul, and as a Theif in the night stole in at unawares, when the eye of the souls watchfulness was fallen asleep; Examination will light the Candle of the word, and search the house narrowly, and find out this ill guest, and before it hath done so much mischief as it intended, apprehended it, indict, condemn, and execute it. Examination every day, is like purging the body at the beginning of a distemper, which takes it be∣fore it hath habituated it self, and so is much the more easily repelled. An enemy may much sooner be forced out of his holds, when he hath newly taken possession, then when he hath continued so long as to cast up his banks, make his ditches, placed his Guns, and fortified them. After we have been foiled by our spiritual enemies, and by examinati∣on find out the cause, it will make us more watchful at that gate at which they enter'd, and careful of that particular wherein they got the advantage of us. As when David had received intelligence, that the Amonites had given his Army some small defeat, he sends Ioab word of the reason, they went too near the City, and wisheth him to make the battel more strong against the place, 2 Sam. 11. So examination
finds out the reason of a Christians defeat by Satan, either it was through self-confidence, or want of spiritual watchfulness, or love to some known sin, and helpeth the Saint to bewail the cause of his defeat, and directeh him how to provide better against the next onset: Frequent examination keepeth the conscience raw and tender, that the least touch of sin will be offen∣sive and troublesom to it. When the heart is used to yeild at a small Willow, it will never be quiet under a great Oak. Searching into our souls, makes sin more loathsom to us. Whilst these filthy sinks are unstir'd, they do but little disturb us, or annoy us with their fil∣thy savour, but when by examination we rake into them, their noysom stench offendeth us extremely, and shews us what need we have of cleansing. Examination every night, will help the Christian to a good nights rest; How comfortably may he lye down, who hath made all even with his Maker, and heard his everlasting Father bidding him Good-night? How quietly may he sleep, who hath his pardon un∣der his Pillow! he needs not fear any Officer to call him up at midnight, and attach him for any treasons or misdemeanours. Its said of Cato, that constantly at evening he would call to mind what ever he had seen,Cicer. de Senec. read, or done that day. It was Pythagoras rule to his Scholars, That they should no night suffer sleep to seise their senses, till they had three times recalled the acci∣dents and passages of the day. O what a shame is it, that Moralists who had no true sense of the benefit of such a duty, should out-go the Christian in the per∣formance of it! That many persons should know
the Chronicles of other Countries or Kingdoms, some ages past, and yet not know the passages of their own souls one day past! Reader, If thou wouldst walk closely with God, and keep even with him, reckon daily with him; Call thy self to a strict scrutiny, What do I? how live I? where am I? is the work I do, warrantable by the word or no? is my life the life of Faith, of Ho∣liness, or no? am I in Gods way, under his protecti∣on, or no? Have I truth of grace, the power of god∣liness, or do I please my self with the form of it? Do I thrive and increase in grace, or do I decay and decline? Suppose I were to dye this night, what ground have I to hope for Heaven? what assurance that I shall escape the power and rage of frightful Devils? What evidences have I, that I am a new creature, engrafted into Christ, and thereby entitled to life and bliss? Thus feel the pulse of thy soul, enquire into its state, visit it often, and see how it doth. Call thy self to an account for thy sins; Let heart and life sins, open and private sins, omissions, commissions, personal, relative, be all reckoned for. Ask thy soul as Rebecah, Why am I thus? Why am I so false to my God? so unfaithful to my Covenants? The heart is like a Ditch, into which filth is continually running, and therefore it beho∣veth thee by examination, to be always emptying it. The Stable that is daily fowled, must be daily cleansed; The hands that are daily contracting dirt, must be daily washed. Our souls are more polluted and diseased then our bodies; we have always a filthy issue of sin running, which we must be daily searching into, and dressing, or our stench will make
us loathsom to, and unfit for any communion with God or his people. Call thy self to an account daily for thy mercies; Ask thy self, How much am I indebted to my God? what privative, what positive mercies do I partake of? what old, what new, what night, what day mercies, what mercies at home, what abroad, what personal, what domestical, what national mercies do I enjoy? or am a sharer in? what bodily, what spi∣ritual mercies do I receive? what time, what talents, have I to trade with, and reckon for? This will help the soul to be speedy and hearty in thankfulness, and force it to Davids Interrogation, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? What hot love should I return, what an holy life should I lead? Do this daily; It is much better to pay sums when they are little, then when they are large. Wise men that are able, find it the best way to pay ready money for their wares. Neglect herein, causeth many mistakes and inconveniencies, and many times differences amongst friends. Having spoken to this particular in the sixth Chapter, I shall say no more to it here, though indeed I judge it next to a new nature, not inferi∣our to any means of godliness. Ninthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness, Avoid the occasions of sin; he that would avoid the commission of sin, must avoid the occa∣sions of sin. If we would not fall down the Hill, we must beware of coming near the brow of it. Keep thee far from an evil matter; Children which in frost venture upon the Ice, may possibly be safe, but
yet many times they break their limbs, and some∣times lose their lives. Its possible for a Saint to come off safe from occasions of sin, but is very seldom seen. A fair booty makes many a man a Theif, who otherwise might have lived honest. It was counted therefore a great part of wisdom in Alexander, when he had taken the beautiful daugh∣ters of Darius Prisoners, not to see the fair Ladies, lest their beauty should have enticed him to folly; The same word in Hebrew, signifieth both an eye and a fountain, to shew that from the eye, as from a fountain, sin doth too often flow; Iobs practice was such, that he would not look on a Maid, lest he should lust after her; And Davids prayer was, Turn away mine eyes from beholding va∣nity. We take the wind of those that are infected with contagious diseases. The wise man gives no∣table counsel to men, if they would avoid drun∣kenness; Look not upon the wine when it is red, when it casteth its colour in the glass, Prov. 23. 31. When it laughs in thy face, then shut thine eyes, lest it steal into thy heart; We are ready to think, what hurt, what danger is there in beholding, the wine in the glass, sparkling and brisky? But Solomon knew that from looking on it, men come to like it, from liking to tasting, from tasting to a draught, from one draught to another, till the man is metamorphised into a beast. Gen. 39. 10, Psa. 119. 37. The wise Socrates could advise men to be∣ware of those meats which would entice men without hunger to eat, and those drinks which would entice a man without thirst to drink, know∣ing that if men come within those traps and baits,
they are easily taken. A guest may easily be kept out of the house at first, but if once entertained, its hard to turn him out of doors. When a Gover∣nour of a Fort once comes to parley with the ene∣my that besiegeth him, there is great fear that the place will be surrendred. I have read of one that having a great mind to go to Rome, yet knowing it to be a corrupt place, and a corrupter of others, entered the City with his eyes close shut, neither would he be perswaded to see any thing there but Peters Church, which he went to visit. Solomon perswades his Son, if he should not be enticed by the Harlot, that he would not come near her house, Remove thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her house, Prov. 5. 8. He that carrieth always along with him, an heart ready to break out into a flame, prone to all wicked∣ness, had need to take heed of those Bellows that will help to blow up the fire. I more fear, saith Luther, that which is within me, then that which is from with∣out. When a distempered stomach comes to meet with tossing waves, sickness ensueth, though the prime cause is not from the Billows without, but Choler within. Occasion and the heart, are like Di∣nah and Sechem, if they meet, they usually part not till folly is committed. Those that desire to hinder the generation of Vice, that brat of Hell, must keep the Male, occasion, and the Female, a wicked heart asunder, one from the other. They who have bodies always ready to take infection, must be more careful of their diet and company then others; Insensible Vapours bring forth horrible Tempests; Behold how great a matter a little fire kindleth.
The best heart is like a flint; there is fire in it, though it doth not appear; occasion is the steel that fetch∣eth it forth, which being let alone would be quiet. Bees in winter being sensible of their weakness, keep their hives, and will not expose themselves to the sharp air and bitter frosts, lest thereby they sicken and dye. Alas, how weak is man! how unable to resist the occasions of sin! no more then the Hound can forbear pursuing the Hare before his eyes, and therefore it concerns him to avoid them. A candle newly extinguished will quickly be lighted again. Powder meeting with a light match, presently takes fire. For this cause it was ordained of God in the law of the Nazarite, who did for a time specially consecrate himself to God, that besides his not coming to the dead, and suffering his hair to grow, he should abstain from these things; 1. from wine, and strong drink. 2. From the vinegar of wine or strong drink. 3. From any liquor of grapes, though it were but the water wherein they were steeped. 4. From the green or moist grape. 5. From the dried grape or raisin. 6. From the husk or kernel of them, Numbers 6.3,4. Had the Nazarite eaten but the skin of the grape or raisin, he had broken the law: Here∣by the holy Ghost would teach us that those who separate themselves from the world, to be in a spe∣cial manner serviceable to the Lord, must avoid not onely plain sin, but the appearance of sin, and all occasions of it, though we may look upon them but as the husks of grapes, to be of small moment and little danger. Beza giveth this reason why the Le∣vite, when he saw the man that fell among theives,
passed on the other side of the way, Ne cadaveris contactu pollueretur; Lest he should be defiled with the touch of the corps. He would be so far from touch∣ing a dead carkass, that he would pass on the other side of the way when he saw one dying. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; avoid it, pass not by it (i. e. come not not near it) turn from it and pass away, Prov. 4. 14, 15. He that will do all he may, will quickly do what he may not. Its lawful to enjoy bodily pleasures and delights, but not to buy them with hazard to our souls. Souldiers in a Garrison that venture to the outmost line, are often snapt up by those that besiege them. We sometimes when in danger of a siege, burn down those houses in the skirts of the City which might be serviceable to us, when we cannot well defend them, lest they should prove helpful to our enemies against us. Theseus is said to cut off his golden locks, lest his adversaries should in fight take hold of them. Even in things lawful its commendable for Christians to deny themselves, when there is danger by taking liberty therein of gratifying the enemies of their souls. Cotis King of Thracia manifested possibly more prudence then pro∣digality in breaking the cupboard of curious glasses presented to him,Plutarch. lest (his nature being extremely cholerick) he should deal too severely with his ser∣vants in case they had broken any of them. Aristotle hath a story of Satyrus, that being a pleader, and knowing himself passionate, and in that drunken∣ness of the mind apt to commit many indecencies, and to rush into foul extravagancies, he used to stop
his ear with wax, lest the sense of ill language should move him to choler. Reader, as thou wouldst shun sin in the action, shun it in the occasion;Qantum pos∣sumus a lubrico recedamus, &c. Sen. Epist. ad Lucil. remember thou carriest thatch about thee, and therefore oughtest to avoid the least sparks. A little wind will drive a ship with the stream and tide; and a small temptation may carry thee that way which thy wicked heart inclines thee. A little pulling will draw a strong man whe∣ther he is willing to go; its safest therefore to be out of harms way, and the greatest magnanimity to flye from the sight of such an enemy as sin is; He hath most true courage who makes a timely retreat before he be wounded. CHAP. XII. Means whereby Christians may exercise themselves to Godliness; An humble frame; Suppressing sin in its first rise; the knowledge of God. TEnthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to Godliness, Walk humbly with thy God. A tree the more deeply its rooted, the more it groweth under ground, the more up∣ward in fruitfulness: The Christian will find that by growing in humility, he shall thrive in godliness. He that turneth his eyes upward is ready to stumble at every rub that lyeth in his way; but he that looketh
downward, seeth and avoideth those stones. A proud man, is like a little man with an high-heeld-shooe, raised thereby in his own conceit, above others of the same rank, but it fits him with many a fall. The proud per∣son giveth not glory to God, and therefore must not expect that God should give grace to him; But the humble man honoureth God, and sanctifieth his name, and sets the Crown on his head, and so may expect (because God hath promised) that God should ho∣nour him, and sanctifie his soul; God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. He leaves those high hills barren, but makes the valleys to abound in Corn. Tis in vain to undertake to pour liquor into a full Vessel, it will all run over, but the empty Vessel will re∣ceive it. The proud person is full still of self, and so will not be thankful for an almes; but the humble man is empty, hungring, and thirsting, and he shall be satisfi∣ed. Proud Vashti divorceth her self, and provoketh her Lord to disown and disclaim her; but humble Hester is thought worthy of a Crown, and admitted into the Kings embraces. The fig-tree that blooms not at all, brings forth most pleasant fruit, when the Sal∣low which hath most glorious palms is barren. Hypo∣crisie kills the flower of grace at the root, Pride nips it in the bud. Sincerity like Paul, planteth grace; Humility like Apollo, watereth it, and helpeth it to flourish. We may take notice all along in Scripture, that the hum∣blest men, were the holiest men; and those that were eminent for any grace, were eminent for Humility. The deepest streams were most silent, and made the least noise. Abraham was famous for Faith, strong in Faith, he beleived in hope against hope, but loe how lowly was he! Behold I have taken upon me to
speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and ashes. So Iacob, named Israel by God himself, for his fervency and prevelancy in prayer; I am less then the least of all thy mercies. David, that man after Gods own heart, I am a worm and no man, as a Child weaed from his mothers breasts, for humility. So Asph, Psa. 23. 21. Agur, Prov. 30. Isaiah, Isa. 6. 3. The Virgin Mary, the Centurion, the Syro∣phenician, Paul, all like full vessels sounded not their own praise, and like Stars, the higher they were in holiness, the less they appeared. When Elizabeth had conceived, she hid her self three months; they who are the most fruitful in holiness, make the least boasting of it. Lord, said holy Hooper, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven; I am full of sin, but thou a gracious God. Bradford would subscribe his Letters, The most miserable, unthankeful, hard∣hearted sinner, John Bradford. The greater the fire of grace, the less the smoke or shew of it to the world. The weightiest Wheat seeks for the lowest place, when the light chaf flyeth in the Air. Whe the Sun is at the highest, the shadow is the least, and the more directly the Sun shineth on u, the less our shadow is; so the higher Christians are in Gods favour, the lower they are in their own eys; The more God exalted David, the more he debased himself, What am I, and what is my Fa¦thers-House, that thou hast brought me up hitherto, and yet thou speakest of thy servants house for a great while to come? 2 Sam. 7. 18, 19. This was Davids language, when Nathan brought him word that God would build him a sure house. Those trees which spread much and grow low, near the ground most
commonly bring forth more and larger fruits then high trees, that aspire up into the air. The highest trees are barren; so the proud and high-minded man, but with the lowly is wisdom. The humble Christian is nearer God then others, and so must needs thrive above others; though God beholdeth the proud afar off, he dwelleth in the humble heart. The lowly Christian is most lovely in his eye, and shall have most of his company. God appear∣ed to Moses, not in a lofty Cedar, but in a low, mean, bject bush. If he that walketh with wise men be∣comes wise, and is the better for such good com∣pany; what good doth the humble Christian get by walking with his God? Pride is like the Remora to a ship, which will ar∣rest it under full sail; hinder the Saint in his heaven∣ly passage, when he is making the greatest speed. its like those weeds which are of so poisonous a na∣ture, that they will suffer no good hearbs to grow near them. The servant that hath been trusted and honoured by his Lord, if he prove a Theif, and steal from his Lord, provokes him to take his stock out of his hands, and to trust him no longer. The proud man steals from God, and robs him of that glory which is due to him; and therefore its no marvail if he deny to trust such an unfaithful ser∣vant with any more spiritual riches. 'Tis the empty Barrel that makes the greatest sound. The poor women that have nothing but a few Matches, or Pins, or Band-strings, or Thread∣laces; the men that have onely a few Brooms, or some Small-coal, or Roots, make a great stir, and loud noise about the City, and would have every
body acquainted with their ware. When the great Usurer that is worth thousands in Bills and Bonds, and the rich Shopkeeper, whose estate swelleth to a vast bulk, never proclaim what they are worth, but rather endeavour to hide it; Those that have least spiritual riches, are most guilty of boasting; Laodicaea bragged much that was poor, and mi∣serable, and blind, and naked, and worse then naught, They who are fullest of Faith, and richest in good works, make the least sound; When their hearts and lives like the face of Moses, shine bright∣ly with grace and holiness, they do not, they will not, know it. They consider their greatest light and lustre, is but a reflection from the Father of lights, and therefore they have no reason at all to boast of borrowed goods. The worm of pride breeds soonest in rotten wood. The proud Pharisee who justified himself, had no∣thing in him but matter of condemnation: When the poor humble Publican, affected with his own vileness and baseness, had something of worth in him, even his sense of his own unworthiness. Brass makes a greater sound, and is heard farther then Gold, but every one knoweth there is no comparison between them; Chaff is seen above the Wheat, not because it is better, but because it is lighter. Alas, what is man? what hath man that he should be proud? He is but enlivened dust, moving earth, refi∣ned clay, that which beasts trample under their feet; He hath nothing that good is, but what he hath re∣ceived; He lives wholly upon the alms and charity of another. A proud heart and a beggars purse do
not agree. As he is a sinner, he is more vile and base, more noisom and loathsom then any Toad, or Snake, or Serpent, and hath he any reason to be proud? Reader, be cloathed with humility; learn of thy Re∣deemer, for he was meek and lowly in heart. Though he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7,8. When pride cometh, then cometh a fall. As a Wrastler, if he can lift his fellow from the ground, quickly gives him a fall; so the Devil, if he can lift up with pride, doubts not but to throw them. Phy∣sicians observe that the Dropsie and Consumption are usually together: when once thou swellest with this Dropsie of pride, expect a Consumption of thy god∣liness. He walks but dangerously who walks on high places, as on the ridges of houses, and on ropes; he that walks below is more safe. Angels, Adam, David, Hezekiah, Peter, and many others in Scripture confirm the Wisemans Proverb, Pride goeth before a fall. Trees that are set on mountains are easily shaken and torn up by the roots, when stormy winds arise. Indeed tis no wonder that a proud man should fall into sin, for he relieth on his own strength, which is but a broken reed. Peter had not fallen so fouly, if he had not undertaken to stand upon his own legs, which were too weak to bear his weight; But be∣fore honour is humility. The lower the foundation, the higher the building. A proud man hath a great infelicity, in that he is his own enemy, and makes all others his enemies. God is his enemy; there is no sinner whom he pro∣claims such open war against, in such express terms,
as the Proud; God setteth himself in battel array a∣gainst the proud. Twere better Earth and Hell should unite their force against him, then one God. Ah who knoweth the power of thine anger! Men are his enemies; he disdaineth others for their meaness or povety, or want of parts, and they disdain him for his pride. He that over-valueth himself shall soon be under-valued by every one. Pride makes him scorn friends (for familiarity would deprive him, he thinks, of that reverence which he deserves) and therefore all must be his enemies; but he is his own ene∣my most, in cutting such a gash in his soul by his pride, and making way for all other sins to fall on. He that is lifted up with pride, quickly falls into the condemna∣tion of the Devil. Satan had found this vice, Pride, by experience so prevalent to draw the creature from God, that he knew no better bait to catch A∣dam with, Ye shall be as gods; and when afterwards he encountred David, 'twas with this weapon; he tempted David to number the people. Yet alas, though it be so prejudicial, how natural is it to us? Pride is a weed, a worm that gets into the best Garden. It was a witty taunt which a proud Car∣dinal had from a friend of his, that upon his election went to Rome on purpose to see him, where finding his behaviour stretcht to nothing but pride and state, he departed and put on a mourning suit, and the next day comes in black to visit him; The Cardinal asking the cause why he was in mourning, he answered, It was for the death of Humility; which fetcht its last breath in him when he was elected Cardinal. Most of us have cause to put on mourning upon the same ac∣count.
Eleventhly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness, Suppress sin in the beginning. This foul Bird is easiest kild in the egge. When a fire is first broke out in a Chimny it may with much less labour be quenched, then when it hath seised the Timber of the House; What small beginnings had those fires which have conquered stately Pallaces, and turned famous Cities into ruinous heaps? An Hair is but a little thing, yet some have been choaked with it; If the Tetter be not killed, it will come to be a Ring-worm. Passion at the first kindling may be quenched, but if let alone, sends such a smoke into the understanding, which thickens in∣to a cloud, and hinders us from the sight of our selves and our duties. The Tree may soon be pulled up, before it hath taken root, but then it may be too hard for the strongest man. A prick with a Pin, or a Thorn, being let alone, hath sometimes caused the cutting off of a limb, nay, the loss of life. Minutes to sin, are like Cyphers to a figure, which quickly increase it to vast sums. Sin increaseth by degrees, Iam. 1. 14, 15. First it surprizeth the heart in a thought, then it steal∣eth into the affections for approbation, then the af∣fections plead with the will for its consent, and then that commandeth the act of it, and frequent acts cause an habit, and custom in sin causeth despair, despair causeth men to defend sin, their defence of sin a boasting and glorying in it, and the next step is Hell. Sin is therefore fitly by the Prophet compared to a Chain, for one link draweth ano∣ther.
As the Ivy by little and little creepth upon the Oak, till at last it doth destroy it; so doth sin cling about the soul, and by degrees over-run and undo it. When the water begins to freeze, it will hardly bear a peny weight; let it alone a little longer, and it will bear a shilling, then a pound weight, then a man, then a horse, then cart and load and all. As the cloud which Elijahs servant saw, was at first no bigger then a mans hand, but afterwards it spread till it covered the Heavens. Peter first denyeth his Master, then sweareth, then curseth, and forsweareth himself. Cain first habours envi∣ous thoughs of his brother, then murdereth him in his heart, then kills him with his hand, then quarrelleth with God and despaireth. There is no staying when we are once down the Hill, till we come to the bottom; If this Giant of sin get in but a limb, he will quickly get in his whole body. Wanton thoughts, if not stifled, bring forth actual uncleanness. Sin is like water, if we give it the least way, run it will in spight of us. If we get not the conquest over it in its infancy, we shall not overcome it when it is brought to maturity. He that cannot put out a spark, will be much more unable to put out a flame. The smallest of these twigs, will prove thorny bushes, if not timely stubbed up. The Horse must be broken when a Colt, and the Lion tamed when a Whelp; Its best to deal with sin, as Iocasta with Oedipus, to cast it forth in its infancy. The Israelite must dash these Ba∣bylonian Infants, against the wall, if he would be a blessed man, Isa. 13.18. The Christian that check∣eth
and curbeth sin when it first appeareth, doth as David to the Philistine, wound it in the forehead, and so slayeth it certainly. As the Snail by little and little creepeth up from the root of the tree to the top, consuming the leaves as it goeth, and leaving nothing behind it but filth and slime: So sin gra∣dually infecteth the whole man. This poison if not presently vomited up, as soon as taken down, flieth to, and destroyeth the vitals. The Apostle calleth it a Canker, and truly so it is in regard of its spread∣ing nature, both as to persons, from one man to a∣nother, and to parts, from one faculty of the soul and member of the body to another. How dread∣ful was the effect of a few boys joyning with Mas∣sianello in Naples, anno 1647. whom the officers and people laughed and jeered at, instead of subduing! What murders, and burning Palaces and Churches did ensue and arise from so contemptible means! Therefore as wise Princes will be heedful to suppress riots, and petty insurrections, knowing that if they be let alone they will break out into open rebelli∣on, and cause much bloodshed and mischeif: So Reader, do thou stifle and kill sin in the womb, be∣fore it be quick, lest thou like the young Serpents, if brought forth, it tear out thy bowels, and its birth cause thy death. Twefthly, If thou wouldst exercise thy self to godliness, study the knowledge of God. Tis igno∣rance of God, that is the original of all sin. Did men know the sad fruits of his fury, they durst not by sin provoke him. Did men know the sweetness of his favour, they would do, they would suffer any
thing to please him. It is in the mist of ignorance that they lose their way, and wander from him who is the chiefest good. The Devil is bound in chains of darkness, and so are all his Chil∣dren. They who know God most, love him most, and fear him most, and trust him most. It is life (spi∣tual, and the seed of life) eternal, to know thee the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent, Joh. 17. 3. All godliness, all grace, is semi∣nally in the knowledge of God, and floweth from it. They who with open face behold the Lord, though but as in a glass, are changed into his image, from glory to glory; from one degree of grace to another,  Cor. 3. 18. They who know the infiniteness, and immensity of his being, cannot but despise all things for him, esteem all things as nothing to him, as nothing without him, look on the whole creation, as less then nothing in comparison of him. Ah what ad∣miring, reverent thoughts of that being of beings, of him whose name is, I am, have they who lanch a little (for 'tis but a little that they can here) in∣to this Ocean! All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then nothing and va∣nity; they canno but desire and labour to enjoy so boundless a portion. They who know the power of God, cannot but fear him, and stand in awe of his presence and threatnings; They fear him who is able to cast soul and body into hell,Mat. 10. 28. Heb. 12. 27, 28. They will de∣pend on him, because there is no want which the Almighty cannot supply, no weakness which he
cannot remove, no danger which he cannot pre∣vent or support in. Acquaintance with him who is mighty in strength, makes the Christian reso∣lute in Gods cause, and as bold as a Lion at his call and command. They who know the eternity of God, will chuse him before temporal vanities; What are the plea∣sures of sin for a season in his eye, who seeth the pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore? What are the honours on earth, to him who knoweth the eternal weight of glory? What are temporal re∣lations, in comparison of the everlasting Father? Nay, what is his natural life to eternal life? no good is little that is eternal; how great then is the infinite and eternal God? They who know the wisdom of God, will submit to his Providences, and acquiesce in all his dispen∣sations. He is wise in heart, his understanding is infinite, and he knoweth what is best for thee and me and all others, and therefore there is all the reason of the world, why I should rest in his will and be satisfied in his pleasure. It is the Lord (saith the soul in his greatest afflictions) who is infinite in wisdom, and knoweth what will do me most good) Let him do what seemeth good in his eyes. They who know the faithfulness of God, will credit his word, and make him the object of their Hope and Faith; They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psa. 9. 10. His truth comman∣deth our trust. We will rely on faithful men, who will not lye, but the Christian seeth infinitely more reason to rely on the faithful God who cannot lye.
They who know the mercy and love, and goodness of God, will love, and admire, and trust, and praise him. The knowledge of his love to us, will call out our love to him, as one that deserves it, being infinitely amiable in himself, and the more deser∣ving of our love, for his love to such loathsom ones as we are. It will cause us to rely on him; for in∣finite love, joyned with infinite strength and faith∣fulness, will not, cannot deceive us. It will help us to see the odious nature of sin, in that it is an abuse of infinite love; The goodness of God will lead the soul to repentance. They who know the holiness of God, will sanctifie him in their approaches to him, and walk humbly and watchfully with him. They know that sin is loathsom to him, because contrary to his holy na∣ture, and therefore they hate it; they know that holiness is lovely, as it is his Image and Excellency, and therefore they follow after it. They are up∣right, and serious, and zealous, and humble, and re∣verent in their holy performances, because therein they have to do with such a holy God. They who know the anger of God, will stand in awe and not sin; They know that God is not to be mocked; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, for our God is a consuming fire. They know his fury is terrible, intolerable; none can abide it, no sinner can avoid it; therefore they hate sin, the object of it, and flie to Christ, who delivereth from it. O what a work, a gracious sanctifying work doth the knowledge of God make in the soul! It makes the understanding to esteem him
above all, the will to chose him before all, the af∣fections to desire him, to delight in him more then all; the whole man, to seek him, to serve him, to honour and praise him beyond all in Heaven and earth. What is the reason that God is so much loved, admired, and worshipped, and glo∣rified in his Church, when all the World besides despise him, but this, In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel! Psa. 76. 1. O Reader, be confident of this; the more thou knowest of the excellencies of God, the more thou wilt prize his Son, submit to his spirit, crucifie the flesh, contemn the world, fear to offend him, study to please him; the more holy thou wilt be in all manner of conversation. Hence the main work of Christs prophetical office was to reveal God to the world. And the Devils great work is to keep men from this knowledge of God, knowing that it will tend so exceedingly to their sanctification and holiness, and to the overthrow of his interest. The Miller mufleth and blindeth his Horse that draweth his Mill, and thereby keeps him at his round, decei∣ving him, in making him to think he goeth for∣ward. The first work of the Philistines was, to put out Sampsons eyes, and then they made him grind at their Mill and make them sport. The Eagle (saith Pliny, Nat. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 20.) before he setteth upon the Hart, rolleth himself in the Sand, and then flyeth at the Staggs head, and by fluttering his wings, so dustieth his eyes, that he can see nothing, and then striketh him with his Talons where he listeth. Satan darkneth mens un∣derstandings,
and thereby commandeth their wills and affections, and destroyeth the whole man; If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, whom the God of this world hath blinded their minds, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5. When men are spoken in Scripture to be vicious and prophane, they are onely said not to know the Lord, and there is no knowledge of God in the land, Ier 4 22. Hos. 4 1. and when God undertakes in his Covenant of Grace to sanctifie and make men holy, he is said to put his knowledge in their hearts, and his promise is, They shall all know me from the least to the greatest, Heb. 10. Ier. 31.34. And they that would grow in grace, are commanded in order thereunto to grow in knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Ignorance is the mother of all irreligion, of all atheism, Ephes. 4. 18. They are alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts. As Owles, sinners may see in the night of this world, have some know∣ledge in worldly affairs, but they cannot see in the day; are ignorant of spiritual, of heavenly things. Sin, like the pestilence David speaks of, walketh in the dark, Psa. 91.5. And Satan is the enemy that soweth his tares by night. This is one cause why sin is called a work of darkness; It is from that darkness which is in mens understandings, that they turn their backs upon God, and run upon their own eternal ruines. It were impossible for the rational creature to be so desperately mad as to play with the wrath of God, and slight the love of God, to neglect his mer∣cy
and despise his justice, if they did but know God. When Princes go incognits, in a disguise, and ae unknown, then they are disesteemed. Hence they who are obstinately prophane and resolved on wickedness say unto God, Depart from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21. 14. The hooded Hawk, that seeth not the Partridge, will never flye after it. The Israelites pitched in Mith∣kah, which signifieth sweetness, before they remo∣ved to Cashmonah, which signifieth swiftness. They onely who know the sweetness of God, will flye to him with swiftness; Ignoti nulla cupido. He who knoweth the Allsufficiency of God, will never turn to the Creature; even as the Bee, if it did not find honey enough in one flower, would never hasten to another. Those that are ignorant of God, abound in all manner of Atheism and wickedness. The Families which know not God, will not call on his name. There is no truth, no mercy; but lying and stealing, and swearing, and killing, where there is no know∣ledge of God, Hos. 4. 1, 2. 'Tis no wonder to see blind men stumble and fall, and break their limbs. I do not marvail to see ignorant men, who know not God, to live without him, to turn him out of their hearts and houses, as if they had no depen∣dance on him, or ingagements to him. Whence is it that men are regardless of their souls and eternal estates, that they dance over the unquenchable lake, and are merry and jovial at the very brink of destruction, that they despise the God that made them, preserveth them, bought them, and hath them in his hands, and at his
mercy every moment, that they slight his Son, his Spirit, his Law, his Love, his wrath, his promises of eternal life, as if they were things of no value, and rather fit to be trampled on then esteemed; that they can lye down and sleep, and rise up and eat, and dink, and follow their sports and pleasures, and laugh and sing under the guilt of sin, and curse of the Law, and infinite wrath of the Lord, but their ignorance of God? Ah did they but know his ho∣liness, his Jealousie, his Power, his Justice, they they would soner undergo any misery that men could inflict on them, then incur his anger, or pro∣voke him to jealousie; they would never neglect is Worship, or put him off with a few heartless prayers; Ludentes cum Deo ut pueri cum suis puppis, as Calvin hath it, Playing with him as children with their babies, when they come immediately to his pre∣sence, and pretend to seek his face. The holy times under the Gospel wherein the people of God shold be of one heat, are spoken of as proceeding from this cause; The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as waters cover the sea, Isa. 11.9. The perfection of grace and holiness in heaven will be the effect in part of this know∣ledge of God; When we shall see him (perfectly) we shall be (perfectly) like him, 1 Ioh. 3.2. Reader, be perswaded therefore to study this knowledge of God; think no labour too much for it pray, and read, and hear, and confer, and mourn that thou mayst know God. Beleive it, it is a jewel that will pay thee well for all thy pains; Encline thine ear unto wisdome, and apply thy heart unto un∣derstanding. Yea, if thou cryest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding. If thou seekest her as silver and searchest for her as for hid trea∣sures; Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. For the Lord giveth wisdom, and out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding, Prov. 2. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Did men but spend that time and strength about the knowledge of God, which they spend in endeavou∣ring to raise their families, and advance their parties and interest, and to suppress them that in their ap∣prehensions stand in their way; we should quickly have a Nation as famous for peace, and love, and holiness, as now it is notorious for divisions and prophaness. CHAP. XIII. Means whereby Christians may exercise themselves to Godliness. A contented Spirit; Avoiding those things that hinder Godliness. THirteenthly, If thou woulst exercise thy self to Godliness, Labour to get a contented frame of heart. A setled fixed frm of heart as to all outward occurrences, is like Ballast to a Ship, which will help it to sail trim in all waters; whereas a discontented spirit is as a light smal boat in the Ocean, tossed about with every blast, and al∣ways in danger of drowning. I doubt not but the
great Apostles diligence to learn this lesson perfect∣ly; I have learned in what state soever I am to be con∣tented; I know how to be abasd, and how to abound, Philip. 4. 12. was a special means of his extraordi∣nary growth, and proficiency in grace. It is ge∣nerally observed that peevish persons whom nothing pleaseth, are usually lean and thin in their bodies; but those who are of chearful tempers, and not overmuch troubled with any disasters, are thriving and healthful. The discontented soul, whom evey heat or cold above ordinary puts into a fright or fever, will rather decline then increase in his spiri∣tual health; but the Christian who is ever chearful in his God and Saviour, and lives about these lower things as one indifferent about them, will never be hindered by them in his work of holiness. As a sickly man is hindered in his journey by every storm, and ready to run to an House or stand under an Hedge at every shower; so is a discontented person, ready to turn aside or stand still at every unexpected providence; when a contented man like a lusty re∣solved travellar, keeps on his course whatsoever weather comes. Godliness requires a contented mind to grow in, 1 Tim. 6. 6. It is said of the Pelican that she is caught by the Shephards in this manner: They lay fire not far from her nest, which she finding and fearing the danger of her young, seeks to blow out with her wings, so long till she burns her self, and makes her self a prey out of foolish pity to her young. So many men out of unwise pity to their relations and possessions, when they are at any time in danger for want of this contented spirit and qiet submission to infinite wisdom, trouble them∣selves
so much, and so long about them, till they make themselves a prey to Satan, and no whit pre∣serve or secure those persons or things about which they are so immoderately anxious and sollicitous. Whilst we are in this world, we must expect various winds, some sharp, some warm, some nipping, some refreshing, some with us, some a∣gainst us, and unless we are prepared for all by an holy pliableness, we shall be injured by every one; Every strong wind, whether with us, or against us, will be ready to overturn us, if we want this ballast. There is no condition in this life so blessed, as to afford the perfection of content; and yet there is no estate in this life so wretched, but a Christian may be contented with it. If thou hast as much as thou wantest, thou hast as much as in reason thou desirest, and therefore hast cause to be contented. The way to true Riches, saith Plato, is not to in∣crease our heaps, but to diminish the covetousness of our hearts. It were well for the world, saith ano∣ther, if there were no Gold in it; but since its the Fountain whence all things flow, its to be desired, but onely as a pass to travail to our journeys end without begging. Every man is rich, or may be so, if he will equal his mind to his estate, and be but poor in his desires; He that hath most, wants somthing, as Haman, when he had the commander of one hundred and twenty Provinces at command; He that hath least, wants nothing, if he want not a contented spirit. He that can bring his heart to an even poize in all providences, will avoid many temptations,
and escape many snares in which others are entan∣gled. The want of this renders many a mans life as unserviceable to God, as uncomfortable to him∣self. The discontented person like the Sea, is sel∣dom seen without storms and tempests; A small mattr puts him out of order and joynt, and so un∣fits him for spiritual actions. As hot Iron, the smal∣lest drop sets him a hissing, like a rufled skein of silk, every way taken to compose him, entangleth him. Discontent like Ink poured into a Bottle of Water, turns all into blackness; O Frind, beware of it. It hinders from praying; A discontented man will rather poure out his passions then any sober pray∣ers, before the Lord. It hinders examining our selves; Though quiet and calm waters will like a glass, if we look into it, shew us the image and likeness of our selves, yet troubled and muddy waters will make no such representation. Though the heart when calm and contented,Joh. 14. 27. Psa. 55. 45. may shew us the face and features of our souls, yet if muddied by discontent they can∣not do it. It hinders from hearing; The noise of passion drowns the voice of the Preacher. Men must with meekness receive the ingrafted word, if they de∣sire it should save their souls, Iam. 1. When a Fountain is troubled, there can no Water be drawn out of it, but what is filthy and unsavoury; When a person is discontented, all his duties are distaseful and unacceptable to God. Therefore Christ more then once diswads his Dis∣ciples from it; Let not your hearts be troubled; Let
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid, Joh. 14. 1, 27. Diogenes resolved, since many evils would befal him, to keep himself steady in all; he would op∣pose Resolution to Fortune, Nature to the Law, his Reason to his Affections; But the Christian hath a better guide, and better grounds for con∣tentedness. There be several thoughts which may quiet and compose the heart in all occurents. 1. That Infinite wisdom ordaineth whatsoever befalleth me, and the present condition that I am in, is ever best for me. If a greater portion of outward good things, had been good for me, I had had it; my Father is not so careless of his Children, as to deny them any thing that is good for them, and if it be not good for me, why should I defire it? He acteth without reason, as well as without religion, who craveth what is hurtful to him. If my condition were cut out by the will of malicious men, I might have some ground of grumbling; but when its cut out by the infinite wisdom of a gracious God, I have not the least cause of discontent. I take it ill if my Children be not satisfied with what food and rai∣ment I think fitten for them; and may not God much more take it ill at my hands, if I sit not down quietly with his allowance, be it more or less? 2. That the smallest mercy is above my merits; If my condition be not so good s  desire, yet it is better then I deserve; If my estate be not so flourishing as I would it should be, it is not so
bad as I know it might have been; Beggars must not be chusers; They who have nothing but of charity and almes, must be satisfied with a bare allowance, and contentedly be at anothers dispo∣sal; Why doth living man complain? Lam. 3. 39. Man, a reasonable creature, and complain against his Maker! Living man complain, when the most miserable estate out of Hell is a mercy to him! 3. That be our estate as low as it will, it is better then we brought with us into the world. Some give us this reason, why man (when none besides of the visible creatures) is born naked, weeping, helpless, bt to teach him contentedness. Have I any food? I brought none with me; Is my gar∣ment course and thin? I was born naked; Am I blest with any comforts? I came into the World without any; Naked came I into the world, and naked shall I go out of the world; The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord. 4. That a better condition might and would make me worse; If I were mounted high in the world, I should be like the Flag at the top of the Mast, more liable to storms and winds. The full purse invites the Theif, and perhaps may occasion a stab; when the empty pocket is secure, and the poor man may travail the road without any such danger. Low shrubs escape many a cold blast, with which tall trees are assaulted; They have no changes, therefore they fear not God, Psa. 55. 7. Atalanta lost the wager she ran for, by gathering up the Golden Apples which Hippomenes for that purpose had thrown in her way.
5. That others who are better then I and more ho∣ly, are worse for this world, and suffer more hardships. In spiritual things look on those above thee, that by an honest emulation thou mayst reform and amend; but in temporal things look on those below thee, that thou mayst not complain or murmur. How many are in fetters, wandring up and down from house and home, set upon the wrack of diseases, and have an ounce of misery for every dram which thou hast? stay Sirs, said the wise Hary in the Fable, let our estate content us, for as we run from some; so others run from us. 6. That all shall work for my good. The Saint is sure to thrive by his sufferiugs; When Children meet with Nuts, or Apples, or Primroses in their way, those are oftimes occasions to make them loyter in their errands, incur their Parents anger, and sometime their late return finds the door shut against them; when such as meet with danger make the more haste, and their speed procureth them the greater welcome. They who meet with pleasures are apt to loyter; they who meet with miseries make the more haste, and shall find the better chear. The Christian hath a promise, and the very Godhead of the Almighty engaged for its performance: We know that all things shall work together for good to them that love God, to them that are called according to his purpose, Rom. 8. 28. Why should not the Christian with an holy resolution hold a steady course in all weathers, and though he be forced with cross winds to shift his sails and catch at side winds, yet wisely steer and keep on his course by the Cape of good hope, when he may be certain that
every wind that bloweth shall help him forward to his eternal joyful Haven. Though we cannot see how some passages of Gods providence, as persecu∣tion, opprossion, loss of relations or estates, sickness or disgrace, should do otherwise then hurt and in∣jure us; and are ready to darken counsel by words without knowledge, and to say as Iacob, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, all these are against me. Chil∣dren are not, Honours are not, Riches are not, Liber∣ty is not; All these are against me. But Christ may say to us of such severe dispensations, as once to Peter; What I do thou knowest not now, but shalt know hereafter. The issue will prove a truth in Gods promises, and the conclusion will speak what was in the womb of the promises. I am confident when God sendeth afflictions, they are at that season more fit for me then outward mercies; and though at pre∣sent I am ready to blaspheme, yet when I find the fruit of them in being thereby partaker of his ho∣liness I bless him for them. A Lacedaemonian wo∣man, when Sparta had got the day in a battel, could not onely submit but rejoyce though her five Sons were slain in the fight. If I get the victory over one sin, I have cause to rejoyce, though it cost me some outward comforts. 7. That the more I repine the worse I make my con∣dition. A discontented man like one in a barrel of Pikes, which way soever he turns he finds some∣thing that pricks, he is best at ease when he lieth still. Murmuring turns whips into Scorpions, and makes that which would be but as a little Finger, heavier then weighty loynes. They who by an even poize may sit safe in a Boat when the waters are
rough, by rising up or stirring, are drowned. Pas∣sions like rain or mist to the best firrs, breed ver∣mine in the soul. Because this man hath not what his lust craveth, he enjoyeth not what God hath given him; but like an Asse feedeth on hearbs, whilst he carrieth better food on his back for others. A single mischief by discontent is made double. The Prisoner galls his legs by striving with his fetters. 8. The examples of others may have some preva∣lency with us; Abraham, Moses, Paul were emi¦nent for this grace. Many Heathen who were ignorant of the wis∣dome, goodness, and faithfullness of God, yet upon principles of morality were constant and even in their behaviours, not changing their countenances with the change of their fortunes and conditions, but bringing their mind to their estates, when they could not bring their estates to their minds. Xantippe said of Socrates that she always found him returning home (though he often met with affronts and abusive language abroad) with the same face and carriage with which he went out. Furius Camillus was ever like him∣self, neither by obtaining the dictatourship in∣flamed with arrogancy, nor being banished his Country fick with melancholy. The whole body of Rome after their disaster at Canna, where their Consul was slain, and the flower of their Gentry and Souldiery cut off by Hannibal; when the whole world did ring their Passing-bell, and judged their Fortune dying and desperate, were even then He∣roick in their carraiage, and acted nothing unwor∣thy
their former greatness. In their Asian enter∣prise they proposed before the battel conditions to Antiochus as if they had conquered him, and after the ight and victory offered him the same terms as if they had not conquered. Abdolomius a poor Gardine, though of the Kings stock, when advanced by Alexander to be King of Zidon, and asked by him how it was possible for him to endure his poverty with contentedness; an∣swered, I pray the gods I may continue the govern∣ment of this Kingdom with the like mind; for those hands were sufficient for me to live by, and as I had nothing so I wanted nothing. 9. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. He doth thee no wrong, he can∣not do thee any wrong, now why shouldst thou complain when not injured? Its unreasonable to murmur when a man hath right done him. 10. God is gracious and good in all his dealings with thee. If thine estate be but little, yet that little with the fear of the Lord is better then the possessions of many wicked men, Psal. 37. A penny which is the earnest of some great bargain, is another manner of thing then an ordinary penny, and more worth then many pounds, being given and received un∣der another notion Thy little is an earnest of in∣fiitely more then thou canst imagine, and there∣fore more precious then others thousands. A din∣ner of hearbs with the love of thy God, in infinite∣ly more elegible then the stalled Oxen of the wick∣ed, and his wrath therewith. Who would desire Eglons present with the dagger; Siserahs milk with
the nail, and hammer; and Hamans banquet with the gallows, that trod upon the heels of it? True∣ly such is the riches of every wicked man. The smallness of thy temporal, may increase thy spiritual estate. If God recompence thy want of earthly, with a supply of heavenly riches, thou art no loser. Nicepsorus tells us of one Cyrus a Courtier, in the time of Theodosius the younger, who through the envious occupation of some favourites being spoiled of his goods, of a Pagan became a Chri∣stian, and of a Christian a Minister of Christ. En∣doxia the daughter of a Philosopher in Athens, being cast out of her Fathers house by unkind bre∣thren, and coming to Constantinople to beseech Theodosius to right a poor Orphan, found such fa∣vour in his eyes, that he made her his Queen. Affliction is the way to honour with men, to more holiness from God; when Prosperity causeth our fall both into sin and misery. He holds the gar∣ments of his godliness fast in a boysterous wind, who would lay it off in a Sunny day. Lastly, If thou woudst exercise thy self to god∣liness, take heed of those things that will hinder thee therein. As if a man would have his trees to thrive, he must not onely open the earth some∣times, and mind its watering, but also lop off su∣perfluous branches; and as a Gardiner if he would have his hearbs and flowers to flourish, must be sure to keep his Banks and Beds well weeded, as well as dunged or watered; so if thou wouldst thrive and flourish in godliness, ere is a necessi∣ty of avoiding what is hurful to it, as well as of using what is helpful.
There be several things which will keep a Chri∣stian from the exercise of his holy calling, some of which I shall but briefly name, having had occa∣sion to speak of others, and also to these in other Chapters. 1. Avoid evil company. Wicked persons delight to have or to make fellows. Hence we find in Scripture that they go as the unclean beasts into the Arke in pairs; Adam and Eve, Simeon and Le∣vi, Ammon and Ionadab, Hymeneus and Alexander, Phygellus and Hermogenes, Ananias and Saphira. Can a man take fire in his bosome and not be burned? Ex∣pect not that the flowers of thy graces should flourish, unless these weeds be removed from them. He that walketh in the rain must expect to be wet, he that walketh in the Sun must ex∣pect to be tanned, and he that walks among pol∣luting persons must expect to be polluted. 2. Take heed of idleness. An idle man is like an heap of dry straw, quickly fired by the sparkes of Satans temptations, Prov. 28. 19. 1 Tim. 5. 13. 2 Thess. 3. 10, 11. Whist the Oyster lieth gaping against the Sun, he is devoured by the Crabfish. Whilst the Chri∣stian lieth lazing on the bed of idleness, he is a prey to Satan. The purest river water if it stand still in a vessel, will become unsavoury. The best corn if not stird will be musty. As the Caterpillar consumeth the leaf, and the Canker the rose, so will idleness thy godliness, Ezek. 6. 49. A men in war lying in the field, if they be sloth∣ful and lie lazing on the ground, must expect to
be a prey to their enemies. The Amalekites found this by experience; the sluggard will rather be kild, then take the pains to defend himself. A slothful man, who will not imploy his stock, can∣not expect to improve his stock. The diligent hand maketh rich in goods and in grace. 3. Love not the World; The thornes of the world hinder the growth of the good seed of grace. This worlds best, are the other worlds worst hus∣bands. Its hard for the Periwinckle in the Sea to swim, because of the house on her back; Its im∣possible for them to swim Heaven-ward, who have the world not on their backs, but in their hearts. The more thou delightest in this world, the more thou wilt neglect the other world. He who is taken with, and fond of an Harlot, will quickly abate in his love to, nay cast off his-honest wife. The Palm tree is least at the bottom, and the higher it groweth, the thicker and greater it is, contrary to all other trees. The higher a Christian mounts in his affections, and the more hea∣venly he is, the more he wil thrive in Christianity. The Child cannot thrive that feedeth on Dirt; the more a man loveh the earth, the lesse he will do or suffer for heaven; Such Esaus will sell the birthrigh for a mess of pottage; such Gehezies will dishonour and beie their Master for a talent of silver; Such Achans will destroy themselves and families, and trouble a whole Israel for a wedge of gold; Such Iudasses will sell their Lord and Saviour for a goodly price, Thirty pieces; For a piece of a Bread such a one will transgresse. The fire which breaks out of this bramble, devours the Cedars of Lebanon.
The Athenians did set up a pillar, wherein they published him to be an enemy to their City, who should bring gold out of Media, as an instrument to corrupt them. Inordinate love of creatures, is a canker which in time will eat up the very life of godliness. Reader, If thou art risen with Christ, seek those things that are above where Christ is. It is recorded by divers Historians, both of the East and West Indians, and some Blackamoors in Guinea be∣tween both, that many subjects willingly dye with their Princes, and Women with their Husbands; that some Men give their Wives, others their Chil∣dren, others their Servants to be buried alive in the Grave, with their Kings to serve him (as they conceit) in the other world; that some Women cast themelves into the fire, in which the dead bo∣dies of their Husbands are consumed. If those can cast away and contemn the world, and all things in it, for the love of a poor wretched creature; what a shame is it to Christians, if the love of Jesus Christ their Head, their Prince, their Husband do not mortifie them to the world, and make them dispise all in it, to injoy him whilst they live, and to be with him where he is when they dye? 4. Allow thy self in o known sin; This like a thief used to the shop, which will steal away all thy gains, and keep thee assuredly from thriving in thy heavenly calling. There is no possibility of making Religion thy business, without the gracious concurrence of the holy Spirit; he it is that must lay the foundation, rear up the building, and per∣fect what he beginneth, but thou canst not expect his company or assistance, if thou harbourest any
corruption in thy heart; though this Dove may flye to thee, desirous to make its abode with thee, as the Dove went of out the Ark, yet if it behold the earth under water, thy heart in any way of wickedness, it will return again whence it came; Doves will lye clean or be gone. Bees will not con∣tinue in a stinking or impure Hive, therefore those that would not loose them, prepare the stools where they set them with perfumes and sweet-smelling boughs, lest ill savours force them to for∣sake their stations. Thus saith Chrysostom, deals the holy spirit; Our souls are the hives, which if per∣fumed with grace, invite his presence, but if pol∣luted with any known sin, provoke him to depart. O let there not be any way of wickedness in thee, if thou wouldst run the way of Gods commandments. CHAP. XIV. Motives inciting Christians to exercise themselves to Godliness. The Vanity of other exercises; The brevity of mans life; The Patterns of others. THirdly, I shall annex some Motives to quicken thee to exercise thy self to godliness, and then conclude the Treatise. First, Consider, The vanity of all other exercises
and labours; The wise man begins his Ecclesiastes with Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity; and after a large and exact demonstration thereof makes this use, and ends his book with, Hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God and keep his com∣mandements, for this is the whole duty of man. It may be Reader, thou takest much pains, and spendest much time, thou risest early, and sittest up late, and wastest thy body, and wear∣est out thy strength, and toylest, and moylest about the things of this life; but alass, to what purpose? to what profit? The foot of all thy ac∣compts, when at the end of thy life the total comes to be summed up, will be onely Ciphers, and signifie nothing; Thou workest all this while at the labour in vain; like the Disciples, thou fishest all night and catchest nothing; thou spen∣dest thy strength for what is not bread, and thy la∣bour for what will not satisfie; If the word of truth, and the God for whom it is impossible to lye, may be beleived, all the things of this life separated from godliness, are lying vanities, bro∣ken cisternes, ashes, lyes, wind, vanity of vanities, and things of naught, Joh. 2. 8. Ier. 2. 13. 1. Sam. 12. 21. Hos. 10. 13. and 12. 1. Eccles. 1. 2. Hab. 2. 13. It is Chrysostoms saying, that if he had been to Preach to all the world, and could so have spoken that all should have heard him, he would have chosen that Text; O mortal men, how long will ye love vanity, and follow after leasing! Demo¦critus gave that for the reason of his continual laughter, which occasioned his Country-men to look on him as distracted; That when he beheld
the labour and diligence, the running and riding, the sweating and painting; nay, the fighting and killing of men to get one above another, and to heap up a fading treasure, he could not but de∣ride their folly. Indeed though the Heathen laughed at the ri∣diculousness of such persons, the sensible Christian seeth great cause to weep at the emptiness and unprofitablenss of such actions, and the madness of the Agents. Cyprian advised his friend Donatus to suppose himself at the top of the highest moun∣tain, and thence to behold the tumults and chances of this wavering world, and told him that then he could not but either laugh at it, or pity it. Its no such wonder that brutish horses should leave good provender to feed on litter, as some Jades do; but that men who are indued with reasonable souls, that seeming Christians, who have a Table spread before them with hidden Manna, with Angels food, with meat indeed, and drink indeed, withal te dainties of Heaven, should neglect these and feed on ashes, may well be matter both of admiration and lamentation. The holy Ghost tells such, that they follow after vain things which cannot profit them, 1 Sam. 12. 21. All outward things are like an olive or date stone hard to crack or cleave, but when with much labour they are opened, they are nothing worth. The Wise Moralist speaking of such laborious loyterers as work hard for nothing, compares them to such as spend many months to learn to write with their feet, and when they have learned it,
are never the Better for it. Caesar compares them to such as fish for gudgeons with a golden hook, hazard more then the fish when taken are worth. Life is precious, health, and strength, and time are precious; because all these have a relation to an eternal estate; now how foolish is he that wast∣eth them upon toys and trifles, and neglecteth provision for the other world? Surely every man walketh in a vain shew, surely they are disquieted in vain, Psal. 39. 6. Observe Rearder, how dearly men pay for their guilded nothings, for their earthen pot∣sherds coverd with silver dross; they walk up and down, run hither and thither, disquiet themselves with cares and fears, and heart piercing frights and vexations for a vain shew; The people labour in the fire, and weary themselves for very vanity, Habbak. 2. 13. Their work is hot and hard, they labour in the fire, even to lassitude and weariness. But is it about the noble concerments of their immortal souls? Is it that their sins may be pardoned, the vitiosity of their natures healed, and that their souls may be fitted for the heavenly mansions? No, it is for very vanity. For that which will not afford them the least good, or make them in any respect better, or blessed. Alas, how much below, nay contrary to reason doth man act, to cast away pearls upon swine, gold upon dross, diamonds upon dirt, to throw away his time and seasons of grace, which are more worth then rubies, then all riches, upon that which is vanity and vexation of spirit! It was a worthy check, which Cineas the Ora∣tour gave to the monstrous Ambition of Pyrrhus;
When that King of Epyrus was solicited by the Tarentines and other people in Italy, to become the head of their league against the Romans; whilst he was musing upon that affair, his favou∣rite Cineas came into his presence, and perceiving the King in a study, desires the knowledge of his thoughts; Pyrrhus courteously opens his heart to him, and asketh his advice whether he were best to accept of that honourable offer or no; but resol∣ving before to joyn with them, and promised him self success; The Oratour answerd him, That in case he should joyn with them and prevail, What would he then do? Pyrrhus told him, Then Sardi∣nia and Sicily will be at my command. Cineas con∣sented and replied, What then will you do? Pyrrhus told him, Then Africa will soon be conquered. Ci∣neas asked, What then will you do? Then said Pyrr∣hus, Grecia will yield to my victorious armes. Ci∣neas continued, When Grecia is brought under what will you do next? The King perceiving the inten∣tion of his favourite, replied smiling, Then Cineas We will sit still rest our selves and be merry. That said Cineas you may do presently without any bloody fight or barbarous outragious acts, without tiresome marches, pinching quarters, tormenting fears of losing the day without any hazard or danger to your self or others. Truly Reader, I may tell thee, if thou art one that busiest thy self about a throng of worldly businesses, and crowdest thy mind and heart with projects and designs, to increase thy heaps, and advance thy name, and provide for thy children, and procure thy self a comfortable subsistance for a few days, that after all thy care, and trouble,
and restlesness, and vexation, and hazards, and dangers, thou wilt be never the better: Thou wilt, but like them that spend their time, and money, and thoughts for the Phylosophers stone, reap thy labour for thy pains, and find all unpro∣fitable. Felix Platerus is of opinion, that all Al∣chymists are mad, in being so laborious for no∣thing. May I not say to thee truly concerning thy pains and time, what Iudas did falsly concerning the Oyntment, To what purpose is this Waste? To what purpose is thy waste of time, and strength, and health? Alas, what profit will all thy pains bring thee in? The Vanity of other labours will appear in that all other things are Unsuitable, Deceitful, Unsa∣tisfying, Vexatious and Uncertain. 1. Vnsuitable to thy soul. Gold is unsuitable to hunger, food to the sick, honour to the weary; so are all the comforts of this life to thy soul. What is an earthly treasure to the poor in spirit? what is the best Physick garden to a wounded conscience? what are all the dainties on the table of the Crea∣tion, to one that is hungry and thirsty after the righteousness of Christ, and the grace? of the Spirit? Bodily things are not suitable to our spirits, nor temporal substance to an immortal soul. The fat∣test increase of the earth, is from the excrements of beasts, which must needs be far from answering the nature of an heaven born spirit. 2. Deceitful. As Iael to Sisera, the world brings forth meat to us in a lovdly dish, and saith, Come in my Lord turn in; but she puts her hand to
the nail, and her right hand to the Work-mans hammer; with the hammer she smites foolish Sise∣ra's that trust her, she smites off their heads after she hath pierced their temples. It serveth its great∣est darlings in their extremity, as Plutarch report∣eth Pompey to have served Cicero; who when Ci∣cero fled to him in his misery for succour, fled out at a back door, and left him to the mercy of his ene∣mies. The world next mans heart is the greatest cheat and impostour in the world. Like an Host it welcomes us in our Inns with smiles and em∣braces, but kills us in our Beds when we suspect no such matter. As the wiseman wisheth them to be moderate and abstinent at a full table, and to put a knife to thy throat, for they are deceitful meat; so I may say of all the dainties and deli∣cates of the Creation, they are deceitful meat, pleasant but poyson. Like the Bramble the world promiseth us protection and refreshment under its shadow, if we will suffer it to be our King and reign over us, but a fire comes out of it to destroy the Ce∣dars of Lebanon; the souls of men. As the Plover to put a man out of his way, fly∣eth before him clapping her wings, that he mind∣ing the noise she makes, and following her, might not find her nest. So the world with its noise and clamours, its songs and musick, keeps men still in admiration of her, and hinders them from find∣ing out her cozenage and theivery. He that trust∣eth in vanity, vanity shall be his recompence, Job 15. 31. It is reported of one Oromazes that he had an inchanted egge, in which (as he boasted him∣self) he had incloed all the happiness of the world,
but being broken, nothing was found in it same wind. Truly, such is the worlds inside, wind, what∣ever appeararance it hath in the eye of a world∣ling; As the forbidden tree seemed to promise knowledge to our first Parents, but it took their knowledge from them, and brought in ignorance; so the world promiseth great matters, much joy and delight, but payeth us with the contrary sor∣row and horror. The worldlings voice is like that of the thief, Come let us lay wait, &c. We shall find all precious substance, and fill our houses with spoil; when alas instead of precious substance, they find perni∣cious shadows; and instead of filling their Houses with spoil, they fill their hearts with Gall and Worm-wood. The world as a cunning Curti∣zan flattereth and fawneth upon the young gal∣lant, to commit spiritual uncleanness with her, and then casteth him from the height of fancied de∣lights, into the depth of real horror, Proverbs 1. 10, 11. 3. Vnsatisfying; All these sublunary comforts are but skin-deep. As a mist they may wet the blade, but leave the root of the corn dry, they may cause a smile in the face, but cannot refresh the heart, or satisfie the soul; The Country-man thinks if he were at the top of some high hill, he should touch the Heavens, but when with much pains and sweat and toil, he is gotten thither, he finds himself de∣ceived. Men think if they could attain to such a degree of honour, or such a quantity of riches, or enjoy such brutish pleasures, then they should be satisfied, but they find their thirst after creatures, as immoderate as before; like men in a Feavor
or Dropsie, the more they drink, the more they desire; He that loveth silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loveth gold with increase; Many men have too much of the world, but no worldly man hath enough; His voice still is like the Horse-leech, Give, Give. Though he hath enough to destroy him, yet he hath not enough to content him. When the Parthians had taken Crassus the covetous Roman, who had robbed the Tem∣ple, they poured molted Gold into his mouth, saying, Drink now thy sill thou greedy wretch, of that which thou hast so long thirsted after. The Covetous Caliph of Babylon, when taken Prisoner, was set by the Great Cham of Tartary, in the midst of those treasures which he had wretchedly scraped together, and bidden eat his fill and satisfie him∣self, but amongst all his heaps of silver and gold, he was miserably famished. The soul will starve for all the food which the whole world afordeth it. A worldling is like Tantalus, who had Apples at his Lips, and water at his Chin, yet pined for want; In the midst of his sufficiency, he is in straights; If thou tryest the whole creation, and empannel∣lest every creature upon the Iury, to enquire where satisfaction is to be had, they will write Ignoramus upon the Bill; If thou askest the Sea, it will answer as concerning wisdom; The Sea saith, It is not in me; And the Depth saith, It is not in me; The Earth saith, It is not in me; Ask every worldly blessing particularly, and it will say, It is not in me. Thou mayst call and cry to them in thy need for comfort, as eagerly and earnestly as Rachel for children, and will each answer as Iacob did
here, Am I in Gods stead, that hath with-holden thy desire from thee? Or as the Angel to the wo∣men, Why seek ye the living among the dead? he is risen, he is not here; Am I a poor finite being in Gods stead to satisfie the vast desires of thy capacious soul? Why seekest thou living comforts, amongst dead creatures, it is gone, it is not here? The World entertains its best guests, no better then Caligula did his favourites, whom he invited to a feast, and when they were come, set golden dishes, and gol∣den cups empty before them, and told them, they were welcome, and he would have them feed hearti∣ly; All the trees in the garden of the creation, are like those trees which Solinus mentioneth in Assyria, the fruit whereof seemeth as yellow as gold, but being toucht, is as rotten as dirt. 4. The things of this world are vexatious. Their sting paineth far more then their honey pleaseth; They are like the Egyptian reed, which will not onely fail them that trust it, but also pierce them with splinters, and wound them deeply, sooner or later; They who will be rich, pierce themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Tim. 6. 9. Instead of satisfaction, thou wilt find vexation. The things of this world are not onely wind, for their vanity; but also thorns, for the vexation they cause. As when the blood is corrupted by a poisoned Arrow, it flieth to the heart, thinking to find some re∣medy there, but as soon as it toucheth the heart, it findeth death where it lookt for life. Thus men that are pressed with miseries, run to the world as their refuge, hoping to finde comfort and refreshment there; but alass, that doth in∣crease
their afflictions, and gives them rather mat∣ter of more mourning then any abatement of their sorrows. They who dive into the bottom of this Sea of the world to the hazard of their lives, in∣stead of the pearl of contentment and happiness, which they take such pains for, bring up nothing but their hands full of the sand and gravel of vex∣ation and anguish. All the ways of worldly de∣lights are strowed with nettles and briars, so that its greatest darlings are but like Bears robbing a Bee hive, that with much labour get a little honey, but are soundly stung for their pains. Therefore reason, much more religion may sound a retreat, and call us off from our eager pursuit of these ly∣ing vanities. Car on il ny aren a gaigner que des coups, volontiers il ny vapas: No man makes haste to the market where there is nothing to be bought but blows. 5. Vncertain. There is no constancy in outward comforts. As Brooks in Winter are carried with violence, and run with a mighty stream, flowing over with abundance of water on every side, when there is no want nor need of waters; but in the heat of Summer is dried up, when water is scanty and hard to be had. Such is the friend∣ship of the world; twill promise us many things when we have need of nothing; but when the wind turns and afflictions overtake us, it is like a tree withered for want of sap, and as a ditch with∣out any water to refresh us. When the sun of our prosperity is hid and coverd with a cloud, these shadows vanish and disappear. As leaves fall off in Autumn, so doth the friendship of creatures
fail men, when the sap of that maintenance which commanded their company, is withdrawn from them. Man in honour doth not abide, Psa. 49. As the rising Sun, coming into our Horizon like a Giant, ready to run his race, appearing to us with a full and glorious countenance, within an hours space is obscured with mists, or darkned with clouds; and however, if it meet with neither of these, when it arriveth at its noon-day height, it declines, descendeth, setteth, and is buried under us: So the Ambitious person sheweth himself to the world as chief favourite at Court, with much pomp and pride, by and by his honour is eclipsed, by the hate of the People, or frowns of his Prince, or envy of his fellow Courtiers; or if not, yet he dyeth, and carrieth nothing away, and his glory doth not descend after him. The like is evi∣dent of earthly treasures, they are soon gone, though not soon gotten. As a gallant ship, well riggd, trimmed, tackled, manned, with her top and top gallant, and her well spread sails, putteth out of harbour to the admiration of many spectators; but within a few days is split upon some dange∣rous rock, or swallowed up of some disasterous tempest, or taken by some ravenous Pyrate; so are this worlds goods on a sudden taken from their owners, or their owners from them. There is a hole in our strongest Bags, and rust in our choicest mettal. The Apostle calls riches un∣certain riches, and honour a fancy, and all the things of this world a fashion, 1 Tim. 6.17. Act. 24. 1 Cor. 7. 29. We are not certain to keep these birds in our yards whilst we live; for Riches make
themselves wings and flie away; but we are certain, if they do not leave us, that we shall leave them. We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we shall carry nothing out of the world. Reader, how unwise is he who neglecteth eter∣nal substance, for fading nothings! The Romans are recorded as guilty of much folly, that in their fight with Mithridates, they were so eager after their prey, that thereby they missed taking the King, who could not otherwise have escaped their hands. Ah! how foolish art thou, if through thy violent pursuit of a perishing world, thou shouldst lose an eternal kingdom! As Constantinople was lost through the covetousness of the Citizens; so is the crown of life and glory, the City that hath a foundation through mens eager endeavours after earthly things. The beloved Disciple doth not un∣fitly represent all the beauties, and glories, and ex∣cellencies of this lower world, under the name and notion of the Moon, which is ever in changes, and never looks upon us twice with the same face, and when it is at the fullest, is blemished with a dark spot, and next door to declining, Rev. 12. 1. An old man of Brasil discoursing with the Mer∣chants of France and Portugal, and perceiving the long and dangerous voyages which they took to get riches; asked them, If men did not dye with them as well as in other Countries? They told him, Yea. He asked them, who should possess their riches after their deaths? They said, their Chil∣dren if they had any; if not, their next kindred. Now, saith the old man, I perceive ye are fools; for
what necessity is there for you to pass the trouble∣some Seas wherein so many perish, and to run so many hazards? Is not the earth that brought you up, sufficient to bring up your children and kindred also? We have children and kindred that are like∣wise dear to us; but when we consider that the earth which nourisheth us is sufficient to nourish them, we rest satisfied. That busie Bee and great trouble-world Alex∣ander, had a tart yet wise reproof from Diogenes, when being taken with the Philosophers witty answers, he bade him ask what he would and he would give it him; The Philosopher desired him to grant him the smallest portiou of immortality. Alexander said, that is not in my power to give; Then saith the Philosopher, Why doth Alexander take such pains, and make such sir to conquer the world, when he cannot assure himself of one moment to enjoy it! Ah! why should thou neglect thy God and Christ, and soul and eternal good, and tyre and weary thy self night and day, for these un∣satisfying comforts which may leave thee to mor∣row, and of which thou canst not secure the en∣joyment of one moment! If God complain of wicked men, and threatens them with fierce wrath and fiery indignation, for selling the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, and would make them know that he valued his people at an higher price, and would not suffer them to be sold at such a rate: What will become of thee if thou shouldst sell thy soul, thy salvation, thy God, thy Christ, for silver, for vain, unsatisfying corruptible silver, when their value is above millions of worlds!
O take heed that thou dost not cast away thy self for such transitory trifles. Let not the Worlds ve∣nison cause thee to lose thy Fathers blessing; Twas a poor change of Glaucus to exchange gold for copper; but O what a sad exchange wilt thou make to exchange heaven for earth, the endless fruition of the blessed God for a moments enjoyment of creatures! Thou wouldst condemn that Mariner of folly, who seeing a Fish in the water, should leap into the Sea to cach it, which together with his life he loseth; What a fool art thou for mortal com∣forts to lose an immortal crown! The women of Corinth, saith an ancient Father, did set up Ta∣pers at the birth of every child, with proper names upon each of them, and that Taper which lasted longest in burning, had its proper name transferred to the Child. God himself gives the highest and richest, though conceited worldling, his name; Thou fool, this night, &c. Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. The plain truth is, the world is the ruine and destruction of men. Its pleasures and honours make the sinner merry and jolly, as the hearb Sar∣donia the eater, who eating dyeth; They that will be rich, fall into temptations and snares, and many hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition, 1 Tim. 6. 9. The world serveth its darlings as that tyrannous Emperor did his servants, let them through a sliding floor into a Chamber ull of Roses, that being smothered in them, they might meet the bitterness of death in sweetness; O do not spend thy strength for that which is not bread, but
hearken to Christ, and thou shalt eat that which is good, and thy soul shall delight it self in fatness, Isa. 55.3,4. Secondly, Consider the brevity of thy life. He who hath but a little time, and a great task, must work hard, or his work will not be done. The Birds know their time, and improve it; in some Countries, the shorter the days are, the faster they flye. Heathen have been sensible of this. Theo∣phrastus cryed out on his dying bed, Ars longa, vita brevis, Time was short, and not sufficient for humane arts and sciences. Seneca saith of himself, Nullus mihi per otium exiit dies, partem noctis studiis de∣vovi; I lose no day through idleness, but even devote part of the night to my studies. The very Devils fol∣low their cursed trade with the greater diligence, knowing that their time is short, Rev. 12. 12. Now Reader, Consider how few thy days are; What is your life! even a vapour, a coming, and a going, a flood and an ebbe, and then thou art in the Ocean of eternity. I have read of one, that be∣ing asked, What life was; was answered answerless; for the party of whom the question was deman∣ded, onely turned his back and went away. We come into the world and take a turn or two about in it, and God saith, Return ye Children of men; A little child may number the days of the oldest man; We project high things, and lay foundati∣ons for an earthly eternity; but the longest life is less then a drop to that Ocean. Yet alas, the most are blown off in the spring, and few continue to fall off in Autumn. Plutarch compareth Galba,
Otho, and Vitellius, in regard of their short reign, to Kings in Tragedies, which last no longer then the time in which they are represented on the Stage. The River Hypanis in Scythia, bringeth forth every day little bladders, out of which come certain Flies, which are bred in the morning, fledg'd at noon, and dye at night; Man cometh up like a flower, and is cut down, he fleeth as a shadow and continueth not, Job 14. 2. This short time posteth away with speed; How soon do our days vanish? Iob tells us that his little time made great haste to be gone; My days are swifter then a Weavers shuttle, Job 7. 6. The Wea∣vers shuttle is an instrument of very swift motion, and so swift that it is used for a Proverb, for all things that are swift and speedy. Radius Textoris dictum Proverbiale; Radio velocius. The Latines express it by a beam of the Sun, or a word which sig∣nifieth a ray, which is darted in a moment from one end of the Heavens to another; Such speed doth our life make to pass away. Cardinal Bellarmin, when he had a full prospect of the Sun going down, to perceive the quick∣ness of its motion, took a Psalter in his hand, and be∣fore he had twice read over the 51. Psalm, the whole body of the Sun was set, whereby he concluded, the earth being twenty one thousand miles in com∣pass, the Sun must go seven thousand miles in half a quarter of an hour; However the Cardinal might be mistaken in his reckoning; Yet, Mans days are swifter then a post, they flee away, they see no good; They are passed away as the swift ships; as the
Eagle that hasteth to the prey, Job 9. 25, 26. Its our shame and misery that our days should be so swift, and we so slack; that our time should be as speedy as a post or ship, or Eagle, and our hearts as slow about our eternal concernments, as a Snail. Our negligence herein speaks us brutish, and void of common sense. Reason will teach him that followeth its directions, to be most in∣dustious about matters of such importance. The Heathen Historian can agree with Scripture, in this; Vita nostra sicut fabula, non refert quam diu sed quam bene;Liv. l. 15. c. 7. Our life passeth away, as a tale that is told; it matters not much whether it be long or short, but whether it be well or ill. Surely it concerneth thee Reader to make Reli∣gion thy business, and work the work of God, when thine everlasting happiness dependeth on it, and thy time is so short that thou hast to do it in. In the days of Ptolomeus Philopater, when the huge and great Anchor of the Ship Thalmegos was laid out upon the shore, the Children of Alexan∣dria did ride upon the stalk and crept through the ring of the Anchor, as if it had been made pur∣posely for their pastime, whereas wise men knew it was appointed for better uses, namely, to sta∣ble and make sure the great vessel in storms and tempests. Truly, so do too many serve time, they play and toy, and trifle it away, as if God had given it to them for that end; when he who hath but half an eye, as we say, may see that it was given for better purposes, viz. to furnish his soul for his eternal voyage, and thereby to help to stablish
and fasten him when he shall lanch into the stormy Ocean. Protogenes made himself ridicu∣lous in the judgement of all that are sober, for spending seven years in drawing Ialisus and his Dog; for though the most excellent Pictures are longest in drawing, yet to spend years about that which may be finished in days, argueth want of wisdom. But having spoken somewhat largely to this in the sixt Chap. I am the more brief in this. Thirdly, Consider the examples of others, who have wrought hard at this heavenly Calling. Cicero tells us, Nothing prevailes more with men then similitudes and examples; Indeed worthy patterns are of great power. Thucydides brake forth into tears out of love to learning, upon hearing Herodotus read an history that he had written. Themistocles tells us, The statue of Miltiades would not suffer him to sleep. Alexander was much provoked to vali∣ant acts, by reading the prowess of Achilles and Hector in Homer. Cesar was so stirred to courage by reading the conquests of Alexander in his youth. that he wept for anger that he had done nothing worthy of himself at that age. Iron put into the fire is turned into fire; conider therefore the Pro∣phets and Apostles of the Lord, how diligent they were at their duty, how hard they wrought for God. The great Apostle was indefatigably industrious for his soul and his Saviour. Consider him in re∣ference to his outward man, how unwearied was he at his Masters wok, and in reference to his in∣ward man, how zealous, how fervent in spirit, serving the Lord! From Jerusalem to Illyricum I
have preached the Gospel. His travails are compu∣ted to be 12970. miles. He gives us when neces∣sitated thereunto, a brief Catalogue of his actions and passions for Christ. Are they ministers of Christ? I am more, in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Iews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwrack, a night and a day have I been in the deep. In journyings often, in perils of water, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils by false brethren. In weariness and painfulness in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness; besides those things which are without, that which cometh upon me daily the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11. 23. to 30. Reader, think, thou hearest the Apostle speak∣ing to thee, as once to the Corinthians, Be ye fol∣lowers of me, as I am of Christ. How did our bles∣sed Saviour work the work of him that sent him while it was day! He went about doing good. Godliness was his meat and drink, I have meat to eat, which ye know not of. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. He wrought so hard that he forgot to eat his bread, and was taken by his kindred to be mad. It was his sleep and rest. He went into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. He prayed with strong cries and groans: And being
in an agony he prayed the more fervently. He was taken to be about fifty years old when he was little above thirty, so much was he worn out with labour for his God, Act. 10. 38. Ioh. 4. 34. Luk. 6. 12. Mar. 1. 34. Heb. 5. 7. Mar. 3. 20. O Reader, let Christ be the Copy after which thou wilt write, and the pattern which thou wilt follow, and be a follower of others as they are of Christ Jesus. Did Christ work so hard for thee? did he lose his food, and sleep, and wear out him∣self, that his strength was dried up like a potsherd, and his heart was melted like wax in the midst of his bowels? and wilt not thou spend and be spent for thy Saviour? I would say for thy own soul; for in serving him thou servest thy self. Think of it when thou art trifling away thy time, and neg∣lecting thy spiritual watch, and dull and dead in holy duties, how eager and earnest, how zealous and sedulous thy Lord Jesus was in working out thy salvation; he did not play, nor dally about the work of thy redemption, but made it his business, and did what he was called to with all his heart, and soul, and strength.
CHAP. XV. The excellency of this Calling, and the Conclusion of the Treatise. FOurthly, Consider the excellency of this Calling. As it is said of God in respect of beings; Who is like thee O God! Among all the Gods none is to be compared to thee. So I may say of god∣liness in respect of Callings, What is like thee O Godliness! amongst all callings none is comparable to thee. 1. It is the most honourable Calling. The Master that thou are bound to, is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Fountain of honour, and Lord of glory; One of whom the greatest Princes and Po∣tentates of the world hold their Crowns and Scep∣ters, to whom they must kneel and do their ho∣mage; One to whom the whole creation is lesse then nothing. The work that thou art imployed in, is not servile and mean, but high and noble; the worship of the great God, walking and con∣versing with his blessed Majesty, subduing brutish lusts, living above this beggarly earth, a conversa∣tion in heaven, a conflict with, and conquest over this dreggy flesh and drossy world, and powers of hell, to which the greatest battels and victories of the most valiant warriours that ever drew the sword are worse then childrens play. To conquer our passions is more then to conquer kingdomes. Thmistocles is renowned by Cicero for telling some
who disparaged him for his ignorance in playing on the Lute; That he knew not how to play on the Lute, yet he knew how to take a City. To subdue one lust is more then to subdue a thousand Cities. Thy fellow servants are the elect of God, glorious Angels and Saints, who are higher then the Kings of the earth; Princes in all lands, a crown of glory, a roy∣al diadem, a chosen generation, the excellent of the earth, vessels of Gold, the Children of the most high, of whom the world is not worthy. The Priviledges of this calling and company are eminent. Adopti∣on, remission, growth in grace, divine love, perse∣verance n holiness, an eternal kingdom, are all contained in the Charter granted to thi Corpora∣tion. The covenant of grace, that hive of sweet∣ness, that mine of gold, that cabinet of jewels, to which all the world is but an heap of dust, is their part and portion, and contains more in i for their comfort, then heaven and earth is able to con∣tain. To serve God is one of the fairest flowers in the Saints garland of honour; hence the Lords kins∣man glorieth in being the Lords servant, and the Lords Mother calleth her self his handmaid, Iude ver. 1. Luk. 1. 38. If the meanest offices about earth∣ly Princes are esteemed honourable, what an ho∣nour is it to wait on the King of heaven? The Saints duty is their preferment, and that service which is commanded them a priviledge. The great Apostle boasteth of his Chain for God as his glo∣ry and credit, and holdeth it up as a mark and badge of honour: For the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain, Act. 28. 20. and begins one of his
Epistles with this honourary Title, Paul a prisoner of Iesus Christ, Philem. 1. It is not earthly riches that make a man honour∣able; we mistake in calling and counting rich men the best men in the Parish: Riches without godli∣ness are but a gold ring in a swines snout, for which the brute is nothing the better. It is not aiery applause or worldly preferments that will make a man honourable. Titles are but like feathers in the hat, or glistering scarfes under the armes, which adde not the least worth to the man that wears them. A great letter makes no more to the sense of the word then a small one. Worship, Honour Grace, High∣ness, Majesty, make nothing to the real intrinsick value of any person. The ungodly Monarchs of the world are but beasts in Gods account. Antichus Epiphanes, whose name signifieth Illustrious, whom the Samaritans stiled the Mighty God, is called by the Holy Ghost, because of his ungodliness, a vile person, Dan. 11. 21. In his days shall stand up a vile person. All honour without holiness is fading, as well as fancied rather then real. External nobili∣ty though it glister in the face of the world, is but as Seneca saith, vitrea, brittle as glass, and com∣pounded of earth. The Potentates of the world are often like Tennis-balls, tossed up on high to fall down low; Hence some of the wiser Heathen have called them Ludibria fortunae, the scorn of fortune. Haman honoured one day, the next day hanged. Gelimer the Puissant Prince of the Vandals, Bellisari∣us, Charles the fifth and Henry the fourth Emperours, and many others experienced the brittleness of worldly glory. But that honour which is from
above is true and eternal. Plutarch tells us the Roman nobles, as a badge of their nobility, wore the picture of the Moon upon their shoes, signify∣ing as their nobility did increase, so it would de∣crease. All priviledges, all prerogatives, all titles, all dignities without godliness, are vanishing sha∣dows. Tis the new creation that rendreth the children of Abraham like the glorious stars in hea∣ven. The world looks on the Saint (possibly he is poor and mean in the world) as the Jews lookt on Christ; As a root out of a dry ground, and so saw no form nor comliness in him; but they who could pierce into the inside of Christ, could see that in him dwelt thee fullness of the godhead bo∣dily; and they who can see into the inside of Christians, behold the Kings daughter all glorious within. As the precious stone Sandastra hath no∣thing in outward appearance, but that which seem∣eth black, bt being broken poureth forth beams like the Sun. So the Church of Christ is outward∣ly black with affliction, but inwardly more bright and glorious then the Sun, with thriving vertues and celestial graces. The power of godliness in a mean Christian is a rich treasure in a mean Cabinet; but vice in robes, in scarlet, is poison in wine, the more deadly and dangerous. Tamberlain tomb was rifled by the Turks and his bones worn by them for Iewels, though their enemy, and one that had conquered them in divers combates, and captivated their Emperour, and car∣ried him up and down in an Iron Cage for his foot-stool. God makes his people honourable in the
eyes of the wicked: Since thou wast precious in my sight thou art honourable, and I have loved thee; there∣fore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. The sons of them that afflicted thee shall bow before thee, and thine enemies shall lick the dust, Isa. 43. 4. A wicked King Iohoram honoreth and waiteth on a Servant of God, Elisha; Herod reve∣renceth the Baptist. Grace is a powerful, though silent Oratour, to perswade all that see it to love and honour it. What Diogenes spake of learning, is truly applicable to grace, or the knowledge of God in Christ; It makes young men sober, old men happy, poor men rich, and rich men honourable. When Agesilaus was ready to dye, he charged his friends that they should not make any picture or statue of him; for saith he, If I have done any thing that is good, that will be my monument; but if otherwise, all the statues you can make will not keep my name alive. The Egyptians in their funeral ora∣tions never commended any for his riches (be∣cause they thought them the goods of fortune) but for his righteousness and justice. Piety is a lasting pillar, that causeth the righte∣ous to be had in everlasting remembrance. Time shall not out-live the Saints honour; grace ren∣ders him more illustrious then ever the Mausolean mountan did that Carian. As the hairs of Taran∣drus are not to be pierced with any weapon; so the name of a Saint cannot be hurt by all the slanders and calumnies of the wicked. They who are Sainted in Heavens Calendar, and whose names are enrolled in the Lambs book of life, are truly honourable and eternally glorious, maugre the ma∣lice
of Men and Devils. The disgrace which the wicked cast on the righteous is at worst, but like the noise of some loud tongu'd gun, ceased as soon as heard; but the honour which God and Scri∣pture put upon the godly, is a pillar which endu∣reth to all eternity; such a monument as neither age, nor time, nor envy, can waste or wear out. Demetrius under all the obloqy and contempt which his countrymen cast upon him, could com∣fort himself in this, that Though the Athenians de∣molished his statues, yet they could not extinguish his vertues, the cause of raising them. Sin is so base and beggarly, so loathsome and shameful a thing, that not onely the children of God, but even wicked men have been unwilling to own it, and ashamed to be taxed with it, or found out at the commission of it. When Godliness is so high and honourable, so noble and excellent a Mistress, that those who deny the power of it, will take upon them the form of it; they who hate its work, will wear its livery. There are hardly any jewels of grace, but for each of them vice hath counterfeit stones O! how noble a Mistris, how honourable a Lady is that, whom all pretend relati∣on to, and even those that hate her would not be thought her enemies, but blush to be taxed as strang∣ers to her. 2. It is the most comfortable and delightful Calling Satan would represent Christians under ugly vizards, and Christianity frightful, to make men loath both the one and the other; As he transforms himself the Prince of darkness, and his ways which are darkness, into an Angel of light and seeming
light, so he endeavours to transform Christians, who are children of light, and their holy ways, which are paths of light, into children of darkness; and paths of darkness. He endeavours to make men think the power of godliness Antipodes to all chearfulness, but holines is far from such a crabbed face, and austere countenance as he would have us fancy. No trade hath so much mirth with it and in i; Ioy is one essential part of this Calling, The kingdom of God consisteth not in meats and drinks, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Rom. 14. 17. The servants of God do not onely rejoyce in the fore-thoughts of their reward, to think of the time when their Indentures shall expire, and they shall enjoy the glorious liberty of the sons of God; We rejoyce in hope of glory; but also in their work, they are joyful in the house of prayer, they sing at their work: Thy statutes are my songs in the house of my pilgrimage; nay, at the hardest and most tiresome of their work. We re∣joyce in tribulation; My brethren count it all joy; when ye fall into divers temptations. Joy is the beam which is darted from the Sn, the stream which floweth from the fountain of godliness: It is observable that the beginning, the lest degre of grace causeth joy, great joy, what then will its growth and perfection do? When Christ did but call to Zacheus he came down hastily, and received him joyfully, Luk. 19. 6. When the Eunuch was converted he went home rejoycing, Act. 8. 39. When the Samaritans had received Christ into their hearts at Phillips preaching, there was great joy in that Ci∣ty, Act. 8. 6, 7, 8. The Jaylor after his heart-quake,
rejoyced, believing in God with all his house, Act. 16. 34. The joy of the Saints as it is invisible, so it is unutterable In whom believing ye rejoyce with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pe. 1. 7. For the measure of it, its compared to the joy of harvest, to the joy of the bridegroom and bride on their Wedding day, Isa 9. 3. Hosea 2. 19. Hence it is that Grace and Godliness are compa∣red to, and set forth by those things which are plea∣sant and delightful, and bring joy with them. As Musick, the joy and delight of the ears; a feast, the joy and delight of the taste; to light, the joy and delight of the eyes; life, wine, which rejoyceth the heart; perfumes, which delight the sent; good, the joy of the will; truth, the joy of the understand∣ing; godliness hath joy proper and sutable for every sense, whether outward or inward. As the higher the Sun is the greater its light is; so the holier, the Christian the greater his joy is. The more clear the fire burns, the more comfortable it is; smoak fetcheth tears from our eyes. When grace burns clear, its refreshing indeed; tis the smoak of sin that turns our houses into Bochims, places of weeping; when good men step awry not pondering their goings, then they wrench their feet, or put their bones out of joynt, and so put themselves to much pain. Indeed, wicked men who are ignorant of the mystery of godliness, becuase they see no sun-shine in the faces of godly men, judge it to be foul weather in their hearts; As the Roman Souldiers, when they entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and saw no Images, presently reported the Jews to worship the Clouds; but a Christians joy is as far
out of wicked mens sight, to discern it as out of their power to remove it; A stranger intermedleth not with his joy; your hearts shall rejoyce, and your joy shall no man take from you. A wicked mans joy is most in his face; As a Black-a-more, he is white no where but in his Teeth. Seneca compares him to a Commander in a desperate battel, who least his Souldies should run away, sets a good face on it, when he is inwardly terrified, and full of fear; he is like one in an high desperate fever, ha∣ving a good colour when his heart is heavy, and he is at the gate of death. The Godly mans joy is most in his heart, he is like that fsh which hath a rough outside, but a pearl within. When there are storms without, there is musick within, peace of conscience, which passeth all understanding. A wicked man is as a book of Tragedies, bound extraordinary, gay and guilt on the out-side, but full of doleful, dreadful stories within, or as Alexander said of Antipater, he was white without, but pur∣ple within; his face may be white and smiling, but his conscience is red and fiery. But the godly mans inside is his best side, though his full sacks of joy and delight are not opened till he comes to his Fathers house, yet the blessed Jesus gives him, as Ioseph the Patriarchs, sufficient provision for the way. The Law gave the first fruits of the earth to God; the Gospel gives the first fruits of Heaven to men, which are both an earnest and a taste of their glo∣rious and everlasting harvest. All sorrow proceeds from sin; As the shadow followeth the body, so doth grief follow guilt. Lust like rotten flesh or wood, will breed worms to
gnaw in the sinners bowels; Therefore its no wonder that Nabal, Saul, and Belshazzar, when their lusts flew in their faces, dyed, or were rea∣dy to dye with horror. If a godly man sin wil∣fully, and wound his soul, its no wonder if he feel the smart and pain of it. When David steps a∣wry, and slips with his feet, and falls dangerously, he may well keep his bed, and water his couch, and cry out of his aches and broken bones; yet the very sorrow of a Saint for sin against his God, hath more real joy and delight in it, then all the skin-deep pleasures of gigling Gallants. Crates could dance and laugh in his thread-bare coat, and his wallet at his back, which was all his wealth. The Saint can rejoyce in his saddest afflictions, though he seldom live in Palaces, yet he always lives in a Paradice, having (if he be careful to keep a good conscience) a constant youth of joy, and perpetual spring, as that place they write of under the AEquatour; The tears of those that pray, saith Austin, are sweeter then the joys of the Theatre. Its true, godliness doth abridge men of sinful pleasures, but its the more pleasant for sepera∣ting it self from that which is worse then poison. Agesilaus could taste by a natural appetite, that such pleasures are more fit for Slaves then Freemen; Averroes and the rest of the Arabian Philosophers, are ashamed of that sensual and beastly Paradise, which their Mahomet provided for them, as most unworthy the soul of man, and infinitely sho of true delight.
Godliness doth not deny us our natural delights, onely rectifie and regulate them, lest we should sur∣feit on them. It doh not deny us drink but drun∣kenness, nor meat but gluttony. Nature even in things in themselves lawful, would run out unlaw∣fully, if she were not restrained; Grace onely keepeth the reins in its own hands, least that skit∣ish Colt should through its wantonness break its own nck. It is as the Pale to the Garden, to preserve the flowers in it from Beasts, or as an hedge to a Field, to keep what is in it within bounds. As Leonidas the Captain, perceiving that his Souldi∣ers left their Watch on the City Walls, for the Ale-houses, commanded that the Ale-houses should be removed to the City walls, that they might both enjoy their pleasure, and discharge their duties together. Godliness alloweth men the comfort of their Relations, and Possessions, on∣ly it so limiteth our delight in them, that we may not by them be hindered from working the work of God, and minding our eternal sal∣vations. Godliness brings more noble and excellent plea∣sures. Others are puddle-water, those pleasures which godliness giveth, are pure and clear streams, such as flow from God himself; There is more sweetness in one drop of the Fountain, then in all the waters of the Sea; There is more joy, more comfort, in a little communion with God, then in the greatest confluence of creature-enjoyments.Conf. l. 9. c. 1. Austin saith, How sweet was it to me on a sudden to be without these sweet vanities; thou Lord who art the true sweetness, didst take them frem me and en∣ter
in thy self, who art more pleasant then all plea∣sure, and more clear then all light. The world, as they say of Fairies, deprives of true children and puts changelings in their room; deprives men of true substantial joy, and gives them shadows in the room; but godliness on the contrary, deprives oft painted poisons, and gives them wholsome and real pleasures. All the comforts of this world to a per∣son void of grace, are but as a sack of perfumes, and medicines, and cordial drugs to the back of a galled horse, which may vex and inrage his sores with their weight, but do not ease or abate his pain with their vertue. A Saints life, notwithstanding his greatest sufferings, whilst it is blessed with the smiles of his father, is an heaven upon earth; but the sinners life, notwithstanding his honours, and plea∣sures, and riches, and relations, whilst under the wrath of an infinite God, and anguisht with the gripings of a guilty conscience, is little less then an earnest and taste of hell. Grace is sugar to sweeten all our crosses, and sin is vinagar to sower all our comforts. The iron seems to embrace the load-stone with great delight, and to be rapt with an amorous extasie. So as Thales thought it animal, and yet that motion is void of the least sense of pleasure. The wicked man seems by his smiling face and gigling countenance, to be the onely merry man, when he is as far from true pleasure as from true piety. The least Bee finds more delight in making and tasting a little honey, then the great Sun and all his glorious attendants in their high and perputual courses. The meanest Christian hath more comfort in making sure his salvation, and
tasting the sweetness of his Saviour; then the Kings of the earth, and their Courtiers, in their abundance of all earthly comforts. The Wie man tells us concerning the ways of wisdom, wherein a Christians daily walk is; Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Pro. 3. 17. And the Saints find them so by experi∣ence. The word of God, which is the rule of their work, is sweeter to them then the honey and the honey comb, and they delight to do the will of God. The sinners life is an uncomfortable life, beide those in∣ward gripes and horror, which sin causeth in the con∣science at present, and its end the sting in the tail, which is the eternal fire; there is trouble, and fear, and shame, and vexation in the very act or commis∣sion of many sins. To forgive an injury, which is one peice of Christianity, is pleasant and delightful; but to revenge an affront, what heats and colds, what passions and perturbations doth it cause? To love our neighbours, and wish their wellfare, is a sweet thing, a reward in it self, it hath meat in its mouth; but to envy my neighbour, because he is richer, or more honourable, or hath larger gifts, and more friends then my self, is as rottenness to the bones, it wasteth and consumeth the inward parts, as rust eat∣eth out iron, according to Solomons phrases. A Con∣tented man hath an heaven upon earth, all the year with him is spring-time or summer, like a child he takes no carking care for food, or raiment, or houserent, but minds his duty, and leaves all to his father who knoweth what he hath need of: But the Cov∣tous, who like the barren womb, hath never enongh, pines with fear of want, & can neither eat, nor drink,
nor sleep quietly, lest he should lose what he hath, or not have sufficient to hold out; nay, he will not allow himself convenient food or raiment, though he have never so much; but like a beast feeds on thistles, when he hath all sorts of provision upon his back. Temperance hath health, and strength with it, and thereby renders the other comforts of this life savoury and comfortable; so also Chastity. But luttony, and Drunkenness, and Whoredom; bring weakness and sickness on mens bodies, and imbitter all other blessings, besides the fear of being disco∣vered, to the shame and disgrace of the Authors, which tormenteth not a little. There is comfort in dealing honestly and righteously, but if a man will cheat, and cozen, and filtch, and steal; no wonder, if he tire his head with plots and projects o carry it on cunningly, and secretly, and terrifie his heart with apprehention that it will be known, and then he shall be branded for a knave, or suffer the penalty of law in a more severe degree. The sinner is hurried hither and thither by his op∣posite Lords, and contrary lusts; and torn piecemeal by them, as a man by beasts, which draw the parts of his body contrary ways. The Commands of sin are harsh and heavy: No Tyrant ever put his sub¦jects upon more crabbed, painful work; But the Commandments of God are not grievous, 1 Joh. 4. 3. Sin is savery, and its servants, worse then those that row in Turkish Gallies; but Gods law, is a law of liberty, and they walk at liberty who seek his precepts. The ways of sinners are called crooked ways, rugged ways, which are unpleasant to travail in; but the ways of God are called strait ways, plain paths, which are
delightful to passengers. I am confident the true Christian hath more true pleasure in suffering for Christ, or one act of mortification, or victory over one lust, then the highest earthly Potentate hath in his largest dominions, in the multitude of his subjects, in the richness of his kingdoms, and in all the honour that is done him, or good things enjoyed by him all his days. 3. It is the most profitable Calling. Reader, this ar∣gument is Achilleum, or instar omnium, the strongest argument, and instead of all; with most men gain is the great God of this world, that commandeth all their heads, and hearts, and hands; to whom they bow down the knees both of their bodies and souls. The theif & murderer are quickened by this to their hellish trade; Come let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk pri∣vily for the innocent without cause. We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil, Prov. 1. 9, 10. The Sechemites upon this ground, will endure the pain of Circumcision, and throw up their former religion; Shall not their beasts, and their cattel, and their substance be ours? The Soul- for this, will scale the Walls, and leap upon the Pikes, and run upon the Mouth of the Cannon. The Husband-man for this, will rise early, go to bed late, eat the bread of carefullness, toyl and moyl all day, and make a drudge, a slave, a pack-horse of himself all the year. The Merchant for this, will plough the Ocean, dance upon the surging billows, suffer many dangers and deaths through his whole voyage. The Shop-keeper for this, will croud into any hole of the City, break his sleep, waste his health, run about hither and thither, early and late. Gehezi,
Achan, Iudas, Balaam for this, will venture their bo∣dies, their souls, any things, all things. Profit is such a bait, that all will bite at. The Devil, that Arch Politician, who hath had so many thousand years ex∣perience; besides, his extraordinary natural know∣ledge, could not judge any Topicks more likely then this to take with our blessed Saviour. All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. The gods themselves were said by the Athenians to be corrupted with Philips gold, that their Oracles still were in favour of him. Money is the absolute Mo∣narch, which can put men upon the most dangerous defignes: Therefore Cassius (surnamed the Severe) one of the wisest of the Roman Judges, in all doubt∣ful Causes that came before him, would demand, Cui bono, Who gained, or had the profit? well knowing that that is the bias which turneth men aside to wrong others; and the heady, wanton horse, which breaks through the fence to trespass upon neigh∣bours. Now Reader, If profit will prevail with thee, Godliness with contentment is great gain. All the gold of the world is dross, all the diamonds of the world are dirt, all the gaines of the world are loss to this gain of Godliness. Egypt watered by Nilus hath four rich harvests, say some, in less then four months. Solinus saith, the Egyptian fig tree beareth fruit seven times in a year: Godliness brings forth 30, 60., 100. fold increase; It giveth an hundreth fold in this world, and in the world to come life ever∣lasting. After ye had your fruits unto holiness, in the end everlasting life, Mat. 19. 29. Rom. 6. 22. Did the sinner but believe Scripture, that speaks the in∣finite
reward of holiness, he would quickly set up this trade, Pinder the Poet saith, in regard of the fertility of Rhodia, and the wealth of the inhabi∣tants, that it rained gold in that country; The fruit of wisdom is better then silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold. She is more precious then Rubies, and all thou canst desire is not to be compared to her, Prov. 3. 14, 15. Lucian fancieth all the Heathen gods and god∣desses sitting in Parliament, and each making choice of that tree which best pleased them. Iupiter chose the Oak for its strength, Apollo the Baytree for its greeness; Neptune chose the Poplar for its length; Iuno chose the Eglantine for its sweetness; Venus chose the Myrtle-tree for its beauty; Minerva sit∣ting by, demanded of her Father Iupiter, why since there were so many fruitful trees, they all had chosen barren ones. He answered, Ne vide∣anur fructu honorem vendere, Lest they should seem to sell honour for fruit; Minerva replied, Well, Do what you please, I for my part make choice of the Olive for its fatness and fruitfulness. They all com∣mended her choice and were ashamed of their own Folly. This fiction doth fitly represent the foolish∣ness of men at this day in chusing the honours and preferments, and glory of the world, which are barren and unfruitful things of no wrth in the other world, before that honour which is from God, and the eternal weight of glory, and also the convictions of their consciences another day, which will force them to be ashamed of their own folly, and to commend the choice of a Christian for preferring grace and godliness, which will stand him
in stead in an hour of death, and day of judg∣ment, and bring him in unspeakable gain, before the aery honours and withering vanities of this life. Reader, If thou wilt give conscience free li∣berty to speak its mind? I know it will tell thee, that no calling is comparable to this for pro∣fit. The gain of Godliness is real gain, rich gain, cer∣tain gain, eternal gain. 1. Its real, if the word of truth may be trusted, its fruit is therefore called substance, in distinction from earthly riches, which are shadows. I will cause them that love me to inherit substance. 2. Its called also true riches, other riches are fain∣ed; hence also godly men are said to be rich to∣wards god, and other men to be rich in this world. Its rich gain, as it hath relation to the best part, it makes the soul of man truly precious, as it is servi∣ceable to our last end, and prepareth man for the fruition of God, and also as its reward is uncon∣ceivable. The vessels of mercy shall swim in an Ocean of glory. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard nor can the heart of man conceive what God hath layd up for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. Its reward is beyond all expression, above all apprehensions, no compari∣son can fully resemble it, no understanding con∣ceive it. 3. Its eternal gain; Other gains are fading, deceitful brooks, dying flowers, withering goards, and vanishing shadows; Riches are not for ever, Pro. 29 Man in honour abideth not, Psa. 49.2. The plea∣sures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11. 25. But this
gain is for ever. The fear of the Lord is clean, en∣during for ever, both in the nature of it, tis incor∣ruptible seed, and in the fruit of it, which is the gift of God, eternal life. Though other trades shall all fail, as useful onely in this needy World; though other callings shall vanish, and time it self shall be no more, yet this trade, this calling, shall rn parallel with the life of an immortal soul; though gold be a corruptible mettal, the gain of this calling is better then much fine gold; its an inheri∣tance, undefiled, incorruptible. Our work, whe∣ther in doing or suffering the Will of God, is but for a moment, but it works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. O what an happy good, what an excellent gain, is that which is eternal! Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall never be taken from her. When thy Lands and Houses shall be taken from thee, thy place and dwelling shall know thee no more; when thy Friends and Relations shall be taken from thee; Son of Man, behold I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; when all the comforts of this life shall serve thee as vermine and lice do a dead man; though they stick close to him in his life, run from him at death; this Calling will stand by thee, encourage thee, never leave thee nor forsake thee. In other things thou chosest for that which is most lasting. If thou buyest an house, or beast, or suit of apparel, thou art desirous to have that which is most durable and strong. O why shouldst thou not chose that good which is everlasting! When Demetrius had taken Megara, and his Souldi∣ers plundered the City, he fearing the Philoso∣pher
Stilpo might receive some loss, sent for him, and asked him whether any of his men had taken any thing of his; Stilpo answered, No, for I saw no man that took my learning from me. Godliness is such Wealth, such Learning, as will abide with thee in general plunder; indeed neither men nor Devils can rob thee of it. 4. Its certain gain. He that sets up of this trade, may be trusted; for none ever brake of this calling. God himself, whose is the earth, and the fulness thereof, is bound for them, and hath undertaken for their perseverance, and growth, and gains. The Merchant that trades into the other world, is not properly a Merchant-venturer; for the Gospel, which is the Ensurance Office, hath engaged infinite power, and love, and faithfulness, for the security and safe return of all the Vessels which he sends forth; The Promises are all yea and amen, the sure mercies of David; The Covenant of grace, which contain∣eth all their gains and riches, is stable in all things, and sure, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Isa. 55. 6. 2 Sam. 23. 5. If there were a free trade proclaimed to the In∣dies, and every man that went, promised as much gold as he would desire, and a certainty of making a good voyage, who almost would stay at home? what crowding would there be to Port-Towns? and what hast to take shipping. Reader, Though God will not suffer this to be, in reference to earthly treasures, knowing out of his infinite wisdom how hurtful they would be to immortal souls; yet he offereth thee all this and infinitely more, in calling upon thee to mind god∣liness; He saith to thee, as Ioseph to his brethren,
Gen 45. 18. Come unto me, and I will give you the good of the Land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the Land; Come unto me and I will give you the good of Canaan, and ye shall eat the pleasant fruits of that Land flowing with Milk and Honey. O Reader, didst thou know the worth of this jewel, thou wouldst trample upon all the wealth of this World as dung, in comparison of it. Little dost thou think or imagine the advantage, the vertues of this Diamond; It is the true Loadstone that draweth all good to it. Luther saith of one Psalm, This Psalm hath done more for me, then all the Potentates of the World; I may say to thee, This calling will feed thee with bread that came down from Hea∣ven, and cloath thee with fine linnen, the robes of Gods own righteousness; twill protect thee and maintain thee, twill advance and honour thee, twill inrich and ennoble thee in life, refresh and rejoyce thee in death, crown and reward thee after death, do more for thee then all the Princes or Potentates, Relations or PosPossessions, Persons or Comforts upon Earth can do. In thy prosperity and enjoyment of outward good things, godliness would like Sugar and Spice, cor∣rect their windiness, and make them wholsom and profitable to thee. It would like Elisha's Meal and Salt, make thy Meat sweet and savoury, and thy drink pleasant and refreshing to thee. It would make thy bed soft and easie, thy garments warm and sweet sented. Twill so far abate thy appetite to this luscious food, that thou shouldst not feed im∣moderately to the surfeiting thy soul. As the fiery bush which Moses saw in the Mount Horeb, though it was in a flaming fire, did not con∣sume;
Or as the shining worm, that being cast in∣to the fire, doth not waste, but is thereby prged from its filth, and made more beautiful then all the water in the world could make it; So Affliction should not ruine, but reform and purifie thee; In the greatest danger, this will be thy defence. Though others like the old world,Dares Phryg. de bello Tro∣jan. are drowned, are destroyed in these waters, yet thou shouldst ride safely in a well pitcht Ark, and to free thee from any fear of miscarrying, the Lord himself would shut thee in. When others are in the open air, on whom storms and tempests have their full force, thou shouldst be housed in Gods presence-chamber, and kept secret by his side. As Gideons fleece, thou shouldst be dry, when all about thee are wet. The whale of destruction may digest thousands of Mariners, but one godly Ionah is too hard for him. The torrent of fire that ran from. AEtna, and con¦sumed the Country, yet parted it self to safe∣guard them that releived their aged parents. When the Grecians had taken Troy, and given every man liberty to carry out his burden, they were so taken with the devotion of AEneas, in carrying out first his houshold gods, and (upon a second licence) his old Father Anchises, and his Son Asca∣nius, instead of treasures, which others carried out, that they permitted him to carry what he would without any disturbance. Ieremiah in the Babylonish captivity, was tendered and regarded highly by the King of Babylon; When Sodom was destroyed, Lot was preserved. It was storied of Troy, that so long as the Image of Pallas stood safe in it, that City should never be won. It is true
of godliness; so long as the fear and love of thy God are within thee, so long as thou makest re∣ligion thy business, nothing shall hurt thee, every thing shall help thee; godliness will bring in all gain, and at all times; No good thing will he with∣hold from them that walk uprightly. A Child of God by adoption, is in some sense like the Son of God by eternal generation, heir of all things, 1 Cor. 3.30, 31. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all is yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Nay, the Christians riches are not onely unsearch∣able, Ephes. 3. 8. but also durable, Prov. 8. 15. When a wicked man dieth, all his riches dye with him. His treasue is laid up on earth, there∣fore when he leaves the earth, he leaves his trea∣sure, Psa. 49. 17. When a godly man dyeth, his riches follow him, Rev. 14. 13. His treasure is in heaven, and so when he dyeth he goeth to his gains. O Reader, what an argument is here, to pro∣voke thee to piety, godliness is profitable in all con∣ditions, in all relations, in both worlds! In pros∣perity, twill be a sun to direct thee, in adversity a shield to protect thee; in life twill be thy comfort, and which is infinitely more in death, that hour of need 'twill be thy enlivening cordial; The smell of Trefoil, is stronger in a cloudy dark season, then in fair weather. The refreshing savour of the sweet spices of grace, is strongest in the Saints greatest necessities. When Death, the King of terrors, comes to enter the list, and fight with thee for thy soul and eternal
salvation, for thy God, and Christ, and Heaven, and happiness, when all thy Riches, and Honours, and Friends, and Relations, would leave thee in the lurch, to shift for thy self, as Dogs leave their Master when he comes to the water; Godli∣ness would be thy shield to secure thee against its shot, and make thee more then a conquerour over it. Thou mightest call thy dying bed, as Iacob the place through which he travailed, Mahanaim, a Camp, for there Angels would meet thee to con∣vey thee safe through the Air, the enemies coun∣try (of which Satan is Lord and Prince) to thy Fathers houses, where thou shouldst be infinitely blessed in the vision and fruition of thy God and Saviour for ever. Godliness would be the Pilot to steer the vessel of thy soul aright through those boysterous waters, to an happy port. The Arabick Fable mentions one that carried an Hog, a Goat, and a Sheep to the City; the Hog roared hideously, when the other two were still and quiet, and being asked the reason, gave this account of her crying, The Sheep and Goat have no such cause to complain, for they are carried to the City for their Milk, but I am carried thither to be killed, being good for nothing else. The Ungodly person may well cry out sadly, when sickness comes, for then guilt flyeth in his face, and conscience tells him, death will kill him, he is good for nothing but to be killed with death, Rev. 2.25. he never honoured God in this world, and God will force honour out of him in the other world. He may well screech out dreadfully at the approach of death, whose body death sends to the grave, and his souls to intolerable and unquenchable
flames, but the godly man may bid death welcom, knowing it will be his exceeding gain and advan∣tage. Reader, When others like the Israelites are a∣fraid and start back at the sight of this Goliah, thou mightest like little David, encounter him in the name of the Lord and overcome him. Thou mightest tri∣umphantly sing in the ears of death; O death, where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy victory! The Lord of life would sweeten death to thee, and subdue it for thee; nay, make it at peace with thee, that thou mightest say to death, as Iacob to Esau, I have seen thy face, as if it had been the face of God, who hath made thee to meet me with smiles instead of frowns. Death would help thee to that sight, to that knowledge, to that state and degree of holiness, for which thou hast prayed, and wept, and fasted, and watched, and laboured, and waited many a day; as its said of Iob, there was none like him in the earth; so I may say of this calling, there is none like it upon the face of the earth; the very enemies of it in their hours of extremity being judges. Ah who would not work for God with the greatest diligence, and walk with God in the exactest obedience, and wait upon God with the greatest patience; when he is assured, that in the doing of his commands there is such great reward; and those that sow to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting! The Conclusion. Reader, I have now ended this Treatise, but whether thou (if a stranger to this calling) wilt
put an end to thy carnal fleshly ways, and begin this high and heavenly work or no, I know not. If thou art ambitious, thou hast here encouragement sufficient; godliness will ennoble thee, and render thy blood not only honourable, but royal. If thou art voluptuous, here is a bait which may take thee; godliness will bring thee to a river of pleasures, to such dainties and delights as take the hearts of per∣fect and glorious Angels. If thou art covetous, here is a golden weight to turn the scales of thy desires and endeavours; godliness is profitable unto all things, it hath the promise of this life, and of that which is to come; when thy house, and lands, and honours, and neighbours, and wife, and children, and flesh, and heart faile thee and forsake thee; godliness would say to thee, (and stand to it also) as Peter o Christ; though all forsake thee, yet will not I. Wen the worlds Trinity, Credit, Profit, and Pleasure serve their lovers and worshippers as Rats and Mice do an house, leave it when it is on fire, flye from them in their need and extremity; godliness would stick to thee as close, as fast as Ruth to Naomi; where thou goest it would go, where thou lodgest it would lodge; nay, it would follow thee into the other world, and abide with thee, a cordial, a comfort for ever; It would give thee cause to say to it, as she to her daughter in law, thou hast shewed more kindness to me at the latter end then at the be∣ginning. What canst thou have to object against godliness, that sets thee at such a distance from it? Wilt thou believe a lying world, a deceitful flesh, a destroy∣ing Devil, or the God of truth? Who is thy great∣est
enemy, God or they? Who will do thee most good, God or they? If thou wilt be tryed by the confessions of the greatest enemies that godliness hath, even they in their hours of extremity, will tell thee grace is of infinite worth; godliness is the best of all. Ah how happy had we been at this hour, had we been as faithful servants to Religion, as we have been slaves to foolish lusts and pleasures! If Reason may be heard, thou wilt not defer one moment the entering thy name in this society, and binding thy self Apprentice to thy Saviour; thou mayst see plainly that it is thine interest as well as thy duty; and all thy happiness for this and the other world dependeth on it. If Scripture may be heard, thou wilt quickly set about thy general calling, and make Religion thy business; it calleth loudly to thee, to turn thy back upon earth, and face about for heaven; to forsake the flesh, before the flesh forsake thee. It telleth thee plainly under the hand of thy Maker; that if thou livest after the flesh, and sowest to the flesh, thou shalt dye eternally. If the Conscience within thee may be heard, thou wilt presently give a bill of divorce to thy carnal bruish delights, and strike an hearty Covenant wit Jesus Christ; It often warneth thee of thy duty and danger, and terrifieth thee with the fore∣thoghts of that fire and fury which thou art hastening to eel. If thy friends and relations, who have any sense of a jealous God, and eternal estate may be heard; then thou wilt immediately hearken to the counsel I commend to thee from God, and exercise thy self unto godliness. They advise, and perswade, and intreat thee to turn over a new leaf, and lead
a new life, and to mind in thy day the things of thy peace. If the God upon whom thou livest, by whom thou movest, from whom thou hast thy be∣ing, may be heard, thou wilt now wink on the world, crucifie the flesh, loath thy self for thy filth and folly, and devote thy heart and soul to his fear. He commandeth thee by his dominion over thee, and thy obligations to him; he threatneth, promi∣seth, affrighteth, allureth, and all to make thee mind thy allegiance to him, and the work he hath given thee to do in this world. If thy Saviour, who humbled himself for thy sake, and took upon him the form of a servant, and in thy nature was buffe∣ted, scourged and crucified, may be heard, then thou wilt immedately take the counsel that is given thee, and turn to the Lord with all thy heart, and loath thy self for all thine abominations. He pleads with thee most pathetically, presenteth to thee the stripes and wounds which sin caused in his blessed body; the blood which he shed, the ignominy he endured, the agony, the death he suffered, and all to satisfie for sin, to make himself Lord both of the dead and living; he tells thee, he gave himself for thee to redeem thee from all iniquity; and to purifie thee to himself a peculiar child zealous of good works. If the daily, and nightly, and hourly mercies that thou injoyest; if the sickness, or pain, or loss, or disgrace, or afflictions which sometimes thou suffe∣rest, may be heard, there would not be so much ado to perswade a wretched creature to be blessed, and an ungodly person to be holy and happy. If the inanimate and irrational creatures, the earth beneath thee, the heavens above thee, the beasts
and birds about thee might be heard; thou wouldst whilst its called to day, now after so long a time attend to the call and command of him, in whose hand is thy life and breath; and follow after holi∣ness, without which thou shalt never see the Lord. Shall a Centurions servant go, when he bids him go, and come when he bids him come? and wilt not thou go and come at the voice of God? Did Bala∣ams Ass speak at Gods command, and reprove the madness of the Prophet? Did Ravens at Gods com∣mand feed Élijah? Did Cater-pillars, and Locusts, and Frogs, and Lice execute Gods judgements up∣on Pharaoh? Do fire, and hail, and snow, and va∣pours, and stormy winds fulfil his word? Doth the earth open, the rocks rend, the stars fight in their courses, waters stand up in heaps as a wall, the Moon stand still, the Sun go backward, wildernesses tremble, things cross the course of nature to obey, his pleasure, and wilt not thou obey him? O man, bethink thy self! wilt thou be worse then these ir∣rational and inanimate creatures? are not thy en∣gagements to God infinitely above theirs? what wilt thou have to say for thy self, when every stone in the street, as well as star in the heavens; when every bid, and beast, and fowl will condemn thee? O where wilt thou appear! I must tell thee that a perillous time, a day of extremity, an hour of trouble and anguish is hast∣ning upon thee; which thou canst no more escape or avoid, then thou canst flye from thy self; when the pleasures, and delights, and honey, and beau∣tiful countenances of those Scorpions, thy fleshly lusts will all be past and gone, but the sting remain
to pierce and torment thee, when those dreggy wa∣ters in which thou bathest thy self now will all be dried up; when all thy possessions, and preferments, and friends, and relations will serve thee, as women their flowers when they are dead and withered, who throw them away; or as sinking floores that will fail men when their weight is on them. And then, O then what wilt thou do? Thou wilt wish that re∣ligion had been thy business, and call, and cry to it as the Elders of Gilead to Iephthah, when the chil∣dren of Ammon made war with them. Come thou and be our Captain, and save us from our enemies. Come thou and be my Captain, to save me from the curse of the law, the terrors of my guilty conscience, the wrath of the Infinite God, and the torments of the eternal fire. But godliness will answer thee as Iephthah did them; Did not ye hate me, and expell me out of my Fathers house? & why are ye come unto me now ye are in distress? Didst not thou hate me, and expell me out of thy heart and house? didst thou not deride, and jeer, and perse∣cute me, against all the commands, and threatnings, and promises, and intreaties of God, and his word? and why art thou come to me now thou art in distress? I must tell thee, thou wilt then weep, and howl, and lament to God, as the Israelites did in their extremity, Deliver us only we pray thee this day. Lord help me, Lord save me, Deliver me this day from the jaws of the roaring Lion; Lord, let not hell shut her mouth upon me. Who can dwell in everlasting burnings? who can abide de∣vouring flames? But thou mayst expect the same an∣swer which God gave them, Go and cry to the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. Go to the flesh, and the world;
Go to thy riches, and honours, and sinful delights, which thou hast chosen and preferred before me, and let them deliver thee in this time of thy tribulation. Where are those gods, the rocks in which thou trustedst? Let them rise up, and help thee, and be thy protection, Iudg. 11. 6, 7. Iudg. 10. 15, 32. Deut. 37. 38. A Saint can sing in such a day of trial, knowing that death is come to him as the Angel to Peter, strik∣ing on his side, not to hurt but to awaken him, to beat off his fetters, and set him in the glorious liberty of the children of God. The Saint and the Sinner never differ so much, at least in open view, as in their ends. Sin in the bud is sweet, but in the fruit bitter; and holiness though at first draught seems not so pleasant, yet afterwards is all sweetness. Though the path of sin be smooth, and pleasing to thy flesh; yet thou wilt find it slippery, and kil∣ling to thy spirit: Its like an evening star to usher in a night of blackness, of darkness for ever. The way of holiness is more harsh to the body, but the onely Nectar of the soul; Ah Reader, if thou wilt but choose it, thou wilt find by experience, that twill be like Hannibal's passage over the Alpes, a way which will require some pains, but twill lead thee into the heavenly Paradise, at that did him into the worlds garden, Italy. Reader, Let me therefore bespeak thee, or ra∣ther God himself. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Turn unto me saith the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto thee, saith Lord of Hosts, Zach. 1. 3. After all thy neglect and contempt of God and his word, after all thy wandrings and wickedness, thou hast one call
more to turn and live; In which thy Maker doth three times pawn and interpose the authority of his name to confirm his word. The Lord of Hosts, three times he doth as it were bring his Angels, his Hosts with him, in this precept and promise (as once to Sinai at the delivery of the law.) 1. As witnesses of his truth. 2. As avengers of him on them that despise his call. 3. As rejoycers for those that turn unto him. O friend, Consider it, that God who might have turned thee into hell, commandeth thee now after all thy folly and lewdness to turn to him; yea, he promiseth that if thou dost come at his call, he will meet thee half way, and turn unto thee. It is not for his own sake that he is so earnest with thee, for he can be happy without thee; he hath no addition by thy salvation, he suffereth no diminu∣tion by thy damnation; but he calleth on thee for thy good, that thou mightst be happy in his favour. It was the saying of Antigona that she ought to please them with whom she hoped to remain for ever. Ah doth it not concern thee to please that God upon whom tho dependest for thy eternal weal or wo? When Antiochus was in Egypt in armes against the Romans, they sent P. Popilius with other Ambassa∣dours to him; where when he had welcomed them,Iustin Lib. 34. P. Popilius delivered some writings to him contain∣ing the mind of his Masters; which he he command∣ed Antiochus to read, which he did.Ios. Lib. 12. Cap. 5. Then he con∣sulted with his friends, what was best to be done in the business. Whilst he was in a great study, P. Po∣pilius, with a wand that he had in his hand, made a circle about him in the dust, saying, Ere thou stir a
foot out of this circle, return thy answer, that I may tell the Senate whether thou hadst rather have war or peace. This he uttered with such a firm countenance, that it amazed the King; wherefore after he had paused a while, he answered, I will do what the Senate hath written, or shall think fit. Reader, I shall onely allude to it and conclude. Thou art if in thy natural estate, a rebel against God; thy heart is full of enmity, and thy life of treason against his blessed Majesty; thou art daily discharging whole vollies of shot against him; he hath sent me as his Embassadour to offer thee terms of peace, and to require thee in his name to throw down thine armes, and to submit to his mercy. I know, thou art ready to consult with thy seeming friends, but real enemies, the world and the flesh, what thou wert best to do in this case; but whilst thou art thus musing, I charge, and command thee in the name of God, and by his authority who sent me to thee, that before thou closest the book, thou returne to thy Maker in thy conscience thine answer, whether thou hadst rather have peace with him, whose wrath is infininety worse then death, and whose favour is better then life, or war? If considering the excellency, necessity, and profit of godliness, thou sayst, I will through the help of Christ do all that the Lord hath written, or thinketh fit to be done, in order to my recovery out of this estate of woe and misery; I shall inform thee that God is ready to receive thee, the Spirit to assist thee, thy Saviour to embrace thee, the rich and precious promises of the Gospel, containing pardon, love, peace, eternal life, are all ready to welcome thee: But if thou deniest thy God, thy real, able, and faithful friend,
and wilt gratifie thy profest, though politick enemy the Devil, so much as to continue in thine ungodly courses, I must assure thee, that Phrygan like, thou wilt repent when it is too late; and be taught by wo∣ful experience, that it had been far better to have hearkened to the Counsels and Commands of God; that with prudent Prometheus thou mightst have forseen a danger, and shund it; then to walk on in the broad way to hell, with foolish Epimetheus with∣out any consideration till thou art unconceiva∣bly and irrecoverably miserable, and plunged in that lake, and amidst those dreadful torments, of which there is no FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table OF THE Chief Heads contained in the foregoing Treatise. A CHristians should Admonish one another. 285 How. ibid. Afflictions tend to a Christians advantage. 814,815 Anger resteth in the bosome of fools. 44,45 B Backbiting to be avoided. 271 The great danger and evil of it. 272, to 275 A Backbiter wounds three wih one arrow. 274 Christians must bear with one another. 288 A threefold burthen Christians must bear for each o∣ther. 289 Their Civil, Spiritual and Natural burthens. ibid. The Beasts of the field may teach men. 453 Beasts teach man six lessons; Thankefulness to God; De∣pendance
on God; The dread of God; Diligence in our callings; Innocency; Wisdom. 453, 454 Birds of the Air teach man eight Lessons 454, to 457 Christians must use a conscience in buying. 17 C CHristians should be diligent in their particular Cal∣lings. 511 Christians must avoid censuring. 266 The great evil of censuring. 267 How to apply our selves to civil men in sickness. 577 Saints must be careful in the choice of their Compani∣ons. 90, 133 The benefit of Company. 86, 87, to 90, 138, 139 The great danger of evil Company to draw men to sin. 9, to 95. 133, to 135 to draw men to suffering. 95, to 99, 136 The Great advantage of good Company. 98, to 101. 241, to 247 A mans Company will discover him. 101, 102, 139 Christians should Company with them that are godly. 109,110,140,141 because they are godly. 116,117 Whether a Christian may not be more intimate with some godly Companions then others. 119 Two Cautions about it. 120,121 Christians should endeavour the spiritual good of their Companions. 121, to 125,182 Saints may sometimes use, but should not chuse the Com∣pany of sinners. 109,110 Objections against it answered. 124, to 128 Evil Company infectios 156, 157 Saints may be the better for evil Company when they
are called to it. 158, 159, 177 Wherein. 179, to 182 Christians must guard their souls in evil Company. 160,161 not needlesly expose themselves to sufferings. 167 Saints must not disown Christ in any Company. 172, to 175 Saints should endeavour the Conversion of sinners. 182, 183 How. 183, to 189 By good Company pious souls have been confirmed. 245 Erring Saints recovered. ibid. Dull Christians quickened. 246 Much sin prevented. 248 Christians must watch themselves in good Company. 62 What sins Saints are most prone to in good Company. 263 The Communion of Saints the most excellent Com∣munion. 236, 250, 257 Wherein the Communion of Saints consisteth. 275 In a mutual communication of their gifts and graces. ibid. In joyning in the Ordinances of God. ibid. In serviceableness each to other. 276 Wherein. 280, to 287 A Contented spirit a great help to godliness 809 Nine Arguments to Contentedness in the most afflicted condition. 813 Christians should receive Counsel. 301 Penitent Christians should be comforted. 283
Its a duty to be courteous. 39 Courtesie is an ornament to Christianity. 40,41 D EVery day to be begun with duty. 496 Arguments to it. ib. to 499 Christians should exercise themselves to godliness, in their dealings with all men. 5 Its a sign of hypocrisie to be careless in dealings with men. 7, to 10 The credit of Religion is much engaged in our Dealings with others. 11, to 14 In our dealings with others we must be righteous. 15 Courteous. 39 Meek. 42 The Principle of a Christian in his dealings, must be gracious. 51, 52 The end of a Christian in his dealings must be minded. 53, 54 A daily performance of holy duties to be minded. 756 The necessity and benefit of daily duties. 757, to 760 Christians should exercise themselves to Godliness on a dying bed. 611,612 What it is to dye in the Lord. 612 Three things in it. ib. In what respects Christ was obedient to the death. 65 Death is a serious thing. 619 Death will try men. 620 At death man is stated for eternity. 622 Satan is busie to assault at death. ib. 623 A death bed is a special season to honour God. 624 Its the last opportunity. 627
How Christians should honour God on a dying bed. 628 In commending God and godliness to others. 629 In commending our selves to God. 633 In praying for our Relations, the Church, our Bene∣factours, and our Enemies. 634, to 637 In exercising grace on a dying bed. 637 What graces Saints should especially exercise on a dy∣ing bed, Faith, Courage, Repentance, Charity, Pati∣ence. 637, to 647 Our whole life should be a preparation for Death. 633, 634 In what respects, or how a Saint may dye with comfort. 658, to 662 Meditation of death a special help to holiness. 745, to 753 The great mischif of discontent. 811, 812 E CHristians must spiritualize earthly things. 372,373 Several examples hereof. 374, to 380 The earth teacheth man four lessons. 457 Earthly things, unsutable, unsatisfying, vexatious, de∣ceitful, and uncertain. 828, to 840 Ejaculations profitable. 435 Christians must look to their ends in their actions. 53, 54 Frequent Examination of our selves and our ways a duty. 523, 786 The great advantage thereof. 524, to 727.781, to 786 Examples helpful to encourage us heaven-ward. 841
F FAith necessary if we would exercise our selves unto godliness. 706 The excellency of Faith. 707 Faith destroyeth sin. 708 Overcometh the world. 712 Faith overcometh the affrightments of the World. 713, 714 Faith overcometh the allurements of the world. 716, 717 Faith enableth to overcome Satan. 720 the flesh. 722 Faith deriveth grace from Christ. 724 Faith sets all other graces at work. 725 Faith makes Ordinances profitable. 727 Nine Questions to them that neglect Family duties. 508, to 511 Fear, sinful when. 179 There can be no true Friendship betwixt a godly and a wicked man. 105, to 108 Who is thy best friend. 303, 345 G SEtting God always before our eyes, a great help to god∣liness. 729, to 737 The knowledge of God a great help to holiness. 801, to 809 Gods Omniscience. 493, 494 Gods Patience, Vide Patience. Gods word, Vide word. Means whereby Christians may exercise themselves to Godliness. 695. Vide Means.
Godliness the most excellent Calling. 844 The most honourable. ib. The most comfortable. 849 The most profitable Calling. 858 Twelve serious thoughts to quicken all to Exercise them∣selves to Godliness. Vide, Epistle to the Reader. H THe heart, the great work-house of thoughts, words, and actions. 698 The necessity of a new heart in all that would make re∣ligion their business. 699, 700 The heart of man backward to good. 255 prone to evil. 364 must be watched. 369 Holiness is honourable. 844 Humility an help to holiness. 792 The Excellency of humility. 793, 794 Vnrighteousness a sign of Hypocrisie. 7, 8 I THe evil of Idleness. 820 The great mischief of Ignorance. 806 The Ignorant should be instructed. 280, 281 A serious consideration of the day of judgement, a special help to godliness. 765 Dreadfulness of the day of judgement to wicked men. 767, 776 The day of judgement will be comfortable to Saints. 772 Their godliness will be mentioned. ibid. Their names vindicated. 773 Persons publiquely acquitted. ib.
Their happiness will be perfected. 774 Justice to what resembled. 39 Justice, Vide, Righteousness. K THe Knowledge of God a special means of godliness. 802 Subjects should pay tribute to their King. 38, 39 L LIfe is uncertain. 490 Life is short. 838 Love should be among Christians. 25 Why the Commandment of Love is called a new Com∣mandment. 236 The fervency of Christs prayer for love. 237 Sad effects of want of love among Christians. 239 M MEans whereby Christians may exercise themselves to godliness. 695 A good Foundation. 696 Living by Faith. 746 Setting God before our eyes. 729 A constant watchfulness. 734 Meditation of our dying day. 745 Dayly solemn performance of holy duties. 756 Frequent thoughts of the day of judgement. 765 Calling our selves often to account. 780 Avoiding occasions of sin. 787 Walking humbly. 793 Suppressing sin in the beginning. 799 The knowledge of God. 801
A contented frame of spirit. 809 Avoiding those things that hinder godliness. 819 Meditation useful. 388 What set Meditation is. 389, to 396 An example of set Meditation on the Word of God. 398 Another example on the patience of God. 466 Its a christians duty to be meek. 42 The excellency of meekness. 43 Meekness a sign of a wise man. 44 The Christians meekness should not hinder his zeal for God. 46,47 A meek man a good Neighbour, in what respects. 48, 49. N NAture is corrupted, and must be renewed. 571 O OCcasions of sin must be avoided. 787 Obedience must be universal. 8, 9 P PAtience of God wonderful. 467 Gods Patience amplified in twelve considerations. 467, to 476 The causes of Gods patience. 476,477 The Application of Gods patience. 485 The vanity of Pride. 795,796 Christians must look to the Principles of their ordinary actions. 50, 51 Men must pay what they owe. 20
Payments must be in good money. 21 Q ITs good for Christians sometimes to put Questions to their own souls. 524 The manner how they should do it. 546, 547 The benefit of it in four particulars. 525, 526 R REgeneration necessary. 695 Christians should rejoyce in others graces. 308 The credit of Religion much engaged in a Christians publique dealings. 11, to 61 Its the duty of Saints, to reprove them that sin. 165, 188, 285, 286 Reproof must be given seriously, seasonably, prudently, compassionately. 191, to 204 Its a Christians duty to take a reproof kindly. 302, to 306 Christians ought to be righteous in their dealings with all men. 15 In their works. 16,64,65 In buying. 17, 18, 19 Wherein Righteousness in buying consisteth. 20, 21,65 Christians ought to be righteous in selling. 22 Wherein it consisteth. 23, 24,25,66,67 The general rule of righteousness. 27,69 Christian ought to be righteous in their words. 34,70 S SAtan a strong, crafty, industrious, and cruel enemy. 336, to 339 Sinful shame, what. 174
Christians must be righteous in selling. 22 Its a sin to work upon the ignorance or poverty of the Seller. 18, 19 Its a duty to visit the sick. 554, 557 Great caution about it. 555 Its a special season of doing and receiving good. 559, 560 It may be the last opportunity. 565 We must be acquainted with the state of sick persons souls. 568 Sutable application must be made to the sick. 570 Five things cheifly to be insisted on to the carnal sick. 571, to 576 How to apply our selves to civil men in sickness. 577 Three great lessons all should learn by sickness. 579 How to apply our selves to Saints in their sickness. 578 We must deal faithfully with the sick. 581 Its a duty to pray with, and for the sick. 582 Much good may be gotten by visiting the sick. 584 We may learn our own frailty, the worth of health, the price of time, the excellency of grace. 585, to 588 Sinful silence, what. 165 What it is to be silent in evil times. 168 Sin to be suppressed in the beginning. 799 Open sins worse then secret in a threefold respect. 13 God hates sin. 467 How many ways we may partake of other mens sins by provocation complyance, Silence. 164, 165, 186 No true friendship betwixt Saints and Sinners. 104, 108, 141, 142 Christians should be careful of their carriage amongst sinners. 155
Christians should not needlesly accompany with sinners. 111. Vide company. In what respect Sinners are said to be without. 155 Sinners joyn hand in hand to oppose the interest and Kingdom of Christ. 153 What it is to sit with vain persons. 112 Slothful Christians must be quickened. 282 Soliloquies a duty. 432 Its a Christians duty to be holy in Solitude. 354,355 The danger of neglecting our watch in Solitude. 362 The great benefit of seasonable Solitude. 357 To make conscience of our carriage in Solitude, is a good sign of sincerity. 365. Wherein it consisteth. 369, &c. In guarding the heart against vain thoughts. 369 In spiritualizing earthly objects. 372 In solemn Meditations. 388 In Soliloquies. 432 Secret Ejaculations. 435 The evil of needless Solitude. 257 The sorrowful must be comforted. 283 T CHristians must be thankful for restraining grace. 180, 181 Vain thoughts must be watcht against. 369 Time is precious and must be redeemed. 263,264,578 Trees teach men ten lessons. 460, to 464 V VAin thoughts, what. 370 Unrighteousness a sign of Hypocrisie. 7,8. 58 The folly of unrighteous men. 25, 28, to 34 W THe life of man compared to a Walk. 1 The life of a Christian to a walk with God. 2
In what respects a Christians life is said to be a walking in the light. 2,3. Christians must watch. 514 Watchfulness requisite in evil company. 155, 160, 161 Watchfulness a great help to Godliness. 734 Great reason for watchfulness. 741 We must watch against sin. 741. for doing good. ibid. in duties. 742. after duties. ibid. our senses. ibid. our tongues. 743. our heart especially. 744 Every Week-day to be devoted to God. 488 Motives to it. 490, to 496. Wherein it consisteth. In beginning the day with God. 496 Diligence in our callings. 511 Redeeming time. 518 Constant watchfulness. 514 Self Examination. 523 Evening duties. 527 Our words should be the language of our hearts. 34 The excellency of the Word of God, largely described in its four causes. 398, &c. The Word of God is true. 412. holy. 408. perfect. 411. powerful. 410 Why the Word of God is compared to light. 416 Why to rain. 419 World not to be loved. 821 The vanity of worldly things. 824 Worldly things unsutable to our souls. 8. 8. unsatisfying. 830. deceitful. 828. vexatious. 832. Z ZEal, what it is. 179 Christians should be Zealous. ibid. FINIS.
These Books following are Printed for, and sold by Thomas Park-hurst, as the three Crowns at the lower end of Cheap-side, over-against the great Conduit. Folio's. THe History of the Evangelical Chur∣ches of the Valleys of Piedmont; By Sam. Mrland. A Commentary upon Iob, Psalms, Pro∣verbs, Ecclsistes, and the Song of Songs; By Iohn Mayr. Exemplary Novels, a famous Romance. An Exposition upon the first Epistle of Iohn; By Iohn Cotton. An Exposition upon the second Epistle to the Corinthians; By Rich. Sibs. The bowels of tender mercy sealed in the everlasting Covenant, wherein is set forth the Nature, Conditions, and Excel∣lencies of it, and how a sinner should do to enter into it, and the danger of refusing this Covenant Reation. Also the Treasures of Grace, Blessings, Comforts, Promises, and Priviledges, that are comprised in the co∣venant of Gods free and rich mercy, made in Jesus Christ with Beleivers; By Obadia Sedgwick B. D. The Parly of Beasts, or, Morphandra, Queen of the inchanted Island, with Re∣flexes upon the present state of most Coun∣tries in Christendom; By Iames Howel Esq The dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living in several Treatises; viz. The fulness and greatest evil that is in sin, on 2 Sam. 24. 10. The love of Christ to his Spouse, on Cant. 4. 9. Nature and Royalties of Faith, on Iohn 1. 15. The slowness of heart to believe, on Iohn 1. 50. The causes signs and cure of Hypocrisie, with motives and helps to sincerity, on Isa. 58 2. The wonderful workings of God for his Church and his people, on Exod. 15 11. Never be∣fore published; By Samuel Bolt D: D. Quarto's. AN Expositon upon the nineteen last Chapters of Ezekiel; By Will. Geenhil. An Exposition on the first eighteen verses of Iohn; By I. Arrowsmith: An exposition on the book of Canticles; By R. Robotham. A Treatise shwing the right ordering of the Bee; By Sam. Purchas. An Exposition on the 15, 16, 17. Chap. of Iob; By I. Caryll. An Exhortation from the Churches of Bohemia to the Church of England; By Iohn Amos Comenius. The Plain Doctrine of the Justification of a sinner in the sight of God, justified by the God of truth in his holy Word and the Cloud of Witnees in all ages; By Charles Chauncy of New England. The whole Tryal of the Marquiss of Arguile. An Exposition upon the 4. Chap. of the 2. Epist. to the Cornthians; By R. Sbbs. Comfortable Sermons on Psalm 24 Preached before the Lady Elizabeth, her Grace; By Daniel Dyke. B. D. God save the King, in a Sermon preached the day after his Majesty came into London by Anth. Walker, Preacher of the Gospel. An Antidote against Anabaptism, where∣in the baptizing Infants, taking Tythes, &c, are flly vindicated; by Aylmor Haughton. The Conversation as heavenly, and as natural, in two Treatises; by D. Stoughton Jesus Christ the mystical or Gospel Sun, sometimes seemingly Eclipsed, yet never going gown from his people; opened in a Sermon at Pauls Church; before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen &c. March 28. 1652. the day before the
le Solar Eclipse; by Fulk Beller. M. A. A Sermon Preached before the Honou∣rable House of Commons, at their late Monethly Fast, being on Wednesday, Iune 30. 1647. by Nath. Ward. A Declaration of the Faith and Order owned and practised in the Congregational Churches in England, agreed upon, & con∣sented unto by their Elders & Messengers, in their meeting at the Savoy, Oct. 12. 1658. Mesolabium Architectonicum, that is, a most rare and singular Instrument, for the easie, speedy, and most certain measuring of Plans and Solids by the foot; invented long since by Mr. Tho. Bedwel Esq A Changlng no company for lovers of Loyalty, or the Subjects Lesson in point of sacred submission to, and humble com∣pliance with God and the King. The beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposi∣tioo of the 82. Psalm, where is set forth the Necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty, and Mo∣rlity of Magistrates; by the labours of Tho, Hall B. D. and Pastor of Kings Norton, and George Swinock M. A. and Pastor of Great Kimbel. Large Octavo's. FOur profitable Treatises, very useful for Christian practice, viz. The killing power of the Law, the spirtual watch, the New Birth, of the Sabbath; by the reve∣ren, W. Fenne late Minister of Rotchford in Essex. Enchirid on Iudlum, or Iehoshaphats charge to his Judges; together with the Catastrophe Magnatum, or King Davids la∣mentton at Prince Abners Incineration by Iames Livesey, Minister of the Gospel at Atherton. The greatest loss, upon Mat. 15, 26; by the same uthor. Meditations, Divine and Moral; by Henry Tabb, M. A. The Psalms of K. Davd translated by K. Iames. Willul impenitency the greatest Self-murther; by that able, faithful and labori∣ous Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. W. Fenner. , the Almost Christian discovered, or the False professor tryed and cast; by Matthew Mead. Spiritual Wisdom, improved against Temptation, by the same Author. Pharonnida, an Heroick Poem; by VVill. Chamberlain. The good old way of Perkins improved, in a plain Exposition of Perkins Catechism, by C. Broxholme. A Treatise of Self-denial, with the Ne∣cessity and Excellency of it; by Thphilu Polwheele. The Hippocrtes Ladder; by John Sheffield. The Christian compleatly armed; by R. Robinson. A practical discourse of prayer, wherein is handled the nature and duty of prayer; by T. Cbbet. The Righteos mans tower; by Ier. Dike. Mount Ebal levelled, or a redemption from the urse; by El. Wales, with Mr. Ca∣lamies Epistle. Tentations; their nature, danger, cure; to which is added, his Remains; by R. Capel. A Wedding-Ring, fit for the finger, o∣gether with the Non-such Professor; by W. Secker. The History of the Turkish Wars in Hungary, Transilvania, Austria, Silesia, and other Provinces of the German Empire, from the first invasion of Amurath the se∣cond, Anno. 1432. to this present year, 1664. to which is prefixed a shor discourse of the state and government of the said Pro∣vinces. The spiritual taste described, and a glimpse of Christ discovered, in two parts, grounded on Psalm 34. 8. and Mal. 4. 2. by Rb. Dingley, M. A. Small Octavo's. CAtechizing Gods Ordinance, in sun∣dry Sermons; by Mr. Zach. Croson.
A bridle for the tongue, or a eatise of ten sins of the tongue; viz. Cursing, Swear∣ing, Slandering, Scoffing, Filthy Speaking, Flattering, Censuring, Murmuring, Lying, and Boasting, on Iam. . 26. by W. Gearing. The Pastor and the Clerk, or a debate (real) concerning Infant Baptism; by Iohn Ellis. Habakkk's prayer applied to the Churches present occasions, on Hab. 3. 2. and Christs counsel to the Church of Phi∣ladelphia, on Rev. 3. 11. by Sam. Balmford. The Rudiments of Grammar: The Rules composed in English verse, for the great be∣nefit and delight of young beginners; by Iames Shirley. The Ladies Dispensatory, containing the Natures, Vertues, and Qualities of Herbs and Simples useful in Physick, reduced into a methodical order, for their more ready use in any sickness, or other accident of the body. The godly mans Ark in the day of his distress, discovered in divers Sermons; the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moor. Whereunto is an∣nexed, Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected by her in the time of her health, or her comfort in the ime of sickness; by E. Calamy, B. D. The Gale of Opportunity, and the be∣loved Disciple; by Thomas Froysal. Sion in the house of mourning, because of sin and suffering, being an Exposition on the 5. Chap. of the Lamentations; by D. S. Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Jesus Christ, briefly explained; whereunto is added, the harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth, the mystery of his coming, and of that redempton which by his death he was to accomplish; By Will. Guild. Good company, being a collection of various, seriou, pious meditations; by I. Melvin. A Religious Treatise upon Simeons song; or Instructions how to live holily, and dye happily by T. Woodriff, B. D. The Reformation, in which is reconcili∣ation with God and his people; or a Ca∣techism unvailing the Apostles Creed, with Annoations; in which Faith, Ordinances and Governments are professed, as in the Primitive Times, in opposition to all Er∣rors and Herees; by W. K. Prospering prophaneness, provoking ho∣ly conference, and Gods attention; several Sermons from Mal 3 15, 16, 17. by Zach. Crofton. The Catechism of Hugo Grtius, done in∣to English. Benedictio, Valediction, or the Remem∣brancer of thy friend, and thy end, being a farewel Sermom, Preached at the house of the (late) Right Honourable Letitia Lady Paget, Dwager, deceased, by her Chaplain Anth. Sadler. Ioh. Am. Comenii schola, Ludu Encuclo∣paedi viva, i. e. Ian Linguarum praxi Comicae. A divine Cordial, or the transcendent Priviledge of those that love God, and are savingly called. A word of comfort for the Church of God. The Holy Eucharist, or the mystery of the Lords Supper briefly explained. A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon preached at the Spittle in Easter-week. All four by Tho. Watson. Poems of divers sorts, by Sir Aston Cokain. The Protestants Triumph; wherein the divinity, excellency, antiquity, and Certan∣ty of our Religion is asserted against the Papists, by Charles Drelingcourt. Twelves. THe dangerous rule, or a Sermon preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster in Ireland, upon Aug. 3. 1657 before the reverend Judges for that circuit; by S. L.
The womans Glory; a Treatise aserting the honour of that Sex, by manifesting that Women are capable of the highest im∣provements: by Sam. Toshel. The discovery of the most dangeros dead Faith; by Iohn Eat, M. A. Christ a Christians only Gain; by R. Vies: A plain Answer to this practical Questi∣on, What course a Christian may take to hae his heart quickened in the duty of secret prayer. By Rich. Mayo, late of Kingstone. The dying Fathers last living Legacy to his only Son. A most excellent Treatise, containing The way to seek Heavens Glory. To flye Earths Vanity. To fear Hells Horror. With the Bell-mans Summons. A Good day well Improved. Death disarmed, at the Funeral of Dr. Hill. The Balm of Gild for the Wounds of England, By Anthony Tukny. The true Evangelical temper, wherein Divinity and Ecclesiastical History are in∣terwoven and mixed; both to the profit and delight of the Christian Reader; on Isa. 11. 6, 7, 9. by I. Iackson. Twentyfours. GRoans of the Spirit, or a Tryal of the truth of prayer. A Handkercheif for Parents wet eyes, upon the death of their Children; or Friends. FINIS.
