T15 12768686 93623
AN UPRORE IN THE NORTH, AT HVLL, About a moneth since by a company of souldiers against their Captaine. With the particular speeches spoke on either side before the said Captaine EDVVARD WALBRUCKE was mi∣serably wounded and slaine. Rebellion is as the sinne of Witchcraft. By H. T. Printed Anno Dom. 1647▪
AN VPRORE IN THE NORTH, AT HULL, By a Company of souldiers against their Captaine Edw. VValbrucke. TO desine warre is to speake of a bloody Theame: of which the subject on which I write forces me unto. Pax ubi non est ibi nilhonesti, saith one: where there is no peace honesty hath little to do, as may appear by the ensuing subject. In Hull (the situation of which place I beleeve few are igno∣rant of, was a Regiment of Souldiers, who have∣ing some distaste of their Captain, scorning to be controuled; told him, as he was their Cap∣taine and commander they honoured him, but if that he went any way to tyrannize over them, he should find a souldiers malice not inferiour to a Captains, they said they came thither to fight for their King and country, for whose sakes the best blood in their bodies they would spend, all shouting forth with a generall con∣sent
cursed be he which fears to die in a iust cause, truth we love, but falshood contemne. One better minded Souldier then all the rest answered most wisely after this maner: Do but give me the hearing and you shall soone grant how rediculous this uprore is; wise men never attempt impossibilities; tis more easie and law∣full for any single arme to quell an army, as to effect with loyalty your intented enterprise. We come hither to fight for our King, & to re∣lieve our country from slavery, but not to raise civill wars amongst our selves, which of all dis∣sension is the worst: then turning to his Cap∣taine he speaked thus: What Magick hath transform'd thee from thy self? Where is thy wonted valour? How hast thou lost thy boasted freedome? What new fire burn'd up thy scorched entrayles? What unknowne desires invade and take poses∣sion of thy soule? All vertuous obiects vanisht? Hastthou stood the shocks of fierce encounters? Stopt thine ears against all syren notes moving to the least distemper against thy Souldiers? What monster is it, which hath drawne thy barke of clemencie, (that which wonder hath kept, an honoured and constant course:) into the gulfe of a deserved ill fame? and in a mo∣ment with thine own hands dig up a grave to bury the momumentall heape of all thy yeares imployd in noble actions: I sorrow for thy fate: we obey thee, and willingly put our
owne fetters on to grace thy triumph, it were therefore more then cruelty in thee to use us as a tyrant useth to doe his servants, for so we are, but not your slaves; wherefore I desire your worship to take consideration. The Captaine with sterne look answered thus: Hang consideration. When you are hanged all, England is able to furnish me with more I have courage to fetch them in. How durst you only entertaine a grumbling syllable in my cōmand? In me great Mavors spake, my voyce did eccho in your eares his thunder, and whilst you like so many seaborne Tritons armed onely with the trumpet of our iniunction you thinke you are safe now: who durst but dispute it or make it questionable, if this moment I charge ye from yon hanging cliffe that glases his rugged fore∣head in the neighbour lake to throw your selves downe head long: Or like fagots to fill the ditch∣es of defended forts while on your backs I march up to the breach. One stout souldier answered, that would not I, (which forc'd the captaine for to frown) but yet said the souldier: I dare as much as any of great Brittaines boldest souldiers. At which the Captaine answered, Adde one syllable more, thou dost pronounce a sentence that Earthquake-like will swallow thee: but yet obey mee according to my minde and I am yours.
With a unanimus consent they thus an∣swered: Thy flatteries we dispise, thus spit at them, and scorne them, and being arm'd in the assu∣rance of our innocent vertue, wee stamp upon all doubts, all feares, all tortures, thy barbarous, cruelty, or villany can shewe upon us: thou art false, falser than Romish religion, more savage than the beat or she Lyon would of her whelps, we have been long burthened with the yoke of your tyrannizing command, and now at length are resolved to shake it off, we doe intend to make no Idol of you, nor as our late Tempori∣zers did to the Altar, bow and bend to you any more upon these tearmes, for since you seeme to forget your love to us, we scorne to tender our servie to you: At which like so many raven∣ing wolves to devour a sheepe or lamb, so ran they upon him and tooke away his life. He exercised Tyrannie over them, and they inhumanity over him, they acted their parts tra∣gically, and he died most miserably. Alas! who knowes whither with his body they slew his soul also. Commanders of what degree soever, mark this my admonition, Let not your rage, excell reason let not pride oversway you which is a vice by which many fall. Let not your thought be lifted up higher than it becomes. If men be your servants, make them not your slaves, for fierie spirits are not soon quenched witnes the fierce fire which was kindled against
this Captaine. It is scarce within the compasse of patience to endure the tyrannie of a King, much lesse a Kings servant. As it is the part of a King parcere subiectis, so it is also Vibellare superbos. Who plucke downe the proud, such whose spirits and ambitious thoughts the highest sphere will not containe▪ with Icaris his wings, many will soare aloft, al∣though the son melt the wax, and they Christen more seas; also there are many fool hardy, or ra∣ther arrogant Phaetons, whose ambitious minde, will desire to rule Phaebus hi horses, although they burne the world, the little world I meane, their own soules. I have done with my admoni∣tion to Commanders, now in a few lines I will admonish all common Souldiers, and so con∣clude. You which are common Souldiers let obedience steer your actions; let not rebellion lurke privily in your hearts, I say make not your hearts like so many closets, to keepe privy con∣spiracies hid, for rebellion is a horrid crime which God will punish either in this world or the world to come, be sure you obey your King, and bee not disobedient to your commanders; if they be bad pray unto God to mend them, but doe not you with your unpartiall sword end them. Let this rebellious uproar at Hull be a cause to make others civil, llet their enormities, make
others cease to be vicious: let their cruelty teach others to be mercifull: let their malice bee a cause of others love: This GOD of his gracious mercy grant: Amen. INIS.
