T2076A 99833563 38040
Treason in Graine: That Most TRAITEROUS, OR LIBEL OF FITZ-HARRIS, Whereby he design'd to raise a Rebellion amongst us the better to make way for a French Invasion, and our utter destruction, as it was read in both Houses of Parliament at Oxford, and upon which the House of Commons Impeached him of High Treason. Falsly and Malitiously called by him, The True English-man speaking plain English, in a Letter from a Friend to a Friend. I thank you for the Character of a Popish Successor which you sent me, wherein our Just fears, and the grounds of them, are justly set out. But I am in greater fear of the present Possessor, why do we frighten our selves about the Evil that is to come, not looking to that which is at hand? We would cut off the Budding Weeds, and let the Poysonous Root lye still; we would stop the Channel of our Evils, and let the Fountain still run: My meaning is this, can Pylades Know and Act all these Bloody Conspiracies, and not impart them to his dear Orestes? if James be Conscious and Guilty, Charles is so too: Believe me, these two Brethren in Iniquity, they are in Confederacy with Pope and French to introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government, as all their Actions demonstrate: the Parliament, Magna Charta, and Liberty of the Subject are as heavy Yoaks which they would cast off to be as absolute as their Br. of France; and if this can be proved to be their only aim and endeavor, why should not every True Britain be a Quaker thus far? Let the English rise, and move as one Man to self defence, to open Action, and fling off their intollerable Riders. Blow the the Trumpet, stand on your Guard, and withstand them as Bears and Tygers, And since there can be no trust given to this goodly couple of Popish Brethren, nor no relief expected from a Parliament; Trust to your Swords in defence of your Lives, Laws, Religion and Properties, like the stout Earl of Old, who told a King that if he could not be defended by Magna Charta, he would be relieved by Longa Spada. Yet to convince the World that this Scottish Race is Corrupt Root and Branch, and Popish from the very beginning, be pleas'd to consider these rea∣sons following.
The Grand-father of these Men, James the Scot, was of no Religion at the bottom, but entred by a pretence of a Sham-plot of the Papists against his Life, whilst really he collogued with the Popish Party under hand; hs Mo∣ther, his Kindred with great Submission, yet afterwards thinking it for hs pur∣pose to Cajole the Parliament, and write against the Pope and Cardinals, he sends a Scots Bird to blind the Eyes of the Vatican Keeper with Money, and to steal his Letters from off the Roman File, and then he crowes as boldly as an unsuspected Harlot for the Protestant Religion and Interest. That Man's Son Charles the First, held a Secret Correspondency with the Pope, calling him his Dear and Holy Father, as is to be seen in his Letters recorded in Rushworth's Collections: Were not his Wife and Courtiers Papists? Did he not countenance and promote the Rebellion in Ireland? As the Irish Grandees and his very Commissions testifie and declare, was there not a Popish Plot, and an Universal Conspiracy of the Papists discovered to him and his Confessor Laud, and did they not piously stifle it lest they should have disco∣vered the Nakedness of their Mother Church? Whilst that goodly Protestant Prince pretended to relieve the poor besieged Protestants at Roshel by his con∣fident Buckingham, did he not hold Correspondency with the French Cardinal how to betray them for a Summ of Money (which his obstinacy with his Par∣liament made him stand in need of.) But they who so ill approved themselves to be Heads of the Protestant Church, Charles and Laud, did they not loose their own Heads by a manifest Judgment of God? And was not the false heart of their Emissary Buckingham, found out by an Assassins Knife? But to come nearer to our purpose, these two goodly Imps of our days are stark naught; arrived at the heigth of Wickedness, and of professed Arbitrari∣ness and Popery. As for James, he was a Papist whilst he had a Regiment in the French, and afterwards in the Spanish Service beyond Seas. And as for Charles, he was re∣ported, e're he came into England, to have been reconciled to the Church of Rome in one of the French Kings Country Houses; and since they came in, how have they wheedled and played fast and loose, in their profession of Reli∣gion as occasion and their Affairs requir'd? Have they not all along maintain∣ed Secret Correspondency with France and Rome? As Colemans Letters may sufficiently instruct such who have not seen more Secret Memories. But let us come to Examine their Actions which are a better proof of their hearts, were not the Dukes Servants and Confidents all Papists? Witness his Talbots, Patricks and other Irish Teags, were not the Duke and such of his Creatures as were known Papists promoted to all publick Offices of trust both at Sea and Land? Witness Bellasis now a Traytor in the Tower, did not James by Coleman, Throgmorton and others, hold open Correspondency with the Pope and Cardinals? and could Charles be Ignorant of all this? Nay he lik'd all so well, that he hardly employed any about him but Papists, as Clifford whom he made Treasurer; or employed any abroad but Persons of the same stamp, Wit∣ness Godolphin whom he sent Embassador into Spain, as he did others elsewhere, what more obvious than that though the Duke's Treachery against the King∣dom and Protestant Religion be fully made out, and the People and Parlia∣ment seek to bring him to a Legal Tryal, yet Charles obstructs Justice, and will not suffer it? How can this be, but that he is joyned in Will and Deed in
all the Dukes Villanies, and that he is afraid to be discovered and found out to be a Papist, and a betrayer of his People and the Protestant Religion. If he was heartily concerned for our Religion, would he not opposcessor, who will Infallibly overthrow it? Can there be any thing more t than that he continues the Dukes adherents, and those who were advanced by him, in all Offices of Trust? And hath he not turn'd out of his Councel the most Zealous Protestants, such as Shaftesbury, Essex and others, and introdu∣ced in their Rooms other meer Tools, or those that are Popishly and Arbitra∣rily affected? Hath he not modell'd all the Sheriffs and Justices throughout England in subserviency to a Popish Design? Was not Sir William Waller and Dr. Chamberlain, and divers others turn'd out of the Commission in and about London, meerly for being Zealous Prosecutors of Priests and Papist? Doth not Charles all he can to hinder the further detection of the Popish Plot? And doth he not to his utmost discountenance the Discoverers of it, and suffer them to want Bread? And doth he not in the mean time plentifully encourage and re∣ward Fitz-Gerald and all the Sham-plotters? Whereas Dangerfield had 8 l. a Week whilst a Forger of Plots against the Protestants, he is cast off with scorn and in danger of his life since he laid open the Popish Engineers. Is not Ch. so much in love with his Popish Irish Rebels (therein treading in his Fathers steps) that he promotes Montgarret (Carlingford, Fitz Patrick and others who were the Heads of the Rebellion, to Honors and Preferment, though Charles took the Covenant and a Coronation Oath to preserve the Protestant Religi∣on, yet hath he not palpably broken them? He made large promises and pro∣testations at Breda for the allowing a perpetual Liberty of Conscience to Non-conforming Protestants, but he soon forgot them all: To what end was the Act which was made soon after his restoration, prohibiting any to call him P or to say he Popishly enclin'd, and rendg such as should offend Gery of a premuire, but to stop the Peoples Mouthes when ever he should Act any thing in Favor of Popery as he was then resolved to do? Is it not manifest therefore, that Scotch Oaths, Breda promises, Protestant Profession, liberty of Conscience, War with France, saving of Flanders is all in Jest to delude Protestant Subjects? Is it not apparent that breaking of Leagues, Dutch Wars, Smirna Fleet, French measures to favor their Conquests, loss of Ships, War in Christendom, Blood of Protestants, reprieving of Popish Traitors, is all in earnest, and done in Favor of Popery? And are not his far Speeches, his true Protestant Love to Parliaments Just rights, and English Liberties, his pretended Ignorance of the Plot, and his Hanging of Traytors to serve a turn, but in meer jest? Are not his great Debaucheries, his Whoring Courtiers, Po∣pish Councels, cheating Rogues, Hellish Plottings, his saving of Traytors, his French Pensioners, his Nests of Whores and Swarms of Bastards, his Macks, his Cut-Throats, his Horrid Murderers, his Burning of London and the Provost's house too, his Sham-plotting, his suborn'd Villains, his Popish Officers by Sea and Land, his Struglings for a Popish Successor, his agreements with France, his frequent Dissolutions of Parliaments, his buying of Voices, his false returns all of them designs to ruine us in good earnest, and in favor of Arbitrary Go∣vernment? And is it not in order to this Bled end that you see none Coun∣tenanced by Charles and James, but Church Papists, betraying Bishops, Tan∣tivy abhorrers, barking Touzers, Popish Scriblers to deceive the People and fix the Popish Successors Illegal Title? Are not Jesuits Councels, French Assi∣stance to conquer Ireland, subdue Scotland, winn Flanders, beat the Dutch, get their Shipping, be Masters of the Seas? And are not facing a Rebellion, the
letting the Plot go on, the endeavoring to retrieve the Popish Cuse by get¦ting a Popish pentionary, abhorring Parliaments, who shall betray their Coun∣try, enslave posterity and destroy themselves at last, means only to save a Popish Traiterous Successor, and a present Popish Possessor? James and Charles are Brethren in Iniquity, corrupt both in root and branch, and who study to enslave England to a French and Romish Yoke, is not all this plain? Have you not Eyes, Sense or Feeling? Where is the Old English Noble Spirit? Are you become French asses to suffer any load to be laid upon you? And therefore if you can get no remedy from this next Parliament (as certainly you will not) and if Charles doth not repent and comply with it, then up all as one Man. O brave English Men, look to your own defence e're it be too late; rouze up your Spirits, remember your Predecessors, remember how that the asserting of their liberties, justified both by success and Law, the War of the Barons against wicked Councellors who misled the King, And will you now let that go which cost them so dear? How many oppressing Kings have been deposed in this Nation, as appears in Records referr'd unto in that worthy Patriots History of the Succession; were not Rich. 2. And Hen. 6. both laid aside, not to mentio others, and was there ever such a King as this of ours? was not K. John. deposed for going about to imbrace the Mahometam Religion, and for entring into a league with the K. of Morocco to that purpose? Though Mahometarism and the K. of Morocco, were no such Enemies to our rights and liberties as Popery and the French King are. Is it not time then that all should be ready? Let the City of London stand by the Parliament for the maintaining of their Liberties and Religion in an extream way, if Parliameary ways be not consented unto by the King, let the Counties be ready to enter into an Assoiation, as the County of York did in H.
