T3190 14560949 102586
A NEW METHOD OF Educating Children: OR, RULES and DIRECTIONS For the Well Ordering and Governing Them, During Their YOUNGER YEARS. SHEWING That they are capable, at the Age of Three Years, to be caused to learn Languages, and most Arts and Sciences▪ which, if observ'd By Parents, would be of greater Value than a Thousand Pounds Portion. ALSO, What Methods is to be used by Breeding Women, and what Diet is most proper for them, and their Children▪ to prevent Wind, Va∣pours, Convulsions, &c. Written (to dis-engage the World from those ill Customs in Education, it has been so long used to) By Tho. Tryon; Author of the Way to Health, Long Life and Happiness. Recommended to Parents, Nurses, Tutors, and all o∣thers concerned in the Educating of Children. London: Printed for I. Salusbury, at the Rising-Sun in Cornhill; and I. Harris, at the , in the Poultrey, 1695. Price bound One Shilling.
To Parents, Tutors, Nurses, and all others, concern'd in the Education of Children. IT was for your Direction, as well as for the Advantage and Benefit of Children, that this small Treatise was at first in∣ended to be wrote and publish'd: 'Tis to you therefore that it is address'd, hoping that it may be found serviceable to you in the Exe∣cution of your Duty in many Respects. For, First, It will constantly remind you of the Necessity and Obligation you lye under, in reference to the particular Management and Education of either your own or others Chil∣dren you have taken the Charge of. Nature puts upon you a Necessity of taking Care of the One, and your own voluntary Act obliges you to the Other. Secondly, It will furnish you with Dire∣ctions, that shall be much easier to you, and more advantageous to the Children you are to instruct. I need not undertake to shew the Inconveniencies of the common Method of
Education. The ill Success that generally at∣tends it, sufficiently detects it to be guilty of some grand Mistakes and Errors: It is not able to answer the end it proposes. For after abundance of useless Pains, Turmoil, and Endeavours, Whipping, Exercising and In∣structing, when a Child arrives at the years of Maturity and Discretion, (as they call it) he is not one Jot mere Vertuous, and scarce∣ly (if at all) more Learned than he was when he first set out. I have seen in Holland, and other parts of the World, Children entred upon Businest, and very capable also of managing it, at those Years, it may be, ours here in England are learning to Spell and Pronounce. Is it not a scandalous thing, to see a great Boy; of Fifteen or Sixteen Years old, trudg∣ing to School, with a great Bundle of Books under his Arm, to learn to decline a Noun and Conjugate Verb, and yet after all, re∣mains uncertain, whether the Genders of Nouns be Three or Seven? But by this time he is it seems a hopeful Youth, and his Master thinks fit that he be sent to the Uni∣versity. Now there's no help for it, he must be a Schollar: And yet perhaps, when he comes to commence Batchelour of Arts, shall
hardly be capable of determining whether the Conclusion be part of a Syllogism. This indeed is the Craft of your common School Masters, to keep Children (like Spi∣rits in a Circle) a long time under the Terror of their Iurisdiction and Discipline, in order only to promote their own Profit and Interest. A mischievous way this, and ought to be ta∣ken Nooice by the Government. Why shu'd the Publick for so many Years be deprived of the Service of so many hopeful Boys, who are ter a great deal to be entred upon Action, and intrusted with the management of Business, than to be compelled to sit in Torment eight Hours in a Day under the grum and unplea∣sing Aspect of an harsh vnd ill-natured Pe∣dagogue. We hope a great-deal of this may be pre∣vented by the Rules and Methods we here propose: For what we here offer to your Consideration, is neither so difficult, nor so chargeable: There is little but what is in the Power, even of the Poorest, to compass and accomplish, at least so far as concerns the ma∣king their Children Vertuous, and teaching them to write and read, which will mighti∣ly qualifie, and enable them to get an honest Livelyhood in the World. By these, and
such like Methods, Fathers and Mothers may in a Twelve-months time teach their Children more of true and useful Learning at home in their Houses, than they learn at the common Schools in five Years. Decem annos trivit legendo Cicerone, To go ten Years to School to learn to construe a Latin Author, and yet perhaps after all, not understand him to purpose. A very fine Accomplishment, when in half the time he might have been taught to speak very readily three several Languages. I shall no longer forestall your Desires of Reading and Practicing these easie and na∣tural Rules that I have laid down. I had I declare no bye nor private Respect in the Printing of them, but was wholly influenced by my Zeal to the Service of the Publick, that if it were possible I might contribute somewhat towards the Ease, Convenience and Welfare of Mankind; which effect, if in any mea∣sure these Papers shall obtain, I have all that I can desire.
To his very Worthy Friend Mr. Tho. Tryon, on his Discourse of Education. LOng since I wonder'd what the Poets meant, When they a Beard to Aesculapius lent, nd yet deny'd Apollo shou'd have one, ho' he the Father was, the other Son. ut now the Wonder ceases, having known, hat Sons are wiser than their Fathers grown; nd what cou'd ne'er be done by Ages past, s to Perfection brought we see at last. hey made Essays, but never cou'd arrive t the true Course and Method how to live. mperfect Rules their glimmering Light affords, dorn'd and Dress'd in a fair Robe of Words, Which please the Ears, from whence Contentment springs, n Reading, but ne'er reach the Truth of Things. heir Art might somewhat tow'rds the Platform yield, ut thou, my Friend, do'st the fair Structure build. uch difference is 'twixt their Attempts and Thine, That Thou perform'st what they cou'd but design. Thou for Mankind, chalk'st out the fairest way To Truth and Reason, where no Man can stray. Each single Page such Influence does impart, That it the Fancy fills, and sways the Heart.
Youth's best Conductor, and its safest Guide, Steering a Course betwixt Contempt and Pride. On this alone our Welfare does depend; Here we see what's amiss, and how to mend: What guilty Education has deny'd, By these Instructions may be well supply'd. This does the Schools Pedantick Course o'er-rule, And makes a Man of him they'd make a Fool. When a young Spark has run thro' all the Rules; The Flogging Gantelope of hated Schools; And to the University repairs, To learn the Terms of Art and Jargon there, The tedious Discipline of seven long Years. What is he better than my Friend and I, An Ant, or Emmet, or a Butter-fly, Or any other thing beneath the Sky. Who Reasons, Dictates, solidly pursue, Without Regard to Terms, of Old or New: Keep close to Nature in her own plain away, By no new Lights and Notions led astray? Whilst all their Art amounts to only This; Nego Sequelam ergo Falleris.
A New Method. OF EDUCATIN Children. &c. Of the Capacity of Children, together with a True Method of their Edu∣cation. IT is a Truth generally acknow∣ledged by Christians, but seldom so well consider'd as it ought. That Man is the compleat Image of God and Nature, and contains in himself the Principles and Properties of all things Corporeal and Incorporeal: That he is endued with an Elemental or
Palpable Body, actuated and informed by an Ethereal Spirit, which directly answers to the great Soul of the World from whence it is taken, and where∣of it is an Epitome and Abridgment or, if you please, the Son and Off∣spring. And as the Soul of Man does contain all the true Properties of the Elements z. Earth, Air, Water and Fire, which are, as it were, the Mothers of the Body that nourish and sustain it; so it has als the Principles of Fire and Light, that is Spirit and Life, that gives Motion to the Body, which bears Relation to the Sou of the great World, or that mighty Spirit which is the Moving, Vivifying Creative, and Conservative Power o God. Now Man being so wonderfully com∣posed, his Soul and Spirit containing the true Nature and Properties of every Being, he must consequently have a Simile or Agreement with the innat Nature, Qualities, Dispositions and In∣clinations of all Beasts, Fowl, Fish Herbs, Seeds, &c. both in the Visible and Invisible World, and is thereby be∣come
a Microcosm, a compleat Image or Resemblance of the Universe. The Earth Essentially contains in i self the Vertues and Qualities of all Seeds, Fruits and Grains; insomuch, that whatever is sown into it, imme∣diately takes root, and attracts to it self an agreeable Matter proper for the Sup∣port and Nourishment of its own Body and Spirit. The like is to be under∣stood of the Soul; it being the Univer∣sal Humane Ground, wherein whatever is sown, whether Good or Evil, takes root, and powerfully, though insensibly, draws agreeable Matter out of all the Powers and Qualities of Nature, to nourish and improve that Seed, where∣by it obtains a strong Form in the Soul, the Essences whereof can never be de∣stroy'd or defaced, especially if the Seeds are sown in the first and tenderest Age of the Child. For then the Soul is most empty and consequently most susceptible of Impressions, and receiving any thing that is offer'd to it. All the Powers of Nature standing then, as it were naked, unbyass'd by Custom and Prejudice, with an earnest and ardent
Appetite, desiring to be stampt with some Character or other, without any regard to either the Beauty or Value o the Impression, having no Distinction betwixt Good and Evil. Upon this account, whatever a Child is first taught and accustomed to, not only takes the deepest root in the Soul, but beget; Habits and Complexions, and denominates the very Constitution it self. This no wise Man can deny, it being Matter of Fact, and common Observation. Besides, all the Art and Industry of the best Tutors can never wholly remove or alter Qualities and Dispositions so earlily planted: Tho by continually representing to them good Examples, back'd with Wholsom and Moral Precepts, if the Soul be of a mild and gentle Nature, they may, for some time, seem to be subdu'd; yet upon the least Intermission, and Neglect o such a Method, they shall be ready to ex∣ert themselves afresh, and perhaps, with redoubled Vigour. Therefore Education and Examples, in the Infancy, and first Ages of a Child, that is, from Two to Eight,
Ten, Twelve Years, are the very Foundation of Vertue or Vice, accord∣ng as they are us'd or apply'd: For hen Good and Evil are indifferent to he Soul; and that which is first im∣ibed, takes the deepest root, and be∣gets the strongest habit. From hence it is manifest of what mportance it is, for Fathers, Mothers, Nurses, &c. to whom the Care of Chil∣dren is committed, to be watchful that he Precepts and Examples of Vertue, have the Honour in making the first mpression on their Childrens Souls: That they labour to acquaint them be∣imes with the Excellence of Patience, Humility and Compassion: That they epresent to them the Noble and Tran∣cendent Dignity of Justice, and shew hem the Deformity of the contrary Vice: That they make them understand, hat there is as much Injustice in Wrong∣ng a Man of a Penny, as in Cheating im of a Pound: That Writhing of the Neck of a Chicken with Delight, is as great an Evidence of the Spirit of Cru∣elty, as the Stabbing a Man. They are to ccustom their Children to a proper and
distinct Method of Speaking: I am per∣swaded, much of the Stammering & Lisp∣ing in many People, might have been prevented by a proper and due Manage∣ment in their Childhood. They ought also to be very careful to Teach them Temperance in Eating and Drinking, and Moderation in their Sleep and Ex∣ercises. By such Methods as these, the Seeds of Vice might more easily, be∣cause timely, be subdued, and a Foun∣dation laid for the building up an Excel∣lent and Accomplisht Person. But seeing that the common Custom of the World commands us, as soon as we are born, to be submitted to the Care and Tuition of Women, on whose good or ill Management of us in that tender Age, a great part of the Felicity or Misery of our Lives depend. And considering the Impressions that Women make, whilst they are Impregnate and go with Child, have a wonderful Influ∣ence upon their Issue, I think it will prove no worthless Service to propose some Observations and Methods where∣by they may be better directed to dis∣charge their Duty.
(1.) A good Diet ought to be ob∣served; that is, they ought to accustom themselves to simple Meats and Drinks such in which no manifest Quality is too predominant; that is, not too sweet nor too bitter, too salt nor too sharp, &c. For all Extreams beget their own Qua∣lities and Complections. All Strong Drinks are to be avoided; for nothing is more inimical to the Nature of Chil∣dren, than things wherein Heat has the Ascendant. All Spoon-Meats are very proper and Natural, except such as are made of Spirituous Liquors, as Wine, Ale, Beer, Cyder, &c. but if sweetned with Sugar, as is commonly practised, they are exceedingly Hotter, and ought to be avoided by all that value their own or their Childrens Health. But Gruels, Paps, Rice, variously dress'd, are very wholsom. Raw Herbs made into Sal∣lads, and eaten with Bread, Butter and Cheese, are excellently good; and for Drink; Midling Beer or Ale is the best, except Water. (2.) They are also, during their Im∣pregnation, to abstain from all Foods that are made Hot in their Preparation,
by Boiling, Stewing, Roasting, Baking, and the like. They ought to let them be quite Cold before they eat them; for their fiery sulphurous Vapours do mightily generate windy Diseases, and that Epidemical Distemper call'd the Scurvy, both in the Mother and Child: for those fiery Fumes and Vapours that all hot Foods send forth, are of a furious and unpeaceful Temper, and contrary to the Natural Heat both of the Sto∣mach and the Food it self. So that I affirm, the Eating solid Food hot, or before these deadly Vapours have sepa∣rated themselves, to be one of the grand Causes of Wind, especially in Women and Children, (as we have largely de∣monstrated in our Way to Health, and other of our Writings.) (3.) They ought to refrain the eat∣ing of all sorts of Roots, as Turnips, Pasnips, Carrets, &c. For by reason of their Crude and Earthy Qualities, they naturally beget Wind. Unripe Fruit, and all things sharpned with Vi∣uegar Oranges, Lemons, &c. are hurt∣ful: For being unequal in their Parts, they generate cold windy Humours,
and afford a very small and imprope Nourishment, especially to Persons u der the Circumstances we are no speaking of. (4.) They must be very careful, n to exceed in Quantity. All Repletio does in a very high degree obstruct the Course of Nature, and produces many Diseases; and utterly destroys the Health and Harmony both of Body and Mind, affecting both with some signal and irreparable Damage, being of far more mischievous Consequence than most do imagine. (5.) They ought to forbear all ro∣bust, masculine Labour and Exercises, as likewise a soft and sedentary Life: Both the one and the other ought to be gentle and easie; not too thoughtfully, engaging the Mind, nor over-burden∣ing the Body. Such a Course wou'd strengthen Nature, by removing Ob∣structions, and causing the Blood and Humours to circulate with more free∣dom and facility. For it is observable in all Countries where Women live live Temperately, use moderate Exercises, eat simple Foods and drink mostly
Water, that windy Diseases are hardly▪ wn to be found either in them or r Children. astly. Above all things, they ought beware that they do not give place Passion, to suffer those irregular tions of the Mind to reign and get  Dominion over them. These sort  Disturbances put the whole Consti∣tution out of Tune, and make fierce and violent Invasions on the Sweetness of the good Powers and Qualities; making the deepest Impressions on the Child, and powerfully incorporating with the erverse Seed of their Simile, whereby evil Inclinations and Dispositions are begotten, and do arise; for there is a strong and unconceivable Sympathy be∣twixt the Mother and the Child, both in Vertue and Vice: so that there is no evil Indisposition that attends the Mo∣ther, but the Child participates thereof, receiving the Nourishment both of Spi∣rit and Body from her. Nothing is more certain, than that every Passion, when it arrives to Extremity, begets its own Complexion; for it penetrates even to the Center, joyns with its Simile, and be∣es strengthned by it.
By this means, the irregular Me of Mothers affect their Children,  often distempering their Minds and  dies; which in a very short time becom so deep and central, that they are hard ever cured or eradicated. This it is to be an ignorant Big to Custom and Tradition. So unco trollable is the Dominion they have ob tain'd, that they sway and biass us against all Reason and Experience. So pre∣posterously is Mankind blinded and de∣praved, that we can neither Hear, See, Feel, nor Taste Truth, nor the Simpli∣city of Nature's Operations. All Seed partakes of the Nature and Quality of the Ground whereinto it is sown: If the Ground be good, and the Seed good, you may reasonably ex∣pect sound and firm Fruit, without ble▪ mish or distemper. Proper Method must be observed, or all will be spoil'd. What Crop can the Husband-man hope for, if he neglects to Till and Manure his Land, or sows it with improper and unsuitable Seed? Or what Profit can he expect from his Horses, Cows, and Sheep, if particular Care be not
about the well-ordering his Cattle, that hey may bring forth their Young Ones with Strength and Health? The like is to be understood of the Humane Ground, if that be not dress'd and cul∣tivated by good Order and Temperance, you must not look for a healthy and vigorous Off-spring. In a word, the whole Education, Improvement and Accomplishment of Mankind, in a great measure, depends on the Management and good Conduct of Women. For Proof of which, let us a little consider what a powerful Influence, from our very Infancy, they have over us, and what a mighty▪ Interest and Concern∣ment they have in those very things that conduce most to our well-being, and have the greatest Effect upon our Constitutions and Dispositions. Custom, and common Practise, has so order'd it, That as we spring from them, we must be return'd to them. No sooner are we born, but we are thrown into their Hands. As they gave us Birth, 'tis judg'd reasonable they should give us Education. It is not enough, at we must suffer under the Impres∣sions
we receive so earlily from them, during the mistaken Methods they too generally observe in the time of their Pregnancy; but we must be submitted to their Discipline and Direction, after we are produc'd, stampt with the Image of God. Do they not form in us our first Notions, and prepossess the Soul before it has leisure to understad its own Power and Liberty? All the Nonsence of our Conceptions, and Irregularity of our Morals, is deriv'd from them, whilst through an over-fond Tender∣ness they confirm and encourage those Seminal Principles of Vice that they ought to discountenance and subdue. How many Souls are ruin'd by Mo∣thers and Nurses scaring their Children with horrid and frightful Names, when they would bring them to comply with their own Humour? Hereby the Seeds of Fear are planted, which continually subject the Soul to constant and un∣avoidable Bondage. Besides, the Ex∣amples of their Passions, and irregular Actions, have a mighty Influence upon our tender Souls, insomuch that those first Impressions can never be obliterated
or removed. They also prepare Chil∣drens Food, and order and appoint their Diet and Exercises. From hence it appears how much we are under their Conduct and Management, as to Bed, Board, and all things conducing to the Preservation of Life and manner of Living. For this cause, it is possible to convince an Hundred Men of the Errors o Life, before One Woman; they being the Mistresses of Intempe∣rance, and mightily espouse the Me∣thods of that ancient Gentleman call'd Custom. Hence it follows, that it is of great Importance. That particular Care be taken about the Education of Women themselves, since they sow the first Seeds in the Humane Ground. When you ask Children why they do This, or That? They will answer, Their Mo∣thers taught them, and they saw their Mothers do it. So that the whole Care and Instruction of Children, especially whilst they are most capable of Impres∣sion, is committed to them. For few or no Men mind it, their secular Busi∣ess calling them to the Management
of other Affairs, which some term Matters of greater Moment. But this  a great Mistake; for I affirm, That rudent Education, and Early Disci∣pline, are the Sinews of all good Go∣ernment. And no Man can reasonably xpect better Success in Publick Affairs, except a more methodical Regulation be observed in the Education of Chil∣dren, especially amongst the Females; for if they are well Brought-up, they will naturally. Instruct and Teach their Off-spring. No Tutors can Teach Chil∣dren to that Degree nor with that Ease, s Mothers. Besides, the Charge of Tutors often-times becomes burthensom; an many neglect the learning of excellent Things, because their Circumstances will not allow them wherewith to pay their Masters. If the Mother or Nurse be a Linguist, and can well understand and speak three or four Languages, the Child will quickly learn them all with as great facility and readiness as the Mother-Tongue. The same is to be understood as to all Arts and Sciences. It is a great Truth, though very little believed, That the Females are naturally
as fit for, and capable of all excellent Learning, as Men, even the Mathema∣ticks it self; and if there be any dif∣ference, the Advantage is on the Wo∣mens-side. They are of curious and apt Capacities, to apprehend all things that depend upon the Power of the Fancy and Imagination, being of a more delicate Contexture, and wrought with a finer Thread than Man. Pray tell me, why were they thought fit, by the wise Antients, to Prepare, Com∣pound and Dress our Food, which in∣deed is true Physick? On the due Com∣position and Proportion of that, all the Health, Strength, nay, the Life it self of Men, depends. The Art of Preparation is not only Deep and Mysterious, but Curious and Ingenious: For, to under∣stand Preparation and Composition, with the proper Quantity and Quality of the Ingredients, is none of the least Points in Philosophy. I am sure, what the Women fall short of in this My∣stery, is not for want of Capacity; for what they are once taught, and have made a Custom, they will hold fast. Therefore, that City or Countrey is
happy, whose Women have been taug good Customs, and the Orders of Tem∣perance; and on the other side, that Country is most unhappy, where the Women have embrac'd evil Custome. How preposterous is it! You will trust Women with the most material Things, even the Government of Life, and Health, and yet deny them to be ca∣pable of understanding meaner Services. We affirm, they are as able to compre∣hend all Arts and Sciences to as high a degree as Men, if not higher, provided their Education be equal. Indeed, we do not approve of their being employ'd in Robust and Masculine Offices. Is i not a pretty sight, to see a parcel of Women Carrying of Burthens, and Crying of Things in Baskets upon their Heads, about the Streets? These are unseemly Employments, which ren∣der Women Rude, Bold, Surly, and Un∣chaste. They are to be apply'd to soft and gentle Exercises, more agreeable to their Complexions. They are to be Tutor'd in Arts more suitable and proper for them, as in good Writing and Arithmetick; to understand Accompts, and the keep∣ing
of Books, and all other things that may be done within the compass of the House; for if they have timely Instruction, they will soon demon∣strate themselves to be very Apt, Sharp and Ready in all curious Arts, and often∣times exceed even the Men themselves. By these means, Daughters would become altogether as helpful and ser∣viceable both to themselves and Pa∣rents, as Sons; and many times more, because they are not so apt and incli∣nable to Travel and Ramble abroad into Foreign Parts, nor List themselves in the Armies of Princes. Besides, the true Learning of all useful things, will render them fit and capable to answer the End of their Creation, viz. to be Helps-meet to their Husbands. For timely Education, and the teaching Children the Doing and Active Part, is, to sow in them the Seeds of Tem∣perance, Frugality, and Good Order. This wou'd make them Thoughtful and Serious, and teach them to have a Value for those Principles of Vertue that are so timely implanted in them; the Practice whereof will be so far
from being difficult and hard, that  will be familiar and connatural to them: They will take care to cherish, preserve and improve these noble Seeds, esteeming them the Foundations of Peace, Comfort, and everlasting Sere∣nity of Mind. Like frugal Men, that get Money by their own Industry, they will know the true Worth of it, and how they part with it: while others are like a wanton and inconsiderate Spend∣thrift, who squanders away all he has, without any regard to the Labour of those who got it for him, or consider∣ing that it might have much better been employ'd in the charitable Relief of poor and better deserving People. For this Reason, most rich Persons Children are Foolish, Idle, Prodigal, and very Expensive; and their Parents can never expect better Fruit from them, till they give them better Precepts, and better Precedents. For, for the most part, they teach them Wantonness and Extrava∣gance from their very Cradles, till they are Seven, Eight, or Ten Years of Age: Which ill Habits grow so very strong in them, that they become
vincible, and no Art or Care possible can root out or expunge them. Some few there are, indeed, that are born with more propitious and favourable Natures,—Queis ex meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan,—whom Phoebus has form'd of better Clay, that by the help of Instruction, surmount the Difficulties of an ill and prejudicate Education. But these are very little beholden to their Parents and Tutors for Good Manners and Sobriety, but chiefly to the Portion of good Nature, and God's Gifts, that are born in them. The Fear of God, Temperance, Cleanness and Frugality, are taught by Precept and Example, even as Arts and Sciences are; as also are Disobedience, Intemperance and Disorder. The principal Time of Teaching and Confirming Vertue and Vice, Tempe∣rance and Intemperance, Arts and Sciences, Industry and Wantonness, is from Three Years of Age to Ten: whatever is fastened to them within that time, will continue for ever, and will naturally grow strong, and im∣prove, with the least Industry imagi∣nable.
If this be true, as certainly it is, ho is it possible that the People of thi Age should expect their Children should be Temperate and Industrious, when they do all they can, both by Precept and Example, to make them Gluttons and Debauched? Do not many Pa∣rents at least permit, if not force their Children to Eat and Drink not only beyond the Necessity and Exactions of Nature, but also more than they are willing to receive? And Persons of all Ages have an Inclination to eat and drink more than the Stomach can with ease digest, especially if their Meats and Drinks are well compounded and delicious; which is often purposedly done, to entice Nature out of her own plain Way. Now, if Persons of mature Age and Experience are apt to exceed in this particular, and over-load the digestive Power of the Stomach, to the extreme prejudice of their Body and Mind; what must Children suffer, that with∣out any restraint, eat and drink to the end of their Appetites? For the Palat continues the Pleasure of Tasting,
many Degrees beyond the Necessity of the Stomach, and the Requirements of the Digestive Faculty. Is not this teach∣ing Children, even in the very Cradle, to be Gluttons? Which being strength∣ned and improved by repeated Practice, is at last so deeply radicated, that it be∣comes a Second Nature. So that it is no wonder to see so many Men and Women Intemperate and Debauched; nay, it is very hard to conceive it should be otherwise, when there has been so much Pains taken, and so many Years spent to confirm and corroborate the Habit; and that even in their Youthful Age, when Impressions are soonest and deepest made. For the Soul of Man is endued (as I said before) with an Universal Spirit both of Good and Evil. There is no Property or Quality in the whole Na∣ture of Things, that does not find in Man somewhat wherewith to assimilate and affix it self. Upon this account it is, that he is capable of learning all things Humane and Divine; and those Precept and Examples that are first presented have the strongest Effect, and take the deepest Root.
Temperance and Order are the fi things that ought to be taught Childre being the Foundation of all excelle Learning. 'Tis by their Direction a and Influence that Man arrives to th Accomplishment of his Nature, an dignifies his Species above the Rank o his Fellow-Creatures. So that if Chil∣dren are accustomed to these things from their Birth, to Twelve or Fifteen Years of Age, it is almost impossible then they should become Intemperate, without the hazard of Sickness, or run∣ning the risque of many unpleasant In∣conveniences. Which Consideration, together with an early and habitual Pra∣ctice of those Vertues, will make it as easie and familiar for them to be Tem∣perate, as Men are now prone to be Extravagant and Debauch'd. Besides, this Method would extraordinarily con∣tribute to the Ease and Satisfaction of all Families, keeping them from many torturing Diseases, and great Expences, both in Servants, Meats and Drinks, and render all things sedate, quiet and de∣lightful. Custom and Precept have wonderful
and amazing Influences over all the Ce lestial Powers and Configurations of th Stars and Elements, and over innat Dispositions, Inclinations and Com plexions. So great is their Power bot in the Good and Bad, that they lead Me to commit the highest Evils and Out rages, even Murther it self, without any Trouble or Regret. For Example: Tak a Boy of Two or Three Years old, tha is dignified in the fiery Trigon in hi Nativity, under Mars, who consequently is, by his Complexion, addicted to pra∣ctice all manner of Wrath, Fiercenes and Cruelty,; let this Child be unde the Tuition of a Bannian Woman, o some other Person that scruples all Vio∣lence, or the killing either Man o Beast, where they live temperately, an observe sober Methods, and you sha soon discern, notwithstanding his Ma tial Inclinations, and the Power o Celestial Influences, that the Custom Religion and Example of those Peopl he is brought up among, will quickl insinuate and conform themselves wit their Similes in the Child's Soul, an and gain an intire Dominion over all th
fierce and rude Dispositions he was earen'd with, from his Nativity, or edominating Consteilation. For cer∣n it is, That the Soul contains the com∣at and true Nature of all Things: nd though one Quality or Property be onger than another in the Soul, yet the other cling to it, and come after, cording to their Degrees of Strength Weakness; and that Form or Quality at is weakest, can easily be made strong∣ by Custom, Precept and Example. nd so, on the other side, that Quality at in the Nativity was most Strong, n by the same Rule be made Weak d Impotent. This is further manifested in Religion, hich is made up of great Varieties of otions, and Practical Ceremonies, there ing as much difference as there is in e Nature of Things; many of them antastical, Vain, and Irrational, and ost of them Ridiculous; the Zealous pprobation whereof, and Formal Pra∣ise, are convincing and undeniable rguments of the Force and Power of ustom. Will not those that have been structed in Base and False Notions,
and constantly us'd to conform with humane and detestable Ceremonies, as easily perswaded to die for their R∣gion (as they call it,) as those that h really embrac'd the Truth, and l under the most sober and agreeable M∣thods of God's Law? Without all p adventure they will; and the freque Instances mention'd in the Records of Histories, determine the Question. Ha there not been Turks and Indians Childr that being educated in the Christian ∣ligion, have prov'd as zealous and f∣ward in the Defence of that Cause, the Child of a Christian? And on  other hand, are not the Ianizaries,  the most part, the Sons of Christian yet there are not, within the Confi of the Ottoman Empire, more obstin and inveterate Mussulmen. In sho Children may be brought to any thin Their Souls are so cereous and flexib that they may, with the greatest facili be form'd into any Shape, or any Figur Good and Evil are alike to them, th know no difference nor distinction: T that they are first taught, fixes the Cha∣cter, obtains the Ascendant, and den
minates the Person either Vertuous or cious. For this Reason it was, that our Saviour mmanded little Children to be brought to him. Which had not relation only their Innocency, but to their Capacity; eir Minds being, as it were, Free and mpty, not yet bound Apprentice to e Vanity of Custom and Prejudice: he Ground was clean, and exempt from e Weeds of Dider and Wickedn; hereby they  render'd more fit d capable to ve the Good Seed. id not our Gat Master likewise go to the Streets and High-ways to preach e Gospel to the Common and Ordi∣ary sort of People? Why did he not tner honour the Synagogues, and preach s Doctrine to the Scribes and Pharisees, ose learned and strict Observers of the aw? No, the former were not fastned  Prejudice, nor so deeply rooted in the ormalities of the Law, and Tradition, nd therefore more likely to embrace the ruth: There were not those Obstacles nd Impediments in them, as were in the tter. For the more free any Man is from e Power of Custom, the more room
there is in the Soul to entertain Ver As the Proverb has it, No Fool like the Fool: Because Folly is so deeply gro∣ded in him, that there is no place any thing else. On the other hand, Children, at th arrival into this World, are utter Str∣gers to Custom and Tradition; they  as it were, like the Incorporeal Being their Imaginations and Fancies are  bnded or mis-led  that we call R∣son; they penetra , and imitate things that they hea , o see done, a this without any Consideration whet it be good or evil, possible or impossi being alike exempt from the fear of  learning, and hope of future Bene they press forward and attain to  Knowledge of Things with wonder expedition and accuracy. And t Younger they are, the more capable  they of receiving Instruction, but A and Experience must improve the Early Plants naturally take the surest a deepest root, and with great vigour a force attract the Vertues of the Earth  their Nourishment; and being dres and cultivated by the industrious H
bandman, the good Juices soon grow ong, insomuch that they will over∣me the Weeds themselves. Upon this Consideration, of the won∣rful Nature and Aptitude of the Soul receive any thing that shall be offer'd it, it appears of what Importance it is, at particular care be taken to sow good ed at first. That if Parents neglect to ant, Children will do it themselves: or the Soul will not be empty, Empti∣ess having no Being in Nature. So that you do not teach and shew them good ethods and Precepts, they will soon arn evil ones: For their whole Em∣oyment and Business is, to learn and itate what they see and hear. As we ave observed before, all Languages and Tongues are alike to them; the one is as asie as the other: but that which the Child first learns, takes the deepest root, nd gets the government over all the est. So that it is in the Power of the Mother, if she be a Linguist, to make Latin, or any other Tongue, the Mo∣her-Tongue, as well as English; and it ill be as easie, natural and familiar for he Child to imitate her in three or four
several Languages, as one: Likewise, arrive at a proper and distinct Meth of Speaking, if the Mother, Nurse,  whoever has the Care of the Child co∣mitted to them, be a Person so qualify and accomplish'd. Which is also to b understood of the attaining to all othe Arts and Sciences. Hence it follows, That the Female ought to have the principal and best Edu∣cation, they being the first Planters o Tutors, having the Children always with them, whom they will imitate and ob∣serve. Besides, Women have a wonder∣ful Dignification in their Natures and Complexions; God having implanted Modesty in their Constitution, which i the Foundation of all Excellence and Vertue. They are of a quick, penetra∣ting Fancy, apt to comprehend any thing that is fine or curious, as the Ar of Housewifery, Needle-work, Painting, Musick, Writing, &c. In these thing no Man can exceed them, if they hav timely and proper Education and Instru∣ction; being both by their Genius and Complexions naturally adapted for al easie Employments, and curious Arts:
the Males are to Tillage, the Manage∣ent of Cattle, Building, and all Em∣ployments that require greater Force and trength of Body to perform; which he Females ought by no means to un∣ertake, or meddle with. Now, if the Women were thus instru∣cted themselves, how easie and natural wou'd it be for them to begin an teach heir Children all excellent Things, even from the very Cradle? Wih how little difficulty might they temper and regulate the Methods of their Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and Waking? For I must tell you, That Sobriety, Temperance, and Cleanness, are taught even as any Art or Science, tho' with much more Ease, and ess Fatigue, and with unconceivably more Success and Benefit. Use and Pra∣ctise are the Life and Spirit that give Vertue and Skill to all Persons whatso∣ever. If the Children see no Disorderly nor Intemperate Examples, but have the Representation and Character of the contrary Vertues continually placed be∣fore their Eyes, they will undoubtedly conform themselves to that Image, in Practice and Imitation. If these Truths
were thoroughly believed, and right managed, what an Healthy Off-spri should we have, every way adorn'd wi Vertue, and the Knowledge of all use and excellent Things? Thus you see ho much it depends upon the Care and Sk of Parents, Tutors Nurses, &c. to for the Souls of Children, and make the what they please to have them. Wha ever they see or hear, they will practio Do but shew them the Way of Vertu and hide from them the contrary Pat they will walk in it, whether you wi or no, to the end of their Lives The will never depart from such deep-roote Laws, and so timely implanted Precept For the Soul takes the Biass and Tur of its future Inclinations from those fir and early Impressions. It is likewise to be consider'd, Tha Children ought not to be kept to any Employment, or Art, too long: For th Humane Soul being compounded and endued with the Nature of all Thing (as we have before mention'd,) cause all People to delight in Variety, it being most like her self; but especially Chil∣dren do mightily press after, and lov
Variety, and there is nothing more rateful to their juvenile and unbounded ancies. So that they will never dwell ong upon any thing, nor be confin'd, ith Pleasure, even to that Sport or lay they seem to take most delight in, urther than their own voluntary Incli∣ations shall sway and induce them. Be∣ides, it would extremely dull and per∣olex, their Understandings, and retund he tender Acumen of their Wit and Spi∣it. But when they come to Years of Discretion, (as they call it,) they will ap∣ply themselves closer and longer to some ne particular Employment, or Study; ecause then Custom, Reason, and Self-nterest, engage and perswade them o it. Moreover, as any one sort of Grain, too often sown on any one piece of Land, without Intermission, exhausts ts strength, and makes it weak, so that it will bear but a poor Crop; because every sort of Grain does draw and attract from the Earth a proper Juice suitable to the Nourishment of its own Body: For which reason the prudent Husband-man will often change his Seed, to give the
Ground variety; by which means h obtains a fruitful and plentiful Cro every Year, if other Causes do not im pede. The like must be conceived o the Humane Ground. For Variety i the very Foundation and Compositio of our Lives; nothing conduces mor to the Health and Prosperity of Man kind, nor is more agreeable to the Na∣ture of Man, than Change of Diet, Ex∣ercise and Employment. Besides, Children are more Inquisitive by many Degrees, and more violently desirous of Knowledge the five first Years of their Age, than afterwards; for their Souls and Minds are, as it were; empty, and long to be filled; which natu∣rally moves the Spirit to Industry, and a Desire after Knowledge. But so soon as those green Years are past, and the Fancy is filled up with the false and mistaken Notions of Custom and Tradition, Men become, as it were, full and satiated; more or. less dull and stupid, and con∣sequently unapt to incline to the Study of any sort of curious Learning. For this reason it is, That whatever a Child is taught to imitate at Three or Four
Years of Age, (it is to be understood of ound and Healthy Children, which ost wou'd be, were the Rules before rescribed to Women, duly observ'd,) akes double the root, and makes deeper mpressions upon them than what they re taught at Five; and that at Five, double to what they are taught at Ten; nd so on proportionably till Fifty or Sixty Years of Age. For, as Persons grow up into Years, their Souls and Minds are not only filled up and sullied with the irregular Dictates of invete∣ate Custom; but the Natural and Animal Spirits become muddy and im∣pure, whereby the Apprehension and Understanding are less quick and pene∣trating. For the Fineness and Thinness of the Spirits, begets Acuteness of Wit, and supplies the Fancy with more Cu∣rious and Noble Images of Things; see∣ing the finer any Man's Spirits are, the more capable he is of understanding the Mysteries of Arts and Sciences. From hence it is evident, That Order and Method do mightily strengthen and advance the Humane Nature, and ren∣der all Persos that observe them, more
ready and adapt to learn, than such a live Irregular Lives; especially Children who, through the Fineness and Tender¦ness of their Spirits, cannot endure th over-charging of Nature, without mani∣fest Detriment and Prejudice. So that those Parents, Tutors, &c. that press them on to a Debauch, or permit or encou∣rage them to Eat or Drink, or use any Exercise, beyond what the Necessity of Nature exacts are guilty of horrid Im∣piety against God, manifest Breach of Trust towards the Children, and ac∣countable for all the sad Consequences of so fatal a Miscarriage. Again, Since Children, at first, do all that they do by Example and Imitation, it must of necessity be the indispensible Duty of all Parents, or Others with whom the Charge of their Education is intrust∣ed, to be industriously careful that they neither hear nor see any Unseemly Action. Such Precedents will be quick∣ly Copied and Transcribed by them, and in a short time be so deeply fix'd in the Imagination that all the Art and Pains they can administer shall never be able totally to deface or remove them.
And if ever they wou'd have their Children to bear any Character in the World, and do any thing to Purpose, hey must be sure to avoid that foolish Half-speaking and Lisping, when they wou'd prattle with them, and divert them. It is impossible to believe what Damage they do their Children by this absurd and abominable Practise, pro∣nouncing their Words by halves, and not one in an hundred properly and truly as it ought to be; thereby putting the Children to a double and treble Task and Inconvenience; first, by their own Example, fondly instilling into them an huddle of imperfect and broken: Nonsence; and then, after they have discern'd the Folly and Mischief of stock∣ing them with such Trash, ridiculously hoping to make them unlearn it again by Whipping and Beating them. They ought to be us'd to plain Discourses, and Words properly, fully and distinctly pronounced; not with a grinning kind of Smile, and comick Distortion of the Visage; but in a grave, folemn manner, and with a sedate and calm Counte∣nance, even as you would propound
Questions, and male Answer to a Judg or Senator. For when they are us'd t such a pertinent and handsom way o Speaking, they will apply their utmo Diligence to imitate and practice th same. For 'tis the same thing to th Child, both as easie and natural to speak Words distinct and pertinent, as lisping and abrupt. Many Children have rea∣son to condemn their Governors and Nurses, all the Days of their Life, for those manifold Inconveniences they are expos'd to by an uncomfortable Imper∣fection in the Utterance of their Speech. Their Governors also are sedulously to instruct them to avoid all Passion, Anger and Violence; and as much as lies in their Power, keep them from seeing any Acts of that nature. There is a conta∣gious Infection in them, that ought as carefully to be shunn'd, as the Plague or Leprosie. They ought to acquaint and make their Pupils sensible, not only of the Danger, but also of the Ugliness and Deformity of such preposterous and ir∣regular Inclinations. Their Peace in this World, and Happiness in the next, in∣tirely depend upon it. All the Preach∣ing,
Precept and Practice of our Great Law-Giver, tended to this End; to in∣ulcate into his Disciples a Principle of Meekness, Love and Unity; to exer∣cise a mutual Charity and Forbearance owards one another. A compassionate Forgiveness of one another's Faults, is the highest Conquest we can gain over our selves, and the nearest Approach we can make to Heaven; and the Occa∣sions of it, is the fairest Field Christia∣nity has to display her self in with her true and proper Colours.—Ecce quam Christiani Amant! Behold how the Chri∣stians Love!—was the Heathen Per∣secutors Saying, of old, and ought to be the Motto and Character of all that would be called Christians now. There∣fore our Great Master said unto Peter, Put up thy Sword: My Kingdom is not of this World. Nothing but Peace, Love, and Concord, can open the Gates into those blessed Realms of Light and Love. Except therefore the first Sallies and Motions of the Soul towards these Irre∣gularities be corrected and reformed, nothing but the most fatal and irreme∣diable Mischief will ensne. It is, I con∣fess,
a Work of great Difficulty; yet that shou'd not discourage our Endea∣vours: nay, 'tis in the Infancy of our Children, if ever, that we can rea∣sonably hope for Success. Besides, the Practise of these Vices, rencounters the Oeconomy of the whole Creation: For all things both in the Animal, Ve∣getable and Mineral Kingdoms, do pro∣ceed from one Ground; and though the Multitude and Variety of them be beyond any humane Number, yet Each and Every of them do, in one degree or another, contain the true Nature and Property of the Whole; and in Man they have their Central Being and Ex∣istence, though not in all alike, but in some one Quality is strong, in others another; from whence proceeds Mens Difference in Dispositions, Inclinations, Love, and Hatred; but the Property which is strongest in the Radix, ever sways and governs the whole Life. There is another base and depraved Custom too frequently used, viz. To scare and affright Children with horrid and terrible Names; thinking thereby to bring them to their Lure, and make
them quietly comply with what they wou'd have them, not considering of what mischievous Consequence it is to the Child to have its tender Soul so alarm'd and prepossess'd with such monstrous Images of Things as keep Nature in a perpetual Agitation and Trembling. If the Child's Soul be of a strong and vigorous Complexion, you thereby awaken the Seeds of Envy, Hatred, Malice, and many other surly Disposi∣tions; and so by mistakenly endeavour∣ing to lay One Devil, you raise a Thou∣sand in his room. But if the Soul be of a soft, meek, and gentle Temper, you utterly confound and ruine it. It shall never be Master of one Regular Thought, and by consequence never produce an Handsom and Commen∣dable Action. It shall be eternally sub∣jected to doubt: Irresolute in its De∣signs, and Wavering in its Attempts. For those Terrors and Amazements awaken the Internal or Central Spirits and Powers of Nature; which incor∣porating and joyning with their Similes, become, as it were, Consubstantiate with the Soul; insomuch, that those dreadful
Conceptions which they form'd in their Childhood, will never wholly depart; but though, for a time, by a vigorous Exercise, and use of Reason, they may seem to be conquer'd, yet upon any sudden Accident of Danger or Disaster, their Fears shall start out a-fresh, and they shall soon be discern'd to be yet under the Dominion of their Youthful Terrors. Which timorous sort of Dis∣position, how Unfit it is for the Business of the World, and how Fatal it has prov'd to many that have been subjected to it, need not be insisted on; what we have already said, may be sufficient to convict this abominable Practice of Ignorance, Cruelty and Madness. Another very great Evil and Preju∣dice to Children, is, To suffer them to play up and down promiscuously at all all sorts of Sports, and with all sorts of Play-fellows. Is it not lamentable, for Parents to let their Children throw away that part of their Time in idle, fruitless and dangerous Exercises, that is the only proper Season for them to learn the Rudiments of Vertue and Knowledge in? For One Hour well
employ'd, from Three Years of Age to Seven, is of more avail towards the true learning of any one Art or Science, than Ten, when they come to a maturer Age, (as they call it.) If they are not well and thoroughly grounded then, it will be very diffi∣cult to improve and accomplish them, when they come to riper Years. It is then the Seeds of True Knowledge and Philosophy ought to be sown, if ever they expect to reap any Fruit from them hereafter. Besides, the foolish and juvenile Pastimes fill the Imagina∣tion with strange Images and Con∣ceptions of Things, that like so many rank and useless Weeds interrupt and divert the growth of Real Knowledge, and True Literature; corrupting the Ground so much, that it will hardly be able to nourish and bring forth any thing of Esteem and Value. Wou'd it not raise a Man's Spleen with Indigna∣tion, to hear an old doating Sot of a Father, cry out of his Son, This Block∣head will never come to any thing: There is not such a Dunce again upon the Face of the whole Earth: It has cost me the
Lord knows what, and yet I can make him learn nothing: I can make him understand nothing that is said to him. Alas! Old Fool, why did not you begin sooner with him? Why did you suffer him to squander away the best part of his Time in Idleness and Folly? Oh, then he was an arch Young Rogue, a Witty, Forward Child, and you'd warrant he'd be no Fool, if he liv'd; but now he's a mere Booby, a Dunce, and a Block-head. Take him for your Pains, Old Gray-bearded Dotard! You may thank your self for all this, and your Child is bound to Curse you. Moreover, there are other ill Effects that attend this Custom. Their Sports are often-times, especially if from un∣der the Eye of their Parents and Tutors, &c. so rude and boisterous, that they over-doe their own Strength, and in a violent pursuit after their Play, strain it to a pitch many Degrees a∣bove their Ability, to the extreme Pre∣judice, and often the irrecoverable Da∣mage of their Limbs and Body; which perhaps, though not presently disco∣ver'd, yet if they live, succeeding Years will give them many sharp and trou∣blesom
Remembrances of it. Like the Effects of Hardships, and Youthful Colds, that will not be forgot in the Winter of Old Age. Thus it is evi∣dent, what a disastrous and Calamitous Influence these irregular Methods have both upon Mind and Body. Now, those that would really pro∣mote their Childrens Welfare, and their own Peace, must consult the Degrees and Abilities of Nature, else they will soon run themselves into great Incon∣veniences. The Bodies and Spirits of Children are young and tender, so that they cannot endure hard and la∣borious Exercises, without the Imputa∣tion of manifest Folly and Damage to their Health. For all Labour, or Ex∣ercise, ought to be measured in Pro∣portion to the Strength of the Body and Mind: so that those appointed for Children, ought to be gentle and easie, such as will not strain the Body, nor dull the Spirit, together with a simple Temperate Diet, rather partaking of Moisture than Dryness; because their Growth requires more liquid Matter, by reason of their implanted Heat and
Fire, than maturer Age. Besides, those rustick and laborious Exercises do mightily offend and retard the Growth of Childrens Limbs, far more than most People do imagine. Hence appears the Necessity of Teaching Children, from Three Years old, and upwards, some easie and useful Things, instead of their idle and im∣pertinent Games and Sports, such as Musick, Painting, Housewifery, &c. Also, to instruct them to Read and Speak Properly and Distinctly, to im∣plant in them the Seeds of Vertue and Good Manners; likewise to Walk Streight and Upright, to Run hand∣somly, and to make True and Proper Steps. This wou'd be a great Orna∣ment, and of good Service to them, when they arrive to a more mature and adult Age: It would cut off a great deal of their superfluous Time, and em∣ploy it much better, and more advan∣tageously than is generally practised. Moreover, it wou'd soon discourage and discountenance the ill Custom of sending Children to be instructed at publick Dancing-Schools; where they
many times receive more Prejudice in a Month, than they can repair or remove, perhaps, all their Lives after. For it shou'd be the Care of Mothers and Nurses, to order the Gaite, and direct the Steps of the Children; where∣in if they are well instructed at first, they will observe the same for ever. For by neglect of this it is, That so many Men and Women make such an Odd and Clownish Figure in their Walking and Moving; sometimes their Steps are too thick, sometimes too short, and sometimes too long; with some extraordinary and irregular Motions of their Backs and Hips, as if their Legs were too weak to support the weight of their Body; with many o∣ther unseemly Postures; which might more easily and less chargeably be pre∣vented, were the Directions we pre∣scribe but follow'd and observ'd. For it is to be noted, That ill Postures, and other Habits, if they are taken up betimes, become so strong and power∣fully grafted in the Disposition, that it is almost impossible to root them out, or unteach them again. This is an
undeniable Truth; and it is a thou∣sand times better, if possible, that Chil∣dren should remain in an intire and and absolute Indifference and Neu∣trality, without learning or doing any thing at all, than to be taught or suf∣fer'd to imitate preposterous Methods. For if the Child be born with Streight, Sound, and Proportionable Limbs, there is but one True, Proper, and Handsom way of Going; which they may be as easily taught and brought to, as they are to Speak, provided a little Care and Pains be taken with them in the due time: For in the Be∣ginning every thing is alike to the Child, and one thing as soon learned as another. Neither should Children, by any means, be permitted to Ieer or Laugh at any Person's Deformity either in Mind or Body. It is a vain and lewd Practise, and generally tolerated; nay, you shall see a parcel of Old Fools stand by, and please themselves ex∣tremely, to hear Children Revile and Reproach one another. These are things that of all others, ought to be
severely corrected and punish'd. If once they are encourag'd to Back-bite, Envy, Defame, or Belye one another, there is no hopes of them; they will be Devils in spite of your Teeth. For these are the Seeds of all Abomination, and will, upon Occasion, as they grow up, break out in∣to the most unlawful and criminal Enor∣mities: Theft, Murther, Blasphemy, Treachery, Dissimulation, Lying, Perjury, and all man∣ner of accursed Villany, are the Off-spring of such an unatural and unchristian Con∣nivance and Tolleration. 'Tis for want of Parents and Nurses taking care timely to reform and destroy these mischievous Seeds of Vice that so many, every Month, ride backwards up Holbourn-hill, to Tyburn. We may say, That through Ignorance and Inconsideration, most People do, as it were, intice and play their Children into all manner of Vice, laying such early Foundations of Wickedness; which meet∣ing with suitable Occasions, in time, grow so strong, that they are never able to shake them off, or withstand them: all which might, at first, with a little Prudence and Care, have been prevented. For in lieu of these, they might with great Facility and Pleasure, have been taught all sorts
and kinds of Vertue, and Degrees of Temperance, the Fear of God, Arts Sciences and Language, several useful and easie Works about Houshold-Affairs; the Names, Vertues and Uses of Herbs and Plants; to distinguish which are proper for Food, and which for Medi∣cine; the Managing of Gardens, and Art of Husbandry, with a thousand o∣her-Employments more honourable and more diverting than their idle Sports and Games, which they usually practice, and whereof they are capable to a very high degree; and then, in a short time, these little Attainments, with small Industry, will grow to very great Improvements, and accomplish them to bear the Cha∣racter of Excellent Persons in the World. There are many other Enormities and great Evils, that Parents (even those of the Best and Soberest sort) are guilty of, in the Education of ther Children. For, First, Tho' they will not allow them to run about the Streets, and play promis∣cuously with the crowd of other Children, (which indeed is extremely commenda∣ble,) yet at Home, in their own Houses, they use all possible Methods to destroy and ruine them, by continually suffering
them to stuff their little Paunches with all sorts of Dainties, and richly compounded Meats and Drinks, over-charging them both in Quantity and Quality; which un∣dermines the very Basis of Health, there being very few of so sturdy and strong Constitutions, that are not wounded by it in one degree or another. What is this, but laying a sure and lasting Founda∣tion for Gluttony and Idleness? Second∣ly, They give them all sorts of Liberty, Commanding their Servants to Humour and Obey them in all their foolish and extravagant Whimsies; by which means they never or seldom arrive at any true Discernment of Things, being indulged in every thing that their extravagant Imaginations can conceive, or their un∣disciplin'd Appetites desire. They very rarely put them to any kind of the a∣bove-mention'd Exercises or Employments; neither do they take care to set them∣selves before them as Precedents of Tem∣perance and Frugality, taking delight to see them hector and domineer over those that wait upon and attend them; by which means they become Haughty, Ambitious and Surly to all that are beneath them (as they conceive) in Birth or Estate; given
to Passion, Gluttony, Ebriety and Laziness; whereas they ought to have the contrary Vertues of Affability, Courtesie, and Genero∣sity, founded even in their very Natures and Constitutions; which infinitely more become and adorn a Noble Birth, and Fair Fortune, than an ill-natur'd and untra∣ctable Pride. Besides, a nice and fond Edu∣cation does, as it were, suffocate and de∣stroy all Knowledge, and True Under∣standing, even in the very bud; and chief∣ly advances Folly & Ignorance, the greatest Evils in the World; for where Folly and Ignorance joyn, (and they can never be separated,) pray what Expectation can there be of any Great or Honourable Pro∣duction? The Fruit must of necessity be bad, when all within the Trunk of the Tree, the very Sap it self, is poyson'd and corrupt. For there are very small Hopes of that Person's doing any thing to pur∣pose, who has once indulg'd himself to an Habit of Idleness. Consider a while the wonderful Active Powers of God, the marvellous Operati∣ons of Nature, the daily Motions of the Celestials, the glorious Company of Stars, their Rising and Setting; the Variety of their Lustre, Courses and Configurati∣ons.
Behold the Rivers and Streams of Water labouring continually, though in in a long and difficult Progress, to pay their Tribute to the Ocean; and the O∣cean again, by industrious Tides, Fluxes, and Refluxes, striving to supply the Land. Observe how the Sun, the bright Lumi∣nary of Heaven, by his Circulations, and Mysterious Powers, does not only give Life and Being to all Elemental Things, but exhales Moisture from Below, and wonderfully bottles it up in the Clouds till the appointed Time, and then returns it, with Interest, to refresh and replenish the Earth. There is no such thing as Idle∣ness among all the Works of God. An idle Person is none of God's Creature. Shou'd the Primum Mobile stand still but an Hour, the World wou'd be at an End, and the whole Globe of the Universe fall into its Original Chaos. All the Accom∣modations of Life are procur'd by Labour; nay, Life it self cannot be otherwise main∣tained: The Blood must be always in Circulation; and the Pulse, Nature's Clock, continually striking: The Stomach must labour hard in her Kitchin, to prepare and separate Aliment for the other Parts. You see then, that there is nothing idle a
Moment in the Greater or Lesser World: How much then is it the Duty of Parents and Tutors, &c. to see that Children are constantly and commendably employed; Idleness being a manifest Breach of the Command of God, and an open Con∣tradiction to the whole Course and Ope∣ration of Nature? It is the Mother of all Oppression and Violence; an Inlet to all Sin and Wickedness; and never goes alone, but is attended with a black train of hor∣rid and abominable Vices; rendring Men subject to the dominion of the gross, inferior and spiteful Powers, and evil Demons, who incessantly prompt them on to commit all kinds of Outrages against God, Man, and Beasts. From hence have all unlawful Sports and Games their rise; such as Cards, Dice, Billiards, Lotteries, Whimsie-boards, Stage-Plays, Drolls, Hunting, Hawking, Prize-play∣ing, Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Cock-fighting, wanton and lascivious Dancing, Racing, &c. with a thousand other Vanities that Pa∣rents and Elder People, by their own Practice, teach their Children, whereof some are Rude, Rustick, Unmanly, and Unseemly; others Cruel, Bloody, and Oppressive; others Mean, Base, and Ef∣feminate:
but all Sinful and Detestable, and ought to be condemn'd to the darkest and deepest Pit of Hell. And all this, forsooth, must be excus'd with the ridicu∣lous Name of Pastime: As if our Time, which is the greatest Blessing we have, were so intollerable a Burthen, that we must be beholden to the Devil's Invention to help it off our Hands: Surely we shall, one day, find, That all we had, was but little enough to do our Duty in. Now, when I speak of Idleness, 'tis not to be understood of an utter insensible Stupidity of Soul and Body, a state of ab∣solute Inactivity, or the doing nothing at all; but the doing of Evil, or that which Children ought not to do; which is the worst sort of Idleness: for, in the other sence, there is scarce any thing Idle in the whole Course of Nature. If Children be not exercised in some useful Art and Things tending to Vertue, they will be always doing the contrary. For in their First and Second Age, which is from their Birth to Seven Years of Age, and from thence to Fourteen, their Spirits are ex∣traordinarily brisk and airy: Their Ima∣ginations & Desires cannot stand still, but will be endeavouring to penetrate into
the Knowledge of Things. Upon which account, good and wholsom Examples ought to be set before them: Their par∣ticular Tasks ought to be assigned them, that they may betimes learn to dress the Gardens of their Souls, and sortifie them against the over-spreading Weeds of Vice and Ignorance, and keep their Bodies clean from Diseases and Distempers. For Idleness and Ignorance are the most inhu∣mane Tyrants in the World; and Man∣kind's greatest Enemies, which this pre∣sent Age has brought into great Favour and Esteem: And because they are re∣solved to have their Children intirely un∣der their Subjection, most Parents accu∣stom 'em to 'em even from their Birth; and as soon as they begn to Speak, fill their Heads with a Rhapsody of idle Prat∣tle, Nonsence and Lies; and so, as it were, erect a School in their own Houses for the Nurture of Ignorance and Vice, and take no Pains to inform and instruct them in the Rudiments of Vertue and true Knowledge. It is a grand Mistake, not to begin to teach Children any thing of Value till they are Eight or Ten Years of Age: As if they ought to commence then, when they shou'd almost have done Learning. They
are early and timely Plants that take su∣rest root, and thrive amain, (as the Ex∣perience of all Mankind can testifie.) In India they teach their Children to Spin fine Callico's and Muslins at Three Years old: Nor cou'd they ever bring them to Perfection, did they begin later. Italy abounds with fine Painters; and Holland and England, with curious Spinners of Thread and Wool: In which Arts, all that have any Reputation, are very ear∣lily instructed. Pray tell me, What Ex∣cellence can Age attain to, in Writing, Reading, Speaking Languages, Musick, Painting, &c. if there have not been first some youthful Instruction implanted in them? It is a certain Truth, That the sooner we begin, the surer and better Progress we are like to make. It is no wonder then, that the Princes, and Great Men of this World, are so mightily given up to Wrath, Fierceness, and Fighting; when we consider, they are bred to it from their very Cradles. As soon as they can handle a Sword, they must have a small one provided; and when the Child shall in the least degree imitate any Warlike and Fierce Action, his Tutor and People about him praise
him to the Skies; I'll warrant (say they) my little Master will be a General before he dies. Then, when he's able to Ride, a Horse must be bought, with Holsters and Pistols, and all other proper Furniture; so his little Lordship must be forthwith mounted. Now his Ears are open to no∣thing but War and Battles; he dreams of nothing but Fighting, Killing and Conquer∣ing; all the Discourse about him, is of no∣thing but Armies and Sieges, of Battalions and Squadrons, of Trenches, Bastions, Half-Moons, Parapets, and Counterscarps, with such impertinent Iargon, that the little Warrier fancies himself already in the Battle, just now a going to enter the Breach, and the Town's our own. By such Methods as these, they animate and excite the Spirit of the Child, and stir up the Seeds of Fierceness and Wrath in his Soul; which they ought, with the greatest Care imaginable, to suppress and mollifie. Thus all Children are taught, from their Infancy, the Trade of Killing; and by practising on Inferiour Creatures, arrive, by degrees, to the Perfection of Murther, in killing of Men. This makes so many rash Young Men leave an honest and profitable Trade, where they have all
Things convenient and necessary, to run heedlessly in the Wars of Princes; blind∣ly, though voluntarily, submitting them∣selves to almost intollerable Fatigues and Hardships, opening their Breasts to Guns and Swords; and yet, after all, if they offer to quit their Colours, they are sure to be Hang'd, having bound themselves Apprentice to the worst sort of Slavery in the World. And this also makes the Gentlemen leave their Wives and Chil∣dren, and all the Delights and Enjoy∣ments of their Estates, to travel into fo∣reign Countries, and there fight like mad, and venture their Lives against those they never had any Quarrel with. Now, I say, if Men are not well fraighted with good store of this unlucky Commodity call'd Wrath, it wou'd be impossible for them to Act as they do, contrary to all Hu∣manity, and True Vertue: but the Power of Education is very great, and captivates all Mankind in one degree or other. Therefore, of whatever Spirit Fathers, Mothers, Tutors, &c. wou'd have their Children to be, let them take care to sow the Seeds thereof betimes in the Child's Soul. Wou'd you have your Child to Love and Fear God? You may easily do
it, to what Degree you please, provided he does not hear nor see contrary Ex∣amples. Wou'd you have him Tempe∣rate in Meats and Drinks? Then accu∣stom him to proper Quantities and agree∣able Qualities in his Diet. Wou'd you have him Hardy, Strong and Healthy? Then use mean Foods, and give them in Order, and with constant Exercise pro∣portionable to the Strength of the Child. Or, Wou'd you have him a Curious and Excellent Artist? Then keep him con∣stant to the Practice of that Art, and where he may always see Examples of the same. The like is to be understood of all other Things. Some Rules concerning Proper FOODS for Children. IT is agreed on by all prudent Men, That simple Meats and Drinks are most friendly and acceptable to Nature, and Healthier than those that are rich, and compounded of various Ingredients, but more-especially for the tender Nature of Children. Did Mothers and Nurses
truly understand and consider what was most agreeable to the Simplicity of Na∣ture, this Age wou'd be happy; and the Pains and Trouble of Bringing-up Chil∣dren would hardly be felt. If their Foods were made of Corn, as Gruel made of Oatmeal; Water-Pap, which is made only of Wheat-flower and Water, with a little Salt and Bread in it; their Chil∣dren wou'd be, for the most part, Plump, Brisk, Strong and Lively. When the Child is Costive, then Water-gruel, with more or less Flower'd-Pap, eating a little Bread and Salt with it, is very good and proper. This sort of Food is not only Healthier than Pap made of Milk, but much more Strong, and every way more substantial. It generates better Blood, and causes a more free and undisturb'd Circulation. For I affirm, If Children shou'd never have any other Food for the first Seven Years of their Age, than Water-gruel, and Pap made with Flower, Bread, and Salt; their Consti∣tutions wou'd be much healthier and firmer, free from innumerable Diseases wherewith thousands are now tormen∣ted; withal, adding good Spring-water for their Drink.
The World is not so grossly mistaken in any thing, as in the due Preparation of Meats and Drinks, especially as they relate to Children. Nothing is a greater Evil than Ignorance. All Meats and Drinks that are rich and delicate, are not in the least agreeable to the Nature of Children; such as Milk-Foods mixed with Sugar & Spices; also Butter & Cheese, if not eaten sparingly: all Fish, Flesh, and Foods wherein Eggs are mixed, as Custards, Cheese-cakes, &c. are pernicious, especial∣ly to some Children; likewise Pies made with unripe Fruit, mixed with Sugar, which must indeed be eaten sparingly. But what unaccountable and prepo∣sterous Methods do we follow? Our Governours Fondness and Ignorance de∣stroys us. Mankind would be as Healthy as any other Creature; and Healthier too, provided his Food was as natural and simple as that of other Creatures. I say, and I affirm nothing but Matter of Fact, A Man may do as good a Day's Work, nay, better too, that eats but a Penny-half-penny's worth of Oatmeal made into thick Gruel, than he that stuffs his Carkass with the greatest Varieties he can think on. A Gentleman of my Acquain∣tance
told me, That he liv'd for a Half∣penny a Day, on that sort of Food, for 3 Months together. But be the Quantity what it will, I am sure a Man may live very well on it; and be more Strong, Brisk, and Lively, than with Beef and Mutton. Besides, if Childrens Diet were simple and natural, they wou'd be of larger Growth, finer and straiter Limb'd, and every way more compleat; especially if their Exercises were gentle, and suited to their Strength. This is evident, from the difference in Health and Strength between the Children of Poor People, and those of Greater Persons. Are there any People that have gene∣rally more or healthier Children than the Scotch Women? Yet most of them live chiefly on Gruels made of Oatmeal; and their Cawdles, when they Lye-in, are no better then Spoon-meats made of Oat∣meal & Water, sometimes boiling there∣with a little Small-beer or Ale. Besides, in those Northern Parts of the World, no People dandle, or carry their Children less about in their Arms: They are com∣pell'd to it by their Poverty and Want, being forced customarily to labour abroad in the Fields for their Livelyhood, as
well as at Home; so that they have lei∣sure to give but little more Attendance on their Children, than just suckle and feed them at the usual Times. For the constant carrying and lugging of Chil∣dren about, is very prejudicial to their Health, by often-times over-heating the Blood; especially if Elder and Stronger Persons take upon them that Office; for by an unaccountable Sympathy, they powerfully attract those fine Spirits from the Child, which would abundantly nou∣rish and strengthen it. For Children be∣ing Tender in their Constitution, and their Spirits Volatile, every little Disor∣der inflames and precipitates them into Feavourish Indispositions; from whence proceeds a long train of other troublesom Diseases: (which I have often labour'd to acquaint Mankind with, to very little purpose; so much is inveterate Custom too powerful for me.) Children are likewise very much pre∣judiced by lying in Bed with Old Per∣sons; and being kept too Hot, whereby they become Uneasie and Froward. For if things were rightly and orderly ma∣naged, there wou'd not be so much Bu∣siness and Perplexity to tend upon Four
or Five Children, as there is now upon One. They are preposterous in all their Methods; they over-Feed them, over-Cloath them, over. Tend them, and over-Bind them: And in other respects they are as much remiss as they exceed in this. If the generality of Women wou'd but exercise the least grain of Sence or Wis∣dom, or if their Infallible Doctors wou'd be so kind as to tell them the Truth, they might quickly give themselves more Ease, and their Children more Health. Where there is no Order, there can be no good Effect, but every thing tends to Divi∣sion and Irregularity. If they will ob∣serve no proper Methods, but do every thing without Order or Discretion, they must take what follows: For the Child will do every thing it is accustom'd to; and that Custom that comes nearest the simplicity of Nature, will soonest and ea∣siest be embraced. If the Child be used to Suck and Feed at such and such cer∣tain times of the Day and Night, it will soon be contented with it, and expect no other Treatment. There is another thing commonly practised by Mothers and Nurses, every way as ridiculous and hurtful as any of
the rest; and that is, Whenever the Child is out of humour, or any thing is amiss, presently to clap the Breast or a Spoon into the Mouth of it; so inhu∣manely forcing it to Suck or Eat: Which, instead of Quieting the Child, does the more Disorder it; and though, perhaps, not for the present, yet afterwards they shall find the Effects. For, the too often Eating, when Nature does not require, must of necessity disturb, heat and burthen the whole Body. A lamen∣table piece of egregious Folly this, and never enough to be exposed! Wou'd it not look odly, if when a Man or Woman is out of humour, or any thing else is the matter, they shou'd immedi∣ately fall to Eating and Drinking, when perhaps they have been at Dinner not above an Hour before? There is another thing, of great mo∣ment, to be observed; viz. That to be∣gin to teach Children betimes any Art, Science, or other Employment, and keeping them moderately to it for the most part of the Day, generates Better and more Manly Thoughts in them; improves the Natural Genius, constantly supplying it with good Notions, so that
they become more Serious and Thought∣ful: For, Necessity is the Mother of Inven∣tion; which is ever encreased by Exer∣cise and Practice. Now, at Play there is no such Necessity, but Children ram∣ble from one thing to another; and are no further obliged, than their own Fancy inclines them. For, Constraint to any thing, dulls their Parts, fatigues and in∣capacitates them for the learning of those things they stand most in need to know. This sort of Instruction wou'd abun∣dantly advance and beget Frugality and Order, even to a Miracle. For having obtain'd their Knowledge by their Pains and Industry, it wou'd be as valuable to them as an Estate or Money procured by a Man's own Toil and Labour. So in∣numerable are the Advantages that wou'd hereby accrue, that it is impossible to do any more than hint at the many Bene∣fits and Vertues that result from an Early, Prudent, and Well-methodized Educa∣tion. There wou'd be little Reason then to reflect, That Boys and Girls play a∣way that Time with Drums and Babies, which they might employ to more pro∣fitable Uses, and turn to a far better Ac∣count. And the Reason hereof is evi∣dent;
Because (as we have already de∣monstrated) they do all Things by Ex∣ample and Imitation. Having before no Prepossession, or Prejudice, they must of necessity own that for their Sovereign, and be subjected to its Conduct. Methods and Institutions of a SCHOOL, for the advantagious Education of Young Persons, Propos'd. FIRST, There must be a Skilful Master, or Governour. 1. One that has been well acquainted with the World, and knows the Mystery and Intrigue of it. He must, in general, be a good Natural Philosopher; and have some Knowledge of the Mathematicks, and Astronomy; together with a com∣petent measure of Ethicks, which is the Life of all. In short, He must be a Person able to bear the Character he undertakes, and instruct the Inferiour Tutors and As∣sistants in all the particular Methods that contribute to the Promotion of Learn∣ing, Vertue, and True Knowledge. It is not much insisted on, whether he took
his Degrees at the University; and his Learning (as to point of Scholarship) is less to be regarded than his Discretion. For as the greatest Scholars are not always the best Preachers, so neither are the Acade∣micks ever the best Tutors. 2. There must be a Sub-Tutor under the Governour, that can speak Latin and French readily and properly. But if one that is a general Master of both Lan∣guages cannot be found, there must be two chosen, one for each. 3. Twice a Week a Musick-Master must come and teach those that are willing to learn that Science. There must be one in the School that understands it also, to hear and keep them to their Business, and Tune their Instruments. Likewise a Painter must come twice a Week, to in∣struct and give Patterns to such Children whose Inclinations lead 'em to practice that Art. 4. Now, when such Masters are pro∣vided as are every way accomplish'd for this purpose, you must proceed in a re∣gular Order and Method: Which will not only make all Learning easie to the Children, but also to the Masters and Tutors.
5. Take Ten or Twenty Children, from Three Years old, to Five or Six at most, who are not to be suffer'd to speak one Word of English, but all keep silence and observe: And as much as may be, the Master and Tutors must make it their Business continually to speak Latin and French to them, commanding them to do this, and fetch that: And when the Children do not understand them, they are to teach them by Example, doing and fetching the thing themselves. By this means they will understand the Names of most things about the House, in Six Weeks, or Two Months; and in the interim, they must be taught to Read the Languages they learn: So that in a Year's time they shall all speak both Latin and French, as well as any Children shall do English at that Age. And when these first Children speak the Tongues, then all that are admitted into the School will naturally learn it of Course, by Con∣versation and Reading, as easily as any learns English from their Mothers, &c. Nay, they shall Speak it better, and more properly Pronounce it, than most Chil∣dren do their Mother-Tongue. 6. The Maids, and Nurses, and other
Servants, shall not speak any other Tongue but what is learn'd and taught in the School; and before they arrive to it, they shall be silent, and do all things by Signs. 7. The Day shall be divided into so many Parts as the Children learn Arts or Things. The Master and Tutors shall neither Whip, Beat, nor shew Anger or Passion toward any Child, be he never so dull: But instead of such Correction, shall take the dull Child aside, and Com∣mend and Praise him for his Endea∣vours; inform him how many Men of mean Birth have advanc'd themselves to a Noble Pitch of Eminence and Glory, by their Learning, Vertue and Sobriety; and by these Means they shall excite and prompt him on to an honourable Ambition and Emulation. This, no doubt will have a good Effect: For both Wise Men and Fools do a-like love to be Praised. But other Methods shall be used for the executing of Justice, if at any time the Children become vi∣cious and criminal; such as shall not ir∣ritate the Spirit, or provoke Passion; which is a great Enemy to the Souls and and Faculties of most Children, and too
too frequently practised in most Schools; which will be wholly prevented by the good and regular Methods we prescribe. For Order, when Children are accu∣stom'd to it, has as great Power and In∣fluence as Disorder. 8. The School shall be at some Distance from other Houses, or any Town, that there may be no Communication between the Children of the School and other wild Children; that they shall not know what Swearing, or any such frothy Dis∣course is, or that there is any such thing in the World. And so of all other evil Communication. So that it will be easie to govern them, when Order and Custom have their free Influences; and where there is nothing else seen or known but the Pra∣ctice of Vertue, and Study of Learning. 9. In the Winter, the Children shall go to Bed at Seven a Clock at Night, and Rise at Seven in the Morning; and in the Summer, at Eight at Night, and Rise at Six in the Morning. For, above all things, Children shou'd have Rest enough, and Sleep enough; which does mightily strengthen and refresh Nature, and renders them brisk and alart at their Learning.
10. As soon as they are up in the Morning, they shall spend one Hour in Reading, and then eat their Breakfast: After which, such as love Musick, shall play and practice one Hour, and those that are for Painting, the like: The o∣thers shall walk in Gardens for the same time with their Tutors, and discourse of the Nature and Vertues of Herbs, Pants, and Flowers, and of the Art of Husban∣dry and Gardening, all in the Language they then learn; then they shall all re∣turn into the School, and learn their Books for one Hour. After which, they shall be instructed in the Business of the House, and the Art of Oeconomicks; also the Manner and Preparation of the Food they have each day for Dinner, and have the Reasons of every thing discovered to them. Then they shall all go to Dinner; after which, in the Summer time, they shall rest an Hour and a half, sitting silent in a Chair, where they may sleep, if they are in∣clined to it, which will greatly enliven, and sit them for the Afternoons Business. After which, they shall read half an Hour, or an Hour, and then such as are
for Painting or Musick, must spend one Hour in the Exercise of those Arts, and in the mean while the others shall be em∣ployed in Writing; Arithmetick, and Ac∣compting. When this is done, they shall be employ'd again in Gardening, Plant∣ing, Sowing, Weeding, Digging, &c. Every one having a little Garden of their own, which they shall be taught to Dress and Cultivate; and such as are not ca∣pable of that Exercise, shall walk among the others, and learn from them to do it themselves, always having their Tutors along with them: After which, they shall walk, run, and play about for half an Hour, their Tutors carefully observ∣ing that they do every thing with Deco∣rum, and handsomly; for all those Exer∣cises that are perform'd by the Motion and Activity of the Body and Limbs, are to be used in the Afternoon, or near the time of going to rest, and not after Full∣ness, or Dinner, as the Custom is. 11. Thus they shall all learn Latin and French by Custom and Conversation; for there shall be nothing else spoke in the School. Likewise they shall learn to read the same Tongue, which may be
done a quicker and easier way, than the common Method, and by many degrees more to the purpose: For after any Child has learn'd the Letters, this will not take up above three or four Months at the most, to teach the dullest Capaci∣ty to read tolerably well, and in any Book, and some Mercurial Children will learn it in half the time. This Me∣thod of ours will be natural, and furnish the Child with more Variety of Words than the common way; by this way they shall lay a Foundation for the Knowledge of all things that are conve∣nient and needful for Mankind to know. French and Latin shall be as their Mother Tongue, and in two Years they shall speak and read, and understand it per∣fectly, and withal, in the same time learn many useful Arts and Sciences: The day being divided into several pairs, they shall easily pass out of one thing into a∣nother, without any Weariness or Lassi∣tude, by which means it will be like Play to them; for it is call'd Play, be∣cause Children do with pleasure pass from one thing to another of their own Inclination. But if they were confin'd
to it, they would find it very hard Work, and be more unwilling to con∣tinue at it, than others that are put to the study of any useful Art. 12. Now the learning and practising several Arts, will mightily acquaint them with the knowledge of Words; for eve∣ry Art or Science has particular Terms and Proprieties of Expression, adapted to it, which they will be obliged to under∣stand in the reading Books, French and Latin, that treat on those Subjects, so that they will have but little need of a Dictionary, when they are put to write, or discourse of the nature of Things, which many great Schollars are forc'd to have recourse to. 13. Thus, when they have learnt to speak these Languages perfectly, then they shall be taught the true Grammar of them, which will be easily done. For to Speak is one thing, and the Art or Reason of Speaking is another. The first must be done by Imitation and Pra∣ctice, the other is the work of Time, and must be improved by Degrees. They that learn the Art of Speaking before they can Speak, invert the true Method,
and as they say, put the Cart before the Horse; and I do affirm, that if there be a true Method taken, the dullest Boy a∣live may be taught to speak good Latin and French, as well as he has the use of his Mother-Tongue. No Man can speak any Language well, and discourse handsomly of all things, but he that learns young, and by Conversation, all the Rules in the World can never make him a Master afterwards. All other Methods of Learning are like the My∣stery of the Lawyers, who have used all possible Skill and Endeavours to make Honesty and Justice intricate, and hard to be understood, which the plainest Man upon Earth knows perfectly, without being beholden to their Books, or being skill'd in their Art. True Pronunciation and Speaking is learnt by Hearing. Those Children that are accustom'd to hear a Noble and Elegant way of Speaking, will imitate the same. This is the way to make Eloquent Orators, and good Ar∣tists. Pray tell me, if the best of Do∣ctors of them all would not be at a Loss, if they were call'd to assist a Person in the Buying and Selling most sorts of the
Commodities of Merchants and Shop∣keepers, to discourse of all the parts of Housewifry, Agriculture, Navigation, Ships, their Tackle and Furniture, and a thousand other useful things? most of them I believe would be forc'd to their Dictionaies, and I am sure in many re∣spects find but little assistance there nei∣ther. No Man can possibly be a Master of any Language, but such as learn it very young, and by Conversation; nei∣ther is he then a Mster any farther than the custom of the Country allows him; for 'tis that which makes all Words pro∣per and improper. 14. It is believ'd by some, that if a Child shou'd never hear Speaking, he wou'd never Speak; tho' there is indeed a real Ground in Nature for Language. It is a noble thing, and distinguishes Mankind from the Beasts, and wou'd do much more, if Man had not lost the true Knowledge and Understanding thereof by his Fall and Degeneracy, viz. The Language of Nature, which was the O∣riginal Tongue that in the first Ages of the World the Antients had some glim∣mering Knowledg of, as appears by their
giving such Names to their Children and other things, that by the Word and Sound the Nature and Quaity of the Person, or Thing named, might be understood, whereof there is now little or no Know∣ledge remaining. 15. But the Fowls of the Air and Beasts of the Field do still retain their Original Language, which the great Creator of all things at first endued them with, for they have not degenerated nor broken the Law of God and Nature, but have continued under the Government there∣of; and tho' they cannot express their Minds and Inclinations in Articulate Words; and tho' for the most part they have but one Tone or Sound, yet they have by the various alteration of that Tone a quicker, and more natural way of Communicating their Sentiments to each other, suitable to their Occasions, and the respective State of their Minds and Desires. than Mankind can, by Ar∣ticulate Words. I am almost bold to say, that if Mankind had not Education, he wou'd be much more ignorant than the meanest of Beasts. Now the chief difference between the Education of Men
and Beasts is this; the latter have their Education from Nature, and act ac∣cording to their first and necessary Law. and the former from depraved Custom and Tradition, great part of which is Vicious and Devilish: He is hurried on with the Spirit of Error into all Acts of Violence and Injustice, being the Devil's Slave, yet boasting of his Knowledge and Understanding, which Knowledge and Understanding is not manifested in any thing, so much as in the works of Darkness. Thus I have given you a short Draught or Delineation of what I judge very ne∣cessary to be Copy'd out into Practice. Many othr useful Directions might be laid down, which shall be made use of if ever these Proposals shall have the good Fortune to be approved of, and encou∣raged. I am confident, such Methods as these would abundantly contribute to the Improvement of true Learning, and the Reformation of Men's Manners. There is one evil Practice that I find Parents and Nurses generally, guilty of, and cannot conclude without some Re∣flection upon the horrid and wicked
Consequences that attend it. From the very Cradle they use all means possible to learn their Children Pride and Vani∣ty: If they have any thing new or fine, they never let them alone till they have made the young Things sensible of the Worth and Value of it, thereby laying unremovable Foundations for Self-Con∣ceit and Flattery, which grows up in them by degrees, till they are seduced into Presumption, and a Contempt of others, and so begets and nourishes In∣dignation, Self-Love, Anger, Hatred, &c. which produces Irreligion, Unbelief, Su∣perstition, Impenitence, Arogance, and a long train of Dabolical Mischiefs. Pride destroys the faculties of the In∣tellect, and will never suffer it to make a right Judgment. Is the Inlet to Cre∣dulity and Falshood, the Gare of Error, and the first step to Oppression and Vio∣lence, Inhumanity and Madness. It blinds all the Inward Senses of the Soul, subjecting them to all Malignant Influ∣ences, destroying the Image of God, poysoning the Imagination, and all the good Virtues, and active Powers of God and Nature. It fills the Fancy with dark
Ideas, and destroys the Harmony of the Universe. It is a stirring Power and Qua∣lity, and may be justly styled the Son of the Devil. Every Man hugs and ca∣resses it in himself, but abhors and abo∣minates it in another. It is a mortal E∣nemy to Mankind, and the Spring head of all War, Devastation, Depopulation, Self-Murder, Lying, Distraction, and whatsoever is odious and wicked in the World. What Ignorance, Blindness and Mad∣ness then does posses Mankind, that they shou'd be at such continual Charge and Pains to improve and nourish this Hel∣lish Quality, that sets the World and all Nature in a Flame? Let all People then in time consider the sad Effects of this Vice, and not intail on their Posterity such a Distemper, which utterly ruins both the Soul and Body. Let them con∣sider what a Christian ought to be, and the Condition on which our Eternal Sal∣vation and Happiness depends, and exa∣mine whether the Educaion of their Children be correspondent and agreea∣ble to Christ's Rule. I say, when this is consider'd, and compar'd, a Man
must necessarily conclude, that Men do not believe what they talk of, and pe∣tend to; for if they did, they could not be contented with such Vicious Me∣thods, in bringing up their Children. Poor Peoples Children, for want of Necessaries, are brought up in Swinish∣ness and Beastiality, and the Rich educate their Children in all the Degrees of Court Haughtiness, Intemperance and Idleness; so that a Man of 1000 l. per an. that has four or five Children, ought to have an Estate better than the whole for each of them, every Child begin∣ning his Trade of Life, where the Fa∣ther and Mother left off; insomuch that if an Account were taken of all the Gen∣men's Families in England, you wou'd hardly find one in twenty of their Chil∣dren that live any thing handsomly in the World. Of all the Youths that Yearly come up to London, to be Apprentices to Mer∣rs, Drapers, Silk men, &c. there is not one in twenty that serves his time out, or lives on his Trade, which can be attribu∣ted to nothing else but the effects of those: Poysonous Weeds of Pride and Arro∣gance,
their Parents sow'd in them in their Childhood. The same is to be un∣derstood of common Servants; are they not Bold, Surly, Nasty, and Ignorant? So that you must teach them every thing before you can have any Service from them; and when they can do your Busi∣ness, upon any light Occasion they grow Sawey and Impudent, and will leave you, without any Acknowledgment of your Kindness to them, which only pro∣ceeds from the want of Publick Schools, and due and timely Methods of Educa∣tion. Let no Person therefore that falls under this Character, think to excuse himself, by murmuring at, and upbraiding his Creator, as if he had dealt unkindly with him; but if the Blame must be laid somewhere else besides, than upon himself, let him charge his Miscarriage upon his Father and Mother, who by their Ignorance and Madness, have sti∣fed and beclouded Vertue, and advanc'd and encouraged Wickedness and Folly, whereby Men become Contemptible in this World; and Miserable in the next.
The True and most Natural Me∣thod of teaching Children to read Latin, French, Dutch, Italian, or any other Langu∣age, as well as their Mother-Tongue, with great Ease and Pleasure, so that they shall pronounce all their Words ful∣ly and properly, which is the greatest difficulty in the Learn∣ing of Languages. THE understanding Tongues and Languages is a sort of Learning, highly useful and convenient, and un∣speakably serviceable, as well in the ma∣nagement of any Trade, Business or Em∣ployment the Divine Providence shall place us in in the World, as in the Spiri∣tual Advantages, in reading the Holy Scriptures, and other good Books.
The common Method is not only te∣dious and difficult, whereby many are discouraged, and grow weary before they are able to read tolerably, but also very chargeable, so that poor People are not able to defray the Charge of School∣ing for their Children. Upon consideration of these things I gave my Mind to think of some more expeditious Course, and more natural Method, viz. A more easie, quick, and familiar way of learning Letters, so that it be very delightful, both to Schollar and Teacher. First, Teach your Child the Letters, and to spell a little in the Primmer, which may be done in a quarter, or half a Year, by often naming the Letters to them, and asking what they are; for the frequent Sounding or Speaking them goes in at the Ears, and penetrates to the Cen∣ter, it being the Sense that records what is spoken; so that the oft repeating, and speaking of the Letters in the hearing of of the Child, makes a deeper Impression upon the Powers of the Mind. When this is done, take any Book that treats of Temperance and Vetue, and
distinctly read one, two, or three words, or so many as your Child or Schollar can readily speak after you, and so proceed, making the Child point to each Word, and look with the Eye upon them, ex∣pressing each Word distinctly after you, and making a Pause after every Word, till the Child hath done repeating; and when you come to any Words or Word that the Child cannot easily pro∣nounce or express, then you ought to reiterate it with a plain strong Voice, assisting and helping the Child in his pro∣nouncing; but if it be still hard, leave it, go on, it will perhaps be easilier done at another time. Thus when you have read one Book, or as much of it as you think fit, chuse another, provided always that your Books be innocent and pleasant; by this means you shall accustom your Schollar to a variety of Prints, Letters and Words, which will be of great use to him; whereas in the common Schools you see a Child that can read tolerably well in one Book, or one Chapter, and yet not be able to read a word in another: but by practicing the Method we prescribe
two or three Hours in a day, in eight o ten Weeks time the Child shall be able to read in most Books. All the Sences have their appointed Offices. Now the particular Office of Hearing is, to receive in, and distinguish Sounds, and bring them thro' the proper Organs, and present them to the Me∣mory, which is a Retentive Faculty of the Soul, whose Office is to Register all the Ears have presented it with, that they may be forth coming, when any Occa∣sion shall call for them. Now the Ears being the natural Or∣gans to receive all Sounds and Words, that Sound, Voice or Word that is spo∣ken by another Person, and receiv'd by a Third, makes a far deeper Impression on the Memory, than that which he reads himself: So that he that reads aloud, remembers more than he that reads softly to himself, because the strong Speaking enters the Organs more forci∣bly, and conveys the Sound and Sense to the Memory, which records and pre∣sents it to the Judgment, which is the guide of Actions, and judges of what passes and repasses thro' the little World-Man.
For this cause never any Man did or can pronounce any Language or Tongue truly and properly, by reading of it on∣ly, if he has not heard it spoke, and tru∣ly pronounced to him, which is the rea∣son that many speak most of their words improperly, tho' they have read them a thousand times, but the Ears immediate∣ly catch what they hear properly spoken, and convey it to the Memory, so that it shall never be forgotten. Now the Sense of Hearing is made good by Hearing; as in Musical Harmo∣uy, by the common use, and hearing of good Musick and Singing, the Ear can distinguish Sounds, and know when it is well perform'd, and the like, is to be un∣derstood of the speaking of Tongues. For any Person shall learn to speak any Lan∣guage by ten Degrees sooner and better, by Hearing and Conversation, than by any other Method. Therefore Children shou'd be taught to speak the Tongue or Language by Hearing or Conversation, before they think of learning the Rules. For the Reason and Philosophy of Speaking, is a great Art, and the work of Time, and
not at all to be taught Children. This preposterous Method does rather distract and confound them, than improve and profit: So that by the Methods com∣monly used in the Schools, very few ever arrive to speak of many things. It is Conversation that givesChildren an Uni∣versal Tongue, or way of Speaking. By this means, viz. By frequency of Speak∣ing and Discoursing, the hardest words will become easie and familiar; for as we said already, they, ought to speak and read perfectly, before they enter upon the Reason and Rule of Speaking. Now the Advantages of the fore men∣tion'd Methods are: First, It saves Ex∣pence of Time, which is of great Conse∣quence; in our Schools, a Boy learns for seven Years, and after all, can neither write nor speak a Line of true Latin. Be∣sides the difficulty in their way of Pro∣ceeding damps and discourages the Child's Industry and Inclination to learn. Secondly, He shall pronounce his Words more properly, and exactly. Thirdly, He shall more readily read in any strange Book, offer'd him at first sight. Fourthly, It does wonderfully benefit and
imprint the matter on the Memory of the Teacher; so that there is as it were a Co-partnership in Learning, between the Master and the Schollar. Fifthly, By this way any Father, Mother or Friend, may with Ease and Delight teach their own Children to read at home, without the Charge or Trouble of sending them abroad to School where for the most part they learn nothing but lewd Words, and ill Manners, and in short, lose all their time. Sixthly, This Method will not be only beneficial to Children, but to those of maturer age, that would learn to read well, who may hereby be im∣prov'd in three or four Weeks, to admi∣ration, and be made capable of pronoun∣cing all Words with their right tone and accent, as well as if they had been bred Schollars. For example, when they have heard, and been used to pronounce this word [Participate] short, they will ne∣ver say [Par-ti-ci pate] making the last Syllable save one long, which wou'd be ridiculous; yet these, and a many other Absurdities, are the effects of the com∣mon Methods of Teaching.
A true Method of Teaching to Write a good Legible Hand. LET there be Copies Engraven, and Printed on good Paper, not one line, only on the top or side, as is usual for Writing Masters to place their Copies, but in lines quite through the Books First, The beginning strokes of every letter, and then the next added, and so on till the whole Letter is finished, that the Child may know how and where each Letter is to be begun and made. After that, let there be several lines of small Letters, and the like of Capitals: and lastly, Copies of Joyned-Hand, all well writ or cut with the due strokes of a neat mixt hand, which is now most in fashion, easily learnt, and best for general use. Then let the Child with a good Pen and the best red Ink, go over the Letters, and make them red, and so proceed to the whole Letters, and then to the Joy∣ning; only at the first it will be necessa∣ry
that the Father, Tutor, or some one that can write pretty well, should show the Child how to hold his Pen, and guide his hand for two or three weeks, and not suffer him to run rudely and hastily over the Copy, which is but wast∣ing me and Paper, and spoiling the the Childs hand; it must be done heed∣fully, and when he has made his Letter to observe what is amiss, and mend it in the next, till he can make all his Leters exactly, and then and not before let him proceed to the Joined-hand Copies, and when the Book is writ out provide another in the like manner. This Writing over the Copies, will by frequent use and cuom bring his Hand to an habit of making his Letters with∣out them in a short time. For if you keep him to this practice two or three hours in a Day, and make him diligent ad intent upon it, there is no question but in two or three Months he will be able to write a very good Hand. And suppose now in that time he writes four or five of those Copy Books, that will be but four or five Shillings charge in the whole. Likewise People of Mature Age
may learn this way with Ease, Secrecy, and Expedition, it being a Method that cannot fail of Perfecting any that shall carefully practice it for one half Year. Of Retaliation, or Rewards and Punishments. REtaliation both in Good and Evil, is the Original Foundation of the Law of Justice ordained by God and Na∣ture, which no Man can escape or avoid. The secret and sure hand of Gods Ju∣stice will certainly meet and find the Transgressor either publickly or private∣ly in this World or in the next. Upon this consideration Moses and all the wise Ancients founded and framed their Laws of Government in Conformi∣ty to this Original Law of God in Na∣ture, which our Saviour Christ has con∣firmed, saying Such Measure as you mete to others, such shall be Measured to you again.
Pythagoras, and all the rest of the Philosophical Law-givers endeavoured by all means to make their followers sensible of the importance of this Law, being the first Principle and Foundation on which all true Religion and Vertue does depend. So that it is imposible for him to be a Sober, Vertuous, Temperate, and Good Man, that has no regard to this Law. Christ also told his Disciples, That they must do unto all Men, as they would have others do to them. Which is the compleat fulfilling of all Laws both Divine and Humane. Therefore there is the greatest ne∣cessity imaginable, that every Man be made sensible of the Worth, Value and Bounty of this eternal aw, and that Children should be instructed even from their very Cradle, that Rewards and Punishments assuredly attend the obser∣vers and Violators thereof. For if little Children were well Educated in the fear of God, and the Methods of Order, Temperance and Cleanness, and taught that every Evil of what kind soever if not Repented of, and forsaken must be Reta∣liated either in this World or the next, it
would immediately stem the Tide of those Enormities that are every Day committed without either Reproof from their Elders, or Regret to Themselves. Now I say, did Men firmly believe these things, the dread of Retaliation would keep them from Oppressing either their own Kind, or Creatures of inferiour Ranks and Species. For all sorts of In∣temperance and Oppression be they little or much, must be retaliated, as well in private Families, as in publick States. What else is the occasion of changing and transferring of Governments, from one to another, and the shifting of private Estates and Families; so that it is rare to have an Estate continue in one Family for three Generations, which proceeds from the neglect of living in, and obser∣ving God's Law in Nature. Kings, Princes, and great Men, with force and power, break all Bonds and Obligation of Justice, violate and oppress their Inferiors having no regard to that Golden Law, of doing unto all Men as they wou'd be done unto, with a thou∣sand other Evils they commit, as if no Mercy or Sense did dwell in them. So
that oftentimes they are depose from their Government, out off by violent and im∣mature Deaths, or else these Evils are re∣taliated upon their Posterity. The like is to be understood concerning every pri∣vate Family and Person. When a sober industrious Person has got an Estate, what does he then but by his own mistaken Conduct, together with the Women's idle and nonsensical Me∣thods in the Education of his Children, make way for the transferring of it, and by this means sets it agoing much faster, and in a shorter time than it was got? Now some think this swift motion of transfer∣ring Estates is occasion'd by the ill getting of them, which indeed is too often true, but not always; for it is visible that the ill Conduct of Parents, in bringing up their Children, does frequently do it: For all Idleness, Intemperance, and Mispet time are certainly punished; and tho' it be done by Children, yet they must un∣dergo the Retaliation, both in the Good and Evil. No Creature under Heaven that breaks God's Law can escape the pu∣nishment, due for such a Violation and Transgression. And on the other hand,
God is no Respecter of Persons; but whoever lives and obeys this sacred Law, is blessed with the sweet Influences of Heaven, and accepted of God, whether young or old. Now if Parents did but give themselves Leizure to think, they wou'd never suf∣fer their Children to run headlong to De∣struction as they do; nay, many give them Precedents and Examples for their evil Practices and Disorders. Which plain∣ly declares them to have no Faith, and that they do not believe one word of the Scripture, or the Commandments of God and Christ, recommended to them. For I must take leave to tell you, Be∣lieving is quite another thing; for where∣ever Faith is, it is accompanied with great Power, which does as it were compel those that enjoy it, to a Conformity and Obedience to its Commands. It hath a secret Sympathetick Operation upon the Inclinations, Gestures and Intentions, and can powerfully change the innate Nature of the Mind. Suppose any sober Person chances to be at some distance from home, and at the same time a Servant or Messenger comes and tells him, that his House by
some Accident was on Fire, and that it burn'd so violently, that his only Child and Wife were consumed to Ashes in the Flames. Now do you not think that this Report would alter and change this Person from a Chearful, Sedate Conditi∣on, to a Melanchollick Anxious State of Mind, as not doubting the Truth there∣of? How many Examples have we of this kind? of Persons, that upon the News of ill Events Accidents, have been so sur∣prized, and overwhelmed with Grief, that they could not be perswaded to Eat, Drink, or Converse with any Body. Some have been so overcome, that they have entred into Vows of Abstinence and Self∣denial, and others so disturb'd, that they have thro an innate Power of the Mind, and strong Imagination of the Belief of the Truth of it, shook off the Bridle of Reason, and broke the Chains of their Senses, and run mad and distracted; which would never have happen'd, had they not firmly believ'd what was reported: Which Instances are wonderful Eviden∣ces and Manifestations of the Power of Faith. And it is clear in the business of Religion, that Men will hazard their
Lievs and Estates as freely, in the defence of a Diabolical Opinion, as for the Truth it self; and the reason is, because they believe it to be true. Pray therefore do but consider the Nature and Operation of undisturb'd Faith, and how powerfully it works on the Mind, and how it alters and changes Nature to all Intents and Purposes. Now I say, if Faith hath so powerful an Ope∣ration on Man for the least of Momenta∣ry Enjoyments, what shou'd be the Ef∣fects of true Faith, for, and of things, that are durable and eternal? Especially if we reflect that Mankind has not in any de∣gree liv'd answerable to the Rule and Condition, on which Salvation and Hap∣piness is promised and intail'd. Hence it is plain, that most Men in the World do bely themselves, when they say they have Faith, and that they believe; for Christ saith, That if we had Faith, tho' no bigger than a Grain of Mustard Seed, we might be able to remove Mountains; that is, all Sins and Evils that lie in our way. Faith is an ineffable Spirit and Divine Power. It is higher than all Heighths, and deeper than all Depths. It is a Spiritual
and Holy Virtue, that does penetrate, e∣ven to the very Centre of all Beings and Commands over all the Celestial and Terrestrial Powers, having as it were the mighty Fiat in its self, making something where there was nothing. Man's Soul is its Chariot, where it rides in Glory and Triumph, altering and changing all Essences, Forms and Qualities: All things submit to its Influences, and nothing is able to withstand its Power. Now the true Season of Sowing and Planting this true Faith in Children is from three or four Years of age, to ten or twelve; and being well fastned and se∣cur'd to them in those young and tender Years, a small Industry afterwards will improve it to a very high degree. And as it lays a sure and deep Foundation for all things, both in Virtue and Vice; so it is clear and most true, tha the that believes God's Commandments, and his Law of Justice and Retaliation, dares not abuse nor violate any of his Kind, nor inferior Creatures, nor be Intemperate, Idle, Lewd or Disorderly. I say, and af∣firm, That it is impossible for Men to be so extreamly Brutified, and Act as they
do, had they but the least Grain of true Faith. It is only Talk, and nothing else, there being no greater Evil in the World than the evil Education of Children, and certainly Parents must, and are obliged to make a Retaliation for their Neglects, and ill Management of their Children. All the great Wickedness, Violence and Pollutions that are frequently committed in our parts, owe their Original to Mi∣stakes in this Point. And shall not there be a Reckoning? For certain, there must be an Account given; and tho' Men for∣get themselves, yet in God's Providence and his Law in Nature, there is no For∣getfulnes. Raro Antcedentem scelestium de∣seruit pede Poena Claudo. Tho' Justice and Punishment come slowly oftentimes, yet they surely come. And Men shall then, when it is too late, bewail their Neglect of that Duty, which now they might with the greatest Ease and Satisfaction perform.
Some further Thoughts con∣cerning the Education of Children. by another Hand. In a Letter to a Friend. Esteemed and Worthy Friend. THE Subject you were pleased to recommend to my Thoughts, which was concerning the Edu∣cution of Children, I have consider'd, and according to my Capacity, have given here at present what hath rise in my Mind concerning it, which I humbly submit to your better Iudgment, having engag'd my self herein, nt with any Thoughts of my own Ability, to perform so great a Task, but purely in Obedience to your Motion. My first Consideration in this Matter is the great Benefits, which must certainly accreu by the well performing so Noble and Worthy a Design, it being the chief Means to attract the Divine Blessings on that Nation, that
universally and earnestly engage themselves therein. It lays a solid Foundation of Virtue, Wisdom, Iustice, Temperance, Industry, In∣genuity, Love to Mankind, Truth, Humili∣ty, &c. and at the same time roots out the contrary Vices. A Child in its tender Infancy is the most helpless Creature. Which by the way teaches us that this is not our home. In this state the Mother hath the Care and Direction; and that her Tenderness and Love to her Infant may not run her into Error, she ought to con∣sider the Needs and Necessities of Nature, and provide against them, what exceeds those Bouds, may prove burthensome to the tender Babe. For good Nature hath provided the Breast, and whilst the Infant hangs there, it is well provided for; without fear of Sur∣feits and Excess. Cleanness and Necessity ought to be observed in its Dress or Cloathing, rather than Custom or Fashion, and for Food where may we take a better Pattern than from Nature? The Mother's Care extends ovr the Child for near the first seven Years, with respect to the Necessities and Weaknesses of Na∣ture in those tender Years: and here ought to bo great Caré taken, both of Body and Mind, to lay a solid Foundation of Virtue and Good∣ness.
What Children ought to be instructed in, the Method of it, the Grounds from whence the Capacity of Children ariseth, ought to be ta∣ken notice of, and well observed, of which I can give but brief hints, without enlarging beyond my intended Bounds. I conceive that a general Rule or Maxime, to be laid down for the Education of Chil∣dren, may be. That Examples of what you would instruct them in, ought constantly to be presented to them. The Capacity of Children to receive and learn what Men are capable to offer to them, may easily be apprehended; for that they par∣ticipate of the same Power and Faculties of Mind and Body with Men: it must be owned that they are in the Bud, not yet come to ripeness: there is as certainly a growing in Understanding, as well as a growing in Sta∣ture, also a growing in Virtue, or gaining Strength in the exercise of Truth, Modesty, &c. It must considered that there are opposite Vices, which the degenerate Nature of Man is proe to embrace and entertain; and if they are used before Children, the base Example prevails in viciating them, more than all pre∣cepts to the contrary can oppose: For where
Pride, Sloth, Voluptuousness, Fraud, Self-Love, &c. are exercised; Children are rea∣dily infected, and become as Seed, sown in∣to a fertile Ground, that in time takes such rooting, that it is hard to be weeded out, if not almost impossible: But according to the Nature of all Weeds, spreads the whole Coun∣try, and on this occasion it is said by the Wise Man, Prov. 24 31, 32. I went by the Field of the Slothful, &c. and lo! it was all over grown with Thorns, and Nettles had cover'd the Face thereof, &c. There∣fore all Example of Vice ought most carefully to be supprest; for that they ruin the present Practicers, and sow a Seed for the corrupting and spoiling the next Generation. This consideration cannot be too much, nor too earnestly pressed; for Knowledge, accom∣panied with Vice, serves but to exalt it to its Perfection; and when a Nation or Person have thus fill'd up their Measures, they are fit Objects for Ruin and Destruction. The Nature thereof is such, that it draws Divine Venge∣ance on their Heads, except infinite Love and Forbearance steps between, to give an Oppor∣tunity for Repentance. This being premised, and due care taken to prevent the sowing of this evil Seed, and also
to root up as much, as may be such evil Weeds; as may arise of themselves in Children, thro' the power of depraved Nature; then it may be proper to offer to their Understandings Things worthy the Nature of Man to receive. We find that Speech or Discourse by words, used by Men to communicate their Thoughts, to explain the Nature of Things, to detect Falshood and Vanity, &c. is only peeuliar to Man, and differences them from the rest of the Creatures, being a Character of a Divine Stamp, and shows the Excellency of the Hu∣mane Nature. We find by common Experience, that Chil∣dren learn Speech very early and easily, and it is equal what ever Language is offered to them, they will with the same ease acquire it, which I conceive is a clear Argument for what I before offered, that Example ought to be presented to Children of what you would instruct them in, and we find also, that what∣ever Language Children are brought up in, and use till they come of Age, that becomes so natural to them, that it is difficult to learn another Language, commonly the first is so im∣prest, that many cannot express themselves in another Language, but it shall have somewhat of the first mixt with it, which showsnot on∣ly
how how easie it is to instruct Children by Example, but also what is learned in Child∣hood, is rooted so deep, that it is not easily Eradicated. If for Example sake we here in England would instruct our Children in the Latin Tongue, or any other Language, would it not be easier, quicker, and more effectual to per∣form it after the same manner they learned their first Speech, than by Artificial Methods, and Grammar Rules, which I conceive ought to be offer'd them afterwards? But this No∣tion hath of late obtained with many Men, who are proper Iudges therein; and there∣fore the less may be said thereof, it carrying so strong an Argument forit self, even in the ve∣ry Proposal. It is found by experience, that in some parts of Europe, where two or three Languages are spoke, that the Children there commonly learn them together; as in Flanders the Dutch and French; in Switzerland, the German and French. What may be the reason that here in En∣gland we speak not the Latin so readily as in some other Countries? May it not be for want of frequent Examples? Another Instance may here be very fitly offered, to show the Ca∣pacity
of Children, and thereby induce us to an early Application for their Instruction, and that as in Musick, which formerly hath been thought too hard and difficult to instruct Children therein, and that it would rather op∣press and burthen, than instruct or improve them; which Opinion hath sufficiently been confuted of late years, by a Person, not fetter'd by such common Thoughts or Custom, but breaking through, hath produced Examples in Children at four Years old, that have attain'd a proficiency to be admired because not com∣mon, viz. Playing on the Viol several things with great swiftness of Hand, and at six or seven Years old, playing Divisions and Sona∣to's in Consort: Therefore I think, many words need not here be added, for that Matter of Fact carries an undeniable Proof along with it. I might instance in that common Art of Spinning, and in that dare appeal to those most knowing therein; if Children, instructed  that Art very Young, are not capable to spin a finer, and more even Thred, than any elder Person can possibly do, that was not put to it young; and altho' this may seem a mean In∣stance, yet it is Pregnant, and the Art high∣ly useful and acceptable with Men, the ma∣king
curious fine Linnen and Lace. This is also Matter of Fact, and not to be deny'd. The like may be said in Painting, Draw∣ing, Graving, &c. Such a Foundation may be laid, if begun as well, might produce won∣derful Effects. That good Doctrin of the Wise Man may serve here in general; Prov. 22. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it. We ought to desire that the whole Nation were a School of Virtue, and every Family as a Branch of the whole, were found in the Exer∣cise thereof; such a School would certainly prove the most efficacious for the end proposed, but this is rather to be desired than expected, and indeed it is to be lamented, that publick Examples should ruin private Instruction: For as the more publick and general Examples of Virtue are, so are they more teaching, and on the contrary, the more publick and general Examples of Vice are the more infecting: Therefore it is that many Lovers of Virtue de∣cline the publick Ways and Methods of instru∣cting, for fear of being infected with the Vi∣ces, publickly practiced, and so lose a benefit, to avoid a certain Mischief, retiring within the narrow Limits of their own Families. And
when Youth comes forth, virtuously educated in Private, to see the Licntiousness used in Publick; the Danger is great, if many are not corrupted therewith. This is not only in∣cident to Youth, but also to elder Years, till the Mind comes to be in love with Virtue for its own sake. If for the attaining the end proposed to, viz. the well Educating of Children, that at present a School might be erected, where such Children designed to be taught, should constant∣ly reside: That such Language proposed to be taught, should there constantly be spoken, and no other. That such Arts or Sciences, worthy the Knowledge and Practice of Men, were there duly and clearly proposed and exercised. That Truth, Industry, Temperance, &c. were there strictly observed, and in fine, all Vice studiously avoided, we might hope for a good Effect and Issue in the thing designed, and that the more sublime Truths relating to God and Immortal Life, might be more explained to us, which at present is wrapt up in the Books of the Scriptures, Nature and our Selves. It would very much contribute to the Im∣  th of Virtue; were it set in a true Light, it ought not to be obscured with that frightful Vizard, as it is commonly re∣presented,
as if there was no Beauty or Plea∣santness therein, but only Melancholly, Dull∣ness, Unsociableness, and Folly: Therefore, Examples should be set before Children in the Conversation of those about them; that as they pursue Virtue in its many Excellencies, they may not forget that Chearfulness, Inge∣nuity, Affability, Generosity, &c. that com∣pleat the Harmony of the whole, without which, instead of attracting the Affections of those young Ones they should instruct, raise an aversion in their Minds against that, which otherwise they would rejoyce in, it be∣ing fasly exhibited to them. I will only in∣stance that great Saying of Solomon's, Pro 3. 17. speaking of Wisdom. Her Ways ar Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Pa are Peace, &c. I beg your Candid Acceptance hereof, and pardon for such Weakness, as may appear herein, and am, Sept. the 4th. 1694. SIR, Yours Intirely, FINIS.
