T641 R14603 11845329 49824
Engraving of Sir William Temple, Bart., framed in a wreath, with the blazon or coat of arms of Sir William Temple, Bart. Engraved by Robert White, after a portrait by Sir Peter Lely. Servare modum finem{que} tueri Naturamque sequi P Lely pinx. R. White sculp. Printed for I. Tonson A. J. Chruchil & R. Simpsō. Dominus Gulielmus Temple Equos Baronettus Ser.miet Pot.mi Mag. Britanniae Regis ad Ord Eoed.• Belgii Legatus Exns. et apud Tractatus pacis tamdquisgram quam Neomagi Legat Mediats. Ejusdem Ser.mi Regis a Secretioribus Concilus. 16.
LETTERS Written by Sir W. Temple, Bart. AND OTHER Ministers of State, Both at Home and Abroad. CONTAINING, An ACCOUNT of the most Im∣portant Transactions that pass'd in Christendom from 1665 to 1672. In Two Volumes. Review'd by Sir W. Temple sometime before his Death: AND Published by Jonathan Swift Domestick Chaplain to his Excellency the Earl of Berkeley, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland. LONDON: Printed for J. Tonson, at Gray's Inn Gate in Gray's Inn Lane; and A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Pater-Noster-Row, and R. Simpson, at the Harp in S. Paul's Church-yard, MDCC.
TO HIS Most Sacred Majesty William III. King of England, Scot∣land, France, and Ireland, &c. These Letters of Sir W. Tem∣ple having been left to my Care, they are most hum∣bly presented to Your MAJESTY by Your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subject. Jonathan Swift.
THE Publisher's Epistle TO THE READER. THE Collection of the following Letters is owing to the diligence of Mr. Tho∣mas Downton, who was one of Sir William Temple's Secretaries, during the whole time wherein they bear date. And it has succeeded very fortunately for the Publick, that there is contained in them an Account of all the chief Transactions and Negotiations, which passed in Christendom during the seven Years, wherein they are dated; as, The War with Holland, which began in 1665: The Treaty between His Majesty and the Bishop of Munster, with the Issue of it: The French Invasion of Flanders in the Year 1667: The Peace concluded between Spain and Portugal, by the King's Mediation: The Treaty at Breda; The Tripple Alliance; and The Peace of Aix la Chapelle in the first Part. And in the second Part; the Negotiations in Holland in con∣sequence,
of those Alliances, with the Steps and De∣grees, by which they came to decay: The Journey and Death of Madame: The seisure of Lorrain, and his Excllency's recalling; with the first Unkindness between England and Holland, upon the Yatch's transporting his Lady and his Family: And the begnning of the second Dutch War in 1672. With thse are intermixt several Letters, fa∣  and pleasant. Book among Sir William Tem∣  th many others, wherewith I had th pportunity of being long conversant, having passd several Years in his Family. I pretend no other Part, than the Care, that Mr. Downton's Book should be correctly tran∣scribed, and the Letters placed, in the Order they were writ. I have also made some literal amend∣ments, especially in the Latin, French and Spa∣nish: These I have taken Care should be translated and printed in another Column, for the Use of such Readers as may be unacquainted with the Originals. Whatever faults there may be in the Translation, I doubt, I must answer, for the great∣er Part; and must leave the rest to those Friends, who were pleas'd to assist me. I speak only of the French and Latin; for the few Spanish Transla∣tions, I believe, need no Apology. It is generally believed, that this Author, has advanced our English Tongue, to as great a Per∣fection as it can well bear; and yet, how great a Master he was of it, has I think, never appeared
so much, as it will in the following Letters; where∣in the Style appears so very different, according to the difference of the Persons, to whom they were ad∣dress'd; either Men of Business, or Idle; of Plea∣sure, or Serious; of great or of less Parts or Abili∣ties, in their several Stations. So, that, one may discover, the Characters of most of those Persons, he writes to, from the Stile of his Letters. At the end of each Vollume, is added a Col∣lection, copied by the same hand, of several Letters to this Ambassadour, from the chief Persons em∣ploy'd, either at home or abroad in these Transacti∣ons, and during six Years course of his Negotiati∣ons. Among which are many from Pensionary John de Witt, and all the Writings of this kind that I know of, which remain of that Minister so renowned in his time. It has been justly complained of, as a defect a∣mong us, that the English Tongue, has produced no Letters of any value; to supply which, it has been the Vein of late Years, to translate several out of other Languages, tho' I think with little Success. Yet among many Advantages, which might recom∣mend this sort of Writing, it is certain, that no∣thing is so capable, of giving a true Account of Story, as Letters are; which describe Actions, while they are alive and breathing; whereas all other Re∣lations are of Actions past and dead: So as it hath been observed, that the Epistles of Cicero to Atti∣cus, give a better account of those times, than is to be found in any other Writer.
In the following Letters, the Reader will every where discover, the Force and Spirit of this Author; but that which will most value them to the Publick, both at home and abroad, is, First, that the Matters contained in them, were the Ground and Foundation, whereon all the Wars and Invasions, as well as all the Negotiations and Treaties of Peace in Christen∣dom, have since been raised: And next, that they are written by a Person, who had so great a share, in all those Transactions and Negotiations. By residing in his Family, I know, the Author has had frequent Instances from several great Per∣sons both at home and abroad, to publish some Me∣moirs of those Affairs and Transactions, which are the Subject of the following Papers; and particu∣larly of the Treaties of the Triple Alliance, and those of Aix la Chapelle; but his usual An∣swer was, that whatever Memoirs he had written of those Times and Negotiations, were burnt; how∣ever, that perhaps after his Death, some Papers might come out, wherein there would be some Ac∣count of them: By which, as he has often told me, he meant these Letters. I had begun to fit them for the Press during the Author's Life; but never could prevail for Leave to publish them: Tho' he was pleased to be at the Pains of reviewing, and to give me his Directions for digesting them into Order. It has since pleased God to take this great and good Person to Himself; and he having done me the Honour, to leave and re∣commend to me the Care of his Writings; I
thought, I could not at present do a greater Service to my Countrey, or to the Author's Memory, than by making these Papers publick. By way of Introduction, I need only take notice, that after the Peace of the Pyrenees. and His Ma∣jesty's happy Restoration in 1660. there was a gene∣ral Peace in Christendom (except only the Remain∣der of a War between Spain and Portugal) until the Year 1665. when that between England and Holland began, which produced a Treaty between His Majesty and the Bishop of Munster. And this commences the following Letters. I beg the Readers Pardon for any Errata's which may be in the Printing, occasioned by my Absence,
THE First Dutch War, Begun May, 1665. To Sir John Temple, Master of the Rolls of Ireland. Brussels, Sept. 6th 1665. SIR, THO' I was forced by the King's express Command, not only to leave you and my Family at ve∣ry short Warning, and in a very melancholy Season, but without so much as telling you whither I was sent, yet I would not fail making you this amends, by giving you an Account of my Journey and Nego∣tiations thus far, so soon as I thought it might be fit for me to do it. When my Lord Arlington sent for me to
Sheen, it was to let me know, that the King had received an Overture from the Bishop of Munster, to enter into an Alli∣ance with his Majesty against the Dutch, from whom he pretended many Injuries; to bring an Army into the Field, and fall upon them by Land, while His Majesty continued the War by Sea: But at the same time, to demand certain Sums of Mo∣ney, that would be necessary to bring him into the Field, and to continue the War: And that if his Majesty would either treat with the Baron of Wreden, (who was the Minister he sent over in the greatest Privacy that could be) or send a Minister of his own to treat with him; he doubted not an easie Agreement upon this Matter, but desired it might be with all the Secret imaginable. My Lord Arlington told me, the main Arti∣cles were already agreed on here, and the Money adjusted, but that it was necessary for the King to send over some Person pri∣vately, to finish the Treaty at Munster, and to see the Payments made at Antwerp, where the Bishop seemed to desire them. That I must go, (if I undertook it) without Train or Character, and pass for a Frenchman or a Spaniard in my Journey, and made me the Compliment to say, He had been per∣plexed three or four Days together, to think of a Person that was not only capable of
the Affair and of the Secret, but that was to be trusted with such a Sum of Money: But that when he had thought of me, and pro∣posed me to the King and to my Lord Chan∣cellor, they had both approved it, and I must suddenly resolve upon my Answer to the Proposal he mademe; but whether I ac∣cepted it or no, I must keep it secret from my nearest Friends. I told him upon the Place, I would serve his Majesty the best I could in it, tho' being a new Man, I could not promise much for my Self; that there was only one Point I could by no means digest, which was the Business of the Money, having ever been a∣verse from charging my self with any bodies but my own. This made at first some Dif∣ficulty between us, but at last, his Lordship was content to endeavour the engaging Al∣derman Backwel (who furnisht it) to go o∣ver himself with it into Flanders, and there by my Order, to make the Payment to the Bishop's Agent, and said, he believed at such a time of Infection in London, the Alderman might easily take an occasion of such a Jour∣ney. After my Instructions dispatcht, I came away in hast, and with the Secret you saw; and without more than one Days stop at Brussels, went strait with the Baron of Wreden to Coesvelt, where the Bishop then was. I
stay'd there but three Days, was brought to him only by Night, agreed all Points with him, perfected and Signed the Treaty, and returned to Antwerp, where the Alderman performed his Part, in making the first and great Payment to the Bishop's Resident there. All this has been performed on all sides with so great Secrecy, that the Bishop has not on∣ly received his Money, but raised his Troops to about Eighteen Thousand Men, without the least Umbrage given, that I can yet hear of, to the Dutch; and by all the Assurances I receive from him, I conclude that before this Letter comes to your hands, he will be in the Field; tho' some unexpected Disap∣pointments about a General Officer he recko∣ned upon, has a little discomposed the Mea∣sures he had taken, and may (I doubt) not a little maim the Progress of them: But that will be governed by Time and Accidents; my Business was to bring him into the Field, and I have had the Fortune to do it, sooner than either they expected at Court, or the Bishop had promised upon our Signing of the Treaty. He is a Man of Wit, and, which is more, of Sense, of great Ambition, and properly, Un Es∣prit remnant: But the Vigour of his Body, does not second that of his Mind, being, as I guess, about six or seven and fifty Years old, and pursued with the Gout, which he is not
like to cure by his manner of Life; he was a Soldier in his Youth, and seems in his Natu∣rals, rather made for the Sword than the Cross; he has a mortal Hatred to the Dutch for their supporting his City of Munster against him, and is bridling those Citizens by a very strong Cittadel he is building there. He seems bold and resolute, and like to go through with what he has undertaken, or break his Head in the Attempt, and says he will perform all he has engaged, Fide sincerâ & Germanicâ, which is a Word he affects. He speaks the only good Latin that I have yet met with in Germany, and more like a Man of Court and Business than a Scholar: He says, if he fails in his Enterprize, and should lose his Country, he shall esteem his Condition not at all the worse; for in that Case, he will go into Italy, and has Money enough in the Bank of Venice to buy a Cardi∣nal's Cap, which may become him better than his General's Staff, tho he has a Mind to try this first, and make some Noise in the World before he retires. This is the best Character I can give of the Bishop, and for my Self, I can say no∣thing but what you know; finding no Change at all by this Sally into a new Scene of Life and Business as well as Climate; my Health, I thank God, the same; my Kind∣ness so too, to my Friends and to Home,
only my Concernment for them in this mise∣rable Time among them, much greater while I am here, than when I was with them; which makes me very impatient after every Post that comes in, and yet very apprehen∣sive of every Letter I open. The Length of this I doubt is too much for once, and there∣fore shall end with the Assurances of my being SIR, Your most Obedient Son and humble Servant, W. Temple. To Alderman Backwell. Brussels, October 9th. 1665 Mr. Alderman, I Am very much in pain to find at Mon∣sieur Rhintorf's Return, that he has made no Progress in his Affairs (which are ours too) during the stay he has lately made at Antwerp. But I am very much surprised to hear that I should have had any Part in this Delay, and that you should have told him,
you had no Orders from me to pay him that Money. However, to take away all scru∣ple, if any can still remain, after our last Conference at Brussels upon this Subject; I do by these Presents order and appoint you, pursuant to those Powers that have been gi∣ven me from the King, to pay or cause to be payd to Monsieur Rhintorf or his Order, al such Sums of Money, as you shall any ways be able to raise, either by the Sale of such Tin as is already arrived, or shall arrive at Ostend upon his Majesty's Account, with all the Diligence and Dispatch that is possible. Or in case you do not find any ready Sale for it, that you will at least pay him all such Sums as you shall be able to raise, by pawn∣ing or engaging it to the best advantage you can; after this. I need say no more, than to Conjure you by all the Zeal you have for his Majesty's Service, and all the Friendship you have for me, to employ upon this Occasion, your utmost Diligence and Credit; for the Conjuncture is grown so extremely pressing at this time, that I can never say enough, to recommend this Service to your best Endea∣vours. I am SIR, Your Servant.
To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, Oct. 13. S. N. 1665. My Lord, UPON Saturday last about Nine at Night, the Bishop's Agent there brought me a Desire from theOf Castel Rhodrige, Go∣vern of the Spanish Ne∣therlands. Marques to come privately to him. We stay'd long together and talked much. The Substance was; that he had last Post writ to the Spanish Ambassadour to inform the King, that he heard the French were ready to march in Assistance of the Hollander against the Bi∣shop of Munster, and had told the Spanish Ambassadour in France, they should take all Delays here in leave of Passage, for Denial: That he, (the Marquess) was resolved upon Confidence of his Majesty's late Letter and Assistance, to oppose them till he received Orders from Spain, and hopes his Majesty will not fail, of protecting and defending him in this Resolution: He speaks with much Earnestness and Passion for concluding the League between England and Spain; and ei∣ther a Peace or Truce, between. Spain and Portugal; in which he very much presses His Majesty's Interposition at this Time, because nothing else will take away the Dishonour
on the Spanish side, but the Respect given to so Great and Powerful a King's Mediation. He assures me, he has given an absolute De∣nial to the Hollanders Demand, of buying a great Quantity of Corn in these Countries, which now begins to be one, among their other great Wants: That the French upon Jealousie of the Swede, sent very lately an Envoy into Holland, to join with them in pressing the Dane, to put himself into a Po∣sture of making a Diversion: That for Secu∣rity of these Countries, six thousand Spani∣ards and Italians were in few Days expected here; these by Land, those by Sea: And that for raising German Troops, he had last Week sent five hundred thousand Gilders into Germany, from whence, if they needed, he could have twenty four thousand Men; so as he doubted not to defend these Countries, if France Assaults him. The Biass of all this Discourse was to shew, they had no great need of our Assistance, at the same time, they press so much to be assured of it; and to re∣present the mutual Necessity of a Conjuncti∣on between England and Spain, with all the Expressions of Affection, to His Majesty's Person and Service, that a Courtier, or al∣most a Lover could use. Upon this last Sub∣ject I could not let him pass, with the Dis∣course of the late King's Ruine, and His Majesty's Danger at home for want of
Friendship abroad; nor could I leave that Point, because he had so often harped upon it, till I forced him to confess, at least by Si∣lence, that his Majesty was as safe at Home at this time, as either French or Spanish King. For the rest, finding him now much war∣mer than he used to seem, in the Desires of the Bishop of Munster's Success, or at least, Preservation; and finding from Alderman Backwell, that he had yet been able to raise no more Money upon all our Tin at Antwerp for the second Payment, those paltry Mer∣chants combining to Ruine him in the Price of it, upon the Belief of his Necessity to sell; I would not omit that Occasion of desiring the Marquess to find some Person out, that should take it all off our Hands, with ready Money, which they might raise at their own leisure, and, I believed, with much Gains, in which I assured him, he would give His Majesty, a great Testimony of his Affecti∣on to his Service, which was so much con∣cerned in the Bishop of Munster's Fortunes: He told me, he would consult about it next Morning; and upon Sunday Night, sent one with a Dispatch of mine to Alderman Back∣well, to know the whole Quantity and lowest Price: So that I am now in great hopes of seeing some good Issue of that Business; which I almost begun to despair of.
An Express from the Bishop of Munster came to me on Saturday last, protesting he could no longer subsist unless the Money came; an Your Lordship may easily imagine, how much Pain I am in upon that Occasion, es∣pecially hearing my Self so often reproached for having drawn him to so desperate an Ad∣venture, so much against his own Resoluti∣ons, which were, not to take the Field, till the second Payment were received, and the third assured on this side: It would look like Vanity in me, to tell Your Lordship more of what I hear too much of this kind; but I will say, that unless you take some speedy and effectual Resolution in this Par∣ticular, I shall look like the veriest Rogue in the World, and such, as it will not be much for his Majesty's Honour to employ. But after all, I will tell Your Lordship free∣ly, that I think all my Trains had not taken Fire, without a perfect Accident, which I had the good Fortune to improve so upon the sud∣den, as to make it the absolute Occasion of the Bishop's taking the Field when he did; which I shall some time or other, I hope en∣tertain you with, and will serve for a Moral to shew how small Shadows and Accidents sometimes give a Rise to great Actions a∣mong Mankind; for either such, or the be∣ginning of such, this bold March is like to prove. All I know of its Success, you will
find in these Letters; one from my Lord Carlingford, to whom I cannot send Your Lordship's last, till I have farther Directions from him for my Address; the other being Part of one from a Person in the Holland Camp belonging to the Rhingrave. Twenty Rumours more we have of his Successes, but I will not yet credit them; this much I will, that nothing can probably endanger him, be∣sides want of Money, and that I know him to be a Man too firm to be diverted from his Point, or slacken it without some such Maim; for he wants neither Prudence, Courage, nor Ambition. For the Hollanders, they were certainly never worse at their ease than now; being braved and beaten both at Sea and Land; flay'd with Taxes, distracted with Factions, and their last Ressourse, which is the Protection of France, poisoned with ex∣treme Jealousies; yet, that must be their Game, or else a perfect Truckling Peace with England. I am ever, Your Lordship's most Faithful, and most humble Servant.
To the Duke of Ormond. Brussels, Novemb. 20. S. N. 1665. My Lord. I Am to acknowledge the Honour I received last, by one from Your Grace of October the 25th, which gives me the Occasion to beg your Belief, that the frequent Troubles I give Your Grace of this kind, proceed from a most hearty and uninteressed Duty, with∣out the least Thoughts of making any un∣conscionable Advantage by such a Com∣merce, or at all expecting a Return of so great value, as Your Lordship's Letters to a Ven∣ture so small as mine. I confess I am ex∣tremely pleased with any Testimonies of Your Grace's Remembrance and Favour to me, which I must esteem the best, and ever ac∣knowledge for the first of my good Fortunes; nor shall I ever be so much pleased with any lucky Hits that may happen to me in pub∣lick Employments from any other Respect, as from the Hopes of meeting some Occasion to express the Esteem and Resentment, of Kindness shew'd me, when I was idle and unknown. But, I beseech Your Grace, ne∣ver to give your self the least Trouble, or
lose Time in writing to me, upon the Score of common Civility, but to deal with me per∣fectly like one of your own; and write on∣ly when you have Commands to honour me, or Inclinations to oblige me; for the rest, one Word to my Father or Brother, may at any time give me the Knowledge that mine are received, which is all they pretend, and perhaps more than they deserve. Since the Passage of the French Troops, which thought fit to touch no Part of these Dominions, we hear little of them: Their Number fell something short of six Thousand, their Horse were brave as they passed Mas∣tricht; their Foot rascally, their Shoes upon their Shoulders, their Feet galled, and their Gallantry spent in giving the Dutch a thou∣sand times to the Devil for their kind Invita∣tion: They paid nothing as they pass'd, or false Money; took the best Treatment the Dutch could make them, with Scorn and In∣solence; and drank his Majesty's and the Prince of Munster's Health, openly in the Market-Place at Mastricht; a strain I suppose of their Extravagance, rather than good Meaning: So I leave them, as they do their Colours when they can, and return this way by Couples and Leashes good Store. By the last from the Prince of Munster of the 12th instant, we had Assurance, that his Bridge over the Marsh was perfected, his
Army joined, and that Colonel, or Baron d'Ossory (who is made a Serjeant Major de Ba∣taglia) had with a Squadron of Horse, killed nine Hundred of the Dutch in a late Encoun∣ter near Groning: Besides this, and the French Envoy's, Monsieur Lessyn having been dis∣miss'd with General Terms, I had nothing but desperate melancholy Complaints of his Disappointments from his Friends, which I will not trouble Your Grace with at this Distance. I had my first Formal Audience last Night from the Marquess, and was received with the greatest Expressions of Zeal and Devo∣tion to the King my Master's Person and Ser∣vice; of the Resentment of the Honour done him by this Resolution of a Resident here, and wonderful Compliment to the Personal Choice; as I believe Your Grace knows, good Words of all Sorts cost no Man less than His Excellency: But I am very confident, his Inclinations to Us, his Aversions to France, his Desires of Truce with Portugal, and strict League with England, are all very hearty. I am ever, Your Grace's most Obedient, and most humble Servant.
To the Baron Wreden. Brussels, Dec. 10. 1665. SIR, I Received yours, and am glad of your Ar∣rival at Court, where I never doubted the good Reception so honest a Gentleman would find, who came from so brave a Prince. I am sorry for your bad Wine and Lodging at Oxford; for as to the former, I know, it is a sort of Plague you are more afraid of, than that at London, where in a little time I hope you will have no occa∣sion to complain either of one or t'other: In the mean while, take my word for the matter, 'tis but half a dozen Glas¦ses more, and good or bad, comes all to the same thing. As for your Lodging, in Troth, I believe the Crowd is so great at present in eve∣ry House, that you will
hardly find an opportu∣nity of making Love to your Landlady: But, Sir, you must have a little Patience, and not think of succeeding in all Amours, at the rate you did with Mada∣moiselle Isabella; besides, if you remember, it cost you dear enough then, by the Fright you were in, of losing your great Diamond. Love, like other things is good for nothing when one makes too much haste in it; and our English Ladies don't care that Men should be over violent in beginning this Game, for fear they should be so in concluding it. Well, I am heartily sorry I can give you no good Recommendati∣ons where you are, be∣cause I am sure you would be so just and ge∣nerous, to pay me by a Bill of Exchange on
your little Mistress here. But, now I talk of a Mistress, you must know Monsieur le Chevalier has ordered his Affairs here worse than at Paris: For I believe seriously, he pass'd through this Place without so much as paying one Visit to his; and that is the Reason why he carried so much Money to Munster. and rode Post with greater vigour than ever he did from hence to France. And is not this now a very fine Letter for two Grave Ministers of State? But come, we must talk a little of Bu∣siness, if it be only for the good Grace of the matter: And yet I am confident, if Sr. Bealing would entertain you at this Rate but once a Month, and unbend himself a little from his serious way, you would reckon him as your on∣ly Friend and think no more of me.
Well; but have you heard what the Dutch Resident tells us, that the Prince of Munster has taken Reyde, a small Sea-Port, where his Friends may come and give him a Visit. The News from Antwerp say further, that he has got the Fort of Bourtang: But they add, how the Bishop of Osnabrug is resolved to let the World see, that a Lutheran Pre∣late is as good as a Ca∣tholick; and to that end, is resolved at the Head of some Lunen∣bourg Troops, to go knock Mitres with your Master: All in good time: and as for Heads, I do not doubt, the Prince of Munster's is much the stronger of the two; but for the Mi∣tres I can say nothing. I am told besides, that your Chapter of Munster has somewhat embroyil∣ed your Master's Af∣fairs; if this be so, there are more Diables de Ca∣nons beside your self. But I believe the Mat∣ter
is not much; for if it were, I know, the Prince would quickly make Monsieur d'Herbe and Monsieur Majette, a cou∣ple of Canons, in Ex∣change for some of those Blockheads: And for Grand Dean, I think, the Governour of Pleuren with the great Belly, would make a good Fi∣gure enough. Who knows, but such Revolutions may happen; For, to speak in your own word, The World is as round as a — For my own part, I had rather be one of your Master's Priests than his Soldiers; for they say here, that he rises at four a Clock, gives them [his Soldiers] his Bene∣diction, and then sends them to the D — over Bogs and Marshes where no secular Captain durst ever pass. Farewel Sir, and when you intend to warm your self with Sack, pray remember to order your Servants instead of re∣moving your Sword, to remove your Purse, and
prevent you from doing (according to your Cus∣tom) more Good than you design, as they pre∣vent others from doing Mischief. For it is a Custom in England, that whatever a Man gives away over Night, he hears no more of it next Morning. At all hours of both I am SIR, Your most Affectio∣nate Servant.
Au Baron Wreden. A Brusselles, le 10 Dec. N S. 1665. Monsieur. J'AY recù là votre, & je me rejouis de votre arrivée á la Cour; je n'ay jamuis douté qu'un aussi ho∣nette homme que vous, & qui a l'honneur d'etre En∣voyé par un Prince aussi distingué, n'y trouvâit tou∣te sorte de bon acceuïl; Je prens part au mauvais gis∣te d'Oxford, & au me∣chant Vin que vous y avez bû. A l'egard de ce der∣nier, je scay que ce'st une sorte de peste que vous craignês plus que celle de Londres; & au reste, j'es∣pere qu'vant qu'il soit peu, vous n'aurez plus sujet de vous y plaindre ni de l'un ni de l'autre. En atten∣dant, croyez moy, il ne faut que six Verres de Vin de plus, il n'importe qu'il soit bon ou mauvais, & tout reviendra á la meme chose Pour le Ingement, je m'i∣magine que la Foule est si
grande á oette heure dans toutes les maisons, que vous ne trouvez pas les moyens de faire commodement l'a∣mour á la fille du logis; Mais, Monsieur, il faut avoir un peu de patience, & ne croire pas rëussir tou∣jours avec autant de bon∣heur & de rapiditè que vous fites avec Madamoiselle I∣sabelle: Encore, devez vous vous souvenir, qu'il vous en couta alors assez cher par l'extreme peur que vous eûtes, quand vous vous appercùtes du danger que couroit le gros dia∣mant. L'amour aussi bien que toutes les autres choses, ne vaut plus rien dés qu'on le traite trop á la hâte; & nos filles ne veulent point qu'on soit si precipitè á com∣mencer cette sorte de jeu, de peur que la fin ne res∣semble trop á la com∣mencement. Je suis ma foy, trés marri de ne pouvoir vous adresser surement dans la ville ou vous ees; car de l'humeur dont je vous con∣nois, je say que vous seri∣ez assez genereux, & assez equitable, pour me rembour∣ser
par un lettre d'echange sur vôtre petite maitresse Brabançonne. Mais á pro∣pos de maitresse, Monsieur le Chevalier a plus mal fait ses affaires icy qu'á Paris; car je croy tout de bonqu'il a passe par icy sans voir seulemeut la sienne; mais c'est par lá aussi qu'il á por∣té tant d'argent á Mun∣ster, & qu'il a couru la poste plus courageusment qu'il n'a fait d'icy en France. Voici ma foy, une belle lettre pour deux sages Mi∣nistres; tout de bon il faut un peu parler d'af∣faires ne fût-ce que pour sauver les apparances: Mais, avouëz la verité, si le Chevalier Bealing vous entretenoit seulement une fois le mois, comme je vi∣ens de faire, & qu'en vô∣tre faveur il relachât un peu de ce grand serieux, n'est il pas vray, qu'il n'y auroit plus que luy'qui fût de vos amis, & que je perdrois la place que j'occupe dans votre souvenir.
Savez vous bien que le Resident d'Hollande avoue que le Prince de Munster a pris Reyde, un petit port de mer, ou il peut être vi∣sité de ses amis; & que les avis d'Anvers nous di∣sent, qu'il est venu á bout du fort de Bourtang. Mais on dit aussique l'Evêque d'Os∣nabrug est fort piqué de la pensée qu'n peut avoir qu'un Eveque Lutherien ne vaut s un Eveque Catholique; & qu'il est tout resolu de s'avancer á la tête de quelques troupes de Lunebourg, & d'aller heurter sa Mitre contre cel∣le de vôtre Maître: A la bonne heure; car je ne doute pas que Monsieur le Prince n'ait la tête plus for∣te & plus dure, á l'egard des Mitres je n'en say rien. On m'a dit aussi, que votre Chapitre de Munster va un peu brouiller les af∣faires de vre Maie; si cela est, vila ma foy des Diables de Canons, aussi bien que vous. Mais je croy qu'il n'en est rien;
car si cela êtoit, le Prince ne manqueroit pas de faire bientôt deux Chanoines de Messieur d'Herbe & de Masjette & de les e∣chànger pour quelqu'un de ces etourdis: le Gover∣neur de Pleuren ne Man∣queroit de pretence, si le titre de grand Doyen e∣toit enté sur son gros ven∣tre. On ne sait point si de pareils changemens ne pourroient pas bien arri∣ver car (selon votre phrase Allemande) Roond is de Werld as een—. Pour moy, j'aimerois mieux êre de ses Prêtres que de ses Soldats; car on dit icy qu'il leur donne sa Bene∣diction, & les Envoye au diable, je veux dire, a travers de Marais imprac∣ticables, d'ou jamais Ca∣pitaine seculier n'auroit ose approcher. Adieu Monsieur, & sou∣venes vous bien en vous ec∣hauffant des fumées du vin des Canaries, qu'on prend souvent la precaution d'oter de devant un homme qui a bû, son epée, de peur qu'il
ne fasse le Mechant; mais que vos amis en doivent prendre un opposée, qui est de vous oter votre argent, de peur que ne fassiez trop le genereux; car en Ang∣let erre, ce qu'on donne le soir, ne se retrouve plus le matin: Quant a moy, & le soir & le matin vous me trouverez tou∣jours. Monsieur, Votre tres Affecti∣onné Serviteur.
To the Marques of Cas∣tel Rodrigo. Brussels, Dec 12. S.N. 1665 My Lord, THE News of your Excellency's In∣disposition has very sen∣sibly afflicted me; but, God Almighty will, I doubt not, quickly re∣store your Health, which is of too great Impor∣tance to Christendom, to sink under common Ac∣cidents. I desire your Pardon for the Liberty I take to let you know, how Mon∣sieur Rhintorf complains exceedingly, that he finds yet no Advance in the Affair you were plea∣sed to undertake for his Master's sake, and in∣deed for that of the King my Master too. I desire your Excellen∣cy once more to give your Hand to it; and that if those Merchants
will not buy the Tin, you will give Order at least, to have it enga∣ged for three parts of it's value; so as some pre∣sent Remedy may be found to the Bishop's Necessities, wherewith, (by means of this delay) he is now press'd, to the last Extremities. I take more part in this Affair, having alrea∣dy writ to the King my Master, that you had wholly finished it, in af∣fection to his Service; for which I do not doubt, but you will re∣ceive His Majesty's Thanks by the first Cou∣rier; so that I shall be in the greatest Confusi∣on imaginable if the Bu∣siness fails, and His Ma∣jesty cannot chuse but think me very imperti∣nent. By my last Dispatch from Court of the 18th instant, I am informed, that the Spanish Ambas∣sadour did that Evening privately deliver his new Credentials to the King, to whom and his Mi∣nisters
he still continued to be very acceptable; and that upon arrival of these Credentials they began to enter in good earnest upon adjusting our common Interests. By a Letter of the 15th instant from the Prince of Munster I am informed of the great and happy Progress of his Arms; but on t'other side, that the Hollanders used their last Endea∣vours to raise against him all the Protestant Prin∣ces of the Empire, under pretext, that Religion has part in the Quarrel, as well as the Interest of the House of Austria: And on both these Ac∣counts, as well as from your own Generosity, your Excellency is en∣gaged not to disappoint him in this little occasi∣on: not to alledge the Moral, which tells us, That, whatever good we can do without damage to our selves, we are obliged to do, even to a Stran∣ger.
Upon an Answer from your Excellency I am ready to dispatch an Express to Antwerp, and shall remain, My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble and obedi∣ent Servant.
Au Marquis de Castel Rodrigo. Brussels, Dec. 12. S. N. 1665. Monsieur. LA Nouvelle de l'in∣disposition que votre Excellence a ressentie de∣puis quelques jours, m'a sensiblement touché; mais je ne doute point, que Dieu ne retablisse bien-tôt une santé qui est trop necessaire à la Chretienté pour succom∣ber sous des accidens vul∣gaires. Je vous demande par∣don de la liberté que je prens de vous avertir que Mon∣sieur Rhintorf se plaint ex∣trement de ce qu'il ne trou∣ve encore rien de fait dans l'affaire qu'il vous a plu de prendre á coeur en fa∣veur de son Maitre; ainsi que sur la recommendati∣du Roy mon Maitre: Je supplie V. E. d'y mettre encore une fois la main, & de donner ordre que si on a resolu de ne point accepter
cette Marchandise, du moins on la prenne en gage pour les trois quarts de sa valeur; á fin de remedier sur le champ aux necessicez dont Monsieur l'Eveque se trouve pressé, qui peut etrê sont rendues extremes par ce retardement. Je me trouve d'autant plus interressé dans cette affaire, qu'ayant deja mandé au Roy mon Mai∣tre que vous l'aviez tout∣a fait finie dans la veue de rendre service á sa Majes∣té, ce qui vous sera sans doute marqué avec remer∣ciment de sa part par le premier Courier; je sero is l'homme du monde le plus confus, & le plus imper∣tinent aux yeux du Roy mon Maitre, si citte af∣faire venoit a manquer. Par la derniere lettre que j'ay receue de la Cour dattée du 18. du courant, j'ay étê averti que Mon∣sieur l'Ambassadeur d'Es∣pagne avoit le soir de ce jour lá presenté au Roy ce novelles lettres de creance
& que sa personne etoit toujours fort agreable, & á ses Ministres: qu'au reste sur l'arrivée de ces nouvelles lettres de creance on alloit commencer de fort bon coeur á ajuster nos in∣terets communs. Par une lettre du Prince de Munster du 15. du courant, j'ay eté averti de ses grands & heureux pro∣grez; mais que d'un au∣tre coté les Hollandois fai∣soient tous leurs efforts pour soulever contre luy tous les Princes Protestans de l'Em∣pire; sous le pretexte que la Religion & la Maison d'Autriche y etoient inte∣ressés. C'est par lá aussi bi∣en que par vôtre generosité que vous êtes engagé à ne luy pas manquer en cette pe∣tite occasion, pour n'alle∣guer pas la Morale qui nous dit, Quicquid sine de∣trimento facere potes, vel ignoto faciendum.
Sur la Response de V. E. je suis tout prêt á depecher un exprez á Anvers; & bien resolu d'etre tou∣jours. de V. E. le tres humble & tres obeisant Serviteur. To Sir William Coventry. Brussels, Dec. 15. S. N. 1665. SIR, I Am to acknowledge both the Honour and Obligation I received by yours of November the 9th; the last of which seems so great in that Light you give it, and by those Circumstances I now see attend it, that had it come from any other hands I should have wished a thousand Times never to have received it: For, there are very few I de∣sire much to be obliged to; having always thought that a sort of Debt which ought as duly to be paid as that of Money, with more Interest, and much greater Difficulty of ca∣sting
up. But knowing that all generous Persons are apt to favour and esteem their own, rather such whom they oblige, than such as serve them; I am extreamly glad to have my Name enter into the knowledge of his Royal Highness, by his Bounty and Favour in the Grant of those Passports, rather than any other way I could have taken; and beg of you, that with my humble Thanks, His Royal Highness may know I enter into his Service with this Advance of Wages, which it shall be always my Endeavour, as it is my Duty, to deserve, I owe, and should say, a great deal to your self upon this Oc∣casion, but that with my Thanks for the Thing it self, I am to join my Complaints for the manner of it: I mean that you should trouble your self to reason me out of any Cu∣stom or Action you would have me leave off, or say any thing upon such a Subject, be∣sides, that you wish it had been otherwise; which I desire you to believe, shall in far greater Matters be from your hand Persua∣sion and Command enough to me, My Pre∣sumptions may be great With my Friends, but they are the easiliest check'd of any Man's alive; which is all I shall say upon this Occasion as to the future; and for the past, I will only assure you that I should not in the least have offered at what I did, had it not been at the earnest Instance of the Prince
of Munster's Resident here; and I am to make it my Business abroad, to enter as far as I can into the Secrets, and for that end, into the Affections of such Ministers as I have to deal with; and as some Men are to be gained di∣rectly by their Heart, so are others by their Hands: But, another Fault were easier to be born than a long Excuse; I will not add to it by our News, since, of all I write I am sure you know as much as you please; only, in general, our Bishop loses not Courage nor Strength upon all the great Preparations of Enemies or Disappointment of Friends. The Dutch seem to be plagued by their own God, and to grow unhappy in their own Element, the Sea having done them in the last Storms most extravagant Harms; some Letters from Amsterdam say to the Value of thirty, and o∣thers, of sixty Millions; their Case may grow harder, yet if the Frosts do so from the Munster side. Our Court here is passionate towards the League between the two Crowns; as I am in the Desires of growing in your Friendship and Favour, and deserving it by any Testimonies I can give of my being, SIR, Your most Faithful, humble Servant.
To Dame Augustina Cary. Brussels, Feb. 16th. S.N. 1666. Madam, I Know not whether the shame of having been so long in your Debt, be greater than that of paying it so ill at last, but I am sure, 'tis much harder to be excused, and therefore shall not attempt it, but leave it to Father Placid's Oratory, tho' having failed in the substantial Part of your Business, I have little Reason to hope he will succeed better in the Ceremonial Part of mine: The Truth is, there is so great a Difference in common Sound between, It is done, and, It will be done, that I was unwilling to acknowledge the Honour of having received your Lady∣ship's Commands, before I had compassed that of obeying them, which the Marquess here hath so often assured me would sudden∣ly fall to my share, that I thought we had both equal Reason, His Excellency to do it, and I to believe it. This Right I must yet do him, that I never prest him in this Con∣cern of your Ladyship's, but he told me, all my Arguments were needless, for the Thing should be done; and how to force a Man
that yields, I never understood; but yet I much doubt that till the Result be given up∣on the Gross of this Affair, which is and has been some time under view, your Part in par∣ticular will hardly be thought ripe, for either his Justice, or Favour, which will be rather the Style it must run in, if it be a Desire of Exemption from a General Rule given in the Case: Whatever Person (after the Father's Return) shall be appointed to observe the Course of this Affair, and pursue the Lady's Pretensions here, will be sure of all the As∣sistance I can at any time give him; tho' I think it would prove a more publick Service to find some way of dissolving your Society, and by that Means dispersing so much Worth about the World, than by preserving you to∣gether, confine it to a Corner, and suffer it to shine so much less, and go out so much sooner, than otherwise it would. The ill Ef∣fects of your Retreat appear too much in the ill Success of your Business; for I cannot think any thing could fail that your Lady∣ship would sollicite; but, I presume, nothing in this lower Scene is worthy either that, or so much as your Desire or Care, which are Words that enter not Your Grates, to disturb that perfect Quiet and Indifferency, which I will believe, inhabit there, and by your Happiness decide the long Dispute, whether the greater lies in wanting nothing, or pos∣sessing much.
I cannot but tell you it was unkindly done to refresh the Memory of your Brother Da. Cary's Loss, which was not a more general One to Mankind, than it was particular to me: But if I can succeed in your Lady∣ship's Service, as well as I had the Honour once to do in his Friendship, I shall think I have lived to good Purpose here, and for hereafter, shall leave it to Almighty God, with a Submission as abandoned, as you can exercise in the low common Concernments of this worthless Life, which I can hardly imagine was intended us for so great a Mise∣ry as it is here commonly made, or to betray so large a Part of the World, to so much great∣er hereafter as is commonly believed. How∣ever, I am obliged to your Ladyship for your Prayers, which I am sure are well intended me, and shall return you mine. That no ill Thoughts of my Faith may possess your La∣dyship with an ill one of my Works too; which I am sure can not fail of being very meritori∣ous, if ever I reach the Intentions I have, of expressing my self upon all Occasions, Madam, Your Ladyships most humble and most obedient Servant.
To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, Mar. 1st. S. N. 1666. My Lord, I Need say nothing to bring your Lordship acquainted with Mr. Sherwood's Person or Errand; yet because all Men take themselves to measure best their own Business, I would not disappoint his Desires of this Address; tho' to add any thing to what I write upon all Occasions of the Prince of Munster's Con∣dition, Necessities, or Complaints, were, as I take it, just so much of nothing to the Purpose. All I will say is, that whatever His Majesty resolves to do, ought to be sud∣den, and in a Lump, to provide for his ta∣king the Field this Spring, with Heart and Strength, which I believe, a Sum within the Compass of a hundred of His Majesty's Subjects would enable him to do; No∣thing will ever me, to give your Lordship those Testimonies I desire, of the most hear∣ty constant Passion, wherewith I shall ever be, My Lord. Your Lordships &c.
To the Duke of Albemarle. Brussels, Mar. 1st. S. N. 1666. My Lord. UPon Mr. Sherwood's Passage this Way into England from the Bishop of Mun∣ster, I could not refuse him the Occasion of waiting upon your Grace, who so well knows how far His Majesty's Honour and Interests may be concerned in the Success of his Er∣rand. Tho' that Prince's Necessities may be grown great, as well as his Complaints and the Arrears of his Payments; yet I am con∣fident, five and twenty or thirty Thousand Pounds in a Lump and sudden, would bring him strong and vigorous into the Field this Spring; which would prove a cheap Advan∣tage to His Majesty's Arms, and perhaps the greatest in Sight, next to your Grace's com∣manding this Summer's Fleet; from which we all here certainly reckon upon a Success, suitable to the rest of your Fortunes and Glo∣ries, which I hope to see compleated upon the French Fleets. Mine will be great, if
your Grace pleases to esteem me as you will ever have Reason to do, My Lord, Your Graces most faith∣ful humble Servant. To my Lord Carlingford. Brussels, Mar. 6. N. S. 1666. My Lord, I Have this Exception to your Service, that my Faults are taken notice of, and not my Diligence; for in your Lordship's of the 21st past, I find not the least Mention of any Letters received from me, tho' I am confident by other Circumstances, some of them must have been come to your Hands, I fear your News at Vienna is not so good nor true as your Wine; and by the Abundance of Re∣ports with shallow Grounds, I doubt your Court is rather inclined to hear News than to make it. That Brandenburg is our Enemy, at least for four Months, is too certain; that Sueden is a Friend to Munster, we may guess rather from Causes than any Effects that I know of; and since neither the Emperor nor
Spain will contribute any Thing towards the Bishop's Assistance, nor so much as the staving off Enemies, that by Dutch and French are raising up against him in the Empire it self, I know no Remedy; But yet in spight of all Force and Artifice to disarm him, I expect for my Part, to see him rather besieged in Cosvelt or Munster, than make a Peace with∣out our Master's Consent, as is hoped by our Enemies, and perhaps wished by some of our Friends, for fear the Continuance of his Mu∣sick should make them dance before they have a Mind to it: But I believe all their Cold∣ness and Shrinking will hardly defend them, and may help them rather to lose their Friends than gain their Enemies: For we have cer∣tain News that the French have made a Place d'Armes between la Fere and Peronne, where that King is coming down to the Rendevouses of Fifteen Thousand Men; and the Hollanders on the other side, are so incurably possest with an Opinion of some wonderful deep impor∣tant League between us and Spain, that they are upon the very Brink of resolving a War too, and concluding a League Offensive as well as Defensive with France; at least, if the Ascendant of this Year be favourable to De Witt's Party as that of the last was, which begins to be a little doubted of late. I will not send your Lordship any English Letters, nor our Declaration of War against the French,
in Confidence it goes along with your Pac∣quet; by which you will see, His Majesty hath been as generous and civil, as the French King was rough in his, to call it no worse; but he hath begun the War with so much Heat, that I am apt to believe he will come to be cool before it ends. I shall ill deserve your Lordship's Leave of writing often, if I do it so long and so little to the Purpose together. After I have ld you, my Lord Ossory is come  into England, and that my Lord Arlington is for certain (as they say both in England and here) to marry the Lady Emilia my Lady of Ossory's Sister; I will give your Lordship the good Night, almost as late as I imagine you use to go to Bed, and only tell you that I am at all Hours, My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant.
To Sir Philip Warwick. Brussels, Mar. 12. N. S. 1666. SIR, THough it be more easie and more usual to beg Favours than to acknowledge them; yet I find you are resolved to force me upon the last, without ever giving me Time of Occasion for the other. How much I am obliged to you in my last Dispatch, I am told enough by Mr. Godolphin, but more by my own Heart, which will never suffer me to believe, that a Person to whom I have been so long, and am so much a Servant, should be any other than kind to me; for that is my way of judging my absent Friends, and serves, like a Watch in my Pocket, to measure the Time, tho' I see no Sun. The very Name of Time, puts me in mind, that yours is not to be spent idly, and that you are more pleased to oblige your Friends than to receive their Thanks; and therefore I will only say, that mine are very sensible and ve∣ry hearty, and that no Man is with more Reason and with more Sincereness than I am, SIR, Your Affectionate humble Servant.
To the Bishop of Mun∣ster. Brussels, Mar. 19. S. N. 1666. SIR, YOUR Highnesse's Letter of the oth instant came in due time to my hands▪ by which I plainly find with how much Faith and Con∣y, as well as Wis∣dom and Courage, your Highness intends to or∣der your Affairs. My utmost Endeavours shall not be wanting for the advancing of them, as well as for encreasing and cultivating the Con∣fidence His Majesty hath in your Highness (on which the common League chiefly relies) especially at this time, when so many ill de∣signing Men use all En∣deavours to shake or de∣stroy it, wherein it, is hard to tell whether
their Folly or Malice be greater. I hear every day in this City; that you Highness has made Peace with th Hollan∣ders, without any Re∣gard to us or our League, or so much as consult∣ing His Majesty upon it: And I pretend to be∣lieve what I  to, tho' I am inwardly as∣sured to the contrary. As for Whispers and Ru∣mours, it is not my Cu∣stom either to amuse o∣thers with them, or per∣plex my self. I confess, I was somewhat moved with a Letter from the Duke of Brunswick to a Man of Understanding in this City, which I late∣ly saw and read; wherein he seems to feed himself and his Friend with hopes of a speedy Peace in all those Parts of Ger∣many, and assures him from his certain know∣ledge, that the Prince of Munster will accept it, in case it be offered to him without the greatest
Ignominy and Loss; wherein he says, the neighbour Princes use all means to engage him. I am sorry to find the Marques Castel Rodrigo of the same Opinion; because I know, the E∣vent must be dishonou∣rable to your Highness; and will be imputed to the King my Master perhaps as Imprudence, at least, as ill Fortune. Nor do I think the Spa∣niards at this time of day so generous as to pro∣mote the League (which we hope to see confir∣med by my Lord Sand∣wich's Embassy into Spain) if they once ima∣gine, tho' but falsly, that His Majesty among such potent Enemies is for∣saken by his nearest Confederates. On the contrary, I am entirely persuaded as well from your High∣ness's last Letter, as from your Virtue and good Sense, that you have too great a Regard for your Faith and Ho∣nour, to darken the Lu∣stre
of so fair a Life by so foul a Stain: This I do not fail continually to inform both His Ma∣jesty and his Ministers: nor do I doubt, but if Fortune shall be wan∣ting to the Justice of your Arms, so far as that your Highness shall be in Danger of being brought to the last Ex∣tremities; you will at least have that Regard to so sacred a League, and to the Honour of so great a King, as to give His Majesty timely Notice; declare the in∣vincible Necessities you lay under, and desire permission to enter up∣on new Councils. As for us, I am sure your Highness is suffici∣ently convinced of His Majesty's Care in per∣forming his Part; and how happily he has o∣vercome the greatest Difficulties and Straits, wherein by occasion of the late Pestilence, his Revenues have been in∣volved. About ten days ago, I gave Monsieur
Rhintorf Letters of Ex∣change for 77000 Dol∣lars; He is a diligent Person, a Friend to the common League, and of equal Probity and In∣dustry. I have given him also other Letters, wherein a very Rich Merchant of Amster∣dam has undertaken to transmit 30000 Dollars more to me with all convenient speed. I have also, Orders from His Majesty to advance Mony for your High∣ness upon a great quan∣tity of Tin lately reco∣vered from Shipwreck at Ostend: And His Ma∣jesty has further given me in Charge to let your Highness know, that whatever remains shall be paid without fail. All this matter was fi∣nish'd before Mr. Sher∣wood's departure for England; whom I have however instructed with the best Council I could, as well as with Letters of Recommendation to the chief Ministers; tho' I  certain, His Maje∣sty's
Justice and Truth will be more prevalent in this Matter than the most importunate Sol∣licitations or Com∣plaints. In the mean while I shall use my utmost Care and Diligence for the Service of your High∣ness, and it will be your part not to be wanting either to His Majesty or your own Honour and Safety, which are all concerned in this Conjuncture. I also beg your Highness not to be discouraged by your Enemies, not to dis∣trust your old Friends, not despaire of raising new ones. Time for the better chan∣ges many things. In the mean time I wish your Highness Health and Victory, and desire you will ever esteem me. SIR, Your Highness's most obe∣dient humble Servant.
Episcopo Monas∣terii. Brusselles, Mar. 19. N. S. 1666. Celsissime Domine, REcté & tempestivè admodum mihi red∣ditae s literae Celsi∣tudinis, vestrae, 9o Mar∣tii dataec quibus plané perspexi qua incocussâ fide, & quam decorâ con∣stantiâ C. V. ressus sem∣per rnatur a sit, dum cas∣de eximiâ prudentiâ & animo molitur inteea & gubernat. Mihi certe ni∣hil erit unquam antiquius isto, officio; quod semper praestiti & praestitus sum tam in illis omni me∣do prmovendis, quam in formandâ, & si opus fue∣rit erigendâ sacrae suae Regiae Majestatis fiduciâ, quâ praecipuè niti videtur communis federis vincu∣lum & robur, hoc praeser∣tim tempore cum multi & vafri & vertosi homines.
illam pedibus eant labefac∣tatum, majore levitate nescio, an malitiâ. In hac urbe pacem jam ratant inter C. Vm. & Hollandos, post habitis om∣nino rationibus & foederis & nostris, nedùm consul∣tâ voluntate, ego utris{que} auribus quotidiè accipio, credulitatem simulo, toto autem pectore inficias o Rumoribas certè & susu∣ris nec mihi alio pasere assuetum, nec meipsum ex∣cruciare; cooum nic paule fate literis Ducis Brsi censis viro saga in hac  transmiss, qu ipse naperrime  diligentin, inqui & s∣se & amicum mult spe∣lactare videtr pacis in universis istis Ge partibus breviter st i∣endae; sibi{que} pro compert const are asserit, Principem Monasterii eam libentissi∣mè accepturum, modò fine summa ignominiá & dam∣no eam oblatam iri con∣tingat; in quo vicinos ait Principes oleam & opera summo jam studio impen∣dere.
Marchionem de Castel Rodrigo eandem imbibisse plané opinionem & sentio & doleo: quippe ejusmodi eventum & C. V. vitio verti necesse est, & Regi Domino meo, impruden∣tiae forsan, aut saltem in∣faelicitati. Nec Hispanos us{que} adeo jam tempori generosos aestimo, ut provi∣bendo foedoxi (quod jam arcti astrictum iri spe∣ramus nuperrimâ Comu de Sandwich in Hispani∣am Legatione) fortius im∣pellant remos, si Regem Domin meum inter tan∣tos hostes, ab intimo foede∣rate desertum iri, sibi ve falso persuaserint. Ego interea tam ex po∣stremus literis, quam ex ingenti C. V. indole & ge∣nio, moribus etiam & stu∣diis, mihi è contra procul omni aleá persuasum ha∣beo, eam virtuti, fidei & gloriae nimis foeliciter li∣tassé, quam ut tot decora
tam insignis vitae tantâ 'labe infuscari ullo modo patiatur. Hoc sacrae suae Regiae Majestati, hoc Mi∣nistris regiis inculcare non desino; nec ullus dubito, si tam justis armis Fortu∣na in tantum defuerit, ut inter tot hostes C. V. in extremis se laboraturam praesentiat; quin hoc sal∣tem tanto foederi, hoc tan∣ti Regis nomini & auspi∣ciis tribuendum judicet, ut sacram suam Majestatem non inconsultam velit, ne∣cessitates insuperabiles ex∣ponat, veniam{que} demum impetret novis & alienis consiliis incundis. Quod ad partes nostras at tinet, satis confido C. V. abunde exploratum habee quanto studio & opere sa∣cra sua Regia Majestas explendis ad amussim sin∣gus invigilaverit, quan∣ta{que} demum faelicitate an∣gustias & difficultates sum∣mas eluctata sit, quibus per nuperam contagionem res suas praecipue pecunia∣rias involutas sensit. Ego
jam infra decem elapsos di∣es literas Cambli us{que} ad∣septaaginta septem Thale∣rorum millia valitutas, Domino de Rhintorfe  tradidi, viro certo impi∣gro, animi{que} erga res com∣munis foederis propensissimi, nec minoris ut mihi vide∣tur probitatis quam indu∣striae. Eidem alias imper∣tii literas, per quas mer∣cator admodum opulntas Amstelodami in se pro∣vinciam recepit, triginta adhuc Thalerorum millia mihi: quamprimum trans∣mittendi. Eodem tempo∣re & magnam stanni mo∣lem Ostendaeper ex nau∣fragio revulfa, augendis C. V. ationibus impende∣re, inter regia jussahabeo; praecipuum{que} a sacrâ suâ Regiâ Majestate mand∣tum, ut C. V. persuasu penitus & securam vetim, quod reliqui est sine ullâ ambagie sctum iri. Haec omnia excussa & absoluta fuisse adverten∣dum est acte appulsum Do∣mini Sherwood, quem ta∣men in transitu saluberri∣mis quibus fas erat consili∣is, & commendatoriis a∣pud
summos Regios Mini∣stros literis munitum volui; etiamsi pro comperio habe∣am, Regis Domini mei jus∣titiam insignem & fidem in violatam plus quaeremo∣niis omnibus vel preoibus maximé importunis in hac re valituras. Ego interea curâ, opere, studio, & diligentiâ, nec desum nec defuturus sum; Celfitudim autem vestrae curae erit ne sacrae suae Re∣giae Majestati, ne sibimet ipsi defuerit, ne propriae denique gloriae nec saluti, quas in hoc cardine rerum ver satis perspectum ha∣bere sse est. Nec inter insurgentes hostes despon∣de ro, nec veteribus ami ad minimum diffi∣dat, nec despere de vis excitandis. Multa Dies varius{que} labor mutabilis aivi Detulit in melius. Valeat interea C.V. & vincendo pergat; inter au∣te addict issiios ejus{que} rèrum studiosissimos de ju∣re semper aestimet C. V. Observantissimum.
To Mr.Afterwarde Sir William Godolphin. Godolphin. Brussels, Apr. 1st. N S. 1666. SIR, AMong my few Debts I could not have imagined my self likely to have any in Spain, till my late Intelligence from Eng∣land and Observation of the Winds persua∣ded me to it, as my good Conscience does to endeavour at the satisfaction of them be∣fore it be called for. After I have welcomed your into the Climate with the same Chear and Kindness the Sun I know will do, You must receive my Acknowledgment of two Letters I had from you before you left Eng∣lish Ground, but withal, some Reproach that you could mingle the Expressions of your Kindness with that idle Business of Accompts, in which you are too just, as those you had to deal with for myFor Barone Patent Fees, were I think too merciful, at least much more so than I expected. Your Letter from Sheen was more obliging in making me believe you  any Thing in that Corner you could be entertained or pleased with; but if it were so, I fear you had your Revenge; for my Wife tells me to my Face in her Letter upon
that Occasion, that She shall love you whilst She lives for the Kindness of that Visit: What Effect this might have upon an absent Man in Spanish Air I know not; but from this more temperate Climate I will assure you that I am content to share with you the Kind∣ness of my best Friends; which is all the Quarrel I will raise at this Distance upon this Occasion. The last Courier from Spain renewed our Mourning at this Court for the News ofSir Richard Fanshaw. Sir R.F. and Sir R.S.'s Arrival at Madrid without Success in the Portugal Truce; which being the Hinge of all Affairs at this time in Christendome, is (I hope) reserved for your more happy and more dexterous Management: I find it a∣greed from France with other Parts, that no∣thing will have good Issue in Portugal with∣out the Stile of King; and methinks the Spa∣niards Height should rather aim at giving him, King without Kingdom, than Amuse about Kingdom without King. The best Swords and Guns and Treasures, will have ever the Power of reviving those Controver∣sies; In the mean time, pray endeavour to make them sensible, that the Possession of Flanders is worth the Reversion of Portugal, and that they could never have such a Con∣juncture to say by the Puntiglio as during their King's Minority, who when grown
Major, may avow and disavow what he plea∣ses of his Mother's Regency. 'Tis pleasant in me to be giving you Ar∣guments; but we are so full of it here, as you must excuse all Impertinencies in this Matter: In short, this is a Business must of Necessity be done, and therefore for God's Sake dispatch it: And there's an End of my wise Councils. From the Marquis you must look for no great Assistance in this one Particular; his Birth and Interest make it too ticklish a String for him to touch; in all others assure your self I have taken a Care to press him, and His Excellency the Pains to endeavour all he can possibly, for preparing whatever may honour your Reception, or facilitate your Negotiation, and being a Person that has run through all the Business of that Mo∣narchy, and allyed to almost all the Per∣sons of the Council, I will be confident his Offices will not be useless to you, as I hope some of our Countrymen's will that prece∣ded them. When you further Desire any from his Excellency here; upon the Notice, I doubt not to furnish you. I find by him, the last Promotion of Coun∣cillors was not made either by the Duke of Medina's or Castriglio's Faction or Authority, but chiefly by the Queen's Confessor, and on purpose to strengthen a Party dependent wholly upon her Majesty.
The Duke of Albuquerque you will find a Man of more Warmth than Depth, and no great Leader in Council or Business; Mon∣talto is a Man of more Head, has more of the Queen's Ear, and runs the Fortune of growing one Day into the greatest Ministry; he is at present embroyled with the Duke of Medina, but if my Lord Sandwich would re∣concile those two Strings and tune them to∣gether, he would find it easie to concert his own Musick there. D'Ayala is Herb John, Aitona considered; and upon his March; which he may suc∣ceed well in, if he contents himself to make it by slow and even Steps. Pignoranda would make a third Party, is learned, and called wise, but wants Birth and Vigour to support more Greatness than he has. The Confessor is honneste Homme, has lived till now retired from Business, but made a great Leap into it on the sudden. Castriglio and Caracena are so far known, as I need say nothing of what you are to hope or fear from them in your Negotiation. Pray present my humble Ser∣vice to my Lord Ambassadour; and give him this little Light if you think 'tis worth it. The French Mens Looks towards us are fair, but I doubt their Meaning; at the same time they offer at Accommodation, they write into Holland pressing all that is possible, that State's Agreement with Munster, that their
Forces may be all free to fall upon England, and encourage the speedy setting out of their Fleet with Assurance of their own being rea∣dy to join: They mustered fifteen Thou∣sand Men but ten Days hence near this Fron∣teer in great Bravery, where King, Queen, and all the Court appeared. The French King resolves to march about the first of May in the Head of them towards Sedan, up∣on pretence to force the Duke of Lorrain to disarm, or at least, to know the Cause of this present Arming: In the mean time the Hugonots of Poiton have put in three Requests to the King, demanding Liberty of their Churches according to the Edicts of Names, and mingling some Strains very bold, with others very humble. The Prince of Munster hath Envoys from six of his Neighbour Princes now with him, treating about the Peace and Security of the Westphalian Circle, and an Accommodation with Holland; all which gives Jealousie of his Honour and Constancy. The Elector of Brandenburg hath put in a Memorial to the States, recommending pas∣sionately the Interest of the Prince of Orange, which hath given some Jealousie both to Dutch and French, The Elector of Collen hath sent an Envoy to the Hague, who is there arrived to demand the Restitution of Rhinberg,
The Prince of Orange's Sister's Marriage is concluded with the Duke of Simmeren; for the Consummation of it the Princess Dowa∣ger and Prince of Orange intend suddenly for Cleve. Captain Bennet and Sir John Sayers with several others are arrived at Ostend in the King's Yacht for Madamoiselle Bevar∣waers's Transportation. The Captain of the Vessel approaching the Town, and pretend∣ing to take a Ship belonging to that Port, and entring there for a Hollander, pursued and fired at her, till a Gunner from the Castle not knowing what Vessel ours was, gave her one Gun, but so unluckily, that it struck through the Cabbin, killed the Gunner, and shot off the Captain's Leg. I have sent Let∣ters from the Marquis to the Governour at Ostend to make all Excuses and Reparations. I have just now dispatcht an Express to the Hague to desire Madamoiselle Beverwaert's Commands where and when I shall attend her Passage, which my Lord Arlington hath advised to make by Antwerp, and to leave all her Money there in my Hands, which with a hundred and fifty Thousand Dollars I shall meet there about the same Time for Munster, will make me so rich, that I think I had best take the good Time, and run away to you into Spain; but I shall never reckon up∣on your Protection, longer than I have some Honesty mingled with my Kindness for you,
and whilst I have the least of one, you may reckon upon the most of t'other that can be from, SIR, Your most affectionate Friend, and most faithful Servant. To the Bishop of Mun∣ster. Brussels, Apr. 27. 1666. SIR, THE Care your Highness was plea∣sed to express for the safety of my Journey, makes me believe you will be pleased, to hear how soon and happily I arrived at Brussels after many Difficulties. By a Letter yester∣day, I recommended to his Majesty the Affairs of your Highness, as I promised to do, and
hope my Care will not be in vain: But since I left Munster, I am in∣formed, that Monsieur Colbert the French Mini∣ster, would arrive in a little time to buy the Troops that your High∣ness designs to dismiss, and to put them into the French Service. Now I cannot but inform your Highness, how unjust, how false, and how un∣grateful it will appear, for those Troops that were raised and armed by the King my Master's Money, to enter into the Service of a foreign Prince, now at open Enmity with us; by which means they be∣come Rebels rather than Enemies. And indeed, I find all the Ministers of Munster are extream∣ly averse from this Counsel. For, since His Excel∣lency the Marques of Castel Rodrigo designs to draw into the Spanish Service, all who are Sub∣jects of his Catholick Ma∣jesty, with two or three
Regiments besides, and for that end designs to send Monsieur D — to Munster; I think it more for the Honour and Advantage of the King my Master, that these Forces be placed in the Service of a Prince who has been long our Friend and Confede∣rate: And therefore, I desire your Highness to give a Hand to this Ne∣gotiation, which I pro∣mise shall be neither un∣known nor unwelcome to the King my Ma∣ster. I am, SIR, Your Highnesse's &c.
Episcopo Monasterii Brussellis, Apr. 27. S.N. 1666. Celsissime Domine, SUmma ista sollicitudo & benevolentia quas C. V. in securitate itineri meo praestanda demonstra∣vit, me persuasum habent, non ingratum fore si eam certiorem velim quàm bre∣vi & faeliciter inter multa incommoda & difficulta∣tes, Brussellas appulerim. Ego jam per Hesternas literas operam & studium meum impendi istis officiis C. V. erga sacram suam Regiam Majestatem ex∣solvendis, quae pollicitus
sum, nec vana fore confi∣do. Accepi autem ex quo Monasterio discessi, Domi∣num Colbert Ministrum Gallicum brevi appulsurum ad mercandas copias quas dimissura est C. V. eas{que} in stipendia Regis Gallici attrahendas. Non possum C.V. celare quam iniquum, infidum, & ingratum vi∣debitur, copias pecuniâ Re∣gis Domini mei conflatas & instructas, in partes & stipendia transire Regis alieni, jam{que} palam nobis inimici, & contra nos ar∣mati; nec isto modo dici potest, ut novum bellum, sed genus quoddam rebel∣lionis instituant; a quo con∣silio ego omnes, quos conveni Monasterii officiales exper∣tus sum admodum alienos. Cum autem Excellentia sua Dominus Marchio de Castel Rodrigo in votis ha∣beat subditos omnes Catho∣licae Majestatis in sua sti∣pendia retrahere, duas{que} insuper vel tres alteras le∣giones;
& in hunc finem statuerit Dominum D — Monasterium us{que} ablega∣re; ego multo magis & honori & utilitati Regis Domini mei conducturum aestimo, si copiae istae in auspicia & stipendia Re∣gis nobis jam temporis con∣foederati & amicissimi transeant; Ideo{que} supplico C. V. ut huic negotiationi facilitandae (quicquid in se erit) utras{que} manus praebeat, id{que} officium Re∣gi Domino meo nec igno∣tum nec ingratum forespon∣deo. C. V. &c.
To Sir John Temple. Brussels, May 10. S. N. 1666. SIR, AFter so hard and so long a Journey, I thought you would be glad to know I was well again in my former Station, and what was the Occasion of my leaving it so suddenly and so privately, that I could not acquaint any of my Friends with it before I went, which now I am at liberty to enter∣tain you with. This Winter has passed with much Noise, made by the Bishop of Munster in his Enter∣prize against Holland with some Attempts, but little Success: The Fault he has laid in some Degree upon the Marquess here, for refusing to suffer the Duke of Bornoville to go and Command his Troops, which he durst not consent to, for fear of giving too much Offence to the French and the Dutch, at a Time when the Spaniards here are in ill Con∣dition for a Quarrel: But the Bishop's chief Complaints have been, Want of those Sums of Money stipulated by his Majesty to be furnished him both before and after his ta∣king the Field. Our Excuses upon the Loss
of the Ships with Tin before Ostend, though they may serve to keep us in Countenance, yet they will not pay Forces in the Field, which he has often threatned these three Months past, must break up without speedy Supplies. In the mean time his neighbou∣ring Princes of the Empire, especially the E∣lectors of Ments and Brandenburg, with the Duke of Nieuburgh; seeing a Flame broke out, which must draw foreign Armies into the Empire both French and Dutch; have used first all Offices they could, to prevail with the Bishop to make his Peace with Holland, engaged the Emperour himself in the same Endeavours, and finding him steddy to his Treaty with the King, at last the Duke of Brandenburg drew his Forces into the Field, resolved to compel him by joining with the Dutch, if he could not persuade him to make the Peace; and the Duke of Nieuburg prepa∣red to second him in this Design: The French were not wanting in their Offices to the same Ends; so that a private Agreement was made about the beginning of this Month, for the French, Dutch, and Munster Envoys to meet at Cleve, and there treat the Peace under the Mediation of the Elector of Bran∣denburg. Assoon as the King received this Alarm, he sent an Express immediately to command me away the instant I received it, with a
Commission to the Bishop of Munster, and with Instructions to do all I could possibly to hinder the Peace, and with Bills of Ex∣change to revive his Payments which had been long intermitted, and Promise of more to be remitted every Post, which I was to or∣der into his Agent's Hands here in my Ab∣sence. I went accordingly, acquainting none with my going but the Marquess here, who gave me Twenty of his own Guards, with Com∣mand to follow absolutely all Orders I should give them. I was to pass through a great deal of the Spanish Country, much infested with Dutch Parties, more of the Duke of Nieu∣burg's, and more yet of the Brandenburgers, who I know were all Enemies to the Affair I went upon, and therefore thought it best to pass for a Spanish Envoy sent from the Mar∣quess Castel-Rodrigo to the Emperour; and charmed my small Guard and the Cornet that commanded them, to keep true to this Note. And some of my Servants, as most of the Guards speaking Spanish, I spoke nothing else unless in private, or when I was forced out of it by some Incident. In this Guise I came to Duseldorp where the Duke of Nieuburg happened to be; (contra∣ry to what I had been informed) assoon as I was in my Inn, one of his Officers came to know who I was, and whither I was going,
and would not be satisfied by the common Answer from my Servants and Guards, but would receive it from me; when he came up, tho' with much Civility, yet he prest me so far, that I found there was no feigning with him, and so bid him tell the Duke, that within an hour I would come and give him an Account both of my self and my Journey. I remembred the great Kindness that had e∣ver interceded between His Majesty and this Prince; and tho' I went upon an Errand that I knew was disagreeable to him, yet I thought he would be less likely to cross me, if I acquainted him frankly with it, than if I disguised scurvily as I was likely to do, be∣ing the Thing of the World I could do the most uneasily. I had a Letter of Credence which I brought out of England at my first coming over, for this Prince; but passing another Way to Munster I had not used it, and so resolved to do it now: I did so, gave it him, told him my Errand; how much His Majesty recko∣ned upon his Friendship, and desired his good Offices to the Bishop of Munster in the De∣sign I went upon, of keeping him firm to his Treaties with the King my Master. This Duke is in my Opinion the finest Gentleman of any German I have seen, and deserves much better Fortune than he is in; being small, very much broken, and char∣ged
with a very numerous Issue; he seems about fifty Years old, tall, lean, very good Mien, but more like an Italian than a German: All he says is civil, well bred, honneste, plain, easie, and has an Air of Truth and Honour. He made great Professions of Kindness and Respect to the King, was sorry he could not serve him in this Affair; his Engagements were already taken with the Emperour and his Neighbour Princes for making the Munster Peace, and by that Means keeping War out of the Empire. He doubted I could not serve His Majesty upon this Errand neither; for, he first believed I could not get safe to Mun∣ster, the Ways being all full of Dutch and Brandenburg Parties, who had Notice of the King's Intention to send away to the Bishop upon this Occasion; and if I should arrive, he believed however I should find the Peace Signed before I came. My Answer was short, for I was very weary; that go I would, however I succee∣ded, that for the Danger of the Journey I knew no providing against it, but a very good Guide who might lead me through Ways the most unfrequented; that I would desire His Highness to give me one of his own Guards to conduct me, because none would expect a Person going upon my Design, would have one in his Livery for a Guide; and I desired he would let me pass as I had done hitherto
in my Journey for a Spanish Envoy: The Duke, after some Difficulties at first (which we turned into Pleasantries) complyed with me in all: I took my Leave and went away early next Morning. I never travelled a more savage Countrey, over cruel Hills, through many great and thick Woods, stony and rapid Streams, ne∣ver hardly in any high Way, and very few Villages till I came neat Dortmund a City of the Empire, and within a Days Journey or something more of Munster. The Night I came to Dortmund was so advanced when I arrived, that the Gates were shut, and with all our Eloquence, which was as moving as we could, we were not able to prevail to have them opened; they advised us to go to a Village about a League distant, where, they said we might have Lodging. When we came there, we found it all taken up with a Troop of Brandenburg Horse, so as the poor Spanish Envoy was fain to eat what he could get, in a Barn, and to sleep upon a heap of Straw, and lay my Head upon my Page in∣stead of a Pillow: The best of it was, that he understanding Dutch, heard one of the Brandenburg Soldiers coming into the Barn examine some of my Guards, about me and my Journey, which when he was satisfied of, he asked if he had heard nothing upon the Way of an English Envoy that was expected;
the Fellow said, he was upon the Way, and might be at Dortmund within a Day or two, with which he was satisfied, and I slept as well as I could. The next Morning I went into Dortmund, and bearing there; that for five or six Leagues round, all was full of Brandenburg Troops, I dispatcht away a German Gentleman I had in my Train with a Letter to the Bishop of Munster to let him know the Place and Con∣dition I was in, and desire he would send me Guards immediately, and strong enough to convey me: The Night following, my Messenger returned, and brought me Word, that by eight a Clock the Morning after, a Commander of the Bishop's would come in Sight of the Town at the Head of twelve hundred Horse, and desired I would come and join them so soon as they appeared: I did so, and after an easie March till four a Clock, I came to a Castle of the Bishop's, where I was received by Lieutenant General Gorgas a Scotchman in that Service, who o∣mitted nothing of Honour or Entertainment that could be given me. There was no∣thing here remarkable, but the most Epis∣copal Way of Drinking that could be in∣vented. Assoon as we came in the great Hall, where stood many Flaggons ready Charged; the General called for Wine to drink the King's Health, they brought him a for∣mal
Bell of Silver gilt, that might hold a∣bout two Quarts or more; he took it empty, pulled out the Clapper, and gave it me who he intended to drink to, then had the Bell filled, drunk it off to His Majesty's Health, then asked me for the Clapper, put it in, turned down the Bell, and rung it out to show he had playd fair; and left nothing in it; took out the Clapper, desired me to give it to whom I pleased, then gave his Bell to be filled again, and brought it to me; I that never used to drink, and seldom would try, had commonly some Gentlemen with me that served for that Purpose when 'twas ne∣cessary; and so I had the Entertainment of seeing this Health go current through about a dozen Hands, with no more share in it than just what I pleased. The next Day after Noon about a League from Munster, the Bishop met me at the Head of four Thousand Horse, and in Ap∣pearance brave Troops. Before his Coach, that drove very fast, came a Guard of a Hun∣dred Hey Dukes that he had brought from the last Campagne in Hungary; they were in short Coats and Caps all of a brown Colour, every Man carrying a Sabre by his Side, a short Pole-Ax before him, and a skrew'd Gun hanging at his Back by a Leather Belt that went cross his Shoulder. In this Posture they run almost full speed, and in excellent
Order, and were said to shoot two hundred Yards with their skrew'd Gun, and a Bullet of the bigness of a large Pease, into the breadth of a Dollar or Crown Piece. When the Coach came within forty Yards of me, it stopt; I saw the Bishop and his General the Prince d'Homberg come out; upon which I alighted so as to meet him between my Horses and his Coach; after Compliments, he would have me go into his Coach, and sit alone at the back end, reserving the t'other to himself and his General: I excused it, saying, I came without Character; but he replied, that his Agent had writ him Word, I brought a Com∣mission which stiled me Oratorem nostrum (as was true) and that he knew what was due to that Stile from a Great King. I never was nice in taking any Honour that was of∣fered to the King's Character, and so easily took this; but from it and a Reception so extraordinary began immediately to make an ill Presage of my Business, and to think of the Spanish Proverb; Quien te hase mas Corte que no suele hazer Ote ha d'engannar ote ha menester. And with these Thoughts and in this Po∣sture I entered Munster, and was conducted by the Bishop to a Lodging prepared for me in one of the Canon's Houses.
The Bishop would have left me immedi∣ately after he brought me to my Chamber; but I told him I could not let him go with∣out asking an Hour of Audience that very Evening: He would have excused it upon Respect and Weariness, and much Compli∣ment; but I persisted in it, unless he would chuse to sit down where we were, and enter upon Affairs without Ceremony. He was at last contented; and I said all I could to∣wards my End of keeping him to the Faith of his Treaty with the King, to the Pursuit of the War till both consented to the Peace, and to the Expectations of the Money that was due; he answered me, with the Necessi∣ties had forced him to Treat; from the fai∣ling of his Payments; the Violences of his Neighbour Princes, and the last Instances of the Emperour; but that he would upon my Coming, dispatch one immediately to Cleve to command his Ministers to make a stop in their Treaty till they received further Orders, which I should be Master of. I went to Supper after he left me, but was told enough privately, to spoil it before I sate down, which was, that the Treaty was Signed at Cleve, tho' I took no Notice of it, because I knew if it were so, being angry would hurt no Body but my Master or my Self. Next Day the Bishop made me a mighty
Feast among all his chief Officers, where we sate for four Hours, and in Bravery I drank fair like all the rest; and observed that my Spanish Cornet and I that never used it, yet came off in better Order than any of the Com∣pany: I was very sick after I came to my Lodging; but he got a Horseback on purpose to shew himself about the Town, while the rest of the Company were out of sight all the Afternoon. The Day after was agreed to give me an Account of the Affair of Cleve; upon the Return of the Bishop's Express after my Arrival; and at an Audience in the Eve∣ning, with great Pretence of Trouble and Grief he confest, the Treaty was Signed, and so past Remedy, and that it had been so be∣fore his Express arrived, tho' much against his Expectation, as he profest, I am sure 'twas not against mine; for I left Brussels in the Be∣lief that I should certainly find all concluded; which made my Journey much harder than it could have been with any Hopes of succee∣ding. I told him, when I found all ended, and no hopes of retrieving it, that I would be gone within a Day or two, and would take my Leave of him that Night, being not well, and needing some Rest before I began my Journey: He said and did all that could be to persuade my Stay till I had represented his Reasons to the King, and received an An∣swer;
and I found his Design was, to keep me as long as he could, while his Agent at Brussels received Bills of Exchange from Eng∣land that were ordered him in my Absence; so that I knew not how much every Days stay would cost the King, and that no other Service was to be done His Majesty in this Affair besides saving as much of his Money as I could. The Bishop finding me immove∣able, advised me however in pretended Kind∣ness to go by Collen, which tho' four or five Days about, would be the only Way that was left for me with any Safety, the Dutch and Brandenburgers having posted themselves on Purpose to attend my Return upon all the o∣ther Roads; and he offered me Collonel Os∣sory an Irish Gentleman in his Service to con∣duct me; I seemed to accept all, and to be obliged by his Care, but wished my Self well out of it, and took my Leave, tho' he pre∣tended to see me again next Day. I went home, laid instead of going to Bed, as I gave out, I laid my journey so as to be on Horseback next Morning between three and four of Clock, upon good Friday, which I thought might help to make my Journey less suspected: I fee'd the Officer that ope∣ned the Gates for me, to keep them shut two Hours longer than usual that Morning, (which I hear was performed) and so committed my self to the Conduct of the Duke of Nieuburg's
Guide, to lead me the shortest Way he could into some place belonging to his Master. I rode hard and without any stop, to a Village eight Leagues from Munster, and just upon the Borders of the Brandenburg Countrey: There I baited, and pretended to go to Bed and stay all Night; but in an hour's time ha∣ving got fresh Horses ready for four Men that I pretended to send before me; I put on a Cassaque of one of the Marquess's Guards, and with my Page, the Duke of Nieuburg's Guard, and Collonel Masjette a Flemish Of∣ficer in the Munster Service, I took Horse at the back Door of my Inn, while the rest of my Company thought me a-Bed, and resol∣ved to ride as far as I could the rest of that Day, leaving my Steward to follow me the next, with the rest of my Train and Guards. I rode till eight at Night through the wild∣est Countrey, and most unfrequented Ways that ever I saw, but being then quite spent, and ready to fall from my Horse, I was for∣ced to stop and lay me down upon the Ground, till my Guard went to a Peasant's House in Sight, to find if there were any Lodging for me; he brought me word there was none, nor any Provisions in the House, nor could find any thing but a little Bottle of Juniper Water, which is the common Cor∣dial in that Countrey: I drunk a good deal, and with it found my Spirits so revived, that
I resolved to venture upon the three Leagues that remained of my Journey, so as to get into the Territories of Nieuburg, having pas∣sed all the Way since I left my Train through those of Brandenburg, whose Engagements with the Dutch left me no Safety while I was there. About Midnight I came to my Lodging, which was so miserable that I lay upon Straw, got on Horseback by break of Day, and to Duseldorp by Noon; where be∣ing able to ride no further, I went to Bed for an Hour, sent to make my Excuses to the Duke of Nieuburg upon my Haste and Weari∣ness, and to borrow his Coach to carry me to Ruremonde, which was a long Days Jour∣ney. This Prince sent me his Coach and his Compliments, with all the Civility in the World: I went away that Afternoon, got to Ruremonde the next, and from thence hither, not without great Danger of the Dutch Par∣ties even in the Spanish Countrey: And so have ended the hardest Journey that ever I made in my Life, or ever shall; for such a∣nother I do not think I could ever bear with a Body no stronger than mine. At my Return I have had the Fortune to stop several Bills of Exchange, that would o∣therwise have fallen into the Hands of the Bishop's Agent here, and to forbid the Pay∣ment of the rest he received in my Absence, which tho' accepted by the Merchants at
Antwerp, yet were not satisfied, the Time having not expired at which they were pay∣able. And this Service to the King is all the Satisfaction I have by this Adventure, which has ended the whole Affair of Munster that has of late made so much Noise, and raised so much Expectation in the World. I am, SIR, Your &c. To the Duke of Ormond. Brussels, May 14. S. N. 1666. My Lord. THO' my late Munster Journey has gi∣ven Your Grace some Ease by my In∣termissions, and me many Troubles, yet I met none of which I was more sensible, than what I received at my Return by the News of Your Grace's Indisposition. But I com∣forted my Self first, that your Health is too considerable to fall, tho'it may suffer under common Accidents; and since, with the cer∣tainty given me of its Recovery, in which I give Your Grace what I receive by it my Self, as much Joy, I am sure, as if I felt ne∣ver so great an Addition to my own; since
Mankind is esteemed so great a Self-Lover that these are the highest Expressions will be allowed us. I have desired my Lord Arlington to give Your Grace in my own Letters to his Lord∣ship, the Account of my whole Transaction; which I take no great Pleasure in repeating, and should very difficultly at once give Re∣lations so particular, as what I made whilst the Objects, their Dispositions, and Motions were in my Eye. The Length of them may make them too much Trouble to Your Grace, of which my Father or Brother I know would be glad to ease you, and give the Minute of a Draught at large. I so concerted with the Bishop whilst I was there, and with the Marquess here at my Re∣turn, that we expect here between five or six Thousand of his best Troops upon His Excel∣lency's paying Fifty Thousand Pattacons, and obliging himself to restore them upon Repayment of the like Sum whenever the Bi∣shop shall have need of them; which is a better Disposal of Forces raised by His Ma∣jesty's Money, than if they had been drawn over into the French Service, according to their Prospect and Monsieur Colbert's Endea∣vour, who was sent to Munster on Purpose to marchand them. Whether the Duke of Nieu∣burg, who seems wholly French, will make any Difficulty in giving them Passage through
his Countrey, I know not; nor whether the Light be true which was lately given me of a War like to suceed in those Parts between that Duke and the Marquess of Brandenburg, which would in this Conjuncture mingle the Cards after the strangest manner imagina∣ble. Tho' we hear much of our Fleets being at Sea, yet we talk more here of the Dutch slow∣ness, who have not yet Men for above fifty Ships, and those so disheartned and cold in the Service, that I fear nothing but their elu∣ding our great Preparations by keeping close in their Harbours, till for want of Victuals we may be forced to return to ours. My Lord Carlingford is now at Prague, un∣certain upon his late Letters from Court, whether he advances this Way, or returns to the Emperour; whither, he hath dispatcht his Son; and where we have some Ground of Complaint, seeing the Emperour's Name a∣mong all the other Princes in the Guarranty of the Munster Peace. The Endeavour of that Court had been much better employ'd in compassing the Peace with Portugal, which hangs yet in great Uncertainties, not to say Difficulties: Neither of which there is the least of in my being with most hearty and un∣feigned Passion, My Lord, Your &c.
To my Lord Lisle. Brussels, Aug. — S. N. 1666. My Lord. I Received lately the Honour of one from Your Lordship; and by it the Satisfacti∣on of finding your Health and good Humour continue, as well as my share in your Favour and Memory which I am much concerned in. I assure Your Lordship, in the midst of a Town and Employment entertaining enough, and a Life not uneasie, my Imaginations run very often over the Pleasures of the Air, and the Earth, and the Water, but much more of the Conversation at Sheen; and make me believe, that if my Life wears not out too soon, I may end it in a Corner there, tho' Your Lord∣ship will leave it I know in Time, for some of those greater and nobler Houses that attend you. I am obliged by the very pleasing Re∣lations you give from those softer Scenes; in Return of which, such as I can make you from those of Business, or War, or Tumult, must, I know, yield rougher Entertainment; and therefore I have sent them in a Paper which shall pass rather for a Gazette than a Letter; and shall content my self only to tell
Your Lordship, that 'tis hardly to be ima∣gined the Change which about three Weeks past have made in the Face of Holland's Af∣fairs, which are now esteemed here to be upon the Point of breaking into much such a Confusion as we saw in England about 1659; Nor can any Thing almost be added in these Parts to the Reputation of his Ma∣jesty's Arms and Affairs; so far, that it grows a Credit to be an English Man; and not on∣ly here, but in Amsterdam it self; I am told my Lord Stafford who went lately thither a∣bout a Process, has more Hats and Legs than the Burgomaster of the Town. I will not increase Your Lordship's Trouble by any en∣larging upon this Subject, having offered you a much longer in the inclosed; I wish I could give you some of another Kind by sending you a little Spanish Mistress from hence, whose Eyes might spoyl your Walks, and burn up all the green Meadows at Sheen, and find other Ways of destroying that Re∣pose Your Lordship pretends alone to enjoy, in spight of the common Fate of Mankind: But however your Friends suffer by it, I wish it may last as long as it pleases you; I am sure the Professions will do so of my being My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful humble Servant,
To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, Aug. — S. N. 1666. My Lord, I Am not to be forgiven, that endeavour by one Trouble to make Room for another, and solicite Your Lordship this Way that my Wife may have Leave to solicite you in a Mat∣ter wherein I can never resolve to do it my Self. Your Lordship's Friendship has left me little to desire or complain of, unless it be when I find my own Fortune so disproportio∣ned to my Mind, in the Resolutions I have of doing His Majesty all the Honour, as well as all the Service I can; But how ill they a∣gree in this Point (tho' I was ever Rich while I was private, even beyond my Desires) is a Story I would rather any Body should tell you than I: However, I should not bring my Wife into this Scene, but that I know she will ask nothing but my own, is a Person not apt to be troublesome or importunate, and in all kinds the best Part of My Lord, Your &c.
Patri Gottenburg. Brussels, Dec. 16th. S.N. 1666. Domine. REctè & per manus dulcissimae tuae sororis ac∣cepi Chirothecas elegantissimè consutas, & non minus politè contextas Literas; per quas nec me elapsum memoriâ vestrâ, nec planè exutum Benevolentiâ, & sentio & gaudeo. Utro{que} nomi∣ne me pulcherrimae istae Indoli per totam vestram Familiam diffusae, potius quam ulli meo merito obligatum aestimo: Habeo ita{que} & ago gratias quamplurimas, ut vero acceptiori quodam modo eas referre studeam sororem optimam exoravi, quae me (ut spero) Officio & Debito perfunctum brevi redditura est. Valeat interim Reverentia vestra, studiis propositis auspicatissimè incumbat, & ex Votis procedat, me{que} semper teneat. Amicissimum &c.
To Mr. Thynn. Brussels, Feb. 19. S. N. 1667. SIR, ABout two Days since I received the Fa∣vour of Yours of the 16th past, and am sorry to be put upon the Defence in an En∣counter so much to my Advantage; This had not arrived, if I could as easily have found the Way of conveying my Letters, as the Dispositions of Writing; For those I have always had about me since I knew your Sta∣tion and Character, which I thought would help to bear me out in that Attempt. The little Acquaintance you are contented to own, I durst not reckon upon, because it was so much more than I deserved, and so much less than I desired; but am very glad that may be allowed of among the Obligations we have to enter upon this Commerce, tho' we need no other than our Master's Service, which may on both sides be improved by the Communi∣cation of what passes in our different Scenes. I shall not engage in answering the Comple∣ments of your Letter, tho' I should have much more Justice on my Side; but I am very ill furnished with that sort of Ware, and the
Truth is, there is required so much Skill in the right tempering, as well as the Distribu∣tion of them, that I have always thought a Man runs much hazard of losing more than he gains by them; which has made me ever averse, as well as incapable of the Trade. It will be to more Purpose to let you know the Confidence we have here of our Treaty with Spain being Signed in all Points to our satis∣faction; but whether Portugal has or will ac∣cept their Part in it, which is a Truce of for∣ty five Years, I cannot yet resolve you, on∣ly this I am assured, that it is feared in the French Court as well as hoped in ours. The current News at Antwerp as well as here, is of the Dutch Merchant Fleet from Nantes and Rochel, consisting of above a hun∣dred Sail under the Convoy of six Men of War, being fallen into a Squadron of about twenty of our Frigats, and few are said to have escaped: tho' this be doubted of none here, and the current Letters from Zealand as well as Ostend make it probable; yet I su∣spend my Confidence till the Arrival of my English Letters, which are my Gospel in these Cases. This Coldness I know makes me lose many Pleasures, but on the other side helps me to escape many Disappointments, which light Belief in the midst of so many light Reports is subject to. The Councils or Dispositions of a subordinate Government as
this is, are not worth troubling you with, but those in the Court here are in short what we wish them. Those of the Scene you are in deserve much more the Enquiry; and I should be very glad to know them from so good a Hand. My Desires of serving you, can I am sure, never be known from a better than my own, which can value it self to you by nothing else, but by telling I am SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant. To the Earl of Clarendon Lord High Chancellor. Brussels, Mar. 4. S. N. 1697. My Lord, UPon the Arrival of the last Post from Spain, which brought us the unwel∣come News of our Treaty meeting an un∣happy Obstruction when it was at the very Point of being perfected; Count Marsyn came to me, and after a Preface of the great O∣bligations he had to His Majesty, and the Part he took in all our Interests, as well as
those of Spain; he fell into large Discourses of the unhappy Influences any Interruption in the present Treaty would have upon the Affairs of both Crowns. He insisted much upon the Hardship we put upon the Spaniards, in not consenting to leave the Assistance of their Enemies, which was all the Advan∣tage they expected from this Treaty in stead of many they gave; that the great Effect of it on both sides would thereby be lost; which was a Return into mutual Confidence, and at least the Beginnings of a sincere Friend∣ship: That Spain having consented to what Terms His Majesty thought reasonable, and Portugal not only refusing them, but entring at the same into new Dependancies upon France; he could not see what could oblige His Majesty to more than offering Portugal an equal Peace, and becoming the Warrant of it. That at His Majesty's Mediation Spain had given them a Style as usual and as ho∣nourable as what they desired; and if they could resolve to give them that of King in stead of Crown they had then no need or use of His Majesty's Mediation. That whether we thought it our Interest to have a Peace or War in Christendome, we must begin by adjusting the Business of Portugal; for if we desired the first, nothing could so much awe the French into quiet Dispositions as that Peace, and ours with Holland, to
which that would likewise be an Ingredient; If the latter, and we had a mind rather to be Seconds in a War of Spain with France, than Principals in any, (which he thought was our true Interest) nothing could make Way for it, or enable Spain either to begin or sustain a War with France, but a Peace with Portugal. That he was confident, His Majesty's con∣senting to abandon them in Case they refu∣sed to be included in our Treaty, would force them immediately to accept it; that if not, and His Majesty should hereafter find it his Interest to support them upon any great Successes of Spain on that side, it would be easie to do it by Connivance, by voluntary Troops of his own Subjects, or by a third Hand, provided it went no further than to keep Spain in the Temper of yielding to the Peace upon the Terms His Majesty shall have judged reasonable: But for the present, without His Majesty's Condescension to Spain in this Point; he did not see how we could hope to effect our Treaty, or to re∣ceive any Fruits of it, where new Occasions of Diffidence and Distaste would every Day arise. These were the chief of Count Marsyn's Discourses, which he ended in desiring me that I would represent them to His Majesty's chief Ministers, and particularly to Your
Lordship from him, as the best present Testi∣mony he could give of his Zeal to His aje∣sty's Service and Affairs; and which he would have done himself, but for fear it might look like intruding into Matters and Councils he was not called to. Besides this single Point upon which this Stop of our Treaty is wholly grounded; I could not but represent to Your Lordship some other Circumstances which I imagine may have fallen in and helpt to occasion it. I hear, France has declared positively to the Spaniard, that they will immediately begin the War, upon the Spaniards Signing the Treaty with us, and concluding the Truce or Peace with Portugal upon our Mediation. To this End, and to shew the Spaniards, they are in earnest, they busie themselves in ma∣king new Levies, and drawing down many Troops upon these Frontiers, as well as all sort of Provisions, either for Sieges or a Camp. Upon this, I know not whether the Spanish Councils may be so faint as not to dare give the French any pretence of a Quarrel, but preserve their Quiet rather by shrinking, than making a bold Peace: Or whether being composed of Men that hardly ever lookt out of Spain, or consider any thing but that Con∣tinent; they may not upon Foresight of War either continuing with Portugal or beginning in Flanders, rather chuse the first, where be∣ing
Invaders, they may give themselves what Breath they please, imploy their own Natives in the Charges of Honour and Gain, and keep all the Money spent in the War, still within their Countrey; whereas whatever comes into Flanders, never returns, and is swallowed up by so many foreign Troops as the Levies for that Service must needs draw together. There may yet another and more prudent Consideration arise with these, which may for the present delay the Conclusion of our Treaty; and that is, a Desire to sign it rather before the Winter than in the Spring, and by that Means both gain this Summer to finish the Fortification of their Frontiers here, and the next Winter to put their Army in a better Posture than they now are, or I doubt, will suddenly be for the beginning of a Cam∣pagne; and if this Council should be taken by Concert with us, that no Breach of Con∣fidence may grow between us by these De∣lays, but the French only flattered by vain Hopes of breaking our Treaty, and thereby induced to let the Spaniard grow a Year ol∣der in their Peace with them, and slacken the War of Portugal into as low Expence, and as little Action or Hazard as they can; I know nothing can be said against it, and should be apt to believe it, were the Coun∣cils there, in the Breast of any one Person by last Ressort; whereas the divided Interests
and Passions of the Councellours cannot well suffer them to fall into such a Resolution with hope of Consent, and Secret among them all. This Reflection puts me upon another I hear from private Hands; which may possi∣bly have made some Change in the Course of our Treaty; which is, that the whole Management of Affairs in the Council of Spain seems at present to be devolved into the Hands of Count Castriglio; the Confessor leaving it to him, and reserving to himself those Things only which depend immediate∣ly upon the Will of the Queen, and proposing to himself during his Ministry (which can∣not be long in regard of Castriglio's great Age) to make Way for his own, by growing older and practised in Affairs, as well as the Know∣ledge, Obligations, and Dependances of Per∣sons. Now, our Treaty having never pas∣sed through Castriglio's Hands, but conduc∣ted by Sir Richard Fanshaw wholly through the Duke of Medina's, (his declared Enemy) and since by my Lord Sandwich chiefly through Pignoranda's, who is a third Party; 'tis not improbable, that a new Hand may give it new Form, either to add something of his own, or to shew his Authority, or perhaps to pursue his former usual Dispositi∣ons, which have been bent upon the War with Portugal: considering no Part of the Mo∣narchy
but Spain and the Indies, and I doubt, in particular, not very partial to our Alliance or Affairs. Upon these Intimations Your Lordship will infinitely better judge than I, to what to attribute the present ill Posture of our Af∣fairs in Spain, and how to retrieve it. I am ever My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble Servant. To Don Estavan de Ga∣marra the Spanish Am∣bassadour at the Hague. Brussels, Mar. 29. S. N. 1667. My Lord, I Do not know how to acquit my self of the Obligation my Lord Stafford has engaged me in to your Excellency, in begging your Favour to procure a Passport from the States for my Wife. Your Excellen∣cy
I am sure will excuse the Care of a Mother, in providing all that lay in her Power for the safety of her Children, and who to ease her self in it has (methinks) considered so little to whom she was trouble∣som If I had been con∣sulted upon this occasion, I should not have suffe∣red one I am so nearly concerned in, to owe her Safety to those who yet profess themselves Enemies to the King my Master; and much less, to them that treat the Wife of one of his Mini∣sters like a Merchant, in demanding an Accompt of her Goods: And therefore am very glad the Passport did not come till she was a Ship∣board in one of his Ma∣jesty's Yatchs, trusting, next to God Almighty, in the Protection of his Royal Name. And tho' I have not yet heard how her Journey has suc∣ceeded, I esteem my self as much obliged to your Excellency (what∣ever
ever happens) for your favourable Intentions up∣on this Occasion to a Man neither known nor deserving to be so, as if you had delivered me and my Family from the greatest Dangers. God Almighty pre∣serve your Excellency many Years, and give me the Occasions of ser∣ving you. I am, Your &c.
A Don Estavan de Ga∣marra. Brussels, 29 di Mar. S.N. 1667. Sennor. YO no se que modo me he de rescartar del o∣bligo en que el Sennor Con∣de de Stafford me ha em∣pennado a V. E. pidiendo su favor, en procurar un Passaporte de los Estados de Hollanda para mi mu∣jer V. E. ha de perdona▪
el recato de una sennora que tenia gana de proveyer todo lo que era possible a la seguridad de sus ninvios, y para descansarse en este cui∣dado no se le dava nada (mi pareçe) a qui en car∣gava trabajo ni importu∣nidad. Si yo huviera si∣do de lajunta en esta occasi∣on, no huviera permitido que una persona que me to∣cava tan, cerca pidiesse su seguridad de los que hazen hasta aora profession de eni∣migos al Rey mi Sennor; y mucho menos de los que havian de trattar a la mu∣jer de un Ministro como a Mercadera, mandando la cuenta de su bagaje; y por esto me huelgo mucho de que no ha venido el passa∣porte antes que se hay a embarcado la Sennora en un Yacht del Rey my Sen∣nor, confiando se (con Di∣os) en el amparo solo de su Real Nombre: Aun{que} no se hasta aora en que ha parado s viage. Toda via por oque ay de las in∣tenciones tau favorables de V. E. en esta occasion a un hombre ny conocido ny que merece selo, me tengo
por obligado al mismo pun∣to, como se me huviera res∣catado a mi y mi familia, de los mayores Peligros que se pueden topar en la mar o la tierra. Dios guarde a V. E. muchos an∣nos, y a mi me de las oc∣casiones de hazer las obras como la profession de lo que soy. De V. E. May humilde Servidor
To my Lady Giffard written in the Name of Gabriel Possello. Amberes, 30. de Marco. S. N. 1667. Sennora Mia. HE recebido con mucho gusto y no menorre conocimiento la guarnicion de spada que V. S. me ha hecha la merced de enbiarme, la qual me ha stado, mucho mas encarecida con lo que me ha dicho despues el Sennor Residente de la parte de V. S. que no era menester enternecer me en la∣grimas ny oraciones (como estoy accostumbrado) con el sentimiento de tal obligo y que V. S. se esti∣mara muy bien pagada con una carta Espagnola; porque a mi es tan facile de mal escrivir como a V. S. de bien hazer. Yes verdad que se tiendra por pagado con una carta? Voto a tal que no le faltara carta aunque la pidiera en Gallego. Pero digo me di veras, es santa V. S. O es hechizera? porque esto se a buen seguro que ha hecho milagro y con una guarnicion di plata mi ha herido hasta el coracon y aum mas fuerte que nolo pudiera hazer el mas bravo Cavallero con una oja de Toledo. Pero me dira V. S. que estamos en un siglo que no es cosa mueva el hazer milagros con la plata y que con esta sola se cumplen aora hazanas mayores que no con el valor y el acero en los siglos passados. Por
vida mia que tiene razon V. S. y por este mila∣gro no lo han de cortarla la capa. Pero no se como ha de escapar quando la dirè que despues que he to∣cado esta guarnicion encantada, me van amenudo cayendo las canas, y en lugar de un viejo de se∣tenta annos, me hallo moco de quinze, me siento calentar la sangre en las venas, y bolverse en tri∣umfo el desterrado amor para afirse d'este misera∣ble coracon y hazer le pedacos en un punto. Des∣dichado de mi que he de tocar otra vez estas pisados tan trabajosas de la ciega mocedad como me basta una vida a padecer dos martyrios. Es possible que yo me sienta otra vez abrasor de las llammas amo∣rozas, y que de ceniza tanfria salga de nuevo tan violento fuego. Que yo me voya otra vez resfri∣andomi con sopiros, y anegandome en las lagrimas y padeciendo las penas y los afanes que no me dxa∣ran la vida si no fuera para sentir cada dia el do∣lor de la muerte. Ah Sennora de mi alma, quan∣to mal me ha hecho conhazarme tanto bien, quan∣to mi ha de costar de veras, la burla que me han hecho de ser enamorado di V. S. en mi viyez pas∣sada. Pero quan facilemente se remedia el mas trabajoso amor con uno poco d'esperanca. Yo me voy piensando que una Sennora tan complida no pu∣ede desviarse de la razon, y que me haviendo tan favorecido quando estava viejo, no puede faltar d'alguna piedad para mi descanso, estandome aora moco y lindo y enamorado. Pero si me lisonjea mi deseo y me enganna mi esperança lo que ay di bueno en esta occasion, es que me haviendo su favor ren∣dido
en un instante de viejo moco, de la misma manera me parece que su crueldad me ha luego de buelver de moco viejo, y entonces me havre a bur∣lar me tanto de su hermosura quanto se puede bur∣lase aore V. S. de mi passion Bive V. S. mille annos, y se vea enamorada como yo a setenta, que con esto no se ha de olvidar entonces de. Su mas humilde cryado y Galan. Gabriel Possello. To Collonel Algernoon Sidney. Brussels, Apr. 29. S. N. 1667. SIR, I Received two Days since one from you of the 19/29th past; with two inclosed, which I shall not fail to convey by the English Pac∣quet that parts this Evening, and with the same Assurance that usually attends my Let∣ters; So that I think you may reckon upon their Safety in those Hands to which they are addressed. Your present Abode was no Secret to me before I knew it from your own Hand; That Information having been gi∣ven me about two or three Months since by
some English Gentlemen, who passed from Italy through Germany and these Parts into England; where I cannot think they made a greater Secret of it upon Occasion, than they had done here. I am sorry your Dispositions or your For∣tunes have drawn you so far out of the Reach of your Friends Services, and almost Cor∣respondence; in which I doubt the Difficul∣ties may shortly increase, at least this Way: For we are here at present in little hopes to see next Month end, without the Advance of a French Army into these Provinces. I had Letters very lately from Petworth, and my Wife some as fresh from Penshurst, which left Health in both those Places; and will thereby I suppose, furnish you with News not unwelcome from SIR, Your most humble Servant.
To Monsieur Gourville. Brussels, May 2. S. N. 1667. SIR, YOu ask me whether we have a mind in earnest for a Peace, and I ask you, whether you have a mind in earnest for a War: For as yet, we are no better infor∣med of the Designs and Marches of the French Troops, than we were at your Departure from Brussels. I begin to think that King and his Mini∣sters are mortal like o∣ther People, and that their Affairs are mana∣ged with as little Con∣cert as those of their Neighbours. For I be∣lieve, as to what con∣cerns this Countrey, the Critical Minute is past, and that the French will find here a braver De∣fence than they pretend to believe. However, it is certain, if they had
begun by Marching ra∣ther than Menacing a∣bout three Weeks ago, the Business on this side had been past Remedy. In short, I as little com∣prehend the French Pro∣ceedings at present, as those of the Spaniards a while ago, nor where they can find their Ac∣count in this Enterprize which begins to awaken and alarm all Christen∣dome. For our selves, my re∣al Opinion is, that our Intentions for the Peace are very sincere, and cannot fail if the other Parties bring along with them the same Disposi∣tions; and if I were as much concerned there∣in, as you perhaps may be. I would regn are my Affairs accordingly for the future. I thank you for your Account of what passes in your Parts; but I am very little satisfied with the Queen of Spain's Letter, whereof a Co∣py
has been delivered at the same rime to the States by Monsieur d'E∣strades: I think the Form is faulty, as well as the Substance; and that if your Soldiers be at pre∣sent no better than your Secretaries, Affairs will hardly succeed as they imagine. By the last Ordinary from Spain, it appears that they dream no more of War there than they do of Fire, at least they conceal from our Ambassadour any Advi∣ces they may have recei∣ved of it from hence: But our Treaty of Com∣merce was yet once a∣gain upon the Point of being Signed. The Spa∣niards make no Prepara∣tions against Portugal this Campagne, and therefore seem to think of being on that side upon the Defensive, or else of an Accommoda∣tion: tho' they are well enough informed of the Particulars of an Ac∣cord concluded between France and Portugal.
Nothing perplexes me more than to find a way of writing often to Bre∣da, and you will not send me your Address. I resign up this to my Fortune, but since yours is always better than mine, it may happen upon that Account that you may never receive it. As happy as you are, I advise you to look to your Affairs at Breda: For in a few Days, I re∣solve to go and plunder your House at Brussels, and get satisfaction for my great Orange-Tree upon your little ones. I do not pretend it shall be open War; however the Hollanders will tell you that we English are D — and all at Repri∣sals. I am Sir your &c.
A Monsieur Gourville. De Brusselles, May 2. S.N. 1667. Monsieur, VOus me demandez si nous voulons tout∣de-bon la paix; & moy, je vous demande si vous voulez tout-de bon la guerre; car jus-qu'i∣cy nous n'en savons pas plus sur vos desseins & la marche des Troupes Fran∣coises, que nous en savions á votre depart de Brussêl∣les. Je commence á cr i∣re que ce Roy & ses Mi∣nistres sont mortels comme le reste des hommes, & que leurs affaires sont maniees avec aussi peu de concert que celles de leurs voisins; car je croy, que pour ce qui est de ce pïs icy, l'heure de berger est passée pour eux, & qu'ils y trou∣véront une resistance plus opiniatre, & plus rebu∣tante qu'ils ne s'imagi∣nent: Mais il est con∣stant, que si au lieu de me∣nacer,
ils eussent commen∣cé á marcher il y a troit semaines, l'affaire etoit sans ressource de ce coté icy. Enfin je les comprens aussi peu dans leur conduite d'a∣present, que je comprenois autrefois les Espagnols dans la leur; & je ne prevois pas comment ils pourront trouver leur conte dins la pour faite d'un enterprise, qui va reveiller & mem choquer toute la Chretien∣te. A nôtre egard, mon sen∣timent, que je croy veri∣table, & que je vous com∣munique sans deguisement, est, que nos intentions pour la paix sont fort sinceres, & qu'elle ne scauroit manquer de se faire, si les autres parties y appertent les mê∣mes dispositions; j'ajoute, que si j'y etois interresse autant que j'entrevois que vous pouvez l'etre- je reg∣lerois mes affaires confor∣mement aux conjonctures. Je vous rens graces de ce que vous me mandezce qui se passe en vos quartiers; mas je suis fort pou satis∣fait de la lettre ecrite á la Reyne d'Espagne, dont la
copie a eté donné en meme tems aux Estats par Mon∣sieur D'Estrades. Il me semble qu'il y a du defaut dans la maniere aussi bien que dans le fond de la chose meme; & que fi pour cet∣te fois vos Capitaines n'en savent plus que vos Secre∣taires, les affaires n'iront pas le train qu'on a pensé. Par ce dernier ordinaire d'Espagne, ils ne parois∣sent non plus songer á la guerre qu'au feu; ou bient ils taisent a notre Ambas∣sadeur les avis qu'ils peu∣vent avoir recu de deça; mais notre traitté de com∣merce eroit encore une fois sur le point d'etre signé. Ils ne font point de prepara∣tifs contre le Portugal pour cette campagne; & par lá ils semblent songer seu∣lement ou á se tenir de ce coté lá sur la defensive, ou bien á entendre d un accom∣modement; quoy qu'ils sa∣chent bien le detail de l'ac∣cord conclu entre la France & le Portugal.
Il n'y a rien qui m'em∣barasse plus que de trouver les moyens d'ecrire souvent á Breda; & vous ne m'en∣voyez point aussi votre a∣dresse. J'abandonne cel∣le cy á mon etoile; mais comme la votre l'emporte toujours sur la mienne, il pourra bien arriver qu'elle manquera saroute. Quel∣que heureux que vous soy∣ez, je vous conseille pour∣tant de bien faire vos af∣faires á Breda, car dans peu de jours j'iray piller vo∣tre Maison á Brusselles, & vanger mon grand Oranger sur vos petits. Ce ne se∣ra pas guerre declarée; mais les Hollandois vous di∣ront que nous faisons le da∣ble á quatre en matiere de represailles. Je suis &c.
To my Lord St. Albans. Brussels, May 13. S.N. 1667 My Lord, SInce my Acknowledgments of the Ho∣nour I received some time since from Your Lordship, I have had nothing to give me Countenance in offering any new Trou∣ble; and indeed the Party is so unequal in regard of our Stations at this time of Paris and Brussels, as well as all other Circumstan∣ces, that no Commerce can pass without very great Presumption on my Side, and as great Condescension on your Lordship's: For we are so amazed with the Numbers and Bravery of the French Preparations to invade this Countrey, that we can hardly lift up our Eyes against the rising of this Sun, that is said, intends to burn up all before it: Yet not to flatter you, tho' Mens Eyes are weak at first sight, when they have gazed a while I believe they will find their Hands, and try to defend themselves against Gold as well as a∣gainst Iron; and perhaps the Stomach they have conceived at, being treated with so little Ce∣remony as to be invaded without any De∣claration of War, to have the Dutchy of
Brabant not esteemed worth the demanding, nor any Colours given to the Justice of the Invasion; will make the Defence sharper than is expected, as it has done the volun∣tary Contributions larger than was imagi∣ned. This makes all Fryars already despair of praying away the War, and begin to look like other worldly Men, and the very Nuns fear they may be forced to work too, before the Business ends: In short, all prepare for a warm Summer, only the Spanish Duennaes cannot think so ill of a King that married an Infanta, and will never leave wondring that Un Rey qui tiene que comer en su Casa, y de rega∣larse tanbien, should resolve to give himself and them so much Trouble for nothing. Our poor Nuns at Louvain have more Faith and not less Fears, and therefore the Reverend Mother hath sent to desire me to recommend them to Your Lordship's Favour, and to beg of you to get them a Protection from thence, in case the Scholars and Learned there should not find Arguments to defend their Town a∣gainst the French, who I can assure Your Lordship, will not lose much by the Bargain as far as I see, of that Nunnery, Nuns and all; for it seems by their Faces, as well as their Buildings to be an antient Foundation, and gone much to decay. Now they have put me upon desiring Pass∣ports,
my Wife will needs have me recom∣mend her to Your Lordship for another for her self, and Servants, and Baggage, to go over into England, and if She shall find it con∣venient, to pass as far as Calais, and embark there, because She is no Lover of the Sea. Upon the first of these Requests Your Lord∣ship has Occasion to merit very much, but by the Second, to deal freely, I know not what you will gain, besides the Obligations of a Person who is already all that can be My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant.
To my Lord Ambassadour Coventry. Brussels, May 21. S. N 1667. My Lord, I Know not by what Conveyance, nor by what Delays the Honour Your Ex∣cellency intended me so long since from aboard the Frigat, came yesterday to my Hands, and made my Acknowledgments later than they ought to have been: I am sorry you a∣greed so ill with the Sea, since that is the Dutch Mens Element, with whom we hope you will agree so well; but if you had the Faculty of uttering your Heart in the Seamens Sense, as well as you had of uttering your Thoughts; I am to rejoice with you upon the good Health you must needs have brought ashoar, and to believe that the Temper and Constitution of your Body, is as sound and as good as that of your Mind. Since my last to my Lord Holles, our Ordinary from Spain arrived; by which Mr. Godolphin assures me that I may expect the News of our Trea∣ty at Madrid being Signed by the next, no∣thing remaining at the Date of his Letter be∣sides only the Examination of the Phrase in Latin, which was referred to the Inquisidor
general, and Count Pignoranda; after whose Sentence upon it, nothing was in Sight that could stop the immediate Signing and Sea∣ling. Mr. Godolphin assures me, all Parts of the Treaty of Commerce are so much to our De∣sire and Advantage, that he hopes to see ma∣ny a rich Man in England by it; for the other Part which concerns the Adjustment with Portugal; tho' the Terms are likewise agreed between us and Spain, yet the present Effect of it seems likely to be avoided by the late Accord between France and Portugal, of which I send the Account inclosed by the Copy of Sir Robert Southwell's Letter to my Lord Sandwich upon that Occasion. I inclose like∣wise the Copies of the French King's last Let∣ters to the States General, and at the same time to the Queen Regent of Spain; decla∣ring his Intentions to invade these Countreys; which last methinks is drawn with so ill Co∣lours and so ill Grace, that if his Captains do no better than his Secretaries upon this Occa∣sion, the Success of his Enterprise may prove no better than the Justice of it here appears. If these Papers may have arrived already some other Way, Your Excellency will how∣ever pardon my Diligence, since you receive no other Trouble than that of throwing them away. The Levies here and Musters go on with all the Care and Speed this Govern∣ment
is capable of. This Evening I am as∣sured, the Twelve Hundred Italians so long expected, are arrived at Ostende. Last Night parted Don Bernard de Salinas, dispatcht from the Marquess here, to beg some Assistance from his Majesty; the present Hopes are only of Leave to recruit the old Regiment here to the Number of Two Thousand, or else to raise two new Ones, under such Of∣ficers as His Majesty shall name. The Cloud threatning these Parts from France is not yet broken, and the Marches of their Troops to three several Rendezvouses make it yet uncer∣tain where it will fall. Cambray, Valencien∣nes, Namur, Mons, and St. Omers are in very good Condition, and the last hath three Thousand Men in Garrison besides the Bour∣geoisie. The Prince of Ligni has now Four Thousand Horse effective at the Head-Quar∣ters near Nivelle, where there will be Five Thousand Foot to join with them, and at∣tend theit Enemy's Motion, and cover Brus∣sels upon Occasion. It is most certain that if the French had begun to march when they be∣gan to talk, about three Weeks since, this Countrey had been lost without Dispute, or Remedy; the Defence will be now perhaps sharper than expected. La Bassè and Armen∣tiers are already slighted, and Charle-Roy is all mined within, the Mines filled with Pow∣der; Guns, and Magazins drawn off, and
ready to flie upon the first Approach of the French, which is here esteemed both a gene∣rous and prudent Resolution of the Marquess, since he could not finish it in Time, nor pre∣serve his Child without the Mother's Dan∣ger. I know nothing else to increase this Trou∣ble besides the Assurances of my being My Lord, Your Excellency's most humble and most obedient Servant. To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, May 27. S.N. 1667. My Lord, TWo Days since came hither the News of Armentiers being seized by a Party of the French Horse, about Five Hundred strong; half of the Fortifications were alrea∣dy slighted, and not above a Hundred and Fifty Soldiers left in the Town: What their next Design will be, seems not yet resolved; their Troops marching on all Parts, give the Occasion I suppose to the several Governours of Mons, Cambray, and Valenciennes, to signi∣fie
by Expresses hither the Jealousie each of them has of the Storm being ready to fall up∣on their Parts. At Cambray and Lille several French have been taken surveying the Works, and disgui∣sed; but all those Places are at present in so good Condition, that the Choice may per∣haps make some Difficulties in the French Councils, which I believe have been much disconcerted by the blowing up of Charle-Roy; a Resolution they expected not from the Marquess, and without which these Parts of the Countrey had run inevitable Dangers, and the most successful Invasion had been made in those Provinces where the French Pretensions lay. The Discoursers here observe that the first Pace of the War being made in Flanders, lo∣ses all the good Grace which the French en∣deavoured to give their Invasion; that the Town they have taken can import no more than the Advance of their Frontiers; that they seem unresolved whether to keep it or no; how to use the Governour and Soldiers whom they took in their Beds, whether as Prisoners, or Friends, and more uncertain what to do next; that their slowness in en∣tring the Countrey, and Loss of twenty Days Time, tho' they were then as ready as now, has certainly saved these Provinces; for it is constant without any Dispute that if
they had fallen on in the beginning of this Month, Charle-Loy, Nivelle, Louvaine, Brus∣sels, and Mechlyn would have cost them nei∣ther Time nor Danger. From these Circum∣stances the Reasoners here conclude a Weak∣ness and Incertitude in the French Councils, and begin to hope they may have taken their Measures as ill among their Neighbours, as they have among themselves; and say confi∣dently, that unless they are agreed with England, their Affairs are in a worse Posture than they have been these twenty Years. They begin to hope that all our late Practi∣ces with the French, are aimed no further than to embark them in this Affair, and have our Revenge for the Game they play'd in enga∣ging us in the Dutch War: They say, that if by Offers and Shews of abandoning Spain, we have drawn the French into this War, which hath already cost them all their Con∣fidence with Holland, all further hopes of amusing Spain, and the Credit of their good Faith and Meaning with the rest of Christen∣dom; that if after our Peace made with Hol∣land and France, we resolve to offer our Me∣diation between France and Spain, and upon the Refusal or failing of it, join with the Hollander in the Protection of these Coun∣treys, enter vigorously into the War, share with the Spaniard whatever shall be gained from the French, and let Holland find their
Account by destroying all the French De∣signs of Trade and Plantations abroad; the Reasoners here conclude that if this has been our Design for these two Months past, and be pursued with the same Success it has be∣gun; It is one of the greatest Councils that has ever been conceived by any Prince, and which will make the greatest Change in our own Affairs, and in those of all Christendom besides; and appear the best adjusted Revenge upon the French that ever was taken upon an Enemy. From Breda we have got little more than the Entry of our Ambassadour, which makes us believe some Mystery in the Delays of Peace there, as well as those of War on the other side. From Sueden I have the last Post a particu∣lar Assurance of that Crown's good Intenti∣ons towards the House of Austria, of their dispatching one Monsieur Tongel Envoy into Spain, who is to pass this Way, and will be Addressed to me to introduce him to the Marquess, by whose Representations the Court of Sueden desires to have their Mini∣ster's Reception in Spain favoured, and his Negotiation advanced. I am, as will ever become me to be, with equal Passion and Truth My Lord, Your &c.
To my Lord Holles. Brussels, May 29. S. N. 1667. My Lord, I Know not with what Speed or Success three of mine may have arrived at Breda, but am apt to doubt the Certainty of this Commerce by observing that Your Excel∣lency's of the 22d came not to my Hands till Yesterday, and after the Receipt of it I was so unlucky, as not to find the Baron de L'Isola till later at Night than would suffer this Dispatch: I now send it to Mr. Shaw of Antwerp with Orders to convey it by Ex∣press from thence, in Case he meets no other sudden Occasion; and whatever Favour or Commands Your Excellency may hereafter design me, will come sooner and safer I sup∣pose by an Address to the same Hand at Antwerp. I acquainted the Baron de L'Isola with the Dutch Allegations concerning some Advances made by him as from his Majesty, upon the Point of Poleroon. He says, however they may seem to interpret it, they could not un∣derstand it by any Thing that passed from him in that private Communication, which
was all he entred into upon his short stay in Holland. That upon his first Discourse of His Majesty's Intention to make the Trea∣ty of 1662 the Foundation of this at present; the Person he discoursed with raised two Dif∣ficulties; the first, that of Poleroon; and the other, the Continuance of the Pretensions left on either side; which as they had given Occasion, or at least Pretext for the present Quarrel so, if they were left still undeci∣ded, they might hereafter have the same Ef∣fect; whereas their Desire was by this Peace to cut off the Root of all future Differences. For the first Point, he (the Baron) asked, whether if all other Articles should be agreed, the States would be so obstinate upon the Point of Poleroon as to endanger the Peace for that alone: It was answered, the French had already essay'd to do some Offices in this Particular, and had brought it to this very Demand; whether the States would continue the War rather than yield the Point of Poleroon; and that the States had answe∣red formally, they would. For the second, concerning the mutual Pretensions left in the Treaty of 1662, He, (the Baron) seemed to approve the cutting them all off, but proposed that in Conside∣ration of it, the States should give His Ma∣jesty a Sum of Money in some sort propor∣tionable to what his Pretences might amount;
and that if the States would make any Ad∣vance considerable in Point of the Sum, He (the Baron) would employ all his own and his Friends Endeavours, to induce His Ma∣jesty to a Condescention in this Point of Po∣leroon as well as that of clearing all Pretensi∣ons on either Side. To this was answered, that for Poleroon nothing more could be said, nor any Consi∣deration make the States yield it, without the Alternative of restoring all on each side, which would create Length and Difficulty in the Treaty. That, for a Sum of Money in Satisfaction of His Majesty's Pretensions, they could not consent to any such Propo∣sal, without a particular Liquidation of what the Pretentions on each side amounted to; since they believed in gross their own upon us, to be higher than ours upon them; And yet at the same time it was insisted, that no such Examen or Liquidation should be entred upon; since doing it before the Conclusion would expose the Treaty to the Danger of Delays, and consequently of Accidents; and leaving it to Commissioners after the Con∣clusion, would leave Field for new Dis∣putes. This was the Sum of the Baron's Negoti∣ation, in which he made all the Advances as from himself; but when he found he was not likely to bring it to any Issue, by Rea∣son
of those two Difficulties, that is, Pole∣roon, and the Sum in Consideration of our clearing all Pretensions; he then told them as by his Majesty's Order, that the Point of Poleroon, touching our East India Compa∣ny rather than His Majesty; the King would send over some Persons Deputed from the said Company, with His Ambassadours; and if the States would do the same, it was likely the Persons Deputed from each Com∣pany might find an Expedient in the Busi∣ness. This the Baron gives me for the short and true Relation of all his Discourses in Hol∣land, which having been made with one Person alone, and very private; I find he expected not they would have been so pub∣lick, as to be alledged upon any new Ne∣gotiations. Our News from the Frontiers since my last is this. About the time of the French King's coming down to Arras, the Orders were given for slighting Armentiers, la Bas∣seè, and Charle-Roy, which being publick, and begun to be executed at Armentiers; a Brigetin Priest of that Town went to Arras, and upon Complaints of their being left without Defence in the Times of Danger that were approaching, made Application to the Governour of Arras for a Protection for their Town: Within a Day or two af∣ter,
when the Works were about half sligh∣ted, instead of the Protection, came Seven or Eight Hundred French Horse, and find∣ing a Guard of about forty Men at the En∣trance of the Place, made a Discharge upon them, killed one, and wounded two: Up∣on which, those few Soldiers that were in the Town-House, shot and killed three or four of the French, who began to pillage some of the Burgher's Houses; but this Dis∣order was soon appeased by their Officers, after which they summoned the Peasants in, and begun to repair the Fortifications, kept the Governour in Restraint, and carried the Matter as if this had been the Declaration of War. This News coming to the Gover∣nour of Lille, he seized upon some French Men he found in his Town by Way of Re∣prisal for those taken at Armentiers; and the Marquess gave Order to the Prince of Ligny who commands the Horse here, to charge any Party he should find making Courses into the Frontiers, and to endeavour to bring away some Prisoners, both as Repri∣sals for those of Armentiers, and to know something of the French Pretensions. After they had kept Armentiers about five Days, they released the Governour, told the People they came not to begin any War, but only at their Invitation to protect the Town; drew off at first one Party of their Men, and
last Friday Morning all the rest: The Go∣vernour of Lille set his French Men at Liber∣ty, and the Prince of Ligny, some that he had taken in a Skirmish of small Parties up∣on the Borders of Hainault, wherein the Mar∣quess tells me, about fifty of the French were killed, and near twenty taken. This I am more particular in relating, because it seems the first Pace of the War, tho' since in a man∣ner disavowed by the French, and indeed it is generally censured as the Effect of a weak and uncertain Council, to begin without any formed Design or Declaration, by siezing so rashly a Place of no Moment, and in the Province of Flanders, where none of their Pretences lie. These three last Days the Motion of their Troops has been through Philiipeville, and the Frontiers of Hainault. The French King was expected last Night at Quesnoy, and to Day at Philippeville. They have begun a Bridge upon the Sambre near a Village called Marsin au Pont, a League up the River from the Place where Charle-Roy stood; the Ground being on the one side Pais de Liege, and on the other, the Spaniards Country; so we expect here they will enter that Country to morrow, but which Way they intend their first Impression is uncer∣tain, the Bridge they make serving a Design either upon Namur, Mons, or Brussels. The Spanish Forces on this Side, lie between this
Place and Marimount, consist of about four thou∣sand Horse and as many Foot, have no formed Design but to attend the Enemy's Motion, and to retire for the Defence of this Place, in Case of the Enemy's marching this Way. The general Belief here of the most Intel∣ligent is, that France has had the Skill or good Luck, de nous endormir, both us and Hol∣land in this great Conjuncture, and by assu∣ring us of Peace upon good Terms with the Dutch, and at the same Time the Dutch of never According with us, nor breaking with Spain to their (the Hollanders) Prejudice, will amuse us both in a slow Treaty till they have made so great an Impression in these Countreys, as will give neither of us the Liberty to take those Measures upon this Affair, to which either of our Interests might lead us: And perhaps find Means to divert the Treaty at last, for coming to any Issue. They say, that delaying our Treaty for the Point of Poleroon, is losing a Dinner for Mustard; and that every Day it is deferred, endangers an irrecoverable Con∣juncture, that Heaven hath given us of ma∣king our Selves Considerable to whom, which way, and to what Degree we please. God send these Reasoners to be deceived, and that we may not be so, at least no more by the same Hands. I am My Lord, Your &c.
To Sir Philip Warwick. Brussels, June 21. S. N. 1667. SIR, I Am very sorry that I must rejoice with You, and condole with all your Friends at the same Time and upon the same Occa∣sion; for tho' the Retreat I hear you have made from Business, must needs be a Trou∣ble and a Loss to us all, yet I know it is an Ease and a Happiness to your self, or else a wise Man as you are, ought not to have chosen it. I will not tell you how great a Contentment I had in knowing my Business lay so much in your Way, because I never intend to pursue more, than what His Maje∣sty pleases to make my Due, and I have e∣ver reckoned both upon your Justice and your Kindness: But I must bear this Disap∣pointment, since you are the Author of it, which is the best Consolation I can think of. In the mean Time I hope you do not intend to retire from the Commerce of your Friends, as well as that of Business; for tho' you should lock your Self up within your Walls of Frog-Pool, I shall ever pretend to have a share in you, there it self, and never omit
any Occasions of assuring you that no Change you can make in your Course of Life, can ever make any in the Resolutions I have ta∣ken of being always SIR, Your &c. To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, July 19. 1667. My Lord, THE Diligence of the Posts or Favour of the Weather, have given me two of Your Lordship's, to acknowledge since my last of the 1st and 5th current, with the good News of the Dutch being beaten off at Harwich; for since we are in a Disease, eve∣ry Fit we pass well over, is so much of Good, and gives hopes of Recovery: I doubt this is not the last, for I hear De Witt is resolved that their Fleet shall not give over Action till the very Ratifications of the Treaty are exchanged: In which he certainly pursues his Interest, that the War may end with so much the more Honour abroad, and Heart at home; for commonly the same Dispositi∣ons between the Parties with which one
War ends, another begins. And tho' this may end in Peace, yet I doubt it will be with so much Unkindness between the Nations, that it will be Wisdom on both Sides to think of another as well as to avoid it. All Discourse here is of the Peace as a Thing undoubted, and every Pacquet I re∣ceive from England confirms me in the Be∣lief that a War abroad is not our present Business till all at home be in better Order; no more than hard Exercise which strength∣ens healthy Bodies, can be proper for those that have a Feaver lurking in the Veins, or a Consumption in the Flesh; for which, Rest, and Order, and Diet are necessary, and perhaps some Medicine too, provided it come from a careful and a skilful Hand. This is all that I shall say upon that Sub∣ject, which I presume has before this, re∣ceived some Resolution by my Lord Ambas∣sadour Coventry's Arrival; for I confess my Stomach is come down, and I should be glad to hear the Peace ended, and our Coasts clear, since it will not be better; but all this while, Multa gemens Ignominiam Plagas{que} superbi Hostis, and I am sure, would not de∣sire to live, unless with hopes of seeing our Selves one Day in another Posture, which God Almighty has made us capable of, when∣ever we please our selves. I am sorry to find the Commerce between
England and Spain so far cut off, as it should seem by Your Lordship's Complaints, of having received none of a Date later than May the 1st, for mine holds yet pretty con∣stant, tho' I suppose visited by the French in their Passage. On Sunday last I received one from Mr. Godolphin of the First currant, where he told me, the Treaties were sent Signed by several Ways into England, and therefore concluded some of them arrived. He seems to doubt still, the Portuguees ac∣cepting their Share in it: which is the like∣lier, because the Marquess tells me, he hears by this Ordinary, that better Terms may be offered them, tho' 'tis pleasant, the Spa∣niard should not have yet resolved to give them the Title, when for ought I know, without it, all their own may be in Danger. His Excellency assures me they are resolved in Spain upon declating a general War both by Sea and Land, and that Way make the French unmask their Designs, that they have sent Order already to sieze upon all that belongs to the French in their Indies, who have a great Share in the Spanish Fleet that is daily expected home; that they have remitted by this Ordinary to his Excellency, a Hundred and Thirty Thousand Crowns, which is the third Remise of about that Sum, arrived since the War began; and that they have negotiated with the Fregoni, or some
such Name, being the ablest Merchants at Amsterdam for Nine Hundred Thousand more; so that the Process seems well ente∣red, and I wish them a good Issue. We have here no Certainty of the Pro∣gress of the French Arms, nor can we say that Courtray is taken, tho' the Report has continued more or less these four Days; but the Marquess would not own any Advice of it on Saturday Night; tho' he spoke ve∣ry despairingly of the Town, but confident∣ly of the Cittadel's holding out at least fif∣teen Days, if those within it did their Duty. His Excellency makes a very different Story of the Baron of Limbeck's Defeat, which was reported here; and assures me that having carried some Relief into Courtray, He re∣treated with only Two Hundred Horse, and meeting a Party of Six Hundred of the French, charged through them, killed the Cap∣tain of their Vantguard with several others, and came off with the Loss only of Fifteen Men. Yesterday Morning the Marquess went to Gant with Intentions of Returning in three or four Days; and hath left the Town so emptied by his Journey as well as the Camp, that besides the Governour, I know not of a Gentleman of my Acquaintance in it. The Baron de l'Isola went this Morning towards Antwerp, and from thence passes to∣wards
Ostend to go over with the Convoy, which I could not persuade him to lose, tho' I endeavoured it upon a Hint in Your Lord∣ship's Letter, and more upon his telling me that you had dissuaded him from coming till the Ratifications of the Treaty were pas∣sed; but he says, he is confident that will be before he can arrive; that he hath sent over all his Papers and Bills of Exchange before Hand, and if he loses this Convoy, knows not when to hope for a secure Pas∣sage. And if His Majesty thinks fit, will rather make a stay at Gravesend, or any other Place near the Water side, till all Jealousie of his Coming be blown over. I give Your Lordship humble Thanks for the Letter I received to make use of Part of the Money in Mr. Shaw's Hands, for Sup∣ply of what was grown due to me; and am, I am sure, at all Times, more troubled to ask it, than pleased to receive it. I was much more sensibly obliged, by the Part you was pleased to give me of the good For∣tune arrived to your Family, by it's In∣crease, and my Lady's Safety; and will as∣sure Your Lordship you do me but Justice, to believe I am concerned in all that hap∣pens to you, and more particularly upon this Occasion, of which I have made very constant Inquiries, tho' without Your Lord∣ship's Trouble. I give you El para bien with
all the Joy that can be, and the Presages of many more such Adventures; and know, my Lady began with her own Sex for no other Reason, but because the War was en∣ded. My own particular Satisfaction in it is, that my Family may continue their Ser∣vices to Your Lordship's, and that way make up, what I shall fall short in the Expres∣sions of that Passion and Truth, wherewith I am My Lord. Your &c. To my Lord Lise. Brussels, Aug. — 1667. My Lord, I Received lately the Honour of one from Your Lordship, which after all Com∣plaints of Slowness and Dulness had enough to bear it out, tho' it had been much bet∣ter address'd, but needed nothing, where it was, besides being yours. In my present Station, I want no Letters of Business or News, which makes those that bring me Marks of my Friends Remembrance, or Touches at their present Thoughts and En∣tertainments,
taste much better, than any thing can do, that is common Fare. I agree very much with Your Lordship, in being little satisfied, by the Witts Excuse, of Employing none upon Relations, as they do in France; and doubt much, it is the same Temper and course of Thoughts a∣mong us, that makes us neither act Things worth Relating, nor relate Things worth the Reading. Whilst making some of the Com∣pany laugh and others ridiculous, is the Game in Vogue, I fear we shall hardly suc∣ceed at any other, and am sorry, our Cour∣tiers should content themselves, with such Victories as those. I would have been glad to have seen Mr. Cowley, before he died, ce∣lebrate Captain Douglas his Death, who stood and burnt in one of our Ships at Chat∣ham when his Soldiers left him, because it should never be said, a Douglas quitted his Post without Order; whether it be wise in Men to do such Actions or no, I am sure it is so in States, to honour them; and if they can, to turn the Vein of Wits, to raise up the Esteem of some Qualities, above their real Value, rather than bring every Thing to Burlesque, which if it be allowed at all, should be so only to wise Men in their Clo∣sets, and not to Witts, in their common Mirth and Company. But I leave them to be reformed by great Men's Examples and
Humours, and know very well, 'tis Folly for a private Man to touch them, which does but bring them like Wasps about ones Ears. However, I cannot but bewail the Transitoriness of their Fame, as well as other Mens, when I hear, Mr. Waller is turned to Burlesque among them, while he is alive, which never hapned to old Poets, till many Ages after their Death; and tho' I never knew him enough to Adore him, as many have done, and easily believe he may be, as Your Lordship says, enough out of Fashion, yet I am apt to think some of the old cut∣work Bands, were of as fine Thread, and as well wrought, as any of our new Points; and at least, that all the Wit, he and his Company spent, in heightning Love and Friendship, was better employ'd; than what is laid out so prodigally, by the modern Wits, in the Mockery of all sorts of Religion and Government. I know not how Your Lordship's Letter has engaged me in this kind of Discourses; but I know very well you will advise me after it, to keep my Residency here as long as I can, foretelling me what Success I am like to have among our Courtiers if I come over. The best on't is, my Heart is set so much upon my little Corner at Sheen, that while I keep that, no other Disappointments will be very sensible to me; and because my
Wife tells me She is so bold, as to enter into Talk of enlarging our Dominions there, I am contriving here this Summer, how a Suc∣cession of Cherries may be compass'd from May till Michaelmas, and how the Riches of Sheen Vines may be improved, by half a do∣zen Sorts which are not yet known there, and which I think much beyond any that are. I should be very glad to come and plant them my Self this next Season, but know not yet how those Thoughts will hit: Tho' I design to stay but a Month in Eng∣land, yet they are here very unwilling I should stir, as all People in Adversity are jealous of being forsaken; and His Majesty is not willing to give them any Discourage∣ment whether he gives them any Assistance or no. But if they end the Campagne with any good Fortune, they will be better hu∣moured in that as well as all other Points; and it seems not a very unlikely thing, the French having done nothing in six Months past but harass their Army, and being be∣fore Lille engaged in a Siege, which may ve∣ry well break the Course of their Success: They have not yet made the least Advance upon any of their Out-works, but been bea∣ten off with much Loss in all their Assaults; and if that King's Design be to bring his No∣bility as low as he has done his People, he is in a good way, and may very well leave,
most of the brave among them in their Tren∣ches there. I had not need write often at this Length, nor make Your Lordship any new Professions of my being My Lord, Your &c. To my Brother Sir John Temple. Brussels, Octob. 10. S. N. 1667. Dear Brother, HAving written so many and long Let∣ters to my Father, I resolved this should be to you, tho' upon a Subject where∣in he has been very desirous to be informed; which was more than I could pretend to, from any Notices of my own; having been Young and very New in Business, when I was first employ'd upon the Munster Treaty. All I knew of the Grounds or Occasions of our late War with Holland, was, that in all common Conversation, I found both the Court and the Parliament in general, very sharp upon it; complaining of the Dutch In∣solencies, of the great Disadvantages they had brought upon our Trade in general, and
the particular Injuries of their East-India Company towards Ours; And it was not easie to think any should better understand the Honour of the Crown than our Court; or the Interests of the Nation, than the House of Commons. One Thing I confess, gave me some Reflections, which was, to observe that three of my Father's greatest Friends, and Persons that I most esteemed upon ma∣ny Accounts, were violently against the Councils of this War; which were my Lords of Northumberland, of Leicester, and Sir Ro∣bert Long; tho' two of them were of the Pri∣vy Council, and the third in a great Office, and ever bred up in Court. For my own Part, when I entred into that Affair, all I knew was, that we were actually in a War, and that the best we could do, was to get out of it either by Success and Victories, or by a fair and reasonable Peace, which I be∣lieved our Treaty with Munster would make Way for; and I found some of our Ministers had no other End by it, having given over the Thoughts of any great Advantages we would find by pursuing the War; how that succeeded, and how it ended, You all know there, as well as I do here. Upon Conclusion of the Peace at Breda, my Sister took a very strong Fancy to a Jour∣ney into Holland, to see a Countrey She had heard so much of; and I was willing to give
her that Satisfaction, after the melancholy Sence we have had here ever since the French Invasion of this Countrey. We went Incog∣nito, with only her Woman, a Valet de Chambre, and a Page out of Livery, who all spoke Dutch. I leave it to her to give you an Account of what Entertainments she met with there, which she was much pleased with, especially those of the Indian Houses: For me, who had seen enough of it in my younger Travels, I found nothing new but the Stadt-House at Amsterdam, which tho' a great Fabrick, yet answered not the Ex∣pectation I had, from so much Time, and so vast Expence as had been employed to raise it: Which put me in mind of what the Cavaliero Bernini said of the Louvre, when he was sent for, to take a View of it; that it was Una granpiccola Cosa. The chief Plea∣sure I had in my Journey was, to observe the strange Freedom that all Men took in Boats and Inns, and all other common Pla∣ces, of talking openly whatever they thought upon all the publick Affairs, both of their own State and their Neighbours: And this I had the Advantage of finding more by be∣ing Incognito; and think it the greatest Piece of the Liberty that Countrey so much va∣lues; the Government being otherwise as severe, and the Taxes as hard, as among any of their Neighbours.
At our Return from Amsterdam, we lay two Nights at the Hague, where I made a Vi∣sit to Monsieur de Witt: I told him who I was; but, that having pass'd unknown through the Countrey, to all but himself a I desired I might do so still: I told him, m only Business was, to see the Things most considerable in the Countrey, and thought I should lose my Credit, if I left it without seeing him: He took my Complement very well, and returned it, by saying he had received a Character of me to my Advan∣tage both from Munster and Brussels, and was very glad to be acquainted with me at a Time when both our Nations were grown Friends, and had equal Reason to look a∣bout us, upon what had lately happened in Flanders, he seemed much to regret the late unhappy Quarrel between us, which had made Way for this new War among our Neighbours. He laid the Fault of ours wholly upon Sir George Downing, who ha∣ving been Envoy from Cromwel at a Time when the States were forced to observe good Measures with him; Sir George had made use of that Disposition, to get a great deal of Money from the East-India Company, who were willing to bribe his good Offices, in some Disputes that remained between the two Companies: That having been conti∣nued in the same Employment by the King,
he thought to drive the same Trade; but finding the Company more stanch, he had taken upon him, to pursue a Dispute about the old Pretensions, upon the Loss of the Bonadventure, as an Affair of State between the Nations, whereas it was left by our Treaties, to be pursued only as a Process between the Parties. That in their Treaty with Cromwel, all Pretensions on both Sides were cut off, but with this Clause; Liceat autem (to such as were concerned in that Affair of the Bonadventvre) Litem inceptam prosequi. That this Treaty having been made the Model of that, concluded with His Majesty soon after His Restoration, that Clause continued still in the New Treaty; and the Process which had been begun long before Cromwel's Treaty, before the Magistrates of Amsterdam, had still gone on after their Treaty with the King, according to the true Intention of that Clause. That Mr. Cary. who was employd to pursue it in the Name of Courtin's Executors, had brought it very near a Composition, deman∣ding Forty Thousand Pounds for all Preten∣sions, and the Dutch offering Thirty. That he, (Monsieur de Witt) to end this Affair, had appointed a Meeting with Mr. Cary, who had since confess'd to his Friends, that he was resolved to end it at that Meeting, and rather to take the Dutch Offer, than let
the Suit run on; but that very Morning Sir George Downing sent for him, told him it was a Matter of State between the two Nations, and not only a Concern of pri∣vate Men; and therefore absolutely forbid him, to go on with any Treaty about it, otherwise than by his Communication and Consent: That he would put in a Memo∣rial to the States upon it, and instead of For∣ty Thousand Pounds which he demanded, would undertake to get him Fourscore, and that he was sure the Dutch would give a great deal more, rather than venture a Quar∣rel with His Majesty. This Course he pursued, made extrava∣gant Demands, and with great Insolence; made the same Representations to our Court, and possess'd some of the Ministers that he would get great Sums of Money, both for His Majesty and them, if they would suf∣fer him to Treat this Affair after his own Manner; for he was sure the Dutch would go very far in that Kind, if they saw there was no other Way to avoid a War with Eng∣land. That Monsieur de Witt for his Part thought they were a free State no longer, if they should yield a Point, that they not only knew we had no Ground for, but were sure we knew it as well as they; and that what∣ever the States should give upon this Occa∣sion,
might be demanded at any Time by our Court upon any other, since none could have less Pretence. This was all the Account he thought fit at least to give me of this War: But other politick Reasoners among the Dutch preten∣ded to give several others. Some said, the Duke's military Genius, made him desirous to enter upon some Action abroad, and be at the Head of a great Fleet against a State he never had been a Friend to: That the Duke of Albermarle had long had a Peek to their Countrey, upon some Usage he resen∣ted during his being an Officer there: That he had a very mean Opinion of their Fleets, as well as their other Forces, since the Suc∣cesses of the English in the first War during the Usurper's Time. That some of the Mi∣nisters were possest with an Opinion of get∣ting Money, by only threatning a War, with∣out Intention of seeing it brought to Effect, and had let it run on so far, till it was too lare to go back. Some others attribute Sir Thomas Clifford's Violence in the House of Commons, and Practices with our East-In∣dia Company, to a deeper Design; and would have the Matter of Religion concer∣ned in the Quarrel, as their Pamphlets still endeavoured during the War; and these will not believe that when all Christendome was at Peace, such a War could be begun, merely
upon a Chicane about the Loss of a Ship or Two so many Years since. There are o∣thers that lay the War upon the Conduct of France, by which they say, we were engaged in it: That the present King was resolved to pursue the old Scheme laid by Cardinal Richlieu, of extending the Bounds of France to the Rhine, for which Ends the Conquest of Lorrain and Flanders was to be first atchie∣ved: That the Purchase of Dunkirk from us was so violently pursued for this End, with∣out which they could not well begin a War upon Flanders. That after this they had endeavoured to engage the present Ministry in Holland, to renew the Measures once ta∣ken in Cardinal Richlieu's Time, for dividing Flanders between France and Holland: But not succeeding in it, they had turned all their Intrigues to engage us in a War, which might make Room for their Invasion of Flanders, whilst the two Neighbours most concerned in it's Defence, should be deep in a Quarrel between themselves: That they made both Parties believe they would assist them if there were Occasion; and would certainly have done it: That as they took Part with Holland upon our first Successes at Sea, and the Bishop of Munster's Treaty, so, if the Successes had been great on the Dutch Side, they would have assisted us in Order to prolong the War.
These are Discourses current in Holland upon this Subject; and I had rather give you those of others upon it, than any of my own. The Duke of Ormond will be able to judge, whether any of these Dutch Reaso∣nings are true, or which are most probable. For my part, I can only say, that however the War began, I am very glad 'tis ended; but sorry it has made Way for another, which if it lasts any time, is like to involve us, and perhaps all the rest of the Neighbours, either in a new War, or in new Dangers. For if the French shall carry Flanders, as they very well may in another Campania, by the Weakness and Disorders in the Government here; the Dutch are sensible that they must fall to be a maritime Province to France, up∣on the best Terms they can. The Empire will expect to see them soon at the Rhine, and thereby Masters of four Electors; and what a Condition England will be left in by such an Accession of maritime Forces, as well as Provinces, to such a Power as France is already, is but too easie, and too melancho∣ly a Reflection. The Dutch are much exas∣perated at this Invasion of Flanders, both as dangerous, and as scornful, to them in parti∣cular; for they say that France, till the very Time of their March, gave constant Assu∣rances to the States, both by the French Am∣bassadour here, and by their Ambassadour
at Paris, that they would not invade Flan∣ders without first taking their Measures upon it, with the States themselves. I find, our Court are as much provoked on t'other side, not only upon this new Danger, but also upon the French having declared War against Us in Favour of Holland, without the least Pretence of Injury or other Occasion; so that if we both understood, or trusted one ano∣ther, 'tis likely we should be both of a Mind in this Matter; but after such a sharp War as hath been for two Years between us, and such a snarling Peace as that at Breda; I do not well see how this can happen before it be too late; and so must leave these Con∣templations to such as are in the Ministry, both in England and Holland, as well as Spain and the Empire, to take such Measures as are wise and necessary in such a Conjun∣cture, which is perhaps the most important, that has been a great while in Christendome, and may have Consequences that none alive will see the End of. 'Tis time I am sure, that you should see an End of this long Let∣ter, and come to the Assurances of my being ever SIR, Your &c.
To Sir George Savil. Brussels, Dec. 9th. S.N. 1667. SIR, BEcause my Wife assures me I am not wholly lost in your Favour and Me∣mory, I will not run any further Venture of forfeiting my Title for want of laying Claim to it, but make use of the smallest Occasion rather than none, in a Matter wherein I am so much, and so justly con∣cerned. This Place never was in worse Posture to furnish either a War or a Gazette than at this Time; for the Troops are all mouldring in their Winter Quarters; and as the greatest Calms ordinarily succeed the greatest Storms; so since the Heat of News and Occurren∣ces here during the late Campagne, I have hardly known a Place, where less of both were stirring; Action and Invention seem∣ing to have ended together. There is in∣deed a new Difference between the two Crowns arisen this Winter; which is, that France talks of Peace, but prepares for War; and Spain talks of War, but prepares hither∣to as if they were sure of Peace: They say
at present they are off that with Portugal, which is the only Thing yet in Sight that can make the other necessary to them. Because my Wife tells me you were con∣tent with the last Papers I sent of the Roman News; I take Occasion to continue it by the inclosed, though there be seldom any Thing in it worth considering at this Di∣stance; unless it be the Style; and the Qui∣et of that Scene, which like the upper Regi∣on, has no Share in the Storms of that be∣low. And besides, as Men have more Cu∣riosity to enquire how a great Man sleeps, than what a mean Man does all day long; so the very Rest and Idleness of that Roman Court, seems among the Discoursers more worth knowing, than the busie Motions of many small ones in this Northern Continent, who yet at this Time pretend to be conside∣red, and to make a Noise. This is all I can say to excuse my Inclo∣sure of such Papers; unless it be, that, to tell a plain Truth, I was very glad of the Occasion to assure you, that I am ever with very much Passion, as well as with much Reason SIR, Your most Faithful humble Servant.
The Triple Alliance was made in January, 1668. To Sir John Temple. London, Jan. 2d S. N. 1668. SIR, YOu will wonder to see a Letter from this Place, my last having been from Brussels, without any thoughts of such a Jour∣ney: And because my Stay here is like to be very short, and my Time extremely filled, I take the first Hour I can find, to give you some Account of this Adventure. Soon after my last, an Express came to me from His Majesty, commanding me to come immediately into England, with all the Speed I could possibly make, but to take the Hague in my Way, and there upon the Credit of a Visit I made Monsieur de Witt last September, and which passed very well between us; to make him another, and let him know, His Majesty had commanded me to do so on Purpose, to inform my self of the Opinions he had, concerning the French late Invasion in Flanders, their great Success there,
and the Appearances of so much greater this ensuing Spring; the Thoughts he had of what was the true Interest of His Majesty, the States, and the rest of Christendome upon this Occasion: That His Majesty by know∣ing his Mind should believe he knew a great deal of that of the States, and thought He might thereby be enabled to take such Measures, as might be necessary for him in this Conjuncture. I obey'd this Summons, spoke with Mon∣sieur de Witt, entred into great Confidences with him, made Report of all to His Maje∣sty at my Arrival here; gave Monsieur de Witt the Character I think he deserves, of a very able and faithful Minister to his State, and I thought, a sincere Dealer, very diffe∣rent from what Sir George Downing had gi∣ven of him at Court, who would have him pass for such another as himself, but only a Craftier Man in the Trade than he. Upon all this, His Majesty came last Night to a Resolution of the greatest Impor∣tance, which has yet passed I think here, in any foreign Affair, and begun the New Year, I hope with a good Presage, and in which the new Ministry, particularly My Lord Keeper and My Lord Arlington have had a very great Part: Mine will be to return immediately upon it into Holland, where if it please God I arrive and succeed, I expect
great deal of Satisfaction by my Errand, and much the greater by knowing that you will have a great deal in it too, as in an Affair, I remember to be so agreeable with what have been always your Opinions. The Season of the Year is bad, and the Weather ill, and yet my Sister has been so kind, as to come with me hither from Brus∣sels, and to resolve to return with me at this short Warning to the Hague, which will be a great Ease to me as well as Satisfaction, and by freeing me from all domestick Cares, leave me the more Liberty for those of my Business, which I foresee, will be enough to take up a better Head than mine. My Wife and Children continue here, till I see where my wandring Planet is like to fix; but my Brother Harry resolves to be of the Party, and take this Occasion of seeing Hol∣land, and what is like to pass in the World upon this great Conjuncture. I am called away, and left Time only to add the con∣stant Professions of that Duty, wherewith I am, and shall be ever, SIR, Your &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Jan. 24. S. N 1668. My Lord, UPon last Friday at Night, I gave Your Lordship the Account, of what Ad∣vance I had then made in my Negotiation, and of the Point where it was then arrested, with Desires of His Majesty's Pleasure; where∣upon having spent that whole Day in De∣bates, I had little Time left for that Letter, but intended to make some Amends for the Haste of it, within two Days by a Dispatch with the Yatcht, and tho' delayed a little longer, will not I hope be more unwelcome by bringing Your Lordship a fuller and final Account, which may be allowed to surprize you a little there, since it is look'd upon as a Miracle here, not only by those that hear it, but even by the Commissioners them∣selves, who have had the whole Transaction of it, which I shall now acquaint Your Lord∣ship with. Upon my two first Conferences with Mon∣sieur de Witt, which were the Tuesday and Wednesday; I found him much satisfied with His Majesty's Resolution concerning our
Neighbours; but of the Opinion, that the Condition of forcing Spain, was necessary to our common End, and to clear the Means towards it, from all Accidents that might a∣rise. For the Defensive League, he was of his former Opinion, that it should be negoti∣ated between us; but, upon the Project offe∣red His Majesty at Schevelin, by which all Matter of Commerce might be so adjusted, as to leave no Seeds of any new Quarrels between the Nations. After two very long Conferences upon these Points, we ended with some Diffe∣rence, upon the Necessity of concluding both Parts of my Projects at the same Time; but for the rest, with great Confidence and Sa∣tisfaction, in one anothers sincere and frank Way of Treating, since the first Overtures be∣tween us. The first Time I saw him, he told me I came upon a Day he should always esteem very happy, both in respect of His Maje∣sty's Resolutions which I brought, and of those the States had taken, about the Dispo∣sal of the chief Commands in their Army, by making Prince Maurice, and Monsieur Wurtz, Camp-Masters-General, and the Prince of Tarante, and Rhingrave, Generals of the Horse, each to command in Absence of the other: He told me all the Detail of that Disposition, but the rest I remember not
well. I laid hold on this Occasion (as in∣deed I thought was necessary) to say what His Majesty gave me Order concerning the Prince of Orange, which he took very well, and said, was very obliging to the States; that for his own Part, he never failed to see the Prince once or twice a Week, and grew to have a particular Affection for him, and would tell me plainly, that the States de∣signed the Captain-generalship of all the Forces for him, so soon as by his Age he grew capable of it. The next Day was my Audience, which passed with all the Respect that could be gi∣ven His Majesty's Character; and the next Morning began my Conference with the Eight Commissioners of secret Affairs; I ex∣posed my Powers, and saw theirs, In pursuit whereof, I offered them the Project of the defensive League, as that which was to be the Foundation of all further Negotiations, and without which, perhaps neither of us should be very forward, to speak our Minds with Confidence and Freedome, in what con∣cerned our Neighbours, being likely therein to shock so great Powers abroad: I told them, for the rest, His Majesty having re∣solved as far as he could in Honour, to comply with the Sense of the States, in the Offices of Mediation between the two Crowns; I was first to expect from them the
Knowledge of the States Resolution, in Case they were already agreed. I took this Course in my first Proposals, because I found here, that the Provinces were not yet resolved upon theirs, five of them only having fallen upon that of Monsieur de Witt; but Zealand being of Opinion to agrre with France for dividing Flanders; and U∣trecht, for suffering France only to retain the last Years Conquest, by way of Compromis, till their Pretensions were adjudged before competent Arbiters, to be agreed by the two Crowns, or by the joint Mediators: And I was in hopes, that knowing His Majesty's Resolutions to join with them, before they were agreed among themselves; it might pro∣duce some Councils among them, a little more favourable to Flanders, and consequent∣ly more honourable to his Majesty. After my Proposals, Monsieur de Witt was by the rest of the Commissioners desired to speak for them all in the Conduct of our Conferences; who after a Preamble of the usual Forms and Complements, upon His Majesty's happy Dispositions, to enter into a nearer Alliance with the State upon the men∣tioned Points; declared the same Resolution in the States, and allowing our Confidence by a defensive League for the Basis of the rest, said, the States were very willing de faire in∣fuser les Clauses pour la souretè commune dans les
Articles de la Mediation; and was large upon this Argument, that the last, being of very pressing Haste as well as Necessity, and they having already Order from their Provinces to proceed upon it, they could not have the same Powers upon the Defensive, being a new Matter, under six Weeks or two Months Time, but as soon as they received them, would proceed to give their Ambassadour in England Powers to fall upon that Treaty, which must for a Basis, have at the same time an Adjustment of Matters of Commerce for his forementioned Reasons. I thought fit to cut this Matter short, and told them directly, I had no Orders to pro∣ceed upon any other Points, but in Conse∣quence or Conjunction of the defensive League; in which I thought His Majesty had all the Reason that could be, both be∣cause he would not venture a War's ending in Flanders to begin upon England, and on the other side knew, the States whose Dan∣ger was nearer, would never be capable of taking any vigorous Resolutions in their Neighbours Affairs, till they were secure at home by His Majesty's Defence. That His Majesty thought the most gene∣rous and friendly Advance that could be, was made on his Side by His Proposition, being Himself so much more out of Danger than they were, and so much courted to a
Conjunction with France to their Prejudice, as well as that of Flanders; that they had not made a Difficulty of such Alliances with Princes, who had lately desmelèes with them as well as His Majesty; and that, God be thanked, His Majesty was not in Condition to have such an Offer refused by any Prince or State of Christendom. These were the Sum of our Discourses, tho' very long, and such as occasioned the Com∣missioners to withdraw thrice and consult to∣gether, tho' nothing was resolved, but that Monsieur de Witt and Monsieur Isbrant should spend the Afternoon with me at my Lodg∣ing, to endeavour the adjusting of Circum∣stances between us, since we seemed to agree in Substance. That Conference ended, as I gave your Lordship Notice that Evening; upon the Point, that instead of the Project of Scheve∣lin, or any new Adjustment concerning Ma∣rine Affairs; the States would proceed upon His Majesty's Project of a Defensive League; provided the provisional Articles in the Bre∣da Treaty, might be inserted and perpetua∣ted in this; and thereupon we should expect His Majesty's Answer to what I should write that Night, The next being Saturday Morning, I desi∣red another Conference with my two Com∣missioners, but could not have it till the Af∣ternoon,
they being to report that Mor∣ning to the States what had passed the Eve∣ning before. At our Meeting Afternoon, they told me their Communication of all to the States; and their Lordships Resolution upon them; that it was necessary the Arti∣cles provisional should be inserted in the Treaty; so as I began to doubt a Stop of all till His Majesty's Answer, which subjected all to Uncertainties; I knew, the French Ambassadour was grown into very ill Hu∣mour upon my Arrival, and fallen into Com∣plaints and Expostulations with several of the States; and the more, because He could not see Monsieur de Witt, from my coming over till that Time, tho' he had often press'd it, and had an Hour given him the next Day, Monsieur de Witt having promised to see him, as he went to Church after Noon: Upon this I knew likewise, he had dispatch'd a Courier to Paris, which I thought would make no Delay, and therefore resolved to fall upon all the Instances and Expedients I could, to draw up a sudden Conclusion. I told them I desired it extremely, before I could hear again out of England, because I had left Monsieur Ruvigny very busie at my coming away, and not unbefriended; that I feared the same Artifices of France to disturb us here, and perhaps Monsieur D'Estrades might at his next Meeting, endeavour to in∣fuse
some Jealousies into them, by the Rela∣tion of what had passed between Your Lord∣ship and Monsieur Ruvigny, three or four Days after the Date of my first Instructions: Upon which I told them frankly (as His Majesty gave me Leave) what had passed in that Affair. Monsieur de Witt asked me whe∣ther I could shew him the Paper drawn up between you; and knowing I had it not, de∣sired earnestly I would procure it him; assu∣ring me no Use should be made of it, but by joint Consent; but saying, nothing would serve so far to justifie them, in Case of a Breach, growing necessary between them and France: I promised to write to Your Lord∣ship about it, which I desire you will please to take Notice of. I told Monsieur de Witt what Confidence I had given His Majesty of his sincere Pro∣ceedings, and how I had been supported by Your Lordship in those Suggestions, against the Opinion of some other great Men: What Advantage these would take, if they saw our whole Negotiation was stop'd upon a Thing that looked like a Chicanerie; since Articles provisional till new Agreements, were in Ef∣fect as strong as perpetual, which might it self be changed by new Agreements: That this would be esteemed an Artifice of his, es∣pecially since he had declared upon my ask∣ing him, that it was his own Opinion, (and
that he would tell the States so if they de∣manded it) not to conclude without Inserti∣on of those Articles, which yet he could not deny to be of present Force; for that they allowed, but seemed to doubt, that refer∣ring in the Treaty of Breda to a new Trea∣ty, they would be invalidated, if a new Treaty should pass without their Confirma∣tion. I found Monsieur Isbrant was content with my Reasons, and said he would undertake his Province should be so, but Monsieur de Witt said, Holland and Zealand would not. I told them at last that I was sure, the States would not think fit, to lose the Effect of the League proposed, upon such a Point as this, and that they intended only to have the Ad∣vantage of seeing His Majesty's Resolution, in Answer to my Letter before they conclu∣ded, with Resolutions however, that this should not hinder at last; that I foresaw ma∣ny Things might arise in ten Days time, to break all our good Intentions, and some more than I had told them, or could at present; that if they knew me, and how far I was to be trusted where I gave my Word, I would propose an Expedient to them; but being so new among them, I thought it was to no Purpose: There I paused. They desired me I would propose however; and so I did; which was, that we should proceed to draw
up the whole Project, and Sign as soon as was possible, and that in Case I afterwards received His Majesty's Leave, in Answer of my Fridays Letter, to insert those provisional Articles, I would freely declare it to them, and insert them in a separate Article, to be a Part of the Defensive League. They both looked a while one upon another, and after a Pause, Monsieur de Witt gave me his Hand, and after a Compliment upon the Confidence he had taken in my Face, and in the rest of my Dealing since our first Commerce, told me that if I would promise them what I had said, en Homme de bien, they would ask no further Assurance of me, and provided the Treaty of Breda might be confirmed in the Preamble of this, to take away all Scruples of those Articles being of less Force than they were before; for his Part, tho' he could promise nothing what the States would re∣solve; yet he would promise that he and Monsieur Isbrant would use their utmost En∣deavours, to induce them to proceed upon my Proposition: And so we fell immediate∣ly to digest our Project of the whole Treaty; For I made no Difficulty of the Confirmati∣on proposed, knowing that new Treaties use to begin by Confirmation of the old. I am the larger in this Relation, that His Majesty may know, upon what Reasons I engaged my Word to them in this Point,
and thereupon may give me Leave without more Circumstances to be true to it, in Case His Majesty's Pleasure in the Point be dis∣patch'd away to me, upon the Receipt of my former Letter. After this Difficulty well evaded, we found none but in this Expression [In Case our Persuasions to Spain should not prevail, and we should come á la Force & á la Constrainte] which I moderated at first by the Words [aux moyens plus durs] and afterwards [aux moyens plus efficaces] For we drew it up first in French: The other Additions or Enlargements I dare presume, His Majesty will not be displeased with, no more than that Article about Por∣tugal, tho' I had no Instruction in it. If I have failed in enlarging upon very short and hasty Instructions, I most humbly beg His Majesty's Pardon, because I am sure I kept my Self as close as was possible, to what I apprehended to be His Majesty's Sense upon the whole, and every Part. That Evening being Saturday, or rather that Night and Sunday Morning, we agreed upon the Project in French, and gave Order for the translating of it into Latin, which was done, and perused by me, and agreed to be∣tween Twelve and One that Night, and en∣grossed by Eleven next Morning being Mun∣day, and at a Meeting with the Commissio∣ners, jointly was Signed and Sealed, and
mutually delivered between two and three that Afternoon, after that, Time spent in comparing the Instruments, and adjusting the Sums, computed as the Value of the se∣veral Aids. After Sealing, we all embraced with much Kindness, and Applause of my saying upon that Occasion, A Breda comme Amis, icy comme Frers; and Monsieur de Witt made me a most obliging Compliment, of having the Honour which never any other Minister had before me, of drawing the States to a Reso∣lution and Conclusion in five Days, up∣on a Matter of the greatest Importance, and a Secours of the greatest Expence they had ever engaged in; and all directly against the Nature of their Constitutions, which enjoi∣ned them Recourse to their Provinces upon all such Occasions, and used to draw out all common Deliberations to Months Delays; and added upon it, that now it was done, it look'd like a Miracle. I must add three Words to do him Right in Return of his Compliment; that I found him as plain, as direct, and square in the Course of this Business, as any Man could be; tho' often stiff in Points, where he thought any Advantage could accrue to his Coun∣trey; and have all the Reason in the World, to be satisfied with him, and for his Industry no Man had ever more: I am sure, for these
five Days at least, neither of us spent many idle Hours, neither Day nor Night. After the Conclusion, I received Yester∣day the Visits of all the publick Ministers in Town, except the Ambassadors, between whom, and Envoys Extraordinary, some Difficulties were arisen (they say, here first begun by Sir George Downing) which have in a manner spoiled all Commerce. None of the other failed to rejoice with me upon the Conclusion of my Business, and to ex∣press their Adoring His Majesty's Resoluti∣ons, which in this Conjuncture, they say, have given new Life to all the Courts of Chri∣stendom, whose Councils were before, in the greatest Perplexities and Disorder that could be. They say His Majesty will have the sole Honour, of giving either Peace to Chri∣stendom, or a Ballance to the Wars; and has shewn, that all must follow what he gives a Head to. Much more of this Kind I hear from all Hands, and have no Reason to doubt their Meaning what they say. Thus far I have given Your Lordship the smooth Side only of this Conclusion, and now you must receive the rough; for ha∣ving concerted with the Commissioners, that Monsieur de Witt and I should give Part of our Treaty (all but the separate Articles) to the French and Spanish Ambassadours; the first we performed this Afternoon, the last we intend to morrow Morning.
The French Ambassadour had been much surprised with our Conclusion: For upon our first Conference with the Commissioners, he had said, Tout cela s'en ira en Fumèe, & que le Roy son Maitre s'eu mocqueroit. The Day before our Signing, being told, we advan∣ced very fast, he replied; Et bien, d'icy á six semaines nous en parlerons, relying upon the Forms of the State, to run the Circle of their Towns. Upon our giving him Part of the whole Business, he replied coldly, that he doubt∣ed, we had not taken a right Way to our End; that the Fourth Article of the Second Instrument, was not in Terms very proper to be digested by a King of twenty nine Years old, and at the Head of eighty Thou∣sand Men: That if we had joined both to desire his Master to prolong the Offer he had made, of a Cessation of Arms till the Time we propose, and withal, not to move his Arms further in Flanders, tho' Spain should refuse, we might hope to succeed: But if we thought to prescribe him Laws, and force him to Compliance, by Leagues between our Selves, or with Spain, tho' Sueden and the German Princes should join with us; he knew his Master ne flecheroit pas, and that it would come to a War of forty Years. From this he fell a little warmly upon the proceeding of the States, saying, they knew
his Master's Resolutions upon those two Points, neither to prolong the Cessation pro∣posed, beyond the End of March, nor to de∣sist the Pursuit of his Conquests with his own Arms, in Case Spain consented not to his De∣mands within that Term. He said, His Ma∣jesty not being their Ally, might treat and conclude what he pleased, without their Of∣fence; but for the States who were their nea∣rest Ally, to conclude so much to his Ma∣ster's Disrespect at least, and without com∣municating with him the Ambassadour at all during the whole Treaty, he must leave it to his Master to interpret as he thought fit. Monsieur de Witt defended their Cause, and our common Intentions with great Phlegm, but great Steddiness, and told me after he was gone, that this was the least we could expect at first from a Frenchman; and that I should do well however, to give His Majesty an Account of it by the first; that we put our Selves early in Posture, to make good what we have said; and that as to the Time and Degree of our Arming, he would consult with the States, and let me know their Thoughts, to be communicated to His Majesty upon this Occasion. I was in hopes to dispatch this away to morrow Morning, but I shall be hindred till Night, by the Delay of Signing of a sepa∣rate Article with the Count de Dona, where∣by
Place is reserved for Sueden to enter as Principal into this Treaty: For I have gone along in the whole Business since my coming over, with perfect Confidence and Concert with the Count de Dona, upon his assuring me, his Orders were to conform himself to His Majesty's Resolution in what concerns the two Crowns, tho' before he absolutely engages, he expects from the Spaniards by our Intercession, some Supplies for Payment of his Troops, and some other Adjustments with the Emperour, which will be treated between the several Ministers at London un∣der His Majesty's Influence. In what I shall sign upon this Occasion, together with the States, I confess to Your Lordship to go be∣yond my Instructions, but apprehending it to be wholly agreeable to His Majesty's In∣tentions, and extremely advantageous to the common Ends and Affairs; I venture upon this Excess, and humbly beg His Majesty's Pardon if I fail. Your Lordship will be trou∣bled with some Postscript to Morrow, before I dispatch an Express with the Copies to be ratified by His Majesty within a Month, tho' I hope a less Time will be taken, those of Holland having undertaken theirs on fifteen Days. I am &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Jan. 26. S. N. 1668. My Lord, SInce the Close of my long. Dispatch I have every Hour expected the Copies to be transmitted for His Majesty's Ratifica∣tion, without being able to procure them: I cannot but imagine some Occasion of the Delay, may have been a Desire in them here to interpose some Time, between the Re∣ceipt of my last Friday's Letter, and of this Pacquet, to the End His Majesty may in the mean Time, have dispatch'd his Orders to me about the Provisional Articles, tho' I cannot think they should be of such Mo∣ment inserted or omitted, to either Side. I now dispatch the inclosed Copies of the Treaty, in Order to His Majesty's Ratifica∣tion, which is generally desired may be re∣turned as sudden as possibly; the States ha∣ving undertaken to have theirs ready in fif∣teen Days after the Signing, and believing it necessary to proceed jointly and early, to the mutual Councils of Arming, in Case France continues the Dispositions they seem to be in at present of pursuing the War.
My Brother who will deliver this Dis∣patch to Your Lordship, is able to add what particular Circumstances I may have omitted, or Your Lordship shall think fit to enquire from this Place; and what he fails, Count Dona will supply, who is a Person very well worth Your Lordship's par∣ticular Acquaintance and Assistance in his Negotiations, or at least the Forms and Entrances of them; being in all Points our Friend. Yesterday the Spanish Ambassadour recei∣ved the Communication of our Treaties from Monsieur de Witt and me, with some Des∣cants upon the hardship of it, but I believe, Satisfaction at Heart. I have this Day written at large, and with all the Instance imaginable to the Marquess de Castel-Rodrigo to induce his Consent, and immediately up∣on the Ratifications, shall away and pursue that Point at Brussels. I cannot but rejoice in particular with Your Lordship, upon the Success of this Af∣fair, having observed in Your Lordship as well as my Lord Keeper, a constant steddy Bent, in supporting His Majesty's Resoluti∣on, which is here so generally applauded, as the happiest and wisest, that any Prince ever took for Himself or his Neighbours: What in earnest I hear every Hour, and from all Hands of that Kind is endless, and even
extravagant. God of Heaven send His Ma∣jesty's Councils to run on the same Course; and I have nothing left to wish, since I know Your Lordship will continue to esteem me what I am with so great Passion and Truth My Lord, Your &c.
To Sir Orlando Bridgman, Lord Keeper. Hague, Jan. 27. S. N. 1668. My Lord, THo' I know my long Dispatch by this Express to my Lord Arlington, will give Your Lordship your Share of Trouble; yet I could not omit the encharging my Brother with a particular Attendance upon Your Lordship from me, nor accompanying him with these Acknowledgments of Your Lordship's great Favour and good Opinion, even before I had the Honour of being known to you. I will presume I have done nothing since to forfeit them, as I had no∣thing before, to deserve them; and that my late good Fortunes at the Hague, will help to continue what my good Fortunes alone at Brussels began, and my five Days stay at London, served to improve in so great a De∣gree. Yet I will assure Your Lordship if I can make any further Advance by the Re∣sentments of your Favour, by my Desires to deserve it in the Return of my best Ser∣vices, or by the true Honour and Esteem of those Qualities, I have discovered in Your
Lordship, upon so short an Acquaintance; I am very far upon my Way already. But I will leave this Subject in the first Place, to congratulate with you upon ano∣ther; which is the Success of a Council, wherein I observed Your Lordship and my Lord Arlington to have the most steddy Bent, in promoting a Resolution of His Ma∣jesty's, which is on this side the Water, e∣steemed generally the happiest and the wi∣sest, that could ever have been taken by any Prince in such a Conjuncture, and upon Re∣spects not only of his own Affairs, but even those of all Christendom besides. It is not fit for me to tell you much of what I hear of this Kind, or the Applauses given to His Majesty and his Ministers upon this Occa∣sion; to tell you all, I am sure would be endless; but from what I hear, I cannot but raise at least a happy Presage of a New Year, and a new Ministry's running on together, with a Succession of the same Honour and good Fortunes both to His Majesty and his Kingdoms. In the next Place, I will according to your Orders, give Your Lordship an Ac∣count of some Particulars, that fell into this great Transaction, which I thought not fit to trouble my Lord Arlington with, as not perhaps proper, or of Weight enough, for the View of His Majesty or the Foreign
Commmittee, and yet worth the Knowledge or Reflection of some of his Ministers, in Order to the Conduct of His Majesty's Coun∣cils hereafter, both in this and other of his Affairs. I must tell Your Lordship, that in my first Conference with Monsieur de Witt since my Return; I begun with telling him, that he could not but remember, that when I passed this Way last into England, I told him, upon what Points His Majesty desired with the greatest Secrecy that could be, to know his Opinion, and by that to guess at what might be the States, upon the present Conjuncture of Affairs in Flanders; to the End, His Majesty might accordingly take his own Measures. That His Majesty guess'd by the general Carriage and Discour∣ses of the Dutch Ambassadors at London, the States were not willing to see Flanders over∣run by France, but could not find they had any thing positive to say to him upon that Subject: That he had therefore sent me pri∣vately and plainly to tell him his Mind up∣on it, as to a Man of Honour, and who he believed, would make no ill Use of it, and (if he thought fit) to know his Sentiments upon that Affair. That, for His Majesty, he neither thought it for his own Interest nor Safety, nor for that of the States or of Chri∣stendom in general, that Flanders should be
lost; and therefore was resolved to do his ut∣most to preserve it, provided the States were of the same Mind, and that it might be done in Conjunction between them; and to that End, desired to know, whether the States would be content to enter into an Alliance with him, both Defensive between them∣selves, and Offensive against France, for the Preservation of Flanders. That he (Monsieur de Wit) might remember, his Answer to me was; first, much Applause of His Majesty's Resolution, great Acknowledgment of his Confidence towards him by that Communi∣cation, much Assurance that the States would be of the same Mind, as to the Preservation of Flanders, which was their nearest Interest next their own: That he found, both His Majesty and the States had the same Mind as well as Interest in this Matter, but that the Distrusts remaining upon the late Quarrel between them, had kept either of them from beginning to enter frankly upon it. But since His Majesty had pleased to break it to him in a manner so obliging, tho' he could not pretend to tell me his Master's Mind, yet he would his own: which was, that the Defence of Flanders was absolutely necessary, but that it ought to be tryed first, rather by a joint Mediation of a Peace between the two Crowns, than by a Declaration of War; but that if the first would not serve, it ought to
come to the other. That I knew, France had already offered a Peace to the Offies made by the States upon an Alternative at the Choice of the Spaniards; that he thought our Mediation ought to be offered to both Crowns upon that Foot, to induce France to make good their own Offer, and Spain to accept it. And that to this Purpose, he thought it very necessary to make a strict Alliance betweeen His Majesty and the States. That for making an Offensive Alliance, it could not be; for it was a Maxim obser∣ved by this State, never to make any, at least when they were in Peace; that for Defensive Leagues, they had them with many Princes, and he believed would be ready to enter in∣to one with His Majesty; and tho' he could not at all answer, what would be the Mind of the States upon these Points, yet he had told me his; and would add, that he was not usually mistaken in theirs, and that he would at least use all his Endeavours to bring the States to such Opinions and Re∣solutions. When I had said this, and observed by his Action and Face, that he assented to this Recital, of all that had passed between us; I ask'd him whether this was all right, that I might know, whether I had mistaken no∣thing in representing His Majesty's Mean∣ing
to him, nor his to His Majesty. He an∣swered, that it was all right, and that he very well remembred it, and much commen∣ded a Method of proceeding so exact and sin∣cere, by an Endeavour to avoid all Mistakes between us. I then told him, that I had upon my Ar∣rival in England, represented all as faithfully to His Majesty as I had done to him; and that upon it. His Majesty had taken so much Confidence in his (Monsieur de Witt's) Opinion and Judgment, as well as in his Credit with the States, that he had taken a sudden and firm Resolution upon it; first, to join with the States in the Offer of a Media∣tion between the two Crowns, and upon such Terms, as they and I should agree, but with a Desire, that they might be as advan∣tageous as the States could be induced to for the Preservation of Flanders, and Recovery of such Places as should be most necessary to it: In the next Place, to conclude a Treaty, the strongest that could be between us, for obli∣ging France to accept the Peace upon those Terms, and in the mean time for putting a stop to the Course of their Arms in Flanders. But that His Majesty thought it necessary to begin all this. with a strict League between him and the States, for their own mutual De∣fence, and to this Purpose had sent me over as his Envoy to the States with full Powers,
and the Draught of a Defensive League be∣tween us; but refers the rest for what tou∣ched Flanders, to what the States and I should agree. Monsieur de Witt received this Discourse with a Countenance pleased, but yet as I mark'd, something surprized, and as if he expected not a Return from His Majesty so sudden and so resolute. He said, that the States would be much pleased with the Ho∣nour His Majesty did them, and the Over∣ture he made them; that I should chuse my Time whenever I desired it, for my Audi∣ence; and would pass the Forms of deman∣ding it from the President of the Week: That he was still confident the States would enter with His Majesty into the Mediation, tho' France gave them Hopes of succeeding by their own: That the Provinces differed in Opinion upon what Terms the Peace should be made: That Utrecht was so bold as to think nothing but Justice ought to be consi∣dered in the Case; that all that France had conquered, should be restored to Spain, and their Pretensions be referred to Judgment or Arbitrage. But Holland with most of the other Provinces, were of another Mind, and considering their own present Condition, as well as that of France, thought it best, to keep the French to their own Offer; but he believed would come to Means of more Force,
if France should recede from what they them∣selves had advanced to the States. That, for the Defensive League between us, he did not know whether the late Sore were yet fit for such an Application, but would try the Mind of the States. That he doubted, they would think it like to prove too sudden a Change of all their Interests, and that which would absolutely break them off, from so old and constant a Friend as France, to relie wholly upon so new, and so uncertain a Friend, as England had pved. I told him, that the doing what he said, would be the Effect of any Treaties of this Nature between us, let them be as tenderly handled and composed as we could: That France would take it as ill of us of them, to be stopp'd in the remaining Conquest of Flanders, as to the forced out of all they had already gained: That he knew very well, it had been long their Design at any Price, to possess themselves of the Spanish Nether∣lands; and he knew as well, that it was their Interest to do so, considering the Advanta∣ges it would give them over all the rest of Christendom; that it was as much our Inte∣rest to hinder it, and that nothing could do it, but a firm Conjunction between us: That the States Part would be next after Flanders was gone, and therefore they had now as much need of being protected by England a∣gainst
France, as they thought they had three or four Years ago of being protected by France against England; and that they had no other Choice, but either continuing their Friendship with France, till they should see both Flanders and themselves swallowed up by such a Neighbour; or else change their whole Measures, and enter into the strictest Alliance with His Majesty for the Preserva∣tion of both; and let France take it as they pleased. Monsieur de Witt confessed the Design of France for the Conquest of Flanders, spoke of the Treaties they had made with the States in Cardinal Richlieu's Time, and lately offe∣red again, for partaging it between them; and said, he understood very well the Dan∣ger of such a Council and Neighbourhood, or else he should have fallen into them; but the Ventures were great on the other side too; that the States were much more expo∣sed than the King; that the Spaniards were weak, and ill to be trusted by the States, be∣tween whom there had never yet been any better Measures than barely those of the Munster Peace, after so great Rancors and long Hostilities. That tho' he believed the German Princes would be glad of what His Majesty proposed, yet he knew not how far Sueden might be engaged in the Measures with France, who lay here at their Backs in
the Dutchy of Bremen. And last of all, tho' this Resolution seemed now to be taken by His Majesty and his Ministers, upon the surest and wisest Foundations, which were those of true Interest and Safety; yet no Man knew how long they might last. That if they should break all their Measures with France, and throw themselves wholly upon His Majesty by such a Conjunction, any Change of Councils in England would be their certain Ruine: That he knew not this present Ministry, and could say nothing to them; but that he knew the last too well. Upon which he said a good deal, of our un∣certain Conduct since His Majesty's Return, and concluded that the Unsteddiness of Councils in England, seemed a fatal Thing to our Constitution; he would not judge from what Grounds, Mais que depuis le temps de la Reyne Elisabet, il n'y avoit eu qu'une fluctuation perpetuelle en la Conduite de l'Angle∣terre, avec laquelle on ne pouvoit jamais pren∣dre des Mesures pour deux Annèes de Temps. After this ended, with some Melancholy that looked a little irresolute, I told him, that as to their own Interests, he knew them, and could weigh them better than I; that after my Audience and first Conference with Commissioners, I should quickly see how the States would understand them, in which I knew very well, how great a Part he
would have: That for our Danger, I con∣fest they would be first exposed to France, and we the last, which made it reasonable they should make the first Pace to their Safety: That for Sueden, I had no Orders to negoti∣ate with them, but being fully instructed in His Majesty's general Intentions, I should be glad to see them strengthened all I could, and to that Purpose if he thought fit, I would talk with the Count de Dona the Suedish Am∣bassadour here, and see whether he had any Powers, to engage their Crown in any com∣mon Measures for the Safety of Christendom; that if by such a Conjunction, we could ex∣tend it to a Triple Alliance among us, upon the same Foundation; I believed, he would think it too strong a Bar for France to ven∣ture on. That for the Unsteddiness of our Councils, I would rather bewail than de∣fend it; but that I should not have made this Journey, if I had not been confident, that had been ended, and we now bottom∣med past any Change or Remove. That I could not pretend to know any Body's Mind certainly but my own; but that upon this Matter, I was as confident of His Majesty's, of Your Lordship's, and My Lord Arling∣ton's, as I was of my own: Upon this Oc∣casion I said a great deal, not only of the Interests, but Resentments that had enga∣ged His Majesty and His Ministers in this
Council; and concluded, that I was confi∣dent it could never break, but would an∣swer, if ever it did, it should never be by my Hand, and was as confident I might answer the same for Your Lordship and My Lord Arlington; and that you would fall or stand upon this Bottom. Monsieur de Witt seemed much satisfied with what I had said; assured me for his Part, he would give his Hands towards a good Con∣clusion of this Affair: That he would trust His Majesty's Honour and Interest upon so great a Conjuncture, as well as the Sincere∣ness and Constancy of His Ministers, whom he could judge of by no other Lights, but what I gave him; made me Compliments upon the great Confidence he had taken in me and my manner of dealing, by what he had heard and seen of me, since the first Vi∣sit I made him in my Passage here, after the End of the War; and concluded, that I should see the Count Dona, and try how far Sueden was to be engaged in this Affair. I tell Your Lordship all these Circumstan∣ces, that knowing where the Difficulties have been, how they have been overcome, and upon what Advances on my side, this Knot has been tied, Your Lordship and My Lord Arlington may the better know, how to support this Affair, and make any others easie by recovering the Credit of our Con∣duct
in England, so far lost by the Unsteddi∣ness too truly laid to our Charge; and at least by your own Constancy, in what you have begun, make good the Characters you have already in the World, and the Assuran∣ces I have given Monsieur de Witt upon your Occasion. That Evening I went to the Count Dona, and run over all Ceremonies of our Charact∣ers, by going straight into his Chamber, taking a Chair, and sitting down by him before he could rise out of his. I told him I hoped he would excuse this Liberty upon an Errand, wherein I thought both our Masters were concerned; that Ceremonies were intended to facilitate Business, and not to hinder it; that I knew nothing to make my seeing the other Ambassadours at the Hague necessary, and so was content with the Difficulties had been introduced between our Characters; but thinking it absolutely for my Master's Service, to enter into Confidence with His Excellency upon my Errand here, I had re∣solved to do it in this Manner, and if he gave me Leave, would pursue it as if our Acquaintance and Commerce, had been of never so long a Date. The Count embraced me, gave me great Thanks for the Honour I did him, made me Compliments upon so frank and confident a Manner as I used with him; and said he was
ready to return it upon any Thing that I should think fit to communicate to him. After this I entred into the Detail of my whole Progress to that Time, both in Eng∣land and here; of His Majesty's Reasons, of the common Interests of Christendom, of the Reception my Errand found from Monsieur de Witt, and the Hopes I had of succeeding: Of our Discourses about engaging Sueden in the same Measures, and a Desire of extending our League, into a Triple Alliance among us, for our own mutual Defence, the Safety of Flanders, and thereby of Christendom. That I knew how the Crown of Sueden had been treated of late Years by France, how close they had kept to the Friendship with His Ma∣jesty, and how beneficial as well as honou∣rable, such a Part as this might prove to them, by the particular Use they might be of to the Crown of Spain; and that upon any good Occasion they might be sure of His Majesty's Offices and the States, who resol∣ved to enter into this Affair without any o∣ther Interest, than that of the Preservation of Flanders, and thereby of their own Safety, and the common Good. The Count Dona professed to applaud His Majesty's Council, to be confident that Sue∣den would be content to go his Pace in all the common Affairs of Christendom, which he was assured of by his own Instructions in
general; but that such an Affair as this not being foreseen, he could have none upon it: That if it succeeded, he would make all the Paces he could to engage his Master in it, as what he thought, of Honour and Ad∣vantage to the common Safety: But that he would return my Frankness to him with the same to me, in telling me, that he doubt∣ed my bringing it to an Issue: That he first doubted Monsieur de Witt's Resolution, to break upon any Terms with France, and close with England; not only considering what had lately passed between us, but the Interests of the House of Orange, which he must ever believe, would at one Time or o∣ther be advanced by us; whereas he was sure to be supported against them by France: Therefore he believed, tho' he would not oppose it, because the States and People might run into it; yet he would find some Means, to elude the Conclusion or Effect of it, without appearing himself in any such Design: That in the next Place, since such a Treaty could not be made by the States ge∣neral, without first being sent to all the Pro∣vinces and Towns for their Approbation, and Orders upon it to their Deputies; he did not see how it was possible for the French Ambas∣sadour, to fail of engaging some Towns or Provinces against it, and the Opposition of any one of them would lose the Effect; since
no new Treaty could be made by the Con∣stitutions here, without an universal Con∣sent; That however he would not discou∣rage me, but wish'd me Success with all his Heart, upon many Reasons, and among o∣thers, as being so much a Servant to the House of Orange, which could not but profit by a Conjunction between England and Hol∣land: And again promised, whenever I brought it to a Period, to use all his Endea∣vours and stretch his Powers as far as he could, towards engaging his Master, in the same Measures with us. In the second Conference I had with Mon∣sieur de Witt, I acquainted him with what had passed with Count Dona, which he seemed much pleased with; and said, tho' we could not expect he should have Powers so gene∣ral as to conclude such an Affair; yet an In∣strument might be drawn up between us whereby Room may be left for Sueden, to enter as a Principal into our Alliance; and the Count de Dona had so much Credit at his Court, to recommend it there so as to suc∣ceed, especially upon the hopes we must give him of obtaining Subsidies from Spain, which might countervail what they might lose from France upon this Occasion. I then fell upon the Form of concluding this Treaty; saying, I could easily foretell the Fate of it, if it must pass the common
Forms of being sent by the several Deputies, to all their Principals for their Result upon it: That I knew, this would take up a Month or six Weeks Time, and that nothing would be so easie as for the French Ambassa∣dour, to meet with it in running that Cir∣cle, and by engaging some one Member, perhaps by Money thrown among the chief Persons in some of the small Towns, to pre∣vent and ruine a Council of the greatest Im∣portance to Christendom, as well as to our two Nations, that had been on Foot in many Ages: That unless the States General would conclude and sign the Treaty immediately, and trust to the Approbation of their several Provinces and Towns after it was done; I should give it for gone, and think no more of it. Monsieur de Witt seemed to think this im∣possible; said, no such Thing had ever been done since the first Institution of their Com∣monwealth; that tho' it was true, the States General might sign a Treaty, yet they could not Ratifie it, without Recourse to their Prin∣cipals, and that they should venture their Heads in Signing it, if their Principals not approving it should question them for doing it without Orders; that he hoped the Forms might be expedited in three Weeks Time, and that all Care that could be, should be taken to prevent the Addresses of the French Ambas∣sadour among the Provinces.
I cut the Matter short, and told him, I continued of my first Opinion, to see it im∣mediately agreed between Me and the Com∣missioners, and then Signed by the States, which might be done in four or five Days; and that the Deputies might safely trust to the Approbation of their Principals in a Point of so great and evident publick Interest: That for my Part, I know not how this De∣lay, and thereby Hazard of the Affair might be interpreted in England, nor what Change in my Orders it might produce: That I had now Powers to conclude an Alliance of the last Consequence to the Safety of Flanders and this State; that if it should miscarry by the too great Caution of the Deputies in Point of Form, for ought I knew, they might venture their Heads that Way, and more de∣servedly, than by signing at present, what all of them believed, would not only be ra∣tified, but applauded by their Principals. With this I left him; and the rest that pas∣sed in the Progress of this Affair, as well as in my Audience or with the Commissioners. Your Lordship has it in my Dispatch to My Lord Arlington, to whom you will please to communicate these more secret Springs, that by knowing the Conception, the Forming, the Throws, and Birth of this Child, you may the better consult how it is to be nou∣rished till it grow to Strength, and thereby
fit to atchieve those great Adventures, for which it seems designed. I am ever with equal Passion and Truth, My Lord, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.
To Mr. Godolphin. Hague, Jan. 28. S. N. 1668. SIR, THO' the Interruption of our Com∣merce hath been long, yet I thought it necessary to renew it at this Time, and thereby let you know, what has lately bro∣ken it on my Side, that you may not be∣lieve any Interruption of yours has had a worse Effect upon me of late, than it ever had before, being an Accident I have often been subject to. About the end of last Month, N. S. I passed through this Place with private Commission from His Majesty, to sound the Mind of the States, in what concerns the present Quarrel between the two Crowns, and how they were disposed to join with him in the Share of a War, or Project of a Peace; to be endeavoured by our joint Offices between them. From hence I went to London, with the private Account of what I had in Charge. After five Days Stay there, I was dispatch'd back, as His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States, with full Power, to treat and conclude upon those Points, which His Ma∣jesty esteemed necessary for our common Safe∣ty,
and the Repose of Christendom in this Conjuncture. Upon the 6th I arrived here, had my first Audience on the 18th; and on the 23d, were signed by me, and the Com∣missioners given me by the States with full Powers, three several Instruments of our pre∣sent Treaty: The first, containing a League defensive and perpetual between His Maje∣sty and the States, against all Persons with∣out exception, that shall invade either of them, with Agreement to furnish each other upon Occasion with forty Ships of War, of which, fourteen betwixt sixty and eighty Guns, and four hundred Men a piece one with another; Fourteen, between forty and sixty Guns, and three hundred Men a piece; and of the other Twelve, none under thirty six Guns, and a hundred and fifty Men: Be∣sides this, with six Thousand Foot, and four hundred Horse, or Money in stead of them, at the Choice of the Invaded, and to be re∣paid within three Years after the End of the War; the Proportions of Money to the se∣veral Parts of the said Aid, being ascertai∣ned in the Treaty. The second Instrument contains our joint Obligations to dispose France to make Peace in Flanders upon one of the Alternatives al∣ready proposed; and likewise to dispose Spain to accept it before the End of May; but in Case of Difficulty made by them, to dispose
France however, to stop all further Progress of its own Arms there, and leave it wholly to the Allies to procure the Ends proposed in this League. The third Instrument, contains certain se∣parate Articles between His Majesty and the States, Signed at the same Time, and of the same Force with the Treaty, but not to be committed to Letters. 'Tis hardly imaginable, the Joy and Won∣der conceived here, upon the Conclusion of this Treaty, brought to an Issue in five Days, nor the Applause given to His Majesty's Resolution, as the wisest and happiest that could in this Conjuncture be taken by any Prince, both for his own, and his Neigh∣bours Affairs; nor are the Reflections upon the Conduct of it less to the Advantage of the present Ministry in England; the Thing being almost done here, assoon as my Jour∣ney was known in London, and before my Errand was suspected by any publick Mini∣ster there. Three Days after our signing, the Suedish Ambassadour signed another Instrument joint∣ly with me and the States Commissioners, o∣bliging his Master to enter as a Principal in∣to the same Alliance, so soon as some Pre∣tensions he has from the Emperour and Spain are satisfied by our good Offices between them. After which, Count Dona parted as
Ambassadour likewise from that Crown for England, where the rest of that Affair will be negotiated; and in his Company my Bro∣ther Henry Temple, with the Whole Account of my Business, and the Treaties signed in Order to their Ratification, for which a Month is allowed, tho' the States promise theirs within fifteen Days after the Date. When those arrive and are exchanged. I re∣turn to my Residence at Brussels, to see the Issue of this Business, which now takes up the Thoughts and Discourse of all Christen∣dom, and from which most Princes, will re∣solve to take their Measures. I suppose My Lord Sandwich upon his Way, and therefore content my self only with gi∣ving you this Trouble, and the Professions of my being SIR, Your &c.
To the KING. Hague, Jan. 29th. S.N. 1668. May it please Your Majesty; IN my last Passage hither, I had the Ho∣nour of trying your Majesty's Yatcht in such a Storm, as that never felt before, and a greater no Man in Her pretended ever to have seen. The Fortune of Your Majesty's Affairs, help'd us to the Discovery of a Pi∣lot Boat at a distance from the Coasts, that brought us happily in, without which we had passed such another Night at Sea, as I should not care to do, for any Thing Your Majesty could give me, besides Your Fa∣vour, and the Occasions of serving You. If we had miscarried. Your Majesty had lost an honest diligent Captain, and sixteen poor Seamen, so beaten out with Wet and Toyl, that the Compassion I had then for them, I have still about me, and assure Your Maje∣sty, that five or six more, will be necessary for your Yatcht, if you use Her to such Pas∣sages as this: But for the rest, I believe there is not such a Boat in the Would. She returns with along, but final and happy Account of my Business, to My Lord Arling∣ton,
and with the Count de Dona, who will be better Company than along ill Letter, and deserves Your Majesty's Welcome by his o∣ther Qualities, as well as his particular De∣votions for Your Majesty's Person and Ser∣vice. I cannot end this Letter, without congra∣tulating with Your Majesty, upon the Suc∣cess of your Resolution, which occasioned my Journey hither; and which is generally ap∣plauded here, as the wisest and happiest both for your Kingdoms and your Neigh∣bours, and the most honourable to Your Ma∣jesty's Person, that ever was taken upon any Occasion by any Prince: And the strange Success of it, hath been answerable, to the rest of Your Majesty's Fortunes and so ama∣zing, that the Expressions made of it here every Hour, are altogether extraordinary, not to say Extravagant. God of Heaven continue Your Majesty's good Health, and good Councils, and good Fortunes, and then I shall have nothing more to wish, but that You may pardon the Faults, and accept of the humble and hearty Devotions of SIR, Your Majesty's most Loyal and most obedient Subject and Servant.
To Monsieur Gourville. Hague Feb. 7. S. N. 1668. I Have just received (by the Rhingrave's Favour) yours of the 28th past, and am ex∣treme glad, to have yet some Place in your Me∣mory, after so many Diversions in Germany, which use to make one forget Things of much greater Importance. But all this was necessary to comfort me for your Absence, which I be∣lieve you have ordered, with Design for all my Journeys into Holland; this is now the third I have made since that of Breda, without ever meeting you there; you I say, who are not able to live three Months without going thither, tho' you are forced for it, to leave the Ladies and the Orange-Trees at Brussels.
I can tell you no News; the Duke of Lunenburg's Resident ha∣ving assured me, that he has sent you word of the Conclusion of our Trea∣ty here, whereof I eve∣ry Day expect the Rati∣fications: They will needs have me pass here for one of geat Abili∣ties, for having finished and signed in five Days, a Treaty of such Impor∣tance to Christendom: But I will tell you the Secret of it: To draw Things out of their Cen∣ter, requires Labour and Address to put them in∣to Motion; but to make them return thither, Na∣ture helps so far, that there needs no more than just to set them a going. Now, I think, a strict Alliance, is the true Center of our two Nations. There was also another Accident, which contributed very much to this Affair, and that was, a great Con∣fidence
arisen between the Pensioner and me, he is extremely pleased with me, and my sin∣cere open way of deal∣ing, and I with all the Reason in the World am infinitely pleased with him upon the same Score; and look on him as one of the greatest Genius's I have known, as a Man of Honour, and the most easie in Conversation, as well as in Business. In short, the two Nations are clo∣ser united, than if there never had been a War. For Affairs in general, I can tell you nothing, but that our common Design is to give Peace to all Christendom, so that if France pleases, they may have it this Spring; if not (as Monsieur d'E∣strades says, at least not after our fashion) they may have their fill of the War. For the Con∣vention at Aix, I can tell you nothing till we get an Answer from France and Brussels, where we have already sent
Advice of our defensive League, and of our Treaty or Project of the Peace. This at least may serve for a new Health at your German Feasts, when the old ones are gone round, and will at the same time help to put you in mind of SIR, Your &c.
A Mons. de Gourville. De la Haye. 7 Fevr. S.N. 1668. JE viens de recevoir par les soins obligeans de Monsieur le Rhingrave, votre lettre du 28 du pas∣sé; & je me rejouïs ex∣tremement d'occuper en∣core quelque place dans vo∣tre souvenir, aprés tant de divertissemens goutez en Allemagne, ce ne seroit pas la premiere fois qu'ils auroient fait oublier des choses plus importantes que ma personne: Mais il ne falloit pas moins que les plaisirs que je say que vous avez gouté, & la nouvel∣le marque que vous me don∣nez de votre amitié, pour me consoler de votre ab∣sence; Je croy au reste que vous l'aviez concertée avec tous mes voyages en Hollan∣de; car voici le trosieme que j'y fais depuis celuy de Breda, sans vous y trover, vous dis je, qui ne pouviez passer trois mois sans y al∣ler, quand meme il auroit
fallu pour cela quitter vos orangers & les mignonnes de Brusselles. Je n'ay point de nouvel∣les á vous mander; le Re∣sident de Lunebour m'ayant assuré qu'il vous avoit ap∣pris la conclusion du traité que nous avons fait icy: J'attens de jour en jour les ratifications. On veut á toute force me faire pas∣ser icy pour habile homme, á cause que j'ay achevé & signé en cinq jours un Trai∣té si important pour toute la Chretienté: Mais je vous diray le secret; quand on arrache les choses de leur centre, il faut du tems & de la peine, & même de l'addresse pour les faire mouvoir; mais lors qu'il n'est question que de les y ramener, la nature y ayde si puissament, qu'il ne faut quasi que leur donner le branle: Or, je croy qu'une etroite Alliance est le cen∣tre de nos deux Nations. Il y a encore un accident qui a fort contribué a cetté affaire; c'est la parfaite confiance qui nous a reci∣proquement uni Monsieur le Pensionnaire & moy: il
se loue de moy & de ma maniere d'agir, qui comme vous savez, est toujours franche & ouverte; & moy, je me loue infiniment de luy; j'en ay toutes les raisns du monde, & je dois á toute sa conduite les eloges qu'il donne á la mi∣enne: Je le regarde com∣me un des plus grands Ge∣nies que j'ay connus, avec cela, trés homme de bien; d'un commerce egalement aisé soit dans les negotiati∣ons, soit dans la conversa∣tion. Enfin la confiance est presentement retablie entre les deux Nations; & je la croy meme plus entie∣re que s'il n'y avoit jemais eu de guerre. Pour les af∣faires generales, je ne vous saurois dire autre chose, si non, que notre dessein una∣nime est de donner la paix & la tranquilité a toute la Chretienté; de sorte que si la France le veut, elle l'au∣ra ce printems; si elle ne le veut pas (ainsi que le dit Monsieur le Compte D'E∣strades, qui ajoute, que du moins ce ne sera pas d'une paix de notre façon) elle aura tout son soul de guer∣re.
Touchant la Conventi∣on á Aix jusq' á ce que nous ayons responce de France & de Brusselles, je ne vous en saurois rien dire. Nous leur avons deja don∣né avis de notre Ligue de∣fensive, & de notre traité ou projet de paix. Du moins cecy servira a fournir une nouvelle santé dans vos festins Allemans, lors que les anciennes auront fait leur ronde accoutumée; & cela vous faira en meme tems souvenir de Monsieur Votre, &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Feb. 12. S. N 1668. My Lord, THE Arrival of the Ratifications here, was received with the same Dispositi∣ons of general Satisfaction and Joy, that the Treaty was concluded: Those of the States will, I doubt, be something later ready, tho' occasioned only by a Delay, in the Assembly of the States of Friezland and Zealand; but new Dispatches were Yesterday sent away for hastning both; and Monsieur de Witt as∣sures me, the 20th of this Month will be the latest I shall expect them, and he hopes all may be ready something sooner. I shall press it all I can possibly, and immediately. after the Exchange made, shall demand my Audience of Congè, and away to Brussels to pursue His Majesty's Instructions there: I cannot tell with what Success, because I know not with what Meen the Marquess has entertained our Project of the Peace, not yet having heard one Word from him in Answer to all I have writ upon this Subject: I wish some of his Visions may not give it another Face than what it ought, I am sure, to re∣ceive
from the true present State of the Spa∣nish Affairs; for in that Case I know his Way of arguing so well, as to expect he should say, there is no Reason for them to give Mo∣ney to lose their Towns; but that in Case His Majesty will enter into their Defence, He shall want no Money the Indies can give him; therefore he must be plied on that side, by the Count of Molina, and Baron de l'Isola, as well as by me here, and not only dispo∣sed to accept the Alternative, but to receive it as the greatest Effect at present of His Ma∣jesty's good Will to the Preservation of Flan∣ders, and Step towards a future defensive League between Us and Them, and Holland, for the general Safety of the Spanish Crown. Tho' I shall not fail of my Part, in pres∣sing all these Points on this Side, yet the Im∣pressions will be easier given the two Mini∣sters there, than the Marquess here, as Per∣sons something more substantial in their Con∣ceptions upon this Point; and will have more Weight upon His Excellency, coming from their own Ministers, than from me: For the Point of Money to be furnish'd by the States upon the Towns of Gelderland; the whole Matter was dismissed by Monsieur de Witt till the Marquess's Acceptance of our Project was declared; upon which the Ba∣ron de Bargeyck will return to pursue it, and in Case of a War, by Obstinacy of the French
Refusal, I doubt not but the Matter will be easie, the Marquess offering Ruremond and Venlo, tho' Monsieur de Witt insists as yet, upon the Fort of Gelre, and two others by Sluys, which the Marquess says, he has no Power to treat upon. For their Opinion of the French Expediti∣on into the Franche Comptè, they seem little startled at it, believing it may the more in∣cline the Spaniards to receive our Offices for the Peace according to the Treaty; and that possibly some Exchange may be found con∣venient for the Spaniards between Parts of the Franche Comtè and those Towns of Flanders, which are now in the French Possession, and lie in the very Bowels of the rest of that Dominion; which are Courtray, Tournay, Ou∣denard, and Aeth; for the rest, they resolve to make good the Peace to the Spaniards, without the Loss of any Thing more, than was actually in the French Hands at the Time of our Treaty being Signed, what∣ever new Progresses they may make before the Conclusion; and in Case France shall re∣fuse, or seek Evasions, I do not believe they will be the least backward, from entring in∣to the War. I should formerly have marked that, in all which is digested in our Treaty, and that is to pass in our Negotiation with France, upon this Occasion, the States avoid calling our
Parts a Mediation; because they say, That seems to import a Neutrality, whereas upon failing of our Offices towards a Peace, we are to take our Parts in a War. For the Method and Manner of our joi∣ning together in pursuit of the War, if it grow to engage us by the French Refusal; Monsieur de Witt tells me frankly, his Opini∣on is for us, to enforce the Towns of Flan∣ders by such of our Troops, as will be neces∣sary to defend them, or at least to draw on long and expensive Sieges, and in the mean Time with our several Fleets, to make the sharpest Impressions we can, upon some of their Coasts, and seize some of their Towns, and force them that Way, to necessary Di∣visions and Diversions of their Forces, as well as give Countenance, to whatever Dis∣contents may arise among them at home, up∣on such an Occasion. Upon my arguing, that an Impression would be the sharper and the safer, perhaps if it were made by our Fleets in one Place, but with joint Forces; he said, he did not see how our Fleets could possibly join, for the Point of the Pavilion; and fell into a good deal of Discourse upon that Mat∣ter, as the only now left, that could ever occasion any Dispute between us; being at length bottomed upon our mutual Interest, and the wrangling about little Points of Com∣merce being taken away. All I could draw
from him upon the Point of the Pavilion was; that they would give all to the King's Ships at Sea, which theirs or any other Ambassa∣dours gave to his own Person in his King∣dom, where his Dominion was as absolute, as he could pretend it to be, in the narrow Seas; which is, to uncover first, and cover last; so that all their Ships should vail to ours when they met, in Case ours would in Return take down the Pavilion as a Civility to theirs afterwards, and theirs should remain vailed, till we had set up our Pavilion again. I told him I could say nothing to that Mat∣ter, which I knew was very delicate; but that if ever we agreed in that Point, I thought it must not be by Articles or Treaties, but by Concert between the Ministers of each Side; as, for the States, first to give abso∣lute Orders to all their Captains to vail to the King's Ships, whenever they met them in the narrow Seas; and at the same Time, to signifie so much to His Majesty in a Let∣ter of Compliment, and as a Resolution ta∣ken upon Consideration of so near and hap∣py Alliance, as was now entred into, be∣tween the Nations: Upon which His Ma∣jesty might consider, what Returns of Civi∣lity he would be content, his Captains should make to an Allie so near as this State, was now likely ever to be, to the Crown of England.
Monsieur de Witt was willing to fall into any Expedient, and said, that whenever I came into England, he would hope I might bring this last Matter to pass, as happily as I had done all the rest. That His Majesty should find he would be wanting in nothing, that the Point of Civility or Deference might require in this Matter, provided it were with∣out acknowledging our Pretensions to the Dominion of the Sea, which they must die rather than do; but in what should pass, they would leave us to our Interpretations, and keep themselves to theirs. For the provisional Articles according to my Word, which made Way for the Trea∣ty's Conclusion; I told Monsieur de Witt, His Majesty had in his Answer given me Leave to do it, with an Article for the Meeting of Commissioners at both Parties Desire, to com∣pleat what should be defective, and change what should be found inconvenient, and cut off any Thing that should be superfluous, so as it might appear to be an Original Treaty between us, which would be more for our Honour, than to copy after the French: That tho' His Majesty had given me this Leave, in Compliance to the States, yet he had ra∣ther the Thing should now be left to Com∣missioners for these Ends, than concluded with Reference to them hereafter. I made His Majesty's Concession in this Point,
easie for these two Ends; that either they finding His Majesty indifferent in it, might grow so too; Men being commonly apt to pull the harder, the faster another holds; or else (if they resolved to insist upon it, since I was already engaged) to value a Thing which costs His Majesty nothing, for as much Obligation as I could to the States, which might make Way for some material Return upon another Occasion. Monsieur de Witt seemed very much plea∣sed at His Majesty's Compliance with them in this Point; and said, if I knew His Maje∣sty's Pleasure in any Particulars which he de∣sired should be added, or any others chan∣ged for common Convenience, he desired me to tell him, and doubted not, but we should end it in twenty four Hours; but he was unwilling it should fall into other Hands, or remain undone, for the Reasons I mentio∣ned in one of my last. After much Discourse, and no Way left to avoid the Thing; we a∣greed it should be done, but with an ample Article for the Meeting of Commissioners for those foresaid Ends; and after the Perpetui∣ty, I will endeavour to get in these Words: Aut quous{que} saltem ex utrius{que} partis Consensu indi∣centur Commissarii; or some Words to that Purpose: And likewise in the Preamble of this separate Instrument, some Expressions of this Kind; ut omnibus innotescat quam sincerâ
sancta{que} Fide nuper contractae Amicitiae non modo in praesens sed in posteros colendae cavere voluerunt; And; Ad divellenda penitus quaecun{que} non modo dissentionum, sed & Litium & Altercationum Se∣mina; And; Ad praecidendam spem omnem, & Expectationem quorumcun{que} praedictam Amiciti∣am novis Altercationibus labefactatam iri interesse possit. Which are Things that come now only into my Head, but shall be digested against we meet to morrow upon this Occasion. And this is all that is possible for me to do in this Matter, and which at least is likely to hast∣en the Exchange of the Ratifications, and to leave our Alliance the clearest, firmest, and most confident that can be: I confess, I am troubled that it cannot be otherwise, because Your Lordship says, His Majesty would ra∣ther have had it so; and if you had not sent me after the Treaty's Arrival, an Explana∣tion of what was written to me, in an unin∣telligible Cipher, it had been so, and my Words had been safe; but I think it had been worse, in leaving a Dissatisfaction between us, which is now avoided; and I find. My Lord Keeper in a Letter to me, seems to put no Weight upon it, if done in the Manner mentioned; and I know you both put a great deal upon any Person's (employ'd by His Majesty) being and passing for an honest Man. No Post going from hence till the End of
the Week, I have resolved to dispatch this by the Yatcht that brought over my Brother, whose Orders it seems are to return immedi∣ately; But I know not how to find the safe Conveyance for the Dutch Ratifications, un∣less another Yacht be sent for them about a Week or ten Days hence; and to that End, I shall leave them with Mr. Carter at my Lord Cravenss House here, and who does all His Lordship's Business; who shall deliver them to any Person that brings a Letter from Your Lordship to that Purpose: This I think will be much better, than to venture them with me in my Journey to Brussels, or upon a Passage from thence. I am ever with My Lord, Your &c. P. S. I had forgot the mention of this inclosed Memorial, given in Yesterday to the States, and by their Order sent me with a Compli∣ment, They would receive nothing without com∣municating it to me; They resolve upon the Marquess's Answer, for the Treating at Aix, to send likewise thither, but refer the Quali∣ty or Number of Persons to the Marquess's
Intentions of going himself, or sending some Delegate; and that I suppose will depend up∣on Don Juan's coming over. In the mean Time, the States are absolutely of Opinion with me, that no Treaty can begin with good Intentions on the French Side, unless they consent to a Suspension of Arms while it lasts; and therefore, that the Force of our joint Instances at Paris, is to be put upon that Point.
To Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Lord Keeper. Hague, Febr. 12. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Received by my Brother the Honour of Your Lordship's, and therein the Testi∣mony of your Favour to me in a Manner so obliging, and indeed altogether extraordi∣nary, that I know as little how to acknow∣ledge as to deserve it; and therefore I shall not enlarge my Self upon a Subject, where I am sure not to succeed as I desire; but leave it to Time, and the constancy of my Servi∣ces, to express how very sensible I am of what I owe, and how great a Value I place upon that Part, Your Lordship is pleased to allow me in your good Opinion and Memo∣ry, of which I beg the Continuance, esteem∣ing them among the very best of my Pos∣sessions. I have written to My Lord Arlington at large, upon the Confidence of this safe Con∣veyance by the Return of the Yacht; which will give Your Lordship your Share of Trouble, but withal, a full Prospect of the Dispositions here, and consequently the pre∣sent
as well as future Estate of our Alliance, if it be pursued with the same Directness it has been contracted; and the happy Conti∣nuance whereof, I am perfectly of Your Lord∣ship's Mind, is the true Interest of both Na∣tions, and will be the surest Support, of His Majesty's Honour, and the Kingdoms Safe∣ty, as well as Satisfaction. The Expression Your Lordship pleases to make, of endea∣vouring in your Station, the inviolable Ob∣servation of it; I shall value before I part, to Monsieur de Witt, and the other Commissio∣ners as it deserves, which will be easie to do; for I dare say very truly, that the ge∣neral Opinion conceived here, of Your Lord∣ships and My Lord Arlington's Honour and Sincerity, and unbiassed Pursuit of the true Interest of the Kingdom, has very much con∣tributed to the Success of my late Negotiati∣on, and been indeed the Spring of any Ho∣nour, that Your Lordship or any others may attribute to me in the Conduct of it. It will not become me to take no Notice, of those repeated Offers, Your Lordship plea∣ses to make, in a Fashion so extremely obli∣ging, to favour me in any of my own Con∣cernments; and therefore I shall humbly re∣commend to you the countenancing my Wife in her pursuing the Payment of my ordinary Allowances while I am abroad; since the narrowness of my own Fortunes (while it
pleases God to continue my Father's Life to us) will not suffer me to serve His Majesty without troubling him, as I am forced to do, whenever five or six Months of my Ordina∣ries are grown in Arrear. Therefore upon Your Lordship's Encouragement, I will tell my Wife, She may beg your Countenance to her when She begins her next Pursuit of that Kind; and that you may the more confident∣ly own your favouring me in this Point; I will assure Your Lordship, His Majesty shall never be troubled with any Pursuits of mine, further than what he has pleased to make my Due, by my ordinary Establishment, tho' lower than that of a much cheaper Countrey, as I am informed; but that is very indiffe∣rent to me; for I am perfectly content to live just in the Posture His Majesty thinks fit I should, while I serve him; and very willing to spend his Allowance and my own Revenue, but no more; which is the plain Truth of my Story: And I doubt now the Fonds at Antwerp fail, out of which I have been hither∣to paid, by My Lord Arlington's Favour to me, something against the Commissioners Inclination, I may find longer Attendances upon the Exchequer, for that is grown or growing due, than my Occasions will suffer; which makes me use this Liberty to Your Lordship; tho' I should not have done it had you not now twice, and of your self encoura∣ged me.
For the obliging Message my Brother brought me likewise from Your Lordship's Favour to me; besides my Acknowledgments, I shall only say, thatIt was, that he should be Se∣cretary of State. what Your Lordship pleased to mention, would be as agreeable to my Inclinations as any thing I know; but I shall never presume to ask any Thing of that Kind from His Majesty, no more than of any other, re∣ferring my Station and every Thing else, wholly to his Pleasure and Choice, whilst I have the Honour of serving him: Besides, I find every Body here and in Flanders, de∣signs another Post for me, at least for a Month or two this Spring, if the Treaty happens to be at Aiz; believing, that ha∣ving had so much Part in what has been done already, I am likely to have some Part in that too: And I confess, because People are fallen into this Thought, I may take the contrary for a Mark of his Maje∣sty's not being satisfied with me, in what is past: and because I am by Advance instruct∣ed in the Business, and acquainted with Per∣sons, I should be very well pleased with it, if His Majesty finds none to serve him bet∣ter, esprcially if by the Marquess's going thi∣ther himself, His Majesty should find it fit, to send a Person of great Quality to maintain the Port of the Employment, and give me my Part under his Shade.
I am ashamed to have said all this of my Self and my Concernments; and beseech Your Lordship to remember, that you have drawn it all from me; and after that, to for∣get it all if you please: For, to say the Truth, I am very well as I am, being of so dull a Complexion, that I do not remember any Station or Condition of Life I have been in these dozen Years, which I have not been pleased with, and a little unwilling to leave. However, what Thoughts of this Kind Your Lordship shall have of me, I desire you will please to communicate them to My Lord Arlington, to whose Favour I have been long obliged: And whatever Your two Lord∣ships shall think fit in my Disposal, will be ever perfectly welcom to My Lord, Your &c.
To My Lord Keeper. Hague, Feb. 13. S. N. 1668. My Lord, SINCE the writing of Your Lordship's Letter, and the scaling up of My Lord Arlington's Pacquet, I have been so far press'd by Monsieur de Witt, to send him the Article for meeting Commissioners, I desired might be added to the provisional Articles in a new Instrument that I have been fain to digest it as well as I could, according to My Lord Arlington's Instructions, and Your Lordship's since given me in your Letter. I thought fit likewise to draw up a Preamble to it, where∣by it might appear, that the Intention of this Agreement, was only an Effect of our mutual Kindness, and for Prevention of any Disputes that might possibly arise to interrupt it, and for cutting off all our Enemies Hopes ever to see us any more, make Way for their Ends by our future Dissention. I will send Your Lordship a Copy on the other side of this Sheet, of both Preamble and Article, which I have been forced to draw up as hasti∣ly as I could; and hope, if Monsieur de Witt thinks fit to pass it in this Form, it will be in
all Points of more Honour and Advantage to as, even than to have had it all omitted. I desire Your Lordship to communicate all this to My Lord Arlington, and to excuse this Trouble, by Reason of His Lordship's Pac∣quet being already sealed up. I am ever &c.
Proemium Tractatus inter Anglos & Hollandos. Febr. 13. 1668. QUandoquidem annuente Divinâ Gratiâ, & conspirante mutuarum rerum salute, aequé ac Christiani Orbis jam temporis necessitate; Vi∣gesimo tertio Die Januarii proximè elapsi, inter Serenissimum — & —, conclusum & signatum sit Foedus perpetuum defensivum for∣tissimis utrin{que} tam mari quam terrâ proestandis auxiliis communitum: Eodem{que} die alio{que} In∣strumento, de rerum vicinarum tranquilitate, pa∣ce{que} Orbi Christiano restitundâ inter Praedictum — & — pronis animis consultum & conventum fuerit, adeo{que} nihil aliud protenus superesse videatur, quod tam mutuâ voluntate con∣flatam amicitiam & necessitudinem ullo demùm tempore interpellare poterit, praeter controversias de mercimoniorum speciebus hic inde redigendis forsitan orituras, & ex incertâ vel ambiguâ ejus∣modi rerum utrin{que} adjudicatione forsitan etiam promovendis. Quo autem omnibus innotescat quàm sincerâ sanctâ{que} fide Praedictus — & — nuper conflatae amicitiae non modo in praesens sed & ad posteros colendae cavere voluerint, jamdemum ad divellenda quaecun{que} non modo dis∣sentionum sed vel altercationum semina, praeciden∣dam{que} penitus eorum Spem aut expectationem quo∣rumcun{que}
demùm praedictam amicitiam novis liti∣bus concussam aut labefactatam iri interesse poterit, In subsequentes Articulos utrin{que} conventum est, qui pro normâ & Regulâ ejusmodi rerum mariti∣marum & mercaturae hic inde redigendae mutuò & perpetuò observabuntur, aut quous{que} saltèm ex utrius{que} partis Arbitrio & Consensu Commissarii indicentur, & conveniant ad uberiorem iis de re∣bus omnibus Navigationis{que} Legibus tractatum, & communi utrin{que} commodo & ulteriore experientiâ dirigendum. Sequuntur Articuli. Conclusio. CUm autem rerum omnium & Conventionum commoda aut Incommoda non nisi tractu temporis mutuae{que} experientiae documentis penitùs indagari poterunt; Conventum ita{que} est ut quo∣cun{que} demùm Tempore utri{que} Parti id visum fue∣rit, ex communi Confensu indici & convenire po∣terunt utrin{que} delegati Commissarii, quorum curae erit, & operis quodcun{que} in supra memoratis Arti∣culis defecisse reperietur, supplere, quodcun{que} au∣tem incongruum & utrin{que} incommodum, muta∣re aut circumscribere, & uberiorem demùm hisce de rebus omnibus Tractatum absolvere prorsus & perlimare.
To the States at first Audience. High and Mighty LORDS, WHereas His Majesty of Great Bri∣tain the King my Master, hath al∣ready found the good Effects of the late Peace, concluded at Breda with Your High and Mighty Lordships, by the general Satisfaction of His Majesty's Subjects, as well as his own; and doubts not but Your Lordships have likewise found, the same Effects among your People in general, as well as among your selves: His Majesty esteems nothing more likely to encrease the mutual Satisfacti∣on, nor to assure the Safety of both Nations, than an Increase of the Confidence and Friend∣ship, already contracted, between His Ma∣jesty and Your Lordships, by a stricter and firmer Alliance at this Time. And whereas His Majesty contented with those great and powerful Kingdoms and Do∣minions, which Almighty God has given him by an undisputed Succession, covers no∣thing from his Neighbours, nor has other Thoughts or Wishes, besides those of the common Peace and Repose of Christendom; His Majesty finds himself in this Conjuncture,
sensibly touched by the Calamities, so ma∣ny others are like to feel, from the Conti∣nuance of the War lately broken out between the Neighbour Crowns, and which in Course of Time, cannot but involve most of the Prin∣ces and States of Christendom, unless the Flame be quenched, before it rise too high. And His Majesty believes that nothing can so much contribute towards a safe and sudden Composure of that Quarrel, nor consequent∣ly restore the Peace of Christendom, as a joint Mediation of His Majesty with Your H. and M. Lordship's (together with each others Allies) between the two Crowns now in War. Upon these two Considerations, His Ma∣jesty hath thought fit, to send me to Your Lordships with full Powers, to treat and con∣clude, upon what shall be found necessary, between His Majesty and Your Lordships, in the Adjustment of all Matters, tending to these great Ends. And since nothing can bring these Negotiations to be of Effect, so much as the suddenness of their Conclusion; I desire Your Lordship's to appoint such Com∣missioners as you shall think fit, with whom I may fall upon the Treaty of these Matters, and to whom I am ready to expose the full Powers which His Majesty the King my Ma∣ster has given me upon this Occasion.
At my Audience of Leave, to the States General. High and mighty Lords. HIs Majesty of Great Britain the King my Master, having seen so happily finished, and in so few Days, three several Treaties with Your High and Mighty Lordships; By which the common Security of both Nations is establi∣shed, the Seeds of all new Differences entire∣ly rooted out, and the Way laid open to the Peace of Christendome, in Case our Neighbours proceed with the same good Faith, wherewith we have begun: His Majesty thinks he has no further Occasion for my Services here, be∣cause Ministers are only proper, for fastening and
cementing a Confidence and Friendship; where∣as ours is so firmly esta∣blished, as not to require any, even the most or∣dinary Supports. For this Reason, His Majesty has order'd my Return to Brussels, there to pursue in concert with Your Lordships, in favour of our Neigh∣bours, what we have here concluded for our selves. But His Maje∣sty has commanded me upon my Departure to assure Your Lordships from Him, that, as all things are best preser∣ved by the same Means they are begun; so His Majesty will not fail for ever to observe what he has now concluded, with the same Faith, the same Sincerity, and the same open Heart, where∣with he gave Command they should be negotia∣ted: and His Majesty doubts not at all, that Your Lordships are en∣tirely resolved, to pro∣ceed after the same man∣ner, which is the high∣est
Mark of a perfect Confidence to be given at present. For my own particu∣lar, I cannot part from hence without expres∣sing my Satisfaction, at the sincere and judici∣ous Proceeding of Your High and Mighty Lord∣ships, in the whole course of these Negotiations; and particularly at the great Prudence you have shewn in the Choice of those Commissioners you gave me; their Candor and Sincerity, their great Capacity, and Appli∣cation, did contribute very much to the quick and happy Conclusion of our Treaties. For my own particular, as I shall ever bear in mind with Joy and Pleasure, this short space of Time I have pass'd with Your Lordships, in whatever Part of the World I may be; so I shall always contribute by my good Wishes, and whatever Services I may be capa∣ble of, to the Support of this good Intelligence,
so happily restored be∣tween both Nations. In the mean time, God Al∣mighty take Your High and Mighty Lordships in∣ot his Holy Protection.
A mon Audience de congé aux Estats Generaux. Hauts & Puissants Seigneurs. SA Majesté le Roy de la Grande Bretagne mon Maitre, ayant vn conclur∣re si heureusement, & en si peu de jours, trois divers traitez avec V. H. & P. S. par lesquels la seureté com∣mune des deux Nations vi∣ent d'etre retablie; les se∣mences de toutes les nouvel∣les discordes entierement deracinées, & le chemin á la paix & au repos ouvert pour la Chretienté, en cas que nos voifins s'y portent avec la meme foy & la me∣me franchise qui nous la deja fait acheminer; sa Majesté croit n'avoir plus besoin de moy en ce lieu, puisque les Ministres ne ser∣vent & ne sont propres qu'a cimenter & entretenir la confiance; mais la notré se
voit etablie sur de si solides fondemens qu'elle n'aura plus besoin des appuis ni des aides ordinaires. C'est pourquoy sa Ma∣jesté ordonne mon retour a Brusselles, pour y poursui∣vre de concert avec V. S. en faveur de nos voisins, ce que nous venons de con∣clure icy pour nous memes: Máis elle m'a commandé sur mon depart d'assurer V. S. de sa part, que com∣me une chose n'est jamais mieux conservée que par les principes qui l'ont fait nai∣tre, aussi sa Majesté ne manquera pas d'observer constamment tout ce qui vient d'etre conclu, & cela avec autant de bonne foy, avec la même sincerité, & la meme droiture de coeur, qu'on luy a vû temoigner lors qu'elle l'a fait negoti∣er: Et sa Majesté ne dou∣te point que V. S. ne soient entierement resolus á tenir la même conduite á son e∣gard; & c'est lá le der∣nier sceau qui doit etre ap∣posé de part & d'autre á nos traitez pour preuve d'une
parfaite confiance. Pour ce qui me regarde en particulier, je ne sau∣rois sortir d'icy sans me lou∣er hautement de la judici∣euse, & sincere conduite de Vos H. & P. S. dans tout le cours de cette Negotiati∣on, & particulierement. de l'extreme prudence que vous avez fait paroitre dans le choix de Messieurs les Com∣missaires que vous m'avez donné. Leur candeur, leur capacité consommée, leur ardeur, & leur applicati∣on pour l'affaire proposée, n'ont pas peu contribué au bonbeur & á la rapidité de la conclusion de nos Trai∣tez. Pour moy, comme je me souviendray, toute ma vie avec joye, & meme a∣vec tendresse du court espa∣ce de tems que j'ay passé prés de V. S. aussi dans quelque lieu du monde que je sois appellé á passer ma vie. je ne negligeray ja∣mais de contribuer par mes voeux, par toutes sortes de soins, & de services dont je me croiray capable, au maintien de cette mutuelle
intelligence que je vois si heureusement retablie entre les deux Nations. Cepen∣dant je prieray Dieu ar∣damment de prendre vos H. & P. S. sous sa sainte protection.
A Letter from the States to the King of Great Britain. Feb. 18. S. N. 1668. SIR, IT is merely in Com∣pliance to Custom, that we do our Selves the Honour to write to Your Majesty, in An∣swer to the Letter you were pleased to send us, relating to Sir William Temple: For We can add nothing to what your Majesty has seen your self of his Conduct, by the Success of the Ne∣gotiation committed to his Charge. As it is a Thing without Exam∣ple, that in so few Days, three such important Treaties have been con∣cluded, so we can say, that the Address, the Vigilance, and the Sin∣cerity of this Minister, are also without Exam∣ple
We are extremely obliged to Your Maje∣sty, that you are plea∣sed to make use of an Instrument so proper for confirming that strict Amity, and good In∣telligence, which the Treaty at Breda had so happily begun: And we are bold to say, that if Your Majesty, con∣tinues to make use of such Ministers, the Knot will grow too fast, ever to be untyed; and Your Majesty will ever find a most particular Satis∣faction by it, as well as We, who after our most hearty Thanks to Your Majesty for this Favour, shall pray God, &c. and remain SIR, &c.
Lettre de Recreance de la part des Etats. Au Roy de la Grande Bretagne. Le 18. de Feur. S. N. 1668. SIRE. CE n'est que pour satis∣faire á la coutume que nous nous donnons l'honneur d'ecrire á Votre Majesté, en response de la lettre qu'il luy a plû nous ecrire au sujet de Monsieur le Chevalier Temple; car nous ne pouvons rien ajou∣ter a ce que Votre Maje∣sté meme a vû de sa con∣duite, par le succez de la Negotiation qui luy avoit eté confié. Comme c'est une chose sans example que dans si peu de jours trois si importans Traitez ont êté ajustéz, aussi pouvons nous dire que l'addresse, la vi∣gilance, & la sincerité de ce Ministre sont aussi sans example. Nous sommes bien fort obligés a V. M. de ce qu'il luy a plû se ser∣vir
vir d'un instrument si pro∣pre á achever d'etreindre le noeud d'amitié & de bon∣ne intelligence que le traité de Breda avoit commencé á serrer: Et nous osons dire, qui si elle continue d'employer des semblables Ministres, le lien devien∣dra indissoluble, & Elle en tirera toujours une satis∣faction toute particuliere aussi bien que nous, qui aprés l'avoir remercié de tout notre coeur de cette faveur, prierons Dieu. SIRE, &c.
A Letter from Mon∣sieur de Witt to my Lord Arlington. Febr. 14. S. N. 1668. My Lord, AS it was impossi∣ble to send a Mi∣nister of greater Capaci∣ty, or more proper for the Temper and Geni∣us of this Nation, than Sir William Temple; so I believe, no other Per∣son, either will or can, more equitably judge of the Disposition wherein he has found the States to answer the good In∣tentions of the King of Great Britain. Sir Wil∣liam Temple ought not to be less satisfied with the Readiness, wherewith the States have pass'd o∣ver, to the concluding and signing of those Treaties for which he came hither, than they (the States) are with his Conduct, and agre∣able
manner of Dealing in the whole Course of his Negotiation. It ap∣pears, My Lord, that you throughly under∣stand Men, and bestow your Friendship only upon such as deserve it, since you cause Persons to be employ'd who ac∣quit themselves so wor∣thily. I think my self happy to have negotia∣ted with him, and that by his means your Lord∣ship hath been pleased to give me a new Testi∣mony of your Goodwill. For the Favour you say His Majesty is pleased to have for me; I have no otherwise deserved it than by my Respects for his Royal Person, where∣of I shall endeavour to give Proofs upon all Oc∣casions, His Majesty will please to afford me. In the mean while, I shall wait with Impatience, for some Opportunity, to shew how sensible I am of all your Lord∣ships Civilities, which I shall ever acknowledge, by a true Esteem for
your Merits, and by a strong Passion to let you see, that I am with as much Sincerity, as you can desire, My Lord, Your &c.
Monsieur de Witt á Milord Arlington. Le 14. Fevr. S. N. 1668. Monsieur. COmme il n'etoit pas possible d'envoyer icy un Ministre plus capable ni plus propre pour le natu∣rel & le Genie de cette na∣tion que Monsieur le Che∣valier Temple; aussi croy∣je que l'on n'auroit pas pû choifir une personne qui pu∣isse ou venille plus equita∣blement juger de la dispo∣sition en laquelle il a trou∣vée les Etats á repondre aux bonnes intentions du Roy de la Grande Bretag∣ne. Il ne doit pas etre moins satisfait de la promptitude avec laquelle les Etats ont passé outre á la conclusion & signature de traitez pour lesquels il est venu icy; qu'ils sont de sa conduite, & de sa belle maniere d'agir en toute la suite de sa negtation. Il
paroit Monsieur, que vous vous connoissez en hom∣mes, & que vous ne don∣nez votre amitié qu'á ceux qui la meritent, puisque vous faites employer des personnes qui s'acquittent si dignement. Je m'esti∣me heureux d'avoir eu á negotier avec luy, & de ce que par son moyen il vous a plû me donner un nouveau temoignage de vo∣tre Bienveillance. Pour ce qui est de la bonté que vous dites que sa Majesté a pour moy; je ne l'ay merité point que par le respect que j'ay pour sa per∣sonne Royale, dont je ta∣cheray de luy donner des preuvez á toutes les occasi∣ons qu'Elle me faira la grace de m'en faire naître. J'attens bien avec autant d'impatience celles ou je vous puisse temoigner com∣bienje suis sensible á toutes vos civilitez, que je re∣connoitray toujours par un veritable estime pour votre merite, & par une trés forte passion de vous faire voir que je suis ave au∣tant
de sincerité que vous pouvez desirer Monsieur Votre &c.
The Triple Al∣liance copied from the Ori∣ginal Papers. WHereas by the late Treaty concluded at Breda be∣tween the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands, both Na∣tions have been resto∣red, through the Bles∣sing of God, to that an∣cient Friendship and good Correspondence which was between them: And in Order to cut off all Occasions of farther Differences, and to prevent all new Accidents, which might tend to the Disturbance of the said Amity and good Correspondence of the Subjects on either
part, some Articles and Rules of Navigati∣on and Commerce were there agreed; and par∣ticularly by the Ele∣venth Article of the said Treaty, it was ordain∣ed, That the said King, and the said States Ge∣neral, shall be oblig'd as Friends, Allies and Confederates, mutual∣ly to defend the Rights and Immunities of each others Subjects against all such as shall endea∣vour to disturb the Peace of either State by Sea or by Land, or such, as living within the Dominions of either, shall be declared pub∣lick Enemies by the one or the other: And because it is not particularly determi∣ned in what way and manner the said Confe∣derates stand oblig'd mutually to succour each other; and that it is the fix'd Resoluti∣on of the said King of Great Britain, and of the said States General,
more and more to cor∣roborate and accom∣plish the said Agree∣ment: Therefore in the first place, and above all other things, they consent to confirm the said Treaty concluded at Breda, together with the said Laws of Navi∣gation and Commerce relating to the same, as by these Presents they are confirm'd, under a mutual and undissolva∣ble Obligation to ob∣serve and accomplish them truly and faithful∣ly, and to command the Subjects on both sides exactly and religiously to observe and fulfill them according to the genuine Sense and Te∣nor of the said Treaty and Articles: And for the better ascertaining the mutual Assistance that the Parties are to give to each other, which was omitted in the pre∣ceeding Treaty; for increasing Amity and Friendship between the said King and States Gene∣ral,
and that full Pro∣vision may be made by a nearer Alliance and Union, for the safety and mutual defence of both States, against the pernicious Endeavours and hostile Attempts of any Enemy under any Pretext whatever; We whose Names are un∣derwritten, in virtue of the Orders and full Po∣wers granted to us, and hereunder to be inser∣ted, do covenant and agree, That the said King of Great Britain, and the said States Ge∣neral of the united Ne∣therlands, shall be mu∣tually obliged, united and confederated toge∣ther, as they are by the Force and Virtue of these Presents mutually obliged, united and confederated in a per∣petual League defen∣sive, in the manner, and under the Conditions following.
I.That if any Prince, State, or other Person whatever, without ex∣ception, shall under a∣ny Pretext, invade or attempt to invade the Territories, Countries, or any Places that lie within the Dominions of the said King of Great Britain, or shall exercise any Acts of Hostility by Sea or by Land, against the said King or his Subjects; the said States General shall be obli∣ged, as by Virtue of these Presents they are obli∣ged, to send forty Ships of War, well furnish'd with all things necessa∣ry, to assist the said King to oppose, suppress and repel all such Insults and acts of Hostility, and to procure him due repa∣ration for any Dama∣ges sustained: That is to say, Fourteen of the said Ships shall carry from sixty to eighty great Guns, and four
hundred Men, a just al∣lowance and computa∣tion being made, as well with respect to those Ships that carry a greater, as those that carry a lesser number of Men: Fourteen other Ships shall carry from forty to sixty Guns, and one with another, three hundred Men at the least, Allowance to be made as before; and none of the rest to car∣ry less than six and thir∣ty Guns, and a hundred and fifty Men. Besides which, they shall assist him with six thousand Foot-Soldiers and four hundred Horse; or shall pay a Summ of Money with due regard to the just value of such an as∣sistance, either for the whole or a part, at the choice of the said King. All these Aids shall be furnish'd within six Weeks after they shall be demanded; and the said King shall reim∣burse the whole charge to the said States within
three Years after the Conclusion of the War. II.That if any Prince, State, or other Person whatever, without ex∣ception, shall under any Pretext invade, or at∣tempt to invade the U∣nited Provinces, or any Places situated within the Jurisdiction of the said States General, or garrison'd by their Sol∣diers; or shall exercise any act of Hostility by Land or by Sea against the said States general or their Subjects; the said King shall be obli∣ged, as by Virtue of these Presents he is ob∣liged, to send forty Ships of War well furnished with all things necessa∣ry, to assist the said States General, to oppose, suppress and repel all such Insults and Acts of Hostility, and to pro∣cure due Reparation for any Damages su∣stained
by them: That is to say, Fourteen of the said Ships shall car∣ry from sixty to eighty great Guns, and four hundred Men; a just Allowance and Compu∣tation being made, as well with regard to those Ships that carry a greater, as those that carry a lesser number of Men: Fourteen o∣ther Ships shall carry from forty to sixty Guns, and one with a∣nother three hundred Men at the least: Al∣lowance to be made as before; and none of the rest to carry less than six and thirty Guns, and a hundred and fifty Men. Besides which, He shall assist them with six thousand Foot-Soul∣diers, and four hundred Horse; or shall pay a Summ of Money, with due regard to the just value of such an Assist∣ance, either for the whole or a part, at the choice of the said States. All these Aids shall be
furnished within six Weeks after they shall be demanded: And the said States shall reim∣burse the whole charge to the said King, with∣in three Years after the Conclusion of the War. III.The said Ships of War, and the said auxi∣liary Forces of Horse and Foot, together with the Commanders of the Ships and Forces, and all the subaltern Offi∣cers of both, that shall be sent to the Assistance of the Party injured and attack'd, shall be ob∣liged to submit to his Pleasure, and be obe∣dient to the Orders of him or them, who shall be appointed to com∣mand the Armies in chief either by Sea or Land.
IV.Now that an exact Computation may be made of the Charges that are to be reim∣burs'd within the space of three Years after the conclusion of the War; and that the value of such Assistance may be adjusted in ready Mo∣ney, which possibly the Party attack'd may chuse, either for the whole or a part of the said Ships, Horse and Foot; 'Tis thought ex∣pedient, That the four∣teen Ships carrying from sixty to eighty pieces of Cannon, should be valued at the Summ of eighteen thousand six hundred and sixty six Pounds sterling; or of English Money; the other fourteen which carry from forty to six∣ty Guns, at fourteen thousand Pounds ster∣ling; and the remain∣ing twelve, at six thou∣sand Pounds of the same
Money: Six thousand Foot, at seven thousand five hundred Pounds sterling, and four hun∣dred Horse, at one thousand four hundred Pounds, for one Month: The Money to be paid by the said King of Great Britain at London, and by the said States General at Amsterdam; according as the course of the Exchange shall be at the time when Payment is to be made. But in consideration of the six thousand Foot-Soldiers, the Summ of six thousand Pounds sterling shall be pay'd within the first Month, to defray the Expence of listing and providing the Men. V.This League, with all and every thing therein contained, shall be confirmed and rati∣fied by the said King of Great Britain, and the said States General of
the United Provinces, by Letters Patents of both Parties, sealed with their Great Seal in due and authentick Form, within four Weeks next ensuing, or sooner if it may be; and the mutual Instruments of Ratification shall be ex∣chang'd on each part within the said time. Here follows a Copy of the Powers granted by the most Serene King of Great Britain, &c. Charles, by the Grace of God, King of En∣gland, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all, &c. A Copy of the Pow∣ers granted by the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands. The States General of the United Provin∣ces of the Netherlands, To all those, &c.
In Witness and Con∣firmation of all, and e∣very part of this Trea∣ty, We, whose Names are underwritten, have subscribed and sealed the same, at the Hague in Holland, the 23d. of January, 1668. Signed on the King of England's Part, W. Temple. On the Part of the States, Gellicom. Asperen. J. de Witte. Crommon. Ʋnkel. Jacob Van Coeverden. K. Isbrants.
Factum tri∣pliciter con∣ventum. QƲandoquidem pa∣ctis non ita pridem Bredae inter Magnae Bri∣tanniae Regem, & foede∣rati Belgii Ordines gene∣rales conclusis, pristina in∣ter utramque Nationem Amicitia ac bona Cor∣respondentia annuente di∣vina gratia restituta, a∣de ó ue ad praecidendam omnem omninò in poste∣rum novis dissidiis an∣sam, atque ad praeveni∣enda nova inter utrius∣que partis subditos acci∣dentia, quae dictam a∣micitiam ac bonam cor∣respondentiam turbare a∣liquando possint, in Arti∣culos quosdam Legesque navigationis ac commer∣ciorum
ibidem consensum atque speciatim undecimo dicti Tractatus Articulo statutum sit, uti dictus Dominus Rex, dictique Domini Ordines Genera∣les maneant Amici, con∣foederati Necessitudine & Amicitiâ, conjuncti & astricti, ad Jura atque Immunitates Subditorum alterutrius contra quos∣cunque demum tuendas, qui utriusve status Pa∣cem Terra Marive di∣sturbare conabuntur, vel qui infra alterutra Do∣minia degentes publici utriusque status Hostes donunciabuntur; neque tamen specificè definita reperiantur media, auxi∣liave, quibus Foederato∣rum pars una alteri, tali in casu succurrere debeat: Dicto autem magnae Bri∣tanniae Regi, dictisque Ordinibus Generalibus stet Sententia ist haec Pa∣cta corroborandi magis, magisque perficiendi, Placui imprimis atque ante omnia, dictum Tra∣ctatum Bredae conclusum, dictasque Leges Naviga∣tionis
ac Commerciorum eo spectantes confirmare, quemadmodum per prae∣sentia confirmantur, ob∣ligatione mutua atque indissolubili, eas bona Fide observandi atque adimplendi, jubendique ut à subditis utrinque exacte atque religiose observentur atque adim∣pleantur, juxta genui∣num dicti Tractatus di∣ctorumque Articulorum Sensum ac Tenorem. Ʋt autem praeterea de specialiore auxiliorum mutuo praestandorum de∣signatione prioribus Pa∣ctis omissa, pro Amici∣tiae inter dictum Domi∣num Regem dictosque Dominos Ordines Gene∣rales Incremento majori cnstet, utque securitati & defensioni mutuae u∣triusque status contra in∣fstos conatus vel insul∣tus Hostiles à quoquam frte qucunque demum sub praetextu instituen∣dos, artiori foedere at∣que Ʋione plene prospi∣ciatur; Nos infra scri∣pti Virtute mandati ple∣naeque
potestatis nobis concessae, atque inferius inserendae, convenimus atque statuimus dictum Dominum Magnae Bri∣tanniae Regem, dictos∣que Dominos foederati Belgii Ordines Generales, invicem obstrictos, uni∣tos atque confoederatos fore; quemadmodùm vi ac vigore praesentium in∣vicem obstricti, uniti at∣que confoederati sunt foe∣dere defensivo perpetuo, modo atque conditionibus sequentibus.
I.Quod si Principum Sta∣tuumve aliquis, aut quili∣bet alius, qualiscunque ille tandem fuerit, Nemine excepto, sub quocunque praetextu invaserit vel invadere tentaverit Ter∣ritoria, Regionesque, aut loca quaelibet sub ditione dicti Magnae Britanniae Regis sita, aliumve quem∣cunque Actum hostilem Terra Marive contra dictum Dominum Re∣gem ejusve Subditos ex∣ercuerit; dicti Domini Ordines Generales tene∣buntur, quemadmodùm virtute praesentium tenen∣tur, dicto Domino Regi, ad insultus eos actusque hostiles arcendos, suppri∣mendos, atque repellen∣dos, debitamque Damni dati Reparationem obti∣nendam, auxilio adesse quadraginta Navibus bel∣licis probe instructis; quarum quatuordecim à sexaginta ad octoginta Tormenta Bellica mj∣ra, Hminesque qa drin∣gentos
forant singulae, facta justa compensatione aut retributione inter eas quae numerosiore, & eas quae minus numeroso mi∣lite Nautaque instructae erunt: Quatuordecim a∣liae à quadraginta ad sex∣aginta Tormentis, oomi∣nibusque ad minimum trecntis; facta compen∣satione ut supra, instru∣ctae sint quaelibet: Et nul∣la reliquarum minus fo∣rat quam triginta sex tormenta, Hominesque centum & quinquaginta: atque insuper sex mille Peditibus, & Equitibus quadringentis; vel Va∣lore justo hujusmodi Auxi∣lii in pecunia numeran∣do,  dicto Domino Regi  placuerit, vel parte  Auxilli, aut dicti Vals in Pecunia, quae à dicto Domino R expetetur, Pastatur autem di∣cta Auxilia intra sex sptimanarum spatium postquam postulata fue∣rint; dictisque Dominis Ordinibus à dicto Domino Rege refundentur impen∣sae
omnes intra trienni∣um, à finito atque extin∣cto Bello numerandum. II.Quod si Principum, Statuumve aliquis, aut quilibet alius, qualiscun∣que ille tandem fuerit, ne∣mine excepto, sub quo∣cunque praetextu invase∣rit vel invadere tentave∣rit Provincias Confoede∣ratas, aut loca quaelibet sub Ditione dictorum Dominorum Ordinum Generalium sita, vel in quibus ipsorum miles praesidio positus est, ali∣umve quemcunque actum hostilem, Terra, Mari∣ve, contra dictos Domi∣nos Ordines Generales, corumve subdies exer∣cuerit, dictus Dominus  tenebitur, quemad∣modum Virtute paesenti∣um tenetur, dictis Do∣minis Ordinibus Genera∣libus ad insultus eo ac∣tusque hostiles arcendos, supprimendos, atque re∣pellendos, debitamque Damni dati Reparatio∣nem
obtinendam, auxilio adesse quadraginta Na∣vibus bellicis probé instru∣ctis; Quarum quatuor∣decim à sexaginta ad octaginta Tormenta bel∣lica majora, Hominesque quadringentos ferant sin∣gulae facta justa Com∣pensatione aut Retributi∣one inter eas quae nume∣rosiore, & eas quae minus numeroso milite Nauta∣que instructae erunt: Quatuordecim aliae á quadraginta ad sexagin∣ta Tormentis, Homini∣busque ad minimum tre∣centis, facta compensati∣one ut supra, instructae sint quaeibet: Et nulla reliquarum minus ferat quam triginta sex Tor∣menta, Hominesque cen∣tum & quinquaginta: Atque insuper, sex mille Peditibus, & Equitibus quadringentis; vel va∣lore justo hujusmodi Aux∣ilii in Pecunia, nume∣rando, prout dctis Do∣minis Ordinibus eligere placuerit, vel parte tali praedicti Auxilii, aut di∣cti valoris in Pecunia,
quae ab iisdem expetetur. Praestabuntur autem di∣cta Auxilia intra sex septimanarum spatium postquam postulata fue∣rint: Dictoque Domino Regi à dictis Dominis Ordinibus refundentur impensae omnes intra tri∣ennium, à finito atque extincto Bello numeran∣dum. III.Dictae Naves bellicae, ac dictae equitum pedi∣tumque Co iae auxiliares, Naviumque & Copia∣rum Praefecti, caeterique Officiales bellici minores, vim atque injuriam passo submissi, ejus Voluntatem respicere tenebuntur, at∣que obsequi mandatis ejus corumve, quos summa cum potestate exercitui suo Terra Marive praefi∣cere voluerit.
IV.Quo autem exacta Computatio institui possit impensarum, intra trium Annorum spatium, post∣quam bello finis impositus fuerit, restituendarum; vel etiam justi earundem Valoris in Pecunia nume∣rata quam vim hosticam passo, loco dictarum Na∣vium, Equitum, Peditum∣que, vel omnium vel pro parte eligere forte placu∣erit; visum fuit impen∣sas quatuordcim Navi∣um à sexaginta ad octo∣ginta Tormentis instru∣ctarum, aestimare Pretio octodecim millium sex∣centorum & sexaginta sex Librarum Slings, sive Monetae Anglicanae; eamque qua decim quae á quadraginta ad sexaginta Tormenta fe∣runt, quar dim mil∣libus Libris Sterlings; Reliquarum autem duo∣decim, sex millibus ejus∣dem Monetae libris: Sex mille autem Pdites, sep∣tem millibus & quingen∣tis
Libris Sterlings: Quadringentos vero E∣quites, mille quadragin∣ta ejusdem monetae Li∣bris, pro quolibet Mense computandis: Nummae∣que à dicto quidem Do∣mino Rege Magnae Bri∣tanniae, Londini, à Do∣minis vero Ordinibus Ge∣neralibus Amstelodami solventur, juxta cursum Cambii eo tempore quo Solutio praestanda erit: Pro primo autem Mense respectu peditum supradi∣ctorum, insuper persol∣ventur sex mille Librae Sterlings, pretium nimi∣rum ad eos conscribendos instruendosque necessari∣um. V.Foedus hoc omniaque & singula eo contenta, à dicto D. Rege Magnae Britanniae, dictisque Do∣minis Ordinibus Generali∣bus Foederatarum Provin∣ciarum, per patentes u∣triusque
partis Literas sigillo magno munitas debita & authentica for∣ma, intra quatuor septi∣manas proximè sequentes aut citiùs si fieri poterit, confirmabitur & ratiha∣bebitur, mutuaque Rati∣habitionum instrumenta intra praedictum tempus hinc inde extradentur. Sequitur tenor Man∣dati à serenissimo Domi∣no Rege Magnae Britan∣niae dati. Carolus, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran∣ciae, & Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, &c. Om∣nibus, &c. Sequitur tenor Man∣dati, à Celsis & Praepo∣tentibus Dominis Ordi∣nibus Generalibus foederati Belgii dati. Les Etats Generaux des Provinces Ʋnies des Pais Bas, A tous ceux qui ces presentes, &c.
In quorum omnium & singulorum Fidem ma∣jusque robur, hisce Tabu∣lis subscripsimus, illas∣que sigillis nostris subsi∣gnavimus. Hagae-Comi∣tum in Hollandia die 23tio. Januarii, An∣ni 1668. Signed on the King of England's Part, W. Temple. On the States Part, Gellicom. Asperen. Johan de Witte. Crommon. Unkel. Jacob van Coeverden. K. Isbrants.
THE King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands, ha∣ving with great Grief consider'd, and maturely weigh'd the Miseries and Calamities of the late War between the two Crowns, which ra∣ged in their Neighbour∣hood; and having ob∣serv'd, That the Flames of that Fire have insi∣nuated themselves a∣mong their Neighbours, which by inevitable ne∣cessity will involve the greatest Part of the Princes and States of Christendom in the same Calamities; unless they may be timely ex∣tinguish'd, before they gather greater Force: Have thought that they could not discharge the Duty of that Trust, and the respective Offices, wherein they are pla∣ced by God, if after the Re-establishment of a mutual Friendship and Alliance, between the
Nations of Great Bri∣tain and the United Netherlands, and the Conclusion of a Peace between the four pow∣erful States that were Parties in that bloody War; They should not apply their Minds with the utmost Diligence and Industry to com∣pose the differences that have arisen between the said two Crowns, and more especially to take care, That the Flames of that War, which have been kindled in their Neighbourhood, may be extinguished. Therefore, The most Serene King of Great Britain, and the High and Mighty States of the United Netherlands having with much La∣bour and enest In∣treaty induced the most Christian King to pro∣fess solemnly to the said States General, That he would imme∣diately lay down his Arms, if the Spaniard would either consent to
yield up to him in due form and manner by a Treaty of Peace, all those Places and Forts, together with the Chastelanies and their Dependencies, which he possess'd him∣self of in the Expediti∣on of the last Year; Or will be perswaded to transfer and make over to him all the right that remains to them in the Dutchy of Luxemburg (or else in the County of Burgun∣dy) together with Cam∣bray and the Cambresis, Doway, Aire, St. O∣mer, Winoxbergen, Furnes and Lincken, with their Bailiwicks, Chastelanies, and other Dependencies; and in case they accept the Al∣ternative last menti∣on'd, the most Christi∣an King will restore to the King of Spain, all such Places and Terri∣tories as the French have possess'd by their Arms since they entred Flanders. Provided the
High and Mighty States General, shall on their part promise, and ren∣der themselves Guar∣rantees to the most Christian King, That they will by their Rea∣sons and other effectual Means induce the Spa∣niards to agree to these Conditions. The said King of Great Britain, and the said States Gene∣ral, jointly conclude and judge, That they can do no better Service in this Conjuncture and State of Affairs, either to the two Kings before named, or to the rest of the neighbouring Princes and States; than by their joint Counsels and utmost Endeavours, to exhort, and as much as in them lies, oblige the said two Crowns to make Peace, upon the Terms and Conditions before mention'd. To which end we, whose names are hereunto sub∣scribed, having receiv'd full Power to that Ef∣fect; have by Virtue of those Injunctions, con∣cluded
and agreed, the following Articles. I.That the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands, shall either jointly or separately (provided their Intentions be mu∣tually communicated, and no way repugnant to this Agreement) use their utmost Endeavors and Industry with the most Christian King, to perswade him to pro∣mise and engage in the best Form, and by a so∣lemn Treaty, to the King of Great Britain, and to the States Ge∣neral of the United Ne∣therlands, That he will conclude a Peace and Alliance with the King of Spain, without any Exception or Reserve under whatever Pre∣text, or for whatever Cause; if the King of Spain shall be induced or perswaded by the
King of Great Britain, and the Confederated States, to yield to the most Christian King, ei∣ther the Places he pos∣sess'd himself of, the last Year in the Low-Countries, or to give him an Equivalent, by delivering up the Pla∣ces above mention'd, or others in lieu of them, as shall be mutually a∣greed betwen the Par∣ties concerned. II.That the most Chri∣stian King be induced to consent, That the present Cessation of Arms in the Low-Countries, may be pro∣long'd to the End of the Month of May, to the end that the King of Great Britain, and the confederated States may, in the mean time, employ themselves with all Diligence, Care and Industry, to procure the Consent of the King or Queen of Spain, and their Council, to the aforesaid Terms and Conditions.
III.But that the most Christian King may have no just occasion to refuse to prolong the Cessation of Arms; the King of Great Britain, and the Confederated States shall oblige them∣selves by the same Treaty, to take effectu∣al Care, That the Spani∣ards shall yield to France all that was taken the last Year by the French, or give them an Equiva∣lent, as shall be agreed with the Consent of both Parties. IV.That the most Chri∣stian King shall be in∣duced and perswaded to give intire Credit to, and put full Confidence in, the aforesaid Promise, that his Arms may not for the future disturb the Quiet of the Low-Countries: So that if it should happen, contrary
to all hope and expe∣ctation, that the King of Great Britain, and the confederated States shall not be able by their Exhortations and ear∣nest Sollicitations to perswade the Spaniards to give their Consent to the Conditions a∣bove-mention'd, before the end of the next en∣suing May; and that it become necessary to use more effectual means to that purpose: Never∣theless the French shall not move or introduce their Arms within, or upon the Limits of the said Low-Countries; but the King of Great Britain, and the confe∣derated States shall en∣gage, and take upon themselves to make such necessary Provision as may effectually ob∣lige the Spaniards to ac∣cept the foresaid Con∣ditions of Peace: And it shall not be left to the Discretion of the most Christian King, ei∣ther to exercise any
Acts of Hostility in the said Countries, or to possess himself of any Town, tho' by volun∣tary Surrender; unless the King of Great Bri∣tain, and the Confede∣rated States shall cease and omit to prosecute the Things above-men∣tion'd. V.That when the Peace is made between the two Crowns, not only the King of Great Bri∣tain, and the confede∣rated States; but like∣wise the Emperor, and all the neighbouring Kings and Princes, who shall think themselves concern'd, that the Qui∣et of Christendom re∣main unshaken, and the Low-Countries be re∣stored to the Enjoyment of their former Tran∣quillity; shall be Guar∣rantees and Conserva∣tors of the same: To which end the number of Forces, and other
means to be used against either of the Parties that shall violate or infringe the said Peace, shall be determin'd and agreed, that the Injury may cease, and the Party of∣fended receive Satisfa∣ction. VI.That this Agreement with all and every thing therein contain'd shall be confirm'd and ratified by the said King of Great Britain, and the said States General of the United Provin∣ces, by Letters Patents on both sides, sealed with the Great Seal in due and authentick Form, within four Weeks next ensuing, or sooner, if it can be done; and within the said time the mutual Instruments of Ratifi∣cation shall be exchan∣ged on both sides. In Witness and Con∣firmation of all which, we, whose Names are
under-written have subscribed and sealed the same. At the Hgue in Holland the 23d of January, 1668. Signed as before.
REX Magnae Bri∣tannae, atque Or∣dines Generales Foederati Belgii, reputantes, atque apud Animum expenden∣tes summo cum dolore Miserias Calamitatesque Belli, quod nuper inter duas Coronas in Finibus exarsit, quodque necessi∣tate quadam ineluctabili maximam partem Prin∣cipum atque Statuum Christiani Orbis iisdem involvet malis, Serpente incendii istius Flamma ad Vicinos, nisi tempesti∣ve & in Principio extin∣guatur: Existimarunt se nullatenus functuros par∣tibus Officii munerisque sibi à Deo mandati, si post foeliciter instauratam Amicitiam sub auspiciis divini Numinis, & re∣ductam veterem necessi∣tudinem inter Magnam Britanniam & foedera∣tum Belgium, eodemque tempore stabilitam Pacem inter quatuor potentes Sta∣tus, qui cruenti istius Belli Partes fuerunt; Animum non applicent
sedulo omnique Industria ad componenda dissidia quae oborta sunt inter praedictas duas Coronas, praesertim ut memorati in sinibus Belli flamma sopiatur. Proinde, cum serenissimus Magnae Bri∣tanniae Rex, & Celsi praepotentesque Ordines foederati Belgii, post mul∣tum Operis insumptum, variasque obtestationes, obtinuerint à Christianis∣simo Rege, ut professus sit dictis Ordinibus Gene∣ralibus se ex hoc tempore Arma depositurum, dum∣modo Hispani parati sint illi rite atque solenniter cedere per Tractatum Pa∣cis omnia loca & muni∣menta, ut & Castelanias cum annexis, quae Ar∣mis in Expeditione prae∣cedentis Anni occupa∣vit aut munivit; vel ut Hispani permoveantur in eum transcribere omne jus quod illis restat in Ducatu Luxenburgico (sive in Comitatu Bur∣gundii) praeter Camera∣cum cum Cameracesio, Duacum, Ariam, Fa∣num
St. Audomari, Bergas St. Vinoci, Fur∣nas & Linckium, cum Bailluatibus, Castelaniis, caetisque quae inde pen∣dent: Regemque Chri∣stian, posteriori casu, re∣stituturum Regi Hispa∣niae omnia loca ditiones∣que, quae Galli Armis ex quo Flandriam ingressi sunt occupavere; ea Le∣ge ut Celsi & Praepoten∣tes D. D. Ordines Gene∣rales reciprocè caveant, Regemque Christian, se∣curum reddant, se effe∣cturos apud Hispanos ra∣tionibus aliisque momen∣tis, ut in easdem consen∣tiant Leges; arbitrati sunt se hac tempestate, atque hoc rerum Articulo optimam navaturos ope∣ram non modò utrique praefatorum Regum, sed & aliis Principibus Statibus vicinis; si con∣junctim communicatis Consiliis collatisque Ope∣ris adhortentur, & quan∣tum suarum Virium est permoveant saepiùs dictas duas Coronas, ad ineun∣dam Pacem Legibus at∣que
Conditionibus supra m noratis; in quem fi∣nm facta nobis, qui has Tabuas su,  us, potesta  ea, ex p aescrip andatorum nostrorum coenimus de Articulis & Capitibus se∣quentibus.
I.Qd Rex Magnae Britanniae, & Ordines Generales foederati Belgii, conjunctim vel separa∣tim, communicatis ta∣men omnino consiliis, & secundùm ea de quibus mutuò convenerit, omnem operam omnemque indu∣striam adhibebunt apud Regem Christianissimum ut in optima legitimaque Forma, solenni Tractatu spondeat & promittat Re∣gi Magnae Britanniae, & foederati Belgii Ordinibus Generalibus, se pacis foe∣dus facturum cum Rege Hispaniae, citra omnem quocunque sub praetextu, vel quacunque de causa exceptionem vel dispen∣sationem; si Hispaniae Rex induci aut permove∣ri queat per Regem Magnae Britanniae, & Ordines foederatos, ut cedat Regi Christianissi∣mo, ut loca anno prae∣terito in Belgica armis
occupata, aut aliud tan∣tundem valens, per tra∣ditionem locorum superi∣ùs memoratorum alio∣rumve in compensatio∣nem, de quibus mutuo consensu partes inter se convenire poterunt. II.Ʋt Rex Christianissi∣mus consentire velit in prorogationem vacatio∣nis armorum in Belgica ad finem Mensis Maij, ut temporis interea Rex Magnae Britanniae, & foederati Ordines sedulò omnique industria & di∣ligentia operam dare pos∣sint apud Regem aut Re∣ginam Hispaniae, ejus∣que Consiliarios, uti le∣gibus conditionibusque praefatis consensum adhi∣bere velint.
III.Vt verè Rex Christi∣anissimus nulla justa ra∣tione dictam armistitii prorogationem recusare queat: Rex Magnae Bri∣tanniae, Ordinesque foe∣derati se eodem Tractatu obstringent, id se effectu∣ros ut reapse Gallicae ceda∣tur ab Hispanis omne quod Gallorum Armis Anno praeterito occupa∣tum fuit aut aliud tan∣tundem valens, de quo mutuo partium consensu convenietur. IV.Quod Rex Christianis∣simus inducetur & per∣movebitur praedicto pro∣misso plenam adhibere fi∣dem, atque in eo Fiduci∣am ponere velit, & ut proinde ejus Arma in po∣sterum quiescant in Bel∣gica, ita quidem ut si praeter omnem Spem & expectationem Rex Ma∣gnae
Britanniae foederati∣que Ordines nequeant per exhortationes obtestati∣onesque permovere Hi∣spanos ante finem Men∣sis Maij proximi, ut con∣sensum adhibeant Condi∣tionibus saepiùs memora∣tis, ac proinde ad media majoris efficaciae venire necesse sit; nihilominus Galii intra fines & in fi∣nibus dictae Belgicae sua arma non movebunt aut introducent: Sed Rex Magnae Britanniae & foederati Ordines se ob∣stringent, atque in se re∣cipient id sese suppletu∣ros quod necessum erit, ut Hispani reapse astrin∣gantur, uti Pacem le∣gibus supradictis accipi∣ant; adeóque Regi Chri∣stianissimo integrum non erit ullos exercere Actus hostiles in dictis Regio∣nibus, neque ullum occu∣pare Oppidum licet spon∣te sua se dedere velit, nisi Rex Magnae Bri∣tanniae, & foederati Or∣dines cessent atque omit∣tant efficere id quod jam dictum est.
V.Quod sancita inter duas Coronas pace; ejus servandae Sponsores vin∣dicesque erunt, in forma omnium optima, amplis∣sima & securissima, non modò Rex Magnae Bri∣tanniae, & foedeati Or∣dines, sed & Imperator, omnesque Rges & Prin∣cipes vicini, qui existi∣mabunt sua interesse ut Orbi Christian inconus∣sa maneat quies, & Bel∣gicae sua reddur con∣stetque tranquillias: In quem finem dfncur co∣piarum militarium nu∣merus, aliaque media quibus utendum erit ad∣versus alterutram parti∣um
quae temeraverit vel violaverit Pacem, ut in∣juriam demat ac parti laesae resarciat. VI.Pacta haec conventa omniaque & singula iis contenta, à dicto Domino Rege Magnae Britanniae, dictisque Dominis Ordi∣nibus Generalibus foede∣ratarum Provinciarum, per patentes utriusque partis literas sigillo magno munitas, debita & authentica Forma, in∣tra quatuor septimanas proxime sequentes, aut citiùs si fieri poterit con∣firmabuntur & ratihabe∣buntur, mutuaque rati∣habitionum instrumenta intra praedictum tempus hinc inde extradentur. In quorum omnium & singlorum fidem majus∣que Robur, hisce Tabulis
subscripsimus, illasque Si∣gillis nostris subsignavi∣mus. Hagae-Comitum in Hollandia 23. Die Januarii, 1668. Signed as before.
Separate Articles, which shall be of the same Force and Authority, as if they had been inserted in the Treaty concluded this Day, between the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Nether∣lands. I.I in the procuring of a Peace between Fance and Spain, any Difficulty should arise about the Point of the Renunciation, 'tis to be so contriv'd, That either no mention at all is to be made of it in the Treaty, or at least, the
Form is to be conceiv'd and set down in such Words, as nothing may accrue to either of the two Crowns, on ac∣count of the said Re∣nunciation; nor any Pre∣judice be created to ei∣ther of them in Point of Right: But if either the King of Spain, or the most Christian King refuse their Consent to this Expedient; then the King of Great Britain, and the confederated States, shall proceed a∣gainst the Refuser, as is agreed by the third and fourth Article of the Treaty, and in the last of these Articles respectively; with this Condition however, That in case such refu∣sal proceed from the King of Spain, the most Christian King shall oblige himself not to make War in the Low-Countries, accor∣ding to the Tenor of the fourth Article.
II.That the King of Great Britain, and the States General of the United Netherlands, to the end that all Parties may be satisfied, shall oblige themselves to use their utmost Endea∣vours, that a Peace may at the same time be establish'd between the Kings of Spain and Portugal; but with this Condition, That the most Christian King shall also oblige him∣self, in case this Nego∣tiation cannot be so soon accomplish'd, that such a Delay shall no way hinder on his Part, the Peace between him and Spain; except on∣ly, That it shall he free for the said most Chri∣stian King, to give Succour and Aid to the King of Portugal, his Ally, either by way of Attack, that he may draw the Enemy fron other Parts, or by an
other means which he shall judge to be most convenient and advan∣tagious. And if the Spa∣niards can be brought to consent to a Peace under the said Condi∣tion, and the same be concluded accordingly; then the most Christian King shall be oblig'd wholly to abstain from the Low-Countries, as possess'd of Peace, and not involv'd in the Di∣sputes of either Party. Neither shall it be law∣ful for him to form any Designs against them, either by open force or clandestine Practices; nor to require any Sa∣tisfaction, under the Pretext of Charges and Expences to be sustain∣ed on account of the War in Portugal; either for raising Men, or a∣ny other Burdens of that War. And if it should happen that du∣ring the said War, the auxiliary Forces of the most Christian King, should possess them∣selves
of any Places in Spain or Italy; the said most Christian King shall restore them to Spain, as soon as the Peace with Portugal shall be made. But if beyond, and contrary to Expectation, Spain should refuse to make Peace with the King of Portugal, and also with the most Christian King; under that Exception, of leaving him free to assist his Confederate, as has been already said: In this unexpected case, The King of Great Bri∣tain, and the confede∣rated States, shall be bound to employ them∣selves effectually to procure the Consent of the Spaniards; yet with this Provision, That the most Christian King do also oblige himself not to make War in the Low-Countries, as in the former Case is al∣ready said.
III.But if beyond all ex∣pectation, the most Christian King should entertain such Thoughts as shall induce him to refuse to promise, That he will sign the Treaty of Peace, as soon as the Spaniards shall consent to give up all those Pla∣ces, which have been acquir'd by him in his last Expedition, or such an Equivalent as shall be agreed by mutual Con∣sent; or in case he shall not accomplish his Pro∣mise; or shall disallow or reject the Cautions and Provisions that are express'd in the said Treaty, which are so necessary to obviate the Fears and Jealousies that are most justly conceiv'd of the most Christian King's Inten∣tions to make a farther progress with his victo∣rious Arms into the said Low-Countries, so of∣ten already mention'd:
In all these Cases, and also, if he should endea∣vour by any Subterfu∣ges or oblique Practices to hinder or elude the Conclusion of the Peace; Then England and the United Netherlands shall be bound and oblig'd to join themselves to the King of Spain, and with all their united Force and Power to make War against France; not only to compel him to make Peace upon the Conditions aforesaid, but if God should bless the Arms taken up to this end, and favour them with success; and if it shall be thought expedient to the Par∣ties concern'd, to con∣tinue the War, 'till things shall be restored to that Condition, in which they were at the time when the Peace was made upon the Borders of both King∣doms, in the Pyrenaean Mountains.
IV.These separate Ar∣ticles, with all and e∣very thing therein con∣tain'd, shall be confirm'd and ratified by the said King of Great Bri∣tain, and the said States General of the United Provinces, by Letters Patents of both Parties, sealed with their Great Seal in due and authen∣tick Form, within four Weeks next ensuing, or sooner if it may be; and within the said time, the mutual In∣struments of Ratificati∣on shall be exchang'd on both sides. Done at the Hague in Holland the 23d of January, 1668. Signed as before.
Articuli separati, qui ejusdem e∣runt Virtutis atque Authori∣tatis, ac si in∣serti forent Tractatui, ho∣dierno Die intra Regem Magnae Britanniae, & Ordines Gene∣rales foederati Belgii conclu∣so. I.SI in procuranda pace inter Galliam & Hi∣spaniam se offerat aliqua difficultas super puncto renunciationis, ea ineunda est ratio, ut vel nulla e∣jus in pactis fiat men∣tio, vel ut ejusmodi Ver∣bis concipiatur Formula, ut neutrae duarum Coro∣narum
quoad praedictam renunciationem eo quic∣quam accedat, aut etiam inde creetur aliquod ju∣ris detrimentum: Quod si verò Rex Hispaniarum vet etiam Rex Christia∣nissimus in id consentire nolint, adversus recusan∣tem, Rex Magnae Bri∣tanniae, & foederati Or∣dines procedent; con∣ventum est Articulo ter∣tio & quarto dicti Tra∣citatus, & ultimo horum Articulorum respectivè: Ea tamen Conditione, ut in casu Recusationis Re∣gis Hispaniae, Rex Chri∣stianissimus se reciprocè obstringat, quemadmo∣dùm in Articulo quarto, se nullatenus arma mo∣turum in Belgica.
II.Quod Rex Magnae Britanniae, & Ordines Generales foederati Bel∣gii, ut prolixiùs ab omni parte satisfiat, se obliga∣bunt omnem sedulò ope∣ram daturos, ut Pax inter Reges Hispaniae & Lusitaniae eodem tempore sanciri possit; ea tamen lege ut vicissim Gallia se obstringat, si tam citò non possit id negotium perduci ad exitum, uti Pax inter se & Hispa∣niam nihilominus inea∣tur; hoc excepto, ut libe∣rum sit Regi Christianis∣simo suppetias ferre Regi Lusitaniae Foederato suo, eique auxilio esse, sive inferendo arma sua ut aliunde detrabat hostem, sive alio quocunque modo quem sibi commodissimum atque maximè ex usu fo∣re existimabit. Et si Hispani adduci poterunt ut consentiant in Pacem sub dicta conditione, at∣que ea proinde conclucla∣tur; Rex Christianissi∣mus
tenebitur, à Belgica ut pacata, atque neutra∣rum, partium rebus im∣plicata omnò bstnere; neque ei jus fa qe erit quidquam adversus eam moliri, neque palam vir∣tute bellica, neque clan∣destinis artibus; ut ne petere ullam satisfactio∣nem sub obtentu impen∣sarum erog tronumque quae in bello Lusitanico erunt facienae tam ob delectum Mtum quam alia Belli Onera. Quòd si contingat mnente di∣cto Bello per Auxiliares Regis Christianissimi Co∣pias, occupari loca quae∣dam in Hispania Italia∣ve; Rex Christianissimus simulatque Pax cum Lusitania facta fuerit, eadem restituet Hispa∣niae: Sed si praeter & con∣tra Expectationem Hi∣spania recuset Pacem cum Rege Lusitaniae, ut & cum Rege Christianis∣simo, ea cum exce tione ut Foederato suo liberum sit ei auxiliari, quem∣admodùm jam dictum est; hoc inopinato casu
Rex Magnae Britanniae & foederati Ordines te∣nebuntur reapse id effice∣re ut Hispani omnimodò in id consentiant; ita tamen ut reciprocè Rex Christianissimus se ob∣stringat quemadmo ùm Casu primo, quod non sit moturus Arma in Belgi∣ca.
III.Si praeter omnem ex∣pectionem Rex Christi∣anissimus inducat in a∣nimum ut promittere no∣lit quod Tractatum Pa∣cis signaturus sit, simul∣atque Hispani cessuri fint omnia loca ab eo occu∣pata in novissima expe∣ditione, vel aliud tan∣tundem valens, de quo mutuo consensu conveni∣etur; aut promissorum fidem non impleat, aut detrectet respuatve cau∣tiones & praemunimenta in dicto Tractatu ex∣pressa, quae necessaria sunt ut obviam eatur metui justissimè concepto, ne Rex Christianissimu arma sua victricia in saepiùs memorata Belgi∣ca ulteriùs proferat: Quod omnibus istis casi∣bus, ut & si per alia Subterfugia aut obliquas Artes conetur Pacis con∣clusionem impedire aut eludere; Anglia, foede∣ratumque Belgium tene∣buntur accedere partibus
Regis Hispaniae, omni∣busque & junctis viribus Terra Marique adversus Galliam bellum gerere; ut compellatur non in le∣ges duntaxat saepiùs jam memoratas Pacem face∣re; sed si arma in eum finem sumpta, Deum ha∣beant faventem & propi∣tium, atque de communi consensu id expedire vi∣sum fuerit, etiam bel∣lum continuare, donec res in eum statum fue∣rint restitutae quo fuerunt tempore foederis in colli∣mitio Regnorum in Mon∣tibus Pyrenaeis sanciti.
IV.Articuli hi separati, omniaque & singula iis contenta, à icto Domi∣no Rege Magnae Britan∣niae, dictisque Dominis Ordinibus Generalibus foederatarum Provincia∣rum, per patentes utrius∣que partis litteras si∣gillo magno munitas, de∣bita & authenticu Forma intra quatuor Septimanas proximè sequentes, aut citiùs si fieri poterit, con∣firmabuntur, & ratiha∣hebuntur, mutuaque Ra∣tihabitionum Instrumen∣ta intra praedictum tem∣pus hinc inde extraden∣tur. Actum Hagae-Comi∣tum in Hollandia Die 23 Januarii, 1668. Signed as before.
The Sweedish Act. WHereas the King of Great Bri∣tain, and the States of the United Provinces of the Netherlands have earnestly desired, that the King of Sweeden might be associated with them, as one Principal party, in that League which is this Day con∣cluded, and signed by their Commissioners and Plenipotentiaries; whereby a speedy and safe Peace may be pro∣moted and made be∣tween the two neigh∣bouring Kings, and the publick Tranquillity of Christendom, by the Blessing of God, may be restored: And whereas the King of Sweeden himself, even from the beginning of these Differences, which have grown to such a height between the two Kings, has acquain∣ted the King of Great
Britain, and the States of the united Nether∣lands, with his good and sincere Intentions and Desire, to associate and join himself to them in the Business a∣bove-mention'd, as well in regard of the strict Friendship and Allian∣ces, which he ackow∣ledges have joined him in one common Inte∣rest with them, as that by his Accession to them, all useful and ho∣nourable Means and In∣dustry may be used to establish a Peace be∣tween the two Kings: Professing that no other Difficulty has hitherto restrained him from o∣pening his Mind upon that whole matter, than, That he waited to be informed, what firm and deliberate Counsels the King of Great Bri∣tain, and the States of the United Netherlds, would take in this Af∣fair, and what Assist∣ance would by requisite, with other things of
that kind, in which the said King of Sweeden desires to be satisfied, to the end that he may proceed by the like Steps, and in equal manner, with the King of Great Britain, and the States of the Uni∣ted Netherlands: For these Reasons, 'tis thought expedient for the common good, That the present Instrument between the Ministers, Deputies and Pleni∣potentiaries of the said Kings of Sweeden and Great Britain, and those of the said States of the United Nether∣lands, be put down in Writing, whereby, on the one hand, the King of Sweeden should be ob∣lig'd, after the fore-said Satisfaction receiv'd, to embrace the said League, to use the same Endeavours and to pro∣ceed equally, and in the like manner, as the said King of Great Bri∣tain and the said States of the United Nether∣lands
think fit to do, in order to promote and carry on so useful a Work; and on the o∣ther hand, the said King of Sweeden will be assu∣red, That a Place is re∣served for him, empty and intire, to enter, as one Principal Party, in∣to this League; as by these Presents he is de∣sir'd in the most friend∣ly manner, both by the King of Great Britain, and by the States of the United Netherlands; who on their Part will most readily employ themselves, and all kind of good Offices, to∣wards the Emperor and King of Spain, to the end that all such Diffe∣rences, as the said King of Sweeden may have with them, be compos'd and determin'd, accor∣ding to the Rules of E∣quity and Justice. And forasmuch as concerns the Aid which is requi∣red from the said King, the States General of the United Netherlands
will not be wanting to send with Expedition, such necessary Instructi∣ons to their Ambassa∣dors in the Court of England; that between them, and such Com∣missioners as the said King of Great Britain shall appoint to that purpose, and the Ex∣traordinary Ambassa∣dor of the King of Sweeden, who is now ready to begin his Jour∣ney thither, together with other Ministers residing there on the Part of divers Princes and States, who are concern'd and interes∣ted in this Affair; such Measures may be taken to settle all things which shall be requisite and necessary, that the said League may acquire the substance as well as the Form of a Triple Agree∣ment: To which the respective Parties shall make it their Business to invite their Friends and Allies, if any of
them should desire to be admitted. Done at the Hague, 13/23 of January, 1668. Signed. Christopher Delphicus B. and Count of Dhona. Haraldus Appelboom.
CƲM Magnae Bri∣tanniae Rex, ac Ordines Foederatarum Belgii Provinciarum, valdè desiderarint Re∣gem Sueciae unà cum ipsis in partem princi∣palem adscisci illius Foederis, quod hodier∣no Die per Deputatos ac Plenipotentiarios suos conclusum signa∣tamque est; quo prom∣ta atque tuta Pax in∣ter Reges duos vicinos promoveatur, quoque Divinâ adspirante gra∣tiâ Orbem Christi∣anum publica tranquil∣litas instauretur: Prae∣terea cùm Rex ipse Sueciae jam ab initio e∣orum motuum qui in∣ter duos designotos Re∣ges cruduerunt, tam Magnae Britanniae Re∣gi, quam Foederatorum
Belgarum Ordinibus sit testatus bonum sin∣cerumque suum propo∣situm ac studium quo tenebatur, sese cum iis in hoc negotio modo supradicto sociandi ac jungendi; idque respe∣ctu arctissimae necessitu∣dinis, & horum Foede∣rum per quae commu∣nibus cum iisdem com∣modis adstringi se a∣gnoscit, ut per hunc in∣terventum, perque mo∣dos utiles quoscunque ac honestos, Paci inter binos Reges stabiliendae insudetur: Nec per ullam difficultatem sese hactenus cohibitum, mentem suam super re totâ aperiendi, nisi quòd praestolatus est dum certò resciretur quid deliberati atque firmi confilii Rex Magnae Britanniae & Foedera∣torum Belgarum Ordi∣nes super omni hoc ne∣gotio essent capturi;
tum quousque promo∣veri subsidia, aliaque id genus nonnulla pos∣sent, per quae dictus Sueciae Rex sibi satis∣fieri exoptat, ut pari & aequato cum Magnae Britanniae Rege ac Foe∣derati Belgii Ordini∣bus passu in hac re pro∣cedat: Ea propter, ex commodo communi vi∣sum est fore, si hoc in∣strumentum inter Mi∣nistros Deputatos at Plenipotentiarios di∣ctorum Regum Sueciae Magnaeque Britanniae, nec non dictorum Foe∣derati Belgii Ordinum scripto consignaetur; Quo unâ ex parte obli∣garetur Rex Sueciae, mediante satisfactione praedictâ, ad amplecten∣dum designatum Foe∣dus, & ad eandem na∣vandam Operam, eo∣demque passu proceden∣dum, quo dictus Ma∣gnae Britanniae Rex, di∣ctique
Foederatorum Belgarum Ordines pro∣cedendum sibi esse exi∣stimant, ut negotium tam salutare promove∣atur: Necnon parte ex alterâ dictus Rex Sueciae certus ità fieret locum sibi vacuum ac integrum relinqui Foe∣deris hujusce inter partes principales am∣plectendi, quemadmo∣dùm id ut faciat à Magnae Britanniae Re∣ge, & ab Ordinibus Foederati Belgii per hasce praesentes, maxi∣mè amicum in modum rogatur; qui & ipsi libenter apud Caesarem & Hispaniarum Regem omne officii genus eo convertent, ut Contro∣versiae nonnullae quae dicto Sueciae Regi cum iis possint intercedee, quamprimùm compo∣nantur, & secundum jus fasque è medio tol∣lantur. Quantùm vero
ad subsidia quae à dicto Rege praetendutur; Ordines Foederati Bel∣gii Generales non defu∣turi sunt mandatis ne∣cessariis confestim ad Legatos suos in Aulâ Britannicâ mittendis, ut hos inter & Com∣missarios quos dictus Magnae Britanniae Rex eam in rem designabit, interque Legatum Re∣gis Sueciae extraordi∣narium, qui iter jam nunc eò meditatur ex Belgio, aliosque illic degentes Ministros Principum Statuumve, quos id negotium quo∣que tangit atque con∣cernit; concilia inean∣tur, super necessariis ac requisitis omnibus constituendis: sic ut Foedus jam dictum con∣sequatur, quamprimùm substantiam atque for∣mam Pacti tripliciter conventi; ad quod in∣vitandis Amicis &
Confoederatis, si qui e∣jus in partem admitti volent, omni ex parte opera quam diligentis∣simè dabitur. Actum Hagae-Comi∣tum, 13/23 die Januarii, 1668. Signed, Christophorus Del∣phicus B. ac Comes in Dhona. Haraldus Appelboo∣mius.
The Negotiation of the Peace at Aix la Chapelle. To my Lord Arlington. Antwerp, Febr. 27. S. N. 1668. My LORD, I Did not expect to give your Lordship another Trouble from this Town, but having been detain'd here some Days by the Marquess's Stay 'till this Morning, and intending at Night to follow him for Brus∣sels; I know not whether my Arrival there may be time enough to write by the Pac∣quet that parts from thence to Morrow at Evening, and therefore will not venture by any Omission to forfeit my Charter of writing every Post. I had yesterday a joint Audience with the States Deputies, and will refer your Lordship for what pass'd there, to the in∣closed Memorial on our Part, and Answer given us by the Marquess, which we have
dispatcht this Morning to Sir John Trevor, and Mr. Bouningham at Paris, by a joint Express; in hopes by their Endeavours there to bring the business to a Suspension of Arms, upon the Marquess's having now ac∣cepted the Truce, to the shorter Term of∣fered by France, as well as the longer pro∣pos'd by his Majesty and the States. For the Alternative, we can yet draw no Resolution from him upon it, defend∣ing himself by the Necessity of first con∣certing with us, how he shall be assisted, in case of France refusing both the Truce, and the Alternative. This is in the Mar∣quess an Aim of engaging us by advance in the Party, and thereby exasperating France, by being threatned more directly; and so imbarque the whole Affair into the necessity of a long ensuing War: For, That Spain would much rather engage in with our Assistance, than be forced to a Peace upon our late Project; and I think, pursues its own Interest right in this Point: That of Holland is certainly oppo∣site to theirs, and leads them to nothing so much as the Composure of the Quarrel, with some security of France growing no greater at least on this side. The Marquess is large, in arguing to me, That our Interest lyes in a joint War, ra∣ther than a Peace between the two Crowns,
and that our end must have been hitherto, only to engage Holland with us in the Quarrel; and reasons from Story, and the present Genius of our People and Parlia∣ment. I endeavour to quiet him in this Point, by assuring him, That whatever other Kings have thought or done, and whatever the People wish or talk; the King, in whose sole Disposition all matters of Peace and War lye, will by no Arts nor Considerations be induced to break from Holland, in the Management of this Business; nor make one Pace further in the Spaniards Defence, than the Dutch are wil∣ling to join in. That his Interest as well as Honour lyes in this Resolution, agreed by so many solemn Treaties; and that we as well as the Dutch can very well content our selves with a Peace, and Pursuit of our Commerce; provided we are not a∣larmed too much, and too near, with the Growth of the French Greatness: And I wind up all with pressing him still to an Acceptation of the Alternative, and to embrace the Peace according to our Project. And thus we fence here at present; of all which your Lordship, I believe, will re∣ceive the Detail more at large by the Hol∣land-Pacquet, in the Dispatches past be∣tween me and Monsieur de Witt since my Arrival here; of which I desir'd him to
send Copies to their Ambassadors in En∣gland, to be by them communicated to your Lordship; because, more Uncertain∣ty in the Nieuport-Pacquet, and the pre∣sent Want of a settled Cypher, have hin∣dered larger Transmissions this way, and more directly to your Lordship's Hands. Yesterday came in the Spanish Letters, and though I have not seen the Marquess since; yet by what I have from his Secreta∣ry, and the Count Monterey, I have reason to believe, That Don Juan is on his way hither, and now at Sea with conside∣rable Supplies of Men and Money; which are very necessary here, either for carrying on a War, or inducing a Peace: The Particulars I cannot assure, though the common Talk is, of eight Thousand Spaniards, and six hundred thousand Crowns in Specie, and eight hundred thousand in Remise. 'Tis very possible, your Lordship may hear more there of his coming, and see him sooner than we shall here, as well as judge better; What, or how much it will import to the Effect or Defeat, the Advance or Diversion of the present Councils. What occurs to your Lordship upon it, and will relate to my Conduct here, I hope to receive from you by the first;
not esteeming any thing well begun without a Thread at least from your Lordship to guide me, nor well per∣form'd, 'till I receive your Approbati∣on; upon which depends so much the Satisfaction, as well as good Fortune of, &c.
To Monsieur de Witt. Antwerp. Febr. 27. S. N. 1668. SIR, I Have received much Satisfaction as well a Honour by yours of the 25th, and am very glad to observe the same Conformity of Sentiments between us since we parted, that there ever was while I resided at the Hague. I shall write to you now with my own Ink; ha∣ving already done it with that of the Mar∣quess, who would not be satisfied, 'till I sent you that Dispatch: And I was forced to shew him my Letter before I sealed it, to see whe∣ther it were agreeable with what he had desi∣red me to tell you up∣on that occasion.
I had at my first Au∣dience prest him so closely to declare him∣self upon the Alterna∣tive, and surmounted all his Excuses upon de∣fect of Powers, by de∣siring that he would do it by way of Limitati∣on, not to be ratifyed 'till the Queen of Spain's further Pleasure; that at last he told me he would comply, provi∣ded France could be brought to ratify their Renunciation in Form in the Parliament of Paris; to content them∣selves with an Equiva∣lent for the Cities ta∣ken, which advance so far into the Heart of the Country: And last∣ly, if in case of a Re∣fusal from France, he might be assured before hand of the Assistance of England and Holland by a common Concert. I told him, That for the two Points of the Renunciation and the Equivalent; he might reckon from our
joint Offices upon all we could obtain from France in favor of Spain. For, as to the Equiva∣lent, our own Interest oblig'd us to it, that we might leave so much a stronger Barrier be∣tween France and Hol∣and: And as for the Re∣nunciation, we desir'd it too, but do not con∣ceive it a Thing upon which Spain ought to be too stiff; since our Guaranty was the only strong and solid Renun∣ciation that could be made upon this occasi∣on: And for the As∣surance he desir'd, of being assisted in case of a Refusal from France; I did not doubt, but he had heard at least, the substance of our se∣cret Articles to that purpose; because their Ambassador at the Hague had told me, that a Jew of Amster∣dam had sent him a Copy of them; by which he must needs be well inform'd of our
mutual Obligations, as well as of our Intenti∣ons not only to assist Spain in case of a Refu∣sal from France, but to engage our selves in the Quarrel by an open War of all our Forces against that Crown. After much Discourse to this Purpose, I thought fit for his en∣tire satisfaction upon the Article of our as∣sisting Spain; to let him know clearly, how far he might hope from us in the Point of the Re∣nunciation, and to re∣move a Thought which Don Estavan de Gamar∣ra had given him as co∣ming from me, That there was something in the Articles, by which it should appear, that we would not force Spain in case of a Refusal: For these Reasons, I say, I thought good to read to him our three separate Articles, with∣out giving him a Copy; for he profest to me, that he never receiv'd
one from the Jew, tho' he did the substance of them both from him, and the Baron de Bar∣geyck. I do not know, whether I did well in shewing them to him; but if you think other∣wise, I hope you will excuse me upon my good Intentions, and my usual plain dealing, to inform freely those I treat with, of what they have to hope or to fear. The Marquess took no Offence at our two first Articles; and onely said, He could not comprehend, why the States being newly Enemies to Portugal, and having still a Con∣troversie with them, should desire so much to see them strength∣ned by a Peace with Spain. I told him, my Opinion was; That they drove on this Af∣fair, because they be∣liev'd, that without a Peace with Portugal, Spain would not reco∣ver it self enough to
make head against France, and reduce Af∣fairs of Christendom to the Ballance that is ne∣cessary. He was satis∣fied with this Answer, and spoke no more of the Business of the Re∣nunciation: But, upon That of the Assistance we promis'd; he said, That the Words of the third Article were strong enough, but in too general Terms; and that after he should have accepted the Al∣ternative, France might yet, during the next Month, or April, make some Enterprises upon the Places on this side, before the new Levies could be raised, and take some of them, if he were not furnished with three or four thou∣sand Foot, which might be easily done from Holland: And tho' I told him, that we could not concert further with him before he had accepted the Alter∣native, and by that
means cast the Refu∣sal upon France, and by consequence, the Force of our Arms in case of a War, which we would not de∣clare 'till we were assur'd upon which Side the Refusal would lye; For all that, he would not be satisfied 'till I had writ you that Letter; from which howe∣ver, I lookt for no other Effect, than to let him understand from you, what he had already learnt enough from me. On Sunday-Morn∣ing your Deputies arriv'd, and we had a joynt Audience with the Marquess, whereof they will send you an account. I shall only tell you, That as we prest him very much upon the Alternative, and he
on the contrary, prest us to a Concert for the Defence of Flan∣ders, and in the mean while to make our Preparations for War; I told him thereupon, what Pre∣parations the King my Master had al∣ready made, and those also made by the States on their side; but I desir'd him by his declaring himself upon the Al∣ternative, to let us know, against which of the two Parties such great Prepara∣tions must be em∣ploy'd. I leave it to your Deputies to en∣tertain you with an Account of the long Discourses he made upon this occasion, which however were moderate enough to∣wards our common Intentions. But we
finish'd them all, by giving him a Memo∣rial to the same Ef∣fect with what we had told him; upon which having re∣ceiv'd an Answer ye∣sterday in the Eve∣ning, we dispatch'd it away this Morning to the Ministers at Paris, to forward the Suspension of Arms, if possible, by our accepting the Truce proposed by France, to the end of March. Yesterday came Letters from Spain: And tho' I have not seen the Marquess since, (who went early this Morning for Brussels) yet, by what I have learnt from other Hands, I have reason to think, that Don Juan may be at present upon his Journey hither, and perhaps at Sea,
and that he brings along with him con∣siderable Supplies both of Men and Money. The Talk runs, that he has eight thousand Spa∣niards, six hundred thousand Crowns in Specie, and eight hundred thousand in Returns. But of these Particulars I cannot assure you at present. I have al∣ready inform'd your Deputies more at large in what I have learnt upon the Sub∣ject of Don Juan; as I shall continually do before-hand of all things that I think you would be glad to know from hence: And I believe they will tell you, That there is no need to desire me to use them with all Confidence whereof they hav
already receiv'd Proofs enough since we met here: And, they will be in every thing the more ac∣ceptable to me, by how much I see they are in Esteem with you, and in Credit with the States, as in∣deed they deserve both from their Qualities and their Persons. Pray give me the Liberty to desire you will send a Copy of this Letter to the Dutch Ambassadors at London, with Di∣rections to shew it my Lord Arlington; because I cannot so well trust the Nieu∣port-Pacquet, too much expos'd to the Inspection of the French; and I am not yet so perfect in my Cipher as to write
long Letters in it upon these Affairs. I desire you will remember me to my Friends at the Hague, and believe me, as much as any Man in the World, Sir, Your, &c.
A Monsieur de Witt. Anvers. le 27 Fevr. S. N. 1668. Monsieur, J'AY eprouvé beau∣coup de Satisfaction, & reçeu beaucoup d'Hon∣nour par vôtre Lettre du 25 de ce mois; & je suis fort aise de remarquer une aussi grande Confor∣mité de Sentimens entre nous, depuis que nous nous sommes separez, qu'∣il y en a toujours eu pen∣dant mon sejour à la Haye. Je vous ecriray â present de mon propre encre, car c'est de celle de Monsieur le Marquis que je vous ecrivis dernierement: Il ne voulut point paroître satisfait, que je n'eusse consenti à me charger du soin de vous ecrire, & par la je me vis contraint à luy montrer ma lettre a∣vant que de la fermer; car il falloit qu'il jugeat si elle êtoit conforme à ce
qu'il m'avoit prié de vous mander sur l'affaire qui en faisoit le sujet. Dans ma premiere audience je l'avois si fort pressé de se declarer sur l'alternative, & j'avois êté si habile a lever tou∣tes ses difficultez, & à m'opposer a ses delais qui etoient fondez sur son manque de Pouvoirs; mes instances êtoient si fortes & si redoublées; qu'il me dit enfin qu'il se disposeroit à faire ce que j'exigois de luy, pour û qu'on pût porter la France à faire verifier, dans les formes sa renonciation dans le Parlement de Pa∣ris; à se contenter d'un equivalent pour les Villes prises, lesquelles sont si∣tuées si avant dans le païs, & presque au coeur de l'Etat, & enfin qu'en cas de refus de la part de la France, il seroit as∣sûré du secours de L'An∣gleterre & de la Hollan∣de, & que les deux Nati∣ons armeroient de concert. Au reste, voicy par ou je reüssis à vaincre sa re∣pugnance,
& à obtenir ma demande; je luy dis qu'en attendant l'arrivée de pleinpouvoirs, il fit sous le bon plaisir de la Reine d'Espagne, & ad ra∣tificandum, la declaration sur laquelle je le pressois. A l'egard de conditi∣ons qu'il propose, voicy ce que je luy ay repondu; que pour les deux premi∣eres, savoir la Renuncia∣tion & l'Equivalent, qu'il se pouvoit promettre de nos soins & de nos offices mutuels tout ce que nous pourrions obtenir de la France en faveur de l'E∣spagne; à quoy j'ay ajou∣té, qu'à l'egard de l'E∣quivalent, nôtre interêt commun demandoit qu'on pressât cet Article, & qu'il fust accordé, afin qu'une plus forte barriere fust laissée entre la Fran∣ce & la Hollande. Que pour ce qui regardoit la Renonciation, nous la de∣sirions aussi; mais que nous ne croyons pas que ce fût une chose sur la∣quelle l'Espagne dût s'opi∣niâtrer; puisque nôtre
Guarantie êtoit l'unique seureté & la seule solide Renonciation, sur laquelle il fût seur de se reposer en cette occasion. Qu' à l'egard de l'assurance qu' il vouloit avoir d'un se∣cours, en cas que la France refusât les Conditions; je ne doutois point qu'il n'eût êté instruit, du moins en substance, du contenu de nos Articles secrets touchant ce point là; que l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne à la Haye m'∣avoit même dit, qu'un Juif d'Amsterdam luy en avoit fait tenir la co∣pie, par où il devoit être assez instruit de nos enga∣gemens mutuels, aussi bien que de nos Intentions pour l'Espagne; qui ê∣toient, non seulement de l'assister en cas d'un re∣fus de la part de la France, mais de nous engager dans sa querelle, par la de∣claration d'une guerre ou∣verte en tournant toutes nos forces contre la France. Aprés beaucoup de dis∣cours sur cetté matiére, j'ay trouvé à propos, afin
de le satisfaire pleinement sur l'Article de secours, pour luy faire evidem∣ment sentir jusqu'ou il pouvoit conter sur nous, dans l'affaire de Renonci∣ation, aussi bien que pour luy ôter la pensêe que Don Estavan de Gamarra luy avoit donnée de ma part, que peut être y avoit il quelque chose dans les Ar∣ticles par laquelle il paroî∣troit que nous ne voulions forcer l'Espagne en cas d'un refus: Pour toutes ces raisons dis je, j'ay jugé a propos de luy lire nos trois Articles separéz, sans luy en laisser la co∣pie; car il me declara, qu'il ne les avoit point reçeus de son Juif, mais qu'il en avoit vû la sub∣stance, & que c'êtoit par le canal de ce Juif & du Baron de Bargeyck. Je ne say pas si j'ay bien fait en les luy montrant; mais en cas que vous jugiez le contraire, j'espere que vous m'excuserez toujours en faveur de mes bonnes In∣tentions, qui m'ont tou∣jours porté à declarer
ouvertement à ceux avec qui je traite, tous les su∣jets qu'ils ont à craindre & d'esperer. Le Mar∣quis ne se formalisa pas de nos deux premiers Ar∣ticles; il dit seulement, qu'il ne peut comprendre pourquoy les Etats qui etoient n'agueres ennemis de Portugal, & à qui il reste encore des chose à demeler avec luy, souhai∣toient fi fort de voir accroi∣tre leurs forces par une paix avec l'Espagne: Je luy dit que ma pensée e∣toit, qu'ils pressoient cet∣te affaire, parce qu'ils croy∣oient que sans la paix a∣vec le Portugal, l'Espagne ne se verroit jamais en e∣tat de faire tête à la France, & de donner par ce moyen aux affaires de la Chretienté le juste equi∣libre qu'elles doivent avo∣ir. Il se contenta de ce∣la, & ne parla plus de l'affaire de la Renoncia∣tion. Mais à l'egard de secours que nous promet∣tons, il me dit, que les termes de l'Article troisi∣eme etoient assez forts,
mais trop generaux; & qu'apres qu'ils auroient accepter l'Alternative, la France pourroit encore pendant les Mois de Mars & d'Avril, faire quel∣ques tentatives sur les Villes du Païs bas; que les nouvelles levées ne pourroient encore etre sur pied; & que la Flandre se verroit enlever quelqu' une de ses places, si elle n'etoit munie de trois ou quatre mille Hommes de Pied, & qu'il etoit faci∣le à la Hollande de les fournir. Quoy que j'aye pris le soin de luy repeter, que nous ne pouvions en∣trer en aucune Negotia∣tion avec luy, avant qu' il eut accepté l'Alterna∣tive, que par là le refus retomberoit sur la France, & que par consequent el∣le s'attireroit toutes nos forces sur les bras en cas de guerre; qu'enfin ces forces ne pouvoient faire de demarches jusqu'a ce qu'on eut sçû de quel côté seroit le refus. Tout ce∣la ne le satisfit pas, & il ne parut point content que
je ne vous eusse ecrit la Lettre qui a precedé celle cy, de laquelle pourtant je n'attendois pas d'autre effet que de luy faire voir par vôtre propre Plume, ce qu'il avoit deja assez appris par ma bouche. Le Dimanche au ma∣tin Messieurs vos Depu∣tez arriverent, & nous eûmes conjointement nô∣tre audience du Marquis; c'est de quoy ils vous ren∣dront conte; je vous di∣ray seulement, que comme nous l'avons fort pressé sur l'Alternative, & que luy au contraire, ne nous a parlé & n'a insisté que sur un Concert pour sa defense, nous proposant de faire tous nos prepara∣tifs pour la guerre en at∣tendant; je luy ay parlé de ceux que le Roy mon Maitre faisoit deja, & de ceux que les etats fai∣soient aussi de leur côté: Je l'ay prié de nous ap∣prendre en se declarant sur l'Alternative, contre le quel de deux parties il faudroit employer de si grands preparatifs. Je
laisse à Messieurs vos Deputez le soin de vous entretenir du Detail de la Conference, qui fut longue, & dans laquelle le Marquis parla sou∣vent & long tems, mais toujours d'une maniere assez moderée, & qui ne paroissoit point s'eloigner de nos communes Intenti∣ons. Notre audience s'est conclue par la Presenta∣tion d'un memoire que nous luy avons remis, & qui contenoit en substance les choses que nous etions charge de luy dire. No∣tre memoire ayant êté re∣pondu hier au soir, nous avons envoyé ce matin la reponse aux Ministres qui sont a Paris, & cela dans la veue de faire reüs∣sir, s'il est possible, la suspension d'Armes; qui selon toutes les apparen∣ces ne sera pas long tems differée, des qu'on aura appris en France, que la treve qu'elle a proposee jusqu'a la fin de Mars vient d'etre acceptee. Il arriva hier des Let∣tres d'Espagne, & quoy
que je n'ay pas vû le Marquis depuis qu'il a reçeu ses depeches (car il à parti ce matin des la pointe de jour pour Brus∣selles) j'ay pourtant lieu de conclure de tout ce que j'ay appris d'ailleurs, que Don Juan est enfin par∣ti, & même deja embar∣que pour se rendre en ce païs-cy, & qu'il a mené avec luy des secours con∣siderables & d'Hommes & d'Argent; le bruit court, que les Troupes con∣sistent en 8000 Espag∣nols, que l'Argent se monte a 600000 ecus en especes, & en 800000 ecus de remises. Mais en vous ecrivant ces par∣ticularitez je ne pretens vous apprendre encore ri∣en de certain. J'ay dit dans un plus grand de∣tail, à Messieurs vos Deputez, ce que j'a∣vois appris touchant Don Juan; & à l'ave∣nir je seray toujours prest à leur declarer toutes lès choses que je croiray que vous serez bien aise que vous soient mandées d'i∣cy.
Je me flate qu'ils vous diront qu'il n'est pas necessaire de me prier de me communiquer, & de m'ouvrir a eux avec toute sorte de confiance, puisque je leur en ay deja donne des preuves depuis que nous nous sommes rassemblez icy. Leur entretien & leurs person∣nes me seront d'autant plus agreables, que je vois qu'avec votre estime ils ont aussi l'estime & la confiance de Messieurs les Etats; c'est une ju∣stice rendue a leur meri∣te & a leurs qualitez per∣sonnelles. M'accorderez vous la liberte de vous prier d'envoyer une copie de cette Lettre aux Ambas∣sadeurs d'Hollande a Londres, avec ordre de la faire voir a Milord Arlington; car je me defie extremement du courier de Nieuport, trop expose a la rencontre des François; & je ne suis pas encore assez grand Maître dans mon chif∣fre, pour m'en servir
dans les affaires d'un aussi long detail. Je vous prie de m'ai∣der a me conserver dans le souvenir de mes amis de la Haye, & de me croire toujours, & autant que personne du monde, Monsieur, Vôtre tres humble & tres affectionne Ser∣viteur.
The Memorial given to the Marquess of Castel-Ro∣drigo. Febr. 1668. My Lord, THE under-signed Resident of the King of Great Britain, and the Deputies Ex∣traordinary of the States General of the Ʋ∣nited Neitherlands, find themselves obliged to represent to your Ex∣cellency, That his Ma∣jesty and their High and Mightinesses having lately concluded a Trea∣ty, by which they have not only provided for their proper Security, but also for the Peace and Quiet of Christen∣dom, in case their Neigh∣bours proceed in it with the same good In∣tentions wherewith the said Allies have begun this Affair: His said
Majesty and Their High and Mightinesses, for the better perfecting so Christian a Work, having given Orders to their Ministers resi∣ding at the Courts of both Kings at present in War, to endeavour by all means, and by a common Concert to di∣spose both the said Kings to accept the means proposed by the said Allies, as the rea∣diest and most necessa∣ry for arriving at so happy an End; that is to say, to accept the Peace upon the Alter∣native already propo∣sed: And (to prevent the Accidents that may intervene to hinder the Progress of the Treaty) to consent also imme∣diately to a Truce 'till the end of March, and in the mean while to send their Plenipoten∣tiaries to Aix la Cha∣pelle, furnish'd with In∣structions and Powers, necessary to treat and conclude a Peace upon
the said Alternative; that the Fire at present kindled, and whereof in all appearance the Sparks are ready to fly through the greatest Part of Christendom; may be soon extingui∣shed, and give place to a general and la∣sting Peace, to the safe∣ty of all those who find themselves engaged in the sad Effects or Con∣sequences of the pre∣sent War. The said Resident and Deputies extraordina∣ry are more particular∣ly obliged by the Or∣ders of their Masters, to represent to your Excellency, how glo∣rious it will be to you, how advantageous to the common Ends of the Peace, and how necessary for preserv∣ing to Spain the remain∣der of Flanders; that your Excellency by vir∣tue of your Powers, would make the first Step in this great Af∣fair, by consenting rea∣dily
to the said Alter∣native, and to the said Truce, and to the di∣spatching of the said Plenipotentiaries to Aix la Chapelle; and for the better entring into this Negotiation, and the said Truce, That your Excellency will declare immediately your Acceptation of the Truce, which the most Christian King has proposed, from the 18th of November to the last of March, 1668. And upon all these Points, the said Resi∣dent and Deputies ex∣traordinary, do pray your Excellency with all possible Instances to give them a speedy and plain Answer, agreea∣ble to the good and ho∣ly Dispositions where∣with his Majesty and Their High and Mighti∣nesses have begun and pursued this glorious and Christian Design of a general Peace.
Memoire au Mar∣quis de Castel-Rodrigo. An∣vers. Fevr. 1668. Monsieur, LES sous-signez Re∣sident de la Grande Bretagne, & les Depu∣tez extraordinaires des Etats Generaux de Pro∣vinces Ʋnies de Pï bas se trouvent obligez de re∣presenter à V. E que sa Majesté & leurs Hautes Puissances ayans depuis peu conclus un traité, par lequel ils n'ont pas eule∣ment pourvû a leur propre seureté, mais aussi á la paix & repos de la Chre∣tiente, en cas que leurs voisins y procedent avec les memes bonnes inten∣tions dont les dits Alliez ont entame cette affaire; sa dite Majeste & leurs Hautes Puissances, pour mieux acheminer un ou∣vrage si Chretien, ont
donné ordres à leurs Mi∣nistres auprés de deux Couronnes à present en guerre, de tacher par tous moyens, & par un Con∣cert commun de disposer les dites deux Couronnes à accepter les moyens pro∣posez par les dits Alliez, comme les plus prompts & les plus necessaires pour arriver à une fin si heu∣reuse; c'est à dire, de con∣sentir à la paix sur l'Al∣ternative deja proposée; & (pour prevenir les ac∣cidens qui pourront sur∣venir pour empecher le progrez d'un traité) de consentir aussi prompte∣ment à une treve jusqu'é la fin du mois de Mars, & en attendant, d'en∣voyer leurs Plenipotenti∣aires à la Ville d'Aix la Chapelle, munis des In∣structions & de pouvoirs requis pour y traiter & conclurre la Paix sur la dite Alternative, afin que le feu qui se voit à present allumé, & du∣quel les estincelles se vont en apparence jetter dans la plus grande part de la
Chretiente, se puisse bi∣entôt etouffer; & faire place a une paix genera∣le, durable & salutaire a tous ceux qui se trou∣vent enveloppes ou dans les effets ou dans les con∣sequences funestes de la guerre presente. Les dits Resident & les Deputez Extraordi∣naires se trouvent plus particulierement obliges par les ordres de leurs Maitres, de representer a V. E. combien il luy sera glorieux, & avan∣taguex a la fin commune de la paix, & necessaire a la conservation de ce qui reste a l' Espagne dans les Pais bas; que V. E. en vertu de ses pouvoirs fasse le premier pas dans cette grande af∣faire, en consentant prom∣ptement a la dite l'Alter∣native, & a la dite Treve, & a la de∣peche des dits Plenipo∣tentiaires a la Ville d'Aix la Chapelle: Et aussi pour mieux ache∣miner cette Negotiatia∣tion & la dite Treve,
que V.E. se declare prom∣ptement d'accepter la tre∣ve que sa Majeste. Tres Chretienne a proposee le 18 de Novembre 1667, jusqu'au dernier jour de Mars 1668. Et sur tous ces points les dits Resident, & les Deputez Extraordinaires se trou∣vent obliges de prier V. E. avec toutes les instan∣ces possibles, de leur don∣ner une reponse prompte, nette & agreable aux bonnes & saintes disposi∣tions avec lesquelles sa Majeste & leurs Hautes Puissances ont entame & poursuivi ce dessein glorieux & Chretien de la Paix commune.
To my Lord Hallifax. Brussels, March 2. S. N. 1668. My Lord, IT would be a difficult thing to answer a Letter I receiv'd lately from your Lordship, if it could ever be difficult for me to do a Duty where I Owe it so much, and Pay it so willingly. The Re∣flections I make upon what you say, and what I hear from other Hands of the same kind, carry me only to consider how much by chance, and how unequally Per∣sons and Things are judged at a Distance; and make me apprehend from so much more Applause than is my Due upon this Occasion, that upon the next I may meet with as much more Blame than I deserve; as one seldome has a great Runn of Cards that is not followed by an ill one, at least Gamesters that are no luckier than I. It is not my Part to undeceive People, that will make my Successes pass for Merit or Ability; but for my Friends, I would not cheat them to my Advantage it self; and therefore will tell you the Secret of all that has seemed so surprizing in my Negotiation; which is, That Things drawn out of their Center, are not to be
moved without much Force, or Skill, or Time; but to make them return to their Center again, there is required but little of either, for Nature it self does the Work. The true Center of our two Nations now so near ally'd, is where they now are seat∣ed; and nothing was in the way of their returning thither, but the extreme Jealou∣sies grown between the Ministers on both sides, and from thence diffused among the People; and This it was my good luck to Cure, by falling into a great Confi∣dence with Monsieur de Witt, which made all the rest easie: And there is the whole Story; that you may see how much you are either biass'd, or mistaken in all the rest you say of it. For what you menti∣on of Reward, I know not how it came into your Head, but I am sure it never en∣ter'd into mine, nor, I dare say, into any Bodies else. I will confess to you, that considering the Approbation and good O∣pinion which his Majesty, and some con∣siderable enough about him, have been abused into, by my good Fortune in this Business: I think, a wiser Man might possibly make some Benefit of it, and some of my Friends have advised me to at∣tempt it; but it is in vain: For I know not how to ask, nor why, and this is not an Age, where any Thing is given without
it. And by that time you see me next, you shall find all this which was so much in Talk to my Advantage for nine Days, as much forgotten as if it had never been, and very justly I think; for in that time it receiv'd a great deal more than its Due, from many other Hands as well as from yours. This I tell you, that you may not deceive your self by hoping to see me ever considerable, further than in the Kindness of my Friends, and that your Lordship may do your Part to make me so in that, seeing me like to fail in all other Ways. But as I remember, this is a Time with you for good Speeches, and not for ill Letters; I will therefore end this, to make you more Room for the others, and hope that none of the Eloquence you are entertained with, can be more persua∣sive than a plain Truth, when I assure you that I am, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Faithful Humble Servant.
To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, March 2. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Am sorry his Majesty should meet with any thing he did not look for at the opening of this Session of Parliament; but confess I do not see why his Majesty should not only consent, but encourage a∣ny Enquiries or Disquisitions they desire to make into the Miscarriages of the late War, as well as he has done already in the matter of Accounts: For, if it be not necessary, it is a King's Ease and Happi∣ness to content his People. I doubt, as Men will never part willingly with their Monies, unless they be well perswa∣ded it will be imploy'd directly to those Ends for which they gave it; so they will never be satisfy'd with a Government, unless they see, Men are chosen into Offi∣ces and Imployments by being fit for them; continued, for discharging them well; rewarded for extraordinary Merit; an punish'd for remarkable Faults. Be∣sides, in these Cases his Majesty discharges the Hardship and Severity of all Punish∣ments upon the Parliament, and commits no Force upon the Gentleness of his own
Nature, while his Subjects see, that no Tenderness of their Prince, nor Corru∣ption of Ministers, can preserve them long from paying what they owe to any Forfeits of their Duty. Nor indeed, can any Prince do Justice to those that serve him well, without punishing those that serve him ill; since That is to make their Conditions equal whose Deserts are different. I should not say this to any Person but your Lordship, to whom I know part of that Justice is due. But to say Truth, the Progress and End of the last War, went so much to my Heart, and I have heard so much lately from Monsieur de Witt, concerning the carriage of it on our side, especially what fell un∣der his Eye, while he was abroad in the Fleet; that I cannot but think the Par∣liament may be excused for their Warmth in this Pursuit. But your Lordship can best discern by the Course of Debates, whether this proceeds from a steddy In∣tention upon a general Good, or from some accidental Distempers, from which the greatest and best Assemblies of Men are not always free, especially when they have continu'd long together.
I beg Your Lordship's Pardon for my Liberty in these Discourses, to which You were pleased to encourage Me by hearing Me so obligingly those few Minutes I was allowed for such Talk or Thoughts at my last being with You, and from the Sense You then expressed of the absolute Neces∣sity there was for His Majesty to fall into a perfect Intelligence with His Parliament, especially being engaged into an Appear∣ance of Action abroad by the Force of this present Conjuncture. I am ever, &c. To Sir John Trevor. Brussels March 5. S. N. 1668. SIR, ABout ten Days since I dispatcht a∣way an Express to You (joyntly with the Deputies of Holland) whereby We acquainted You and Mons. Beuningham that the Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo had ac∣cepted the Truce and Suspension of Arms proposed some Time since by France until the End of March, as well as the other proposed lately by His Majesty and the States General until the End of May. We are in some Pain to have yet received no
Account of His Arrival, but hope this Delay will be recompenced by bringing Us news of the Treaty's being accepted in the same Terms by that Court as well as by this. However in case of any Scruple which may be raised there, for want of due Notice given of the Acceptation here, we now send You an Act of the Marquis Castel-Rodrigo, authorizing His Majesty's and the States Ministers at Paris, to ma∣nifest to that Court His Excellency's said Acceptation, and thereupon to negotiate and conclude the same on that Side. And, to the End that no Objection may be made by France against the present Ex∣pedition of this Truce in order to an en∣suing Treaty and Peace; We send You likewise by this Express the Marquis's last Answer to our Instances Yesterday made for the Acceptation also of the Alterna∣tive, which is so full and so direct to the Ends of our late Treaty, that we have now nothing left to do on this Side; the Re∣mainder of the whole Negotiation lying on your Parts at Paris, which we are here very much pleased with, seeing it is de∣volved to so much abler Hands. I hope You will place the whole Strength of His Ma∣jesty's and the States General's Credit in that Court upon an immediate Consent to the Suspension of Arms; knowing how
dangerous all new Accidents may prove to the fair Hopes and Prospect in which we are at present of a Peace; and withal how far His Majesty and the States are engaged to take Part in any Action that shall begin after the Marquis's accepting the Alterna∣tive, as well as all other Points of their late Project for bringing about so happy an End. For a good Presage of this greater Peace, we received here the News of That of Por∣tugal, the very Evening which brought us so happily the Marquis's Answer upon the Alternative; which has so much raised the Hearts of the Spaniards here, that we are likely to have less Thanks for pressing them so far to a prejudicial Peace, as they esteem it on this side: But since they are already obliged, it will depend wholly up∣on France to hinder the Conclusion of this in the same Season with the other; which I will believe them too wise to do, as well as too constant to the Assurances they have already given His Majesty, the States, and several other Princes in this Point; of which the immediate consenting, a Suspension of Arms will shew the Mean∣ing and Effect. I shall no further increase your present Trouble than by the Professions of my being Sir, Your most humble Servant.
TO THE Count de Molina, Spanish Ambassa∣dor at London. March 7. 1668. My Lord, YOUR Excellence cannot doubt of my Satisfaction in ar∣riving at Brussels, to find my self there im∣mediately possessed of your Letter with the inclosed Paper; tho' the News of your Health was more ne∣cessary to me than that of the Unreasonable∣ness of one of your Neighbours, and true Interests of the others, which I find so well described there. But the best Ink in the World is not a Balsom that can cure such Wounds; they must find their Remedy from more powerful Medicines, which the
Marquis of Castel-Ro∣drigo has given us rea∣son to hope, if France will still chuse rather to fall out with all the World, than to make a Peace so much to their own advantage as that we offer them. At least it is certain, that your Excellency with a stroak of your Pen, has brought to light the most covered De∣signs of your Enemies, undeceived with the greatest Clearness your Friends, and put Flan∣ders under the securest Protection; of which I cannot help rejoycing with You as the Au∣thor. For what relates to Father Patrick, how much soever I concern my self in his Fortunes, I do not yet see any way that it can be in my power to serve him on this Occasion; the last French Conquests having determined the Dispute between the Abbot Arnolphino and the Marquis of Baden
about the Abbey de la Charité. But the Mar∣quis de Castel-Rodrigo has assured me, he will find some other way of shewing the Esteem He has both for the Merits and Person of Father Patrick, to whom I hope Your Excellen∣cy will do me Justice, having endeavoured (though without Suc∣cess by this unhappy Conjuncture) all that lay in my Power to serve Him. I Kiss Your Excellency's Hands, and am Yours, &c.
Al Conde de Molina. 7 Marco 1668. Sennor Mio, NO puede V. E. du∣dar del gusto que he tenido enllegar a Brus∣selleus, aviendome yo al∣lado a qui con su car∣ta en las manos con el quaderno adjunto, aun∣que a mi era mucho mas necessaria la noticia de su salud de V. E. que no de la sinrazon de uno suyo vezino ny del in∣terez verdadero de los otros, que van muy bien traçados en el dicho qua∣derno; Pero la mejor tin∣ta del mondo no es bal∣samo bostante para curar tales heridas, y es me∣nester remedios mas fu∣ertes, a los quales la pru∣dencia del Sennor Mar∣ques de Castel Rodrigo a dado lugar, si la Francia
par sus peccados mas quisiere la guerra con todo el mondo, que no la poz avantajada que la hemos offrecido: a lo menos se puede dezir que S. E. con un rasyo de pluma a sacado en luz los desinios mas en∣cubiertos de sus enimigos, a dado a los interessados el mas claro dessenganno, y puesto las cosas de Flandes debaxodel am∣paro mas fuerte que se podia buscar, de que no me puedo impedir de dar a V. E. la enorabuena. Por interessado que soy en los aumentos del Padre Patricio, no veo come sara possible servirle mas en esta occasion; avien∣do la Francia con su postrera conquista deter∣minada el pleyto entre el Abad Arnolfin y el Marques de Baden, en la de la Abadia de la caridad. Pero el Sen∣nor Marques me ha pro∣metido con muchos ve∣ras de hallar otra ma∣nera di manifestar en quanto stima la person∣na
y los meritos del dicho padre, a quien V. E. me ha de justi∣fiar por averme empen∣nado quanto era possible en suo negotio aunque faltado en alcancarle por la desdicha de las coy∣unturas. B. L. M. D. V. E. Su Mayor Servidor.
To my Lord Arlington. Brussels March 13. S. N. 1668. My Lord, THE last Post brought me none from England, nor has this Week as yet brought me any from Spain; so that 'tis France only at this Time that entertains Us. The Dispatch return'd Us late last Night from Sir John Trevor upon the point of the Alternative, has given the Town here occasion to talk of the Peace as a Thing done; though I know not yet what the Marquis says to it, having not seen Him since; but think it possible He may be as much surprised with their Accepta∣tion, as Sir John Trevor says They were with His. It seems plain to Me that France desires to pursue the War, but fears our engaging in it, and to hinder That, will use all the Address that can be to lay the Obstruction of Peace upon the Spaniards; They on the other Side desire to continue the War, provided they may be sure of our and Holland's Assistance, and to that End, if they play their Game well, they will be sure to retort the Ad∣dress of France upon them, and lay the Blame of the War at their Doors, without
which they have no Hopes of Holland's falling into their Party; who whether they are partial to the French or no in this Quarrel, are certainly partial to the Peace, and will not be drawn to share in the War but upon the last Necessity. Therefore my Business will be at present, to induce the Marquis to clear those two Scruples made by the French upon His Powers, and the Choice of one or other of the Alternatives; in which I know not what Success I am like to have after so many Advances made already as He con∣ceives on His Side, and so near Don John's Arrival, at least according to the present reckoning here, which perswades us that He parted from Madrid upon the 22d. past. I know your Lordship has the same Pa∣pers I received from Sir John Trevor, and for what occurrs upon them here, I beg your Lordship's Leave that I may this once refer you to the enclosed Copy of my Let∣ter this Evening to Him upon that Subject, having not Time left Me to repeat it here o at large as I ought to do. The Truth is, I never had so hard a Part upon me as I have at this Time, to keep all in good Temper between the Marquis and the Deputies of Holland; For besides that their Ends may perhaps be a little dif∣ferent,
their Complexions are extremely so: He is not the easiest of Access, nor the quickest at Dispatch; And His Officers are at the same Rate: The Dutch Deputies are all upon the Spur, and when they de∣mand an Audience or a Paper, if they have it not within half an Hour, they say the Marquis Se mocque d'eux, et Ils se trou∣vent obligez de l'escrire ce Soir aux Estats, et que le Marquis ne cherche que des Retarde∣ments, & par la' de les engager dans la Guerre. When they receive Orders to move the Marquis in any Particular, they must have it granted the first Time it falls in Discourse, and in the very same Form and Words it runs in their Letters; and think the Marquis ought to observe the States Order and Directions as punctually as They; And will reason Him to the Death upon every Point: The Marquis who uses to owe no Man any thing in that Kind, grows ten times more difficult by that time they have talked an Hour, than He was at first; and engaging in large Discourses, gives them twenty Occasions of growing Warm upon the Place, and Wise afterwards by Interpretations, that, God knows, were never in the Case; so that in their Audi∣ences, between the Marquis's Eloquence and their Leyden Philosophy, the Cards com∣monly run high, and all is Picque and Re∣picque
between them; and I am to go to one and t'other next Day to set all right again, and endeavour to make them agree asunder upon Points which they could by no means agree upon together. But if I go on, I shall weary your Lordship as much as they weary Me; And therefore I shall break off this Letter with telling You only, that the Talk here is of an Attempt for the Relief of Genap, and that the Horse are drawing together for that Purpose, with what Success I know not, but am sure, the French deserve none there, for continuing an Attempt so long after the Suspension of all Enterprises was accorded. I am ever, &c. To Sir John Trevor. Brussels March 13. S. N. 1668. SIR, I AM two Letters in your Debt since my last by the Ordinary, one of the 8th, the other of the 12th; but I must needs say that your last has left you nothing in mine. That King's Answer is full and fair in my Apprehension, what it will appear in the Marquis's I know not; For since that Court cavils at His Acceptation of the Al∣ternative,
and calls it captious, I know not whether He may not have His Revenge at theirs. Besides, Monsieur Lionne's Letter I confess looks of a very different Style from His Master's, and, in my Judgment, Arti∣ficial: Nor do I understand great Ministers reasoning upon the Intentions of Crowns, rather from common Report, from Passa∣ges of private Mens Letters, or of Books made for Argument; than from the open and positive Declaration of Ministers, who ought to know their Powers best, and how to use them. Besides, they give the Spa∣niards very fair Play against them in this kind of War, by an Action I am very much unsatisfied in, which is, beginning and continuing the Siege of Genap, about four Leagues from hence, now the eighth Day after the Accord granted by France for the Suspension of Arms, notwithstanding our Signification of it to the Commander of those Troops; Besides the seizing of ano∣ther Castle five Days after the said Accord, though the Courier came in two Days from Paris, and the same Haste might as easily have been made upon the other Er∣rand. In short, if France pretends to be believed here, they must give Deeds as well as Words; and will shew the Sincerity of their Intentions for Peace, by consent∣ing to the Truce till the End of May, ac∣cepted
already here; Since, if there should be any Defect in the Marquis's Powers, it may be easily supplied with a little Time, and any Delay in the Choice of the Alter∣native repaired. In the mean while, I will hope by the next Courier to give you Sa∣tisfaction in those Points; For I neither know why the Marquis should be difficult in making His Choice upon the Alterna∣tive, or exposing the material Clauses of His Powers, which I will assure you, are as full, in my Apprehension, as can be granted. In the mean time, this Courier goes to you with a Duplicate of Monsieur Colbert's Pass, (which was sent some time since to the Internuncio at Aix) with the Orders sent out for the Suspension of Arms, and with the Marquis's naming a Day for the Baron de Bergayck's coming to Aix, in case Monsieur Colbert can be ready in that time; Though I do not see how the Treaty can begin till His Majesty's and the State's Ministers can be there, as well as two Principals; And in that Regard as well as many others, it will be absolutely necessary to obtain France's Consent to the Truce, if they would have Us believe they intend the Peace, and in the mean time to procure Orders for the Suspension of Arms before Genap as well as all other Places.
To morrow I expect an Audience upon the Choice of the Alternative; though I confess I did not think, any more than the Marquis, that such a Declaration was ne∣cessary before the Ministers meeting at Aix; but the Compliance must be on the weaker side, and to that Purpose I shall use my best Endeavours; And remain, Sir, &c. To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, Mar. 16. S. N. 1668. My Lord, BY Your Lordship's of the 28th past, I am put out of Pain for the Merlin Yacht, and Return of the Ratification up∣on the last Treaty. The Error in the Forms of the preceding Instruments sent over for His Majesty's Ratification, was, I suppose, occasioned, as your Lordship says, by the Omission of Signing both Parts, which I confess was offered Me by the Dutch Commissioners, but being unpractised in those Forms, I chose to follow the Am∣bassadors Example at Breda, who Signed but one. Your Lordship sees how ill a Minister I am likely to make, if ever I must enter
upon new Forms, or a Character that re∣quires being more punctual in them; I shall however say no more in answer to what your Lordship has hinted to Me about the Journey to Aix, having writ∣ten from Antwerp all that occurred to me upon it, after which I know very well, it becomes Me to leave all to the King's Pleasure. I have asked the Marquis, with what Character He will send the Baron de Bergayck; He says, in Quality of Plenipo∣tentiary, but in the rest, with Power to take upon Him that Character the French Minister shall assume: He plainly acknow∣ledges that in Right He cannot send any Man with the Title of an Ambassador, which lies only between two Soveraigns; and I know not why the Character of Plenipo∣tentiary may not agree with that of Envoy Extraordinary on all Hands. But the Light in this Point must be drawn from France, and not from this Place. Last Night at an Audience joyntly with the Dutch Deputies (which I had disposed in the Morning with the Marquis, and with Difficulty enough) His Excellency was content to declare His Choice of the Alternative, which was to leave France their Conquest of last Campagne, and like∣wise to promise Us a Transcription of the most material Clauses, both to be sent to
Sir John Trevor and Mr. Van Beuningham at Paris, to enable them to give that Court Satisfaction upon their last Objections a∣gainst the Marquis's Acceptation of the Alternative. So that we have now gained the utmost Point that can be desired here in pursuit of our Treaty, and must leave the rest upon their Hands at Paris. The Marquis took occasion at the same time to complain hard of the French break∣ing the Suspension by the Attempt upon Genap, which was yielded to them two Days since upon Conditions, after a large Breach with their Cannon, and seems to be designed for a Post to block up this Town, which they would certainly do if they could possess themselves of Terveur and Vilvorde; the first being an abandon∣ed Place, and the second not tenable with∣out Forces to relieve it. I do not see how His Majesty and the States can refuse to oblige France to restore Genap within the Time of the Suspension, since no Pretence of Mistake or Delay in the Orders can ap∣pear at all sincere without the Restitution, the Siege continuing to the eighth Day after the Accord made for the Suspension at Paris. The Marquis seems to apprehend, that the Effects of our having obtained from Him all that France can demand in pur∣suit
of their former Proposals, or We in Pursuit of our Treaty, will be a sudden throwing off the Mask on the French Side, and making what Advances they can in the War before We and Holland are in Po∣sture to enter upon Defence of this Coun∣try, and therefore presses all that can be our arming, and concerting how to pro∣ceed in such a Case: And I suppose His Majesty may think fit to encourage Hol∣land that is so near, and already armed, to furnish them here with three or four thousand Foot, for Defence of their Towns upon the first Motions of the French to attack any of them; with assurance that His Majesty will fall into the same Course, with all possible speed and vigor, and in the ways that shall be concerted. For the supplies of Money from hence, I can yet say no more than in my former, though I omit no Instances upon that Sub∣ject: But, I doubt, in the present Posture Here, the King must lose His Right, which they say will be, where Nothing is. And I cannot yet find any Thing drawn to a Conclusion in the Negotiation with Holland for the Money upon their Towns. The Marquis shewed Me Don Estevan's last Letters Yesterday upon that Matter, which say, that the Dutch insist peremptorily up∣on all the Spaniards hold in Gelderland,
and besides, upon Damme and two other Forts in Flanders. On the other side, the Spaniards are unwilling to conclude, if a Peace be like to ensue; by which means, parting from those Places to the Dutch, and at the same time so many other to the French, would leave them hardly any thing here they would think worth their pains to keep: So that the Conclusion of this Money matter between them, will depend upon the Fr. King's Answer to the Truce till th d of May, and fuller declaring the Contin of His Satisfaction upon the Alternativ▪ And even then I doubt it may be necessary for Me to make a Journey into Holland, for the perfecting that Treaty between them and the Marquis; who has not yet found out the Persons or Ways of treat∣ing to any purpose with them. In the mean time if I knew how far I might en∣gage His Majesty to arm in the Defence of these Countries, since Spain has accep∣ted all We propose in our Treaty; I would endeavour to induce the Marquis to con∣clude a Treaty to that Purpose, and for furnishing His Majesty thereupon, with certain Sums at certain Times, thereby to make the Debt at least from Spain a cer∣tain thing whenever the Money could be found. I hope to receive some Light from your Lordship upon this in answer to a for∣mer
of mine, and the mean while will prepare the Matter with the Marquis. I am sufficiently warned upon the Point of the Pavilion, and will hope His Maje∣sty's Constancy therein proceeds from a Resolution to take those Courses and Coun∣cils which may make Him as much feared abroad as any of His Ancestors were, in whose Time that Point was first gained: For, without That, our Pretensions will grow Vain at present, and in time Obsolete. In the mean while I hope, some Expedient will be foreseen that may prevent the In∣conveniencies or Unkindnesses which may happen between Us and the Dutch upon this Point in the present Conjuncture; and in case of Necessity to joyn our Fleets. The Indignity offered Us by la Roche in landing armed Men in England, and the rest, seems the greatest I have ever heard of that Kind; And how far Moderation in resenting and revenging Injuries, is a Vertue in a Prince, or a State, as well as in a private Christian, I will not take up∣on Me to judge: That which I know best is, that I am ever, &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, Mar. 20. S. N. 1668. My Lord, THE Day after the last English Pac∣quets Arrival, I received Your Lord∣ship's of the 2d. by the Dutch Resident's Conveyance, which together with some Expressions I made out of your Letter, gave Me occasion to conclude that your Lordship at the writing of it believed Me in Holland; I know not whether upon something written by the Marquis or Me, but that Journey I see, the Marquis would have depend upon the French Answer to our last Dispatch, and their consenting or refusing the proposed Truce till May, from which He supposes it will be easie to guess a Peace or a War. In the mean time I was in hopes to receive some particular Com∣mands or Instructions for my Carriage in Holland, not desiring to be left so much at large; and 'tis very possible I ought to have received them by your Lordship's last; But that new Cypher will at one time or other cast Me into Despair, for by all our skill we cannot make out one Syllable of the two long Paragraphs; though ma∣king out the last short one very easily,
makes Us see the Fault must be on the Writers side; And I am apt to imagine the Exactness required to this Cypher, is more than can agree with the Haste often necessary in your Lordship's Office; ha∣ving observed frequent Mistakes in the Use of the old Cypher, which yet never hindred my Collection of the Sense, whereas the least of this is mortal to the whole Paragraph. I cannot yet come to any Adjustment with the Marquis upon the chief Point re∣commended to Me, though I have often fallen upon the Discourse, and endeavoured to engage it further by the offer of a Pro∣ject I have drawn up to that purpose; But He assures Me your Lordship is fallen upon it with the Count de Molina and Ba∣ron de l' Isola in England, and when you have agreed it, will send it over hither for His Excellency to perfect; which I confess I think were the better way, since I am but very generally instructed in it: However His Excellency desired Me this Morning to perfect the Draught I had pro∣jected, that in case we found it not con∣cluded in England, it might be ended here. I doubt, He will not be induced to part with what the Dutch demand in Gelderland, till He foresees plainly an inevitable War; And till that Conclusion, or Don John's Ar∣rival,
all will be Misery here; what could be spared being gone out upon new Levies and Recruits, and the very Spaniards late arrived here, falling already into Want; which is a piece of Husbandry of all others I cannot understand, the old Troops every day diminishing as the new Levies advance. But they assure Me, Don John brings with him in Bars a Million and a half of Crowns, and another Million and a half of the same Money in Remises; which is the Life of all Hopes here, though we cannot yet be certain of His having lest Madrid; The last Letters of the 29th past mentioning His Indisposition, at the same time with His design of parting three Days after. Your Lordship will have sound that all I could uncypher in your last was already performed here, both upon the Choice of the Alternative, as well as Satisfaction in the Powers, and Disposition of the Baron Bergayck's parting for Aix: However, I failed not to mind the Marquis of the last this very Morning; who assured Me the Baron should certainly be there by the Day appointed, which is the 27th of this Month, and that His Equipage was already well advanced; but however the compleating of it, should not hinder His Journey. The Baron tells Me, that France upon des gn∣ing Monsieur Colbert, declared His Cha∣racter
to be of Ambassador Plenipotentiary, with Reserve of joyning another to Him as chief of the Ambassy in case of the Marquis's going, but that He, (the Baron) knows not yet in what Quality He shall go, leaving it wholly to the Disposition of the Marquis. I have this Week a long and hearty Assurance from Monsieur de Witt, of the State's Resolutions to pursue the Effects of our Treaty, with all the Vigor that can be; and for that End, of their having gi∣ven the first Rendevous to their Army near Bergenop Zoom, from whence they may easily fall into the Defence of the Spanish Towns, upon the first Attempt of the French after they have refused the Peace; which they must now suddenly unmask themselves in, one way or other▪ no fur∣ther Pretences being left, since our last Friday Pacquets, which were repeated by an Express on Sunday, and shall go by a∣nother this Week for surety sake; (and your Lordship may be assured we omit no Cautions, we can use, in the matter of our Dispatches, of which none yet has failed us): The Suspension of Enterprises is owned by the French Commanders since the taking of Genap: So that there is little now, that furnishes Talk here, be∣sides the shameless Treason by which Bur∣gundy
was lost, and of which, the Marquis d' Yenne the Governor, his Nephew the Count de St. Amour, and Don John de Batteville have chief Honor; the last being em∣ployed by the Marquis to treat with the Suitzers for the Protection of that Country. The Villany and Foulness of this Action make the Spaniards say here, that a great King, should rather have sent His Lacquays, than gone Himself, to receive such a Con∣quest. I am ever, &c. To my Lord Keeper. Brussels, Mar. 23. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Believe You may wonder on that side, as well as many do on this, both here and in Holland, at the Election the Marquis has lately made, of the Alternative offered by France, after so long a Deliberation, as might have served him, to make a wiser Choice. For if Spain had parted with the County of Burgundy, Cambray, Air, and St. Omer; tho' they had furnish'd France with a better Frontier, yet they had kept a good one for the rest of these Countries on both sides; whereas, parting with the late con∣quered Places, besides their large Depen∣dancies,
which straighten their Territories, that should maintain their Armies; their whole Frontier is laid open on the side of Flanders, by the loss of Douay, Lisle, and Tournay, and on the other side, by that of Aeth and Charleroy; which leaves the Spaniards the open Towns of Lovain and Brussels for a Frontier on this side, and those of Ghent and Bruges on the other; and the Country so pierced by the French Conquest, as what remains, will be the Work, but of one Campagne, whenever the Councils or Forces of England and Hol∣land, shall fail or delay to defend them. The Reasoners here, pretend to say, that Spain could not part with theBurgundy. French County, because they must with it quit the Title they yet retain of Dukes of Burgundy; and besides, they would thereby lose their Communication wholly with Lorrain, and in a great measure, with the Empire: This last is indeed of weight, though the first be but airy: But neither of them, I take, to have determi∣ned the Marquis in his Choice; And ha∣ving in various Conferences, penetrated his inmost Thoughts upon this Subject, I judged it necessary to acquaint your Lord∣ship with them; that His Majesty knowing perfectly the Dispositions of his Neighbors, may the better take his own Measures, in
this great Conjuncture. But, to explain this Matter I must run it up to the Ori∣ginal. Your Lordship remembers, that after the French Invasions and Successes, last year in Flanders, and the Peace at Breda; when they found, how much both England and Holland resented the Progress of their Arms in Flanders; They sent a Declarati∣on to the States General, that they were willing to make a Peace with Spain, either upon Spain's quitting all their Right to the late conquered Places; or else to the Coun∣ty of Burgundy, Cambray, Air, and St. O∣mers, and would leave to Spain the choice of either of these Alternatives. The Dutch were perplexed, what Use to make of this Declaration, being frighted at the Danger of Flanders, but newly and faintly recon∣ciled to England, and not knowing, how we would take, the Invasion of Flanders. In these Doubts I found them, when His Majesty sent me first to sound their Inten∣tions, and immediately after, to enter into Leagues with them, for our own mutual Defence and that of Flanders. The King would have joyned with them, for the recovery of all the Spaniards had lost in Flanders, either by a Peace or a War. The Province of Utrecht was for this Resoluti∣on; but the Pensioner and the other six
Provinces, were for accepting the Offer of the Alternative, made by France, and obliging Spain to make their Choice, as well as France, to stand by their own Pro∣posal. Upon these Terms the Triple Ally∣ance was concluded, but with different Views, both of Holland and of Spain. The truth is, Holland was unwilling to break off their antient Amity with France, and embark in a War, with the Conjuncti∣on of such an old Enemy as Spain, and such a new Friend as England. They rec∣koned on a Peace, upon one of the Alter∣natives, and were sollicitous only, to pre∣serve Flanders, as a Frontier for Holland against France, without considering the Interests of Spain further, than as they appeared to be their own. They reckon∣ed certainly upon Spain's chusing to part with Burgundy, Cambray, &c. which lay far from Holland, and recovering the Towns they had lost in Flanders, by which their Country would be left defensible, at least with the Assistances of England and Holland. On the other side, Spain, though they profess'd the greatest sense that could be, of what they owed His Majesty, upon the late generous Advances he had made in their Favour; yet they were enraged at Holland, for seconding so ill, His Maje∣sty's
Resolutions, and turning it upon the Choice, only of an Alternative, by which the Spaniards were to lose so great Terri∣tories, and part with their Right to them, instead of recovering the Possession they had yet only lost. They took it, as the greatest Indignity in the World, that Hol∣land should pretend to oblige the Crown of Spain to accept the very Conditions of France, after an Invasion so unjust, as they esteemed this last. They were at first, upon the thoughts of parting with all they had in the Low-Countries, to France, upon some Equivalent on the side of Spain; and thereby both end the Charge of keeping Flanders, and be revenged upon the Dutch, by leaving them open and exposed to the Neighbourhood of France. The Marquis once assured me, that most of the Council of Spain were for making this desparate Peace; and that for his own part, he was inclin'd to it, though more out of spight to the Dutch, than what he thought was the true Interest of Spain. After some Pause, this heat of the Spaniards began to cool: They saw the Spanish Crown, by parting with Flanders, must abandon all Commerce with the Princes and States on this side that Country; and that upon a new War with France, about the Successi∣on, they should have no way left of di∣verting
the French Forces from falling up∣on Spain it self. And so, with much ado, they resolved to accept the Alternative; but left the Choice to the Marquis here, as best inlightned in all the Interests of Flanders, as well as the Dispositions of their Neighbours. The Marquis hated the Peace, upon either of the Alternatives, and desired no∣thing but the continuance of the War, with the Assistance of England and Holland; to which he saw His Majesty inclinable, and thought the States would be induced to, rather than venture an Agreement be∣tween Spain and France, for the Exchange of Flanders: He thought, that if they yielded Burgundy and the remote Frontiers, Holland would be secure, and France would perhaps be contented to let the Peace rest upon those Terms during the King of Spain's tender Life: But if he yielded all the late conquered Towns to France, Hol∣land would be in perpetual Allarm, for the Danger of the rest; England would be like∣wise the more concerned, and both being obliged, to be continually armed, to pre∣vent the Danger or Flanders, would find it their Interest, rather to enter into such a War, as might end in a safer Peace, than by a patcht Peace, to lie always in danger of a new War, whenever France should be
in a Condition of carrying the rest of Flanders, by any sudden Invasion, or by any Disconcert of Councils or Interests, between Us and Holland. Besides, the Marquis imagines, that France will either endeavour to avoid the Peace now offered; or if they conclude it for the present, that being possess'd of the Frontiers of Flanders, they will not long resist the Temptation of carrying the rest, being in a manner but open Country; and thereby engage both Us and Holland, to assist Spain with all our Forces; which he thinks, must make the War prosperous, or a Peace secure. So that upon the whole, the Marquis has chosen this Alternative, not from any desire of making the Peace at present; but only in the view, either of carrying on the present War, or of making another with the Strength of his Neigh∣bours. Your Lordship may easily judge, how much the Dutch are like to be disappointed and offended with the Spaniards, for this Choice: So that I cannot pretend to guess, what is like to become of a Peace which both France and Spain come to so unwil∣lingly; and which England and Holland promote upon Conditions, which they both dislike. And so I leave this perplex∣ed Affair, and ask your Lordship's Pardon
for this long Deduction, which I should not have troubled your Lordship or my self with, but that I thought you would come to know the true Springs of it no other way: And which I could not have known, if the Marquis were not a very warm Talker, and sometimes further than he intended. I am ever, &c. To Monsieur de Witt. Brussels, Mar. 25. S. N. 1668. SIR, BY Monsieur Van Beu¦ninghen's dispatches of the 21st. you will have known the Ans∣wer of the French Court upon the Truce we de∣sired; which in my o∣pinion seems to make the War inevitable; and that all the Ap∣pearances France has made of desiring a Peace, are levelled at
no other Mark but to slacken the Resolutions of the Allies from as∣sisting Flanders; or at least, to gain six weeks time to enlarge their Conquests, before the Spaniards can either receive the Recruits they expected, or the Assistance of their Neighbours for defend∣ing their most conside∣rable Places. For, as to what the French pro∣pose, of restoring all they shall conquer be∣tween the end of this Month and the 15th. of May, it seems to me to be too gross, and to discover a contempt of our Wit as well as of our Treaty: For, if all our Offices and Of∣fers to make Spain rati∣fie what the Marquis has accepted, are not sufficient to with-hold them six weeks, from what they pretend to restore, how will they be capable of restoring for ever what they have already taken. I can∣not
see how their man∣ner of accusing and making Exceptions to the absolute Powers of a Minister of Spain; and all this founded upon particular Intelli∣gence they pretend to have from the Court at Madrid; nor the for∣mal Objections they make against the Dele∣gation of the Baron de Bargeyck, when at the same time they send Monsieur Colbert to Aix la Chapelle: How, I say, all this can admit bet∣ter Interpretation in what regards their In∣tentions for the Peace: For, in whatever comes from these Ministers at Paris, I think one may discover an irregular Ambition under a great deal of Affectation and Disguise, whereof God only knows the Issue. For my self, I will tell you in confidence and with my usual Freedom, my Opinion in all this I think then in the first place; that
by all our Negotiations tho' never so well ma∣naged; by all our Of∣fices and Caresses, we shall never obtain a Peace from France, while they have any Appearances of pursu∣ing their Interest or their Glory in carrying on the War: And, that the only way of disposing them to a Peace, is to order it so, as they may only find their Interests in it; which we can no o∣therwise do but by shewing them the Strength of our Forces, and the Firmness of our Resolutions before the War begins; and since we only draw a War on our selves by desiring a Peace, to en∣deavour on the contra∣ry to draw on the Peace by making all the Appearances of de∣siring a War. Therefore I think, that what remains to be done, is, to advance as much as possible, our
Preparations and For∣ces by Sea and Land; and let the Most Chri∣stian King know by our Ministers, that since His Majesty still declares he is content with the Alternative al∣ready accepted by the Marquis of Castel-Rodri∣go, and that all the Difficulty His Majesty finds, is only upon the Powers of the said Marquis, and the Sin∣cerity of Intentions in the Court of Spain; We therefore desire His Majesty to give us so much time by a Sus∣pension of Arms, as may be sufficient to send a Dispatch to Ma∣drid, and return to Pa∣ris with a full and plain Answer from the King of Spain upon the Al∣ternative. (And truly I think, a Months time will be sufficient after the Dispatches of our Expresses from Paris.) But in the mean time, to add, that if His Ma∣jesty refuses us a De∣mand
so necessary to the Peace of Christen∣dom, and will still car∣ry on his Arms with∣out consideration of the Offers of Spain, or Of∣fices of the Allies; that upon the first Advances he shall make to attack the rest of Flanders, we will march with our Forces to defend it, and endeavour further by all ways to give him a Diversion both by Sea and Land. This I think is all that is left us to do up∣on the present State of Affairs, for obtaining the Peace: And as to the inward Dispositi∣ons of the Spaniards, I will tell you, that there is not one of them here, of the least Con∣sideration, who does not desire it, and think it wholly for the pre∣sent Interest of Spain: And the Marquis as∣sures me in confidence, that he has not only the Power exhibited, but that the King his
Master has given him others, by which he leaves him Absolute Arbiter of the Con∣ditions of the Peace, according as Conjun∣ctures shall serve to make him accept ei∣ther an equal or a disadvantageous one. And all the Delays of Don John seem only to proceed from their hopes of a Peace up∣on the Project of our Treaty. In the mean time, I am glad the States have sent Monsieur van Beverning to be at Aix with the Ministers of both Crowns; I doubt not but the King my Master will do the same, when he shall have received Advice of their Departure: For Forms must be observed as well as Substance: Though for my share, I can∣not imagine to what Effect this Congress will meet; France ha∣ving declared it self
already upon the In∣validity of the Dele∣gation in particular, as well as of the Powers in general. And truly I think, all Pretence of ne∣gotiating without a Cessation of Arms, seems a meer Jest, in an Affair where two Months Progress in the War may so near end the Dispute upon which they pretend to treat. I am, Sir, Your, &c.
A Monsieur de Witt. Brusselles, le 25. Mars. S. N. 1668. Monsieur, VOus avez appris par les depeches de Monsieur Van Beuninghen du 21. du courant, la reponse de la Cour de France sur la treve tart desirée: Cette reponse selon moy semble rendre la guerre inevitable; et il paroit que toutes les mines que la France fait de la vouloir, ne tendent á autre but qua
refroidir les Alliez sur le secours de Pais bas, ou du moins, á gagner un mois et demy de tems, afin de pousser ses con∣quetes, avant que les Espagnole puissent rece∣voir leurs recruites, ou des secours de leurs voi∣sins pour munir leurs plus importantes places. Car, á l'egard de l'offre qu'elle fait, de restituer tout ce qui sera conquis entre la fin de ce mois et le 15. de May, cela me paroit trop grossier, et decouvre meme son mepris pour nos Esprits aussi bien que de notre traité. Car, si tous nos soins, et nos bons offices, joints á l'offre que nous faisons de faire ra∣tifier par l' Espagne les articles deja acceptés par le Marquis de Castel-Ro∣drigo, n'ont pû obtener de la France qu'elle renonce pour six semaines au des∣sein de tenter de nou∣velles conquetes, qui sont, du reste, les seules qu'elle offre de restituer; si tout cela dis je, est vay, pou∣vons nous flater que nous
en obtiendrons la restitu∣tion entiere. Je ne voy pas que leur maniere de chi∣caner, et de faire des exceptions contre les pleins pouvoirs d'un Ministre d'Espagne, et tout cela fondé sur les avis par∣ticuliers que la France pretendo avoir de la cour de Madrid, non plus que les objections formelles qu'elle fait contra la de∣legation du Baron du Bergeyck, en meme tems qu'elle envoye Monsieur Colbert à Aix la Chapelle; puissent recevoir de meil∣leurs interpretations par rapport à les intentions pour la paix; Car dans tout ce qui part de ces Ministres, il me semble qu'on découvre une am∣bition dereglée, qui se couvre sous une addresse recherchée, et des manieres trop etudiées pour etre sincere. Dieu sait ce qui en est. Pour moy, je vous diray avec ma confiance et ma franchise ordi∣naires, mon sentiment sur tout cela. C'est, que
par toutes sortes de Ne∣gotiations les mieux con∣duites, par toutes sortes de cajoleries, et de ca∣resses, et par tant de bons offices reïterez, nous ne pourrons jamais obtenir la paix de la France, pendant qu'elle est flattée par les apparences; et qu'elle juge qu'il est et de son interêt et de sa gloire de pousser la guerre: et que par consequent, le seul moyen de la disposer á la paix c'est de faire en sorte que la paix seule puisse s' accorder a∣vec ses interêts. Pour cela il me semble, que la seule voye qui nous est offerte, est de fair une grande montre de nos forces, de paroitre bien resolus á la guerre, a∣vant que la guerre com∣mence: Car puisque nous attirons la guerre en voulant trop fortement la paix, il faut tâcher au contraire d'attirer la paix, en faisant toutes les mines de vouloir la guerre.
C'est pourquoy, il me semble que ce qui reste á faire, c'est de hâter nos preparatifs, et de mettre toutes nos forces en etat tant par mer que par terre: De faire dire en même tems par nos Ministres au Roy tres Chretien, que puisque sa Majesté paroit disposée á se contenter de l' Alternative dêja acep∣tée par le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, et que toute la difficulté roule sur les pouvoirs du dit Mar∣quis, et sur la sincerité des intentions de la cour d' Espagne; nous la prions de nous accorder par une suspension d'armes autant de tems qu'il en faut pour depêcher á Madrid, et de Madrid revenir á Paris avec une reponse, j'entens une reponse nette et precise de la Reine d' Espagne, touchant l' Alternative, dont les deux partis temoi∣gnent se contenter (et pour moy il me semble, qu'un mois apres, le depart de nos couriers de Paris, sera suffisant) D' jouter en même tems, que si sa
Majesté nous refuse une demande si necessarie au repos de la Chretiente, et veut sans egard pour les offres d'Espagne, et les offices des Alliez, pousser ses armes plus loïn; que sur la premiere demarche qu'elle ferá pour attaquer le reste des Pais-bas, nous ferons avancer nos troupes pour les defendre, et tâche∣rons de produire une pu∣issante diversion tant par mer que par terre. Voila ce me semble tout ce qui nous reste á tenter sur l'etat present des af∣faires, afin d'obtenir la paix. Et pour ce qui est des dispositions interieures des Espagnols, je vous diray, qu'il n'y en á pas un seul icy tant soit peu considerable, qui ne la sou∣haite, et qui 'ne croit y voir l'interêt present de l'Espagne. Le Marquis m'a assûré en confiance qu'il n'a pas seulement les pouvoirs exhibés, mais de plus, que le Roy luy en á donné encore un autre, par lequel il le rend arbi∣tre absolu des conditions
de la paix, selon que les conjonctures le devront de∣terminer á la recevoir á des conditions ou egales ou desavantageuses. Et tous les retardemens de Don Juan ne semblent prove∣nir que de ce qu'il espere une paix conforme au pro∣jet de notre traité. En attendant, je suis bien aise de ce que les E∣tats font partir Monsieur van Beverning, pour se trouver á Aix avec les Mi∣nistres des deux Couronnes; je ne doute pas que le Roy mon Maitre ne fasse la même demarche, quand il aura reçû avis de leur de∣part; car il faut satis∣faire aux formes aussi bien qu' au fond; quoy que pour moy, je ne puisse i∣maginer quel effect resul∣tera de ce Congrez; la France s'etant déja de∣clarée sur l'invalidité de la delegation en particu∣lier, aussi bien que sur les Pouvoirs en general. Et pour moy, toute apparance de negotiation avant une cessation d'armes me pa∣roît une pure mocquerie,
sur tout dans une conjon∣cture où deux mois des guerre et de progrez peu∣vent changer la face des choses, et decider le diffe∣rent sur lequel on va traitér. Je Suis, &c.
To Mr. Godolphin. Brussels, Mar. 27. S. N. 1668. Sir, I Received lately the favour of some Lines from you in a Letter of my Wive's, which were the first I remember to have seen of yours these five or six Months past, though I never failed on my part to enter∣tain the Commerce between Us as became both our Stations, and the Kindness with which it began on both sides, as I thought; I am sure on mine, till I took your Silence as a civil Declaration that you were willing it should end; And the Complyance I was desirous to shew you in all things, would not suffer me to deny it you in this. I find it very difficult to answer your last otherwise than by giving you Thanks for the favour of your Remembrance, which indeed I thought had been better employ'd than upon one, who has for so long time so little deserved it. For those Expressions you are pleased to use so much below your self, and so much above me, I confess they rather confound than oblige me; since I am not fond of receiving what I despair of returning. I know no reason at all I had to be angry with you, but much rather with my self, if having been once possest
of your Friendship, you found I did not deserve it; But as I reckoned that Loss among my ill Fortunes, so I shall among my good, whenever you, return to your former dispositions of Favour to me; tho' the Misery of the Scene where I live, will teach me to be fond of no Possessions that I am in danger of losing; and to a plain equal Man like Me, the Certainty of an Estate seems more valuable than the Great∣ness of it. But I have as much Ambition for my Friends Advances, as others have for their own; And therefore rejoyce in all your good Fortunes in Spain, and wish you an Encrease of them in your next Designs. I am, &c. To my Lord Keeper. Brussels, April 3. 1668. My Lord, I Received some Days since the Honour of one from your Lordship of the 9th. past, and though I owe all the Acknow∣ledgements that can be upon it, yet I will not so much wrong your Lordship's Time or my own Sincereness, as to enlarge them with much Ceremony. It will be enough to say, that nothing can be more obliging
than your Favour to me, both in the De∣gree and Manner of it, arising so freely from your Lordship's Bounty and Gene∣rousness, as well as express'd in a way so franck and so hearty as that of your last Letter; and on the other side, that no Man can resent it more, though they may much better deserve it; And that your Lordship can never reckon more truely nor more justly, upon any Person's Esteem and Services, than upon mine, which I humbly beg your Lordship to believe. I doubt you will be troubled with my Wife's Attendances, having told Her, your Lord∣ship had given Her that Liberty; If she ever pretends your Favour and Countenance further than in receiving what the King has made my due upon this Employment while I have it, or what His Majesty shall from his own Motion assign me, upon any new Commission; I disclaim Her before∣hand, and declare she goes not upon my Errand; For I shall never think that too little which His Majesty thinks enough: For the rest I will be confident neither your Lordship nor my Lord Arlington in∣tend I should ruin my self by my Employ∣ments, or that I should at my own Charge bear out a Character, which of it self is enough to turn round a Head that has all its Life, till these last three Years, been
used to Shade and Silence. In case the Occasion should break, and my Journey to Aix should yet fail, I ask nothing of His Majesty, though putting my self in a Posture to comply with any sudden Ne∣cessity of it, has already forced me to en∣ter into very considerable Expences; But in case I must go, I beg your Lordship that has Children, to consider how hard it would be for Me to perform such a Jour∣ney upon my own Credit. Whatever it be His Majesty thinks fit to assign Me up∣on such an Occasion, if He pleases to or∣der Alderman Backwell to furnish Me with a Letter of Credit, for so much, let it be what it will, I will live according to what, that and my own little Revenue will reach, and not spare any little Presents, I have re∣ceived in His Majesty's Service, where His Honour requires it: All I desire is only not to be forced into Debts, which to say the truth, I have ever abhorred, and would by my good Will, eat dry Crusts, and lie upon the Floor, rather than do it upon any other Consideration, than of His Ma∣jesty's immediate Commands, and I hope those, His Justice and my Friends Favour, will prevent. I beg your Lordship's Pardon for trou∣bling you with this strange Freedom about my own Concernments, which you have
pleased to encourage Me to, and may at any time check Me in it, with the least Discountenance, which I doubt I have al∣ready deserved. But I will not encrease or lengthen my Faults by Excuses, nor trouble your Lordship, by repeating any thing of what my Lord Arlington receives from Me at large, upon the Course of Publick Affairs here; which though seem∣ing to change often, in others Eyes, ap∣pears to Me constant in the French De∣sign of a War; which I believe nothing can alter, but the visible Marks of Force and Steddiness in their Neighbours, to oppose them. I beg your Lordship's Belief, that as I am with very great Reason, so I am with very great Passion too, My Lord, Your, &c.
To Monsieur de Witt. Brussels, April 17. S. N. 1668. SIR, I Doubt not but you are pleased as much as I, at the Contents of the last Dispatches from Paris, which make us believe, that in two or three Days we shall have the Sus∣pension of Arms to the end of May; and then I do not see the least Difficulty that can hap∣pen, which we shall not easily avoid in the Negotiation of the Peace: For I see not how France can draw back, after the Satis∣faction we are going to give them at Paris: And for Spain, I never had the least scruple upon their Conduct; And I still believe, as I ever did, that unless we drive them to De∣spair
by ill Usage, nei∣ther the Spanish Nation in general, nor the Marquis of Castel-Rodri∣go in particular, will have recourse to any base Evasions. And to speak to you in Confi∣dence (as it is necessa∣ry between Physicians) since the Resolution you have talkt of, about driving the Spaniards wholly out of this Country, and Canton∣ing your selves in it: And since so many violent Instances made by your Deputies for signing Monsieur de Ly∣onne's Project without altering a Word, or so much as giving the Marquis any Assurance of assisting him in case France should draw back, (according to the Orders of the Queen) I have often heard His Excellency say, that if he were now in the Council of Spain, he would give his Advice without further Diffi∣culty, for making Peace
with France by deliver∣ing this Country up to them, rather than suf∣fer such a Treatment from all their Neigh∣bours, who are more interessed in the Loss of it than themselves. For it cannot enter in∣to the Marquis's Head, why we should give France more Assurances than they desire, in case of Spain's refusing the Alternative, and e∣ven contrary to our Treaty at the Hague; and yet refuse to give Spain the bare Assu∣rances of the words of our Treaty, in case of France's Refusal af∣ter having driven Spain to all we can ask. Nei∣ther can the Marquis imagine why we press him so much to sign a Project word for word from Mons. de Lyonne, without first using our Endeavours at Paris, to reduce the Affair of Cities in the Heart of the Country, to some rea∣sonable Exchange; as
we have always pro∣mised him, and as I let him see in one of your Letters: Nay without once endea∣vouring to hinder the Devastations in the Franche Compté: So that by this Project, he sees clearly, he must be con∣fined within Brussels as in a Prison, shut up by French Garrisons, with∣in seven Leagues of him on one side, and eight on the other; And that Burgundy may be invaded as an open Country, without the possibility of defending it a Day. And if the Peace be made upon these Terms, every one may see, that France will only wait till we are engaged in a Quar∣rel with our Neigh∣bours, or till some Misunderstanding hap∣pen between our two Nations, to finish the Conquest of this Coun∣try, which they may do in fifteen days. However, the Marquis
says, that in case we will give him Assuran∣ces to follow the third of our Separate Ar∣ticles, he is ready to Sign himself, or give Powers to Sign even Monsieur de Lyonne's Pro∣ject immediately, as the Foundation of the Treaty; and will rely upon our good Offices to negotiate either some convenient Ex∣change for Burgundy, or to have it restored in the condition it was taken; or else find means to repair the Towns demolisht. In case you will not be persuaded to give him these Assurances, we must endeavour to fi∣nish it all together at Aix; whither I shall begin my Journey as soon as we shall have received the Suspension of Arms. And I shall not fail to pursue as effectually as I can, both there and at other Places, the Accomplish∣ment of this great Af∣fair;
and shall be glad to receive your Advice from time to time, up∣on the Conduct of this Negotiation. Before I go, I must tell you freely, that the less of Business you leave between the Mar∣quis and your Deputies here, I think it will be so much the better for the general Affair: For in one word, they are not Persons made for each other: The Marquis being of a hu∣mour rather to dye than be Governed in the management of Busi∣ness: And he says, Monsieur Bourgersdycke is a Man not to be em∣ploy'd but where you absolutely give the Law. I have already hinted something of this to you; but now I think it necessary you should be informed of it, that you may do thereupon as you shall find convenient: For I have not observed one thing in the course
of this Affair, which you and I could not have compassed with∣out the least Heat or Discontent: And I will not tell you the Pain and Cares I have been at to manage Matters between them, and prevent their breaking out into Vio∣lences upon so many Occasions; which I endeavoured by all means to avoid; Be∣cause I know, the Dispositions of Mini∣sters are often infused into their Masters. I see nothing in the World that can hin∣der the Peace at pre∣sent, unless France finds some Misunderstand∣ing between Us and Spain. To tell you the Truth, many People would persuade me, that you have changed your Measures since I left Holland: But I answer every body, that I trust so much to the Sincerity of your Proceedings, that
I do not doubt, but if it were so, your self would be the first to inform me. You see what Con∣fidence I have in your Person, and you may safely have the same in that of, Sir, Your, &c.
A Monsieur de Witt. Brusselles, le 17. Avr. 1668. S. N. Monsieur, JE ne doute pas que vous ne vous rejouissez au∣tant que moy du contenu de dernieres depêches: de Paris, qui nous donnent lieu de croire, que dans deux ou trois jours nous aurons une suspension d'armes jusqu' á la fin de May; et cela etant, je ne vois point de difficulté qui puisse survenir, dont nous ne venions facile∣ment á bout dans le cours de la negotiation de la paix. Car je ne vois pas comment la France pourra reculer aprés la satisfacti∣on que nous luy allons don∣ner á Paris. A l'egard d'Espagne, je n'ay jamais eu le moindre scrupule sur sa conduite; et je croy encore, comme je l'ay tou∣jours crî, qu' á moins que nous ne la reduisions au de∣sespoir
á force de la trai∣ter de haut en bas; ni la nation Espagnole en gene∣ral, ni le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo en parti∣culier n'auront point re∣cours á de honteux subter∣fuges. Et pour vous dire en confidence (comme il faut faire entre Medecins) Depuis que vous avez parlé de la resolution de chasser les Espagnols des Païs bas, et de vous y cantonner; depuis tant d'instances reiterées faites par vos Deputez pour la signature du projet de Monsieur de Lionne, sous la condition de ne rien changer, et même sans luy donner la moindre espe∣rance de l'assister en cas que la France recule, con∣formement aux ordres de la Reyne; Depuis cela (dis-je) j'ay souvent oüy dire á son Excellence, que s'il etoit á cette heure au conseil d' Espagne, que son avis seroit, qu'on fit sans marchander l'accord avec la France, en luy don∣nant tout ce Païs, plutôt que d'endurer un traite∣ment
pareil, de la part de tous les Etats voisins de la Flandre; lesquels doivent être plus interessez dans la perte de ces Provinces, que les Espagnols eux mêmes. Car il ne peut pas entrer dans l'esprit du Marquis, que nous donnions á la France plus d'assurance qu'elle n'en desire, supposé le refus d'Espagne, et céla même contre notre traité de la Haye; et que nous refusions á l' Espagne de l'assûrer simplement des clauses de notre traité pour ellé, en cas que la France refuse, sur tout, apres a∣voir poussé l'Espagne á faire tout ce que nous a∣vons voulu. Le Marquis n'imagine point aussi, pourquoy nous le pressons tant pour la signature mot-á-mot du projet de Monsieur de Lionne, sans faire par avance tous nos efforts á Paris, pour reduire l'affaire des villes situées dans le coeur de Provinces, á quelque echange raiso∣nable: cela luy avoit tou∣jours eté promis; et je l'en ay moy meme assuré
par une de vos lettres que je luy ay fait voir. Il s'etonne encore pourquoy nous ne fassions pas nos efforts pour empêcher la demolition des places dans la Franche-Compté. De sorte qu'il voit tres claire∣ment, que par ce projet il sera dans Brusselles comme en prison, ou en ôtage á l'egard de la France, ses garnisons d'un coté n'en e∣tant qu'a huit lieues, et de l'autre qu' á sept. Il voit de plus, que les forces de France entreront dans la Bourgogne comme dans un plat païs sans qu'on la puisse couvrir un jour en∣tier. Que si la paix se fait dans ces termes, tout le monde voit que la France n' attendra que le moment de la premiere desunion entre quelqu'un de nos voisins, ou de la plus legere mesintelligence entre nos deux Nations, pour achever la conquête des Païs-bas, qui ne luy coutera plus de quinze jours. Pourtant le Mar∣quis dit, qu'en cas que nous luy donnions des as∣surances
de poursuivre le troisiême de nos Articles separez, il est prêt de sig∣ner ou donner les pouvoirs de signer le projet même selon les termes de Mon∣sieur de Lionne, comme servant de fondement au traité: Qu'il s'en remet∣tra á nos soins et á nos bons offices pour la nego∣tiation de quelque echange commode á l'egard de la Bourgogne, ou bien d'une restitution en l'etat ou elle á et prise, ou pour trou∣ver les moyens de reparer les villes demolies. En cas que vous luy refusiez á tous ces egards les assu∣rances qu'il demande, il faudra que nous tâchions de reprendre et d'achever le tout ensemble, et d'un même filet á Aix la Cha∣pelle; ou je commenceray á m' acheminer ds que nous aurons reçû nouvelle de la suspension d'armes, et lá non plus qu' ailleurs de poursuivre de tout mon pouvoir la conclusion de cette grande affaire. Je seray bien aise de rece∣voir de tems en tems
vos avis sur la manieré dont cette negotiation sera conduite. Avant que je parte, il faut que je vous dise franchement, que le moins d'affaires que vous don∣nerez á discuter avec le Marquis á vos Deputez, sera le meilleur pour la cause commune; car en un mot, ce ne sont point des gens faits les uns pour les autres. Le Marquis est d'un humeur á braver plutôt la mort, que de souffrir d'etre maitrisé dans la conduite et le ma∣niment des affaires. Il dit, que Monsieur Bour∣gersdycke n'est propre á etre employé, que dans les lieux ou vous donnez sou∣verainement la loy. Je vous en avois deja touché quelque chose, mais je croy á cette heure qu'il est ne∣cessaire de vous le dire, afin que sur cela vous en usiez comme vous le ju∣gerez á propos. Je n'ay encore rien remarqué dans le cours de cette affaire dont je ne fusse venu á bout avec vous sans le moindre
chagrin, mais même a∣grement: Et je ne vous diray point les peines et les soucis que j'ay eu á menager toutes choses entr' eux, et á prevenir des eclats et les reparties pic∣quantes qu'ils etoient prêts de se faire á tout bout de champ; j'ay employé pour cela toute mon a∣dresse; car je faisois cette reflexion; que les disposi∣tions, ou si vous voulez, les passions des Ministres ont une grande influence sur celles du Maitre. A cette heure je ne vois plus rien qui puisse em∣pêcher la paix, si ce n'est que la France vit la dissention se glisser entre l' Espagne et nous. A ne vous rien celer, il y á icy beaucoup de gens qui voudroient bien me persuader que vous avez changé de mesures depuis mon depart d' Hollande; mais je leur repons á tous, que je me repose si fort sur votre since∣rité, et á la candeur de votre proceder, que sup∣posé que ce qu'ils disent
fust, vous auriez eté le premier á m'en instruire. Voila qu'elle est la con∣fiance que j'ay en vous, et vous pouvez avoir la même en, Monsieur, Votre, &c. To my Lord Arlington. Aix, April 28. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Never writ to your Lordship in worse Health nor in worse Humour, and therefore you could never receive a worse Letter than this is like to be. The Cere∣monies of my Journey your Lordship shall find in a Letter to Mr. Williamson, so soon as a Feaver which is now upon me, gives me leave, to say one more Word, than what I think of absolute Necessity; For so I conceive, all I have now written to the Marquis is. The Despight of seeing the Baron de Bergayck yet refuse to sign the Project of the Treaty, without another
Dispatch from the Marquis, after that, I brought him, is enough to lose all Pati∣ence; My ill Humour I confess, is not lessened, by seeing my self here, with equal Character to other Ministers, and without possibility in this Place, of putting my self in an Equipage suitable to them, which I could not think possible neither to provide my self before my Journey, considering the Uncertainty of it, almost to the very last, and the Assurance I came with from the Marquis, of the Treaty's being Signed the first Moment. I assured the Baron de Bergayck, that I thought it necessary, so that I hoped three Days would end our Business, which I believed, His Majesty would unwillingly see done, without his Intervention, and would be content to have all Men think as they have done here, ever since the Convention began (and perhaps every where else) that nothing could be done, till the King's Minister came, and that would immediately close the Affair. The rest I must refer to the inclosed Copy of my Letter this Night, to the Marquis, by an Express; And beg your Lordship to give me leave to rest a very weary distem∣pered Head, which yet can never forget how much I am, My Lord, &c.
TO The Marquis OF Castel-Rodrigo. Aix, April 28. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Arrived yesterday in this City. This Afternoon I received a Visit from the Baron de Bargeyck, and another from Monsieur Colbert. I treated them both equally; upon a Mes∣sage by a Gentleman sent from the Baron to inform me, that he was already qualified, Ambassador of Spain by the Letters and Powers of the Queen her self. Monsieur Beverning vi∣sited me this morning Incognito; And, all that a great Indisposition will suffer me to tell you at present, is this; that it is not possible to make any other
Paces for saving the Netherlands, but by im∣mediately signing the Project sent to the Ba∣ron de Bargeyck: For every body expected the signing of it upon my arrival. The French Ambassador declares e∣very where, as he has already done to me, that he is ready to sign this very Evening, and in all Points as they have been couched by our own Ministers at Paris. And if the Baron makes any Exceptions or Difficulties, he is ready to give answer thereupon, according to his Instructions, and as he shall think conve∣nient: But, that Spain must impute to it self whatever may happen by this loss of Time. I see plainly, he is ready to second and assist the Baron de Bargeyck in any Delays that may be given to the Affair; And foreseeing that is must at length pass in the words of this Pro∣ject,
since we and Holland are already en∣gaged about it at Paris; He hopes either to see the Affair break, or have the Honour to make Spain yield at last upon all Difficul∣ties they first raised. In the mean while, Monsieur Beverning pre∣tends to think, that after the Orders given to the Baron de Bargeyck, and the Copies of them sent into Holland, no Difficulties can arise upon the Signing: And for me, I cannot re∣fuse to carry the Or∣ders, and am in the greatest pain imagina∣ble, to see the Baron still make a Difficulty to Sign without ano∣ther Order from your Excellency. There∣fore I desire you in the name of all those who wish well to the Affairs of Spain and of Christendom, to dispatch an express Command to the Baron, to Sign without further Tri∣fling,
and to send him Instructions for any thing that your Excel∣lency shall find conve∣nient to have negotia∣ted afterwards; in which I shall have Mon∣sieur Beverning's Assist∣ance, but not at all before the Project is signed. If your Excellency will not think fit to comply with this; I discharge my self at least of all the fatal Effects that may arrive upon it. I desire your Excellency yet once more, to grant this Dispatch to the Instan∣ces of one who had sounded the Bottom of this Affair with all possible Attention, and all the Reflexions I am capable of making; and who forms a Judg∣ment of it, without o∣ther Passion than that I have for the preser∣vation of Flanders. I am, &c.
Au Marquis DE CASTEL-RODRIGO. A Aix le 28. Aur. S. N. 1668. Monsieur, I'Arrivay hier en cette ville. I'ay reçû cette aprés-dinée une visite de la part du Baron de Bar∣geyck, et une autre de la part de Monsieur Colbert. Je les ay traité tous deux egalement, sur la parole que le gentilhomme envoyé de la part du Baron m' a donne, que son Maitre etoit déja revetu du titre d' Ambassadeur, et qu'il etoit munides lettres et de pleins pouvoirs de la Reine elle même. Monsieur Be∣verning m'a aussi visité incognito ce matin; et tout ce qu'une grande in∣disposition qui me retient á present permet que je dise á V. E. c'est, qu'il ne reste plus d'autre demarche á
faire pour sauver les Païs bas, que de signer inces∣samment le projet envoyé au Baron de Bargeyck; cela est si vray que meme á mon arrivée tout le monde en attendoit la signature. Celuy de France declare par tout aprés avoir de∣claré á moy meme, qu'il est prêt de signer des ce soir même tous les points, tels qu'ils ont eté couchez par nos Ministres á Paris. Que si le Baron de Bar∣geyck fait ou des difficul∣tez, ou des exceptions, il donnera ses reponses con∣formement á ces instructi∣ons, et selon l'exigence des choses; et qu' aprés tout, l' Espagne ne doit attri∣buer qu' á elle seule les malheurs quipeuvent nai∣tre de tant de delais et de tems perdu. Je vois fort bien, qu'il est prêt á suivre et á aider le Baron de Bargeyck dans tous les re∣tardemens qu'on pourra ap∣porter á la conclusionde cet∣te affaire; et que prevoyant que l' Espagne doit enfin s' accommoder des conditi∣ons et des termes du traité,
veu l'engagement ou la Hollande et nous sommes dêja entrés par nos Mini∣stres á Paris; il se pro∣met ou de voir l'affaire se rompre, ou d'avoir la gloire de faire ceder l' Es∣pagne sur toutes les diffi∣cultez qu'elle aura mise en avant: Cependant, Monsieur Beverning ne s' attend point á voir sus∣citer de nouveaux ob∣stacles, et de nouvelles difficultez touchant cette signature, aprés des ordres donnez au Baron de Bar∣geyck, et dont les copies ont eté envoyées en Hol∣lande. Pour moy, aprés l'avoir promis, je n'ay pû reculer á porter les ordres, et je suis dans la plus grande peine du monde de voir que le Baron de Bargeyck fait difficultè de signer avant que d'avoir recçû un autre ordre de V. E. C'est pourquoy, je la supplie au nom de tous ceux qui souhaitent le bien des Affaires d' Espagne, et de la Chretienté, d'ordon∣ner par un commandement exprés, que l'ordre soit
signé, et qu'on n'y mar∣chande plus. V. E. donnera aussi ses avis au Baron de Bargeyck touchant ce qu'elle trouvera bon qui soit negotié dans la suite; cela fait, je pourray con∣ter sur le secours et l'ide de Monsieur Beverning, du quel je n' attens rien, tandis que la chose sera comme elle est. En cas que V. E. suive d'autres voyes, je me decharge par avance de toutes les suites funestes qui en pourront arriver. Je supplis en∣core une fois V. E. de donner cela aux instan∣ces d'une personne qui á approfondi cette affaire, avec toute l'attention et la reflexion dont je suis capable; et qui en porte un jugement exempt de Passion, excepte celle qu'il á pour la conservation des Païs-bas. Je Suis, &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Aix, April 30. S. N. 1668. My Lord, IN the Hurry of these Expresses to Brussels, all that I can possibly do, is to give your Lordship the Account of the State of our Business here, in the Copy of those Letters I am forced to write to the Marquis: To which end, the Ambassadors of Spain and Holland have been very often with Me already, though I have not yet stirr'd out of Doors, and they are but now gone successively from my Bed-side. The Fruits of our Conferences your Lordship will find in the inclosed, and will pardon me for doing nothing more at this Time, than barely acknowledging, and that in extream haste, yours of the 10th and 13th, which are come here to my Hands: The torn Paper is the Original of a Postcript I received just now in a Letter from Monsieur de Witt, which I send in Answer to one I had lately from your Lordship. The in∣closed from my Secretary to Mr. Williamson, gives Account of all the Ceremonies that have been hitherto past. I am ever, &c.
TO The Marquis OF Castel-Rodrigo. Aix. April 30. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Am very much in∣disposed, and God keep me from those Accidents, which the Despight I have upon the present Course of Affairs, may cause in my Illness. All I have to say is, that the Am∣bassador of France has Orders not to change a Word in the Project as prepared by our Mi∣nisters at Paris: The Dutch Ambassador has the same Orders from his Masters: The Nun∣cio presses also the Signing without any Change; and all the German Ministers are of the same Opinion.
The Baron refuses to Sign without another Order from Brussels: Upon which, the French Ambassador presses both me and Monsieur Beverning to give him an Act, wherein we are to witness, that he has been ready to Sign ever since the arrival of the Project. The Dutch Ambassador protests he cannot refuse it; and besides, that if the Ba∣ron will not Sign to morrow, he will de∣part, and return for Holland. The Most Chri∣stian King has sent all his Officers into the Field, and intends to follow them in Person; so that our Ministers at Paris apprehend some new Accidents, unless they are prevented by signing the Treaty. For my self, I have Instru∣ctions to use all means for advancing the Peace in concert with the Dutch Ambassadors; and can by no means disagree with his Reso∣lutions.
I bear with what Patience I can, the Mortification, to see that I must pass for a Person whom your Excellency has impo∣sed on, by giving me an Order which your Minister was not to o∣bey: But I cannot bear with Patience to see that the Affairs of all Christendom must be absolutely ruined by a Caprice of the Baron de Bargeyck: For I will not, as others do, im∣pute to your Excellen∣cy such a Feinte as that of drawing from us, all Assurances you de∣manded, upon your promise of immediate∣ly signing the Treaty, and then of giving me a sort of Order to the Baron, contradicted be∣fore by a counter Or∣der in secret. I should not have left Brussels, had not your Excellency assu∣red me, that the Baron should Sign without delay, whenever I
judged it necessary: I now find it so; and have told him, it is so very necessary, that I believe, France would not have carried grea∣ter Advantages, nor triumph'd more upon the winning of a Bat∣tle, than on the Ad∣vances they have made in this Affair. For my self, I was never in my life in greater mortification, than what I have born in this Affair. I am, &c.
Au Marquis DE CASTEL-RODRIGO. Aix le 30. Avr. S. N. 1668. Monsieur, JE trouve ma santé fort ebranlée, et á Dieu ne plaise que les ac∣cidens qu' est capable de me causer le depit que je ressens du train que pren∣nent les affaires, viennent se joindre á mon indispo∣sition. Tout ce que j'ay á dire c'est, que l' Am∣bassadeur de France á or∣dre de ne changer pas un seul mot au projet de nos Ministres qui sont á Paris. Celuy d' Hollande á les mêmes ordres; le Nonce du Pape presse la signature, et insiste sur le méme point: enfin, tous le Mi∣nistres d' Allemagne sont dans le même sentiment.
Le Baron de Bargeyck refuse á signer sans un nouvel ordre de Brusselles: Lá dessus l' Ambassadeur de France presse et moy et Monsieur Beverning de luy donner un acte, dans lequel nous temoig∣nions, que depuis l'arrivée du project, il á eté tous les jours prêt á signer. L' Ambassadeur d' Hol∣lande proteste qu'il ne peut pas le luy refuser; et que même, si le Baron de Bargeyck ne signe pas dans lá journée de de∣main, il partira d'icy pour s'en retourner en Hollande. Le Roy tres Chretien á fait partir tous ses Officiers pour aller ouvrir la campagne, et il pretend les suivre en personne: De sorte que nos Ministres á Paris ap∣prehendent de nouveaux desordres, si on n' arrête tout ce grand mouvement par la signature du traité. Pour moy, les instructions que j'ay reçû, portent qu je n' epargne rien pour avancer la paix, et que je fasse toutes choses de con∣cert
avec l' Ambassadour d' Hollande, et je ne puis en aucune sorte me de∣partir de ses resolutions. Je porte le plus patiem∣ment que je puis, la mor∣tification de passer pour un homme dont V. E. s' est jouée, lors qu'elle m'a fait expedier un ordre auquel on ne devoit pas obeïr, et que Votre Ministre á en effet eludé; mais je ne puis voir qu'avec la der∣niere inquietude, que toutes les affaires, de la Chreti∣enté se brouillent et se perdent par le seul caprice du Baron de Bargeyck. Car je me garde bien de supposer comme les autres, une feinte en V. E. et de luy attribuer de nous avoir tendu un piege, en tirant de nous les assurances de∣mandées, sur la promesse de faire aussi tôt signer le traité; et ensuite de m'a∣voir chargé d'un ordre pour le Baron de Bargeyck, qui par avance étoit de∣truit par une instruction secrete. Je n'aurois jamais parti de Brusselles, si V. E.
ne m' avoit assuré de bouche, que la Baron sig∣neroit sans y manquer tout aussi tôt que je juge∣rois la chose absolument necessaire. Nous nous som∣mes vus, et je luy ay re∣presenté la chose si pressée, si necessaire, que je croy que la France n'a pas remporté plus d'advan∣tage, ni ne se soit erigée á elle même un plus grand triomphe par le gain d'une bataille que par les avan∣ces qu'elle á faite en cette occasion. Pour moy, je n'ay eu de ma vie une plus grande mortification que celle que j'ay essuyé en cette rencon∣tre. Je Suis, &c.
To Mr. Williamson. Aix, April 30. S. N. 1668. SIR, MY Master being kept in his Bed by an Illness that seized him the first Night of his arrival here, and since en∣creased upon him by the Constraints he was forced to the next Day in the Re∣ception of the several Ambassadors; hath commanded me to give you the Account of his Journey hither, and desires you will help it to pass with my Lord Arlington for that Promise which he made in his last, of doing it himself to his Lordship upon next Occasion. He parted from Brussels upon the 24th of this Month, with nine and twenty Persons in his Company, of which, ten in his own Livery. Besides those who belonged to him, my Lord Stafford, Cap∣tain Brumidge, and Captain Wesely, did him the Favour to accompany him in his Journey, and twenty of the Marquis's Guard for his security till he came the se∣cond Night into the Land of Liege. The first Night at Louvain passed without any Ceremony, not taking upon him any new Character in the Spanish Dominions: The
second Night he lodged at Herkinraedt, a very rich Abby of Bernardin Nuns, where he was received as the King of England's Ambassador. The next Morning the Magistrates of the Town of Hassel sent to inform whether he passed by their Town of Hassel in his way to Mastricht, to the end they might do him the Honour due to his Character; But my Master desiring to avoid those Ceremonies chose to pass a private Way about a Mile from the Town; However, he found all the Road where it lay over-against the Town, crouded with People, and among them, the Magistrates of the Town, who in the High-way entertained him with a Speech, a Banquet, great store of wine, and all the great Guns of the Town at the same time. The same Night he arrived at Mastricht, having only sent an ordinary Servant be∣fore to take up his Lodgings: Near the Town he was met by a Gentleman from the Rhingrave, to tell him, that if the Hour of his Arrival had been known, he would himself have met him on the Way, but however would not fail to do it at his coming to Town: He was received there by all the great Guns of the Town, the Garrison ranged through the Streets as he pass'd, and at the end of them a Volly of
their small Shot. At his Inn he was immediately visited by the Rhingrave, and after him by the Magistrates of the Town: The next morning he returned a Visit to the Rhingrave, who would by force accom∣pany him back to his Inn. As he went out, he had all the great Guns of the Town thrice round, and greater Volleys of Shot than the Night before, and the Rhingrave met him in his Coach about half a Mile out of Town, to perform his last Compliment, having told my Lord Stafford that he had express Orders from the States to do all the Honour that was possible both to his Character and his Person. From Mastricht he sent a Letter to the Baron de Fraisheim here, to give him Notice of his intended arrival upon Friday the 27th. but withal, to desire him to keep it private, that so he might enter with little Noise or Ceremony, in regard he came upon a sud∣den Journey and a very short Stay, and therefore with the Train of the King's Resident at Brussels, rather than of his Am∣bassador. The Baron de Fraisheim did his Part in suppressing the Knowledge of it, but the Town having Notice by Orders they had given at Mastricht to that Pur∣pose, sent one to meet him in the Mid∣way with Compliment, and desire that they might receive him as they had done
other Ambassadors: My Master referred it to them to do as they pleased, and the rather because he heard that the French Ambassador had made a Solemn Entry a∣bout six Days before, with very great Train, and Ceremony, and he thought by this more private Entry to avoid the Ex∣pectation of any other; So he was recei∣ved in the Town with all the Guns, and the Burghers in Arms, and complimented immediately at his Arrival both from the Magistrates of the Town, and a Comman∣der of the Duke of Nieuburg's, to assure him that the Duke had given him Orders for two hundred Horse to attend him up∣on the Confines, and to accompany him into the Town, as he had done the French Ambassador at his Solemn Entry, and that the Baron of Fraisheim's Assurance of his desiring to enter privately, had only pre∣vented that Attendance. The Night of his Arrival, my Master went about ten a Clock Incognito to the Dutch Ambassador's House; resolving to tell him, that upon his Arrival here, he intended to live after another sort with him than with any of the other Ambassa∣dors, as well in respect of the near Ally∣ance between their Masters, as of their Mediation. The Dutch Ambassador hap∣pened to be in Bed, but having heard of
my Master's Intentions, came and visited him early the next Morning without Train or Ceremony, and gave him full Informa∣tion of all that had passed here, which made good what we met with every where upon the Road, that nothing in the Peace could be done till the Arrival of the King's Ambassador here. My Master's Indisposition that Morning dlayed his sending to give the several publick Ministers Advice of his Arrival till about ten a Clock, and then he was prevented by Compliments; First from the French, and then from the Spanish Ambas∣sadors, which were returned that Morning, and succeeded in the Afternoon by Visits from them both in the same Order. My Master upon His first Enterview with the Holland Ambassador, enquired of him what Intercourse had passed between Him and the Pope's Nuncio; and finding that after some Offices by third Persons between them, it had stopt upon some Difficulties without coming to any Visits or formal Compliments; He spake to my Lord Stafford when he made a Visit of Himself to the Nuncio, to let him know in common Conversation, that my Master finding by what had pass'd between Him and the Dutch Ambassador, that the same Difficulties were like to befal him, had o∣mitted
to give him any advice of his Ar∣rival, but to tell him at the same time, that he was very much a Servant to the Merits of the Cardinal Padrone, upon his acquaintance with him at Brussels, and was very glad to hear of the continuance of his Health since his last Recovery; and so that Matter ended, as I suppose; My Ma∣ster having no Instruction in that Point, and therefore desiring as civilly as he could, to take this Occasion of avoiding further Commerce with him. I have no∣thing else worth giving you the Trouble of, but am, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, Tho. Downton.
To the Elector of Mentz. Aix, May 2. S. N. 1668. SIR, THough my own Indisposition, and Monsieur Schouborne's Af∣fairs, deprived me of the Happiness of see∣ing him since my arri∣val in this City; I would not however delay any longer to acknowledge the Ho∣nour of your High∣nessess's Letter of the 12th past, and to make you the Offers of my Services (since, of the King my Master's Af∣fection, your Highness wants no Testimonies) In the mean while I send your Highness the agreeable News of the Peace; the Treaties whereof I have at pre∣sent in my Hands; one Signed in presence of the Dutch Ambassador,
and t'other in mine; which I was glad to obtain by precaution, so to surmount the Difficulties raised upon delivering the Instru∣ments to the Nuncio. I give your Highness Joy of an Affair so im∣portant to the Happi∣ness of Germany; and your Highness may justly do the same to the King my Master, who tho' at distance, and out of danger of this Flame, has howe∣ver contributed more to the extinguishing of it, than all those who were most interessed in the Neighbourhood. And since this Peace, as well as that of Portugal, has so justly given His Majesty a Rank so high among the Pacifici; Your Highness will joyn your Prayers to mine, that God Al∣mighty will please to add also to his Cha∣racter, the Beai. And as your Highness has all Reason to believe
the King my Master your Friend, so I beg your Highness to e∣steem me always, SIR, Your Highness's most, &c.
A l'Electeur de Mayence. Aix le 2. May, S. N. 1668. Monsieur, QUoy que mon indispo∣sition, et les affaires de Monsieur Schouborne m'ayent empêché de le voir depuis mon arrivée en cette ville; je n'ay pourtant pas voulu differer plus long tems sans me servir de cette voye pour reconnoitre l' honneur que V. A. m'a fait par sa lettre du 12. du passé, et sans luy envoyer dans une des miennes les offres de mes services; je dis de mes services, car pour l'affection du Roy mon Maitre elle est assés connue á V. A. et n'a pas besoin de mon temoignage. En même tems je donne∣ray á V. A. une nouvelle bien agreable, puisque je luy apprendray que la paix est conclue, et qu' á l'heure que je luy ecris, lestraitez en sont entre mes mains;
l'un signé, en presence de l' Ambassadeur d' Hol∣lande, et l'autre en la mienne, ce que j'ay eté bien aise d'obtenir par precaution, et afin de sur∣monter les difficultez sur∣venues lors qu'on á livré les Instruments á Mon∣sieur le Nonce. Je donne á V. A. toute la joye d'une affaire qui importoit au bonbeur de l' Alle∣magne, comme elle la don∣nera avec justice au Roy mon maitre; car, quoy qu' eloigné et á couvert des flammes qui devoroient tant de païs, on dira pourtant avec justice qu'il á seul plus contribué á eteindre cet embrasement, que tous ceux qui en e∣toient et les plus voisins et les plus alarmez. Et puisque cette paix, aussi bien que celle de Por∣tugal á si legitimement place sa Majesté dans le plus haut rang entre les Pacifici. V. A. joindra ses prieres aux miennes, afin que le bon Dieu y ajoute aussi les Beati. Et comme elle á tout lieu
de croire le Roy mon Maitre des ses amis, je la prie aussi de m' esti∣mer toûjours, Monsieur, &c. To my Lord Arlington. Aix, May 8. S. N. 1668. My Lord, SInce my last I have received your Lordship's of the 17th and 20th, which both complain of the ill State where∣in the Suedish Treaty then stood, and com∣mand my Applications to the Marquis for a Remedy. I have infused it all I could possibly into the Baron de Bargeyck at his return from hence to Brussels, which was in haste, and immediately after the sign∣ing and dispatching away the Instruments of the Treaty. Some here attribute his Haste to an Intention of avoiding any Speech of a general Guaranty for the Peace, which with so many other Difficulties and Delays before the Signing, as well as so
many Declamations against the Violence and Injustice in pressing him to it, are Evi∣dence enough of the Force by which the Spaniards have been compelled to it; Though I doubt of their being this Age in a Condition to make any better Use of it. For my part, I was of opinion that since Don John was neither arrived with Supplies, nor hardly expected in any Time. Since Holland was so desperately bent up∣on the Peace without any Respect to the Spanish Honour or Interest, further than joyned immediately with their own; Since Spain had not been able to find Means to engage His Majesty or Sueden in their Quarrel by Supplies necessary to both Crowns: And since His Majesty was not in any Condition of entring into the Bu∣siness single, upon Considerations of Ho∣nour, Justice, or a remote Danger; And consequently, since upon the Projects made both at a Time in Paris, it grew evident to Spain, Qu'il faloit passer par là ou par les fenestres. Upon all these Considerati∣ons, I say, I was of Opinion that the Spa∣niards Business was to end franckly and immediately upon my arrival here, there∣by to have more Time for bringing the Ratifications of the Treaty signed here, from Spain within this Month, and so avoid all Pretexts (which I expected) of France's
breaking the Business, and which I knew they would be strongly tempted to by the Spaniards want or neglect of Preparations, and by our Disconcert for their Defence. Upon these Considerations I confess I have press'd as hard upon the Baron de Bargeyck, as the Dutch Ambassador himself, to finish the Affair, ever since my arrival, and was at an end of my Patience to see him stop it upon such slight and unreasonable Pre∣tences as his two last; which were, first, not to insert his Powers, because both his and those of France were sharp upon the Rise of the War; But Monsieur Colbert's were sent in that Stile since his arrival here, and only in Return of the Marquis's, since those he brought with him were soft and without any Reflections: The Baron had been advised by Monsieur Beverning at his first coming, to have them changed, had three Weeks to do it, and yet made no Difficulty upon it till after the Treaty was Signed, and the Powers came to be in∣serted, which he refus'd to suffer, saying, He expected new and softer Powers within two or three Days, and in the mean time would have had the Instruments dispatcht away without any Transcription of the Powers, though in the Treaty mentioned as inserted: And I believe France would not have wish'd a better Occasion to de∣lay
the Business beyond a possibility of being ratified within the time. This Diffi∣culty took up a whole Day after the Sign∣ing; and when the Baron was beaten out of it by main Force, he threw Us upon a worse; For, whereas his first Powers, and all he had ever given Copies of, or men∣tioned to any Minister here, had only run, as deputed from the Marquis with the same Power to Treat and Conclude as if His Majesty had been here in Person: When he inserted his Powers, after having made Monsieur Colbert's express Stay a whole Day, he brings the Instrument with a Power agreeing in all Words with the first, but only those of Ambassador and Plenipoten∣tiary joyned to his Deputation, which put Monsieur Colbert into such a Rage that he was ready to tear all in Pieces; and for five Hours Monsieur Beverning and I could draw no other Answer from the Baron, but, that 'twas impossible for him to do any other∣wise, protesting he had no other Power here, the first having been returned to the Marquis upon the Transmission of this, the Advice of which he said he had recei∣ved from Monsieur Beverning. With Mon∣sieur Colbert we had no hopes of prevailing to have his new Style allowed, nor had we indeed any reason to press it, being offered upon a Surprize, and there being no Co∣lour
for the Marquis being qualified to send an Ambassador upon this Occasion: I was five Hours upon the Rack with the Opini∣on the Business would absolutely break by the Delays This world occasion; and in∣deed out of all Patience with the Baron, not believing it possible he could be with∣out his first Powers by him; And Monsieur Beverning and He were at those Heights, that they were several times upon the Point of drawing their Swords in my Room, and I believe had done it in any other Place. But after all, the Baron con∣fess'd he had his first Powers, and Order to insert them if he could not make the others pass, but Instructions to endeavour That to the utmost; which to give him his due, he acted to a Height that I could never have done without straining my own Truth as well as my Business. And so upon the 4th at Night all ended. My Dissatisfaction with the Baron Bargeyck's Conduct since I came hither, was, I confess, very great, and my Expressions upon it very free in my several Expresses to the Marquis, who it seems takes part in it, and owns it so far, as to seem most extremely ill satisfied with the Ministers using so much Earnestness here in beating him out of all those De∣signs. I have had three several Letters from his Excellency since my being here,
upon that Subject, but all so ill-humoured and so Emportèes, that I think they had been better spared, and though what was particular to Me, civil enough, yet some Expressions concerning the general Pro∣ceeding wherein I had the chiefest Part, so Picquantes, that I think I have reason to resent, and am sure have not deserved it from any publick Minister either there or here; And having answered them ac∣cordingly, I know not upon what Terms we are like to be upon my Return; And therefore could not forbear giving your Lordship the trouble of this Relation, to justifie my self not only to your Lordship, for there I am sure it will not need; but if you think fit, to the Count Molina, and the Baron d' Isola too, who may perhaps have received Letters from the Marquis upon our Proceedings here, of the same Style that I have done. I have been the more earnest in bring∣ing this Matter to an Issue here, (which the Holland Ambassador says, had never been done without Me,) because I con∣ceived by all I have had from your Lord∣ship, as well as from other Hands, not only that you desired it in England, but that the Peace was necessary for the Con∣stitution of His Majesty's present Affairs: And since he has had the Glory of makng
two Peaces so important, we have now no∣thing to wish but to see him in a Conditi∣on to make War as well as Peace, when∣ever the Honour and Interest of his Crowns shall make it necessary; For that Necessity can, I suppose, be no ways long avoided, but by our being in a Posture to welcome it whenever it comes, and to make Advan∣tage of it. And I think the best Time to fall into Councils tending to this great End, will be after the Conclusion of this gene∣ral Peace, when no Engagement abroad, forces His Majesty to have so much need of Money from his People. For, the Time to repair the Harms that Storms have done a House, is in fair Weather; and, to mend a leaky Ship, she must be brought ashore. God of Heaven send your Lordship to be an happy Instrument in the Proposal and Application of such Councils, and that we may take warning by the poor Spani∣ards Example, whose ill Conduct of late in the Government has so far subjected them to their Neighbours Disesteem, and Insolence, and Humour, as well as to their Conquests, Violence, and Oppression; which I confess have been enough to put them upon such desperate Councils as your Lordship mentions, of giving up all to the French in these Countries, rather than be the bare Guardians of other Frontiers. And
yet all these Misfortunes are the natural Consequences of their Conduct, and will never fail befalling any Prince, that fol∣lows their Example. I wish That might befal the French, to temper a little, such an over-grown Greatness; but I doubt it much, from the present King's Dispositi∣ons, among whose Qualities those of Care∣lesness or lavishing his Treasures, I am a∣fraid are none: Therefore I wish him en∣gaged in some very charming Pleasures, or else in some more difficult Enterprises than his last, and where we may not have so great a Share: That which they talk on here may possibly prove so, which is drawing, or forcing the Empire to chuse the Dau∣phin King of the Romans; For though his Party be grown strangely powerful in Ger∣many, and, if Brandenburgh be falling into it as is believed, none will be left to the House of Austria that I know of, unless Saxony and Triers; yet such a body so dif∣ferently composed as the Empire, should methinks very hardly move all one way in any new Course. Monsieur Colbert talks of his Master's sending immediately ten or fifteen thou∣sand Men for the Relief of Candy, which were a glorious and Christian Council; and in all ways that can be, to be cherished and applauded: And if any Offices could be
done towards engaging the French Court in that Design, by Us or the Dutch, I think they were not ill bestow'd; about which I have entertain'd Monsieur Beverning, who is of my mind, and have insinuated the same Notions among the German Ministers here, who swallow it greedily; and I hope it may take Effect, and help to free all these Parts of the Jealousie which so great an Army must needs give, as this Peace is like to leave idle upon the French Hands. I intend to begin my Journey to Brussels to morrow, Monsieur Beverning gone to day; but I doubt I shall be five or six Days upon the Way, not knowing any thing now that presses me to more than ordinary Haste. I received 600 l. owing me upon my Employment there before my coming a∣way, and was very sorry to find by a Letter of my Wife's, that the Fear she had of my being dissappointed in that Particular, made her draw up a Memorial which it seems the Council was troubled with, about my private Concernments: I may very truly and justly disown it, as I do, and hope she will be pardoned for too forward a Care and Concernment in that business: For, as to the Charge of my Journey here, when your Lordship thinks fit to command it, I shall send you the ex∣act Account which my Secretary keeps, of
all I spend, and leave it in your Lordship's Hands, for His Majesty to do as he plea∣ses in it; which is all the Trouble I shall give you or my self about it. I am ever with equal Passion and Truth, &c. TO The Marquis OF Castel-Rodrigo. Aix. May 8. S. N. 1668. My Lord, I Received yours of the 4th Instant; and am glad your Excellen∣cy is so extreamly sa∣tisfied with the Mode∣ration, (as you are plea∣sed to style it) of the Baronde Bargeyck; while at the same time you are so much provoked at the Complaints I made of his Conduct here. I shall always
openly confess, that seeing Don Juan's Ar∣rival with the intended Supplies delay'd, and perhaps wholly frustra∣ted; seeing Holland so desperately fond of the Peace, without consi∣dering the Interests of Spain; seeing the Em∣peror appear wholly disinteressed in the Matter; seeing Spain had used no Endeavors to engage the King my Master, or Sueden, otherwise than by fair words; And that His Majesty was not in a condition to enter in∣to the Affair alone, up∣on pure Considerations of Generosity or of a Danger at distance: Seeing also, that Spain approved even the first Project of Peace drawn by Monsieur de Lionne: I thought, upon all these Considerations, that it was their Inte∣rest sincerely to finish the Affair, and gain the most time possible, to get the Ratifications
from Madrid; and by that means take away from France all Hopes or Pretexts of Break∣ing, without such an Evidence of Falshood and Ambition, as would make Holland of neces∣sity engage in your Defence. And upon the same Considerati∣ons I urged the Baron de Bargeyck all I could, to finish the Affair; as soon as I saw, that nei∣ther the Ambassador of France nor Holland, any more than the Nuncio, would hearken to Pro∣positions of changing any thing in the Pro∣ject. And, besides, I thought, all the Diffi∣culties the Baron made upon the Signing, very unseasonable, and of ill consequence to the Affair; and I shewed him how much he was in the wrong to com∣plain of the sharp Pow∣ers of Monsieur Colbert, which were drawn up only in revenge to yours, his former ones
having been without any Reflection upon what was past: And the Baron de Bargeyck having had three weeks time to send for softer Powers, and more pro∣per for treating of a Peace. I was also ill satisfied to see him keep us three or four days on the Rack, till the Affair was just breaking, only to in∣sert a new Power with the word Ambassador, which the Nuncio never heard the Baron once mention before; there being nothing of it in those Powers whereof he had given a Copy. And, as insignificant as these Accidents seem to be, I think they were such, that if Mon∣sieur Colbert either by his own Disposition, or the Interests of his Brother, had not been very much inclined to the Peace; I am persua∣ded, that this great Moderation of the Ba∣ron de Bargeyck, had
wholly ruined the Af∣fair. I am your, &c. Au Marquis DE CASTEL-RODRIGO.
Aix, 8. May, S. N. 1668. Monsieur, J'Ay reçù la votre du 4. de ce mois; et je suis bien aise que V. E. s'est si fort satisfaite de ce qu'elle appelle la Mode∣ration du Baron de Bar∣geyck, pendant qu'elle te∣moigne être si picquée de l'aigreur que j'ay fait paroistre en me plaignant icy de son procedé. J'a∣voueray tout publique∣ment, que voyant retar∣der
avec l'arrivée de Don Juan, les secours destinez et promis, et voyant qu'on en seroit peut être frustré; voyant l' Hollande si e∣perduement amoureuse de la paix sans egard aux interêts d' Espagne; voy∣ant l' Empereur jouer dans cette affaire le role d'un Prince parfaitement desin∣teresse; voyant que l' E∣spagne n'avoit encore agi auprés du Roy mon Mai∣tre, et auprés de la Suede, que par de belles paroles; connoissant que Sa Maje∣sté n'etoit pas en etat d'en∣trer seule dans cette epi∣neuse negotiation; et que pour la porter á le faire, il falloit autres choses que de purs motifs de genero∣sité; Enfin, voyant l' E∣spagne elle même approu∣ver le Projet de Monsieur de Lionne, tel qu'il l'avoit dressé: Faisant attention á toutes ces choses, j'ay crû que leur interêt de∣mandoit qu'ils achevassent franchement l'affaire; gagnant le plus de tems qu'il seroit possible pour faire venir les ratifications
de Madrid; et ôtant par lá á la France tout pre∣texte, et toute esperance d'en venir á une rupture; á moins qu'elle voulût elle même êtaler sa honte, et faire voir si á decouvert sa perfidie et son ambiti∣on, que necessairement l' Hollande se trouveroit engagée dans votre de∣fense. Ces mêmes conside∣rations ont fait, que j'ay pousse autant qu'il m'a eté possible, á terminer promp∣tement l'affaire, dés que j'avois clairement apper∣çû, que ni l' Ambassadeur de France, ni celuy d' Hol∣lande, non plus que le Nonce, ne vouloient point écouter la proposition de changer quelque chose aux termes de Projet. Et méme j'ay regarde toutes les difficultez du Baron de Bargeyck sur la signa∣ture, comme faites hors de propos, et d'une facheuse influence pour la conclusion de l'affaire. Je luy ay donné le port qu'il s'est plaint de la forme en la∣quelle étoient conçus les pouvoirs de Monsieur Col∣bert,
il y á crû y entre∣voir de l'aigreur, sans faire reflexion qu'ils etoi∣ent dressez á l'imitation, et peut etre á l'envi des votres; les premiers Pou∣voirs de Monsieur Colbert ayant eté conçûs sans au∣cune relation au passe; et le Baron de Bargeyck ay∣ant eu trois semaines pour faire venir des pouvoirs plus doux et plus sortables á la paix. J'ay eté aussi fort indigné de ce qu'il nous á retenutrois ou qua∣tre jours á la gêne; et cela parce qu'il vouloit in∣serer un nouveau pouvoir avec le mot d' Ambassa∣deur. Le Nonce n'en a∣voit jamais ouy parler auparavant au Baron; car la moindre mention n'en avoit pas eté faite dans les pouvoirs, dont il avoit donné copie. Quel∣que legers que puissent pa∣roître de tels incidens je croy pouvoir dire, que si Monsieur Colbert par la situation des affaires et des interets de son frere, ne s'etoit pas trouvé tout-á-fait porté á la paix, je
suis persuade que cette bel∣le et louable moderation qu'on vante en Monsieur Bargeyck, auroit suffi pour gâter tout. Je Suis, &c. To my Lord Arlington. Brussels, May 22. S. N. 1668. My Lord, YOur Lordship's of the first current, referred me to another I was to ex∣pect by the following Post, with particu∣lar Directions how to pursue the Suedish Affair here; But That being not yet arri∣ved, I have hitherto been only able to make some general Diligences therein, to∣gether with the Holland Deputy in a joynt Audience this Morning. The Marquis's Guard consisted chiefly in these Points; That what he had promised of sending Powers to the Count Molina, was in time of War, and with Intention of engaging Sueden with Us in the Affair. That the Peace has altered that Measure; and though he had full Powers to grant what he thought fit in the time of War, whose Accidents admitted not Recourse to Spain,
yet he had not the same in time of Peace, but had written effectually upon this Sub∣ject. That, in the mean time he expect∣ed to know the Effect of this League, and see the Form of Guaranty it should pro∣duce, with what Concert, and what Ad∣vantages for the Affairs of these Countries, of which he had yet received no particular Account from the Count de Molina. That he did not understand why Spain should satisfie the Expence of those Months which the Suedes had kept up their Troops only at the Desire of Holland, and without any Reflections upon the Business of these Countries, which was from the time of the Conclusion at Breda to that of our League at the Hague, wherein Count Dona enter'd, and which seemed the first Instance of the Suedes concerning themselves in this Coun∣try or Spain's Affairs. The Holland Deputy press'd his Excel∣lency hard upon his Promise, and his de∣claring to Us, that he had sent his Powers to the Count Molina, pursuing him with Res non est integra, and, Mandatum non potest revocari, and such Civil Law Argu∣ments, till it grew warm, and so not very proper for a Man in ill Health, nor in my Opinion, for the Business as it stands: So that I was fain to divert it upon my ex∣pectation of new Powers and particular In∣structions,
by which I hoped to be able to give the Marquis satisfaction in the Project of the intended Guaranty. This Morning arrived Sir John Trevor's Secretary, with Directions to bring the Business of the Ratifications to a Period, by carrying one from hence for Sureties sake, in case That from Spain should fail, which is expected upon the very Treaty signed at Aix; and withal to concert o∣ther Circumstances in the manner of the Exchange, which is made very imperfect in the Treaty; that is, one to be delivered at St. Germains, and the other at Brussels. I carried the Secretary this Afternoon to the Marquis, and we have fallen upon this Agreement; That to morrow he shall re∣turn for Paris with a Ratification upon the Treaty at Aix, and with Insertion of the same Powers; a blank now in the Marquis's Hands being to be filled up in that Form, and to be dated the 16th currant, which will answer a Possibility of a Post going to Madrid after the 2d. when the Treaty was signed at Aix, receiving this Ratification there, and returning to Paris by the 24th, the Day this Gentleman expects to arrive there. For the Exchange, it shall be made at Paris, and by the Hands of our Ministers there, who shall deliver the Spanish Rati∣fications,
and at the same time receive the French, with which the Marquis is content, and will proceed to the publishing of the Peace, so soon as our Ministers are possest of the French Ratifications, which may afterwards be sent hither at leisure. The Day we propose for exchanging the Rati∣fications is the 26th, and the 28th, for pub∣lishing the Peace, in case we receive a Courier by that time with Advice of the French Concurrence in that Day. For the Manner of executing the Treaty, I confess I was of Opinion, nothing should be mentioned of it till the Exchange and Publication were past, since new Difficul∣ties may arise upon it, which will be easiest overcome when the Thing is done, and perhaps the Parties will have begun to dis∣arm: The Marquis was of my Opinion in it, and therefore has proposed only in that Point, that after the Publication, Commissioners may be appointed on both sides to meet upon it, and the Media∣tors desired by both Parties to intervene likewise by their Commissioners, for the better composing of any Difference that may arise between the Parties; and to whom the Adjudication of such Difference may be referred: The Place of meeting to be Oudenard or Courtray, as most commodious for adjudication
of the Limits which may fall in Dispute. After this Matter thus digested, and Pro∣mise of the Ratifications to be in my Hands to morrow by Noon; I came away with Sir John Trevor's Secretary; But the Marquis sent after me, to desire he might speak with me alone; And told me, he was to thank me for sparing him this Morning in Disputes he was falling into with the Holland Deputy; That in short, the Dutch had cross'd him in an Alliance he was making last Year with Sueden, because they would make them∣selves Masters of the Affair; and now would buy the Suedes Dependance at the Cost of Spain. That he had all the Rea∣son in the World to be satisfied with His Majesty's Conduct of this Affair, but little in the Dutch; That he knew no Reason why they should not pay what they had promised to Sueden after the Treaty of Breda, nor why all the Money Spain could spare should not be given His Majesty upon a nearer League between Us, who was the only Prince had proceeded affecti∣onately and generously in the Spanish Af∣fairs; and who was the best able to sup∣port them in case he were in Condition to make War without his Peoples Purses: That he expected the Baron Isola sudden∣ly here for Conclusion of the Guaranty,
and this Affair with Sueden; And that at last, if it must be paid by Spain, it should be all laid in His Majesty's Hands to dispose of as he pleased. I gave his Excellency Thanks for Expressions so o∣bliging in what concerned our Part in this whole Affair; But desired him to take it for a Ground in all the Superstructures to be made upon the present Foundations; That Spain must not disoblige Holland even to oblige Us, but dissemble any Resent∣ments they had given him, and sacrifice them to the Advantage both We and Spain received by their present Separation from France. And so our Discourses ended, and we are returned into the same good Correspon∣dence we were in before I went to Aix; which had been interrupted by some Let∣ters I received from his Excellency there, and some I returned in the Style I thought they deserved: It being perhaps natural to the same Men, to be the least subject to do Injuries, and the least capable of recei∣ving them; For it is easie enough to find Morals for the first, but Christianity e∣nough for the last, I doubt is difficult. I am, &c.
To Monsieur de Witt. Brussels, May 27. S. N. 1668. SIR, BY my last, from Aix, I gave you Account of the Sign∣ing of the Peace; and was in hopes by this, to have given you also an Account of the Ra∣tification; which is not yet arrived from Paris. Mean while, the Ravages made by the French Troops over all the Country, and their Approaches to this City, alarm us here, as if they had a Design to wrangle upon some Formalities, and in the mean time, put them∣selves in a Condition to carry the greatest Advantages upon expi∣ration of the Truce. I will not have the least suspicion of such a Proceeding; the most
Christian King having already given notice of the Peace, to the Pope and other Christian Princes: And (which is of greater weight) knowing that Sueden has already entered in∣to the Tripple Alliance. Therefore, the Business that gives me most Pain, is to draw from Spain the Satisfaction stipulated to Sueden, up∣on which your Depu∣ties here have without doubt already given you the Marquis's Ans∣wers, tho' indeed some∣what cold and uncer∣tain. I have since gi∣ven him a very pressing Letter Letter from the King my Master, upon the same Subject, but have had yet no Ans∣wer, further than that he has not yet seen our Tripple Alliance, nor knows the Advantages given to Spain by it, or whether they are equal to Spain and France. He makes Difficulties also upon the Subsidies of
these Months past be∣tween the Treaty at Breda, and ours at the Hague, which was (as he says) the first day that Sueden began to consider the Affairs of Spain; And he adds, that he has writ into Spain upon this Mat∣ter, and waits an Ans∣wer; his Powers be∣ing more ample in time of War than of Peace. By the Thread of his Discourse I imagine, that he is sufficiently convinced of the Ne∣cessity of the Affair, and that he will agree to it; but knowing that he has time till Ratifi∣cation come from Sue∣den; he makes use of it, either, first to see the supplies of Money expected with Don John; or perhaps, be∣cause there are some Natures in the World, who never can pro∣ceed sincerely in Bu∣siness, but are always for gaining Time, which
they will do if they were going to their Wedding as much as if they were going to their Execution. Mean while, the King my Master has thought good to order another Letter to be writ to the Queen of Spain her self upon this Subject, and to come to an end of this Affair, notwithstanding the Difficulties that may arise here: And I think it will not be amiss if the States ob∣serve the same order, writing a Letter to the Marquis, and at the same time another to the Queen, to press the Affair, and both in civil Terms, without sharpning the Matter, or seeming to make Difficulties upon the Ratifications of the Guaranty, at least, not to make them appear greater than they are. I have told my Opini∣on in this Affair, and I have dealt with the
Spaniards long enough to know a little of their Genius; nor do I doubt coming to an end of this Matter, as well as I have done of others more difficult, provi∣ded we go the same way, as having to do with the same People. I doubt not, but you will be of my Opini∣on, that it will be ne∣cessary after the Peace is made, to endeavour at coming to some Ex∣change of Places, as well to remove the French from your Fron∣tiers, as to leave the Spaniards in a better condition of defending themselves against any new Surprise or At∣tack: And this will deserve your Thoughts upon it; I mean, the Manner by which you must begin and carry on this Affair: And, I think, the best Oc∣casion of entring in∣to the Business will be upon the Execu∣tion of the Peace;
and to represent that the Restitution of Bur∣gandy in the Condition it is in at present, is an offer not agreeable to the Promises of the Most Christian King. I have desired Mon∣sieur Beverning to dis∣course you about a small Particular in our last Instrument of the Marine, which does not seem to me of any Importance, but by which some of your good Friends have undertook to reflect particularly upon me: But having had no News of Monsieur Be∣verning since his De∣parture, I should be glad to know that He spoke to You of it; and what You think. I am, &c.
A Monsieur de Witt. De Brusselles, le 27. May, S. N. 1688. Monsieur, PAR ma derniere lettre d'Aix la Cha∣pelle, je vous ay appris la signature de la paix, et j'esperois par cellecy vous apprendre la ratification; mais elle n'est pas encore arrivee de Paris. Ce∣pendant, les ravages faits par les Troupes Françoises dans toute la Flandre, et leurs approches de cette ville, causent encore de l'alarme icy, comme s'ils avoient dessein de chicaner sur quelques formalitez, et en attendant, se mettre en etat de remporter les plus grands avantages au moment de l'expiration de la Treve. Je ne veux point former le moindre soupçon d'un tel procedé dans les François; le Roy tres Chretien ayant dêja donné avis de la paix,
tant au Pape qu' aux au∣tres Princes; Et, (ce qui est de plus grand poids) sachant que la Suede á dêja entré dans la Triple Alliance. C'est pourquoy, la chose dont je me mets le plus en peine, est de tirer de l'Espagne la sa∣tisfaction stipulée pour la Suede. Vos Deputez icy vous ont sans doute deja communiqué sur cet article les reponses du Marquis, á la verité un peu froides et incertaines. Je luy ay remis depuis, une lettre de la part du Roy mon Mai∣tre sur ce sujet, fort pres∣sante, mais je n'en ay jusqu' icy pû tirer d'autre reponse, si non qu'il n'a pas encore vû le traité de notre Triple Alliance, et qu'il ignore quels avantages y sont contenus pour l' Es∣pagne; et s'ils sont ba∣lances egalement entre la France et l'Espagne. Je forme aussi des difficultez sur les subsides des Mois ecoulez entre la conclusion du traité á Breda, et la date du notre á la Haye, qui etoit, dit il, le premier
jour que la Suede á com∣mencé d'examiner les af∣faires d'Espagne, et d'y faire attention. Enfin il ajoute qu'il á ecrit en Espagne, sur cette ma∣tiere, et qu'il en attend la reponse, ses Pouvoirs etant plus amples en tems de guerre qu'en tems de paix. Par la suite de son discours j'ay crû ap∣percevoir, qu'il est assés persuadé de la necessité de l'affaire, et qu'il y veut venir; mais comme il sait, qu'il á du tems jusqu' á la ratification venue de Suede, il tâche de s'en servir, dans l'es∣perance que les secours d'argent arriveront avec Don Juan. Mais peut etre que ce temporisement á un autre principe, et qu'il y á des esprits dans le monde faits de telle sorte, qu'ils ne saurcient jamais aller rondement en besogne, et qui songent toûjours á gagner du tems, lors meme qu'il s'agit d'aller aux nôces, comme lors qu'il est question d'al∣ler á la mort.
En attendant, le Roy mon Maitre á trouvé bon de faire ecrire une autre lettre á la Reyne d'Espagne elle même sur ce sujet, pour venir á bout de cette affaire, malgré les difficultez qui se pourront rencontrer icy. Il me semble qu'il ne seroit mal á propos que Messieurs les Etats sui∣vissent la même voye, et qu'ils fissent ecrire au Marquis et en même tems á la Reine, afin de presser l'affaire. Ces deux lettres etant con∣ceues en termes obligeans, et au lieu d'aigrir le different, et de grossir les difficultez, paroissant a∣voir pour but de pacifier toutes choses, et de tendre á une prompte conclusion touchant les Ratifications de la Guarantie, pour∣roient produire un tres bon effet. Voila mon o∣pinion sur cette affaire: J'ay eu un assez long com∣merce avec les Espagnols pour connoitre un peu leur genie; et je ne doute point que je ne vienne á
bout de ce que j'ay en∣trepris, ainsi que se suis dêja venu á bout de choses plus difficiles, pourvû que nous marchions tous d'un même train, ayant áffaire á mêmes gens. Je ne doute pas que vous ne soyez comme moy du sentiment, qu'a∣prés la paix faite, il sera necessaire de faire nos efforts pour amener les choses á un échange des places, tant pour eloigner les Françcois de vos fron∣tieres, que pour laisser les Espagnols en etat de se mieux defendre contre de nouvelles surprises et de nouvelles invasions. Cecy merite vos reflexions. Vous penserez aussi á la ma∣niere dont il faudra s'y prendre pour entamer et poursuivre cette affaire. Il me semble que l'occa∣sion la plus propre d'en∣trer en matiere sur cela, sera sur l'execution de la paix; et de representer, que la restitution de Bourgogne dans l'etat ou il est á present, est une offre peu convenable aux
promesses du Roy tres Chretien. J'ay prié Monsieur Beverning de vous en∣tretenir sur une petite particularité touchant no∣tre dernier memoire sur la marine; la chose ne me paroît pas importante, mais parce que quelques uns, de vos bons amis ont pris à tache de me blamer moy seul en par∣ticulier: Comme je n'ay point eu de nouvelles de Monsieur Beverning de∣puis son depart, je seray bien aise de savoir s'il vous en é parlé, et ce qui vous en semble. Je Suis, &c.
To Monsieur de Witt. London, July 3. 1668. SIR, HAving taken so much Part in your good Fortunes, and the Applauses gi∣ven you by the World, it's but reasonable, I should also take Part in your Losses, and tell you with equal Displeasure and Truth how much I am con∣cerned at your late Misfortune. I have long observed, that your Fatigues for the Publick were eas'd by your Domestick Enter∣tainments; and instead of those Diversions which others seek in Vice and Extrava∣gance, you always placed yours in the innocent Pleasures of Conjugal and Paternal Affection. I have ob∣served also, how hap∣pily
you discharged your self of all Affairs of your Family upon a Lady who now lives no more but in the Memory and Esteem of all those that knew her; And therefore I am but too sensible how nearly this Loss must afflict you; and that it is neither just nor decent to give you Consolation upon it so soon. Therefore, I will only say, that if it were not for this sad Occasion, you would have wanted one great enough to shew the strength of your Mind, which is often apter to sink under Domestick Accidents, than those of Court or of War; For by These a Man is only hardned every day, but he is softned and made more tender by the others. I beg you therefore not to neglect this Occasion of your Glory; nor to forget, in the midst of your Grief, that you
have this long time espoused the Good of your Country, and of Christendom it self, in these last Conjun∣ctures; to which you owe all your Appli∣cations and Caresses: I hope these will be at present some Com∣fort to you, or at least, a Diversion, as they have formerly been a Fatigue and a Pain. Having begun this Letter only to con∣dole with you upon this sad Occasion, I will not intermix any thing of Business, only to tell you, that the King my Master pres∣ses me every day to prepare for my Voy∣age, which I shall de∣lay no longer than my Domestick Affairs have made it neces∣sary after so long an Absence. In the mean while, I assure you, I find nothing here that can any way change or slacken the Pursuit of our true and
common Interests; which consist in the Firmness of our last Alliance. But of this I shall tell you more when I see you. I am, Sir, Your, &c.
A Monsieur de Witt. De Londres le 3. Juill, 1668. Monsieur, AYant pris tant de part dans vos pro∣speritez, et dans les ap∣plaudissemens que vous re∣cevez de tout le monde; il est bien juste que j'en prenne dans vos disgraces et dans vos pertes; et que je vous dise avec au∣tant de douleur que de veritè, que j'ay eté-vive∣ment touche de la derniere perte que vous venez de faire. Il y á long tems que j'ay remarqué que votre domestique vous á toujours servi d'unique relachement dans des fa∣tigues que vous causent les affaires publiques, et qu'au lieu de recourir á ces divertissemens qui ap∣prochent si souvent de l'extravagance et du crime, vous faisiez, toû∣jours consister les votres á cultiver les fruits de l'a∣mitié
conjugale, et de la tendresse paternelle. J'a∣vois remarqué aussi, avec quelle joye et quelle confi∣ance vous vous etiez de∣chargé de tous les soins de mênage sur cette vertueuse epouse, qui ne vit plus á present que dans l'estime et le souvenir de toutes les personnes qui l'ont connue; et par lá je ne sens que trop combien sa perte vous doit sensiblement toucher: ni la bienseance, ni la raison ne souffrent point que j' entreprenne de vous consoler si subitement. C'est pourquoy je vous diray seulement, que sans une si triste occasion, vous n'au∣riez pas eu celle d'êtaler toute la force de votre ame, qui succombe quel∣que fois plus promptement et plus absolument sous les afflictions domestiques que sous le revers de la Re∣publique, ou les disgraces de la guerre: On se fa∣miliarise avec ces dernie∣res, et on s'y endurcit avec le tems; mais les pre∣mieres conservent toûjours le droit de nous attendrir
et de nous toucher infini∣ment. Je vous prieray donc de ne pas negliger cette occasion de votre gloire, et au plus fort de votre douleur, de ne point oublier avec quel de vone∣ment, et depuis quel tems vous avez epousé le bien de votre Patrie, et avec le sien, celuy de la Chre∣tienté dans ces dernieres conjonctures; votre at∣tachement, vos soins, votre tendresse même luy sont dûs, puisque vous devez vous même tout entier á elle. J'espere qu' á l'a∣venir vos veilles et vos fatigues pour la Repub∣lique vous procureront quelque soulagement, ou du moins apporteront quel∣que diversion á vos ennuis, au lieu des travaux et des sueurs qu'elles vous ont coute autrefois. Ayant commencé cette lettre uniquement dans la veue de me cosoler avec vous, je ne veux point la finir en y mêlant quelque chose qui soit etranger á votre douleur. Je ne vous parleray donc point d'af∣faires,
et je vous diray seulement que le Roy mon Maitre me presse tous les jours sur les preparatifs de mon depart; je n'y ap∣porteray d'autres retarde∣ments que ceux que mes affaires domestiques ren∣dent indispensables aprés une si longue absence. En attendant, je puis vous assûrer que je n'ay rien apperçû icy qui puisse tant soit peu alterer ou rallentir les soins de nos veritables et communs interests, que je fay consister dans la fer∣meté et la durée de notre derniere Alliance: vous verrez cela plus au long á mon arrivée. Je Suis, &c. To Sir John Temple. Sheen, July 22. 1668: SIR, THough I doubt our late Motions may have lost or delay'd some of your Letters, which we have now been some time in want of; yet I presume ours have had their constant Course to you, though from several Parts; And though mine have not been frequent, upon the
Permission you give me to spare my own Eyes and Time when they are otherwise taken up, and trust to my Sister's enter∣taining you: Yet upon my return home after three Years absence, I could not but give you some Account of my coming and stay here; and of what I can foresee is like to follow it, both as to my own Particular, and to the publique Affairs, in which That seems at present to be so much involved. After the Conclusion of the Tripple Al∣liance and the Peace of Aix, I was at an end of my Ambition; having seen Flan∣ders saved as if it had been, by one of the Miracles, the House of Austria has, they say, been used to; and the general Inte∣rests of Christendom secured against the Power and Attempts of France; and at the same time the Consideration and Honour of His Majesty and his Crown abroad, raised to a Degree it has not been in for some Ages past, and we had no reason to expect it should be in some Ages to come, upon the Decline it felt after the Business of Chattam, and the Peace of Breda that succeeded it. I returned from Aix to Brussels without other Thoughts than of continuing in that Station till I grew wea∣rier of it than I was like to do very sud∣denly of a Place, I confess I love; But
immediately upon my Arrival there, I met with Letters from my Lord Arlington, which brought me the King's Orders to continue the Equipage of an Ambassador, that I was in, upon my Aix Journey, in order to my serving His Majesty in the same Character at the Hague, whether he was resolved to send me, and to renew upon occasion of our late Alliances, a Character, which the Crown of England had discontinued in that Country, since King James's Time. In order hereunto I was left at liberty to take my Leave of the Marquis, and to return into England as soon as I pleased, which I did by the Way of Holland, and left most of my Ser∣vants and Horses at Utrecht. Upon my Arrival here, I was received both by the King and Court a great deal better than I could deserve or pretend; But People seem generally pleased with the Councils and Negotiations, in which I have had so much Part since Christmas last; and I understand not Courts so ill (how little soever I have been used to them) as not to know, that one ought not to lose the Advantage of coming home with the common Opinion of some Merits or good Hitts at one's Back; if one's Business be de pousser sa Fortune; And I am put e∣nough in mind of it upon this Occasion,
by several of those many new Friends one would think I had at this time of Day, as well as by some of my old ones; But I cannot imagine why I should pretend to have deserved more than my Pay of the King, for which I served Him in my late Employments; and if I got Honour by them, 'twas so much more than I had to reckon upon. Besides, I should be sorry to ask Money of him at a time when for ought I can judge by the Cry of the Court, He wants it more than I do. The Spanish Ambassador and Baron d' Isola, as well as others of my Friends, would needs be ask∣ing a Title for Me, and 'tis with difficulty enough that I have prevented it; But 'tis That I am sure I never can have a mind to, and if it should ever be offered me, I re∣solve it shall either begin with you, if you desire it, or if not, with my Son, which I had much rather. But I suppose, no∣thing of this can happen in our Court without Pursuit, and so I reckon my self in all these Points just where I was about six Months ago, but only designed for another Ambassy, and no Man knows how That will end. I am very much press'd to dispatch my Preparations for it, by my Lord Keeper and Lord Arlington, who are extream kind to Me, as well as to the Measures lately taken by their Ministry,
and seem to value themselves a great deal upon them. They say, all the Business the King now has, both at home and a∣broad, will turn upon my Hand in Hol∣land, by keeping the French from break∣ing in upon our late Alliances, and the Confidence between Us; and by drawing the Emperor and Princes of the Empire in∣to a common Guaranty of the Peace; and thereupon they are mighty earnest with me to hasten away. On t'other side, the Commissioners of the Treasury seem to have more mind to my Company here than I could expect: For after some of them had tryed to hinder the King's Resolution, of sending either an Ambassador at all in∣to Holland (upon Pretence of so long Dis∣use of that Character) or Me in particu∣lar; when That could not be carried, they prepared my Way by entring upon new Regulations in the Exchequer, among which, those concerning foreign Employ∣ments, brought down the Equipage Mo∣ney of Ambassadors from three thousand Pounds as it has been since the King came in, to fifteen hundred Pounds in France and Spain, and to one thousand Pounds in all other Courts; And their Allowance, from one hundred Pounds a Week to ten Pounds a Day in France and Spain, and to seven in other Places. Though this be
pretended by the Commissioners as only a Piece of a general Scheme of Parsimony they find necessary in the present Condi∣tion of the Revenue; Yet I understand it as calculated just at this Time particu∣larly for Me; and my Lord Arlington con∣fesses, he thinks it so too, and takes part in it as a piece of Envy or Malice to Himself as well as to Me, from some who are spighted at all, that has lately passed between Us and Holland, and at the Per∣sons who have been at the Head of those Councils. For my part, I resent it not only as a Thing I have not deserved, upon an Employment cast wholly upon me by the King's Choice, and, as he seems to think, by the Necessity of his Affairs; but as that which I find plainly by the short Experience of my last Am∣bassy, will not defray the Expence of a∣nother, with any Honour to the King or my Self abroad; And though I do not pretend to make my Fortune by these Employments, yet I confess I do not pre∣tend to ruin it neither. I have therefore been resolved several times absolutely to refuse this Ambassy, unless it be upon the Terms all others have had; But my Lord Arlington puts so much weight upon my going, that he will not hear of it: He says, 'tis That our good Friends would
have, and intend by this Usage; and that I can no way disappoint them so much as by going, and that this Rule will be broken in three Months time: That I should not consider small matters of Mo∣ney in the course of my Fortune, and that the King cannot fail of making mine at a Lump one time or other: That there is nothing I may not expect from him upon my return from this Ambassy; And that if His Majesty had not thought me of absolute Necessity to him in Holland up∣on this Conjuncture, he had brought me now into Secretary Moris's Place, which upon my going abroad is designed for Sir John Trevor. My Lord Keeper is of the same mind, to have me by no means re∣fuse it (as he says) neither for the King's sake nor my own; And your old Friend Sir Robert Long agrees with them both; and says, after a Year or two of this Ambassy, I cannot fail of being either Secretary of State, or sent Ambassador in∣to Spain; which are both certain ways of making any Man's Fortune. With all this, I confess I find it not very easie to resolve, and very much de∣sire yours and my Brother's Opinion up∣on it: And that you may the better give it me, I shall tell you one Circumstance
which weighs a little with me, though not at all with my Friends here. They are all of Opinion, the Measures the King has lately taken cannot be broken nor al∣tered, however they may be snarled at by some Persons, upon particular Envy or Interest; But I see plainly there are others of another Mind. Six Thomas Clifford said to a Friend of mine in Confidence, upon all the Joy that was here at the Con∣clusion of the Tripple Alliance; Well, for all this Noise, we must yet have another War with the Dutch before it be long. And, I see plainly already, that He and Sir George Downing are endeavouring with all the Industry that can be, to engage the East-India Company here in such De∣mands and Pretensions upon the Dutch, as will never be yielded to on that Side, and will encrease a Jealousie, they will ever have, of our unsteddy Councils, and of our leaving still a Door open for some new Offences when we shall have a mind to take them. On t'other side, the French will leave no Stone unturned, to break this Confidence between Us and Holland, which spoils all their Measures, and with∣out which they had the World before them. If they can, they will undermine it in Holland by Jealousies of the Prince
of Orange, or any other Artifice, and will spare neither Promises nor Threats. If I should be able to keep that Side stanch, they will spare none of the same Endea∣vours here, and will have some good Helps that I see already, and may have others that do not yet appear. If by any of these Ways, or other Accidents, our present Measures come to change; I am left in Holland to a certain Loss, up∣on the Terms they would send me, though I should be paid, but to a certain Ruin if I should not; which I may well expect from the good Quarter I may reckon upon from some in the Treasury; And when my Ambassy ends, I may find a new World here, and all the fine Things I am told of, may prove Castles in the Air: There is I know, a great deal to be said for my going, but on t'other Side, I am well as I am, and cannot be ruined but by such an Adventure as this. I beg of you to let me know your Opinion up∣on the whole; And if I could have the Confidence, I should beg a great deal more earnestly that I might see you here, since I cannot get loose to wait on you there. Till I hear from you, I shall let the Talk and the Forms of my Embassy go on, and am confident, however they
presume, yet I can spin out the Time of my going till about the End of August in hopes of seeing you here; which will be, I am sure, the greatest Satisfa∣ction that can befal SIR, Yours, &c. The End of the First Volume of Sir William Temple's Letters.
LETTERS TO Sir William Temple.
From Sir Thomas Clifford. Copenhagen, Octob. 7. 1665. SIR, I Have received your obliging Letter of the 20/30th past: And the News of this Country is like the Commodities, not of equal Value with the more Southern, and so you are like to be a Loser by the Barter: But your Kindness is the greater. I hope the King of Spain's Death will no way al∣ter the State of our Affairs with that Crown. I cannot yet tell you the Effect of my Negotiation here; but shall in my next give you some Hints. The Direction of your Letter brings it safe to me; I shall advise you before I remove. Here came a Report last Night, that a Squadron of the English Fleet had taken out of Fleckery nine of the Dutch Merchant-men, and ran another on Shoar: But I have exa∣min'd it, and find there was no Ground for the Report. Two of their East-India Men are still at Tunsburg, near Christiana in Norway, and two more are returned to Bergen: But the six Men of War and East-India-Man that came here into the Sound
after the Storm, are put to Sea, and gone toward the Texel. The East-India Ship that got into the River of Elve, is there unlading, and they are sendihg the Goods home in little small Vessels, under the Convoy only of a little Toy of eight or ten Guns: They go home over the Watts; a Privateer lying there would pro∣bably make his Market. Last Night some Dutch Ships going for Dantzick arrived here, and boasted, that their Fleet of ninety Sail, under De Ruyter, sailed upon Sunday last, the first Instant, towards England, and to the Chanel, as they thought, to join with the French; but no body gives credit to the Relation. You see what a shift I make to compleat my Bill of Store; but pray let it not dis∣hearten you from corresponding: For if I have nothing else to say, I shall be glad of Opportunities to express my self, SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, Thomas Clifford.
From the Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor. Oxford, December 28, 1665. SIR, I Do confess I have since we parted, re∣ceiv'd three Letters from you, which I should be asham'd to acknowledge now, if I had been faulty in not doing it sooner; as I promise my self you have been inform∣ed from my Lord Arlington's Justice and Friendship. It is now near three Months, that the Pain of the Gout hath restrained me from the Exercise of Writing; and I am hardly yet returned to it; because not able to put my Head out of Doors, or more than to stand, rather than walk in my Chamber: So that I would not have ventur'd to have given you this Trouble; but upon the Absence of my Lord Arlington, (who hath transmitted to you constantly what we thought jointly:) But upon the Sight of your last Letter, which came since his Departure; I think it necessary to say a little to you upon a Particular or two.
I do, in the first place think and believe the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo to be a very generous Person, and a very useful Friend to the King our Master; and one who will be the best Instrument to contribute to that firm Friendship between the two Crowns, that is necessary for the joint Interest of both; And therefore we must be careful to remove the least Umbrage, which may dispose him to suspect our Pru∣dence, with Reference to our own Affairs, or our Affection, with Reference to Spain. With Reference to our selves, it is not possible we can be without a Sense of the almost insupportable Weight that lies upon us, in the carrying on the War against the Dutch, and preparing for a War against France. And therefore we cannot but heartily wish to be fairly quit of one of them; and would be very glad that any Advance were made to it by Holland. I thought always that the O∣verture made by the Spanish Ambassador, had come from Don Stephano, and never heard the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo's Name: But it being the very same in Terms that the French Ambassadors had made, there could then be no Proceedings upon it. But we have done all we can to in∣vite the Dutch to an Address how pri∣vately soever: Nor shall we make any
Demands concerning the Prince of O∣range, lest it should do him hurt. If we can bring them off from a Conjun∣ction with France (in which Spain is more concerned than England) I confident we shall insist upon very reasonable Con∣ditions. We have great Reason to com∣mend the Proceedings of the Bishop of Munster: Nor are we jealous in the least Degree of him, or his treating: And as our Failing towards him has not proceed∣ed from any Faults of ours, but even from the Hand of God: So we shall out of hand repair those Omissions: And it is but reasonably expected that the Princes of the Empire should (how se∣cretly soever) support him from a Dis∣solution, lest before many Months past, and the French Designs are a little more evident, they would be glad to re-pur∣chase the Advantage of the Bishop's be∣ing in such a Post as he now is, at any Price. There is nothing now ought to be laboured with so much Industry and Dex∣terity, as the uniting Enland, Spain and Flanders, which would give, and which only can give Peace to Christendom. I am sure our Master is passionately inclined to it; and truly I think Spain is well dis∣posed to the main; yet I know not how
by the fatal Delay in Dispatch there; and it may be their Expectation, that in the Straits we are, we shall buy their Friendship at a Rate we shall never pay for it; there is not Haste made that the Affair required. My Lord Sandwich (who will be gone in twenty Days) I hope will give Life to it. You see how ill my Hand is, though never legible, by shaking and weakness somewhat worse than usual. God keep you; and I pray let me know, that this is come to your Hands from, SIR, Your Affectionate Servant, Clarendon.
FromLate M. of Hallifax. Sir George Savil. Febr. 5. S. N. 1666. SIR, IT is a Sin against the Publick, and a Trespass upon you, at this time to clog you with such an idle Correspond∣ence as mine: But I find I consider my own Interest before yours; beeing not a∣ble to make you an Expression of my Kindness at so dear a rate as the denying my self the Satisfaction of hearing from you. And therefore I take hold of your Offer, and beg you would sometimes bestow a Letter upon me; which shall be as welcome for telling me you are well, as it can be for the best News it bringeth in relation to the Publick: For which, if I can be concerned next to what I am for my best Friends, it is the utmost I will pretend to in that Matter. I find his Majesty of France will be an angry Ene∣my. He doth not declare War, like an honnête homme; and therefore I hope he will not pursue it like a wise one.
I do not despair, but that the Eng∣lish who use to go into France for their Breeding, may have the Honor once to teach Them better Manners. The League with Spain is a good Circum∣stance to make us able to do it: It is so seasonably, and so well done, that I will suppose you had a Hand in it. In the mean time we have great Alarms the Monsieur will invade us, which makes every body prepare for their Entertain∣ment. And I hope they will neither find us so little ready, or so divided, as perhaps they expect. I will not make this longer, when I have assured you I am, SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, George Savill.
From the Bi∣shop of Mun∣ster. Munster, Feb. 12: 1666. SIR, THE Favours you have expressed to me, are such, that no∣thing can add to my Esteem of you: How∣ever, it was very acce∣ptable to find from yours of the 25th past, that your Affection to me still continues. In the mean time I am busie in preparing an Army against Spring; Nor do I doubt, but such Care is taken of the third Payment, that I may have it all together; at least, that you have prepared 30000 Dollars ready at Brussels; and that 25000 more may be returned with all speed
by Exchange to Co∣logn: For it is certain, that by small Sums, and paid by Parcels, nothing can be per∣form'd worthy of such an Undertaking; and that my Expedition will be as much obstru∣cted by these, as if the Subsidies were wholly delayed. Besides, I shall this Year meet with more Resistance by Enemies unexpect∣ed to whom the Ele∣ctor of Brandenburg will join himself. But that I hope will be recom∣pensed by the Friend∣ship of Sueden, and his Majesty's Declaratory Letters communicated to me, and to be kept secret. Nor shall any thing be more unviola∣bly observ'd by me, than the League I have made with his Majesty; from which nothing shall be able to force me. Nor is there any Reason why the Offer of a Mediation from the Emperor and Princes, should raise any Suspi∣cions
of the contrary; since the present Con∣junctures would not permit me abruptly to refuse it. And in or∣der to gain time, I have kept that Affair within Preliminaries, relating to the Persons of the Mediators, the manner of negotiating and the means of Secu∣rity to be propos'd, being resolv'd by any means not to separate my self from his Maje∣sty; from whose Pro∣tection I trust to pro∣cure Safety and Satis∣faction to my self. I am glad of the Peace between England and Spain being signed at Madrid; and that it is sent into England to be ratified. I wish the Effects of it be not de∣layed; and that the Spaniards may be ready at the time, against whom I hear the Hol∣landers have also decla∣red War by the Insti∣gation of the French. Your most oblig'd Servant, Ch. Bernardus.
Ab Episcopo Monasterii. Monasterii Feb. 12. 1666. Generose Domine, Dominationem ve∣stram ita meis re∣bus faventem reipsa sem∣per expertus sum, ut nul∣lâ quidem contestatione meae desuper conceptae exi∣stimationi plus addi possit; gratissimum tamen fuit, ex ejusdem literis de 25 to∣elapsi mensis Januarii percipere, quod D. V. e∣undem zelum & affectum continuet. Ego interim non desino instruere & praeparare exercitum im∣minenti jam veri; nec dubito de tertio termino sic provisum, ut integrè à meis sublevari possit, aut certè dispositione Dis. Vrae. triginta thalerorum mil∣lia Bruccellis in paratis praesto sinto, & viginti
quinque millia Coloniam cambio quantotius trans∣mittantur. Certum enim est minutis summulis & carptim solutis, vix quic∣quam pro dignitate tantae rei effici posse; nec minus ex his quam dilatis subsi∣diis expeditionem meam incommodi cepisse. Quae quidem hoc anno plus re∣sistentiae & difficultatis à tot incopinatis hostibus, quibus & Elector Bran∣denburgicus se sociabit, habitura est. Id tamen fiducia amicitae Sueciae compensatum existimo, ac∣cedentibus S. Regiae Ma∣jestatis declaratoriis literis mihi communicatis, & secretò servandis. Nihil{que} mihi unquam erit anti∣quius aut magis inviola∣bile noto foedere cum S. Regiâ Majestate sancito, à quo nullo modo divelli me patiar. Nec est quod oblata Caesaris & quo∣rundam Principum me∣diatio, umbras aliquas contrariae suspicionis in∣vehere possit; cum illam praefracte respuere nec temporum horum ratio
patiatur, nec mihi consul∣tum fuerit, qui lucrando tempori inde occasionem nactus, rem omnem ha∣ctenus intra praeliminaria de ipsis personis Mediato∣rum, de modo tractandi, & mediis securitatis pro∣ponendis continui, certus non separare me à S. Re∣giâ Majestate, cujus au∣spiciis, & satisfactionem, & securitatem me conse∣cuturum confido. Quòd foedus Anglo-Hispanum Madriti jam tum signa∣tum, & ad ratificandum in Angliam transmissum sit, libenter accepi; opta∣rem sane hujus effectum non deferri, & Hispanos tempori paratos esse, qui∣bus etiam ab Hollandis bellum Gallorum instigati∣one denunciandum intelli∣go: Ac hisce maneo Dominationis vestrae addictissimus, Ch. Bernardus.
From Sir George Savill. April 4. 1666. SIR, THis must carry my Thanks to you for two Letters I receiv'd at the same time from you; which giveth me a fair Occasion to say a great deal to you; but that I will not trespass upon our Agreement, to omit Ceremony, or any thing that looketh like it. Yet you must give me leave to tell you, I think my self as much assured of your Kindness, by your letting me stay in your Thoughts (when you might forget me without Breach of Friendship, considering the Weight of Business that lieth upon you) as I could be by any Mark of it you can imagine: And if you will suppose my Sense of it answerably, and reckon up∣on my Service accordingly; if it may ever be of use to you, you will do me but Right. In the mean time you make me sensible of the Inconvenience of liv∣ing out of the World: Now that I find it impossible for me to write three Lines of Sense in Exchange for your
Letters, that are full of every thing which can make them welcome. I am so asham'd you should converse with a dead Man, that I almost wish the French landed upon our Coast, thinking it better to write you a sad Story than none. How soon I may be furnished with some∣thing of this kind, dependeth upon our Success at Sea, and the Faith of your Bishop, which may well be shaken, if you do not support it with your Bills of Exchange. He is likely to be so o∣ver-match'd this next Campagne, that I doubt he will be tempted to break Faith with Hereticks, rather than be a Martyr in our Calendar. I should be glad to hear Spain would come into our Scales, to help us to weigh down our Enemies; But I fear their ill Luck in the late War, hath not left them Spirit enough to fall out with the French, though their Interest provoketh them to it. Besides the Crown is in a Cradle: And a Spa∣nish Council I imagine to be as slow an Assembly as a House of Commons. So that we must rely upon the Oak and Courage of England to do our Business, there being small Appearance of any thing to help us from abroad.
I believe before this cometh to your Hands, you will be waiting upon Ma∣damoiselle Beverwaert, who is a Testi∣mony that this War hath given us no such Antipathy to the Dutch, since we chuse one to breed Statesmen for the next Age. The Captain that went upon so peaceable an Errand, and into a Friend's Harbour, had ill Fortune to be so roughly saluted: But it being a single Act of the Officer, without any Order from his Superiors, it is of no more Consequence to us than the Sound of it may amount to. I direct this as you bid me; and tho' it should not come to you, I assure my self you would not impute it to the Omis∣sion, but to the ill Fortune of SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, George Savill.
From the Bi∣shop of Mun∣ster. May 21. 1666. SIR. I Doubt not, but by your good Offices, the Reception of my Envoy the Baron de Ro∣senback at Court will be so prepared, as that his Majesty may have an Account of my Designs: And I hope you will continue your Favour so far as the King may be perswa∣ded that the Necessity which forced me to accept the Peace, has not taken any thing from the Profession of that Honour, Duty and Service I shall e∣ver pay him. To which end, I have order'd my Agent Rentorf to cul∣tivate a strict Friend∣ship
in my Name, as well as to communi∣cate to you my most secret Affairs, resolving to watch all Occasions for the Service of his Majesty; in order to which, I have sent back to the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo the Bra∣bant Troops as well as those raised in the Cir∣cle of Burgundy, all en∣tire. And now some German Regiments well armed and exercised, are preparing for their March into Flanders, of whose Valour the Hollanders themselves are Witnesses, as I be∣lieve you know already from the said Marquis. Now since it concerns me very much that his Majesty should know these Soldiers are kept in his Service; I should be extremely satisfied if you would inform the King of it, at the same time that the said Baron de Rosenback will be arrived at Lon∣don. And that it be
represented as Mark of my eternal Devoti∣on to his Majesty. In which you will highly oblige me: And in Confidence thereof I remain, SIR, Your most Obli∣ged Servant, Chr. Bernardus.
Ab Episcopo Monasterii. Lugderio, Maii 21. 1666. Generose Domine, NON dubito officiis Dis, Vrae. additum in Aulâ Regis ablegato meo Baro∣ni de Rosenback ita prae∣paratum, ut S. Regiae Majestati ratio consilii me praebetur; quod Dom. Vram. ita con∣tinuaturam spero, ut Rex persuasum omnino habeat istam necessitatem quae mihi pacis lages imposuit, nihil prorsus detraxisse de animo quo S. Majestatis observantiae, gloriae, & utilitati, aeternùm devo∣tus sum. Eum{que} in fi∣nem mandavi Agenti meo Rintorf intimam meo nomine cum Dne. Vrâ. Communicationem mea∣rum rerum, & amicitiam colere, intentus semper in
occasiones omness futurus pro servitio S. Majesta∣tis; quem in finem copias Brabanticas, & in circu∣lo Burgundico conscriptas, Domino Marchioni de Castel Rodrigo integras remisi: & jam itineri in Belgium Hispanicum ac∣cinguntur legiones aliquot Germanorum; fortis sanè & exercitatus miles de quorum virtute ipsi foede∣rati Belgae testari pote∣runt: uti Dom. Vram. jam ex praedicto domino gubernatore latiùs cogno∣visse arbitror. Cum au∣tem meâ plurimum inter∣sit ut Regiae Majestati suae constet militem hunc in suo servitio conservari; pergratum mihi foret, si Di. Vra. de eo, facillitandae intentioni meae, quam∣primum & fine morâ hoc ipso tempore quo dictus Baro de Rosenback Lon∣dinum appulerit, S. Ma∣jestatem certiorem faciat, & tanquam indicium ratum aeternae meae in Regem fide contestetur: Quo me Dio. Vra. sibi summopere obligabit:
Et hàc fiduciâ manes, Dominationi ve∣strae addictissimus, Chr. Bernardus. From my Lord Arlington. Whitehall, July 30. 1666. SIR, WHAT I received in yours of the 2d. was written to me at large, from him whom I suppose to be the Author of it, but not exactly with the same Cir∣cumstances: whether his Meaning or his Imagination fail him, is a great Que∣stion here. His Name, to speak freely with you, is able to discredit any Truth; And against the Grain I employ'd him in Holland, not to make him the Instrument
of Peace, but to send us News: How∣ever, I do not yet discourage him from writing, though I wish what he saith came from any Hand rather than his. Accord∣ingly, you shall do well to handle him: And this is enough upon this Subject, when I have so much a better to entertain you upon. Here enclos'd you have the effective Truth of what I sent you the Symptoms in my last. I durst not hazard any of my Acquaintance with the put∣ting it into French; because of the Sea-Terms wherewith it abounds: But if you can get it well done, and quickly publish∣ed, you will do his Majesty a good Ser∣vice, and may fairly put the Cost of it in∣to your Accompts. Moreover, I have pro∣mis'd his Majesty to charge you with the writing of some small Paper, and publishing it in French, that may pleasantly, and pertinently awaken the good Patriots in Holland, not only to Thoughts and Wishes of Peace, but to a reasonable Ap∣plication for it; assuring them his Majesty continues still to wish it, and would gladly receive any Overtures for it from the States, here in his own Kingdom; not expecting less from them in this kind, than they did to the Usurper Cromwell. This done in any Form you like best, wou'd certainly operate well in Holland,
and be a Work worthy of your Pen; which, I know has Sufficiency very much greater. One thing especially it will good to mind them of, the con∣siderable Succors and Advantages they have had by the Conjunction with France; which hath not been remakarbly visible in any thing more than in getting their Narratives to be believed in all the Courts of Christendom, and helping them to make their Bonfires for their Succes∣ses. His Majesty is going this Night to visit the Queen at Tunbridge; for which he had not Leisure till now. I am, SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, Arlington. POSTSCRIPT. LET your Emissaries give you a parti∣cular Account of the Condition of the Dutch Fleet gotten into Zealand; and of the Readiness they are in to come out again; with an exact Account of their
Strength if it be possible. Monsieur Ny∣pho will help to convey it speedily to us. From the Earl of Clarendon. Worcester-House, Aug. 2d. 1666. SIR, I Have many Excuses to make you for not acknowledging all your Letters punctually when I received them, which I suppose would give you some Trouble: And I am sure all I can say to you by way of Information or Advice, is con∣stantly and abundantly supplied by the Diligence of my good Friend my Lord Arlington. The last Favour I receiv'd from you was of the 23d. of this Month; since which time it hath pleased God to give a wonder∣ful Improvement to our Affairs: And yet I am perswaded that you there know more of the full Extent of the late great Victo∣ry than we do. In all Mens View it is ve∣ry great and noble, and in one Respect very wonderful, that almost the whole Fleet that went from hence, rides now be∣fore the Enemies Harbours, without being compelled to send any considerable Num∣ber
of their Ships to be repaired: And I believe this Success will change the Measures of most of the Councils in Chri∣stendom. I wish with all my Heart it may work upon them from whom your Court must receive its Orders, to move with a little more Vigor in their Resolutions; the want of which will at some time or o∣ther prove fatal to that Monarchy. They have it yet in their Power to secure them∣selves from ever receiving Prejudice from the French; which I take to be the only Blessing they are to pray for in this World: But it will not be always in their Power to do so. I presume my good Friend Ogniate is before this time arrived there with good Satisfaction: And I will not deny to you I always wished well to those Transacti∣ons, the Concessions being (in truth) no other than what in Justice ought to be granted; except we would declare to the World, that whilst we have a War with Holland we will have no Peace with Flanders. I wish with all my Heart that it may be punctually and religiously ob∣served on our Part, by the exemplary Punishment of those Persons who in the least Degree violate the Protection agreed upon. And though there will be, as you say, a great Latitude for them to cover
the Dutch Trade; yet that cannot be long done without Discovery; and they will thereby render themselves infamous to the World, and will suffer accordingly. I know the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo will be as jealous in that Affair as is possible: And Ogniate, who was the fittest Person alive to be sent on that Errand, will be vigilant to the utmost; and I am confident will advertise the Marquis upon the least Discovery. I know not whether he be enough known to you: But trust me, He is very wor∣thy of your Friendship, which is due to him from all good Englishmen; having ex∣pressed the same Veneration to the King, and the same Civility and Kindness to us, who had the Honor at the same time to attend his Majesty, when we were in Flanders, as he can do now, when we are at Whitehall. And as that Respect of his was then of great Use and Benefit to his Majesty; so it was apparently to his own Prejudice and Disadvantage: So that if we are not all kind to him, we deserve no more such Friends. I am, SIR, Your Affectionate Servant, Clarendon.
From Sir William Coventry. Septemb. 21. 1667. SIR, SINCE my last to you, I have acquaint∣ed his Majesty and his Royal High∣ness with your having disposed the blank Passes sent to you; and that the People of those Countries were still desirous of those Passes; though there was another Provisi∣on made for their Security, by the Agree∣ment with Monsieur Ognate: Whereupon his Majesty gave Consent to the sending over some more of them. By this Con∣veyance I send you five of them. More shall be sent hereafter, if you continue to desire them: But I thought not fit to swell this Pacquet too much. The French Fleet hath been in the Chan∣nel, and Prince Rupert's Fleet having been driven from their Anchors with a Storm, and by other such Accidents, he did not meet with them at their first coming; and now we are uncertain whether they are not gone back again. To morrow will tell us more of that than I can now affirm. The
Storm which drove Prince Rupert's Fleet from their Anchors, dispers'd some of the French Fleet, and seven of them on the Right fell into our white Squadron: One of them (a Ship called the Ruby) of fifty four Guns and five hundred Men, we took; and some of our Frigats pursued the rest, with what Success I know not as yet. I am apt to believe the Body of their Fleet is gone back again towards Brest or Rochel. We hear De Ruyter is dead, and another Admi∣ral chosen. This Day the Parliament voted that they will supply his Majesty proportionably to his Occasions; or Words to that Effect: o our Neighbours will see our Hearts do not fail us in all our Misfortunes. I am, SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, William Coventry.
From the Duke of Ormond. Kilkenny, Octob. 14. 1666. SIR, I Have more of yours to acknowledge than I have by me to take particular Notice of. They were very pertinent In∣formations as things then went: And some of them got hither with so much speed, that they out-run any Intelligence I could get out of England. To morrow I shall be in your Livery, and perhaps try whether your Brussels Camlet will resist I∣rish Rain, as I have known it do that of Flanders. I must thank you for the Pre∣sent, as coming very seasonably, both in respect of the time of the Year, and that for ought I can yet find, my Michaelmas Rent would hardly have purchased two Cloaks: And that your Stuff will make me, if slhall be honestly dealt with. I know both from hence and out of England, you are informed of all that passes here. The Commissioners and their Dependents, I mean Lawyers, and the Train belonging to that Court, have all the Business, and will have all the Money;
and consequently if they please, much of the Land contended for, and to be distri∣buted. In England they are revenging upon us here the falling of their Rents; but I doubt, not repairing themselves: They have us, and perhaps the King, at an Advantage: The King must be sup∣plied, and England only can do it. I wish we could hear of some Overtures towards Peace; then would the King be freed from a Necessity of consenting to unreasonable Things; or we should be the better able to bear the Interdicture of our Trade with England: For to that upon the Matter, the forbidding us to send our Cattle to their Markets, will a∣mount. I am very really, SIR, Your most affectionate Servant, Ormonde.
From Sir William Coventry. Whitehall, Novemb. 2. 1666. SIR, I Have received the Favour you did me of the 5th. S. N. and received with it the Bill of Exchange for Fifty Pounds, which, I doubt not, will suddenly be paid. I owe so many of those Advantages to your Care and Kindness, that they become ordinary, and do not leave me any new Expressions for my Thanks. We have great Expectations what the Suedes Army at Bremen, and the new Confederation against them will produce. We hear the Duke of Savoy, and the State of Geneva are falling out, which probably will not want. Partners in its Success: So that the Influence of 66, will extend it self further than the Puritans Allowance for the Revelations to be fulfilled in, which they confine to England. We are debating still in Parliament which way to raise Money, but we draw nearer a Conclusion; and I believe the
next Week will bring it to good Maturity. I am, SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, W. Coventry. From the Duke of Ormond. Dublin, Decemb. 18. 1666. SIR, YOurs of the 9/19 past found me on my Way hither, where I purpose to spend the rest of the Winter. How the Sum∣mer will be spent, seems very doubtful: Our Preparations for the War would make one think we are sure of a Peace; which may be well said without any Reflection on the King and his Ministers. I am once to thank you for your great Civility to my Nephew Clancarty, in whose Consideration you have undertaken to endeavour a Pass Colonel Murphy, and for the Disposition of the Money the Colonel was ordered (if he thought fit to put into your Hand. I have by this Post written to Sir John Shaw to draw it into England when he shall find it best:
And I am prepared to pay the Colonel here. I believe you heard as soon of the Sup∣pression, as of the raising of the Scottish Commotion; perhaps equal Credit would not be given in Holland to both. It made me hasten hither, and prepare my self to have kept Christmas in the North, if the Rebellion had lasted. What Discovery will be made, and Justice done upon the Offenders, you will receive sooner Know∣ledge of out of England than from hence. I am very confident they had Well-wishers here; which is a good, or rather a bad Step to Correspondency as that is to Con∣junction. Those that think well of Pres∣byterians, distinguish those Fellows, and call them Remonstrators. I think the true Difference is, These thought they had Pow∣er to change the Government; and the o∣ther do wish they had. When you are at leisure I wish to know what kind of Fort is raised at Charle-roy, and what Number of Men, Horse and Foot it will contain. I am with all reality, SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, Ormonde.
From the Duke of Ormonde. Dublin Jan. 29. 1667. SIR, THE Success of your Negotiation gives no Man greater Satisfaction for the Part you had in it, than to me. The happy Consequences which may reasonably be expected from the Conclusi∣on of that Treaty, may extend further and last longer, than I have had time since I received yours of the 24th In∣stant, to consider. I confess, my first Re∣flections were upon the good Effect it will have at home, and the good Humour it is likely to put the Parliament in at their first; Meeting; which I look upon as the Foundation of all other Advantages to be derived from it, by Reputation, and all the good Effects of that amongst our Neigh∣bours. I shall be glad to hear where or when you are like to fix, that my Letters may be conveyed to you when I think they may be worth your receiving from, SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant., Ormonde.
From my Lord Ambassador Coventry. Breda, July 4. S. N. 1667. SIR, YOurs of the 29th July I have re∣ceived, and thank you for it. I doubt not but by this time you have heard of the several Treaties of Peace signed here the 21/31st. of July We were so very busie in dispatching away Sir John Coventry for England with the Treaties, that I had not leisure till now, to give you an Account of it. That betwixt the States and us consisteth in an absolute Abolition of all Pretences on either Side, each to remain Masters of what they were in possession of the 10/20th. of May, 1667; what since taken, to be restor'd, as to Lands and Fortresses: Ships are yet liable till after Publication; when all Hostilities are to cease within twelve Days in the Channel and so proportionably in other Seas; then the whole Treaty of 1662 renew'd, and we both to make use of the Articles be∣twixt France and this State for contraban
Goods, till such time as we can agree of one betwixt our selves. The rest is a re∣storing of the Treaty in 1662, as to all its Articles except the eleventh, wherein our Pretensions are contained. As to the Act of Navigation, you will hear much Noise, that That is repealed. There is no such thing; neither doth the Article about that Matter give the States any more Ad∣vantage than as I conceive the Act gave them before. As to the French, we re∣store all to each other that each hath taken, and all things done, put in Oblivion. As to Denmar, .... the Debt he owed the Hamburgh Company, France standing ve∣ry firm to him upon the Point; and their greatest Argument was, That it was not a Debt contracted by him or his Father; but on the contrary, imposed on his Father for having assisted the late King: And, be∣sides, they gave us our Choice, either to agree thus, or to account for what had been taken on each side, and render: The lat∣ter was thought the more prejudicial to the King our Master; and so this hath pass'd. And there is, I think, the Substance of the three Treaties. How or where this Letter will find you, we know not: For we here believe Brussels besieged, and that according to the Fashion of this Year's Campagne, is little less than taken.
All publick Ministers have, or will have left this Town within a Day or two except our selves. To morrow Fortnight they all meet here again expecting the Ratification. I am, Sir, with very great Sincerity, Your most faithful humble Servant, Henry Coventry. From my Lord Hollis. Breda, July 4. S. N. 1667. SIR, I Have received yours by my Lord Sfaf∣ford's Servant, and see you have put off your Journey hither in Expectation we might be removing hence; and for which it seems the Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo is pleased to express himself with so much of Civility and Kindness towards us; for which both my Lord Ambassador Coventry and my self do return our most humble Thanks. But it will not be possible that we can remove so soon; so as assuredly you will have time enough to do us that Favour and very gladly we shall shall receive it from you; when we may at leisure dis∣course
of the present Posture of our Af∣fairs, and make those sad Reflections which they deserve; and which will be much fitter for a Conference than to be set down in Paper. I shall reserve them till then, and in the mean time, and ever remain, SIR, Your very affectionate, and most humble Servant, HOLLIS. From my Lord Ambassador Coventry. Breda, Aug. 12/27, 1667. SIR, I Am very thankful to you for the Buck you sent us; and it came very well, and so seasonably, that I made use of some of it the very Morning it came. We have no News to send you from hence; but that we are now altogether imployed in Jollity, and expect our Ships to give us some Sea-Physick, to purge the Excesses
we make. Your Health is not only what we drink, but what e pray for. The first part hath already been useful to help us to digest our Venison, and the other we reserve for more important Considerations. In Conclusion, we hear more of Drums and Trumpets since the Peace, than we did in the War; though I hope this will not be so fatal a Noise as they make at Lisle. I am sorry both for the want of your Company and the Reason of it. Now our own Peace is done, I could wish with all my Heart Christendom's were so to. Sir, I pray believe me to be, what I very sincerely am, Your most faithful humble Servant, Henry Coventry.
FromLate E. of Leicester. my Lord Lisle. Septemb. 26. 1667. SIR, SInce I had your last Letter, I have made you no Acknowledgement of it: A Retirement is in several Respects like the Night of one's Life, in the Obscurity and Darkness, and in the Sleepiness and Dosed∣ness: Which I mention to put you in mind that I am only by my Posture of Life apt to be failing towards you. What is of Court or Assembles near us is at my Lord Crofts's. Sir Thomas Ingram this Summer hath made no Noise at all. Old Lady Devonshire keeps up her Feasts still; and that hath been of late Mr. Wal∣ler's chief Theatre: The Assembly of Wits at Mr. Comptroller's will scarce let him in; And poor Sir John Denham is fallen to the Ladies also: He is at many of the Meet∣ings at Dinners, talks more than ever he did, and is extreamly pleased with those that seem willing to hear him; and from that Obligation exceedingly praises the Dutchess of Monmouth and my Lady Ca∣vendish: If he had not the Name of being
mad, I believe in most Companies he would be thought wittier than ever he was: He seems to have few Extravagancies, be∣sides that of telling Stories of himself, which he is always inclin'd to: Some of his Acquaintance say, that extream Vanity was a Cause of his Madness, as well as it is an Effect. All Persons of Note hereabouts are going to their Winter-Quarters at London. The Burning of the City begins to be talk'd of as a Story like that of the Burn∣ing of Troy. At Sheen we are like to be bare: Lady Luddal seems uncertain in her Stay; and we hear that when Sir James Sheen and his Lady were ready to come from Ireland, great Cramps took my Lady in her Limbs: And Sir James's Ser∣vants doubt whether we shall see him this Winter. I desire, Sir your Leave to kiss my Lady Temple's Hands, and my Lady Giffard's Hands by your Letter. My Daughter and I were in dispute which of us two should write this time to Brussels; and because I was judged to have more Leisure, it fell to me, and my Lady Temple is to have the next from her.
I wish you, Sir, all good Successes in your Businesses, and am Your very affectionate Servant, LISLE. From the Earl of Sandwich. Madrid, Septemb. 27. 1667. SIR, THIS begs your Pardon for my not writing by the last Post, and pre∣sents you my humble Thanks for that Letter I should then have acknowledged, and another of September 7. S. N. which, with many Advices very considerable and desirable to be known, gives me one par∣ticular Satisfaction, to hear that one Co∣py of the Treaty is in so certain a Way of getting home. There are two more gone by Sea; one from Cales, August 2d, S. N. the other express by a Vessel from Rigo in Gallicia, August 31, S. N. designed to set a Gentleman of my Company a-shore in Ireland on the South Part; which Course I directed as a certain Way to avoid the Danger of the Sea, and no very tedious
Way of Passage, I suppose all these likely to arrive in England much about a time. This Place affords not much considerable News to return you. Our Portugal Ad∣justment keeps the Pace of the accustomed Spanish Gravity (if it proceed forward at all.) They have here removed the Presi∣dent of the Hazienda (or as they call it, bilar'd him) giving him his Salary still of 6000 Ducats per annum, for his own Life, his Wife's, and his eldest Son's; and also have given him some other consi∣derable Mercedes: And have made Don Lopez de los Rios, President de Hazienda in his Room. This last is Castillo's near Kinsman and Creature, the other a near Kinsman of the Duke of Medina's de las Torres. The Conde de Fwensalida is lately dead, (a Grandee of Spain.) my chief Business here is a longing Expectation to hear of the Treaty I have made here, to be received in England; which now I daily shall hope for; and as any thing thence, or here, occurs worth your Notice, it shall be presented you by, SIR, Your most affectionate, and most humble Servant, Sandwich.
From the Earl of Sandwich. Madrid, Dec. 1/2 1667. SIR, I Hope from your Goodness to find Par∣don for missing the other Posts; but dare not adventure your Patience to fail this also; though I am now hurried by Business; so that I have not time so largely and considerately to write as I desire. Be pleased then to know that Mr. Godolphin's Journey to Portugal suffered so much De∣lay, until it was found necessary that I must go in Person thither; and then he resolved to make use of the King my Master's Leave to return into England, and began his Journey for Bilboa on Tuesday Morning last. You know the Value of Mr. Godol∣phin so well, that it is needless to tell you my Griefs in parting from one of the most accomplisht, worthy, and generous Friends that ever I met with: And I am heartily' glad that your Friendship and mine do al∣so Convenire in aliquo tertio. My Journey for Portugal hath almost met with as many or more Calms than Mr. Godolphin's: and, in good earnest I
am not able to give you any Light, whe∣ther it be likely to proceed or not. The Spaniards have reformed two Re∣giments of Germans at Badajos; very good Officers they say, and are resolved never to serve the Spaniard more. The King of Spain has had the Small-Pox; but is so re∣covered, as they fear no Danger. In Portugal, Don Pedro is made Govern∣our to assist his Brother in the same Na∣ture as his Mother did when she was Re∣gent: And the Addresses are made in the same manner. The Queen is returned to a Convent, as∣serting her self to be a Maid; and the King has under his Hand and Oath deli∣vered the same. So the Queen pursues the Cause among the Church-men to have the Marriage declared null. There are Cortes to be called there January 1. S. N. On the 7th Instant, S. N. the Marquis of Sande (the Embassador that brought the Queen) was shot and kill'd in the Street, with a Carabine, and no body knows who did it. I wish you a very merry Christmas, and am most affectionately, SIR, Your most faithful, and most humble Servant, Sandwich.
Postscript. IF I go to Portugal, pray continue our Correspondence to Mr. John Werden, a Gentleman worthy of your Favour, and very able and securely my Friend, who does me the Favour to continue in my House, and manages the King's Business in this Court in my Absence; and will send me your Letters. From Monsieur Gourville. Luneburg. Jan. 28. 1668. SIR, BY a Copy of the Letter written from the King of Eng∣land to the States, I un∣derstand you are a peaceable Man: And the Memorial you have given to desire Com∣missioners in order to examine jointly with
you into the Means for a good Peace, makes us believe that you de∣sire in good earnest to give Repose to Chri∣stendom. You know how I have always desired it; but howe∣ver it will be the more agreeable to see it done by your Hands. In good earnest, I am glad the King of Eng∣land has made choice of you for so great and important an Affair: When his Majesty knows your Merit, I assure my self you will be always in the grea∣test Employments; and I assure you that I shall always be ma∣king Wishes for your Advancement, till I see you made Chancel∣lour of England. In the mean time I shall be e∣ver, SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant, Gourville.
P. S. IF you have a Desire to make the Peace, I look upon it as very far advanced: The Princes here shew their Desire of it. I did not think to stay in this Country above 8 or 10 Days; yet here I am after four Months. Pray let me know whether you think the Assembly will be at Aix, and near what time; that I may keep my Lodg∣ings there; and if you will tell me in Confi∣dence the Opinion you have of the Peace, I shall be obliged to you: Mine is, that you may make it if you please; but I am not yet con∣vinc'd whether you can hinder it, if Mon∣sieur de Wit has so much Desire to make it as many People be∣lieve, according to what I am told.
A Monsieur Gour∣ville. A Lunebourg, 28 Jan. 1668. Monsieur, PAR la copie de la Lettre que sa Ma∣jesté Britannique a êcrit aux Etats des Provinces Unies, J'apprens que vous estes un hommne pacifique; la memoire, que vous avez presenté pour demander des Commissaires pour chercher ensemble les moy∣ens
de parvenir á une bonne Paix, doit faire croire que c'est tout de bon que vous voulez donner le repos á la Chrêtienté. Vous sçavez comme je l'ay toujours Souhaitté, mais elle me sera autant plus agreable, de la voir faite de vôtre main: Tout de bon je me rejonis que sa Majesté Britan∣ique vous ayt choisi pour une si grande et si impor∣tante affaire. Quand elle conoîtra vôtre merite, Je m'assure que vous aurez toûjours les plus grands emplois; et je vous assure de la meilleure foy du monde, que jusque á ce que je vous voye Chance∣lier d'Angleterre, je feray toûjours des voeux pour vôtre advancement. Et en attendant, je ser ay tou∣jours plus veritablement que personne du monde. Votre tres humble, et tres obeissant Serviteur, Gourville.
P. S. SI vous avez bien en∣vie de faire la paix je la tien fort avan∣cée; les Ptinces icy te∣moignent la desirer: Je ne croyois demeurer en ce païs icy que huit ou dix jours, et m'y voila au bout de quatre mois. Je vous prie de me mander si vous croyez que l'on s'assemblera á Aix, et á peu prez le temps a fin que j'y fasse retenir ma cham∣bre: Et si vous voulez confidamment me mander l'opinion que vous avez de la paix, je vous en se∣ray obligé. La mienne est que si vous la voulez que vous la ferez: Mais je ne suis pas si convaincu que vous la puissiez empê∣cher, si Monsieur de Wit a autant d'envie de la faire comme bien des gens le croyent, selon ce que l'on m'en mande.
From Monsieur Gourville. Luneburg, Feb. 22. 1668. SIR, ALL your modest Reasoning will not hinder me from believing that any o∣ther Minister the King of England could have sent to the Hague, would not have finish∣ed in many Months what you have done in four Days. With∣out Flattery, 'tis a thing you ought to be extreamly satisfy'd with. I suspected at first, that you had made this Treaty by some Concert with the Mar∣quis of Castel-Rodrigo: For tho' the King my Master has so much Reason to be content to see him grant what his Majesty demanded, nevertheless the bad Council of the Spani∣ards
has put them in a Condition to receive your Work as the Safe∣ty of what remain'd to them of Flanders. I never lamented my Absence from the Hague but since I knew you were there. I cannot yet tell what time I shall be oblig'd to stay here. Monsieur de Lionne having en∣charged me from the King with some Or∣ders in this Court, which I have reason to believe will accommo∣date my Affairs. I am strongly persuaded the King my Master will hold to the Alter∣native, Monsieur de Li∣onne having sent me Word, that his Majesty was content with what you had done at the Hague; and that if the manner of it had been a little more obliging, there were nothing more to be desired. These Princes mightily desire the Peace upon your Conditions; the
League of the Rhine is extreamly satisfied with it; so that in all appearance Spain may do what they please; for, this time their Country shall be sav'd, no thanks to them. I would fain know whe∣ther you think of go∣ing to Aix. I have a great mind to see this Negotiation: And I should have nothing to desire if I were sure to find you there. I see by this Businese here, that the Peace will be made; or else, that there will be a great War; but I rather think the former. And if they will let me come no more to France, 'tis there (at Aix) I design to reside for the rest of my life. I doubt not but they will let me take one turn to Paris to see if I can make my Peace; but I fear they will raise insupportable Difficulties.
I desire you to be∣lieve me always, SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Gourville. It may be I shall see you at the Hague soon∣er than you think.
A Monsieur Gour∣ville. A Lunebourg, 22d. Fevr, 1668. Monsieur, TOute la modestie de vôtre raisonnement ne m'empêchra pas de croire, que tout autre Ministre que sa Majesté Britan∣nique eut envoyé á la Haye, n'auroit pas fait en bien des mois ce que vous avez achevé en quatre jours. Sans flatterie c'est une chose qui vous doit exr∣tremement satisfaire. J'ai d'abord soubçnné que vous aviez fait ce traitté de quelque concert avec Mon∣sieur le Marquis de Ca∣stel-Rodrigo: Car encore que le Roy mon Maître ait tant sujet d'estre con∣tent de le voir accorder ce qu'il a demande; ne∣antmoins le mechant con∣seil des Espagnols les a mis en état de recevoir vôtre ouvrage comme le salut de ce qui leur restera
aux Païs bas. Je n'a vois point regretté mon absence de la Haye que depuis que je sçay que vous y estes: Je ne sçau∣rois encore savoir le temps que je seray obligé de de∣meurer icy; Monsieur de Lionne m'ayanr chargé de la part du Roy de quelques ordres en cette cour, tant que j'ay lieu de croire que cela accommodera mes affaires C'est pourtant un chemin qui me peut eonduire á cette fin: Je suis tres fortement persua∣dé que le Roy mon Maître se tiendra á l'Alternative. Monsieur de. Lionne m'a mandé que sa Majesté estoit contente de ce que vous aviez fait á la Haye; et que si la fa∣çcon en eut esté un peu plus obligeante, il n'y auroit eu rien á desirer. Ces Princes icy souhaittent fort la Paix aux conditi∣ons que vous la voulez faire: La Ligue du Rhin en est tres satisfaitte, ainsi selon les apparences les E∣spagnols auront beau faire, on sauvera leur pais en∣dêpit
d'eux pour cette fois icy. Je voudrois bien savoir si vous croyez aller â Aix; J'ay fort envie de voir cette negotiation, et je n'aurois rien á desirer si je sçavois vous y trou∣ver. Je voy par cette affaire icy, que la paix ce fera ou que ce sera une grande guerre; mais tout me fait croire le premier; et si on ne veut point de moy en France, je m'en vay prendre mon party pour le reste de mes jours. Je ne doute point que l'on ne me laisse faire un tour á Paris pour voir si je pourrois m'accommo∣der; mais je crains que l'on ne me fasse des diffi∣cultez insupportables.
Je vous supplie de me croire toujours, Monsieur, Vtôtre tres humble, et tres obeissant Serviteur, Gourville. Je pourray peut être vous voir á la Haye plû∣tot que vous ne pensez. From Mon∣sieur de Wit. Hague, Feb. 25. 1668. SIR, THE Bearer hereof delivered me the Letter you did me the Honour to write to me from Antwerp of the 24th. Instant; wherein I behold with Pleasure your Zeal and Diligence for the
Advancement of our common Affair; as also the good Dipositi∣ons that your Offices have already raised in the Mind of the Mar∣quis of Castel-Rodrigo, and the Appearance of a more satisfactory De∣claration we shall re∣ceive upon the com∣mon Request to be made him from the K. of Great Britain and this State. I delayed not to communicate and deliberate the Con∣tents of the said Letter with the States Com∣missioners deputed up∣on the Subject of our last Negotiations; and we hope you will judge as we do, that it is ab∣solutely necessary for his Excellence to de∣clare himself without further Delay or Re∣serve, agreeably to what his concluded be∣tween England and this State, without de∣siring before-hand any Concert more particu∣lar than that which is
made, signed, and ra∣tified between us and our Masters: For since the King of France has seen by his last Con∣quests how weak and negligent the Spaniards are, 'tis to be feared, that if the Marquis lets the Month of March expire, without plainly declaring himself as we desire, the King of France may be very glad, after the Expira∣tion of the said Term, not to be oblig'd by virtue of his Word gi∣ven, to make the Peace upon the Alternative; but may make use of the Time and Disor∣der of the Spaniards, to surprize Luxenburg, and a great part of what remains to the King of Spain in the Nether∣lands; and to order his Affairs afterwards as Occurrences shall hap∣pen. The States Gene∣ral are oblig'd, and en∣tirely resolv'd, in case of Refusal from the King of France, or any
Evasions from that side, after it has been insinuated to him that the Marquis has accep∣ted either part of the Alternative; to exe∣cute in the most vigo∣rous manner possible, what is contained in our third separate Ar∣ticle; and by conse∣quence, jointly with England to break into open War against France, to act in con∣cert, not only for Defence of the Nether∣lands, but also, and a∣bove all, to attack and infest France by Sea, by Descents, Invasions in∣to the Country, and all other Ways. But because it must be pre∣supposed in publick, that the King of France after having given his Word to the States, and afterwards by a circu∣lar Letter, not only to the King of Great Bri∣tain and the said States, but also to many Prin∣ces of Germany; will not break a Promise so
solemnly made; we cannot by any means enter into Concert and League with Spain, be∣fore this Case effectu∣ally arrives: And we think that such a League and Concert made before the Sea∣son, would be likely indeed to produce the Effect the Marquis de∣sires; but which is far from his Majesty of England's Aim, or that of the States; for you cannot but know, that his Excellence would pre∣fer the Continuance of the War with our As∣sistance, to the Con∣clusion of the Peace upon the Alternative; and his Majesty, as well as the States, pre∣fers this Peace before the Continuance of a War, whereof they must bear all the Costs and all the Profit be to the King of Spain. Now, we comprehend very well, that such a Concert and such a League as his Excel∣lence
desires, would put the King of Erance upon an absolute ne∣cessity of continuing the War; because if he should comply af∣ter such a League made with his Ene∣mies, it would appear publickly, that he was obliged to it by this Bond, and consequent∣ly by his Enemies themselves. And there∣fore the Matter is ju∣diciously enough pro∣pos'd by his Excellence for arriving at his End; but since it would make us miss of ours, we hope you will put the Marquis off it, and make him quit all Hopes of en∣gaging us by the force of his great Genius, to enter of our own accord, where we have no mind to come but upon a fatal Ne∣cessity. I think his Excellence does wrong to the King of Great Britain and the States, in not trusting their
Affection and their Honour, which are concerned, as well as their Interest, after the Alliance, and the Peace they have already made together: but if after his Excellence has accepted our Propositi∣ons, the King of France shall happen to draw back or seek Evasions; then the King of Great Britain and the States General entring into the Party, and even into a Rupture with France, it will be very just and proper to con∣cert with his Excellen∣cy after what manner to act in the Territory of the King his Ma∣ster; and yet in the mean while not omit entring into Action without the least loss of time. Therefore it will be no way ne∣cessary for me to be upon our Frontiers to∣wards the End, pro∣pos'd by his Excellence, which besides will be
wholly impossible for me; much less to send any body from hence to Brussels, since the States Deputies, who are there at present, are the same we should chuse for the End de∣sired: For I assure you I can name no body in whom the States as well as I in particular can have greater Con∣fidence, whereof I do not doubt but they will give you Proofs, as well as of their Sin∣cerity and good Con∣duct. I desire you therefore, Sir, to use them with as much Freedom as me, and I will engage they shall do the same by you. And if you have been at all satisfied with my manner of trans∣acting, as I have been extremely with yours, that you will be also satisfied with that of the said Deputies. For the rest we ap∣prove extremely the
Diligence you make on all sides in sending to the Ministers of the King of England, and the States now at Paris: And from your common Offices we promise to our selves an Universal Peace in Christendom, to the great Advan∣tage of the Publick, and the Eternal Glo∣ry of your selves, which no Man desires more than he who is, SIR, Your most humble, and most affectio∣nate Servant, de Wit.
A Monsieur de Wit. A la Haye 25me Fevr. 1668. Monsieur, LE porteur de cellecy m'a bien delivré la Lettre qui vous a plû me faire l'honneur de m'ecrire d'Anvers le 24me. de ce mois; et j'y ay veu avec agrément le zele et la di∣ligence que vous avez ap∣porté pour l'avancement
de nôtre affaire commune; comme aussi les bonnes dispositions que vos offices ont deja fait naître dan l'esprit de Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Ro∣drigo, et l'apparence d'une declaration plus satisfai∣sante que nous recevrons sur la priere commune qu'on luy va faire de la part du Roy de la Grand Bretagne et de cet Etat. Je n'ay pas tarde de com∣muniquer et deliberer le contenu de ladite lettre avec les Commissaires des Etats Deputez sur ce sujet de nos dernieres negotiati∣ons; et nous esperons que vous jugerez avec nous qu'il est absolument neces∣saire que son Excellence se declare sans plus de delay et sans aucune re∣serve conformement á la disposition de ce qui est conclu entre l'Angleterre et cet Etat, sans desirer au preallable aucun concert plus particulier que celuy qui est fait, signe et rati∣fié entre nous et par nos Maîtres. Car puisque le Roy de France a veu par
les derniers progrez, com∣me les Espagnols som foibles et negligents; il est á apprehender que si Monsieur le Marquis lais∣se ecouler le mois de Mars sans s'estre declaré nette∣ment comme nous le desi∣rons, le Roy de France ne soit tres aise de n'etré pas obligé apres l'expîration en vertu de sa parole donnée, de faire la Paix sur l'Al∣ternative; et quil ne se serve encore du temp et du desordre des Espagnols pour supprendre en même façon le Luxenburg, et une grande partie de ce qui reste au Roy d'Espagne dans le païs bas; et pour se regler par aprés selon les occurrences. Les Etats Generaux se trouvent ob∣ligez et entierement reso∣lus, au cas de refus du Roy de France, ou des echap∣patoïres recherchés de son côté, apres qu'on luy aura insinué que Monsieur le Marquis ayt accepté l'une ou l'autre partie de l'Al∣ternative, d'executer en la maniere la plus vigour∣reuse que faire se pourra,
lé contenu au troisieme de nos Articles separez; par consequent de rompre con∣jointement avec l'Angle∣terre en guerre ouverte contre la France, d'agir de concert non seulement pour la defense du Païs bas; mais aussi et sur tout d'attaquer et incom∣moder la France de leurs Forces maritimes; er mê∣me par des descentes, ou in∣vasions dans le Païs, et en toute autre maniere: mais d'autant qu'il faut pre∣supposer publiquement, que le Roy de Franee, aprés avoir donné sa parole par une lettre circulaire non seulement au Roy de la Grande Bretagne et aux dits Etats, mais aus∣si á pleusieurs Princes d'Allemagne, ne voudra pas manquer á une pro∣messe si solennellement donnée; nous ne pourions en aucune façon entrer en concert et ligue avec l'E∣spagne, avant que ce cas soit effectivement arrive: Et nous jugeons qu'un tel concertt et une telle lige faite devant la saison,
seroit fort capable de pro∣duire l'effet que Monsieur le Marquis souhaitte; mais qui est tout á fait eloigne du but de sa Ma∣jesté de la Grande Bre∣tagne, et de leurs Hautes Puissances: car il ne peut vous estre inconnu que son Excellence preferreroit la continuation de la guerre avec nos secours, á la con∣clusion de la Paix sur l'Al∣ternative. Et sa Ma∣jesté aussi bien que leurs Hautes Puissances prefe∣rent cette paix á la conti∣nuation d'une guerre dont ils seroient obligés de por∣ter toutes les depences, et dont tout le profit seroit pour le Roy d'Espâgne. Or, nous comprennons fort bien qu'un tel concert et une telle ligue que son Ex∣cellence desire, mettroit le Roy de France, dans une necessité resolue de conti∣nuer la guerre; d'autant que se rendant aprés une telle, ligue faite avec ses ennemis; il parôitroit publiquement qu'il y fût obligé par cette liaison, et par consequent par ses
ennemis mêmes: Et par∣tant l'affaire est judici∣eusement proposée par son Excellence pour parvernir é son but; mais puis{que} elle nous feroit perdre le nôtre nous esperons que vous en detournerez Mon∣sieur le Marquis, et que vous luy ferez perdre toute esperance de ne pou∣voir pas par son grands ge∣nie même nous engager comme par gayeté de coeur, ou nous ne voulons venir qu'au cas d'une fatale necessité. Il me semble que son Excellence feroit tort au Roy de la Grande Bretagne, et aux Etats Generaux, de ne se fier pas á leur affection et á leur honneur, dont il y va si bien, que de leur interêt aprés la liaison et le pas qu'ils ont fait deja ensemble. Mais si aprés qu'elle aura acccepté nos propositions, le Roy de France vient á reculer, ou á chercher des echap∣patoires; alors le Roy de la Grande Bretagne, et les Etats Generaux, en∣trans dans le party, et
même en rupture avec la France, il sera tres á propos que l'on concerte a∣vec son Excellence la ma∣niere dont on agira dans le territoire du Roy son Maître; et que pourtant l'on ne laisse pas cependant d'entrer en action sans la moindre perte de temps. Il ne sera donc nullement necessaire que je me trou∣ve sur nos frontieres pour la fin proposée par son Excellence, ce que d'ailleurs me seroit tout á fait im∣possibile; et encore bien moins que lons envoye quelqu'un d'icy á Brus∣selles, d'autant que les Deputéz des Etats qui s'y trouvent presentement, sont ceux la même que l'on pourroit choisir pour la fin desirée; vous pou∣vant asseurer que je ne pouvois nommer personne, en qui l'Etát aussi bien que moy en particulier, pussent avoir plusde confi∣ance dont ils vous donner ont sans doute des preuves aussi bieu que de leur in∣tegrité et de leur bonne
conduite. Je vous sup∣lie donc Monsieur, d'u∣ser avec eux de la même franchise, dont vous avez usé envers moy, et je vous de∣meure garand qu'eux de leur côte en useront de même: Et si vous avez esté en quelque façon sa∣tisfait de ma maniere d'agir, comme je l'ay esté de la vôtre, que vous le serez tout á fait de celle desdits Deputés de l'Etat. Au reste, nous approuvons fort les diligences que vous fe∣rez de part, et d'autre directement aux Mini∣stres du Roy de la Grand Bretagne et de cet Etat á Paris; et nous nous promettons de vos Offices communs la paix universelle de la Chretienté, au grand profit du public, et á la gloire eternelle de vos personnes; La∣quelle vous souhaite a∣vec autant d'affection que personne du mon∣de, celuy qui est, et
qui demeurera á ja∣mais, Monsieur, Votre tres humble, et tres affectionné Serviteur, Joan. de Wit.
From Mon∣sieur de Wit. Hague, March 5. 1668. SIR, 'TIS with great Sa∣tisfaction that I have learnt from your Dispatch of the 2d Instant, and by that of the Deputies of this State, the provisional Success it has pleas'd God to grant to your Cares and Application to the Marquis of Ca∣stel-Rodrigo: And I doubt not, but the Conduct you have us'd to dispose those of the Council of State of this Country to con∣form to his Excellence's Opinion, will be ap∣lauded by them. I hope, before the Re∣ceit of this you will have receiv'd from his Excellence a Declarati∣on in Form, and in
Writing, couched in clear and satisfactory Terms, without any Ambiguity or Obscu∣rity; and, in short, such as will leave no Occasion or Pretext to France to find any thing to object against, but what shall put them to a Necessity of decla∣ring themselves plainly on their side, upon the Conditions and Arti∣cles of our Conventi∣on, and shall put us out of Doubt and Trouble of what we have to do. For my self, I shall endeavour all I can, that this State shall be put in a Posture of entring vi∣gorously and effectual∣ly upon the Defence of Flanders, in case, af∣ter a plain and satisfa∣ctory Answer from his Excellence, the King of France shall leave us a∣ny Apprehensions of his endeavouring to make further Progres∣ses in this Country; which we cannot sup∣pose
without the Pre∣judice of suspecting that the said King will falsifie his Word given, and the Promise so so∣lemnly made by his publick and circular Letters; which God forbid, and which however, common Pru∣dence should make us suppose to be possible, that we might not neglect the Means, whereof we have so often discours'd; and upon which the States have given Order to their Ambassadors in Holland, to concert more particularly with the King of Great Britain and his Ministers. You have further o∣bliged me by not giv∣ing a Copy of my fore∣going Dispatch, to the Marquis; since in my Opinion he might have made use of it to provoke and anger the King of France, and oblige him as it were in point of Honour to be obstinate in the War
against the Desire and Intention of the King of England and the States: But by giving his Excellency so much part therein, as to read to him our separate Articles; that is, what I cannot but entirely approve, as being whol∣ly agreeable to my manner of proceeding, as well as your Pre∣caution, wherewith you kept the common Cause from the Dan∣ger above mentioned, in not giving him a Copy. For the rest, I refer my self to what the Deputies of the States shall have alrea∣dy told you upon the Contents of your for∣mer Dispatch, and to what they shall com∣municate to you from time to time of the In∣tentions of Their High and Mightinesses, and shall ever remain what I am with Passion, SIR, Your most affectionate and humble Servant, Jo. de Wit.
De Monsieur de Wit. A la Haye 5me. Mars. 1668. Monsieur, C'A esté avec beau∣coup de satisfaction que j'ay apris par vôtre depêche du 2d de ce mois, et par celle de Messieurs les Deputez de l'Etat, le succez provisionnel qu'il a plû au bon Dieu d'octroy∣er á vos soins et á votre direction auprez du Mar∣quis de Castel-Rodrigo; et je ne doute point que la conduite que vous avez tenue pour disposer ceux du conseil d'Etat de ce païs á ce conformer au sentiment de son Excel∣lence ne produisse leur ap∣plaudissement. J'espere que devant que cellecy vous sera rendue, vous aurez receu de son Excellence une declaration, dans les formes et par ecrit, cou∣chée en termes clairs et
satisfaisants, sans aucune ambiguité ou obscurité; et en fin telle qui ne laisse aucune occasion ni même aucun pretexte á la France d'y trouver quelque chose á redire; mais qui la mette en necessité de se de∣clarer ausside son côte net∣tement sur les conditions et articles de notre conven∣tion, et nous hors de doute et d'embarras de ce que nous avons á faire. Quant á moy, je ne manqueray pas de tenir la main á ce que l'Etat se mette tout á fait en posture de pouvoir accourir vigou∣reusement et efficacement á la defence du Païs bas en cas qu'aprés une decla∣ration nette et satisfaisante de son Excellence, le Roy de France nous lasse en∣core de l'apprehension des plus grands progrez que sa Majesté voudroit tâcher de faire dans le même païs, ce que nous ne pou∣vons pas presuppsser sans estré preoccupé d'un soub∣çon que ledit Roy voudroit bien fausser sa parole don∣née, et sa promesse si solen∣nellement
faite par des lettres publiques et circu∣laires: ce qu' à Dieu ne ne plaise; et ce que pour∣tant la prudence veut que nous nous figurions comme possible, pour ne negliger pas les moyens dont nous nous sommes bien souvent entretenus, et sur lesquels les Etats ont donné ordre á leurs Ambassadeurs en Angleterre de concerter plus particulierement avec le Roy de la Grande Bre∣tagne et ses Ministres. Vous m'avez encore o∣bligé de n'avoir point donné copie de ma prece∣dente depêche au Marquis; puisque á mon jugement, on auroit pu s'en servir pour aigrir et picquer le Roy de France, et pour l'obliger en quelque façon par point d honneur, á s'opiniâtrer dans la guerre contre le but et scuhait du Roy de la Grande Bre∣tagne, et des Etats Gene∣raux: Mais que vous ayez, donné part á son Ex∣cellence par lecture de nos articles separez, c'est ce que je ne puis qu'approu∣ver
entierement, comme estant fort conforme á ma maniere d'agir et de pro∣ceder; aussi bien que la precaution dont vous avez garanti la cause commune du sudit danger, en ne luy en ayant point donné copie. Au reste je me remets á ce que Messieurs les Deputez de l'Etat vous auront dêja dit et temoigné sur le contenu de votre depêche precedentê, et á ce qu'ils vous communique∣ront de temps en temps de l'intention de leurs Hautes Puissances: Et demeureray á jamais ce∣luy qui suis avec pas∣sion, Monsieur, Votre tres affecti∣onné et tres hum∣ble Serviteur, Johan. de Wit.
From Mon∣sieur de Wit. Hague, March 16. 1668. SIR, YOur Dispatch of the 11th Instant did not come to my hands till the 14th at Noon, the Courier who brought it, having not been dismiss'd from Brussels till the 13th. I was very glad to see you had at last dis∣pos'd the Marquis to dis∣patch the Baron of Ber∣geyck for Aix la Chapelle, being very much per∣swaded that it imports us mightily to have a quick Conclusion of the Peace, or else to see clearly into the most inward Dispositi∣ons of the King of France, as well as those of the Spanish Court; and that all Delay is very prejudicial to our
Intentions, and to the Interests of Spain: And that we may be nei∣ther surpriz'd nor a∣bus'd on either side, I think in the pre∣sent Conjuncture two things are absolutely necessary: The first is, that England and this State be well furnished by Sea and Land; and the other, that we take away, not only all lawful Cause, but also as much as possible, all Pretext from France to delay or avoid the concluding and sign∣ing the Treaty of Peace. To satisfie on our side, for the first Point, we are resolv'd as soon as the Season will per∣mit, to send into the Field all our Cavalry, which consists of 7300 Horse; and provisio∣nally 25 Regiments of our Foot; for which the chief Rendezvous shall be at Bergopzoom, or thereabouts; from whence there will be a
convenient March in a few days into most part of the King of Spain's Places in the Nether∣lands. We have also given Order for equipping 48 Ships of War, a∣bove the Number com∣monly used for Guard and Convoy; And the States have already gi∣ven order to their Am∣bassadors in England to concert with the King of Great Britain and his Ministers upon the Number of Ships and Men that each Party shall be oblig'd to have ready, and in what time. Besides, the De∣puties of the State have this Day finally agreed with the Ministers of the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunebourg, to bring into the Service of this State three Regiments of Horse, and 3000 Foot; and I hope the Treaty will be signed to morrow or the next Day: And, further, they are going here to
augment the Old Mi∣litia by new Levies, to the Number of 12000 Men, with the Troops of the said Dukes, which are to enter into the Service of the State: And I will not fail of helping what I can to the accomplishing of all this, as soon as it can be done by the Constitution of the Government. And if you approve all these Preparations and Dili∣gences, as I hope you will since they seem very necessary, and no way offensive, since he who really desires the Peace, will find in it his Support and Ad∣vantage; and that these Forces shall not be em∣ploy'd till the last Ne∣cessity, against him, that by his Wilfulness would disappoint Chri∣stendom of the Benefit of it; I desire you by your Letters to make the Exhortations neces∣sary to the King of England and his Mi∣nisters,
that they may not fail on that side to make the like Prepa∣rations and Diligences. As to the 2d Point, I think it imports much that the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo should explain himself upon which of the two Conditions proposed by the Alternative, he pretends to have acce∣pted; wherein there seems the less Difficul∣ty, since his Excellence will, without doubt, explain himself for the abandoning the Places the King of France has conquer'd the last Campagn, with their Dependances. But then I think it will be our Interest and Duty to endeavour that some reasonable Exchange be made, for Places far in the Heart of Flan∣ders, against Places late∣ly taken in the Franche Compté, or others that shall be more for the Advantage of France,
and less for the Incon∣venience of Spain and Us. Besides, to take all Pretext from France which they may pre∣tend to make upon a Defect of Powers in the said Marquis, ei∣ther in the principal Matter, or by default of a Clause of Substi∣tution, or otherwise: I think it will be very necessary that the K. of Great Britain and the States General shall be obliged to ratifie and accomplish whatever shall be treated and concluded at Aix; and shall promise in the firmest manner the K. of France can desire, to oblige Spain in case of necessity to the said Ratification and Ac∣complishment, by all their Forces both by Sea and Land: And in short, that in every Oc∣currence they will do very judiciously to ob∣viate all Exceptions and Delays which can
be brought to the Pre∣judice of the Peace. But further, when we shall have brought the King of France to an absolute Necessity of either finally conclu∣ding, or discovering his Intention contrary to the Peace; in that Case, upon the first Step France shall make to frustrate Christendom of such a general Good, the King of, Great Britain and the States shall without fur∣ther Delay, bring all their Forces by Sea and Land, not only for Defence of the Spani∣ards, but also for the Intent specified in the third of our separate Articles, and more amply deduc'd in my Dispatch of the 25th. of February last. For the rest, if you have receiv'd the King of Great Britain's Rati∣fication upon our last Marine Treaty, I shall wait till you think pro∣per to exchange it;
upon which I shall en∣deavour to cform the States to your De∣sire; whether our Ra∣tification shall be sent to our Commissioners now with you; or whether you will please to send your Se∣cretary or your Bro∣ther hereto the Hague; or whether you know any way will please you better: For in this and every other Oc∣currence, I shall en∣deavour to follow your Desires and second your Intentions, as be∣ing not by form of Compliment, but very really, Sir, Your, &c.
De Monsieur de Wit. A la Haye 16me. Mars, 1668. Monsieur, VOtre depêche du 11me de ce mois ne m'a esté rendue que le 14me. apres midy; le courier qui la apportée, n'ayant esté expedié et parti de Brusselles que le 13me. J'ay esté fort aise de voir que vous aviez enfin disposé Monsieur le Mar∣quis de Castel-Rodrigo, á depêcher le Baron de Ber∣gayck promptement vers Aiz la Chapelle; estant tres persuadé qu' nous importe d'avoir une prom∣pte conclusion de la paix ou de voir clair dans les intentions les plus interi∣eures du Roy de France, aussi bien que dans celle de la cour d'Espagne; et que tout delai est fort pre∣judiciable á nos intentions
et aux interêts de l'E∣spagne: Et á fin que nous ne puissions pas estre sur∣pris ou abusés de coté ou d'autre; je juge qu'en la conjuncture presente deux choses nous sont absolument necessaires: dont la pre∣miere est que l'Angleterre et cet Etat soient bien ar∣més par mer et par terre; et l'autre qu'on ôte non seulement toute cause legi∣time, mais aussi tant que faire ce pourra, tout pre∣texte á la France de delai∣er ou d'esquiver la con∣clusion et la signature du traitté de paix. Pour satisfaire de nô∣tre côté au premier point, nous sommes resolus de mettre en campagne, aus∣sitôt que la saison le pour∣ra permettre, toute nôtre cavallerie qui consiste en sept, mille et trois cens chevaux, et provisionelle∣ment vingt cinq regimens de nôtre infanterie, pour lequel le principal rendez∣vous sera á Bergopzoom et aux environs; place fort commode pour pouvoir de là nous jetter en peu de
tems dans la plus part des places du Roy d'Espagne au Païs bas. Aussi avons nous donné ordre pour l'equipage de quarante et huit vaissaux de guerre par dessus le nombre qui sert pour la garde et l'escorte ordinaire: Et il y a dêja quelque tems que les Etats ont donn ordre á leurs Am∣bassadeurs en Angleterre de concerter avec le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et ses Minist essur le Nom∣bre et la quantité des Va∣isseaux et hommes, que chacun s'obligeroit d'avoir tout prêts et en quel tems. Outre cela les Deputez de l'Etat sont tombez au∣jourdhuy finalement d'ac∣cord avec les Ministres des Ducks de Bronswich et de Lunebourg, pour faire passer au service de cet Etat trois regimens de Cavallerie, et trois mille hommes á pied; et j'espere que le traitté en pourra estre signe demain, ou a∣pres demain: et au sur∣plus va-on icy encore aug∣menter la vielle milice
par des nouvelles levées jusques an nombre de dou∣ze mille hommes, y com∣pris les troupes desdits Ducs qui passeront au ser∣vice de cet Etat: Et je ne manqueray pas de tenir la main, et de presser au∣tant qu'il me sera possible que tout ce que dessus aye son accomplissement le plûtôt qu'il se pourra faire selon la constitution de ce gouvernement. Et si vous approuvez toutes ces preparations et dili∣gences, comme je l'espere, et que'lles me semblent fort necessaires et nullement offençantes; d'autant que celuy qui voudra la Paix reellement, y trouvera son appuy et son avantage; et que leur emploi sera de la derniere necessitté contre celuy qui par son opiniâ∣treté en voudroit frustrer la Chrêtienté; Je vous supplie de faire les exhor∣tations necessaires par vos lettrés au Roy de la Grande Bretagne et á ses Ministres, a fin que de ce coté lá on ne manque pas de faire de semblables
preparatifs et les mêmes diligences. Quant au second point, Je croy qu'il importe grandement que Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Ro∣drigo s'explique, laquelle des deux conditions pro∣posées par l'Alternative il entend avoir accepté; En quoy il me semble tant moins de difficulté, que c'est sans contredit que son Excellence s'expliquer a pour l'abandonnement des places que le Roy de France a conquis la cam∣pagné passée, avec leurs dependances: Mais ce se∣ra ce me semble alors de nôtre interêt et de nôtre devoir de travailler pu∣issamment áfin que quel∣que echange rationable se puisse faire des places les plus avancées en Flandre, contre des places nouvel∣lement occupées dans la Franche Compté, ou autres qui seront plus en la bien∣seance de la Ftance, et moins á l'incommodité de l'Espagne et de nous au∣tres.
De plus; pour ôter á la France tout pretexte dont elle se pourroit servir à raison qu'il pourroit y avoir quelque manquement au pouvoir dudit Mar∣quis ou en la matiere prin∣cipale ou par defaut de la clause de substitution ou autrement; il me sem∣ble qu'il sera trés neces∣saire que le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et les Etats Generaux se fas∣sent fort de la ratification et de l'accomplissement de tout ce qui sera traetté et conclu á Aix; et pro∣mettent en la maniere la plus forte que le Roy de France le pourra desirer, d'obliger en cas de hesoin l'Espagne á ladite Ratifi∣cation, et au dit accom∣plissement, de toutes leurs forces par mer et par ter∣re: Et en fin qu'en toute autre occurrence on fera tres judicieusement d'obvi∣er a toutes les exceptions et delais qui pourroient estre apportéz au prejudice de la paix. Mais aussi quand on aura mis par la le Roy de France dans une ne∣cessité
absolue de proceder outre á la conclusion finale ou de decouvrir son inten∣tion contraire á la paix; qu'alors á la premiere demarche que la France feroit pour frustrer la Chrêtienté d'un bien si sa∣lutaire: Le Roy de la Grande Bretagne et les Etats Generaux feroient agir incontinent et sans marchander, toutes leurs forces par mer et par ter∣re, non seulement pour la defence des Espagnols, mais aussi pour la fin speci∣fée autroisième de nos ar∣ticles separés, et plus am∣plement deduite en ma de∣peche du 25 Fevrier passé. Au reste, j'attendray de vos nouvelles si vous avez receu la ratification du Roy de la Grande Bre∣tagne sur nôtre dernier traité de Marine, que vous jugerez á propos que l'on en fasse l'echange; sur quoy je tacheray de disposer les Etats á se conformer á vôtre desir; soit que l'on envoye nôtre ratification és mains de nos commissaires qui se
trouvent presentement auprez de vous; soit que vous envoyez votre Secre∣taire, ou bien Monsieur vôtre Frere icy â la Haye; ou que vous scachiez, en∣core quelque autre façon qui soit plus â vôtre goût: Car et en cela, et en toute atre occurrence, je tache∣ray de suivre vos desirs, et de seconder vos intenti∣ons, comme estant non par forme de compliment, mais fort reellement, Monsieur, Votre, &c. From Mon∣sieur de Wit Hagne, Mar. 25. 1668. SIR, I Receiv'd the Honor of yours of the 25th Instant, upon which I
will tell you in few Words, that I am wholly of your Opi∣nion, as well for what regards the King of France's Disposition to carry on the War; the Insufficiency of his Offer to restore all he may conquer between the 1st of April and the 15th of May, the strai∣ned Exceptions against the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo's Powers, and his Acceptation of the Alternative; As chiefly for what regards the Forces to be rais'd with all possible readiness; and the manner by which we ought to proceed to the Defence of the Netherlands, as soon as the K. of France shall begin to move a∣gainst them. The States are every Day more confirmed in the same Sentiments, as their Actions declare, by marching an Army with all Diligence to Berg-opzoom, and by sending an Express to
the King of Great Bri∣tain with Intelligence, that they are of Opi∣nion, that in order to satisfie the K. of France upon the Scruples pro∣pos'd in Monsieur de Li∣onne's Paper of the 19th Instant, with Pro∣mises and Assurances sufficient, we must let him know discreetly, and yet positively, that we think his Genero∣sity will not suffer him to ruine a State, or a Minister of Spain, whom the King of England and the States General have obliged at his Request, to accept the Conditions pre∣scrib'd, with a formal Assurance, that by that means he should free himself from all Danger of the War. And, at least, that the Honour and good Faith of the King of Great Britain and the States cannot suffer such a State or Minister to be injured without lending him their Ser∣vice
and Assistance. And by every body's Disposition here I am assured, that as soon as the Agreement is con∣cluded, we shall march to the Assistance of the Netherlands, upon the first Step France shall make to attack them, if the King of England will do the like. But to acquit our Consci∣ences, and let the World see the Justice of our proceeding; I am entirely of opinion we must make all Ad∣vances, and give all due Assurances to France, to oblige them to the Peace. Upon which, with many o∣ther Particulars, I refer you to the Deputies of the States to communi∣cate to you; having not time at present to enlarge further, but only to repeat in one word, that I am truly Sir, Your, &c. Johan. de Wit.
De Monsieur de Wit. A la Haye, 25 me. Mars, 1668. Monsieur, J'AY bien receu la lettre dont il vous a plù m'honnorer le 25me de ce
mois; surquoy je vous diray en peu de mots que je suis tout á fait de vôtre opinion, tant á l'egard de la disposition du Roy de France á continuer la guerre, l'insuffisance de l'offre de vouloir restituer tout ce qu'il pourroit co∣querir entre le premier d'Avril et le 15me May; les exceptions recherchées contre les pouvoirs du Marquis de Castel-Rodri∣go, et contre son acceptati∣on de l'alternative; que principalement et sur tout á l'egard de l'armement que l'on devroit avancer avec toute la promptitude possible, et de la maniere de laquelle on devra ac∣courir á la defence du Pais bas, des que le Roy de France commencera á se remuer pour l'accabler. Lés Etats ont dêja approu∣vé et confirmé enco∣re de jour en jour les mémes sentiments par leurs actions; faisants marcher en toute diligence une armée aux environs de Berg-opzoom et ayants envoyé leur avis par un
exprez au Roy de la Grande Bretagne, qu'ils sont d'opinion qu' aussi bien que de satisfaire au Roy de France sur les scrupules proposés dans l'ecrit du Sieur de Lionne du 19me de ce mois avec des as∣seurances et promesses suf∣fisantes; il faudra luy faire savoir discretement et neantmois bien positi∣vement que nous jugeons que sa generosité ne pourra pas permettre qu'il accable un Etat ou un Ministre d'Espagne, que le Roy d'Angleterre et les Etats Generaux ont obligé á sa requisition d'accepter les conditions prescrites, avec une asseurance formelle que par lá il se deliverroit de tout danger de la guerre; Et qu'au moins l'honneur et la bonne foy du Roy de la Grande Bretagne et des Etats, ne pourra pas souffrir qu'on accable un tel Etat ou un tel Ministre, sans luy prê∣ter leurs services et assi∣stances: Et je ne vois point de disposition icy, qui ne m'asseure que l'op∣pignoration
estant conclue, on marchera au secours des Pais bas dés la premiere demarche que le Roy de France fera pour l'atta∣quer, si le Roy de la Grande Bretagne en veut faire autant. Mais pour nous satisfaire en bonne conscience; et pour faire voir á tout le monde la justice de nôtre procede: Je suis entierement d'opi∣nion qu'il faudra faire toutes les avances, et don∣ner toutes les asseurances requises á la France pour parvenir, et pour l'obliger á la paix. Surquoy, com∣me aussi sur plusieurs au∣tres particularitez, je me remets á ce que les Depu∣tez de l'Etat vous com∣muniqueront plus en de∣tail; n'ayant pas de tems de m'etendre icy plus am∣plement, mais seulement pour repeter en un mot que je suis tres veritable∣ment, Monsieur, Votre, &c. Johan. de Wit.
From Mon∣sieur de Wit. Hague, April 4. 1668. SIR, I Could not immedi∣ately answer yours of the 2d Instant, by reason of a Feaver I got by a great Cold last Night: But to∣wards Noon the Fea∣ver lessening, gives me leave at present to tell you, that though it is now some Days since M. Beverning's Depar∣ture for Aix la Chapelle, yet I do not see how in the present Conjun∣cture of Affairs it shou'd be more neces∣sary for you to reside in that City than at Brussels; but on the contrary, that the Affair is now reduc'd to such a Point, that the Business which carried you to Aix,
ought to be treated and finish'd in a few days, in the Place where you are, and in the Nether∣lands; and I think the King of England's Mi∣nisters, and those of the States at Paris, have ne∣gotiated with Address in procuring us an In∣strument, which in a few Days will put us in a clear Light upon what we are finally to resolve and to do; if the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo seconds us, as we hope and expect from his Prudence, and from the visible Interest of his Master, which obliges him to it. I speak of the Project of the Treaty drawn upon the Foot of the Alternative, and concerted between the said Ministers of our Masters at Paris, and the Commissioners of the K. of France, where∣of I am sure you have receiv'd a Copy from Sir John Trevor. I think this Project gives us a
certain way of obtain∣ing the Peace; or else a War, wherein all the Princes and States of Christendom will support us, or at least, com∣mend our Conduct and Proceeding. And I think we must proceed in it after this manner: I suppose before-hand that you and our De∣puties with you, will not be at much pains to dispose the Marquis to send immediately a Power to Monsieur Be∣verning and Sir John Trevor to sign in his (the Marquis s) Name, and from the King his Master, the Treaty with the K. of France's Commissioners, agree∣able to the Project a∣bove-mention'd, which I find entirely confor∣mable to our Agree∣ment and secret Arti∣cles, as Monsieur Bever∣ning tells us, that he and Sir J. Trevor made the same Judgment of it. Unless his Excellency would rather sign the
said Treaty himself, and receive the Exchange of it signed by the K. of France: In which case I think there may be only writ on the Top of the Project, A Trea∣ty of Peace between the Kings of * Spain and France to prevent dis∣puting upon the Terms of the Preface;And in the o∣ther Instrument, Of France and Spain. and beneath to add the Date. This being done, the aforesaid Ministers at Paris must, in my Opinion, offer the K. of France to sign in the K. of Spain's Name, or (in case his Excellency thinks fit to sign him∣self) to exchange the Treaty signed; on condition that France will consent to a rea∣sonable time to procure the Ratification from the Queen of Spain; and above all, the Con∣tinuance of the Cessa∣tion of Arms during the time agreed. I see that for granting this term a little more to
the Humour of France, you will be more libe∣ral and complaisant than I: For whereas you are satisfied with the Term till the 15th of May already propo∣sed by Monsieur de Ru∣vigny, I think Reason and Decency should oblige to take till the End of May. And if the King of France re∣fuses either to sign on his side; or to grant the said Term with the Cessation of Arms, I should not stick to declare immediately for Spain, and act by Sea and Land in Con∣formity to our third separate Article. And since it cannot enter into a reasonable Man's Mind, that the Q. of Spain can be so blind as not to ratifie the said Treaty, by which aThe County of Burgundy. whole Pro∣vince is resto∣red, and a minor King deliver'd from being engaged in a second War with us and Spain;
I should not be hard at granting the King of France whatever he can demand with any Ap∣pearance of Reason, in a Case that will ne∣ver arrive: Chiefly, be∣cause many Princes of Germany will then de∣clare on our side, who might else (blinded by the Appearances of Reason in Monsieur de Lionne's Letter of the 19th. past) abandon us intirely. The King of Sueden or his Minister at London, do, I think, stretch the Cord too far, and he will break it if he does not yield a little. However, we have last Wednesday sent such Orders to our Ambassadors, that I doubt not a good Suc∣cess of this Negotiation. For the other Points of your Letter, I must refer my self to what you can learn from our Deputies and his Excel∣lency, by Advices from the Ambassador Don Estavan de Gamarra.
Therefore I shall con∣clude remaining, Sir, Your, &c. Johan. de Wit.
De Monsieur de Wit. A la Haye 4me. Mars. 1668. Monsieur, UN grand rhume qui m'a suscité une fie∣vre la nuit passee, á esté cause que je n'ay pas pû vous repondre d'abord á votre lettre du 2d de ce mois: Mais vers le midi la fievre estant beaucoup diminuée, me laisse pre∣sentement la faculte de vous dire, que quoy qu'il y a deja quelques jours que Monsieur de Beverning est parti pour se rendre á Aix la Chapelle, je ne voy pas pourtant que dans la conjoncture presente des affaires, vôtre sejour soit plus necessaire au dit lieu qu'a Brusselles; mais que tout au contraire, l'af∣faire est presentement re∣duite á un point, que ce pour quoy vous vous fus∣siez transporte á Aix, se
pourra et se devra traitter et achever en peu de jour au lieu ou vous estes et au Païs bas: Et il me semble que Messieurs les Mini∣stres du Roy de la Grande Bretagne et des Etats á Paris, ont negotié adroite∣ment de nous avoir sceu procurer un instrument qui nous mettra en peu de jours dans une clarté en∣tiere pour resoudre finale∣ment ce que nous aurons á faire; si le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo nous y se∣conde comme nous l'esperons et l'attendrons de sa pru∣dence et de l'interet visible de son Maître qui l'y obli∣ge. Je parle du projet de traitté dressé sur le pié de l'alternative et concerté entre les dits Ministres de nos Maîtres á Paris et les Commissaires du Roy de France, dont je m'asseure que vous aurez receu copie de la part de Monsieur Trevor. Il me semble que ce projet nous donne en main un moyen asseuré pour avoir la paix, ou une guerre dans laquelle tous les Princes et Etats de
la Chrêtienté nous appuye∣ront, ou au moins loueront nôtre procedé et nôtre con∣duite. Et voicy comme quoy, á mon avis, nous y pourrions proceder. Je presuppose que vous et Mes∣sieurs nos Deputez qui se trouvent auprez de vous, n'auront pas beaucoup de peine á disposer Monsieur le Marquis d'envoyer in∣continent un pouvoir á Messieurs van Beuningen et Trevor, pour signer en son nom et de la part du Roy son maître, le traitté avec les Commissaires du Roy de France, conforme∣ment au projet susdit que je trouve entierement con∣forme á nôtre convention et á nos articles secrets; ainsi que le Sieur van Beuningen nous mande aussi, que luy et Monsieur Trevor en ont rendu ce même jugement. Si ce n'est que son Excellence ayme mieux de signer luy même ledit traitte, et d'en recevoir un en échange sig∣né de la part du Roy de France, au quel cas il me semble que l'on n'auroit
qu'a mettre dessus le pro∣jet,Et en l'autre Instrument, De France et d'E∣spagne. Traitté de paix en∣tre les Roys d'Espagne et de France; pour ne disputer pas sur les termes de la preface; Et au bas d'ajoûter la date. Cela estant fait, il faudra á mon jugement que lesdits Ministres á Pa∣ris offrent au Roy de France de signer au nom du Roy d'Espagne, ou bien d'echanger le traitte signé, si son Excellence ayt trou∣vé bon de signer luy méme; moyennant que la France accorde un terme raisona∣ble pour procurer la rati∣fication de la Reyne d'E∣spagne, et sur tout la con∣tinuation de la cessation d'armes pendant ce terme un peu augre de la France, vous seriez plus liberal ou complaisant que moy; car au lieu que vous vous contenteriez du terme de 15me de May cy devant proposé par Monsieur de Ruvigny, il me semble que la raison et la hiensance nous obligeroient bien de prendre jusques au dernier
jour de May: Et si le Roy de France vient á refuser ou la signature de son côté, ou le terme avec la cessation d'armes, je ne hesiterois point á nous de∣clarer d'abord sans mar∣chander, pour l'Espagne, et agir par mer et par terre en conformite du 3me de nos articles se∣parez. Et comme il ne peut tomber dans l'esprit d'un homme raisonable, que la Reyne d'Espagne pourroit estre si aveugle que de ne ratifier point le dit traitté qui luy fait ren∣dre uneLa Conté de Bourgogne. Pro∣vince entiere, et qui de∣livre un Roy mineur d'un second accablement de l'Angleterre et de cet E∣tat; jé ne serois nullement chiche á accorder au Roy de France tout ce qu'il pourroit demander avec quelque apparane de rai∣son, dans un cas qui n'e∣cherra pas. Principalement parceque plusieurs Princes d'Allemagne alors se de∣clareront de nostre parti qui sans cela aveugles par
les apparances du raison∣nement compris dans la lettre de Monsieur de Li∣onne du 19me du mois passé, nous abandonneroi∣ent entierement. Le Roy de Suede, ouson Ministre á Londres me semble trop tendre la corde; et il la rompra s'il ne se met un peu á la raison: Neant∣moins nous avons encore Vendredy passé envoye tels ordres á nos Ambassadeurs que je ne doute d'un bon succés de cette negotiation. Quant aux autres points de votre lettre, je suis o∣bligé de me remettre á ce que vous pourrez entendre de nos Deputez et de son Excellence par les âvis de l'Ambassadeur Don Este∣van de Gamarra: C'est pourquoy en finissant je demeureray comme je suis veritablement, Monsieur, Votre, &c. Johan. de Wit. From the Ele∣ctor of Mentz. Mentz, April 12. 1668. My Lord, HAving heard of Your Excellency's Arrival to Aix la Cha∣pelle, to assist in his Ma∣jesty of Great Britain's Name at a Negotiati∣on of Peace between the two Crowns, I could not forbear ex∣pressing my Joy, and the Confidence I have that the Intervention and Authority of so great a King, will give much Weight to the Affair, and very much facilitate the Peace; which employing all my Thoughts at pre∣sent, I have dispatch'd to the said Town of
Aix, the Baron of Schon∣born my Nephew, with Orders to render all Offices from me to Your Excellency, and to contribute all he can towards a Peace so ne∣cessary to the Repose of all Christendom. In the mean time I desire Your Excellency to be assured, that, as I shall always reckon it an Honour to serve the King your Master, so I shall never let pass a∣ny Occasion of shew∣ing in particular that I am, My Lord, Your Excellency's most humble, and affe∣ctionate Servant, J. Ph. El. de Mayence.
De Electeur de Mayence. A Mayence 12me. Avril, 1668. Monsieur, AYant sceu l'arrivée de votre Excellence á Aix la Chapelle pour y assister au nom de sa Ma∣jesté de la Grande Bre∣tagne á la negotiation de la paix entre les deux Cou∣ronnes: Je n'ay pû m'em∣pecher de luy temoigner ma joye, et la confiance que j'ay que l'interventi∣on et l'autorité d'un Roy si puissant donnera un poids tres grand á l'affaire, et facilitera de beaucoup la conciliation et le retablis∣sement de cette paix: La∣quelle faisant aujourdhuy tous mes soins, j'ay depêché á ladite ville d'Aix le Baron de Schonborn mon
neveu avec ordre d'offrir et de rendre á Votre Ex∣cellence de ma part, tous les offices, et de contribuer de son possible pour parve∣nir á la fin que l'on s'est proposée, pour obtenir une paix si necessaire au repos de toute la Chrêtienté. Cependant je prie Votre Excellence d'estre asseurée que comme je feray tou∣jours gloire de servir le Roy son maitre; de même je ne perdray jamais l'oc∣casion où je peurray temoi∣gner en mon particulier que je suis, Monsieur, De Votre Excel∣lence tres humble, et tres affectionné Serviteur, J. Ph. E. de Mayence.
From Mon∣sieur de Wit Hague, April 16. 1668. SIR, AFter having writ to you on the 4th. I find my self ho∣noured by two of yours of the 9th. and 14th. Instant. The Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo's man∣ner of transacting does infinitely displease us; and we believe we have entred enough into his Designs, to conclude, that his aim is to delay the signing of the Pro∣ject, and the sending of the Powers till the French begin to be in motion; and in the mean while to sign or send the Power desired, and summon us by virtue of a former Pro∣mise, to oppose our Arms against those of France, which will then begin to enter into A∣ction, and by that means set us into an o∣pen
War by Advance. However, to give the said Marquis the am∣plest Assurance, and to convince him he is in the wrong, we were willing entirely to a∣gree to your Advice, and to authorize our Deputies to pass a pro∣mise with you in due Form by Writing, in∣serting in it the same Words of our third se∣parate Article: And I think you have very judiciously considered, that the Condition of the Promise ought to be, not only the signing of the Project and Pow∣ers; but if after the Signing, &c. France re∣fuses either to consent to it, or to continue the Suspension of Arms, we believe we have great cause to complain of the Marquis, that notwithstanding the solemn Promise made by the States General, and delivered to Don Estevan de Gamarra in their Resolution of the
5th of this Month, he has delay'd to sign and dispatch the Power; so that if this had been done at first, we had been already out of all Doubt; for either the Conclusion of it would have been pursued at Paris with the Suspen∣sion of Arms; or, in case of Refusal, Eng∣land and this State would already act in earnest, and with a good Conscience for Spain. And I desire you to let his Excellency see as plainly as possible, that if now after the signing and sending the Power to Paris, and before the K. of France can be inform'd of it, he shall receive any Disgrace, it is himself he ought to impute it to; for England and this State will not put into his Hands the Power of involving them in an open War with France, unseasonably,
and against their Inten∣tion clearly exprest in the Agreement of the 25th Instant; which would have hapned if we had left him the liberty to delay the signing or sending his Power, till he had pro∣voked the French to move; or if then sign∣ing or sending the Pow∣er, he had the right of employing our Troops against those of France, before the K. of France could have had Intel∣ligence of the said sign∣ing or sending of the said Power, and by consequence before the said King could have finished the Treaty and continu'd the Suspensi∣on of Arms. I hope, and am assured, that after this Pace, which is the last the States are capa∣ble of making in this Conjuncture, the Mar∣quis will not delay a
Moment the signing and sending of the Peace to Paris; but if, contrary to all Ap∣pearance, he should be capable of doing so, I desire you to let him know, that neither England nor the States can assist one who nifestly refuses, and consequently that he will be abandoned on all sides; and also that we shall find our selves under a Neces∣ssity to reduce him by more effectual means, to accept really and effectually by signing of the Treaty, the Alternative he has already acepted by a separate writing. And I even apprehend that by
the Delays already pass'd, the Affair is re∣duc'd to a Point not to be redress'd; as in truth we shall find our selves embarassed e∣nough, if the King of France be already gone from Paris to his Ar∣my, before the Pro∣ject signed, or the Pow∣er be arrived there. I cannot tell by what Politick his Excellency desires, his Conduct should be decryed by all Men, or that his Government should be lost; for, to think us so ill advised, that he can engage us in a War against France, when they on their side, are earnest for concluding a Peace, is what I can∣not suppose; and if he thinks France will draw back, or refuse the Suspension, then
why he would not let it appear publickly to the World by a ready signing on his Side; this is what I cannot comprehend. In the mean time, Monsieur Colbert at Aix, has loudly made appear the Easyness, and even the Complaisance of his Master, by the Prote∣station he has publickly made, that he has or∣der to sign the Alter∣native, without ex∣cepting against the Pre∣amble of the Marquis's Power upon the Defect of a Faculty to substi∣stute, or upon any o∣ther; whereas on the contrary, the Baron de Bergeyck is not autho∣rized to do any thing at all: And I assure you, the positive Ad∣vices we receive of it, make every Body's
Head turn; Therefore I desire you so much the more to endeavour effectually that the Marquis should finish the Affair without any more delay: For if this last Compliance of the States does not sa∣tisfy him, I confess to you I shall think no further, but of some effectual means to re∣duce him to Reason, and of some Expedi∣ents by which the King of Great Britain and Their High and Mighty∣nesses may take Mea∣sures with France for preventing the Mise∣ries of the Neighbour∣hood; in which I hope you assist with as much Application, ac∣cording to the intent of our Agreement, as I believe you will by all means endeavour to prevent a Case so de∣sperate, and so destru∣ctive to Spain: And for me I shall remain ever with much Passion, Sir, your &c.
De Monsieur de Wit. A la Haye 16me. Mars, 1668. Monsieur, APrés que je vous ay ecrit le 4me je me trouve honoré de vos deux depêches du 9me et 14me de ce mois. La maniere d'agir la Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodri∣go nous deplaît infiniment; et nous croyons penetrer assés dans ses visées, pour conclurre que son but est de delayer la signature du projet et l'envoy du pou∣voir jusques á ce que les François commencent á se remuer; de signer en même temps ou d envoyer le pouvoir desiré, et de
nous sommer en vertu d'une promesse prealable d'opposer nos armes contre celles de Franee qui com∣menceront alors d'entrer en action, et par ainsi nous mettre en guerre ouverte par provision. Neant∣moins pour donner au dit Marquis une asseurance plus ample, et pour ache∣ver de le mettre dans le tort, nous avons bien vou∣lu nous conformer-entiere∣ment á vôtre âvis, et au∣toriser nos Deputez á pas∣ser avec vous la promesse en bonne et deüe forme par ecrit; y inserant les mémes paroles du troisi∣eme de nos articles sepa∣rés; et je juge que vous avez tres judicieusement consideré que la con∣dition de la promesse doit estre non seule∣ment la signature du projet et des pouvoirs; mais si apres la signa∣ture, &c. la France
refuse ou d'y consentir, ou de continuer la sus∣pension d'armes: Nous croyons avoir grand su∣jet de nous plaindre du Sieur Marquis en ce que non obstant la promesse solennelle, faite par les Etats Generaux, et de∣livrée á Don Estevan de Gamarra dans leur re∣solution du 5me de ce mois il a dilayé de signer et de depêcher le pouvoir; d'autant, que si cela eut esté fait d'a∣bord, nous nous trou∣verions deja hors de toute obscurité; car ou la conclusion en auroit este suivie á Paris, a∣vec la suspension d'ar∣mes; ou en cas de re∣fus, l'Angleterre et cet Etat agiroit deja de bon coeur et en bonne conscience pour l'Espa∣gne. Et je vous sup∣plie de faire voir á son Excellence le plus vivement qu'il se pour∣ra faire, que si á cette
heure aprés la signature ou l'envoy du pouvoir vere Paris, et avant qu'on en puisse avoir averti le Roy de France, il reçoiue quel∣que disgrace; que ce sera á soy même á qui il le devra imputer: Car l'Angle∣terre et cet Etat ne peu∣vent pas luy donner en main un moyen asseuré pour les enveloper mal á propos et contre leur in intention clairement ex∣primée dans la conventi∣on du 25me de ce mois dans une guerre ouverte avec la France; ce qui se feroit si on luy lais∣soît la faculté de dilayer la signature ou l'envoy de son pouvoir jusques á ce qu'il auroit provoqué les François de se re∣muer; ou qu'alors sig∣nant ou envoyant le pouvoir il eut le droit de faire agir nos troupes contre celles de France avant que le Roy de
France eut pû avoir nouvelle de ladite sig∣nature ou de l'envoy duit pouvoir et par con∣sequent avant qu'il eut pû faire achever le traité et continuer la suspension d'armes: J'es∣pere et je me tiens as∣seuré qu'aprôs le pas qui est le dernier que les Etats sont capables de faire en cette conjoncture, Mon∣sieur le Marquis ne di∣layera plus un moment sa signature et l'envoy d'un pouvoir vers Paris; mais, si contre toute apparance, il fût capa∣ble de le faire, je vous supplie de lui faire voir comme il faut que-ni
l'Angleterre ni les Etats, ne peuvent pas assister un refusant manifesse; que par consequent il sera a∣bandoné de tous cotés, & qu' aussi nous nous trou∣verons necessités de le reduire par des moyens plus efficaces á accepter reellement & en effect par la signature du traite, l'alternative qu'il a deja accepté par un ecrit se∣paré. Et j'apprehende même que par les delais deja passés, l'affaire ne soit reduite á un point pour ne pouvoir pas estre redressee: Comme en verité nous nous trouve∣rions bien embarassés, si le Roy de France fût de∣ja parti de Paris vers son armée, avant que le projet signé ou le pouvoir y fût arrivé. Je ne say pas par quelle politique son Excellence trouve bon de faire decrier sa con∣duite par tout le monde, & de perdre le pais de son gouvernement; car de nous croire si mal avi∣sés qu'elle nous pourroit engager dans une guerre,
contre la France, lors qu'elle de son côté veut tout de bon conclure la paix, c'est que je ne pu∣is pas presupposer: Et si elle juge que la France reculera ou refusera la suspension, pourquoy qu'elle ne l'aye pas voulu faire paroître publique∣ment devant tout le mon∣de par une prompte signa∣ture de son côté, c'est ce que je ne puis pas com∣prendre. Cependant Mon∣sieur Colbert á Aix a fait paroître hautement la facilité voire la com∣plaisance du Roy son Maitre, par la protesta∣tion qu'il fait publique∣ment, qu'il a ordre de signer l'alternative, sans faire exception sur le preambule du pouvoir du Marquis, sur le defaut de la faculté de substituer, ou autres, lá ou au con∣traire Monsieur le Baron de Bergeyck ne se trouve autorisé á rien. Et je vous asseure que les avis positiss que nous en rece∣vons, font tourner la tête á un chacun: Ce pour∣quoy
je vous supplie d'au∣tant plus de tenir la main efficacement á ce que Monsieur le Marquis acheve l'affaire sans plus de delay; Car si cette derniere complaisance des Etats ne luy satisfoit pas, je vous avoue que je ne songeray plus qu'aux moyens efficaces pour le reduire á la rai∣son, & aux expedients, par lesquels le Roy de la Grande Bretagne & leurs Hauttes Puissances se puissent entendre avec la France, pour prevenir les malhenrs de son voi∣sinage: En quoy j'espere que vous cooperez avec autant d'application selon l'invention de nôtre con∣vention, que je me tiens que vous tacherez par toute sorte des moyens de prevenir ce cas deses∣peré & ruineux pour l' Espagne. Et moy, je demeureray á jamais a∣vec beaucoup de passion Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Johan de Witt.
From Monsieur de Witt. Hague, April 27, 1668. SIR, YOU ought to be well satisfied with your whole Conduct, since the Success so well answers your good Intention, and that your Work has so ex∣cellent an Agreement with the Foundations you had laid. All Christendom owes You the Glory of having first disposed the King of Great Britain's Mind to so strict an Alliance between his Majesty and this State, for the universal Good and Peace of Europe. It is upon this Principle, you have continued to labour with so much Application, and so successfully with the Marquis of Castel-Ro∣drigo, that it is chiefly
to You we are obliged for the good disposi∣tion he is in at present, and for the enjoyment of so great an Advan∣tage to Christendom as results from it. I speak of it as a thing we pos∣sess already, because I see nothing that can hinder us from it; it being likely that the Baron de Bergeyck has already executed the Power we have sent him; and that the Court of Madrid, in order to deliver Flan∣ders from its trouble∣some Guests, will no longer defer to ratify the Treaty. For the rest, I agree extreamly with your Sentiments, and am of Opinion, some exchange of Pla∣ces should be negotiated immediately after the signing of the Treaty. I writ about it be∣fore to Monsieur Be∣verning, so that I do not doubt but you have been entertained with it already. I con∣fess
also with you, that this Negotiation will be more conveniently managed afterwards at Paris than any where else, at least if the Marquis of Castel-Ro∣drigo can resolve to have confidence enough in the King of Great Britain's Ministers, and those of this State, to refer to them the Nego∣tiation of an Affair of this Nature: Tho', if he considers it well, he will find, that we both have the same Interest in it. You have nothing else, but to go on your own way upon the Foundation of the Agreement of January the 23d, to support the Peace made, by a Guaranty of all who are interessed in it ei∣ther in general or par∣ticular; never fearing that those who shall ne∣gotiate jointly with you in the Name of this State, will disorder the Harmony that has appeared in the whole
Course of this Nego∣tiation: What they do, is as well from their own Inclination, as in pursuance of their Or∣ders. For me, I shall ever second your Zeal with Joy, and shall take all Occasions to shew with how much Passion and Sincerity I am Sir, your &c.
A la Haye, 27 Avril, 1668. Monsieur, VOus devez estre bien satisfait de toute vôtre conduite, puisque le succez repond si parfaite∣ment á vótre bonne in∣tention, & que vótre ouvrage a un si excellent rapport aux fondemens que vous en aviez jetté. Toute la Chretienté vous doit la gloire d'avoir donné la premiere dispo∣sition dans l'esprit du Roy de la Grande Bretagne á une si êtroite liaison entre sa Majesté & cet Etat pour le bien & le repos universel de l'Eu∣rope. Sur ce principe vous avez continue de travailler avec tant d'ap∣plication & si heureuse∣ment auprés de Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, que c'est á vous
principalement á qui l'on est obligé de la bonne disposition en laquelle il se trouve presentement, & de la jouissance d'un si grand avantage pour la Chrêtienté qui en re∣sulte. J'en parle comme d'une chose que nous pos∣sedons deja, parceque je ne voy rien qui nous en puisse frustrer, y ayant de l'apparance que dés á present le Baron de Ber∣geyck aura executé le pouvoir que nous luy a∣vous porte; & que la Cour de Madrid pour delivrer les Paiis bas de l'importunité de ses hôtes ne voudra pas differer de ratifier le traité.  Au reste, je donne fort dans vos sentimens, & suis d'avis, que l'on fasse ne∣gotier quelque exchange de places incontinent a∣prés la signature du traité. J'en ay ecrit cy de∣vant á Monsieur Be∣verning, de sorte que je ne doute point que vous ne vous en soyez deja entretenu. J'avoise aus∣si
avec vous que cette negotiation se faira plus commodement dans la suite á Paris qu'ailleurs; au moins si Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo peut resoudre á prendre assez de confi∣ance aux Ministres du Roy de la Grande Bre∣tagne & de cet Etat, pour s'en rapporter á eux de la negotiation d'une áffaire de cette nature; quoyque s'il le considere bien, il trouvera que nous y avons les uns & les autres presque le mê∣me interêt. Vous n'avez que continuer vôtre route sur le fondement de la convention du 23 Jan∣vier, pour soutenir la paix faite par une guar∣antie de tous les interes∣sés en general & en par∣ticulier; & ne point craindre que ceux qui travailleront au nom de cet Etat avec vous, de∣concertent cette belle har∣monie que l'on a veu en toute la suite de cette
negotiation. Ils le feront non seulement en execu∣tion des ordres qu'ils en ont, mais aussi par incli∣nation. Pour moy, ce sera toujours avec joye que je seconderay vôtre zele, & que je rencon∣treray les occasions ou je vous puisse donner des preuves de la passion & sincerité avec laquelle je suis Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Johan de Witt.
From my Lord Arlington. Whitehall, May 8, 1668. SIR, IF I had written to you last Post, (as I should have done if there had been time for it) you would have heard me complain much of the Pain I was in not to hear from you in fifteen Days in so delicate a Conjuncture of Affairs; which was occasioned by contrary Winds. In the mean time we were a little eased by Sir John Trevor's Assurance to us of the Peace having been signed on the 2d, S. N. which hath since been amply confirmed by two of yours brought together, of the 2d and 8th, S. N. So that now I can with Foun∣dation give you the Parabien of this great Work, which you may without Vanity call your own, whatever Padrinoes you have had to assist you in it: And with more Satisfaction, considering what Escapes you made betwixt the Marquis's Irresolu∣tions, the Baron de Bergeyck's Puntillioes, and Monsieur Colbert's Emportement. God be thanked, the great Business and You are
so well delivered from these Accidents; after which I hope this will find you safely arrived at Brussels, and keeping your self still in the same Figure of Equipage to wear the better the Character of his Ma∣jesty's Ambassador at the Hague; towards which I shall send you with all speed his final Resolution and Instructions. In the mean time you will receive by the In∣closed, his Mind to the Marquis, recom∣mending to his Excellence the making good with all speed to the Crown of Suede what we and the Dutch Ambassadors have promised to the Count de Dona, as you will see by this inclosed Act, which we gave him at the Exchange of our Treaty ingaging him in the Triple Alliance; the performance of which the Dutch Ambassa∣dors and I have already bespoken of the Count de Molina within six Weeks time; when we hope the Ratification will be come from Stockholm; and the said Ambas∣sador observing already that the Count de Molina calls to the Dutch Ambassadors and Us for a Ratification; he admonishes us to delay it till the Conditions be per∣formed with him: This, I say, is offered, but not concluded by Us to be so ob∣served.
His Majesty had resolved the Parliament should adjourn on Monday last, but an un∣happy Difference falling out betwixt the Lords and Commons upon a great Point of their Priviledges, their sitting hath been spun on to this Day, though not without hopes of our finally rising to Morrow. Our long talked of Miscarriages have this Week been finished with a very unhappy one in the Queen; after twenty Days go∣ing, and raising the dejected Hopes of the whole Nation, which even this Misfortune hath somewhat revived. I leave it to Am∣bassador Patrick to entertain you upon this Subject, who cannot fail of long Letters by this Post. I am with all Truth and Affection, SIR, Your very humble Servant, Arlington.
POSTSCRIPT. YOU never sent us any Copy of the Promise of Guaranty you signed to the Marquiss; though you did the Original of That he gave you in exchange of it, with relation to the King our Master. When the Count de Molina hath pressed me apart from the Dutch Ambassadors for his Majesty's Ratification, I have told him he ought to have ready his Ratification from Madrid to exchange with ours; which it will not be amiss for you to take notice of likewise to the Marquis when he shall give you occa∣sion for it.
From the Elector of Mentz. Mentz, May 14, 1668. My Lord, THE Honour of a general Joy upon the Peace concluded and signed between the Crowns, being equally due to the vigorous Interposition of his Majesty of Great Bri∣tain, and to the wise Conduct of your Excel∣lency in an Affair of such Importance to Christendom; I desire to rejoyce with you up∣on the happy Success of it. I hope, the Ra∣tification of this Trea∣ty will be exchang'd in due time on both sides; and shall not fail on my part, of contribu∣ting all I can to the Preservation of the publick Peace, and to second his Majesty's Intentions; assuring
your Excellency in the mean time, that the Obligations will never be forgot, which an infinite number of good Christians ow you for your Diligences in ac∣complishing the Peace: And that for my parti∣cular, I shall cherish all Occasions of shewing your Excellency the Sincerity of my Affe∣ction, and how much I desire to let you know that I am Your Excellency's most humble and most affectionate Servant, Jean Philippe
De Mayence, 14 May, 1668. Monsieur, L' Honneur d'une joye generale sur la paix conclue & signée entre les Couronnes, se devant êgalement á la vigoureuse interposition de sa Majesté de la Grande Bretagne, & á la sage maniere dont Vôtre Ex∣cellence a sceu conduire une affaire de telle im∣portance á toute la Chrê∣tientié. J'ay bien voulu me conjuir avec Elle de l'heureux succés qui l'a suivi. J'espere que la Ratification de ce Traité sera êchangée á son terme de part & d'autre; & ne manqueray de contri∣buer de ma part tout ce que je pourray á la con∣servation du repos public, & pour seconder les in∣tentions de sa Majesté:
Asseurant cependant Vre. Exce. qu'on n'oubliera jamais les obligations que Luy doivent une infinité de bons Chrêtiens pour les soins qu'elle a apporté á la conciliation de cette paix; & que pour mon particulier je cheriray les occasions par lesquelles je luy pourray têmoigner la sincerité de mon affection, & combien je desire luy connoître que je suis Monsieur, De Votre Excellence tres humble & tres affectioné Serviteur, El. de Mayence.
From the Duke de Roanez. From the Camp of Ruys∣brouk, May 29, 1668. Monsieur, THE Count of Rembourg has in∣formed me this Morn∣ing (being the 27th Instant,) at eleven a Clock, from the Mar∣quis of Castel-Rodrigo, of the arrival of the Ratification; to which I sent answer, that I doubted not of what he did me the Honour to write to me, but that I had no News of it from the King: Be pleased that I repeat the same thing to you, and tell you that I wonder ex∣treamly how any one can complain that I have attack'd their Troops out of the Ci∣ty; since these Acts of Hostility are always al∣lowed till the Publica∣tion of the Peace; for
it is but yesterday that one of their Parties at∣tack'd ours, whereof I sent you the Prisoners back to Braine le Cha∣teau; and the same day those of Braine le Cha∣teau, took 10000 Francs from the Equipage of one of our Captains. They might better in∣form you, how I send your Prisoners back without suffering them to be dismounted or plundred; that I allow no Pillage that comes to my Knowledge, and that they have dis∣mounted and stript even my own Dome∣sticks. For what the Marquis of Castel-Ro∣drigo has assured you, that his Troops on the 27th at Noon, and the 28th or 29th at Night, acted only in the de∣fensive. If there be any Action for the future, whereof I see no Ap∣pearance, then I shall know by the Issue, whe∣ther they have yet acted defensively or of∣fensively.
This is all I can answer you upon what is past, or to come. In Expectation of the King's Orders for publishing the Peace at the Camp, as it has been this Day pub∣lish'd at Brussels, you will do me Justice to believe that no one is more than I SIR, Your most humble Servant,
Au Camp de Ruys∣brouk, 29 May, 1668. Monsieur, MOnsieur te Conte de Rembourg m'a fait scavoir ce matin 27, á onze heures, de la part de Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo, l'ar∣rivée de la ratification: A qui j'ay fait rêponse, que je ne doutois pas de ce qu'il me faisoit l'hon∣neur de m'ecrire; mais que je n'en avois aucune nouvelle du côté du Roy. Trouvez bon que je Vous repete la même chose; Et que je vous dise que je suis extremement êtonne, que l'on se puisse plaindre de ce que j'ay fait at∣taquer leurs trouppes hors de la Ville: Piusque ces sortes d'actes d'hostilite sont permis jusqu' á la publication de la paix;
& que même hier un de leurs parties attaqua les nôtres, dont je renvoyay les prisonniers á Braine le Château; & le même, jour ceux du même Braine le Chateau prirent prés de dix mille francs d'equi∣page á un de nos capi∣taines. Ils pourroient en∣core mieux vous infor∣mer comme je renvoye leurs prisonniers, sans permettre qu'on les de∣monte & qu'on les de∣pouille; que je ne souffre point de pillage, qui vi∣enne á ma connoissance: Et qu'ils ont demonté & depouillé jusqu' á nos do∣mestiques. Pour ce que Monsieur le Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo vous a as∣seuré que ses troupes le 27me aprés midy, & la nuit du 28me ou 29me, n'avoient agi qu'en se deffendant; c'st un veri∣té dont je tombe d'accord: Si á l'avenir il y a quel∣que action, á quoy je ne voy point d'apparance, alors je sauray par l'issue s'ils ont encore agi en se deffendant ou en at∣taquant.
Voila ce que je vous puis repondre pour ce qui est passé, & ce qui peut arriver: En at∣tendant les ordres du Roy pour faire publier la paix á Camp comme l'on l'a publie aujourdhuy á Brus∣selles; Vous tne ferez justice de croire qui'l n'est personne qui soit plus. Monsieur, Vôtre tres humble Serviteur, Le Duc de Roanez.
From Monsieur de Witt. Hague, July 6, 1668. SIR, I Could not receive more agreeable News than what you tell me of your return hither with the Chara∣cter of Ambassador. I am sure you will not doubt the Truth of what I say, when you reflect on the Satisfa∣ction I ought to have, and have already in the Generosity and Since∣rity I have observed in all your Proceedings. You have reason, Sir, to say, that it is im∣possible the King of Great Britain should not design to live in a perfect good Intelli∣gence with this State, when he sends us a Per∣son who ought to be so dear to us upon so many Considerations,
honoured with a Cha∣racter that shews the Esteem and Friendship he has for this State; we shall endeavour the Continuance of both, by doing all his Majesty can expect from his most faithful Allies; and by the same means I shall endeavour to give his Majesty the Marks of that profound Respect I have for his Person, and the Proofs of those Sentiments I have for your Merit. And as you and I de∣sire nothing on both sides, but to preserve eternally the good In∣telligence you have helpt to strengthen, with so much Success; I cannot doubt, but we may easily avoid what∣ever is capable of changing it. Permit me, Sir, to say, that you shall find me always disposed to give all fa∣cility to whatever can establish the common Interest of either State; and as I know I shall
always find the same disposition in you, I cannot but rejoice when I consider, that I shall have to negotiate with a Minister who posses∣ses all the Qualities that can make him succeed in whatever he under∣takes. This is all I am per∣mitted to say, by an Affliction lately come upon me, having lost a Wife who was indeed the true half of me; whereof I make no dif∣ficulty by this occasion to inform you, who have had the Goodness to tell me, that you take part in my Con∣cerns, as on my side I shall ever do in all your Interests, with that Af∣fection and Sincerity wherewith I am and shall remain all my Life SIR, Your most humble Servant,
A la Haye, 6 Juill. 1668. Monsieur, JE ne pouvois pas rece∣voir un avis plus a∣greable que celuy que vous me donnez de vôtre pro∣chain retour avec la qua∣lité d'Ambassadeur: Je m'asseure que vous ne douterez point de la ve∣rité de ce que je viens de dire; quand vous vou∣drez faire reflexion sur la satisfaction que je dois avoir, & ay en effet, de la generosité & sincerité que j'ay remarqué en tout vôtre procedé. Vous avez raison de dire, Monsieur, qu'il ne se peut, que l'intention du Roy de la Grande Bretagne ne soit de vivre dans une parfaitement bonne in∣telligence avec cet Etat, puisque Il nous envoye une personne qui nous doit estre chere par tant de conside∣rations,
revêtu d'un cha∣ractere qui marque l'esti∣me & l'amitié qu'il a pour cet Etat. Nous tacherons d'en meriter la continuation en faisant tout ce que sa Majesté pourra desirer de ses plus fideles Alliez; & par le même moyen je tacheray de Luy donner des mar∣ques du profond respect que j'ay pour la personne de sa Majesté, & des preuves des sentimens que j'ay de votre merite. Et comme de part et d'∣autre, nous ne desirons rien, ni vous ni moy que de conserver eternellement la bonne intelligence que vous avez aide á affer∣mir avec tant de succês; je ne puis pas doute que nous n'evitions sans peine tout ce qui pourroit estre capable de l'alterer. Per∣mettez moy, Monsieur, que je vous dise encore, que vous me trouverez toujours disposé á donner une derniere facilité á tout ce qui pourra et ablir l'interet commun de l'un & de l'autre Etat; Et
comme je say que je trou∣veray toujours la même disposition en vous, il ne se peut que je ne me re∣jouisse quand je considere que j'auray á negotier a∣vec un Ministre qui pos∣sede toutes les qualités qui le peuvent faire re∣ussir en tout ce qu'il en∣treprendra. C'est tout ce que me permet de dire presente∣ment l'affliction qui m'est survenue, venant de per∣dre une femme qui faisoit en effet la veritable moi∣tié de moy même; dont je ne fais point de difficulté de faire part par cette occasion, á celuy qui a eu la bonté de me temoigner qu'il en prend beaucoup á ce qui me touche; com∣me de mon côté j'en pren∣dray toujours á tous vos interêts avec toute l'affe∣ction & sincerité avec laquelle je suis & demeu∣reray toute ma vie Monsieur, Votre tres humble Serviteur, Jean de Witt.
From Monsieur de Witt. Hague, July 27, 1668. SIR, IN your obliging Letter of the 3d Instant I find so many Marks of Affection and Tenderness for me, that I cannot defer to return you my most humble Thanks, and to tell you, that of all the Consolations given me in my Affliction, there is none has been more effectual than what I received from you. I there find, it is the Heart that speaks, and that you truly take part in my Affliction, whereof I see you know the greatness, because you so well know the inestimable Loss I have suffered. And I dare to say, that if any re∣medy be capable of
closing the Wound, it will doubtless be what your gentle healing Hand has applied to it. I confess it is some∣what sensible because it searches the Wound, but it afterwards ap∣plies a Balm that eases and lessens the Pain. I receive it as I ought, and shall endeavour to profit by all your Con∣solations, by comba∣ting my Weakness with the Strength of your Reasons, which are dictated to you not only by that Christian Philo∣sophy whereof you make Profession, but by that sincere Friendship wherewith you are pleased to honour me. I most humbly intreat you to be persuaded that I perfectly return your Kindness, and am impatient for an Occa∣sion to give you Proofs of it, which as I hope I shall find when we have the Happiness to enjoy you, so I desire with Passion to see you
here, to let you judge of the Intention of this State, to preserve faith∣fully the Alliance that the King of Great Bri∣tain has pleased to make with it, but more par∣ticularly, to let you judge of the Inclination I have to contribute thereto all in my small Power; and to remain as long as I live, Sir, your &c.
A la Haye, 27 Juil. 1668. JE trouve dans l'oblige∣ante lettre que vous m'avez fait l'honneur de m'ecrire du 3me de ce mois, stile du lieu, tant de marques d'affection & de tendresse pour moy, que je ne puis pas differer de vous en rendre mes tres humbles graces, & de vous dire que de tou∣tes les consolations que l'on me donne en mon af∣fliction, il n'y en a point qui ait esté plus efficace que celle que je viens de recevoir de vous: J'y reconnois que c'est le coeur qui parle, & que vous prenez veritable∣ment part á mon affli∣ction; dont je voy que vous savez la grandeur puisque vous savez celle de la perte inestimable que j'ay fait: Et j'ose dire que s'il y a un re∣mede
capable de fermer la playe, c'est sans doute celuy qui y applique la main benigne & salutaire que vous me prêtez: Elle se fait sentir je l'a∣voue, parce qu'elle sonde la playe, mais elle y ap∣plique ensuite un baûme qui l'adoucit & qui en soulage la douleur. Je le reçoy comme je dois, & tâcheray de faire mon profit de toutes vos con∣solations, en combatant une foiblesse avec la force de vos raisons, que vous dicte non seulement la Philosophie Chrêtienne, dont vous faites profession, mais aussi la tres sincere amitié, dont il vous plaît m'honorer. Je vous sup∣plie tres humblement d'∣être persuadé que j'y re∣ponds perfaitement, que je suis dans l'impatience de vous en pouvoir don∣ner des preuves; & que comme j'espere que j'en trouveray les occasions, lorsque nous aurons l'a∣vantage de vous posseder, je desire avec passion de vous voir icy, pour vous
faire juge de l'intention de l'Etat á entrenir fi∣dellement l'alliance qu'il a plû au Roy de la Grande Bretagne faire avec luy; mais bien plus particuli∣erement de l'inclination que j'ay á y contribuer tout ce qui est de mon petit pouvoir, & á de∣meurer tant que je vivray Monsieur, Vôtre tres affectionné & tres humble Serviteur, Johan de Witt. From the Lord Keeper Bridgeman. July 26th, 1668. SIR, I Received yours yesterday morning after you were gone hence; and am afraid the Letter which I sent you from
Mr. Williamson, might come unseasonably to discompose you: It not being so intended by me; nor I believe the Message from the King to be otherwise intended than out of Kindness and Respect to you to hasten you away; that you might know how impor∣tant he held your Negotiations might be for his Service at this critical Time. And therefore I should be glad that you would take this by the right Handle. I had a Letter this Night from Sir Tho∣mas Clifford; who writes, that they in the Treasury have a great Desire to accommo∣date you; And though it be not in the Privy Seal that you shall have three Months Ad∣vance besides the 1000 l. yet they will be careful that you receive the Mony as it is due. The Draught of the Instructions are sent away to my Lord Arlington, and ex∣pected back on Tuesday-night, and the Fo∣reign Committee appointed to sit on Wed∣nesday to dispatch them. Really, Sir, I do not think that there is any Intention in pres∣sing your Departure for Holland, but just and honourable towards you, and with re∣spect to the Greatness of the Employment and the Urgency of the King's Affairs at this time to have you at the Hague: And (if you will take my Opinion) I would not have you take other Measures of it even for your own sake. In the mean time, while
you do stay, you may press on the Business of your Account, tho' I should not advise you to retard your Journy upon that score. It may be as well pressed on by your Lady if she do not not accompany you, or else by your Sollicitors (among whom I will be one) who if any Obstructions be, may write to you to remove them: But you will find the Vice-chamberlain dilatory, and then your stay at last upon this new Business (for so I may call it) may beget a Misconstru∣ction. You will pardom the Freedom I take in imparting my own Thoughts to you in this Case. I wish You and my Lady (to whom I recommend my humble Service) a happy Journy and all other Felicities, as I wish to my self; who am ever Your faithful and very affectionate Servant, Orl. Bridgeman, C.S. The End of the First Volume.
LETTERS Written by Sir W. Temple, Bart AND OTHER Ministers of State, Both at Home and Abroad. CONTAINING An ACCOUNT of the most Important Transactions that pass'd in Christendom from 1665 to 1672. In Two Volumes. VOL. II. Review'd by Sir W. Temple sometime before his Death: And Published by Jonathan Swift Domestick Chap∣lain to his Excellency the Earl of Berkeley, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland. LONDON: Printed for J. Tonson, at Gray's Inn Gate in Gray's Inn Lane; A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in Pater-Noster-Row; and R. Simpson, at the Harp in S. Paul's Church-yard, MDCC.
Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE's First Embassy AT THE HAGUE, Begun August 1668. VOL. II.
To the Elector of Mentz. Hague, Aug. 31. S. N. 1668. SIR, I Did not receive the Honour of your Highness's Letter till some time after my Ar∣rival in England, with
the inclosed for the King my Master; which he received with that Esteem his Majesty al∣ways bears to what comes from your High∣ness; and having pro∣mised me an Answer upon my Return for Holland, which has been put off from day to day; I have deferred my particular Acknow∣ledgments to your Highness till I could value them by the Ho∣nour of accompanying a Letter from his Ma∣jesty. I send it now inclosed; and desire your Highness to be∣lieve, that I resent as I ought, the Honour you have done me; and that I will preserve your Highness's Letter among the greatest Marks of Honour to my Family; and shall not fail upon all Occa∣sions to shew how much I shall cherish the Title I pretend to with so much Justice, of being SIR, Your Highness's, &c.
A l'Electeur de Mayence. De la Haye, le 31 Aout. S. N. 1668. Monsieur, LA Lettre dont V. A. m'a honoré, & qui est datée du 14 de May, ne m'a eté rendue que quelques jours aprés mon
àrrivée en Angleterre, avec elle j'ay recû l'en∣velopé pour le Roy mon Maitre, que je luy ay porté, & qu'il a reçû avec les memes marques d'esti∣me que sa Majesté a tou∣jours fait paroitre pour tout ce qui vient de la part de V. A. le Roy m'ayant promis la reponse pour le tems de mon re∣tour en Hollande, qui a toujours trainé de jour en jour; J'ay differer de marquer a V. A. ma reconnoissance en parti∣culier, jusqu' á ce que j'eusse l'honneur d'etre porteur d'un Lettre de sa Majeste. Je l'envoye á cette heur, & je supplie V. A. de croire que je ressens comme je le dois l'honneur qu'elle m'a fait, & que je conservera sa Lettre, & la conteray par∣mi les titres & les hon∣neurs qui elevent la glorie de ma famille. Je ne lais∣seray echaper aucune occa∣sion de temoigner combien je cheris & cheriray tou∣jours la qualité que prens avec tant de justice de Mr. De V. A. &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Sept. 7. S. N. 1668. My LORD, SINCE my last I have not stirred out, but had the Favour of several Visits in my Chamber; among the rest, one from Monsieur Meerman on Wednesday, and one of three Hours from Monsieur de Witt yesterday. I fell into Talk with the first, upon the Matter of the Guinea Company; who said, my Lord Holles, and as I remem∣ber, Mr. Secretary Morris, had spoken of it to him before; but only given him a general Relation upon which he could not sufficiently inform the States: That they had likewise mentioned some other Parts of the Marine Treaty, by which the East-India Company thought themselves ag∣grieved, but remembred nothing particu∣lar besides the Form of Passports, in which we might receive what Satisfaction we pleased, and the better Definition of what was meant by a Town invested. I told him, the Business of Guinea was distinct from any Thing of the Marine Treaty (though he was unwilling to understand it so) that I was very little instructed in the first, be∣cause
his Majesty's Commands in that Point were only to procure the Reference of it to Commissioners for the proposing Rules by which both Companies should proceed, and thereby preventing the said Company's acting wholly by Rules and Officers of their own, which had been the first Occa∣sions of the unhappy Disputes between us, and might possibly prove so again. For the Marine Treaty, I told him I had yet no Instructions upon that Subject, but might have in a little Time; and thereupon took occasion of discoursing to him at large the whole Business of Commerce between us, and the necessity of giving us some Reason and Ease in those Matters; upon which, tho' he seemed a little stanch, as his Complexion is, and jealous of our great Growth in Trade, by a more parsimonious and industrious Genius among us of late, than had formerly been; yet I found, what I said had Impression on him: For he part∣ed with great Professions of contributing all he could towards the Success of all Ne∣gotiations between us; And went that Night to communicate all to Monsieur de Witt, as I found by our Conference next Day. It began with his having perused my Papers about the Guinea Company; upon which he desired to know if I had no other Information than those gave me: For by
those, the Matter seemed favourable to them, by the Letters of their Director be∣ing particular, and with Relation to Time, and to the Articles of the Breda Treaty, by which the new Settlements there were to be governed; whereas, what concerned our Pretensions was contained only in some loose Examinations concerning Possession or not Possession formerly by one or the other, without any Reference to the Con∣stitutions made by the Breda Treaty, and without mentioning in any direct Terms what it was we complained of, or what we desired. The Truth is, all the Papers concerning that Matter remitted to me by Mr. Secre∣tary Morris, were only the Guinea Com∣pany's Petition, the Examination of Mr. Thomas Crisp, Captain Merbrooke, and Mr. Be'ois, with a Letter and Protest of the Director of the Dutch West-India Com∣pany. I excused my being so little in∣formed, upon the Reasons I had alledged to Monsieur Meerman, and press'd in the same manner the Reference of it to Com∣missioners. He allowed his Majesty's Consideration of preventing the two Com∣panies proceeding by Rules or Executions of their own, to be very prudent and ne∣cessary; and that he knew the States would second his Majesty's good Intention in it;
and that when he could find the Matter of Fact and Right but alledged in distinct Testimonies of known Persons, he doubted not but he should easily find a Composure for all these Disputes, and agree upon a constant Reglement hereafter. And to this purpose he would send immediately to en∣quire among the Officers of their Com∣pany for any Papers that may have been remitted to them from our Officers to theirs in Guinea; for he could not believe but that Letter and Protest of their Director had either been occasioned by some pre∣cedent Letters or Demands from some Officers of ours, or at least followed by some Answers, in which our Demands and Rights were asserted, as those of the Dutch were in those Papers of their Director. I answered all, by insisting upon Commissi∣oners according to my Instruction, and argued its being a Matter much more pro∣per for such to debate and determine, as understood the Coasts, Situations, manner of Trade in those Parts, former Possessions, and Matters of Fact past, than for him and me, how willing soever we should be to inform our selves, or to find Expedients; and went so far upon this Subject, that he seemed inclined it should be so; at least when the Pretensions were stated, so as it might appear what was to be referred to
such Commissioners. But upon this he fell into the Discourse of what Monsieur Meer∣man had told him, or I had formerly writ∣ten to him, concerning some Exceptions to the Marine Treaty; and how willing the States would be to alter the Form of Pass∣ports, when they knew how we desired it: And if the King wisht any more particular Definition of what should be esteemed a Town invested, he did not doubt we might agree upon that too; having found me al∣ways to propose only what I thought rea∣sonable, and to agree to what I found so; and he was made after the same manner, and so I should always find him. I easily perceived, that the Thing he would be at, was, upon occasion of this Guinea Matter, to know at once the Bottom of all we pre∣tended, in point of regulating Commerce between us, having I presume, heard, more than was need perhaps, of all the Noise made by the East-India Company upon the Subject of the Marine Treaty, or by their Patrons, either out of Zeal to the Good of our Commerce, or out of Envy at the Success of so great a Council and Conduct of his Majesty, in which they had no Hand, and upon which if we had lost a little in Trade by changing the Form of the Articles at Breda into a Marine Treaty, (wherein I do not conceive how we lost at
all) yet I am sure it was infinitely recom∣pensed by the Necessity, the unexpected Success, and the great Consequences of those other Alliances, to which that Cir∣cumstance of the Marine Treaty was made, I thought, but a Sacrifice of Smoak. And this I could not but say for his Majesty's Satisfaction, and your Lordship's Vindica∣tion, with those other Ministers, by whose Advice that Council was taken and pur∣sued, finding every Day more how highly it is applauded abroad, while it is maliced by some, and so little esteemed by others at home; tho' his Majesty has reaped al∣ready from it, both the whole Honour of giving Peace to Christendom, and perhaps the only Safety of his own Kingdoms, con∣sidering the Conjunctures in which that Council found us. But to return to my Conference with Monsieur de Witt: Finding him lead me so industriously into a Field wherein I had no Intention to enter, I resolved however to take the Occasion, and once for all, to say all I had thought, or your Lordship had infused into me upon that Subject: And so I told him plainly, That I was not yet in∣structed in that Matter of our Exceptions to the Marine Treaty, but believed I might be in a little Time; That the Particulars he mentioned were complained of in the
Treaty it self, and other Things thought to be admitted, but that I could not enter into any Particulars till I had Instructions; but since he gave me the Occasion, I would enter once for all into the general. I di∣scoursed over to him the common Interest, and indeed Necessity, of preserving perpe∣tual the present Alliances between Us, espe∣cially on their Side, while the Dangers were so great from the Ambition and Power, as well as Neighbourhood of France; The great Overtures would now be made us from thence to the Prejudice of this Alliance, and at all other Times, whenever they could hope we were ready to receive them. That though I could give him no Jealousy of them now, but on the contrary assure him he might be at Ease on that Side, and that the King would only have the Honour by it of setting them an Example of his Sincereness and Constancy, which he would expect they should follow when the Game begun with Them, as it would after it ended with Him: Yet I ould tell him, That France was at all Times capable of making us such Offers, and of giving us our present Account so well, tho' in Ex∣change perhaps of Danger to come (in case of no new Revolutions) that whenever there should be in England a Prince less di∣rect or less foreseeing than his Majesty, or
either a weak or corruptible Ministry, I could not answer what Measures we should take: That, upon this Ground, I thought they could not do wiser than to root this Alliance in the very Hearts of the People, and current Genius of the Nation, and not rely wholly upon the present Inclinations or Judgment of his Majesty, or the Dispo∣sitions of the Ministers: For if there were any Thing that lay cross to it in the com∣mon Interest or Humour of the People, it would be upon all Occasions breaking out to disturb it, and whenever that should concur with the Dispositions of the Prince, they would be able to make a great Noise in the World. I told him, That many Persons in England, either to make way for the French Alliance by weakning or breaking this; or else perhaps to discredit the most applauded Councils of the present Ministry, had made a Noise about the Marine Treaty as if it had been a ruining the Na∣tion, and from thence took Occasion to in∣fuse into all People as far as they could, that we should never find any Fairness, or Di∣rectness, or Equality, in all we treated with the Dutch; but Subtilty, and Hard∣ship, and Injustice, and when Occasion was, Obstinacy and Injury, in all Matters of Commerce between us; while we gave them Reason to believe we thought their
Friendship necessary or very convenient to us. That, I had ever since I knew him, maintained the contrary to his Majesty, as∣sured him of the Sincerity I had found in their Proceedings, and been always made confidently believe by them, that his Ma∣jesty should find them ever reasonable and easy in what should be offered in reducing Matters of Commerce to an Equality, and to be reciprocal between us. That it was a small Matter, that all my Credit, and per∣haps Fortune lay at Stake upon their mak∣ing this good; But I was sure it was consi∣derable that the very Safety of our Alliance might at one Time or other come to lie at Stake upon it too: And therefore for my Part, I thought they could not do in the World a wiser Thing, than to give us all reasonable Satisfaction in these Points, by consenting to any Reglements of Commerce which might import Equality, and be re∣ciprocal between us: That any Equality it self would be the same Advantage to them, that a long Arm against a short would be between two Men with equal Swords; for considering their Parsimony, Industry, Ne∣cessity of turning all their Stock to Trade for want of Land, and multitude of Peo∣ple; and on the other side, our native Lu∣xury, want of Order or Application, and our Extent and Cheapness of Land, and
Ease of Taxes, which made People chuse to turn their Mony that way: They could never fail of Advantage enough in any Equality, and upon it would find the surest, the most commodious Ally, and the best able to protect them that they could have in the World, being without any Ambi∣tion or Designs among our Neighbours, further than to keep the Ballance of Chri∣stendom: And yet on the other Side, the only Power that was feared by France, and that were able in Conjunction of our Fleets with theirs, to awe them by what they might suffer from Sea, into some Conside∣ration of what was fit for them to act at Land. During this Discourse, which I enlarged the most I could to the Purpose, resolving to bend all my Force upon the Effect of it; I found Monsieur de Witt very attentive, and willing to let me go on, with Marks in his Countenance of relishing, and as I thought, approving what I said; which made me resolve to go yet one Point further, and to the Root of all that could spring into any Jealousies between us. I told him, it was true, That there wanted not some among us that would be so wise to know, that it was impossible for us ever to fall into any firm Confidence with the States upon their pre∣sent Constitution, nor particularly with
him, upon the Prince of Orange's Occasion: That; for my part, I was not at all of that Mind: That tho' the King could not lose the Affection he had for his Nephew; yet he was of Opinion he could not express it better than by infusing into him the Belief, That he could make himself no way so happy as in the good Will of the States, and trusting wholly to Them in the Course of his Fortunes, and not to private Facti∣ons, or Foreign Intrigues and Applications. That his Majesty was of an Opinion him∣self, That Princes were not apt to do them∣selves more Hurt, and make themselves less, any way than by affecting too much Power, or such as was directly contrary to the Stomach and Genius of the Country which fell to their Share: And besides this, I knew his Majesty was so just and so rea∣sonable, that tho' he should take kindly of the States any Respects they should shew his Nephew; yet I did not believe he would offer That to any other King or State, which he should not take well that any other should offer to him; and I did not believe he would ever be put upon any such Designs by his Council or his People's Inclinations: For they who lookt upon the Prince in a possibility of one Day coming to be their King; and that loved a Prince who grounded his Power in the Affections
of his People, and loved to Rule by Laws; had rather perhaps see the Prince of Orange happy in the good Will of the States, and such moderate Power as they should think consistent with their Government; than of a Humour and Aims at any Thing that might tend to subvert their Civil Consti∣tutions: So that I saw nothing of Danger to them upon this Chapter, either from the Judgment and Disposition of his Majesty, or the Humour of the Nation: But was confident, in case we could agree upon Matters of Commerce, nothing could ever intervene to break an Alliance that was so useful to our Selves, and all Christendom besides: And so I left it with him. Upon this Discourse, Monsieur de Witt with very great Signs of Satisfaction told me, That all I said was so reasonable, that he agreed with me perfectly in it: And upon that, said a great deal, of the Sympa∣thy he had ever observed between us, and how easy That would ever make any Thing we should fall in Treaty of. That he knew from Monsieur Meerman, I had been the oc∣casion of giving him any Credit in England of an honest sincere Man; and he would never lose mine upon that occasion by giving the King Cause to believe other of him. That he confest he had often told me, That the States would be ever contented with an
Equality with us in point of Trade; and, that provided they might know what it was we would be at, and that we proposed nothing but what was equal and reciprocal between us; he would give me his Hand (as he did) that he would use all his Endeavours to give us Satisfaction in it; and he thought he knew the Minds of the States so well, that he durst almost promise it me in their Names by Advance, and without knowing what it was. That for any Thing amiss in the Marine Treaty, he did not see how any Complaint could be made of what I had done in it; But that the Ambassadors at Breda ought to answer for That, if there were any Thing ill in it; ours being but Word for Word the same with theirs, and both Parties Consent being necessary to alter what was then provisional, as what is now more formally establisht. That, for the Form of the Passports, let me but bring one drawn up as we desire it, and in Terms current with the Forms of their State, and it shall be immediately agreed to. That, for defining, what Towns shall be said to be besieged, he is very willing that should be done too, since it imports the same for one as t'other: And even for any other Matters that were thought necessary to be added to the Marine Treaty, since nothing else was desired to be altered: If
his Majesty would instruct me fully in all Points, and that they proved as I said, equal and reciprocal, he would once more undertake we should agree upon them, and desired me to assure his Majesty so much; and he thought, the sooner I was instructed in it, the better: But desired that no use might be made of this, to encourage either the East-India Company or others, to make new Exceptions or Demands, but only I might be instructed in those which had been made already: And that, I said, I durst promise him, for they had been already digested before the Council. From this, he fell to discourse of our Alliance, and the Considerations we had to strengthen and continue it; and how much he was pleased with what I said of the King's Resolution upon that Point, of his shewing them an Example of Constancy, and that I could never doubt their following it. And a∣mong other Things, said, The States had suckt That in like Milk, which was already pass'd into the very Flesh and Substance of their Body: And we might be the more confident of it, since the Minister they em∣ploy'd in France, and through whose Hands all such Matters must pass, and be repre∣sented to the States by the Lights he should give them, was as firm and earnest upon it as any Man could be: That he knew,
France would try Them as well as Us, and would not say but they might possibly gain some one of the little Provinces; but for Holland in particular, and the Provinces in general, it was not a Thing to be thought on. From this he fell to speak of the Prince of Orange; and seemed very much pleased with what I had said on that Sub∣ject, both of the King's Dispositions, and the People's Humors and Thoughts, espe∣cially that of the King, of doing as he would be done by: He said, The States Intentions were, to make him Captain-General of their Forces, and Admiral too, though it was not mentioned; and to this purpose, they would already have brought him into the Council of State, in order to fit him for those Charges, had it not been for some of the Provinces that had hindred it upon pretence of more Kindness to him, and designing greater Matters for him. That it was indeed agreed, those Charges were inconsistent with that of Stadtholder, which gave as much Authority in the Civil, as the others in the Military Part of the Govern∣ment. That, considering the smalness of their State, and Greatness of their Milice, there was an End of their Republick when both was in one Hand. That, for his Part, if he had been born under a King, he could never have consented to what his Ancestors
did towards the King of Spain; but being born under a Common-wealth, and sworn to maintain it, he could consent to nothing that should destroy it; and he wondred how it had subsisted so long in that Dan∣ger; which was to be attributed to their constant Wars abroad, and to the great Moderation of those Princes, among whom none had Thoughts of it but the last, nor would he ever have fallen into them, with∣out having been put upon them by the French, who had his Breeding and his Conversation. That, if he had lived, he would have been the ablest of all the Race: And from thence fell into Commendations of this young Prince's Parts and Dispositions: And so this Matter ended. For the Business of Spain, he was scan∣dalized as well as your Lordship, at that Queen's slight Answer, and pleased with his Majesty's Letter upon it. He said, the Talk of Don John's coming began to renew; and that in the mean time, the Marquis neither answered upon the Suedish Subsidies, nor press'd them upon the Guaranty, be∣cause they had refused to give it without the Compliance of Spain in the other Point. I pursued that no further, having not yet heard from the Marquis nor from the Spanish Ambassador here upon it. The Treaty between the Emperor and Sueden is not yet
ratified; upon a Disagreement in the pri∣vate Article about Mony to be furnish'd them by the Emperor, who stands upon giving but one hundred and eleven thou∣sand Dollars a Year, upon some Calcula∣tions made by some certain Quota's upon the several Parts of the Empire; and the Suede demanding one hundred and fifty thousand; which would make one ima∣gine the Spaniards had not one of their five Senses left, to hazard or delay for such a Sum, a Treaty wherein your Lordship will observe a particular Clause leaving Room for Spain to enter into it as they please. While I am writing, I receive this in∣closed from the Suedish Envoy here, by which you will see how unhappily a poor Ambassador is Embarassè by the Ceremo∣nies that hinder him from seeing those that have so much Mind to it, and with whom he must have so much to do. What Expe∣dients I shall find hereafter, I know not yet; but shall let him know, that being Incognito till my Entry, Et ne faisant pas l'Ambassadeur, if he pleases to come and be content that as Incognito I neither receive him nor conduct him out of my Chamber, I shall in it give him all the Civilities he expects, as I have hitherto done upon the same Pretence of being yet Incognito, to all
Persons of Quality that have seen me here. Your Lordship will tell me if I do well or ill; and in Recompence I shall only tell you, That I shall not think I do well longer than you esteem me, what I am so much Your, &c. To the Count de Molina. Hague, Sept. 9. S. N. 1668. My Lord, AFter a tiresome Passage by Sea, the pleasure of your Excellency's Letter was not a little necessary to divert and relieve me, renewing with the Spa∣nish Language at least the memory of my past Happiness at Brussels. I read the Paper that came with it, and much esteem the Honour the Marquis does me in still preserving me in
his Memory and Fa∣vour, which I shall not fail my self of acknow∣ledging with the first Occasion. I am much pleased with what they tell me here, of the good con∣dition of the Army in Flanders; and that they begin, with the Mony they have received, to recover new Life; if they have too much, I wish it were imployed in Sueden to bring that Nation into the Spanish Interest. I pray God to pre∣serve your Excellency many Years, and give me many Occasions of serving you. I kiss your Excellency's Hands, &c.
Al Sennor Mo∣lina. La Haye, Sept. 9. S. N. 1668. Exmo. Senr. SEnnor mio, Despues de un passaje de mar muy enfadoso, no me era menester cosa de menor gusto que la carta de V. E. para recrearme, y con la Lengua Espagnola refrescar al menos la me∣moria de mis passados contentamientos de Brus∣sellas. He leydo tan bien el papel adjunto con mucha estima de la honra que me haze el Sennor Marques de no haverme
olvidado ny echado menos en sus buenas gracias, lo que le he de agrdecer co∣mo devo con la primera occasion. Mi huelgo mucho di entender loque me di∣zen aqui delas lindas tropas que se hallan aora en Flandes, y que comi∣ençan a cobrar la vida con el dinero lo que ay de sobrado, quisiera mucho que fuesse en Suecia para enterar los de esta gente en los interesses Espano∣les. Guarde Dios a V. E. los annos que la desseo, y me de muchos Occasiones di servir le. Exmo. Sr. B. L. M. D. V. E. Su mayor Servidor.
To my Lord Keeper. Hague, Oct. 2. S. N. 1668. My LORD, I Received the Honour of two from your Lordship, of the 4th and 10th past to∣gether, in one Packet from Mr. Williamson about the time of my last Dispatch into England, which was the Reason of my not answering them the same Day; besides that I had written to your Lordship a long one about another Subject by that Post. For all that touches the Marine Treaty, I must refer to my Lord Arlington's Letters by this Ordinary. As to the Point of my treating Envoys, I think it is better to let it rest as it is, than for your Lordship to move any further in it; and be content we should follow, since we are not at present of a Humour to lead. I believe I could order it so, as Spain and Sueden, and this State, should alter the Cu∣stom by Consent with us; but that which I wish'd was, that his Majesty might have said singly, he would follow no other Prince's Rules but the old ones which he had used, and seemed to approve by Sir
George Downing's Demands, and so given me Order at my first coming, to give the Hand and Door as all Ambassadors did, till the French Caprice changed it about eight Years ago: And this I took to have been of more Honour as well as Advantage to his Majesty; but it seems I did not under∣stand it right; it may be others would have understood it so too, if they had seen both Spain, Sueden, and these States, and all others except France, follow his Majesty's Example, which I could have held a fair Wager of, and is every Bodies Opinion here, as it is many Peoples, that France it self would have fallen in too, upon the Ad∣vantage in Commerce with other Ministers which would have followed it; For if I had given it, not one Resident would ever have seen the French Ambassador without it, whereas two or three of them now do both Him and Me. I am sure, if France understand it right, they will take an Oc∣casion to change it themselves, and to reap the first Profit, and all the Honour as well as Pleasure of seeing us all dance after Them both up and down as our Leaders in a Country Dance; and I am sure I had as lieve be lame as do so; and cannot tell why his Majesty should not think of being in the Head both of the Affairs and Forms in Chri∣stendom, as well as any of his Neighbor Kings.
I acquainted Monsieur de Witt both with the Examinations, and what your Lord∣ship writ about the Prisoners from Suri∣nam: He is of Opinion, the Complaint lies still on their Side as it did at first; That Captain Needham's Person, who had first left my Lord Willowby to come to the Dutch, and after, them to my Lord Wil∣lowby, made them expect nothing Friendly from him; That his Commission was very extraordinary, and to be executed upon In∣dians who were their Subjects; That he knows not what can be done further than to send Offenders to be both examined and punish'd by their own Prince; That if they were ill used by the way, the Dutch were very much to blame in that, and 'tis a Thing he abhors (but we have yet only their own Words for that) and he will in∣quire as far as he can into the whole Matter. In the mean time, I having no Instructions upon it, either to complain or demand, had nothing more to do than acquaint him with it, till I should receive any further Orders. I hear the same here which your Lordship does there, of the Marquis Castel-Rodrigo's Intentions to pass through Eng∣land into Spain, which I should be glad of: I believe with your Lordship, he will have Credit in the Councils of Spain, and since you would have me think of what I judge
fit to be proposed to him; I will give you my Opinion concerning our Affairs with Spain, though I am likely enough to be prejudiced in it, by so particular Ac∣quaintance with the Weakness of their pre∣sent Conduct, and Division of their Coun∣cils as well as the Consequences of them; which are, want of Order in their Govern∣ment, their Armies, their Revenue, and I doubt, at present, even of Genius in their Nation, which ever rises and falls accord∣ing to that of the Prince or Ministry: For, if Men see the way to rise, is by Worth and virtuous Qualities, the Genius of a Nation will run that way, and produce great Subjects. If they can hope to do it by vicious Humors, by little Arts, by warm Pursuits every Man of his own In∣terests; the whole Spirit runs into those Courses, and perhaps the faster, from the Propension of our Natures rather to Ill than to Good. After all, I am of Opinion, That our present Interest and that of all Christendom besides, in some measure, is the Defence of Spain, and not only in Flanders but in all other Parts where it shall not be able to defend it self against the Power and Ambi∣tion of France; from whence alone we have all our present Fears, and shall find our Dangers upon any further Growth; For
if a great Accession should come to them in Navarre, Catalonia, Italy, during the Spa∣nish King's Life or upon his Death, as there will do in Lorrain after this old Duke's Life; we should find them more formida∣ble and troublesom even in our Neighbour∣hood; as Nourishment taken in by one Part increases Strength in all, if it be once digested: 'Tis true, if for want of Heat or Strength of Nature, it be not digested into the very Substance of the Body, it will grow weaker rather than stronger by it: As we see in Spain, the Spirit began to fail by the Weakness of their Kings and Mini∣sters. For this Reason, and all those which formerly engaged us so firmly to bear up France and Holland against the House of Austria, I think it is our common Interest to bear up Spain now against France, and the more, in respect of their being now lower than ever the others were, by Reason of the King's tender Life, and the Distraction like to ensue his Death, if their Affairs find no steady Support from their Neighbours. If we were what we have been, what we might be, and God knows why we are not, at home; I think our Interest were to enter singly into a Defensive League with Spain, and might either preserve their Peace, or else hope to make a short War,
and with such Advantages as might coun∣tervail what our Trade would suffer, and the Dutch grow, during the Time of our being in War and they in Peace. My Rea∣son for making in that Case the League single, is because we might thereby reap alone all the Advantages which Spain would be able to give for their Defence, which would be great, as low as they are, not only in Point of Trade by their Wools and Logwood, but by great Pensions in yearly Quantities of Salt from Sardinia and other Parts, which is much beyond any French Salts, and would be the same as Mony to his Majesty, considering what Quantities his Kingdoms spend: And be∣sides, I doubt not they would offer us con∣stant Payments of ready Mony, and if we could make War abroad at their Charge, and without pressing too much the Subject at home or needing them at every Turn: I know nothing were more glorious, nor perhaps more safe, and advantageous for us, than to be in Action abroad, especially if it were in Conjunction of Three against One, and not as we were lately, One against Three. This we may be sure of, that the Spani∣ard will give more for our defensive League than for all others, will not much care for any others, so they may have Ours, and in
short, will give for it whatever they are able: But the Question is whether we are able to take so vigorous a Council, and I doubt, not: Therefore, the next would be to know, whether we are so, to enter into their Defence jointly with Sueden, which would either aw the French into a Conti∣nuance of the Peace, or else without doubt make the Party strong enough for the War: And in this Case, we must be content to share with Sueden whatever Spain can any way give for the Purchase of their Defence; and where our Gains are less, the Conside∣ration will be more, of what we may lose, or the Dutch gain in Trade, if a War should break out and last: For there would be no other Reflections, since the Suede I believe would enter into the League upon such Terms as Spain could make them: And the Dutch would ask nothing better, than to see us all in War, and themselves in Peace, without danger of the War ending, in the Growth of the French Power. The third Way, is entring into a Defen∣sive League with Spain, Sueden, and Hol∣land; For in all Cases I suppose, we might reckon upon the Emperor, as far as That would signify. This I think were certainly to be desired in what Case soever we may be, either to accept or decline the other two But the Ills in this are; First, the unlikeli∣hood
of Holland's engaging in it; For I could never since my first Acquaintance here, find any Disposition towards it; and then the Incapacity of Spain to satisfy the Pre∣tensions of Benefit from them, which we might all three pretend; for Holland would resolve to have a Share, if we had any; so that the particular Advantage would grow only to Sueden, by certain Subsidies or Benefits in Trade from Spain: And we and Holland, should content our selves with the Certainty, of preventing a War, by so powerful a League. This is all which occurs to me upon this Subject, and which becomes me best, that is, to Represent and not to Advise. For Matter of proposing to the Marquis, I sup∣pose he will know as well as we, that the Proposals ought to come from him, at least till he desires to know of us, what we de∣mand upon a Defensive League, which is certainly the Desire of Spain, either with us singly, or in Conjunction with the rest, and were the more to be wish'd, for the preventing the Spaniards from falling into a desperate Council, of agreeing with France, and quitting Flanders to them, for Ad∣vantage on the other Side, and a good deal for Revenge, of their Neighbours pressing so hard upon them, by a disadvantageous Peace, and afterwards Irresolution of
maintaining that it self, by a Defensive League. If the King should think it fit to endea∣vour the disposing of the Dutch to enter into it, (which for my part I think they are en∣gaged in by the first, as I remember, or the second Article of the Peace at Aix, though they do not conceive so) I should make some Tryals, and give Account of what I find; for I fear we are not growing fast enough, into a Posture of making these Paces alone, at least by what I could ob∣serve or hear during my short stay in England, which was but too much enter∣tained with ill Bodings and Complaints: But, Quid tristes Querimoniae si non Suppli∣cio Culpa reciditur? Quid Leges sine Moribus vanae proficiunt? Without great Virtue and Steddyness in the Government, and Reso∣lution of going through, with whatsoever is thought fit and just, whereby Men may see, that the only way to rise is to deserve it; all tempering of Factions, taking off Persons, and soothing Parties, is but patch∣ing up an ill House: I mean not Virtue, in a peaking, formal Presbyterian Sense, but that which the greatest Nations of old, so politickly favoured and renowned, which consisted in those Qualities, that made Men fit for the Service of their Princes and Coun∣tries, by strong and healthful Dispositions,
both of Bodies and Minds. Your Lord∣ship's Pardon for this once, and you shall have no more such Troubles as these from Your Lordship's, &c. To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Oct. 2. S. N. 1668. My LORD, SINCE my last I have received your Lordship's of the 14th, and in one Letter from Mr. Williamson, an Account of what was resolved at the Foreign Com∣mittee, to whom your Lordship's only re∣ferred the Determination of what manner, the Amendments of the Marine Treaty should be pursued in; and accordingly I have since fallen into the Debate of that Affair in all its Particulars, with Monsieur de Witt: And the Differences between us are not great, and some of his Exceptions seem so reasonable, that I must be furnish'd with Arguments to maintain the Points against him, if they must be insisted on; for I confess I can find none of my own.
Upon the First he consents to the Change of the Form of Certificates, and will ac∣cept of such as we shall draw up, so they run equal on both sides Mutatis Mutandis: But to that which the East-India Company say, of their Desire, that Trade may ra∣ther be carried on without any Certificate at all; he says, he does not see how that can be, or to what purpose all the Articles are against counterband Goods; since it is by the Certificate, whereby it is known what the Ship is, and what the Goods are she carries, and thereby all further Trouble of Search is avoided. He says, He should be content, and the Advantage would be theirs, to have all Trade free, and none to ask at Sea what another Ship was, whether it went, or what it carried; but since that cannot be, there is no way of avoiding Disputes, beside that of Certificates: And indeed I doubt, the Merchants in that con∣sidered not the main End of the whole Regulation, which was, to avoid Quarrels between the Nations; but only their own private Interests, in saving the Trouble and Charge of Certificates, which made them likewise desire, it might be from the Magistrates of the Ports, from whence the Ships parted, and not from the Admi∣ralty.
Upon the second, he consents to the Pro∣posal in the Margin, with only the leaving out those two Words [of India] so as the Rule may be generally to all Places, and not confined to the Indies; which I had nothing to say against, believing those Words fell in, only by the Matter coming from the East-India Company, without no∣tice of any other Traders. Upon these two Points I had given your Lordship the Account formerly of my hav∣ing at several Discourses gained his Con∣sent: And I do not find that any Thing he excepts at in them, is different from what we mean our selves. For the other Points, which are wholly new, and Additions to the Treaty, they cost us a great deal more Debate, which I shall not trouble your Lordship with, but only the Result at least, of the Opinion he gave me leave, to write to your Lordship as his, upon them; tho' the first, second, and fourth, were all of more difficult Di∣gestion, and such as I doubt would have given some Work to Commissioners in pur∣suance of the Breda Treaty so much as to have touch'd: For the Truth is, our Trade in the Indies being so little, and theirs so much, all Equalities of this kind are Gains to us and Loss to them.
For the first of the four Particulars not provided for in the Marine Treaty, he consents to the one half of the Period ending with the word Government: But for the other, allowing Liberty to pass any River or Pass leading to any Place of Trade, al∣tho' the other Company have a Fort or Castle upon the said River or Pass; he says it cannot possibly be, nor would it ever be executed, tho' the States should consent to it; for in those Passes, the very end of either Company's building a Fort or Castle, was, to secure the Trade of such a Country to themselves; so as they would by this Article lose all the Benefit of the Expence they had been at: That, if to such Nati∣ons, there were any other way found, not under the Reach of their Cannon, that Passage should be free: But under a Fort built to the aforesaid Ends, he did not be∣lieve any Orders would compel those in it, either of our Nations or theirs, to see the Trade they had secured to themselves, drawn away to the other Nation, by a free Passage. The second Particular I got wholly agreed to, tho' with much Difficulty, as importing I suppose, more Advantage to us, than any of the rest, considering how many more Na∣tions the Dutch trade with, than we, by Virtue of such Agreements.
The third was without Difficulty, im∣porting as we both conceived, no more, than was before provided, by the Marine Treaty, and more particularly. For the fourth, he could not consent it should extend further, than to Ships be∣longing to either Company, or to any Na∣tions or People subject to either Company, and consequently under Protection of the said Company, for the making it run, in the Words of our Article, To any Nations with whom either Company shall trade, and not in Enmity with the other Company; would occasion only either Company's selling their Passports to all the Nations that would buy them, leaving it afterward to dispute, upon any Accident should arrive, whether such Nation were in Enmity with the other Company or no; the Natives maintaining the Negative, and perhaps the Company the Affirmative, and it may be upon pre∣tence of some new Injury, which had late∣ly given the Occasion of the Enmity: And where such Disputes should be determined, was difficult to find. Besides, he argued from common use of Nations, that Pass∣ports operated, only toward those, who were subject to such, who granted the Passports, or else by Alliance and Accord between Nations, to such as were one ano∣thers Subjects, and under their Protection:
But how it should extend to other Nati∣ons, because they were not in Enmity with our Ally, he could not see any Reason, nor had heard any Example. But on the other side, it was ever to be supposed, that there would be no need at all of Passports from the one, to such as were not in Enmity with the other: Nations being to be esteemed as just in their Actions, and not likely to di∣sturb or seize another, without at least pre∣tence of Enmity, which would be a sort of Pyracy at Sea, or Robbery at Land; but in case such a Thing should happen, no other Nation concerned themselves in it, unless it were offered to their Subjects, and consequently to Persons under their Pro∣tection. I thought his Reasoning seemed good, and besides, I imagined the Thing was not of Weight; for, where one Company found a Nation, not in actual Enmity with the other, and had a mind to protect their Navigation, they might do it by receiving that Nation into their Protection, and then giving them Passports as Subjects to them. Where Nations will not submit to such a Subjection, they must protect themselves. And this was the Result of our Conference, which came to no sort of Agreement on either Side; since I neither had Power to do it from his Majesty, nor he from the
States: So that we can only represent on each Side, what pass'd, and attend our Orders upon them; and he in the mean time dispose the States to his Opinion, when we meet and conclude formally upon them. When I receive Instructions, I suppose it will be necessary to know the Manner as well as the Matter, we are to agree in; that is, whether a new Marine Treaty to be made, with these Particulars to be di∣gested into the Body of it; or else those to be perfected in an Instrument by themselves, as Additions to the Marine Treaty. For the doing it with or without Commission∣ers I can say nothing, since so great Authors are on both Sides; but if both seem neces∣sary, one to the Substance, and the other to the Form, I was thinking whether two or more might not be joined in Commission with me, to treat and conclude it with Commissioners of theirs, and those to be acquainted before-hand, with what was to be expected upon this Matter. But I know not how our Expectation of having the Commissioners meet at London, would be satisfied by their meeting at the Hague; nor how Forms go in joining Commissioners to an Ambassador, for a particular Business; and so I leave it. I am, &c.
To the Duke of Buckingham. Hague, Oct. 12. S. N. 1668. My LORD, THO' I could not think it became me to interrupt your Grace's Business or Entertainment, by empty Letters; and I know you have what Share you please of the constant Troubles my Lord Arlington receives upon the Account of my Negotia∣tions here: Yet having this Inclosed sent me to convey to your Grace, I was in hopes a good Letter may keep an ill one a little in Countenance, and bear me out in taking this Occasion of preserving my self in your Grace's Favour and Memory, which I esteem among my best Possessions, and should be glad to find ways of continu∣ing them, rather by serving than by trou∣bling you. Whilst I can do nothing to∣wards the first, I will do the less towards the other, and content my self to assure your Grace in the Language of a plain Man, that none can wish you happier than I do, in the Course of your Fortunes and Honours, nor rejoyce more in the Presages I make of both, from those wise and gene∣rous Dispositions I left you in, of employ∣ing
those many great Talents and Advan∣tages given you, towards his Maiesty's and the Kingdom's true Service and Happiness. I am still of the Mind, nothing is more ne∣cessary to both, than the Continuance and Encrease of that Harmony which we used with so much Reason to wish so well to, and which I think has at this time more Operation than that of the Spheres was thought to have, upon the good Temper and Order of the World. For, I believe the Spring of all the Motions or Quiet we are like to see round about us, lies in that Point and those Councils which proceed from it. I beg your Grace's Pardon for this Trou∣ble, which I should not have begun but to end with my being My Lord, Your Grace's most obedient and most humble Servant.
To the Constable of Castille. Hague, Oct. 19. S. N. 1668. My Lord, HAving passed so much time, and with so much Satisfa∣ction to my Self, in his Majesty's Service at Brussels; 'tis impossible for me to lose the Con∣cern I have ever had for the Interest of that Country, nor to avoid rejoycing with your Excellency upon your succeeding in the Go∣vernment; wishing you all Honour and Satisfa∣ction, as foreseeing ma∣ny Advantages to his Catholick Majesty in so prudent a Choice. But, with the Plainness that has been always natu∣ral to me, I must con∣fess that it has not been at this time without some Regret that I
have lost the Corre∣spondence of a Gover∣nor of Flanders, with whom I had contracted so great a Friendship, and had so entire a Confidence; finding my self in such a Con∣juncture (after having so disposed the States of Holland) as to be confident of having it in my Power, to do something, if not some∣thing very considerable for the common Good and Repose of Christen∣dom, as well as for the Interest and Safety of the Spanish Monarchy; if there were at present a Governor of Flanders that had full Powers joined with his own de∣sires, and Confidence between us to agree to∣gether in the Concert of such a Negotiation. I doubt it will not look prudent to enter fur∣ther into such Reason∣ing with your Excel∣lency, to whom I am so wholly unknown; tho' perhaps you may
have heard at Brussels that I am not a Man used to build Castles in the Air, no more than to engage my self un∣seasonably in Affairs of this kind: But your Ex∣cellency may believe me, that at this time nothing is more abso∣lutely necessary, nor that more concerns the Interest of Spain, than that absolute Powers should be sent either to your Excellency or some other Minister, to treat and conclude with the three Allies, and which is likewise as necessary for the pre∣tended Satisfaction of the Suedes, as for the Advantage (in so much greater Proportion) that it may be to Spain and the common In∣terest of Christendom. The same that I say on one side to your Excel∣lency, I come from say∣ing on the other, to the Suedish Minister Resident here: For 'tis too plain to be seen,
that with the length of the Journies and Re∣turns from Spain and Sueden, nothing can be hoped for but the loss of Time and Occasi∣ons; the first of which never returns to mor∣tal Man, and very rarely the other: At least, it is certain that if we do not this Win∣ter make our Advan∣tage of the present posture of Affairs for the common Good, we are never again to hope for the same Occasion. I beg of your Excel∣lency, That this Ad∣vice may be only to your self, or those in Spain who are most concerned in it. What is most necessary; I have told your Excel∣lency, is, to hasten the Powers, and that needs no Consultation; the rest Time will shew; and 'tis not necessary, the Spanish Ministers here should concern themselves in it till the Powers come. I engage
my self to dispose things so here, that whenever they arrive, your Ex∣cellency shall be able to make the advantage of them, for your Master and the Countries you govern. Your Excellen∣cy will not look upon this Letter as coming from an Ambassador, but from a Man ex∣treamly desiring the Publick Good, and that has been a little en∣lightned by having so much part in what has been design'd towards it: And I hope will pardon my having en∣tertained you so long in a Language that I be∣gin now to forget, and had never learnt well: But, I had no mind what I have here said to your Excellency should pass through another Hand. Pray God preserve your Excellency, and give me the Occasions of serving you. I kiss your Excellency's Hands, &c.
Al Condestable de Castilla. De la Haye, Oct. 19. S. N. 1668. Exmo. Senr. SEnnor mio. Haviendo stado tanto tiempo y con tanto gusto a Brus∣sellas, de la parte del Rey mi Sennor, no me es possible perder el encare∣cimento que he siempre tenido por las cosas y in∣teresses deste pays, ni dexar de dar a V. E. el parabien de su llegada a este govierno desseandole en ello mucha satisfac∣cion y honra, como au∣gurando a su Magestad Catolica mucho provecho de tan sabia eleccion. Pero con la llaneza que me ha sido siempre na∣tural, es menester con∣fessar, que me pesa mu∣cho en este punto de ha∣ver
perdido la correspon∣dencia de un Governa∣dor de Flandes, con quien he tenido tan estrecha amistad, y entera confi∣anza; hallandome aora en una conyunctura, y aviendo dispuesto los Estados de aqui de tal manera que me pareçe poder obrar algo, sino mucho por el bien com∣mun, y por el reposo de la Christianidad, como por la salud y interesses de la Monarchia de Es∣panna, si estuviera aora Governador o Ministro en Elandes que tuviera poderes bastantes y tan bien la voluntad y confi∣ença para concurrir com∣migo en el concierto de tal negocio. No pare∣ciera de hombre discreto de entrar mas adelante en estas razones con V. E. a quien stoy tan descono∣cido; aunque bien pudi∣era aver entendido a
Brussellas que no soy hom∣bre para dezir dispara∣tes, ni para ponerme fu∣era de tiempo y occasion en cosas agenas. Pero crea me V. E. que no sey que no puede aver otra en este tiempo que toca mas a Espanna, ny que la sea tan necessaria, que de embiar sin perder pun∣to o a V. E. o a otro Ministro poderes absolu∣tos para tratar y concluyr con los tres Alliades, lo∣que fuera menester, tan bien por la satisfaccion pretendida de los Suedeses, que por la utilitad que con ella se puede alcançar mas que proporcionado a la Espanna, y al bien commun de la Christiani∣did. Lo mismo que digo de una parte a V. E. vengo de desir de de otra al Ministro de Suecia, a qui Residente porque bien hecho de ver, que con
las ydas y bueltas en Es∣panna y en Suecia sobre estas materias, no se hara jamas sino perder el tiempo y las occasiones, aunque el primero nunca se le velve a los hombres, y muy raramente las postreras. A lo menos muy claro esta, que si este hivierno no nos ap∣provechamos de las pre∣sentes por il bien com∣mun, nunca hemos de esperar las mismas por el venidero. Supplico a V. E. que este aviso la sirve a solas, si no a los tan bien en Espanna qui son los mas interessados en ellos. Por∣que lo que es el necessario lo vengo de desir en lo de hazer venir los pode∣res, en esto no se ha de consultar; por demas los tiempos lo diran, y no se avra di entremeterse a qui, en el entretanto Mi∣nistro Espannol antes que vengan los poderes, que
yo me encargo de disponer las cosas a qui di manera que llegendo los V. E. avra de approvecharse d'ellos por el bien de su Rey, y de los payses que govierna. V. E. no ha de interpretar esto como viniendo di mano de Ambaxador, pero de un hombre muy afficionado al bien commun, y un poco esclarecido en las co∣sas corrientes, como avi∣endo tenido tanta parte en ellas; y me pardone averla entretenido en una lengua que y a commi∣enço a olvidar, aviendo le nunca bien appren∣dido; pero no he querido que V. E. en lo que la digo, avria de tercero. Guarde Dios a V. E. muchos annos, y me de las occasiones de servirla. B. L. M. D. V. E. Su mayor Servidor.
To my Lord Keeper. Hague, Nov. 2. S. N. 1668. My LORD, I Have had the Honour of your Lord∣ship's of the 13th past, some Days by me, and deferred the Acknowledgment of it till this Post, that I might make it at a little more Leisure. I must first beg so much Favour from your Lordship, (for I shall esteem it a Kindness to me) that you will never constrain your self to write to me in Pain or Trouble; but upon all such Occasions use either any other Hand, or any others Correspondence with me, to send me your Commands: And in the next Place, I shall desire your Lordship's Belief, that I never took any Thing ill in the least, from any Hand, that I knew meant me well; and am very well pleased to hear of my Faults from my Friends, as I hope they will ever be to receive my just Excuses, and others I shall never desire to trouble them with. I know your Lordship is sa∣tisfied with what I did in shewing that Letter, having given you the Advice of it at the same time I promised it; and I shall make use of the prudent Intimation you
please to give me upon that Particu∣lar. Monsieur de Witt has several times spoke to me since about the Pavillon, applauding your Lordship's Resolution, or at least In∣clination, to bring it to some Certainty; and desired me to offer to your Lordship as most advantageous to a good Issue in it, That the Expedients he proposed, you would first mention as your own; because, whatever is offered from the contrary Party, is commonly either suspected or despised even for its being so. I find, a good End of this Matter is the Point he has much at Heart, believing no Quarrel could ever happen between the Nations, if that Occa∣sion were once out of the way. He says, he has never yet spoken to any Man, about the Offers and Expedients he proposed, and knows, they will be stomackt by many here; but he will put all the Strength he has upon it, to make them pass, or any Thing else, that is at all reasonable in the Case, and doubts not to succeed. I sup∣pose, whatever we have by Accord with them, will not be only so much of a gained, instead of a disputed Right; but will en∣gage them, to further our Pretence, of so much with other Neighbours, and to take part in our Quarrel, if any shall be raised by any of them with us, upon that Point:
And if so, we should have something very substantial for that which methinks is very airy now, and which serves only for an occasion of Wars, at a Time, we have no mind to enter into any; and I doubt, with some Reason: For if we had a conquering Genius at this Time among us, and Force to second it, nothing could be so useful to us as this Pretence: But every Pilot that would be safe and well, must carry Sail as the Weather is abroad, and as the Sides of his Ship are strong or weak to resist it. I am much pleased to find I have the Honour of agreeing with your Lordship in all Points that fall into Consideration, as well this, as that about Envoys, and about the Benefits of a Quadruple League; con∣cerning which I writ my Opinion freely in one to my Lord Arlington by the last Post, being the only Thing which can crown the great Work his Majesty has undertaken, of settling the Peace of Christendom, and giving a stop to the French Career, which about ten Months since, was in a fair way to over-run us all, one after another, and hangs still like a Cloud over all their Neigh∣bour's Heads, leaving every one in doubt when and where it will fall. And till That be compass'd, I shall hardly be secure of Spain's not trinkling at one time or other
with France, for the Remainder of Flanders, at least upon such a Revolution, as would arrive at that King's Death, if not before: Nor of the French Parties getting Ground enough again in Sueden at one Time or other, to turn the Bias of that Crown to∣wards the French Interests, by the Offers of Mony, which can best be made them on that Side: Whereas by such a League, Spain would find their Account in keeping Flanders, and not fear any War which the French Pretensions there, might engage them in: Sueden would find theirs, by some certain Subsidies from Spain, even in Times of Peace, and by Assurance from Them and Us, of greater in case of a War: Hol∣land would be broken off, from all Return into any new Measures with France, and be forced to follow the common Interests and Councils of the Alliance: Spain and Sueden would be both hindred from entring into any separate Concert or Treaty with∣out Us and Holland: The Emperor, and Princes of the Empire, and Duke of Lor∣rain, would be glad to be admitted into such an Alliance: And his Majesty would remain Head and Director of a League, which would have the Glory of preserving the Peace of Christendom, and checking and bounding the French Greatness, at a time, when no other Prince durst look it
in the Face. And in Case of a War break∣ing out from France, in spight of all these Defences; I suppose, considering the Strength of the Alliance, and the Temper of our People at home, bent wholly upon these Councils, his Majesty would have rather Reason to desire, than to apprehend it. I conceive the way of effecting such a League, must be, to make a Draught of it with Monsieur de Witt here, if he can be finally disposed to it; and that with all the Secrecy in the World, and to proceed in it, as near as is possible, with all the Fairness and Equality; in the Consideration and Comprehension of each Party's Interests, which is the only way to facilitate such Ne∣gotiations; and whenever we and Monsieur de Witt are agreed in it, then for his Ma∣jesty to take upon him the proposing it to Spain, and trying what private Advan∣tages may be gained from that Crown, in Consideration of his both proposing and effecting a Matter so much to their Ad∣vantage. All that seems to be against such a Council, is his Majesty's present want of Treasure; which renders him in a Condi∣tion very unfit, to enter into any Action abroad, by provoking France.
As to that: First, the end of this Coun∣sel is Peace, and not War; and seems in∣deed the only way to secure it, by letting France see, they cannot find their Account in a War; for till they do that, they will never leave the Designs of it. Then, in∣stead of provoking France, I should think, this would make them much warmer, in their Offers and Applications towards us; when they see, that without gaining us, they are absolutely bound to the Peace: For, to say the Truth, our falling at any time into the French Interests, is the ready way to a War abroad, wherein it may be, we shall not have any present Share, but shall pay for our present Quiet with dear Interest, of the utmost Danger, after two or three Years time. Besides, though our Condition is ill to∣wards the Support of a War, 'tis the most imprudent Thing we can do perhaps, to own it, if we intend to continue any Com∣merce abroad; whereas, looking our just Debts, both to our Neighbours and our Selves, boldly in the Face, will, as it does sometimes with a Merchant, hold up our Credit so high, that with good future Management and the Strength of that, we may help to re-establish our Estate; but, if not, nothing can keep us up so much, as being closely link'd with several other
Traders of better Stock, who will by that Means, become engaged, not to let us sink. And in case of Action, to succeed such a Quadruple Alliance, and his Majesty's Necessities keeping him from furnishing his Part towards the Support of it: 'Tis not to be imagined that Spain and Holland would not do their utmost towards his Supply rather than lose his Assistance▪ and leave him under the Temptation of falling into any new Measures with France. After all this, I think, let his Majesty make what Paces he please, either bold or tender, in the way he is (for I cannot think of a Change in that with the present Conjunctures) I know nothing will be so necessary, with the Foresight either of Peace or War, as for his Majesty not to be found the next Spring without any Mony in his Treasury, or Credit to raise it speedily and easily, without relying wholly upon his Parliament's Supplies, by any new Bur∣thens upon the Body of the People; for that can hardly be done without long and perhaps cross Debates in the House, which lessen his Majesty's Credit with his Neigh∣bours whenever they happen, more than the Supplies granted can raise it: And be∣sides, after so great Payments as the King∣dom has continued, ever since his Majesty's Restoration, especially during the last three
Years, though joined with the great Di∣minution of Mony and Trade during the War; I question whether any Thing con∣siderable can be raised in general upon the People, without some reasonable Occasions of Aversion and Complaints. But nothing, they say, is more the part of a weak Understanding, and unfit for Business, than to propose and enlarge upon Inconveniences, without so much as offer∣ing Remedies: And therefore I shall say, That First, methinks, two Proposals which have been already a-foot, are very consi∣derable towards this End; as, the selling of small inconsiderable Quit-Rents, where the Sum is hardly worth the Charge of raising, and yet by the reason of the Trouble to the Tenant by them, they will yield five or six, if not ten Years Purchase more than greater Rents: If this Council be tied up to these Circumstances, I think it very ad∣vantageous, and as prejudicial, if it be suf∣fered to go beyond them. Secondly, The selling of the Chimney-Mony would, I suppose, be easily granted by the Parliament; would take off the Tax, of all others, most distastful to the Subjects, and if sold at pretty easy and mo∣derate Rates, would be taken kindly of the People, purchased readily, and yield a very great Sum; and the most equally raised
that any could be, sparing no Man's part, and holding an equal proportion with every Man's Estate: Only this Circum∣stance should be in it to make it easy, That not only every Man should have the Offer and Pre-emption of his own; but if upon refusal it should be sold to another Hand, yet it shall be free for the Owner to buy it of him at any Time within a certain Space, as of two or three Years; and the present Purchaser to be content with the Profit he shall have made in the mean Time, which will prove a great Interest for his Capi∣tal. Thirdly, A reducing of the Interest which the King pays, from Ten to Eight in the Hundred, with which the Bankers may very well be contented, and must be, I suppose, if the King pleases, and finds a Course to make them see their Security can∣not fail them: For, two in the Hundred Gain is, of all Reason, enough for them, where the Security they receive, is as good as what they give; as it is in this Case: For the King's Security to the Banker is in effect the Banker's Security to his private Creditors; and whenever one fails, the other must. Now the Bankers pay but Six in the Hundred at most, for In-land Mony, and less for some: And I have Rea∣son to doubt, a very great Trade is driven
with them from Holland by Dutch Mer∣chants, who turn their Mony through their Hands, encouraged by the great In∣terest they gain there in lieu of so small here, that the States have lately refused to take the Value of Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling of the Duke of Lunenburg's Mony at Two and a half per Cent. and Three is the utmost that any Man makes. And if the King, by granting good Security, pun∣ctual Payments, and the Reputation of good Order in his Revenue, were gotten into Credit, I do not see why he might not upon Occasion take up what he pleased at Six per Cent. as well as the States do here at Two and a half. Fourthly, To enable the King upon any Occasion to give better Security, I know nothing would do so much, as if the Par∣liament could be disposed to settle the Customs upon him for one Year after his Death, as they are already for his Life; but that being an uncertain Term, Mony will not be readily or without Exaction of Interest lent upon that which may fail next Day: And yet I conceive it to be the largest Branch of the Revenue, and in all other Points the most certain. Fifthly, If any Thing were set on foot in Parliament, towards an Act of Resum∣ption of Grants of Crown-lands, since a
certain Time, Use might at least be made of it, towards drawing such Grantees, to a voluntary Composition, of holding their Grants at the Rent of a fourth or fifth part of the real Value to the Crown, in Con∣sideration of having such Grants confirmed by Act of Parliament, or the King's En∣gagement to consent to nothing to their Prejudice, after their Consent to such a Rent and Tenure. Sixthly, A View may be made at least of what has been gained by any Grants from his Majesty, above what were really his Majesty's Intentions to grant: As, where the King intended to give Five hundred Pounds a Year, and perhaps Seven or Eight, or a Thousand Pounds is made of it: And the same, of Sums of Mony, out of certain Benefits granted, towards the raising them: And what is found to be beyond the Inten∣tion of the King's Grant, to be repaid. Many smaller Particulars might perhaps be thought of: All which with what has been mentioned, will be made valuable by a good Order in the management, and a stanch Hand in Grants hereafter, till the King be as much before-hand, as he is behind-hand now. I am, my Lord, your &c.
To Mr.Now Earl of Montague. Montague. Hague, Jan. 2. S. N. 1669. My LORD, IT is an ill Sign of the Dulness of this Place, that I must have Recourse to the Complements of the Season for the Oc∣casion of a Letter; and that I can find very little to say from hence, besides wishing your Lordship, according to our good old Stile, a merry Christmas. The Spaniards have not yet had so much good Nature as to make ours here the merrier, with their Two hundred thousand Crowns: I doubt it has some Enchantment or other upon it; and is not to be delivered but in some fatal Hour, or by some charmed Knight. All is here frozen up; and the Bishop of Mun∣ster may march if he pleases; but if he do, as has been so much talkt, will blow his Fingers, unless he receives very great Influ∣ences from your warmer Climate: For, the good Pay of these States is in so much Credit among their Neighbours, that I believe, they will not want what Forces
they shall have Occasion for, besides what they have a-foot. I should be very glad to hear what becomes of my Lord and Lady of Northum∣berland, and how long they intend their Pilgrimage, supposing your Lordship keeps some Correspondence with them, of which I am out of the way; but very much in that of being My LORD, Your Excellency's most obedient humble Servant.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Jan. 18. S. N. 1669. My LORD, THE Baron d'Isola arriving here Yesterday, I have this Afternoon had some Discourses with him upon the Subject of his Journey; which he professes to be a Desire of advancing the Treaty of Guaranty, as a Thing his Master has more Interest in than Spain it self, which will be better able to subsist after the Loss of Flan∣ders, than the Empire can. I find he came with Hopes of affecting much by his Elo∣quence and great Parts, and by making others see more of their own Interests, than they were willing to do. And so the two Themes wherein he came provided, were; To make it evident that France would open the War again this Spring, and with∣in six Weeks attack either Burgundy or Luxenburg; and on the other Side, That the Councils of Spain as they are now composed, if they saw not a solid and firm Assistance from their Neighbours, would fall into the easiest way of ending that Mat∣ter, by giving up Flanders upon the best Terms they could. That they were as a
sick Man, that would not or could not help themselves, and were so to be dealt with by those that were so deeply con∣cerned in their Loss, as these States in par∣ticular seem to be: And that after the Dis∣arming of the Duke of Lorrain, which France had now resolved, and the seizing of Burgundy, which would be their next Work; it would be impossible to main∣tain a War in what remains of Flanders, when they could do it no longer by Diver∣sion, after these two Inlets into France stopt up. From this we fell into the Story of the Suedish Subsidies, and the Hardships put upon Spain in that Business; all which I suppose your Lordship has heard a dozen Times already, and are obvious enough, and therefore I shall not repeat them, not remembring any Thing new in that Dis∣course: But it ended with Spain's having less Reason to pay for that Peace, than France; since the Guaranty offered, would be equal to both, and the Gain of the War had been all on the French Side. That, for his part, he could trust little in any Treaty, where the Obligations were not reciprocal; and when the Guaranty was given, he did not know whether these States would not be still apt to sacrifice any new Conquests France should make, to any unreasonable Peace, provided the Danger grew not
nearer them: And he had the more Rea∣son to believe it, by a Resolution he was assured of, among the States of Holland, to Treat with France about diverting their Attempts upon Flanders in Case of the King of Spain's Death, and leaving all the rest of that Monarchy open to his Pre∣tensions. This was the Substance of his First Dis∣course: Upon which I told him, That the Friendliest Office I could do him at his Arrival, was to tell him, what Men and what Resolutions he would find here, to the End he might not lose his Paces by their being at first ill directed. That, for their own Interest in the Preservation of Flanders, they thought, they understood it as well as any other of their Neighbours; and needed no new Lights in that Prospect, nor new Motions, to engage in its Defence, if they might hope to succeed: That this depended upon Spain's good Conduct and Provisions in Flanders, and upon their sa∣tisfying Sueden. That without Sueden's Engagement, Holland could do nothing considerable in their Defence, lying open to the French on the one Side, and the Bi∣shop of Munster on the other; and without Holland he might assure himself, the King would never interess himself in their Quar∣rel, but seek his Measures some way else.
So that the Strength of their whole Assist∣ance depended upon the engaging of Sue∣den, and that upon Payment of the Sub∣sidies. That I would tell him freely, I thought Holland might be induced to give a general Guaranty, according to the Ar∣ticle of the Treaty at Aix. That if his Majesty and Sueden would be induced to join with them in it, I thought it was the cheapest Bargain that ever any Crown had made. That I believed a Guaranty, with∣out reciprocal Engagements, more to their Advantage, and less to ours, than a De∣fensive League, which they so much de∣sired: But yet the Conjuncture was such, and the Respects that entred into it, as I could assure him he would fail in the Pur∣suit of the last; and I believed, might suc∣ceed if he would content himself with the other. That, if nothing else were in the way, there was not Time left for it, and therefore I would advise him, to lose none about it. That, for what should happen after the King of Spain's Death, I was con∣fident, neither the King nor the States would enter into it; but leave those Con∣siderations to the Season, in which they should arise. That, if Spain was resolved to destroy themselves, That was a Thing beyond all our Prevention or Remedy, and
so only to be bemoaned, and no more to be thought on: If they would be preserved, they knew the Price, which is, the Suedish Subsidies, and could best tell whether it were worth it or no. This I thought was the best way of dealing with a Person, that had more Wit a great deal than I, and so would be sure to have the better in Argument: And be∣sides, I thought it fittest for a Business, which it is necessary to bring to some short Issue: And the Baron seemed not to resent it ill, and said, Well, If you are certain the Dutch will not be brought to a League with us, we must think of what we can have, and not what we cannot: And all that remained to be done, was to draw up the Form of a Guaranty, and send it to the Constable; and let him know, that upon Satisfaction of the Suedish Subsidies, that should be ready for him, and without it we had no more to say. I told him I thought he was in the right way, and hoped he would succeed in it, and assured him of our Endeavours to draw Sueden to the same Measures, and per∣suade them, if need were, to some little Ease in the Terms of Payment. He asked me, in Case the Subsidies were not paid, and the Guaranty given, and France should next march, attack Burgundy or Lutzen∣burg,
what I thought we would do? I told him, I was ever to think, that the King and his Allies, would do upon all Occasions, what they had engaged. He would have had me join with him, in drawing up an Instrument of Guaranty. But I, that had a Mind to excuse my self, at least, till I received my Instruction, advised him to propose it to Monsieur de Witt, with whom he had an Hour assigned upon our parting. And so our first Con∣ference ended. I am, My Lord, your &c.
To my Lord Keeper. Hague, Apr. 24. S. N. 1669. My LORD, UPON a late Conversation with Mon∣sieur de Witt, tho' I had some Rea∣son to be surprized, yet I think I had none to take any notice of it; but am very sure I can have no Reason for doing it, to any other Person, but your Lordship, of whose Friendship I have had so many Testimo∣nies, and with whom I have lived in so much Confidence ever since our first Ac∣quaintance. The present Subject is so de∣licate, that I can hardly tell how to touch it my self, or to trust it in any other Hands but your Lordship's, who will better judge whether any Use may be made of it, and I am sure will make no ill one; nor do I expect there can be other, than to gain some Light in a Matter wherein I am wholly ignorant, and perhaps your Lord∣ship may not have been curious enough to observe so near; and which 'tis yet very necessary for us both, to be as well informed as we can. Monsieur de Witt came to me, as he said, upon a particular Visit; and as a Friend,
not a Minister: But the Occasion of it at present he would confess, was, to acquaint me with a Conversation he had lately had with Monsieur Puffendorf, a Suedish Agent, who passed this way from Paris to his own Country: That he had been some time at the French Court since our Measures taken by the Triple Alliance, and the Negotiati∣ons set on foot with the Spaniards in Conse∣quence of them. That the Ministers in France had taken much Pains to persuade him, that Sueden would find their Account very ill in pursuing those Measures: That Spain would fail them, in what was pre∣tended from them; and that Holland alone would not be able to support them, or the Measures they had rashly taken: And to make this good, the Ministers there had at length told him (but as a Secret only for the Service and Information of the Court in Sueden) that England would certainly fail them; and was already changed in the Course of all those Councils they had taken with Holland and Sueden, though they did not think fit to let any thing of it appear; and the Secret was yet, in very few Hands, either in the French or the English Court. That when this Agent seemed incredulous of all this Story, and to suspect that it was Artificial, and only intended to give an Ombrage or false Light to the Court of
Sueden, and thereby help them to make the first false Step; Monsieur Turenne at last, shewed him a Letter from Monsieur Colbert their Ambassador, wherein he gave an Ac∣count of the happy Successes he had met with, in his Negotiations at our Court, of the good Dispositions there, and especially those of some of our chief Ministers; upon which he added these Words,And I have at last made them sensible of the whole Extent of his Majesty's Liberality. Et Je leuray enfin fait sentir toute l'Etendue de la Libera∣lité de sa Majesté. Here Monsieur de Witt stopt as if he had no more to say, and with a very equal Countenance; though I found he had ob∣served mine very narrowly, all the while he was talking, as well as when he ended. For my part, though I thought the Story and the Circumstances very odd, and knew not what to make of it, yet I believe I lookt innocent, and thereby as unconcerned as he did. I told him, I had Reason to be surprized at what he had said, but did not know whether we had either of us any, to put much Weight or draw any great Consequence from all this Story: That there might be Artifice in it, on several Hands; That some of those it had passed through might deceive, and others be de∣ceived; That there might be Mistake in
Mens Apprehensions of what passed in Talk, and the Relations too: That Mon∣sieur Colbert might say a great deal to value his Services to his Court, and more than he thought himself: That the Suedish Agent might be made partial in France to their Interests, and wish his Crown still in them, as most beneficial to the Ministers there that were so engaged: That it was at least artificial in the French Court, to employ Monsieur Turenne to give this no∣tice to the Suedish Agent, and shew him Monsieur Colbert's Letter, which had been more proper for a Secretary of State; but that it was likely Monsieur Turenne's shew∣ing it and believing it, would have more Credit and more Effect in the Court of Sueden. That further than this I had no∣thing to say upon it, besides protesting to him upon my Honour and Truth, That I knew nothing of it; nor had I Reason, by any Thing I heard from England, to sus∣pect any more than I knew. That I had told him, upon the Negotiation of our last Alliance, and his Suspcions of our Incon∣stancy in England, what I truly thought of the Dispositions and Intentions both of his Majesty and his Ministers: That I knew, and all Men confessed, their Interests were so deep in it, as well as the Humour of the whole Kingdom, that it was hard to think
I could be deceived. That however, I could answer for no Man but my self; and that I would, that if ever these Measures were broken, it should not be by me; nor would I ever have any part in destroying, what I had the Honour of building, so much for the Safety, as I conceived, of both our Nations and the rest of Christen∣dom; and with so much Glory and Ap∣plause to his Majesty's Councils upon that Occasion. That I was still of the same Mind, and had no more to say. Monsieur de Witt smiled, and said, what he had told me was but as a Friend and in Conversation; and left me to make what Use I pleased of it, or none if I thought fit, without drawing it into further Con∣sequence: That he had been very suspicious when he first entred into the Ministry, but had been so often deceived by it, that he had cured himself of that Quality. That he knew very well it had been said among some Foreign Ministers here some Months since,That it must be confessed, there has been for 9 Months the greatest Mini∣stry in the World, in England. Qu'il faut avouer qu'l y a eu pour neuf mois du plus grand Ministere du Monde en Angleterre; as if they believed some Change had befallen our Councils before the last Year ended. That for his part, who went to the substantial as near
he could; and the plainest way; he had made but one Reflection, and kept that as much as he could to himself: Which was, That after my Ambassy hither had been resolved in England, to support and im∣prove the Ends of our last Alliances, and to engage the Emperor and chief Princes of the Empire, as well as Spain, in the Sup∣port of them; he could not but wonder to find me engaged of late by my Orders from Court, so warmly in a Chicane about such a Trifle, as that of Surinam; and in so many eager Disputes about the Preten∣sions of our East-India Company, which were fitter for Merchants than for Mini∣sters: And look'd, as if we had them more at Heart, than the Pursuit of those pub∣lick Interests, that were thought so neces∣sary for Christendom, at my first coming over. But after all, for his part, he would go on constantly upon the Foot of our last Alliance, as the best Ground of our common Safety; and believed the States would do so too, till his Majesty or his Ministers should let them plainly see, he had changed his Measures. And with this, rising up, he seemed not to expect any Answer, but to go away in very good Humour: And I was not very desirous to draw our Discourse into more Length; and so it ended.
'Tis time this Letter should do so too, which I desire your Lordship will burn when you have read it; and to forget it, if you find no Occasion to think further of it; and then I shall endeavour to do so too. I am sure it should never have be∣gun, if it were not to end with the Pro∣fessions of that Truth and Passion where∣with I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant. To my Lord Cavendish. Hague, July 18. S. N. 1669. My LORD, THO' I had much rather make your Lordship my Complements upon some better Fortunes, and upon your Health rather than your Dangers; yet I could not omit doing it at this time, upon so ho∣nourable a part as all Men allow you to have had in your late Adventure at Paris; which I do not only as a private Person and
Servant of your Lordship's, who wishes you all Encrease of Honour that may not be bought too dear; but withal as a Publick Minister, who ought ever to consider above all Things the Honour of our Nation; and knows, that the Complexion of it in times of Peace, is very much either mended or spoiled in the Eyes of Strangers, by the Actions and Carriage of particular Persons abroad. I can assure your Lordship, all that can be said to your Advantage upon this Occasion, is the common Discourse here; and not disputed by the French themselves; who say, you have been as generous in ex∣cusing your Enemies, as brave in defending your self: The Dutch will have it, that you have been the first in Excess; and say, that such a Thing, as Seven or Eight falling upon One, would never have been done in any other Place but France, nor suffered neither by the rest of the Company. How∣ever, I am of Opinion, if Excess may be allowed in any part, it is in that; and there∣fore rejoyce with you in the Honour of both, and with my self in that of my being My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, July .... 1669. My LORD, I Am to acknowledge your Lordship's of July the Ninth, and have but too much Reason to agree with you in despair∣ing to see this Matter of the Marine Arti∣cle brought to any fair Conclusion, about which I writ at large by last Post to Sir John Trevor; and will tell your Lordship more in private, That I very much fear our East-India Merchants have some fur∣ther meaning in it, than we yet under∣stand, and than they desire we should. For having had this whole Business run through my Head with more Thought and Appli∣cation, than ever any other did before; I could not but observe many several Ine∣qualities in their Proceedings, and make some Reflections upon them. As First, That it began immediately upon the finishing our Alliances with the Dutch; in which none could detract in the least from the Glory abroad, and po∣pular Applause at home, of the King's Councils, but by declaiming against this Marine Treaty, though at first it was only
upon the Inequality of the Passports: When that Point was easily accorded by Monsieur de Witt; our Merchants added another, about the Definition of a besieged Place, which was all their Exceptions a∣gainst the Treaty it self, could amount to: But when there were some Hopes given by Monsieur de Witt in his Letters to me, that this likewise might be surmounted; they added several other Articles, untoucht in the Marine Treaty: And when they saw all were like to be gained here, but that one of a Free Trade with People not in Sub∣jection, and of passing Forts (which Sir George Downing had found here was an in∣vincible Point) they then declared, That without This, all the rest were worth no∣thing: And upon this said, they have left our Treaty a ground, now for about Eight Months past. When we begun first to struggle out of it, they said, They only aimed at preventing some Innovati∣ons, which had been of late Years pra∣ctised by the Dutch, against the ancient Usages in those Parts, and many others of the same kind, which they had Reason to fear: Whereupon the Dutch desired the particular Instances of what they either had felt, or thought they had occasion to fear; that so they might redress Us in par∣ticular, and understand Us in general:
Our Merchants instanced in Cochin and Cananor, and I think one other Place, which Monsieur de Witt said, was not at all to the Case, but to another, provided for, by the defining of a besieged Place: So that I was forced by them here, to press still for Instances by several Letters, till the Merchants at last sent a long angry Paper, with very many Recapitulations of Things past, and which the Dutch said, had been debated and agreed in former Treaties; and therefore still desired to know, which of the Particulars named, we thought applicable to the present Que∣stion. Upon which I received Answer, That the Practice of the Dutch, against which they desired to provide, was but be∣ginning▪ That they could not, or that it was to no purpose to give particular In∣stances, their Apprehensions being general, of what the Dutch intended to impose upon us: And that, in short, what we de∣sired was for Prevention rather than Re∣medy; which, they said, made it much harder in the Dutch to deny us. After this, Monsieur de Witt and I con∣certed an Article between us, to propose to our Principals on either Side; and which I confess I thought comprehended our meaning, as I understood it by the Letters I received from your Lordship, and the
King's other Ministers; which though it was immediately refused at Amsterdam, as liable to the Interpretations they so much feared, yet was likewise rejected by our Merchants too, and another sent over, yet stronger than the first, in those Parts wherein the Dutch were most sensible; though your Lordship seemed to think, the Article I had transmitted, would reach our Aim, till you proposed it to them. Upon the new Debates we engaged in, arrives the News of what we had suffered at Macassar; which our Merchants made to be a formidable Instance in the Business depending, and of far more Consequence than all they apprehended by Dutch Forts and Passes, and therefore immediately pre∣sented the King with their Demand of Restitution, together with some other Par∣ticulars which we were fain to disown im∣mediately, as against an express Ar∣ticle of the Treaty at Breda: And I had the Blame of proposing all their De∣mands to the Dutch, though the Paper of them was sent to me without any Distin∣ction. So soon as the Point of Macassar was yielded us, which I thought would prove the most difficult of any, as of most Im∣portance, and was, I am sure, for a great while the most contested; and after the
Project of a general Article was gained from the Dutch (against all their former Resolutions) which was grounded upon these two Points; That we desire no In∣novations; and will make no particular Instances or Complaints, in which they have ever offered us Redress: Our Mer∣chants seeing the Matter draw near a fair Issue, now seem resolved to end all with these two Answers; That their Re∣stitution to Macassar (as Sir John Trevor writes) will be too dear bought, by such an Article as shall confirm upon us all the Injuries we have complained of by Forts, and Passes, and Treaties too: Whereas the Article as 'tis proposed by the Dutch (how∣ever defective) does not extend to any Treaties to come, but only to the past; nor do the Dutch desire to sell us Macassar at the Price of any such Article; but had much rather restore it to us upon concluding the Treaty, without any such Article at all: Nor do I know yet, of the Injuries in particular we have already complained of, either by Forts, Passes, or Treaties, be∣side this of Macassar; but contrary, have always been told, what we desired was rather for Prevention than Remedy. But next they say (as your Lordship tells me) They had rather be left as they are, with their Pretensions fair and entire, than have
them blasted for ever with a bad Conclu∣sion: Whereas no Conclusion they now make, upon what we have gained, and the Redress of what they complained of in the Marine Treaty (though without this contested Article) but will leave them and their Pretensions in the same Condition they were before: The same Liberty still remaining upon the last Article of the Ma∣rine Treaty, to appoint Commissioners, and alter or add any Thing, when both Parties shall agree; and will be but like taking so much by Advance, upon Account of a greater Debt. So that I am apt to conclude from all these Observations; That they who influence our Merchants in this Prosecution, either have no meaning this Treaty should end fairly, and so they put it obstinately upon that single Point, and in that Form which they know will never be granted; or else they aim at gaining an Occasion of raising new Disputes with the Dutch, whenever they find a Conjuncture for it; there seeming some Reason for the Dutch Opinion, that agreeing upon an Ar∣ticle as ours propose it, we may fall into new Contests upon the Extent and Inter∣pretation of it whenever we please. If this last End be in the Bottom of this Bu∣siness, and it be taken up or countenanced by his Majesty or his Ministers, upon Rea∣son
of State, and we make our Provisions and take all our Measures accordingly; for ought I know it is a wise, and may prove an honourable Council in Time, at least if the present State of Affairs in Christendom should change by any sudden or unexpected Revolution. But if our Merchants, or those who influence them in this Matter, mean no such Thing as a Conclusion of the Treaty; but only by the depending of such Disputes to leave an Unkindness and Weakness in our Alliance, which may in time shake the Foundations of it, and make way for new Measures on one Side or other, which will in time prove destructive to both; I cannot but interpret this as the Effect of their Distast or Envy, at the King's present Ministry, and the Course of his Councils, which have not gained greater Honour abroad, nor per∣haps Safety and good Will at home, by any Thing, than by our late Alliances so re∣nowned here, and thereby the Stop we have given to the Progress of the French Great∣ness. And therefore it must come from the Influence of some, who would be glad to see not only our Alliance shaken or changed abroad, but our Ministry at home too; which I shall be sorry to see, till the King can find better Hands for himself and the Kingdom to place it in: And when∣ever
that happens, as much as I am your Lordship's Servant, I shall be very well contented, and so I dare say will you too. If your Lordship should imagine any par∣ticular Envy or Peek at me or my Em∣ployment here, may have contributed to the Difficulties which have succeeded in this Business; and that our Merchants or those that influence them, believe it would thrive better in any other Hand; I will beg of you not to be sway'd by Considera∣tions of Kindness to me in a Matter of pub∣lick Concernment; nor to fear, that when∣ever this Employment falls, you shall be troubled with me at home, as great Mi∣nisters use to be with Men out of Office: For while the King's Business goes well, 'tis not two Straws matter whether such a Body as I have any Share in it or no. And there's an end of all the Reflections I have had upon the most troublesome and untoward Business that, I thank God, I ever had in my Life, or I hope shall ever have again: And perhaps I am mistaken in them all. However, if your Lordship can pardon this, you shall be sure not to be troubled in haste with any more of it from My Lord, your &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Aug. 7. S. N. 1669. My LORD, I Was very glad to find your Lordship in your last, upon your Journey into the Country; because I very much doubt whether the Exercise or Diversions you usually allow your self, are what your Health requires, and what your Cares and Troubles deserve. I am sure, in the Pro∣spect I have of them, I am so far from en∣vying them with all their gay Circum∣stances, that I think your Lordship has a very hard Bargain of them altogether; unless it be one Day made up to you by the Glory and Satisfaction of some great Suc∣cess in the Pursuit you intend of his Ma∣jesty's and the Kingdoms Honour, Safety, and Happiness; which I doubt will need some stronger Councils, than Men seem at present disposed to: But this is none of my Business. I cannot give your Lordship any Ac∣count of what you say is made a great Matter of by Somebody to a private Hand; about the Difficulties intended by Spain in the two last Suedish Payments, with De∣sign
of making new Demands: I am only in Pain at present to see the first Payment finished, which is not yet arrived, but ex∣pected by the first Courier. When that is done, and the Guaranty delivered by Sue∣den, as well as us and Holland, I shall be in no great Fear besides that of the Spanish King's Death, or of Spain falling into some Agreement or other with France for the Exchange of Flanders, by seeing so great a War still entailed upon it, and their Neigh∣bours unwilling to share so far in their Dangers as perhaps it were Our and the Dutch Interest to do. I am sure in the present Posture of that Monarchy, if I were of their Council, I should be of Ad∣vice to do it whenever France would be content upon it to quit all Pretence to the rest of the Spanish Dominions: And per∣haps 'twere wise for France to get Flanders by that or any other quiet Condition: For within two Years after he were well pos∣sess'd of that little Spot of Ground, I doubt no Prince or State in Christendom, would pretend to dispute any more with him then, than the Spaniard does now. But these are Events to be considered by Men in greater Spheres than I am, and perhaps deserve to be a little more thought on than they are.
I have received and returned a Visit with the French Ambassador; so that we are upon as good Terms as can be. My Lord Culpepper pass'd this way last Week; and upon that Occasion I cannot but desire your Lordship to let me know more particularly from you, how I am to treat any English Lord as to the Hand and Door in my own House: For though the French Example is given me, as to all publick Ministers, yet there is nothing specified as to other Per∣sons; and if I am to follow it in this and other Particulars; I desire to have some∣thing from his Majesty's positive Com∣mands to bear me out, as the French Am∣bassadors have, and as methinks the Case deserves: Since I am told, the Innovation began in Monsieur Cominges's Time in Eng∣land, and that before the Orders he received in it, he gave the Hand to all Gentlemen of Quality in England, and to all Persons of great Quality or Families, though of his own Nation: And that my Lord St. Al∣bans ever gave it to all English Lords while he was Ambassador at Paris: Though it seems my Lord Hollis changed it upon the French Ambassador doing so in England. I know not what my Father said to your Lordship concerning the Trifle you men∣tion in the End of your Letter: And am sure you might very well have spared your
self the Trouble of taking Notice of it; as I may do of giving your Lordship any further Assurances of what will never fail you; which is the hearty Passion and Truth wherewith I am and ever shall be My Lord, Your Lordship's, &c. To Sir Charles Wolsely. Hague, Aug. 10. S. N. 1669. SIR, I Received some Time since the Favour of a Letter from you of May 9th; but hearing by your Son that you had soon after left the Town; and finding how ill Fortune one of mine had met with in lying five or six Months before it came to your Hands: I omitted the acknowledg∣ing yours till I might presume on finding you sooner by my Father's Conveyance, to whose Care I have committed this, upon Information of his Journy by your House into Ireland. Were it not for ac∣quitting my Debt, and assuring you of
your Son's Health, and Welcom here while it may be any Ease to you or Im∣provement to him, I should have little to bear me out in giving you this Trouble: For the Return of your Compliments would but multiply them between us: And that is a sort of Exercise in which I am soon out of Breath, as having but a small Stock of those more refined Imaginations which are required to make up any great Abilities in that kind. Therefore I shall end an empty ill Letter as soon as I can; but not without the Professions of my being SIR, Your most humble Servant.
To the Spanish Ambassador. Hague, Aug. 13. S. N. 1669. My Lord, I Was in hopes the Affair now under Debate could have met with no Reply to what I writ yesterday to your Excellency: But having observed the contrary by yours of this Evening; I am obliged to say, that I thought, upon our last Conference, I had left your Excellency en∣tirely persuaded, that the Constable was in the wrong to raise a Diffi∣culty about the first Payment upon the Con∣cert proposed; because there was no mention of it in the Act signed by your Excellency. I shall say further, that you have reason at pre∣sent, if in that Act
you shall find (either expressed or implied) these Words of the Guaranty, Y los Instru∣mentos necessarios depen∣dientes de ella. If these Words are not there, the Party contracting cannot bring them in by any Interpretation of his own, without Consent of t'other Par∣ty, or Sentence of some Arbitrator: Besides, that this of the Concert, does not absolutely or of necessity import any thing to the Security of the Guaranty: For, provided we execute it as the Wants of Spain require, it is of no Importance whether it be done with such or such a number of Troops, either of one or t'other Nation, since that i to be concerted according to the diffe∣rent Interests or Con∣veniences of each Par∣ty: And it may happen
that the Attack from France may be so pow∣erful, that it will be necessary for each of us to assist you with all the Forces we can raise or equip, according to the general Guaranty, and not according to any Concert of Forces specified in the Treaty. I do not accuse Spain of any want of Since∣rity in all this Affair, but only of Readiness and Freeness to con∣sent to, and accomplish what was absolutely necessary for engaging Sueden in the preser∣vation of the Peace. And on t'other side, your Excellency cannot accuse the Sincerity of the King my Master; who at the lowest of your Affairs, and when Flanders was desperate, gave the first helping Hand (when the Prin∣ces
nearest allied to the Crown of Spain would have nothing to do in it); contracted his Alliances last Win∣ter, set a Fleet to Sea the Summer following, sent Ambassadors to Aix la Chapelle, found∣ed the Triple Alliance, and sollicited other Princes to join in it: And all this, only to begin and procure a Peace, where neither his Dominions nor Peo∣ple were concerned; nor (with permission of great Reasoners) had any Prospect of fure Dangers, but what would concern the Em∣pire and all the rest of Christendom, before his Majesty or his King∣doms could be exposed to it.
For what your Ex∣cellency desires to know, why, Monsieur Marechal having said, there would be no Dif∣ficulty in concluding and ratifying the Con∣cert, there should not∣withstanding prove to be any in doing it at present; I will tell you, That the two Mi∣nisters of Sueden, in all that has passed between us, have not only said, but still persist, that they were ready to enter into the said Con∣cert, and intended to do so before Monsieur Marechal goes from hence (upon which however he is extream∣ly pressed) but that they never intended to enter into it before the Payment of the first Subsidies, which ought to have been made up∣on the mutual Delivery of the Ratification; saying withal, that they would never allow that this Mony ought to pass for Payment of
the particular Aids they were to give Spain by virtue of the Triple Alliance. I have always found them so stiff upon that Point, that I have been a long time in despair of over∣coming their Nicety. It remains therefore to Spain to consider whe∣ther the Guaranty of three such Powers be worth giving this little Satisfaction to Sueden; and whether it would not be more to the purpose when the se∣cond Term expires, to press us then upon the Concert, if you shall not see it finished: But by all means to procure as soon as pos∣sible that the general Guaranty be put into your Hands: And I do not doubt, but accord∣ing to the Dispositions I see on all sides, that the Concert will quickly follow, though your Excellency should no more concern your self with urging us to
what we are drawn by the Interest of every particular Party as well as the Publick. I wish your Excel∣lency Health and Hap∣piness; and am, &c.
A l'Ambassa∣deur d'Espagne. De la Haye, le 13 Aout, S. N. 1669. Monsieur, J'Avois esperé que l'affaire dont il s'agit á present ne trouveroit plus d'obstacles, & qu'il n'y auroit point d pei∣que á ce que crivis hier á V. E. Mais comme j ay vû le con∣traire par avotre Lettre ecrite le Sir même, je me crois obligé de dire, qu'il m'avoit paru que le fruit de notre derniere conference, avoit eté de laisser V. E. pleinement persuadée, que le Conne∣table de Castille avoit tort de susciter une diffi∣culté toucha le premier payement su le Concert proposé, puisqu'il n'en est point fait mention dans l'acte signé par V. E. J'ajouteray á cela, que vous auriez aujourdy
raison, si dans cet Acte vous trouviez on expri∣mé ou sousentendu les mots de Guarentie, Y los instrumentos neces∣sarios dependientes de ella. Si pareils mots n'y sont pas, un des par∣tis contractans ne peut pas les y faire entrer par une interpretation de sa façon, á moins que le consentement de l'autre parti intervienne, ou que de part & d'autre on convienne de s'en rap∣porter á la decision d'un arbitre: Sans conter que celuy de Concert luy mê∣me n'importe point ab∣solument ni necessaire∣ment á la secureté de la Guarantie: Car pourvû que nous l'executions se∣lon le besoin des affaires d'Espagne, il importer a peu qu'avec un tel ou un tel nombre de troupes, ou que ces troupes apparti∣ennent á une de deux Nations plutôt qu' á l'au∣tre; car si l'on doit agir de concert, c'est selon les divers interêts & les differentes commoditez de
chacune des Parties. Et meme il peut arriver, que les invasions & les attacques de la France seroient si redoutables, qu'il sera necessaire que chacun de nous rassemble tout ce qu'il peut de for∣ces sur pied, ayant egard á l'intention de la Gua∣rantie en general, & non á quelques cas particu∣liers specifiés dans le traité. Je n'accuse pas l'Es∣pagne d'avoir manqué de sincerité dans tout le cours de cette affaire, mais d'avoir manque de promptitude & franchise á accomplir ce qui leur etoit absolument necessaire pour engager la Suede dans la conservation de la Paix; sur cela je di∣ray aussi a V. E. qu'elle ne peut pas accuser la sincerité du Roy mon Maitre; lors qu l'etat de vos affaires etoit le plus deploré, & que tous les Pais bas etoient comme an desespoir, il a le pre∣mier mis la main á l'ouvrage (quand les
Princes les plus proches de la Couronne d'Espagne n'y vouloient pas toucher) tout l'hyver dernier sa Majesté a employé á faire traiter ses Allian∣ces, & á faire equiper une flote qui a paru en mer; L'eté suivante il a envoyé ses Ambassa∣deurs á Aix la Chapelle, il a cementé la Triple Alliance, & fait sollici∣ter divers Princes de s'y joindre en plus grand nombre: Tout cela dans la ve d'acheminer & de procurer une paix, qui ne endoit rien á ses Etats ni á ses Peuples, puisque les uns & les au∣tres etoient á couvert des ravages de la guerre. Car malgré tout ce qu'il plait aux grands discou∣reurs d'insinuer, & de publier; les dangers qui menacent l'Angleterre, & que la Politique a du prevoir, ces dangers re∣gardoient & l'Empire en particulier, & toute la Chretienté en general de plus prés que sa Majesté & ses Royaumes.
V. E. demande, pour∣quoy Monsieur Marechal ayant dit qu'il n'y auroit aucune difficulté á con∣clure & á ratifier le Con∣cert, il s'y en trouve pourtant aujourdhuy; Je vous diray sur cela, que les deux Ministres de Suede sur tous les points discutez entre eux & nous, non seulement nous ont dit, mais ils persistent toujours á dire, qu'ils etoient prets á entrer dans le dit Concert, qu'ils avoient meme pre∣tendu le faire avant le depart de Monsieur Marechal, quelque pressé qu'il paroisse; que leur pensée n'a jamais eté d'attendre á faire cette demarche, que le paye∣ment des premiers sub∣sides, fixé au tems que l'echange de la Ratifica∣tion seroit delivrée. Ils ajoutent á cela, qu'ils ne consentiront jamais, que cet argent puisse passer pour le prix & la recom∣pense
qu'ils s'engageroit de donner á l'Espagne en vertu de la Triple Alli∣ance. Je les ay trouvé si roids sur cet Article, que j'ay desesperé il y a long tems de vaincre leur delicatesse. Il reste donc pour l'Espagne á exami∣ner & á bien peser, si la Guarantie de trois Puis∣sances telles que celles qui se presentent, ne vaut pas bien qu'on cede á la Suede la legere Satisfa∣ction qu'elle demande. Je voudrois que l'Espagne confiderât, s'il ne seroit pas plus á propos d'atten∣dre á nous presser sur le Concert, que le terme du second payement fût echeu: Si tout n'etoit entierement conclu; mais en tout cas de procurer au plutôt que la Guaran∣tie generale vous soit mise en mains. Je ne doute pas, veu les dispositions ou je trouve tous les Es∣prits, que le Concert ne suivît immediatement, & sans que V. E. ait la peine de nous presser d'advantage: En cette
rencontre notre propre in∣terêt se trouve joint á celuy du publique. Je sachaite á V. E. la santé & la prosperité qu'elle desire; & suis, &c. To the Spanish Ambassador. Hague, Aug. 14. S. N. 1669. My Lord, I Received your Ex∣cellency's Letter last night, as I was making my Dispatches for England, in which I immediately inclosed it, that the King my Master may see, in what this Affair has ended. For the Com∣plaints your Excellency is pleased to make of me, as having hindred instead of advancing an Agreement so much desired; I shall not de∣fend
my self with Words, if my Actions have not done it; nor think my self obliged whatever has passed in this Affair, to give ac∣count of it to any Body but the King my Ma∣ster. I am not the first Minister, whose Services to Spain have had no Returns but of Reproach and Ingrati∣tude, which I shall not lay to Heart, since our part is only to obey. However I cannot but think it had been more Prudence in the Spanish Ministers to acknow∣ledge all the King my Master has treated and done for 18 Months past in favour of that Crown, than to accuse his Majesty upon every Occasion, either to have done nothing, or only what he found convenient to himself: Since the true way of engaging a generous Mind in new Obliga∣tions, is to be thank∣ful for the old, and
rather encrease than lessen what a King and a Friend has done, at least with so much desire of succeeding well. Since your Excel∣lency is pleased to give so wrong a Turn to what I writ with so good Intentions, I will say nothing to excuse it, but still repeat what I said before; That to me it seems more rea∣sonable that you should press the Suedish Mini∣sters upon this Agree∣ment, if you think the time of the second Subsidies not yet run out: Because 'tis plain, that the first Payment (by your own Act) was to be made upon the signing the Ratificati∣ons of the Guaranty, without any other Condition; and there being three distinct Acts from the three Parties, your Excel∣lency has very artifici∣ally made mention both of that of the Guar∣anty,
and the other of Concert; whereas that of the Guaranty ought only to be given to Spain; and that of Concert, but commu∣nicated as an Agree∣ment between the three Parties entred into the Triple Alliance. With all this, your Excel∣lency may see, that when I said this, I told you at the same time, that there was no doubt, after having given the Guaranty, and that the Suedes had received their first Pay∣ment, the Agreement would be concerted too: And this I still believe from the Inte∣rest the Suedes have in it, to secure the other Payments; and Holland yet more, either to preserve the Peace, or in case a War should happen, to secure a strong and powerful Defence from Flanders, which next to their own Towns, is what they are nearest concerned
in. I must repeat again what I said of his Ma∣jesty, That if the Suedes and the Dutch can find the way of agreeing this Affair, it will ne∣ver be laid to the King my Master's Charge if they do not see a good End of it. But I have entred deep enough in∣to the Thoughts of the Suedes upon this Point, to be absolutely of Opi∣nion, That they will never consent to the Agreement, till they have received their first Payment. Monsieur Marechal having only heard some Expression of your Excellency's upon this Affair, came immediately to desire I would go to you, and inform my self of the Truth of it; and bring a positive Answer from you; swearing, that if this were your Re∣solution, the Suedes could very well con∣tent themselves with∣out the Mony: And that for his Part, he
was resolved to leave the Hague to morrow; and about four or five Days ago, Monsieur Appleboom sent his Se∣cretary to tell me, he had heard something to this purpose, of your Excellency; and to complain of it. But if you can otherwise dispose both the Suedes and the Dutch, as to me it seems by your Letter, you imagine; I shall extreamly re∣joyce at your Success, and applaud your Dili∣gence, tho' you are so little pleased with mine. I cannot tell how I came to engage so far in a Language I know so imperfectly: If you understand me, 'tis all I desire. God pre∣serve your Excellency many Years. I kiss Your Excellency's Hands, and am Your most humble Servant.
Al Ambaxador de Espanna. De la Hay, Aug. 14. S. N. 1669. Exmo. Senr. A Noche recebi la de V. E. standome en mis dispachos para la Inglatiera, en los quales la he luego encerrado, para que vea el Rey mi Sennor en que punto a parado este negocio. Por lo que se va V. E. quex∣ando de mi, como el que atrasava el concierto tan desseado, en lugar de encaminarlo; Yo ne me voy defendiendo con ra∣zones,
si las obras no me defienden. Sea lo que fuera de mi, que no ten∣go de responder a nin∣guno de lo que hago en esta materia, si no al Rey mi Sennor, y no soy yo el primre Mistro a quien aviendo  merecido de Espanna s lo reconoce con desagra∣decerle todos sus officios; Pero no importa, porque no tenemos nos-otros otra parte en los negocios, si no de obediencia. A lo menos me pareçe que los Ministros de Espanna hizieran mas prudente∣mente de agradecer al Rey mi Sennor, loque ha negociado y obrado des∣pues de anno y medio passados en favor de las cosas de esta Corona, que no de accusar su Magestad a cada punto, o de no haver hecho na∣da, o averlo todo hecho por su propria convenien∣tia; porque el verda∣dero medio para empen∣nar un espiritu generoso en nuevos beneficios, es agradecerle algo de los
passados, y mas presto agrandecer que no yr siempre disminuyendo, lo que un Rey amigo a he∣cho a lo menos con buena voluntad. Puesque V. E. se gusta de tomar a tuerto loque yo he escritto a derecho, yo no le he de impedir, pero me voy rediziendo, que a mi pareçer tuviera mas razon de appretar los Ministros de Suecia sobre este concierto, si veyra que no se havra acabado al segundo ter∣mino de los Subsidios; porque es cosa evidente por su proprio acto, que el primero pagamiento se ha de cumplir con la extradition de las ratifi∣cationes de la guarencia sin otra condicion; y que siendo tres actos distin∣ctos de las tres partes, por esto V. E. a hecho mencion de los actos de guarentia, y otro de con∣cierto
como V. E. va concluyendo aora con mucha agudeza, porque el acto de concierto no se devia dar a la Espanna como el de la guarentia, si no comunicarla sola∣mente como un accuerdo entre las partes de la Triple Alliança. Con todo esto muy bien pudi∣era ver V. E. quo en diziendo esto he dicho tan bien que no havia duda, que despues de ha∣ver dado las guarentias, y recebido la Suecia el dinero del primero ter∣mino, se acabara el con∣cierto, y lo creo tan bien porque veo a la Suecià interessada en ello por asseguarse de los otros terminos, y tan bien por lo que espera en succedi∣endo la guerra y la Olanda sta aun mas in∣teressada para assegurar tanto mas la paz, o en caso de guerra une fuerte y bastante defensa del pays, baxo como tocando les muy apretadamente y mas que otra cosa des∣pues de sus proprias villas.
Y lo que he dicho del Rey mi Sennor, lo digo otra vez que accordando se la Suecia y la Olanda en las particularidades del Concierto, no tendra a su Magestad de no acca∣barlo. Pero aviendome yo harto escudrinnado los sentimentos de los Suecos en este negocio, soy enteramente del pa∣reçer que nunca han de tocr al Concierto antes de haver recebido el pri∣mero termino; porque el Sennor Marechal aviendo entendido solamente al∣guna cosita que V. E. avia dicho a este propo∣sito, me venia luego sup∣plicar de yr me a V. E. di informar me dello, y tirar una respuesta cate∣gorica sobra esta mate∣ria; jurando si tal fuessa la resolution de V. E. que la Suecia se passaria muy bien del dinero; y que para el stava determina∣do
de salir la mannana de la Haya. Y no ay mas que quatro o cinco dias que el Sennor Apple∣boom me ha empiado su Secretario para quexarse de la misma manera di haver la segunda vez entendido tal cosa de V.E. en ello. Pero si puede disponer y los Suecos y los Olandezes de otra ma∣nera (como me pareçe de immaginar en su carta) para mi me huelgare de su successo, y mucho he de alabar sus diligentias, aunque tan poco se con∣tenta de las mias. No se como me he em∣pennado tan adelante en mi geregonça de Espan∣nol. V. E. le ha de pardonnar, con que le hecha de entender, basta. Guarde Dios a V. E. los annos que la desseo. B. L. M. D. V. E. &c.
Aoust, ..... 1669. Sentence donee sur l'Affaire de Portugal & de la Hollande, par l'Ambassadeur de l'Ang∣leterre, a qui les deux Partyes avoient remis la Decision finale de lours Differences, non pas comme Ambassadeur d'Ang∣leterre, mais comme Cheva∣lier Temple. MOnsieur l'Ambassadeur de Portugal & Monsieur le Pensionnaire de Witt; ayants trouvé á propos de communiquer á l' Ambassadeur d' Angleterre les Points qui ont esté si long tems en dispute sur l' Accommode∣ment proposé entre le Portugal & la Hol∣lande. Le dit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre a trouvé sur la premiere Conference avec les deux Par∣ties, que la principale Difficulté qui restoit á demeler, estoit sur la maniere de faire les deux Millions cinq cent mille Cruzados qui estoient
accordés par le Portugal á la Hollande, payables á dix Payements egaux; c'est á dire deux cent mille Cruzados par an. Le dit Ambassadeur d'Angleterre avoit aussi remarqué dans la mesme Conference, que les deux Parties estoient d'accord que lesdits Payements se feroient par les Droits du Sel de Setuval, & qu'a cet Effet chacun d'eux avoit proposé son Expedient, par lequel ledit Am∣bassadeur d' Angleterre voyoit que Monsieur l' Ambassadeur de Portugal se proposoit que lesdits Payements entiers se fervient par l'As∣signation desdits Droits du Sel de Setuval pour le terme de dixsept ou dixhuit ans: Et que Monsieur le Pensionnaire de Witt se faisoit fort que ladite debte de pourroit entierement satisfaire selon son Expedient par lesdits Droits du Sel de Setuval dans le terme de vingt & deux, ou vingt & trois ans. Ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre ayant aussi remarqué que l'accommodement sur aucun des∣dits Expedients estoit desespere pour les Diffi∣cultez sur la maniere de payer les interests, dont les deux Parties ne pouvoient aucunement venir au bout: A trouve bon de proposer comme un Expedient entre deux: Que le Portugal assigneroit á la Hollande les droits de Sel de Setuval pour l'espace de vingt ans en satisfa∣ction entiere de ladite debte; si le Portugal ne trouvoit pas que la Hollande eut receu sa satis∣faction entiere en moindre tems; & qu'en tel
cas ledit terme seroit retranché aprés telle satis∣faction achevée. Ledit Ambassadeur d'Angleterre ayant pro∣posé cet Expedient á chacun des deux Parties; Monsieur l'Ambassadeur de Portugal a pris du tems pour la considerer; & Monsieur le Pen∣sionnaire l'a accepté sur la condition suivante; Scavoir, si dans aucune année dudit terme, lesdits droits du Sel de Setuval ne monteront pas á la valeur de cent cinquante mille Cru∣zados; Qu'en ce cas le Portugal dans l'annee suivante suppleera en Sel la valeur de ce qu'on trouvera avoir manqué á ladite somme l'an∣nèe precedente: Et á fin que les Payements se pourroient parachever en moindre temps, le Portugal s'obligeroit de n'y hausser pas le prix du Sel pour les Hollandois, ny de l'abaisser pour les autres. Ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre ayant com∣muniqué le mesme soir á l'Ambassadeur de Por∣tugal ledit Acceptation sous la Condition men∣tionnée: Il s'accorda á l'Expedient de l'Am∣bassadeur d'Angleterre, & aussi á la Condition du Pensionnaire, pour ce qui estoit de ni hausser ni abaisser le prix du Sel; Mais pour l'autre partie de la Condition. Il la refusoit entiere∣ment, á cause que la Hollande estant asseurée par lá de recevoir en Sel tout ce qui manqueroit chaque année sur les Droits du Sel a l'accom∣plissement de cent cinquante mille Cruzados, se pouvoit deporter de tirer dudit Setuval si grande
quantité du Sel, qu'elle estoit accoutumée de tirer chaque année par le passé: Et que par lá le Royaume de Portugal se trouveroit appauvri afaut dudit debit ordinaire du Sel, & le Prince se trouveroit chargé d'autant qu'il plairoit á la Hollande sur les manquements des Droits annuels. Sur ces Entrefaites les deux Parties estants entrées encore dans une Conference avec l'Am∣bassadeur d'Angleterre, & ne s'y pouvant pas accorder non plus que dans la precedente, sur aucun dés Expedients proposés; Ils ont á la fin trouvé bon de convenir ensemble que la decision finale de toute cotte dispute, se feroit par l' Arbitrage absolu dudit Ambassadeur d' Angle∣terre, pourveu que l' Ambassadeur de Portugal consentiroit que la valeur du Sel se regleroit entierement par les Cruzados, sans auçun egard á la valeur des Reys sur laquelle il y a eu aussi beaucoup de Controverse entre les deux Par∣ties. En vertu de cette Convention, ledit Ambas∣sadeur d'Angleterre ayant meurement consideré tout ce que dessus, & aussi l'interest de ces deux Nations, aussi bien que de leurs Voisins & Alliez, que cette affaire si long tems debattue, se puisse enfin terminer á l'aymable, & ne tirer pas en aigreur entre les deux Nations par des Disputes ulterieures; Declare & juge que le premier Expedient proposé par ledit Ambassa∣deur touchant les vingt annees ayant esté deja
accepté par les deux Parties; Demeurera firme & valable avec ces Conditions, que la Hol∣lande sera obligée de tirer de Setuval toutes les années durant ledit terme, autant de Sel qu'elle a tiré dans aucune de dix années dernierement passées: Mais, qu'en cas que par ledit debit du Sel, les droits á Setuval ne monteront pas pour∣tant jusques á cent cinquante mille Cruzados dans aucune annee dudit terme de vingt ans; que le Portugal suppleera en Sel l'annee sui∣vante ce qui aura manqué á ladite somme, pour∣veu que ledit manquement n'excede pas la valeur de trente mille Cruzados. Ledit Ambassadeur d' Angleterre juge aussi equitable que la Hollande ne pretendra autre satisfaction de la Debte, hormis lesdits droits du Sel de Setuval pour ledit terme de vingt années. Que la Valeur du Sel sera conté par Cruzados sans egard á quelque autre monoye puisqu'il n'y a eu mention dans le Traitté d'aucun autre espece. Et qu'en cas que le Portugal trouvera á propos de se decharger de quelque partie de la dete par quelque autre moyen; la Hollande re∣tranchera aussi ledit terme en proportion.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Sept. 2. S. N. 1669. My LORD, HAving received his Majesty's Letter to the Constable from your Lordship's Hands, I thought it was fit for me to re∣turn his Answer by the same way: And, that not having Matter enough to furnish two Letters this Ordinary; your Lordship would be content to receive the whole Trouble of what I have to say, since you were of course to have a Part of it. I received at the same Time with this for his Majesty, the other for my Self; and the same Express brought another for the States; I doubt, all in the same Stile; by which your Lordship will understand the ill State of our general Business here. Mon∣sieur Marechal came yesterday to visit me; and told me, his Errand was to know, whether I could propose any new way of drawing their Satisfaction from Spain; if not, whether I would give any Hopes of their having it from his Majesty and the States: And if neither of these, what I could propose as the best way
To get out of this Affair with the best Grace, and without too much Noise. Pour sortir de cette Affaire de la meilleure Grace, & sans trop de Bruit: I told him, For the First, I was at an end of my own Inven∣tion, but should not fail how∣ever of consulting with the Dutch Commissioners whom I had not seen since our Answer from the Constable. For the Second, I knew he was so sensible of Sueden's having no Right to demand of us more than our good Offices in this Particular, that he would never think fit to press us any further; and those he should not fail of. For the last, it was a Point I was very loth to think of; but when it was necessary, I would join with him in that Consideration, but would fain believe, the Affair was not yet desperate. He fell into great Complaints of the Spanish Ministers here, and of their laying several Discourses to his Charge which he never made; particularly, of their being willing to take a verbal Engagement from Spain for thirty thousand Crowns a Month in time of War; which he protested was con∣trary to his Orders, that were, to stand firmly upon having Assurance for the whole sixty thousand pretended from his Majesty and the States, and leave us to find our Se∣curity from Spain, with whom they had not had any thing to do in the whole Business:
But he said, he would tell me in Confi∣dence, that they had represented the Im∣possibility of this Pretension to their Court, and the necessity of taking the Assurances for thirty thousand from Spain; and ex∣pect Answer upon this Point by the very first Letters: And in Case of their Court's consenting to it, he was in hopes all Diffi∣culties would be overcome; for we might finish the Concert before the Payment of the Mony, and give the Spanish Ministers Assurance of our signing it suddenly after: And though Holland had hitherto declared against assuring any part of the sixty thou∣sand Crowns without real Security from Spain, yet his Majesty having resolved to assure Sueden of his Part, Holland could not avoid following his Measure and Ex∣ample. I easily perceived the first Part of this Discourse was brought in, only to usher the last; and to sound me about his Ma∣jesty's Intention in this Point: And so I told him, I did not remember to have heard his Majesty had ever declared any such Resolution. That there were indeed se∣veral Projects framed by several Hands about that time, some of which contained what he said: But I asked him whether he had ever seen any of them signed? He con∣fessed he had not, but their Court ever
look'd upon it as a Thing agreed to by his Majesty. I said I wondered at it, be∣cause they could not but consider his Ma∣jesty as very little more concerned in this Affair than themselves: And being so, it would be very hard for him to engage in the Defence of Spain without any Hopes of Reimbursement for his own Part; and withal to furnish Sueden with so great a Share of the Subsidies they expected upon a bare Promise from Spain, of repaying it after the War ended. That, for my Part, having not then been in England, I would not affirm, his Majesty had not agreed to it, because he seemed to affirm he had: But if he had not, I thought it would be a very hard Thing to expect it from him. He replied, He would not dispute whether it were hard or no, but was sure, in Sue∣den they made no manner of Doubt upon it; and, that in his Instruction, which mentions their solliciting Our and Holland's assuring the whole Sum, there are these Words, The King of England having con∣sented to assure one fourth Part. That if there were a Question upon this, though their Court should consent to accept an Act from Spain for Thirty thousand, yet he saw there would be another Difficulty less surmountable than all the rest; and so lookt upon the Affair as desperate. But
having frankly communicated to me his Instructions whenever I desired it; he in∣treated me freely to communicate mine to him upon this Particular, that they might know what to trust to. I told him frank∣ly that I had none upon it; That his Ma∣jesty, being so near, had only ordered me, when they and Holland should be agreed about the Particulars of the Concert, that I should communicate it to him, and should receive a sudden Answer upon it. We broke up this Conference very Friendly; resolving only that I should dis∣course with Monsieur de Witt upon the whole State of our Affair, while they ex∣pected their next Orders from Sueden, after which we should all have a Conference to∣gether and take our last Measures. This Day Monsieur de Witt came to me upon the same Occasion; shewing me the Constable's Letter to the States, which con∣tained nothing more than mine from Him, besides desiring them to employ their good Offices towards the Ministers of England and Sueden for the Accomplishment of this Affair. After having asked me two or three times what I thought was to be done; and I protesting I knew not; at last he said, That though he was never for plaistring up an ill Wall; and he was confident, if Sueden trusted to Spain for the thirty thou∣sand
Crowns a Month, they would never be paid; and so their Assistance would fail in case of a War, unless Spain gave such a Security as might certainly raise the Mony: Yet considering that the very Reputation of this Business concluded, might very well prevent a War, might hinder Spain's taking their Measures with France to our Disadvantage; and in case of a War, Sueden's having received the Subsidies al∣ready due, would hinder them from taking any Measures with France, though they should not furnish their Assistance to Spain for want of the future Subsidies: For his Part, he could wish the Thing done; and though it had ever been against his Opi∣nion, yet if his Majesty should think fit to assure Sueden of a fourth Part, he believed, the States would be induced to do the same, rather than endanger the breaking of the Business. After I had deduced to him the great Differences there were in his Majesty's Concernment and theirs upon this Matter; and how hard it were for his Majesty that had his Seas and Fleets to defend him, to contribute in all Points as much as they who had the French Armies at their Gates, so soon as Flanders was over-run: And finding him still firm, as I had done so of∣ten
before, that this State could never go other than even Paces with us in this Mat∣ter, nor look upon themselves as nearer concerned in the Greatness of France than other Neighbours, till they saw the Dan∣ger fall directly this way: I at last told him plainly what I had told Monsieur Marechal before, concerning my Instruction: Which he received with his usual Temper, and said, We must refer all to a Conference with the Suedish Ministers; and in the mean Time each of us should think what Expedient is to be found in the Case. Concerning our Business of Surinam, I am in great Hope yet to come to some good End of it, though they will not hear of it in Point of Right as to his Majesty's Inter∣cession: But that it is fit to give his Ma∣jesty greater Testimonies of their Deference than in such a Matter as this, is already the declared Opinion of Mr. V. B. the Pensi∣oner of Harlaem, and some others I have pursued: And Monsieur de Witt promises me, if those two will second him, he will endeavour to bring the Province of Hol∣land to it, this Assembly; and then we may deal with Zeeland I hope well enough by one way or other. The Paper Mr. V. B. has made me expect two or three Posts, upon the Account of the Places we have
specified in the Indies, he promises shall not fail me by the next Post; and should have come sooner, but that he was resolved to be the most exactly informed that could be in all Particulars. Monsieur de Witt has writ to those of the East-India Company at Amsterdam in pursuit of your Lordship's Letter, and Sir John Worden's Desire, concerning one Cary coming over to offer an End of a Suit upon the Pretensions of Courtin's Heir: Their Answer is, That I might be secure they will give no Mony for an End of that Bu∣siness, since all further Pretensions are clearly cut off by the Treaty at Breda: And I find, Monsieur de Witt is of the same Opinion. Yesterday died Monsieur Weymenum, a great Man in this State, but very little bewailed. I believe your Lordship may hear Re∣ports of Discontents growing, and Parties changing here: But I doubt it is not in Discourse further than among those that are in the Skirts of Business; which makes me hope there may be no more Ground for all that is so lavishly talkt of here, and of the same kind among us in England: If it should be otherwise, I am at least glad to be ignorant of it; being of so much Dis∣reputation
abroad to our Councils: And all the Persons in Consideration here, I am sure are sorry for what they hear of it, pro∣fessing to be as much concerned in our Union as their own; and placing all their Hopes of taking any constant Measures with us, upon the Steddy∣ness of his Majesty's late Councils, and the Dispositions of our present Ministers, be∣fore whose time Monsieur de Witt says,That there was nothing but wa∣vering in the Councils of Eng∣land. Que ce n'estoit que Fluctuation dans les Conseils d'Angleterre. I am, Your Lordship's, &c.
To the Constable of Castille. Hague, Sept. 4. S. N. 1669. My Lord, I Sent the other Day in the Spanish Am∣bassador's Pacquet, a Letter from the King my Master to your Ex∣cellency in favour of Monsieur Taaf; and am obliged to second that Affair by all my good Offices, though I hope they will not be necessary; and I hope that this Gentleman shall not be reckoned the less capable to serve his Master, for having already well served his Friend. I cannot let pass this Occasion without re∣presenting to your Ex∣cellency the undoubted Necessity there is, to give Order with all speed for the Payment
of the 200000 Crowns to the Ministers of Sueden, who have ex∣pected them with so much Patience; and are ready to deliver in∣to the Spanish Ambas∣sadors Hands the Rati∣fications of the Guar∣anty, jointly with me and the States General. They assure me also, that they are ready to enter into a particular Concert of Forces, as soon as this Affair is finisht; but are re∣solved not to mix one with t'other; and are so ill satisfied with some Difficulties that the Spanish Ambassador has raised upon this Mat∣ter, that I believe it will not be possible to keep them here two days longer; if your Excellency sends them an Answer not accord∣ing to the Act signed by the said Ambassa∣dor, and since ratified by the King of Spain;
that is to say, to order the Payment of the Mony upon the mutual Delivery of the Guar∣anty. This is what they told me two Days since; and may per∣haps ruin an Affair that has been so long negotiated, and brought into the Port through so many Difficulties. Your Excellency will judge better than any Body, how you can answer to the Court of Spain, and to all Chri∣stendom, the loss of so great an Occasion for establishing the Secu∣rity of the one, and the Repose of the o∣ther. For, all this de∣pends upon your Re∣solutions, to which the three Confederates, as well as so many o∣thers, will entirely at∣tribute any Misfortune that shall arrive. And, as I have not failed since the beginning of this Affair to contri∣bute all my Cares to it, so I would not be
wanting towards the End, to represent the pressing Necessity of this Conjuncture. It is left to your Excellency to make what use of it you please; from whose Conduct every one will form Presages good or ill to the Af∣fairs of Spain. I am Your Excellency's &c.
Au Conetable de Castille. De la Hay, le 4 Sept. S. N. 1669. Monsieur, J'Envoyé l'autre jour dans le Pacquet de Monsieur l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne, une lettre du Roy mon maitre a V. E. en faveur de Monsieur Taaf; je me crois obligé de l'aider de tous mes bons offices, mais je croy qu'ils ne luy sont pas ne∣cessairs, & que ce Gen∣tilhomme n'en sera pas jugé moins digne & moins capable de servir son Maitre, pour avoir si bien servi son ami. Je ne puis laisser passer cette occasion sans repre∣senter á V. E. qu'il est d'une necessité indispensa∣ble d'expedier incessam∣ment des ordres pour faire toucher aux Mini∣stres
de Suede les 200000 ecus qu'ils ont jusqu'icy attendus avec tant de patience. Ils sont prets de delivrer entre les mains de l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne les Ratificati∣ons de la Guarantie con∣jointement avec moy & les Etats Generaux. Ils m'ont aussi assuré qu'ils etoient tout prets á en∣trer dans un Concert particulier pour fournir un secours de Forces, que pour cela ils n'attendoi∣ent que de voir finir cette premiere affaire; & quil's etoient resolus de ne point mêler l'une avec l'autre. Ils sont au reste si mal satisfaits de quelques dif∣ficultez que Monsieur l' Ambassadeur d'Espagne leur a fait sur ce premier article, que je ne croy pas qu'il soit possible de les re∣tenir deux jours icy aprés que V. E. se sera expli∣quée sur cette affaire, & que nous aurons reçû, sa reponse, supposé que cette reponse ne s'accorde pas á l'acte signé par le dit Am∣bassadeur, & depuis rati∣fie
par le Roy d'Espagne, c'est ásavoir de fair con∣ter l'argent sur l'Extra∣dition de la Guarantie. Voila ce qu'ils m'ont dit depuis deux jours, & ce qui pourroit bien faire aller en fumee une af∣faire si long tems negociée, & menee au port á tra∣vers tant de difficultez. V. E. sentira mieux que personne, qu'elle se rend responsable & á la Couronne d'Espagne, & á toute la Chretienté de la perte d'une si grande occasion, qui establissoit la sureté de l'une, & le repos de l'autre. Car, c'est de vos resolutions que tout cela va dependre; & c'est aussi sur elles se∣cules que les trois Confe∣derez, ainsi que tant d'autres vont rejetter les malheurs qui suivront du peu de Succés de nos ne∣gotiations. Comme de le commencement je n'ay epargné ni veilles ni soins pour cette grande affaire, je n'ay pas voulu manquer sur la sin á faire une der∣niere demarche, qui est,
de representer a V. E. toute l'importance des conjonctures qui s'offrent encore á nous, mais qui sont prêtes á nous echap∣per. Ce sera á V. E. á en user comme il luy plaira: On tirera des mesures qu'il va prendre, des presages certains pour le bon ou le mauvais etat des affaires d'Espagne. Je suis de V. E. &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Oct. 11. S. N. 1669. My LORD, I HAVE this Day received your Lord∣ship's of the 21st past, and having none by me from Mr. Secretary Trevor, shall presume to return in an Answer to your Lordship's that little I have to say by this Post: For all at present is here at a stand in our Business of the Alliance; and when it will proceed again, depends whol∣ly upon his Majesty, do what I can. Since last Post, the Spanish Ambassador, the Baron d'Isola, Monsieur Marechal, and Monsieur de Witt, have been severally with me to know what I will propose, or what I will consent to for an Expedient in this Matter. The two first would fain have something from me to work upon; and I entertain them with Complaints of the Spanish ill Usage towards us, having proposed at London not only to indemnity us, in what they projected there concern∣ing his Majesty's engaging to the Suede, but likewise a Share of his own Charge likely to arise upon a War: All which, ever since the Peace they have been content
to forget, and now would put us upon a necessity of engaging to advance the Suedish Subsidies. I further represented to the Spanish Ambassador, the Imprudence of their Councils, in raising this Difficulty in the first Payment to the Suedes, by the easy∣ness whereof they might have possessed themselves of the Guaranty, and thereby entred into Confidence with Sueden; se∣cured them from thinking of any other Measures, and pursued the Finishings of our Work by any particular Concerts with∣out Danger or Unkindness. I urged all this so far, that though the Spanish Ambassador persisted in affirming, That the Orders from Spain to the Constable, as well as to himself, were positive in the Case of not paying the Mony without the particular Concert; yet he at last joined with me very freely in blaming the Weak∣ness and Unhappiness of the Spanish Coun∣cils upon these Particulars; and wondring how the Marques Castel-Rodrigo could suf∣fer the Dispatch of such Orders. The next Morning the Baron d'Isola came to me, and entertained me with long Discourses of what pass'd between him and the Spanish Ambassador, in consequence of what I had said the Night before: And the Sum of all was, as I imagined, to sound me whether I would be induced to enter the Concert
upon the Spanish Ambassadors promising me an Indemnity from Spain for the Hun∣dred and fifty thousand Crowns a Month insisted upon by the Suedes to be secured to them from the King. Upon this Insinua∣tion I resolved to take no Hold at all; be∣cause if his Majesty should ever resolve to promise the Advance of the Hundred and fifty thousand Crowns in case of a War; I thought it would be better trusting to gain his Satisfaction by negotiating in Spain to that purpose, upon the Grounds given of so many Overtures by the Spanish Ministers both at London, Brussels, and here; than by taking a Promise or Instrument here from this Ambassador (as the Baron says) beyond his Power, and especially whose Se∣crecy in it we cannot much reckon upon: Whereas the publishing any such Thing may have ill Consequences of Jealousy be∣tween Us and the Dutch. Therefore, I con∣tented my self to tell the Baron, That I was at the end of my Line; and could proceed no further than I had done already: That his Majesty had ordered me to give the Guaranty in Conjunction with the other Confederates upon Payment of two hundred thousand Crowns according to the Spanish Ambassador's own Act: That he thought the Spaniards had no Right to press us up∣on the particular Concert, which yet he
would be ready to consider of when the Confederates thought fit; and in the mean Time was very sincerely resolved to per∣form the Guaranty if there should be Oc∣casion for it. Monsieur Marechal press'd me something harder upon entring into a Conference with him and the Dutch Deputies, which I pro∣miss'd before my last, but have excused till Monday next, in the mean time to prepare Matter for it. He desired to know if I had yet any Powers to promise the Hundred and fifty thousand Crowns projected at London (as he ever insists) to be secured by his Ma∣jesty; without which he did not see any Thing to be done here: I told him di∣rectly, I had not. He then asked me to what End we should confer, since without That, the Concert could not be framed, nor consequently the present Mony paid: And complained that the want of this Concert was of present Prejudice to Them alone, tho' it depended equally upon the Consent of the other Confederates. I answered him, That till I received new Orders, he should never find me vary from those I had so often told him; which were, to see first in what Proposals Sueden and Holland could agree, and then represent it to his Majesty, whose Answer could be of no long Delay: And That I suppose will be the Fruit of our
Conference. He said, he thought They and Holland were agreed upon all Points but one, that is, in the number and kind of Forces, according to the first projected Con∣cert, and in Holland's assuring them a fourth Part of the Sixty thousand Crowns. That which they differed upon was; That whereas Spain offered a Promise of the other Thirty thousand Crowns; they ex∣pected, We and Holland should likewise warrant that Payment, because their En∣gagement for Sixteen thousand Men upon the Concert, would be to Us and not to Spain; and it was no Reason, if Spain failed of that Payment, they should yet stand en∣gaged to Us for the whole number of Men. I told him, I doubted much, that if this Point were still between them, they were not very near agreeing: And he said, He would speak with Monsieur de Witt once more upon it before the Conference. But I doubt this will not hinder them from com∣ing to some Proposal to be made his Ma∣jesty of something they shall agree in. I am, &c.
To the Prince of Toscany. Hague, Dec. 5. S. N. 1669. SIR, I Should not have deferred the Ac∣knowledgments I owe your Highness for the Honour of your Letter, if I had not been pur∣sued with a great Ill∣ness at the time I re∣ceived it: And I would not acquit my self of this Duty by any o∣ther Hand but my own, because I am sure there is none so pleased or so ready to engage in the Occasions of your Service. I am extream glad of your Highness's happy Arrival at Flo∣rence; where I wish you all the Felicities
that ought to be desti∣ned as they are due, to so great a Merit: And I hope, that after the glorious Fatigues which have hitherto been the Diversion of your Highness, you will now find Pleasure in the soft∣ness of Repose. For my self, I shall never think I am hap∣py till I have paid my Respects to your High∣ness in your own Court; and I envy no Man at present but my Lord Falconbridge, who is going on an Ambas∣sy into so fine a Cly∣mate, and among such Conversations as those of Italy, where Wit and Weather are equal∣ly clear; while I lan∣guish in a Country where we breath no∣thing but Mists, and discourse of nothing but Business. To confirm this last, I cannot end my Letter
without telling your Highness, That after so many Shocks the Triple Alliance has born for some time, and so ma∣ny Presages of its Death; there is with∣in these two Days some appearance of its Re∣covery, unless any unexpected Accident should occasion a Re∣lapse. Justice is so essential among the Qualities of a Great Prince, that I will not doubt but your Highness does me That of believing always with equal Passion and Truth, SIR, Your Highness's &c.
Au Prince de Toscane. La Haye, le 5 Dec. S. N. 1669. Monsieur, JE n'aurois pas perdu un moment á mar∣quer la reconnoissance que je dois á V. A. de l'hon∣neur qu'elle m'a fait par sa Lettre, si dans le me∣me tems qu'elle me fût rendue, je n'eusse ete ata∣qué d'une violente ma∣ladie. Je n'ay pas vou∣lu, je l'avouera, m'ac∣quiter de ce devoir par une main etrangee, & cela vient de ce qu'il me semble, qu'il n'y a que la mienne qui sente autant de plaisir, & s'employe avec autant d'affection, des qu'il est question de quelque chose qui regarde V. A. & son Service. Je prens beaucoup de part á l'heureuse arrivée de V. A. á Florence; je souhaite qu'elle y goute toutes les
prosperitez deues & sans doute destinées á un me∣rite comme le sien. J'es∣pere, qu' aprés les glo∣rieuses fatigues qui ont fait jusqu' icy les diver∣tissemens de V. A. elle va trouver quelque plai∣sir dans les douceur du repos. Pour moy, je ne seray jamais content de la for∣tune, que je n'ay fait la reverence á V. A. dans sa propre Cour; & á l'heure qu'il est, se seul homme que j'envie dans le monde, c'est Mi Lord Falconbridge, que son Ambassade va conduire dans un si beau Clymat, & ou il va gouter tous les charmes attachez au delicates & spirituelles conversations d' Italie; il trouvera lá les jours & les esprits egalement purs & brillans; & pour moy, mon partage est de lan∣guir dans un pais ou l'on ne respirent que des brou∣illards, & ou l'on ne sait que parler d'affaires. J'ay deja un peu con∣tracté de ce Genie; &
pour le prouver á V. A. c'est que je ne scaurois achever ma Lettre sans luy dire, qu' aprés tant de secousses que la Triple Alliance a souffert de∣puis quelque tems, & tant de sinistres presages qui ont anoncé sa mort, il y a pourtant depuis deux jours quelque ap∣parance qu'il va revivre, á moins qu'un accident inopiné ne cause sa re∣chûte. La justice est une de ces qualitez si essentielles á un grand Prince, que je ne veux pas meme soup∣çonner que V. A. me refuse celle de me croire toujours ce que je suis avec tant de passion & de verite, &c.
To the Constable of Castille. Hague, Dec. 5. S. N. 1669. My Lord, THO' it will be difficult to add any Thing to the Ar∣guments used in my last Letter, and in other Memorials sent so fre∣quently to the Spanish Ambassador, upon the Subject of the Payment already due to the Crown of Sueden, and so solemnly stipulated by the Act of May the 9th, signed by the said Ambassador, and af∣terwards ratified by the Queen Regent: How∣ever I would not fail in this important Con∣juncture, to make this last Effort to dispose your Excellency to the quick Execution of a
Council so just and ne∣cessary to the Repose of Christendom, as well as the Preservation of Spain; and of such Im∣portance to the Honour of your Excellency, who never can defend your Self against the Complaints of having by little Scruples lost the Success of so great an Affair, and neg∣lected the Fruits of an Alliance whereof all Christendom hath spoke with so much Applause, and hoped from it so much Felicity. I do not desire to importune your Excel∣lency by a Repetition of Things already said; and I have nothing new to add, but the Consideration of Mon∣sieur Marechal the Mi∣nister of Sueden's de∣parture, after long Im∣patience, and much Discontent at the Pro∣ceedings of Spain, in all the Negotiations where he has inter∣vened for eight or nine
Months past. Before he went, he demanded back from me the Act of Guaranty signed by Sueden, and placed in my Hands with the o∣ther Acts to be con∣signed into the Hands of the Spanish Ambas∣sador, upon payment of the 200000 Crowns to Sueden: And in the mean time, he con∣sented entirely, that I should give back to the said Ambassador his Act of the 9th of May, by which he was o∣bliged to the said Pay∣ment upon the con∣signing of the said Guaranties: But I used all my Endeavours to keep the said Guar∣anty of Sueden some∣time longer in my Hands, hoping your Excellency would yet in a few days acknow∣ledge the Obligation and Necessity of ad∣vancing this Satisfa∣ction
to Sueden, so long due and demanded. And as yet I have it in my Power to deliver the three said Guar∣anties to the Spanish Ambassador, as soon as he will have given the said Mony to the Sue∣dish Resident here: But if this Affair be delayed till Monsieur Marechal has repre∣sented it to the King his Master, as he was resolved to do upon his departure; or till the Suedish Minister's Re∣sident here shall have received an Answer to the Dispatches they sent about three weeks ago, upon the Spight and Despair they were in at the bad Success of this Affair: In either of these Cases, I leave
your Excellency to judge, whether there will be any Hopes that the Suedish Court, sow∣ered by the ill Treat∣ment and angry Repre∣sentations of their Mi∣nisters, will then give us the means we pos∣sess at present, to fi∣nish this great Work: And how necessary it will be to follow the late ill Impressions made in that Court as soon as possible, by new ones to their en∣tire Satisfaction. For, as soon as Spain shall be in possession of the Guar∣anties of all the Con∣federates, one may say, That not only all the Appearances are safe, but also that the Sub∣stance it self is finished. And if any Forms re∣main towards the last Perfection of the Work, there must be time giv∣en to concert them,
without hazarding the Gross of the Affair. I desire your Excel∣lency to consider, that such Occasions as you have at present in your Hands, are not usually given twice to Men, and that they common∣ly lose their Force by a slowness in laying hold of them. But I cannot apprehend so sad an Ef∣fect from the Prudence and good Intentions of your Excellence: At least, I shall comfort my self that I have done my utmost Duty to∣wards preventing so great a Misfortune to Christendom. I am, My Lord, your &c.
Au Conneta∣ble de Castille. De la Hay, le 5 Dec. S. N. 1669. Monsieur, QƲOY qu'il soit bien difficile d'a∣jouier quelque chose aux raisons dont je me suis servi dans ma derniere Lettre á V. E. & qui d'ailleurs sont repandues & ont eté repetées en tant de divers memoires en∣voyés á Monsieur l'Am∣bassadeur d'Espagne, tou∣chant le payement deja deu á la Couronne de Suede, & si solennelle∣ment accordé & stipulé par l'Acte du 9 de Muy, qui a eté signé par le dit Ambassadeur, & ratifié aepuis par la Reine Re∣gente: Je n'ay pourtant pas voulu dans une con∣joncture si importante negliger de faire un der∣nier effort, afin de tacher á disposer V. E. a une prompte execution dans
une affaire si juste, si ne∣cessaire d'ailleurs au re∣pos de la Chretienté, aussi bien qu' á la conservation de l'Espagne; j'ajouteray, si importante á l'honneur de V. E. Peut etre sera t'il hors de votre pouvoir de parer aux reproches & aux plaintes d'avoir par de petits scrupules re∣noncé au succés d'une si grande affaire, & neg∣ligé les fruits d'une Al∣lyance dont la Chretienté a parlé avec de si grands applaudissemens, & dont elle se promettoit tant de joye & de prosperité. Je n'ay pas dessein d'importuner V. E. par la repitition de choses de∣ja cent fois dites; & tout ce que je puis ajouter de nouveau, roule sur le depart de Monsieur Marechal, le Ministre de la Suede, qui aprés bien des impatiences, a∣prés tant de pourparlers inutiles, enfin mecontent de l'Espagne autant qu'on le peut être, & ayant sur le coeur l'inutilité des negotiations ou on l'a fait intervenir, & qui ont
consumé neuf mois, pres∣se son depart, & va tout reveler au Roy son Mai∣tre; il me redemande avant son retour l'Acte de Guarantie signé par la Suede, & remis entre mes mains avec les au∣tres actes, pour etre en∣suite deposé entre les mains de Monsieur l' Ambassadeur d'Espagne, lors que les 200000 ecus auront eté payé á la Couronne de Suede. En même tems il m'a declaré qu'il consentoit pleine∣ment que l'acte du 9 de May fait par le dit Am∣bassadeur, & dans le∣quel il s'obligeoit au dit payement, sur la remise des Guaranties, & lequel acte j'ay aussi entre les mains; que cet acte, dis je, fût rendu á l'Am∣bassadeur d' Espagne. J'ay fait de grands ef∣forts pour retenir encore quelques jours la dite Guarantie entre mes mains, dans l'esperance que V. E. informée de tout en peu de jours, sen∣tiroit la justice & la ne∣cessité
de satisfaire la Suede; il y a long tems que la chose luy a eté promise, par consequent il y a long tems qu'elle luy est due; elle a ete souvent demandée, elle l'est encore aujourdhuy, & á l'heure que j'ecris je suis en pouvoir de liv∣rer les trois Guaranties á Monsieur l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne, aussi tôt qu'il aura fait mettre l'argent au Ministre de Suede, qui est encore icy. Mais, supposé que l'affaire soit ou negligée ou retardée jusqu' á ce que le Mini∣stre ait envoyé son me∣moire & sa relation á la Cour de son Maitre, & qu'il l'ait instruit de la situation ou toutes choses etoient au moment de son depart. Supposé même que par les delais on don∣ne le tems aux Mini∣stres de Suede de recevoir la reponse aux memoires qu'ils envoyerent il y a trois semaines tout rem∣plis du depit & du deses∣poir de voir le projet se reduire á rien. L'une
ou l'autre de ces deux choses supposés (& V. E. voit qu'on les peut suppo∣ser toutes deux) il est aisé de juger que la Cour de Suede aigrie de l'Es∣pagne par toutes les choses que ses Ministres luy au∣ront representé, ne vou∣dra plus nous continuer le moyen que nous avons en∣core de finir ce grand ouvrage. V. E. voit donc de quel importance il est de poursuivre les derni∣eres impressions que la Suede a eues jusqu' icy, par la nouvelle d'une prompte & entiere conclu∣sion. Car aussitôt que l'Espagne sera en possessi∣on des Guaranties de tous les Confederez, on pourra dire que non seu∣lement toutes les appa∣rences seront sauvées, mais qu'on aura meme pouroû au fond de la chose. Que s'il manquoit quel∣ques formalitez á la per∣fection de cet ouvrage, il ne faudra que du tems; car comme tout sera dis∣posé á une entiere conclusi∣on, on ajustera tout á
loisir, sans que le gros de l'affaire soit en danger. Je prie V. E. de faire reflexion, que des circon∣stances pareilles á celles que vous avez presente∣ment comme sous la main, n'ont pas accoutemé de s'offrir deux fois á une meme personne, & que c'est leur laisser perdre de leur force, que de differer á s'en saisir. Mais la prudence & les bonnes intentions de V. E. me rassurent contre la crainte d'un evenement si funeste. J'aurois du moins la con∣solation d'un homme qui a fait son devoir, & qui n'a rien oublié pour eparg∣ner un si grand malheur á la Chretientié. Je suis, &c.
To Mr. Cary. Hague, Dec. 6. S. N. 1669. SIR, I Very much wonder to hear from Mr. Andros the Difficulties you make in delivering the Tin according to my last Order; and that you thereby occasion so much Prejudice to the King's Service, which I thought you would have advanced all you could, when I writ to you to de∣sire your Care in that Business. But that you may understand what you call my Commission to you; I will let you know that I had no Power to give any Orders at all about that Matter, but in Pursuance of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury's Commands; and therefore new Orders being arrived from them by Major Andros, they are to be obey'd in what concerns the Tin-Business. I desire you once again to comply with him readily in the Delivery of the Tin, according to the last Letter wrote you upon that Subject; and do ab∣solutely disown you in all Difficulties you shall make upon Pretence of any Order from me: And if you continue to delay it any longer, shall upon the first Notice of it
write effectually to the Constable to do his Majesty Justice in it, and me in particular, who neither expected nor deserved this Dealing from you. Your Servant. To Major Andros. Hague, Dec. 6. S. N. 1669. SIR, SInce the writing of this I received yours of the 4th, complaining still of Mr. Cary's refusal to deliver the Tin; where∣upon I have written him the inclosed Let∣ter, which is as much as I can say in it: If he continues his Impertinence still, I sup∣pose 'twill be at his own Cost, since your Protest: And if you will send me Word what are the ways of proceeding against him, I shall write either to the Constable or to the Governor of Ostend, or Sir Mark Og∣nate at Bruges, to favour your Dispatch. I am, Sir your Servant.
To theNow King of Portugal. Prince Regent of Por∣tugal. Hague, Dec. 8. S. N. 1669. SIR, THo' nothing could happen more ac∣ceptable to me, than the occasion which the Por∣tugal Ambassador late∣ly gave me, not only of promoting the Peace so much desired be∣tween Portugal and this State (both Friends and Confederates of the King my Master) but also of shewing some little Mark of my great Devotion for the Queen my Mistress; yet, I confess, my Sa∣tisfaction was much en∣creased by your Royal Highness's Letter, when I found how acceptable
that small Service was to you. I do not in the least pretend to de∣serve the Thanks your Royal Highness is pleased to give me, at least, not upon any other account, than that of desiring by all means to seek other and greater Occasions of being serviceable to your Royal Highness and to the Affairs of Portugal; and in so do∣ing I may have some better Pretence to your Royal Highness's Fa∣vour, wherewith you are pleased to honour me. I wish your Royal Highness all Health, and am Sir, &c.
Principi Portu∣galiae. Hagae Comitis, Dec. 8. S. N. 1669. Serenissime Princeps, QƲanquam nihil mi∣hi gratius istâ oc∣casione accidere potuisset quam mihi nuper praebuit Dominus Legatus Portu∣galiae, non modo exopta∣tam utrin{que} concordiam & finem litium inter Por∣tugaliae & Foederati Belgii Status (utros{que} Regi Do∣mino meo Amicos adeò & Confoederatos) promo∣vendi, sed & eodem no∣mine, immensi erga Re∣ginam Dominam meam obsequii, saltem exiguum aliquod specimen exhi∣bendi; auctam tamen & cumulatam planè ex lite∣ris A. V. R. oblectati∣onem meam fuisse confi∣teor, cum illi tam ac∣ceptum extitisse istud qua∣lecun{que}
officium summâ cum voluptate percepissem. Ego me autem nec gra∣tias, quas mihi dignata est A. Ʋ. R. meruisse prae∣fero, saltem non alio no∣mine quam summi istius quo teneor desiderii ul∣teriores aliquas & ma∣jores occasiones conse∣quendi, quibus devotissi∣mum prorsus in A. V. R. & res Portugaliae studi∣um meum testari potero, benevolentiam{que} istam cu∣jus testimonio me tam eximiè ornatum voluit, omni meliore modo de∣mereri. Valeat interim A.V.R. me{que} semper inter praeci∣puos Gloriae suae Cultores, rebus{que} suis addictissimos aestimare velit.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, Dec. 10. S. N. 1669. SIR, I Received yesterday yours of the 23d past, together with his Majesty's In∣structions of the 22d; and could have wish'd Mr. Werden had brought them with him for a Reserve, though not to have been communicated till the last Minute of his stay, and the Despair of all other Trials, for by that means we might have kept the Business entire; whereas now, though it may recover some Life, yet I much doubt whether it ever can, the Strength and Health of its first Constitution: For be∣sides so great and so many Jealousies as are entred into it on all sides; I count Mon∣sieur Marechal's going away, a very ill Accident; and can yet make no Guess how Monsieur Applebome will acquit himself whenever we shall come to the Payment of the Subsidies; tho' Monsieur Marechal was so forward as to make it sure: But Mr. Werden can tell you how different sorts of Men they are; and for ought I see, all Businesses depend upon the Qualities of the
Men that manage them; which (consider∣ing the ill Success of this) is all I shall say in Answer of your Compliment to me; That, 'tis in very good Hands. I gave you an Account in my last, of the bold Advance the Dutch had made to the Constable, of signing their Part of their Concert alone immediately upon the Pay∣ment of the two hundred thousand Crowns. We expect every Day the Answer of this Proposition; and finding one Clause of my Instructions to command the suppres∣sing them, in case I find either before or after their Arrival, that the Mony would be paid according to the Treaty of May last; I thought it agreeable to what I conceive of his Majesty's Intentions, for me to take no Notice of them, till I see what this Return from the Constable will produce; and in case it be followed by the Payment of the Mony, to expect his Ma∣jesty's further Orders before I proceed upon them. If the Constable still insist to have the Concert jointly signed, I shall then fall into the Consideration of it with the Suedes and Dutch Ministers, and endeavour to bring it to an Issue according to his Ma∣jesty's Instructions, but so as not to prosti∣tute our Offer till we have Assurance that no more Difficulties will be made by Spain;
nor any Changes desired in that Concert which has so long been framed, and in which I have not observed the least Incli∣nation in any of the Ministers here to ad∣mit of any Alterations. I suppose it is not his Majesty's Intention I should consent to the Concert, but in Conjunction with the Suede as well as the Dutch, in case the first should not be induced to it, or raise new Difficulties; and according to this Appre∣hension I shall proceed. In all which Points I am more distinct, that you may find whether I understand his Majesty's Meaning right, and may please accord∣ingly to inform and direct me: For, the Paces, as they are much more difficult, so they ought to be much more cautious in a Minister, when his Instructions are nume∣rous and particular, as mine are grown in this Affair. And you may be very confi∣dent, when they are once given they shall be punctually observed to the best that I can understand them: And in that it self, I thank God, I have not yet failed; and desire nothing of my Master and my Friends more than that I may be the first to hear of it when I do. I did enclose the last Memorial I sent the States upon the Business of Surinam; and spoke with Monsieur Van Beuninghen
since my last upon it. He protests, that for his Part he is of Opinion (and so are most of his Province) to give us just what we ask in that Matter; but that we must excuse the Delays of their Constitution, when the Dissent of one Province makes the Resolutions of all the other lame. He con∣fess'd that though Zealand had consented to what I mentioned in two of my late Letters, yet they had ordered their Depu∣ties to delay the Conclusion of it for a while; so as they had been forced to write once more to convince them of the Ne∣cessity which Holland thought there was to dispatch it speedily as well as effectually: And he hoped for a sudden and good An∣swer from them. The Ministers here have been earnest with me to propose to his Majesty, to go the same or equal Pace with them in laying Impositions upon the French Commodities; which they think would prove the greatest Parsimony that either of us could use, and be a greater Blow to France than Armies could give: And they say, in case his Ma∣jesty should resolve upon it, they would go as far as he pleased in it; whereas, with∣out that, they must be something tenderer than they would be. They would fain engage me likewise to propose to his Majesty their joining with
us in equal Proportion of Ships and Men for the carrying on a War against Algiers: But I suppose their End is, That they may be comprehended likewise in a Peace with them, which may perhaps be our furthest Aim: And so I tell them this might have been a welcom Proposal when we began to set out our Fleet; but can signify little, now the Action seems near an end: How∣ever, that such Things are fitter to be pro∣posed by their own Ambassador in England than by me: And I mention them, that you may be prepared, in case he receive Instru∣ctions to propose them there. I am always as becomes me, &c.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, Dec. 13. S. N. 1669. SIR, THOUGH I had Liberty given me by your last of the 2d past, to make use of my late Instructions as soon as I pleased; the Constable's positive Answer having satisfied you what we were to ex∣pect from thence: Yet the Advance having since been made from the Dutch, by the Offer I acquainted you with to the Constable; I resolved still to pursue what I intended in my last, in suppressing wholly this In∣struction, till I saw the Constable's Answer to the States Letter, and what Hopes that would furnish us with of obtaining the Payment of the present Mony without engaging his Majesty in the Concert before his Measures were taken more fully with Spain. Bat yesterday the Spanish Ambassa∣dor came to tell me, That he had received a Letter from their Agent Fonseca, which assures him, that Orders were already sent me to sign the Concert; and that his Ma∣jesty told him so at the same Time when he received News of Don Juan de Toledo's Death: I told him, the Authority was too
too good to be disputed: And therefore I confess'd I had received Orders to make a further Advance for the Satisfaction of Spain and the Confederates than his Ma∣jesty had yet thought fit to do, or esteemed himself at all obliged to: But I desired them to believe there was nothing to give them any the least Hopes of his Majesty's charging himself with any part of the Sue∣dish Subsidies. That if They, and Sueden and Holland could agree upon that Point, so as to dispose Sueden to sign the first Con∣cert that was proposed at the same Time with the Guaranty; His Majesty would go very far towards the Conclusion of the whole Matter. But I assured him at the same Time, That though I were agreed with Sueden and Holland to make him an Offer of the Concert; yet we would not do any Thing towards it till he had Powers to consign the Mony immediately, with∣out any new Dispatches and Difficulties from Brussels. I found, the Spanish Ambassador had immediately upon Receipt of his Letters from England, sent an Extract of them to Monsieur de Witt; as the Baron d'Isola had done to Monsieur Applebome; who were both in Pain till they knew the Truth from me, and sent to me to that Purpose: And knowing the Ambassador would be as di∣ligent
to inform the Constable as them, and consequently influence any Answer not al∣ready given to the Dutch Letter; I resolved to go and talk with them both upon the Business, and concert with them what Course to hold in the Progress of it. I could not get a Time of speaking with Monsieur de Witt to day, but did with Monsieur Applebome; and much to the same Purpose as I had yesterday to the Spa∣nish Ambassador, but plainer, and in more Confidence: All I could get from him was, That he would read over that first Concert to day, and consider whether he could sign it: That it was true, Monsieur Marechal had offered to sign something like it, but containing in the same Act the Security of their future Subsidies, which they were to insist upon before they sign it. I told him, all the Difference would be, that whereas they contented themselves before with Spain's Promise of one half, to take it now for three Parts, if the Spaniards would be persuaded to it; and they had the same Se∣curity for one as for t'other, (which I knew they reckoned upon) of not furnishing more Troops than in Proportion to the Mony they received. He seemed a good deal un∣satisfied that the Spanish Ambassador had received the Advice from England, before the Answer was returned from the Constable:
For since we will make no Part of the Se∣curity for their future Subsidies, I find they would very fain touch the two hun∣dred thousand Crowns before they give the Concert; which they might then sell dearer to Spain, or at least make it the Price of their Satisfaction growing due by the two next Payments of the four hundred eighty thou∣sand Crowns already due. All ended be∣tween us with this Promise, of acquainting me with his Resolution, so soon as he had considered it, and the Proposal of a Con∣ference upon it with Monsieur de Witt. I find now the Want I always feared of Monsieur Marechal, who is not to be re∣trieved; so that we must make our best of what we have, and do all we can to put him out of his Pace. The Baron d'Isola came to me this After∣noon; and his Business I found was, to persuade me to sign Monsieur Marechal's Projects, and thereby charge his Majesty with the fifteen thousand Crowns to Sueden, but upon a Promise from the Constable, of Spain supplying his Majesty with the Sums we should furnish upon that Engagement. But I cut him off short in that and all other Expedients; and told him, if his Majesty were induced to sign the Concert, as it was more than they had any Reason to expect from him, so it was all they were to hope
in this Matter; and therefore I desired him to reckon upon it, and take their Mea∣sures accordingly. I suppose by what he said, his Intentions are to go away for Brussels within a Day or two, and bring us a positive Resolution of what we are to ex∣pect from thence as to the immediate Pay∣ment, and their Promise to Sueden of three Parts of the future Subsidies: But he will first endeavour to know Monsieur Apple∣bome's mind; who will at least be stiff in this, that the Promise be made by Spain to the Confederates, and not directly to Sueden. Since my last, the Lunenburg Envoy came to desire me, that I would let his Majesty know, how much his Masters esteemed themselves honoured by the Over∣tures his Majesty made them of entring in∣to an Alliance, of which he was the Head: That thereupon they had ordered him to attend here ever since, in hopes of some further Proposals towards the engaging them in it: But that his Masters hear∣ing no further from hence; and finding that by the ill Posture of our Triple Alliance, other Princes of Germany were seeking other Measures, they had commanded him to return (which he should do about three Weeks hence) but first to endeavour by my Hand to give his Majesty the best Testimo∣nies
of their Affections to his Service, and good Intentions towards the Ends he had so gloriously engaged in. I promised him to perform the Message; and employ'd the rest of my Discourse in convincing him, how much more the Princes of Germany were concerned in the Defence of Flanders than his Majesty; and that however, if his Masters had any Expectations besides their own Interests towards engaging them, they ought to be from Holland and not from Us; since the most important Use of their Troops would be to awe the Bishop of Munster, who might otherwise be able by the French Assistances, to divert all, or the greatest part of the Dutch Forces that way, and thereby leave Flanders open to the French. He confess'd both these Points; and I promised to do him any good Offices I could towards the Dutch Ministers. The Deputies of the States came this Day to me, to assure me of their Desires and Resolutions to satisfie his Majesty in the Business of Surinam; but that they could not yet come to a final Conclusion, and therefore desired me to have Patience for a little longer time, after which I might as∣sure my self of a good End in it. They pretended Monsieur de Witt's and their chief Ministers being so much taken up at this time; but upon Discourse confess'd, the
Zelanders Aim to have their next Ships ar∣rive from Surinam. Upon which I fell in∣to some Heat with them; and told them, I would never send such a Message to his Majesty, such Delays being fitter for Law-Suits than publick Negotiations: At last concluded, that because I would a little consider their Ministers being so much taken up at this Pinch, about Levies and other Affairs agitating in the States of Hol∣land; I was content to stay six Days longer for their Resolution in this Matter, upon Condition I should have it in that Time to his Majesty's Satisfaction. To make short of a long Conference; this they agreed to at last, and I will hope may keep their Words, since there was one of the Zeland Deputies among them. The Task you give me in the End of your Letter, is as you say, a hard one; for, whatsoever is planted of that kind, will not grow long or well but out of a good Root at home; however, I shall venture at it here all I can; and dare undertake it shall not thrive worse in this than in other Neighbour Soils. I am, &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Dec. 24. S. N. 1669. My LORD, THO' Monsieur Overkirk wants no∣thing to make him welcom every where, but especially at the Hague, yet I confess he was the more so to me, by a Letter he brought me from your Lordship; whereby I found my self to be not altoge∣ther forgotten where I desire most to be remembred, and would deserve it if I could. I am very sensible that the Right you say he has done me there, may rather prove an ill Office than a good; But how∣ever I am not the less obliged by his good meaning, nor the more touched by their ill; who are not content I should gain a little Esteem, whilst I am content to gain nothing else; and where I should not care for That neither, but that I believe it to be the best way any Minister can take to∣wards the Advantage of his Master's Ser∣vice. Whilst your Lordship hath neither Share nor Belief in the ill Offices are done me, I shall very easily neglect what comes from other Hands, and content my self with not deserving them, and with the
Assurance, that Time will do me Right; and that your Lordship will not lose your Confidence of me, till you have told me of some one Action in my whole Life, that you thought did not become a Man you were inclined to think well of. And so I will leave that Subject. I agree with your Lordship in being sorry that Mr. Werden did not stay to see the Effect of his Majesty's last Resolution in the great Business here: And tho' the ill or no Entertainments of this Place might excuse his haste of returning; yet I believe he would have been content a little to de∣lay it, if he had expected any Thing new from England: And for my Part, I wish nothing more than some true Witness of my Carriage where-ever I am employ'd; which I doubt not he would have proved, without encreasing, any more than lessen∣ing my Faults. I shall do neither by those of the Spaniards, which your Lordship has so much Reason to censure and re∣proach; nor should I be less amazed at them, but that I look upon them as the usual Distractions of weak and diseased Bodies. 'Tis certain, they have deserved so little of us, that we have no Reason at all to concern our selves in their Interests or Dangers, unless we find they will have very
strong and necessary Consequences upon our own; and in that Case, our growing angry with them will only serve to hurt our selves; and we had better help Them to mend their Faults, than force Them by Despair or Hardships to encrease them. Most of the Ministers here not knowing what to make of their late Conduct in the Difficulties upon the Suedish Mony; nor seeing well which way to turn themselves, in case Spain should take its Measures with France by an Exchange of Flanders; begin to confess they have dealt too roughly with them, in imposing not only the Laws of a hard Peace upon them, but the Suedish Subsidies at the same time; and ever since refusing them their Guaranty till those were paid; and seem to wish they had either accepted the first Proposal I was sent hither to make Them upon that Occasion, or else endeavoured a Defensive League with Them after the Conclusion of the Peace at Aix; I mean, if it might have been done in Conjunction with us: For I think, while we are content to hold firm with them, it were no great Matter to under∣take they shall never take any Measures without us, either there or any where else: Though I know there are Reports in France that would make us believe it, if we are apt to those Impressions.
For their detaining us so long upon the Point of Surinam, it must be attributed to the Constitution of this State, where the Obstinacy of any one Province can keep off a Resolution of the States General as long as they please: And that happens often where (as in this Case) the Matter touches one Province by a particular Interest, and the rest only by a general one: For, I am sure, the Province of Holland and the other Five were many Months ago resolved, not only to give us in Substance the Satisfaction we demanded, but in our own Forms too; till they found that Zeeland would neither be persuaded ni Gourmandè into the same Resolution; which hath made it hang so long, and go over at last defective as to what we expected about one of our own Ships, though as they contend, full as to what we can in any way ground upon our Articles. For their great Arming, which it seems makes more Noise with You and in France than it does here; I shall not need give your Lordship the Particular of it; because that is done with the other current News by my Secretary Mr. Blaithwait every Week to Mr. Williamson; and shall only mark what may perhaps have escaped your Lordship, That there are yet no actual Levies here agreed upon, but only
Officers chosen, Agreements made with them, and Security taken for their bring∣ing in their Men at a certain Warning when they shall be called upon by the States: So as the Execution of what is hi∣therto but prepared, will depend upon the clearer Discovery of the French or the Munster Intentions to open a War; both which are expected here, and equally fear∣ed; the Difference not being great between the Danger of Flanders and their own: So that I can only answer your Lordship's Question about the State's meaning in this Point; That it is, Qu'on ne les trouve pas sans Vert le Printems qui vient; and that if it must prove a Year of Action, they will not be found without Arms in their Hands for the better making either of Peace or War. 'Tis a hard Attempt what your Lordship mentions, to defend their Neigh∣bours in spight of their Teeth; yet I be∣lieve, in Case Spain should come to an Ex∣change with France, and any of the Towns of Flanders should refuse to obey it; either not to be sold lik Slaves (as they call it) by the Spaniards, or not to be used like Slaves by the French; you would see this State protect them with all their Forces; and blow up any such Ends of a War in Flan∣ders, rather than venture it at home; and
perhaps endeavour to unite any such new Member into the Body of their State, by giving them an eighth Voice in their Ge∣nerality, in case it should be such a Place as Antwerp, or Gant, or Bruges, where they might easily come with their Arms to de∣fend it: And they have Notice of some such Discourses a-foot already in these Parts, which they neglect not to foment, as a Pro∣vision against such a Blow from Spain. In case all they can do should not be of Force to prevent the falling of Flanders into the French Hands; I believe their last Ressource may be to endeavour being received as a Circle into the Empire: But in all these Transactions, their chiefest Care will be, to strengthen their Union all they can with us; and to embark us in what they now esteem the Common Cause, of stopping the Growth of the French Greatness. For though they say, and with Truth, That we engaged them first in the Pursuit of these Measures, and the whole Course of their present Councils; yet they would be much at Ease to see us now as warm and as deep in them, as they are themselves; and would fain give Us the Honour of Leading in them all. The Discourse your Lordship will pos∣sibly hear about Changes or Decays in the
Credit of the Ministry here; I believe have no further Source than an Endeavour in the City of Amsterdam to make themselves more considered than as a simple Town in the Provinces; since they pay half of all that is laid upon the Province of Holland, as Holland does upon all that is levied on the Seven Provinces; which makes them be∣lieve they ought at least in some Degree be considered in the Province, as Holland is in the State; which made them employ all their Strength to oppose the Faction of Leyden, Dort, Rotterdam, &c. who under Monsieur de Witt's Influence have of late Years carried all before them in the usual Elections; and join with the Body of the Nobility here, to chuse Monsieur Mattenesse in Exclusion of Monsieur Meerman; where the Contest was about an Office of the greatest Profit in these Countries, and of great Honour, though not Influence upon the Publick Affairs. They have likewise succeeded well in the late Election of Offi∣cers for the new Levies, and seem disposed to run on still in a String. And amongst them there have of late been Overtures about making a new Minister, under the Name of Secretary of State; whose Province should be chiefly to receive the Addresses of Foreign Ministers, and take the Care of
all Foreign Dispaches; and so ease Mon∣sieur de Witt of that Attention he is fain to give to those as well as the Home-Affairs. And this I suppose was calculated for Monsieur Van Beuninghen, who has silently had a great Hand in all the Councils and Motions of his Town of Amsterdam; and I believe, will in Effect come to have the chief Part, or at least Burthen in Foreign Transactions, whether with any new Name or no. Monsieur de Witt in these late Brigues has very prudently avoided any Appear∣ance of being a Party in them; and con∣tented himself with going his usual Pace, but stickling no further in any of them; seeming rather to intend and endeavour the Composure of all, than the valuing him∣self upon a Division; which I believe, with his being so very necessary to the State, will ever preserve him in his Con∣sideration here, without some violent Re∣volution, to which nothing seems at all disposed. Among the late Divisions of this Pro∣vince, one great Point has been, about the intended Prohibition of French Commodi∣ties; which has been violently carried on by Monsieur Van Beuninghen and his Town of Amsterdam; but opposed and tempered by the Towns of the other Faction, upon
the Respect of their particular Interests in the French Trade, and the Pretext of Dan∣ger or ill Consequences in such a Council, unless it be taken in Concert with England: So that whether it will go further than the Defence of the common French Commodi∣ties that are in Wear, I know not; tho' Monsieur Van Beuninghen reckoned (not long since) absolutely, that it would be carried to French Salt and Brandy: And if we would go the same Pace, It should reach to their Wine too: Which he be∣lieved, would soon bring France into such a Consumption as would keep them from being so troublesome abroad. But I en∣tred no further with him into any Discourse of that kind; because I doubt whether we are of a Temper or a Humour to resolve or execute any bold or smart Propositions, how well soever conceived, or conducing to our Health and good Fortunes: Tho' I question not at all, but God Almighty has given us the Power of going as high as the greatest of our Neighbours: But per∣haps, as your Lordship says, unknown to our selves, and in another way than some of us would be glad to have had it. But where-ever it lies, I doubt it will never come out, till his Majesty can find the Means to make an end of all fencing with the Bents of his Parliament, or Discontents
of his People; and bring his Government into the Credit of having no other Aims nor Interests but those of his Subjects in general, not in particular; nor conse∣quently any Eye upon their Mony but for those Uses they are willing to give it. This I confess is my Opinion upon the whole, and, that all does not consist in a Parlia∣ment's being prevailed with to give what is asked in Point of Mony, as I find many People think. However, I should never have said it to any but your Lordship; nor to you neither, but induced by the melan∣choly Reflections I observed in your Letter, upon this Subject: But, whatever mine or another's Opinion is, I am confident every Man that thinks at all, must think it were not amiss if his Majesty and his Ministers would once for all consider and agree upon a general Draught of those Ways and Councils both at Home and Abroad, as they judge will best answer the great Ends of the King and Kingdom's Safety, Ho∣nour and Quiet. For when such a Scheme is once agreed upon, all the Parts of it may be pursued in their Order, and with con∣stant Application till they are brought to pass; at least such as fail not in the Trial, and so are found to have been ill conceived. But if it should prove (as I find some Men think) that we live only by the Day; and
content our selves to patch up Things as they break out, and fly at the Game as it rises; it is at the best but like Birding or Hawking; which may furnish a Dish or two, but can never keep the House. If your Lordship can pardon all this Li∣berty and Trouble, I will not run my self into the occasion of asking it again; if not, you must lay the whole Fault upon your own Letter, or rather upon my not having heard from you, or written to you of late; and upon my perpetual strong Inclinations of returning into my old Correspondence, just as a Man does into an old Love, which lies still at Heart, however diverted or dis∣continued. But because I use so much Free∣dom in the Account of Dispositions here, and of my own Thoughts, I send it by Mr. Richard's Conveyance to your own Hands; in which I shall ever think all safe that concerns me, because I have been al∣ways, and am with so much Passion My Lord, your &c.
To the Constable of Castille. Hague, Jan. 23. S. N. 1670. My Lord, I Doubt not but the Spanish Ambassador has by this Courier communicated to your Excellency the Project of the Concert for Par∣ticular Forces, drawn up by consent of the Ministers of the three Confederates: And I can assure your Excel∣lency, that to bring it into Form, all the said Ministers have stretcht their Powers as much as possible, so that there will be no room to press them further: And it has been with Difficulty enough that we have resisted the Instances of the Suedish Minister, to have his Guaranty, rather than make this Pace after so
many other unprofita∣ble ones. He assures us, that he never ad∣vanced any Proposition of bringing Troops from Pomerania or Bre∣men; because there are no more in those Parts than what serve for Garrisons; and when he is pressed upon this Point, he answers us, That, to maintain su∣pernumerary Troops in those Parts, they must have Subsidies even in time of Peace; and upon this Condi∣tion Sueden will be content. I think, what he promises is sufficient; that is, to bring into the Field the 16000 Men in three Months after the Attack; for there is no Appearance of employing so great Forces, unless by way of Diversion; since the Troops to be furnish'd by his Majesty and the States General, joined to those of the Catho∣lick King, will be as
many as can be well employ'd for the De∣fence of Flanders; for it is not designed they should be Masters of the Field. Your Ex∣cellency sees, that you may reckon if you please upon 10000 Men from the States in 15 days time; and tho' there be no Term spe∣cified by the King my Master, I think your Excellency need make no Difficulty upon it; since the Words, As soon as possible, signify the shortest time one can desire. And I con∣fess, that not having observed any Refle∣ction upon the Time, in the Orders of the Queen Regent of Spain, which were communi∣cated to us by the Am∣bassador Gamarra, I gave no notice of it to his Majesty, thinking
my self sufficiently guarded by my Powers, to sign the same Pro∣ject, which had been sent into England as well as Spain. I hope, that as soon as your Excellency will have sent Powers to the Spanish Ambassador to deliver the Mony, there will be no Diffi∣culty in signing the Project as it has been communicated to him. And I do not think, from what I can judge by the Minister of Sue∣den, that the Affair is likely to suffer any fur∣ther delays; whereof I thought good to give your Excellency this Intelligence, which you may make use of ac∣cording to your Pru∣dence, and the Interests of the King your Ma∣ster. I am, My Lord, your &c.
Au Conneta∣ble de Castille. La Hay, le 23 Jan. S. N. 1670. Monsieur, JE ne doute pas que Monsieur l'Ambas∣sadeur d'Espagne ne com∣munique á V. E. par ce Courier le Projet du con∣cert des forces particu∣lieres, lequel a eté arreté icy par le consentement des Ministres de trois Confederez. Je puis bien assurer V. E. que pour le reduire á la forme ou il est, tous les Mini∣stres se sont relachez á l'envi, & autant qu'il leur a eté possible. Il seroit inutile de les presser de nouveau, & pretendre en obtenir davantage: Nous avons trové assez de dif∣ficulté á l'emporter sur les Ministres de Suede, pour avoir sa Guarantie avant que d'aller plus loin, & de faire de nou∣veaux
pas inutiles, aprés tous ceux que nous avi∣ons faits. Il nous asseure de n'avoir jamais rien proposé qui tendît á faire venir de Troupes de Po∣meranie ni de Breme, qui sont des lieux ou il n'y en a pas un plus grand nombre que ce qu'il faut pour les garni∣sons; que si l'on le presse sur ce point, il nous re∣pond, que pour entretenir des Troupes supernume∣raires en ces lieux lá, il faut des Subsides en tems de paix même, & qu'a ces conditions la Suede en sera satisfaite. Il me semble que c'est assez qu'il promette de faire agir le 16000 hom∣mes trois mois ecoulez aprés l'attaque; car il n'y a guere d'apparence d'employer de si grandes forces, que par voye de diversion: Les Troupes qui doivent etre fournies par sa Majesté & les Etats Generaux etant jointes á celles du Roy Ca∣tholique, leur nombre sera
suffisant pour la deffense des Paîs-bas, car on n'a pas dessein de se repandre dans le paîs? & de s'y elargir, ni de paroitre maitre de la campagne. V. E. voit, que quand il luy plaira, quinze jours de tems la rendront maitresse de dix mille hommes de Troupes des Etats Generaux; & á l'egard du Roy mon Mai∣tre, quoy que le terme ne soit ni exprimé, ni precisement specifié, il me semble pourtant, que V. E. ne peut former de difficultez sur cela; Car ces mots, Au plustot que faire se pourra, emportent bien un terme limité, quelque court qu'on veuille le sousen∣tendre, personne n'ayant jamais exigé une chose plutôt qu'elle ne se peut faire, J'avoüeray, que les ordres & pleins pou∣voirs de la Reine Regente d'Espagne, qui nous ont eté communiqués par l' Ambassadeur Gamarra, ne faisants aucune men∣tion de cette petite dif∣ference,
je n'en avois pas donné avis á sa Ma∣jesté, me croyant assés muni, & assés autorisé par mes pleins pouvoirs pour signer le même pro∣jet qui avoit eté envoye en Angleterre aussi bien qu'en Espagne. J'espere que dés que V. E. aura depeché les Pouvoirs á l'Ambassa∣deur d'Espagne de de∣livrer l'argent, il n'y aura plus de difficulté á la signature du Projet, tel qu'il luy a eté com∣muniqué: Et autant que je le puis juger, sur tout par rapport au Ministre de Suede, je ne croy plus que cette affaire trouve de retardement. C'est dequoy j'ay voulu donner avis á V. E. C'est á elle á en user selon sa pru∣dence, & les interets de son Roy, & á m'estimer comme je suis, &c.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, Jan. 24. S. N. 1670. SIR, I Am to acknowledge yours of the 7th with an enclosed to Monsieur Van Beun∣inghen, which I have sent to Amsterdam, having first perused it as you pleased to give me leave. I shall say nothing upon it till I have spoken with him, and seen how we agree in Matter of Fact: Because the Weight of all seems to lie upon the use of those privative Contracts to the Exclusion of our Trade; having been disowned, if not invalidated by the Treaty between the two Nations after the first War; and upon the Practice having been exercised accord∣ingly for several Years after, and till with∣in few Years of our second War: Which two Points, if they can be evidenced by the Treaty, and by sufficient Testimonies of the subsequent Practice, we have certainly all the Reason in the World for our De∣mands. But if we must rely upon the common Equity in Freedom of Traffick between Friends; we are engaged in the Question upon which we cannot yet agree; whether the same Rules are current in the
Indies as in Europe: To which I suppose we shall hardly our selves consent, if the West must be comprehended as well as the East. But I shall be able to say more upon this, when I have got a Sight of the Treaty after the first War, and heard Monsieur Van Beuninghen upon your Letter: And in the mean time, shall assure you of all the Offices I can possibly ren∣der towards the obtaining of what we pretend. I can add nothing to my last upon the Business of Surinam; being engaged in my Endeavours of disposing those of Ze∣land to let it pass smooth when it comes to the States General: Such Stops being easier prevented than removed; while Men are so apt to persist in what they have once said. In the mean Time the Pensioner of Zeland presses me to procure the Names of such as his Majesty intends to employ as Commissioners, before the Orders here are consigned me, according as they desired in their last Letter: Wherein you may ob∣serve the Names of three Men to be in∣serted on purpose that his Majesty might de∣cline them in this Commission: If you please to send me the Names, I suppose it may be necessary to the expediting of these Orders; unless you should think of any Inconveni∣ence in it, which occurs not to me.
In Pursuit of the late Conferences, whereof I gave you Account in my last; we have agreed upon this enclosed Project to be sent the Constable, as that which he may hope will be signed upon the Mony being paid; and wherein I am sure there is not any Thing of the least moment changed, as to what concerns his Majesty; though the changing of the Form that you sent me, could not be avoided, because it was without Introduction or Conclusion; and besides it went a Step further than the Suedish Minister was willing to do, in making it an Act to the Spaniards; whereas this runs only as an Instrument between themselves, of which the Spanish Ministers are to have only an Authentick Copy: And since the Suedes had rather have it this way, I thought best to agree with them; at least if the Spaniards will be contented with it: But I would not be induced to engage his Majesty in point of Time; though I was never press'd with more Earnestness to any Thing, both by the Spaniards and by the Dutch; who sent their Deputies twice to persuade me to it, because they were un∣willing to leave the Constable that way of escaping us. And to say the Truth, in my own Judgment I thought it very little ma∣terial, but I had no Orders to go further in it; and have to the Spaniards taken upon
my self the not having given his Majesty any notice of that Pretension, early enough to have it included in my Powers; as you will see by the inclosed Copy of the Letter I yesterday wrote the Constable, in Conjun∣ction with another from the States, to press Conclusion in this Affair. For particular Occurrents, I refer to what goes to Mr. Cook, being unwilling to charge my self with the Credit of current News; which I have ever found so uncer∣tain, that a Man may be considered more for what he does not write, than what he does. Yet I will trouble you with two small Matters, whether they deserve it or no. Monsieur de Rohan, Brother to the Duke de Mombaçon, having sold his Place of Grand Veneur for four hundred and odd thousand Livres, came hither last Week to dispose of a hundred thousand Crowns in this Country, tho' Interest is not half so high as in France; and has done it: Which I reflected on, because I had heard formerly, he was a Person as well with his Master as almost any at Court. There was executed this Week at Am∣sterdam, a Person of very good Quality and Credit among them; only for having en∣gaged the Copies of an Obligation he had from the Admiralty, instead of the Origi∣nal, to some Persons from whom he took
up Mony upon them: And tho' he was Nephew to one of the Burgomasters of that Town, and Brother to the Treasurer of Zealand; and all the Instances that could be, were made for having him condemned all his Life to a Hole where he could neither see nor stir; with offer of repaying all the Mony he had taken up: And afterwards a thousand Pounds would have been given to have had him executed in Prison; yet he could not escape losing his Head with the common Forms in Publick; to the Loss of his Creditors, who were as much concerned to save him as his Friends. Which I ob∣served as a remarkable Strain of the Justice here, so much different from the Style of most other Places. I am Sir, &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Feb. 7. S. N. 1670. My LORD, SINCE my last I have received your Lordship's of the 28th past; and doubt not but before this arrives, you will be fully satisfied by the late Accounts I have given, of our Progress here, to∣wards the Conclusion of what had so long depended between Us and the Spanish Mi∣nisters: I cannot yet say, the Mony is paid; but I see nothing that wants towards it, only the adjusting of that Conjunction (demanded by the Constable) of Merchants at Antwerp: For the Spanish Dealings are in so ill Credit, that 'tis hard to find any who will give Caution for such a Sum to the Spaniards, and in their own Dominions, where they can plead and judge themselves: I believe the States must at last engage to the Merchants here, that they will indem∣nify them from all that shall fall out on this Occasion; though after the Arrival of the
Ratifications from England and Sueden, the Spaniards should make a Querelle d'Allmand with their Correspondents at Antwerp, and force them to any Prejudice without any Pretence. I gave Monsieur de Witt the first News of the French King's Declaration, to remit the Judgments of the Differences depend∣ing on the Peace, to his Majesty's and the Crown of Sueden's Arbitration: He thought, the leaving out the States, was something discourteous on the French side; but said, however he was very glad of the Thing being done; and hoped, as the Business should receive no Hurt by any Resentment on their Side, so it would re∣ceive none on our Side by any Effect of the great Cajolry of France; especially since this Resolution appeared by the Time to have another Source than only the Civi∣lity or Deference of that Court towards his Majesty. I doubt, the Confidence in this Decla∣ration will stop the Levies which were in∣tended for this Spring; though these Mi∣nisters are not the most believing in the French Promises; and I am not very confi∣dent, the Effect of this last may not be
spoiled by some unreasonable Answer from Spain upon it; having been confirmed in such a Suspicion by the Baron d'Isola's Opi∣nion, who told me he would write to the Marquess Castel-Rodrigo, to advise that the Queen should accept this Offer of France,Provided, the most Christian King would refer to the same Ar∣bitrage all the Con∣traventions of the Peace, whereof Spain complain'd at the Conference of Lisle. Pourveu que le Roy tres-Chrêtien remettroit au mé∣me Arbitrage toutes les Con∣treventions de la Paix dont l'Espagne s'estoit plaint á la Conference de Lisle. Which concerns the Spoils of Burgundy, and which France would never admit to give jointly in the Conference with their Pretensions about the Depend∣ances. I told the Baron, I feared such an Answer might ruin the Business, since it could not come till the beginning of the Spring, and might then give the French a Pretext of recalling his Word; after the passing of it had laid asleep all Thoughts or Preparations for War both in Flanders and Holland, from whence the first Assistance is to be expected: And that I thought the Answer of Spain ought to be full and abso∣lute as to the Acceptance of what is offered by France: And if they would make room for the Contraventions he mentions, that they should do it rather by enlarging the
Acceptance than restraining it to any Con∣dition, and say they accepted the Arbitrage upon those Dependances, and all other Differences arising upon the Peace, in the Discussion whereof the Spanish Pretensions might likewise be brought before the Ar∣bitrators, but at a more seasonable Time than this next Spring will prove. The Baron profess'd to be convinced by these Reasons: But because there is not much Trust to a Person who is so far in Love with his own Sufficiency; and seems to mind the valuing of himself at least equal∣ly with the doing of his Business; I thought it not impertinent to give your Lordship my Reflection upon this Matter; That if you approve it, you may by some safe Way or Cypher transmit it to Sir William Go∣dolphin: For otherwise I am confident the Spanish Answer will be perplexed with those Contraventions, which have held the Commissioners all this while at a Bay at Lisle, and will not be admitted by France in the Decision of the Dependances. I sent your Lordship inclosed Baron d'Isola's rough Propositions concerning his Master's joining with the Triple Alliance; which the Ministers of the Confederates think fit to discourse first among themselves,
and afterwards enter into Conference with him, as the Ministers of one united Power. All we can do at first, will be to commu∣nicate what passes to our Masters: And therefore I send your Lordship the first Pro∣posals by Advance, that I may the sooner know your Reflections upon them. After what will pass here in the Con∣clusion of our Guaranty and Suedish Pay∣ments; I think, if Monsieur Ognati can propose any good way of securing his Ma∣jesty, or rather furnishing him before-hand with what one quarter of the Suedish future Subsidies will amount to for the 3 Months which are to be advanced; it would add to the Strength and Credit of our Alliance, in giving so great a Satisfaction to the Suede, as they would receive by his Majesty's un∣dertaking for the fifteen thousand Crowns a Month, which they have so much insisted on, and seem so much unsatisfied with fail∣ing in it. I had Notice from my Lord Falconbridge of his intended Journy; and have already begun our Correspondence by a Letter which will meet him at Paris: And shall not fail in that, nor I hope in any other Du∣ties of my Employment.
I wish my Lord Berkly all Success in his new and great Charge; not knowing any other wherein a diligent, honest, and able Person may be of greater Service to his Majesty than in That. I am ever My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.
To Sir William Godolphin. Hague, Apr. 3. S. N. 1670. SIR, THIS Bearer Monsieur Chiese is dis∣patched by his Highness the Prince of Orange to Madrid, for the Prosecution and Recovery of a great Debt owing now some time from that Crown to his High∣ness, and I think not disputed by them: And though this Gentleman goes armed with much better Weapons than any I can furnish him towards the Pursuit of his En∣terprize; yet the Prince having com∣manded me to give him my Recommenda∣tions to You among many other he carries; I could not fail of it, nor will I doubt its being of some Force with you, since it comes in the Service of a Prince whose Birth gives him so much Interest in all English Men, and whose Personal Qualities and Virtues give him a great deal more in all those that have the Honour to know him. I must therefore beg all the good Offices and Assistances you can shew this Gentleman in Pursuit of his Highness's Con∣cernments; as well as your Advice to him
if he desires it, how to address himself by such Persons and in such Ways as will give him most appearance of Success. Your Favour herein I shall take Care to value as I ought towards his Highness; as I shall always my self acknowledge it, and remain SIR, Your obedient humble Servant.
To the Marquis of Castel-Ro∣drigo. Hague, Apr. 3. S. N. 1670. My Lord, THO' the Bearer hereof, Monsieur Chiese, will have no need of other Support beside the Name of the Prince his Master, and the Justice of the Affair he has in charge; I would not fail how∣ever, of giving him besides, this Recom∣mendation to your Ex∣cellence, as well to pay my Duty to his High∣ness the Prince of O∣range, as to shew my Confidence, that I have yet some Share in the Memory and Friend∣ship of your Excellency. I can assure you that the Court of Spain in doing Justice to his
Highness, will oblige a Prince who equals his great Birth by his great Qualities; and who will be one day ca∣pable of recompensing the Kindness that shall be shewed him at present. His Highness already takes great part in the good Turn of the Spa∣nish Affairs, by such Sentiments as deserve to be cherished, and not discouraged by any Treatment either un∣just or disobliging. I could not recommend his Pretensions to a Person more generous than your Excellency, nor to one who has been always pleased to interess him so much in what regards the King my Master. And your Excellency's Favour in this Affair cannot be desired with greater In∣stance, nor by one who is more than I am My Lord, Your Excellency's, &c.
Au Marquis de Castel-Rodrigo. La Haye, 3 Avril, S. N. 1670. Monsieur, QƲoy que le porteur de cette Lettre, Monsieur Chiese, n'ait pas besoin d'autre appuy que du nom du Prince son Maitre, & de l'equité de la cause dont il est chargé; je n'ay pourtant pas volu manquer á luy donner comme par sura∣bondance de droit, cette recommendation auprés de V. E. autant pour sa∣tisfaire á mon devoir envers son Altesse le Prince d'Orange, que pour me faire honneur de la confiance avec laquelle je croy avoir encore quel∣que part dans le Sou∣venir & l'amitié de V. E. Je pourrois bien l'assurer, qu'en faisant justice á son
Altesse, la Cour d'Es∣pagne obligera un Prince dont les grandes qualites egalent la grandeur de la naissance, & qui sera un jour en etat de recon∣noitre les bontez qu'on aura á present pour luy: Ajouteray-je, que ce Prince prend deja beau∣coup de part au bon train que prennent les affaires d'Espagne, de tels senti∣mens quand ils seroient seuls, meritent que sa per∣sonne soit cherie, & qu'au lieu de le rebuter par des traitemens qui sentent l'injustice, on embrasse cette occasion de l'obliger. Je ne scaurois recommander ses interêts á une personne plus genereuse que V. E. ni qui se soit toujours plus interessée dans tout ce qui a touché de prés le Roy mon Maitre. V. E. ne scauroit etre plus instam∣ment priée d'accorder sa faveur, ni par une per∣sonne qui luy soit plus acquise, & qui soit avec plus de passion que je suis, &c.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, May 6. S. N. 1670. SIR, I Have newly received yours of the 23d past, with a former of the 19th, which brought me some Marginal Additions up∣on the Paper I last sent into Zealand con∣cerning the Business of Surinam. As to the Words, The Dutch Nation inhabiting there; which are conformable with the Style of the States last Letter to his Ma∣jesty upon that Subject; I question not to get them inserted, in case the Zealanders come to a Conclusion upon my Paper; tho' they say, it already contains several Points more than our first Demands. For the Words, Ou quelque autre, con∣cerning the Person by whom his Majesty will send the Orders; I suppose they will pass too; in case the Intentions are not to employ any of those three Persons for the carrying them, against whom the Dutch at first excepted. For the other Words which determine the Rendition of the Colony, to be that made by Major Bannister, April 21, 1668.
I must say freely, that I have very little Hopes of gaining it; having formerly em∣ploy'd my Strength upon it without any Success, so much as with the Deputies of Holland, or of any other Provinces which have expressed the most easy Compliance with our Demands: And they ever thought it very hard that having yielded to our Demands, of exporting Slaves, contrary to all Customs formerly practised in that Co∣lony, and upon the disputed Sense of an Article; we should press them to carry away likewise those very Slaves which they themselves had furnished us with, though they offer to repay more than the Price they cost. And upon my Instances upon this Matter, their Answer was, That there was no need of distinguishing the Renditions of the Colony; since the mean∣ing of their Letter was, that what Slaves had been furnished by the Dutch should be left, and the rest should be carried off: So that if none were by them furnished be∣tween the first and second Rendition, then none were to be left; but if any were, then those to be left, as well as such as had been furnished by the Dutch since the last Rendition. And this Point I am confident was debated by the Deputies, not upon any particular Knowledge of what it im∣ports;
but only upon the general Notion and Reason of the Thing, from which it will be very hard to make them recede: However, I shall use my Endeavours in it, and be as glad as you can, of any good Offices that I am able to render Major Ban∣nister; though he has been the most trou∣blesome Acquaintance to me, that I have ever had in my Life. I pressed Monsieur de Witt, and the Commissioners at our last Meeting two Days since, and particu∣larly the Deputy of Zealand, for the Dis∣patch of this Business: But not having then your Additions to my last Paper, I could say nothing of them. Monsieur de Witt told me, a Conference was ap∣pointed this Day between the Commis∣sioners of Holland and Zealand upon this Business. On Sunday-night last the Exchanges were made of the Ratifications of the Concert, with that from Spain for the future Suedish Subsidies: But the Suedish and Dutch Mi∣nisters having each of them three Origi∣nals of the Concert, and not contenting themselves with Authentick Copies, as I had proposed; I am forced to give you the Trouble of sending two Originals more of the Ratification of the Concert, to be delivered to the Ministers of those two States upon my receiving the like
from them. I will tell you by the way, That I had some Reason to doubt whether the Ratification you sent me, would pass or no; though I thought it was not fit for me to make you any Scruple upon it, unless it were first raised by the other Ministers here: And do not know whe∣ther, it came in that Form by Choice or by Mistake; but I am sure the Ratification as it runs, is only of the Guaranty with its Clauses, of which the Concert was never taken to be a part, and stands in need of a very strong Deduction or Connexion with the Words of the Preface; which indeed mentions the Concert as well as the Guar∣anty: And you will find it very different from the Ratification which came from Sueden (and goes here inclosed) and such as I must confess, had I been the Spanish Ambassador, I should not have accepted, though neither He nor the Suedish Mini∣ster have yet taken Notice of it. I thought not fit to communicate it to Monsieur de Witt, till the Day before the Exchange was to be made, because I knew it could not escape him, and did it then only be∣tween our selves: And he immediately checked when he came to the Words, Supra memoratam Garantiam; and observed that there wanted the Convention about Forces, which was the sole end of their
Ratification; and thereupon he said imme∣diately,This is not as it should be. Cela n'est pas comme il faut: But comparing it with those in the Preface, he said at last,This may do. Cela peut suffire; and wished that others were no more scrupulous than he, where he knew the Intentions were good: And so he made no further mention of it upon our Exchange of the Ratifications; which I believe proceeded in him from the ill Con∣sequence he foresaw might arise upon the Discovery of a Weakness of our Instrument in this Conjuncture, when our Intentions in this Affair are something more suspected than you assure me they deserve. I hear the Town of Amsterdam has con∣sented to Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Journy; but shall not be able to give you an Assu∣rance of it till my next, and content my self now with that of my being always Sir, your &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, May 15. S. N. 1670. My LORD, THE Knowledge of your Lord∣ship's Absence from Town, has given you of late more Ease than other∣wise I intended; and your Trouble now begins upon the first Advice I had of your return; which was by your Lordship's of the 29th past: By which I find the Sus∣picion you have conceived there, of the late Spanish Answer to his Majesty, having been indited at the Hague: And withal you desire to know something more parti∣cular of Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Errand into England. The first I am confident is without other Ground, than a common Opinion we have conceived of more Finesse than I have yet observed in the chief Mi∣nisters here; who are as hard and as firm as you can imagine them: But for Tricks or Jugling, I do not observe either their Abilities or their Dispositions lie much that way; nor I believe does any wise Man's unless he be brought to it by the ill Con∣dition or Necessity of his Affairs, and finds
no other way of living; which is not yet their Case here, nor will be I suppose while Flanders is preserved: And so long I shall look upon them as Merchants in good Estate and Credit, and who will en∣deavour to keep it up by square dealing: But whenever they fail in that Adventure, I shall grow as jealous of them as I see others are. I have enquired particularly of the Spanish Ambassador▪ and am as∣sured by him, that all Monsieur de Witt's Discourses upon that Subject of the late Answer from Spain, agreed perfectly with what he made me upon the same Occasion: And I know, the States Deputies at Brus∣sels had immediate Orders from hence to apply themselves very earnestly to the Con∣stable for the Redress of that Fault: And I dare say, whoever thinks that these Men here will quit a Point of Interest for a Point of Honour, has taken a wrong Mea∣sure of them. The Spanish Ambassador bids me be assured, That the Answer from Spain will be amended, and come in all Points to his Majesty's Satisfaction: He goes this Day from hence towards Brus∣sels, being hastned thither by an Express from the Constable; who I believe intends to make use of him in the Junto there; upon whom I hear he will wholly devolve
all his publick Business: Having taken an Attestation from his Phisicians, that his ill Health has rendred him wholly uncapa∣ble of charging himself any longer with it. For Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Errand into England, I suppose the Rise of it was of an old Date; and occasioned a good deal by my laying often to their Charge, the want of Respect they shewed his Majesty in the choice of the Ministers they sent in∣to England; who are seldom of the Pro∣vince of Holland, or of those Persons most considered in this State: Besides, when I found I was not able to bring the Business of our Marine Treaty to such a Conclusion as we proposed, though I failed but in one Article (which yet it seems is thought to import the whole of our Pretensions there) I told them here, That it would be abso∣lutely necessary to treat it in England, and bring it to some Issue there: And for that purpose, to send some able Person over, who being perfectly intrusted in it from hence, might debate it there with Persons as well instructed on our Side. Upon these Grounds Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Journy was thought fit above a Year ago; but his being chosen Burgomaster of Am∣sterdam about the same time, made him then
absolutely refuse it. Since his Year expired, my Instances still continuing for a Conclu∣sion in our East-India Business; and Mr. Secretary Trevor's Papers upon the same Subject keeping Life in it from Time to Time, Monsieur Van Beuninghen began about two Months since to shew some In∣clination to the Journy; which has been pursued very earnestly by the States here, and especially by Monsieur de Witt, till it came lately on all Sides to be resolved on: So as your Lordship must reckon, that the avowed Errand will be the Business of the East-India Company; and the clearing that part of the Marine Treaty which so long proved too hard for me here. Besides, this will be the Compliment they pretend to make his Majesty, in sending a Person of so much Account among them, as Mon∣sieur Van Beuninghen: And with the Or∣ders of Surinam, which they here reckon upon as a perfect Piece of Compliance with his Majesty. And this is the Account they give the French Ambassador of this Journy; adding a good deal of Monsieur Van Beun∣inghen's Inclination to see England in this Season. That which is further meant by it, is, First in general to inform themselves per∣fectly of our Temper in the Pursuit of those
Ends we have been these two or three Years last engaged in: And which many Discourses and Reflections of late have made them a little suspect, does not con∣tinue so equal and so warm as it began. And in this Regard it will be his Business to use his best and most parsuasive Oratory to confirm us in the Pursuit of those common Interests abroad, which we have of late so much advanced by our Triple Alliance, and the Dependances of it: And in short, to persuade us, that it is more our Honour and our Interest to Lead than to Follow. In Pursuit of this, he will I believe endea∣vour to dispose Us to accept a Conjunction with such Princes of the Empire as desire it, upon such Measures as are proposed in the late Project I sent your Lordship drawn up by Monsieur de Witt: Though I have made so good way in defending you upon this Point, that I believe it would not cost much Trouble there, unless you are will∣ing to enter further into it than you seemed of late. Another Point, and that which I believe he will most eagerly pursue, is the Prohi∣bition of French Commodities, upon which his particular Imagination has been long bent, as the only sure and easy way of bringing the French Power and Riches into
Decay, in case the Thing could be agreed on among all or the greatest part of their Neighbours: And this State having sound∣ed the Spanish Court upon that Point, re∣ceived Answer, That whatever England and They should agree upon, Spain would readily join with Them in it: By which means they suppose, that besides what would be saved by both our Nations, by stopping the vast Importation of French Commodities; a very great Traffick would be gained by exporting our own, to fur∣nish the Spanish Fleet, which supplies their West-Indies every Year in a great measure with Commodities brought them from France: The Resolutions of this State go as yet no further as I can hear, than to all sorts of wearing Goods and Brandy; nor do I know whether this it self will be brought to Execution, before they are sa∣tisfied how far we are likely to join with Them in it: After which, the Considera∣tions of Wine and Salt will likewise come in Play. Besides these Publick Matters, I doubt you will likewise be pursued about Mr. Ho∣nywood's Widow, who is Daughter to a Burgomaster of Amsterdam, and so most properly under Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Protection, especially being a young and
handsom Widow; which I hear will tempt her to go over with him herself, and plead her own Cause. I do not think, the Intentions of his Journy go further than what I have men∣tioned, unless he be invited to any Thing upon the Place, or by some new Accident from abroad. In the mean time, to do him right, we shall have a great deal of Reason to welcom him, because he has very industriously employ'd himself in helping us to gain our Point upon the Bu∣siness of Surinam, which was yesterday resolved on by the States General, though the Province of Zealand protested against it: And besides, nothing has given us so hopeful a Prospect of the Prince's good Fortunes here, as the Support of the Town of Amsterdam, so declared, and so warm in his present Concernment; towards which I am confident Monsieur Van Beun∣inghen has very much contributed, as being a Person of very great Influence in that City. The State of that whole Business is so well and so fully set down in the Paper of Intelligence, that I am sure I cannot amend it, and therefore will not repeat it. Your Lordship will know by the in∣closed, that Monsieur de St. Evremont set out this Morning towards England, with
the Portugal Ambassador likewise, who both accompany Monsieur d'Opdam as far as Nieuport, and there embark for Dover; whilst he goes on to meet the French King at Dunkirk with the States Complements. I am ever my Lord, your &c. POSTSCRIPT. I Had forgot to tell your Lordship, That another part of Monsieur Van Beun∣inghen's Instructions will be, to endeavour all that can be, that this State may be ad∣mitted into a Conjunction with his Majesty for the Pursuit of the Algerins till they are reduced to the Necessity of a Peace with both.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, May 27. S. N. 1670. SIR, I HAVE this Day received yours of the 13th current, with the Account of my Lord of Essex's Treatment in passing the Sound; which, if wholly new, was what we had very little Reason to expect from that Crown since the Change of their Ministry: Though there are some Reports here that they intend to keep up a close Intelligence with France, for fear of the Suede; whose Forces give them at this time, it seems, some Jealousy. I will hope, my Lord of Essex may receive the Satisfaction he demands; however he will have that of having discharged his part upon this Occasion with the Constancy that became him. I do not question but you will receive a wiser Answer, as you say, from Spain; and wish they could find wiser Men to encharge with their great Affairs and Go∣vernments, than you will see they do by the Accounts I know you receive from Brussels, of the Constable's late Caprices in
order to his return for Spain. It is here variously discoursed who shall succeed him: The old Empress and Prince Charles of Lor∣rain being still in Name among some o∣thers; either of which, or both together as it is talk'd of, seeming the best Choice that can now be made by the Crown of Spain. It is wish'd here that his Majesty would further it all he can by the Offices of his Minister in that Court. Yesterday the Spanish Ambassador's Se∣cretary came to communicate to me a Let∣ter he had received from the Ambassador at Brussels; taking notice, that upon a more particular Observation of our late Ratification of the Concert; the Date of it was preceding to that of the Concert it self, signed by me here at the Hague; which was the last of January N. S. whereas the Ratification at Westminster bears Date the 7th of January O. S: And this Remark of the Ambassadors I find to be true by comparing it with the Copy of the Ratifi∣cation that lies by me: And doubt not but the Mistake only was of the Month of January for February, in the Ratification you sent me over. Whereupon I assured the Secretary there could be no Difficulty in the Redress of it; and he desired me to endeavour it as soon as I could; and I hope
the Notice of it may come time enough to prevent the same Mistake in the Instruments intended for Sueden and Holland, as well as to procure a new one for Spain. I could not by the last Post give you the Certainty of the Issue in the Prince of Orange's Affair, the States of Holland not rising till one a Clock that Night, after the warmest Debates which have been known among them for many Years: However, the Towns which favour the Prince having the Plurality of Voices, and Amsterdam in the Head of them, at length carried their Point; and brought it to a Resolution, That the Prince should have Session in the Council of State with a deci∣sive Voice; and should have the same Place his Ancestors were used to. After this was resolved on, that Party which the most opposed the Prince's Interest, started two new Points: The First, That no Captain-General should be chosen otherwise than from Year to Year, but by Unanimity of Voices. And Secondly, That in case the Prince should be chosen Captain-General for Life; then it should be again debated and resolved by Plurality of Voices, whe∣ther he should continue his Session in the Council of State. And these two Points were agreed to by all the Towns excepting
four or five, in which number were Am∣sterdam and Haerlem; who maintain, That they were not now to be resolved, but then only when those Matters came in Question. The States of Holland being separated after these Resolutions, the Execution of that concerning the Prince's entrance into the Council of State, will remain in the States General, and consequently receive no Op∣position that I can foresee: And though it bears no great Name, yet I take it to be of that Importance, as to leave his High∣ness's future Fortunes in a manner wholly dependant upon his own Carriage and Per∣sonal Qualities, which give hitherto all the Signs that can be of advancing and not impairing them. In the Course of this Business, Monsieur Van Beuninghen has so much provoked the ill Will and Opinion of these Towns which were contrary to the Prince, that they had almost resolved to make a Stop of his Journy; but that is now over, and he pre∣pares to be gone the end of this Week: And will not deserve to be less welcom in England for what has lately passed here; though perhaps it may not be to his Ad∣vantage, nor to the Prince's neither, to give him any too publick Testimonies of it. He gave me Hopes on Sunday-night,
that to Morrow the Business of Surinam would be ended, according to the Form I drew up in Pursuit of our last Conference, which I here send you enclosed: Though he told me there would be Difficulty in the Point of Major Bannister's landing with so much Liberty as is insisted on: And therefore he pressed me hard to be content with either remaining aboard his Ships, or else lodging in the Fort till his Affairs were dispatched; where all Convenience should be provided him: But I refused both; and so left the Thing with him in the Form it now runs. I am Sir, your &c.
To my Lord Berkeley. Hague, May 30. S. N. 1670. My LORD, THo' I know your Excellency would easily forgive me a Commission which might save you a Trouble in the midst of many others that are a great deal more necessary: Yet I could not forgive my self if I should any longer delay giving your Lordship the Assurances how great a part I take in all your Fortunes; and con∣sequently how much I have shared in the general Satisfaction which I hear you have both left in England, and found in Ireland, upon your late entring upon the Govern∣ment of that Kingdom. I am not only much pleased with it upon a private Score, as one of your Lordship's Servants, but as having always had the best Wishes for the publick Good of that Country, and his Majesty's Service in the Establishment of it: Both which will I am confident, thrive very much in your Lordship's Hands; not only in regard of the great Experience and Abilities which are so generally allowed you; but because you are too Rich as well as too Generous to lose the Merit and
Glory of great and honest Actions, in the Cares of your own private Fortunes: For this has too often given an Alloy both to the Worth and Success of several of your Lordship's Predecessors; and contri∣buted chiefly to the Unhappiness of the Governors as well as of the Country; both which I hope you will have the Honour to restore. I cannot but observe to your Lordship, That I find by a general Con∣sent of the Merchants here, that Ireland runs every Year an eighth part in Debt by Importing so much beyond its Exportation; which being to be drawn out in Coin, will be a certain though slow Consumption of the Treasure of that Kingdom; un∣less remedied by Sumptuary Laws or Ex∣amples for lessening the Importation of Foreign Commodities; or else, Industry for increasing the Native, which are either consumed at home, or carried abroad: The first is like Diet, but the other like Exercise, to an indisposed Body; which is the way of acquiring Strength and Vigor; whereas the former gives but barely Health. I believe the two great Improvements to be made in Ireland, are of the Fishing and the Linnen Trade; This to keep our Mony at home, and That to fetch more in from abroad. If your Lordship thinks these Particulars worth your Care; and that I
can contribute toward them by any Lights and Assistances from hence; I shall be glad upon that or any other Occasion to receive your Commands. I have given my Secretary Order to make an Extract of the News which either arises here, or comes to me by Letters from Foreign Parts; which shall go Week∣ly to you, if you think it worth the Trou∣ble; and will please in return to do me the Justice of esteeming me what I am with much Truth and Passion, My LORD, Your Excellency's most obedient humble Servant.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Jun. 3. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I WAS extream glad to find by your Lordship's of the 16th past, some As∣surance of your Recovery: And whatever the Name of your Illness was, will believe the Nature of it could not be very bad, since it left you so soon: After which I will trouble you no more with my Remedies; nor shall I need any my self after so great a one as your Lordship has given me by the Knowledge of your own and my Lady's Health: For which I make you my particular Acknowledgments. By observing the Winds, I guess Mon∣sieur Van Beuninghen will, before this ar∣rives, have given your Lordship the Ac∣count himself of his leaving the Hague on Sunday-night, and setting Sail I suppose on Monday-evening; unless Madam Honywood made him stay some Hours longer, who had appointed to be with him by that time from Amsterdam. I will say nothing in Fa∣vour of her Pretension, but that she is Daughter to the ancientest Burgomaster of Amsterdam, who has expressed the greatest
Passion of any other of the States, in Favour of the Prince of Orange's late Concernment; and may perhaps thereby deserve some Mark of his Majesty's Favour; which I assure you I say wholly of my self: For my good Offices in her Business were not at all thought worth engaging, since Mon∣sieur Van Beuninghen undertook it, as I suppose he has done by their joining Com∣pany. Your Lordship will find nothing to lessen your Esteem of his Person; unless it be, that he is not always so willing to Hear as to be Heard; and out of the abun∣dance of his Imagination is apt sometimes to Reason a Man to Death: Which I tell your Lordship before-hand, that you may not fall into any Prejudice before you know him well: And on the other Side, I have taken some Care to prevent his employing that Talent too much in your Conversa∣tions. For the rest, you will find him Fort honnête homme; one that puts all the Good of his Country upon maintaining and cul∣tivating his Majesty's Alliance; and who upon the Prince's Occasion will deserve the good Will of our Court. For his manner of Negotiating, I am confident you will find him not ill-bred, nor offering to impose his Measures, as you call them, upon us: But after any Proposi∣tions and Reasons he shall lay before you,
will rather tell you that you are Masters of all; and that the States will in all Things that concern our Neighbours, per∣fectly follow those his Majesty shall take. Whatever Reception the State's Propo∣sal about the Algerins meets with in Eng∣land; I wish to God some better Order were taken for preserving our Honour in the Mediterranean: For, what with the ill Conduct of our Captains, that they say will turn Merchants, leaving our Mer∣chants to play the Men of War; and with the late shameless Loss of the Saphire: I assure your Lordship, the Reputation of our Sea-Affairs and Men, decays abroad to a Degree that is very sensible I am sure to me; and I doubt will hardly recover with∣out some new and severe Discipline or Examples. The Prince of Orange was introduced into the Council of State on Saturday last, and with the Circumstances which he is very well pleased with. He resolves upon his Journy into England about the latter End of this Month, or beginning of next: But will not fix the Time till the Pensioner's Return from Groningue about ten Days hence. I am my Lord, your &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Jun. 17. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I WAS very glad to hear this Morn∣ing of your Lordship's being well ar∣rived in Town; where I hope the Diver∣sions of your late Journy have returned you with such an Encrease of Health as is necessary for the Support of your great Affairs, Y para mi consuelo. Many French have lately pass'd this Way since the Re∣turn of that Court; some who attended Madame into England, and extreamly ap∣plauded her Reception there, and his Ma∣jesty's great Graciousness to those of her Train. The Count d'Estrades came like∣wise three Days since, but I think barely on a Visit to his old Home; or if he has any Business, it is particular, and at Am∣sterdam. I find, they all agree in assuring Us of the Peace, as long as we can assure Them of the King of Spain's Life: But in giving us fair Warning that whenever that fails, their Master will march into the rest of Flanders without any Circum∣stance, and possess himself of it if he can.
This Knowledge, and that of the King of Spain's late Sickness, have given Them some Perplexity here, which is much re∣lieved by this Days News of his Recovery. But we find nothing yet towards the Re∣dress of the late untoward Answer upon the Arage. The Prince of Orange continues still the Talk as well as the Desires of his Journy into England: But has of late been very earnest to know my Opinion, whether he be like to procure any Satisfaction in his Pretensions there; saying, as I guess, In∣dustriously, that all his best Friends here are of Opinion, that in Case that should wholly fail him, his Journy into England would prove of great Prejudice to his Af∣fairs here; by letting his Friends see how little he is considered by his Majesty, whose Countenance will be a great Support to him in the Course of his Fortunes. I durst not offer his Highness the least Judgment of my own upon this Matter; assuring him I was wholly ignorant of all his Majesty's Affairs, besides what related to this Country; and particularly of the present State of his Revenue, or how much the late Supplies have contributed towards the Ease of it: Upon which, the Prince seemed very desirous that I would touch
this Point to your Lordship, so as to have your Thoughts upon it before he goes: This I suppose proceeds chiefly from the Princess Dowager, who declared her Opinion positively to me some Weeks ago upon this Matter, to the same purpose; and I hear, persists in it; which yet she does not in all Things: For I can assure your Lordship, she now professes to be the most satisfied that can be with my Conduct in relation to the Prince; and makes me more Ac∣knowledgments than are fit for me to re∣ceive; since I pretend only not to have spoiled his Business, which it had been the easiest Thing in the World for an English Minister here to have done. I wish to God he do nothing towards the Prejudice of it himself, by Advice of younger or warmer Heads: For this is a Country where Fruit ripens slowly, and cannot be preserved if it be gathered green. I am very confident from his last, as well as the present Dispositions I here discern, that his Fortunes are in his own Hands; and I hope he will make great Advantages in the Conduct of them, by your Lordship's Advices when he sees you in England, of whose Prudence and Virtues he will go over with a very full Persuasion.
Monsieur de Witt returned yesterday to Town, after fifteen Days Absence at Groningue about the composing some Dif∣ferences in that Province.This was a Year or two before he was massacred. There is a violent Humour runs against him of late in the Town of Amsterdam, upon Pretext of his growing too far into the Sway of all Affairs in this State by so long a Ministry; and of advancing his own Friends into Offices and Places of Trust, with too much Industry. But I suppose, the Bottom of this is the same with that of all Popular Humours: That is, a de∣sign in the Leaders to change the Scene; that so those who have been long employ'd may make Room for those who have been long out. I am not of Opinion they will succeed to prejudice him suddenly; both because his chief Enemies acknowledge his great Abilities and Ʋsefulness to the State, and because he will always have it in his Power to fall in very considerably with the Prince's Interest, which the other Party pretends to promote: Though in such a Case his Highness would have a hard Choice with which Wind to sail: As indeed he is likely to fall into Conjunctures here that will require all his Prudence. I thought fit to say thus much at once to your Lordship, that so you may the bet∣ter know what to make of twenty Reports
that may arise upon these Occasions. Tho' it will I think after all be our Parts both in England and here, to seem the least we can concerned in them, further than our Wishes to the perfect Union of a State we are so near allied to; which we may I sup∣pose own our Opinion of, that it will never be compassed but by taking in the Prince's Interests, as far as can consist with the Li∣berty of the State: And making such a Person of him, as may in Title, Expence, and other Circumstances, represent the Dig∣nity of their Commonwealth. I am ever My Lord, your &c.
To the Earl of Northumberland. Hague, Jun. 17. S. N. 1670. My LORD, BY the same Post which brought me the Honour of a late Letter from your Lordship, I received from other Hands the News of my Lord of Northum∣berland's having left you to the Succession of all his Honours and Fortunes: Which gives me the Occasion of acknowledging your Lordship's Favour and Memory; and at the same time of condoling with you upon the Loss of a Father, whose great Virtues and Qualities must needs have made so many Sharers with you in this Affliction. I hope the Help which is given your Lordship by so many of your Servants and Friends upon this Occasion, will serve to ease your own Part in it: And that after all that can be offered up to De∣cency, and to the Memory of so great and excellent a Person, this will find your Lord∣ship rather taken up with the Imitation of his Virtues than the bewailing of his Loss: Since this is but what he owed to Nature and to Age, and to the Course of long
Infirmities; and the other is what will be due from your Lordship all your Life, to your Birth, your Family, and your Self. Nor indeed can ever so much depend upon so few Paces, as will now, upon those your Lordship shall make at your first setting out: Since all Men will be presaging by Them the Course of your Journy; as they will have indeed Influence upon the Ease as well as the Direction of it. For my own Part, I expect a great Increase of your Lordship's Personal Honour upon this Occasion: And that having been so excel∣lent a Son of a Family, you will shew your self the same in being now a Father of it; since nothing makes Men fit to Com∣mand, like having learnt to Obey; and the same good Sense and good Dispositions make Men succeed well in all the several Offices of Life. Those I know will be your Lordship's Safety in entring upon a Scene, where you will find many Exam∣ples to avoid, and few to imitate: For I have yet seen none so generally corrupted as Ours at this Time, by a common Pride and Affectation of despising and laughing at all Face of Order, and Virtue, and Con∣formity to Laws; which after all, are Qua∣lities that most conduce both to the Happi∣ness of a Publick State, and the Ease of a Private Life.
But your Lordship will, I hope, make a great Example, instead of needing other than those of your own Family, to which so much Honour, Order, and Dignity, have been very peculiar; as well as the Consequences of them in the general Ap∣plause, and the particular Esteem of all those who have had the Honour to know and observe it. Among whom there is none more desirous to express that Inclina∣tion by his Services, nor that has more of it at Heart than My Lord, Your Lordship's most faithful and most humble Servant.
To the Great Duke of Tus∣cany. Hague, Jun. 27. S. N. 1670. SIR, HAving so long taken part in whatever concerns the Person or Interests of your most Serene High∣ness, I could not fail to condole with you for your great Loss, whereof all Christendom would have been sensi∣ble to the last Degree, if the Grief for such an Accident were not les∣sened by the Succession of a Prince who has left such Impressions of his Person and Merits where-ever he has ap∣peared, as will never be worn out.
'Tis true, such is the Composition of Human Things, that nothing is pure or without mixture; so that even upon this Occasion I see some Ground to mix my Congratula∣tion with my Con∣dolence, when I con∣sider that your High∣ness has finished your Travels before the Ac∣cession of this glorious Charge. Your High∣ness has added to your Birth and Wit, all the Advantages that the Commerce of Stran∣gers is accustomed to give; and you now find occasion for the exercise of all, to∣wards the Government of your Subjects. My Wishes and Applauses shall not be wanting to your Highness; tho' I know your Conduct
and good Fortune will give me little Occasion but for the latter, as your Highness's great Qualities have already given me a great deal, to be SIR, Your Highness's most humble and most faithful Servant.
Au Grand Duc de Toscane. De la Haye, 27 Juin, S. N. 1670. Monsieur, AYant pris depuis long tems une aus∣si grande part dans tout ce qui touche la personne ou les interêts de V. A. Sme. je ne pouvois man∣quer á m'affliger avec elle á l'occasion de la perte qu'elle vient de faire, & qui est telle, que la Chre∣tienté en seroit inconso∣lable, si la douleur d'un evenement si triste n'etoit soulagée par l'idée du Prince qui vient remplir la succession; on sçait que c'est un Prince qui a laissé de sa personne & de son merite par tout ou il a paru des impres∣sions qui ne s'effaceront jamais.
Il est vray, que telle est la composition des choses humaines, que rien n'y est pur & sans me∣lange; le bien & le mal ne se laissent guere gou∣ter separement. En cette rencontre donc je vois de∣quoy meler mes congra∣tulations á mes condole∣ances; je fonde les pre∣mieres sur ce que V. E. Sme. avoit achevé tous ses voyages lors qu'un si glorieux fardeau luy est tombé en partage. Elle a ajouté au bonheur de sa naissance, & á la pe∣netration de son esprit, tout ce que le commerce & la comparaison de di∣vers etrangers chez qui elle avoit sejourné, a accoutumé de donner. Cette riche moisson etant á peine faite, tant de talens sont mis en ouvrage, & V. A. se voit á pre∣sent obligée de les consa∣crer au soin du gouverne∣ment de ses Sujets. Mes voeux & mes ap∣plaudissements ne man∣queront jamais á V. A. quoy que sa conduite &
sa prosperité me repon∣dent que je ne feray usage que de ces der∣niers: Ses grandes qua∣litez avoient deja fourni beaucoup de motifs d'etre Monsieur, De V. A. Sme. le tres-humble & tres-fidelle Serviteur.
To Sir William Godolphin. Hague, July 3. S. N. 1670. SIR, I HAVE not had any Thing of late worth your Trouble, nor any of yours by me to acknowledge; though I should have been glad to have received from your Hand the Assurance of what comes to me more uncertainly from others, of the Ca∣tholick King's perfect Recovery, and the Junto's Disposition to admit simply of his Majesty's and the King of Sueden's Arbi∣trage, as was proposed. The great Dead∣ness of the Season in point of News would have excused you this Trouble, but that the Sueaish Minister here begins to pursue me hard for my Offices towards the Spa∣nish Court for the second Payment, which he reckons to be already due by the Expi∣ration of eight Months since the delivery of the Guaranty. But Monsieur de Witt and I are both of Opinion, the Spanish Ambassador's Act may very well be con∣strued to signify eight Months from the signing of the Concert, which Spain al∣ways insisted upon as an essential Part of
the Guaranty: And to begin the Pay∣ments only upon the signing of it, which was the last of January past; by which Calculation the second Payment will grow due at the End of next September. But this is fitter to be argued by Spain than by us: And that which is more necessary, is for Them to provide so as the Mony may be ready here by that Term, to re∣cover by the Fairness and Ease of this Pay∣ment the Credit they lost in Sueden by the Difficulties of the last. In the mean time, if you can persuade the Spanish Court to signify to the Suedish Minister either there or here, that they have been put in Mind of it by you; and have it so much in their Care as to provide that it shall not fail at the end of September, which They take to be the Term it grows due; you will I suppose perform an Office both necessary and grateful to all the Paries interessed in that Affair. The Dutch would have en∣joyned it to their Minister, if they had any present at Madrid; he Want of which gives you more tha your Share in these Transactions. They would fain engage Monsieur Beverning to accept of that Em∣ployment; whch I wish for your sake, but I doubt its succeeding.
The Prince of Orange intends to go for England about the end of this Month; and my Lord Ossory is shortly expected here, to attend him in his Journy. I am always SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant.
To the Earl of Essex. Hague, July 7. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I HAVE received by this last Post the Favour of one from your Excellency of the 18th past; which gives me the Hopes of a sudden Dispatch in your present Ne∣gotiations, and the very welcom News of your Intention to pass this way in your Return; where I shall be very glad to find the Occasions I desire of serving your Lord∣ship in a Place that indeed better deserves a passing Visit than any long Abode. Your Excellency will have received by a former Letter my Condolements upon my Lord Northumberland's Death, which indeed was very untimely for Himself, his Fa∣mily, and his Friends. But if we needed greater Examples how little Defence is to be found against that Enemy either from Greatness or from Youth; we should have received a very sufficient, as well as a very sad one by an Express which brought this Morning the News of Madame's Death,
by particular Letters both to the States and to the Prince of Orange. The French Courier being not expected till to Morrow Morning, I have not yet received any Letter of it from my Lord Ambassador at Paris; and therefore shall give your Lordship the Relation just as it comes in the Prince's Letter; which says, That on Sunday last being the 29th of June N. S. Madame having eaten very well at Dinner, and continued so some Hours afterwards; about four a Clock in the Afternoon called for a Glass of Succory-Water, which she used to take every Day about that Hour; and having drunk it off, complained that it was very bitter, and presently after began to find her self ill, and fell into violent Fits of the Colick; upon which she said, That she was sure she should die, and immediately sent for her Con∣fessor, and with great Resolution disposed her self to it, by passing through all the Forms of that Church upon such Occasions. The News of her Highness's Illness was immediately dispatch'd from St. Clou where she lay, to Versailles where the Court then was; and occasioned the King's coming presently to her, who arrived about Eight a Clock that Night, and brought his chief
Phisician with him; who both began to comfort her Sickness, and assure her that her Colick could not easily carry away a Person of her Age. But she persisted in assuring them of her Death, spoke a good while softly to the King; and afterwards said aloud, That she had no Regret at all to die; but that her greatest Trouble was, by so hard a Separation to lose his Majesty's Friendship and good Graces which he had always express'd to her. She spoke to Monsieur in the same Terms about her great Willingness to die; which, she said, was the more, because she had nothing to re∣proach her self of in her Conduct to∣wards him. The King left her about Ten a Clock at Night, his Phisician assuring him she could not die of a Colick, or at least not so suddenly as she seemed to apprehend: But her Illness and Pain encreasing, she expired about Two a Clock in the Morn∣ing, leaving great Sadness in that Court, and Regret in all those who had the Ho∣nour to know her. Your Excellency will easily imagine how sensibly his Majesty will be touch'd by this Affliction; and therefore I am sure you
will receive the same Part in it that I, and all the rest of his Servants ought to do: Which I shall not encrease by enlarging upon so sad a Story, further than by one Particular more of the Prince's Letter; That her Body being opened in the Pre∣sence of several Persons, and among them my Lord Ambassador, they could not find the Cause of so sudden a Death. Our News from Brussels is, That the Constable was to depart from thence on Sa∣turday last, leaving the Count de Monterey Governor of those Countries by the Queen Regent's Commission for the In∣terim, until a new Governor should be sent from Spain; who they give out will be Don John, and that he will be there in a very little time, and take upon him that Government for his Life: But the Cer∣tainty of this we must expect hereafter from Spain. The Danish Envoy here, tells me he intends to go very shortly for Copen∣haguen, and that he hopes to find your Excellency there; wherein I confess I dif∣fer with him. I should be very glad to know whether he did me the Right of conveying a Letter I wrote to Monsieur Guldenlew, in answer to one I received from him upon his last Arrival in Denmark.
Your Lordship will oblige me to let one of your Secretaries inform himself from one of his, whether such a Letter was re∣ceived, without drawing it into any fur∣ther Consequence. I beseech your Lordship to believe me always what I am with very much Sin∣cereness My LORD, Your Excellency's most faithful most humble Servant.
To my Lord Berkeley. Hague, July 11. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I Received one from your Excellency of the 11th past, by which you were pleased both to oblige and to inform me: Nor could any Thing happen more agree∣able to me than an Occasion of acknowledg∣ing as I ought the Favour you there express both to my Friends in Ireland and to me: Of which I am equally sensible. I doubt not but your Lordship will find in the loose Posture of Affairs in Ireland, a great Subject for your Prudence and In∣dustry; in the Application whereof, I wish your Lordship all Success and Glory, being incapable at this Distance to make any Reflections on Particulars, either the Evils or the Redresses: Only as an old Servant, I may have the Liberty of putting your Lordship in mind of one Point wherein your Reputation is much concerned, and upon which I doubt you do not much re∣flect: But if you should continue this luxu∣rious Custom of getting a lusty Boy every Year, People will think that you live like a
voluptuous young Man of twenty Years old, and not like a staid and wise Go∣vernor of a Kingdom: Nor am I very well satisfied my self, whether it be a Thing that consists with the Gravity of a Privy Counsellor, much less of a Lord Lieutenant: But when I consider that of so good a Race we cannot have too many, I am forced to leave my Censures to give your Lordship much Joy of your Irish-man. We have nothing here in Discourse but the sad and surprizing News of Madame's Death; of which your Lordship will have the Particulars from so many Hands, that I will not repeat them; nor enter into the general Reflections that are made upon it in all Places I think, I am sure here without Scruple or Dispute. The Constable is gone for Spain, and left his Government much as he held it: Nor can I judge whether it came from his natu∣ral Temper or some contracted Indisposi∣tions: For his Health has been of late the Cover for it: But these six or eight Months past, he has been obstinate to hear nothing of Business, returning all that has of∣fered by his nearest Officers, withWhy do you kill me? Quiere Matarme? And passing his Time with his Virginals, his Dwarfs, and his Graciosoes.
Some say, his Imaginations reached so far as to raise up Spirits and Assassins when he was alone. If Spain has no greater Men, its pity they have so great Use of them; for I am sure, Non tali Auxilio nec Defensoribus istis Tempus eget. He has left the Government for the interim by the Queen Regent's Or∣der to the Count de Monterey whom he hated; and I hear Count Marsyn says, he will not obey a Man,Who is but just born. Qui ne fait que naître; because he is but twenty eight Years old: But they have succeeded so ill with oneWho thought of nothing but dying. Qui ne songevit qu' á mourir, that I think it will not pass for a very just Exception; and our Friend Count Marsyn, who is hot at Hand, will I hope come to himself, and help to keep all Things quiet in Flanders till Don John's Arrival, which is now talk'd of, but I am not the easiest to believe it. I beg your Lordship's Favour or rather Justice both to esteem and use me as My Lord, your &c.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Jul. 15. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I WAS very glad to find that the great Measure of his Majesty's Grief upon Madame's Death, was a little lessened by the Satisfaction he had received, that it had passed without that odious Circumstance which was at first so generally thought to have attended it; and of which I endeavour in my Discourse here, to allay the Suspici∣ons since I see his Majesty is convinced; though it is a very difficult Matter to suc∣ceed in, after so general a Possession, which has been much encreased by the Princess Dowager's Curiosity, to ask her Phisician's Opinions upon the Relation transmitted hither to one of them from his rother, who is the Dutch Secretary at Paris; and pretends it came from Dr. Chamberlain, tho' something different from what he trans∣mitted into England. However it hap∣pened, it had certainly all the Circum∣stances to aggravate the Affliction to his Majesty; which I am infinitely touch'd with, as well as with the Sense of an Acci∣dent in it self so deplorable: But it is a
necessary Tribute we pay for the Continu∣ance of our own Lifes, to bewail the fre∣quent and sometimes untimely Deaths of our Friends. Et levius fit Patientiâ quicquid corrigere est nefas. The Baron d'Isola parted this Day for Brussels; from whence he told me he would answer your Lordship's last Letter, by which he pretends to have drawn Con∣fidence of his Proposals succeeding in Eng∣land with the Temper the Dutch had given it here: But he does not press the Matter much at present, because he does not pre∣tend that the Emperor's Resolutions are fully taken upon it; nor will be till after the Enterview, which is as he says about this time contrived between the Electors of Mentz and Triers; where an Envoy from the Emperor, another from the Duke of Lorrain, and (as the Baron pretends) from some other German Princes, are to inter∣vene; where the Measures will be fully taken among them. In case his Majesty should fall into the Thoughts of admitting that Conjunction; as Monsieur de Witt tells me he has likewise some Hopes given him from Monsieur Van Beuninghen; I think it were best however reserving the Decla∣ration of any such Consent, until he were very well assured of the Emperor's and the other German Princes final and firm Reso∣lutions;
which I know not whether we may be confident of learning from the Baron d'Isola; whose Business seems to be rather first to draw out our Points, and make them his Ground for persuading his Court to agree with them; and thereby value himself both to his Master, the Ger∣man Princes, and others, upon his own being the Author of so great a Negotia∣tion: And perhaps, if his Majesty have a mind to see the bottom of it, and wishes it effected for common Interest sake; he could not do better than to acquaint the Elector of Mentz privately with his Thoughts upon it; and leave him to make use of that Knowledge towards the pre∣paring all Pieces for the Work. For I find, That Prince must be the Spring of all the Motions that are made in it on the German Side: So that all will depend upon his Dispositions and Conduct; which for my part I pretend not to understand yet in this Affair: For though his late Envoy here visited me with great Professions from his Master to his Majesty, and much Civility to me; yet I fell into no sort of plain or confident Discourse with him upon this Matter; but finding him rather shy in it, I resolved not to be behind-hand with him in that Point: And so we parted as wise as we met.
By this Days Post I hear, the Count de Monterey is declared Governor of Flanders by way of Interim; which yet may last longer than is thought of, according to the slowness or uncertainty of the Spanish Councils, especially Don John having now finally refused to accept that Charge. The Count Marsyn I hear, says he will not obey a Man Qui ne fait que naître; because the Count Monterey is but twenty eight Years old; and therefore sets on foot already many Brigues against him both in Spain and Flanders, which we here fear may pro∣duce very ill Effects by encreasing the Dis∣orders of Flanders, and thereby the Tem∣ptations of France; though I hope our Friend, who you know is something hot at Hand, may yet come to himself: For methinks his Exception against the new Governor is not very just, after having so long obey'd a Man that thought of nothing but dying; and for ought I hear, was by that Apprehension rendred unfitter for his Post than any he could have met with to leave in it, without very great Luck. They much persuade me here to make a Journy to Brussels in this Conjuncture; having heard me speak of it this Summer, and of having his Majesty's leave; be∣cause they know I am acquainted with those at present upon the Scene: I find
their Deputies have no Credit there, and come back only with Dissatisfaction and Complaints: I see nothing like to take me up here, when I have observed this As∣sembly of the States of Holland, and what they will do and promise further in the Prince's Business, which a Fortnight will determine; and therefore am well enough inclined to it: But should be much the more, if his Majesty should think fit to Complement the Count Monterey upon this Occasion, and save the Expence of an ex∣press Person, by sending him a Letter with me to be delivered as one that goes wholly Incognito, and without any Character, as was last Year intended I should have done to the Constable: Of which your Lordship can easily satisfy me. I find, the Prince has put off the Thoughts of his Journy till towards the sitting of the Parliament, upon what your Lordship last writ: By whose Advice his Highness resolves to steer in the Course of his Affairs and Motions relating to England. I am ever My Lord, your &c.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, July 22. S. N. 1670. SIR, I AM at once to acknowledge both yours of the 1st and 5th current, with the inclosed Names of the Scotch Mini∣sters in the first; and in the other the last Paper concerted with Monsieur Van Beuninghen concerning the Affair of Surinam. Upon what concerns the Scotch Mini∣sters, I gave in yesterday a Memorial to the States; upon which I received this Day a Message from Them, expressing their Readiness to perform all Parts of their Treaties with his Majesty; and desiring to know from me the several present Abodes of the said Persons, to the End they might direct their Orders to them accordingly. But in this Point I was not able to answer Them at so short Warning, having not yet upon Enquiry heard of any of the three Persons, excepting Mackard, who it seems lived some Months since privately at Ʋtrecht; but whether he continues still there or no, I am yet ignorant: And therefore I told the States Agent, That I would endeavour to inform my self of
their Abodes if I could; but would not take upon me to find them out in any cer∣tain Place; since it was the Custom and Interest of such kind of Men to be as pri∣vate as they could, and to shift often: And therefore I did not see any Thing likely to reach them, but a Publication of their Names, with the States Orders for their avoiding these Dominions; which at some Time and Place or other could not fail of coming to them, and have the same Effect that could be expected from a more particular Direction. I spoke with Monsieur de Witt this Morning concerning your last Paper of Surinam; which he perused, having not seen it before, nor heard any thing of it from Monsieur Van Beuninghen: And therefore he said, the States could not fall upon the Debate of it without knowing upon what Grounds or Considerations Monsieur Van Beuninghen might have made these Changes, since his last Paper upon this Subject, which they expected would have been final in this Matter. Besides some Point wherein he thought the Style not so clear, he observed two main Altera∣tions in the Substance: The first is, that our Ships should not carryCannons mount∣ed in the River. Des Canons montés dans la Ri∣viere: Which he said, im∣ports
that they might carry what Cannon they please so they were not mounted, which is not the Business of an hours time; and is contrary (as he said) to your first Agreement with Monsieur Van Beuninghen. The second was, concerning Major Banni∣ster; whose Landing is here positively al∣lowed with the Liberty of going to his own Colony. Both which were (as he says) referred in Monsieur Van Beuninghen's last Paper to the Governor's Discretion and Judgment, whether it might be done with∣out Danger of the Colony. Upon both these Points we had large Discourses, which ended with his assuring me, that he should be the last to raise any Scruples upon either of them; but doubted that the Zealanders might thereupon (especially the last con∣cerning Major Bannister) change their late Protestations to Clamors, which might oc∣casion the States General to make more Dif∣ficulty in these Changes; unless they were satisfied in the Reasons of them by Mon∣sieur Van Beuninghen's Dispatches; to which all was of necessity to be referred. I hear, Monsieur Lionne entertained the Dutch Secretary at Paris with the News he had received from Madrid, of that Crown's joining this State with his Ma∣jesty and Sueden in the Arbitrage; and at the same time with many Reasons why his
Master could not admit of it; though he said he had not yet communicated it to him: However the declared Opinion of such a Minister seems to raise a strong Prejudice in the Case. I am sorry the Business of Conventicles gives you so much Trouble, and could wish we were at a good End of all such Controversies; which make his Majesty appear abroad to have so great and consi∣derable a number of Subjects that have not learnt to obey him; and consequently make up no part of his Strength, but seem rather to lessen it; and amuse People both at home and abroad with Imaginations of Changes. Yet Monsieur Van Beuninghen hath repre∣sented it hither as a Business which his Ma∣jesty will easier master than you seem to be confident of: But their Interest here may help them to believe as well as to desire it; upon the Expectation of so many Persons and Stocks as will be brought over to them upon this Occasion; and makes as they sup∣pose a considerable Increase of their Trade, and Diminution of ours. I am always Sir, your &c.
To the Count de Monterey. Hague, Jul. 22. S. N. 1670. My Lord, HAving long taken part in what re∣gards the Person and Interests of your Ex∣cellency, and having heard of your Advance∣ment to so great a Charge as that of Go∣vernor of the Nether∣lands, I would not fail of giving you Joy, and letting you know the Satisfaction I receive by it upon many Ac∣counts. For, since by the force of the present Conjunctures, it will be often necessary for me in the Post I am in, to have something or other to negotiate with the Governor of Flanders, about the common Interests; I shall be very glad to
enter into Business where I have already entred into Friend∣ship; and to have to deal with a Person who has already given me so many Testimonies of his fair and prudent manner of transacting, as well as of his parti∣cular Inclination for confirming the Ally∣ance between the Crowns of both our Masters, and for the Advancement of their Interests, wherein the Welfare and Repose of Christendom are con∣cerned. And whereas the good Order of Af∣fairs in Flanders is very important to his Ma∣jesty and the other Parties of the Triple Alliance, as well as to the Crown of Spain; I will hope, that by your Excellency's Con∣duct some good Order may be taken for set∣ling the Affairs of the Militia of this Coun∣try; and in the mean time, an end be put to
the Complaints and Miseries of the Inhabi∣tants; since a Govern∣ment is never well established but in the Hearts of the Subjects; nor so hard to be shaken as when the Generality of the Peo∣ple as well as the No∣bility, finds no Interest in the Change. I doubt not but your Excellen∣cy proposes these Ends, and will succeed in them, because you are too generous to mix with them your own Passions or particular Interests, which will not be less glorious to You than profitable and happy to Christen∣dom. And besides the Advantage Spain will make by your Excel∣lency's good Conduct, they will save them∣selves the Trouble to think of a new Go∣vernor, or to end an Interim so advantage∣ous to them. My best Wishes shall not be wanting to your
Excellency, nor my Services, upon all Oc∣casions where they shall be necessary; for no Man is with more E∣steem and Truth than I am, My Lord, Your Excellency's most humble and most affectionate Servant.
Au Comte de Monterey. De la Haye, 22 Juill. S. N. 1670. Monsieur, AYant pris depuis long tems beau∣coup de part dans tout ce qui touche la personne & les interêts de V. E. & venant d'apprendre qu'elle a eté pourvû d'une charge aussi importante que l'est celle de Gouver∣neur de Pais-bas; je n'ay pas voulu manquer á luy donner el para bien & temoigner la joye que j'en ay ressentie pour plu∣sieurs raisons. Car puis∣que par l'enchainement de conjonctures presentes, & dans le poste ou je su∣is, il me sera souvent necessaire de negotier, & d'avoir quelque chose á demêler avec le Gouver∣neur de Flandres, je seray fort aise d'avoir une li∣aison d'affaires avec celuy
avec qui j'ay deja des liaisons d'amitié; je me felicite d'avoir á faire á un sage dispensateur qui m'a deja donné tant de marques de sa noble & judicieuse maniere d'agir. Avec quelle joye n'ay je point vû votre penchant particulier á affermir l'alliance entre les deux Couronnes de nos Mai∣tres, & votre inclination á avancer des interêts qui ne tendent aujourd∣huy qu'á procurer le bon∣heur & le repos de la Chretientié. Comme sa Majesté & ceux de la Triple Alliance ont fort a coeur l'et at des affaires de Flandres, aussi bien que la Couronne d'Es∣pagne; je me fais un plaisir de penser que par la bonne conduite de V.E. on fera enfin quelque bon reglement touchant la milice des Pais bas, & qu'en même tems on met∣tra fin aux plaintes & aux miscres des habi∣tans;
puis qu'un Gou∣vernement n'est jamais si sûrement etabli, que lors qu'il a son fiege dans le coeur des Sujets. Rien n'est si difficile á ebran∣ler qu'un Etat ou la mul∣titude du peuple aussi bien que la Noblesse n'ap∣perçoit point d'avantage dans un changement. Je ne doute point que V. E. ne se soit deja proposé toutes ces fins, & qu'elle n'y reussisse, ayant une elevation d'ame assés grande pour n'y laisser point entrer ses propres passions, ni aucun interêt personel. Ʋne telle con∣duite ne luy sera pas moins glorieuse qu'elle sera utile pour la Chre∣tienté, & outre le profit que l'Espagne en tirera, elle luy sauvera le soin de songer á un nouveau Gouverneur, & luy fera prendre le parti de pro∣longer un si heureux in∣terim. Mes voeux ne man∣queront jamais á V. E.
& mes services secon∣deront mes voeux, toutes les fois qu'ils luy seront necessaires; car il n'y a personne qui soit avec plus d'estime & de verité que je suis. Monsieur, Votre, &c.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, July 29. S. N. 1670. SIR, I AM to acknowledge one from you of the 12th; and hope the Dutch Captain you therein mention, is before this time arrived, and will prove what you desire him, and thereby deserve the Encourage∣ment you intend him. I know not why Monsieur Van Beuninghen should at pre∣sent receive the Proposition concerning the Emperor's Admission; since Monsieur — confesses he thinks there will be Difficul∣ties made in it by the Emperor himself; who has not yet declared himself to the Elector of Mentz, nor I believe, to the Baron d'Isola neither; tho' it be true what you observe, that it ought to be authen∣tickly demanded on that Side. I hear no Hopes at all from France of admitting this State into a Part of the Arbitrage: So that if Spain persists in the Demand of it, as France no doubt will do in the Refusal; we shall be as much to seek in the End of the Year as we were in the beginning.
For what concerns the Commands I received about the three Scotch Ministers; though I cannot find out their present A∣bodes, yet I question not to obtain what is desired against them: There can only be one Scruple, if these States will adhere strictly to the Treaty, which is the Au∣thentick Knowledge of their being declared Rebels by his Majesty; which I should be glad to know, if it be so; tho' I shall in the mean time pursue it, as if I expected no further Informations. I have so far press'd them here upon as∣senting to the last Paper transmitted by Monsieur Van Beuninghen upon the Affair of Surinam; that the States of Holland have agreed to it; and appointed three Persons to endeavour either to dispose or to quiet the Zelanders, and to pass it in the States General; and I hope it will succeed, the Town of Amsterdam concerning themselves particularly in it for the Support of Mon∣sieur Van Beuninghen's Credit. The Assembly of the States of Holland will separate on Friday next; and are yet likely to agree in the long agitated Impo∣sitions upon the French Commodities before they part; the Town of Rotterdam hav∣ing (as I hear) this day at length assented; but with Condition that it shall not be executed till after Monsieur de Groot's Ar∣rival
in France, and account from thence whether that King be disposed to dispence with the late Rigors there used for dis∣couraging all Dutch Commodities. Though nothing has been yet mentioned this Assembly concerning the Prince; yet I am made believe they may, before they part, settle a Pension upon him, though a small one of twenty four or thirty thou∣sand Franks a Year, being only in Consi∣deration of his Session in the Council of State. I am always Sir, your &c.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, Aug. 12. S. N. 1670. SIR, SINCE my last, the States Agent brought me a Copy of the Letter they had agreed on to the Governor of Surinam; which I suppose, they delay'd till about the Time of their dispatching it away, because they knew I would except against the Limitation given to Major Bannister's landing; though they assure me, the Go∣vernor shall have Orders not to hinder it without very evident Knowledge of the ill Consequence it may have upon the Peace of the Colony; and that the Zelanders were so sharp in this Point, that they could not pass it in any other Form. I have likewise since my last been assured from the several Ministers here, that the Orders I desire concerning the Scotch Ministers would be granted: But that the Thing being proposed to the States of Holland then assembled, whom it most concerned, the Persons being supposed to be in their Province; several of the Deputies declared they would not resolve without communi∣cating it first to their Towns, among whom
those of Rotterdam were the chief: But their Pensioner Monsieur de Groot upon his departure from hence last Saturday to∣wards France, assured me of his Endeavors to clear all Scruples in it before he left that Town. I have since received your Commands in one of the 24th past con∣cerningMentioned in the Histories of K. Charles I. for removing that King by force from Holmeby. Cornet Joyce; to which I can yet make no re∣turn, Monsieur de Witt being out of Town and not ex∣pected till to Morrow: And I must first break it to him, by whom I can best know what I may hope for from the States in it; and withal contrive how it may pass with such Circumstances of Se∣crecy, that the Noise may not go before the Shot: By the next I hope to give you an Account how I am likely to succeed; and in the mean time will only assure you of my utmost Diligence in a Matter wherein you say his Majesty is so much concerned. I doubt not but a great part of Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Errand was to dispose us towards the Admission of the Emperor, and therefore wonder not at his enforcing that Proposition: But yet, sure the Ground of his Journy was the Desire of finding some Temper in the Business of the East-India
Trade; wherein I am very glad you hope for Satisfaction from him; I mean upon that single Article which has so long stopt the Marine Treaty, and foiled me absolutely in the Pursuit of it. For the other Point, I know not yet whether Mon∣sieur de Witt has received any new Account from Mentz of the Emperor's Intentions; nor how much it signifies, what the Baron d'Isola tells me, That the Imperial Minister there, has declared his Master's Resolution, of referring himself wholly to that Elector for the Conduct and Conclusion of that Affair: And that the said Elector hath de∣clared his Judgment of its being both fit and necessary; but that as to the Proposition of Forces to be furnished by the several Princes, he could not proceed to ascertain it, without more particular Directions from the Emperor, tho' his Minister there press'd him to it. All which seems to me a very general and loose Account for his Ma∣jesty to proceed upon; and to have some∣thing of the Baron d'Isola in it, as well as of the Negotiations of Mentz: And yet this is all the Light I can get at present; nor do I well know where to expect better, the States Envoy having already left that Place. I shall not fail of performing all the Of∣fices you please to enjoin me towards the
preserving our mutual Confidence in this Conjuncture; which I have endeavoured in all my Discourses here upon the Duke of Buckingham's Journy into France, since I first heard of it: And I am confident to have succeeded with the most Rational and Intelligent. For common Authors, they are not to be dealt with, being too many and too credulous to be reasoned with upon such Points: The best is, their Credit is of as little Weight as their Belief; and at last Truth will ever out. I hear, the Count Molina parted from Madrid upon his way through France into England about sixteen Days since; so as he ought to be by this Time well advanced. The Spanish Ambassador is likewise upon his return from Brussels hither: Which with other Marks confirm me in the Opinion of the Count de Monterey's being likely to find a long Interim in the Government of Flanders. I have nothing more to encrease your Trouble besides the Profession of my being always Sir, your &c.
To Mr. Williamson. Hague, Aug. 12. S. N. 1670. SIR, I AM to acknowledge the Favour I have lately received of two from You of the 22d and 26th past, with the Advices you were pleased to give me of what pas∣ses with you in my Lord Arlington's Ab∣sence: And know not what better Return I can make you from so barren a Scene as this is at present, but continuing the Or∣ders I gave upon Mr. Blaithwait's going out of Town, for all the Prints as well as the Papers of Occurrences, to be constantly transmitted to you by my other Secretary Mr. Downton; who tells me he does not fail you in these Points, no more than I shall do in any other wherein I can serve you here. I thought in a time of so little Motion or Talk, to have used his Majesty's Leave for a short Journy into Flanders; but some small Matter still arises to keep me from being wholly idle; and among others, the Shadow of the Surinam Business haunts me still, tho' Monsieur Van Beuninghen assured me he would Lay it upon his going over.
I should be glad to know if you find him as eloquent in a Court as they do in an Assembly of States here; and that he proves as good at Concluding as at Reasoning. I know to a Person of so much Business, an empty Letter is an Interruption; there∣fore will add nothing to this but the Pro∣fession of being SIR, Your most humble Servant.
To Sir John Trevor. Hague, Aug. 15. S. N. 1670. SIR, UPON Tuesday-night Monsieur de Witt returned to Town; and the next Morning I went to him upon the Affair wherewith you had charged me in your two last Letters, whereof that of the 29th past gave me notice of the Yatcht's being dispatch'd away. I related the Oc∣casion to Monsieur de Witt, and his Ma∣jesty's Desire upon it, as near as I could in the Manner and Terms you had imparted them to me; adding of my own whatever, I could think of, concerning the Interest of this State in such Compliances to his Ma∣jesty, especially where his Person was con∣cerned; and how fit it was for them to pass over the Want of small Circumstances and Obligations of Treaties, in Matters of so great Importance to a King so nearly ally'd to them, and in whose Safety and Quiet they were so deeply concerned. He al∣lowed all this latter Part of my Discourse; and for the Matter it self which I desired, he told me, That whatever the States were
obliged to by the Treaty, they had Power to enjoin the Execution of, because every Province had already given their Consent to it: But in other Matters the States Ge∣neral had no Power upon any Point where∣in the Jurisdiction of a particular Province was concerned: The Union consisting of seven Provinces, whose Sovereignty re∣mained still entire to each of them. That, for this Reason it was impossible to seize upon a Man residing in Holland, and send him over to his Majesty by any other Power but that of the States of Holland, who were not now assembled. That the seizing those Criminals by Sir George Down∣ing, hapned to have been desired at a time when the States were assembled, who gave their general Consent to it: Whereas, if the Town wherein they were, had dis∣sented and stood upon their Privileges, it had not been in the Authority of the States of Holland themselves to command it. After my Expostulations upon these Forms in their Government, which made it much harder to Treat with Them, than They found it to Treat with other Princes; and Monsieur de Witt's Deduction of the several Sovereignties of their Provinces, and Privileges of their Towns from their
Original, as well as the framing them into an Ʋnion (rather than a Government) for their common Defence: We fell at last into the Consideration of what could be done upon the present Business, since we had found what could not. And he told me with great Professions of his own Desire to see it succeed, That if I put in a Memo∣rial to the States General, besides the Dan∣ger of having it grow publick, I should lose just so much Time; whereas all they could do would be but to recommend it to the Committee de Raedt of Holland, to dis∣pose the Magistrates of Rotterdam to seize upon the Person I desired, and keep him safely guarded without suffering any Ap∣proach to him but by my Order until the next Assembly of the States of Holland, which will be about a Month hence: And this he said, the Committee might do of them∣selves; and he hoped they would, upon my writing a Letter to the President, espe∣cially if I would take the Pains to speak before-hand to the several Members of it: And in this he promis'd me his Assistance; and withal, that if the Magistrates of Rot∣terdam would seize and guard him till the Assembly of the States of Holland, he would then use all his Endeavours to dispose the said Assembly to send him over to the
King, though he doubted much Difficulty in it, and that the Town of Rotterdam would never consent to it, without an Act from his Majesty to the States, that he should be remanded to their Town after he had been examined: For without such an Act, he said, the Town of Dort had abso∣lutely refused to send a Person within their Jurisdiction to the States themselves. Upon all these Discourses I resolved as the best I could do, to speak severally that Evening with all the Members of the Com∣mittee de Raedt that were in Town, which I did as late as I could, so as to give the least Time for the Matter's taking vent. They all agreed in the same Account of the Constitution of their Government, which Monsieur de Witt had given me; and as∣sured me they would act as far in this Bu∣siness as they could do, if it came to them from the States General: But withal agreed that they could do no more than recom∣mend it to the Magistrates of Rotterdam, upon whose Resolutions it would wholly depend. While I was late in these Visits on Wednesday-night, Captain Harris came to my House, and told me of the Yatcht's being come to the Briell, but so ill used by the Storms she had met with, that she would need some Repair before she could
go to Sea again; which I was very sorry for, considering how ill her Voyage was likely to succeed, and that I had no hopes of sending her back with her intended Charge. The next Morning being Thurs∣day, I sent my Letters to the President just upon his going into the Committee: And within an Hour after, Monsieur de Witt's Brother who is a Member of it, came to me; and told me, That they had written a Letter to the Magistrates of Rotterdam to the same Purpose I desired, and with all the Earnestness they could; and to enforce it the more upon them, had appointed him and Monsieur Voorburgh another Mem∣ber of the said Committee, o go imme∣diately thither, and dispose the Magistrates all they could to the effectual Execution of what was desired. I acknowledged the Care and Compli∣ance of the Committee; and because I knew all depended upon Suddenness and Secrecy, and that I had been assured the Day before of Joyce's being in Town; I told him that I was resolved to go my self, but as privately as I could, and be there as soon as they: And while they were dis∣posing the Magistrates of the Town, I would endeavour to set the Fellow, so as to be sure of him when the Scout should
have Orders to apprehend him. After this I went strait to Rotterdam, and got privately into a House within three Doors of Joyce's; and had not been there an hour, when the Agent I employ'd to find him out, had met with him in the Streets, and staid with him till he saw him go home to his own House. I sent immediately to my two Commissioners, (who I heard had arrived some time before me in Town) to give them Notice of it, in hopes of their being ready for me: But I found they were at the Town-house, where the Magistrates had been assembled ever since their Ar∣rival; and they could not be spoke with by the Person  sent to them till about an hour after: And then they told him, That they had been dealing all that Time with the Magistrates, who made great Diffi∣culties in the Business; and they could not yet give me Account what they would re∣solve, but as soon as they could, they would come themselves and give me notice of it. After this I waited with great Spight and Impatience till about five hours after the Magistrates had been first assembled: The greatest part of which Time I could not have failed of my Prize, if they had sent their Officers. But after seven a Clock at Night, my two Commissioners came to
me and told me they had never seen the Magistrates in greater Perplexity, which had kept them so many hours unresolved what to do: That they said, It was abso∣lutely against the Privileges of their Town, to seize upon any Man without a particular Charge being ready against him: That this Man they heard, was a kind of mad extravagant Fellow: That having long re∣sided in their Town, he could be guilty of nothing towards his Majesty, unless it were of Words; which People were very free of in their Country; and amounted not to a Crime that was thought to deserve Imprisonment. That, they should have been glad to know the Words he was ac∣cused of; and that if they should seize a Man without any particular Charge, the Surety and Protection of their Town would be discredited, upon which much of their Trade depended: And that they were confident, no Town in Holland would do what was desired of them. That how∣ever for his Majesty's sake, and at the In∣stance of the two Commissioners, they had at last resolved he should be seized on, and that I should have the examining of him if I pleased: But that if I could exhibit no particular Charge against him, and he did not make himself guilty by his own Con∣fession,
they must release him the next Day. I replied plainly, this was just no∣thing to the Purpose, and was only so much Noise without any Effect: That the King's Demand was to have him sent over, and that since that could not be done without the Assembly of the States of Holland; my Desire was to have the Man seized upon and kept till the said Assembly, or at least till I received further Orders from his Majesty: And less than this was nothing at all. Hereupon one of the Commissi∣oners seeing how much I stomack't this Dealing, told me, the Magistrates had not absolutely said they would release him: But the other reply'd, That it was true they had not absolutely said it, but that he must confess he found it was their Intention. For my Part, I thought it was best at a venture to be once seized on him if I could; and try whether I could get any Thing out of him upon his first Sur∣prize, and leave the rest to further Endea∣vors; and therefore I desired however that he might be seized. They told me, the Magistrates doubted he was not in Town; but when I had taken off that by Evidence to the contrary; they said, the Magistrates did not know the Man, nor any of their Officers. But if I could send somebody
that did to the Town-house, they would send their Skout with him to execute what I desired. This I presently did; but the Person I sent found the Magistrates still unresolved, and in very ill Humour about it; and saying besides a great deal of what the two Commissioners had before told me, That in case Joyce had said he would kill the Burgomasters, or burn their Town, yet they should never have thought of impri∣soning him for it: And that it was hard to be put upon Things so contrary to their Privileges and their Customs, as well as their Interests. My Agent finding these Difficulties, desired Leave for me to seize him with such Persons as I could find my self: But this they said could by no means be done; and if it should be attempted with∣out the Officers of the Town, the Burghers would certainly rise and rescue him. With these kind of Debates they put him off about an hour longer, making him twice withdraw and come in again to them: But at last, when it was grown a very dark Night, they gave Order to their Skout to go with him, and apprehend the Fellow. Hereupon they went and searched his House, but without finding him; and two other of his usual Haunts with the same Success: but they found evident Marks of
his having had Notice given him of his Danger: For one at his House said, He wondred I would search for a mad Man; and that if he were assured I desired only to examin him, perhaps it might be done; but that for the present he knew not where he was, having taken the Key of his back Door, where he seemed to believe he was gone out. By all that had hapned, I found plainly the Magistrates of the Town had no Intention the Thing should be done; and began to be assured of what I had al∣ways doubted, that such a Pack of Rascals of so many Sorts as had been long nested in that Town (more indeed than in all the rest of Holland) had not made this Choice without some good Assurances from the Magistrates, of being protected there. I found as plainly that without their resolute and fair dealing in it, 'twas to no purpose for me to endeavour it; and that my being there was already known, and had given such an Alarm, that some of Joyce's Crew were walking continually up and down the Streets thereabouts ever since it grew dark, and others of them standing at his Door and his Windows: And therefore seeing that till this Allarm was over, there was no hopes of finding my Game; I resolved to speak with the presiding Burgomaster, and
engage him as far as I could for the effe∣ctual Pursuit of the Business; and make him see I understood well enough how it failed, and where it depended, and so leave the Town before Morning to give the Fellow the more Security. I sent to the Burgo∣master about Ten a Clock at Night, desi∣ring not to have it taken notice of when I spoke with him: But he sent me his Excuse by saying he was in Bed: After which I sent for the Skout; and when he had con∣fess'd he had Orders to take the Fellow, and that he knew him very well (contrary to what the Magistrates had pretended) I said all that I could possibly to engage him in the Pursuit of it; and told him, as the best Argument, that I would give him my self a hundred Duccatoons as soon as ever it was done; besides representing his Dili∣gence so to his Majesty, as that he might expect a greater Gratuity. And for the better effecting of it, I desired him to get me the Keys of the Town-gate that was near me, resolving then to go out of Town, and to pass with Torches before Joyce's Door, that so he might see I was gone, and with me the Persons I had employ'd in this Business, and thereby grow secure of any further Danger for that Night. And I desired him that about an hour or two after,
he would once more search for him at his House, and other Places where he used. All this he promised very fairly, and all other Diligences in it for the future; but to say the Truth, in such a manner, that I perceived plainly the Fellow had his In∣structions given him after another Fashion, from those that had more to do with him than I. And though I have expected some News from him all this Day, I yet hear nothing. Since my coming home I have spoken again with Monsieur de Witt, who professes to be very sorry for my ill Suc∣cess; says I did prudently in coming away after my first Attempt failed: That he knows not what to judge of the Magistrates proceeding till the return of the Commissi∣oners; and hopes something may yet be done by them, because they were not come back this Afternoon. He says he writ two Letters himself to the Magistrates, besides that of the Committee, to dispose them more; because he knew all would depend upon their hearty or faint Proceeding in it; and assures me of all his further En∣deavours. For the Business of Surinam; they will not believe their last Letter should not sa∣tisfy, since Monsieur Van Beuninghen had represented that of Bannister's absolute Per∣mission
as a Thing desired by you, but not insisted upon: So that if it be further press'd, it must be by your Orders after you received the last Papers. I ask your Pardon for any ill Digestion of this Letter, as well as for writing it in another Hand, which my Eyes force me to; and may all be attributed to the Want of Sleep these two Nights last past. I am however Sir, your &c.
To my Lord Keeper. Hague, Aug. 19. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I HAVE lately received the Honour of one from your Lordship of the 26th past; by which I was very sorry to find that any Occasions had at all withdrawn your Lordship's usual Concurrence in all great Affairs, wherein his Majesty uses the Advice as well as Labours of his Ministers. For the Steadyness of your Lordship's Judgment, and Directness of your Appli∣cation to his Majesty's and the Kingdom's Honour and Advantage in all your Coun∣sels, gave me at my last coming over hither much Confidence in the successful Course of our Affairs both at Home and Abroad: And the more your Lordship estranges your self from them, the more my Confi∣dence in that kind is like to abate; because I am apt to think it not only an ill Thing, but an ill Sign too. I am glad to receive your Lordship's Opinion concerning the Continuance of our Measures abroad, because I see not at
present where we can take better: And I the more need some such Encouragements as your Opinion gives me; because, to say the Truth, I should not be very apt to concur with you in it from the Observation I can make from hence of several other Circumstances: However, nothing ought to discourage such publick Hearts as your Lordship from contributing all they can to the Firmness of such Counsels, as they esteem most Just and Safe at least, if we are not in Condition to think so far as Glorious: Multa dies varius{que} Labor mutabilis Aevi Detulit in melius— We have nothing new nor material in present Agitation upon this Scene. The last little Commission I had was as trouble∣some as unsuccessful; and proceeded cer∣tainly in the Manner of it, from want of knowing or considering the Constitutions of this Government; which makes me confident your Lordship had no Part in directing it, no more than my Lord Ar∣lington, who was out of Town. I wish your Lordship perfect Health and Satisfaction; and that when neither of these make it necessary, you may not be too much at your Country-House.
Tho' in all Places I shall be ever with equal Constancy and Truth, My LORD, Your Lordship's, &c. To the Duke of Buckingham. Hague, Aug. 21. S. N. 1670. My LORD, AS your Grace will, I hope, meet with many new Entertainments on this Side the Water; so you must, I fear, be content with some new Troubles: For both usually happen upon all Changes. I wish your Grace all that can be of the first; and should not have given you any of the other, but to rejoice with you upon your happy Arrival at Paris. From so little and so barren a Scene as this is at present, I cannot offer at inform∣ing your Grace of any Thing; especially, since Men expect here to receive all their material Informations from your Motions where you now are, and from what shall succeed them at your Return. But, to
leave these People in their doubtful and mystical Reflections; I shall not interrupt either your Grace's Business or Leisure with any Thing but what is plain and certain; for nothing is more so, than that I am with equal Passion and Truth My LORD, Your Grace's most obedient and most humble Servant.
To my Lord Falconbridge. Hague, Aug. 22. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I WAS very glad to find by your Lord∣ship's of the first current, that the Sud∣denness of your Return therein mentioned was owing to the Dispatch of your Business in Italy, and to the Care of your Health; and consequently, that you receive from it both Honour and Satisfaction. I shall esteem it a great deal of both to me, if you continue so favourable Intentions as you ex∣press, of taking this Place in your way; where your Lordship may promise your self whatever my Services can be worth to you. I expect my Lord of Essex with my Lady here every Day; unless they have changed their Design since their Arrival at Hamburgh, where they came about ten Days since, after my Lord's having dis∣patch'd all his Affairs in the Danish Court. Our Treaty with Spain for regulating the Affairs of the Indies, came signed to London last Week, from whence I doubt not, it will be suddenly remitted with its Ratifica∣tion. All here is in great Quiet and Si∣lence, and like to continue so, unless
France furnish us with some new Dis∣course. I have hitherto writ by Mr. Perwich's Conveyance; but chuse to send this by Sir John Finch's, who is like to be a nearer Ob∣server of your Motions. But I will not give your Lordship a long and an empty Interruption, which has little else to bear it out besides the Profession of my being My LORD, Your Lordship's most faithful humble Servant.
To the Great Duke of Tus∣cany. Hague, Aug. 25. S. N. 1670. SIR, I Received almost at the same time the Honour of two Letters from your most Serene Highness; one of March the 31st, with an entire Vintage of the finest Wines of Italy; and the other of the 5th Instant, with your Highness's Con∣dolences upon the Death of Madame. The great Delay of the Ship that brought the Wine, and your High∣ness's great Dispatch to make a Compliment so sad and so obliging, were the cause that two Letters of so dif∣ferent date arrived al∣most
together. For I have very much reason to commend the Dili∣gence of Monsieur Fer∣roni, in conveying me all your Highness's Fa∣vours. I find the Wines admirable, and seeming to resemble their Prince, in having lost nothing of their natural Tast or Good∣ness, by the length of their Voyage, or the Extreams of Heats or of Colds. And herein I am more obliged to your Highness than you imagine, not only for having made me tast the Delights of so fine a Climate in so mise∣rable a one as this; but also for having by the same Means given me the Talent of a Drinker, a Quality I
wanted very much to acquit my self of an Ambassy in Holland. I cannot tell whether your Highness by your moving Expressions up∣on the Deplorable Death of Madame, has more discovered the Beauty of your Wit or the Greatness of your Affection to the King my Master: Therefore I hope your Highness will not take it ill that I have sent his Majesty a Copy of your last Letter, by which you have given such sensible Proofs of the Part you take in whatever happens to the Royal Family. The States General are very much sur∣prized at the News brought them this Day from France, in an Ex∣press sent them from their Minister at Paris, which assures them of the march of the French Troops towards the Frontier, to the num∣ber of 30000, where
they are to rendezvous at Peronne: But it is not yet known whe∣ther their Design be upon Flanders or this Country, or whether they project any other Measures. However, the Alarm is here so great, that they have immediately resolved to continue six thou∣sand Men, which they were just going to dis∣band: They have also ordered the Council of State to compute what Forces and Provisions they shall judge neces∣sary in case of a Rup∣ture with France; and have dispatched a Boat from Scheveling to Eng∣land with Orders to Monsieur Van Beuning∣hen (who is upon the Point of departing) to stay till further Orders from the States.
For my self, I know not what to judge of these Appearances; I shall ever complain of any Events that are like to endanger the Quiet of Christendom, to which I have for some time (under the Orders of his Majesty) dedicated all my Cares. And without doubt, if the War opens at pre∣sent, great Conjun∣ctures will arise, where∣of perhaps there will be Reason to give your Highness Joy, not for being out of the Noise of them; but because great Princes only wait for great Occasions. I am Sir, Your Highness's &c.
Au Grand Duc de Toscane. De la Haye, le 25 Aout. S. N. 1670. Monsieur, J'Ay quasi reçû en meme tems les deux Lettres que V. A. Sme. m'a fait l'honneur de m'ecrire; l'une datée du 31 de Mars, & accom∣pagnée des plus riches vendanges d'Italie, je veux dire, de ses vins les plus exquis; & l'autre du 5 du courant, avec les complimens de con∣doleance de V. A. sur la mort de Madame. Le long retardement de navire qui a apporté les vins, & l'empressement de V. A. á me faire un compliment aussi triste qu'obligeant; ces deux choses ont fait, que deux Lettres si fort eloignees par leurs dates, se sont
presque rencontrées á leur arrivée. Car j'ay beau∣coup á me louer de la di∣ligence avec laquelle Monsieur Ferroni tache de me faire tenir les fa∣veurs de V. A. Les vins m'ont paru excellens; & si j'osois, je dirois vo∣lontiers, qu'ils semblent tenir quelque chose du Prince qui les envoie, les changemens de Climat, la longueur & les tra∣verses du transport, la rigueur de l'hyver, ni les ardeurs de l'eté, ne luy ont rien fait perdre de sa seve & de sa force; & cela, ne fournit il pas un embleme assez naturel de la personne de V. A. J'ay au reste, plus d'ob∣ligation á V. A. qu'elle ne pense, sur son present de vins, non seulement parce qu'elle m'a fait gouter des delices du plus beau pais du monde, sous le Clymat le plus triste; mais sur tout, parce que son present m'a excité á devenir beuveur, qualité qui me manquoit absolu∣ment, & qui est pour∣tant
necessaire pour se bien tirer d'une ambas∣sade en Hollande. Je ne say ce que V. A. fait le plus paroitre dans les expressions si touchan∣tes dont sa Lettre est remplie, ou la fecondité de son esprit, ou sa ten∣dresse de coeur pour le Roy non Maitre. C'est pourquoy, j'espere que V. A. ne me sçaura pas mauvais gré d'avoir en∣voyé á sa Majesté la copie de sa derniere Let∣tre, dans laquelle elle a donné des marques si tendres de la part qu'elle prend aux evenemens de la Famille Royalle. Les Etats Generaux paroissent surpris de la nouvelle que leur a ap∣porté un exprés depeché par leur Ministre á Paris, qui vient de leur ap∣prendre la marche des Troupes Françoises au nombre de 30000 hom∣mes; elles s'avancent vers les frontieres, &
leur rendez-vous est mar∣qué a Peronne. On ne decide point encore sur le dessein de cette marche, & on ignore si elle re∣garde ou la Flandre ou ce pais icy; & on ne sait point si l'approche de ces Troupes ne tend point á cacher les veritables des∣seins, & á mieux reussir dans les mesures qu'on a prises. Quoy qu'il en soit, l'alarme est icy á un tel point, qu'on a pris sur le champ la resolu∣tion de continuer la solde á six mille hommes qu'on alloit congedier; que le Conceil d'Etat a ordonné de dresser promptement un etat de guerre, qui comprit tant les levées d'hommes, que les muni∣tions de bouche & de guerre, qui seroient esti∣mées necessaires, en cas de rupture avec la France. Qu' enfin on a fait partir de Shevelin en diligence une barque pour l'Angle∣terre, avec ordre d'y re∣tenir Monsieur Van Beun∣inghen qui etoit sur le point d'en partir.
Pour moy, je ne say ce que je dois juger sur toutes ces apparances; je gemiray toujours sur les evenemens qui pourront mettre en danger le repos de la Chretienté, qui de∣puis un tems, & sous les ordres de sa Majesté, a eté l'objet de mes veilles & de mes soins. Et, sans doute que sila guerre recommence, elle va don∣ner lieu á des grands evenemens, desquels on aura peut etre á donner el para bien á V. A. non comme eloignée de la tempête, mais parce que les grands Princes ne re∣spirent que les grandes oc∣casions. Je supplie V. A. de m'en offrir toujours, par lesquelles je puisse luy marquer avec combien de passion & de verité je seray toute ma vie, Monsieur, De V. A. Sme. &c.
To the Procu∣rator of the Court of Hol∣land, upon the Rights of Am∣bassadors. ONE of my Secre∣taries having giv∣en me a Copy of a Paper signed by you, F. de Brusis, which was brought to my House, and given to one of my Servants; by which Paper you summon one N. Wat, Valet or Foot∣man, to the English Ambassador, to appear before the Court of Holland: By the Title you give the said N. Wat, you make it plain, that you believe him to be actually in my House, and Service. Upon which I have thought good to tell you that I look upon
you as an Insolent Fel∣low, for daring to bring such a Paper into my House; and that I do not intend any of my Servants shall be look'd upon as subject to the Jurisdiction of any Court of this Coun∣try, or of any other beside those of the King my Master: And if any of them offends against the Laws, Com∣plaint must be made to me, that I may either order Justice to be done, or deliver the Offender of my own accord to be punish'd by the Law of the Place; having before∣hand dismiss'd him from my Service. Therefore I do not de∣sign to be exposed to such an Insolence as this that you have com∣mitted against me, in treating me like one of your Burghers, as well by the Paper left in my House, as by the ring∣ing of the Bell, where∣of you make mention.
What I here say, you may let your Masters know from me, by whose Order you pre∣tend to have acted. Besides, for their fur∣ther Information, let them know, that while I reside in this Coun∣try, I will never suffer the Rights and Privi∣leges so long granted to Ambassadors by the Law of Nations, and hitherto observed and respected by all Princes of Christendom, to be violated, or any way infringed in this Coun∣try in my Person; un∣der pretence of any particular Sovereignty of a Province, or Pri∣vilege of a City, in a Common-wealth where I have the Honour to serve a King in quality of his Ambassador.
Au Procureur de la Cour d' Hollande, sur les droits des Ambassa∣deurs. UN de me Secre∣taires m'ayant fait voir la copie d'un billet signé par vous F. de Bru∣sis, qui a eté porte dans ma maison, & donné á quelqu' un de mes gens, & par lequel billet vous sommez un certain N. Wat, Valet, ou Lac∣quais de l'Ambassadeur d'Angleterre, de com∣paroitre devant la Cour d'Hollande. Par la qua∣lité que vous donnez au dit N. Wat vous faites bien connoitre, que vous le croyez actuellement dans ma maison, & at∣taché á mon service; lá dessus j'ay trouvé bon de vous dire que je vous
tiens pour un Insolent, d'avoir osé porté un bil∣let dans ma maison; &, que je ne pretens point, qu'aucun de mes gens, soit regardé comme rele∣vant de la jurisdiction d'aucune cour dans ce pais icy, ni d'aucune au∣tre que de celles du Roy mon Maitre: Que si quelqu' un d'eux commet quelque chose contre les loix, on n'a qu'a mien faire des plaintes, afin que j'en fasse faire la justice, ou que je le livre de mon propre gré á la rigueur des loix du pais, l'ayant prealablement congedié, & chassé de ma maison. Je ne pre∣tens donc pas etre exposé, á une insolence pareille á celle que vous venez de commettre contre moy, en me traitant comme un de vos Bourgeois, tant par le billet laissé chez moy, que par le son de la cloche dont vous faites mention. Tout ce
que je viens de vous dire, vous pourrez le dire de ma part á vos Maitres, par l'ordre des quels vous dites avoir agi. Au surplus, & pour leur plus grand eclaircissement, qu'ils sachent, que du∣rant mon sejour en ce pais, je ne souffriray ja∣mais que les Droits & les Privileges, accordez depuis si long tems Jure gentium aux Ambassa∣deurs, & jusqu'icy ob∣servez & respectez dans les Etats de tous les Princes de la Chretienté, soient violez, ou le moins du monde alterez en ma personne en ce pais, sous les pretextes d'aucune souveraineté particuliere d'une Province, ou le Privilege de quelque ville, dans une Republique, ou j'ay l'honneur de servir un grand Roy en qualité de son Ambassadeur.
To Monr — upon the Death of his Daugh∣ter. Hague, Sept. 1. S. N. 1670. SIR, YEsterday late in the Evening, I received an Account of your Loss; and can assure you, that my Wife, my Sister, and my Self, were so sen∣sibly afflicted at it, that if it were possible Grief could be lessened by being communicated with real Friends, upon these sad Occasions, you would have immedi∣ately found some Con∣solation in yours: I must confess, your Grief is lawful enough, and founded not only upon the Dictates of Nature, but upon the Merits of her you lament; so that,
to pretend to comfort you by other Conside∣rations, than those which your Prudence, and above all which your Piety would sug∣gest, would be to at∣tempt an unprofitable Work; God has pleas∣ed to impose this Tri∣bute for the Continu∣ance of our Lives, often to lament the Death of our Friends. We must learn to submit and resign to his Will, which is the wisest and most Christian Part we can follow. To this I shall add, that the De∣sires of your Friends who yet remain, and your Care of their In∣terests, do demand from you that you will pre∣serve your self to them. Among these, there is none who is more than I SIR, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant.
A Monr — sur la mort de sa Fille. De la Haye, 1 Sept. S. N. 1670. Monsieur, ON me donna avis hier au soir bien tard, de la perte que vous venez de faire, & je puis vous assurer, que moy, ma femme, & ma soeur en avons eté si sensible∣ment touchés, que si l'af∣fliction pouvoit etre di∣minuée par celle qui se communique aux verita∣bles amis en ces tristes oc∣casions, vous auriez sur le champ eprouvé du sou∣lagement en la votre. Je le faut avouer, votre douleur est bien legitimie, elle est fondés non seule∣ment sur les devoirs de la nature, mais encore sur le merite de la per∣sonne que vous pleurez.
Ainsi pretendre vous con∣soler par d'autres refle∣xions que celles que vo∣tre prudence, & sur tout votre pieté vous suggere∣ront, ce seroit tenter une chose inutile. Je a plû á Dieu imposer une peine durant le cours de notre vie, qui est l'obligation de pleurer frequemment sur la mort de nos proches & de nos amis. Il faut se soumettre, & á appren∣dre á se resiner á sa vo∣lonté; c'st lá l'unique bo parti, & le seul qui soit & veritablement sage, & veritablement Chretien. J'ajouteray á cela, que les prieres des amis qui vous restent encore, & le soin de leurs intcrets, de∣mandent que vous vous conserviez. Parmis cx qui prennent la qualité de vos amis, il n'y a per∣sonne qui vous soit plus acquis que Monsieur, Votre tres-humble & tres affectionne Serviteur.
To my Lord Arlington. Hague, Sept. 2. S. N. 1670. My LORD, I MUST in the first Place rejoice with your Lordship upon your Return to Town, and to the Exercise of your usual Cares, which are so necessary to the Ser∣vice of his Majesty and the Kingdom, that I cannot doubt, any Thing is meant us so ill as the Danger of your Lordship's Health; tho' I find by your last of the 19th past, that you had fallen into some Indisposition upon your return: But the Length as well as the Clearness of all your Lordship's Discourses in it, give me the Confidence that it was already past. I have understood from Monsieur de Witt, the Sum of all Monsieur Van Beuninghen's Discourses with his Majesty upon the same Subject as those with your Lordship, of which you were pleased to give me the Account: And do not find, that Monsieur Van Beuninghen has failed of receiving all the Assurances from the King that he could wish, concerning the Negotiations of the Duke of Buckingham in France: For he has not only transmitted them to the States as
he received them at Court, but added like∣wise his own Opinion upon them; That as far as Human Appearances will go, he has all the Reason that can be to believe, that nothing has been treated of by the said Duke, nor was ever intended to be so in the French Court to the Prejudice of his Majesty's Alliances here. For the rest, they take it as well as they can, that they see no Advance made in the Propositions of the Emperor's joining with those of the Triple Alliance in the Guaranty of the Peace. Which I suppose touches them so much the more by the News brought this Day to the States; which I am now to give your Lordship an Account of, as of the way I received it. Just as I was sitting down this Day to Dinner, the States Agent came to me, desi∣ring that their Commissioners might have the Liberty to speak with me though at that unusual Hour; being of a Matter newly come to them, and of very great Import∣ance. I consented; and thereupon Monsieur de Witt came in the Head of the other Com∣missioners; and told me, that the States had newly received certain Advice from France of the Date of the 29th past, That the Chevalier de la Fourrille, who had been dispatch'd secretly from Court some Days before the breaking up of the Camp at
St. Germains, and with the Troops quar∣tered near the Borders of Lorrain; made a sudden March into that Country, and seized upon the City of Nancy; and that by so unexpected and quick an Attempt, that he failed very little of surprizing the Person of the Duke, and had taken the Dutchess. That the Duke escaping, had retired to a small but strong Place called Bidsch; where he busied himself in as∣sembling what Forces he could for his De∣fence. That the Mareschal de Crequy being dispatch'd from Paris had met this News upon the way, and returned with it to Court; from whence he was dispatch'd in haste the second time to Lorrain. That the French Camp near St. Germains was marched towards Peronne under the Com∣mand of Monsieur Vaubrun; but that by Orders sent after them upon the way, they were to be divided into two Bodies; of which one was to march away to the Mareschal de Crequy in Lorrain; and the other towards Sedan; where they should make a stand, and face any Attempts that might be designed from Flanders or this Country, towards interrupting the Suc∣cess of their Affairs in Lorrain. Monsieur de Witt told me further, That the States having considered these Advices, had or∣dered them (the Commissioners) immedi∣ately
to acquaint me with them: And fur∣ther, that though the States esteemed it a Matter of so great Importance, that all the Parties of the Triple Alliance ought to concern themselves in it, as wholly destru∣ctive to those Ends of conserving the Spa∣nish Dominions, which were mutually proposed in the said Alliance; yet they (the States) should not, nor indeed could not proceed to any Resolutions thereupon, without first knowing those of his Majesty, and being assured of his vigorous Conjun∣ction. And hereupon they desired me to give his Majesty Notice immediately by an Express, to the End that I might know his Sense and Intentions upon this Conjuncture; or at least be instructed to confer with the States upon it. After this, much was enlarged by Mon∣sieur de Witt and the Commissioners, con∣cerning the very great Importance of the Seizure of Lorrain; as the cutting off Bur∣gundy wholly from the rest of the Spanish Dominions, as well as all further Commu∣nication between any of the Netherlands, and many of the Princes of Germany, with the Suitzers. So as they compared Lorrain to a Cittadel in a Town, from which all the rest would be commanded at pleasure. They added, That the Dutchy of Luxem∣burg would be in a manner block'd up, and
maimed in their mutual Assistance with the rest of the Spanish Provinces. That the Electors of Mentz and Tryers would have the French Feet upon their Throats: And consequently, that whenever France should begin with Flanders after the Possession of Lorrain, the County of Burgundy would be their own in an Hour, and Flanders in a very short Time; without greater and rea∣dier Assistances than there seemed to be any reasonable Hopes for. After this, they told me, They had re∣ceived likewise a new Account by this Post, of all the French Preparations at Sea, and the present Estate of their own Fleet; of which they gave me this inclosed List. And by all I can gather from their Dis∣courses, I judge they are capable of any vi∣gorous Resolution that his Majesty should think fit to inspire them in Conjunction with us: But that without it they are re∣solved, as they express it,To leave it to God, and to see the French at their doors, without stir∣ring a-foot. De laisser agir au bon Dieu, & de voir la France á leurs Portes sans se remuer. Upon all which they pretend, that the Disposal and Ballance at this Time of all Affairs in these Parts of Christendom, lie before his Majesty; from whom both the Empire and Spain, as well as Sueden and this State, will receive their Measures.
Three Days since the Baron d'Isola was with me, to communicate a Letter he had newly received from the Emperor, declaring his Resolution to join with the Triple Alli∣ance in the Guaranty of the Peace of Aix; which he desired me to give his Majesty part of by the Post: But having told me at the same time that he resolved to give your Lordship the same Account, I omit to trouble you with any further Particulars. He came to me again just upon the Close of what I have written, and shewed me a Let∣ter from Monsieur Louvigni at Brussels, containing the Particulars of what has hapned in Lorrain, and little different from those I had before received by Monsieur de Witt; only that the Duke of Lorrain re∣solved to retire with all his Forces into the Mountains, and hopes to defend himself some time, provided he might be sure of not being abandoned. I am ever my Lord, your &c.
To my Lord Keeper. Hague, Sept. .... S. N. 1670. My LORD, I Lately gave my Lord Arlington the Account which was given me by the States Commissioners, of the Seizure of Lorrain, with their Reflections upon it, and the Consequences it must needs have upon all the Affairs of Christendom; and their Desires of my communicating all from them with Speed and Care to his Majesty; which I did. I have since received by last Post, and by a Letter from his Lordship, the King's Orders for my immediate Repair into Eng∣land, and for my acquainting the States with it; and that it is only with Intentions of my informing his Majesty better in the several Points that concern the present Conjunctures of my Station here. This I have done in a Conference upon it with Monsieur de Witt. I found him at first very pensive upon the News of it: and apt to reflect upon this hapning so soon and unexpectedly after the late Seizure of Lor∣rain; and both after the many Delays and Difficulties raised by us (as he apprehends)
in admitting the Emperor to the Guaranty of the Peace of Aix in conjuction with the Triple Alliance, which we formerly so much desired. He remembred at the same time the many Instances we have made for many Months past about such a Trifle as the car∣rying off our Planters from Surinam (whom he takes by the Articles to become their Subjects,) and the invincible Difficulties in which we have engaged Matters between our East-India Companies; in which he says he is assured our Merchants have no Part, but as they are instigated by some Persons at Court; whose ill Intentions he fears towards the late Alliances contracted between his Majesty and these States, both for our own mutual Safety and that of all Christendom. He reflected upon a Coldness in all our Negotiations of that kind, ever since Madame's Journy into England; and upon the late Journy of the Duke of Buck∣ingham's to Paris, which he could not think was,To see the Country, or learn the Language. Pour voir le Pais, ou apprendre la langue: And desired I would tell him what I could make of all this laid to∣gether: For on the one side, there were Circumstances enough to awake a suspicious Man; and on the other side, he could never think it possible for any Na∣tion or Court it self, to quit so certain a
Point of Interest and great a Point of Ho∣nour, as must be forfeited by our breaking our Alliances with this State, or entring into any with France; whose Greatness had occasioned our Measures for our own as well as our Neighbour's Defence. He said, I knew the best of any, how all these Mat∣ters had pass'd: How his Majesty had en∣gaged these States in those common Mea∣sures, and even prevailed with them to make a Sacrifice of the ancient Kindness and Alliance this State had always before with France, to the Considerations of the present Danger from the Greatness of that Crown to the rest of Christendom; though they might have had what Terms they pleased from them for the dividing of Flanders. That I knew with how invio∣late Faith and Firmness the States had con∣stantly observed for these two Years past, their Friendship and Alliances with his Majesty, and how great a Part I had in contracting and pursuing them, by the particular Confidence the States and He especially had in my Person, as one that was persuaded of our common Interests, that knew my Master's Mind, and would not be an Instrument to deceive those that trusted me. For these Reasons he said, he desired to know my Opinion upon this whole Matter, especially that of my Journy
into England; which, he said, would be very surprizing to every Body here, and therefore he would be glad to give the News of it to the States in the best manner he could. I protested to him that I had hitherto received constant Assurances from both the Secretaries of State, of his Majesty's Re∣solutions to observe constantly the Mea∣sures in which he was engaged to this State. And that I knew not a Word more of the Reasons of my sudden Journy into Eng∣land, than what I had told him. That I had Orders to leave my Family behind me: And that his Majesty might possibly think it necessary for his Information to speak with me upon the present Conjunctures, and to return me immediately according to my Lord Arlington's Letter. That I con∣fessed, I was apt to make many of those Reflections that he had done; but could not believe it possible for any Crown ever to enter into Councils so destructive to their Honour and Safety as those he suspected. That if such a Thing should ever happen, I desired him to remember what I told him upon the Scruples he had made in trusting our Court upon the Negotiations of the Triple Alliance: Which was, that I told him then what I thought of his Majesty's Dispositions and Resolutions as well as
those of his Ministers; That I could not believe it possible for them to change in a Point of so evident Interest, and which would be so understood by the whole Na∣tion. That however I could answer for nobody besides my self; but this I would; and that if ever such a Thing should hap∣pen, I would never have any Part in it. That I had told the King so as well as him; and would make it good. That for the present, there was nothing more to be said, but that I must go away for England. That if I returned he would know more; and I doubted by what he said, that he would guess more if I returned not. Monsieur de Witt smiled, and said, I was in the right. That in the mean time, he would try to cure himself and Others of all Suspicions upon my Journy: And would hope on t'other side, it might be of use to the common Interests, by possessing his Majesty of the great Importance of the late Seisure of Lorrain; and of the States Reso∣lutions to stick close to him in all Measures he should take upon it. And so we parted. I would have gone away immediately upon this Summons, but that it found me very ill, and uncertain whether it would end in a Fever as it seemed to begin; but since a great Swelling fallen upon my Face
I hope it may pass. However, being forced to delay my Journy some few Days, I could not but give your Lordship this Account before-hand, and leave it to you to make what use of it you think fit; with∣out expecting any Answer, since I hope so soon to follow it. But I know your Lordship fully per∣suaded of our Interest to preserve our Al∣liances here, and the present Measures of Christendom which depend upon them. And tho' you have said nothing yet to make me distrust our Counsels in that Mat∣ter; yet I confess I have not the better Opinion of it from what I find of your Lordship's estranging your self of late, or being estranged from the Consultations of them. I have likewise reflected upon the kind Hint your Lordship gave me some time since, of my Lord Arlington's not being the same to me which he had formerly been, and constantly since our first Acquaintance: Which made me, I confess, then doubt rather some Mistake in your Lordship's Ob∣servation, than any Change in his Friend∣ship or Dispositions. From himself, I must needs say I yet find nothing of it; and tho' his Style seems a little changed in what concerns our Publick Affairs, yet not at all in what is particular to me. When I
come into England I shall soon know the Truth of your Conjecture, and tell it you, because by that I shall judge the Truth of mine: For having never said or done any Thing to deserve the least Change in his Lordship's Friendship to me since it first began; I am sure if it happens, it can be derived from nothing else but a Change he foresees in those Measures at Court which he has been with your Lordship so deeply engaged in; and which he knows as well as your Lordship that I will never have any Part in the Councils of altering, till I can be convinced that any others will be more for his Majesty's Honour and Safety. All this I say in Confidence to your Lord∣ship, without touching any Word of it to my Lord Arlington, or any other Person: And shall increase this Trouble no further because I hope to have so soon the Honour of seeing you, and assuring you a nearer way, with how much Passion as well as Truth, I am and shall be ever My Lord, your Lordship's &c.
To the Great Duke of Tus∣cany. London, Nov. 4. 1670. SIR, I Should not have sa∣tisfied my self bare∣ly to resent all the Fa∣vours of your most Se∣rene Highness, and par∣ticularly the Honour of your last of September the 30th, if I were any way capable of ac∣knowledging them as I ought, either by my Expressions or my Ser∣vices. But your High∣ness being pleased to oblige so many ways, so unprofitable a Per∣son, can hope for no other Returns than the Pleasure of your own Generosity, and the Devotion of a Heart so grateful as mine.
I should have ex∣treamly regretted the length of time your Letter was in passing before it found me at London, after having missed me at the Hague; were it not that your Highness is to consider me here as one of the commonest among the King's Subjects, and not as a Minister who has any Part in Publick Af∣fairs. And therefore you can expect nothing in my Letters but the tedious Complemen of an idle Man, instead of such Informations or Services as your High∣ness might expect to re∣ceive from those who are devoted like me to your Service. But the Marq. of Puzzi is too well received at the K. my Master's Court, and too well informed, not to have given your Highness all Intelli∣gence necessary, as well of his Majesty's Friend∣ship and Esteem, as of the general Devotion
his Subjects bear for the Person of your High∣ness. He must also have informed your Highness of the happy Disposition his Majesty has found in his Parlia∣ment, for the Encrease of his Revenues, and by that means for the Establishment of his Interests both within and without his King∣doms. I am sorry the said Marquis has found nothing here to please or keep him longer a∣mong us. But I hope your Highness will not think that during my stay here, there can want a Person, as ready to receive and obey all your Commands as any of your own Subjects, Since I am so much, SIR, Your Highness's &c.
Au Grand Duc de Toscane. De Lond. le 4 Nov. S. N. 1670. Monsieur, JE ne me contenterois pas de ressentir com∣me je le fais & comme je le dois, toutes les bontez de V. A. Sme. & parti∣culierement l'honneur qu'elle m'a fait par sa derniere lettre du 30 de Septembre, si je me trou∣vois le moins du monde capable de les reconnoitre comme elles le meritent, ou par mes expressions, ou par mes services. Mais, V. A. ayant voulu par tant de manieres diffe∣rentes obliger un Sujet aussi inutile que je le suis, n'a pas dû en esperer d'au∣tres fruits que la plaisir de jouir de sa propre ge∣nerosité, & de s'attacher un coeur aussi reconnois∣sant que le mien.
Je me serois fort plaint des longueurs á travers lesquelles la lettre de V.A. est enfin venue me trou∣ver á Londres, aprés m'avoir manqué á la Haye, si desormais je de∣vois etre regardé de V.A. autrement que comme un homme privé, & un des Sujets les plus ordinaires de sa Majesté, qui n'est plus ni Ministre public, ni admis dans les affaires. Par consequent mes let∣tres ne peuvent contenir que les complimens d'un homme oisif, au lieu des relations & des instructi∣ons que V. A. attend de ceux qui sont aussi atta∣chez á elle qu'elle sait que je le suis. Mais, Mon∣sieur le Marq. de Puzzi est trop bien a la Cour du Roy mon Maitre, & d'ailleurs trop eclairé, & trop exact, pour n'avoir pû informer V. A. de tout ce qu'elle doit savoir par rapport á notre Cour; sur tout, il n'aura pas negligé, je m'assure de luy, parler de l'amitié &
de l'estime de sa Majesté pour la personne de V. A. en cela secondée par l'af∣fection generale de tous ses Sujets. Il vous aura aussi entretenu des heu∣reuses disposiions que sa Majesté vient de trou∣ver dans l'assemblée de son Parlement, pour l'aug∣mentation de ses Finances, & pour la seureté de ses interêts tant au dedans qu'aux dehors de ses Etats. Je suis bien marris que Monsieur le Marquis n'ait pas trouvé icy assés de charmes pour s'y plaire, & s'y sejour∣ner un peu plus long tems. Mais j'ose esperer que V. A. ne croira pas man∣quer dans Londres d'une personne entierement de∣vouée á son service, & aussi empressée á recevoir ses ordres, qu'aucun de ses propres Sujets, tandis que j'y feray mon sejeur, puisque je suis, Monsieur, De V. A. Sme. &c.
To Sir John Temple. London, November 22. 1670. SIR, I MUST make you my humble Ac∣knowledgments for so great a Present, as you have been pleased to send me to∣wards that Expence I have resolved to make at Sheen: And assure you, no part of it shall either go any other way, or lessen what I had intended of my own. I doubt not to compass what I told you of my Lord Lisle, for enlarging my small Territories there; when that is done, I propose to bestow a thousand Pounds upon the Con∣veniences of the House and Garden; and hope that will reach all I care for: So that your five hundred Pounds may be laid out rather for Ornament than Use, as you seem to desire, by ordering me to make the Front perfectly uniform. Your Care of that, and me, in this Matter is the more obliging, the less I find you concur with me in my Thoughts of retiring wholly from publick Affairs, and to that Purpose, of making my Nest at this time as Pleasant and Com∣modious as I can afford it. Nor shall I easily resolve to offer at any of those Ad∣vantages
you think I might make upon such a Retreat, of the King's Favour or good Opinion, by pretending either to Pension or any other Employment. The Honour and Pay of such Posts as I have been in, ought to be esteemed sufficient for the best Services of them: And if I have Credit left with the present Ministers to get what is owing me upon my Ambassy, I shall think my self enough rewarded; considering how different a Value is now like to be put upon my Services in Holland, from what there was when they were per∣formed. 'Tis very likely at that Time, as you believe, there were few reasonable Things the King would have denied me, while the Triple Alliance and our League with Holland had so great a Vogue; and my Friends were not wanting in their Ad∣vices to me to make use of it. But I have resolved never to ask him any Thing, otherwise than by serving him well: And you will have the less Reason perhaps to reproach me this Method, if you will please to remember how the two Ambas∣sasies of Aix la Chappelle and Holland were not only thrown upon me without my seeking; but also, what my Lord Ar∣lington told me was designed for me upon Secretary Morris's Removal, in case the King had not thought my Ambassy into
Holland of the greatest Necessity in pur∣suance of those Measures we had taken with that State. For what you think of the Interest we have still to pursue them, and consequently of the Use the King will still have of me upon that Occasion: I will not enter into any Reasonings with you upon that Matter at this Distance; but will only tell you some Passages of Fact upon which I ground the Judgment I make of Affairs wherein I have no Part; and which I am not so sollicitous to draw into the Light, as I doubt others are to keep them in the Dark. And when I have told you these, I shall leave you to judge whether I take my Measures right as to my own private Con∣duct. You know first the Part I had in all our Alliances with Holland; how far my own personal Credit was engaged upon them to Monsieur de Witt; and the Resolutions I not only acquainted Him and You with, but his Majesty too; that I would never have any Part in breaking them whatever should happen: Tho' that I confess could hardly enter into any Bodies Head that understood the Interests of Christendom as well as our own. I have given you some Intimations how cold I have observed our
Temper at Court in those Matters for this last Year; and how different it was thought abroad from that Warmth with which we engaged in them: So as it was a com∣mon Saying at the Hague, Qu'il faut avouer, qu'il y a eu neuf mois du plus grand Ministere du monde en Angleterre: For they would hardly allow a longer Term to the Vigour of that Council which made the Triple Alliance, and the Peace of Aix, and sent me over into Holland this last Ambassy to pursue the great Ends of them, and draw the Emperor and Princes of the Empire into the common Guaranty of the Peace. In∣stead of this, our Pretensions upon the Bu∣siness of Surinam, and the East-India Com∣panies, have grown high and been ma∣naged with Sharpness between Us and the States; and grounded (as Monsieur de Witt conceives) more upon a Design of shew∣ing them our ill Humour than our Reason. I was sensible, that my Conduct in all these Matters had fallen short for many Months past of the Approbation at Court it used to receive; and that Mr. Worden was sent over to me only to disparage it, or espy the Faults of it; tho' I think he returned with the Opinion that the Business would not bear it. 'Tis true, both my Lord Ar∣lington and Sir John Trevor continued to the
last of my stay in Holland to assure me, that the King still remained firm in his Mea∣sures with the States: But yet I found the Business of admitting the Emperor into the Guaranty, went downright lame: And that my Lord Keeper was in a manner out of the Foreign Councils; for so he writ to me himself, and gave me notice at the same time, that my Lord Arlington was not at all the same to me that he had been: Which I took for an ill Sign in our publick Business, and an ill Circumstance in my own; and the more, because I was sure not to have deserved it; and found nothing of it in his own Letters, but only that they came seldom, and run more upon indifferent Things than they used to do. Ever since Madame's Journy into Eng∣land, the Dutch had grown jealous of some∣thing between Us and France; and were not like to be cured by these Particulars I have mentioned: But upon the Invasion and Seizure of Lorrain by France, and my being sent for over so suddenly after it, Monsieur de Witt himself could keep his Countenance no longer; though he be nei∣ther suspicious in his Nature, nor thought it the best Course to discover any such Dis∣position upon this Occasion, how much soever he had of it: But yet he told me at
my coming away, that he should make a Judgment of us by the suddenness of my return, which the King had ordered me to assure him of. When I came to Town, I went immedi∣ately to my Lord Arlington according to my Custom. And whereas upon my se∣veral Journies over in the late Conjunctures, he had ever quitted all Company to re∣ceive me, and did it always with open Arms, and in the kindest manner that could be; he made me this last time stay an hour and half in an outward Room before he came to me, while he was in private with my Lord Ashly. He received me with a Coldness that I confess surprized me; and after a quarter of an hours Talk of my Journy and his Friends at the Hague, instead of telling me the Occasion of my being sent for over, or any thing else mate∣rial, he called in Tatá that was in the next Room, and after that my Lord Crots, who came upon a common Visit; and in that Company the rest of mine pass'd, till I found he had nothing more to say to me, and so went away. The next Morning I went however to him again, desiring to be brought by him to kiss the King's Hand, as I had used upon my former Journies. He thought fit to
bring me to his Majesty as he was walking in the Mall; who stopt to give me his Hand, and ask me half a dozen Questions about my Journy, and about the Prince of Orange, and so walk'd on. Since which Time, neither the King nor my Lord Ar∣lington have ever said three Words to me about any thing of Business; though I have been as often in their way as agreed with such an ill Courtier as I am, or a Man without Business as I found my self to be. I have seen my Lord Keeper and Mr. Secretary Trevor: And find the first uneasy and apprehensive of our present Councils; the last sufficient and confident that no Endeavors can break the Measures between Us and Holland, because they are esteemed so necessary abroad and so rati∣onal at home: But, I find them both but barely in the Skirts of Business, and only in Right of their Posts: And that in the Se∣cret of it, the Duke of Buckingham, my Lord Arlington, my Lord Ashly, and Sir Thomas Clifford, at present compose the Ministry. This I tell you in short as the Constitution of our Affairs here at this Time, and which I believe you may reckon upon. You know how different Sir Thomas Clif∣ford and I have always been since our first
Acquaintance, in our Scheams of Govern∣ment, and many other Matters, especially concerning our Alliance with Holland: And that has been the Reason I suppose, of very little Commerce between us further than common Civility, in our frequent Encounters at my Lord Arlington's for se∣veral Years past: This made me a little surprized at his receiving me upon my first coming over, and treating me since with a most wonderful Graciousness, till t'other day, which I suppose has ended that Style. Upon the first Visit he made me, after many Civilities; he told me, he must needs have two hours Talk with, me at some Time of Leisure and in private, upon our Affairs in Holland: And still repeated this almost every time he saw me: Till one Day last Week, when we appointed the Hour, and met in his Closet. He began with great Compliments to me about my Services to the King in my Employments abroad; went on with the Necessity of preserving our Measures with Holland, and the mutual Interest both Nations had in it: And concluded with wonding why the States should have shewed o much Difficulty upon those two Affairs of Suri∣nam and the East-India Company, wherein our Demands seemed so reasonable. And
how it came about that I had failed in compassing his Majesty's Satisfaction in those two Matters, after having succeeded so much in all my other Negotiations. I thought he might not have understood the Detail of those two Affairs; and so deduced it to him, with the Dutch Reasons, which I confess seemed to me in many Points but too well grounded. He seemed unsa∣tisfied with them all, and told me I must undertake that Matter again, and bring it to a Period; and asked me whether I did not think I could bring them to Reason: I said plainly I believed I never could, to what we called so, and therefore was very unwilling to undertake it: That I had spent all my Shot in vain; and therefore thought their best way would be to employ some Person in it that had more Wit or Ability than I. Upon this he grew a lit∣tle moved; and replied, That, for my Wit and Ability they all knew I had enough; and all the Question was, whe∣ther I was willing to employ them upon this Occasion, which so much concerned the King's Service and the Honour of the Nation. Hereupon I told him, how I had used my utmost Endeavours in it al∣ready, how many Representations I had made the States; how many Conferences I had had with their Commissioners, how
long and particular Accounts I had given them hitherto; and how I had valued all the Reasons transmitted me from hence; and how all to no purpose: And being, I confess, a little heated after so long and unpleasant a Conversation (as well as he) I ask'd him in the Name of God what he thought a Man could do more? Upon this in a great Rage he answered me; Yes, he would tell me what a Man might do more, and what I ought to do more; which was, to let the King and all the World know how basely and unworthily the States had used him; and to declare publickly how their Ministers were a Com∣pany of Rogues and Rascals, and not fit for his Majesty or any other Prince to have any thing to do with: And this was a Part that no Body could do so well as I. My Answer was very calm, That I was not a Man fit to make Declarations; That when∣ever I did upon any Occasion, I should speak of all Men what I thought of them; and so I should do of the States, and the Mi∣nisters I had dealt with there; which was all I could say of this Business. And so our Conversation ended. Upon all these Passages, and some others not fit for a Letter, I have fixed my Judg∣ment of the Affairs and Counsels at present in Design or Deliberation here. I apprehend
Weather coming, that I shall have no mind to be abroad in; and therefore re∣solved to get a warm House over my Head as soon as I could: And neither apprehend any Uneasiness of Mind or Fortune in the private Life I propose to my self; unless some publick Revolutions should draw both upon me, which cannot touch me alone, and must be born like a common Calamity. I cannot find them willing yet to end my Ambassy in Form, or give me leave to send over for my Wife and Family; which I easily apprehend the Reason of, and must go through as well as I can; tho' my Ex∣pence at the Hague be great, and my Hopes little here of getting my Pay, as I find Af∣fairs go and Dispositions too in the Trea∣sury, where all is disposed in a manner by Sir Thomas Clifford. In the mean time, I have sent over for my Spanish Horse, and intend to send a Groom away with him to Dublin, in hopes you will be pleased with him. I can be so with nothing more than the Occasions of expressing always that Duty wherewith I am Sir, your &c.
To Monsieur de Witt. Sheen, July 25. 1671. SIR, BY yours of the 14th Instant I received the Marks you were pleased to give me of your Friendship and Memory, which I value as I ought, and as com∣ing from a Person who has already acquired the Esteem of all the World, and by that the Right of doing much Honour to others to whom he gives any Testimony of his own. I can pretend to no o∣ther Part in it, than what your Goodness gives me, and am a∣fraid that this may do Injury to your Judg∣ment. But knowing
that your Opinion of me is solely founded upon your knowledge or my good Intenti∣ons, I shall defend my self no longer; be∣cause in this Age there is so little Honour in being a good Man, that none are suspected to employ their Va∣nity about it, any more than their Pursuits. I should quit my Resi∣dence at the Hague with much Regret, if I were of your Opi∣nion in what regards me; for I think I should be wholly useless there, and find I am better turned for making a good Gard'ner than an able Minister. How∣ever, I shall ever bear much Respect and E∣steem to those who are well qualified for the latter, and therefore cannot fail of both for your Person in parti∣cular, any more than of my Acknowledg∣ments for your Civili∣ties
to me at the Hague, whereof I shall ever preserve the Re∣membrance, as well as the Passion wherewith I am SIR, Your &c.
A Monsieur de Witt. De Sheen, le 25 Juil. 1671. Monsieur, J'Ay reçû dans votre lettre du 14 de ce mois les marques que vous avez bien voulu me donner de votre souvenir, & de votre amitié, je les estime ce qu'elles valent, & comme venant d'une personne qui s'est deja acquis l'estime de tout le monde, & par la le droit de faire beaucoup d'honneur en donnant des marques de la sienne. Je n'y sçaurois pretendre d'autre part que celle que votre generosité m'y don∣ne & je crains même que cela ne fasse quelque tort á votre jugement. Mais, sachant que le bonne opi∣nion que vous temoignez avoir de moy, n'est fon∣dee
que sur la connois∣sance de mes bonnes in∣tentions, je ne veux plus me defendre; car, au reste, dans un siecle com∣me le nôtre, il y a trop peu de gloire á etre hom∣me de bien, pour s'attirer le soupçon d'avoir tourné se veues á ce coté lá, & borné sa vanité á si peu de chose. Je quitterois avec beaucoup de regret, le sejour de la Haye, si j'avois de moy même, l'opinion que vous voulez que j'en aye; mon senti∣ment est, que j'y serois tout-á fait inutile; & je me sens beaucoup plus propre á pratiquer l'art d'un bon jardinier, que celuy d'habile Ministre. J'auray pourtant toujours l'estime & le respect qui sont dûs á eux qui savent bien ce dernier, & par lá je croy dire assez clairement, que je n'en manqueray jamais pour vôtre personne en parti∣culier. Je say de plus quelle reconnoissance je dois á toutes les civilitez que j'ay receues de vous
pendant mon sejour á la Haye; & mon coeur en conservera eternellement le souvenir, ainsi que la passion avec laquelle je suis, Monsieur, Votre &c.
To Sir John Temple. London, Sept. 14. 1671. SIR, I AM sure you will be pleased with knowing that my Wife and Family are safe arrived from Holland, after a Passage that might very well have met with other Dangers besides those of Wind and Wea∣ther. I could not obtain Leave to send for them till July, though I had for some Months sollicited both That and the end∣ing of my Ambassy: But then his Majesty was pleased to grant me both that Liberty, and also of writing to the States and to Monsieur de Witt, to take my Leave of Them, and end my Ambassy as upon my own Desire, and my own private Occasi∣ons; which were indeed enough to engage me in that Pursuit, considering the Charge of maintaining an Ambassador's Family at the Hague, while my Payments from the Exchequer went so heavy and so lame. 'Tis true, I had other Reasons long a∣bout me, which I kept to my self: For, soon after my coming over, my Wife writ me Word, That Monsieur Gioe the Danish Envoy there, had told her in Confidence,
and out of Kindness to me, that Monsieur Pompone the French Ambassador at the Hague, had acquainted him, That new Measures were taken between our Court and that of France; among which one was, that I should be recalled and return no more. At the same time Monsieur de Witt had upon the Delays of my Return, told my Secretary Mr. Blaithwait, that he should take my stay or coming back for certain Signs of what the King's Intentions were towards the preserving or changing the Measures he had taken with the States: And had desired him to let the Court know what he said. This I suppose made them unwilling to make a Declaration by my recalling, of what they intended upon this Occasion, before all Things necessary were more fully agreed or better concerted. Therefore they continued not only my Family there for so many Months, and the Talk of my Return, but entertained the Dutch Ministers here with such Language as gained in them an Opinion of our Mea∣sures still continuing firm upon the same Bottom; and with such a Credulity as was enough to make one doubt whether they were willing to deceive their Masters or to be deceived themselves.
