V388 R3207 12083588 53662
A RELATION OF THE COASTS OF AFRICK CALLED GUINEE; WITH A Description of the Countreys, Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants; of the pro∣ductions of the Earth, and the Merchandise and Commodities it affords; with some Historical Observations upon the Coasts. Being Collected in a VOYAGE By the Sieur Villault, Escuyer, Sieur de Bellefond, in the years 1666, and 1667. Written in French, and faithfully Englished. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleet-street near Temple-Barr, 1670.
THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS. A Relation of their Voyage from Am∣sterdam. page 1 The Description of Cap-Verd. p. 16 The Coast of Malegeta, with the King∣dome of Sierra-Leone. p. 29 The Description of Sierra-Leone, or the Mountain of Lyons. p. 37 Cap de Monte, and its Description. p. 54 Cap Miserado. p. 66
Rio de Junco. p. 73 Petit Dieppe. p. 76 Rio-Sextos. p. 77 The Coast of Graives called Malaguette. p. 87 The Coast of Elephants Teeth. p. 98 Coste d' Or, or the Gold Coast, with a Re∣lation of our Occurrences there. p. 114 The Description of the Golden Coast. p. 131 Of the Stature and Proportion of the People of this Countrey, of their Wit, Inclination, Industry, and Habits. p. 133 Of their Women, their Genius, Humour, and Habits. p. 140 Of their Mariages, and the Education of their Children. p. 145 Of their Houses, Heusholdstuff, Drink,
Meat, Palme wine, and how it is made. p. 154 Of their Markets, their manner of Buy∣ing and Selling, with a Description of their Measures and Weights. p. 162 Their Religion. Of their Sundayes, Feasts, Devotions, Gods or Fetiches, of their Sacrifices, Priests, and Habits. p. 166 Of their Superstition, their Swearing upon their Fetiches, their manner of pacify∣ing them, when they think they are angry, and the Burial of the Dead. p. 182 Of their Old Men, their Slaves, their Lame, their Servants, the Diseases they are usually subject to, with their Cures, and the way to prevent them. p. 195 Of their Dances, and Feasts, both pri∣vate and solemn. p. 207 Of their Exercises, their workmen, their Trades, their Merchandises, their Fish∣ing, and the Duty they pay to the King. p. 214
Of the Kings of those Countreys, their Courts, Authority, and manner of li∣ving with their Courtiers, of their Wives and Children, of the Succession of their Kingdoms, their Revenues, Feasts, Deaths, Burials, and Elections of ano∣ther King. p. 223 Of their Nobles, the manner of their ma∣king Warr, the grounds upon which they do usually make it, their Arms, of their Cessations and Peace. p. 238 Of their Civil and their Criminal Justice, and of the successions of particular men. p. 249 Of their Beasts, their Birds, and their Fish. p. 255 Their Fruits, Hearbs, Bread, Millet▪ Mays, their manner of sowing and making of Salt. p. 260 Of their Gold, where it is found, and how, with the variety of works they make of it. p. 264
Of the Return of our Vessel for Europe. p. 272 The Description of the Isle of Saint Tho∣mas which lyes under the Line. p. 274
A VOYAGE TO The Coasts of Africk called GUINEE. With a Description of the several Countries, Fashions, and Manners of the People, the Fruit and Com∣modities of those parts, with the Trade and Commerce they afford. THe Coasts of Africk, commonly called Guinee, comprehen∣ing a Tract of ground of seven hundred Leagues, from Cap-verd in the fourteenth degree of Nor∣thern
latitude, and nintieth degree of longitude East: to Cape Gonsal∣vo in the first degree of Southern la∣titude and 29 and a half of Eastern longitude, are at present so little fre∣quented by the French (and all from an opinion they have taken up of the Malignity of the air) that it cannot (without great sence and reluctancy) be consider'd how long, and how unhappily they have been deserted by them, and left as a prey to all other Nations, without re∣serving so much as the least share in the most advantagious Com∣merce they afford. I must confess (having the heart and passions of a Frenchman) I could not observe without great re∣gret, the cunning, and artifice, wherewith the English, the Hollan∣der, and the Dane had possest us of the pernitiousness of the air, and the unwholsomness of the place,
and that with so much subtilty, they had almost perswaded us out of the whole country, and to have given up those few places which are still in our power: a practice of that Moment, and importance to them all, that from their traffique upon these coasts alone (would they be ingenious and confess) they must acknowledg they derive their most considerable profit and advantage. And indeed what Frenchman is their in the world so stupid and im∣penitrable, that can behold several Bays along these coasts, (by the in∣habitants called Bays de France) and several Towns (as Petit Diep and o∣thers) declaring at this day the Ge∣nealogy of their founders, so intire∣ly abandon'd by his countrymen, that there is nothing remaining there now but their name, and an indeliable desire in the natives, that they would conquer them again;
what Frenchman I say can consi∣der this without remorse, or re∣member it without being affected. True it is, in the time of the ci∣vil wars wherewith it pleas'd God to afflict the Kingdome of France in the reign of Henry le grand, our expulsion in those parts was com∣pleated, for having no leisure to re∣inforce such garrisons as we had there from the time of Lewis the Eleventh, we were forc'd out of them all and constrain'd to yeild possession to the Portugais, who at that time like an inundation over∣whelm'd all we had formerly gain∣ed upon the Golden Coast, and for better security of their conquests, built a Castle called St. George de la Mine, of which I shall give a more ample discription hereafter. Yet, as an argument that our in∣terest was considerable there once, and that our magnificence was suit∣able
to our interest: it is worthy observation, that at this very day the Dutch make use of a fair Church built formerly by the French, still adorned with our Monuments and Arms, and the principal Battery they have towards the sea, is still by the Natives themselves called la batterie de France. Upon these Coasts we had once the possession of Akara, Carmentin, Cape-corse and Takorai, at which last the Sweeds rais'd a new Fort since that, and upon the ruines of ours, but their late wars in Germany, (like our wars in France) having caus'd it to be neglected, and been an occasion of interrupting its sup∣plies, it is demollish'd as well as ours, and hath nothing left now but rubbish, to shew that ever it was there. Besides this, we have suffered the Hollander to incroach upon us in
our days, and to possess themselves of our Plantation at Commendo, a Town some two leagues distance from the Chasteau de la Mine, but they were glad to attend the death of two Frenchmen who had lived there along time, built a fair house (of which there is nothing now standing but the walls) and com∣ported themselves with that candor and integrity to the Natives, that they gain'd the affections of them all, and have left such a perfume and reputation of the French be∣hind them, the Moores do glory in being call'd by that name, and will still beat their drums after the mode of France. Three Months in the year, the aire of this Country is dangerous, and no more, yet so little then, that with the least providence and mo∣deration one may preserve himself as well as in France, and perhaps
better, because we have several di∣seases which are familiar in Europe, that are utterly unknown in this Country. But the truth is, this is but pre∣tence, and the collusion of the Dutch to put that into our heads, that see∣ing our commerce declining in those parts, they might not onely eradicate all our thoughts of reco∣vering it again, but all our regret and concernment for the loss of it, and they themselves go quietly a∣way with the commerce of so many Kingdoms, which is so prodigious∣ly rich, I shall only touch upon it in transitu, and not tell what I saw my self least it should seem to be incredible. Only this I shall be bold to offer to the consideration of the world, whether it is probable the Hollan∣ders (who are a people so ardently devoted to their interest and advan∣tage,
that there is scarce any body but knows it) would upon occasion of surprising the Fort at Cormentin upon the Golden Coast which was formerly theirs, have ventured upon the last war with England, had not their profits upon those coasts been more then ordinarily considerable. And indeed so sweet was their trade there, and of that consequence and importance they would never have endured either English or Dane amongst them, had not the Natives compelled them. The instance I shall give in the ill usage we receiv'd from the Heer Walkenbourg their General at the Mine, at a time too when we were in so strict alliance with them, that we had espous'd their quarrel, and made their Enemies our own, will I doubt not be sufficient to demon∣strate, that there is nothing so Bar∣barous, or inhospitable, they will
not act for their profit, and to ex∣clude the world from the notion of a Trade that would alone maintain the Grandeur of their State, were they absolute Masters of these coasts without any competitors. That the Genius and Humour of the Mores is more susceptible of the French, then any other Nation, is manifest by the designs all Forreign∣ers have lay'd to keep us from thence: they know very well should our commerce be readmitted, theirs would be lost irrecoverably, and we should ingross the vast quantities of Ivory and Gold-sand, which comes yearly from thence: besides the be∣nefit of the Nigroes which are tran∣sported for Slaves into America; and contribute exceedingly to the profit of those plantations. Nor ought any difficulty in the Voyage, be able to discourage us, seeing when once arrived at the Ca∣naries,
the wind serves always ve∣ry well, no tempests, no storms, and ankorage is every where so good, that an ankor of nine or ten inches, will hold a Vessel of 400 Tun. Monsieur Daliez Seigneur Martel being imployed into these parts by the West-Indy Company at Paris, and setting out from Amsterdam in a new Ship of four hundred Tun, (called the Europe) took me along with him in the quality of his con∣trouler for that Voyage.
On St. Mathews Eve, in the year one thousand six hundred sixty six, I departed from Paris in order to my imployment, and arrived at Brussels the Saturday after, the next night passing to Antwerp, and from thence to Roterdam, I came safely to Am∣sterdam on the 13th of September where having spent some weeks with the rest of our Officers in frait∣ing our Ship, I departed with the  Heer Vantesck, the Heer Willembourg (our Captain,) the Heer Vander∣berg, and Mounsieur Mathews (our Secretary) for the Texel. The next morning we went a∣board, and on the 13 of November with a fair wind we set sail, steer∣ing our course south south west; we gave the Fort of the Texel three guns, and then put out the colours of Ostend to prevent being stopt, there having been an express prohi∣bition for any Hollander to serve any forreigner in those parts upon pain of death, let the pretence be what it would. Having dismist our Pilot which conducted us to sea; by degrees, and the opportunity of a mist we past thorough the Channel, and (escap∣ing the English of whom we had great apprehension) we came up at length to certain Islands about some 20 leagues distance from the River of Lisbon.
In this place it seems it is a cu∣stome amongst the Hollanders (and punctually observed) to baptize such of their seamen and passengers as have never past the Tropique or Line before, and if the Vessel have never made that Voyage before (as ours had never done) by the same custome the Captain is to obliged to give the Seamen some certain bottles of Brandy to be merry, and drink his health with all, other∣wise he forfeits. The weather being fair, and we very much beholding to the benig∣nity of the sun, all things were pre∣pared, the Bell rung, and the Sea∣men immediately upon the Deck, and having slackned our Sails, they began the ceremony of Baptism as follows. Those of the Seamen who had made this Voyage before, sised up∣on the other, and tying their hands
behind them, they took them one by one, and having fastned a Rope under their armpits, they puld them up to the yard of the main mast, from thence soucing them into the water, and then drawing them out again three or four times, somtimes they ducked them for the King of France, and somtimes for the States General, and at last for the Officers of the Ship, and their wives if they had any, after which they gave them a glass of Sack, or a dish of Brandy, and all were good friends. The boys in the Ship were stript to their shirts, and put under a bas∣ket, and had seven or eight buckets of water poured over their heads. Nor were the Officers exempt, for after their presents of drink to the Seamen, they were contented to stand still till they threw some little water upon their heads out of a glass or pot, which concluded the ceremony.
This Christning being over, we set sail again, and by the error of our Pilots, we past by the Maderas, where we intended to have put in. At length we discovered a high foreland, and advanced within 4 leagues of it to discover what it was, after five hours coasting we found by our sounding (the water being forty fathom) and the redness of the sand, that it was not the Isle of Palma (as we imagined) but that we were got as far as the Gulf de sainte Croix neer the Cape Geer up∣on the coasts of Moroque. Having past the Canaries and the Cape de Bajador, we past the Tropick of Cancer on the 10 of De∣cember, and on the 12 having past the Cape Blanc, we came into 18 degrees of latitude, and by the be∣nefit of a south east wind we run a∣long by the shore till we came to the 16 degrees, at which time we
began to descry the coasts of Africk and to observe them sandy and low. The 14 at sun-rising we found our selves at the mouth of the river of Senegal, about 15 degrees, where the wind falling, we endured a calm, so as that day nor the night following, we made no progress at all. On the 15th we discover'd Cap-Verd, which at a distance resembled two Brests, but in respect it was en∣vironed with Rocks, and not ap∣proachable without danger, we steer'd to the North-West, and on the 16, we doubled the Cap in our passage to Rio-Fresco, a Town upon the coasts of Africk, about 6 leagues from the Cap; a place where they usually take in fresh water, and somtimes trade, but with little secu∣rity, the Fort and Island of Goure (which belongs to the Hollander) being too near.
CAP-VERD. SO called from a perpetual ver∣dure which embellishes it, is one of the pleasantest and most a∣greeable places in the world. It is a Promontory which throws it self a long way from East to West into the Sea; the North part of it is Mountanous, and covered always with green Trees, its point to∣wards the East, is about a Mile over: it is a Rock very steep and sharp towards the Sea, which with great gentleness bathes and washes the feet of it, after it has been bro∣ken, and discust by several smaller, and conceal'd rocks that incompass it, and seem to be plac'd there by nature, on no other purpose but to oppose themselves (in the behalf of so delicate a place) against the
fury of so impetuous an Element. The 2 points advancing like moun∣tains, and making as it were a ver∣dant terras or rampart walk betwixt them, yeilds a most incomparable perspective thorough the trees on the East-side, and is no less beauti∣ful on the South, though the coun∣try lies low, by reason of the Trees which one would think were plan∣ted by a line, if he considers with what exactness and regularity they grow. But the same wind which (being gentle) had indulg'd our curiosity, and given us a grateful and com∣pleat prospect of this Cape, remo∣ved us almost insensibly, and brought us to Goure. Goure is a little Island about a League in circumference, and three Leagues distant from Cap-Verd, 'tis separated from the Terrasirma by a little arm of the Sea, about half a
League over. At present it belongs to the Hollander, who on a mountain on the west-side has built a Fort, on the East it is low, has a good Port on the South, and good Ankorage. We saluted the Fort with five pieces of Canon, and received as many from them; we gave them 3. more by way of thanks, and that they might not seem to be behind us in civility, they return'd us one more, and set up the Dutch Standard. A while after the Governor sent out his Boat to inquire what we were, and what news; he that com∣manded it spake very good French, and it fell to my share to entertain him a good while. Our discourse was about Cap-Verd, and Le-Segnal, which he cry'd up to me as the most pleasant part of the world, and the best for trade, and told me, that at long run the French would carry it from every body.
For Cap-Verd, that they whch loved hunting, might abundantly divert themselves there, that there was plenty of game, as Partridge, Hares, Harts, Roe-Bucks, and se∣veral other Animals very good meat, though utterly unknown in Europe. That the Moors were not to be fear'd, and that there was ex∣cellent fishing. After Dinner he return'd to the Fort, desiring us to go on to Gambay where the English had a small Fort with eight pieces of Canon plant∣ed, and the Government worth 2000 l. per ann. Rio-Fresca, is a Town in Africk, near which, we came to Anchor in the Bay de France, which is firm and gravelly at the bottome, and is six Fathoms deep at low water. After Dinner our Secretary was sent on Shore to carry the Alcair, or Governor, his Presents, (which were
Knives, and Brandy) and to take a view of what Commodities they had there and to procure fresh meat. At his return, he told us the Alcair had receiv'd him very civilly in his own house, which is built in the midst of several others, that he made him sit down by him upon a very neat Mat, and regal'd him with such Wine and Fruits as the Coun∣trey did afford. That as to Commodities, the coast was at present unfurnish'd, but if we would have patience for a fortnight, he would give notice to the Mar∣chants of the Country, who would doubtless supply us, especially se∣veral Portugals which they then had amongst them: and as to fresh Vic∣tuals he would furnish us next day. Whilst our Notary was a shore, there came a Canoe aboard us from the Alcair, but so mann'd, as surpri∣zed me very much: they were ex∣ceedingly
black, their Mine not much better than our Beggars in France, and naked as they were born, except a little linnen before. They demanded what we were; we told them French: they ask'd if we were come to stay, or had put in only for Provisions; we reply'd for Provisions, but we would return to continue; to which they answer'd Bon, Bon: the French are more worth than all the rest of the World. There came several other Canoes to us with great quantity of fish, which they barter'd for knives and strong waters, which they fancy exceedingly. That night we stood to our arms, apprehending some attempt from Goure to surprise us. The next mor∣ning, the Alcair himself, called Ab∣donsech, came aboard us in our Shal∣lop, accompany'd with his Offi∣cers, and the principal of the Town.
He was a person of about 35. or 40. years of age, well proportion'd, and understood his interest well e∣nough. He was in a long white Robe made of Cotton, which came no lower than his knees, the sleeves long and wide like a Surplice, only gather'd close at the hands, about his neck great quantity of locks of Red Wool, with a Callecon of the same; he had a Cap upon his head not much unlike the Capuches worn in Hungaria. The Officers had all of them old Mantles of stript Cot∣ton about them, partly white, and part blew, not unlike our Gipsies. We made them sit and dine with us, after which they desir'd the Of∣ficers of the Vessel that they would return thither and continue, which we promising, they enter'd into a Contract of allyance, which was sign'd and seal'd on both sides. We ask'd them where their King
was; they reply'd three days jour∣ney up into the Countrey: That he was call'd Damel Biram, and his kingdom Caillor, that he loved the French best, as being more frank, and liberal, and less addicted to their interest and profit. It's a wonder to see these people, they can neither write nor read, and yet all of them spoke Portugais; but the Alcair, French, English, and Dutch, as perfectly as those that were born there: about Noon he took his leave of us, and we fill'd him a great Gourd with strong wa∣ter, which he had brought full of Palm Wine, which is the best in their Countrey; I went on shore with him, and interrogating him a∣bout those following things for se∣veral hours, he inform'd me, that Rio-Fresca is a Town of about 200 houses, that it hath a conve∣nient Harbour on the West-side of
it, and capable of a shallop: That the houses are but small, and ac∣cording to my computation, like our thatched houses in Normandy, built only with mud and sticks layed a cross. That there were not above 300 men in the Town, be∣sides women and children. The East-side is covered with a Wood, thorow which I past four or five hundred paces, and disco∣vered large fields beyond it, which my eye could not compass. This Wood consists of Palm-trees, and other very lofty Trees, which in Europe are unknown. The aire (though the place be fourteen degrees on this side the Line) is as good and as warm, as any on these coasts; for which reason both women and men, go naked, on∣ly a little linnen before, to cover their pudibunda, which the men doe not scruple to laave off when they go to Sea.
Their Religion is so various, and intermixt, that besides the Portugal Catholicks, which are there in great numbers, they have other circumci∣zed Catholicks, that come near to the Jews, as also Mahumetans and Ido∣laters. These latter have little baggs of leather which they wear con∣stantly about their necks, and call them Fetiches, which is as much as to say their Gods, (as I shall demon∣strate more at large in my Chapter of the Superstition of th which inhabit the Golden Coast) in which likwise they have so great confi∣dence, they beleive that unless it be the Whites, there is no body can doe them any harm. They eat very little flesh, though they have Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Kids, Hens, Pidgeons, a kind of Phesants, and small Birds in a∣bundance; Their chief diet is Fish, as the Guilthead, the Shadfish, the
Pilcher, which they take day and night in great numbers, besides ma∣ny other unknown among us. Their fishing is in little Canoes, cut out of the Trunk of a Tree, and made hollow, with a stick, (instead of a Mast) set up in the middle when the wind is down, but otherwise when it is high, they stand right up, and row with a kind of oares, some four or five foot long, and as broad at the end as a good large plate. The men of this place are very personable and well, not many of them Camous, and from hence it is they have the best slaves in Africk. The women and daughters are for the most part very common, court∣ing and solliciting of Strangers by that time they are fourteen years old, and that in the midst of the streets, so great a kindness and in∣clination they have for them. The men have as many wives as
they can keep, will prostitute them for a small matter, and somtimes offer them for nothing. They have their haire tied up upon their heads (which are always uncovered) to which they fasten certain little pie∣ces of wood, and think them great preservatives against the heat of the Sun. All of them both men and women speak a kind of corrupt Por∣tugais. The commodities this Country affords, are Skins, Gums, Feathers, Ivory, Indigo, Civet, and great quantity of a kind of Cotten cloth, stript with white and with blew, which is immediatly put off again at the Golden Coast. Though they are naturally great lyars, and not to be beleived, yet it is certain the Alcair gave adver∣tisement to the Inhabitants up the country as he promised us, but we thought it not fit to trust him
according to the advice of another Vessell of Amsterdam, which made advantage thereby. We bought that day some Hens, Pullets, and Kids, and delayed our time so long on shore, our camerades were forced to give us a signal, by discharging a great Gun, that we should come back, as ap∣prehending some mischief might befall us from the Hollander. That night we set sayle for the Sierra-Leoane, or Mountain of Lyons, neither thinking it convenient to make up the other Rivers, or to pass directly to Gambay. And on the six and twentieth of December we came to an anchor within three leagues.
The Coasts of MALEGETA, with the Kingdom of Sierra-Leone. THe next day by the benefit of the Tyde, we came to an an∣chor in the River of Sierra-Leone; aboot noon the Mores came aboard us to conduct us into the Bay de France, which is the 4th from Cap-Ledo at the mouth of the River. At six fathom deep, low water, we came to an anchor within musquet shot of the fountain, where we took in fresh water, and having landed, we went that night to supper upon the banks of it, where we killed a Goat which came thither to drink, and found the water more pleasant and delicious (in respect of our thirst) then the best of our Wines. We put out the colours of Ostend, and not of France, because there
was an Englishman living in one of those Isles a long time, where he had a faire house and four pieces of Canon, and was besides well beloved and protected by the Kings of that Country. The next day we sent two of our Officers up the River, about ten leagues, to wait upon the King of Boure, with our usual presents, and to desire permission to trade, and to furnish our selves with fresh water, & wood; and in the mean time our people fell to work to cut down wood, and carry water, the Notary, my self, & one of my servants, going along with them as a guard. Du∣ring our absence there came aboard our ship five or six Canoes, in one of which there was one John Tho∣mas (Captain of one of the Isles in that River) who brought some quantity of Ivory along with him. The Captain (who was the only
Officer aboard) received him very civilly, saluted him at his entrance with a volley of great shot, and re∣galed him as much as was possible, but he bought none of his Ivory be∣ing too dear, which gave so much dissatisfaction to Mounsieur Thomas; he went away in a huff about five a clock, and landed with 15 or 16 Mores in his company, near the bank of the Fountain I have spoke of before. The Clerk and my self were returning in our great shallop laden with balast, and advanc'd as much as the tide (which was then coming in) would give us leave, in so much that our shallop was afloat: which being observed by the Cap∣tain and his Mores, they put them∣selves into their Canoes again, and made with all speed to our men, who were cutting down wood upon the banks of the Bay. At the same time they gave us a signal from the
Ship by furling our colours, which made us double our speed, in appre∣hension there might have been some mutiny or sedition aboard; but when we arrived, we found it was only to give notice of the design of the Mores, who were seen making to our men with their weapons in their hands, but the man I left be∣hind me, having his musquet with him, stopt their proceedings, and the rest defended themselves so well with their Axes, that there was none wounded or kil'd of the whole company, only one antient man re∣ceived a scratch in one of his arms. We sail'd immediately towards them, but as soon as we came with∣in musquet shot, and they percei∣ved our Guns in our hands, they run strait into the woods, where they lay close all day long, but at night we could hear them making great noise about the fountain a∣foresaid.
The next day being the 29 De∣cember, the Clerk, the Pilots Mate, several servants, and about 20 of our Seamen, went a shore in our shallop for fresh water and wood. At their landing the Mores aban∣doned the fountain, and betook themselves to the Woods, where they made a great noise likewise, but without any attempt, for our men having run towards them, and fired 5 or 6 musquets at a venture into the woods, they took their heels, and from that time we heard no more of Mounsieur Thomas, nor any of his crew. After dinner our Embassadors returned from the King of Boure's Court, having stayed there with his most August Majesty but one night: but they brought most of the Canoes thereabout along with them, laden with Ivory, which was bought off indifferent cheap. The next day the King of Boure's
Brother came aboard us, and brought with him a Portugais (which we had seen before, and is imployed in the affaires of that Prince) we know it was some per∣son of quality as soon as we dis∣cerned his Canoe, which we di∣stinguished by the sound of his Trumpets, and immediately sent out our boat to receive him, into which he entred with his Trum∣pet and Drum, and at his coming aboard our Ship, was saluted with a volley from the great Guns. The Brother of the King of Si∣erra-Leone is a person of about fifty or threescore years of age, and be∣gins now to grow gray: his stature is but indifferent, but grave, and in∣telligent enough in his affairs. His habit was not much unlike that of the Alcair of Rio-Fresca, unless it be that the Alcair's habit was of white cloth, and this of cloth
strip'd with black and blew, he had a gray hat upon his head, a stick like a musquet rest in his hand, his Attendants had all of them Robes of Cotton cloth, only the Portugal was drest ala Portugaise. Whilest we were treating him, we gave him an accompt of the sto∣ry of John Thomas, to which he an∣swered that he was a mutineer and a rebel, and that in case wee should catch him, we should not only have his pardon, but thanks. After he had dined, he pulled out about twenty little stones, out of a little purse, which he threw upon the Table, demanding so many Barres (as they call them) in discharge of their Kings duties, as well for the business they had nego∣tiated with him, as for their fresh water and wood. Though these people can neither read nor write, yet they make use of this way
of gathering their Rights, and the frequency of their Commerce with the Portugals, has brought them to talk altogether by Barres, which is the word they do most ordinarily use. According to their demand, the 20 Barres were payed him, that is to say, in Iron 12 Barres a little Barrel of Strong-waters at 4 Barrs, a Kettle at 2 Barres, a Hat at 2 Barres, and so on: He was himself upon his own score presented with 2 Bottles of Brandy, and his Reti∣nue with Knives: at the close of the evening he returned, well stuft and well satisfied, as the greatest part of his Attendants were also; at his departure he had several Guns given him, and was dismist with all possible civility. He is in great respect among the people, his Trumpet and Drum are always carryed along with him, even when
he goes about his most natural af∣fairs. During these three days, we had several Portugals came aboard us with their Commodities, of whom I endeavoured what I could to inform my self of the manners of that Country. The Description of Sierra-Leone, or the Mountain of the Lyons. THe Countrey of Sierra-Leone, is called Boulombel by the Mores, which in their language is as much as the large Countrey. In respect of the extraordinary height of the Mountaines towards the South, which are much higher then either the Pyrenaean or Alps, and the multitude of Lyons which are constantly to be seen there, it was called Sierra Leone by the Por∣tugals, which in our Language amounts to no more then the
Mountain of Lyons: Their Coun∣trey begins a great way up in the land Eastward, and ends North∣west with the Cap-Ledo, which throws it self into the Sea: from the point of that Cape, as on passes up the River, there are several Bayes, the fourth of which is the Bay de France, either because the French were formerly possessed of this Coast, or that they burn'd a Town there heretofore, and this is the only Bay in that River where they can take in fresh water. I had one day the curiosity to trace one of the three Fountaines which are there, and having fol∣lowed it a league to the foot of the Mountaines, observing the tracks and Print of the wild beasts, which are very strange, and dreadful, I returned as I went, and have been since informed by one of the Por∣tugals, that it rises in the midst of
the woods, which are above 15 leagues over, and that if I had pursued my design, and traced it to its spring, I must never have ex∣pected to come back, as well for the vast number of Lyons, as for the Tygars, Elephants, and Cro∣codiles which are there, and would probably have devoured me. Those Mountains are covered with Trees very full of Gumme, always green, and for the most part not unlike our Laurel. The Northen parts of this Sierra-Leone lye very low; and are in the possession of the King of Boulom, as the Southern parts are of the King of Boure. The Kingdom of Boulom is not o∣verwell known, either to the French or Hollander, their affections being principally inclin'd to the English and Portugals, of which last, there are several that inhabit there.
The River which bears the name of Sierra-Leone likewise, runs a great way Eastward up into the Countrey, is about 3 leagues over at the mouth; and one about 14 or 15 leagues higher. The Harbour is not above two fathoms deep, in∣somuch that in entring into it, we were fain to come as neer the Mountains as we could, where we found 10, 12, and 16 fathoms wa∣ter. It has several little Islands in its channel, the most of them in∣habited, and covered with green Trees, especially Palm trees, of which they make great quantities of Wine; It is very full of Fish, and breeds Crocodiles near the head of its Fountain. The borders of these Islands are set with certain Trees whose bran∣ches do never extend themselves further out one then another, but the shutes or siences growing
downwards, as soon as they touch the water or the earth, they take new root, and by that means make a Hedge sometimes of 10 or 12 yards broad. The Inhabitants of this Coun∣trey are very well made, I observ'd very few of them Camous'd, the men much more civil than at Cap-Verd, they are always clothed, and for the most part more modest. In the Town of Boure there can∣not be above 300 houses, accord∣ing to the estimation of some of our men who were there, and told me among other things, that the Pallace of their King is built like∣wise in the middle of the Town, and would not make a good resi∣dence for a Justice of Peace. Their Women are generally common, every man has as many of them as he pleaseth, and pro∣stitutes them to Strangers, as he
thinks good, except only the first, which are kept with great jealou∣sy, and circumspection all along these Coasts, so as properly the o∣ther are nothing but Concubines. According to the computation of every body I spake with, there may be in Boure about 4 or 500 men, besides women and children: Their King is a Roman Catholick his name Philippes, and has a Capu∣chin and a Jesuit in his Court. In an Island called Saint Andrew, I entred into one of their houses, and found it built of sticks and dirt, on one side a little window cove∣red with leaves, a hole for the dore, and a small fire in the middle; they lye upon matts, made of great rushes, which they place in a corner, and have their Arms by their sides, which for the most part are swords, daggers, darts, bows and arrows, the head of which
they impoison with fruit of a cer∣tain tree, whose poison is so incon∣ceiveably subtil and quick, it runs immediatly into the blood, and af∣fects it so suddenly, it is no easy matter either to prevent or cure it: Which fruit is long like a rad∣dish, and green. Some of them have their Guns, which they all of them are fond of, and do use with great dexterity. Their Religion also is various, the great Commerce the Portugals have in this place, and the great numbers that inhabit there already have converted many of them, the rest being Mahumetans, and Ido∣lators. They pay a reverence ex∣traordinary to certain extravigant figures, which they call Fetiches, worship them as Gods, pray to them punctually Morning and Night, and when at any time they have any thing better then ordi∣nary,
either Meat, or fish, or their Palm-Wine, they throw it all down upon the ground in ho∣nour to their Gods. As I went a shore one day in the Canoe of a certain More, I heard him muttering to himself, and having distinguish'd these words Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, I asked him what he was doing, he told me he was giving thanks to his Fetiche, for having preserved him at Sea, and that the rest of the Mores, as they had occasion, did always the same: They all of them carry their Fetiches in little baggs, either upon their hearts, or their shoulders, tendring them meat Night and Morning constantly, they trim them up with Rasade; or little grains of glass of all colours, which they take to be the greatest Ornament in the world. This Country produces great
quantity of Rice, of Millet, and Mays, which is a kind of Turkish Corne, they make their bread off, and is not very ill: Some of them having wash'd their Rice in Sea water, will eat it raw, and with∣out any ill effect. Their common diet is fish, and great store of fruits, as Berrys, Figgs, Pears, Prunes, Oranges, Ci∣trons, and a kind of Chestnut, not altogether so good as in Europe, but it has the virtue to quench the thirst though one be never so dry. These Mountains produce great quantities of Goats, Hoggs, Lyons, Tygres, Elephants, wild Bores, Harts, and Roebucks, which last are so numerous, they bring them on Ship board, and truck them for little or nothing: But the Serpents (if we may believe either the Mores or the Portugals) doe increase so unmeasurably, that
some of them will swallow a Man at a gulpe. The Mores are perpe∣tually at wars with them, and doe use a certain herbe (which is ad∣mirably good against poison) against the bites of all the Beasts they encounter. The Apes run up and down every where in great Troops, de∣stroying their plants where ever they come, upon which score the Mores are their implacable ene∣mies (as well as the Elephants) hunting and persuing them per∣petually, and sometimes eating them when they have done. I have tasted of their flesh, which is not bad, and in my judgement comes very near our Beef. All of them speak Portugais, and are very apprehensive of being drunk, for which reason (espe∣cially amonst us) they drank but little strong water.
The Merchandise this Coun∣trey affords is Rice, excellent Ivory, Civet, and some Amber Greece. Of all the Coasts, this is one of the best for matter of trade, seldome yeilding less profit then Cent pour Cent: But the Portugals gain is much greater, they buying their I∣vory up higher in the Countrey, and afterwards selling it again at the Sea side to other Merchants; Four or five men might live in one of the little Isles in this River, and be very well susteined by the la∣bour of two or three Slaves. The English have a Ware-house in one of those Islands, and the Factor thereof writ to us several times to desire he might come to us and trade, we told him he might doe it with safety, and on the last of December, upon our parole, when we had finish'd our bargains for Ivory with the Por∣tugals,
and Natives, the said En∣glishman called Abraham, came aboard us in his shallop (rowed by three Slaves) accompany'd by a certain Hollander, and two others which belonged to him; he was well received, but after Supper, contrary to the advice of all the rest, the Captain made him a pri∣soner, and the three Mores which were with him, to their no small astonishment, and on the first of January 1667. the great shallop was mann'd out with 30. men, the Captain, the Chyrurgion, and my self, with one piece of ordnance, to besiege and plunder his house. It is built of Brick, and free stone, defended with four pieces of Canon, carrying a four pound bullet, and incompass'd with a fair wood of Palm-trees, which sup∣plyed him with Wine. On one side there are fifteen or twenty
Cabines for the Natives, and on the other, a spring of very good wa∣ter. This Island is the best and most beautiful upon the River: As we were about to land, we discovered some 200 Mores, got together a∣bout the house, with their firelocks, and a greater number up the woods at farther distance: which obliged us to make a show of passing on higher, as being the weaker, and by consequence in more need of the advantage of the wind. They ima∣gined we had been going to Boure, and immediately dispatch'd a Canoe to give Boulom the alarm, and to advise him to come to them; we persued this Canoe with all possible diligence, but could not perswade them to come in till we fired 3 or 4 times into their boat; They were two young Slaves, belonging to a Portugal, that was with the English Man, but we could not make them
confess any thing, by all the inter∣rogations we could use: Those of the English party observing what was past, fired at us with their Ca∣non, and 3 of their bullets fell with∣in ten paces of our boat. We put our selves out of the reach of their Guns for the present, and came to an anchor, attending the comming in of the tide to accommodate our return: The weather being calme, about half an hour after, there ap∣pear'd two Mores belonging to one of the neighbouring Islands, in a Canoe, which made directly up to us, and came within pistol shot, but would by no means be perswaded on board; whereupon we shot off 2 or 3 Guns (not with intention of doing them harm) but to instruct them of the truth: They no sooner heard the noise of our Guns, but they run away immediately, plying their cars as fast as they could, and
stooping (upon sight of our fire) so low, they seem'd to us no higher then Cats: In the mean time the Canon of the English were not idle, playing still upon us, though they saw we were out of their reach, which they did not so much to do any execution, as to let the Natives see they had undertaken their de∣fence, and desired their friendship: However the tide comming in, we pass'd by several little Islands, and made our retreat. We found several Mores, and Portugals aboard our Vessel, and a∣mongst the rest, the King of Bou∣loms Son called Bombo, who was a person of about 30 or 40 years old, well proportioned, and (bating his complexion) a very handsom man, his aire was courteous, and maje∣stick, he was an intimate friend of Abrahams, but knew nothing till supper, of his imprisonment: He
no sooner understood it, but he in∣terceded for his ransome, and went immediately with the Portugal (that manages the affairs of the King of Boure) to procure it: On Munday at noon they came aboard again with a 100 Elephants teeth, weigh∣ing 900 pound weight, and two live Civet Cats, upon the delivery of which he was dismist, and went home after dinner, we giving him a little barrel of Strong-waters, a rowl of Tobacco, a Cheese, and a Salvo of 3 Guns, when he went off. Some sew Portugals stay'd behind till they made up their Markets, and having dispatch'd them the fisth, they returned out of hand. That day we intended to have been gone, but happening upon a calm, and to have a tide against us too, we were forc'd to attend a lit∣tle longer then we designed. About noon there came a Canoe aboard us,
with two Mores, which pretended to belong to Boulom, who brought us fruit, but having no Ivory, we lookt upon them but as spies, and sent them back again about five. That night we set sail, and having past Cap-Ledo, we steer'd a South South-East course, to avoid the the Banks of Saint Anne, and the next morning discry'd a little Ves∣sel of Holland, coasting upon the shore as we did to make the Cap de Monte, which is about 60 leagues distant from the Sierra-Leone. On Friday the 7th of January, we past by the mouth of the River of Madre-Bomba, where the English have a house also, and not inferior to that at Sierra-Leone. In the afternoon we came with∣in sight of the Rio de Gallines, so called by the Portugals, from the multitude of Hens there, and the cheapness of them, the people gi∣ving
one, two, and somtimes three for a knife of a penny. The Hol∣landers had a house there former∣ly: The Natives gave us a sign to approach and put in, but the neigh∣bourhood of the English would not suffer us to hear on that ear, but we continued our coast to the East till Saturday morning, at which time by the assistance of a clear day, we discover'd the Cap de Monte, at a∣bout ten leagues distance. CAP DE MONTE, and its Description. THe wind being but little, we came not to an anchor till night, and then about half a league from the shore, at twelve fathom low water, and upon a sand. The Cap de Monte is so called from a point of ground which gives it that figure, and rising just
by the Sea, formes its self into a round Mountain, all the rest of that coast lying very low. We could not descry either house or cabane all along, yet on the 19th we went on shore, and found 4 or 5 houses at some distance, where the Blacks made their Salt. They appeared very joyful at our arrival; they told us their King lived three days journey up into the Countrey, that they would give notice to their neighbours of our coming that night, and that if we thought good to return the next morning, we might find such store of Ivory as could be suddenly got. That if we intended to keep our promise when we came on board, we should give them two great Guns as a signal, and they would make fires to confirm us on their side, which was agreed and per∣formed accordingly.
The tenth, and the eleventh days, were spent entirely in bar∣tring, I being on board the 12th, I went on shore, though with some difficulty, the Sea breaking off. so abruptly, our shallop was left some 20 paces upon ground, and the Seamen forc'd to go out of the boat, and land the Officers upon their backs; where we found the Mores had made a large Arbor, covered over with leaves, and branches of trees, to keep our commodities dry, and shelter us from the violence of the Sun. Whilst we were Negotiating our affairs, we heard a great noise on a sudden, and saw the Mores in a great hurry, running Pell-mell from their houses, and merchandise both: we apprehended we might be surprized, and took up our arms immediately, but being got out in∣to the air, we understood it was
only their King was coming to us; whereupon some of our men went to meet him, and saluted him with a volley of five or six of our fire∣locks. Before him marched his Drum, and his Trumpet, 8 or 10 of his kin∣dred and friends, and the rest were his Officers: his Wives, and his Daughters, marched on his side, be∣hind him his Slaves followed, and a certain number of women carrying his dinner in bowls of Wood, and of Tyn, which they held up as high as they could possibly: By him he had four Slaves marching, two of them covering him with two large Bucklers, and the other carrying his bow and arrows, and javelin: As he approached, the Mores di∣vided themselves, the Men on one side, the Women on the other, singing, and dancing, and leap∣ing up and down, and testifying
their joy in a thousand different pos∣tures. The King took a dart, and pre∣tended to throw it at them, upon which they threw themselves im∣mediately upon the ground, and at the same time they which came a∣long with his Majesty took their turn, both to dance and to sing. Pre∣sently the King took an arrow, which he shot up into the aire, and presently all run to the place where it fell, and happy was he that could take it up first, and bring it to him; after this he made a show of shooting directly amongst them, & they throwing themselves down again, with great acclamation, con∣tinued this pastime for a quarter of an hour: In this triumpth and gran∣dour, he was conducted to us; we received him as honorably as we could, saluting him with volleys of small shot. He was a grave and venerable
old man of about threescore years of age, or upwards, they called him Falam Boure, he was very sensible and majestick: his habit was the same with the rest of the Gentle∣men, saving that his was quite blew, and the Robes of the Gentle∣men, Officers, and Nobility of that Countrey, are always strip'd (like the Captains of Rio-Fresca) with white and blew: We payed him what respect vve could, and after vve had made him such presents as vvere usual, he retired into another Arbor the Mores had made for him, and left us very graciously to our Negotiations. I vvaited upon him to his Arbor, vvhere he entertained me in Portu∣gais, and told me, that it vvas four years since he had seen any Whites, and vvith teares (as it were) of joy assured me, that the French should be alvvays vvelcome to him; that
indeed they were a little quick and capricious, but otherwise honest men: that he and his Country (which he thought was not contemptible) I would be eternally at their service. And in truth were all the rest of Africk like this part of it, it was indubitably to be preferred to any part of Europe. No sooner is your foot upon the ground, but you are presented with a faire plaine, planted on this side and that, with curious groves per∣petually green, and in their leaves not unlike to our Laurel. The prospect is bounded to the South with the Mountain of the Cape; and on the North by a large grove, which gives a shade to a little Island in a little River, which casts it self hard by into the Sea, though it be navigable for a Canoe only, or perhaps with some diffi∣culty for a shallop: Eastward
there is no stop nor termination of the eye, it may delight and lose it self, in vast meadows and playnes, beautifi'd and perfum'd with ex∣cellent verdures, and water'd with several pritty Rivers, which open and expan'd themselves to the Mores, and seem to invite them to a communication with those that live higher up in the Countrey. In this place their Rice, their Millet, and their Mais (of which their bread is made) is more plentifull, and grows in greater quantity, than in any other part of Guinee whatsoever. They have Citrons, Oranges, Amants, Berrys, Melons, Gourds, and a sort of plums not much unlike our Brugnons, but not so well tasted. They have great variety of fowl, as Hens, and Pidgeons, and Ducks, and Mallard, and Teal, which
must be very plentiful, by the price they are sold for. Goats and Hoggs are very com∣mon, and Apes too, but ugly ones. They have great store of Fish, both Sea-fish and in their Rivers, which I have said they value much above flesh, they have Tortoises likewise are excellent meat, but their shels not worth a farthing. They are very neat in their fee∣ding, they roast their meat upon wooden spits, turning them with great care, and observing very cu∣riously least one side be more roast∣ed then the other. Whilst he was at dinner in his own appartment, I took the confi∣dence to begin a health to on of his Sons Wifes, in their Palme-Wine, and she answered me in French, Monsierje vous remercie, and told me afterwards in Portugais, that her Husbands Father had lived al∣ways
amongst the French, when they were in those parts, and that she could distinguish easily by our aire, that my self and Lacquey were the only Frenchmen in our whole company. The inhabitants are generally handsome, good natured, tractible, and speak a kind of corrupt Portu∣gais. They go all naked both wo∣men and men, only a little cloth be∣fore them, but the women wear theirs from their stomack, to their mid-legg: they are more chast then the rest, and their Husbands com∣monly more jealous. For their Religion, do what I could, I could not inform my self, only one of them told me the Whites pray'd to God, and the Blacks to the Devil: Yet I could perceive many of them were Cir∣cumcised, and all of them had their Fetiches.
At our landing, there was not a∣bove five or six houses to be seen, and those belonging to such as made Salt there, and carryed it af∣terwards into the Country: But within two dayes time, the plaine (which was about a league in cir∣cumference) was cover'd over with houses, which the Mores from all parts had built, in order to their traffick with us. In the Kings houses, or the hou∣ses of their Nobility, they have a distinct appartment where their beds are made, either upon plancks, or mat; about a yeard from the ground, about which they hang a cloth (in stead of curtains and val∣lence) and so sleep all night upon them. For their repose in the day time, they have a sort of delicate neat mats, exquisitely made (of which the Hollander buys great store for their Chambers) where laying
themselves down with their heads in their Wives lapps, they spend much of their time in combing and ordring their Husbands hair. For four days together we had a very good Trade. The commodi∣ties we bought were Mats, Rice, and Ivory, which in those parts is plentiful and excellently good. And in this place certainly (if any where) a man may live hap∣pily, all things contributing to make his life pleasant; the beauty and bounty of the Countrey, the humour and disposition of the peo∣ple, the aboundance of all necessa∣ries, the considerableness of the gain, and the aptness and conve∣nience for building in all places wherever you come. On the thirteenth we went a shore again, but seeing they had no Ivory left, (though the King promis'd in three dayes time we
should have ten times as much as we had bought aleady,) we set sayle that night for Cap-Miserado. CAP-MISERADO. THe next day being the 14th of January, steering or course East-South-East and by South, we discovered the Cap-Miserado, but the weather being duskish, and a thick fog interrupting our pros∣pect, we were glad to cast anchor at three leagues distance from the shore (imagining notwithstanding we had been nearer then we were) and afterward we shot off 2 Guns to give the Mores notice of our arrival. The fifteenth we discovered our mistake, yet by reason of calme, we were forc'd to continue at anchor till noon, at which time we percei∣ved a Canoe making towards us with 2 Mores in it, which coming up, de∣manded
who we were, and of what Countrey, we told them of Holland; and they desired us to come nearer land, but would by no means be per∣swaded on board us, till they saw us take the advantage of the wind, weigh anchor, and sayle towards the shore. They entered then, and told us it was a full year since they had seen any Whites: that the next day they would bring good store of Ivo∣ry to the Sea side for us, and that they might perform what they had promised, after we had made them some small presents, they took their leaves. We came up within half a league of the land, to the mouth of a little river they call Duro, at the foot of the Cape, where we found six fathom deep at low water. This Cape is called Miserado by the Portugais, either because it is in∣compass'd by rocks that lye under
water, and would inevitably destroy any Vessel, which should come nea∣rer then half a league, or because the French which were formerly mas∣sacred there, cryed out Misericorde, Misericorde: Besides the Natives of this place being very cruel, they have denominated the river, and called it Duro, as being hard and fa∣tal to the Whites. Upon which score we fortifyed our shollop with a great Gun, to fright them and keep them in order. They set up a little house against we came in order to our negotiati∣ons, but not another to be seen within less then half a league, and those too in the woods. The River Duro casts it self into the Sea on that side towards the Cape, but is so small and inconside∣rable, it carrys nothing but Canoes. At our coming on shore, we found the Captain (who governs those
parts) with several of his Officers sitting under a tree, we presented them with two Bottles of Brandy, which they drank freely, and then conducted us to the house they had prepared, and stay'd with us till night came on, and we returned to our Ship. The Captain was a very lusty man of a severe aspect, in a Robe like that of the Alcair de Rio-Fresca, saving that his was red, with a bonnet of the same colour, he was attended by 50 or 60 Negroes, with great darts, bows, arrows, and swords, and with some few women, which they sent back again to the Woods, not above fifty paces from our lodge, from whence we never durst trust our selves above ten. They ask'd us whether we came as enemies or friends, observing it seems the Canon in our shallop; We told them that we could not
but take notice, that they came with their armes, contrary to the custom of all other places we had traded in, and that we did, was but to secure our selves, and our Merchandises, which we should bring on shore by degrees, and according as we sold what we had brought. Some of the Captains Women, lugging their children along with them, came to see us at our lodge, and we were forc'd to present them, though the Captain was so refracto∣ry, what Ivory soever he expos'd to truck, or to sale, he ask'd with that unreasonable confidence, there was no reason to give it: They all of them spake Portugais, and were all of them clothed. Whilst we were at dinner, the Captain demanded some one of us to stay with him, and I (very coura∣giously) proffered to be the man, which he took so kindly, he took
me by the hand, and put it into the hand of one of his daughters, with this complement, that he gave her me for my Wife, after which we grew very intimate and great; He took me and shew'd me to the rest of the Mores, who called me their kinsman and friend, promised me Saves, carryed me along with them, and setting me in the midst of them, they made me drink of their Palm-wine. One of the Officers that din'd with us, I observ'd to throw Wine up∣on the ground, before he drank; I ask'd him the reason, and he told me, that if his dead Father should be dry, he would come thither to drink. We had a sight too of some of their Priests, but their habits being the same, with what we saw after∣wards upon the Golden Coast, I shall pass them by in this place, with this animadversion only, that they
carry themselves towards them with great deference and respect, believing every word they spake an Oracle. The Captain shew'd me one of them, and told me, if I had lost any thing, he could tell me where it was, and cry'd him up as he had been a Prophet: But above all things, their greatest supersti∣tion is of their Fetiches. Their Traffick is principally I∣vory, (which indeed is excellent) and Rice in great abundance. The English have a ware house beyond the Cape, and are in great favour with the Mores, who used us ill in no respect, but as they thought us enemies to them. When we returned to our Ves∣sel, we promised to be with them again the next morning, but obser∣ving they had brought us good quantity of Ivory at first, which was not afterwards to be seen, we had a
suspicion might be a design of the English to amuse us with their Trade, whilst they could get more men together out of the Countrey; Upon which grounds, that very night (though one of our Officers left a golden ring with the Captain, as a gage for his word) we weigh'd anchor and away for Rio-Sextos. Being on the other side of Cap-Miserado, we discovered fires, which the Mores had made along the shores, which is the ordinary signe they use, to signifie to such Ships as pass by, that they have Merchan∣dise for them, upon which accompt we resolved to cast anchor. RIO DE JƲNCO. ABout 9 or 10 a clock we came to an anchor, directly over against the fires upon the shore, we shot of 2 great Guns, to invite them
aboard, but seeing none of them come, we mann'd out our shallop after dinner, and sayl'd towards them with some few Merchandises, but we could not reach the shore, within fifty paces, without inevi∣table danger of bulging. Seeing some Mores upon the banks, we made signes to them to come to us, and they came swim∣ming half way, and went back a∣gain, nor could all our alurements win them aboard, till at last two of them ventured in a Canoe, and were kindly received, which they on the shore observing, three of them threw themselves immediately into the Sea ond swam to us; we pre∣sented them with a bottle of Srong-waters, which they carryed on shore to their infinite satisfaction: we shew'd them our Kettles, and what other Commodities we had, at the sight of which, they made a
thousand expressions of joy, and could have done no more, if Para∣dise it self had been shown them: they ask'd us if we had any large white Rasade. Those which were upon land, held up great, and great quantity of Elephants teeth, to hast∣en us them, but having used our ut∣most endeavour to no purpose, and finding it impossible to come at them, without manifest danger, we sent back the 2 Mores (which came to us) to them: Who by their as∣pect and Mine, seem'd to be persons of more then ordinary quality. Rio de Junco is a River which lyes five degrees and fifty minutes of Northern latitude, and of Eastern longitude, 9 degrees, 10 minutes. The mouth of it is known by three great trees which stand very high, and three great Mountains over a∣gainst them, but at some distance into the land; the mouth of it is
near five hundred paces over, but shallow, the banks so well decora∣ted with trees, and flowers, that considered with the smoothness and serenity of the stream, they make a most admirable landship. Orange-trees, Citrons, and Palme-trees, are planted all along, and in exquisite order, and (as the Mores which came aboard intimated to us) they have abundance of all things, especially Poultry and Palme-Wine. We went aboard, and perceiving no body came at us, we set sayle that night, and came the next moring before Petit Dieppe. PETIT DIEPPE. PEtit Dieppe is a Town not far from a River, which casts it self into the Sea, and in its passage, twisting about a spot of ground, forms it self into no contemptible
Island: it was formerly in the posses∣sion of the French, but deserted long since; at the disemboguement of this River, there are many Rocks, which make the entrance more then ordinary difficult: We disco∣vered a little Vessel upon this Coast, and gave chase to it, but without any success. The 22d we came to Rio-Sextos, whose description follows, RIO-SEXTOS. RIo-Sextos is a River, which comes a great way down the land, North and North-West, and is about half a league over at the mouth of it. On both sides it is set very pleasantly with Trees, very large, and very tall; about three leagues up the River, the English had formerly a house, but there is nothing of it left but the Walls.
This River will carry a Yacht or a large Barke a douzaine leagues and more up in the Countrey. It was called Rio-Sextos by the Portugais, from a certain kind of Pepper which grows by it, and is called Sextos by them, the same I suppose with what we call Mala∣guette which I shall speake of more particularly in the next Chapter: We were told by their fisherboats, that about a fortnight before there pass'd two Flemish Vessels that way to the Mine, that we might finde good quantities of Ivory, but that their Canoes being so small, it would be necessary for us to carry our Mer∣chanhise on shore: whereupon we anchor'd about half a league from land, in about 16 fathom water. Some of our Officers went a shore in our shallop, and carryed some Commodities along with them, to begin the Commerce; they carryed
them three leagues up the River, and their King (who lived yet high∣er into the Countrey) came down to see them, and according to Cus∣tome had his usual presents. They came back very late, and the Notary at his return gave me this accompt of him, that he was a very lusty man, with a stern and su∣percilious aspect; that he profess'd great frienship for the English: That he brought down great store of Ivo∣ry with him, but having furnished the two Flemish Vessels so lately, he held it so dear, there was no dealing with him for it. That they seem'd worse natured then the Mores at Miserado; But that the River was very fine, and is full of little stones upon the shore like our Flints, only these are harder, and give more fire upon any collision. Whilest they were amongst them, there came about 10 or 12 of their
Canoes aboard us with a kind of Sea-Pike (an excellent good fish) and several other sorts, of which we bought some. The people are generally well proportioned, and bearing eve∣ry one of them the name of some Saint or other, I had a great curio∣sity to know how that custom came upon them. I took one of them aside, and having cajoled him with a glass of Wine, and strong-water (which they love better then their Wives) I asked him the reason, and he told me, that when any Vessels passed that way, and did the Natives any kindness, it was usual to begg their Names at their departure, which they gave afterwards to their chil∣dren, in memory of the courtesie they had received from them: Which convinced me, being im∣bellished with so noble a virtue as gratitude, they could not be so bad
as they had been represented to me, and the rather, because the King of them having upon the death of an English Merchant seized upon all his Ivory and goods, did upon the arrival of the first English Ship, vo∣luntarily, and without any solicita∣tion, deliver all to the Captain: An invincible argument of their piety and saith. I gave him that gave me this accompt, two little knives for his pains, and he was so surpris'd at the present, he desired my name, and I having told him, he oblig'd him∣self, if his Wife (which was big at that time) was brought to bed of a boy, he should carry my name, and if ever I return'd that way, he would bring him to see me. All along this Coast, their man∣ner of salutation is the same, they take our sore finger and thumb, into their hands, and putting them into a certain posture, they pull them
hard, and make them snap, crying out Aquio when they have done, which is as much as your Servant with us. This Countrey is very fertil, well furnish'd with Fowl, and Rice, and Millet, of which they make all the bread, which they carry with them in their Canoes when they go out a fishing, which (as I obser∣ved) they are very neat and axact in keeping clean. He that would stay upon the place, might make very good advan∣tage either by Rice, or Pepper, or Ivory, which is excellently good; their kindness has been always more conspicious to the French, then either to the Hollander or Por∣tugal, neither of which they would ever suffer to cohabit with them. On the 32th. by break of day, we discovered a little Fleet of Canoes of about 40, which were go∣ing
a fishing, and within a quarter of an hour they dispersed them∣selves every way: Of the whole Ar∣mada, there was but one came to us, with some few Elephants teeth, which he held so dear he had his labour for his paines, and carryed them off as he brought them; where∣upon we also weighed anchor for Rio-Sanguin, which is the first place upon the Coast of Malaguette, and about twelve leagues from Rio-Sextos; for four hours together we steer'd Southward to avoid the Rocks which ly in great numbers betwixt Rio-Sanguin, and Rio-Sextos, after which we steer'd East and by North, and came safe to Rio-Sanguin. That the French had the preoc∣cupancy of these Coasts, in respect of all other Nations of Europe, I think is clear from the Names of se∣veral Bayes, and a hundred other monuments of their glory: But at
present we have nothing left there, nor indeed any body, but the Eng∣lish, who by means of seven or eight houses, doe carry away as it were the whole pofits of the place. The Portugais succeeded the French, but being over-power'd by the English, and the Dutch, and beaten off from the Coasts, in the year 1604. they retreated farther into the Countrey, and marrying with the Natives, have begot that generation of people, they call Muletto's, or Olive-couler'd, and have by that means acquired such an interest amongst them, as have been the cause we have made no farther discoveries there, and that they doe to this day go away with the whole Island Trade; he that should endeavour to share with them being certain to be destroyed by their great influence and au∣thority with the Nigros: So that
they have ingross'd that whole commerce to them selves, passing up and down every where as they please, and running up the Niger, as far as Benin, which is more then 800 leagues. They it is that have been the loss of Cantozi to the Danes, which is a little Island upon the Niger, two hvndred leagues above the mouth of the Gambie. Their authority over the Mores upon the Coasts is so great, they manage them as thy think good, and we can never read that they have at any time rebelled▪ against them, as they have frequently done against the rest of the Euro∣peans; Nay▪ so absolute is their Empire, they are many times served at the table by the Sons of that King, which is so superlative a command, there can be nothing beyond it; Yet if any other Euro∣pean
does but quarrel or affront any of their Grandees, there is nothing but they will attempt which may contribute to their revenge. One of them who came to traffick with us at Sierra-Leone, told me, he did use every year to go to Senegal, which is two hundred leagues from Sierra-Leone, and that where he had not the conveniency of a river, both himself and his Commodities were carryed up into the Coun∣trey on the backs of the Mores. They have all of them little Chappels built near their houses, in which they use all possible means for the conversion of those people, and when they have had any success, and made a prosilite, they hang Chappelets about his neck, and have a particular care of them ever after.
THE COAST OF GRAIVES CALLED MALAGUETTE UPon the three and twentieth of January, the same day we set sayle from Rio-Sextos, we came to an anchor before Rio-Sanguin, where the Coast of Malaguette, or Manigette begins, and extends it self sixty leagues to the Cape de Pal∣mes, about three degrees and forty minutes of Northern latitude, comprehending all these places, Ri-Sanguin, Cestre-Crou, Brova, Bassou, Zino, Crou, Crousestre, Wapo, Batou, Grand-Sester, Petit-Sester, and Goiane, all which places we vi∣sited in ninteen days, which we
dedicated to our traffick in those parts. Rio-Sanguin runs into the Sea South South-East, and will carry a Petach about twelve leagues, and no more; upon its bank it has a Town of about a hundred houses, and large Trees on both sides of it, but is not five hundred paces broad at the widest part of it. That night there came a Canoe a∣board us with three Mores, one of them was the Kings Brother, who having been three years in Holland, spake very good Dutch; he sent back his Company, and his Canoe, and supp'd and lodged with us that night. At supper he told us, that a∣bove a Month before, there was a Flemish Ship put in at Rio-Sanguin for fresh water and wood, but that discovering an English Vessel make∣ing towards them, he weigh'd an∣chor  being a good
sayler, got off, and that the Vessel that chaced them returned, and steer'd his old course for Rio-Sextos. He described the bulk of it so well, we concluded it was the Ship we had seeing crusing up the Coast of Petit Dieppe. He told us moreover, that a while since the English had a house at Rio-Sanguin, but for four years last past, they had none; and that a little Vessel going by lately, had surprized about a douzen Mores near Crousester, and carryed them away. As we were hoisting sayle on the five and twentieth, the King of Rio-Sanguin came aboard us, attended with two other Canoes, and about ten or twelve Mores. He was an ancient man, very grave, and venerable, his hair very white, yet his person large and lus∣ty; his habit blew, like their habits at Cap de Monte. That which was
most remarkable was, he drank nei∣ther Wine nor Strong-water, nor Palme-Wine, nothing but pure wa∣ter; he and his Brother both stayed with us till night, and having recei∣ved some presents they departed. We had passed the place above∣said, as far as from Rio-Sanguin to Wapo, where being at anchor, the third of February, about Sun-rising we discryed a Vessel at Sea, making towords us with all the sayle she could make: We thought at first it had been the English Piqueroon we had been told of, for which reason we stood all that night to our armes, but the next day the hopes we had of over-powring and take∣ing her, vanished with the Vessel, which we could never see more. Till Saturday the fifth we spent our time wholly in traffick, on which day having come to an an∣chor at Batou, we discovered ano∣ther
Vessel coming towards us also with full sayles: The number of Mores who were then aboard us, hindered us from discovering them perfectly, but coming nearer, we could discry the Vessel to be as bigg as ours, whereupon we dismist our Merchants, weigh'd anchor, and stood towards them directly, resol∣ved not only to defend our selves, but to venture upon them. When we were come within a league of him, he hung out his Dutch colours, and clapt his Cornette upon his Sprit-sayle, and we hung out our French. When we came nearer, we knew the Ship to be a Frigat of Amsterdam, of about 400 Tunn, and 36 pieces of Ordnance, set out by a private person, and by the autho∣rity, and consent of the East-Indy Company, sent to Ardres. The Cap∣tain called Wilere, having boasted when we were in the Texel, that if
he found us upon these Coasts, he would either sink or take us; we took down our French colours, and put up a red flagg, endeavouring, and tacking three hours together, to get the wind of him, he had all his sayles out, and his caps up, and yet sayled worse than we. About Sun-setting he furled his sayles, and having lost the wind, and we with∣in 20 paces of him, he made signes with his hat to know if we were not the Europe: he told us his name; and calling for a glass of Wine, be∣gan a good soup to our healths, and we did him reason in our turn. Af∣ter which he took his leave, conti∣nued his course to the Mine, and we came that night to an anchor before Grand Sestre, called for∣merly by the French Paris; where the rest of our time we spent in our Negotiations and Trade. This Coast is called the Coast of
Malaguette, in respect of the Pep∣per (which I have mentioned be∣fore) at Rio-Sextos, which amongst the French is called Malaguette, or Maniguette, which commodity is more profitable than can be imagi∣ned, especially if Pepper be dear, and the Indy Fleet comes not un∣luckily in, but if that falls out, it sells not altogether so well: This is the principal Commodity of this Coast, and is sharper and hotter than the ordinary Pepper, and par∣ticularly than the white. All the Towns along these Coasts are built upon the backs of some little River, or other which gives them their Names: The chief are Rio-Sanguin, the Grand Sestre, which runs a good way up into the Countrey, and is deep enough to carry a Petach: which the Inhabi∣tants of Dieppe called Paris, in com∣parison of the aboundance of Pep∣per at both places.
All these Coasts are bordered with great Trees, the land very low, and fatt, and water'd with so great a number of Brooks, and Rivelets, that they render the aire so very unhealthful, there are but few of the Whites can stay long there without being sick. We understood nothing of their language, so they were put to ex∣plain themselves by signs, they have no ill Physiognomy, their propor∣tion is good, they go always naked with their head, and have only a little piece of linnen before, for the shelter of their whole body: And though the aire be so ill, and un∣wholsome, yet they are so hardy and strong, I saw one of them that had a Rupture hung down to the middle of his legg, and a lusty cut over the Pate, that had lay'd his skull as naked as his back, and yet he came aboard us every day,
smoaking and drinking Strong-waters, with the best of them, as if he ail'd nothing at all. They work excellent well in Iron: at Grand Sester they mended our shears for us, with which we cut out our barrs of Iron, and gave them such a temper as made them incom∣parably better than they were at first. Besides this Pepper, this Coast affords Rice and Millet (of which they make their bread, and brought us good store of it) excellent Peas, (very tender and good, boyled) Beans, Citrons, Oranges, Bullys, and a kind of admirable Nutt, the shell something thicker than ours, but without any skin over the ker∣nell, but all round like your Al∣monds or Pistaccios of Spain. They have likewise store of Oxen, Cows, Goats, Hoggs, Pullen, and o∣ther Fowl, which may be collected
from the price that they bear. Their Palme-Wine is very good, and especially the Plums, which are so pleasant, I have seen them on Ship-board refuse all that could be offered, to be crawnching of them; and this is all I can say of the Coast of Malaguette, for as to their Reli∣gion and manners, understanding but little, I shall say nothing at all, only I imagine they have as many Wives as they can keep, for the More at Rio-Sanguin, told us his Bro∣ther had fifty, and himself fifteen. The Inhabitants of Dieppe have traded long upon these Coasts, and were grown so cunning at their Trade, they had found the way of mingling this Pepper with that of the Indies, before it was grown so common, and the Portugais had discovered the Island of St. Tho∣mas, and from thence diffused them∣selves all over Guinee, by which it
appears we Traded there formerly, and every thing contributes to con∣firm it, for besides the Grand Sester, which retaines still the name of Pa∣ris, that little language they speak intelligibly is French: They call not Pepper Sextos with the Portu∣gals, nor Grain with the Hollander, but Malaguette with us and if a Vessel at any time comes in, when their salutations are over, they cry out as loud as they can, Malaguette tout plein, tout plein, tant a terre de Malaguette, which is French they learned from us, and nothing else. If they meet any of their friends from a different place, they take one another by the upper part of the arm, and stretching them out, they cry Toma, then they come to the elboe, and grasping it hard they cry Toma again; and at last catch∣ing one another by the fingers, as I have observed at Rio-Sextos, they
make them snapp as they did there, crying out Enfa Nemate, Enfa Ne∣mate. Which the More that speak Dutch, interpreted to us, and told us it was no more then, My dear friend how is it, all that I have is at your service, even to my life it self. From which very complement we may conclude the language is more ele∣gant then we imagine, to one that understands it. THE COAST OF ELEPHANTS TEETH. ON Friday morning the 11th of February, we weigh'd an∣chor before Goyane, and steered a South-East course, to double the Cape de Palmes, and avoid the Rocks which incompass it, which we con∣tinued
for a while, and came at last to an anchor before Grova, which is the first place upon the Teeth-Coast. This Cape is denominated from the Palme-trees, which doe shadow it on all sides near the Sea, it rises in several hills, covered all over with these kind of Trees, and lyes in four degrees and ten minutes of Nor∣thern latitude, and twelve and a half of longitude Eastward. The Coast also takes its name from the vast quantity of Elephants teeth sold there, which is so great, that though all the Ships that are bound for Ardres or the Mine, doe pass that way, yet they seldome or never have any Merchandise left, which they bring thither to ex∣change. It extends it self four and twenty leagues, from the Cape de Palmes to to the River d' Asene, where the Gol∣den Coast begins, and contains these
places upon the Sea: Crova, Tabo, Petit-tabo, Grand-drouin, Tao, Rio S. Andre, Giron, Petit-drouin, Bortrou, Cap la hou, Jacques la hou, Vallochk, and Gomma, where the ordinary trade is, where we spent seventeen dayes, without any considerable ac∣cident, unless it be that which hap∣pen'd at Cap la hou. On Saturday the 26th. being at anchor there, the Seamen discove∣red a Ship making towards us with full sayl; we imagin'd at first it might be the English Privatier the More had given us notice of at Rio-Sanguin; we weighed anchor imme∣diately, and made as fast towards him, having put out our French co∣lours, which he saluted with a vol∣ley of Canon, and hung out the co∣lours of Holland, which we gratify'd with another. He sent forth his shal∣lop forthwith to discover us, and although he which commanded
understood very well the greatest part of our Equipage were Flemings, he could not be perswaded aboard us, but return'd; a while after, the shallop came to us again, bringing their Lieutenant along, who came a∣board, was civilly recieved, & staid with us two hours; and in the mean time, this little Vessel of Brittainie (though commanded by a Zelander, and was not above 100 Tunn) made like a Pinnace with 8 guns, and 40 men) sayled round about our Vessel, the Captain making his Drums and his Trumpets sound all the while, with a thousand other osten∣tations of joy. He told us for news, that at his departure from Flush∣ing, he came out with 26 other Privatiers in his company, but that they were dispers'd in a Storm, and he heard nothing of them since: that as he was entring into Sierra Leone, he found the little
Vessel we saw as we came out, who complained, that the English man which we had imprisoned and ran∣som'd again, had siezed his long boat or shallop, with nine of his men, whilst they were fishing, and that the same Portugals we had tra∣ded withall, had assisted them; whereupon he thought himself ob∣liged to vindicate himself, and did it so effectually, that he beat the house down with his great Guns, killed several of the Mores which defended it, and rescued his nine men, paying three thousand weight of Ivory for their Ransome, which had not been done, had not the Mores, up∣on the approach of these two Ships, carryed them all into the Woods; we gave him a Collation, and then he took his leave. About midnight, the Captain himself came aboard us to drink and be merry with our Officers,
but he told us no more then his Lieutenant, only this, that the Mores who were by us when we weigh'd anchor to meet him, had come to him, and told him, in these words, If you be English, you must run for it, but if Dutch, you are safe enough. After which they all clapt them∣selves down close in their Canoes, to attend what would follow, and in case we had fought, and one of us been sunk, to have had the bene∣fit of the pillage: At his departure we gave him three Guns for a fare∣well, which he repayed exactly when he got aboard; we gave him a Cheese, two Barrels of Powder, and four Bullets, he told us he was bound for the Mine, from thence to Ardres, to Capolopo and Gonsalves, and that if he met with no prize there, he would go unto the Isles; but we heard afterwards at the Isle of S. Thomas, that he pass'd by there
with 400 Negroes, which he had ta∣ken about the Cap de Lopes, out of 2 Vessels, which had put in there for fresh first water; the first yeilded without any resistance, the other having lost his maine mast, he sunk to the bottom. The same day the Mores percei∣ving we were friends, came aboard us again, to finish their Markets, which being done, the next we set sayle for the Golden Coast. This Countrey produces a great quantity of Rice, Pease, Beans, Ber∣rys, Citrons, Oranges, Cochonuts, &c. Besides which the Natives brought us Suger-Canes aboard, of a very considerable bigness. 'Tis one of the best Countreys in Guinee, the Hills and the Valleys are admira∣ble, the great Rocks of Mountains, which are red, with the constant verdure of the Trees wherewith they are covered, by the variation
of Colours make delicious prospect: But even of these places the Grand Drouin, and the Rio S. Andre are the best. The Grand Drouin is situate in the midst of a little River, which winds about a little Island betwixt 2 Mountains; it is encompass'd with excellent Meadows, and is wash'd so gently by the water, you would think it was affraid to come near it. Rio S. Andre of all Africk ts the properest place for building, the River of the same name, runs up far into the Countrey, and not far from the place where it falls into the Sea, it divides its self into two branches, one running North-West, and the other East: It is bordered on both sides with very fair Trees, environed with fine Meadows and Fields, and is deep enough to car∣ry a Yacht an indifferent way up. The Rock at the Sea side, at the
mouth of the River, is three hun∣dred paces in circumference the top, which being flat, commands all the Countrey about it without any contest. 'Tis very steep to∣wards the Sea, and on the East-side, and indeed inaccessible, unless by the River on the West, which makes it so near being an Island, that the cutting but of 15 paces of earth, would make it one entirely; On all other sides it is encompass'd with Rocks under water, upon wch even a shallop would be lost: The fresh water which comes out of a Fountain at the foot of a large Mountain, which covers this Rock on the North-side, may be defen∣ded from thence with the shot of a Faucon; and the Towns of Petit-Drouin, Tao, and Groua, are at no greater distance then the Grand-Drouin, which is only one league and no more: From the top of this
Rock Giron may be discerned on the East, built upon the side of a de∣licate large Meadow, and Tabo on the West at the end of a fair Cam∣pagnia, planted up and down with curious Woods, which run up a good way into the Countrey, and terminate at the foot of several great Mountains, which are visi∣ble from thence. Saturday the 9th of February we came to an anchor, and took in fresh water all the rest of the day, as well as on the Sunday and Mun∣day following, which gave me op∣portunity of considering these fol∣lowing observations: The water we took in at this place served us almost till we came at the Isle of S. Thomas: The Fountain is very pure, but being shadow'd by a large Tree, at the fall of the leave, when they fall into the Fountain, they ren∣der it something black for a time.
Upon these Coasts they have great quantities of Bullocks, Goats, Kids, Hoggs, and Dear, which are so cheep, one may buy a good Beef of them for a douzain of knives of about twenty pence, and a good Roe Buck for the same price. The People are well made, strong, lusty, their limbs large and fat, but their looks austere and dreadfull, and 'tis reported they do eat the Whites: I never heard of any house built by the Europeans in these parts where they land but very rarely, and have as little to do with them as they can. 'Tis not above thirteen or four∣teen years ago, since fourteen Hol∣landers were killed, and eaten at Rio S. Andre, as they were taking in fresh water, without any occasion of quarrel; for which reason, we went alwayes well armed, and were alwayes upon our guard.
The common people wear only a linnen cloth before but the Gran∣dees and Nobles of the Countrey are conspicuous by a kind of Man∣tle they wrap about them, and a Ponyard by their sides. They are great lovers of great heads of hair, which they breid for one another very handsomly, and then bind them up upon their heads, but the Womens hair they usually cut. The women of Giron, and Petit-Drouin, had the curiosity to come and look upon us as we were take∣ing in water, and to bring their daughters along with them, the liniaments and features of their fa∣ces were so just and regular, that (bate them the unhappiness of their complexion) they were abso∣lute beauties: Amongst fifty of them which I saw, there was not any fat or tall, wheras on the contrary, not one of a hundred amongst the men
but are both: The women have only a cloth before, and the least covered I observed any where upon those Coasts; if there be any thing besides their colour amiss in their faces, it is, that they threaten re∣venge and mischief a little too much. When they come aboard any Ship, the Captain of it must come to them, and it is their custom whilst they have one foot upon their Canoe, and the other upon the Ship, holding by one hand upon the Rope, they dip the other in the Sea, and throw their handfull upon his head, which is intended as a great instance of kindness and ami∣ty, and in this they are so perti∣natiously superstitious, that without it they will never be forc'd nor perswaded to enter any Ship: and when they would affirm any thing with more vehemence than ordi∣nary, they use the same ceremony:
They are so diffident and distrust∣full, they will never begot with all the art can be used, either under deck, or into any of the Cabains, which the Mores of all other parts, would do very freely. They have a great fancy for brace∣lets of Iron, with rings and bells up∣on them, with which kind of Gal∣lantry, most of their arms, and legs, are plentifully furnish'd; they have great store of Mulettoes among them. We could not understand their language, nor they speak one word of Portugais: When they came first aboard us, they cryed Qua, Qua, Qua, which we found after∣wards to be as much as, you are welcome, or good morrow; for which reason the Hollanders have given the name of Quaqua to a good part of this Coast: they made great use of that word, especially if their Gutts had been filled.
The Commodities which this Countrey yeilds, are Elephants teeth, so large sometimes, that they weigh 200 weight a piece, and then they are worth 10000 livers: If we may credit those that live on the Gold Coast, which are their Neigh∣bours, they have so great number of Elephants, that they are forc'd for their security against them, to make their houses under ground: They kill as many of them as they can: but that which accommo∣dates them with so many teeth, is, that the Elephants doe shed them every three year, as the Staggs doe their Horns. This Countrey affords likewise good store of Cotton, of which they make a pritty sort of stuff, strip'd with white, and blew, about three quarters broad, and three or four ells long, which is much valued a∣mongst them, and sold afterwards
at a good rate upon the Gold Coast, to cover their Pesantry there. They have Gold amongst them likewise undoubtedly, for without any Commerce or communication with their Neighbours, they bind up their hair for the most part with hair laces of Gold very curiously made; I made a sign to one of them, to know which way they came by it, and he show'd me the great Mountaines up the Countrey afar off, and sign'd to me from thence. for which reason, he that should make further discovery of these parts, would questionless encoun∣ter many rarities, and without a∣ny great difficulties, in regard the Countrey consists for the most part of Plaines. The Inhabitants here are more afraid off fire armes, then of all the inventions in Gui∣nee. The 26 of February we weigh'd
anchor, and continuing our course all Sunday, about evening we made the Golden Coast, and stood to it directly. COSTE D' OR, OR THE GOLD COAST. With a Relation of our occur∣rences there. MƲnday the last of February, we came to an anchor, at sixteen fathom low water, at Asbini, the first place upon the Gold Coast: The Countrey thereabouts is very low: the Town is seate'd upon the mouth of a River of that name, which runs up North-West a∣mongst the Hills, and South into the Sea, we stay'd there 3 days bartring for Gold-Sand.
The 4th of March we past before Albiani, Tabo, and other Towns, upon that Coast: The Countrey there is but low likewise, very full of Trees, but no River at all: Those Canoes which came aboard us ha∣ving assured us, they had no Gold, we gave them the go by, and past on. We thought to have doubled the Cape of Apollonia that night, but two of their Canoes coming up to us, and promising fair, we beleived them and cast anchor. The next day some of their Canoes brought some Gold, which we bought of them, though it was not much: This Cape throws it self a far into the Sea, and raising it self by degrees into Hills, and then into a Mountain, makes no unpleasant prospect. But it is of no good access, the Sea beating so violently upon it, there is great danger in approching: We weigh'd
anchor again that night, but the weather being calme, we could not reach Axime before Sunday in the afternoon, at which time we came to an anchor. Axime is a Fort belonging to the Hollanders, some twelve leagues di∣stant from the Cape Apollonia, situate upon the side of a River, which runs up Northward also into the Countrey, and abounds with Gold-Sand, which is esteem'd the best of all that Coast. Its banks are higher than either Asbini, or Cape Apollo∣nia: Before this place we stay'd all Sunday and Munday, but perceiving the Dutch obstructed the Mores coming aboard us, we weigh'd an∣chor on Tuesday, and doubled the Cape de Tres-Puntas, so called from three Mountains which appear so at a distance, and by the conveni∣ence of their position, do make two little, but convenient Bayes.
In the afternoon we appear'd before Botrou, which is another little Fort belonging to the Hollan∣der, situate beyond the Cape upon an eminence, at whose foot runs a brook that is not unpleasant: We stay'd here as long as we had any Trade, and departed the 11th. be∣ing Friday. We weigh'd anchor at that time, and came to anchor again betwixt Saconde and Takorai, about six leagues distant from Botrou, they are seated amongst the Mountains, which lean as it were upon the banks of the River they lye so near it; at which place, we received Letters from the Governour of Frederisbourg, not far from Cape Corse, offring us his road (if we pleased) in consideration of the alliance betwixt France and Den∣mark, desiring us also to secure some of his Merchandise for him.
We remained there Friday and Saturday, and it was no small trou∣ble to me to see an antient Fort which had been formerly ours, in its ruines and rubbish; it was at Takorai, upon a Mountain which commanded the whole Countrey, the sides of it spake it but barren, being quite naked of either Trees or Grass, and the stone of a reddish complexion. On Sunday the 23th. we weigh'd anchor, and in two hours appear'd in the road de Comendo, whose In∣habitants are greater lovers of the French, than of any other Europe∣ans: The Town (that may consist of about a hundred houses) is built on the Sea-side, and watered by a Rivulet, which falling into the Sea likewise on the South, forms a prit∣ty Channel and Harbour for Ca∣noes, and Shallops: The East-side lyes low, but the West rises into a
hill, which being flat a top, is very convenient to build upon. The house appertaining formerly to the French, stands upon the North-end of the Town, which runs up into the Countrey, and rai∣ses it self into little hills by degrees, at whose feet there are very fair Fields, and Meadows, planted up and down with variety of fruit. The Mores which came aboard us, were in great anxiety and dis∣order to resolve which way they should signifie their joy. Their King held his Court some four leagues from us in the Town de Grand Comendo, he sent us fresh meat, and other presents, invited us a shore to his Court, proffer'd us all the commodities af the Town, and sent us word, that he had re∣fus'd a banner which Walkembourg (who was General for the Hollan∣der at the Mine) had sent him, and
return'd him this answer; That the Countrey had been alwayes in the possession of the French, and that they only should be welcome thither. We returned him many thanks, sent him our presents, and stay'd where we were to the 16. of March, and then set sayl for Frederisbourgh, and came before the Castle of Mine before night: we found three Vessels in that road, but not consi∣derable. This Castle I shall say nothing of being so famous both for its situation, the commiodity of its Harbour and Fort, and the great Trade which is drove there. Two hours after we past before Cape Corse, where the English have a very strong Fort, which made re∣sistance to all the Dutch Fleet, under the command of du Ruiter. The Harbour is very safe, and the Castle fortifyed with three Batteries, one above the other: The Town con∣sists
of more than 200 houses, in the middle of which there is daily kept so considerable a Market, that it is eminent for its plenty all over those Coasts. At length about 3 hours after we came before Frederisbourg, and sa∣luting the Governour with 5 Guns, he returned our civility with 3, which we again requited with one. The Castle of that name was built by the Danes, in assistance to the Mores, after they were beaten from Cape Corse by the Dutch, which was taken from them again by the English, with the assistance of the Dane, and as a mark of their interest, he retains a great house at the end of the Town, with a Da∣nish Officer and Garrison, and the colours of Denmark set out upon the top on't. Frederisbourgh is seated upon a high Mountain, which runs up
into a point: The whole circuit of it amounts not to 300 paces, and commands all about it, even Cape Corse it self, which is not above Musquet shot from it: The forme of the Plott upon which it is built is round, but the Fort triangular, fortifyed with three Bastions, one of them playes Southward upon the Road, the other Westward up∣on Cape Corse, and the third to∣wards the Fort de Nassau or de Moure to the East. The foot of this Mountain (which is not above 100 paces high) and cannot be ascended but by going about) is compass'd by houses which the Mores have built that inhabit there. We were no sooner at anchor, but we dispatch'd one immediately with our complement to the Gene∣ral, called Henry Dalbreckhe, a Hamburger borne; he was but a little man of his person, but fierce,
and brisk, and yet courteous with∣all, witt enough; and very civil. He sent his Secretary aboard us, by name of Dasse of Amsterdam, who had been there six years; he came in a Canoe; conducted by 8 Slaves, which sang and ranted all along as they row'd, which it seems is the custom when they bring any Whites with them, and before they put them aboard, they row three times about the Vessel, with as much force and expedition as they can row. As he enter'd, we gave him 3 Guns, and spent the rest of that day and night in his entertainment: This night we had the greatest storme we had seen all our voyage, in so much, we were oblig'd to cast out our greatest anchor, but it ceast at last, and the next day having lay∣ed by such commodities as the Ge∣neral had desired, he took his leave and returned.
On Saturday morning our Nota∣ry going ashore with the Merchan∣dise he desired, they shot from Cape Corse at our shallop, and the bullet fell within six or seven foot of them: The Governour of Frederisbourg immediately fired a great Gun up∣on the Castle, and the bullet fell at the foot of the second Battery, to which they replied, but without balls, seeing the General took us in∣to his protection, and after that u∣sed no act of hostility more. The reason was, because, though there be war declared betwixt England and Denmark, upon the Hollanders account, yet the Generals of these two Forts have made an amicable agreement, to commit nothing of hostility betwixt themselves, and it is so punctually observed, the Souldiers of both Garrisons meet daily, eating and drinking toge∣ther at their pleasures.
The two and twentieth I went on shore my self, & was receiv'd with all civillity, and very good cheer by the General, he enquired of me what news, I answered him in La∣tin, which he spake very well, but no French at all: I understood from him, that the Kings of that Coun∣trey had been at wars four years, which was a great impediment to their Trade; that we should find three English Vessels in Ardres road, and that he was obliged to send provisions to Christiansbourgh, where the war was yet so hot, all that Countrey lay unmanured: in short, I was so much engaged to him, that upon several occasions which I had to converse with him, he us'd all means to satisfie my cu∣riosity, and to instruct me in the manners of the Countrey. All the rest of that month, and the four first dayes of April, we
spent in traffique, and on the fifth we discern'd a Petach passing to∣wards the Mine, with a great shal∣lop full of Souldiers which the Dutch General sent to Cormentin, a Fort which belongs to them: we were ut∣terly ignorant of the design, but were told afterwards by the Mores, that the Governour of that Fort being gone to Anembou with seve∣ral of his Souldiers to drink and be merry (there being the best Palm-wine in Africk) had been seized upon, and all his company with him, by the King of that Countrey, in whose dominions Cormentin stood, and that two of them en∣deavouring to defend themselves, were killed: the ground of this Insurrection was this; The King of Fantin having ingaged himself to the English at Cape-Corse, to put them again into possession of that Fort, had given them his Son in
hostage, and desiring to have him restor'd, and the English refusing till his Articles were perform'd, he had seized upon the Governour, and 4 other Hollanders, with design to exchange them for his Son. Thursday the 7th of April, we had news that the Controuler ge∣neral of Holland was killed at Axime, and the Mores of those parts had un∣animously declared for the English. That day we arrested two Mores in our ship, and kept them priso∣ners, to secure a debt due to us from two Merchants on shore; they continued two days with us, but the Denmark General interposing, we gave them their liberty, and were paid by the Merchants with∣in eight days afterward. On Good-Friday the 8th of A∣pril, we weighed anchor in order to our passage to Eniacham, a Town about four leagues distance from
Frederisbourg, who gave us his guns when we went off, and we return'd ours in requital. We sail'd by Moure, where the Fort of Nassau is, which belongs to the Hollanders, & is some two leagues and a half from the Castle of the Mine. This fort is scituate upon a Rock, flank'd with four Bastions, the Sea washes the foot of it, and the Town of Moure (which consists of about two hundred houses) encompasseth it about on all sides but towards the Sea: it holds of the King of Acanis∣petit, as well as the Town of Icome, which is not above a quarter of a league from it, on the Sea-side too. In the afternoon we came to an anchor before Eniacham, where the English have a little Fort upon a little Eminence, about six hundred paces within land: near which the King of Sabou has a Town, of whom Eniacham holds likewise.
We saluted the Fort with 3 Guns, which they return'd immediately. On Easter day the tenth of April, the Mores brought us good store of their Palme-Wine, and assured us their Merchants would come down the next day, and bring us gold enough: On Munday they sent us a Fricassee of Pullets; (which they dress as well as in France, as I shall mention hereafter) and ac∣quainted us, that the King of Fantins Souldiers had entred Sabou in the night, killed four men, & ta∣ken several Prisoners. Upon which the Town of Sabou had sent away their Wives and Children, and put themselves in arms: We smelt their design, and resolved to return that night to Frederisbourg, having nothing to do at Cormentin, be∣cause of the Hollanders, nor at Akara, by reason of the wars that King had with Tacara.
From Eniacham we could see Cormentin, but not distinguish the Fortifications by reason of the di∣stance: It is situate upon a Hill, and belongs to the Hollanders, who have a house at Fantin also, and another at Nemabon, a Town in the same Kingdom. On Tuesday in the afternoon we set sayle for Frederisbourg, by the benefit of a North wind from the Hills, which blows constantly on this Coast from midnight till noon, and about nine a clock we came to an anchor again: We stay'd there till we had put off all our commo∣dities, and then away for the Isle of Saint Thomas, having been two months upon the Golden Coast: and forty dayes in Frederisbourg road, where I went on shore again, to inform my self more particular∣ly of the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants of the Golden Coast:
I had the good fortune to see the most of their curiosities, and to sa∣tisfie and inform my self of the rest from the General, the Minister, and the Mores of Frederisbourg, who all of them spake Portugais. The Description of the GOLDEN COAST. THE Golden Coast lies be∣twixt four degrees and a half, and six and a half of Northern lati∣tude, and betwixt 17 and 20 of lon∣gitude East: it has taken its name from the vast quantity of Gold is brought yearly from thence, as well from their Mines, as the Sand in their Rivers, and contains (besides the places above mentioned) Rotou, Ronate, and Akara, which lye more to the East; its extent is a hundred
and thirty leagues. The bank of Asbini, which is but low in Ax∣ime, rises near Achema to a Moun∣tain, and then humbling it self to Cape Corse, it raises it self again, and continues so the rest of the Coast; the circumference compre∣hending the in-land Countrey and all, contains about four hundred leagues, divided into the King∣domes of Asbini, Axime, Comendo, Fetu, Acanis-Petit, Sabou, Fantin, Akara, and the Seignories of A∣brambou and Takara, all which de∣pend upon the King of Acanis le grand, who is called Akim, (whose Imperial Town is situ∣ate 90 leagues Northward of the Mine) and may be called an Emperour.
Of the Stature and Proportion of the People of this Countrey, of their Wit, Iclination, Industry, and Habits. THe Inhabitants of the Golden Coast are handsome, and well-proportioned, they have no∣thing disagreeable in their Coun∣tenance, but the blackness of their Complexion; some of them have flattish noses, and all of them little ears; their eyes are quick and spark∣ling, but above all, their teeth as white as Ivory, of which they have a particular care, and for their con∣servation, are perpetually champ∣ing a certain wood which grows in the kingdome of Acanis, which has a peculiar quality of making them white, of preserving their gums, and preventing any black∣ness or rottenness in them. Though
their beards appear not so soon as ours, yet they affect them exceed∣ingly, and their Grandees and Officers wear them very long upon their chins, and some of them like the Capuchins with us. Their skin is black indeed, but smooth and delicate, without any hair, but as they grow old, their blackness lessens, and their hair which is short, black, and frizell'd, grows grizled by degrees. Their Stomachs are generally so hot, they do not only digest all kind of meats that are roasted or boyled, but raw likewise; and some there are among them which prefer that to the other. They are great lovers of cleanli∣ness, and wash themselves dayly to prevent Vermin, rubbing after∣ward with oyl of Palmes. They are not at all ashamed of their nu∣dity, but they have so great an ab∣horrency
and detestation of belch∣ing, or any such thing, that they will sooner die than do it; and if it happens at any time they be in the company of any Europeans that are guilty of it, they run out of the room immediately, making the horriblest faces imaginable. They have a great deal of wit, are solid in their judgements, cun∣ning, and so dexterous and quick, one need never shew them the same thing twice: they are lyers to the highest degree, their memory transcendent, and though they can neither write nor read, yet they manage their Trade with the great∣est exactness: they never dispute the commands which are laid upon them: you shall have a Merchant negotiating and managing 4 Marks of gold for 20 several persons, every particular man desiring five or six several Commodities, which he
performs without hasitation or mistake. Their address appears abun∣dantly by their dexterity in their Commerce, they are all of them given to pilfering, covetous to that point, especially to the Whites, that they think they do a mighty act, if they present them with a little fruit: they are drunken, luxurious, and much subject to the Lues Venerea, which is no scandal amongst them: they are but ill paymasters, and satisfie their debts with great difficulty and unwillingness: they are great enemies to cold weather, and endure it with much impatience: so proud, that their Merchants, (who are all of them Nobles, Cap∣tains, or other great Officers) march up and down the Streets with their eyes fix'd upon the ground, not vouchsafing so much
as a glance upon the common peo∣ple: behind them they have con∣stantly a Slave with a chair in his hand, that they may sit down when they please, it being thought dishonourable to be too long upon their leggs; they never answer any ordinary person, but with great su∣perciliousness, and never speak to them but with great Majesty: to o∣ther people they are civil enough, and pay very much respect to the Whites, especially if they be Of∣ficers, to whom they never speak but with their hat in their hand. The surest way of gaining their af∣fection, is to be civil to them which they value more than any other thing one can do. Though the manner of their habits be much different from ours yet they are as curious and as proud in them, as the best of us. When their Officers or Mer¦chants
walking the Streets, or are in transaction with any Stranger, they take a piece of Silk, Taffaty, or fine Indian Damask, about two or three Ells long, which they tye a∣bout their waste, and afterwards bringing it betwixt their thighs, they let the two ends hang down before and behind almost to the ground. Sometimes they wrap o∣ther Stuffs about them, from their breast to their mid-legg, or else throw it over their shoulders like a Mantle. They order their hair in several ways; but rich, and poor, and all, are very curious in adjusting it hand∣somely, and inventing new modes and gallantries to adorn it, it being the only business almost which gives their women imployment. Most of them dave hats, some of Straw, some of the Bark of trees, some of Goats-skin, but their Slaves
are distinguish'd by going bare-headed: they trim themselves up with divers Necklaces of Rasade, and Bracelets, which they beautifie with little works of Gold, in ho∣nour to their God, after they have muttered out some of their Prayers over it: they have Rings or Jewels upon the small of their Leggs, or else a string of Coraile, of the bark of the Tree, under which they pay worship to their Fetiches. Though they love exceedingly to be spruce yet, they are good house-wives of their cloths, never put on their finery but upon some such extraordinary occasion as I have mentioned, and then whip and off with them again as soon as they come home, folding them up care∣fully, and putting them into chests, which they buy of the Europeans for that purpose, where they lye snugg till some new opportunity
brings them abroad again: Never∣theless from the King to the Cob∣ler they affect change of apparel, to make themselves more conside∣rable, and that more or less accord∣ing to their riches or gains. And yet for all this in the main they are frugal enough, will buy nothing that is superfluous, but what they do buy, let it be stuff, or any thing else, they will be sure it be lasting and good, or they will be sure to have none of it, for all slight things they laugh at and despise. Of the Women, their genious, humour, and habits. THE Women upon these Coasts are generally well shap'd also, but some of them are little, and some great and corpu∣lent: the young Women do place their principal care upon the
whitening their teeth, and adorn∣ing their hair. They have witt enough, good mine, honest, and obliging, but much more curteous then the men; they are very grave, addicted to frugality in their houses, but to pompe and ostention abroad: But their lasciviousness is above all, which they suck as it were with their milk, playing hoyty∣toyty amongst the young fellows starke naked. There are but few of them barren before, but when married they are seldome over fertile, which may be attributed to their temper and complection, for there is seldome any of them have above four or five. The Virgins, (to please, and to enamour the young men, as soon as they are up every morning) take water and wash, and then combe their haire (which they
have in twice the plenty the men have) with great curiosity, pla∣ting and disposing it in a hundred several modes and gallantries, gum∣ming it with oyl of Palmes, instead of mouth glew, tying it with ri∣bands if they have any, if not, adorning it with little pieces of gold, or a certain red cockle shell, which is very common amongst them. Some of them paint their foreheads with red and white, and sometimes their eye-brows, and cheeks: they cut and carve their skins about their ears, and temples, which rising up in little blisters, they paint them over with divers colours, and fancy it a great addi∣tion to their beauty: they have all of them Pendants at their ears, they all of them love the Ribbands, and above all Ribbands, the red; they wear necklaces of Corail, or of Rasade, and bracelets not only
upon their wrists and their armes, but upon their leggs, and their ankles; the maidens for the most part have their bracelets made of the bark of that tree which is dedi∣cated to their Fetiches, which are their Gods as I shall shew hereafter. When they go abroad, if they be the Wives of Merchants, Officers, or Captains, in that Countrey, they have a piece of Silk, Taffaty, or other Stuff, either red, or blew, or violet-colour'd (which are the co∣lours they are most pleased with) which they take and wrap about them, from the breast to the mid-legg, stuffing it out behind with a great Rouler. They have alwayes a great bunch of keys at their gir∣dle, though they have many times never a Chest in the world: they wear bracelets of Ivory, and Gold, and Rings in that abundance, one can see no fingers that they have
sometimes; and in this posture they are fit to be seen: the common sort dress them selves as fine as they can too, but when they come in again, they are mighty careful to sold them up handsomely, putting on a kind of coarse linnen with which they make shift to cover themselves from the Navel, to the midst of their Thigh. They love variety of habits too as well as the men, but the Virgins especially, who make it their whole business from morning to night to spruce up themselves, and make themselves acceptable, above all to the Whites, whom they seem to caress much more than those of their own Complexion. Their Ladies of pleasure, are not distinguishable in any thing, they are welcome where-ever they go, and handsomly received by every body; but they are more mercena∣ry
and covetous than in any other part of the world. Of their Marriages, and the Edu∣cation of their Children. I Happen'd to be present at a Marriage whilst I was at Fre∣derisbourg, which was consumma∣ted in no unpleasant manner. The Father of a young man finding him at age to get his living himself, looks out immediately for a Wife for him, & having pitch'd upon one he thinks will be proper, he goes to his Son, tells him what he has done, advises him to see her, if they like one another, his Father desires her of hers, if they agree, they go all of them together with one of the Priests who gives them Fetiches, and in the presence of the whole As∣sembly, the Bride takes a solemne Oath upon the Fetiche to be true
and faithfull to her good man; her Groom promising on the other side as much to her very civilly, but no Oath of fidelity in the case. The Parents present one another reci∣procally, and give in the bride and the Bridegroom what they are able to spare, they spend the rest of the day in feasting and jollity, and there's an end of the Marriage. However this Lady has this ad∣vantage over her Spouse, by being his first love, that he can never take another, but by her permission, which yet her Ladyship is seldome so morose as to deny. But it was my fortune to see a young Merchant of the Mine who had worse luck, his name was Anthony, he came se∣veral times aboard our ship, and ne∣ver with less than 10 or 12 Marks of Gold; amongst other discourse, I ask'd him one day how many Wives he had, he told me but one,
and the reason was, she was so cross grain'd a Jade, she would let him have no more; and then told me very seriously, that amongst them that custome was inviolable. Nevertheless, all women know∣ing very well, that variety of Wives and Children is the greatest honour and reputation to their husbands, and what they themselves will boast of to Strangers: when they see their husbands grow wealthy, and in a capacity of maintaining them, they themselvs wil press them to take more, which to speak truly, are no other then Concubines, they being not at all concern'd for their liberty or incontinence: the first has this priviledge also, that she lyes 3 nights successively with the good man, whilst the younger brood must be contented with one, and that according to the priority of their Marriage. In short, they live
very lovingly together, and have seldome any jealousies or animosity amongst them. A good Merchant, or Officer, will have twenty or thirty, according to his abilities. The King of Fetu's Son-in-Law had forty, by whom he had a dou∣zain of daughters, fourteen to the douzain of the other Sex, and kept constantly a hundred Slaves to at∣tend them. In those parts, who will may come into the Chamber of any Woman when she lyes in: as soon as the Child is safe in the world, they bring the good Woman a bottle of drink made of Rice, and Mays, and Water and Wine, and Malaguette, (not unlike our Pep∣per Posset) which having taken off kindly, they cover her well, and then leave her three or four hours to her devotions, which being over, she rises immediately, washes her
Child, falls to her business, and there's an end of that labour; but (to be sober) I could not but ad∣mire very much the force of their temper, when I saw the very same thing done by a Slaves Wife at Frederisbourg. As soon as they have wash'd their Child, the Father and Mother give it commonly a name, and for the most part, of some European or other they have been beholding to, that done, they wrap it in a kind of blanket, and then lay it in a skin upon the Rushes, where it lyes quietly till it be three weeks or a month old, after which time the Mother carries it at her back upon a piece of wood with the leggs un∣der her armpits, tying its two hands about her neck, where it hangs all day, and never comes off, but when she goes to bed; and this is the reason why the Children of
their Nobles, or better sort, have seldome camous noses, because their Wives do not labour, nor carry their Infants about them, as the others do, whose Children sleeping many times whilst the Mother is walking or at work, knock their noses against their Shoulders, and so in time they become flat: if they cry out for the teat, they throw their breasts over their shoulders, and let them suck. Every morning they wash and rub them with Oyl of Palmes. By that time they be 7 or 8 months old, they lay them along upon the ground, drawing them forward upon all four, like Kitlings, which possibly may be the reason the Children go much sooner in these Countreys than in Europe. Whilst they be thus tender and young, the Parents put little works of gold about their necks, wrapt up
in the rind of the tree where they worship their Fetiches, for fear the Devil should run away with them, and when they come to be about 4 year old, they bind little branches of it (which they buy of their Priests) about their arms, and their leggs, wreathing and bending them into a round figure, which they look upon as a great Antidote a∣gainst any sickness or disaster what∣soever. In this manner they conti∣nue their care of them till they be 7 or 8 years old, but after that they feed upon the same as the Father and Mother does, heaping up ma∣ny time such nasty things as they find in the Streets, which they eat afterward very heartily, when they are hungry: the boys and the gyrls, being higledy-pigledy to∣gether, and all naked, it takes off much of their modesty, and is a cause they are never ashamed of
any thing; to which may be added their want of correction, their Pa∣rents being so far from whipping them, they never so much as re∣buke them in the least. From the seventh or eighth year of their age they learn to swim, which they do with so much suc∣cess and perfection, that when they are grown up, if their Canoe over∣sets at any time at Sea, they are not affrighted, but swim back again ve∣ry quietly from whence they came, they will dive excellently well too, and fetch up goods or any other thing that is accidentally cast a∣way, upon which score one may see the shore so full sometimes of little Blacks, one would think them so many young Devils. At 12 year old they fall under the jurisdiction of the Father, who shews them which way to get their livelyhood: if he be a fisherman he
carries them to Sea, shews them how to make a Canoe, and which way to take fish; if a Merchant he teaches them the mistery of Tra∣ding, brings them acquainted with Forreigners, and instructs them in this manner till they be 18 or 20, and can begin to do something for themselves, then he gives them Slaves to do their work, and all the care that is behind, is to help them to Wives, which from that time forward they are alwayes con∣triving. The Gyrls are imployed in keep∣ing clean the houses, in picking their Rice, beating their Mays, ma∣king their bread, managing their Kitchin, and buying or selling at the Markets what is to be bought or sold, sometimes they make bas∣kets of rushes, sometimes matts (in which they are transcendantly ex∣cellent) sometimes weave, but above
all their care is greatest of their Fa∣ther and Mother, to see that they have their meat and drink in good hours, and that nothing of their goods be imbezled; in short there is nothing of good housewivry or frugality, that is wanting amongst them, and when they are once marryed, they may teach that lesson to most of the Women of Europe. Of their Houses, Houshold-stuff, Drinke, Meat, Palme-Wine, and how it is made. THe great Commerce they have had with the Europeans having learned them the art of building, the Officers and great Merchants of this Countrey have follow'd their directions and built themselves houses, with high and lofty roofes, several appartments,
with one chamber opening into a∣nother, and usually at the door of their chamber 2 Slaves constantly attending with darts in their hands in the nature of guards, which are releived at certain hours. All their houses are made of earth, but the common people have their walls so low, they seldome exceed the height of a man. Their beame and rafters, and the whole frame of the house resting only upon them: the houses of the Grandees as well as the commons are all thatch'd, and have all of them but one little square hole, which serves for a door, to which they fasten a piece of board, without either lock or hinges, like the poor Peasants in the Countrey to their Garden-doors, and are contented to fasten them only with a rope, either with∣out or within. Their windows are small, the earth they make their
floors with, very close and com∣pact, they have at least two cham∣bers to a house, and this character must be given them, that they are very curious in keeping them neat, and paint them very frequently both without and within. Amongst the common sort, there is nothing of houshould-stuff, or what is us'd commonly about the house, to be seen, all is locked up in their Coffers, which they buy of the Whites; except they be Mer∣chants or great men, and then their Tables and Chairs appear sometimes, but never no Beds, for they lye alwayes upon Skins spread upon the ground, or else upon Mat∣tresses made of Rushes, covering themselves with the Skins of Oxen, or some other Beast, without any Boulster, except they be of the No∣bles, and then they have Pillows under their heads, and a good fire
in the middle of their Room, but not the least hole for a Chimney. Every woman has her appart∣ment, or little house, joyning to her Husbands, consisting of one or two Chambers, where she mana∣ges her own affairs by her self, sel∣dome eating or drinking together. Some of them go a Gossipping to their Neighbours, and carry such as they have along with them. The good man takes the same course, and he visits his Merchant, not so much as concerning himself how squares go at home, the women be∣ing alwayes very punctual to ac∣commodate them with every thing necessary, and to bring up their Children carefully; yet sometimes on their Festivals, or upon some great occasion, their Stomachs come down, and they feed very lovingly together. As the women have the charge
of the house and the money, so they make it their whole business that neither of them miscarry in their hands. The men employ themselves constantly abroad, ei∣ther in matters of Trade, or in ma∣king of Palm-wine, or fishing, as every mans genius inclines him: when they have got any money, they give it still to their wives, who order it so well, they never make the least unnecessary disbursement; they go every night themselves in∣to the granaries, delivering out such a proportion of corn as they judge will be necessary for the whole fa∣mily the next day. By break of day the young girles are up and at work, beating their Rice, and their Mays (which is cal∣led Turky wheat amongst us) in a wooden Mortar, and when it is bruis'd, they grind it (as the Paint∣ers do their colours.) betwixt two
stones, and so reduce it to powder, then kneading it with water and salt, they divide it into a kind of penny loaves, and put it into a great earthen pot that stands upon the fire, with a little earthen lid, they throw embers upon it, & 'tis done; if it be well bak'd, 'tis very good, and without any ill relish at all. Their food generally is fish, though they have great store of flesh also, which they boyl or roast as they think good, but their fish is most commonly bak'd, being sea∣son'd first with water, and pepper, and salt: the great Merchants who have Slaves to wait on them at the Table, do eat a l' Europeenne, and have their Ragousts as well made as in France, which they learn'd of us, and the Cook at the Fort of Den∣mark; yet there are some Mores will make a Pottage, or a Ragoust with the best Cuisinier in Paris.
They eat great store of fruit, of Peas, Beans, and such like: they make usually but two meals a day, that is, at Sun-rising, and Sun-set∣ting, where they feed like Cormo∣rants, and when they have eat ne∣ver so much, are hungry still, which I impute to nothing but an exces∣sive heat within them, which gives them a Canine, and perpetually in∣satiable appetite, insomuch that I have observed them when they have been at dinner a Ship-board, one Black has eat as much as six of us could do. Their Mornings draught is either of water, or a kind of small beer, which they call Poitou, and is made of Mays, but 'tis night before they drink any Wine, and the reason is because the Peasant never brings it to the Market till after dinner. The Palm-Wine comes out of a Tree, not unlike our Date-trees;
the Mores make a hole at the top of the tree, to which they fasten a pott, like one of the Monks pitch∣ers, and the next day, or the day after, they find it full of a kind of juice like Milk, sweet and very pleasant, but with a quality to in∣ebriate The Mores have got a trick of late to sophisticate it, and put water amongst it for their gain, but 'tis no hard matter to discover it. This Wine cannot be kept till next day, but will grow sower in a nights time, upon which grounds, the Merchants, and other good fel∣lows do meet, and drink smartly many times, but with this ceremony alwayes, that they leave a little in the bottome, which they throw upon the ground in honour of their Fetiches. Those who have no provision, nor means to make any, are forc'd to buy what they want (at a little
Market hard by) with what they have got by fishing, by making Palme-Wine, by building or re∣pairing of houses, carrying home what the Merchants have bought on Ship-board, and such other ser∣vile imployments as our Mecha∣nicks in France live by: to which Market the Whites go also some∣times when their Stomach hangs after fish. Of their Markets, their manner of buying and selling, with a descripti∣on of their Measures and Weights. THe best Market in all Africk is held every day at Cape-Corse, but we being at wars with England, I could have no sight of that, and therefore must be con∣tented with the Market at Frede∣risbourg, which is not indeed so bigg, but there is the same thing observed in a place designed for
the same use, and that is, that it be ordinarily in the midst of the Town. By break of day the Peasants come in with their Sugar-canes, bound up like Fagots, their fruits of all sorts, Plums, Potatoes, Turnips, Carrets, Citrons, Oranges, Rice, Mays, Malaguette, Bread, Pullets, Fish, Eggs, and whatever is necessary for the life of man; after Dinner their Palme-wine comes in, and what Fish is taken since the morning. They have never no confusion in their Markets, each Commodity has a peculiar place assigned for it by the Merchant, which is obser∣ved with great order; their Tobac∣co is sold in the leaf, which being dryed by the fire, they light it and smoak, their industry as yet not having been great enough to make it up into Rowls. There is no such thing amongst them as trusting or credit, no Mo∣ney
no Merchandise there, every one brings his Gold in his hand. If the Commodity be of small price, they take their Gold and poise it upon the end of their finger, adding or substracting as they think fit; but if considerable, and of great value, they out with their Scales and weigh it. Their Scales are made of two flat pieces of Copper something broad∣er than our Crown pieces, which they hang by a thread at the end of a short stick, and ballancing so ex∣actly, there can be nothing more true. Having no Needle, they make a noose of thread with their thumb and fasten to the middle, in which, instead of weights, they hang a certain red grain they call Tacous, each of which grains weighs about two-Penny weight, with which Pian Piano, they will weigh a Mark of Gold, yet there are
some great Merchants which have Scales like ours, which they have bought lately of us. All that comes to this Market, (which is kept every day in the week (Sunday excepted) is Tribute free, and pays no duty to the King. There are others that resemble our Fairs, and fall out not above twice in the year, to which all the whole Countrey repairs, for there is never in any of those Kingdoms two Fairs kept in one day, left one should be a hindrance and disad∣vantage to the other. By the report I have had, 'tis to these places they bring the best and finest of their things, and whatever they buy of us, as likewise to the ordinary Mar∣kets which are kept farther up into the Countrey, but to those Markets which are kept nearer the Sea, there is nothing comes but what is neces∣sary to humane life, which the Pea∣sants
bring (like so many Mules) upon their backs, and that but from 5 or 6 places: yet so strict are they in their Religion, and doe so much postpone the considerations of their advantage and gain, that if any of these Fairs does happen to fall out upon a Sunday, it is ipso facto put off till the next day. THEIR RELIGION. Of their Sundays, Feasts, Devotions, Gods or Fetiches, of their Sacri∣fices, Priests, and Habits. THough amongst these poor people, there is not the least tincture of the true Religion to be seen, yet they observe a Sabbath (which is our Tuesday) very strictly: Every man rests that day from his labour, the Peasants bring nothing
to the Markets, and no man is per∣mitted to traffick, unless it be those upon the Sea side, who have liberty to go aboard, any Vessel in the Road, and to truck and make bar∣gains as they please. The rest im∣ploy their times wholly at their de∣votions, and doe observe it with much more punctuality then we doe our Sundays with us. They meet altogether in a place, in the middle of which there is a great Tree, called the Tree of their Fetiche, of the barke off which they make the fillets, with which they bind their little pieces of Gold to their armes, and their leggs. At the foot of this Tree a Table is spread, (the feet drest with several Crowns and Garlands made of the boughs of trees) upon which they set Rice, Millet, Mays, Fruit, Meat, and Fish, with Wine, and Oyl of palmes, to eat and drink to their
Fetiches, they dance, and sing, and jump up and down all day about this Tree, making a most obstrepe∣rous noise with Copper Basons, and other instruments for the purpose. They wash their faces that mor∣ning with particular care, and more exactly then all the week after. The first bit of what ever they eat, they throw down upon the ground in honour of their Gods, and at night the Captain or the Governour di∣stributes Palme-Wine to all the In∣habitants, the Peasants being obli∣ged to bring it to him that evening. Ask them about any thing of their faith, and they will look down upon the ground, but never give you an answer; only one of them told us that we had a very good God, that gave us so many fine things: They all of them be∣lieve an other life, but where, whe∣ther above or below, they cannot
tell. For which reason, lest their Father or Mother should be hun∣gry and starve, they put meat and Palme-Wine very often into their graves, to the end that if they be thirsty or hungry, they may repair thither, and be relieved. When they hear it thunder, rain hard, or the wind blow very strong, there is not one of them to be seen in the streets, all hide themselves in their houses, and cry, the Gods of the Whites are angry. I ask'd one of them of what colour his God was, and he told me black: The Devil is so dreadfull to them, they tremble at his very naming, they say he beats them, and makes them do ill things for their Feti∣ches, for whom they have an incre∣dible superstition, though they be all of them inanimate, and some of them so nastily villanous, one would not touch them with a pair of tongs.
They every body carry some of them about with them, some are made of the end of horns, fill'd up with ordure, others of little figures, as the heads of some creature or other, and a hundred such like im∣pertinences, which their Priests sell them at their own price, and pretend they found them under the tree of the Fetiche. They tye this tree about (which is the place where they sacrifice) with little roaps of straw, and after their Ceremonies are over, they take those ropes, and stringing their gold work upon them, they fasten them to their arms and leggs, and then think themselves safe against any mischief whatever. For the preservation of their houses, they have a sort of Fetiches which are planted at their dores, and they are no better than our poles, or hooks, we pull down the
boughs withall when we gather our fruit: Of these Fetiches their Priests set a great number about a stone, which (by their tradition) is as old as the world, and when they have been there a certain time, the Priests sell them to the people. If at any time any trouble befall them, they repair immediately to their Priest, for a new Fetiche (the old one is to be trusted no longer) who most graciously supplies them for their money, and into the bar∣gain, he gives them a piece of Suet, or Tallow, with two or three Par∣rets feathers set right up, or else a certain hearb; the King of Fetu's Son-in-Law had the head of an Ape for his Fetiche. They do all of them abstein from something or other, in ho∣nour of their Fetiche, with this opi∣nion, that if ever they eat or drink
of that, after they promis'd absti∣nence (which is usually at their Marriage) they shall dye upon the spot; for which reason, one eats no Beef, another no Goat, ano∣ther no Hens, this man drinks no Wine, and the other no Strong-waters, which they observe so exactly, they will sooner dye than be perswaded or forc'd to the con∣trary. These Fetiches I have spoken of hitherto, are but private Fetiches, and belong but to particular men: but they have another sort of Feti∣ches which are tutelary to the whole Countrey, as for example, sometimes such a Mountain, some∣times such a kind of Tree, some∣times such a Stone, sometimes such a sort of Fish, or such a Species of Birds, which they look upon and worship as so many Gods. If a Negroe by accident kills any
of those Birds, he is punish'd suf∣ficiently, and if a White, he runs a great hazard of his life. I saw one of these Birds at Frederisbourg, a little thing about the bigness of a Wrenn, with a Beak like a Lin∣net, mark'd with black and white, and the Feathers a kind of light brown: if any of these at any time are seen flying about in the Gar∣dens of a More, 'tis look'd upon as a good Omen, and he throws it meat immediately. The Consecrated Trees are or∣dinarily those about which their Sacrifices are perform'd; they be∣lieve whoever cuts such a one down, destroys (without more adoe) all the fruit in the Countrey: and therefore if there be any such Malefactors, they are punish'd with death, as it happen'd to the Hollanders at Moure in the year 1598, before they had built the
Fort of Nassau, where 8 or 10 of them were killed the 8th. of May, for having cut down a Tree dedi∣cated to their Fetiches. The highest Mountains, and such as are most subject to Thunder and Lightning, they imagine are the Residences of their Gods, and therefore they pay great honour and respect to them: at the bottom of them they will lay Rice, Millet, Mays, Bread, Wine, Oyl, and other things, that they may eat and drink if they be hungry or dry. Their Stones (which they fan∣cy to be Fetiches) are like our great Land-marks in the Countrey, (or such as are laid to distinguish and determine the bounds or li∣mits of a Countrey Parish) and they believe them as old as the world: about these it is their Priests do set their Cruches which they sell afterwards to the people for
conservation of their houses, as I mentioned before. Besides these Fetiches aforesaid, if five or six Neighbours build near one another, in any place divided from the rest of the Town, they will have a Fetiche to themselves, and will sacrifice and pray to him for their preservation. Thursday the fourteenth of April being at Frederisbourg, whilst they were at Prayers above, I went down, and at the entrance of a house which stood alone by it self, I observed a man and a woman, bleeding of a Hen (which they had prick'd on purpose) upon cer∣tain leaves which they had plac'd upon the ground, and after it had done bleeding, they cut it into mamocks, threw them down upon the leaves, and then turning their faces upon one another, and kissing their hands, they cry'd, Me Cusa,
Me Cusa, Me Cusa, which is as much as to say, Make me good. I let them alone till their ceremony was done, and then ask'd them what they were about, they told me, that the Fetiche of that quar∣ter had beaten them, and they by way of attonement, had given him a Hen for his dinner: As I was looking down upon their leaves, (or an herb rather which grows upon the Sea-side) they desired me not to touch them, and told me whoever eat of that Pullet, in half an hours time, would be as dead as a herring; but I was so stout-hear∣ed, I took it up, had it broyl'd up∣on the coales, by my Lacquey, eat∣ing some part of it in their pre∣sence, and throwing the rest to the piggs: the poor people were ama∣zed, and stood gaping to see me fall down dead, or sink over head and ears into the earth immediate∣ly.
I ask'd them to see their Fetiche, they carried me into a little Court, to a kind of a Tyle wrapt about with straw, and told me that was the Fetiche which had beaten them. Well said I, I'le be reveng'd, and throwing it on the ground, I break it into a hundred pieces, and planted a Cross in the Room on't. I taught them to signe themselves also, broak all their Cruches about the door, and having given them each a little cross for their pockets, and bid them when ever the Fe∣tiche came to plague them again, that they should signe themselves with the signe of the Cross, take that out and kiss it, and they should hear no more of their Fe∣tiche ever after; they heard me very patiently, and made such re∣lations at home, that a whole Church of them came to me next day, desiring to swop a Fetiche for
a Crucifix: We came immediate∣ly to a bargain, and when I began to examine my Fetiche, I found it nothing but a piece of putrified earth, nointed over with suet, and grease, and oyl of Palmes, with five or six Parrot-feathers bolt upright in the middle, to which morning and night they pay'd their con∣stant devotions. I perswaded them afterwards to shew me to their Fetiche General, which they did: I found it in a plain where they made all their Sacrifices; it was nothing but a stone covered with earth, which I routed immediately, and brake five hundred of their poles which they had planted about it; from thence I went to their Priest, to see what Fetiches he had to sell, he told me I had one, which was one of the poles I had brought along in my hand, and would have had me
pay'd him for't: I took him by the elbow, and carry'd him to the Ma∣ster Fetiche, and when he saw he was demolish'd, Lord! what a pickle he was in, he roar'd and cry'd out to his Neighbours, and all of them look'd upon it as a mi∣racle that I was not as dead as a door-nail in the twinkling of an eye. I told him, Sir, for your pay∣ment I have set up this Cross, and whosoever touches it (unless upon the knee) is a dead man in a mi∣nute; at which words, they ran home as fast as they could, yelling and crying out to one another, whilst I return'd to the Castle. They have so great an opinion, and veneration for their Priests, the whole world is not able to disabuse them: if they have one bit better than other, 'tis kept for them; they are the only people amongst the Mores, that are suffer'd not to
work, are nourish'd at others cost, and charess'd all ways they can think of, to the end they may af∣ford them their prayers. They sell Fetiches (as I have said before) to the common people, perswading them, they found them hanging upon the Fetiches Tree, which they believe so obstinately, their own eyes are not sufficient to con∣vince them; for if at any time they see the contrary, they will sooner believe it an illusion, than imagine their Priests would deceive them: so blind are these poor people, be∣ing led by those who are blinder than themselves. The Habit of their Priests re∣sembles a Coat of Arms, and is made of some course linnen, or serge, about which they have a scarf, set with little bones of broyl'd Pullets, like the Cockle-shells worn by the Pilgrims of St. Mi∣chael;
the rest of their bodies is quite naked, they have garters a∣bout their legs, made of the Fibers of their Fetiche Tree: all people, even to the Kings themselves, are ambitious of their friendship, that they may intreat their Fetiches to be favourable to them, either in their Trade, or any thing else. For my part, I believe they are made all of them by the Priest, and that they talk and converse with the Devil, who communicates with them, and teaches them which way to cheat the people so easily; and that which makes me say it, is this, they alwayes mutter out some words to their Fetiches, before they them.
Of their Superstition, their Swear∣ing upon their Fetiches, their manner of pacifying them, when they think they are angry, and the Burials of the Dead. THeir Superstition towards their Fetiches, is so positive, and dogmatical, nothing in this world is able to convince them. Their chief end in carrying them about them, is to keep them from any ill might befall them, and when any does, they believe the fault is in themselves, and that they have not perform'd their duties towards them. They dread Swearing by their Fetiches above all things, believing it impossible to live an hour after, if they swear false; for which reason when the good woman goes to the Market, or abroad at any time, the good
man takes his Fetiche, and putting it into a cup of drink made with Palm-wine, he gives it her, and makes her swear to be faithful to him in his absence, and swears her again (whether she has or not) when she returns. When we were before Asbini, there was one called Attire, who complain'd that he was robb'd of a Mark of Gold in our Ship: Mon∣sieur Wantesk took a crust of bread, and bid him swear by his Fetiche, and then (eating that) wish the Devil might carry him away in an hours time, if it were not true; but his Conscience being too tender, he refus'd it, and made himself so ridiculous amongst his Brethren, he never durst appear in our ship afterwards. The eight and twentieth of A∣pril, being with the Danish Gene∣ral about Supper time, the King of
Fetu's Son-in-law (called Janque Senece) arriv d, the General sus∣pected he had nimm'd away a Ring from him, but his Excellence protested the contrary, offering to swear, and to swallow his Fetiche upon the premises. I had a great mind (upon the tidings) to be present at the Ceremony; I went in, and found a Faggot of Thorns in a Basket which a Slave carried under his arm, covered over with a Skin, I made bold to uncover it, and in the middle of the Fag∣got, I saw a piece of Suet and Wax, with Parrots Feathers, little burnt bones of Pullets, Plumes of the Bird which was Fetichissi∣mo of that Countrey, and several other nastie things with them. One of their Priests was present, who told him he had made it as strong as was possible, and that if he lyed, he could not out-live it a
quarter of an hour; for all that, he took a piece of bread, and a glass of Wine, and was falling to work, but the General stopt him, and would not suffer him to drink it. I put my hand to this Fetiche, the Priest saw me, started, and bid me have a care, If I took it up, I was a dead man. I lifted it out of the basket for all that, he stept back, and cryed out to me, if you turn, or move it, the fire will fall down from Heaven, and con∣sume you: I took it and twirl d it three times on the right hand, and as many on the left: and then threw it dash against the ground, leaping upon it, and breaking it into a thousand pieces. They said I would dye in the morning, and were very much amazed to find me alive afterwards. But they re∣collected, and told me, I was not dead, because I did not believe: I
answered, They were fools, not to be as great Infidels as I? They replyed, It was impossible, their Fetiches would not suffer them: Quoth I, Who is this Fetiche? They told me, It was a great black Dog, that appeared very frequently at the foot of a great Tree. I asked them, If they had seen him? they told me, No, but their Priests and he were very great, conferr'd notes often, and they gave them a relation of their discourse. Besides the wayes of appeasing their Fetiches, which I have menti∣oned before, they have other whim∣seys as memorable: If they have not so good fortune a fishing, as they use to have, they imagine their Fe∣tiche is offended, and has driven them away. If their Trade be but dull, they are of the same opinion, believe them to be the cause, & fall to their devotions immediately.
If a poor fisherman goes out, takes little, and returns after all his patience and pains, not much rich∣er than he went, he concludes his Fetiche is disgruntled, repairs pre∣sently to his Priest, presents him with a token of his Love, and with tears in his eyes, begs of him, that he would set them to rights again; after which he marches with his Wife and Children (as neat, and as trim, as hands can make them) to the Sea side, with great branch∣es of their Fetiche Tree about their necks, which after certain cere∣monies they throw into the Sea, with Rice, Millet, and Mays, crying out a thousand times, Me cusa, Me cusa. If the King observes that Gold comes not down so plentifully as formerly, or that his traffick and duties decrease, to work he goes instantly with his Fetiche, he
prayes, he sacrifices, he treats, spreading of meat, and drink, about the Mountains and Trees that are consecrated to him, which the Mi∣nister of Frederisbourg told me he had many times seen. Having seiz'd upon two Mores on Holy-Thursday, to secure some debts we had owing us upon the shore. On Friday morning we ob∣served one of them to wash his face more than ordinary, to mutter out some words to himself, and to take water, and throw it behind him: we ask'd him for what rea∣son he did so, and he told us, it was to implore the Fetiche for rain, that Gold might be washed down from the Mountains, and the Mer∣chants inabled by that to set them at liberty. After they have sowne their Corne (of the manner of which I shall give a relation by and by)
that night they burn all the thorns they can find in the field, and then skipping, and dancing, and singing, whatever they have more than or∣dinarily precious, they throw it (with Palme-Wine) into the fire, conceiving thereby to render their Fetiche more favourable in their Harvest: By which we may see the deplorable blindness of those poor Creatures, and be excited to give God thanks, who has illuminated us with the rayes of the Gospel. The General of Frederisbourg, having notice that there was one of them dead in the Castle, gave me advertisement immediately that I might be present at the Funeral Ceremonies, a thing which the Mores will never permit, but by constraint. When any one dyes amongst them, they put the body into a Coffin made of Osiers, the barke
of Trees, or of Rushes, which in∣deed is no more than a panier, the women, the relations, friends and neighbours that are there, run up and down the house, crying, and la∣menting, and interrogating the dead person why he would leave them. If it be a woman that dyes, her daughter or some other woman, (for the men are never called to their funerals) goes from house to house complaining and making her moan, and with the gold she finds about her, or in the house, buys an Ox or a Sheep, which she gives to the Priest, to pray to the Fetiche of the dead person, to con∣duct her into a place of repose: the Priest orders this Ox, or Mutton, to be killed, and then sprinkling the blood about in honour to her Fetiche, he begs of it, that it would not interrupt her in her passage to
the other world, and that it would pardon whatever she had done amiss. Those who are present be∣ing put by him into a ring, in a corner of the Chamber, he places himself in the midst, and drest ve∣ry sprucely with Rasade, Corail, or plates of Gold, sets a great quan∣tity of Pease, Beans, Rice, Mays, and Oyle of Palmes about them, and then sprinkles them with the blood of a Pullet, which is killed, and afterwards makes a kind of a necklace of certain hearbs, which he hangs about his neck, whilst the good women cut the Pullet in∣to morsells, and present them be∣fore the Fetiche. After this the Priest having muttered out some prayers to himself, he takes water, or Palme-Wine in his mouth, and spirts it upon the most antient of the Fetiches, from which he takes a proportion of suet and grease, and
mingling it with the leaves of his coller, and other things, he stamps and bruises them altogether with his feet, till they be brought to a consistence, then making them up into a great mass, he separates again into several little pieces, which being wrapt up in the rind of a consecrated tree, he distributes to the whole company, reserving a part to be buried with the corps, to make her journey more prosperous into the other world, and these Fe∣tiches are lookt upon as the most propitious of all. This Ceremony being over, the body is expos'd about half a day, with the head bound about, and the arms extended, after which the women carry it to the place of its Sepulture (it being their Province to bury the dead) the men never stirring in that case, unless the bu∣rial be to be in some other Village,
which is frequent by reason of a custome they have of burying eve∣ry body in the Town they were born, and then they attend the Corps with their weapons in their hands; but this person I saw being buried hard by, I had the opportu∣nity of being a Spectator of the whole Ceremony. The Corps being brought to the place of its Burial, the men which inhabited there, digged a hole of about four or five foot deep, and put it in, but so, as the Earth came not near it, then turning about the Grave, they bid him adieu, with great noise and ejulation; that Wife which he had most kind∣ness for, threw his Fetiches into the hole, and at last laid a good part of his houshold∣stuff (as his Kettles and Cloaths) by his side, and his Arms a top on him: if he loved any thing more
than ordinary, as Palm-wine, or any thing else, they plac'd it by him, with Rice, Millet, Mays, and what∣ever they thought necessary for the life of man, that he might want nothing whither he was a going. Over his Grave they set up a little Shedd, to keep it from the weather, which continues there till it be rot∣ten, without being touch'd by any one. He which makes the Grave, and buries the dead body, has the liberty to take his choice of such things which they put into the Grave with the Corps, and it is lookt upon as a due, if he be not paid otherwise for his pains. If a woman dies in Travail, and the Child dies also, they are buried together, and the Infant in the arms of the Mother. These Ceremonies being finished, they return weeping and lament∣ing to their houses, where both
men and women do wash them∣selves forthwith, after which they eat the Beef or the Mutton which was bought, passing the rest of the day in feasting, and jollity, only eve∣ry year they carry meat and drink, and set it at his grave, lest he should be hungry or thirsty in the other world. Of their old Men, their Slaves, their Lame, their Servants, the Disea∣ses they are usually subject to, with their Cures, and the way to prevent them. THough there is but little love lost amongst them, and the men, and the women (unless it be their first wives) quit one ano∣ther as they please, yet they are troubled and concern'd when it happens. So great an aversion have these people against idleness, that amongst them the aged men and women are not allow'd it, but are
constrained to get their livelihood by such employments as their age and infirmities will bear, some of them being set on work either to blow the bellows in some forge, to supervise the business of the house, or some such trifling affair, which requires not much pains: the lame, and such as by any other means are rendred incapable of working, are forced to the wars, or if unable for that, they are sent to sell and barter for their Commodities at the Market, or else assist at the making of their oyl of Palm, make Mattres∣ses, or what else their strength will admit. They have not many Slaves up∣on this Coast, it not being permit∣ted to any but Nobles, to Trade in that nature by which means they are not allowed to entertain any but for their necessary service in their families or fields.
These Slaves are commonly such poor miserable Creatures, as ha∣ving not wherewithall to maintain or keep themselves alive, are glad to sell themselves to the rich Mer∣chants of that Countrey (that are all Noble-men) who to know them from others, do give them alwayes a particular mark of their own, if they endeavour to escape, for the first time they cut off one ear, and for the second the other, if they attempt it a third time, and be taken, they either sell them a∣way, or cut off their heads, as they please. The children of these poor people are Slaves as well as the Pa∣rents, and obliged to do whatever they are commanded, as watring their fish, spinning Rasade, &c. The King has several sorts of Slaves, some like these I have mentioned; others which are for∣feited to him for want of paying
their Fines, or other penalties im∣posed for some fault they have com∣mitted: and both of them sent com∣monly to be sold at the place set a∣part for the Trucking of Slaves. The Kings Slaves are distinguish∣able from other men, only by this that they have no hats, but go al∣wayes naked with their heads. The Inhabitants will not be called Mores (which is an appellation they say belongs more properly to their Slaves) but Pretos, which is as much as Negroes. They generally use their Slaves very well, seldome or never giving them any corre∣ction. Though they have not so many diseases amongst them, as we, yet they are not without their share, & those as troublesome as ours: the most frequent are the Neapolitan disease, pains in the head, burning Feavers, (which for the most part
are occasion'd by their women) the Chollick, and worms which grow betwixt the flesh and the skin, to which strangers also being subject, I shall speak a word or two anon. For the Neapolitan disease (which is not infamous amongst them) they use only Salseparilla, which they boyl in a Skillet to such a height, and then straining it, they use it as a diet-drink, and (as they say them∣selves) with very great success. Their pains in their head they cure by fomentations made of cer∣tain herbs which they lay upon the Patients face, and it takes the pain away immediately. Sometimes they raise little blisters upon it, which then applying to them a certain kind of Earth, they have amongst them, it asswages and cures them also. The Chollick, and Wind in the Stomach, is not over frequent
amongst the Natives, but all Stran∣gers are much subject to them, till they be accustomed to the air of that Countrey. To prevent and fortifie ones self against them, it is good to bind a∣bout the Stomach very hard, to keep ones self warm in the night with a Waste-coat, or some other thing, and if notwithstanding all this, it be not prevented, it is not a∣miss to take 4 or 5 drops of balm of Sulphur in a little Strong-water, cover ones self well, and sweat, the next day let blood, then purge two dayes after, and 'tis odds but he will be well. 'Tis very dangerous sleep∣ing upon the ground, in three days many times they are dead of an in∣curable cold. Sometimes they bath them with Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Pel∣litory of the Wall, Powder of Cassia, each half an ounce, then
they boyl it upon the fire to a cer∣tain degree, and put ten or twelve drops of Oyl of Anniseeds amongst it, which makes it sovereign; but the best way of all is to keep the Stomack warm, and have a great care of sleeping upon the ground. As to the worms which grow betwixt the skin and the flesh, Fo∣reigners are as much subject to them, as they: they breed over all the body, but principally in the thighs, legs, and most fleshy parts. Sometimes they have them two years together, and never perceive it till about a fortnight before they come out. By the report of those who have had them, there is no torment like them, & it exceeds the most violent pain in the teeth. There has been great inquisiti∣on into the cause of it, some attri∣bute it to their Palm-wine, others to the Fish which is eaten upon
that Coast, others to their Water, every one arguing according to his fancy, but all of them wide of the Mark; for those Mores who live but forty leagues up higher into the Countrey, know nothing of it at all, nor are in any danger of the Evening dew. The most probable cause is the dew which falls in the Evening upon the Coast, occasioned by the Breezes from the Sea, which be∣ing very cold, the Mores do con∣stantly make fires at their feet when they go to sleep, and indeed nothing is of more importance to ones health, than to keep off the chilness of that Air, and to pre∣serve ones self as warm as one can. The ill water they drink, toge∣ther with the nastiness of their diet, may add something, but 'tis the nipping Winds and Rains which fall upon the Coast, and
makes those parts so subject to worms: in June, July, and August, (which are the most rainy months amongst them) experience tells us, those worms are most apt to engen∣der. In short, every drop of their Rain is bigger than a large Pea: if in a shower of that nature, one be wet never so little, and lets his clothes dry upon his back, besides that in three dayes his clothes shall be rotten, if he has no worms, he shall be sure of a distemper that will be very dangerous. We may affirm therefore 'tis the rain, as well as the dew, which produces these worms, how, or which way, I leave to the Phi∣losopher, and Physician to resolve; but this I am sure, having many times put out a bit of flesh in the rain, or in the evening dew, I found as soon as the beams of the Sun glanced but upon it, it turned
all into Worms, which experi∣ment I made very often, & am con∣vinced by it, that they come but those two ways, either by the rain or the dew. Of those Worms which grow in the body, there are two sorts, one lesser, the other greater, and some of them as slender as a hair; the least are half a foot long, the larger a foot, and some there are of an ell, but very rarely. When you are once plagued with them, there is nothing to be done till they are out, which is evident by the tumours they raise in the flesh, and the swelling of the part where they lie. There is nothing like keeping ones bed, and opening the corner of the skin gently with a knife to give them free passage, if they perceive them advancing, they may hasten their journey, and pull them out by little and little, if they find any
stop or reluctance in the Worm, they must let them alone (lest they break them) and tye a hair or piece of silk about them, to keep them from going back: sometimes seve∣ral of them will come out at one hole, but they must have patience, for their motion is but slow: above all things they must have a care of breaking them, for they are of so venemous a quality, there is no way to preserve the person against its virulence, but by cutting off the part. When they are out, they usu∣ally rub the place with butter and salt, and wash it with Sea-water, which in that case is soveraign. Their best way to secure them∣selves against them, is to put file-dust into their breeches and shooes to keep their feet dry, and if at any time they be wet, to change their clothes and their drawers immediately, by no means to sleep
upon the ground, to have a care of the Seraine or evenings dew, to bind themselves up close, and keep their stomachs warm, to abstein from Women, to use confection of Hyacinth, Alkermes, or Clarie, to keep ones self clean, avoid the raine, which the Mores are as feard of as the Plague, shutting up themselves as soon as it begins but to mizzle; if one be wett, to dry his cloths, and by these observati∣ons they may be probably prevent∣ed. I saw a person of quality who had been there 17 years, who told me he had never been troubled with them but the first year, and that was for want of these cautions. But to continue these stories of death and diseases, is but to make the Reader chagrin and melancho∣ly; it is time now I should to some∣thing of more pleasure and diver∣tisement.
Of their Dances, and Feasts, both private and solemn. THe Inhabitants of the Coasts of Africk, are great lovers of Musick, and songs, but espe∣cially of dancing, in which they spend two or three hours every evening before they go to bed: to this purpose the men and women both, dress themselves as fine as they can, putting on their bracelets of Gold and Ivory, and trimming up their hair; the men carry little fanns in their hands, made of the tayls of Elephants, or Horses, (like the boasom of feathers wherewith pictures are dusted, saving that these are gilt at both ends) and meet all at a place about Sun-set; Being come together, those who make the Musick, draw into a cor∣ner by themselves, their Instru∣ments
are a kind of Drum, or Ta∣bor, made of the trunck of a Tree, hollowed: A Cane with several holes in it, like a flute, a Tambour de Basque, and an instrument some∣thing near our Guitars, with six strings; all which playing toge∣ther, make no contemptible har∣monie. As soon as they strike up, the men and women divide imme∣diately, and putting themselves (two and two) directly against one another, they begin their dance, marching up to one another, and then recoyling in good measure, clacking their fingers, as they pass nodding their heads, whispering certain words into one anothers ears, tossing about their fanns, with a thousand postures and gesticula∣tions, and in this manner spending the evenings till they go to bed: this dance is not much unlike one of our Filoux in France; some of
their women and maids will take a hoop and throw it upon the ground, then skip, and dance about it, and at last take it up with their toes. In short, dancing is in so great request amongst them, they have Schools on purpose to teach them. Besides Sundays, they have par∣ticular Festivals, and particular dances belonging to them; for the dayes which are observed by their Kings, I shall speak of in a Chap∣ter by themselves. On the 26 of April being at Frederisbourg, I saw one of these Feasts, which are commonly in∣stituted in memory of some advan∣tage befaln the State: This that I was at, was celebrated by the King of Fetu's Son-in-Law, who had gain'd a great battel against the King of Acanis, and the Lord of Abrambou, on the same day the
year before, in which ingagement as the General of Frederisbourg told me, there were slain on both sides above 5000 men. The Festival be∣gan at Cape-Corse, where the Son-in-Law lived, who made a great Feast, distributed largely to all that were there, who troubled them∣selves that day with nought but their sports, and at night came to finish their ceremony at the Castle of Frederisbourg; we were just set∣ting down to the Table, when on a sudden we heard a great noise of showts and acclamations, and im∣mediately their Drums and their Trumpets strike up. Their Trum∣pets are of Elephants teeth made hollow: we perceived presently it was the Kings Son-in-Law, with his Drum before him, 15 or 20 Trumpets, about 12 of his Wives, and about 60 Slaves after him, two of which attended him with great
Bucklers, carried on purpose to co∣ver him, and two others with his, Darts, his Bow, and his Arrows. The Women were drest in Da∣mask and Taffaties, which they wrapt about them from their breasts to their mid-legg, wearing several Fetiches upon their heads, several little plates of gold in bracelets, a∣bout their wrists and ankles, or else of Rasade or Ivory, their hair very well drest, according to the mode of that Countrey: the Kings Son in-Law had a piece of blew Taffaty about his wast, whose two ends were drawn betwixt his leggs, and trail'd almost upon the ground. Be∣fore him he had a little faulchion carried, he had a Cap trim'd with pieces of the skulls of such persons as he had killed, and covered all o∣ver with plumes of feathers: on his arms and his leggs, he had seve∣ral little pieces of gold excellently
well wrought, and two little fanns in his hands made of horse-hair; When they were received into the Court, after a hundred shouts and acclamations, the men put them∣selves on one side, the women on the other, and the Slaves, Trum∣pets, and Drums behind him, who sounded as they pass'd, and made all the noise and clamour was pos∣sible; having separated themselves, they began their approaching, and retiring with great exactness, tur∣ning themselves this way and that way about half a quarter of an hour: after this he gave his 2 fanns to one of his Slaves, and taking his Dart in his hand, he pretended to dart it at the women, who were do∣ing the same thing on their side; but the Slaves got about him, and cover'd him quite with their buck∣lers: this having lasted a pritty while, on a sudden he claps his
hand upon his sword, and run a tilt at the women, who did the same to him with sticks they had in their hands for that purpose, and then mingling themselves pell-mell with the Slaves (who had swords also in their hands, and made as if they struck them as hard as they could) they gave a great yell, divided again, and so made an end of their Ceremony. The General treated them very kindly with Strong waters and o∣ther things, and whisper'd to me, that their manner of fighting was at that rate; in short, this Son-in-Law of his Majesty was not quit of this sopperie at less charge than 500 Marks of Gold, from thence he went to the Governour of the Mores in Frederisbourg, to pass that night with him, and as we heard, he stay'd very graciously with him till the next day at noon.
Of their Exercises, their Workmen, their Trades, their Merchandises, their Fishing, which way it is used and the Duty they pay to their King. AS they have several Trades and imployments amongst them, so are they very constantly imploy'd, especially if there be no Ships upon their Coasts to divert them. They have Goldsmiths which work very curiously, they have Carpenters that make their Canoes, they have people that Fish, they have others that cut down their wood, the women in the mean time keeping their Markets, and selling their Commodities to Merchants which come higher out of the Countrey. Those who come aboard to ne∣gotiate with us are commonly Offi∣cers, or Captains of some Town,
who are all of them Merchants: their manner of coming aboard us, is in a little Canoe, very neatly made, rowed by two Mores, the Merchant in the middle upon a little chair, with his sword lying by him. Being of several places, they have a different way of Trading, those who live farther up the Countrey, and are neither acquainted with the language, nor manner of Com∣merce, which is practis'd by the Whites, are constrain'd to make use of a sort of Brokers to negotiate for them, and do usually give them good recompence for their pains; this is an advantage accrews parti∣cularly to such as live near the Sea-side, and (so generally are they de∣voted to their profit) the greatest Merchants amongst them will not refuse the imployment, if there be the least prospect and expectation of gain.
Most commonly, it is those who live upon the Coasts, or within 10 leagues distance of the Sea, that buy up the Commodities which are brought in by such Ships as come into their Roads, and sell them af∣terwards when the Ships are gone, to the Inlanders, seldome for less profit than six per Cent. Having been deceived sometimes formerly, they are now grown so subtil and wary, there is no cheat∣ing them any more; it is our busi∣ness now rather to be upon our guards, lest they be too cunning for us. They have so great judgment & insight into Merchandise, they will distinguish whether a piece of Saye be dyed at Leyden or Harlem. When their bargains are made, and their business done, they fall a begging and bawling for some pre∣sent or other (which they call Da∣che) and will never be satisfyed
without it. The Hollanders brought up this Custom at first, to cajole, and work them off from the Portu∣gais: But what they did volunta∣rily then, is become now such a Custome, that some of the Mores are so confident, as to demand what present they shall have, be∣fore they will admit any proposi∣tion of Traffick. They have one pretty odd kind of superstition amongst them, if a Merchant sneezes as he comes out of his house, and turns his head by accident, towards the right hand, (which they call Eninfan) they believe they shall run a great hazard of losing their goods that day. If he turns it to the left (which they call Abnicon) though they were sure to gain the profits of a Kingdom, they would not stir out that day from their houses. When they return from our Ship
they have alwayes store of boys, & young fellows attending upon the shore, to carry the Commodities they have bought to their houses, for which the Merchant gives them some little pieces of gold as a reward. Those who live higher up the Countrey have all their Com∣modities brought down upon the backs of their Slaves, making no use of horse, or any other Creature in that business, which is no small inconvenience to a Merchant that comes a hundred leagues to us cross the Countrey, and forces them to travel with their Arms. Fishing being their principal im∣ployment, every morning there are twenty or thirty Canoes to be seen sailing out of their harbours, & di∣viding themselves instantly into all quarters when they come out to Sea. In each of them they have com∣monly two men, one to fish, & the
other to manage the Canoe, and by them they have their swords and their Victuals. Their Canoes are ve∣ry neat and beautiful, painted and adorned with all possible care; they fasten Fetiches to them, to pre∣serve them from storms & disasters, and when they have done fishing, they draw them up under a place on purpose to keep them dry. They are so light, two men will carry one of them as they please. In this manner they go a fishing every morning, yet not so much by design, as by natural impulse, the wind from the hills forcing them as it were to Sea, and altering at night, and blowing hard upon the shore, they are brought home again by the same necessity and violence: and this they do constantly every day but Sunday, never failing when the weather will endure it. The most general way of fish∣ing,
is with little hooks, of which they fasten twenty (sometimes) to one line; others make use of lines with a kind of slipping nooses, but this is as rarely at Sea, as it is ordinary in their Rivers, and Lakes within Land. They are much delighted with fishing in the night, which they do by the light of Torches greas'd over with Oyl of Palm, or Rosen, hooking the fish up as they come near them. Others go up to the bellies into the Sea, with a lighted Torch in one hand, and a Net in the other, which they throw over them with great dexterity: and from hence we may collect how industrious they are, neglecting no time, nor labour to get themselves a lively∣hood. At their return, they are attended by several boyes, who are alwaies waiting in the harbour to help them home with their fish,
and to make up their Lines and their Nets for them, for which pains, they usually gratifie them with some little present of fish. But the Fisherman and Merchant are no sooner return'd, but the Re∣ceiver of the Office (in which the Duties and Customs are paid; for the King in whose Dominion that Port is) stands ready alwaies to receive them, and to carry with him a full third of whatever they bring on shore) to bring the Mer∣chant to a higher composition, for there being no fix'd prices set, it is the Merchants business to get off as cheap, and the Receivers to hoist him as high as he can: besides these duties, the foreign Merchants which are not of that Kingdom, are oblig d sometimes to give a Mark of gold more for a free pas∣sage through the territories of the neighbouring Princes.
But those who live upon the Sea-side, are exempted from any tribute in this nature, provided the worth of their Merchandise exceeds not two ounces of gold at one time, if it does, they pay as other people. The duty upon their fish is paid punctually to the Receiver every day, who as punctually sends it every day to the King; not one Fisherman daring under a great penalty, to sell one morsell till it be paid, this tribute being design∣ed to the sustenance of his Royal Family; for which reason, what∣ever fish is taken, is brought im∣mediately to the Office, where the Receiver has a great measure about the bigness of a Peck, which he fills and delivers frankly to the Fisherman; that done, he mea∣sures the rest, and reserves a fifth part for the King, which is sent away presently by the Slaves for
the use of the house. These Recei∣vers are for the most part, the Sons, Brothers, or near Relations of their Kings. Of the Kings of those Countreys, their Courts, Authority, and manner of living with their Courtiers, of their Wives and Children, of the Successi∣on of their Kingdoms, their Reve∣nues, Feasts, Deaths, Burials, and Elections of another King. THe Kings being the chief heads of so many people, I ought in justice to have given them the precedence, and have spoken of them in the first Chapter; but ha∣ving never seen them my self, and what I write is but from the report of such as have lived there six or seven year, I have thought it best to put this, and the three sub∣sequent Chapters by themselves, having been an eye-witness of
what I have writ before, & what I shall write hereafter of the Fruits & Productions of that Countrey: But these Chapters I took out of the Memoires of the General, & Mini∣ster of Frederisbourg, who are in the Kingdome of Fetu: & as their man∣ners and customs all along those Coasts are every where the same, speaking of one, I shall give suffici∣ent prospect, and information of them all. The King of Fetu as they repre∣sented him to me, is no unhandsome man, he is a great lover of the Whites, & has exprest it upon se∣veral occasions; he is about five & forty, or fifty years old, Majestick, requires honour and respect, rich, and very liberal, he has come many times to visit the Governour of Fre∣derisbourg, & made him several pre∣sents: Liberality is very ordinary in these parts, and used, to inveigle the
people, and oblige them to parties: He keeps a great Court, passing a∣way the time in drinking & laugh∣ing in a great Hall in the middle of his Palace; about Sun-set he sets himself down at the Gate, drest ve∣ry sine, with his bracelets and neck∣laces of Gold, & clad in the richest habits can be bought for money; in this manner, if he be at peace, he passes away his time with his La∣dies, whose principal business is to wash and keep him neat against night, at which time he has dan∣cing constantly and balls. His subjects have all of them a great veneration for him, & are in much aw and apprehension of his displeasure, by reason that whoever amongst them has but once dis∣obey'd their King, he is ipso facto by the Laws of that Kingdome; made incapable of any publick of∣fice. His authority is so absolute,
he does what he pleases, and no body dares to controul him. He has alwayes a great number of Slaves and Souldiers guarding his Palace, which is very large, and neat, and incomparably much handsomer than a house he has near the Sea-side: it consists of a∣bove two hundred chambers, and is built in the midst of a Town, with large Courts round about it; when he goes abroad, he is always attended and carried upon the shoulders of his Slaves, all people endeavouring to please him where∣ever he comes. To gain the affections of his Courtiers, and the Grandees of his Countrey, above all things it is necessary he be Noble, for they hate avarice, and look upon it as ignominious in a great person, on whom all people do depend, to be too parsimoniously intent upon
hoording up Gold; Yet this libera∣lity that is look'd for, consists only in treatings & banquets, which he makes very often for them, & if the Whites at any time make him a present, he distributes it amongst them, if it be of Strong-waters, he drinks it merrily amongst them, preferring their company, in that case, to his Wives and Children, to whom notwithstanding he al∣lows a proportion. He has as many Wives as he plea∣ses, who are all disposed into several appartements, with whom he dines or sups sometimes as he thinks good, but very seldom, when they go abroad, they are carried likewise on the shoulders of their Slaves: they are abundantly proud, and im∣ploy their whole time in diverting and indulging the King; some of them are admitted into his compa∣ny after dinner in the great Hall,
and are very happy if they may but wash and dress him in the morning, they having servants enough to dis∣patch what else is to be done in the house: when they have spruc'd him up, they fall to work upon them∣selves, combing, and curling their hair in several postures: their cloaths are very rich alwaies, and loaden sometimes with such abun∣dance of Gold, it is a wonder which way they can bear them. Whilst their Father lives, their Children are brought up at the charge of the publick when they go abroad out of the Palace, they are carried by their Slaves likewise, and have alwayes their Trumpets, and one Drum: by which formali∣ties they are distinguished from o∣ther people, and as they pass, re∣ceie great honour and respect. The succession of the Kingdom goes not to the Children, is it does
in Europe, but devolves upon him that is next of Kin to his Majesty, that the Crown may be sure never to go out of the Royal Family: for this reason the Kings Children make hay whilst the Sun shines, & lay up what they can whilst their Father is alive: they work and take pains too as well as the rest, having no other advantage but ex∣emption from tribute, living al∣wayes with their Father: whilst he lives himself, they have opportu∣nity of getting & laying up against an evil day. If they marry, the Fa∣ther gives them only the quality of Nobles, not but he would wil∣lingly do more, but dares not: the greatest priviledge they have, is to keep Slaves, but the King disposes of all as he pleases. The principal Offices of the Kingdome are re∣serv'd for them, as well as the chief Commands in the Armies in
times of war: In time of peace they are sent frequently as hostages to other Princes, to secure their Leagues, and to inform themselves of their manner of Government: If they be brave men, and generous, they are respected when their Fa∣ther is march'd off, but if covetous and base, on the contrary they are abandon'd by their Relations, and contemptible to every body else; they will oftentimes complain that their Father durst not do any thing indirectly to inrich them, that they are poor, and indigent, and yet have vast treasures conceal'd. The Revenue of the King con∣sists in Fruit, Fish, Wine, Oyl of Palm, Millet, Rice, Mays, Flesh, and whatever else is necessary to the life of man; all which are brought in daily to his Palace, that he may have no cares upon him, nor no room left for any thing but diver∣sion.
The Revenue of the Estate arises from the Customs and Fines which are adjudg'd to him in Civil and Criminal cases, which the Receiv∣ers deliver every 3 months to his Treasurer, who makes the whole disbursement, both for matters of State, for the expence of his Court, for the payment of the Souldiers in time of war, for his privy purse, buys all the Cloths for the King, his Wives, and his Children, upon which score, he never stirs from him, accompanies him where ever he goes, and has an appartment in his Palace; this Office of Trea∣surer, is the best Office in the King∣dome, and the Treasurer is in more repute amongst all people, then any child of the Kings. Besides Sundays (which the King passes ordinarily after his devotions are ended amongst his Wives and his Children) he observes several
Festival days, in which he buys up all the Palm-wine, and Fowl, the Peasants bring that day, and regales the Treasurer, his Courtiers, & No∣bles of the Countrey, in the compa∣ny of his Wives and his Children. The first and chief Feast which he observes, is on the day of his Coronation annually, which they call the Feast of Fetiches: on that day he invites not only all his No∣bles, but his neighbouring Princes, and whatever Whites are upon his Coasts, who send him presents at that time, and are present them∣selves if they have any designs upon his friendship: if they come upon the invitation, he receives them ve∣ry well, feasting them for three dayes together, and entertaining with Balls and Dances, and what∣ever may contribute to their re∣creations; to which they do wholly devote themselves; after
they have past their devotions, (which are finished to their Feti∣ches usually in a morning) and af∣ter they have left them meat and drink at the foot of some Moun∣tain or Tree, to refresh themselves if they happen to be hungry. The other Feasts which they observe, are ordinarily in memory of some eminent accident for the honour, or advantage of the State, as upon some memorable victory, or so, in which cases the Europeans are commonly invited, and must come too, if they mean to keep up a good correspondence with them. These Festivals consist in Collati∣ons, Banquets, Dances, and Songs, by all which the liberality of that Prince is very conspicuous, but es∣pecially by his Feasts. When their King dies, they express their sorrow by their complaints, their dole∣ful Songs, and horrible outcries;
after the aforementioned Ceremo∣nies are over, he is exposed for some days, and in the mean time, his meat and drink served up to him, as duely as he were alive. When his body begins to smell, 2 or 4 of his Slaves take him, and carry him into the Woods, where they bury him as they please, no person yet having ever known where their King was buried: if any of their Wives follow him, the Slaves kill them, and bury them together, throwing in their Feti∣ches after them, and then his Arms, Sword, Darts, Bows and Arrows, Cloths, Housholdstuff, & whatever he delighted in when he was alive: by his side they place good store of Palm-Wine, Rice, and such other necessary sustenance, and when they have done, they present themselves very demurely before the Palace to be killed, believing they shall be
cocksure of the best places about their King in the other world. Whilst the Slaves are imploy'd in the interrement of the King, the Inhabitants of the Town, run up & down like mad, cutting the throats of man, woman, child, and slaves, to make his equipage as they call it, and attend his Majesty into the o∣ther world, insomuch, that if he be a great Prince, they kill 4 or 5 hun∣dred persons sometimes at the day of his funeral. If he loved any place better than ordinary, they set up a Tombe for him there, where his Successor commands all things ne∣cessary to be plac'd once every year, left he should want any thing in the world where he is gone. When their Funerals are over, the next Kinsman is advanced to the Throne, and then conducted with great acclamation to his Pa∣lace (which is lock'd up & a Guard
set upon it from the death of the former) their next business is to give him possession of all the Trea∣sure his Predecessor had scrap'd up, whose children cannot pretend to any part of it, or of any thing else, unless it be something their Father was possess'd of before his advancement to the Crown. But this is true, the new King gives something considerable alwayes to the Children, and takes care of his Wives, who are matches for the best Noble-men in the Countrey. Yet their condition sometimes is so miserable, that if they have not been good husbands, and lay'd up something for themselves, they be∣come so abject and contemptible, they are forc'd to make themselves Slaves for subsistence, and to live in perpetual infamy, to avoid dy∣ing with hunger. This done, the new King makes a
Banquet for all comers, and a Feast, which continues 4 or 5 days, during which time he treats all people, the Whites, the Kings his Neighbours, & his Nobles, who all of them send him their presents. He takes new Fetiches that day, and prays to them afterwards, renewing this Feast every year, as I have said before. Sometimes he changes his Offi∣cers, and puts in his relations, and friends, but 'tis but seldome, for if they be old that were in before, he lets them dye in their places, not out of any affection to them, but to oblige and captivate the people by such examples of bounty, to whom he gives great largesses that day likewise, & then calling his Wives and his Children to Court, they be∣gin to take State upon them, to leave off beating the Hoof, and to be carried in great Pomp upon the shoulders of their Slaves.
Of their Nobles, the manner of their making of War, the grounds upon which they do usually make it, their Arms: of their Cessations and Peace. SO much are the Mores in love with the title of Nobles, they will not baulk any thing can possi∣bly advance them to it, of which there are several sorts amongst them notwithstanding: This honour is acquired two ways, either by some great and honorable Exploit for the benefit of the State, or else by his money: for if a common More finds himself rich enough; he must be ennobled immediately, though it drains him never so dry. The day he is ennobled, he in∣vites all his friends, and all the No∣bility of the Country that are then in the Town. In the presence of the King and his Lieutenant, his Slaves
take him up upon their backs, car∣rying him a pick-pack round about the City; the good women dancing, and singing, and jumping before him all day till Supper comes up and stops their recreations. This Feast holds three dayes, at the end of which he gives an Oxe to the poor, and a proportion of Palm-wine. He takes new Feti∣ches too that day, and observes it annually with his kindred and friends. 'Tis reported also, that the Nobility have a certain day in which they all meet and feast eve∣ry year amongst themselves. The Priviledges which they en∣joy above other people, are these, they can Trade in every place as they please, they can sell and buy slaves, they may have their drums and their trumpets, and make them play as they think good; but those who are advanc'd for any noble
atchievment, have this prehemi∣nence, that they have alwayes the principal charges and commands in the Army. These Kings being perpetually emulous, and jealous of one another to the highest degree, do common∣ly declare warr upon the slightest occasion; so that upon the least ap∣prehension of injury, the King calls his Courtiers together, tells them his disgust, requires their assistance, and they in hopes of booty and plunder conclude upon a warr. An Herald is immediately dispatch'd to the Enemy, and a time and place appointed for the battel; his Sub∣jects are advertis'd of the quarrel by his Guards, and a place set for the Randezvouz; there is an uni∣versal appearance of joy, every one prepares against that day, as cheer∣fully, as it were to be his wedding; they paint and adorn themselves
with variety of colours, and from that instant conceive a mortal and implacable hatred against their Enemies: if the injury be great, and the warr likely to be long, they take their Wives and Children with them into the field, burning their houses, lest it should be their misfortune to be beaten, and they become a prey to the Foe: if the quarrel be but small, they send them to the next Town where there is peace, to attend their success. They meet precisely at the day and place, the Captains with Cas∣ques upon their heads, some of them made of the Skulls of such people as they have kill'd in the preceedent wars, others of the Skins of Lyons or Crocodiles, with plumes of feathers upon them if they have any: on their left arm they carry a large Buckler made of the Skin of a Tygre or Oxe, with a Dart in
thei right hand; they have no de∣fensive armes, nor any thing at all upon their bodies, but a peice of linnen before, that they may be the more active and agile when they come to be ingaged; before them they have their swords carryed, be∣hind and of each side, their Slaves with their Bows and Arrows. The common Souldiers are armed with a kind of Battle-axe and Swords, and having of late by their Commerce with the Eu opeans some of them got Musquets, they are look'd upon as rave fellows, & plac'd in the Front. Being come near one another, they give a great shout, and fall on, they threw their Darts immedi∣ately, shoot Arrows without num∣ber, covering themselves with their Bucklers against the blows of their Enemies; when they once come to the Sword, they are Devils and not men, the very Women and
Children kill and slay, and adding their cries to the noise of the Trum∣pets and Drums (which are play∣ing incessantly) they increase the fury in their Parents, and excite them to more inhumanity. The slaughter continues till one side be defeated, but when they see the victory clear, they give quarter then, and fall a taking of Prisoners, which are made Slaves out of hand, and can never be ransom'd upon a∣ny terms whatsoever. When the battle is over, some of them (as an expression of their hatred to their Enemies, and devo∣tion to their Prince) will eat the bo∣dies of those they have kill'd, but all of them cut off their under Jaws, and hang them afterwards before their doors as a mark of honour, which is the 11 step as it were of re∣commending them to the Nobility. As their wars are commenced
upon frivolous occasions, so they are like a wisp of straw, no sooner kind∣led, but extinguished. Sometimes they last longer indeed than others, but seldome any considerable time. If after a lusty ingagement, they be any better inclin'd, they agree up∣on a place, where they meet exact∣ly, bring their Fetiches along with them, upon which they swear so∣lemnly on both sides, to do no hurt for the future, to retain no malice, nor to remember their past hostili∣tie, and for their further securitie, hostages are delivered, which are commonly the Sons of the Kings, or (if they have none) the princi∣pal Persons of the Countrey. The rest of the day is spent by both par∣ties, in mirth, singing, dauncing, & making good cheer, after which, Trading revives betwixt them, and they live as lovingly, as if they had never had warrs.
Whilst we were in that Coun∣try, there was a very fierce War brake out upon this occasion: Abrambou is a Seigneury which has six Towns under it, independant of any of their Kings, and holding of no body but the Emperour of Achim or Acanis Grand. The Pre∣decessor of him that possess'd it then, who was dead about 4 years before, would needs put a duty up∣on the Merchants of Acanis the less, and all such as past through his Dominions, nor was there any of the Neighbouring Kings durst ex∣postulate the business, so great was his courage and power. After his death, the Merchants of Acanis demanded restitution of such goods as had been taken a∣way by violence before, and were in possession of the present Prince, but they were refused, whereup∣on those of Acanis declared warr
against him: the King of Fetu's Son being by accident at Acanis, inga∣ged generously with the Town, and was slain in the first battail. His Father having no more Sons, and resenting the loss of him, the more because he was so extraordi∣narily hopeful, joyned himself with the Town of Acanis, against the Lord of Abrambou, and ingaged all his allyes in the quarrel also, in so-much as the war continued above four years, had destroyed more then 60000 men, and put a stop to all Commerce and Trade; The Ge∣nerals of the English, Danes, and Hollanders, used all possible means to accommodate the difference, but in vain; and in memory of a Battail gained by the King of Fetu in this war, was the great Feast at Frederisbourg I have spoken of before. There was a quarrel also betwixt the Kings of Fantin,
and Sabou, about a Noble man of Fantin who had been in love with a Lady of Sabou, and stolen her away: the difference not be∣ing to be composed in an amica∣ble way, both Kings having ta∣ken cognizance of it, they were so highly incensed, they sell to war immediately, endeavouring to have surprized one another as I have mentioned before, for they doe not always come to a pich'd field, but sometimes endeavour to destroy one another by surprizes and in-Roads, by burning, pil∣laging of their Towns, and taking all prisoners they meet. The Danish General told me, that sometimes a Gentleman (if he were wealthy and rich) would be able to make war against his King, so strangely are the Mores additl to gain, and indeed it is no won∣der having so little affection
or kindness for one another, they will scarce give a wounded man a drop of water to save his life, but will see one another die like doggs without any relief, and for the most part the first that forsake them are their Wives and their Chil∣dren. At Frederisbourg we saw a poor creature abandoned by all people, and the Mores admiring how we durst come near him: but his in∣firmity being only an oppression in his Stomach, our Chyrurgeon cu∣red him with ease; we saw him afterwards merry and drinking with his Camerades, who used him then with a thousand caresses, though but eight dayes before his Wife and children had deserted him, as not knowing his malady.
Of their Civil and their Criminal Justice, and of the Successions of particular men. AMongst these bruitish and barbarous Nations, Justice has its place, and all crimes are pu∣nishable, though not capitally, but upon great offences. To begin with their criminal Justice, he which is accused of adultery, or fellony, is immediately cited by the Judge, who having heard what he could say, and found his defence to be impertinent, sets a fine upon him out of hand, which he is obliged to pay down into the hands of the Receiver of the Customs. If he be not able to pay it, he is sold as a Slave, and can never redeem him∣self afterwards. If the criminal be escaped, his Kindred are to pay it, unless they will choose to leave the Kingdome rather, and
that without hopes of ever coming into it again. If the accusation be for adultery, (that is to say with the first wife of another Man) the Hus∣band has power to divorce himself from her, but he cannot make her a Slave. If it be matter of homicide, fratri∣cide, or disobedience to his Majesties Orders, they are carryed before the King as crimes extraordinary: and if the thing be not very soule in∣deed, he condemnes them only in a sum of Money, one half to be pay'd to his Courtiers who are present at the Tryal (which is always in pub∣lique) and the other to be pay'd in∣to the Kings Treasury. If the Offend∣er be judged to dye, he is led out of the Town blindfolded, and at the place of execution, run thorow with a Javelin, his head cut off and hung upon a Tree, and the rest of his bo∣dy cut in mammocks and thrown into the aire.
If one be accused in any Civil, or Criminal case, and he desires to purge himself by oath, in drink∣ing, or eating his Fetiche, he is permitted, and if he be found dead the next morning, the informer goes to pot in his place, and pays a good round sum as a penalty to the King: But if there be several witnesses which depose against the Criminal, in that case he is not al∣lowed to swear. They hate adultery mortally, if committed with the first Wives, for which reason, they punish that as severely as any other Crime, and so it happens sometimes, that out of the malice they doe naturally  to one another, the Father accuses the Son, and the Son the Father: If an Offender escapes, and is taken a∣gain, he has a large fine set upon his head, and is made a Slave into the Bargain, without all hopes of re∣demption.
In their civil affairs, whether for debt or any thing else, they are ci∣ted before the Judge of that place; which I saw my self in the person of one called Pitre at Frederisbourg; being come before the Judge, the Plaintiff spake first, the Defendant answered, & after they had pleaded what they could on both sides, the Judge pronounced sentence imme∣diately, which is so peremptory and Authentick, there lyes no appeal against it in any other place, but 'tis executed forthwith. Sometimes the business is so dif∣ficult, the Judge will not undertake to determine it, but transferrs it to the King, in which cases their an∣ger and indignation is many times so increast, that of civil Offenders, they become criminals, and chal∣lenging one another, they come into the field with three or four seconds on a side, and a resolution
to decide it by the Sword: If one be killed upon the place, the other is obliged to run out of the King∣dom: If he be taken, he is brought before the King, who sets a good lusty Fine upon him, upon the pay∣ment of which he is discharged: This act of grace has such an in∣fluence, and authority upon the people, no body dares asperse him in the least with what is past, no not so much as the Widow nor Children of him that is slain, to whom, by the Justice of the Coun∣try, a moiety of the Fine does na∣turally belong: if he has not where∣withall to pay his Fine, he is made a Slave, and delivered up to them to be sold into foreign Countries, after which he is never to appear in his own again. There was one Jean Classe Go∣vernour of Acanis, who came a∣board us every day, he told us,
that having fought a duel upon oc∣casion of a civil affair, and killed his adversary, he had a Fine set upon him of an hundred and se∣venty Marks of Gold, and pay'd it every penny to the King. The Judges are ordinarily the Captains of the Towns, that the King may have no more Officers to pay than are necessary, & that more advantage might accrew to his Treasury, by the Feasts and Pre∣sents they are oblig'd to make him. For their inheritances (which amongst us make the greatest part of our suits) they have no contro∣versie at all, the next kinsman inhe∣riting always amongst them, to the exclusion of Wife and Children, who have nothing left them, and are sometimes constrain'd to serve for their living, though their Hus∣band & Father died never so rich; for which reason, the good man u∣ses
them to work betimes, that when he comes to dye, it may be no news to them, but that subsisting by their labour, they need not be for∣ced to turn Slaves for a livelyhood. Of their Beasts, their Birds, and their Fish. IN these Countries there are but few Elephants to be seen, but great store of Lions, Tygres, Leo∣pards, Panthers, and other beasts of prey: they afford likewise multi∣tudes of Oxen, Cows, Hogs, Goats, Sheep, Stags, Roe-bucks, Wild-boars, Deer, & ares, & other beasts which are very good meat, besides Civet-Cats, & Apes of several kinds They have Dragons also, and a sort of great Lizards which are good to eat; they have Serpents of unmeasurable bigness, as also Crocodils, and Cameleons; these
last are about the bigness of our green Lizards in France, and do not change their colour, as is imagined, but having their skins firm and sca∣ly like glass, they represent variety of colours according to the diffe∣rent reflections upon them, which is the ground of that errour. Their wild Fowl, and Birds of prey, are Eagles, of which they have several kinds, but one espe∣cially, and which is to be found only in the Kingdom of Acara; it has the feathers of a Peacock, the leggs of a Stork, the Beak of a Heron, and a Crown of feathers upon the head. The Commissi∣oner at Acara sent a live one to Frederisbourg, and another dead, which was very good meat, but the live one was sent to the King of Denmark; From hence it is our gray Parrots, with red tayls and wings are brought, which
are observed to speak sooner than from any other place: their Para∣quittes are very beautiful to the eye, they have their bodies and their heads green, and as small as Linnets, their beak and feet like Parrots, edg'd with a kind of red∣ish Orange colour, like our gold∣finch, their musick is not very plea∣sant, but some say they learn to speak well enough: they have a thousand sorts of little birds of all colours, black, red, yellow, green, and mixt, which they take com∣monly with nets. Their Fowl for the Table are Hens, Pigeons, Pintades Geese, Duck and Mallard, Phesants and Partridge, but smaller than ours, Peacocks, Feldisars, Cranes, Ring∣doves, Turtles, and Beet in great multitudes; in short, they may be said to abound with all sorts of Birds which are visible amongst us,
unless it be Larks, of which sort I could never see any. Having spoken before of their Fish, and manner of fishing, I shall say nothing of their Fish again, but of such as are to be seen upon the Coast, having indeed nothing to say of such as are to be found in their Rivers and Lakes, which are far∣ther up in the Countrey. Their Sea-fish are the Gold-fish, Bonnittes, Jacos, as big as our Calves, Sea-Pikes, fresh-Cod, Tun∣ny-fish, and Thornback; Small fish they have in abundance, espe∣cially Pilchards, which are fat, and excellently good: they have a sort of flying fish, the which are very good meat, and as white as snow: their biggest Oysters (of which they have great quantities all along these coasts) are no bigger than our smallest, but very good meat, as their Cockles are likewise.
It is very dangerous washing ones self upon these Coasts, espe∣cially near the Island of St. Thomas, in respect of a ravenous sort of fish called Requiens, which abound there. From Cape-Verd to the Island of Saint Thomas, there is a fish which fastens it self alwayes to the Keel of the Ship, and will not be got off: the Hollanders call it the Ordure-fish, because it lives only of the or∣dure which is thrown out of the Ship: it is of the shape of a Grou∣din, but shorter, and without scales, it has the skin of an Eel, is flead and excoriated like that, and has much of its fat, and taste also: it sticks so fast to a Ship by the help of a thing it has upon its head, about three fingers broad, and eight fingers long, that there is not a man living can put it off.
Their Fruits, Herbs, Bread, Millet, Mays, their manner of sowing and making of Salt. THeir Fruits upon these Coasts are Plums, Pears, Oranges, Citrons, Cuckoe-nuts, and Figgs, but of the last no great plenty. The General of Frederisbourg has made a Garden about Musquetshot from the Castle, where he has Cab∣bage, and Roman Lettice, which grow very well, they have excellent Mellons, and the ground covered all over with a kind of Purslane; Besides which, they have in many places another herb they call Tetie, in its stalk and leaf not unlike our Rape, it is pleasant to eat, and ve∣ry good for the Stomack. They have Potatoes good store, which the Hollander has brought over, and calls them Field Arti∣choaks,
because they have the taste of our Ignames, which is a thick root very white within, which they cut in trenches, as they do Turneps in Limousin: and this is the bread and sole nourishment of the poor, and Peasants of that Countrey: their Beans, and their Peas are of several coulours, red black, violet colour, and gray, and a sort of Lentils in great abun∣dance, which are easily baked, and very good meat. They make their bread of three several sorts of seed; some of them of Rice, which is very white; but heavy upon the Stomach; others of their Millet, which is something browner than ours, but has not so good a taste when 'tis made of that alone; the other of Mays, or Tur∣ky Corn, which is well, and very common, but much better if ming∣led with the flower of Millet, which makes it more pleasant.
When the Month of April ap∣proaches, they go to the Receiver of the Kings duties for permission to sow, (all the fields belonging wholly to the King) having ob∣tained leave, they go up and down rooting up the bushes from one side to the other, and then digging it once or twice, they let it lye for a day or two, and then sow it with Rice, Millet, or Mays, for the King or the Governour, and when they have done for them, they begin for themselves. When they have done sowing, they bring all the bushes they have stubb'd up, into a corner of the field, and then burn them, singing, and dancing, and throwing about their Palm-wine, in honour of their Fetiches, to the end they may send them a happy Harvest: It appears in eight dayes after∣wards, and they reap it in three
Months; those who have not sown, buy their provision for the whole year at that time; those who have, and are obliged to go to the Recei∣ver, carry him such a proportion of gold as they think reasonable, which the Receiver carries after∣wards to the King, and is very well treated for his pains. Their Mays or Turky Corn, a∣grees best with the Hills, their Millet and Rice with the Valleys; they plant their Mays, as we do our Peas, but their Millet and Mays is sown as we do our Corn. I did not observe many Flowers upon the Coasts, only one whose leaves and stalk were as large as our Mustard-tree: the flower is of an admirable flame colour, but no scent at all, they are most common about the Isle of Saint Thomas. Their Salt is whiter and bet∣ter than ours, they make it in
great quantity in January, Febru∣ary, and March, which they car∣ry up afterwards higher into the Country, and make good advan∣tage by it, but it has this defect, it will not endure their violent heats, but becomes bitter and acide. Of their Gold, where it is found, and how, with the variety of works they make of it. THe Gold which is transport∣ed in so great quantities from these Coasts, that it gives them the Epithet of Golden, is taken in several places. The Gold of Axime is reckon'd the best, and is oftentimes found in pieces of two and twenty, or three and twenty Carrets. The Gold of Acara or Tasore, is something less: that of Acanis
and Achema is next, and the worst of all is the Gold of Fetu. The manner of taking it, is known only by the report of the Negroes, and (if they speak truth) is several wayes. Those of Axime and Achema find it in the sands of their Rivers, in powder: & 'tis to be supposed would they dig at the feet of the Moun∣tains where these Rivers arise, 'tis probable they would meet with greater proportions, seeing by their own confessions, after a lusty shower their plenty is increast, up∣on which score they have this su∣perstition amongst them, that when they want Gold, they pray to their Fetiches to send them good store of rain, and they are sure to be sup∣ply'd, as I hinted before. The Gold of Acara comes from the Mountain of Taffou, some thirty leagues distance, from the Town,
which is three dayes journey up in the Countrey: One of the Cap∣tains of the Blacks had a great de∣sire to have carried me to the place, & would have lest the Kings Brother and Son in hostage: but the water sailing as we were ready to go, we could not proceed in our design. He told us that the Mine belonged to the King, that there was no more to be done but to dig about the Mountain, and they would have gold enough; that those who found it were to have one Moyety, and the King the o∣ther, that he had an ingot of gold before his gate, which by the uni∣versal confession of all the Negroes, was bigger than the Fetiche of the whole Countrey, and taken out of this Mountain. An Officer at Frederisbourg, who has been several times at Fetu and Acanis, assured me, that those
two Kings had each of them before the gates of their Palaces, a golden Fetiche of a vast bigness, not so big indeed as that of the King of Fetu, but yet full as big as a Peck. The gold of Acanis and Fetu, is found in the earth by digging, some∣times more, and sometimes less; he which discovers a Mine has one half, & the King the other: it is ne∣ver above twenty or one & twenty Carrets; it is melted down at nei∣ther place, but brought to us aboard as it is taken out of the ground. The Danish General has an in∣got of gold, taken out of the Moun∣tain of Tafou, which weighs seven∣teen Marks, and about the seventh part of an Ounce. It was a present sent him by the King of Acara, when his Army was beaten by the Seigneur of Acara, and he protect∣ed him in his Fort. When the French and the Por∣tugais
frequented these Coasts, the Natives knew not the value of their gold, but since other Nations have been admitted, (and the Hol∣landers especially) they have learn'd, by their earnest desire to have it, that 'tis of more price, and do now hold it so dear, and stand so high in their demands, 'tis al∣most insupportable. Besides that, they have found out new ways of increasing their quan∣tities by adulterating it, and ming∣ling it with little pieces of Copper, which they call Quaquara, or other∣wise with Brass: the chief place for this Artifice is Commendo, where I may say boldly, there are the best cheats in the world. Yet these practices are only a∣mongst the lesser sort of Merchants of whom great care is to be taken, for they are so ingenious in this kind, there is not a cheat or for∣gery
that can fall under the inven∣tion of mankind, which they do not use for the circumvention of stran∣gers. They pretend very much to imi∣tate the Europeans in their working of their Gold, & to speak truth they are so happy as to surpass all the workmen I ever saw; their files are much iner than ours, and will make their work as fine as our Fi∣ligranne. The King of Fetu has a Casque, and a suit of Arms of beaten Gold, admirably well done. Amongst o∣ther things, they make great quan∣tities of Bracelets of polish'd Gold, and of those Fetiches which they wear upon their heads, as thin as paper: But above all things they transcend in their hatbands, which they make of threads as fine as any hair. Their Kings have their Vessels in Gold still, their
working Goldsmiths making eve∣ry thing they fancy, and every thing that comes into their heads. The Wives and Daughters of their Kings, Merchants, and Nobi∣lity of that Country, are so well la∣den with Rings, Bracelets, & Feti∣ches of Gold, especially when they go to their Balls, that they have sometimes in such trifles, to the weight of 20, or 25 Marks of Gold, and the men to thirty or forty. It is so incredibly plentiful in those parts, that a King upon an or∣dinary Festival will distribute two hundred Marks of Gold amongst his Courtiers, and sometimes more; for which reason, the Negroes de∣light to have liberal Kings, that their largesses may be more fre∣quent, and the Gold (not being lockt up in their private Coffers) may expend and circulate through the whole Kingdome.
Nor is the dearness of their pro∣visions, a small argument of the plenty aforesaid; a Fricassee of Pul∣lets bought of the Mores will cost two Crowns at least, a Pot of their Palm-wine, as it comes intirely from the tree, a Crown, and is no more than three of our Chopines at Paris. 'Tis true amongst themselves things are not altogether so dear, but having taken up an opinion that the Whites make treble advan∣tage of whatever they buy of them, they sell every thing they can possibly at that rate to them: their fish is somewhat cheaper indeed, & for ten pence one may have as much as will suffice ten men. Notwithstanding all the pains I did take, I could never inform my self further concerning their Gold, or their manner of taking it out of the Mines: talk to a thousand persons of it, and they will all
tell you several stories, not that they are ignorant themselves, but their diffidence of the Whites is so in∣vincibly great, they will never be perswaded to impart it to them. Of the return of our Vessel for Europe. THe immense profits that are made upon these Coasts be∣ing obvious to all people, it would be superfluous to speak any more of them: by the universal consent of the whole world, it is agreed, that these Voyages are more cer∣tain, and advantageous than any other, which appears by the ex∣traordinary attempts have been made by all Nations of Europe, to make themselves absolute Masters there, and evinceth the truth of what I have said, to any one that
imagines the contrary, so that it remains now, that I speak only one word of our return. Having finish'd our trading de∣signs, we weigh'd Anchor from be∣fore Frederisbourg, the twentieth of April, & sail'd directly for the Port of Saint Thomas, (which is an Island belonging to the Portugais, scituated directly under the Line) to supply our selves with victuals for so long a Voyage. The first two dayes we steer'd our course East and by South, the two next East South-East, and the two next full East; after which, we discover'd the Island of Saint Thomas, and came to an Anchor before the Castle on the sixth of May, seven dayes after our departure from Frederisbourg, having made in all twenty six leagues and upwards.
The Description of the Isle of St. Tho∣mas which lies under the Line. ON the 8th. of May we made a visit to the Governour of the Castle, who received us with great civility, but would not be perswa∣ded to permit us to go into the Town; he gave Orders to his Lieutenant to treat us with all re∣spect, which he was not able to perform himself, by reason of an indisposition that was upon him at that time. He is a little man, well propor∣tion'd, about 40 or 50 years of age, his name is Acosta, a fierce quick man, but very civil. That night a Captain of the Fort came aboard us, to whom we gave an account of what provisions we wanted, and the Governour order'd us to be sup∣plyed the last day in Rogation week.
Every day whilst we lay there at Anchor, our men went to a little River which runs hard by into the Sea, to provide our selves with fresh water, which is indeed the best in all Africk, for we kept it a year afterwards, and it was as good and as sweet as at the first day. Du∣ring all the time we were there, not one person of our Crew was per∣mitted to go on shore, but my self, who had that priviledge by being a Frenchman. I lay on shore three nights, but desiring the Governours leave that our Notary might do the same for the benefit of his health, he told me for my self all places were free, I might go whether, and buy what I pleased, but for the Notary he could not permit it, he being a Flemming; that if our whole Equipage had been French, they should all have had
the same liberty, but that the Por∣tugais had too rational a jealousie of the Dutch to allow them a free∣dome that had not been practis'd since the Island came into their hands; that the Town was then a rebuilding, and that there still re∣mained the foot-steps of the mis∣chiefs and desolations the Hollan∣ders had made there, especially amongst their Churches, which were very beautiful. The Island of Saint Thomas is about sixty leagues in circum∣ference, it has a Bishoprick in it, and a Cathedral (which they were then in repairing) not inferiour in bigness to Saint Meredick in Paris, but much more beautifull, and neat, the Musick and Chapter were maintained at the King of Portugals charge: Besides that they had Negroes to their Priests, I was much pleas'd to hear the lit∣tle
Morish Boys, which serve there in the Quire, and sing without Notes or Books, as exactly as our Choristers in France, which I observed in their Procession, the first day of their Rogations: all the Mores in that Island are Christians: the Town consists of about five hundred houses, the most part of Wood, since the Hollanders took it, and burn'd it. The general opinion is, that this Island is not healthful, but they have all things necessary for the life of man, in that plenty and a∣bundance, that 'tis a Miracle to me considering the heat of the Climat, and the unwholesomness of the air. The Sugar which comes from hence, is cryed up above all the Sugar in the world. They have a fair Ctadel built upon the Sea-side, on the East-side of the Town (with its
gate towards the North) about the distance of Musquet shot; the fi∣gure is square, fortified with four good Bastions, lined with Free-stone, planted with sixty pieces of brass Canon, carrying from eight to eight and forty pound bullet. But so many Authors having writ of it at large, it would but importune the Reader to enlarge any farther. Upon Ascension day we weigh'd Anchor, and set sail for Europe, ha∣ving saluted the Castle with 5 Guns, and received their complement in three, steering South-west, though the wind stood South-East, and is so constantly upon those Coasts, the next day we discovered Ana∣bou, another Island in the possession of the Portugais; at which place we began to alter our course West∣ward, as we did many times after∣wards, according to the discretion of our Pilots.
We past on the back-side of Scotland, coasting upon the Isles de Terro, which are under the Domi∣nion of the King of Denmark, and upon the Coasts of Norway, where meeting with some Dutch Ships, we received the first news of the Treaty at Breda, which was the most remarkable thing in our pas∣sage; for our Pilots having been mistaken, and run to the wind∣ward, more than two hundred leagues too much, I can say but lit∣tle of our return. In short, on the 29th of August we found our selves at the mouth of the Texel, where for want of a fair wind our Ship was forc'd to ride at Anchor till the first of Sep∣tember, at which time we entred, and on the fourth following came to an Anchor before Amsterdam, where all the Officers, (except the Captain and the Secretary) were
arrived the last of August, by the convenience of a Shallop with Oares, which do usually come out to all such Ships as are to go into the Texel, for that purpose. And thus was our Voyage con∣cluded, having spent in our jour∣ney, our stay, and return, about nine Months and a half, without any disaster, or the loss of any more than one man, who dyed as we were passing the Line, of a Dissentery he had got at the Island of Saint Thomas, by eating too great a quantity of their Sugar, and sweet meats; all the rest both Of∣ficers and Soulders were continual∣ly in health, lively, brisk, and well disposed, without the least malady or sickness in the world. For which, God be praised. FINIS.
