W107 99829300 33737
AN EXAMINATION OF A Late Treatise OF THE GOUT: Wherein John Colbatch's Demon∣strations are briefly Refuted, the College cleared from his scan∣dalous Imputations; And a short Account of His Vulnerary Powder. By S. W. no inconsiderable Branch of the College. Efficiam posthác ne quenquam voce lacessas. Virg. LONDON, Printed, for the Author, and sold by the Book∣sellers of London and Westminster, 1697.
To the President and other Members of the Royal College of Physicians, Lon∣don. Gentlemen, OUR Countrey is the most fam'd of any, in the World, for the Liberty we enjoy, and the se∣curity we have made to our Property by its excel∣lent Laws: Yet, I think Societies are, upon some occasions, so very strict, that to less discerning Eyes they may seem meer Monopolies. I must complain of my own hardships in this matter espe∣cially; but to whom, I know not; for tis from You that all my misfortunes flow; and since this Error of the first Concoction cannot be so easily re∣trieved among you, by Reason of the fault and defect in the Constitution that hinders People of singular parts, tho' now of a mean Office, at last to arrive to the liberty of being admitted a Fellow among you: to be a Licentiate will not go down, since Colbatch s admission. I confess I did once re∣solve to have suppress'd all those aspiring thoughts, with considerations of Religion; but when I see scandalous Libels thrown about against you, and these so fitted to the Capacity of the Mob, that you think their Author below your wrath; I must per∣swade my self that my Religion obliges me to se∣cure my Neighbour's good Name, and that the following defence of my old Masters may entitle me a great deal better to a Diploma, than any thing this feigned friend of the College can pre∣tend
to; and may also prevent my Petitioning the King and Parliament to oblige you to do me Justice. But if we look into the merit of the Cause, it must be allowed me that I who have seen so many Dissections, heard so many Lectures, over-heard so many Examinations of Young Physicians, I who have kept the Books written by our learned Mem∣bers, and have very often carried their Gowns and Caps, must be a great deal more knowing in all the difficult parts of Physick than He. Did I not hear the learned Dr Harvey talk after so lively a man∣ner of the Blood's Circulation, and his Generation ex Ovo, that I vow and swear, I have thought I have seen the Drunken Heart spew out its Blood into the great Artery, and I could trace its Stages thro' the whole Body? then for the business of the Valves, I have so lively an Idea of them, that I can show you them only by look∣ing upon you Skin. But as for the Generation, that did so tickle me when I was a Young Man, that I easily apprehended the false Notions of for∣mer Physicians upon that Subject: I can yet give a very plain description of that genital liquor at∣tacking the ripe Egg in the Ovarium, and a great deal more that I saw at some diffections he made to King Charles II. nay, for my part, I thought all this matter was so clear that I wonder the Dr never found the way to get a Male-child at one bout of a Consummation Action. We have Sir George Ent's Book too that defends his Circulation contra omnes mortales, for as easy a matter as Colbatch thinks it; but had he had to do with Parisanus, the old fellow wou'd have plaid the Devil with him, and his Li∣gature too; then came Dr Glisson with his Livers, Stomachs, and Guts so nicely prepar'd, that the Secretion of the Gall, the Digestion, the business of the Chyle, and the Excrements were so familiar to me, that I had no difficulties left me in that affair. But as for Dr Willis, he was the first that
taught us to dissect the Brain, that we might see all its parts; when Physicians before him were con∣tent to slice it down like a piece of Pudding, and when Des Cartes did see his Glandula Pinealis stick∣ing in a slice like a Plum, he was a great Master who could hit upon it once in five times; but our Dr cou'd show you any thing, and when you pleas'd; he trac'd out all the Nerves, and describ'd nobly the whole Brain: I have heard him talk of his Anima Brutorum, his Books of Fermentation, Ʋrins, Fevers, &c. with that exactness, that I must own that I have had sometimes the Vanity to think my self as learned a Physician as himself. Dr Wharton began first to number the Glands, and to undeceive the World of a fancy they had about Parenchymatous substances. Next came Dr Lower, who told us of the Hearts being Muscular, and put it under the same laws; he tells us in the same Book of putting Blood out of one Animal into another, and what advantage that may be in cu∣ring some Diseases. Dr Havers gives us a Book of the Make of the Bones, and Dr Riddley gives us a Lecture upon the Brain, tho' a Frenchman one de Vuyssens had made Dr Willis's way more clear, yet not so much neither, but that the Dr has done it in greater order. Dr Garth read very finely upon Respiration and the use of the Lungs: Dr Lister has oblig'd us with the Anatomy of Snails, and Dr Cockburn with an O Econom. Animalis. Of Bota∣naists we have had a vast number, and lately Dr Sloan has given us an excellent account of the Plants of the Leeward Islands: Pharmacians, a great many, and lately Dr Bates. But for the Theory and practice of Medicin, no Countrey has exceeded us: in my time Willis both for the Theory and the Practice, Dr Charleton, Sir Theoder Mayern, Dr Bates, Dr Morton, and Dr Cockburn, who first told us how they are sick at Sea. Now, can any Man think that I can be such a blockhead, as to have liv'd among all these Masters
in Medicin, to be bred up as it were at the foot of Gamaliel, and for so long a time; and not to be better qualified for my Admission than a fellow that either cannot think, or at least cannot tell us what he thinks, and yet is so vain as to esteem himself more knowing, than any of your worthy and learn∣ed Members; one of whom he attacks, because he▪s Dead, one still alive, and by Name; and ano∣ther he has only the courage to hint at, tho' he has told his story so plainly over the Town, that 'tis now no great difficulty to know him: and there∣fore I may hope that my thus proving a dutiful Servant, in giving my self all this trouble, may give me greater pretences to a Diploma, and to be more and more, Gentlemen, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, S. W.
THE PREFACE TO John Colbatch. SIR, YOƲR Book fell first into my hands on Ash-Wed∣nesday, after I came from Church, and I was glad to think you had hit upon an absolute Cure of the Gout, a demonstrative one at least, as you please to call it, in the frontispiece. Your Dedication smelt somewhat of Gratitude, which is still well; but when I found this demonstration was to be turn'd upon Acid and Alkali, or a thing we do not understand, I began to suspect your knowledge; yet, I thought it possible that new lights might be discovered even by you, in this matter, and surely you had not the Impudence to pro∣mise us a Demonstration of a thing we know nothing of, after a great deal of enquiry; and really when I lookt first into your Preface you wou'd make us expect no less than Revelation: but all this soon vanish'd into Dream∣ing, Asserting, Defaming downright all foreign Phy∣sicians, then the lesser half of the College it self, and next the greater, for really the praise you give them is so invidiously turn'd, that tis one of the worst pieces of Satyr. The Scene thus odly chang'd, very strangely at least as to my expectation, rais▪d in me quite other ap∣prehensions: my Church thoughts were not the very same; my passion grew almost into fury, to see my
Masters so ill us'd, and one whom Nature had laid asleep, and forbid us to remember him to his disadvan∣tage; yet his Ashes were to be rais d for your trifle about the Gout. I confess I cou'd hold no longer, but the duty that s incumbent upon every man to defend his own, or his friend s Reputation, made me find some time from business to become an Author, tho' that was when I had attempted a second reading, and after ten days. 'Tis the defence of all foreign Physicians, and a great many of our own that I have undertaken; a task I acknowledge too bold for me, with any one but your self; and ev n these few that are excepted, must fall too when you are out of the apprehensions of an Answer, or any other inconveniency from them: this is no forc d and unnatural conclusion; for, notwithstand∣ing your turning over Books to no purpose, as you say very well, foreign Physicians and my Masters are agreed in most things of Physick; so that if your de∣sign were to destroy Opinions, and lay under no fears of Men, you might have as easily run down all the College, as Ignoramus's, as you have done the learned men abroad: all these foreigners since the beginning of the World, all our dead Gentlemen, and a third of what's alive; surely my living Masters that are spar'd cannot have better pretences than They; nay, I le an∣swer for them, that they re asham'd on your behalf, and angry too, that you have parted them from so good company; but esprcially that you huve join'd them to your self: Have not you done Dr. Cole a great deal of honour, in obtruding upon him your ridiculous jargon, and to call them his Opinions, Opinions he was very fa∣miliar with, or because you are the first that vends em, opinions that he has lenrn't from you? Is there any such stuff, in his Book de Secretione Animali, his letter of an Apoplexy, or his Book of Agues? if my memory fails me not, he s among one of your Dunces that make that Disease proceed from the Acidity of the Blood, as Dr. Jones does, and yet you may make him say here, that 'tis an Alkali that's the Original of that sickness; old People, men say, are twice Children, yet he is not quite
so old, as to forget what he said lately, to chatter after you: but since you use your Friend, your Patron no bet∣ter, I think your Doctors you make War upon have no reason to complain. In this Preface of yours, you have got into a Cant of Experimental knowledge, Experiments upon the Blood, and such things you understand, and use the very same way that Enthusiasts do the Scripture: these are the best help to Natural Knowledge, as the Scripture are to Divine; but all this meer Jargon, Cant and Nonsense in your mouth who cannot under∣stand them: and in my opinion the only way of proselyt∣ing you, must be the same that the Church-men take with their Enthusiasts, to despise you. Are not you a rare Fellow to pretend to make an Experiment, who after all your toyl, all your reading, and all your Dis∣quisition, are pleas'd to tell us that Physicians have hitherto unanimously agreed that Acids have a∣bounded in all Diseases, this is as wonderful an ad∣vantage as you have gain'd by reading of them; for 'tis manifestly false, and if we were to look into the state of Physick in former Ages, or ev'n in our own time, we can find no such Ʋniversal Consent; but now when I think of it, you only said if turning over of Books wou'd do it, that you shou'd rest satisfied; but that will not do; nay distilling, and combining of Liquors so long as your eyes are open, will never make one Experi∣ment, without some Book-learning, which to you is a bug-bear. You see how well an accomplish'd Gentle∣man you are like to prove for making Experiments, and so you have very good reason to say that in your Introduction you have made use of a Familiar and easy Experiment to confirm the truth of your New Hypothe∣sis; and if any one shall take upon them to answer what you have said in this, or any of your former Pieces, you expect that they should back their Arguments with Ex∣periments, or you shall take no notice of them. What good service your Familiar Experiment is like to do you, turn the leaf, and there you ll find it: but pray, if one may ask questions, tell me what Syrup of Violets it self
is, Acid or Alkalin; according to this Familiar Ex∣periment, 'tis nothing; for Syrup of Violets, added to Syrup of Violets dissolv d in an aqueous Body, may aug∣ment the quantity, but will still be blue; Ergo tis nothing, because neither Acid nor Alkali: the next time you write, be sure to make a Syrup of Violets prin∣ciple, h. e. every thing that does not change the Colour, is Violaceous; and find some Disease to be made or Cur▪d by it, so there will be Three, and Musae gaudent Numero Impari, the principles of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury are Three, Des Cartes's are Three, and yours are Three; but this I'm affraid you won't like, because you affect singularity. And as for answering your pieces, I know no body will be at the pains, but a Porter; nay, I'le promise you that when I had done, I had a great dispute with my self if I shou'd do you the honour: but a little for my Masters, and helping off the Bookseller with the damn d Copy, did prevail; but here I faithfully promise and swear, that no more of my Stoln time from other business shall be employ'd that way. But, pray, Why are all your Books Pieces? nothing but Artillery sounds with you since you was in Flanders: the Preface before, was Powder and Ball, and now Pieces for the Powder and Ball; not so, good Member, your Pieces are harm∣less things enough, any body may attack them, and that more easily, and with more safety than nail d up Cannon, and you see the following Sheets are an At∣tempt of an Ordinary fellow.
AN EXAMINATION OF A New Treatise OF THE GOUT. SEmper ego auditor tantum, nunquamne reponam, Vexatus toties rauci Theseide Codri? Or for our better understanding, as Mr Dryden and I, with a little liberty, will sing it: Still shall I hear, and never quit the score▪ Stunn'd with Colbatche's nonsence o're and o're. I have been quiet these forty years, because I was always hearing something that inform'd me; but now to have Libels upon our learned Members, by one who has not learn d his Institutions, is in∣supportable; and however he may be below their notice, as he really is, yet he cannot escape me, who have been charm'd so long with their Learn
ing. But to do this as shortly as his want of me∣thod, useless repetitions, and ridiculous malice will allow me, I will only consider the strength of his pretences, and discover their weakness from such solid maxims, as I have either heard or read that my Masters do suppose; and reserving his Preface for mine, the first thing we shall consider shall be his Introduction; which I shou d take to be the most modest thing of the whole Book, were it not that he pretends his principles are so very obvious, that they are to be seen thorow by any body, and yet they have been remov'd from the eye of Physicians. The familiar experiment is, That all Acids, such as Oyl of Vitriol, Oyl of Sul∣phur per cam panam, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, Vinegar, &c. being poured into Syrup of Violets in any aqueous Vehicle, will immediately turn it from a Blue to a very Red Colour; and as the Acid is more or less strong, so will the Red Colour be of a deeper or paler Dye. On the other hand, all manifest Alkalies, such as lixivious Salts, all the volatile Spirits and Salts, such as Spirit and Salt of Hartshorn, Spirit and Salt of Sal Armoniac, Salt of Vipers, &c. will turn the Syrup of Violets, or a solution of it, either in Spring Water, or in any other aqueous Vehicle, from a Blue into a Green Colour; and as the Alkali is more or less strong, so the Green Colour will be of a paler or a deeper Dye. From this he concludes, that if the Serum of the Blood change this solution of Syrup of Violets into a Red, it must be Acid; and if it changes it into a Green colour, positively Alkalin; and confirms this farther with a piece of Logick, which shews sufficiently that he has no∣thing of the University breeding, without his tel∣ling us so; and notwithstanding the expence of Money he has been at, in acquiring this Learning, all he shews is the Ergo, strangely brought in. But pray, Mr Member of the Royal Colledge of Physicians, do you think that because you were an Apothecary, and made up the Doctor's Hyste∣rical
Juleps and Gargarisms, and saw sometimes Spirit of Hartshorn added to the Waters which dis∣solv'd some of the Syrup of Violets; or at other times, Spirit of Vitriol, Niter, &c. added to some such Tinctures, and to make this Red or Green Colour: Do you think, I say, that these Physicians had never seen these changes as well as you? That must not be suppos d even among foreign Physici∣ans (for those, and such as are dead, or want a name, you only are pleas'd to expose) but how came it that they never fell upon this demonstra∣tion of yours, surely 'tis not so much out of reach; but the reason you may have, when I'll show you immediately that you have discover'd nothing at all. First, some Physicians, and those most Fo∣reigners, have said that the principles of mixt Bodies were an Acid and an Alkali, tho they have had vast difficulties even to describe them so, that we cou'd know what they wou'd be at; and truly yours is no better; for of all the mixt Bodies, how many are there that will give your Water and Syrup of Violets a Red or a Green Colour? not the thousandth part, and conse∣quently not the thousandth part of mixt Bodies are Acid or Alkalin, or the thousandth part of mixt Bodies have no compounding Principles, h. e. they are something and nothing: Yet 'tis ve∣ry natural to think, with one f my nam'd Ma∣sters, that if Acids and Alkalies are the true In∣gredients or Components of Bodies, and that they concur as principles in their action, and bear Contre-parts in this action; then because the In∣fluence of either upon the other, may be augment∣ed, diminished or lost, and this is to be faulty or vitious; therefore, or ergo, tis evident, that ei∣ther of em may have its defects, and consequent∣ly that the blame should not be laid upon one: h. e. supposing the principle of Alkali and Acid, Dr. Blankard and the Member, are both wrong; tho I confess if Acid and Alkali were any thing,
Dr. Blancard is most in the right; for the serum of the Blood, in the healthiest People makes ei∣ther no such alterations of Red or Green; and when it does in that circumstance, 'tis always to the Green, and consequently the Blood in heal∣thiest People is Alkalin; and because that Constitution of the Blood that gives us Health can never be the same when we are Sick, and since the Blood when we are in Health is Alkalin, it must not be supposed so, when we are sickly, but rather something of a different and opposite temper: and because that is to be Acid, ergo, our sicknesses do all proceed from an Acid, according to Dr. Blankard, against the Royal Mem∣ber; now hehimself has given judgment upon such ridiculous inferences as he makes, that they ought to be kickt out of a Commonwealth, for endea∣vouring to impose upon Mankind: And truly this is the only thing in the whole Book he and I seem most agreed upon; only I think we shou'd begin with him. But supposing that that were an Acid which changes a solution of Syrup of Violets with Water into a red Colour, and that an Alkali, that changes it into Green; and that all mixt bodies made those changes, and none else, h. e. let us have this Hypothesis in its best light; yet it is so precarious and obscure, that it cannot help us in the understanding one Phoeno∣menon; we know not their properties and powers, nay, one of them he supposes more useless than a Cypher; pray what knowledge can we attain to by knowing that a Triangle is a Figure that has three angles, or a Chiliogonum has a thousand, without knowing any of its properties and rela∣tion to other Figures in practice for the use of Man? We don't apprehend by this that the three Angles of any Triangle are equal to two right Angles, and that the whole thousand Angles in an Chiliogonum are but equal to four right Angles, and much less do we gain all the advan∣tages
and knowledge that the Doctrine of plain and Spherical Trigonometry affords us, by can∣vassing Triangles upon different occasions. Now I say, That if we could arrive to as useful a piece of knowledge, by supposing his Acid and Alkali to be what he describes 'em, by demonstrating their properties as evidently as we see those of the mentioned Example, he might, for me, call the one Bow-Church, and the other the Royal Ex∣change: but on the contrary, all that ever we are to know of them is, that the one can make Syrup of Violets, dissolved in any aqueous body, Red, and the other can make it Green. The poor Philoso∣phers and Mathematicians that knew nothing of Syrup of Violets and Water, were at a sad loss. But pray, Mr. Member of the Royal College, since all the Phoenomena in Nature are to be accounted for by those two principles, except the inconsiderable ones about Motion and Rest, Light and Darkness, Magnetism, and a great many other, (of this kind) too many here to insert, I'm affraid that all the Phaenomena are to follow; yet perhaps you are confident of all those of your own Trade, and that they may stand your friends, except it may be that little sort of motion of the Blood, which the Fools of Physicians call the Basis in the O Economy, and curing Diseases; but let us except that, and tell us the business of seeing from Acid and Alkali, why we have a Pulse? And I'm sure, that if you cannot do that, you cannot tell us whether a Stone sees or not, at least you cannot be useful to any that suffer in their seeing. Pray, good Mr. Member, now tell me, why I, when I was a young Man could not see any thing ten Yards be∣fore me, without the help of a Glass, and now when I am old, I can see ten times further, with∣out any such help, and other Men of my acquaint∣ance that accused me of blindness cannot see their own length now without a Glass? One thing more I would beg of you, and that is, that
when I am a Doctor, and must feel my Patients Pulse, how we ought to have a Pulse at all, and what kinds of Pulses tell me that my Patient is Sick, and all this from the Combination and Privy Councel of Acid and Alkali, where you are Secre∣tary, and can tell all their tricks? Moreover, settling our knowledge upon change of colour is the most uncertain thing in the World; not only because I have seen Dr. Slaer take two Dia∣phanous liquors, that were as white as Water, yet, by putting them together soon chang'd into 20 Colours, some smoakt, some grew thick from being the thinest substances I ever saw, and a thou∣sand such tricks which are useful to be tried, but I never knew of the principle that could ac∣count for them, tho' such experiments afford us many conclusions about the uncertainty of human Understanding; nay, I have seen Mr. Boyle, and Mr. Newton at a deadly work about this business of Colour, and I am told that Des Cartes and Mr. Newton have exchanged many a Letter upon that Subject; tho' we believe that Mr. Newton had the best by much. Now, Mr. Member, don't you think that I have given you a very good reason, for former Physicians making no account of your Shop Experiments, they have seen a Thousand times, but have left you to take up with it, for no body else wou d. Indeed you are in the right to make your appeal to the Mob about your dis∣covery; for they know nothing of the matter: but Gentlemen are generally of so liberal an Edu∣cation, that tho' they cou'd not dispute the fact, yet they have the good Manners to think every thing true any one tells them, to his knowledge, to be matter fact; yet I le assure you that your Conclusions and theirs will be vastly different. This being premis d, we see what a certain foundation he has laid for himself; yet he thinks it so certain that in the 5th page he tells us, That an ounce or two of Blood is to be spared in any
case. Again, It will plainly appear by this Ex∣periment, That the Blood of such persons a∣bounds with Alkalies; and if so, why should we croud in more Alkalies, unless it were to prolong the Distemper, to increase the number of Fees. Here he shows abundance of Learn∣ing and Honesty; for in the first he supposes that an Ounce or two of Blood may be spared in any case, which is so very contrary to what I have heard my Masters talk about, Revulsion and De∣rivation, that nothing can be more; for if the Blood is brought more to one part than another, by the different ways of bleeding, as this Doctrine plainly intimates; then it may happen that we shall bring Blood to some part, upon occasions, in a very ill and unlucky time, unless we under∣stand the business of Revulsion and Derivation somewhat exactly; but this is neither an Asser∣tion peculiar to him, nor is it my design to An∣swer his Book to every particular, but only where he sets up for himself, or asserts common opinions too peremptorily; and therefore I will only say to his Honesty, That that is very singular, if he keeps his Patients long under his hand for gains sake; yet by what he says, one wou'd think him a great Fool or Ignorant; for to heighten a Dis∣ease as he talks, is to kill the Patient out-right, and so farewel Fees, which is his primum mobile, and a principle he's more fond of than Acid or Alkali; for I m inform'd he valu'd his Book a∣mong the Booksellers at twenty Guineas, which he said he wanted to buy a pair of Geldings to put into his new Coach. But after he has made so great advances by his demonstrations, he be∣gins still to challenge the ignorance and disho∣nesty of Physicians, whom he makes a set of Fools or Knaves, and sometimes both. People, says he, must long since have known the truth of this hypothesis, or they must not: If they have not known it, then it is plain they have grop▪d
in the dark, and they have cur'd Diseases with as much certainty as a blind Man can catch a Hare, as the Proverb is, when they speak of any thing that is very unlikely. If they have known it before, then the giving of Alkalies at the rate that has been done, is a plain argument against them that they have not acted like ho∣nest men. But I dare acquit them from this charge, I do believe they have sworn in Verbo Magistri. And because a few Book-learn'd Gentlemen have dreamt that the Bloods abound∣ing with Acids has been the cause of Diseases, therefore right or wrong it must be so, tho it be contrary to the most obvious and plain experi∣ments. So firm an Hypothesis being once esta∣blished, his consequences must be so plain and evident that nothing can withstand them; and therefore he catches the poor Physicians in this in∣evitable Dilemma, People, &c. Truly, good Mr. Member, I told you just now, that your ex∣periment has been seen often every day, but the Hypothesis you raise upon it, is unworthy of any ones sight but your own; but since you have got within your Dilemma, as Conjurers are said to be within a Circle for their defence from the De∣vil, that we may give you story for story, I will, for once, suppose that they knew nothing of the matter, and yet I cannot see how they cur'd by guess, or groped in the dark, since they had more certain Rules which you seem to despise, and I'm sure you know nothing of; and what lumieres you have got from this Hypothesis, we shall find by your following observations; tho having ruined your foundation already, the thing is evi∣dent of it self. Again, we suppose that they did know it, tho no otherways than that the Hypo∣thesis of Acid and Alkali is the most precarious supposition in the world, and that they knew Dr Blankard fond, tho modestly, of this Castle in the Air, and you a peremptory, dictating Block-head,
maintaining this ill-grounded stuff, and defaming Men of Learning to defend it; and in that sense they were not confined to your giving of Acids upon all occasions, and to despise the greater part of Simples, which they must needs do; since the greater part are either Alkalies, in the com∣mon acceptation, or nothing at all. I said in the common Acceptation, because I am one of those who desires no kind of jargon in physical know∣ledge. But what a fine excuse you make for them, I think the common-wealth of learningought to grace your Birth-day with a Panegyrick upon it; that men of learning who will own no other Motto but Nullius in verba, yet you'll bedaub them with your impudence jurare in verbo (as you call it) Magistri; I must tell you that in governs both the Accusative and Ablative Cases, and so it may be good Grammar, which I'm sure is more than you know; but in the sense you design it, 'twas never us d but in the Accusative: But pray you what Masters' words do you find your College Oath bind you to, or what Master is that other Physicians follow; since they did shake off Hip∣pocrates and Galen, the antient Guides of former Physicians, we see none other set up, but every one wou'd make Proselytes, or instruct with the force of reason; they declare, that we may learn a great deal from, and ought to read Hipp. Gal. Avicen, &c. on one side and all the moderns, of whatso∣ever sect, on the other, but not to fight for the Infallibility either of Hippocr. or Van Helmont; but these old Gentlemen are none of your acquaintance, and therefore for once, I crave your Mercy, for introducing them into your Company. But pray Mr Member, must a man be said to jurare in verba, that will not blindly follow all the nonsense that an impudent fellow wou'd obtrude upon him; if so, then I'le pro∣mise you  will be the word still.
Now to what you say of a few Book-learn'd Gentlemen's dreams about Acids, being the source of all other Diseases; I don t say that you'll own my Masters Book-learned, but we see few of them either fond of Acid or Alkalies being the causes of Diseases; but if one of them must needs be so against all sense and reason, I told you before that Dr Blankard appealing to your experiment, has prov'd it so, without Book; surely you could not have thought that. I don t think the rest of this Paragraph worthy my consideration, and especi∣ally because I was by when Mr Boyl s Dialogists were at a hot dispute about the power of Fire, in bringing out the first principles of Mixt Bodies, where it was carried in the Negative, after many a learned Speech; but you were not worthy of such a Conversation, nor I neither; but I was Door-keeper, and did sometimes peep in, and took care to over-hear as much as possibly I could; and tho I'm no Book-learn'd Man, nor a Gentle∣man, yet I was told that That was all in print; I think they call'd it the Sceptical Chymist. Now here was a learned man, that was for trying a thousand tricks upon Blood, and every thing, without ever dreaming of essential and elementa∣ry princlples, as some of the common Chymists about this town, who were only employ'd about his Furnace, have done since; and for any thing I know, you may have got some Learning by blowing his Bellows, as I have by carrying of Gowns and Caps. The rest of this Book to the 10th page, con∣taining nothing but Conquest and the Ignorance of others, I must pass it over, because I cannot be able to consider it, without letting slip some things as undiscreet as his are. Only I think that a Man of his Policy and Understanding, wou'd at least have represented his Antagonists as more knowing, and of more Experience, that so he might lay his way for a Glorious Conquest, and now if
he is struck with the Servant of these Ignorants, what a damnable misfortune is it to fall by the Jaw-bone of an Ass. But the 1st §. of the 10th page, is so full of Instruction and Knowledge, that it requires our serious consideration; and therefore we'll set it down at length. For want, says he, of our taking pains in making Experiments, has been the only cause of our so long building the Foundation of our Practice upon so false a Bottom; and I hope, that what I have said will excite the Physicians of our Age to make such Experiments, that thereby we may act upon some sort of certainty. The Physicians of our own Age, but more par∣ticularly of our own Nation, and amongst them in a more especial manner those of our College, have made more and greater discoveries in Anato∣my than ever were made before, I mean in the Anatomy of the solid Parts. But as for the Fluids, those parts wherein the Cause and seat of most Diseases lurk, they have in a great measure been neglected: But the College a∣bounds with Men of such large Capacities, that if once they set about that noble work, I doubt not they will soon perfect it, to the great satis∣faction and Advantage of all Mankind. This Paragraph consists of three considerable Members, the first is the Cause why Medicin has not made greater advances, the praise of the Anatomi∣cal discoveries in our Age, but more especially in our own Nation, and the third an Encomium up∣on the College, a little healing after his Causticks and Incisions, as good Chyrurgeons generally do work to the ground of sordid and sinuous Ulcers, such as he has or will make the present Members, if he can but out-live them. But pray Mr. Mem∣ber of the Royal College, do you pretend to be the first beginner of making Experiments; truly they'l be well made, when I dare challenge you to tell me whether a Stone sees, hears, &c. or not; but have we not discover'd to us by the affiduous
labours of learned Men, a more perfect know∣ledge of the make of our own Body, the convey∣ances of its liquors, and the Circulation of the Blood; have we not noble Experiments about our Body, and its liquors being affected by ambient bodies, comparisons made, and Histories of the com∣parisons that have been by the combination of Salts with Salts, Liquors with Liquors, and even trials of all those upon our Liquors. I'm of the opinion that we ought to proceed with all these trials; but how to absolve, and what use is to be made▪ of those Observations I am convinced that you do not know; we shall see immediately what familiar Theories you raise in the curing of the Gout, from all those discoveries; what vindicati∣ons you make, and what reason you give for your Medicins; I'm affraid we shall find you so uncapable to apprehend the circumstances of a nice Experiment, that you are not even able to give us a genuin History of a Disease. I agree with you that I believe that the Physicians since the Restoration of K. Ch. II. have made greater discoveries in the Anatomy than any; but for my part I don't pre∣tend to know the Doctors abroad; I have told you of my Masters that have been fam'd for some new piece of Learning, and all that in my time, so I'm apt to believe what you say; tho' I have sometimes heard of a French Fellow that told us a Story of the Lacteal Vessels, when the noise of discoveries was so great at home; I have heard of Bartholin, D'Graaf, and some others I cannot call to mind, which makes me believe we had some pretty Experiments abroad. But as for the Fluids, these poor, these damn'd Fluids that make us sick and well, I have seen Mr. Boyl and some others making a great many Experiments upon them; and I have been told that one Malpighius, Lewenhoeck, and some other Fellows have taken Glasses, Spectacles, I don't know how you call them, to look into them; but these are Gentlemen
below your notice, and so you think they have been neglected: But the College abounds with Men of such large Capacities; and Faith so it does, and I hope will in spite of you, that I hope they'l al∣ways be a doing something worthy of that noble Faculty: But you a fearful defamer, to talk as you have of Physicians, ought to be Scandalum Magna∣tum; you are convinc d your Book wou'd never be read abroad, and so you freely call them▪ Ignorants, guessers, and I don't know what; but your Ma∣lice too does carry you so far, as to defame a Mem∣ber of this College, because he's Dead; another you name, because perhaps his talent is to be mo∣dest, or to neglect such pretenders as you, and a third forsooth you will not name, tho' you cou'd not conceal him among such as you take to be your Friends; but I'le tell you that when we come to his Story I le name them, and him after you, and let you see too that you never expos'd your self more than in relating of that Observation; but all this in good time: and if thus you deal under∣hand with our living Members, and openly with him that is Dead, God have mercy upon the shortest livers, they'l be sure to have your Tongue for a Purgatory in a Protestant Common-wealth. Now your whole Introduction being compleat∣ed by the next Paragraph, I will look into that, and leave the honest Gentleman that intrusts you with his Letters, to the mercy of the World. A I have before said, so I shall now repent it again, that I may not be misunderstood by any one; that tho' I commend Acids in the Cure of Diseases, yet I do not pretend that any one Acid will answer all Intentions, there being a mighty difference in the Operation and Na∣ture of Acids. That Acid that will Cure an Acute Distemper (generally speaking) will not cure a Chronical one. I have generally obser∣ved that volatile Acids are most effectual in
Acute Distempers, and fix'd ones in those Di∣stempers we call Chronick ones. But in these every Man's practice must be regulated and go∣vern'd by Observation: For as Physick had its Rise and Original from Observation, so I am sure that by observation only it is capable of be∣ing brought to perfection. What greater confusion can any Man discover, than there is here in these few lines; if his only, and certain principles can give him no greater Lights and Notions in his Study and beloved O∣pinions, the Lord have mercy upon those Patients from whom he's to gather the History of Diseases! and if we stammer so in explaining our selves, our common discourse must needs be self-evident. Pray, why don't you at least tell us a Story of those vast differences that are in the Operations of Acids, if you cannot tell me whence that dif∣ference comes? I may very easily mistake one Acid for another, and then play the Devil with my Patient; 'tis true he was convinc'd by his Blood that 'twas Alkalin, and therefore 'twas to be cur'd by an Acid, and then if it does not take, but does him harm he himself was judge, but the Disease did master us: Pray, good Mr. Member, What is it that this Acid does with the Fluids? Does it make the Blood run quicker or flower? but I beg your pardon again, for you say you know nothing of that. What then do you say, That the Acid that will cure an Acute distemper (generally speaking) will not cure a Chronical one; so far all's well; for generally, only 'twill not do it; then I may give either without any consider∣able mistake; but then generally again, you say you have observ'd that Violatil Acids are most effectu∣al in Acute Distempers, and fix'd ones in those we call Chronick ones; now, to speak freely, I do not believe you know the difference betwixt Acute and Chronical distempers, as you say you call them; for in the Acute Diseases, such Dr. Willis and my
other Masters call Fevers, the Blood seems to be all volataliz'd, it flies about like lightning, and therefore every thing that s Volatile, flying (damn those Latin words) I think must make it fly faster; and in Chronical Distempers, as a Dropsie, &c. How the Devil wou'd a Sick Man of common Sense, nay one that's in Bedlam, look upon me; if I bid him drink large draughts of fixt Acids. Vinegar, viz. as you tell me, &c. every hour of the Day. Cure, that won't take, that's too bare faced, and I find you smell it, when you leave that to be regulated by ever Man▪s Apprentice. Is this the Man that wou d have a Thousand Pound a Year towards a Labarotary? This is a way to kill more than a Thousand Pound's worth of Powder and Ball, and he says that's spent every Year to kill the Enemies abroad, and he wou'd have as much to kill the Friends at home: If it had been the Jacobites it had been tolerable, but Friend and Foe, and to give a Fee too to be kill'd, is the Devil and all. But pray, what Observati∣ons are you like to make? you have only two things to deal with, and these are both of a sort; yet you cannot tell us how to manage them; but there s more in this matter: Diseases don't al∣ways appear with the same face, no not in the same person at different times; Oh then what can I do? nay any thing, and take a Fee. Now in short, Mr. Member, I le tell you that Physick was neither begun, nor can be promoted by such Observations. And thus having made a hopeful Introduction; we must expect a learned and use∣ful practice, which I now will follow him into, and leave him singing his Io triumph's over the learning of the Introduction, by which he has baffled all Foreign Physicians, some Dead ones, and all living ones without names.
CHAP. I. Of the GOƲT. He begins first with the Names the Gout has ob∣tain'd among Physicians, when they would tell any one of its having seiz'd upon any one part of the Body; tho' this sorting by-name he seems to arrogate to himself; but pray Sir do you know that the most of the Names you have told us are all Greek, Heathen Greek; and how came they by those names without ranging this Disease into the same order you pretend to: They gave name to the Sciatica too; but you have forgot it. But not to insist too long upon Names, where the thing is so plain, especially since you have afford∣ed me more matter to reflect upon, than really I can be at the trouble to consider; that I will tell you, that 'tis no other than to read your Book, and to write an answer; for I have no other be∣fore me but your own. And now to begin, you tell us, p. 16. § 3. of the different opinions Au∣thors have vented about the seat and original of this Disease; but I will delay speaking any thing to that subject now, because its proper place is a little after this: but since you now begin your description, I will tell you that I will have no consideration about that, since your owing it to Dr. Sydenham (which is more than you confess) has miraculously obtain'd him from you the Cha∣racter of a fair and honest man; and I will con∣tent my self to attack you, where you first begin to shew your Learning, in p. 16. § ult. I can∣not agree, say you, with those Gentlemen, who will have all pain to proceed from a solution of Continuity, which in plain English is either a Wound or Ulcer: Now for my part, I can't see why we should not be made sensible of any thing that injures us, which whatsoever causeth pain doth, without destroying the Integrity of the parts; and it's plain, whatever causeth a
solution of unity, must destroy the Integrity of them. Further, Malbranche tells us, that our Sences were given us to guard ourselves from injuries, and that they never fail to answer the end for which they were given us: They are never guilty of Deceiving us-; as, for instance, our Taste, &c. and all these proceed from a placid vellication of the Membranes. Pain pro∣ceeds from a Contraction of the Fibres, and Pleasure from a pacid relaxation of them) which being granted, &c. My Masters the Physicians, I assure you, do not care whether you agree with them, or not; but why the pox won't you agree with your self? for you say that a solu∣tion of Continuity, in plain English, is a Wound or an Ulcer, then in the very next paragraph, that a Blow with a blunt thing upon any part, which only bruiseth it, will occasion greater pain than if the same part were cut with a sharp in∣strument, although the one only compresseth the parts, and the other divides them asunder, and so makes a perfect solution of Unity. Now, good Mr. Member, did ever any one but your self call a Contusion by the name of Wound, or Ʋlcer? Nay, I'm convinc'd you will not say so neither, and I'll undertake to prove to you that pain is a solution of Unity, and then you ll see that not on∣ly Contusions, but even Wounds and Ulcers, that make more sensible solutions of Unity, may make pain: yet, still there comes another inconvenience upon the heels of this; for we see that the pain of a Contusion is greater, by your own confession, than the pain by a sharp instrument; yet this pain in a Contusion is not so great, at least not greater than the pain of the Gout, and this you tell us only comes from the sharp pointed particles that may affect the membranes of the Toe; and do you think then, that those particles have more points, and are sharper than the Knives and Saw that Surgeons use in amputations? but this en pas∣spant.
Now, for the other part, that we ought to be made sensible of any thing that injures us, which what∣soever causeth pain doth, without destroying the Inte∣grity of the parts: What he means by this I cannot understand, neither is it true English; and I don't know any body but will acknowledge that pain makes him sensible with a vengeance; but why should we be made sensible without destroying the integrity of the parts? For a Wound, and an Ulcer, by his own confession, causes pain; and yet he says too, that in Wounds and Ulcers there is a solution of Ʋnity, or the Integrity of the parts broke off. But what a Devil brought Father Malebranche hither? was it to let us know he has seen his Book de la recherche de la verit? More of his works he pretends not to have seen, and even that I'm convinc'd he never read in the Original, or English translation, for this proves nothing to his purpose: But I'll tell you, good Mr. Member, that the great design of that part of the Book you quote, is to prove to us the real design and use of our senses; ho tells you that they are made ser∣viceable to our design of living, and that in a due distance, in a proper Medium, and when there's a Mens sana in Corpora sano we are never deceiv'd by them in what they represent to us; he tells you, that beyond a due distance a House that is square will appear round: The reason he gives you, but you don't understand it; yet he main∣tains, that tho the House is really square, and we apprehend it to be Round, our sences are not de∣ceived, because the object is not round at a proper distance; but why it appears round rather than of any other Figure he makes very plain: after the same manner he tells you, that if you put your black Stick with the white Head (for so much only you have of a Fop Doctor) into clear Water, your Stick will appear bent; yet when you pull it out, you find it as straight as it was; and notwith∣standing this Paradox, your Eyes perfectly well,
if you but saw as Pere Malebranch did, your reason, wou'd tell you all the time, It is in the water that 'tis very strait. But how comes all this authority in, to condemn poor solution of Unity? Is it, be∣cause he tells you, in the one, that that proceeds from a placid vellication of the Membranes: I don't know he has any neeessity to say that, but because you quote it from him, and I have not the Book by me, I'll believe you. But what does this vellication make for your purpose? Vellication to you is pain, and nothing that's placid; only peo∣ple cannot be kept from showing their reading up∣on occasions. And because all this will not do, you wou d palm upon us a description of pain and pleasure; that ought to be your own, tho it is not truly so; and then wou d make a very ridiculous conclusion, and that without your learned ergo. The Conclusion I have no time to consider, but to the description we ll allow a line or two: and I'll suppose with you, in another part of this Book, that all sence proceeds from vibrillation, motion, I don't remember how you express it, of the Nerves, and that pleasure is a more placid relaxati∣on of them, as here: Now, does not the word Relaxation, at first view, signifie a solution of unity: Yet, not to put this hardship upon you, let us suppose, I say, that sence, and every feel∣ing, in general, is a accompany'd with a vibrilla∣tion or trembling of the Nerve, with viz. an al∣ternat contraction and distraction of the same: but these motions cannot be perform'd, if there be not a mutual departure or excursus of these parts, of which the Nerve is made, in their con∣tact; neither this excursus, but by a successive change of their Contact, or in plain English, but by a solution of Unity; and therefore 'tis evident too, that in all sensation there is a sort of solution of Unity, and so even pleasure itself is never with∣out a solution of Unity. But because pain is a trembling of greater power, hence it is that that
solution which is by pain, is greater and more vio∣lent than in any other feeling; and since this gives the doleful feeling alone, this alone may be said to be a Solution of Ʋnity, insomuch that a solution of Unity signifies or infers a troublesome sensation and feeling. Pray what▪ reason can you perswade us by, that pain proceeds from a Con∣traction of the Fibres, and pleasure from a pacid Relaxation of them? These are indeed most peace∣able words; but what authority have you for this positive assertion, as you are pleased to speak in the following Paragraph. I may agree with you that pain may be by a stagnation of the Juices, but not by a compression, but a distention of the vessels that this feeling is made, and of this you are so very fond, that you assert that there can be no pain but by a stagnation; entirely forgetting the pain we talk'd of but now when a cutting. But pray when the Blood is upon occasions penn'd up in any Vessel, so that the obstructing power is greater than that of the approaching Blood, can any Man think that this greater quantity will ra∣ther contract the Vessel or dilate it? I'm sure if it does the last, the pain that attends it must be a solution of Unity, as I explain'd before. The same's to be said of the Blood in a neighbouring Vessel, that does not stop any other way, than by the distended side of the obstructed vessel com∣pressing its less resisting side. But pray Mr. Member give us an account of the wonderful flight in the next Paragraph, that positive Assertion (as you are indeed full of such) by which you wou'd so evidently put upon us, a conclusion ab absurdo which is natural from your Doctrine, but not at all from ours; in a palsie there is a wasting and a decay of the Member, and a Man might say that it is contracted; and if so, supposing your Assertion, there ought to be a great deal of pain, which indeed is contrary to Experience: on the other hand such wastings and decays of Members
are far from the conditions we prov'd to be ne∣cessary in feeling, and still further from the con∣ditions of pain; and therefore (or ergo) this ex∣perience you have brought in, destroys your Hy∣pothesis, but mightily establishes what I prov'd to you before. All I will add to this, is, that if you ever have the impudence to show your talent to the World once more, you will not assert any thing positively, and without a foundation too; but especially when you are to run down Men and Opinions both. But to proceed, I pass over the weak Account you give of the Disposition some People at different times have to this Dis∣ease more than at another time; and we consi∣der your Definition, which I'll assure you is very far from an Ʋniversity Definition, and 'twill please you mightily, because you hate all the Art of that place, You tell us, that it is Pain of the Joints, and parts adjacent, occasion'd from an extrava∣sated Alkaline Humour, irritates the Mem∣branes of the Joints, and parts adjacent Hitherto, we suppose with you, that all pain is the Extrava∣sation of Alkaline parts upon those Membranes where the Pain is; but the difference being the Extravasation upon the Membranes of the Joints that constitute the essence of the Gout: Then all Pains in Joints are Gouts; but Nocturnal Pains that affect the Vertebrae, are Pains in Joints; Ergo No∣cturnal Pains are either the Gout, which I do not believe you'l assert, or else your Definitio non com∣petit Definito; and that's contrary to the Laws of a good Definition: But again, why alkaline parts? they are the most innocent, smoothest things in the World; they have no edges, because you tell us their Antagonist's have; then supposing that these were Extravasated, and this condition cou'd effect the Membranes, we cannot see how 'twould irritate them; but you prove afterwards, that these are the offending Particles, and there's no standing a∣gainst your Arguments; Ergo, they may be true,
tho▪ not hitherto. Well let's get another step forward, and see what necessity there is for their being Extravasated; truly I see none for it, but a great deal to the contrary: But again, we'll sup∣pose them Extravasated, and as sharp as you say they are, nay even carrying Chevaux de Frise with them, yet I don't believe they could provoke Pain, and my reason is, that I have been told by some of my Masters that Aq. Fortis applied to a Membrane or a naked Nerve, not otherways hurt, did excite no Contractions as Convulsions, or the like, and if that be true, as I believe it is, then farewell something else, and your excellent Definition; which indeed, I believe, you think gone for nothing, but that 'twas never at the Ʋniversity, and you think to put it upon the Ʋniversity Doctors. Having thus told us the very Nature of this Dis∣ease, by this learned Definition, we must needs advance and determin the Cure and Original too: You take your ordinary way in Sacrificing three or four Old Fellows at least, for every thing you are to Establish; and because some charge the Head, others the Liver, and your Dear Friend, Helmont, the Stomach, for troubling us with this Disease; 'tis below you to charge either: But why did not you tell us who they were that accused the Liver and Head, as well as him who accused the Stomach? Was it that you do not know? or is it that you'l let the World see that your Devoirs are only paid to Truth; and in that respect down must go Friend and Foe, all alike, very Ingenious in∣deed. But how do you Refute those old Gentle∣men; your first Argument is from the general Disorders that precede a Fit. Is this an Argu∣ment to make us fall upon our Friends? Don't you know that a Fit of the Stone makes us vomit, makes our Heads ach, our Limbs as if they were paralitical, makes us Feaverish, dry, and makes us sweat; this is a pretty▪ general piece of Disor∣dor, and pray, you, did any one carry the Stone
further than the Kidneys, Ureters, or Bladder Again, as you say afterwards, an unclean Stomach makes Impure Chyle, ill Chyle base Juices, base Juices, the Gout; ergo, an unclean Stomach makes the Gout. Moreover, do you know that for a long time the Blood, the very Blood, the Store-House of the other Juices was believ'd to be made in the Li∣ver; and if this be true, as I doubt you can't prove the contrary, we ought to go to the first thing, since we are digging for the Fountain. But still Malbranch, another Friend of yours, tells us, that all Pain is in the Brain, and not at all in any part; because, after a Man has lost his Leg, he frequent∣ly puts down his Hand to scratch the Toe of that Leg that he had lopp'd off some time before, and if so, we ought to place our Disease in the Head. 'Tis evident that all these three cannot be the Ori∣ginal of this Disease, and I don't tell you how far any of them are so: All that I pretend to say, is, that any of those old Gentlemen may enjoy their Opinion, notwithstanding this your first Argu∣ment; and now we will see if the Second is any better, and that is From the condition of the Blood and Juices during the time of the Fit: Under which Head, I shall make it appear that the Blood and Juices during the time of the Fit, abound not with Acid Particles, but on the contra∣ry, with Alkalious ones. Ha! this a dangerous point to meddle with, here comes in again the In∣fallible Experiments, demonstaative Ergo's, nay, as he tells us afterwards, as Demonstrative as any of Euclid▪s Propositions. Is not this a rare Fellow? A rare Promoter and Discoverer of Truth, here's a new one indeed, the poor People before him never thought any piece of Learning so demonstra∣tive, as any of Euclid▪s Propositions; take any of his, and because, You may have lookt over, or over∣lookt the first Book, take the 5th. or Pythagoras's 48th. and let us see the same certainty in your Argument, as there is in any one of these, you
think the easiest and most uncertain. I have made some considerable Doubts about your Demon∣stration, but I cou'd never about his Demonstra∣tion, in any of these following Propositions. This second Branch he defers till afterwards, and proceeds now to illustrate further his first Argu∣ment; but instead of doing that, begins already to be jealous of his Acids and Alkalies, and leaving the Proof of this general Disorder, or that such a Disorder is peculiar to this Disease, as he ought to prove; he only tells us that these disorders are different, according to the different Constitutions, and then going to tell us that Alkalies are always the cause of Feavers, but never Acids, he falls again into a mad Fit; could he think, that the old Gentlemen were to be justled our of their Seats by so small a touch; tho' he thought, he had set them upon rotten Chairs, altogether fit for that purpose; I dont know how much in the right, or in the wrong any body supposes them to be; but 'm sure every body will say, that you ne∣ver attempt to destroy their Opinions, otherways than by an old trick of your own, a positive Asser∣tion, which is not only unmannerly enough, and like a young University Man, but you are even pleas'd to grace such Assertions with the Title of Demonstration; and you won't stop there neither, but they are as evident as Euclid's Demonstra∣tions. But again, I'll suppose that you under∣stand the Business of Constitutions, and that a Fea∣ver is always one of those general Disorders, how the Devil came in Acids and Alkalies, in the proof of general Disorders proceeding a Fit of the Gout: you did always, and evidently prove that the Juices, and Juices alone were the source of the Disease; but if you think, that you had made a cunning Re∣treat into your Circle, 'tis done so ill that I will not follow you at this time; your safety there, after what has been said in the Introduction, being sensible and obvious even to your self; but we shall
have an occasion afterwards to talk upon this matter.: Only I must tell you, that I ll always suppose after this, that 'tis the damn▪d Alkalies that makes all the Fermentations, and that the Acids check them; and I do assure you, that this Foundation will go a great way against you. Your History, Sir, which you now begin very abruptly, and like an ill Taylor sowing together two pieces of Cloath, you joyn things very scur∣vily, you follow Dr. Sidenham close, but you bring him in by the Head and Shoulders. I told you, before, I had nothing to say to that great Man; and therefore I'll begin with another Botch of yours, after you have done with him, where p. 23. §. ult. you are so afraid of your Alkaline Par∣ticles, that you carry them always in your Pocket, lest at any time you might misplace them, and just after you have ended Dr. Sydenham's History, you begin so; The Blood abounding with too great a quantity of Alkalious Particles, is the general Cause of this Distemper, in order to which, there are several other things which concur: As first, &c. Is not this handsomly added to the Tail of your History; but these things you dispise, that is an University Gloss; yet even, that is necessary for those that would play the plagiary, and not be so easily discovered, for whether I ever had read Dr. Sydenham or not, I must see this is a Wen in your Book; but you being too wise to be instructed, and I seeking information every where, and thinking to find it with you, who are a pro∣moter of new Truths, one who would have the World to take nothing upon your Authority, but Demonstrates every thing; I intend to try, if I can discover any greater certainty in your concurring Causes, than I have found in the rest. But to be∣gin, I think a way of Aphorism in tbis matter wou'd have becom d your asserting design, better than to tell us, you are to say nothing without a Reason, and at the same time not one reason you
give for any thing. First, say you, too moist a State of Air, which hinders free Transpiration, by which means the Excrementitious Alkaline parts, which should be thrown out by the Cuta∣neous Pores, are retained, and the quantity, &c. Now since you are talking of Magick, pray tell me, dear, good, Learned Member of the Royal College, who it is that manages matters so exact∣ly within, that only these Excrementitious Alka∣lies are thrown out; and why not rather the Acids, who you say are sharp, half Pikes, Spades and Mattocks; surely I wou▪d think that a Body of armed Men are better for breaking into an En∣campment (that I may speak so, since you have brought those fine words out of Flanders) than a parcel of Boors, sluggards, and heavy fellows that have no Arms at all; besides, a Master of mine in a Latin Book of his, treating about this business of perspiration (as he calls it) thinks it a strange Paradox, to assert that the heaviest Bo∣dies are easiest mov'd; or to your understanding, that the most Volatile things are the least apt to rise, or be sublim'd; and the most earthly things the easiest: but to say no more of this Paradoxi∣cal nonsense, I must tell you that perhaps the Transpiration is not so free in moist, as it is in clear weather; yet you give us no reason for it; on the contrary, because you are a wonderful fel∣low at experiments, I'le tell you, that the Tran∣spiration ought to be more free in moist weather, than in clear; if you'll only grant me that if there are two fellows meeting at a Door, and by plain force the one keeps the other not only out, but makes his way forward too, this fellow is to be thought the strongest; now, only grant me this, and then I'le add, that because you say, in clear weather, our steems can get clear thorow the pores, these doors of our Skin, that they'll much more easily get through in moist weather; be∣cause by a certain experiment, which at this time
shall be nameless, the Air is a great deal heavier, justles more, and presles against our departing steems with greater force than when it is moist. You see now, How well you demonstrate. I have no time to insist upon your Prophane, and ill made parallel that follows; neither much to the second Article, since you neither prove why variety of Meats, or a great deal of any one sort is hurtful; and again you make a most experimental paralel betwixt the Stomach and the Root of a Tree; It may be good Enthusiasm, but 'tis far from a Man of so nice experiments as you pretend to be. The third concurring cause is astonishing, but espe∣cially for the wonderful way you have in ma∣naging it; we must drink Wine, and not drink it. We must not drink it, because the Spirits of the Wine meeting with the Volatile Alkalious salt of the Blood, by a mutual combination of them, they are turn'd into Helmont's Offa abba, which can by no means Circulate with the Blood; I can smell the Experiment this your assertion depends upon, but I'le tell you that it wants a little Labo∣ratory-work before that is done; for especially, you ought not to have talk'd of Wine, but Spirit of Wine; which has other affections, properties and powers than Wine it self; then you ought to prove that this Alkalious salt is so plentiful, and in so great an abundance in the Blood; and I peremptorily challenge you to answer me upon all the integrity you have left you, whether or no you can by the help of your Fire show me a real volatile Salt, or Spirit from any kind of sick∣ly (for out of healthy Blood is allow'd to be im∣possible) Blood new let out of the Vessel, with∣out any sort of Digestion; and if this be but true, your reason will not debar us from drinking of Wine; but again, you say that Wine drank in any great quantity makes them lose their Tensity; and if so, they are more Relax, and when they are more Relax, they are in the circumstances
you place them, when they are to be the Instruments of our pleasure; but at this time they are the Causes of the Gout, and before of pleasure, and therefore Wine must not be drank, because it makes the Gout a pleasure, or a pleasant, delightful, desirable Gout: O brave Member, Is this the result of your reasoning? Yet, 'tis not fair dealing to remember what was said a Page or two before, and therefore, I'll leave this part, and see why we must drink it; a small quantity of Wine, saith the Member, drank at convenient seasons doth raise the Spirits, and invigorate the Nerves. Now supposing all this to be true, how are the Vinous Spirits hindred, and kept from combining and taking counsel with the Alkalious Particles, so as not to make that damnable, immoveable Offa Alba; they will not do it now, because you will not have it so; but you are so fond of this Tensity and Relaxation, that nothing can be more; must I tell you, that I'm told, (because I'm no Book Learned Gentle∣man) that this was an oversight of Des Cartes's, and perhaps you have seen it in Malbranch, they tell you indeed, that a Rope stretch'd and bent a hundred Yards in length, cannot be struck at one end, but 'twill move at the other; yet can any Man be so blind, but he must see that this is not the condition of the Nerves, for they are seen no where to be so, but just where they come out of the Brain; but if you will try an Experiment that will come nearer the Condition of the Nerves, take a Rope of what length you please, nail it hard to a Beam, then stretch it out in a Spiral or any other Figure, half a Foot more, then nail it again at the end of that half Foot, and so all a long 'till you have nail▪d Forty Yards if you will; that this may be liker the Nerves implanted so firmly in Muscles, that they make but one Sub∣stance; only I must desire you to leave a Yard, or a Yard and a half after the last nailing, fitted with
a Nooze for your Neck, then go in and swing so long that one that you may think a fair judge, may cut you down when he observes the end that was first nailed begin to move, vibrillat, and shake, then indeed, when you give me an account of this Experiment, you shall be allow'd to talk of Tensity and Relaxation as you think fit. Fourthly, say you, the immoderate use of vene∣real exercises, for that it spendeth the Spirits, and decayeth Natural heat, and so procureth a weakness to all the parts of the Body, &c. Good Member, if I had but time and patience enough, I cou'd show you that there is not one sentence in this whole Paragraph that's either consistent and agreeable not only with common Sense, but ev'n your self too; yet not to pass it over without some remarks, I must ask you why the matter may not be so contriv'd, that the useless Alkalin parts may be thrown off in this evacuation, as well as by perspiration before, and afterwards by the Counses in Women? again, Pray are venereal exercises, Acid or Alkalin? Moreover, a little di∣version with a Girl must needs be a very good Cure for the Gout, according to you; because the Fever you told us before, which is made by that devilish fermenting Alkali, intimates to us the necessity of something that may hinder this fermentation, and allay this Heat; and now you tell us, upon this occasion, that it decayeth Natural heat, and a little of it we want to have decay'd, that we may cure the Gout and Fever; ergo a touch or two must be very useful for Gouty People, which is contra hypothesin & experientiam, tho' no unnatural consequence of your reasoning. I promis'd indeed not to say one word more to this Paragraph, but you think when a Man has read the institutions, that he's straight fitted not only to be a Physician, but a great Author; and therefore whether it be to the purpose or no pur∣pose, or rather playing at cross purposes, you will
show your talent there, in a long story of volun∣tary and involuntary motion; where you are pleas'd to be the first that ever reckoned Respira∣tion among the involuntary motions; 'tis a disco∣very of your own I confess, and no body that I know will dispute it with you, tho' I must tell you that I can keep my breath a minute or two, not∣withstanding my performing that action three or four times in that space of time, when I do not contrive and order it so. Your way of describing Involuntary motions is peculiar to your self too, for I have walk'd in my sleep, I have talk'd and yet walking and talking were never call'd invo∣luntary motions by any one but you self; ergo, I think that you your self ought to read the prin∣ciples of Medicin before you begin not only to teach, but even to run down others. As to the fifth concurring Cause, I'le only desire you to tell me whether Sleep or over-much sleep in the Af∣ternoon is Acid or Alkali; Alkali it must be, but how do you prove it? for further upon this Para∣graph I will not attempt, because I really tell you That in that whole letter of Dr. Cole's, about an apoplexy, where you read this, I believe 'tis the most unlucky, ill spoke thing in the whole Book, and so the Dr. your good Friend, is not only very much oblig'd to you for bringing him upon the stage, but for joining him too with your Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum; which I must tell you is grea∣ter nonsense ev'n than your Treatise of the Gout, if that is possible. But to pass over at this time, your 6thly, 7thly, 8htly, 9thly and 10thly; both because I want time, and these are the most inconsiderable, and lastly, That you cannot write another Book without them, and so we'll leave them yours untoucht, only I must desire you'll please to inform me how overmuch Watching and Fasting, and Study, and Sorrow, and Care, and much Labour, over-much Rest, sudden Rest, exposing the Body to the Air in cold or
moist Seasons, after any violent Exercise, the total leaving off of any accustomed Exercise, the keeping the Feet either too Hot or too Cold, are Alkalies; For these they are; but how, is my desire to know. And now to your Eleventhly, because tho' I am old, yet I like a little baudy as well as you, and this we cannot pass over with the rest, without an unpardonable neglect, be∣cause of your exact observations on this point. Eleventhly, say you, from the stopping of any usual evacuation, as the Monthly Courses in Women, and a Flux of the Hemorrhoids in Men, which I have frequently known to keep their certain periods to a Day, by means of which observation the Excremen∣titious Matter wanting its usual vent is transmitted to some other part of the Body. And according to the nature of the Part upon which it is thrown, it exerciseth its Tyranny accordingly. This is a trick indeed, good Member, you tell the Women that you know that they have Monthly Courses, and that you have kept a correspondence with so many of them, that after all your long conver∣sation, you have met with some of them that have gone to Day; now more than this, I can∣not learn from this branch; you that are a re∣former, are you not yet free of the vulgar Error of the Blood of the Monthly Courses being rank Poison, do you think still that one drop of this Blood can destroy whole Corn-fields, the periodi∣cation or the necessity of having such Courses has been a very hard task to Physicians to account for, but I remember that one of my Masters in my Dedication proves very evidently, that the men∣struous Blood must be the same, in every respect, with the rest of the Blood running in the Arteries; excepting any impurity it may contract, by the way, in the Vagina Ʋteri, or further in its way of coming out; so however certain it may be that Women are not so apt to have the Gout, and ev'n other Diseases, so long as they keep time in that
Monthly Evacuation, yet this is not because there is an Evacuation of Morbifick Matter, or of Mat∣ter that may occasion Diseases, and really no more than the Key that sticks in your Laboratory∣door, when you make an Experiment, can be said to be the contriver and manager of it. But pray, supposing all this were true, what's the necessity of this matter's affecting the Joints more than any other place? you say nothing of this all along. Having thus distinctly shown that you have not at all distinctly given an account of all those things which either cause the Gout at the be∣gining, or accelerate a fit on those People who have already received the Morbifick impression, and also of the general disorders that precede a Fit; I will now proceed with you to your se∣cond and beloved Head; which is, That the Blood and Juices during the time of the Fit abound not with Acid Particles, but on the  with Alkalious ones. And because I hate Totologies as well as you do, I wish you wou'd make us happy with this History of Human Blood of yours, that we are thus plagu'd with; but let me advise you, for a better guide, to lay before you an apparatus to such a History, I am told that Mr. Boyle has left you; but tis very probable that a Book-learn'd Gentleman of his small Capacity is unworthy of your notice. Yet to say no more of this, you delay your giving us an account of the state and condition of Human Blood in the time of a Fit, till you bless the World with this your Experimental History, for which your other Books are but so many obstre∣porous Trumpets for a Poppit-show; so we must wait with patience, and, in the mean time, hear what else you are pleas'd to dictate upon this oc∣casion, which is, that besides the necessary Con∣clusions to be made from reiterated Experi∣ments of Distilling, or Analizing by Fire the
Blood of those People who labour under the Fit of the Gout, the generating of the Chalky Sub∣stance contained in the Node during that time, and those Nodes nor that chalky Substance are at any other time produced, but during the very time of the Fit; from this very production alone, it plainly appears that the Blood, and other Juices, &c. Here I set your Achillean Argument in its best and most favourable Light, and after I tell you that, I pass your rediculous stuff about this matter, being bred all in one Fit, &c. I must enquire of you, what this proves in the general about the Alkality of the Blood in the time of any Sickness; and then I'll tell you that 'tis not against the Doctrine establish'd before, upon supposing the Truth of Acid and Alkali, being the real Prin∣ciples of Bodies; tho' at the same time, Dr. Blan∣kard tells you, that you Chymists, (as you please to title your self) say that all Fermentation arises from the Combination of Acid and Alkali, tho' you say most astonishingly from the Alkali only; but you are both agreed that Acids are more the causes of Quiet or Rest; now Quiet is a necessary requisite for Petrification, and consequently that the Acids is more fit to make the parts of this Stony and Chalky Substance unite; but a great deal more than that bustling Alkali that causes Fermentation and Disunion of parts: but again, I must tell you, that you will not have it an Alkali neither, for you lay this as a general Truth, that whatever changes a Solution of Syrup of Violets with water, or an Aqueous Body into Green, is an Alkali; and now you tell us, that when this Chalky Substance is Calcin'd, it will turn Syrup of Violets Green, and sometimes (tho' not al∣ways) will do the same without Calcination. Here is indeed Chymical Sense, every thing that changes Syrup of Violets dissolv'd in Water, into a Green Colour, is an Alkaline Substance, the Chal∣ky Stuff taken out of Gouty Nodes seldom do it,
ergo 'tis an Alkali, positively Alkali; Is not this a hopeful Conclusion? But, Sir, I know you despise the Maxims of my poor old Masters, that have al∣ways told us that the cause and effect are the same, or the cause and effect are always together, and never separated; here by a piece of sublimated Knowledge, you tell us, that 'tis the Essence of an Alkali, which makes us call a Body so, because it works these changes upon your Syrup of Violets, yet here's no such change; but yet it must be an Alkali: How are you to be understood? 'Tis an Alkali, and 'tis not an Alkali; well, but say you, Calcine, it then it will do; but pray, why must I Calcine it? that it might be more Homoge∣neous as you call it, and liker what it is in the Bo∣dy; but how am I sure that there is such a Fire in our Bodies, and a Chymist that makes these Alka∣lines, or that the Fire has made this Substance more natural; some change it has undergone, it did not change your Syrup, now it does, but is it become more natural? But these are things of common Sense, and you Chymists despise all that; and therefore. I tell you, that I'll leave all the rest of this damn'd Jargon, and your whole II Chap∣ter too, about the Regulation of the non Naturales, as you call them, because I would only vindicate my old Masters, and have a touch at your belov'd Medicine before I've done; yet I must tell you that Dr. Garth in his Lecture proved it evidently, that no Air was mixt with the Blood in the Lungs, and another said, that it would make it less Fluxil if it was so; and because People live most upon Air by your Experiment which you bring us; I wou'd advise you to get into a Glass Vessel with a cover that's peirced, to let in the Air, then Substracting two thirds of your ordinary al∣lowance because of the Experiment, and a half of the other third, because you now are quiet, and do not perspire so much as when you go about in your Coach and smoke Tobacco in the
Coffee-Houses, and then we'll know more of the matter. But let's leave this, and look in∣to your III. Chapter, and there you tell us that, To Demonstrate the Insufficiency of the Me∣thod of Cure, both heretofore, and at this time in common practice by the generality of Phy∣sicians; for the well performance of which, I shall give you the whole Method taken by a great Physician, Sir John Gordon since dead, with a Noble Lord, the Lord Carlisle, he used all the Alkalious Medicines, &c. He was a Man very fit to teach you Mr. Member, both by Instructing you in any part of Physick, and curbing that inso∣lent, impudent forwardness of yours, and 'tis well you have nick'd the time so well, as to accuse him after he is Dead, and when he may have no Friend out of his own Country; but I can assure you for once, that his Death was very much re∣gretted by worthy and learned People, that had known his dextrerous Hand in ordering, and ad∣justing a Medicine; his Merits I acknowledge are as far above my praise, as they are above your snarling; and therefore I will only ask, why this great Man was to expiate for former, and present Phy∣sicians? he never told you that 'twas the Gout he was to cure my Lord Carlisle of, and how come you to know it? were not there Books of former Physicians that told you, I give Alkalies for the Gout, and Physicians alive that justify this practice; why was not their Blood to be sprinkled before your Threshold? dead Authors may have defenders, and live ones will; but here's a Man for the purpose, he has few Friends here, and my Books being only design'd for the Mob, they are not only not read here, but they're sure never to go into Scotland. Yet, may I presume to tell you, that the usage of the French in disturbing the Ashes of the Dead at Hailbron Two Years ago, after they had taken it, was reckon'd a piece of the most inhuman and barbarous Cruelty that
ever was heard of. They were incens'd Enemies, and might have done it in fury and in a mad fit; but for you to do almost the same thing, and more, considering the circumstances, is unpardonable: It not only shows the meanness of your Soul, but the apprehensions you lye under as to other Phy∣sicians of your own time. But when did you learn this Story? was it about the time, that you had the impudence to come in upon the practice of one of the greatest, and justly eminent Chyrurgeons of this Town, for my Lady Carlile, and was in a very short time after sent a packing for your success? truly this is a very remarkable occasion! and as I was saying to you but now, How did Mr. Nicholson or you either know, so certainly as to venture to defame a Man, that Sir J. G. was to cure that Noble Lord of the Gout? Again, sup∣posing it was so, you cannot prove by all that is said that this was not a good practice, but ev'n that it was not the best: then, say you, Why was not he curd? Because he was incurable, and I sup∣pose Sir J. G. told him so: and when all this is done, is Sir John or the whole Art of Physick to be ridicul'd, because it cannot immortalize Men? or have you attain'd to that certainty that you can keep a Man from dying of any one Disease? truly, I have heard one of my great Masters say, that he wou'd value himself mightily, if he cou'd but certainly cure Corns: but more than this you can do; tho' if I had time, I cou'd very easily demonstrate (since that is the word) that your own practice, for which you have shed so much Blood, attack'd so many reputations, or made so many hecatombs, is the most ridiculous stuff in nature: but I'm sure those that are as mad as your self to try it, will find the event by a great and running name. And now since I am brought so near an end, and am forc'd to skip a great many nonsensical Things hat fall a course, considering the former ruines;
I'le content my self with looking into your ob∣servations about Fevers, that I may see how dis∣creet you are to some living Physicians, and how well you show your own understanding, in de∣faming them. In the first observation, you are a great deal kinder than you have hitherto show'd your self; you tell us here of a Lady of great worth (as all your Patients are) that was ill treated, by some friend or disciple of yours, 'twou'd seem, because you you have not given us his name; this Lady is just a going down into the Chambers of Death, and her Friends expressing their loss by their Tears, when in comes the Great Colbatch with a saving Acid, and gives them better hopes of their de∣parting Friend. Well done 'faith, Mr. Member; but who the Devil, do you think, will believe that you cur'd a deplorable Patient of a Hectick Fever, in 12 Days especially? I will not doubt of a Cure of something perform'd in that time, but that you know what a Hectick Fever is, I mighti∣ly doubt. And that these your Medicines may be of use to the World, as you say you design them, you ought to have given us a true Observation, or an exact History of the circumstances of the par∣ticular Patient, which you neither do in all these Observations, nor do I believe you capable to do it. But lastly, you give us a fine example of what you wou'd do, for curing a Hectick Fever; which is so fine, that I think the College ought to Fine you excre tuo for a mala praxis: but if I were to observe all the mistakes you make in every particular in this and the other Observations (as you please to call them) I shou'd put an endless task upon my self: You know that is not my main design, but the Vindication of my Masters, and therefore to pass your second Observation with one Question only, we shall be brought to the pur∣pose: now the Question is, Whether or no the giving a Vomit to such a Patient as you describe here, before
you let him Blood, is not the real cause of all the swellings of his Face, that brought him into so great danger through the whole Cure? I am apt to be∣lieve that if that were determin'd too, there wou'd be another Twenty pound. To the pur∣pose again, as much as your cross-purpose will allow us; you promis'd us an account of Fevers cur'd by Acids, but instead of that you will bring in, over head and ears, a Story to abuse Dr. Richard Robinson; and that is of an Apoplexy; the fact, I mightily doubt of, as of all yours, you make them so monstrous to show your skill, that they are not to be believed; here's now a living Physician, and therefore I will not presume to vindicate him, because he is more able, in every respect, than I am; and will not observe your ridiculous cure of a radicated Phtisis, as you call it, because the description is like all those of your own co ntrivance, very Originals for Non∣sense: who ever describ'd a Phtisis Pulmnum as you do, or cur'd so soon such an one as you wou'd describe. Now you come into Fevers a∣gain, and to make the story more formidable, you tell us of a fearful Pestilential Fever, wonder∣fully describ'd, but manag'd by an Honest and Great Physician; very well Member, good words indeed; But did you never tell over the Town who this Great Physician was? Yes, you did, 'twas Dr. G—s a very learned and great Physi∣cian, I do assure you, and one of the fairest Practitioners about Town; but how the Patient was manag'd, what his Constitution was, &c. you say nothing of: You tell us he had a bleeding at the Nose for Thirty hours, and that 'twas stopt by your Vulnerary Powder, and that he was cur'd by you afterwards. Was not all this very great, to come in upon an Honest Physician and to Cure his Patient? Your Vulnerary Powder you are so fond of, will be consider'd anon; but 'tis always your good luck to expose your self most,
where you expect the greatest Applause, 'tis hard to have to do with Great Physicians: they have designs you can dream nothing of; you tell us, you stopt the Bleeding, yet the Fever continued; now the same doubts remains with me, that it seems did with Dr. G. this evacuationseem'd to be critical, and 'tis an old Maxim founded upon Observation, that Nulla Crisis est Parca, and some of my Masters have told us the reason of it; so that 'tis more than probable that the Fever would then have been cur'd, if you had not stopt the Bleeding too soon, and was really cured by the very same Evacuation, and perhaps was then cured for all your saying so; I do not accuse your honesty in this point, but your knowledge; for a Man that cannot tell me when any one has a Fever, at least the par∣ticular Circumstances can never tell me when he Cures one, and this is much your Case: For since you do all for the good of Mankind, and all the World knows we want exact Hi∣stories, and Accounts of Fevers, more than Medicines; give us first a good Indication, Instruments can never be wanting, Ammuni∣tion Bread, and a Bottle of Water, will do very often with a great many: Let me add to all this, that I think a Mala praxis is more justly your Reward than any thing else; you need not be afraid of that Doctor, for you are too much below his wrath. We have seen enough of your Talent of Writing, your excellent art in describing Diseases, your singular, but unlucky way of Defaming Physi∣cians, and a great deal of a ridiculous Practice, supposing your descriptions were natural, or in plain English, we see how honest, and how learned a Physician you are, and that really you are too much honourd, even with my notice of your Book; and therefore since I have begun, I'll endea∣vour to do you Justice about your Vulnerary Pow∣der
too, and that from a Letter to you, from your unknown, yet faithful Servant, and Well∣wisher, T. S. I believe indeed, as you do, that he's a Gentle∣man of Candor and Ingenuity, nay and a Prophet too, for he said, you would Write on till you ex∣pos'd your self, which is most true. But the De∣vil's in your Impudence for comparing your Dis∣covery, as you call it, to Harveys Circulation; you accuse the Ancients of more Ignorance than Harvey thought fit to do, and even his Discovery it self must be lessen'd by you; if you had been be∣fore his time twou'd certainly have been yours; but I'll swear, I doubt you understand it still, for as evident as it seems to you, I admire, say you, how People could be so sottish, as to see Blood run from a Vein below the Ligature, and not from thence infer a Circulation. Is this all the Evi∣dence you have to disparage Harvey's Discovery by, and to entitle you to the liberty of making Dunces of former Physicians? Mr. Member if I were to Examin you upon this Point, I'm afraid, you should be Remitted to your Studies. Let us suppose then with the Ancients, that Blood came from the Head, the Liver, &c. into the Arms and Legs, and that this Blood was returned by these Veins, a Ligature in this case stopping the motion of the Blood in its return, obliges the Blood to run out of a Wound that's made below the Ligature, as much on this Supposition, as upon Harvey's De∣monstration, and therefore we hear them talk of Bleeding the Cephalick in the Arm for Head-Aches, the Hepatick in Inflamations, and the Me∣dian in more Ambiguous cases. You see now, how well you understand the Circulation; but you confound every thing you meddle with, if it were even a T—d. But after all your boasting, we return to your Powder that cures Wounds of the Guts, and Lungs certainly; here's Impudence indeed, but for evincing this
as shortly as I can, I'll hint at two or three things about curing of Wounds, and then De∣monstrate what a Medicine must be, that cures the Wounds in the Lungs in particular. 'Tis agreeable with common Observation that Wounds on Muscles, or in the more musculare parts are the easiest cured, supposing our power of coming at them, (which is a Bull of a supposition were it not made to a Block-head) and consequently the less Muscular any part is, the less capable it is to be cur'd: Now the Lungs are a Congeries of Bladders and Blood Veslels, and consequently very hard to grow together; but besides this, a Medicine that cures the Lungs must not only make it grow to∣gether in Fifteen seconds, but even so, as to contain air against its gravity and elastical power in that time, which is an infinite force: Now, since this is so evidently necessary, let us see if this Medicin can unite and cure a wound in the best Circumstances, in Fifteen seconds; and if it cannot do that, or if it cannot cure a Cut-finger in that time, far less will it ever cure a Wound in the Lungs; and that this must be the time is evident from the business of Respiration. Now, for its effects, I can give you a prety good History of it from a Master of mine, who talkd with my Lord Cuts about it, in Chaves's Chocolat-House in the Pall-Mall, when my Lord had a design to promote his singular discovery; and a word out of Flanders about a Lieutenant Colonel, because he only talks of Granadiers or a Serjeant, then I've done. This Nobleman, who I'm told is a very good Friend and promoter of any thing that may be of publick Service, was conducted by this Learned Member to see some Experiments
made upon Dogs; he had then the confidence to desire some of the Gentlemen that attend∣ed my Lord thither, to run one of the Dogs thorow the Guts, and the other thorow the Lungs as near as they could; which was done, and he dress'd up the Dogs, and pro∣mis'd to let his Lordship see them recover'd in Six or Eight Days: My Lord had not seen the Event when he talk'd with one of my Masters about that Affair; but next Sunday my Master meeting his Lordship at Whitehall, he ask'd him about his Dogs, who was answerd that Colebatch had told him that they had made their escape: This was such a piece 'of stuff that did not take with his Lord∣ship; but answering, there's a Granadier of mine run thorow the Lungs and he has him now under his Cure; I am told that my Master askt my Lord, if he was sure that he was run through the Lungs, for Chyrurgeons have not given us any distinguishing Symptoms in this case; but the Lord Cuts said of that he cou'd say nothing, but that he said he was run through the Lungs: However, my Master meeting his Lordship again, askt him about the Granadier, who told him that he was Dead. This I may believe was the true reason that he never made any further addresses to his Lordship, he not being very easy to be put upon. Then as to Flanders tis very well known that Lieutenant Col. Hume, of my Lord Lorne's Regiment, got a wound on the Thigh, with a Musquet Bullet at Namur, and sending for the Member for his Cure, was dispatcht, before his Friends heard that he was wounded, his Thigh swelling pro∣digiously, which next day gangreen'd, of which he died.
Here, good Mr. Member, you have both Rea∣son and Experience about your Powder, and they are both in their own Nature so convin∣cing, that I doubt you cannot bring your self off; a little impudence does very well with a Quack, and if you had staid there, you might have been safe for me; but Ignorance being once joined with it, no body can be safe; You attack my Dead Master with a Name, a Living one without a Name, and the whole College in a very plain way: I have told you this once, Verbum sapienti sat est, but a Fool's never to be mended. FINIS.
