C5888 12029731 52719
Iohn iij King of POLAND Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia Samogitia, &c Pag. 163
The History of POLAND, IN Several LETTERS to Persons of Quality. Giving an Account of the Antient and Present State of that Kingdom, Historical, Geographical, Physical, Political, and Ecclesiastical; VIZ. Its Origin and Extent, with a Description of its Towns and Provinces, the Succession and remarkable Acti∣ons of all its Kings, and of the Great Dukes of Lithuania: The Election Power and Coronit o the King: The Senate, or House of Lords: The  and Form of Go∣vernment: The Privileges of the Gry their Religion, Learning, Language, Customs, Has, Manners, Riches, Trade, and Military▪ Affairs; together with the State of Physick and Natural Knowledg  also an Account of the Teutonick Order, and of the Duke of Curland, his Family and Territories. With Sculptures, and a new Map after the best Geographers. With several Letters relating to Physick. VOL. I. By BERN. CONNOR, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and Member of the College of Physicians; who in his Travels in that Country collected these Me∣moirs from the best Authors, and his own Observations. Publish'd by the Care and Assistance of Mr. SAVAGE. London, Printed by J. D. for Dan. Brown without Temple-Bar, and A. Roper in Fleetstreet. M DC XCVIII.
THE PREFACE. HAving neither a Genius, nor a Talent for History, much less for Politicks, and having passed but a very small time at the late King of Poland's Court, I can neither promise the Criticks, nor Po∣liticians, that Politeness of Stile, nor those exact Rules and Circumstances of History they generally expect, and are accustom'd to meet with in Rela∣ions of this nature. For the Memoirs I collected, and the Remarks I made in that Nation, as well as in other Foreign Countries, were first intended for my own Curiosity; until being come some few Years ago from my Travels into England, and finding there had not been yet publish'd in our Tongue any Account of this vast neighbouring Kingdom, I was often discours'd, chiefly during this last Election, about the Constitution of that Country, and was desir'd to communicate to the Publick what I knew of it. This gave me occa∣sion to revise my Memoirs, and to consider that if they were put into good order, they might perhaps be of some use, because the Form of Go∣vernment in Poland is in some respect like that of ours. But the first Year I came over, I spent
some Months at Oxford to publish a small Latin Treatise of Physical Matters, and to communicate to the Ingenious Gentlemen there what small In∣sight I was thought to have in Anatomy, and in the Materia Medica. The Summer following I made some Chymical and Anatomical Demon∣strations at Cambridg. These two last Winters I have been much taken up here in Town in trying a great many Chymical and Anatomical Expe∣riments, and in publishing my Treatise de Me∣dicina Mystica; and besides, being busied in my other Occupations in the Practice of Physick, to which I have entirely applied my self of late, as being more sutable to my Temper and Profession than Historical ones, I neither could take any Delight, nor have any Leisure to write over, or to put into due method the Memoirs I brought from Poland: so that the Publick is in∣debted to my ingenious Friend Mr. Savage; for without his help this Account of Poland could not doubtless have thus appear'd these several Years. I hope Ingenuous and Candid Persons will ex∣cuse the Faults and Defects they will undoubtedly meet with in this Historical Relation; since what I design'd only to do at my own leisure in some Years, I have dispatch'd with too much Pre∣cipitation in few Months, to satisfy the Curiosity of People during the late Election in Poland, who long'd to see some Account of that Kingdom publish'd. Wherefore I neither deserve nor desire any other Reputation by it, than that being the first that has given any History of that Country in our Language, I give occasion to others that may travel after me in Poland, to give a more satisfactory Account thereof.
I admire our English Gentry, who travel into Germany, have never the Curiosity to go either from Berlin through Prussia or Posnania to Warsaw, or from Vienna through Silesia to Cracow. They may with ease perform this Jour∣ney in three Months time, and not think their time lost; for tho there are not so many Rarities to be seen, nor that Conveniency of travelling s in most other Countries, yet they may observe the most remarkable Places in Poland, the peculiar form of Government, the Splendor of the Court, and the extraordinary Grandeur of the Nobility, who are not so barbarous nor so unpolish'd, as they are generally represented. For these sixty or seventy Years past, the Poles have taken a Humour to travel, and have of late refin'd them∣selves extreamly, having had French Queens and French Factions reigning amongst them during the four last Reigns successively; which has produc'd this good Effect, contrary to the private Designs of France, that not only the rough Temper of the Poles is made more polite, and their Beha∣viour more civil, but likewise their Judgment improv'd, and they themselves rendred more capa∣ble of knowing their own Interest, and more wary than formerly of a Despotic Power, which their Kings of late, assisted by the French, have la∣bour'd to introduce: for the Poles are now sensible that the French King, who is absolute at home, and well known to be ambitious enough to enlarge his Conquests abroad, has just reason to think that it would have been casier for him to manage his Interest against the Empire with a King of Poland, who was likewise absolute, than it is now with one who entirely depends on the uncertain Resolutions of a free Parliament: Be∣cause,
let a King of Poland be ever so Despotic, his Kingdom being poor, he will always want Mo∣ney either to satisfy his Pleasure, or to gratify his Ambition, and will scarcely ever be proof a∣gainst fifty thousand Louis-d'Or's. The Poles are not only watchful against the en∣croaching Factions of France, but likewise they begin to consider the unhappy Condition of their inslaved Neighbours, the Muscovites, Swedes, Danes, Germans and Turks, who groan under the heavy Yoke of the unlimited Power of their Soveraigns. These visible Examples make them so very jea∣lous of their Kings, and so extream fond of their Liberty, that they will not only always keep their Crown elective, but likewise oblige their new King to enlarge their Privileges, which are at this time more ample than ever they have been before. And it is not to be imagin'd that the King of Po∣land will become Despotic as the King of Den∣mark did; because in Denmark the King, Clergy and common People being kept under by the ex∣orbitant Power of the Nobility, join'd together, and soon brought the Nobility to declare the King Absolute, choosing rather to be under one Master than under several petty Tyrants. But in Po∣land, both Gentry and Clergy, who are very nu∣merous and powerful, have a joint Interest to li∣mit the King's Power, and to keep the Common People in subjection, who are stupidly pleas'd with, or rather insensible of their Slavery. And the Notion of Liberty is so inbred with the Polish Gentry, that if they should suspect that their King did aim at making any Breach upon their Laws, they not only think themselves no longer oblig'd to pay him Allegiance, but likewise ex∣clude
his Children: For they maintain, That ex est Rex, their Law is their King; and that they elect a Prince only to head their Army, against the Invasion of Foreigners, and to govern the turbulent Spirit of the Gr who think they are all equal among themselves, and their King but the first among his Eqls. So th the urest way for a King of Poland to ma the Crown Hereditary, is never to  but to ave entirely to the free will of the Di to ouse whom they please. Which  by the bad Success Prime  had in the te Election, caused by the ill Con of King obieski his Father, who prompted by his  and French Counsel,  ears before his Death, to perswade the Die i thuse a Successor; which drew such  and Jealousy upon his Children, that very few appear'd for them in the last Election, th he lig'd the Chief Officers to whom he  onsiderable Employment, to take an Oath to  his Childrens Interest after his  But the Poles, who think themselves to longer ound by their Oaths, than they find them con∣formable to their Laws and Interest,  t abandon those Princes to chuse the Elector of Sax∣ony; and to give a new Precedent for two things they never practised before, to exclude their own King's Sons, and to elect a German Prince. For the distance and situin of the Elector of Saxony's Hereditary Dominions, and the Jealousies the other German Princes would have conceiv'd, had he usurp'd more Power than the Laws allow'd, took away from the Poles all suspicion that this Prince would ever attempt
to invade their Privileges, as they apprehended the Prince of Conti, and perhaps John III's Children would have done. When I came first into this Nation, my chief Design was to converse with Physicians, and other Naturalists, to improve my Knowledg in the Practice of Physick, and in Natural History: But finding little here to satisfy my Curiosity in these Matters, that I might not lose my Labour in travelling in so remote a Country, I resolv'd to look into their Chronicles, to inform my self of the Origin of the Monarchy; of the Succession, and Remarkable Actions of all its Kings; of its Geography, and its Products; and to enquire in∣to the Antient and Present State of that vast Kingdom. Which I have done with as much Care and Accuracy as I could well compass in so short a time. People perhaps will admire how I could pretend to give an Account of so large and Antient a Kingdom, not having been in it a full Twelve∣month. I own this were no small presumption in me, had I undertaken to give a compleat History thereof; but as I only relate briefly either what I have gather'd from the best Polish Authors, learned from the most Intelligent Natives, or observ'd my self, I hope the Publick will have no ill Thoughts of me for this Attempt. The first Writers of the Polish History, like most other Historians, were credulous and superstitious, and have fill'd their Writings with a great many Romantio and almost fabulous Stories, which I have omitted, tho I have inserted some, as the golden Tooth, the devouring Dragon, Popiel's being eaten by Rats, and some others; not with a
design to make the Publick believe them, or that I believ'd 'em my self, but only to shew how the Ignorance of some, and the unfair Relations of others, have impos'd upon the World in all Ages. I knew something of the Constitution of Po∣land before I went thither, having formerly con∣versed with several Gentlemen of that Country at Paris, in Italy, and Germany; which in∣clined me in some measure to travel with some of them from thence into that Kingdom. Besides, I came out of Poland with the Electoress of Ba∣varia, the King's Daughter, in Company with several Natives thereof, who attended her High∣ness from Warsaw to Brussels. In this long Journey I had likewise opportunity to inform my self further of the present State of that Country. So that I have not only collected this imperfect Account, which I have ventur'd to give of it, during the little time I resided at the King's Court, but likewise before I came thither, and since I left it. I did not at first design this Historical Ac∣count should swell to so great a Bulk, nor that chiefly the Geographical Part should be so tedi∣ously long, but thought to reduce the whole to the narrow compass of one Volume; until Mr. S— considering the Inconveniency of too small an Epitome, enlarg'd the Geography of the King∣dom of Poland, and of the Great Dutchy of Li∣thuania, to make the Relation of them both more exact, and more satisfactory to such as are de∣sirous to compare the Towns and Provinces with the Map.
THE CONTENTS OF THE First Volume. Letter I. TO the Right Honourable William Lord Dartmouth. Of the Origin of the Kingdom of Poland, with the Succession and remarkable Actions of its first Dukes from the Year 550 to 830. Let. II: To the Right Honourable Laurence Earl of Rochester, Embassador from his Majesty Charles II. into Poland. Containing the second and third Classes of the Kings of that Country, or the Succession and Remarkable Actions of the Families of Pi∣astus and Jagello, from the Year 830, to the Year 1574. Let. III. To his Grace William Duke of De∣vonshire, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Houshold. Of the Succession and remarkable Actions of the four Classes of the Kings of Poland, consisting of mixt Families, from the Year 1574, to 1674.
Let. IV. To the Right Honourable William Earl of Yarmouth. Concerning the Family and remarkable Actions of John III. King of Poland. As also his Daughter's Marriage to the present Elector of Bavaria, &c. Let. V. To the Right Honourable Charles Lord Townsend. Of the Extent and Products of Poland, toge∣ther with a Description of the chief Towns and Provinces of that Kingdom. Let. VI. To George Stepney, Esq; His Ma∣jesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the Princes of the Empire. Of the Extent and Products of the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, with an Account of its chief Towns and Provinces.
The CONTENTS of the Se∣cond Volume, being the present State of Poland. In several Let∣ters. Letter I. To his Grace Thomas Lord Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. Of the Form of the Government in Poland, and of the King's Power and Revenues. Let. II. To his Grace the Duke of Norfolk. Of the Senate of Poland, or House of peers, consisting of Bishops, Palatins, Castellans, and the ten great Officers of the Crown; as likewise of the Starosta's and other Persons of Note. Let. III. To the Right Honourable James Ver∣non, Esq; Principal Secretary of State. Of the Diet or Parliament of Poland, and o∣ther Courts of Judicature. Let. IV. To the Earl of Marlborough. Of the Election and Coronation of a King of Poland, with the Interregnum. Let. V. To the Lord Marquess of— Of the Power of the Gentry, and Slavery of the People in Poland; where the Genius, Character, and manner of living of the Poles are related. Let. VI. To his Grace the Duke of Ormond. Of the state of the Army, Forts, and Military Affairs in Poland. Let. VII. To his Excellency Monsieur de Cle∣verskerk Embassador from Holland. An Account of the Trade and Riches of Po∣land, as likewise of the City of Dantzic.
Let. VIII. To the Earl of Burlington. Of the Origin of the Teutonic Order, and the Succession of its great Masters in Prussia, and in Livonia; with its present State in the Empire. Let. IX. To Sir Thomas Millington, President of the College of Physicians. Of the state of Learning, of Natural Know∣ledg, and particularly of the Practice of Phy∣sick in Poland; with an account of some na∣tural things, chiefly of a Disease in the Hair peculiar to the Poles, call'd Plica Polonica. Let. X. From Baron Blomberg, his High∣ness the Duke of Curland's Minister, to Dr. Connor. Giving an Account of the Duke of Curland's Family, Strength and Revenues, as likewise the Extent and Products of his Territories. Let. XI. To the Honourable Mr. Bridges, eldest Son to my Lord Chandois, and Fellow of the Royal Society. Giving an Anatomical Account of the Natu∣ral Cause why People must necessarily die of old Age alone, attended with no other Disease. Let. XII. To— Explaining the Nature of curable and incurable Wounds, demonstrating by Practical Obser∣vations, and Anatomical Experiments, the small number of Wounds which are of them∣selves absolutely mortal, and shewing the true use and common abuse of Styptic Wa∣ters and Pouders in the Practice of Surgery.
A Catalogue of such Authors as have been consulted in both Volumes of this Book; whereof some have been quoted, and others omitted on account of Consent in Opinion. POmponius Mela de Sarmatiâ Commentariolus Hartmanni Schedii de Sarmatiâ Aeneas Sylvius de Poloniâ, Lithuania, & Prussiâ, five Borussiâ. Martini Cromeri Polonia. Alexandri Guagnini Rerum Polonicarum. Sigismundi Liberi Baronis in Herberstein De∣scriptio Lithuaniae. Jacobi Pritusii de Provinciis Polonicis. Chronicon Poloniae Vincentii Kadlubi. Matth. de Michovia Chronica Polonorum. Polonici Regni tredecem Mutationes. Johannes Duglossus Annales Polonorum. Salomonis Neugebaveri Historia Polonica. Johannes Herburtus à Fulstin Compendium His∣toriae Polonicae. Flosculi Legum Polonicarum. Stanislai Orichovii Annales. Mariciani Mattbiae Ladovli Constitut. Polon. Compendium. Pastorii Florus Polonicus. Johannis Boteri Poloniae Descriptio. Historia Reformationis Polonicae. Authore Stanistao Lubiensko Equite Polono. Stanislai Krzistanowicksi Status Poloniae.
Simonis Starvolsii Poloniae. Relation Historique de Pologne. Par Mons. Hauteville. Hartkbii Respublica Polonorum. Adam Bremensis Seculi IX. Scriptor, Histo∣ria Ecclesiastics. Alhini Chronicon. Hornii Arca Noae. Historia de Vitâ & Obitu Sigismundi Augusti. Heidenstein de Rebus Polonicis ab exoessii Si∣gismundi Augusti. Dsoanorum Clades a Johanne Lasicio Polon. obslaus Balbinus Historis Bohemiae. Historia Bohemiae. Chronica Pomeranie. Alberti Cranzii Polonicarum Rerum. Annals Polon. I. Regis Poloniae cum Fragmentls . Ʋladislai Boloni & Sueciae Principis Vita. Casamir Roy de Pologne. Guerre Civili di Poliniae, di Alberto Viina. Description d' Ʋkraine, par Beauplan. Cuerres des Turcs avec la Pologne. Histoire des Cosaques & leurs Guerres contre la Pologne. La Politique des Polonois. diere Histoire des Dietes. Philippi Honorii de Interregno. Grammatica seu Institutio Polonice Linguae. Effata Regum Poloniae. Polonica.
Books printed for Daniel Brown and Abel Roper. 1. FOur Treatises of Physick and Chirur∣gery. 1. A Physico-Medical Essay concerning Alkaly and Acid. 2. Farther Considerations on the said Essay. 3. A new Light of Chirurgery. 4. The new Light of Chirurgery vindicated from many unjust Aspersions. By J. Colebatch, a Member of the College of Physicians. 2.—His Treatise of the Gout. 3.—His Doctrine of Acids in the Cure of Diseases farther asserted; in which is con∣tained some things relating to the History of Blood, &c. 4. Nature and Qualification of Religion, in reference to Civil Society. Written by Sam. Puffendorf, Counsellor of State to the late King of Sweden. Translated from the Original. The Present and Antient State of Muscovy, in which is inserted all things material to be known in relation to that vast Country; with several Sculptures, and a new Map.
A New Map of POLAND Exactly delineated after the best Modern Geographer.
THE ntient and Present STATE OF OLAND. PART I. The Antient State. LETTER I. the Right Honourable WILLIAM Lord Dartmouth. the Origin of the Kingdom of Poland; with the Succession and Remarkable Acti∣ons of its first Dukes, from the Year 550, to 830. MY LORD, HAving had the good Fortune, some Years since, to meet your Lordship at Venice, in my Travels from France, hrough Italy and Germany into Poland, I ound, that not contented with a superficial nd transitory Account of Places, your Ge∣nius
led you naturally to enquire not only into the Government, Laws, and Characters of the several Nations you passed through, but likewise to examine nicely into their Maxims of State, and their different Inte∣rests; and this, that by discovering the Excel∣lency of some of their Constitutions, and De∣fects in others, you might, like a wise and thinking Patriot, admire the Perfections of our own Government, Goodness of our Laws, and Wisdom of our Senate, whereof you your self are so worthy a Member. My Lord, You may remember, that after your Resolution to take Medicines, as well as my small Skill in prescribing them, had had the good Effect of curing your Lordship at Venice of that acute Disease which made me almost despair of your Recovery, I left you at Padua with the Earl of Kildare to ga∣ther strength; and went thro' Tyrol, Bava∣ria and Austria down the Danube, to Vienna; where having staid for some time to see the Emperour's Court, I set forward, with some Noblemen of Poland, through Moravia and Silesia to Cracow, the Capital City of that Kingdom; from whence, in eight days, we arrived, with a numerous Attendance, at the King's Court, which always resides at War∣saw; where I was kindly receiv'd by the late King John Sobieski, who did me the Ho∣nour to intrust me with the Care of his de∣caying Health: and sometime afterwards his Majesty sent me with her Electoral Highness the Princess Tcresa, his only Daughter, then married to the Elector of Bavaria, to take care likewise of her Health in her long Winter Jour∣ney
from Warsaw to Brussels; which gave me opportunity to come sooner out of that King∣dom, than I at first apprehended I cou'd. Tho, my Lord, my chief business both in Poland and other Countries has been always o improve my self in what related pecu∣iarly to the Practice of Physick, and to Na∣tural Knowledg; yet for my own Satisfac∣tion and Curiosity, I was desirous to be in∣ormed further, both from the Natives them∣selves, and their Historians, of the true State and Origin of this vast Kingdom. I found that Poland has met with the same Fate with most other Countries, that is, to be little known from its Minority: For when this Monarchy was first founded by Lechus, there were no Learned Men to hand down to Posterity by their Writings the true State thereof from ts Infancy; but what small Account there is extant of it, was written some Ages after: Wherefore, not having besides been a twelve∣month in that Kingdom, I cannot presume to give that satisfaction which perhaps your Lordship might otherwise expect from the discourse I lately had with you; yet I can securely assert, that the following Relation of the Origin of that Country is drawn out of its most authentick Historians. Origin of Poland. POLAND, by the Romans call'dPomp. Mela lib. I. de situ Orbis, cap. 3. & lib. III. ap. 4. Sar∣natia Europaea, came to be a distinct Nation, and to be govern'd by Elective Princes, much about the Middle of the Sixth Century, some∣time
after that the Goths and Vandals had ravag'd the South parts of Europe, and aban∣don'd their own bleak Northern Habitati∣ons to establish themselves in warmer Regi∣ons, Italy, France, Spain and Africk, which gave occasion to theAlbinus tit. 6. pag. 70, &c. Sclavonians, as Sabelli∣cus, Thuanus, and other Authors have it, to quit the Cimmerian Bosphorus or Straits of Caffa, Great Sarmatia, and Great Russia, or Moscovy, to inhabit those desolate Countries. After∣wards, this People, dividing themselves into two considerable Bodies, one pass'd the Da∣nube, and settled in Dalmatia, Istria, Bosnia, Carynthia, Bulgaria, as far as Greece, and in some part ofAdam. remenss seculi 9. scriptor, in lib. I. Hist. Ecclesiast. cap. 10, &c. Germany; while the other, under the Conduct of three Brothers, Lechus, Cechus and Russus, turn'd towards the North to possess themselves of those Provinces which the Goths and Vandals had forsaken. These BrothersGuagnini Rerum Polon. p. 50. are said to have built Bre∣men in Germany, so naming it from a Sclavo∣nian Word, signifying a Burden, because they had there, as one may say, laid down their Burden, and were in great measure freed from their former Miseries. These Princes likewise divided their Followers into three Parties, whereof one commanded by Cechus, settled in that Kingdom which lies between Poland and Germany, now call'd Bohemia; the other, headed by Lechus, fix'd in the lower part of Great Sarmatia, a Flat and Champain Country; whence the Natives have since call'd
it Polska, from the Sclavonian word Pole, whichWhence so call'd, and what by the Inhabi∣tants. either signifies Plainness, or Hunting; and the Germans, Poland, or Even-Ground.Lib. I. cap. 2. pag. 21. Hart∣knoch is of Opinion that Poland was an anti∣ent Name of Sarmatia in the time of Ptolomey, before the Poles inhabited this Champain Country, which it might have taken from the Bulani or Bolani, that are said to have settled near the Vistula, and to have come from Sar∣matia. The third BrotherHornii Arca-Noae, & Pet. Lucari in Annal. agusis. Russus esta∣blish'd himself in that Province of Poland, which is now call'd from his Name Russia. Not only the Testimony of Authentick Writers, but also our own Reason will con∣vince us, that all these Nations have origi∣nally been the same; which may appear by their Languages, being but as so many Dia∣lects of one Mother-Tongue, the Sclavonian; which is now spoke in more Countries than any Language of Europe. Founded by Lechus. Here Lechus had no great need of Force to establish himself; he met with but little resistance, all this Country having been left desolate for some time before by the Vandals: OnlyGuagnini Rerum Polon. p. 51. Regulus, a German Prince, is said to have oppos d him at first, and to have challeng'd him, but was soon vanquish'd by him in a Duel; whereby he became Master of Pome∣rania, which was then Regulus his Coun∣try. In these days there were no Cities in Po∣land, no Money was yet known, nor any Laws writ, such as they had being only pro∣nounc'd What Laws.
by their Princes Mouths, and handed down by Tradition to the People.Herburt. de Fulstin. Senat. Polon. in Chronico p. 2. Princes were then rather Fathers of Fami∣lies, than Lords and Masters; and their Re∣venue consisted only in a moderate Imposi∣tion on their Subjects Labour. Lechus, my Lord, settled in that great Pro∣vince which joins the State of Brandenburg, since call'd Posnania, where he built the firstThe first City. City, naming itId. ibid. Gnesna, from the Sclavonian word Gniazdo, which in that Language signi∣fies a Nest; and this because, that where it was building, a Tree was cut down which had an Eagle's Nest on the Top of it: which Lechus taking for a good Omen, not only call'd his City Gnesna, and made it the Me∣tropolis of his Kingdom; but also order'd, that the Arms of Poland should for ever after be a Spread-Eagle, which has so continu'd even down to this day. He likewise builtSecond City. another City in a Wood, eight Miles from the former, which he nam'd Posnania (by the present Inhabitants call'd Posnan) signifying in the Polish Tongue Knowledg, because he there met and knew his Brother Cechus, Prince of Bohemia, after above twenty years absence. This City gave occasion for naming the Pro∣vince Posnania. In Memory of Lechus to this day, the Poles stile their Country in their Poems Lechia: and Mr. Mountague North, who liv'd for some∣time at Constantinople, has lately told me, that the Turks call a Polander, in their Language,
Lech, making the Poles likewise derive their Name from their Founder. Tho, my Lord, this Lechus brought that People under a kind of Monarchical Govern∣ment, yet neither he, nor any of his Successors could ever so far prevail upon them as to make the Succession Hereditary; they having con∣tinued Elective for above Eleven hundred years; always reserving a full Power and Au∣thority to themselves, of choosing whom they pleas'd for their King. Nevertheless, it is to be observ'd, that they have still hitherto elected one of the Royal Family, where the deceas'd King had any Issue left, except in this present Election, which is like to go otherwise. I find by their Chronicles, that not so much as a Daughter has been excluded when there has been no Son: However, they always thought fit to acquaint 'em at the time of their Election, that they were not to at∣tributePolicy of Poland. their Accession to the Throne to any Right contracted from their Parents, but were altogether oblig'd to the Senate and Gentry for putting that Scepter into their hands. Hereby they intimated how much their Kings were indebted to 'em, and what Necessity they lay under to behave themselves well towards a People that were pleas'd to raise 'em to a Supreme Dignity, which they had no better Claim to than the meanest Gentleman in the Kingdom. They acquainted them likewise, that they thought themselves no longer ob∣lig'd to pay them Obedience, than that they kept to their Oaths: And moreover, they always reserv'd to themselves a Right of de∣posing them whenever they violated their Laws.
This Maxim has hitherto prov'd very be∣neficial to the Poles for enlarging their Coun∣try, and maintaining their Privileges; and might well have extended their Dominions beyond those of any State in Europe, had their other Constitutions been as well grounded, or as exactly observed: For tho the Poles have been constantly molested by their Neighbours, the Suedes, Moscovites, Tartars, Turks, Hun∣garians, and Germans, and their Kingdom been several times reduc'd to Extremities, burnt and plunder'd by frequent Incursions, put into Convulsions and Desolations, and thou∣sands of their People been carry'd away intoPolicy of its Kings. Captivity; yet by the prudent Conduct and Courage of their Kings, through a desire of gaining the Affection of their Subjects by serv∣ing their Country zealously, to the end their Fame and Merits might raise their Children to the Throne after their deaths, the Poles have not only always oppos'd, but likewise repuls'd the exorbitant Force of their Ene∣mies: They have also by degrees enlarg'd their Country by vast Conquests, and render'd it several times the most formidable of any Kingdom in Europe: They have likewise never submitted to any Foreign Power, no not even to the Romans by force: They have also hitherto inviolably maintain'd their Liberties, Pro∣perties and peculiar manner of Government, against all the Attempts, both of their Ene∣mies abroad, or the Cabals form'd either by themselves or their Kings at home: and I believe I may say to their great Commenda∣tion, that they are the only Nation in the World who have kept the longest Succession
of Kings without subjecting themselves either to a Despotic or Hereditary Monarchy; their Princes being now, as most are thought to have been at first, wholly elected by the People. Tho, My Lord, I have said the Poles have never excluded their Kings Children, yet must it be understood that their Crown has not al∣ways been in the same Family, by reason that from time to time the Royal Line has fail'd; and therefore they have consequently been oblig'd to elect Princes out of other Families; but still I may very well affirm, that there has never been any Stranger chosen, except in the present Election, where the preceding King had any Issue surviving. Number of Princes. The Princes and Princesses of this Kingdom have in all been fifty, two whereof were Wo∣men, as Venda, and Hedwigis, both having had the Government for some time; and the other forty eight were Men.Hartknoch Respub. Polon. p. 22. At first these Princes were only stil'd Duces, Dukes or Ge∣nerals of Poland; as if their Office in those times had been no other than to head Armies: for 'tis to be observ'd that to Boleslaus Chrobry they were not so much as crown'd. This Title continu'd from the Year 550, to the Year 1005. when the Emperour Otho III. created Boleslaus I. the Sixteenth Duke of Poland,The First King. King, being the second Christian Prince that had govern'd that Country, all before him and Miecislaus I. his Father having been Pa∣gans; as were likewise the Poles themselves till the tenth Century, when this Miecislaus
the fifteenth Duke of Poland turn'd Christian in the Year 964, in Pope John the XIIIth's time; by which means his Son Boleslaus came to have the Title of King. All the Princes of Poland may be dividedFour Clas∣ses of Kings. into four Classes, whereof the first and last are of different Families; the second and third of but one, in which the Crown passes from the Father to the Daughter. The first Class reign'd from the Year 550, to the Year 830; The second from 830, to 1382; The third from 1382, to 1574; and the last from thence down to our Time. I shall now proceed to give your Lordship some short Account of the Succession and most Remarkable Actions of the first Class of the Dukes of Poland, from the Year 550, to the Year 830. Lechus. 550. LECHUSKadlubkon in Praefat. p. 8. Son of Annon, first Duke of Po∣land, as I said before, founded this Nation:Gnesna and Pos∣nan built. He built the first City there, naming it Gnesna, now the Primate's See; as likewise the City of Posnan, Capital of Posnania. 'Tis uncertain how many govern'd before his Race came to be extinct, and there is great Contest among the Polish Historians about his Successor: but some affirm that he order'd by his last Will (like Alexander the Great) that they should elect the most worthy Person among them. Visimirus. VISIMIRUS hisGuagnini Rerum Polon. p. 52. Nephew was thereupon chosen, who is reported to have extended his
Dominions even to the very Borders of Den∣mark, and to have built a very great Ship which was an exceeding Terror to the Danes. He is also said to have given that Nation a great Overthrow by Sea, and to have pursued his Victory into the very Bowels of that King∣dom, where he subdued many Provinces, andHis Con∣quesis. built several Cities, whereof one was Wismar, which retains his Name to this day. In one Battel this Visimirus is said to have taken the Danish King Prisoner, and to have carried him into Poland; whence afterwards being releas'd, and conspiring together with the Swedes and Holsatians, he made an Incursion into Poland with a numerous Army, but was soon met and vanquish'd again by Wisimir, who thereupon push'd on his Victory so far as to reduce the greatest part of Denmark, which he then united to Poland. In opposition to this Story Mon∣sicur Pauli, Minister here from Denmark, has assured me that the Poles never made any Con∣quest in that Country, which may give some Exception to the truth of this King's Reign: tho it may very well be suppos'd that several Kings reign'd during the space of 150 Years, there being so much time between the begin∣ning of Lechus his Reign and the Election of Cracus. However, to gratify the Curiosity of the Publick, I hope I have not done amiss to insert it, since I withal quote my Author. After many glorious Actions, having greatly augmented his Dominions, this Wisimir diedHis Death. without Issue. Vapovius says that Lechus his Posterity reign'd all that space of time between him and Cracus, being 150 Years: yet having
consulted all their Historians, I can find no manner of Account given of their Reig▪ nor of the Government of Poland in all that space of time. Lechus his Issue being extinct, 'tis certain theTwelve Woievods. People elected twelve Woievods (in the Polish Language Captains of War) to govern 'em, who divided that Country into twelve parts: for the Poles sticking close to their Liberty, would then by no means put the Government into one Man's hands. But soon after theseDepos'd. Palatins disagreeing among themselves, the People chose one Cracus. 700. CRACUS for their Head, a very Rich and Popular Person, reported to have been of the Race of the Gracchi at Rome, who were ba∣nish'd into this Country by King Ancus. Who this Cracus was all Historians do not agree: The Polish Writers say he was one of the twelve Woievods; but theVide Bohusl. Balbinum, lib. 1. Hist. Bohem. cap. 10. p. 82, &c. Bohemians affirm he was a Prince of their Country. He gain'd extremely upon the good Will of his Subjects, for he soon appeas'd the impending Storms of a Civil War, built a City on the River Vistula,Cracow . calling it after his own Name Cracow, and transfer'd his Residence from Gnesna thither; which is the reason that this City has ever since been the Metrpolis of Poland, in which all the Kings by the Constitution are to be crown'd, tho they are to live at Warsaw. Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 55. There goes a frivolous Story of a mon∣strous Dragon that rag'd in those days near this City, who with his poisonous Breath kill'd all
that came near him, and likewise sometimes sally'd abroad to the Destruction of thousands; to prevent which they were wont to throw him every day three Oxen, which at length al∣most causing a Famine, Duke Cracus made use of a Stratagem to destroy him, which was this: He order'd an Ox's Hide to be stuff'd full of Sulphur, Nitre, Pitch, and the like, and to be cast to the Monster, who taking it for no other than his daily Offering, greedily devour'd it, but quickly found himself en∣flam'd with so great a Drought, that he soon after burst with drinking in the River Vistula. His Death. After this Duke's Death he was uried, by his own Orders, on a little Hill in sight of the Town, and this to put the Citizens in mind of their Founder. He left three Chil∣dren,His Issue. Cracus, Lechus, and Venda, whereof Lechus II. LECHUS II. to obtain the Principality mur∣der'd his elder Brother Cracus in a Wood;His Banish∣ment and Death. which being soon detected, he was banish'd the Country, and died in Exile. Vend 750. VENDA a Virgin (which shews the Affecti∣on the Poles have always had for the Royal Family) succeeded him. She was a very beautiful Princess, and amongst several others was courted by oneMicralius lib. 2. Chron. Pomeran. num. 22. p. 161. Ritiger a German Prince, who not proving much in her Favour, came with an Army to force her to marry him, but was bravely oppos'd and vanquish'd by her, as the Polish Historians will have it; tho the German affirm the contrary, and say she drown'd her self upon his pursuing her close, Her Death.
which the others pretend was occasion'd by her hearing Ritiger was a handsome Man, and had kill'd himself in a rage. With this Princess Cracus his Family beingTwelve Woievods. extinct, the Poles chose a second time twelve Woievods, who falling out as before among themselves, and the Hungarians and Moravi∣ansDepos'd. invading their Country, they thought fit to elect one Premislus a Goldsmith for their Duke, afterwards call'd Lescus I. 750. LESCUS I. The reason of whose being chosen was a Stratagem he had contriv'd, that sav'd the Poles when they were in Distress.How he came to be elected by The manner of which was as follows: They being in the Field against the Hungarians and Moravians, and finding themselves much infe∣rior in number to their Enemies, this Gold∣smith contriv'd a way to make 'em seem more numerous, and at the same time to gain 'em a compleat Victory; to effect which he got a certain number of Helmets made of the BarkA Strata∣gem. of Trees, which he dawb'd over with Quick∣silver and Gall, and by Night hung 'em in order of an Army on small Boughs at the side of a Wood, which the Enemy next Morning perceiving, by Reflection of the Sun upon 'em, believing it to be the Polish Army, march'd directly towards 'em, when the Poles who were behind the Trees removing the Helmets, the Enemy thought they had retreated for fear; whereupon hotly pursuing 'em into the very heart of the Wood, the Poles, who lay in Ambush, surrounded and cut 'em all to pieces. He govern'd the Poles in Peace and Quietness for a good while, none during his Reign da∣ring
to molest that Country. How long heHis Reign and Death uncertain. reign'd, and where, and of what Distemper he died, is uncertain. Election by Horse-race. This Duke leaving no Issue, a Horse-race was instituted, wherein the Victor was to suc∣ceed in the Government. Hereupon a Stone Pillar was rais'd before Cracow, on which were aid the Crown, Scepter, Globe and other Regalia, and at the same time a Herald pro∣claim'd the Throne to him that got first from the River Pardnic to the Goal. Upon which several Candidates appearing, one Lescus thinking himself wiser than the rest, laid Iron Spikes in the Road where the Race was to be run, by which the others Horses beingA Strata∣gem de∣feated. am'd, he came first to the Pillar: but this Fraud being soon detected, instead of being chosen, he was torn to pieces on the spot, and Lescus II. 776. LESCUS II. a poor Country Fellow, whom the Poles look'd upon to be destin'd for their Prince, was elected in the Year 776, who while the others Horses were hamper'd by the way, running the Race on foot for want of a Horse, tho rather to shew his Swiftness than out of any thoughts of the Crown, got next the Impostor to the Goal. A Commen∣dable Ex∣ample. This Duke in Commemoration of his for∣mer Condition would once a Year solemnly ay by his Robes, and put on his Country Clothes, which he preserv'd whilst he liv'd for that purpose, and which induc'd all the Courtiers to be as meanly clothed at the same time. They write that he was kill'd in theHis Death. Wars against Charles the Great.
Lescus III. 804. LESCUS III. his Son succeeded him, being chosen in the Year 804. He soon forc'd theHis Death uncertain. aforesaid Emperor to a Peace, but when he died I find no mention made. He is said to have had above twenty natural Sons. Popiel I. 810. POPIEL his Son succeeded him in the Year 810. This Prince had none of the good Qualities either of his Father or Grandfather, his great∣estHis Vices. care being to make much of himself with∣out any regard to the Publick. He thought Cracow too much expos'd to the Incursions of the Hungarians and Russians, and therefore, for security of his Person, withdrew into the Heart of the Country, first to Gnesna, and afterwards to Cruswitz, where he soon afterHis Death. died suddenly.Herburt. de Fulstin. p. 11. His common Execration was wont to be that he might be devour'd by Rats, which tho it happened not to him, yet his Son Popiel perish'd by that Fate. Popiel II. 815. POPIEL II. Son to the former, was elected next in the Year 815, and reign'd to 830, who being a loose and profligate Prince, was more universally hated than his Father; which his Wife perceiving, as likewise that his Fa∣ther's Brothers were more belov'd, contriv'd a way to poison them, thereby the better to secure the Succession to her Children. Here∣upon,A cursed Stratagem. by her Stratagem, Popiel feigns a dange∣rous Sickness, and invites his Uncles to visit him; which they speedily obeying, he caus'd 'em to come to his Bed-side, where taking 'em by the Hands, as if just going to leave
e World, he recommends to 'em a Cup to ink, which they, little suspecting any Poison, urteously accepted, and drank off; when king leave of their Nephew, a little while ter they fell into excessive Pains, and soon ed. Upon which this barbarous Duke, by e instigation of his Wife, gave out that it as a Judgment from the Gods upon 'em for e treacherous Designs they had form'd a∣inst him and his Children; and therefore dered their Bodies to lie unburied for a con∣erable time, the better to take away all spicion of his Crime. Hereupon no body er so much as suspected either Popiel or s Wife of their Deaths, till at length Di∣ne Justice discover'd, and punish'd the Offen∣ers after an extraordinary manner: For all e Chronicles, Histories, and general Tradi∣ons of Poland agree, that out of these dead odies came a vast number of huge Rats,Judgment upon Popi∣el by Rats. hich guided by an unknown Intelligence, llowed Popiel, his Wife and Children where∣ver they went; neither Rivers, nor strong alls, close Rooms, nor their very Guards as they say) were able to prevent these Ani∣als from crawling about 'em, and continually eeding on their Bodies both night and day: They first devour'd the Sons, afterwards the Wife, and lastly Popiel himself, tho he retir'd or safety to an Island in the River Vistula. Tis said the Water-men were afraid that hey should gnaw through their Boat, and sink m before they reach'd the Island; for they lways pursu'd through Fire, or whatever else was oppos'd to 'em with a great deal of Noise nd Fierceness.
This doubtless your Lordship will think f∣bulous; yet since all their Historians una∣mously agree in it, I thought my self oblig to relate it as they do. 'Tis certain the Po would never elect any of Popiel's Nephews,  any other of his Relations, for the Aversio they had conceiv'd to his Name after this  normous Crime; so that he was the last of h Family that reign'd, and likewise the last  the first Class of the Dukes of Poland. After the Death of Popiel, the Poles electe one Piastus, a Wheelright, nothing related  ther to him, or any of his Predecessors. H Family reign'd successively, without interru∣tion, for about 800 Years, of which it woul be too tedious to trouble your Lordship wit a Relation, and therefore I will conclude wit giving you only this imperfect Account  the first Princes of Poland, and with sub∣scribing my self, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient Humble Servant, B.
LETTER II. To the Right Honourable LAU∣RENCE Earl of Rochester, Em∣bassador from his Majesty Charles II. into Poland. Containing the second and third Classes of the Kings of that Country, or the Suc∣cession and remarkable Actions of the Fa∣milies of Piastus and Jagello, from the Year 830, to the Year 1574. My LORD; THE great Character I found your Lord∣ship had left behind you in Poland, to the Honour of the English Nation, makes me as well admire your prudent Conduct, and circum∣spect Behaviour at that Court, as the happy Choice so great a Prince made of you, to represent his Royal Person there: for tho this Western part of Europe will hardly allow the Poles the same proportion of Sense and Judg∣ment with most other Nations, yet Politicians readily own that there is more Art and Policy requir'd in an Ambassador to manage his Master's Credit and Advantage with the tur∣bulent Spirit of the Senate of Poland, than with any other Court whatever govern'd by well regulated Methods, and refin'd Maxims.
This, my Lord, the vigilant Court of France and wise Republick of Venice have long ex∣perienc'd, and therefore of late, have sent into that Kingdom none but their most ac∣complish'd Statesmen. The Esteem the Court of Poland profess'd for your Lordship's Memory was fresh enough in my time to convince me, that you were throughly acquainted with the Genius and Constitution of that Nation; Two things Publick Ministers ought chiefly to be vers'd in, and which are the Rules they generally go by in their Ministry, to compass more effectually their Designs. It would therefore, my Lord, appear vain in me to presume to tell you any thing New as to the present State of that Kingdom, since, by conversing with your Lordship, I have learn'd some Particulars of that Country I knew nothing of before. The Subject I thought most agreeable for your Entertain∣ment, was a short Account of the Renowned Families of Piastus and Jagello, who reign'd about eight hundred Years, and whose re∣markable Actions were doubtless out of the Memory of those Grandees you convers'd with, being only recorded in voluminous Annals, which, probably, Publick and more Important Affairs might not allow your Lordship lei∣sure to peruse. The Kingdom of Poland beginning to make some considerable Figure in the World about theHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 38. ninth Century, and having imbraced the Christian Religion in the tenth, foreign Nations, particularly its Neighbours, began to
look more nicely into it, and to embody its History with their own; so that from thence forward I can promise your Lordship a more certain Account of this Country than hither∣to I have given from the sixth Century to that time. After the Death of the inhuman Popiel, the last of the first Class of the Princes of Po∣land, his Cousin Germans, whose Father he had poison'd, aspiring to the Crown, were unanimously rejected by the Poles, either be∣cause they were thought unqualified or un∣deserving, or by reason of Popiel's Crimes, which had entail'd a kind of Odium both on them, and all his Posterity. Whereupon a Ge∣neral Assembly or Diet was call'd at Cruswitz, a small Town in Lower Poland; but not being able to agree, their Session was dissolv'd. A little while after another was conven'd in the same place, which being resolv'd to pitch up∣on some body to prevent farther Disorders, elected one Piastus. 830. PIASTUS a Wheelright, Son to Cossisco a Citizen of Cruswitz, in gratitude for having supply'd their want of Provisions after the following manner. Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 64. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 1. p. 13. & Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 68, &c. Cause of his Election.Piastus having provided a small Collation for the naming of a Child, born about the time of that Convention, happen'd to be vi∣sited by two Pilgrims, Paul and John, whom they report to have been afterwards Martyrs at Rome. These Mendicants being repuls'd
at the Hall of Election, were notwithstanding kindly receiv'd by him, whereupon to return his Civility, they named his Child Ziemovitus, and departed. Afterwards, by the great Con∣course of Electors, Provisions growing scarce at Cruswitz, and many applying themselves to Piastus for Relief, he furnish'd them all gratis, (but that not without being thought a Miracle, for 'twas believ'd the Blessing of those good Men remain'd upon him) and extended his Bounty much beyond his suppos'd Ability, which made 'em look upon him as a Man sent from the Gods to govern 'em, and therefore unanimously chose him for their Prince. This good Man, having thus obtain'd theHis Ver∣tues. Principality, did not yet change his Life with his Condition; but his Power being encreas'd, continued his Bounty comparatively. In his Reign there arose many intestine Disorders, all which he soon quieted rather by his Cle∣mency than Severity. So being belov'd by good Men, and respected by bad; and having remov'd his Court from Cruswitz, which he abominated for having been the Scene ofHis Death. Popiel's wicked Life, to Gnesna, he died in the 120th Year of his Age. His Family reign'd above 600 Years in Poland, nay, a Branch of 'em wereHartknock. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 74. Princes of Silesia a long while after, to the Year 1675, when George William, the last of that House, dying without Issue, the Dukedoms of Lignitz and Brieg in Silesia fell to the Em∣peror. In memory of this Piastus, when any Native ever after obtain'd the Crown of
Poland, they call'd him a Piasto. He was suc∣ceeded by his Son Ziemovi∣tus. 861. ZIEMOVITUS by his Wife Repicha, a rave and warlike Prince. This Duke had considerable Advantages by having the Admi∣nistration of the Government long before his Father's Death, who for some time was super∣nnuated. He obtain'd great Conquests over the Hungarians, Moravians, and Germans, andHis Wars. was theHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 1. p. 15. first that brought the Polish Army to a Discipline, by instituting Generals, Colo∣nels, Captains, and other Subaltern Officers among them. He regain'd what the Popiels ost, and besides, considerably enlarg'd his Dominions by new Conquests. His Cha∣racter. He was a Person of a boundless Resolution, seem'd destin'd for WarFlorus Polon. cap. 12. p. 22. (being able to un∣dergo the greatest Fatigues) and consequently was exceedingly admir'd and belov'd by his Subjects. He dy'd at Gnesna, was buriedHis Death. there, and was succeeded by his Son Lescus IV. 892. LESCUS IV. who being elected young, was under the Care of Governours for some time. He was of a quiet and peaceable Disposition,His Cha∣racter. enclin'd rather to Peace than War, and con∣tented to preserve what his Father had left him, without ever aiming to enlarge his Do∣minions. He dy'd in the Year 913, and wasHis Death. succeeded by his Son Ziemovis∣tus. 913. His Cha∣racter. ZIEMOVISTUS, who reigned 51 Years. This Prince was much of the same Temper
with his Father, there having been no Wars in his time. He had but one Son ecislaus I. who being born blind, was miracuously restor'd to his sight about the Age of seven Years, when he was about to have his Head shaven according to the Pagan Custom; which gave occasion to the Magi of that Kingdom, to prognosticate that he should be the Light of Poland, which, not long after his Election,His Death. came to pass. Ziemovistus dy'd, and was bu∣ried at Gnesna, and his Son Miecis∣laus I. 964. MIECISLAUS I. came to the Crown next. He had seven Wives at a time, yet could have no Children by them, which opened a wayHow the Poles be∣came Chris∣tians. for the Christian Faith to enter Poland; for there being then several Christians wandring up and down that Country to convert those Pagans, they came to this Duke, and told him he could never have any Issue till he had turn'd Christian; which Miecislaus hearkning to, immediately put away all his Wives, andHis Chris∣tian Wife. married Dambrawca Daughter to Boleslaus Duke of Bohemia, on condition to turn Chris∣tian and be baptized. Whereupon Pope John XIII. sent Cardinal Aegidius with a great number of Priests into Poland, to preach the Gospel there, which before had been altoge∣ther unknown in that Country. This Duke erected the Arch-bishopricks of Gnesna and Cracow, with several Bishopricks. In the mean while Miecislaus had a Son call'd Boleslus, which mightily augmented his Zeal to oblige his Subjects to be converted:Cromerus▪ lib. 3. p. 43. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 70. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 2. p. 19. for
he caused a Law to be made, that while any part of the Gospel was reading at Mass, every Man should half draw his Scimiter, to testify their forwardness to defend that Faith. His Wars. This Duke had Wars with Ʋlodimirus▪ Duke of Russia, to whom he lost Premislia and other Towns. He sent Lambert Arch-bishop of Cracow to Rome, to obtain leave of Pope Benedict VII. for the Princes of Poland to be stil'd Kings, but was refus'd, this Pontiff not being yet dispos'd to grant that Favour. He buried Dambrawca, and afterwards married Judith Daughter of Jesse Prince of Hungary, and was succeeded by his Son Boleslaus Chrobry. 999. BOLESLAUS CHROBRY, a vertuous Prince, who was elected in the Year 999. andDubravius lib. 6. Hist. Bohem. p. 49. & Albert. Cranzius lib. 2. cap. 36. Kadlubkon. lib. 2. Chron. Epist. xi. p. 130. after some Years reign by Consent of the Pope, was dignified with the Title of King byCreated first King 1005. the Emperor Otho III. who also remitted the Pretensions his Predecessors had to Poland as be∣ing Emperors of the Romans, and this in con∣sideration of a kind Entertainment made him by Boleslaus in his Pilgrimage, on account of his Health, to the Tomb of St. Adalbert Bishop of Prague, who was martyr'd by some Pagans to whom he offer'd to preach the Christian Faith. Of these Barbarians Boleslaus bought his Body, and caus'd it to be buried at Gnesna, whither great numbers from all parts came to pay their Devotion at his Shrine. The Emperor Otho also at the same time married his Niece Rixa to Boleslaus his young
Son Miecislaus, who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. To confirm his being crown'd King by Otho the Emperor, it would not be amiss to recite part of an old Epitaph written upon him; Ob famam bonam tibi contulit Otto Coronam, Propter Luctamen sit tibi salus. Amen. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 2. p. 22. This King was surnamed Chrobry (signify∣ing in Polish Acute) from the Quickness and Excellency of his Parts. Boleslaus made Bo∣hemia, Moravia and Prussia tributary to Po∣land.His Wars. He also declar'd War against the Saxons, who made Incursions into Pomerania, which was then govern'd by Lescus III's Family. HeTwelve Se∣nators As∣sistants. likewise instituted twelve Senators to assist him in the Government. This King's Death was so sincerely regretted, that for a Year's time there was no Mirth nor Splendor in Po∣land.Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 71. This Prince was of an undauntedHis Cha∣racter. Spirit, tho withal modest, courteous and en∣dearing. Both Boleslaus and his Father lie bu∣ried in the middle of the Cathedral ChurchHis Death. of Posnan, whose Tombs I have there seen. His Son Miecis∣laus II. 1025. MIECISLAUS II. being about 35 Years old was elected next, being crown'd by Hy∣politus Arch-bishop of Gnesna. He degenera∣ted in all respects from his Father, and lost most of those Conquests which he had addedHis Wars. to the Crown. To him the Bohemians and
avians refus'd to pay Tribute; yet he ued Pomerania, which belong'd of right he Polish Crown. He was a Person very y and stupid, and chose rather to beHis Cha∣racter. ed by his Queen and Companions than Council, which made him soon slighted and is'd both by his Friends and Enemies: Yet reign'd almost nine Years, and liv'd forty  'Tis said he died mad, and left butHis Death. Son, Casimir I. 104. CASIMIR I. who being elected young, his ther Rixa officiated the Regency duringQueen Re∣gent. Minority. This King was not chosen with∣ much difficulty, for many of the Electors, ing he might follow his Father's steps, vi∣ously oppos'd him at first: Also the Poles re dissatisfied with his Mother's Admi∣ration for several Reasons, among which  was, her robbing the Treasury, and after∣rds flying with her Son to her Brother sar in Saxony. This young Prince being sent afterwards his Mother to study at Paris, became a Be∣dictin Monk at the Abby of luncy in France. the mean time the Poles, having no body to eside in their Government, had great Dis∣sions among them; and therefore earnest∣ entreated the Pope to dispense with Casi∣r's Vow, that he might return to his Throne, hich they at length obtain'd uponHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 71. Agree∣ent, that for each Head, except those of the obility and Clergy, they would contribute early a farthing to maintain a Lamp perpe∣tually
burning in St. Peter's Church at R and moreover, for ever after cause their H to be shav'd about their Ears like Mo (which is practis'd to this day) as like stand in a white Surplice while Mass was ∣ciatingCasimir recall'd. on all Holidays: upon these Condit they had their King again; but when he  crown'd I could never learn. He enter'd into an Alliance with JaroHis Mar∣riage. Duke of Russia, Son to Ʋlodomirus, and  ry'd his Sister Mary afterwards, call'd Do∣neva, whose Mother was the Princess  Sister to Basil and Constantine, Emperoun Constantinople. He conquer'd the Province of MasoHis Wars. where now lies Warsaw, and defeated  Army of Maslaus, then Duke of that Co∣try; who retiring among the neighbour Barbarians, not long after return'd  greater Force, and ravag'd Masovia  along to the Vistula, but was soon met  overthrown a second time by Casimir; wh flying to his Friends, as he thought, that  assisted him, they took, flea'd, and fastned  to an exceeding high Cross, saying,Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. . p. 34. That was but just that he should be exalted whose A tion was so boundless. Afterwards Casimir bei mindful of the Benefits he formerly receiv in the Abby of Cluny, sent thither great Pr∣sents and Offerings. At length this good King having setled hHis Death and Issue. Kingdom in its former Tranquillity, dy'd, and left three Sons, Boleslaus, Ʋladislaus, and Mi∣cistaus,
and one Daughter Suentochna. He was y'd at Posnan in the Year 1058. Boles∣laus II. 1059. BOLESLAUS II. his Son, surnam'd the d, succeeded him, who reign'd 23 Years. n the beginning of his Reign he had WarsHis Wars. h the Hungarians, Bohemians, Russians and ssians, all caus'd by the protecting of three les. He vigorously maintain'd the Cause Bela Prince of Hungary, who was then mar∣d to his Aunt, and banish'd by King An∣. Whereupon he dethron'd Andrew, and wn'd Bela King of Hungary, notwithstand∣ the considerable Succours sent to Andrew  of Germany and Bohemia. Afterwards, re∣ning into Poland, he marry'd Viseslava,His Mar∣riage. ughter and Heiress of the Duke of Russia, by om he had that Dukedom for a Portion. Hartknoch. lib.  cap. 2. p. 73. Towards the latter end of his Reign he came very dissolute and lewd; oppress'd the ple with extraordinary and insupportable xes; took away publickly Gentlemens dies to satisfy his Lust; could not endure  that took notice of his Irregularities; ish'd such as complain'd of his TyrannicalHis Vices. vernment, and at length kill'd Stanislaus zepanovius Bishop of Cracow, for refusing  the Sacrament of the Altar; the manner which was thus: Boleslaus continuing in enormous Crimes and Extravagancies, this od Man earnestly entreated him to amend Life; but perceiving his Obstinacy, one y he refus'd him the Communion: Which s Prince being highly offended at, watch'd
an opportunity to revenge; and a little while after, as the Bishop was officiating at Mass, he gave him such a blow with his Sa∣bre, that he made his Brains fly against the Wall; and afterwards his Guards entring, cut the good Bishop to pieces. Hereupon he was soon pursu'd with Vatican Thunder, and con∣sequently render'd odious to his Subjects: Wherefore fearing some Conspiracy might beHis Flight out of the Kingdom. rais'd against him, he left his Kingdom, and retir'd with his Son Miecislaus, which he had by his Queen Viseslava, to Ladislaus King of Hungary, where 'tis reported, that out ofHis Death. meer Madness he afterwards kill'd himself. This Bishop Stanislaus was Canoniz'd by Pope Gregory VII. and has all along from thencePatron of Poland. been receiv'd for the Patron of Poland. The Pope also excommunicated the whole Coun∣try, and Boleslaus his Successors were for aTitle of K▪ ceases. considerable timeHartknoch. lib. I. cap. 2. p. 40. depriv'd of the Title of Kings. Next came Uladis∣laus I. 1082. ULADISLAUS HERMANNUS, Brother to Boleslaus, to be elected; who being afraid of the Pope, or else fearing his Brother's return, would only accept of the Title ofHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 45. Prince. He recall'd his Nephew Miecislaus, who died in six Years after. He built many Churches and Monasteries, all which he richly endow'd. This Prince also brought over the rebelli∣ousHis Wars. Pomeranians and Prussians, and defeated likewise the Army of Ʋratislaus Prince of Bohemia, whom the Emperor Henry IV. had
dignified with the Character of King, giving him moreover a Right over Poland, tho he had no Title to dispose of it, his Predecessor Otho III. when he crown'd Boleslaus I. King of Poland, having renounc'd both for himself and his Successors all Claim to that Kingdom. Nay, I heard the Poles themselves say that this was rather a piece of Civility in Otho, than any Obligation upon them, their Coun∣try having never been conquer'd by any Fo∣reigner, not even by the Romans themselves. His Mar∣riage. He married Judith, Daughter of Ʋratislaus King of Bohemia, by whom he had Boleslaus III. surnam'd Krivoustus, or the Wry-mouth'd; and afterwards by a Daughter of the Emperor Henry IV. he had three Daughters. He diedHis Death. in the fiftieth Year of his Age, was buried at Ploscow, and succeeded by his Son Boles∣laus III. 1103. BOLESLAUS III. surnam'd Krivoustus, or the Wry-mouth'd. He was the most warlike and successful Prince that Poland ever had, and at length subdu'd his Bastard Brother Sbigneius that re∣bell'dHis Wars. against him, whom at last he was forc'd to cause to beHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 60. murder'd. But of all others, his Contest with the Emperor Henry V. is most famous, which is as follows. This Emperor having declar'd War against Colomannus King of Hungary, and engag'd the Bohemians on his side, Boleslaus join'd Co∣lomannus, and to make a strong Diversion en∣ter'd Bohemia, and destroy'd the greatest part of that Country; whereupon, to be reveng'd
on Boleslaus, the Emperor surpriz'd the Pro∣vinces of Silesia and Marchia, which were then in the hands of the Poles, and had been abso∣lute Master of them had not Boleslaus speedily marched with an Army to oppose him; who finding his Enemies much superiour in num∣ber, at first thought it better to compose the matter amicably, and therefore sent an Am∣bassador to treat of Peace; to which the Em∣peror, thinking he had the Advantage, would by no means condescend, except upon very dishonourable Terms for the Poles.Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 55. And hereupon leading Scarbicus the Ambassador to see his Treasure, he told him, that that (point∣ing to his Gold) would bring the Poles to what Terms he pleas'd: at which Scarbicus being highly affronted, took off a Gold Ring from his Finger, and throwing it into the Treasury, said, Whatever be your Imperial Majesty's Opi∣nion, I do not question but the Polish Iron (mean∣ing their Swords) will prove as good Metal as the German Gold. Which said, he imme∣diately took his leave, and returning to his Master, acquainted him with his Negotiation; which the haughty Pole highly resenting, re∣solv'd to hazard a Battel, which he did, and by the Bravery of his Army obtain'd a signal Victory in the Dogs-field near Breslaw chief City of Silesia: whereupon the Emperor im∣mediately struck up a Peace with him, gave himHis Mar∣riage. his Sister Adleida in Marriage, and his Daugh∣ter Christina to his young Son Ʋladislaus. This Prince forc'd the Pomeranians to the Christian Faith, which they had often rejected before.
The Poles all this while were in possession of Silesia, but afterwards the Kings of Bohemia conquer'd it, and therefore it consequently now is under the Emperor. Hartknoch. lib. . cap. 2. p. 74. It is reported of this Prince, that he had fought forty seven Battels with success, ex∣ceptHis Valour and Suc∣cess. one only▪ with the Red Russians, which was meerly lost through the Cowardice of a Woievod of Cracovia, to whom the King after the Fight sent a Hare-Skin and Spinning∣wheel for Recompence. Nevertheless, this one Defeat stuck so close to him that he soon after died, leaving four Sons, among whomHis Death and Issue. he divided his Kingdom. This King per∣form'd a great many more memorable Actions, which, my Lord, because they might be too tedious to insert here, I have omitted. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 72. His Cha∣racter.He was of an undaunted Spirit, a great despiser of Danger, and no less an observer of Truth and Right; very liberal and gene∣rous upon the smallest Occasions, and more∣over endued with singular Clemency and Mo∣desty. He was further very ambitious of Glory, but at the same time no Enemy to Peace, tho he is said to have been train'd up to War from his very Cradle. To Uladis∣laus 11. 1140. ULADISLAUS, surnam'd the Driveler, his eldest Son, he left the Supreme Power, which was confirm'd, and he elected in the Year 1140, but reign'd only six Years: and to the other three he gave only some separate Pro∣vinces, which afterwards was the occasion
of great Disorders in Poland; for the elder Brother Ʋladislaus pretending to dis∣possessPersecutes his Bro∣thers. the other three, turn'd his Brother Boleslaus out of the Palatinates of Ploskow and Masovia, and his Brother Henry out of the Province of Sendomir, who both retir'd to their third Brother that govern'd Posnania. Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 73. Ʋladislaus had always with him a Noble∣man, call d Peter Dunin, whom taking out one day to hunt, they happen'd to be so late abroad, that they were oblig'd to lie all Night in a Wood; where, for Diversion, the King began to joke with his Companion after this manner. Dunin (quoth he) I. be∣lieve your Wife lies more at ease to Night with the Abbot Scrinnen, than we do: To which Dunin, forgetting himself, tartly reply'd, And it may be your Majesty's does the same with Dobessus: Who, it seems, was a handsom Fellow about Court that his Queen Christina lov'd. This Answer so nettled the King, that he after∣wards employ'd the same Dobessus to be re∣veng'dA severe Revenge. on Dunin, which he effected by pulling out his Tongue and Eyes. Hereupon the People perceiving how cruelly Ʋladislaus persecuted his own Brothers, and at the same time how ill he treated his Subjects, began to be daily more and more disaffected to him; whereby his Brothers Party greatly en∣creasing, he was beaten by them as he was going to besiege Posnan. Wherefore disco∣vering new Factions hourly appearing a∣gainst him, and fearing some ill Fate from a universal Hatred, he timely withdrew into
Germany to the Emperor Conrade III. CousinHis Flight out of the Kingdom. German to his Queen Christina, who several times endeavour'd to restore him, but all in vain; for his Brother Boleslaus Crispus having got possession of the Crown, Ʋladislaus was forc'd to compound for Silesia only, which afterwards fell to the Principality of Bohemia, and has ever since been out of the possession of the Poles. This Prince lies buried at At∣tenburg,His Death. a City of Germany in Alsace. Ʋla∣dislaus with his Son having abdicated the Crown of Poland, his second Brother, Boles∣laus IV. 1146. BOLESLAUS CRISPUS, or the Frizled, was elected in the Year 1146, and reign'd to the Year 1175; yet the Emperor Conrade did what he could to restore Ʋladislaus. To effect which, he first sent Embassadors into Poland, but to no purpose: Then he resolv'd to make War with the Poles, but defer'd it till his Expedition against Asia was over; to facilitate which he had obtain'd leave to pass through Boleslaus his Dominions to the Euxine Sea: But at his return being constantly soli∣cited by Ʋladislaus and his Queen, he march'd with a powerful Army against Poland; yetHis Wars. what with Delays, Stratagems, and Ambus∣cades, he was so fatigu'd by the Poles that he could do nothing, till at last he was call'd home to appease some Intestine Broils in his own Dominions, which having effected, he soon after died. His Successor Frederic Bar∣berossa also espous'd Ʋladislaus his Cause, but not being able to do any thing in his Favour by Embassadors, he march'd with a numerous Army against the Poles, which they likewise
harass'd and wearied out, till they had ob∣lig'd that Emperor to strike up a Peace with 'em, he being in War at the same time against Milan; by which it was agreed, that Boleslaus should remit Silesia to Ʋladislaus, whose Posterity afterwards divided it into several Dutchies, till at last it came to the Empire. This great Province, my Lord, as I observ'd in my Journy through it, is one of the most fertile and plentiful Countries in all Germany. Boleslaus began another War against the Prussians for refusing to pay him Tribute, and forc'd them to this Compliance, that they should submit in case he left 'em to their Religion; but otherwise they boldly declar'd, that they would rather die than become Christians again. Whereupon Boleslaus was forc'd to grant them Liberty of Conscience; yet they soon revolted, and by aFlorus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 8. p. 78. Strata∣gem entirely routed the Polish Army, andHis Death. kill'd his Brother Henry. This King died not long after, and was buried at Cracow. Miecis∣laus III. 1174. MIECISLAUS, surnam'd the Old, Brother to Boleslaus, succeeded him, being elected in the Year 1174, and reign'd only to 1178. He was call'd the Old from his great Sagacity and Prudence in his Youth. His CovetousnessA bad Po∣licy. induc'd him to hoard up great Sums of Mo∣ney by oppressing the Gentry and People with unreasonable Taxes, and selling all Employ∣ments, tho against the Constitutions of the Kingdom. This extreme Avarice brought him to be generally hated by the Clergy, No∣bility
and People: whereuponIb. p. 80. & Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 5. c. 9. p. 88. Gedeon Bi∣shop of Cracow endeavour'd several times to encline him to pity his Subjects, and despise Money, since he had no need of it; but he would by no means hearken to his Advice, wherefore this Bishop concerted together with the Gentry to dethrone him, and remitDethron'd. the Crown to Casimir his Brother, who more deserv'd it, which they effectually did after some little Bloodshed. Here we may observe, that Covertousness is the greatest Vice that any Prince can be guilty of, especially a King of Poland, whose Sub∣jects, as your Lordship doubtless has observ'd, are generally liberal even to Extravagance. At first Casimir refus'd the Crown offer'd him, alledging it was his Brother's Right, and that such an Alteration might occasion Civil Wars, which he by no means had any mind to be the Author of. But when they unanimously declar'd they would have no o∣ther King, and could never more obey Mie∣cislaus, Casimir II. 1178. CASIMIR II. consenting to accept of the Government, was elected in the Year 1178, and reign'd to 1195. He was surnam'd the Just, being altogether unlike his Brother, as appears by the following Particular.Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 75. Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 9. p. 82. Be∣ing at play with a Gentleman of his, nam'd Conarius, whilst he was Prince of Sendomir, and having won all his Adversary's Money, the Gentleman in a Passion struck him over
the Face, and fled; but next day being brought before him, was adjudged by every body to have deserv'd Death for his Insolence. NotA commen∣dable Ex∣ample. at all (replied the good Prince) for being af∣fected with his Loss, and not having it in his Power to revenge himself on Fortune, it is no wonder if he fell foul of her Favourite: and moreover, rather blam'd himself for conde∣scending to play with him, and likewise thanked him for putting him in mind by that Blow, how unworthy it was for a Prince to bestow his time so ill: And lastly, as a fur∣ther. Argument of his dissenting from his Brother's Principles, he return'd the Courtier all his Money again. Miecis∣laus endea∣vours to be restor'd. Miecislaus being excluded, retir'd with his Princess and Children to Ratisbon to the Em∣peror Frederic his Kinsman, who yet could do him no good, he being engag'd at that time in War both in Italy and Asia; therefore his next Recourse was to his Brother's Clemency. This so far wrought upon Casimir, that he made a Speech to the Senate to recal him, but was extremely blam'd by them for offer∣ing to prefer a private Kindness to the Pub∣lick Safety. All this while Miecislaus was little sensible of his Brother's good Nature, tho he afterwards under-hand endeavour'd again to get him restor'd. Casimir begun his Reign by easing his Sub∣jects of the Taxes his Brother had impos'd upon 'em, and restraining the Power of ex∣orbitant Magistrates. While he was absent in Russia, on account of composing some Differences, by instigation of Miecislaus, some of the Nobles conspir'd against him, and en∣deavour'd
to re-instate Miecislaus; which the better to bring about and satisfy the People, they pretended that Casimir was poison'd in Russia. Hereupon Miecislaus readily arrives in Poland, and was receiv'd every where but in the Castle of Cracow, which Bishop Fulco held out against him. Of all this Casimir be∣ing soon inform'd, by Assistance of the Russi∣ans, overcame his Brother, and gave both him and his Army their Lives; which Goodness of his at length so wrought upon Miecislaus, that he never after aim'd at the Crown. Submits. After Casimir was well settled, being not unmindful of the rebellious Prussians, nor of the Death of his Brother Henry, he march'd with so great fury against them, that he had regard neither for Man, Woman nor Child, but put great numbers of all sorts to the Sword, and burnt and plunder'd their Coun∣try to that degree, that at last they quietly submitted to the absolute Dominion of Po∣land. Dantzic made a City. This King made a City ofFlorus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 10. p. 85. Dantzic in Prussia, which before was only a poor Fisher-Town on the Baltic Sea. He lies buried at Cracow, having left two Sons Lescus and Con∣rade,His Death and Issue. and one Daughter Adleida. He liv'd to the Age of six and fifty Years. After his Death the Poles elected his Son Lescus V. 1195. LESCUS V. surnamed the White, in the Year 1195, who being very young had for Guardians, his Mother Helena, with theƲnder Guardians. Bishop and Palatin of Cracovia. In the mean
time his Uncle Miecislaus being yet aliveHis Wars. came with a powerful Army of Poles and Si∣lesians to dethrone him, and gain'd a bloody Battel over the Palatin of Cracovia, who commanded Lescus his Army. Hereupon he immediately dispatch'd Embassadors to He∣lena, to represent to her his unquestionable Right to the Crown, his Strength; the Disor∣der among Lescus his Tutors, who being too young, was not able of himself to govern; the great Advantages he had obtain'd in the late Battel; and lastly, his great Party in the Kingdom. He moreover desires Helena to make him Guardian over her Son, and pro∣mises to adopt him for his own, to leave him the Succession after his Death, and that he will do nothing but what shall be according to the Constiutions of the Kingdom. All theseDethron'd. Proffers having been throughly weighed byMiecis∣laus III. restor'd, 1199. the Queen and Council: At last Miecislaus was recall'd a second time in the Year 1199. after having taken a solemn Oath to perform all his Promises. But being once reinthron'd he soon forgot his Oath, and fell to consiscating several of his Subjects Estage, and giving 'em to others, saying,Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 6. p. 99. That a King was no longer oblig'd to keep his Oath, than when it was nei∣ther safe nor beneficial for him to breake it. Here∣uponDethron'd. the Palatin of Cracovia seizes on theLescus V. restor'd. City of Cracow, and receives Lescus a second time, whilst Miecislaus, being then absent, by all the Intrigues imaginable endeavour'd to be restor'd: Whereupon he flatter'd the People, perswading them that Lescus his Party
had cast false Aspersions upon him; and that if he did any thing contrary to his Oath, he was meerly betray'd to it by the malicious Perswasions of his pretended Friends. By these and such like fair words he Iulls asleep the credulous People, and gains their Affecti∣ons the third time: Whereupon he sends to the Queen to inform her that Nicholas Palatin of Cracovia had been the Author of the late Disturbances, and therefore wills her to re∣move him from Court, and receive himself again; which she, pitying his unfortunate Case, even in prejudice of her own Son, was inclin'd to do, and would therefore admit of no Justi∣fication from the Palatin. Whereupon this Person being a Man of great Authority in the Kingdom, goes and joins Miecislaus; many fol∣low his Example, and in short, the Queen was quickly forc'd to recal Miecislaus a third timeMiecis∣laus rein∣thron'd, 1202. in the Year 1202. When being reinthron'd, he requited Queen Helena for her Services by seizing upon the Territory of Voslicia, and three other Places in Sendomir, which of right belonged to her: and being about to do the same to several others, he was prevented by a sudden Death in the seventy third Year ofHis Death. his Age, leaving two Sons, Otho and Ʋla∣dislaus Lasconogus. After Miecislaus his Death, the greater part voted for Lescus V. that was still alive; but Nicholas Palatin of Cracovia, and the Bishop of Cracow his Brother, would by no means consent to itHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 75, 76. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 6. p. 102, 103. unless Lescus would
banish out of the Kingdom Gouoric Palatin of Sendomir, of whom they were both very jealous. Lescus answer'd, He would not buy a Kingdom (which by right was his own) by do∣ing an Injury to his Friend. Hereupon by the Bishop and Palatin's Interest he was put by, and Uladislaus Lascono∣gus. 1203. ULADISLAUS LASCONOGUS, that is, Thin-foot, elected in the Year 1203. But this good Prince, considering Lescus his Right, af∣terSurrenders his Crown. three Years Reign, voluntarily surren∣der'd to him, when Lescus V. Re-esta∣blish'd. 1206. LESCUS was receiv'd the third time, in the Year 1206, and reign'd to the Year 1226. Un∣der his Reign the Poles heard first of the Tar∣tars, a barbarous Nation that came from the Caspian Sea and Mount Imaus in Asia, who made Irruptions into Taurica Chersonesus, and the Frontiers of Podolia and Russia, and have ever since been most inveterate Enemies to Poland. Lescus had a Brother call'd Conrade, to whom he gave the Provinces of Masovia and Cujavia, and made one Suentopelus Go∣vernour of Pomerania, whereof one was Au∣thor of Lescus's Death, and the other of most blood Wars in Poland: For this Suentopelus thinking to make himself absolute in Pomera∣nia, employed People toGuagnini p. 92. murder Lescus, which they not long after effected according∣ly,Murder'd in a Bath. when this good Prince was in a Bath: Whereupon, after his Death, Suentopelus de∣clared himself Duke of Pomerania and Conrade,
andFlorus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 2. p. 94. & Herburt. de Ful∣stin. p. 111. call'd into Poland the Knights of the Teu∣tonicTeutonic Knights call'd into Poland. Order, (who were then banisht out of Sy∣ria by the Sarazens, and settled in Germany) to help him against the Prussians, who were wont to make frequent Incursions into his Country, to whom for Recompence he gave the Terri∣tory of Culm, and some other small Places, on condition they should act vigorously a∣gainst the Prussians; but after they had con∣quer'd those People, they were to resign Culm, &c. and have the half of their Con∣quests to themselves. These Auxiliary Troops prov'd afterwards very pernicious to Poland, having been the Cause of many bloody Wars in that Country. This Agreement between the Knights of the Cross (as they were like∣wise call'd) and Conrade, was approv'd and confirm'd by Pope Gregory IX. in the Year 1228. In a short time these Knights effected what they undertook. This Lescus lies buried in the Cathedral at Cracow, and left behind him a young Son, Bloes∣laus V. 1228. BOLESLAUS V. surnam'd the Chast, whose Guardians he order'd to be his Brother Con∣rade, and Henry Duke of Breslaw his Cousin. This young Prince, notwithstanding the many Intrigues and Cabals Conrade form'd against him, who design'd to make himself King, was elected in the Year 1228, and reign'd to the Year 1278. He marry'd Cunigunda, DaughterHis Mar∣riage. to Bela King of Hungary; but after they were bedded, he had not the courage to consummate the Marriage, and therefore by mutual Consent both made a Vow of Chastity.
Inad of Tartars. Ib. p. 96. & Herburt. de Fulstin. p. 116.'Twas in this Prince's Reign the Tartars made their first Irruptions into Poland, where∣of there were three at several times. In the first they ravag'd all the Country about Lub∣lin and Russia, and carry'd away an incredible Number of Prisoners with great Riches. In the second they return'd with more fury, and not being contented with the Plunder of Po∣land, spread likewise all over Silesia, where near Lignitz they entirely defeated the Con∣federate Army of the Christians; wherein Henry Duke of Breslaw, Boleslaus Son to theHis Trou∣bles. Duke of Moravia, Pompo Great Master of the Teutonick Order, and several other Persons of Note were kill'd.Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 76. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 7. p. 119. The Number of dead Bodies was so incredible, that they fill'd nine great Sacks with the Christians Ears, cutting off each Head but one, after the same manner as Hanibal at the Battle of Cannae fill'd several Bushels with the Rings cut off from the Fing∣ers of the Roman Knights only, that were there kill'd. Boleslaus had not the courage to march in Person against the Tartars when they came a second time to invade him, but retir'd withRetires in∣to Hunga∣ry. his Court into Hungary, and thereby left his Subjects to the Mercy of their Enemies. Which base Action the Poles being extremely offend∣ed at, intended to have elected a new King; whereupon Boleslaus, Son to Henry Duke of Breslaw that was kill'd in the Battle after∣wards, was nam'd; but Conrade vigorously op∣posing him, and pretending to have more Right, the Gentry, to prevent Civil Wars,
recall'd their former King Bolestaus fromReturns. Hungary, and in the mean time Conrade dy'd. Not long after the Tartars, together with the Lithuanians, which were hitherto Pagans, made Incursions a third time into Poland, when they pillag'd the Country up as far as Cracow; which City, meeting with no body in it to re∣sist'em, they both plunder'd and burnt. After∣wards they went to Ʋratislaw, which they foundHis Trou∣bles and Wars. ready fir'd to their hands; for the Townsmen having had timely notice of the coming of the Barbarians, had got all their Treasure toge∣ther and fled, whilst the Souldiers, distrusting the Strength of the Place, and searing it might become a Prey to the Enemy, set fire to it, and retir'd into the Castle; which having greatly incens'd the Tartars, they laid Siege to the Castle with all imaginable Vigour, and would soon have taken it, had they not been frighted from before it by a Prodigy. Du∣ring this, Boleslaus march'd in Person against the Lithuanians, whom he overthrew, and kill'd their Duke Mindacus. The Prussians likewise being yet Pagans, sided with the Li∣thuanians, when the Teutonick Order, which was then settled in Prussia, call'd to their As∣sistanceFlorus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 13. p. 103. Ottocarus King of Bohemia, who quickly reduc'd the Prussians; and the betterKonings∣berg built. to keep them in Awe, built a Fort call'd Ko∣ningsberg or Royal Hill. Boleslaus was a pious and good Prince, and lies bury'd at Cracow in a Monastery foundedHis Death. by himself. He built other Religious Houses, and reign'd near 50 Years; and having made a
Vow of Chastity, left no Children: Where∣fore his Uncle's Son, by the Father, Lescus VI. 1279. LESCUS VI. surnam'd the Black, succeeded him, being elected in the Year 1279, and reign'd only to the Year 1289. In the begin∣ning of his Reign the Russians, summon'd by the Lithuanians and Tartars, made Incursions intoHis Wars. Poland under Command of Leo their Duke; but were defeated, first by Varsias the King's General, and afterwards were beat by the King himself out of a Village where they had entrench'd themselves, which from thatCity of Leo∣pol, whence so called. General's Name has been since call'dHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 8. p. 136. Leopol, and is now a sine City. Upon this Defeat the Enemy were forc'd to retire with great Loss. Not long after they return'd again, but more to their prejudice than in the former Irrupti∣on: for then, tho their Army consisted of a Prodigious Number of Men, and an innume∣rable Company of Mastiff Dogs train'd up to War; yet were they a second time routed by Lescus, insomuch that a certain People call'd Jazyges, who then inhabited a part of Lithuania, and came only to plunder in Poland, were so totally destroy'd, that there remains nothing left of 'em except the Name. But at Length the Tartars making another Irruption, had better success; for they not only vanquish'd Lescus, but also carry'd away, besides Men, marry'd Women and Children, above twenty thousand Maids into Captivity. An Insur∣rection. After this Defeat, an Insurrection was rais'd against Lescus by Paul Bishop of Cracow; for
that under the Reign of Boleslaus the Chast, Lescus had kept him about a Month in Prison. Hereupon, Conrade Duke of Masovia was in∣vited to accept the Crown; who, coming into Poland for that purpose, was met at Sendomir by General Varsias, Paul the Bishop, and a great Number of the Nobility. Upon this, Lescus perceiving himself forsaken, fled intoHe retires into Hun∣gary. Hungary to King Ʋladislaus; but the City of Cracow still bearing a respect to him, conti∣nu'd Loyal, and prepar'd to sustain a Siege: Whereupon having been summon'd to sur∣render, their Answer was, That they could not be treaberous to their lawful Soveraign Lescus, but would defend his Right to the last drop of their Blood. Hereat the Nobles being grievously nettled, resolv'd to sit down with their Army before that City; but, upon their Approaches, finding it empty, the Inhabitants being re∣tir'd into the Castle, they set sire to it, think∣ing by those means to bring the Enemy sooner to a Compliance. This done, Lescus having obtain'd a considerable Army of King Ʋla∣dislaus, was marching directly towards Cra∣cow, to relieve his besieg'd Friends; when meeting with Conrade, who came to oppose him, near the River Raba, he entirely rout∣edReturns with suc∣cess. him, and forc'd him back again into his own Country. This hapned about the Year 1285. His Death. This Prince dy'd, and was bury'd in the Monastery of the Trinity at Cracow. Lescus the VI. leaving no Children, his King∣dom consequently fell into great Distracti∣ons; for Ʋladislaus Locticus his Brother seiz'd on the Palatinate of Siradia, and Boleslaus Duke
of Ploskow, Brother to Conrade Duke of Ma∣sovia, on the Palatinates of Cracovia and Sen∣domir; but this latter was soon dispossess'd by Henry 1. 1290. HENRY Duke of Breslaw, surnam'd the Ho∣nest, of the Family of Piastus, in the Year 1290; who was likewise not long after turn'd out by Locticus, but soon restor'd, and reign'd in qua∣lity of King for the space of five Years, tho I do not read he was crown'd. He appointed Premislus Duke of Great Poland, for his Succes∣sor, being of the Family of Piastus likewise. This Premislus also had the Province of Pomerania left him by Miescingus Prince of that Country. Premislus. 1296. PREMISLUS, in the thirty eighth Year of his Age, was crown'd King at Gnesna by James Swinka Archbishop of that City, in theTitle of King re∣stor'd. Year 1296, which was an Honour that had not beenHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 40. done to any Prince of Poland before for above two hundred Years, since Boleslaus the Bold kill'd Stanislaus at the Altar; but Premislus did not long enjoy this Title, for seven Months after his Coronation, he is said to have beenMurder'd. Florus Polon. lib. 2: cap. 15. p. 113. Guagnini Tom. 1. p. 97.murder'd by some Brandenburg Emissaries, that Marquess being afraid of this King who was Master of Pomerania which join'd to his Country. He was bury'd among his Predecessors at Posnan. After the Murder of King Premislus, Uladislaus III. 1296. ULADISLAUS LOCTICUS, (so call'd from the wordHartknoch. p. 77. Lokiec, an Ell, having his Name from his low Stature) Brother of
Lescus the Black, was chosen in the Year 1296, and reign'd only four Years. He went upon an Expedition against the Silesians that wereHis Wars. enclin'd to assist the Bohemians against him, who then pretended a Right to the Kingdom of Poland. These Locticus subdu'd, and having considerably ravag'd their Country, return'd home, where he afterwards gave himself up to a lewd and debauch'd Life, insomuch thatHis Vices. he neglected the care of all Publick Business, and minded nothing but his own private Plea∣sures. These his intolerable Vices brought upon him the Ill-will of his Subjects, insomuch that after three years Reign they pronounc'd him unworthy of the Scepter, and resolv'd to elect another. Hereupon Locticus being de∣thron'd,Dethron'd. they invite Winces∣laus K. of Bohemia. 1300. WINCESLAUS King of Bohemia to accept their Crown, who was marry'd to Rixa, Daughter of King Premislus, and crown'd King of Poland in the Year 1300, but reign'd only to 1305. After he came to reign he per∣secuted Locticus, who hid himself for some time, but was forc'd at last to quit the King∣dom. When Winceslaus thus saw himself se∣cure at home by the flight of Locticus, and after having put Bohemian Garisons into the several Cities of Poland, which seem'd veryFalse Poli∣cy. uneasy to that Nation, he thought it high time to go and settle Affairs in Bohemia. During this, Ʋladislaus Locticus having a con∣siderable Party in the Kingdom, which daily encreas'd on account of discontent against Winceslaus; and having got together several Troops out of Hungary, he march'd directly His Wars.
towards Poland, hearing that the Bohemian Government was somewhat burdensom to that Nation. At first Locticus had considerable Advantage over the Bohemians, but by the Death of Winceslaus, which followed soon af∣ter, he had all the Success he could desire; for the Bohemians, who had possession of the Garisons, finding themselves in a strange Country, and moreover hated and ill thought on by the People, were afraid of an Insurrec∣tion against 'em, and therefore made no great difficulty of surrendring to Locticus all those Cities and Towns they had possession of, as Cracow, Sendomir, &c. In the mean time young Winceslaus coming with an Army to dis∣pute his Father's Kingdom with Locticus, wasFlorus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 17. p. 118. murder'd in the Expedition, 'tis thought, by Orders of the Emperour Albert; and since his time the Bohemians have ever been go∣vern'd by foreign Princes. Winceslaus KingHis Death. of Poland and Bohemia dy'd, and was bury'd atHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 9. p. 147. Prague in the Year 1305. Uladis∣laus IV. restor'd. 1305. After the Death both of Winceslaus the Fa∣ther and Son, Ʋladislaus Locticus was restor'd, almost by common Consent, in the Year 1305, and reign'd to the Year 1333. And this they did, either because they thought he had had time to repent and mend his former Life, or by reason they were afraid of Civil Wars if they should elect any other.Ib. p. 148. & Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 18. p. 119. Notwithstand∣ingMeets with Difficul∣ties. the Palatinates of Posnania and Kalisch hav∣ing a fresh Memory of his past dissolute Life, would never acknowledg him their King.
Also the Governour of Pomerania, which then belong'd to Poland, being brib'd by the Mar∣quess of Brandenburg, deliver'd up to him all the Cities of that Province, as likewise the City of Dantzic, except the Castle which the Governour thereof, one Bogussa, being truly loyal to his King, would by no means sur∣render. Teutonic Knights e∣stablish'd in Prussia. In these days the Knights of the Teutonic Order were fully settled in Prussia, being both very Strong and very Rich. They were esta∣blish'd there by Agreement with Conrade, Bro∣ther to King Ʋladislaus Lasconogus, for assist∣ing him against the Prussians when he was op∣press'd by them. They there built, some years before, the City ofIb. p. 120. Marienburg, appointed forCity of Ma∣rienburg, when built. Residence of their Great Masters. Here Loc∣ticus was oblig'd to crave their Aid against the Rebels of Pomerania and Dantzic, which they readily granted, on condition that half the Garison of the Castle of Dantzic should be of their Troops, by which means they soon be∣came Masters of the whole; for they after∣wards not only turn'd the Poles out of theTeutonic Order trouble∣some to the Poles. Castle, but both Brandenburghers and Pomera∣nians out of the City of Dantzic it self; and likewise under pretence of assisting the King of Poland, conquer'd all Pomerania for themselves; when being Masters thereof, they offer'd to buy the Title of Locticus for Money, which he refus'd. Then they offer'd the same Summ to the Marquess of Brandenburg to re∣nounce his Right to that Province; which he, tho he had no Title to sell, yet was wise enough to accept their Prosser.
The Poles were very sensible of all these Af∣fronts and Injustices offer'd 'em by the Teuto∣nic Order; but before they proceeded to Re∣venge, they thought it advisable toFlorus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 18. p. 123. acquaint the Pope therewith, who liv'd then at Avignon, who, after four years Delays and Debates, or∣der'd the Knights to give due fatisfaction to the Poles: but they having had four years res∣pit to fortify themselves, and to make strong Alliances with some Neighbouring Princes; and besides, having a very considerable Army on foot, answer'd his Holiness, That they had often done great Services for Poland; that that Kingdom ow'd them Sums of Money; and that they presum'd that not only the Lands they were in possession of in Prussia and Pomerania, were lawfully theirs; but that also they thought the Poles oblig'd to give 'em either more Land or more Money to recom∣pense the several Kindnesses they had doneAnd there∣fore excom∣municated by the Pope. them. Hereupon the Pope excommunicates this Order; and the Poles, under command of their King, march'd directly against 'em. Here Locticus made an eloquent Speech toLocticus his Speech to his Ar∣my. his Army, representing the many Affronts and Injustices they had receiv'd from a little Sect of People, to which his Predecessors the Kings of Po∣land had out of meer Goodness given their Protec∣tion when banish'd from their own Country by the Sarazens. Then he enlarg'd upon the Covet∣ousness and Ambition of this Order, and con∣cluded by encouraging his Men to fight brave∣ly, and not suffer those to become their Mas∣ters, who were at first their Vassals. Here∣upon
the Poles, animated by this Speech of their King, tho much inferior in Number to their Enemies, yet fought so siercely and bravely, that they entirely routed the TeutonicOverthrows the Teuro∣nic Order. Order, and kill'd about twenty thousand of their Men, tho they themselves have had the presumption to affirm that they did not lose above five or six hundred. Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 18. p. 131. Among the wounded, there was one Flori∣anus Szari, Knight of that Order, who having his Belly open'd with a Scymiter, and his Guts dropping out, which he held up with his hands; the King passing by, pity'd him: Whereupon the Knight said to him, Sir, A Man in his Village suffers more than I do when he has bad Neighbours. The King admiring at this dying man's Thought, immediately caus'd his Surgeons to take care of him; and when he was well, gave him Land that had no bad Neighbours about it. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 9. p. 153. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 77, 78. This Ʋladislaus, it seems, not being through∣ly satisfy'd with Premislus his Right, to trans∣mit the Title of King to his Posterity with∣out leave of the Pope, sent an Embassador to his Holiness to request a liberty for himselfIs crown'd, together with his Queen, by Order of the Pope. and his Queen Hedwigis to be crown'd, which was forthwith granted, and the Ceremony perform'd in the Cathedral of Cracow by the Archbishop of Gnesna, and other Bishops, in the Year 1320. The King long after dy'd, and was bury'd at Cracow, in the Year 1333.
Casimir III. 1333. CASIMIR the Great succeeded his Father Locticus, being elected in the Year 1333, andMakes Peace with the Teutonic Knights. reign'd to the Year 1370. He made a Peace with the Teutonic Order, that was not at all advantagious or honourable to the Polish Na∣tion, the Knights being thereby still to re∣main in possession of Prussia, Dantzic and Po∣merania, notwithstanding the Threatnings of the Pope, and his Bulls of Excommunication. This Casimir had no Children: He is the last Male of the Family of Piastus: Wherefore that the Crown might not go altogether out of his Family, before his Death heHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 10. p. 166. prevail'd with the Poles to elect Charles King of Hungary his own Sister's Son; but he dying before Casimir, his Son Lewis was chosen. The Poles had seve∣ralHis Con∣quests. times conquer'd Russia, but it was never enjoy'd peaceably till Casimir's time; who having had better success than any of his Pre∣decessors, annex'd it as a Province to the Crown of Poland. The Province of Masovia was likewise conquer'd by him, and annex'd to the Crown.Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 19. p. 135. The Poles had never hither∣to any written Laws, and but very few madeHis other good Deeds. till Casimir began to make Institutions, name Judges, create Magistrates, build Forts, and to establish a better Oeconomy in the King∣dom than any Prince before him. The Laws and Constitutions of the Teutonic Knights seem'd very rational and political to him, having had a sensible Experience of the good Government of this Order for a considerable time: Wherefore he introduc'd their Laws
into Poland, which have continu'd ever since, and are call'd the Magdeburg Laws. His Cha∣racter. This Casimir was a very lewd Prince, but withal exceeding Liberal and Just: He kept a Jewish Concubine, at whose request he grant∣ed great Privileges to that People: He gain'd so well the good Opinion and Affection of his Subjects, that he was stil'd the Father of the Poor; and a great manyHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 78. Starovolseius De∣script. Polon. p. 122. Germans, who were oppress'd by their own Princes, in his time came into Poland, and have ever since inha∣bited the Foot of the Carpathian Mountains. The Daughter of Boguslaus, Duke of Pomera∣nia, was then marry'd to the Emperour Charles IV. Casimir celebrated the Nuptials with great Splendor and Magnisicence at Cracow, where assisted Lewis King of Hungary, Sigismund King of Denmark, and Petrua King of Cyprus, with the Emperour, and many Princes of Germany, Poland, and other Countries. Valachia at that time was a kind of Repub∣lick of it self, having before had Governours, which they call'd Hospodars; the last of which being dead, and his Children aspiring to the same Dignity, Casimir sent an Army to sup∣portHis Wars. 'em, but by an Ambush of the Valachians, plac'd in a Wood, was entirely defeated. Casimir dy'd soon after this of a Fall from hisHis Death. Horse, and was bury'd at Cracow. This King reign'd thirty seven Years, and liv'd sixty.Bizardiere Histoire des Dietes, p. 1. Guagnini Tom. 1. p. 102. He was surnam'd the Great (being the only Person that had had that Title among the
Polish Princes) not because he had gain'd a great many Victories, but by reason of the many beautiful Structures and Fortresses he had built, as likewise of the many beneficial Laws and Constituions which he had made. Casimir, being the last King of the Family of Piastus, had caus'd his own Nephew by his Sister, Lewis King of Hungary, 1370. LEWIS, King of Hungary, to be elected for his Successor during his Life-time, who was crown'd accordingly in Poland in the Year 1370, and reign'd 12 Years. The Poles were not extraordinarily well satisfied with him, being a Foreign Prince, and there∣foreOblig'd to take an Oath. oblig'd him before they would crown him, to take anRadevicus lib. 1. cap. 3. p. 13. Oath, not only to maintain their former Privileges, but also to enlarge 'em; for hitherto the Successors of Piastus had almost had an absolute Power in Poland, a great deal more than their present Kings have. Returns in∣to Hunga∣ry. After some time Lewis was forc'd to return into Hungary to settle some Affairs there, when he left the Administration of the Go∣vernment, during his Absence, to his Mother Elizabeth. His going away occasion'd great Troubles, for the Russians rebell'd, and the Lithuanians made Incursions into the very Heart of Poland. The Poles also were di∣vided among themselves; they could not en∣dure to see their Towns in the hands of Hun∣garian Garisons; and besides, they were so much displeas'd with their King's leaving 'em
to the Government of his Mother, whom they neither lov'd nor esteem'd, that they sent to acquaint him, that they thought it Ho∣nour enough for himself to govern Poland. All these Troubles and Distrusts soon oblig'd the King to return into Poland with a strong Ar∣my of Hungarians, where he first march'dHis Wars. against the Rebel Russians, and subdu'd them; next against the Lithuanians, and oblig'd them to a Peace: soon after which he dy'd, and wasHis Death, buried at Belgrade in Hungary, in the 56th Year of his Age, having reigned 12 Years. HeAnd Issue. left two Daughters, but no Sons, one of which married to Sigismund the Emperor's Son, and the other, nam'd Hedwigis, he left to succeed him in the Kingdom of Poland. Chwalkowski singularia Polonica p. 20. Florus Po∣lon. lib. 2. cap. 20. p. 145, 146. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 11. p. 189, &c. This Prince was very curious to know what Opinion People had of him, and was also exact in reforming the Faults they laid to hisA commen∣dable Ex∣ample. Charge. For this purpose he was wont to disguise himself, and enquire among the Peo∣ple how they lik'd their King, and what they thought amiss in him; and according to their Answers he redress'd the Grievances sug∣gested to him. My Lord, I have hitherto given you a suc∣cinct Account of the Family of Piastus; next I shall proceed to present your Lordship like∣wise with that of Jagello, being still a Conti∣nuation of Piastus his Family in the Line of a Daughter.
Of the Family of Jagello. When Lewis King of Poland and Hungary dy'd, his Daughter Hedwigis being with her Mother the Queen Dowager in Hungary, the Poles, tho there were several Princes of the Race of Piastus left in Poland and Silesia, yet either because they did not think them de∣serving, or else by reason that they believ'd 'em engag'd in their Enemies Interests, sent a solemn Embassy for the young Princess Queen Hedwigis 1382. HEDWIGIS, who soon came into Po∣land, with Cardinal Demetrius, the Bishop of Strigonia, and several others of the chief No∣bility of Hungary. At her arrival the Poles receiv'd her with great Joy, Splendor and Magnificence; and the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, Bozenta, crown'd her after the usual Ceremo∣nies at Cracow, on the Feast of St. Hedwigis (always religiously observ'd in Poland) in the Year 1382, and she reign'd alone four Years. This young Princess, being not yet marry'd,Has seve∣ral Sui∣tors. had several noble Suitors, among which Zie∣movitus Duke of Masovia was the first, whom she refus'd; the next was William of Austria, who came in Person to court her: Him she lik'd, but the Senate of Poland would by no means consent to a Marriage with him, having always had a Maxim (which they never hi∣therto broke) that they would by no means admit any of that Family to their Crown, and this, fearing so powerful a Neighbour might one time or other find means to make himself Absolute in their Country. But at last Ja∣gello great Duke of Lithuania had better For∣tune,
for he soon obtain'd her by the greatIs married to Jagello, who be∣comes a Christian. and advantagious Proffers he made the Poles. He first promis'd to embrace the Christian Religion with all his Country, who were be∣fore Fagans: Next to unite Lithuania to Po∣land, during his time, under the same form of Government; and lastly, that in case his Male Race fail'd, it should for ever after be annex'd to that Kingdom. Hereupon Jagello was baptiz'd, and takes upon him the Name of Jagello, or Uladis∣laus V. 1386. ULADISLAUS V. and after having consum∣mated the Marriage with Hedwigis, was conse∣crated by the Arch-bishop Bozenta in the Year 1386. and reign'd 48 Years. Not long after his Coronation he went with Priests into Li∣thuania,Converts the Lithua∣nians. and in a twelve Month's time con∣verted all that Nation; but this not so much by their Preaching and Vigilance, as by his own exemplary Zeal and Perswasion.Herb. de Fulst. l. 13. p. 207. Hartkn. l. 1. c. 2. p. 87. Af∣terFounds the Ʋniversity of Cracow. this he erected the University of Cracow, which Casimir the Great had only begun, and sent to Prague in Bohemia for learned Men to instruct the Youth in all manner of Sciences, which had never before been taught in this Country. About this time Queen HedwigisHedwigis dies. dy'd, after having endow'd the University, to encourage Learning. His Wars with the Teutonic Order. This Prince had long Wars with the Teuto∣nic Order, which then very much insulted over the Frontiers of his Kingdom; where∣upon the Poles were not a little enclin'd to be reveng'd on this proud and powerful People. Now Poland not being alone sufficient to with∣stand
'em, Jagello made up a considerable Army of Poles, Lithuanians, Russians and Tar∣tars, with all which he march'd directly to∣wards them, who were got ready to receive him with a Body of about 140000 Men; yet notwithstanding, after a long and doubtful Fight, the Poles happen'd to have the better, and entirely routed the Teutonic Army, kil∣ling their great Master Conrade of Thuningen with about 30000 Souldiers, and near 15000 taken Prisoners. This Victory the Poles pur∣sued so far, that they took most of the Towns in Prussia, and doubtless had entirely destroy'd that Order had not the Emperor Sigismund' come to their Relief, who soon forc'd the Poles to make Peace with 'em, and to restore all they had taken from 'em. After∣wards Jagello had several other Conflicts with the Teutonic Order, in all which he conquer'd. His Death, He dy'd of a Fever in Russia after having reign'd forty eight Years and some Months, and lies buried in the Cathedral at Cracow. This King had had four Wives, all which heAnd Issue. caus'd to be crown'd, and two Sons, Ʋla∣dislaus VI. and Casimir IV. Tho his Son Uladis∣laus VI. 1435. ULADISLAUS the Sixth was but nine Years old when his Father dy'd, yet after long Debates and great Opposition in the Diet, he was elected at Briescia in the Year 1435, and reign'd ten Years.Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 167. He was so young when he was chosen, that his Coronation Oath was fain to be dispens'd with, his Mo∣ther Sophia and some of the Peers having pro∣mis'd
he should take it when he came of Age.The Se∣nate, Re∣gents. In the mean time the Senate were Regents during his Minority. Some while after the Tartars made great Incursions into Podolia which then belong'd to Poland, when having kill'd the Polish General Bucarius, and the greatest part of his Army, they retir'd with great Booty into their own Country. After this, by the Death of the Emperor Albert, Hungary having no King to defend it against the Turks who threaten'd it on all sides, sent Embassadors to Ʋladislaus to entreat him to come and be their King, which, after some Deliberation, he accepted of; and going into that Kingdom, notwithstanding the Cabals and Party of the Empress Elizabeth, who was left four Months gone with Child, he was crown'd King of Hungary at Buda. The ChildUladislaus crown'd King of Hungary. the Empress went with was afterwards born, and call'd Ladislaus; but she dying not long after, left King Ʋladislaus in Peace, at least at home, till the Turks oblig'd him to take Arms for his Defence abroad; for Amurath, Empe∣ror of the Turks, was not only then on his March to besiege Belgrade in Person, but also commanded the Hungarians to pay him Tri∣bute. Hereupon Ʋladislaus was forc'd to de∣clareHis Wars with the Turks. War against him, and under the Com∣mand of Huniades sent an Army made up of Poles and Hungarians to oppose him, which coming upon him by Night, surprized the Turkish Army near the River Morava in Hun∣gary, and made such a slaughter of 'em that 'tis thought the Turks lost above 30000 Men that day. After this happy Victory Ʋla∣dislaus
banish'd all those Infidels out of Hun∣gary, and pursu'd 'em to the very Frontiers of Macedon in Greece, where he gain'd a se∣cond Battel over Carambeius General of the Troops of Asia, took him Prisoner, and drove his Army into Mountains and inaccessible Places. The King was wounded in this Acti∣on. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 14. p. 172, &c. Upon this occasion John Palcologus Empe∣ror of Constantinople, the Pope, and many otherCompli∣mented by Christian Princes on his Victory. Christian Princes, sent Embassadors to com∣pliment him. Afterwards Amurath, under pretence of ransoming Carambeius, sent Mi∣nisters to treat of a Peace, but Ʋladislaus would only agree to a Truce for ten Years. After this the Gentry of Poland sent to their King Ʋladislaus to return among 'em; but he being advis'd by several Christian Princes, especially the Pope who sent a Nuncio to him on purpose, to break the Truce and continue the War, instead of complying with the Poles Request, march'd immediately with all the Troops he could get together, into Bul∣garia, and came to Nicopolis Capital of this Province, whereFlorus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 175. Dromla or Dracula, Palatin of Moldavia, meeting him, he earnestly en∣treated him to keep his Royal Promise with the Turks, tho Enemies to the Christian Belief; but perceiving the King's inflexible Resolu∣tion to continue the War, gave him 4000 Men under his own Son's Command. In the mean while Amurath, who after the Truce agreed upon with Ʋladislaus went to conquer a cer∣tain
People of Asia, call'd Caramani, hearing of this great Army's marching against him, turn'd his Forces, consisting, as Jovius relates, of about 80000 Men, to meet 'em, and near the Town of Varna fought 'em; where by his Camels frighting the Polish and Hungarian Horse, together with the invincible Courage of his Janizaries, he entirely defeated the Christian Army, and kill'd King ƲladislausKill'd and routed by the Turks. in the Year 1445. Whereupon some body made a Satyrical Epitaph upon this unfortunate King, as follows. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 88. Romulidae Cannas, ego Varnam Clade notavi: Discite Mortales non temerare fidem. Me nisi Pontifices jussissent rumpere Foedus, Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis Ora Jugum. Ever after this, the Turks always fortified themselves against the Christians, who they thought could never keep either their Oaths or Word; and not long after Mahomet the Great took Constantinople in the Year 1453, wherein Constantin Paleologus, the last Christi∣an Emperor of the East, was crowded to death in one of the Gates. King Ʋladislaus leaving no Children, his Brother Casimir IV. 1446. CASIMIR, great Duke of Lithuania, was elected next, and crown'd in the Year 1446, and reign'd forty five Years. He marriedHis Mar∣riage. the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to the Em∣peror Albert II.
In the beginning of his Reign the Prussians threw off the heavy Yoke of the Teutonic Or∣der, and put themselves under Casimir's Pro∣tection.Assists the Prussians against the Teutonic Knights. Hereupon this King went in Person into Prussia to take their Allegiance and Fide∣lity, where he likewise granted them many Privileges; who thereupon oblig'd them∣selves, especially at Dantzic, to maintain the King and his Court for four days, whenever he should please to come again in Person among 'em. In the mean time the Teutonic Knights got together a strong Army in Bo∣hemia and Germany, with which they imme∣diately march'd against Casimir, and routed him before he could execute his Designs of be∣siegingIs routed by that Or∣der. Marienburg, and several other Towns which that Order had yet left in Prussia. Ca∣simir, not a little sensible of this Affront, to lose a Battel where he himself was like to have been kill'd, call'd a Diet, and prevail'd so far upon the Gentry as to grant him half their Yearly Revenues to carry on the War against the Teutonic Order. By which means after a long and obstinate Dispute, he at last oblig'd 'em to accept of Articles of Peace, wherein the Pope's Nuncio was Mediator. By this Agreement they were to restore to Poland allTet obtains an advan∣tagious Peace. Pomerania, the Territories of Culm and Mi∣chalow, with the Cities of Marienburg, Stuma and Elbing; and were to be left in possession of the rest, only on condition that their Great Master for ever after should be Prince and Senator of Poland, and take Oath of Fidelity to the King. The Moldavians likewise by their Hospodar desire Casimir's Protection a∣gainst the Turks, and offer to take an Oath
to him as Vassals, and a Tributary Nation, which they continu'd for a long while after. His Issue. This King had four Sons, whereof Ʋladis∣laus was first chosen King of Bohemia, and af∣terwards of Hungary; for this last Kingdom, after their King's Death, had entreated Casi∣mir to send one of his Sons to reign over them. Whereupon Ʋladislaus, then King of Bohemia, march'd speedily into Hungary with a small Body, to prevent any of his Brothers pre∣tending to that Crown: Nevertheless, his Brother John Albert went soon after with ano∣ther Army to oppose him, and met and fought him; but Ʋladislaus having got the better, was crown'd not long after; yet he was kind to his Brother, and gave him some Towns in Silesia, which then belong'd to Bohemia. Deputies first ad∣mitted to the Diet. In the time of this King Casimir, the De∣puties of the Provinces first appear'd at the Diet: For before, the King and Senators had the supreme Power of making Laws.Lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 89. Hartknoch says, that till this King's Reign the Latin Tongue was very rarely spoken in Poland; for that when the King of Sueden had a certain Interview with Casimir at Dantzic, neither Casimir nor any of his Court could discourse with him in Latin, but were fain to be beholden to a Monk to do that Office for them; which Casimir being much asham'd of, publickly commanded all his Officers forth∣with to set about the Study of that Language; from which time the Poles have continu'd great Prosicients therein, nay, beyond any other Nation whatsoever.
His Death. This Prince dy'd in the Year 1492, and lies bury'd at Cracow, having reign'd forty five Years, and liv'd sixty four. John Al∣bert. 1493. JOHN ALBERT succeeded his Father Ca∣simir, being thought the fittest, tho I do not read he was the eldest of his Sons. He was crown'd King in the Year 1493, and reign'dHis Cha∣racter, with that of the Va∣lachians. nine Years. This Prince was very ambitions, but withal unfortunate; for designing to reduce the Valachians, who were then Vassals to Poland, and who, according to the Condi∣tion they saw that Kingdom in, would refuse or pay Obedience, and who would sometimes side with the Turks and Tartars to ravage it:Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 198. He, the better to compass his Intentions, pretended to make War against the Turk, and for that purpose march'd with his Army through Valachia, as if he design'd nothing but to make his way into Turky; but being once got into this Country, he caus'd his Soul∣diers to pick a quarrel with the Valachians for not providing them with Forage as they de∣sir'd; which however was not an easy matter to do for an Army of 80000 Men which heHis Policy and Army defeated by the Vala∣chians. had with him. Hereupon he besieges Sozisaw, one of their strongest Towns; but the Inhabi∣tants defended themselves so well, and Stephen their Hospodar so fatigu'd the Besiegers by taking their Convoys and intercepting their Provisions, that at last Albert was forc'd to raise the Siege, and return into his own Coun∣try; when the Hospodar greedily pursuing him, destroy'd great art of his Army in a
Wood, where he had laid an Ambush. Soon after this the Hospodar, to be farther reveng'd on the Poles, call'd to his Assistance the Turks and Tartars, who all joining together, enter'd Poland with a prodigious Army, and carry'd away about 100000 Captives, of which the greatest Part were Russians. The Moldavians and Valachians quickly return'd home, but the Turks out of covetousness of Plunder, stay'd till the great Frosts and Snow surpriz'd 'em, when not being us'd to such excessive Cold as this Country is subject to, above 40000 of them were frozen to death.Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 201. Some among 'em that escap'd were forc'd to cut open their Horses bellies, and thrust themselves into them to preserve their natural Heat. After this,Makes Peace with the Vala∣chians and Turks. John Albert made peace with the Valachians, and Bajazet Emperour of the Turks. Next he went in Person into Prussia to oblige Frederic Duke of Saxony, then Great Master of the Teutonic Order, to take Oath of Fidelity to him, which he had for some time refus'd, but dy'd suddenly at Thorn before he could effectHis Death. his design. Albert leaving no Children, the Diet thought fit to elect his Brother Alexander. 1501. ALEXANDER, Great Duke of Lithuania, the better to renew their Alliance with that Country. This Prince being proclaim'd King, comes to Cracow, where by his Brother Fre∣deric, Cardinal and Archbishop of Gnesna, he was crown'd in the Year 1501, and reign'd only five Years; but the ArchbishopHerburt. de Fulstin. lib. 19. p. 348. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 90. refus'd
to do the like Office for his Queen Helena, be∣cause she was of the Greek Church, being Daughter to John Great Duke of Muscovy; which Country are all of that Persuasion. Soon after that he was crown'd, his Father-in-Law,His Wars. the Great Duke, made War upon him, and besieg'd the City of Smolensko, Capital of a large Province of the same Name; but Alex∣ander coming in time to relieve it, oblig'd the Muscovite to make Peace for six Years. In his time also the Moldavians and Tartars made Irruptions into Poland, but were beaten back with great Loss; insomuch that 'tis said, there were kill'd only of the Tartars in that Action near 20000. The King was not in Person at this Victory, he then lying sick at Vilna, Capi∣talHis Death. of Lithuania, where he dy'd soon after, and was buried in that City. His Cha∣racter. Fulstin. lib. 20. p. 356.He was of a middle Stature, had a long Visage and black Hair; was very strong built, but exceeding dull-witted, and consequently but a little Talker. He exceeded all his Bro∣thers in Generosity, and was wont to delight much in Musicians and such trifling Artists. Nevertheless, this his Liberality was generally esteem'd but Prodigality, insomuch that some were so hold as to say, That he dy'd in time, or else both Poland and Lithuania might have been lavish'd away. To prevent the like pernicious Generosity for the future,Hartkn. l. 1. c. 2. p. 90.the Diet made a Law, calling it Statutum Alexandrinum, by which they revok'd all this King's profuse Gifts. Alexander leaving no Children, and but two Brothers, the Archbishop of Gnesna dying be∣fore him,
Sigis∣mund I. 1507. SIGISMUND was preferr'd to Ʋladislaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia, either because the Gentry were more affected to him, being bred among 'em, or by reason they were afraid of Ʋladislaus's great Power. He was elected at Petricovia in the Year 1507, and reign'd forty one Years. When Sigismund left his Government of Lithuania to come into Poland, he substituted one Glinski, a great avourite of the late King's, in his room.Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 6. p. 213, &c. This Palatin having great Authority among the Lithuanians, be∣came so ambitious as to think of making him∣self Absolute; which concealing for a good while, at length he agreed with Basilius Great Duke of Muscovy, to allow him his share of that Province in case he would afford him his Assistance; which Proposal the Great Duke being pleas'd with, readily consented to, and with all Expedition dispatch'd away an Army to Glinski: but as such great Designs are notDefeats a great Con∣spiracy and Army. to be carried on without great Noise and Suspicions, Sigismund came soon to hear of this treacherous Enterprize; whereupon drawing up all his Forces to oppose the intended In∣vasion, he meets and defeats their Army, ra∣vages and destroys their Country, and at last obliges them to sue for Peace, which he not without some difficulty granted. His other Wars. Afterwards the Valachians and Tartars mak∣ing Incursions into Russia and Poland, he for∣ces them to return home with great Loss. The Muscovites likewise making War upon him a
second time, and taking the City of Smolensko, with all the Country about it, he beat their Armies in several Engagements, and having kill'd in all above 30000 of their Men, re∣took Smolensko, and made 'em accept of a Peace the second time for five Years. He soon af∣terHis Mar∣riage. married Buona Sforza, Daughter to John Galeatio Duke of Milan. Afterwards he madeHis War with the Teutonic Order. War with the Knights of the Teutonic Order, the reason of which was, because Albert Mar∣quess of Brandenburgh his Sister's Son, and then Great Master, refus'd to take an Oath as it was agreed in the late Wars. Hereupon Sigismund took from him some Towns, and had great Advantages over him in several Engagements; but however Albert having considerable Succors sent him from Germany, prolong'd the War for a good while in Prussia. About this time Martin Luther's Doctrine came to be known in these Parts, and most of the Citizens ofFlorus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 6. p. 226. Dantzic embrac'd it; for which at first the King was very severe with them, but at length, fearing that to preserve their Religion they might side with the Teutonic Order against him, he granted them Liberty of Conscience. All this while that Order made vigorous Resistance, and with equal Loss on both sides, fatigu'd the Polish Army, till at last it was agreed by both Par∣ties to make the Emperor Charles V. and Lewis King of Hungary Arbitrators; who determin'd that Sigismund should relinquish to the Mar∣quess of Brandenburg all the Eastern part of
Prussia (which is above half of that great Province) and that he and his Heirs shouldEnded by Mediation. for ever enjoy it (as they have actually done ever since) without any disturbance from Si∣gismund; but the Marquess of Brandenburg, as Duke of Prussia, for himself and his Heirs was to take an Oath of Fidelity to the Kings of Poland, and to send to their Service every Year in time of War a hundred Horse ready equipt, which those Kings were to maintain at their own Charges from the time they went out of Prussia. At this time the House of Austria was not a little jealous of the exorbitant Power and vast Dominions of the Family of Jagello: for not only Sigismund possess'd Poland, the great Dutchies of Lithuania, Smolensko and Severia, and likewise all the Countries between the Euxine and Baltic Seas; but also his Ne∣phew Lewis, Son of Ʋladislaus, was King of Hungary, Bohemia and Silesia, insomuch that they secretly rais'd several Enemies against them; whereupon the Muscovites, Moldavians and Tartars came a third time to molest Po∣land, but were forc'd to withdraw after ha∣ving done some Mischief. About this time Solyman the Great, Emperor of the Turks, made War with Hungary, and gain'd the fa∣mous Battel of Mobac, where King Lewis and the flower of his Army were slain, and the better part of Hungary subjected to the Turk. This King Lewis left only one Daughter,How the Emperor came by Hungary, Bohemia and Silesia. which was married to Ferdinand of Austria, whereby that House came into possession of the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, as like∣wise of Silesia, all which it enjoys to this day.
Sigismund dy'd not long after the Council of Trent begun, being 82 Years old, and having reign'd about 40 with great Success. Paulus Jovius says that in this King's time there were three Heroes, viz. the Emperor Charles V. Francis I. King of France, and Sigis∣mund I. King of Poland, each of which deserv'd alone to govern the Universe, had they not happen'd to live at the same time. His Cha∣racter, Marriages, and Issue. This King was as famous in Peace as War, being adorn'd with more Vertues than any Prince of Poland before him. Besides which Perfections of his Mind, he had also great Strength ofHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 90. Body; for he is reported to have been accustom'd to snap Horseshoes a∣sunder, and to have broke the strongest Ropes with his Hands only, as I am cre∣dibly inform'd the Elector of Saxony, at pre∣sent King of Poland, has often done. He had two Wives, Barbara Daughter of Stephen Woievod of Transilvania, by whom he had one Daughter nam'd Hedwigis, married to Joa∣chim, Marquess of Brandenburg; and another Wife Buona Sforza, mention'd before, who brought him four Daughters, which were Isa∣bel, married to John King of Hungary, Sophia to the Duke of Brunswick, and Ann and Ca∣therine, both successively to the King of Swe∣den; and one Son Sigismund Augustus, who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Po∣land. A false Christ. Guagnini Tom. 1. p. 125.Martin Bielski, a Polander, who writ the Annals of his Country in his Native
Language, mentions, that in the beginning of this King's Reign, a certain Gentleman nam'd James Melstinski Starosta of Brezina, being not a little beside himself, pretended to be Christ descended again upon the Earth; and consequently, together with one Peter Za∣torski, a Citizen of Cracow, and eleven others of the same stamp, set forward through di∣vers Cities and Villages, canting and imposing upon the common People all along as they went; sometimes he pretended to raise the Dea, which he seemingly effected by help of  Compact with some of his fellow Im∣postors. Next he work'd several pretended Miracles by Legerdemain, as by finding things in places where it was almost impossible for them to be, which nevertheless he had pru∣dently taken care to lay there before, as Fish in Bogs, and the like. Afterwards he went to the Monastery of Cestochow, where it seems he was not known. Here he caus'd one of his Followers to pretend to be possess'd with the Devil, who thereupon being immediately seiz'd on was led by the Monks to the Altar at a time when a great Concourse of People were gathered together to hear Mass; but the Impostor having provided himself a large Coat with several deep and winding Plights, as likewise of divers small Pebbles which he had wrap'd up in his Sa, broke furiously from those that held him, and immediately leap'd upon the Altar, where seizing upon all the Of∣ferings, he soon convey'd them into these ob∣scure Folds of his Coat, when the Monks go∣ing to search him with great Violence, found only the Stones in his Sash, which they be∣lieving
to be the Money transmuted by the Power of the Devil, immediately fell to ex∣orcising the Stones; but finding the same Species still remain, they threw down their Books in great Indignation, and cry'd, Talem Daemonem nunquam experti sumus, abite cum eo ad omnes Daemones. By help of the Money they had thus got by this Cheat, they travell'd all over Silesia, and at last came to a Gentleman's House where they told his Wife, that Christ and his Apostles were come to visit her, and that she must make some Offering, and her Soul should be sav'd; to which the Woman reply'd, that her Husband was from home, and therefore she could not possibly comply with their Requests: whereupon they deman∣ded of her, if she had any Linen to sacrifice; she answered, she had, and presently fetch'd them down a small parcel, which they receiving from her hands, told her, they would keep that for themselves, and Christ should bless her, and encrease her Store: whereupon, en∣quiring farther if she had any more, she shew'd them another Parcel; but they being about to do the like by that as they did by the other, she told them, her Husband not being within, she durst by no means part with it: which Answer displeasing these Impostors, they privily slid a piece of lighted Coal among the Linen, which the Woman not knowing any thing of, took the parcel and lock'd it up in her Chest as before, but which not long after bursting out into a Flame, first burnt the Chest, and then the House. The Husband coming home and finding his House on fire, enquir'd into the cause of it; whereupon his
Wife answer'd, that because she had treated Christ disrespectfully who came to visit her, this Judgment had befallen them. At this the Man flying out into a Passion, cry'd, This was an Impostor, and no Christ; wherefore cal∣ling his Neighbours together, they pursued them close till they heard of them in a Village hard by, which the false Saviour being in∣form'd of, said to that Apostle of his, nam'd Peter, Peter, now is my Hour come, and the time wherein I am to drink that bitter Draught approaches, which I have no other way to avoid but by leaping out at this Window: To which Peter reply'd, I also will follow my Master's Ex∣ample, that I may live. Whereupon they both leap'd out at the Window, and the rest of the Apostles fled also their several ways; but the deluded Countrymen closely pursuing them, at length overtook them, and surrounding them, with Clubs, Scourges, and the like, laid them on most unmercifully, crying all the while, Prophesy to us, O Christ, with thy Dis∣ciples, in what Wood did these Clubs and Scourges grow. By this severe Discipline these Impos∣tors having been totally reform'd, confess'd that it was no small Task to imitate Christ and his Apostles. Before his Death, Sigismund got the Diet to elect his Son Sigis∣mund II. 1548. SIGISMUND II. surnam'd afterwards Au∣gustus, who was crown'd in the Year 1548, and reign'd to 1576.Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 238, &c. Guagnini Rerum Polon. Tom. 1. p. 128, &c. The Diet was very angry
His Mar∣riage dis∣pleases the Diet. with him, that after his Coronation he mar∣ried the Lady Radzivil Widow to a Woievod without their Consent, which is against the Constitution of that Kingdom; but this Queen dying soon after without Children, they a∣greed to his Marriage with the Princess Ca∣tharine, another Widow of the House of Au∣stria, which was before married to Francis Duke of Mantua. In his time Livonia, which is a great Pro∣vince that lies between Prussia, Swedeland, Muscovy and Lithuania, whereof part belong∣ed to the Teutonic Order, and part to the Arch-bishop of Riga, being the whole under Protection of the Empire, was like to have been over-run by the Great Duke of Muscovy, who brought thither a powerful Army for that purpose, and took most of its Towns. Whereupon the Inhabitants finding they were not able alone to resist so great a Force, sent to the Emperor Ferdinand for Relief, who, being then busied in other Wars, answer'd, he could spare 'em none; but gave 'em leave to have recourse to whose Protection they thought fit. Some therefore among them put themselves under Eric King of Swe∣den; but the Arch-bishop of Riga, and the Great Master of the Teutonic Order, with all the Nobility and Gentry, requested the As∣sistance of Sigismund King of Poland, who would by no means grant it them, unless they would submit themselves entirely to his Obe∣dience, and take Oath of Fidelity according∣ly; next that they should give up all their Towns and Country, and lastly, annex Livo∣nia for ever to Poland. To these Terms the
Livonians were neither ready nor willing to submit; however, at length they thought it better to condescend to these Proposals, than be forc'd to accept of worse from the irre∣sistible Fury of the Muscovites; and there∣fore,Livonia u∣nited to Poland. having maturely deliberated on the matter, consented that Gothotred Ketler, a Gentleman of Westphalia, then Great Master and General of their Army, should publickly abdicate his Mastership, and give up to Ni∣cholas Radzivil Palatin of Vilna, deputed for that purpose by the King, the City and Cita∣del of Riga, and declare Livonia from thence∣forward subject to Poland, which was accord∣ingly done; and at the same time, by Order of the King his Master, Radzivil proclaim'dFirst Duke of Curland and Semi∣gallia. Gothotred KetlerHartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 8. Duke of Curland and Semi∣gallia, which are two Provinces of Livonia; and next day by further Orders, declar'd him Vice-roy and Governour of Livonia. These two Provinces of Curland and Semigallia Ket∣ler's Posterity have enjoy'd ever since by He∣reditary Succession, but still as Vassals to Po∣land. Upon this Agreement the King declaresHis Wars with the Musco∣vites. War immediately against the Muscovites, who were then very strong, having just before taken from the Tartars the Kingdoms of Astracan and Casan; nevertheless he defeated their Army upon the Frontiers of Lithuania, and forc'd 'em to retire into their own Coun∣try, but they soon return'd a second time, commanded by their Czar, John Basilowits, tho with as little success as before.
Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 255. This Czar is reported to have been a most cruel Tyrant, it having been his chief Diversion to invent new ways of torturing, insomuch that 'tis said, that to boil and roast both his own Subjects and the Prisoners he took, was the least Punishments he made 'em suffer. It would be both tedious and horrid to hear all the Tortures he us'd towards Men, Women and Children. He was wont to recompense such as invented new ways of Torture; but these his inhuman Cruelties did so exasperate his Subjects, that Sigismund found no great difficulty to force him to a Peace. After this Sigismund sent a small Army in∣to Valachia, to support Bogdan in his Inten∣tions to make himself Prince thereof; but the Valachians, assisted by the Turks, soon oblig'd the Poles to return home. Lutheran Religion propagated. Neugebaver. lib. 8. Hist. Polon. p. 572, &c.In this King's Reign the Lutheran Reli∣gion got great ground in Poland, the cause of which was a Quarrel, upon account of a Whore, between the Courtiers and Scholars, which induc'd the latter to retire into Germany, where they first imbib'd these Principles, and which upon their return they not a little pro∣pagated in their own Country. The first Person of note that embrac'd this Religon, was Johannes a Lasco Palatin of Lanschet, who in the Year 1540 left his Government, and went into Holland and England; and at his return, converted several to that Per∣swasion. All this while the King gave distur∣bance
to none that abjur'd the Roman Faith, but ratherSarnitius lib. 8. Annal. Polon. ad An. 1552. p. 394. favour'd them, having heard se∣veral of their Preachers in his Court, parti∣cularly two, Johannes Cosminis and Laurencius Prasnitius, which occasion'd most of the Bi∣shops to be enclin'd to that Belief. Here cannot well be omitted a great Escape King Sigismund had at Koningsberg in Ducal Prussia, whither being invited by Albert Mar∣quess of Brandenburg, and at his Reception salu∣ted with all the Cannon, by negligence of a Gunner a Bullet was left in one of them, which when fir'd came so near the King as to dash out oneNeugebaver lib. 8. p. 585, &c. Wisnoviec's Brains, who march'd just behind him. The Com∣monwealth of Babina. In Sigismund'sSarnitius lib. 8. Annal. Polon. p. 395. time flourish'd the jocular Commonwealth of Babina, consisting of several merry Gentlemen of Lublin, who met together at a place call'd Babin to exercise their Wits upon all occasions. This Meeting, to procure the greater respect for their Proceedings, they modell'd into the form of the Government of the Kingdom, electing a King and Senate, toge∣ther with divers Officers and Magistrates. As whenever any among them talk'd out of his Sphere, and meddled with matters that did no ways belong to him, they created him an Arch-bishop or Palatin; such a one as made a great many Blunders, and delighted in Con∣tradictions, they chose for their Speaker or Chancellor; and whoever boasted too inor∣dinately of his Valour, they prefer'd to be
their General, passing immediately a Patent for that purpose, and which was to be pre∣sented to him with a great deal of Submission by the Bragadochios of a Minor Character; but if the Person elect refus'd this Command, they persecuted him with hissing and hooting till he had accepted it. Thus they created se∣veral other Senators of different Qualities, whence it followed that in short time they became judicious Censurers, wary Talkers, modest Observers, humble Performers, and true Relaters of any Exploit. Whenever they admitted any of their Society, they first enquir'd into his Abilities, and requir'd a Specimen of his Parts, and this to determine the better what Office or Employment he was fittest to execute in their Commonwealth, they having several others of an inferior Rank besides those we have already mention'd: As if any one introduc'd an impertinent Dis∣course of his Hounds or his Hawks, him they immediately made either their Huntsinan or their Faulkoner: Likewise if a Man run out too much upon Religion, he was constituted their Chaplain; and where any dealt too much in Matters of Controversy, he was forthwith ordain'd their Inquisitor: lastly, where a Man was too exuberant in his Discourse about Horses, or Houshold Affairs, him they either promoted to be their Master of the Horse, or their Majordomo. By these means in a lit∣tle time they reform'd most of the Abuses and Indecorums crept into the Government of Poland, and prov'd than the force of Satyr is of no less benefit than that of Oratory. At length this pleasant Constitution came to the
King's Ear, who was often delighted with hearing of their Transactions; and one day enquiring after their dignified Members, he ask'd, whether they had any King among them? to which the Starosta of Babina, who was most celebrated for his pleasant Countenance and jocular Humour, reply'd, Far be it from us, most Serene Monarch, that we should make choice of any other King while your Majesty is living. Which Answer so extreamly pleas'd Sigismund that he laugh'd heartily, and was so far from shewing any signs of Dislike, that by several Expressions which dropt from him he occasion'd great Mirth in all the Company. Afterwards there arising some grave Disputes in this Society about the Antiquity of the Monarchies of Persia, Greece and Rome, a cer∣tain merry Fellow started up and cry'd, What makes you thus boast, Gentlemen, of the Anti∣quity and Extent of these Monarchies, when ours of Babina is much more antient and of wider Bounds than them all? What says David? Om∣nis Homo Mendax, all Men are Liars; where∣fore the whole Earth must consequently have been comprehended within the Limits of our Juris∣diction from all Ages. His Opinion was unanimously receiv'd with Applause. This Society further boasts of having always had Privileges and Immunities from Emperors and Kings: but still such as were too severe in their Reflections, were not to be admitted of this Republick. The place where this Assem∣bly met the Members term'd Gelda, being the word that the Dantzickers use for a Ta∣vern, and which the Poles apply to a merry Company of witty Fellows.
His Death. Sigismund died of a Chronical Distemper at Knyssin in the Consines of Lithuania, &c, and left no Children, but had two Sisters surviving, Catherine and Ann, the former of which was first married to John Duke of Fin∣land, and then to the King of Sweden; she was Mother to Sigismund III. who was afterwards King of Sweden and Poland. Ann liv'd a long while a Maid till she was married to Stephen Batori Prince of Transilvania, and afterwards King of Poland. Jagellonic Family ex∣tinct. After this Sigismund's Death the Male Race of the Jagellonic Family was quite extinct. I am afraid I have almost tir'd your Lord∣ship's Patience with this prolix Narrative of the second and third Classes of the Kings of Poland, yet I can safely aver that I have been as concise as the Subject Matter would hear, since I have run through the Course of about 800 Years; where your Lordship may ob∣serve, that tho these Princes could never pre∣vail with their Subjects to declare their King∣dom Hereditary, yet they had sometimes Influence sufficient over them, to cause them to elect their Children for their Successors while they themselves were yet alive: And likewise sometimes the great Service they had render'd their Country, oblig'd the Poles in Gratitude to advance their Issue to the Throne after their Deaths: Besides, the na∣tural Affection which this Country always bore to the Royal Family, enclin'd them to elect the next Relation to the deceased King. But notwithstanding after Sigismund the Se∣cond's Death, tho there were several of the
Family of Piastus and Jagello remaining alive, both in Poland and Silesia, yet the Poles, for fear so long and so uninterrupted a Succession of Princes of the same Line might subject them to a Despotic Monarchy, as they almost were in Sigismund's time, resolv'd to choose Kings out of other Families, as they effectu∣ally did afterwards out of France, Transilvania and Sweden, which it would be too tedious to give your Lordship a Relation of; and there∣fore to ease your Impatience, I will subscribe my self, My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient Humble Servant, B. C.
LETTER III. To his Grace WILLIAM Duke of Devonshire, Lord Steward of His Majesty's Houshold. Of the Succession and Remarkable Actions of the fourth Class of the Kings of Po∣land, consisting of mixt Families, from the Year 1574, to 1674. My LORD; THE great Esteem and true Respect which your eminent Qualities and gallant Be∣haviour, both beyond Sea and at home, com∣mand from all those who have heard of your Name, made me ambitious to give your Grace, in this Account of Poland, a Testimony of mine, and congratulate my self in the Honour of being known to so great a Person. The Subject, my Lord, I thought most sutable to so great a Mind and Genius as yours, is a Relation of Heroic Actions, I mean the Lives of the Kings of Poland, from the last of the Jagello∣nick Family, to the Election of the late King John Sobieski, comprehending the space of a hundred Years. By Sigismund the Second's Death, the Great and Renown'd Family of Jagello came to be extinct as to Males; for he left no Chil∣dren, and had only two Sisters, Catherine and
Ann. The former was first married to John Duke of Finland, and next to John III. King of Sueden, having been Mother to Sigismund III. who was afterwards both King of Poland and Sueden. The latter Ann liv'd a Maid for a considerable while, till Stephen Batori, Prince of Transylvania, being elected King of Poland, marry'd her, but had no Issue by her. A Diet call'd. The ABp of Gnesna, James Ʋchanski, having notify'd the late King's Death to all the Gen∣try, call'd a Diet after the usual manner, to Elect another; whereupon several Candidates appearing, they all had their different Parties and Friends in the Kingdom. The chief Pre∣tenders were Ernest of Austria the Emperour's Son, John III. King of Sueden, the Great Duke of Muscovy, and Henry of Valois, Brother to Charles IX. of France, besides several Natives of the Country. After a long deliberation, they pitch'd upon Henry of Valois. 1574. HENRY of Valois Duke of Anjou, and sentHeidenstein Rerum Polon. lib. 1. p. 30. col. 2. Adam Conarsky Bishop of Posnan, and Albert Laski Palatin of Siradia, in quality of Ambas∣sadors, together with several other Senators, into France, to bring him into his Kingdom, after having agreed to the following Articles; to the performance of which, both the King of France and his Brother the King of Poland, took a solemn Oath. The Articles were as follows: Imprimis, That Henry of Valois should trans∣port all his Effects and Annual Revenues in France into Poland.
2. That the King of France should pay Sigis∣mund the late King's Debts with his own Money. 3. That the French King should maintain a hundred young Polish Noblemen at his Court, and fifty in other Places. 4. And lastly, That he should build a Fleet in the Baltic Sea, and help the Poles to carry on the War against the Muscovites. There was another Article the King would by no means consent to till he came into Po∣land, and that was, 5. That he should marry the Princess Ann, Sister to Sigismund late King of Poland. King Henry having thus chiefly satisfy'd the Conditions, he set forth from Paris about the beginning of October, in the Year 1576, and pass'd through Lorain and Germany, directly to Posnan in Poland; whence he soon afterHis Coro∣nation. went, and was crown'd at Cracow the 21st of February 1577: but in four Months time after his Coronation, receiving Letters from France that the King his Brother wasHeidenstein lib. 1. p. 62. col. 1. dead without Issue; and being begg'd to return to enjoy his Right, he communicated those Letters to the Senate, acquainting them withal, that it was necessary he should return into France to prevent Civil Wars, and maintain his Ti∣tle to that Crown. But fearing lest the Poles might have detain'd him, (as I have often heard them say they would certainly have
done) on the 18th of March he stole away,Abdicates Poland. and rid Post through Silesia and Germany in∣to Italy, and thence to France. The King being miss'd next morning, they sent seve∣ral Senators after him, who overtook him in Silesia, and begg'd of him to return, and not abandon a Nation so shamefully which had elected him with such Universal Affecti∣on; yet nothing could prevail upon him, but he however promis'd, that as soon as he had settled his Affairs in France, he would return among them; and moreover acknowledg'd, that he was extreamly oblig'd to the Polish Nation for their Kindness and Good-will to∣wards him. Hereupon the Senate afterwardsPolish Em∣bassy into France proves fruitless. sent two Embassadors into France to intreat him to return, which the King had several times a mind to comply with, for he lov'd that Nation extreamly well; but his French Subjects still prevail'd upon him to change his Mind, representing to him the many Dan∣gers he would expose France to by such a Journey. Thus the Poles having lost all Hopes of hav∣ing their King again, the Primate Ʋchanski calls a Diet at Warsaw the 4th of November following, to proceed to a new Election, where two Princes were principally propos'd, whichCandidates for a new Election. were the Emperour Maximilian, and Stephen Batori Prince of Transylvania; but they could never unanimously agree which of the two to choose, and therefore the Diet was dissolv'd. Maximilian's Party sent Embassadors to ac∣quaint him that he was chosen, and that they expected he should speedily come and be crown'd, while Batori's Faction did the like for
him, and invited him to come forthwith into Poland. Hereupon Stephen Batori. 1577. BATORI made more haste than the Em∣perour to comply with their Request; for he immediately left Transylvania, and passing through Valachia and Russia, quick∣ly arriv'd at Cracow; where, on the 18th of April 1577, he was receiv'd and crown'd by Karnkovius Bishop of Ʋladislaw, the Archbishop of Gnesna being for Maximilian; who yet af∣terwards, rather than he would undergo a Siege in his Castle of Lowitz, quietly submit∣ted to Batori. In the mean time the Emperour was more slow, resolving to come with an Army to dis∣pute his Right; but his Party growing less and less every day, at length the Senate sent Embassadors to acquaint him, that his Slow∣ness and Indifference had superseded his Right to the Crown, it being resolv'd to be given to him that arriv'd first. Hereupon the Emperour, who was then at the Diet at Ratisbon, order'd the Embassadors to be put in Prison, and forthwith determin'd to go for Poland himself, but was prevented by a dan∣gerous Sickness; of which he soon after dy'd, Octob. 12. Batori, 'tis true, was chiefly indebted to his Merit for the Crown of Poland; yet at the same time the Family of Zborowski was not a little assisting to him, occasion'd by his civil Reception of one Samuel of that Family, who had been banish'd his Country for striking John Teczynski Castellan of Wounitz in the King's Court. Whereupon Samuel employ'd all his
Interest for Batori, for at the time of the E∣lection he writ to several of his Relations and Friends to Vote for that Prince; but it being the Temper of the Polanders never to think themselves sufficiently recompens'd after they have done a Service, Batori, tho he sought all he could to oblige that Family, yet could not keep them from proving his most invete∣rate Enemies, by reason that he would not submit to govern according to their Humours: which not long after costFlorus Polon. lib. 4. p. 340. Samuel his Life by a formal Proceeding in a Court of Jus∣tice. His Rise. Batori was first, as I find him, a private Gentleman in Transylvania; but at length by his Merit and Valour came to have great Au∣thority among the People of that Country, for he was once sent Embassadour to the Em∣perour's Court, where he manag'd Affairs to the satisfaction and advantage of both Parties; so that after Prince John Sigismund, Son to the Sister of Sigismund II. of Poland, dy'd, they elected him Prince of Transylvania. After he was crown'd King of Poland by Karnkouski, whom he made Archbishop of Gnesna, he endeavour'd to appease the Disor∣ders among the great People, and to win the Affections of the Male-contents, which at last he effected by marrying the Princess Ann,His Mar∣riage. Daughter to Sigismund I. and Sister to Sigis∣mund II. by whom he had no Children. The Dant∣zickers re∣duc'd. Florus Polon. lib. 4. p. 302. Sleidan. lib. 65. p. 325, &c.About this time the Emperour fomented a Sedition among the Inhabitants of Dantzic,
which induc'd them to refuse to take an Oath of Fidelity to Batori, and moreover to raise an Army and stand upon their Defence. But the Senate of Poland having declar'd 'em Re∣bels, their Army was soon defeated, and Town besieg'd; and at last they were oblig'd to com∣ply by Mediation of the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, and Lantgrave of Hesse. The chief Cause of this War was, that the Citizens of Dantzic pretended not to be subject to the Republic of Poland, but only to the King; yet notwithstanding this Treaty, they were forc'd to submit themselves to both. No Courts of Justice. Florus Polon. lib. 4. p. 306.Hitherto there were no Courts of Judica∣ture in Poland, all Differences being decided by the King and Council. But the Gentry finding this way of Procedure too tedious to the Nation, and too burdensom to the King, obtain'd leave of Batori to erect two Courts of Judicature, which they commonly call Tri∣bunals; one at Petricovia, and the other at Lub∣lin, where all Civil Causes were to be deter∣min'd absolutely without any Appeal to Court, unless upon any Matter relating to the State; in which Case, the last Decision was to be re∣serv'd to the King and Diet together. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 102, &c. This King was more severe in his Punish∣ments than the Polish Laws allow'd, yet he molested none on account of Religion, al∣ways affirming that three Things God had wholly reserv'd to himself, which were, to make something out of nothing, to foretel Things to come, and to govern and direct Consciences.
This Prince, like Sigismund I. very much en∣courag'd speaking Latin in his Dominions, be∣ing reported to have said often to the Gentle∣mens Sons, Discite Isatinè, nam unum ex vobis aliquando faciam Mosci Pan, (a great Lord.) Whereby the Youth being all in Hopes, prac∣tis'd that Language with great Diligence, which very much contributed towards the En∣crease of Arts and Sciences in this Kingdom. When Sigismund I. sent the Bishop of Varmia his Embassador to Vienna, the Emperour was surpriz'd to hear even the Polish Coachmen speak Latin fluently. Also after Sigismund the Second's Death, when Embassadors were sent to bring Henry of Valois into Poland, the French wonder'd that not one of all their Train but spoke this Language with great Address. This King, in the beginning of his Reign, was like to have been over-run by the Musco∣vites; for they had so great Advantages over the Poles, that they took several Towns from them in a Dutchies of Severia, Smolensko and Lithuania. In these Wars the Muscovites wereHis Wars. not a little politick, for they took occasion to invade the Poles, either when they had Wars abroad, or Disturbances at home; but at last King Batori having appeas'd his own intestine Jars, and made Peace with his Neighbours, by the concurrence of a general Diet declar'd War against the Muscovites, and pour'd in up∣on 'em with such Vigour and Success, that in three Years time he re-took all his own Towns, and besides carry'd the War into the very heart of their Country, plundering and
destroying wherever he came. In this Expe∣dition he got from them above twenty great Cities and Provinces, such as Polotia, Sokola, Sussa, Krasna, Ʋsviata, Sitna, Jeseriscia, Kossia∣no, Nescerda, all the Dutchy of Plotia, Lukis, Neuela, Zavolotia, Ostrovia, &c. All this put the poor Muscovites into such a fright that they immediately dispatch'd anBizardiere, p. 59. Embassador to the Pope, to give him hopes, that if he could pre∣vail upon the Poles to withdraw their Army out of their Country, and make an honourable Peace with 'em, they would all submit to the Roman Church. This your Grace may imagine soon put the Holy Father upon a pious Stratagem; for he sent his Nuncio Possevinus to assure the Czar, that he would employ all his Interest in his be∣half. Whereupon the Poles, having besieg'd Pleskow, the strongest Town in Muscovy, with ill success; and moreover, having lost above forty thousand Men during the War, at length, through the prudent Management of Possevinus,15 of Jan. 1582. they agreed to a Suspension of Arms for ten Years; and farther, that the King of Poland should restore to Muscovy all the Provinces and Towns he had taken in this War; and that, on the other side, the Czar should give up to the King all Livonia: yet the Czar made no Alteration in his Greek Religion, as he had made the Pope believe he design'd to do. Thus ended the War with Muscovy, which was like to have prov'd so fatal to that Coun∣try.
Bizardiere Hist. des Dietes, p. 59, &c. The Tartars durst not make any Incursions into Poland during his Reign; and their Cham having sent Embassadors thither to demand the Tribute formerly paid them for Transyl∣vania, he dismiss'd their Embassy with a great deal of Indignation, declaring he would pay Tribute to no Man. The Turk likewise shew'd great Deference for this Prince, for he never made any Hostilities in Transylvania while Ba∣tori govern'd there; but his Nephew being elected Prince of that Country, the Port would have augmented their Tribute; but Batori espousing his Cause by an Embassy to the Grand Seignior, the Port chose rather to be contented with little than to hazard the losing of all by disobliging so powerful a Prince. All that huge Tract of Land, above three hundred Miles long from East to West, and above a hundred broad from South to North, was for fifty Years before in possession of the Poles. It is call'd by one general Name Ʋkrai∣na,Ukraina Whence so call'd. which, in the Selavonian Language, sig∣nifies aIbid. Frontier, serving for Bounds be∣twixt them, the Turks and Tartars. This vast and fertil Country is divided into two great Provinces, Volhynia and Podolia. Of Volhynia, the capital Town is Kiovia, built on the Borys∣thenes, which was formerly, as they say, one of the largest in Europe. It antiently belong'd to the Dukes of Russia, but now is entirely ruin'd between the Turks and Tartars. The capital Town of Podolia is Caminiec, a fortify'd City built on a Rock. The Inhabitants of Ʋ∣kraina
Inhabitants term'd Co∣sacks. are commonly call'dHeidenstein Rerum Polon. lib. 9. p. 326. Cosacks, which in the Sclavonian Language signifies Robbers. At first they were Peasants that came from Russia and other neighbouring Countries, settling in the Islands of the River Boristhenes, and who afterwards spread all over Ʋkraina, and liv'd on Robbery; for they us'd to make In∣roads into Tartary and Turky, plunder Trebisond and Sinope, and ravage even up to the Gates of Constantinople. They also us'd to pirate on the Black Sea, and have been very useful to the Poles when they were engag'd in War against the Infidels. I can compare 'em to no People better than to the Miquelets of Spain, or Highlanders of Scotland. Chevalier Hist. de Cosaques, p. 3. King Stephen, to make this People more serviceable to the Crown of Poland, put 'emReduc'd to a Disci∣pline. under a good Discipline, order'd 'em Officers and a General; and moreover, gave 'em the Town of Techtimoravia upon the River Boris∣thenes, which they made a Magazine, as also the Place of Residence for their Governours, to be a Bulwark against the Irruptions of the Tartars, who frequently infested them. He endow'd 'em likewise with many Privileges; for all which they afterwards did him consi∣derable Services. It will not here be amiss to give your Grace some farther Account of this People, who are often much talk'd of, and yet at the same time but very little known. Guerre Civili di Polon. lib. 1. p. 7. Whence their Name.Alberto Vimina in his Civil Wars of Poland says, it is certain that they have their Name
from the Sclavonian Word Coza, which signi∣fies a Goat; and this either because they were wont to be cloth'd with Garments of Goats Hair, or that they liv'd like Goat-herds in Huts; or else by reason that they skipt about like Goats, and found no Country of too diffi∣cult Access for them. Extent of their first Dominions. The Country they first possess'd was not above eighteen Leagues on either side of the Borysthenes, not far from the Place where Ovid was sent into Banishment, and where they affirm is a Castle still that goes by the Name of Ovidoua, where Ovid may be suppos'd to have been buried: This Vimina says he does not at all discredit, the Country agreeing with a Passage of Ovid in his Elegies writ to Ru∣finus. Non Ager hic Pomum, non dulces educat uvas; Non salices Ripa: robora monte virent: Neve fretum laudes terra magis, aequora semper Ventorum rabie, solibus orba tument. And the Fierceness of the People describ'd by Ovid in another place, encreases his Opi∣nion. Maxima pars hominum, nec te pulchorrima curat Roma, nec Ausonii Militis Arma timet. Notwithstanding all this, we must not pre∣tend to derive this Modern People from An∣tiquity, for it is certain they were at first a Body of Vagabonds that fled from Justice in∣to this Country, where they liv'd only upon fishing and hunting, and at last, as now, upon Piracy and Robbery.
Their pre∣sent Ex∣tent. Hist. des Cosaques, p. 26, &c.The present Extent of their Country is much larger than formerly, for now it reaches 100 Leagues in length, and above 40 in breadth. They report the Grass here generally grows so high, that a Man on Horse-back is easily hid under it. This Country abounds so with all sorts of Grain, that the Inhabitants know not what to do with it, their Rivers being shallow, and therefore not capable to trans∣port it to other places. They have also all sorts of Beasts, Fish and Fowl, with most o∣ther Necessaries, except Wine and Salt, where∣of the first comes from Hungary, Transilvania, Valachia and Moldavia; and the second is fetch'd from the Mines of Poland. Their Buil∣dings, Beauplan. Descript. d' Ukraine, p. 3.The Houses of this Country are generally of Wood, built in like manner as in Muscovy and Poland, and rarely above one Story high. The Walls of their Towns are most com∣monly made of Earth kept up with Stakes and Planks, such being most proper to resist the force of Cannon. Character, Hist. des Cosques, p. 32.The Inhabitants of Ʋkraina are for the most part robust and strong, generous, and great Despisers of Covetousness, inconceiva∣ble Lovers of Liberty, and impatient under the mildest Slavery: They are likewise inde∣fatigable, bold and brave, but withal excessive Drunkards, treacherous Friends, and perfidi∣ous Enemies: Their common Employments are Hunting and Fishing, and they are indiffe∣rently skill'd in all the necessary Arts of
Peace and War; but what they excel most in is, the preparing Saltpetre, with which they furnish several parts of Europe. They are moreover excellent in making Gunpowder. The Peasants of this and the Neighbouring Countries are very Slaves, being forc'd to work three or four days in a Week for their Lords gratis, and to pay besides several rigo∣rous Duties; but still this is nothing, for their Lords Power extends not only over their Goods, but also their Lives; wherefore it cannot be wonder'd at if these miserable Wretches have often rebell'd, and defended their Liberty with great Obstinacy. Religion. Their Religion is generally the Greek Perswasion, which they receiv'd in the Year 942, under the Reign of Ʋlodomir Prince of Russia; yet the greatest part of the Gentry profess either the Roman or Reform'd Re∣ligion. These Greek Principles extend all over Muscovy, Moldavia, Valachia, Turky and Persia. The Cosack Priests are call'd Pops, which in their Language signifies Guides. Their Fasts are very frequent and rigid, for then they not only abstain from Flesh, but also from Butter, Milk, Cheese, Eggs, &c. feeding only on Herbs, Pulse, Roots, and the like. There are some among them so excessive de∣vout, that they will never eat Bread, nor drink Water but on Saturdays and Sundays. The Women court the Men in this Country, which is so common, that it is not at all thought im∣modest, for they speak only to the Person's Relations whom they design to make their Husband.
Abundance of Flies and Lo∣cusls. This Country is so very much incommoded by Flies, that in Summer the Inhabtaints are forc'd to fortify themselves several ways a∣gainst them; but it abounds much more with Grashoppers, who in a dry Season come in Clouds of five or six Leagues long, and four in breadth, and darken the Sky even at Noon∣day: Where-ever they settle they make a clean Harvest in less than two hours: They live but sixth Months. Where they reside in Aumun they lay their Eggs, each having about three hundred; these they hatch in the Spring, of which but very few prove addle: Great Rains, or a violent North-East Wind can only re∣move them. Before the young ones are strong enough to fly, they creep into the Houses, hop upon the Beds, Tables, Victuals, and the like, insomuch that scarce a bit can be swal∣lowed without two or three of them along with it: At Night they lie in the Roads and Fields, which are most commonly cover'd with them above a Foot thick; and when a Couch or Wagon passes over them, it raises a most in∣tolerable Stink. Language, The Language of the Cosacks is a Dinlect of the Polish, as that is of the Sclavonian. It is very soft, and full of Diminutives, and consequently very delightful both to the Hea∣rer and Speaker. Customs and Man∣ners. The chief Study of the Cosacks is Arms, which, tho they practise for the most part on Horse-back, yet they will sometimes alight to do the Duty of Foot. They endure the Hardships of War to a wonder, and will live upon little or nothing: They commonly content themselves with a sort of black Bis∣ket,
which they eat with Garlick and Onions. They manage their Archibuss and Bow with great Dexterity, and also make use of a kind of Scimiter. They are very little acquainted with Luxury, only they love Aqua-vitae ex∣treamly, with which when mixt with Honey they will often get drunk. Customs and Man∣ners in Peace and War. They have all sorts of Handicrafts a∣mong them, and their Women are imploy'd chiefly in spinning Linen and Wollen. The Peasants understand perfectly all sorts of A∣griculture; and the Inhabitants in general are well skill'd in brewing Beer, making Mead, Aqua-vitae, &c. There is scarce any among them, of what Age, Sex or Condition soever, but will strive to out-do each other in drink∣ing and carousing: and I believe there are no Christians in the World that are more care∣less or negligent, tho they are by Nature almost capable of any thing. When they are in the Field against their Enemies, they are always extremely sober. Where the Cosacks shew the most Courage is in their Tabords, which are certain Chariots they use to fight in; tho by Sea also they are not contemptible, but on Horse-back they are little worth, for two hundred Polanders would easily drive two thousand of their best Troopers; yet their Foot will stand to the last Extemity. When they discover any Vessel by Sea that they have a mind to take, they lie con∣ceal'd with their Boats till about Midnight, when they row towards her with great Swiftness, and having encompass'd her round, easily take her by Surprize. When they have drawn out all her Lading, they ge∣nerally
sink her, because they are not able to carry her off. Having thus given your Grace a short Ac∣count, by way of Digression, of the Cosacks, I will return to King Stephen, who having no Children, propos'd to the Diet to elect his Successor while he liv'd, and that to prevent Disorders that usually happen in Interreg∣nums;Batori is refus'd to name his Successor. which this Grand Council would by no means condescend to, imagining he in∣tended to force one of his Brother's Sons upon them, or else for fear of giving a bad Precedent for future Elections, which might tend in time to the utter abolishing of their Privileges and Power▪ This King, by the Solicitations of the Pope and other Christian Princes, being ready to engage in a War against the Turks, dy'd after ten Years Reign, and about the fifty fourth Year of his Age, at Grodna in Lithuania, where he had establish'd his Residence under pretence of its being a fine Country for hunting, tho the true Reason is thought to have been, because he did not care to live with his Queen Ann, who was above sixty Years old when he marry'd her. His Cha∣racter. He was a prudent and circumspect Prince, couragious, and just even to Severity. He not only enlarg'd his Dominions, but also settled a better Order in 'em than any before him; and I have heard the Poles speak of him with the greatest Respect and Veneration. His Death, Sept. 13. 1586. On this Wise and Valiant Prince a certain Person compos'd the following Elogy, found in an antient Manuscript.
Florus Polon. lib. 4. p. 349, &c. In Templo plus quam Sacerdos. In Republicâ plus quam Rex. In Sententiâ dicendâ, plus quam Senator. In Judicio plus quam Jurisconsultus. In Exercitu plus quam Imperator. In Acie plus quam Miles. In Adversis perferendis, Injuriis{que} condonandis, plus quam Vir. In publicâ Libertate tuendâ, plus quam Civis. In Amicitiâ colenda, plus quam Amicus. In convictu, plus quam Familiaris. In Venatione, feris{que} domandis, plus quam Leo. In totâ reliquâ vitâ plus quam philosophus. The Death of Batori put Poland into the same Confusion it had been in twice before, from the time of Sigismundus Augustus. The Provincial Diets assembled in 1587, whose bu∣siness it was to secure the Frontiers from In∣vasion, and settle the Peace of the Republick. Next the Primate Stanislaus Karnkowski no∣tify'd the Death of the King according toA Diet call'd. Custom, and call'd a General Diet to meet at Warsaw in March, where it was afterwards agreed that the Diet of Election should meet in June following. The Lutherans contended so high for their share in the Government, that for Peace sake they had more granted them than the antient Laws of the Kingdom allow'd: For in this Assembly their Party was so strong, that they not only obtain'd Toleration, but also per∣petual
The Luthe∣rans obtain Liberty of Conscience. Liberty of Conscience. This the Bi∣shops vigorously oppos'd, which made the Primate and Bishop of Ʋladislaw leave the Diet dissatisfied, when Demetrius Sulikowski Arch-bishop of Leopol, presiding in the Assem∣bly, in conjunction with Laurence Goslicki Bishop of Caminiec, considering the Confusion occasioned by the Absence of the Primate, thought it either necessary to comply with the Lutherans, or to dismiss the Diet; but the Bishop of Caminiec at last found a mid-way, which was to grant the Lutherans their De∣mands, but withal to insert a Clause, that what had been done at that Session was meer∣ly to preserve the Publick Peace. The time of the Election being come, Chris∣topher Zborowski, who was banish'd during Ba∣tori's Reign, and now recall'd by the Power of the Lutherans, appear'd at the head of 500 French, with as many Germans and LutheransThe Luthe∣ran and Catholick Factions as amounted to near 10000 Men; with these Stanislaus de Gorka, Palatin of Posnania, join'd: He was a Person of Wit, and extremely po∣pular; for tho he was crook-back'd, yet his great Estate and generous way of spending of it made him look'd upon with universal Esteem. Zamoski was also at the head of a considerable number of Troops, which, tho they were fewer than those of the opposite Party, yet were they much better disciplin'd; with these he encamp'd within two Miles of Warsaw, and entrench'd himself within Lines of Circumvallation. The wiser part of the Diet having a mind to accommodate these two Factions, order'd them Audience one after another, forbidding
either to appear in Arms before them. They also shew'd an Inclination to reverse what had been decreed in favour of the Lutherans, which these last would by no means hear of,Not to be nitd. promising themselves a sufficient Defence from their Number, which Zamoski ridicul'd, re∣lying upon the better Discipline of his Fol∣lowers. The Lutherans perceiving there was no Justice to be expected from the Diet, without any regard to their Orders, came in Arms before them: After which they retir'd, com∣plaining that they were depriv'd of their Li∣berties. This had soon occasion'd a RokzThe Luthe∣rans . (being an Association in which the Gentry are oblig'd to engage when they are oppress'd) had not the Primate timely prevented it. During all this the Lithuanians had not yet declar'd themselves; and it may be it wouldSuppress'd. have been difficult to have known their Minds, had not a Confusion given them occa∣sion to explain them. Three Fac∣tions. There were three Factions at this Election, whose Power was almost equal. The first was that of Lithuania, which was for electing Theodore Odonowic, Great Duke of Muscovy, he having proferr'd to unite his Dominions to those of Poland. This Proposal might have been thought plausible enough had it been made by any but Muscovites. The hopes several of the Gentry gave the Czar were apparently only to amuse him, fearing he might invade the Kingdom during the Inter∣regnum. The second Party was that of Zborowski and Gorka Palatin of Posnania; they were en∣tirely in the Interest of Maximilian Arch-duke
of Austria, Brother to the Emperor Rhodolph. TheseHeidenstein Rerum Polon. lib. 8. p. 253. col. 1. Anibal of Capua the Pope's Nuncio join'd notwithstanding they were Lutherans, yet he all along fed them up more with Pro∣mises than Presents. The third Faction was that of the Senate, being the strongest of the three, by reason that Zamoski with the Flower of the Polish Army was on their side. It was much doubted upon which of theSeveral Candi∣dates. Competitors the Election would fall. The Czar of Muscovy and a Piasto were talk'd of only for fashion-sake. The Batori's of Transil∣vania had their Envoys at the Diet, but they had no other Orders from their Masters, than to demand the Personal Estate of the late King, when, had they ask'd the Crown like∣wise, it is highly probable some regard might have been had to Batori's Family. Sweden was upon the Roll a third time, tho its King John had been rejected in the two former Elections, by reason he was thought a Luthe∣ran; but by the Catholick Liturgy publish'd in that Kingdom in 1575, the Poles were dis∣abus'd in that Opinion, wherefore his Son Sigismund was no longer suspected; for the Poles had occasion to oppose some great Power to the House of Austria, and what could be sitter for that purpose than the Family of Jagello, from which Sigismund was descended by his Mother? King John also caus'd his Emissaries to give out that Li∣thuania of right belonged to his Son, as being of the Jagellonick Race. This bold Claim might well have rais'd a War
between Sweden and Poland, had not the lat∣ter prudently thought fit to avoid it. The Luthe∣rans Poli∣cy. In the mean time the Lutherans were firm∣ly dispos'd to Maximilian's Interest, but Za∣moski broke all their Measures: They had a mind to kidnap the Primate, but by the Ad∣vice of this General he retir'd to the Castle of Warsaw. Nevertheless Cardinal Radzivil, to whom the House of Austria had given a Principality, declar'd for Maximilian, as like∣wise did several others by his Example. This augmented the Courage of the Lutherans, yet did not in the least diminish that of Zamoski's Followers; both Parties were like to come to Blows, had not the Bishops mounted on Horse∣back and interpos'd. While these Prelats were thus doing their Duty, the Pope's Nuncio, tho lame, clamber'd up the highest Tower in Warsaw to view the Army: He doubted not but his Friends the Lutherans would get the better, their Num∣ber being greater. At this the Catholicks were extremely offended, and us'd to say that Maximilian's Interest must needs fall, being only supported by a Hook-back and a Cripple. The Lutherans perceiving that both the Name and Family of Maximilian were odi∣ous to the Poles, agreed together to relinquish him, and propose the Czar, by which means they brought over to their Party those who were neither for Maximilian nor Sigismund. Ministers admitted to Audi∣ence. After this the several Embassadors had their Audience; the Pope's Nuncio spoke first, and made his Harangue chiefly on the good Qualities of Maximilian; but this Can∣didate was not better lik'd of than his Orator,
or his Panegyrick. Stanislaus Pawlowski, the Emperour's Minister, was heard next, who run also out in Commendation of his Master's Brother; but from whom there being more Ill to be fear'd than Good to be hop'd, his fine Speech was but little minded. Then came the Embassadors of Sueden to be introduc'd, which wereHeidenstein lib. 8. p. 256. col. 2. Eric Sparre Senator and Grand Chancellor of that Kingdom, and Eric Brahé Great Master of Prince Sigismund's Houshold. These insinuated that their Master did not send sooner, because he knew the great Affection the Poles always bore the Jagllonick Family, of which his Son was descended. They made no great Profers, knowing well that the fear of Maximilian's carrying it would not give the Diet leave to ask that of them which at other Conjunctures they would surely have de∣manded. The Primate being not unmindful of the fright the Lutherans had put him into when they form'd a Design to carry him away, had a mind to make a speedy End of the business the Assembly met about; and therefore, with∣outElection. being deterr'd by any Threats, proceed∣ed to an Election the 9th of August 1587. At which time the Number of the Lutherans was much lessen'd, Gorka their Leader having a∣hus'd several of them; wherefore, to be re∣veng'd, they went over to the contrary Party. Upon the Poll, the Majority of Voices was found for Sigismund III. 1587. SIGISMUND DE VASA, whom consequent∣ly
the Primate proclaim'd King of Poland. After the usual Acclamations the Assembly se∣parated; and the Archbishop, accompany'd by the Senate and Gentry, went directly to the Cathedral of Warsaw to give Thanks for having so happily ended this great and dan∣gerous Affair. Hereupon Embassadors were immediately dispatch'd to Suden to bring the new King notice of his Election, and that his Coronation was design'd to be the 7th of Octo∣ber following. Whilst the Catholicks were thus labouring at the Election of a King, the Palatine Gorka and those of Zborowski's Party minded nothingLutheran Party dis∣sents; but Drinking; yet when they heard of what had hapned, they were extremely surpriz'd; but at the same time endeavouring to repair their Faults, they fell into much greater. They immediately protested against the Election as both Irregular and Illegal. Their Assembly ordain'd, that the King that was to be chosen should annul all that had been done against Christopher Zborowski during the late Reign. They likewise made several other Regulations, which were all so very extravagant, that they were but little regarded. To this Faction the Gentry of Lithuania offer'd their Mediation, which yet they would not accept of, decla∣ring they were resolv'd to elect Maximilian. Whereupon on the 21st of August, Gorka, with his Associates, proclaim'd Maximilian KingElects and Proclaims Maximili∣an; of Poland, and sent Embassadors to acquaint him therewith. Whilst this was doing, the Lithuanians declar'd against both Elections, and thereby disengag'd themselves from fa∣vouring either Party, till they saw which was like to have the better.
The Diet as yet was luckily not dissolv'd;But pro∣nounc'd Traitors by the Diet. which Assembly pronounc'd the Election of Maximilian Seditious, and immediately null'd all that the Lutherans had done: but as the best Considerations become useless, if there be not force sufficient to put them in execu∣tion, they at the same time provided for the safety of the Kingdom against the Attempts of Maximilian and his Party; for this Prince was then but at Olmitz in Moravia, and there∣fore might quickly have come into Poland, when Sigismund had not yet pass'd the Bal∣tic, which is a very dangerous Sea in Autumn. The Diet, before they separated, charg'd Za∣moski with the Care of the Commonwealth. A Comical Prophecy. I may here acquaint your Grace of a fa∣mous Astrologer or Magician, who happening to dine with Zamoski some hours before Sigis∣mund was chosen, that General ask'd him, If he could tell by his Art who should be elected King? To which this Person, after a little Consideration, reply'd, Quem Deus volet: Which Answer not in the least satisfying Za∣moski, was but little regarded by him. The next day after the Election, the same Astrologer sent a Note into the Assembly, address'd to Zamoski with these Words: Sir, You under∣stood not yesterday the Answer which I made you, but now read the wordSued. Deus backwards, and you will find the Mystery explain'd. The two Candidates come into Poland. Afterwards Maximilian and Sigismund both arriv'd in Poland. The latter being at Oliva, a Monastery near Dantzic, receiv'd the Oath of Fidelity; and preparing to march towards Cracow, which the former then besieg'd, for
want of Troops was forc'd to retire to Rava. The Arch-Duke hop'd to have taken this Place by the Intelligence he had with the Germans which inhabited the Suburbs, who had pro∣mis'd him to harbour two Regiments in their Houses, which might seize on the weakest Gate, and so let him into the City; but this Stratagem was detected by Zamoski, who marching to raise that Siege, had notice of these Designs; whereupon first suffering the two Regiments to enter, he set fire to the Suburbs, and burnt them and their Friends together. Maximili∣an routed by the Po∣lish Gene∣ral. Afterwards the Siege was rais'd, but the Arch-Duke did not go far off from the City, but drew up in Order of Battle in a Great Plain, which infinitely pleas'd Zamoski, who had no less Inclination to fight than he. At length they came to Blows, and the Fight lasted two Hours; but in the end Maxi∣milian being defeated, retir'd to Cestochow, whither Zamoski did not think it proper to follow him. A little while after Sigismund came to Cracow, where he was harangu'd by the Bishop of Caminiec, whom he answer'd in the Polish Language which his Mother had taught him. His Entry was usher'd in with that Solemnity, which was thought almost im∣possible to have been perform'd in time of War. After some Difficulties surmounted, his Coronation was fix'd for the 27th of De∣cember following, when he was Crown'd by theSigisimund Crown'd. Archibishop of Gnesna. The Lutherans still in∣sisted upon those Demands they had formerly made, which were fain to be granted them, because Maximilian was again ready to
take the Field, notwithstanding his last De∣feat. In 1588, the Arch-Duke came again into Poland, and Zamoski march'd directly to meet him; but Maximilian expecting more Assis∣tance, went aside into Silesia, whither he thought the Enemy would not dare to follow him: But this valiant General not only over∣took and fought him, but also routed and took him Prisoner in the City of Biczycna, af∣ter having belieg'd it some small time. Hav∣ing taken this noble Prisoner, Zamoski gave him all the respect due to a Person of his Qua∣lity; and moreover, that he might not appear under confinement at Cracow, which he had formerly besieg'd, he left him in the Citadel of Crasnostow, whence Zborowski's Party were like to have recover'd him, had not their De∣sign been discover'd by Mark Sobieski Gover∣nour of that Place. In all other Respects, Za∣moski treated his Prisoner very honourably, which gain'd so much upon the Arch-Duke, that he afterwards stood Godfather to one of his Children. Maximili∣an beaten again and made Pri∣soner. The taking of Maximilian, with all his Ar∣tillery and Baggage, was not the only good Event of this Victory, for hereupon the Male∣contents immediately acknowledg'd Sigismund. Also Zamoski's generous Usage towards the other Prisoners, whom he releas'd all upon their Parole, contributed very much to confirm Sigismund in the Throne. The Kingdom of Poland now was become no more a matter of Dispute. All the House of Austria aim'd at, was to procure the Arch-Duke's liberty, which at length was obtain'd through the
Mediation of the Pope, who sent Cardinal Hyppolito Aldobrandin into Poland to treat of his Ransom, which by that means was rated much lower than the House of Austria could have expected: For altho it was urg'd to Sigis∣mund, that as Charles the Vth dealt former∣ly by the King of France on the like occasion, so he ought to have a Sum of Money paid down sutable to the great Quality of his Pri∣soner; yet Sigismund answer'd, That it wasOffer'd Li∣berty on ho∣nourable Terms. to no purpose to propose Charles the Vth as an Example in this Case, since that Prince had been guilty of an Action unbecoming his Grandeur: When, for his part, he did not look upon it suffici∣ent Advantage to have got the better of his Enemy, unless he likewise had the Glory to give him his Liberty, and not to make him buy it. By this Mediation Maximilian was to quit for ever his Title to the Kingdom of Poland, to restore some Places which had been surrender'd to him, and to remain in a perpetual Amity with Poland; to all which the Emperour his Bro∣ther was made Guarantee. But altho these Conditions were so very reasonable, yet Maximilian would not ratify them till 1589. Wherefore his Wilfulness detain'd him in Pri∣sonDissents. till that time, when he escape  to his Parole of Honour. Nevertheless, he was afterwards brought to sign them by the PowerConsents. his Brother had over him. Sigis∣mund's Marriage. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 105, &c.Sigismund III. was first marry'd to Ann Daughter of Charles Arch-Duke of Austria; and after her Death to Constantia her Sister, by both which he had three Sons, Ʋladislaus
by the former, and Casimir and Ferdinand by the latter, the two first succeeding him in the Kingdom. When the King his Father was dead he went into Swedeland, and was thereCrown'd King of Sweden, 1592. likewise crown'd King of that Country in the Year 1592, on condition that every fifth Year he should come and reign over Sweden in Per∣son; but being engag'd in a long War against the Muscovites, Turks and Tartars, he could not be spar'd in fifteen Years, and therefore sent a Senate of Jesuits to govern them and suppress the Lutherah Doctrine, which was then mightily spread in that Country.Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 105. Here it must be observ'd, that this King's Mother Catherine strictly adher'd to the Roman Church by the permission of her Husband John III. King of Sweden, who also lean'd a little that way. Whereupon, when Sigismund's Tutor Arnold Grothusius would have seduced him from that Perswasion, his Father John being in a great Passion, and drawing his Sword upon the Tutor, cry'd, I will have my Son educated in hopes of both Kingdoms, meaning his own and that of Poland. These Jesuits the King order'd to be re∣ceiv'd with the same Honour as if he himself had come in Person; at which the Swedes be∣ing grievously nettled, sunk them in the Harbour of Stockholm in the Ship that broughtDepos'd, and Charl. IX. proclaim'd in Sweden. 'em from Dantzic, and immediately thereupon proclaim'd Charles Duke of Sudermannia, Si∣gismund's Uncle, their King, who had em∣brac'd Lutheranism some time before, and which the Swedes have profess'd ever since.
This occasion'd bloody Wars between these two Nations; but Sigismund being likewise engag'd with other Countries, was forc'd to accept of a dishonourable Truce. In the be∣ginning of this War King Charles IX. took a great many places from the Poles in Livonia, most of which were afterwards retaken by the Polish General and Chancellor Zamoski. Besides this the King of Sweden was vanquish'd in a great Battel fought near Kirckholm and Riga, where he narrowly escap'd himself: but some intestine Divisions arising between the King and Nobility of Poland, he got time to recover Breath. What caus'd the War with the Musco∣vites. The occasion of the Wars between the Poles and Muscovites was this: A certain Per∣son coming into Poland, pretended to be De∣metrius Son to John Basilowitz, Great Duke of Muscovy, and that he was to have been mur∣der'd by order of Boris Gudenow, afterwards Grand Duke, who hop'd thereby to secure the Succession after the Death of Theodore, eldest Son of the said Duke, but that another had been kill'd in his stead. Hereupon he found so great Encouragement from George Mniszeck, Palatin of Sendomir, that he mar∣ried his Daughter to him; and by the Assis∣tance of some other Polish Lords, gather'd to∣gether a great Army, and march'd with De∣metrius into Muscovy, when Boris Gudenow, then Grand Duke, happening to die suddenly, he was receiv'd by the Muscovites, and proclaim'd Czar in Moscow. Hereupon he sent into Po∣land for his Bride; but while the Nuptials were celebrating in Moscow, the People, sus∣pecting
him to be an Impostor, gather'd toge∣ther, rais'd a Tumult, and attack'd the Castle, where they cut to pieces Demetrius with most of the Poles that came along with him and his Bride, and took her Prisoner. Then Ba∣silius Suski, descended from the Grand Dukes by the Mother's side, having got together a∣bout 0000 Men, was proclaim'd Czar: im∣mediately after which a Rumor being spread abroad that Demetrius had escaped, tho Suski had taken care to expose his Body to view, which was so mangled that none could know him, and a Person pretending to be him, the Poles acknowledg'd him as such; whereupon they together with the Cosacks assisted this Person to recover his pretended Right, and several times beat Suski, and oblig'd him to set at liberty the Captive Bride. She also ac∣knowledg'd this Demetrius for her Husband; but whether he was really so or not, could ne∣ver yet be determin'd. Sigismund laid hold of this opportunity, to try at least whe∣ther he could recover Smolensko and Seve∣ria; whereupon he besieged the former in the Year 1609, but could not make himself Master of it till the Year 1611, when he took it by storm. In the mean time the Poles, who had hitherto sided with Demetrius, were recall'd by Sigismund, who thought it not convenient that so considerable a part of his Forces should be under the Command of ano∣ther. By the removal of this Army Suski had leisure to recover himself; whereupon with the Assistance sent him out of Sweden, he march'd directly against the Poles, who
then were besieging Smolensko, but was shame∣fully defeated by them near Clusin. By this Overthrow the Affairs of the Muscovites were again in a very dangerous Condition; wherefore to avoid the danger, they resolv'd to depose Suski (who by his Misfortunes be∣came odious to them) and to offer their Crown to Ʋladislaus, Sigismund's Son. This Suski was afterwards surrender'd to the Poles, and dy'd at Warsaw in Prison. Whereupon Ʋladislaus marching towards that Country with a powerful Army in the Year 1610, and they hearing of it, thinking he came rather to conquer than accept their Crown, unanimously revolted against him, especially when they heard that Demetrius had been murder'd by the Tartars who were his Guards. Hereupon Prince Ʋladislaus his Expedition was made to no purpose, he being forc'd to make a Truce with the Muscovites for four∣teen Years, whereby it was agreed, that in the mean time the Poles should keep in their possession the several Dukedoms of Severia, Zernikow and Novogrod, which they had taken during the late Troubles in Muscovy. In the mean time George Farenbach surrender'd seve∣ral Places in Livonia to the King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus: but it was suspected that he intended to betray that King; for soon after the said Farenbach was reconcil'd to King Sigismund, to whom he restor'd all the Places except Pernau. The Poles in War with the Turks▪ In the Year 1620, the Poles were engag'd in a War against the Turks, fomented, as was suppos'd, by Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transil∣vania,
for which the Turks afterwards en∣deavour'd to banish that Prince for siding with the Poles. In the Year following the Turks march'd with their whole Forces against Poland, but were met by the Poles near Chocim under the Command of Prince Ʋladistaus, who with an Army of about 65000 Men, repuls'd above 392000 Turks commanded by their Emperor Osman in Person. The Turks attempted three times to force the Polish Camp, but were as often beat back with Loss. Nevertheless in the mean time the Poles suffer'd extremely for want of Am∣munition and Provisions, and besides were mightily weakened by Sickness and a huge Mortality among their Horses. Notwith∣standing all this, at length the Turkish Em∣peror was forc'd to strike up an honourable Peace with them after having lost about 60000 Men in the several Attacks he made upon their Camp, and a greater number in his March back to Constantinople. Invasion by Gustavus Adolphus. In the mean time Gustavus Adolphus falling into Livonia, took the City of Riga with∣out any great Resistance; and all the rest of that Country except Dunneburgh was con∣quer'd likewise by the Swedes in the Year 1625. Afterwards Gustavus enter'd Prussia in the Year 1626, where he took the Cities of Marienburg and Elbing, besides some o∣ther Places. This War was thus carried on without any general Engagement till the Year 1629, when Hans Wrangel the Swedish Gene∣ral defeated the Poles near Gorzno. Then the Emperor sent some Forces to the Assistance
of the Poles, who in a Battle fought near Stuma were very near having made Gustavus Prisoner. But however, the Polish Affairs after this Battel falling into great Confusion, they were forc'd to clap up a Truce till the Year 1634, by the Mediation of Charles the First, King of England, and of Lewis the Thir∣teenth of France; the Swedes in the mean while being to keep possession of Elbing, Mc∣mel, Braunsberg, Pillau, and what besides they had taken in Livonia. Sigis∣mund's Death. After this Sigismund dy'd the last day of April in the Year 1632, being sixty Years old, and having reign'd forty four. His Cha∣racter. Bizardiere, p. 89.He had all the Qualities that could be re∣quir'd in a great Prince: He lov'd Justice, and all the World commended his Piety. He was always of an even Temper either in good or bad Fortune; and the Lustre of the Polish Crown obtain'd when he was but young, to∣gether with the loss of the Kingdom of Sweden to his Uncle, might well have either exalted or debas'd him, had he not had a great Soul: yet among all these good Qualities, he was too much wedded to his Opinion, which was the cause of some Misfortunes that happen'd to him. Prince Ʋladislaus was absent when his Fa∣ther Sigismund fell sick, yet he arriv'd at Court just as he was expiring, whose Presence so much reviv'd the King, as to give him Power to put the Crown of Sweden on his Son's Head, tho he was to leave that of Po∣land to Chance. This Election was much
A peace∣able Elec∣tion. more peaceable than his Father Sigismund's, in that he had no Competitors to oppose him. Some thought Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden had a design upon the Crown; and his boundless Ambition, join'd with the great Number of his Friends the Lutherans, dis∣persed throughout the whole Kingdom, might very well support that Opinion: yet the Gen∣try of Great Poland which were most to be suspected on account of Conformity in Reli∣gion with him, were the first that strove to exclude him; for they declar'd those Enemies to their Country, that should in the least dare to propose him. Likewise at another Assem∣bly, a Palatin offering but to insinuate that it would be proper to choose a Foreign Prince, the Gentry were so unanimously offended at him, that he was fain to retire betimes to a∣void their Fury. Also Gustavus Adolphus had then too many Irons in the Fire, to draw any more Enemies upon his Back. Prince Ca∣simir sus∣pected for a Competitor. John Casimir, Brother to Prince Ʋladislaus, was likewise suspected to have a mind to the Crown, and this Conjecture had a more plau∣sible Foundation than the former. These two Princes were both Sons to Sigismund III. yet had they not the same Mother. That of Ca∣simir did all she could to advance her Son to the Throne: At the Diet met at Thorn she endeavour'd to have a Successor elected whilst the King was living; whereupon she employ'd a certain Bishop to propose her Son, but with which the Diet was so extremely incens'd, that they would have immediately tri'd that Pre∣lat for infringing the Publick Liberties, had not more weighty Affairs interven'd which
caus'd them to lay those Intentions aside. Du∣ring this Prince Casimir did all he could to satisfy the Publick that he had no Design upon the Crown, but that all his Aim was to pro∣mote the Interest of his elder Brother. A Diet call'd; The Primate John Vezik having notified the Death of the late King, conven'd the Diet on the 27th of June, where the Lutherans continued their Cabals and Facti∣ons as formerly, but did not favour any of Ʋladislaus his Competitors as before. The Diet of Election was fix'd for the 27th of September in the same Year, whither the Gen∣try all flock'd at the time appointed, but that more to ingratiate themselves in their Prince Ʋladislaus's favour, than to sell their Suffrages. One thing was propos'd at this Diet, which had it been followed, might have deliver'd the Kingdom from great Oppressions. This was to digest the Laws into a Code, and to get the King Elect to confirm it: Also to reform the many Abuses crept into the Practice of the Law; but this was too vigorously oppos'd by the interessed Party, and therefore was fain to be let fall. Proceeds to Election. Hereupon the Diet devoted themselves wholly to the Election: Prince Casimir first propos'd his Brother Ʋladislaus, which Henry Firley Bishop of Premislia seconded by a Speech to this purpose, That tho that Assembly had a Right to elect whom they pleas'd, yet they had ever had a particular regard to the Offspring of their Kings; that every body there acknowledg'd the Candidate to be of the Blood of Jagello: That even the Merit of his Father pleaded for the In∣terest of the Son: That Uladislaus his own Con∣quests
had sufficiently testify'd his Valour; and lastly, that a favourable Result was to be expected from that Assembly, since each knew as much of the Merit of that Prince as he. This was courteously answer'd by the Primate; after which they proceeded to admit the Ambassadors. Foreign Ministers admitted. First Honorius Visconti, the Pope's Nuncio, had Audience; who being plac'd on the left hand of the Primate, first desir'd the Assem∣bly to choose a Catholick Prince, and then recommended Prince Ʋladislaus. Next the Embassadors of the Emperour and King of Sweden contended for Prior Admittance, when the latter being prevented by the Gout, or at least so feigning it, was forc'd to yield. The Emperour's Minister therefore was in∣troduc'd, who in the Name of his Master re∣commended likewise Prince Ʋladislaus. Af∣terwards the Swedish Embassador's Indispositi∣on gave him leave to be admitted; he pro∣pos'd a strict Alliance between Sweden and Poland, in case the Diet would elect none of Sigismund's Issue, but on condition that he should first renounce all Right to the King∣dom of Sweden. This Proposal was not at all approv'd of: and there was something else said also by this Minister which mightily dis∣pleas'd the Diet; yet at that time they thought it better to dissemble their Dislike, than pro∣voke so powerful a Prince as Gustavus by a Re∣sentment. Dantzic first allow'd a Vote. At this Diet the City of Dantzic had a great Favour granted them, which was for the fu∣ture to have a Vote at the Election of the Kings of Poland; which Privilege had never been granted before but to the Cities of Cra∣cow
and Vilna, one being Capital of Poland, and the other of Lithuania. Prince Uladis∣laus VII. 1632. ULADISLAUS was chosen the 13th of No∣vember 1632. when he took the usual Oaths, was proclaim'd by the Primate, and after∣wards crown'd on the 18th of February 1633. His Mar∣riage. He was first marry'd to Coecilia Renata, Daughter to the Emperour Ferdinand II. and afterwards to the Princess Mary Ludovica di Gonzaga, Daughter to the Duke of Nevers of the House of Mantua. The Kings of France always match'd the Princesses of Nevers and Nemours, as Princesses of the Blood, to Crown'd Heads. His Wars The Year after his Election, Ʋladislaus not only forc'd the Muscovites to raise the Siege of Smolensko, and obtain'd a signal Victory over them, but likewise brought their Army to such Extremities, that they surrender'd themselves; and the Turks, who had made a Diversion, were also at the same time brave∣ly repuls'd. Not long after Ʋladislaus made an advantageous Peace with the Muscovites, by virtue of which they renounc'd their Pro∣tensions to the two large Dukedoms of Smo∣lensko and Zernikow, which begat such a Ter∣ror in the Turks, that they also freely made Restitution for the Damages sustain'd in their last Incursion, and strangled their Bassa who commanded those Forces. He forc'd likewise the Swedes to restore him those Places they possess'd in Prussia, and to prolong the Truce for 26 Years; which they the easier consent∣ed to, by reason that their Affairs in Germany were but in an ill Condition after the Battle of Norlinguen.
Heidenstein lib. XI. p. 327, &c. In the Year 1637, the Foundation of theWith the Cosacks. War with the Cosacks was laid, which brought unspeakable Damages upon the Poles, and which was occasion'd thus. The Privileges the Cosacks had obtain'd from King Stephen, made them to encrease in Number, and grow much stronger than they were before; for the Peasants of all the neighbouring Countries, having been exceedingly oppress'd by their Lords, to deliver themselves from Slavery, ran in great Numbers into the Ʋkraine, whereby the Cosacks soon grew very formida∣ble both to the Poles and Turks, which em∣bolden'd them to make frequent Incursions into Turky, and which was afterwards the oc∣casion of many bloody Wars between these two Nations. The Great Men of Poland hav∣ing purchas'd divers Estates in Ʋkraina, thought their. Revenues might be considerably aug∣mented, if the Privileges of the Cosacks were but reduc'd to a narrower Compass; and if instead of plundering their Neighbours the Turks, they were restrain'd to manure the Ground, and live upon the Products of their own Labour. Whereupon the Poles prevail'd upon their King Ʋladislaus to send General Konicepoliski to reduce them. Hereupon at first the Cosacks made a vigorous Resistance, and oppos'd the Building of the Fortress Hudack just at a Point, where the River Zwamer falls into the Boristhenes. But being at last entire∣ly defeated by the Poles, they were oblig'd to surrender their General Paulack, with some others of the chiefest among them, who, not∣withstanding
a Pardon promis'd them before∣hand, were all beheaded. Besides this, it was decreed in the Diet, that all their former Pri∣vileges, together with the Fortress of Tecti∣moravia, granted them by King Stephen, should be taken from them, and a new Body of Mi∣litia setled there in their stead. To put this Decree in execution, the Polish Army march'd forthwith into the Ʋkraine, but were oppos'd by the Cosacks with great Bravery; who yet nevertheless promis'd to be faithful to the Crown of Poland, Provided their antient Pri∣vileges might be continu'd to them; which the Poles readily agreed to, but however never perform'd: Nay, treated several of them very ill; for among other oppressive Methods, they took from them some of their Greek Churches. Afterwards the Cosacks recover'd in some measure under their General Bogdan Chmie∣linski, who having been justly enrag'd by Ja∣rinski's ravishing his Wife, and afterwards murdering both her and her Son, resolv'd on some Expedient to revenge this Affront, and rid his Country of the Tyranny of the Polish Government. Constit. Ann. 1647. p. 9. tit. Ordinacya Poszty. In this King's Reign Posts were first us'd in Poland, setled after the German manner, in the Year 1647. His Death. King Ʋladislaus, after an indifferently happy Reign, dy'd of a malignant Fever at Merick in Lithuania the 20th of May, in the Year 1648. The Muscovites vanquish'd under his Reign; The Turks forc'd to sue for Peace; The Inclina∣tion he ever had to oblige every body, and the
concern he was always under, when it was out of his Power to give sufficient Proofs of his Liberality, were powerful Motives to in∣duce the Poles to regret his Loss, whose Con∣sternation was the more augmented after his Death by their Defeat, and the taking of divers Places by the Cosacks, for want of him. Ʋladislaus leaving no Issue, his Brother John Casi∣mir. 1648. JOHN CASIMIR, who had led a religious Life for some time, and was afterwards crea∣tedPiasecius ad Annum 1648. fol. 599. Cardinal by Innocent the Xth. succeeded him, being elected King in the same Year that his Brother dy'd, with the following Circumstances. The Primate Mathias Lubienski having sig∣nifi'd the Death of the late King by CircularA Diet call'd; Letters, and conven'd a Diet to meet on the 25th of June, (the Diet of Election having been fix'd for the 6th of October) all the Se∣nators and Deputies met at the time appoint∣ed; but there were no such Heats and In∣trigues among them as formerly, by reason that the Cosacks and Tartars had rais'd too great Disorders in Poland for them to think of any thing at that time but Union: for the News of such prodigious Preparations made against them, were enough to stagger any Re∣solution but that of the Polanders, whose Va∣lour has generally procur'd them the greatest Success. Hereupon Orders were immediately issu'd out to raise Troops to oppose these cruel In∣vaders;Proceeds to Election. and afterwards the Gentry proceed∣ed to the Election of a Successor to the Throne,
at which time no body thought that Prince Ca∣simir, who was then complimented with the Title of King of Sueden, would have had any Competitor; for the Great Duke of Muscovy, and the Prince of Transylvania, who both put in for the Crown, were look'd upon to have little or no Interest. The Czar very bluntly demanded the Crown, or upon refusal threatned to come and force a Compliance: But George Ragozzi seem'd to have recourse to a milder Method; yet tho he offer'd his Army of 30000 Men to the Re∣publick to assist them against their Enemies, he was suspected to have design'd it against them. But at length the Threats of the one, and Promises of the other, had no better Effect than that they were both equally despis'd and rejected. Prince Ca∣simir op∣pos'd. The Competitor that Casimir expected least, was Prince Charles Ferdinand Bishop of Breslaw in Silesia, and Ploczko in Poland, who solicited the Crown for his Brother, but design'd it for himself. It was believ'd he had written into Sueden to engage the Queen in his Interest. He had also lent a Million to raise Troops; but this seem'd no extraordinary Policy, since his Brother Prince Casimir had before been de∣clar'd Generalissimo of the Army. Stanislaus Zaremba, Bishop of Kiovia, was thought to have given Ferdinand this bad Counsel, think∣ing if he could advance that Prince, he might withal procure himself the chief Dignity in the Kingdom, the Archbishop of Gnesna be∣ing then fourscore Years old, and therefore not likely to live long.
His Cha∣racter and Travels. Prince Casimir had always shewn an uncom∣mon Vertue in all his Actions. He lov'd War, and had ever a great Inclination for Travel: Whereupon in 1638, he embark'd at Genoa for Spain with design to assist that Kingdom against France; but being taken in Provence, he was kept two Years, till he was restor'd to his Brother Ʋladislaus by means of an Embassy sent to the Court of France. This Disgrace which hapned to this Prince, did not hinder him from undertaking other Voyages; for in 1643, he left Poland a second time, and pas∣sing by Loretto, became a Jesuit there, without acquainting the King his Brother therewith. To withdraw him honourably from this Com∣pany, and prevent the Publick from blaming his Inconstancy, Pope Innocent the Xth made him Cardinal in 1646, which Dignity Ca∣simir seen after resign'd; for his Brother's Son dying in 1647, and his Brother being neither like to have any more Children, nor to live long, he prudently bethought himself of other Measures: wherefore in 1647, he sent his Renunciation to his Holiness by Francis Fredt de Moulinet, a French Gentleman, a Per∣son he had always cherish'd and employ'd up∣on divers Occasions, and whose approv'd Fi∣delity made him often say, That a Prince was always better serv'd by Strangers than by his own Subjects. This Retreat of Casimir among the Jesuits,Like to be excluded. gave occasion to the Bishop of Kiovia to labour at his Exclusion, in which he was zealously assisted by the Protestants, who mortally hated that Society. This Bishop likewise imagin'd he had got the major part of the Gentry on
his side, who seem'd also dissatisfi'd with the Jesuits; but he was not a little mistaken, for Prince Casimir being the Elder, and King Ʋla∣dislaus his Brother having recommended him by his Will to the States, the Faction against him only retarded his Election for a few days, the Senate in that time having a mind to re∣concile the two Brothers. The 6th of October began the Diet of Elec∣tion, where almost all were unanimous, and only study'd to hinder the Progress of the Cosacks. First John de Torres, Archbishop ofForeign Mi∣nisters ad∣mitted. Adrianople, the Pope's Nuncio, the young Marquess of Grana Ambassador from the Em∣perour, the Count of Arpajou Embassador Ex∣traordinary, together with the Viscount of Bregi Embassador in Ordinary from France, recommended the Interest of Prince Casimir; whereupon, the 29th of the same Month, John Tyskiewitz Bishop of Samogitia, made an ele∣gant Harangue in his behalf, alledging the Case of Casimir the IId. who had retir'd into the Abby of Cluny, but nevertheless was not ex∣cluded the Throne. The next day the Minister of Ragozzi, Prince of Transylvania, had Audience, who, contrary to all Expectation, recommended Prince Casimir; yet at the same time insinua∣ted, that if they did not think fit to elect him, his Master, who had always had so sin∣cere Affection for Poland, would gladly be their Prince. The Diet, altho they detested his Flattery, yet express'd themselves grate∣ful to his Master for the kindness he had pro∣fess'd.
The 3d of November Prince Ferdinand's Em∣bassadors were introduc'd with the Bishop of Kiovia at their Head. The Profers these made were receiv'd with a great deal of In∣difference; but when the Bishop began to speak with disrespect of Prince Casimir, he was soon silenc'd by a universal Confusion of Voices, which seem'd all to be against him. Whereupon Prince Ferdinand sent forthwith his Excuses, and publickly resign'd his Pre∣tensions to his Brother; which prevail'd so far upon Casimir, that he granted him his Friendship; and moreover, made him a Present of the Principalities of Oppolen and Ratibor in Silesia, and likewise re-imburs'd the Charges he had been at to oppose him in his Electi∣on; which generous Usage so influenc'd Fer∣dinand, that he express'd less Joy for all these noble Presents than Sorrow for having been concern'd against so deserving a Brother. Casimir e∣lected. The 17th began the Election, when all Ob∣stacles being remov'd, Casimir had been pro∣claim'd the same day, if his Embassadors had sign'd the Articles propos'd to them; but ne∣vertheless on the 20th, he was admitted to the Throne on the same Conditions with his Father Sigismund. His Mar∣riage. He marry'd, by the Pope's Dispensation, the Queen-Dowager Mary Ludovica his Brother's Queen. She being a French Lady, and medling too much with Affairs of State, perhaps with design to promote a Successor of her own Country, is thought to have contributed in great measure towards the Troubles whichHis Wars. afterwards ensu'd. Soon after he came to the Crown, the Cosack General Chmielinski be∣gan
to put in practice his Revenge: Where∣upon calling the Tartars to his Assistance, he march'd at the Head of a formidable Army into Poland; where burning, plundering and ravaging wherever he came, he did all the Mischief he could, defeated the Polish Army, took the City of Kiovia, and afterwards be∣sieg'd Leopol, Capital of Russia, with an Army of near 300000 Men, yet could never take it, tho its Fortifications are but very inconside∣rable. They nevertheless ravag'd the Coun∣try all about it for many Leagues together. To revenge which Affront, the Poles sum∣mon'd the seventh Man throughout the whole Kingdom, and march'd against the Cosacks without the Consent of their King, who had before refus'd to head them, but were again miserably beaten. Nevertheless the King's Army at other times had considerable Ad∣vantages over them; for tho they found they were not able to fight them, yet they fa∣tigu'd and weakned them so, that they were forc'd to call the Muscovites likewise to help them forward with their intended Work. Whilst some put themselves under the Pro∣tection of Muscovy, others had recourse to the Port, so irreconcilable were they ever to have any more to do with the Crown of Po∣land, and have been so ever since to their own Ruin, and the great Disadvantage of the Poles. The only Damage they sustain'd, was, when Chmielinski was celebrating the Nuptials of his Son with the Daughter of the Prince of Vala∣chia, where the Poles surpriz'd them, re-took the City of Kiovia and plunder'd it, as like∣wise made the Grecian Patriarch Prisoner.
Then the Cosacks sent to the King to know if this had been done by his Majesty's Order; which being answer'd in the Negative, and moreover, that the Nobility had done it to be reveng'd on them for the frequent Damages they had done them, they immediately, in conjunction with the Tartars, fell into Poland with the greatest Fury imaginable. Against these the King went in Person at the Head of the Nobility, and defeated them in Battle. But nevertheless the King was afterwards forc'd to clap up a Peace with them, tho the Gentry were very much displeas'd at his granting them their own Terms, by which the Muscovites were left in possession of Smo∣lensko and Kiovia, which they enjoy to this day. The Muscovites likewise took Vilna in Lithuania, with some other considerable Cities in that great Dutchy. The King of Sweden invades Poland. In the Year 1655, Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden, rais'd a more fatal Storm in Po∣land; for with an Army of chosen Men he en∣ter'd that Kingdom, and in two years time made himself absolute Master thereof. He first conquer'd Great Poland and Masovia, and afterwards the Lesser Poland, with Cra∣cow, the capital City of the Kingdom; from whence he march'd into Prussia, where almost all the Towns immediately surrender'd to him except Dantzic, wherein at first were a great many Citizens that favour'd the Suedes; but who not long after, by the Persuasions of some Ministers, continu'd their Obedience to Po∣land. The Resistance made by this one City, was the main Reason why all the Advantages got by the Swedes at last prov'd fruitless, and
that they could maintain themselves no longer in Prussia: notwithstanding that, not only the whole Militia of Poland, and that part of Li∣thuania which was under the Muscovites, had submitted to the Swedes, but also King John Ca∣simir was fled into Silesia; for the Poles having recover'd themselves after their first Conster∣nation was over, and being moreover join'd by the Brandenburgers and Tartars, fell upon such of the Swedish Forces as were scatter'd up and down the Country. The Lithuanians also rose up in Arms, and kill'd all the Swedes that were in Winter-quarters among them. Cause of his Invasion. The Occasion of this Swedish Invasion was some familiarity King Casimir had had with the Wife of the Vice-Chancellor Radziouski, Father to the present Cardinal Primate. This great Senator could by no means brook a Scan∣dal so publick; and therefore having first made a Party in the Kingdom, he call'd in the Swedes through Livonia to revenge his Quarrel, who soon got the Duke of Curland's Country, and took him Prisoner. Afterwards they had such vast Success in their Progress, that all the Towns of Poland soon submitted to them, none being able to withstand a Siege. It is to be observ'd, that there are but few fortify'd Places in Poland; it being a Maxim of State there, That their Kings should not streng∣then themselves at home, whereby their Enemies might take footing from abroad. This vast Conquest made all the neighbour∣ing Princes very jealous of the Power of Swe∣den; for on one side Ragozzi, Prince of Tran∣sylvania, thinking perhaps to obtain that Crown for himself, enter'd Poland, but with
no Success. The Danes likewise made a con∣siderable Diversion on their part by attacking Sweden. Also the Muscovites came upon Livo∣nia, and the Emperour sent Troops to succour the Poles; whereupon, by Assistance of the Brandenburgers and Tartars, and the prudent Conduct of General Czarneski, the Polish Nobi∣lity in six Months time restor'd Casimir to his Throne. Cracow took by a Strata∣gem. This Czarneski re-took the capital City of Poland by a Stratagem, which was by con∣triving to have some Cartloads of Wood en∣ter the City betimes in the Morning, and to break in their Passage through one of the Gates; by which means, with 800 Men, he forc'd his way into the City, and destroy'd the Swedish Garison. The Advantage of an unfortify'd Kingdom will always be this, That tho it be soon conquer'd, it will nevertheless be as easily recover'd. King of Sweden enters in∣to a League with the E. of Bran∣denburg. When Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden, had met with an Opportunity to make War with Poland, he made several private Treaties with the late Elector of Brandenburg, Frederic Wil∣liam, and at length enter'd into a League with him, on condition, that when he had conquer'd Poland, he should give him the Soveraignty of Ducal Prussia; whereupon they both join'd their Forces together, and soon conquer'd the Poles. But afterwards the King of Sweden be∣ing call'd home to take care of his own Domi∣nions, which were then invaded by the Danes, he was forc'd to compound with Poland for 800000 Rix Dollars, which the Poles, not hav∣ing had any Intelligence of the Danish Invasion, were glad to agree to. But the Elector of
Brandenhurg observing that the Money stipu∣lated for, was not like to be easily rais'd, of∣fer'd, unknown to the Swedes, to give the Poles that Sum; and moreover, to help them to drive the Swedes out of their Kingdom, in case they would but confirm to him and his Heirs the aforesaid Soveraignty of Ducal Prussia. To this the Poles, being in extream Confu∣sion and Necessity, quickly condescended, with this Restraint only, That whenever the said Elector's Male-Issue fail'd, that Dutchy should revert to the Crown of Poland. Whereupon the Elector of Brandenburg having been pro∣claim'd Soveraign Duke of Prussia, he imme∣diately join'd the Polish Forces, and in short time drove the Swedes out of their Kingdom, which he before had been instrumental in bringing in. This is the Account I have heard the Poles give of their Deliverance from the Swedish Yoke; and Sir Robert Southwell also gave us lately the same Account at the Royal Society, which he had had from the late Elector of Brandenburg's own Mouth. Treaty of Oliva. At thisPufendorf. Rerum Brandenb. lib. VIII. Sect. 55. &c. fol. 508. col. 2. Treaty of Oliva (a Monastery near Dantzic) the Poles likewise were to renounce all the Pretensions they had to Livonia. Casimir, after having routed the Swedes, rais'd an Army of about 30000 Germans, un∣der pretence of being reveng'd on the Tar∣tars for detaining several Poles Prisonners, which he had betray'd himself, the better to curb his Subjects. But Prince Lubomirski,
Crown-Marshal, having discover'd his private Design, which was to render himself Despotic, rais'd an Army likewise, and attack'd that of the King with so good Success, that he en∣tirely routed it, took its General, a French∣man, Prisoner, and quickly oblig'd the King to disband his German Forces. At thisMotive and Means of Casimir's Abdication. Affront receiv'd from his own Subjects, Casi∣mir was extreamly netled, insomuch that he abdicated the Crown not long after. But some time before his Abdication he convok'd a Diet at Leopol to pay off the Army. The best Expedient to effect this was thought to be, to call in all the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom, and re-coin it; but this having been found deficient, the States consented to have vast Quantities of Copper coin'd, which before had been very scarce in that Country, and to raise its intrinsick Value to almost dou∣ble the common Standard. With this Mo∣ney the King paid the Publick for what they brought in, as likewise the Arrears of the Army, but kept all the Gold and Silver, which he afterwards privately remitted into France, and soon follow'd himself, whereby he beg∣gar'd the Nation; for which the Poles con∣demn him even to this day. They also hate his Memory for having favour'd the Cosacks Re∣bellion to the empoverishing those Gentlemen that had Estates in Ʋkraina. This appear'd unquestionable by a private Letter intercept∣ed, sent under Casimir's own hand to Chmielin∣ski and Doroczinko, Generals of the Cosacks Ar∣my, whereby he invited them to make War against himself for not having been redress'd in the Grievances they had sustain'd under the
Jews, the Noblemens Stewards in the Ʋkraine; by which means he gave them occasion to de∣liver themselves from the Polish Slavery, as they continue to this day. All this while the Cosacks were not a little troublesome to the Poles, taking advantage of these intestine Disorders, and the ill Condition the Affairs of Poland were in during Casimir's Time, who at length, after 20 years Reign, being tir'd out with Vexations, publickly re∣sign'd his Crown, like Charles V. at St. John's Church at Warsaw the 16th of September, inCasimir's Death. 1671. the Year 1668; and retiring into France, dy'd afterwards at Nevers, the City where his Queen was born. While I was at Warsaw, I spoke with seve∣ral old Gentlemen about this King's Abdica∣tion, who told me that Casimir, the day after his Resignation, observing the People hardly paid him the Respect due to a Gentleman, much less to a King, seem'd to have repent∣ed heartily of the Folly he had committed. The Officers which this Prince had reserv'd to himself in his Retreat, rais'd a stately Mo∣nument to the Memory of their Royal Master in the Abby of St. Germains at Paris, whereof he was made Abbot. The Brass and Marble of this Monument shall not outlast the Latin Epitaph which Father Francis Delfault made on this Prince, and which for the Excellency in its kind, I shall beg leave of your Grace to insert.
Aeternae Memoriae; REGIS ORTHODOXI, HEIC; Post Emensos Virtutis Ac Gloriae Gradus omnes, Quiescit, Nobili sui Parte, JOHANNES CASIMIRƲS, Poloniae Ac Sueciae Rex; Alto E Jagellonidum Sanguine, Familia Vasatensi POSTREMƲS, Quia Summus LITTERIS, ARMIS, PIETATE. Multarum Gentium Linguas Addidicit, quo illas Propensius Sibi devinciret. Septemdecim Praeliis, collatis cum Hoste signis, Totidem uno minus vicit, SEMPER INVIGTƲS,
Moscovitas, Suecos, Brandebur∣genses, Tartaros, Germanos ARMIS; Cosacos, aliosque Rebelles Gra∣tid, ac Beneficiis EXPƲGNAVIT; Victoriâ Regem eis se Praebens, Clementiâ Patrem. Denique totis viginti Imperii Annis, Fortunam virtute vincens, AƲLAM HABƲIT IN CAS∣TRIS, PALATIA IN TENTORIIS, SPECTACƲLA IN TRIƲMPHIS. Liberos ex legitimo connubio Suscepit, queis postea orbatus est, ne si se majorem reliquisset, non esset ipse Maximus; Sin minorem, stirps degeneraret. Par ei ad fortitudinem Religio fuit, Nec segnius Coelo Militavit, QƲAM SOLO.
Hinc extructa Monasteria, & Nosocomia Varsaviae, Calvinianorum fana in Lithuania exoisa; Sociniani Regno pulsi, ne Casi∣mirum haberent Regem, Qui Christum Deum non Haberent. Senatus A Variis Sectis ad Catholicae Fidei Communiousm Adductus, Ʋt Ecclesiae legibus Continerentur, Qui Jura Populis Dicerent. Ʋnde Illi praeclarum ORTHODOXI NOMEN Ab Alexandro VII. Inditum. Humanae Denique Gloriae Fastigium Praetergressus, Cum Nihil Praeclarius Agere Posset,
IMPERIVM SPONTE ABDICAVIT ANNO M. DC. LXVIII. Tum Porro lachrymae, Quas Nulli Regnans Excusserat, Omnium oculis Manarunt, Qui Abeuntem Regem, non secus Atque Obeuntem Patrem, LƲ:XERE. Vitae Reliquum in Pietatis Officiis cum Exegisset, Tandem Audita Kameneci Expugnatione, ne tantae cladi Superesset, CHARITATE PATRIAE VƲLNERATƲS OCCƲBƲIT XVII. KAL. JAN. M. DC. LXXII. Regium cor monachis Hujus Coenobii, cui Abbas praefuerat, Amoris pignus reliquit; Quod illi isthoc tumulo Moe∣retes condidorunt.
If King Casimir's Resignation procur'd Quiet to himself, it occasion'd no less Distur∣bance to the Polish Commonwealth; for there∣by none of the Family of Vasa remaining, se∣veral Princes rais'd Factions to get the Crown into their Families, and consequently each en∣deavour'd to hinder him that was most like to obtain it. A Diet call'd.Stanislaus Prasmowski the Primate had con∣ven'd a Diet to meet at the beginning of De∣cember, where, after some innocent Heats, the second of May 1669 was pitch'd upon for the Diet of Election. This Interregnum, unlike the former, was not disturb'd by the Prote∣stants; King Casimir having taken such Mea∣sures, that the Socinians were in his time ba∣nish'd; and the other Sects being look'd upon with Contempt, were consequently discou∣rag'd in their Advances. Competi∣tors for the Crown, At this Diet of Election, four Competitors appear'd, viz. The Son of the Great Duke of Muscovy, who had been bred in Poland, and spoke that Language; on whose behalf the Great Duke his Father offer'd, 1. That his Son should change his Religion for that of the Roman Communion. 2. That he should make a Publick Renunciation to Muscovy. 3. That all Places formerly taken from the Poles by the Muscovites should be restor'd. 4. That four Millions should be advanc'd as his free Gift to∣wards the Payment of the Arrears of the Po∣lish Army. And lastly, That he would be oblig'd to assist Poland against all Enemies whatever with an Army of forty thousand Men; and moreover, enter into a firm and perpetual League with them. The
next was the Duke of Neuburg, supported by the French Interest. The third was the Duke of Lorain, upheld by the German Fac∣tion. And the fourth was the Prince of Conde's Son, whom the Archbishop of Gnes∣na, and General Sobieski were thought to fa∣vour. Reduc'd to two. At length the Contentions for the Crown of Poland were altogether lodg'd in two Pre∣tenders, for the Duke of Muscovy declin'd sending his Ambassadors out of Pride, as be∣ing displeas'd with the Poles; and the Prince of Conde had quitted his Pretensions on ac∣count of Discouragement; wherefore the two Competitors that remain'd had the Gen∣try almost equally divided between them, and which arriv'd to those Extremities, that almost every Night twenty or more were found murder'd in the Streets. These Dis∣orders the Marshal of the Diet us'd several Means to suppress, but at length found none so plausible as to proceed forthwith to an Election. Foreign Mi∣nisters ad∣mitted. The 4th of June the Embassadors were first admitted to Audience, when the Pope's Nuncio made a Speech in Latin, and exhorted the Assembly to elect a Catholick Prince. The 7th of the same Month Count Schafgots had Audience, who, contrary to the expectation of every body, recommended the Duke of Neuburg in the Name of his Master the Em∣perour. On the 12th the Duke of Neuburg's Mini∣ster had Audience, who promis'd in the Name of his Master two Millions to pay the Army; next to maintain always 4000 Men for the
Service of the State out of his own Coffers; and lastly, to build three Fortresses on the Frontiers of Poland, as likewise to found a College for the Polanders in Germany. The Prince of Leixin, who had Audience next, profer'd almost the same on the part of his Ne∣phew the Duke of Lorain. To which the Ab∣bot of Riquet also added, that the same Prince, for whom he likewise spoke, was ready to dis∣pute the Crown in single Combat with his Op∣ponent, to the end he might obtain it by the most honourable Means. But nevertheless, the Pride of the latter of these Competitors had not better effect than the Promises of the for∣mer. In the mean time the Gentry were very im∣patient at the tediousness of the Diet, and atHeats arise; length were ready to go together by the Ears; when Opalinski Palatin of Kalisch, to appease the Disorder, made an elegant Speech, alledg∣ing, That it was meer Madness for them to cut one anothers Throats about choosing of Princes which they never saw, and that it would be more prudent to reject them both, their Birth and Alliance with the House of Austria being sufficient to merit their Exclu∣sion. And proceeding in his Harangue, he put them in mind that the Austrian Family, pro∣viding they persisted to make choice of a Prince out of it, might in all probability serve them as it had formerly done the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary; and that therefore it was not only unsafe, but also contrary to the Constitutions of their Kingdom to have any thing to do with them. Hereupon the Tumults began something to abate, which gave
him encouragement to go on and shew, that formerly, when Heats grew high, a Native, meaning Piastus, had been chosen, who govern'd the Kingdom so prudently, that even at 120 Years of Age his Death was regretted. TheseAppeas'd by a Speech. Precautions (continued he) our Fore-fathers had against the Ambition, Envy or Avarice of such as pretended to the Crown: Let us therefore (quoth he) leave the Duke of Neuburg to govern his small Estate and nu∣merous Family; and let the Duke of Lorain exhaust his Treasures to recover his Paternal Dominions. For our parts a Piasto would be most proper for us, as we may find by a seri∣ous Reflection on these Divine Words, Ad∣mitte ad te alienigenam, & subvertet te; Ad∣mit a Stranger among ye, and he shall under∣mine and ruin ye. By these means the Palatin of Kalisch having pretty well calm'd the turbulent Spirits of the Diet, and moreover influenc'd them with kind thoughts of a Piasto, he immediately posted, together with the Palatin of Posnania,A Plasto propos'd. to Wiesnowiski then at Warsaw, where finding him in the Church of the Recollects, they both earnestly begg'd of him to accompany them to the Field of Election, which Request, after some difficulty, he comply'd with. Where∣upon all three arriving while the Partisans of the two Competitors were ready to go together by the Ears, the Palatins of Kalisch and Posnania took occasion to propose Wiesno∣wiski; and the Illustrious House he wasHartknoch. lib. . cap. 2. p. 109. de∣scended from soon determin'd the Gentry in
his Favour. It must be understood that Wies∣nowiski was not lineally of the Race of Jagello, for that ended with Sigismundus Augustus, but collaterally descended from Korybuth Jagello's Brother. Mr. Yard who went with Sir Peter Wyche to compliment King Michael on his Accession to the Throne, told me lately, that the PalatinPolicy dis∣appointed. of Culm acquainted them at Warsaw, that when Michael was propos'd, the Intention was not to have him elected, but only by proposing of him to discover how far the Diet would re∣lish a Native; some of the Great Men among them having secret Designs to advance one of themselves to the Throne, but which they were unexpectedly disappointed in by the E∣lection of this poor Prince. Wiesnowizki was not a little surpriz'd when he heard himself nam'd, and which also en∣creas'd upon him when they seated him by force in the midst of the Assembly, and begg'd of him to accept the Crown. At first heMichael refuses the Crown; burst out into Tears, and declar'd he was not capable to sustain so great a Burden; but the major part of the Diet persisting in their Demands, at length he thought fit to acquiesceAccepts it. and accept their Proffers. The Dukes of Neuburg and Lorain were hereby immediate∣ly depriv'd of their most profess'd Friends: But the Lithuanians would by no means accept of a Prince they had not first nam'd, and therefore propos'd others. This dissenting of theirs occasion'd new Disorders, which grew so high, that a Gentleman speaking his Mind too freely, was cut to pieces on the spot; yet at length, the latter being the weaker side,
they were forc'd to comply with the former, and confirm Prince Wiesnowiski. The Pri∣mate con∣forms. The Primate not approving of this Electi∣on, retir'd to his Castle of Lowitz; but the Gentry threatned to force him, and the Se∣nators intreated him to consent, which at length he agreed to, and according to custom proclaim'd him. It is said that whilst the Palatin of Kalisch was haranguing, a Swarm of Bees and a Pi∣geon happen'd to fly over their Heads, which the Poles immediately taking for a good Omen, cry'd out unanimously, God save King Michael Wiesno∣wiski 1670. MICHAEL WIESNOWISKI. This his Excellency Monsieur de Cleverskerk, now Em∣bassador from the States of Holland in England, assures me to be true, he having been present at Warsaw as a Traveller at the time of this Election. King Michael being thus chosen, chiefly in∣deed by the Minor Nobility, was proclaim'd by the Primate, and crown'd the 17th of Sep∣tember in the Year 1670, and reign'd to the Year 1673. His Mar∣riage. He married Eleonora of Austria, Daughter to Ferdinand III. and Sister to Leopold the pre∣sent Emperor of Germany; by reason of which Alliance Jealousies were rais'd, that his Ma∣jesty had a mind to make himself Absolute and Hereditary, and to subvert the Polish Liberties, all which he soon appeas'd by a timely compliance with the Demands of the disaffected. This Prince before he was advanc'd to the Throne was very poor, subsisting only on a
Pension of 6000 Livres, which had been charitably allow'd him by King Casimir and his Queen Mary Luduvica di Gonzaga. He had, 'tis true, formerly a vast Estate in Ʋkrai∣na, but which the Cosacks were then in posses∣sion of. He was, as I am inform'd, Gentle∣man of the Bed-Chamber to the present Em∣peror of Germany, which yet that Prince did not think sufficient reason to exclude him from marrying his Sister after his Election. The Co∣sacks Re∣bellion In the Year 1672, the Cosacks, assisted by some Tartars, having again fallen to their old Custom of rebelling, General Sobieski with the Forces of the Crown soon chastis'd them, and forc'd their Leader Doroczinko to retire.Favour'd by the Turk: Hence the Turk took an occasion to quarrel with Poland, upon pretence he had taken the Cosacks into his Protection, whom he would needs have to be opprest. This King was by no means endu'd with the Warlike Spirit of his Predecessors; for in his time the Turks not only over-run Podolia, but also took its Capital City Caminiec, andProduces a bad Peace. likewise oblig'd the Poles to dishonourable Ar∣ticles of Peace, whereby Michael was to pay the Turks an Annual Tribute. The farther Particulars of this Matter are as follows: So∣bleski, made Great Marshal and Crown-Gene∣ral by Casimir for having always adher'd to his Interest, presenting King Michael when elected with a Coach and six Horses to com∣ply with the Custom only, for it must be un∣derstood Sobieski was his Enemy; the King by the Perswasions of his haughty Mother re∣fus'd the Present, which the General greatly resenting sought all manner of ways to be
reveng'd on him, and in order thereto, fre∣quently caball'd with the Gentry assembled in Parliament against him, and at length ob∣lig'd the Diet to be dissolv'd without con∣cluding any thing to his advantage; while in the mean time, I am positively assur'd, he kept Intelligence with the Turks and Tartars, as may appear by their taking of Caminiec, and besieging of Leopol. Mr. James Walker a Scots-man, who was in the City when be∣sieg'd, and is now in London, told me lately, that there were 90000 Turks, 20000 Tartars, and 10000 Cosacks and Moldavians at that Siege which happen'd in the Year 1672, all which begirted the Town close, playing con∣tinually upon it from five Batteries. The Governour that held out against them was one Lonsky, a Colonel of Dragoons, who had, as Mr. Walker assures me, but five hundred of his Men in Garison without any Horse, besides 1100 of the Inhabitants in Arms: With these Lonski defended himself vigorously, in∣somuch that what by the Correspondence he kept with the Christians in the Turkish Army, and by the Bravery of his own Men he main∣tain'd his Defence three Weeks, when the King sent Count Morstin and other Commissi∣oners to treat with Caplan Bassa General of the Turks, who agreed, that for raising the Siege the King should pay 22000 Gold Du∣cats yearly Tribute to the Grand Seignior, 100000 Lion-Dollars down on the nail to save the City, whereof the Inhabitants paid 10000 presently, and the Publick were to pay the rest; this they gave eight Hostages to perform, who were kept Prisoners at Cami∣niec,
and dy'd there by reason that the Debt contracted for was never paid. Besides, the Turks were to remain in possession of Caminiec and all Podolia. But General Sobieski, and the rest of the caballing Party being asham'd of this dishonourable Treaty, came to a better Understanding among themselves, and sided with the King to recover what had been lost. The Poles march to recover Podolia; Hereupon the Armies of Poland and Li∣thuania marched directly towards Podolia to retake it, that of the Kingdom being com∣manded by General Sobieski, and the other of the Dutchy by General Patz. These two Generals soon obtain'd a signal Victory over the Turks near Kochim five Leagues from Ca∣miniec, by the Treachery of the Moldavians and Valachians, who never hitherto signaliz'd themselves but persidiously, which yet prov'd very advantagious to the Poles, who were then in want of every thing but Courage. Caplan Bassa commanded the Turkish Army, being join'd by the Moldavian Troops, headed by their Hospodar; but the former being dis∣pleas'd with the Conduct of the latter, his Souldiers being not so many as he expected, and those not well equipt, struck him over the Head with his Scimiter, which the Hospodar highly resenting resolv'd upon Revenge, which he afterwards effected, by deserting the Turks in conjunction with the Valachians who took his part, and going over to the Poles. This mightily facilitated Sobieski's Entry into the Enemy's Camp, which gain'd him a compleatConquer; Victory. This Defeat had doubtless put the Affairs of Poland into a good Condition had
the Generals sufficiently pursu'd it. But, as it has always been the unfortunate Custom of the Poles, they immediately withdrew theirBut fail in their De∣sign. Troops into their Country, and so have since left the Turks in full possession of Podolia. This famous Battel began upon Saturday, and was scarce fully over in three days. Some few days before this Victory obtain'd, King Michael dy'd at Leopol, November the 10thMichael's Death; 1673, suppos'd to have been poison'd by a French-man at Zamoisk, being about 32 Years old, and having reign'd about four Years, leaving the Poles less afflicted at his Death, than asham'd at the bad Choice they had made of him for their Prince. This Prince not long before he dy'd, had the Misfortune to see an Aga come from the Grand Seignior to demand Tribute of him, who brought him from his Master a Commander's Staff and a Turkish Vest, both being Badges of Vassalage. He left no Children, tho hisLeaves no Issue. Queen, who was afterwards marry'd to Charles late Duke of Lorain, has since had several. She is lately dead, and in my Travels from Italy to Germany resided at Inspruck, the Ca∣pital Town of Tyrol, where I had the Ho∣nour to kiss her Majesty's Hand, being intro∣duc'd by my Lord Carlingford. Her Brother the Emperor allow'd her and her Children a Pension out of the County of Tyrol; for she receiv'd nothing either out of Poland or Lo∣rain, the latter having been hitherto in the French Hands; and the Constitution of the former being, that when the Queen Dowager marries, she forfeits her Pension setled upon her by the Diet at the King's Coronation.
Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 109, 110. An odd Story.An odd Story goes of a Child that was born in this King's Reign in the Year 1670, at Vilna in ithuania, with a Golden Tooth, which was esteemed truly such by all the Phy∣sicians, Surgeons and Goldsmiths about that City, being also tri'd on the Touchstone in the presence of the Bishop of that place: But what is yet more wonderful, that Child having a Fever afterwards in the Year 1673, his Golden Tooth was changed into Bone. How worthy this is of Credit I leave to the Judicious Naturalists; I have only this to say for my self, that I found it in an authentick Author. King Michael being dead was succeeded by John Sobieski the late King of Poland, who was Captain of the Guards, and Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber to King John Casimir. Whilst he had these Employments he marry'd Prince Zamoski's Widow, who had 10000 Rix Dollars left her for a Jointure, by the contrivance and management of King Casimir and his Queen, to whom she was then Lady of the Bed-Chamber. At this Juncture Sobieski's own Estate was not 2000 Pounds Sterling a Year: But however, the King promis'd to advance him after he had marry'd this Lady, which he accordingly perform'd, and I may say that it was through the means of this Marriage that Sobieski was gradually promoted to the Supreme Dignity of the Crown. Thus, my Lord, I have given as short and exact an Account of the memorable Actions of the fourth Class of the Kings of Poland, as
my Incapacity, and the Precipitation with which it was publish'd, would allow. But be∣fore I put an end to this Letter, I must beg your Grace's leave to take notice, that the Crown of Poland, tho always Elective, yet has been successively in the same Family from Fa∣ther to Son, or at least from Father to Daugh∣ter or other Relation, from the Year 830 to the Year 1674, which is from Piastus his Reign to the Election of the late King John Sobieski, except only the five Months that Henry of Valois reign'd, I mean Henry III. of France, who was kill'd by a Monk. To evince this, your Grace may be pleas'd to understand, that the last of the Family of Piastus in a direct Line was the Princess Hedwigis, who marry'd Jagello, Great Duke of Lithuania. His Male Race by her reign'd to Sigismund the Second's time, of whose two Daughters, one was marry'd to King Stephen Batori his Successor, and the other was Mother to Sigismund III. who with his Sons were successively elected to the Throne to the time of King Michael Wies∣nowiski; who, tho he was not lineally descend∣ed from Jagello, yet came laterally from the Race of Koributh Jagello's Brother: So that it is evident that the Poles have reconcil'd a free Election of their Kings with an uninter∣rupted Succession of the same for 844 Years; as likewise that they have never excluded the deceased King's Son, nor ever elected any German Prince to the Throne before this last Election of the Elector of Saxony, Frede∣rick Augustus, now King of Poland. But as it is lawful for all Governments to alter their Constitutions at often as they find it conve∣nient
for the good of the Publick; so the Poles observing that their Native Kings have not of late sufficiently promoted the Interest of their Country, were wise enough to choose a Foreign Prince, whose Wealth and Courage would enlarge their Dominions, as their pre∣sent King Frederick Augustus is very likely to do, being in League with the Emperor, Muscovites and Venetians. I hope your Grace will be pleas'd to pardon my Indiscretion in presuming to write of Matters which are al∣together out of my Element, since it was only to shew with what Deference and Respect I am, My LORD, Your Grace's most Obedient and most Humble Servant, B. C.
LETTER IV. To the Right Honourable WIL∣LIAM Earl of Yarmouth. Concerning the Family and Remarkable Actions of John III. King of Poland: As also his Daughter's Marriage to the present Elector of Bavaria. My LORD; THE Obligations I owe to your Brother Mr. Alberti and his Lady, join'd with the Value I have always profess'd for your Lord∣ship's Friendship, makes me glad to find this occasion of giving both you and them a publick Testimony of my Respect and Gratitude; and since you have often shew'd your self wil∣ling to know something of the Affairs of Po∣land, I thought nothing could be more agree∣able to your Temper, than that I should in∣form you chiefly of the Heroick Actions of that great Prince, with whom your Brother for so many Years so prudently manag'd the Interest of the wisest Republick in the World in a long lingring War against the Ottoman Empire. It is to his Kindness that I must own my self indebted for the Honour I have had of being in the Esteem of so Warlike a King, and of being moreover entrusted
with the Care of what was most dear to him. John Sobieski, my Lord, is not so much to be esteem'd for his memorable Exploits after his Election, as for his Merits, and the wise Conduct by which he advanc'd himself from a private Gentleman of an indifferent For∣tune, and nothing at all related to any of the former Kings, through all the Posts of the Army to the Crown of Poland, notwithstand∣ing the several powerful Factions which ap∣pear'd against him. Immediately after the Death of the late King Michael Wiesnowiski, John Sobieski then Crown-General gave a signal Overthrow to the Turks near Caminiec, which caus'd a great Alteration in the Republick of Poland; for thereupon the Turkish Aga and Treasurer were not so peremptory in their demanding Annual Tribute shamefully stipulated for by Michael, as they had been before, but were contented to be put off to the Diet of Election. A Diet call'd; The Senate being assembled, order'd pub∣lick Rejoicings, and began their Session by leaving off their Mourning for the late King. The Diet which preceded that of the Election was appointed to meet the 15th of January 1674, which was design'd to be termi∣nated in 15 days; but the ordinary Distur∣bances that arose in these sort of Assemblies, together with the Inclination which every body had to advance General Sobieski, occa∣sion'd it to be prorogu'd till the 22d or 23d of February, without doing any thing but assigning a Jointure to the Queen Dowager.
The 20th of April began the Diet of Electi∣on;Poceeds to Election. the Candidates were in great number, and every ones Pretensions were heard. The Czar of Muscovy, who had been so often baffled at preceding Elections, yet made fresh Interest at this. His Envoy demanded the Crown for his Master's youngest Son, who was then about thirteen or fourteen Years of Age; but however he neither made so great Profers as formerly, nor us'd any Threats, for he would then have been laugh'd at, Po∣land being at that juncture in a much better condition than before. Next the Prince of Transilvania offer'd fifteen Millions of Money, as likewise that he would unite his Principa∣lity to Poland, and maintain fifteen thousand Men in the Service of that State against the Turk: but these Propositions were look'd upon too considerable to be either real or possible; for the Poles believ'd that they had possess'd themselves of the greatest Treasure of Transilvania when they chose Stephen Ba∣tori for their King. The Elector of Branden∣burg likewise had some hopes in favour of the Prince his Son, when he profer'd that he should change his Religion as soon as ever he was elected; but he soon quitted his Preten∣sions when he consider'd what had pass'd in regard to the Germans and Protestants in for∣mer Elections. If this Prince had been a Ro∣man Catholick, his Family might have had just Pretences to Poland by the Interest of uniting Ducal Prussia to that Kingdom. Several Candi∣dates. The Dukes of Modena and Parma had also their Envoys at this Election; but whereas every body thought their business was to ask
the Crown, they only came to condole the Death of the late King, and congratulate the Poles on their Victory at Chochim, so that they did not add to the number of the Com∣petitors. Don Pedro di Ronquillos came from Spain without taking upon him the Quality of Em∣bassador: His Instructions were to recommend Duke Charles of Lorain, after he had done his best in favour of Don John of Austria; but this Policy did not take, and the Council of Spain afterwards found another Expedient to rid themselves of this Prince. A French Prince pro∣pos'd, but not nam'd. A French Prince, whose Name was not mention'd (tho I suppose it was the Prince of Conde) occasion'd the most Jealousy of all the rest. The other Pretenders to the Crown were not a little pleas'd that this Prince was not nam'd. The Duke of Neuburg renew'd his former Pretensions, tho they had suc∣ceeded so very ill. He did not desire the Crown for himself, but for his younger Son Prince Philip. This Duke made the like Profers for his Son as he had done for him∣self at the preceding Diet. The Duke of Lorain solicited powerfully on his part, andQueen Dowager's Zeal. the Queen Dowager had pawn'd even her Jewels to augment his Party; but a false Re∣port, of which some Letters from Rome gave the occasion, was intended to frustrate all his Endeavours: It was reported that this Prince was marry'd to the Empress Dowager. Every body knew the Obligations he had to that Princess, and how she granted him Protection, and made the Emperor his Friend after he had been depriv'd of his Patrimony by France;
but notwithstanding the Queen Dowager still continu'd her Esteem for him, and soon dissipated the Rumours rais'd against him, by which she brought over the Lithuanians, who seem'd altogether to have forsaken the Inte∣rest she had before engag'd them in. Only three Competi∣tors and Factions left. At length the number of Competitors was reduc'd to three, in favour of whom as many Factions were form'd, all which threaten'd had Consequences. The first Faction was that of Lithuania, headed by the Grand Ge∣neral Patz, who declar'd for the Duke of Lorain. It was observ'd that whilst Patz was discoursing with Sobieski, Grand Marshal of the Crown, at the Camp of Choczin, Sobieski said, that it was convenient to choose a King that was rich, valiant, and not young; to which Patz added, And who above all is not marry'd. This sufficiently shew'd, that whether the French Prince or Sobieski was propos'd, it would be no small difficulty to obtain the Consent of the Lithuanians, who would have no King but such a one as was in a condition to marry after his Election. The second Faction was that of the Polish Gentry, which was not at all considerable by reason that it was di∣vided, one Part being for a Piasto, and two others for the Duke of Neuburg, and the Duke of Lorain. The Army compos'd the third Faction, which was the most to be fear'd. Ge∣neral Sobieki propos'd the French Prince, but in reality work'd under-hand for himself. France employ'd its Interest for the Duke ofWhose In∣terest France espouses. Neuburg, looking upon him as less engag'd to the House of Austria than the Duke of Lorain, who was indebted to that Family for
all he either had or could expect. If this French Prince had been but nam'd when he was put up, doubtless he would soon have ruin'd the Measures of the Germans, for whom the Republick never had any Kindness, who consequently might have sav'd them∣selves a great deal of fruitless Charge had they never thought of the Crown of Poland; but on the contrary, their Ambition has all along hitherto surmounted the Dictates of their Reason. Magnificent Trains. The Gentry arriv'd at the Diet one after another with their Followers; but however. none had any thing like the Train of the two Marshals of the Crown and of Lithuania: their Parties seem'd too numerous to assist at a Diet where there is so much Freedom as in that of Poland. Nevertheless Sobieski must be indulg'd considering the great Services he had done the State, and common Justice re∣quir'd the same Liberty for the Lithuanians. These two Generals no doubt had different Intentions. Sobieski apparently sought the Crown from himself, and Patz his Design was to hinder him from obtaining it. Both had a fair opportunity to come to Blows, but it seems Fate had order'd it otherwise, tho the Duke of Lorain was with an Army on the Borders of Silesia to animate his Friends. Lithuania against a Native. The Lithuanians, who plainly perceiv'd that Sobieski aim'd at the Crown, omitted nothing that might prove a means to exclude him from it: They therefore endeavour'd all they could to raise ill Thoughts of a Piasto, and proclaim'd those Enemies to their Country who were not of their Opinion. This was
thought so very unjust, that most of the Diet protested against it, and that with so great Indignation, that there would doubtless have been a great deal of Blood shed had not the great Prudence of Sapieha grand Treasurer of Lithuania, and Marshal of the Diet, inter∣cepted and appeas'd their Fury. The first that had Audience of this Assem∣blyForeign Ministers admitted. was Francis Bonvisius the Pope's Nuncio, who desir'd them in the Name of his Holiness to elect a Catholick Prince. Next Christopher Count of Schafgots the Emperor's Embassador, recommended the Duke of Lorain; as like∣wise did the Bishop of Marseilles the eldest Son of the Duke of Neuburg, in the Name of his Master the King of France. The Ministers of these two Competitors made almost the same Profers as they had formerly done; yet not∣withstanding the before-mentioned different Factions, did not forsake the Interest of those whose Party they had espous'd; for that of Sobieski continu'd to insist, in all outward ap∣pearance, on the Anonymous French Prince, whose Character had procur'd him a great many Suffrages. And the other of the Great Chancellor Patz, tho not so strong, yet was not a whit less constant to the Interest of the Queen and Duke of Lorain. Both these re∣mainingA double E∣lection ap∣prehended. so obstinate in their Pretensions, gave great reason to apprehend a double Election, which caus'd some of the more prudent sort to represent the great Disorders that had ensu'd from thence in the preceding Elections of the Kings Batori and Sigismund, but this with little or no effect.
These Contests and Heats occasion'd the Diet to be prolong'd to the 19th of May. The Senate deputed four or five Bishops to the Queen to acquaint her, that if her Majesty would please to forsake the Interest of the Duke of Lorain, they had orders to offer her Prince Philip of Neuburg for her Husband, to∣gether with the Crown. These Ministers the Queen receiv'd very civilly, and thank'd the Senate for their Kindness to her, but withal insinuated, that she did not believe thatThe Queen and Patz endea∣vour'd to be seduc'd. they were yet absolute Masters of the Electi∣on, since her Friends the Lithuanians had not forsaken her. The same Prelats perceiving the unalterable Resolution of the Queen, went in quest of the Grand General Patz, whom they also found firm in the Duke of Lorain's Interest, which yet they could not but com∣mend in him, he having had great Obliga∣tions to the Queen. Lithuania tends to∣wards a Civil War. The next day all the Gentry of Poland and Lithuania met again, each Party resolving to maintain what they had undertaken. It was plainly to be perceiv'd that Sobieski was strong enough to make himself Head of the Election, and therefore the other side had thoughts of joining the Duke of Lorain's Army; but this made all Men tremble who had regard to the Good of the Publick. At last the Palatin of Russia made a Speech to the Assembly, re∣presenting, That the Queen having refus'd a Husband which the Government had profer'd her, the Republick had no more to do with her; and that they had done but too much already for the House of Austria and Germany, neither of which had ever done them any Service; that notwithstanding
the Opposition of the Lithuanians who did but dishonour their Country by excluding a Piasto, yet they ought to choose one, to shew the World that if their Ancestors had not done the like oftner, it was because they had a mind to avoid the Jealousies which would have arisen between so many Subjects that deserv'd the Crown; and that since now there was one present whose Merit was not to be question'd, they ought forthwith to elect him. Then he pro∣ceeded to name John Sobieski with this Cha∣racter, That his Life had been entirely devoted to the Service of the State, which even while he was speaking, peaceably enjoy'd the Fruits of his late Victory at Chocim; and further, that this pre∣sent Happiness was hut a Specimen of what he was able to do for his Country: and lastly, that the Crown was due to Sobieski out of meer Gratitude and Acknowledgment, since it was through his means that they sat there, and had a Power to dispose of it. Poland and part of Lithuania biass'd to Sobieski by a Speech. The Gentry of Russia being influenc'd by what their Palatin had said, immediately de∣clar'd for Sobieski, who was a Native of their Province, and all the rest of Poland soon fol∣low'd their Example; together with some Palatinates of Lithuania, brought over by the Management of Prince Radzivil Vice-Chan∣cellor of that Dutchy; every one being for∣ward to deserve Favours from one whom they had acknowledg'd for their Prince. Patz re∣tires and dissents; The Great General of Lithuania being highly displeas'd at all these Proceedings, left the Diet in a Heat, and together with his Friends march'd out of the Field about Nine at Night, no body being able to bring him back. Hereupon he immediately enters▪ Pro∣test
against this Election, alledging that it was against the Constitution of the Kingdom for any King to be chosen without the com∣mon Consent. The next day, being the 20th of May, the Lithuanians return'd into the Field, but retir'd after having made their Protestations against this Election; where∣upon several Senators and Nuncio's were sent to re-cal them, but their Answer was, that they were going to deliberate upon the Mat∣ter, and would inform them of their Reso∣lutions by their Deputies. The Poles and Li∣thuanians who had espous'd Sobieski's Interest, forthwith commanded the Bishop of Cracow to proclaim him; which notwithstanding this Prelate declin'd, wisely foreseeing the Disorders so rash an Election might occasion, and which might probably end in a Civil War. Complies, with the rest of Li∣thuania. The Deputies of Lithuania arriv'd a little while after; whereof the Chief being the Bishop of Vilna, Brother to the Grand General, deliver'd the Message, giving Sobieski the Ti∣tle only of Grand Marshal; yet in the con∣clusion of his Discourse he told them, that he was ready to give his Vote for him, but desir'd the proclaiming him might be defer'd till next day, to the end the Lithuanians might assist at it, and thereby the Election become unanimous: which Request of his was readily granted. Whereupon the 21st of May Andrew Trzebicki Bishop of Cracow, who presided at the Diet in the room of the Pri∣mate Czartoriski just then deceas'd (which happen'd very well for Sobieski, the Primate having been no Friend of his) went with the
Senators before the New Prince to the Place of Election, where they were met by the Li∣thuanians with their General Patz at their head, who was too politick not to assist there with his whole Family. JOHN SOBIESKI was soon after pro∣claim'd,John III. 1674. and the Gentry proceeded to sing Te Deum in the Cathedral of Warsaw, end∣ing the Day with usual Acclamations and Re∣joicings. This Prince was descended of a Noble and Antient Family, tho none of the most consi∣derable, nor richest in the Kingdom. His Fa∣therHis Father. James Sobieski was Castellan of Cracovia, a Person no less eminent for his Abilities in Affairs of State, than renown'd for his Cou∣rage and Conduct in the Field. He was em∣ploy'd in the Year 1621, as Embassador and Plenipotentiary upon a Treaty of Peace, which by his Prudence and Address was honourably concluded with Sultan Osman. He distinguish'd himself likewise on many other important Oc∣casions; and after several other great Services faithfully perform'd for his Country, he dy'd in the Year 1646. His Mother. His Mother was one of the Daughters of Stanislaus Zolkiewski, Grand Chancellor and Grand General of the Crown, who bravely fought that memorable Battle at Cicora on the 10th of September 1620; and tho he was again five times attack'd by the Turks on the 2d of October in the same Year, yet he gallant∣ly repuls'd them, till at last being overpow∣er'd with Numbers, and forsaken by his Fol∣lowers, he was slain, couragiously fighting
among the thickest Troops of his Enemies. His Tra∣vels. This Prince was carefully educated by his Parents in his Youth, and sent to travel into France, where his Father bought him a Captain of Horse's Commission, which gain'd him great Experience: He also travell'd into England, Germany and Italy; where having observ'd all the different Manners, Interests, Laws, Military Discipline, Strength and Poli∣cies of those People, and, in a word, all else that was necessary for a Person of Quality to learn in his Travels, he at last return'd home, when Casimir after several Trials both of his Valour and Discretion, and admiring at his great Merit and quick Parts, which he had improv'd so well both in Languages, Scien∣ces, and Military Accomplishments, made him first a Colonel of Foot, and afterwards Captain of his Guards; and from thence advanc'd him gradually through all the Posts of his Army, till he arriv'd at being Grand Marshal of the Crown in the room of Lubomirski, and Grand General of Poland in the room of Potoski. He behav'd himself in all these Employments with that Courage and Prudence as became a Souldier, and was re∣puted the Hero of his Age, and the Terrour of the Ottoman Empire. His Mar∣riage. He marry'd Mary de la Grange, Daughter to the Marquess of Arquien (not long since made Cardinal) of the Family of La Grange in Ni∣vernois in France. She, by the contrivance of King Casimir's Queen, to whom she was Maid of Honour, was first marry'd to Prince Zamoiski, one of the greatest Palatins in the Kingdom, and after his Death to the Grand General So∣bieski,
by whom she had several Children, and amongst the est three hopeful Princes, the eldest of which has the Honour to be Brother-in-Law to the Emperour, King of Spain, King of Portugal, and to the Duke of Modena, by marrying one of the Princesses of Neuburgh. This Prince was not Crown'd till above fif∣teen Months after his Election; during which time, he gain'd great Advantages over the Turks, and forc'd them to a Peace at Zorowna, whereby they were oblig'd to remit the yearly Tribute, stipulated for by King Michael, but were still to be left in possession of the Fortress of Caminiec. At the time of his Election he was pleas'dHis Gene∣rosity. to promise, of his own free Will and Motion, that the Queen-Dowager should be provided for sutably to her high Quality and extraor∣dinary Merit; as also, that the Arrears of the Army should be forthwith discharg'd out of his own Revenues, since the publick Stock was then hardly able to do it. He conferr'd the Command of Grand Marshal on Prince Deme∣trius, Uncle to the late King, and that of Lieutenant General of the Crown, thereby becoming vacant, on the Palatin of Cracovia. But as he signify'd his Resolution to prosecute the War against the Turk with the utmost Vi∣gour, so he promis'd that at his own parti∣cular Charges he would raise one thousand Foot, and maintain them during the War; and this to encourage the Senators and other Great Men of the Kingdom, to do the like proportionably: For which reason, he desir'd that he might retain the Command of Great
General in his own hands till the Campagn was ended, for that the present Urgency of Affairs was like to prevent his Coronation▪ To which Propositions the Nobility immedi∣ately assented. A Jointure assign'd the Queen-Dowager. Pursuant to the King's Promise, the Queen-Dowager, by the Consent of the Diet▪ had a yearly Revenue of two hundred thousand Guilders assign'd her, with Liberty to reside in any of the Polish Dominions, except Cra∣cow, or some other fortify'd Places on the Borders of Silesia; whereupon her Majesty made choice of Thorn in Prussia for her Resi∣dence. Tho the King was most solicitous to carry on the War against the Turk, yet the Nobility and Senators were generally as remiss therein: for tho they had promis'd him Maintenance for sixty thousand Men, yet he now desir'd but forty thousand; however, such were their Dissensions and Jealousies, that they would not afford him so many. Notwithstanding, to oppose the Turks, Muscovites and Tartars in the Ʋkraine, he got together a small Army of about fifteen or six∣teen thousand Men, with which he march'd from Warsaw the 22d of August, towards the Frontiers; when at the same time the Mus∣covite General's Army consisted of above one hundred thousand; but which nevertheless did no damage, being diverted by the Turks by a Stratagem, insomuch that these, with the Tar∣tars, quickly got possession of all Ʋkraina, ex∣cept two or three Places.
The Troops of Lithuania, consisting of about twelve thousand Men, came up to the King, which made his Army amount to near thirty thousand; so that he immediately call'd a Council of War at Slotzow, and resolv'd to march directly toward the Ʋkraine, with de∣sign to fall upon the Enemy with all the fury imaginable, notwithstanding some Overtures of Peace made him by the Vizier: But this was look'd upon by the Poles only as a Strata∣gem to amuse them, and foment the Jealou∣sies of the Muscovites; by which means the Turks thought to divide them. Accordingly, upon his Approaches, he sends out the Woievod of Russia to learn the Condi∣tion of the Enemy, who, near the Walls of Caminiec, surpriz'd and defeated a thousand Turkish Horse, and brought a hundred and fifty away Prisoners. Whereupon he pro∣ceeds vigorously, and takes several Towns of great Importance in Podolia. But at this time the Lithuanians would needs leave his Majesty and return home, alledging, that they were not able to bear the rigour of the Winter. But nevertheless the King with his Gallant Poles resolv'd to continue the Cam∣pagn,His Con∣quests. and push on his good Fortune; scarce a Week passing, but some considerable Place or other was yielded to him, the Turks all this while not daring in the least to oppose him. So that now his Majesty had subdu'd all that part of Ʋkraina, which lies Westward of the Nieper, except only the City of Czebryn. In April 1675, the Turks and Tartars began in numerous Bodies to take the Field: not∣withstanding the King, animated by his na∣tural
Courage, resolv'd not to stir a foot, but forthwith reinforc'd the several Garisons of Mohilow, Braclaw, Nimirow, Kalmick and Bialicierkiew; which done, he had hardly for∣ces enough left to deserve the Name of an Army. The Turks and Tartars, after having been baffled at Slotskow, march'd directly towards Leopol, where the King's Army lay within a Mile of the Town. That way the Enemy was to approach, there was an Ascent of about three hundred Paces, when one was to descend again by a very narrow Way, amidst a Wood that had lately been cut down. At the foot of this Hill there was a Plain, through which the Tartars must necessarily pass to come at the Poles. Here the King posted his Brother-in-Law Duke Radzivil with some Troops for Guard of the Pass on the Right-hand of his Camp. And General Kariski on the Left, caus'd several Cannon to be planted on a Hill, whence they might annoy the Enemy in the Plain. He also caus'd the Wood on each side the narrow Way to be well lin'd with se∣veral Companies of Musketeers. After which his Majesty order'd some Troops of Horse to advance into the Plain to oppose the Enemy, who about four in the Afternoon appear'd in such Numbers, that they almost cover'd the Ground. In the mean time the King from a Hill observ'd their Motions: After which with his usual Air of Gallantry, common to him in time of Action, at the Head of the remaining part of his small Army he descend∣ed into the Plain, encouraging his Souldiers, by telling them that he came there with full
Resolution either to conquer, or die. Where∣upon,A Battle. repeating thrice the Name of Jesus, he briskly advanc'd towards the Enemy. The Fight began with great Fury on both sides; the King omitting nothing either as to Cou∣rage or Conduct, but performing both the part of a most prudent General and a vali∣ant Souldier, by his Example inspiring all the rest of his Officers, insomuch that with this small handful of Men he forc'd Multitudes of the Enemy to fly before Night, leaving be∣hind them incredible Numbers slain upon the place. The King would gladly have pursu'd the Enemy, but that the Night prevented; and that he fear'd likewise, lest the Cham might come up to their Assistance. In this memo∣rable Victory, the greatest perhaps that has been known in any Age, the King had not actually with him much above five thousand Men, the rest having been left to secure the City of Leopol and the Passes. With this small Party, to defeat by downright Fighting an Army of threescore thousand Men, has more of Prodigy than Probability in it; yet so great was the Fright and Consternation of these Tartars, that they fled in one Night as many Leagues as they had march'd in three Days before. But here this Dispute did not end, for the Cham and Ismael Bassa, to shew they were not dismay'd at this ill Success, resolv'd to march against the King; and in order thereto, com∣manded a Body of two thousand Janizaries out to attack a Castle near Brzeziani, wherein were only sixty Poles, who defended them∣selves
so bravely, that they repuls'd the Ene∣my with great Loss. Soon after a Body of ten thousand Tartars advancing somewhat near the City of Leopol, the King sent out the Lord Harkownisky with a good Squadron of Horse against them, who after a brisk Engagement forc'd them to take to their Heels, leaving Thousands of their Companions dead upon the Spot. In this Action there were several brave Polish Gen∣tlemen slain. Afterwards the King being again ioin'd by the Lithuanians, by which his Army amounted to fifteen thousand Men, march'd to seek out the Enemy, tho by a modest computation they might be reckon'd seven times as many. But understanding that the Enemy had be∣sieg'dPodhais taken by the Turks. Podhais, he was marching thither to relieve it; when, by the way, he receiv'd In∣telligence of its being surrender'd, burnt and plunder'd, and twelve thousand Persons made Prisoners, tho the Garison had expresly capi∣tulated to march out with Bag▪ and Baggage. The King was extreamly nettled that so many Christians should be made Slaves, and his Ter∣ritories laid desolate; therefore he resolv'd forthwith to remedy it, or perish in the At∣tempt, for he march'd the same day towards the Enemy, who were then set down before Buozalz; but upon notice of his Approaches, they rais'd their Siege, and retreated with all their Forces to Trembowla, which they likewise invested. Here they were often repuls'd with great Loss, yet continu'd obstinate to pursue their Enterprize, till at last happening to in∣tercept a Peasant that was carrying a Letter
from the King to the Governour, wherein his Majesty assur'd him, that he was coming with all speed to his Relief; the Terrour of King Sobieski's Name struck such a faintness into the Infidels, that they immediately dis∣lodg'd their Cannon from their Batteries, which consisted of a hundred Pieces, and forth∣with march'd towards Caminiec with a great deal of Confusion. Nay, so great was their Consternation, that under the Cannon of Ca∣miniec they thought not themselves sufficient∣ly secure; for not daring to stand an Engage∣ment with the Poles, they resolv'd to pass the Niester, and march towards Valachia: Yet this they could not do so speedily, but Prince Lubomirski, with part of the King's Army, fell upon their Rear, and slew great Numbers of them. The Turks, by the Fear they were in of being farther pursu'd, re-pass'd the Da∣nube, and the Tartars return'd home with great Precipitation by the way of Bialogrod. Whereupon the King resolv'd to put his Ar∣my into Winter-quarters, and so to return home; which he did to the Joy and Satisfac∣tion of all his Subjects. It being now high time to prepare for the Ceremony of the Coronation, January the 17th the Corps of the late King Michael was con∣vey'd from Warsaw in a Herse drawn by eight Horses, attended by all the Officers of his Houshold, and several Persons of Quality, to Cracow; where, together with the Body of King Casimir, likewise brought lately out of France, it was honourably interr'd, all De∣cency and Respect being paid to both their Memories. This Ceremony being dispatch'd,
His Coro∣nation. 1676. John Sobieski, with his Queen Mary, were both Crown'd in the Castle of Cracow the 2d of Fe∣bruary, in the Year 1676, with great Pomp and Magnificence. After this the King applying himself to supply the Vacancies (as usual) made Lubo∣mirski Grand Marshal of the Kingdom; the Lord Siniawski Court-Marshal, and Prince De∣metrius Wisnowiski Palatin of Beltz. He like∣wise bestow'd the Command of General of the Forces of the Kingdom on Jablownowski Palatin of Russia, at present Great General of Po∣land. In June following Sultan Nuradin, with the two Sons of the Great Cham, pass'd the Nie∣ster with a great Army, having sent out Par∣ties before to ravage the Country. At the same time Ibrahim Bassa advanc'd likewise to several Posts about Caminiec. Whereupon the King order'd what Troops he could get together near Leopol, where they were to ren∣dezvouz, and likewise convok'd the Pospolite, or Militia, for the defence of the Country. My Lord Roche∣ster's Em∣bassy into Poland in the Year 1676▪ The same Year his Excellency Mr. Hyde, now Earl of Rochester, was sent Embassador from his Majesty Charles the IId to the Court of Poland, to congratulate the King upon his Accession to the Crown, and to stand for his Master Godfather to the young Princess, now Electoress of Bavaria. He arriv'd at Dantzic in August, where meeting with the Queen of Poland, who made a Journey thither while the King was in the Field, he had Audience of her Majesty there, and presented the young Princess her Daughter with a very rich Jewel, a Cross of Diamonds of great Value: He af∣terwards
set forward for Poland, and was re∣ceived by the King in his Camp near Leopol in Russia, with Demonstrations of Respect and Kindness sutable to his Character and Person; where his Majesty sent some of his chief Offi∣cers to shew him the Army, and their way of Encamping. The Turks and Tartars began to appear now very formidable, and yet at the same time continu'd so sensible of their last Year's De∣feats, and so dreaded the Name of King So∣bieski, that they seem'd to desire nothing more than Peace; for which purpose the Grand Seignior, by the Prince of Moldavia, madePeace con∣cludedwith the Turks. an Overture for a Treaty, which was ac∣cepted after a Battle gain'd by the Poles, and some other small Mischiefs done on both sides. The Peace being thus happily concluded to the Advantage of Poland, his Majesty return'd in November to Zulkiew, his own Patrimony, whither my Lord Rochester waiting upon him,Audience to the Eng∣lish Embas∣sador. had his publick Audience there in a more so∣lemn Manner than before. He was first car∣ried in the King's Coach, and then received by the Court-Marshal, (who is in the Nature of a Lord Chamberlain) at the Stairs-foot of the Palace, and was conducted to his Majesty, who receiv'd him standing under a rich Cano∣py of State: and after two Months residing there, his Excellency had his Audience of Leave, and return'd into England through Si∣lesia, Austria, and the Empire. The Poles enjoy'd this Peace with the Turks till the Year 1683, when they came under the Command of Cara Mustapha their Grand Vi∣zier,
to besiege Vienna, whereof Count Sta∣renbergHe relieves Vienna. was Governour. The King, with his Son Prince James, Prince Lubomirski, and most of the Polish Grandees, came with an Army only, as they assur'd me, of twenty four thou∣sand Men to relieve it. This the King of Poland was oblig'd to by the Alliance sign'd with his Imperial Majesty in 1683. When be∣ing join'd by the Imperial Army, together with the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, the Duke of Lorain, and a great Number of other Princes of the Empire, in all amounting to near fifty thousand Men; he attack'd the Turks with such Bravery and Conduct, that on the 12th of September they, tho consisting of 191800 Men, as appear'd by a List found in the Grand Vizier's Tent, were oblig'd, after an entire Defeat, to raise the Siege, and re∣tireDefeat of the Turks. towards Hungary. The great Standard and the Horse's Tail were taken by the Poles, who obstinately pursu'd the Turks in their flight, tho no great way, being too much fa∣tigu'd before. There was also great Booty found in the Turkish Camp, which was wholly plunder'd, even to the Tent of the Grand Vi∣zier, where they met with great Riches in Gold, Silver, and other precious things. All their Ammunition and Baggage, with their Artillery, consisting of above a hundred Pie∣ces of Cannon, were taken. This mighty Victory was obtain'd with not above the Loss of a thousand Men on the Chris∣tians side, and of those very few Persons of Quality. This Overthrow was chiefly ascrib'd to the great Conduct and Courage of the King of Poland, who exposed his Person among the
thickest of the Enemy, having always by him the Prince his Son, who thus early signaliz'd himself. Nor ought the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, the Duke of Lorain and Prince Waldec, to go without their share in the Glory, since they all behav'd themselves so wonder∣fully well in this memorable Action. His Entry through the Breach of Vienna. The King made his Entry into Vienna, through the Breach, with great Acclamations of the People, the great Turkish Standard be∣ing carry'd before him, which he afterwards sent to the Pope, and which I have seen hung up in the Church at Loretto in Italy. Next day after his Entry, the Emperour came to meet him, and made him his Acknowledgments with the most endearing Expressions imaginable, while K. John receiv'd his Compliments with a Modesty equal to his Courage. After his Im∣perial Majesty had order'd a rich Sword, set with Diamonds, to be presented to Prince James, he departed, and the King of Poland decamp'd with his Army, and march'd to∣wardsHe pursues the Turks. Wisena in Hungary, and thence by a Bridg of Boats over the Danube, about a Mile below Presburg, on the twenty fifth of Septem∣ber; and on the twenty seventh the Imperial Army follow'd him over the same Place. On the ninth of October, understanding that a Body of about fourteen thousand Turks lay encamp'd near Barkan, being the choicest of the remaining Troops, under the Command of several Bassas, the King of Poland, and some of the Imperial Troops, advanc'd thither. The Turks no sooner saw them, but they march'd briskly up, and charg'd them very desperately; but being as warmly receiv'd,
after a sharp Encounter the Infidels were put to flight; one of their Bassas slain, another taken, and the rest of them hurrying over the Bridg at Gran, the same broke, and all that were upon it drown'd; so that of all that great Body of Men, there were scarce four thousand escap'd. Takes Zytchin in Hungary. The next considerable Exploit was the tak∣ing of Zytchin, a Place of great Importance in Hungary; for the King having parted with the Duke of Lorain, and understanding that the Turks had a considerable Garison at that Place which might incommode the Communi∣cation betwixt his Troops and the Imperia∣lists, he sent his Son with the Palatin of Lub∣lin to invest it; but the Garison soon retir'd into the Castle, which the King immediately commanded to be storm'd: Whereupon the Turks hung out a white Flag, and the Com∣mander in Chief, with two others, came out and begg'd his Majesty to permit them to march to Buda; which was granted, and they left behind them a great Quantity of Provisi∣ons and Ammunition. This Town he put in∣to the hands of the Imperialists. Next the King sent to summon two Castles, Brigh and Holoch, which soon yielded at Discretion. Then he return'd to his own Kingdom, but left the Lithuanian Troops in Winter-quarters behind him. He arriv'd at Cracow the 21st of December, where he was joyfully receiv'd with Testimonies of an universal Affection from his People; and to render his Triumphs yet more compleat, he was saluted at his Arrival with the News of the General of the Cosacks, the Sieur Kiniski's having obtain'd a great
Victory over the Turks and Tartars in the Ʋkraine. He afterwards made a League Offensive andEnters into a League against the Turks. Defensive with the present Emperor, the Pope, and Venetians against the Turks, which has continu'd ever since, tho very little to the advantage of either Party. The Poles, since the Siege of Vienna, have been highly disgust∣ed at the ill Treatment they receiv'd from the Germans, whom they had deliver'd from the Turkish Invasion; and besides, it is thought that the King for several Years lean'd to∣wards the French Interest. 'Tis certain, that at last he lov'd Money soIs immode∣rately Co∣vetous. well, that I heard the Poles themselves say, That he was the most covetous and richest Prince that ever sway'd their Scepter. Eve∣ry Year, for the 22 Years he reign'd, they computed that he laid up a hundred thou∣sand Pound sterling; all which should have been disburs'd in the Expences of the War, as all his Predecessors were wont to do. Some of the Gentry told me moreover, that if his Son James hapned to succeed him, he would be oblig'd to disburse the best part of that Treasure to pay the eight Years Arrears due then to the Army. As for what relates to King Sobieski's Per∣son,His Person and Dress. He was a tall and corpulent Prince, large fac'd and full ey'd, went always in the same Dress with his Subjects; which because it is different from any other in Europe, I thought an Account of it would not be unacceptable to your Lordship. They have all their Hair cut round about their Ears like Monks, and wearThe Habits of his Sub∣jects. furr'd Caps, large Whiskers, and no Neck∣cloths;
a long Coat hangs down to their Heels, and a Wastcoat under that of the same length tied close about the Waste with a Girdle: Their Sleeves are extream close, like those of Mariners, coming down to their Wrists, with a Flap on the back of the Hand, which reaches as far as the middle Nuc∣kle, which they turn up in hot Weather, and let down in cold, for they never wear any Gloves. This long Coat is of strong Cloth, and is lin'd in the Winter with rich Fur, but in Summer only with light Silk; tho I have seen at Court some of the Persons of Quality wear Furs as they us'd to do in Winter, for it is a fine Ornament: under this Wastcoat they wear wide Shirts like Womens Smocks, tied loose about their Necks, with wide Sleeves coming down to their Wrists. As to their Breeches they are likewise very wide, and with their Stockings make one continued piece. Instead of Shoes they always wear both abroad and at home Turky Leather Boots with very thin Soles, and hollow deep Heels made of a blade of Iron bent hoopwise into the form of a Half-moon. They carry a large Scimiter, the Sheath equally flat and broad from the handle to the bottom; it's generally set richly with Diamonds, accord∣ing to the Quality of the Person. It's custo∣mary all over the Kingdom, not only among the Gentry, but also amongst the Vulgar, to carry Pole-Axes in their Hands, or on their Arms; they take care that this Pole-Ax be kept bright and shining, with Plates of Silver round the handle, and sometimes set with Jewels. I have seen the Palatins and other
Senators come with those Pole-Axes into the King's Presence, which seem'd when I came first to Court a frightful Sight, tho reckon'd an Ornament; but I was inform'd that at first it was for Defence, the Nation being tumultuous and quarrelsom, that they might make use of these Pole-Axes in a Throng where their Scimiters could be of no use. This Dress looks extreme manly, particularly on Horseback, and is the most expensive of any that I have seen in Europe; for their Furs are very fine and dear, their very Fur Caps cost sometimes 20 or 30 Guineas: they change the Fashion of making their Clothes as often as our Western Countries do. His Cha∣racter. The King was a well spoken Prince, of ve∣ry easy Access, and extream civil, and had most of the good Qualities requisite in a Gen∣tleman; he was not only well vers'd in all Military Affairs, but likewise in all Polite and Scholastick Learning; besides his own Tongue the Sclavonian, he understood the Latin, French, Italian, German and Turkish Languages; he delighted much in Natural History, and in all the parts of Physick; he us'd to reprimand the Clergy for not admit∣ting into the University and Schools the Mo∣dern Philosophy; he lov'd to hear Persons dis∣course of those Matters, and had a particular Talent to set People about him very artfully by the Ears, that by their Disputes he might be diverted, as hapned often in my time, es∣peciallyHe engages the Author in a Physi∣cal Dis∣pute. once when I was undesignedly con∣cerned my self; the King being at Dinner, and having the Bishops of Posnania, Plosko, Vilna, and other Divines about him, particu∣larly
Father Vota, an ingenious Jesuit, the King ask'd me in Latin, What part of the Bo∣dy I thought the Soul was in? I was willing to decline talking of that Subject, and told the King, That being a Physician, my chief Enquiry was about the Body, and that the Divines there present were able to satisfy his Majesty. The King re∣ply'd, That since the Soul has an Influence upon the Body, and since the Passions of the Mind, as Anger and Fear, breed Fevers and other Distem∣pers, it was necessary that the Physicians should examine the Soul in that respect as well as the Body. I answer'd, That Physicians did enquire into the Nature of Passions, and observ'd that there was such an Influence of the Soul upon the Body, and of the Body upon the Soul, that alter'd the thoughts of the one as well as the Operations of the other; but that the Soul being a Substance invi∣sible, and without Extension, it was impossible for Physicians to conceive the Nature of it themselves, or explain it to others, as they do that of the Bo∣dy, which they take into pieces by Anatomy, and resolve into its minutest Elements by Chymistry; that the Physicians only agree in the main, that the supreme Author of things has establish'd such Laws between the Soul and the Body, which make a mutual Correspondence between them; that as for the Seat of the Soul, I might perhaps differ from the Divines then present, and consequently oppose the common Doctrine of the Schools, for they hold, with Aristotle, that the Soul is entire in all the Body, and wholly in every part of the Body, which was impossible to conceive; for if the Soul was entire in every part of the Body, there would be as many Souls in the Body as there are Parts, since it is impossible that the self-same
Substance, tho an indivisible Spirit, can ever be in two places at the same time; besides, the Soul can't be but where it does think▪ and every one finds by Experience, that his Thought is not in his Hands nor Feet, but is conscious to himself that his Thought is in his Head, and that consequently the Soul must be only in the Brain, which is the Seat of Sensation, and the Origin of all the Nerves, which are the Organs of Perception and Motion. Father Vota being alarm'd at this Doctrine, which seem'd altogether new in that part of Europe, said, That if the Soul was only in the Head, the rest of the Body would be dead, since the receiv'd Opinion was, that the Soul was the Life of the whole Body, and that to enliven the whole Body, the Soul must be wholly present in every part of it. This drew on a longer Dispute than I expected; for I answer'd, That the Ra∣tional Soul was not the Life of the Body, but the Blood only and the Animal Spirits, and that this Blood and Spirits circulated equally all over the Body, and gave it its natural Heat and Motion, which is properly its Life: and that this Circula∣tion of the Blood and Spirits could not possibly depend on the Rational Soul, because it was an involuntary Motion formed by the Mechanic Struc∣ture of the Body, and by the natural Impulse of the Heart, which is the Primum Mobile of the whole Machine; and that tho they all held not only in Poland, but in other Countries, that the Ra∣tional Soul perform'd every minute Action in the Body, yet this Opinion was irreconcilable with the free Will of the Mind, which they all admitted▪ for since they allow that whatever the Soul does, not only it is conscious of it, but likewise does it freely without being necessitated thereto; when as
it is evidently obvious to every one, that the vital Motions in our Bodies, I mean the Motion of the Heart, and that of Respiration, with the Peristaltic Motion of the Stomach and Guts, are perform'd naturally with such Mechanism that the Soul can't stop them; no nor as much as hasten or retard them, and that the Soul is not at all conscious of them; for if we think of any Object, or not think at all, as when we are asleep, or in an Apoplex, those vital Motions go on equally the same. The Bishop of Posnania, who was bred up in his Youth a Physician, seem'd to speak in favour of this Opinion, as did likewise some others of the Company; which made the Je∣suit very angry, insomuch that he acquainted them in a kind of Passion, That neither the King nor they ought to hearken to any Discourse con∣trary to the receiv'd Opinion of the Church; that it might have been a pernicious Discourse had it been publick: for (says he) if the Soul be not in all the Body, and if it does not animate the Body and per∣form all its vital Functions, it would be of no use, and consequently we should live like other Animals. I answer'd him, That doubtless the Operations of Life were perform'd by the same Mechanism in us as they were in Brutes, since we have the same Or∣gans with them, as likewise the same Fluids to en∣liven us: That the Prerogatives of the Soul are not less for its not being present to every Action of the Body; for the Soul, tho it is not the cause of spontaneous or vital Motion in us, yet it per∣forms all voluntary Actions, as speaking, walk∣ing, and all other free Motions of the Body; it receiv'd all Impressions from the five Senses; it forms to it self all Ideas of ambient Ob∣jects: it reasons upon them, to know what's most
useful and hurtful to it self, and to the Body. The Soul, in short, is like the Pilot, tho it does not set the Body in motion, as the Wind does a Ship, yet it is capable of governing its Actions, and directing voluntarily its Course.
The Dis∣pute conti∣nues. The King being thus satisfied, that the ra∣tional Soul did not actuate, as they call it, or enliven all the Parts of the Body, desir'd to know what was properly Death. The School Divinity maintains that Death was a Separati∣on of the rational Soul from the Body. I own'd indeed that in Death the Soul was actually separated from the Body, but I could not al∣low that that Separation was the cause of Death, but that the Death of the Body was the Cessation of the Motion of the Heart, of the Blood, and of the Spirits; which Cessa∣tion could not proceed from the Separation of the Soul, since these don't at all depend upon it, as I proved before; but it was occasion'd by some Defects in the Organs and Fluids of the Body, which losing their due Disposition, and their mutual Correspondence with one another, all their Actions cease, which Cessation is properly called Death; so that the Soul finding them incapable of receiving its Influence, and of obeying its Com∣mands, quits the Body after it is dead: by which it appears that the Separation of the Soul is not properly the Cause of Death, but that the Death of the Body is the cause of the Se∣paration. The King himself illustrated this Opinion with a familiar Example of an Or∣gan and an Organist: While the Organs were in their due order and symetry, the Or∣ganist play'd upon them; but when by length of time they were either broke, used too much,or any other way quite put out of Tune, he leaves off playing on them. This Discourse, my Lord, held from three of the Clock till seven, and the Divines were extreamly warm in it; and some of them had the boldness to tell the King, that his Majesty should not suffer such Heretical Opinions (as they called them) to be introduc'd before such a great Assembly, contrary to the receiv'd Doctrine of the Church. This Discourse caus∣ed a great many other Matters to be talk'd on, of which it would be too long to inform your Lordship. By this you may plainly see how fond the Divines are of their old Opinions, relying upon the Doctrine of Aristotle, whom we can't suppose to be so throughly acquaint∣ed with the Structure, Springs, and Motions of the Humane Body, nor indeed with all other Natural Causes, as the Modern Physi∣cians are: yet it is the Policy of the Divines, not only in Poland, but in Spain, Italy, and in most other Countries where their Power is very great, not to let any Opinions creep in among them, that would seem to contradict those of Aristotle; for having built their Systems of Divinity upon the Principles of this Pagan Philosopher, they are justly afraid, that if Experience and Reason should shake the Foundation, the Superstructure would fall to the Ground, as doubtless it would for the most part. His Build∣ings. This King built several fine Houses both in Russia, and other parts of the Kingdom, par∣ticularly three Miles from Warsaw, a neat Country House call'd Villa Nova, very richly furnished. He has had several Natural Chil∣dren,
but took no care of any of them; for it is not customary in Poland to have that Con∣sideration for them as there is in other Coun∣tries: but he left vast Riches to his Lawful Children, and made a Motion in the Diet fiveHis Care of his Chil∣dren. or six Years before he died, to settle the Suc∣cession on one of them. He told the Assembly of the Disorders that usually happened in Elections after the King's Death; that the Turks and the Tartars took then Opportunities to make Inroads into the Country and ravage all before them; that the Nobility of the Kingdom were generally divided, headed by Factions, and biass'd by Self-interest against the publick Good of their Country; and that he himself would be glad to prevent all those dangerous Broils before he died, out of the Love he bore to his Country, and Subjects. But the Diet finding that his private Design was to get one of his Sons elected, answered, That they hoped that his Majesty would live yet a long while; that it was necessary to take a long time to consider of a Matter of that great moment: which the King seeing it was a civil way of refusing to enter upon that Subject, never after intimated any thing to them like it, but took all possible care to en∣rich his Children in case none of them should be elected after his Death. It was exactly computed to me that he laid up every Year for above twenty Years 100000 l. Sterl. whichHis great Riches. he left partly in Bankers Hands at Dantzick, Hamburgh and Amsterdam, and put the rest into the hands of the Jews, who are very nu∣merous in that Kingdom, to trade with it; besides, he bought great Territories in the
Kingdom, tho it is against the Constitution; so that his three Sons, James, Alexander and Constantino, if they manage their Affairs right, may be worth each above 50000 l. Ster∣ling per Annum; for it is the Law in Poland, to divide equally the Estate among the Chil∣dren. The Queen's first coming into Po∣land. The Queen was but ten or twelve Years of Age, when she together with the present Duke of Gordon's Aunt, afterwards married to Count Morstin great Treasurer of Poland, came from France into this Kingdom, with Ladislaus King of Poland's Queen, who made them both her Maids of Honour, and took great care of Madamoiselle d' Arquien, being very ingeniousHer first Marriage. and beautiful: She got her married first to Prince Zamoiski, who soon left her a Widow, with a Jointure of about 2000 l. a Year; she was afterwards married in Casimir's Reign to John Sobieski, then Captain of the Guards, who was not very willing to marry her until the King promis'd that he would give him considerable Places, which he accordingly did by the Instigation of the Queen, for he made him Great Marshal, and Great General of Poland, which gave him Authority and Interest enough to make himself afterwards King, and her Queen; so that this Marriage was the occasion of his Rise in the World, which he was so sensible of, that he refus'd to be divorced from her, as the Diet would have perswaded him to do after his Election. Her Age, and Quali∣fications. The Queen is now about fifty four Years of Age, tho she appears not to be forty; she goes in the French Dress, as all the Polish Ladies do; she speaks almost naturally the ▪Polish
Tongue; which with lier sweet Temper, re∣fin'd Sense, and majestick Air, gain'd her such Affection with the Poles, such Influence over the King, and such Interest always in the Diet, that she manag'd all with a great deal of Prudence, and that to the advantage of her native Country France, whose Interest she generally espous'd upon most occasions du∣ring the King's Life; which was believ'd to be the Cause that he did not carry on the War with vigour these late years against the Turks and Tartars. She maintain'd at her Court her Father Cardinal D' Arquien, and her Brother Count Maligny, who had but a very small E∣state of their own. She has two Sisters, one is the Widow of the late Count Bethune, who was Ambassador from France in Poland, and afterwards dy'd in his Embassy in Sweden; the other is the Widow of a Nobleman in Po∣land. Her Ad∣dress in disposing of Employ∣ments. The Queen had the Art to dispose of all the Imployments in the Kingdom for Money; for the King, who by the Constitution ought not himself to sell any Place, gave to under∣stand privately, that all Persons should apply themselves to her first, that she might secret∣ly negotiate the Price of every Preferment; which she did very industriously, and obliged them furthermore to take an Oath to espouse the Interest of one of her Children after the King's Death. The Poles never scrupled those Oaths, tho they were resolved to keep them no longer than they thought it for their In∣terest, which was manifested at this last Elec∣tion, in which so few appeared for Prince James; for this unlawful way of treating the
Nobility, together with the King's extream Covetousness, and Prince James's Inconstancy towards his Friends, set the Minds of the Gentry against them. Pr. James his Charac∣ter. This Prince is black, has a thin and meagre Look, and is of a low Stature, more like a Frenchman or a Spaniard than a Pole; he is ve∣ry sociable and courteous. He is now about the Age of thirty, and has made several Cam∣pagns with the King his Father, particularly that of Vienna; and had his Conduct been answerable to his Courage, he would doubt∣less have made a more considerable Party: He is extreamly Liberal, which is the only good Quality he excels his Father in: He was first contracted in Marriage to the rich Heiress of the House of Radzevil in Lithuania, who was Widow of the present Elector of Branden∣burg's Brother, who dy'd without Issue. An Envoy was sent to Berlin to negotiate the Mar∣riage, which was agreed upon by the Elector's and her Consent, and the Prince himself came thither in Person with a numerous Attendance to consummate it. At the same time came to Berlin the Elector Palatin's Brother, Prince Charles of Newburg, Brother to the Empress, to see the Ceremony of the Marriage; but this Princess taking more fancy to him than to the Prince of Poland, gave him encourage∣mentHis intend∣ed Marri∣age disap∣pointed; to make his Addresses to her; which he did with that success, that he engag'd her so far, and so unexpectedly, that he was private∣ly marry'd to her the night before she was to be marry'd to the Prince of Poland, so that Prince James was forc'd to return back shame∣fully: which the King his Father resented so
highly, that he was resolv'd to have satisfacti∣on from the Elector of Brandenburg for suffer∣ing his Son to receive so notorious an Affront at his Court; but the Elector knowing no∣thing of that private Intrigue, justify'd him∣self, and all Animosities were at last adjusted by Prince James's marrying his Rival's Sister,But marri∣ed to ano∣ther. the Princess of Newburg, who was sent into Poland, and has two Daughters by him. This Account I learn'd in Poland, which was lately confirm'd to me here in Town by the Sieur Dankelman, now Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Brandenburg at our Court. A Charac∣ter of his two Bro∣thers. Prince James has two Brothers, Alexander and Constantine, who were not taken notice enough of in my time, to give your Lordship a Character of them, the eldest being but eighteen, and the other sixteen. Alexander was a tall and proper young Man, of a true Polish Complexion. The Queen had more kindness for him than for Prince James, as I observ'd when he was any ways indispos'd; she was very careful of his Health, and did not seem much concern'd for Prince James, tho he was a weak and sickly Person. Little Re∣spect paid to the King's Children. I was surpriz'd to see the little deference the Nobility paid to these Princes, who did not seem to take much more notice of them than of other Gentlemen, and treated them very familiarly: for they say that the King's Sons, by the Law, are no more than Gentlemen; and that if they give them the Title of Prince or of Highness, it is more out of Courtesy to them, and Respect to the King, than out of any Obliga∣tion they lay under to do it. The People had more Esteem for Prince Alexander and Con∣stantine,
because they were born after the King's Election, than for Prince James, who was born before; for they superstitiously ima∣gin'd that some Royal Stamp was engraven upon them, or some Royal Tincture infus'd into their Blood, to give it a more exalted Nature. Prince James was Knight of the Golden Fleece, which made him obnoxious to the French Party. Prince Alexander and Con∣stantine are, since my time, made (as I am told) Knights of the Holy Ghost, as the King himself was, which makes them suspected to the House of Austria to be of the French Faction. The Cha∣racter of the Prin∣cess. The King had one Daughter, the Princess Teresa Cunigunda, now about twenty three years of Age, who, tho she be not a compleat Beauty, yet is a very comely Lady, of a mid∣dle size; and tho she has not the Life and Vi∣vacity, nor the Air and Wit of the Queen her Mother, yet has she a great deal of Sense, Modesty, and all the Accomplishments becom∣ing her Birth: She is well vers'd in the French, Italian, Latin, and the Polish Languages; tho she seems in her Carriage and Discourse to be humble, obliging, and of an easy affable Tem∣per, yet she is of her self high-spirited andHer Mar∣riage. imperious. She was marry'd in my time to his Highness the present Elector of Bavaria, who twice sent thither Baron Zell, and after∣ward Baron Simeoni, his Envoys Extraordinary, to negotiate and conclude this Marriage: for the Duke of Bavaria having had but one Son by his deceased Electoress, the Emperour's Daughter by the Infanta of Spain, younger Sis∣ter to the late Queen of France; and this young Prince being design'd to be King of
Spain, if the present King should die without Issue, as is likely to be, the Bavarians were afraid their Country should be reduc'd into a Province, and therefore desired the Elector to marry a second time, to have more Chil∣dren that might reign over them, in case the eldest Son should be call'd into Spain. The King and Queen of Poland agreed to this Match, and gave 500000 Rix Dollars forHer Porti∣on. her Portion, besides Jewels and other Ex∣pences in her Journey, and the third part of her Mother's personal Estate when she dies, which is reckoned at 50000 Rix Dollars more. The Ceremony of the Marraige was perform'dCeremony of her Mar∣riage. in the Month of August at Warsaw in the Year 1694, with a great deal of Splendor and Mag∣nificence. Most of the Persons of Quality and their Ladies and Children came to this Solem∣nity from all Parts of the Kingdom; for there had not been a Princess of Poland marry'd for above 150 years before. The Ladies were ve∣ry richly drest, and I saw at that time more Jewels in that Court, than in any other that ever I was at. The Gentlemen and Ladies, after the usual Custom in Poland, gave great Presents to the young Princess, some fine Pieces of Plate, some Watches set with Diamonds, some preci∣ous Jewels, every one making a Complement to her in a very formal manner. It was thought that the presents amounted to the value of 100000 Rix Dollars. The Hospodar of Mol∣davia sent her a pair of Pendants of a consi∣derable Value. This Custom of making Pre∣sents to the Bride is not only for Kings Daughters, but for every one else according to their Quality; and the Gentlemens Daugh∣ters
do not so much reckon upon the Portion their Fathers give them, as upon their Number of Relations and Friends, who are to make them Presents; and the Husband is as diligent to know how many Relations she has, as how much her Father will give her. Pr. James officiates as Embassa∣dor. Upon the day of Marriage Prince James, the young Bride's Brother, took upon him, by the King and the Elector of Bavaria's Consent, the Quality of Embassador for that day, by reason that the Court would not receive (as was secretly whilsper'd) Embassadors from the Duke of Bavaria, as being not an absolute Prince: He went three Miles out of Town in the Morning, and about two of the Clock in the Afternoon made a most solemn Entry on Horse-back, having his Brothers Prince Alexander on his Right-hand, and Prince Con∣stantine on his Left, preceded by a great Number of Coaches with six Horses, and a noble Cavalcade of the Polish Gentry, who went two by two. The Cere∣mony conti∣nues. Thus he march'd through the City to the Palace, where he was receiv'd by the King and Queen; and after half an hour the great Officers of the Crown, the Palatins and o∣ther Senators, with an incredible Number of Gentry, began to march from the Palace on Foot two by two, upon Scarlet Cloth spread all along to St. John's Church, being about three hundred Paces; after them Prince James led the Bride, the French Embassador Monsieur de Polignae led the Queen, and the King came last alone with a grave majestick Countenance. The Ceremony of the Marriage was perform'd by Cardinal Radziouski the present Primate,
who was the King's Relation. Afterwards they returned to the Palace where they were nobly entertain'd for four days together, with Feasts, Balls, Fire-works, and an Italian Pastoral in nature of an Opera, made upon this occasion by the Secretary of the Pope's Nuncio. Equipage for her Journey. After the Ceremony was over, a splendid Equipage was prepar'd for the Princess's Journey from Warsaw to Brussels. The Bishop of Ploskow was named Embassador, and the Palatine of Vilna's Lady, Prince Czartoriski's Daughter, was appointed Embassadress: Mon∣sieur Zalowski the Bishop's Brother and his La∣dy were likewise nam'd, besides abundance of Gentlemen, and about forty of the King's Life-guard, to attend her Electoral Highness. The Embassador represented to their Ma∣jesties, that in such a long Journey of near 1000 Miles, and in frosty Weather, it was ne∣cessary to send a Physician with the Princess for fear of any Accident or Distemper by the way: one Signior Revelli an Italian, and several other Physicians made Interest for this place; but the Queen would by no means employ any of them, having no Opi∣nion of their Skill. Hereupon, my Lord, I spoke to Mr. Alberti your Brother, Mi∣nister there from the Republick of Venice, who had great Interest with the King and Queen, and desir'd him to get me imploy'd in that Journey, for I longed to be out of that remote Country (tho I had not been a twelve Month in it) to come for England: for tho the King and Queen had a great deal of Kind∣ness for me, and Prince James (whom the Court Party look'd upon to be the King's
Successor) promis'd me a considerable Pen∣sion after the King's Death, yet seeing that the King, then being sixty four Years of Age, very corpulent, and labouring under seve∣ral Distempers, as the Dropsy, Gout, Rheu∣matism, and Oppression of the Lungs, could not live long, and that Prince James was not beloved; and besides having never had any mind to engage my self to live in any Fo∣reign Country, I resolv'd to come out of that Kingdom. Their Majesties, not knowing my private Resolution of coming for England, did me the Honour to name me Physician to wait upon the Princess in her Journey, which I was very ready to comply with, tho to out∣ward appearance I did not seem much desi∣rous of it; this, my Lord, gave me oppor∣tunity to come out of that Country sooner than I could have decently done till the King was dead; which I must owe intirely to the Friendship and Interest of Mr. Alberti, who is a great Lover of the English Nation. Begins her Journey. The Princess set forward on the 11th of November following with a Retinue of about two hundred Persons, all which came to Brussels with her, besides abundance of the Nobility who waited upon her Highness to the Frontiers of Brandenburg. The Palatins of the Provinces receiv'd and entertain'd her in all the Towns she pass'd through with a great deal of Splendor and Expence: our first Re∣ception was at Lowitz, the Cardinal Primate's Castle; here the Princess lay one Night, and was most magnificently entertain'd. The next was at Posnan, a considerable City in the Province of Posnania, where she lay two
Nights: the Palatin and the City made her a Present, entertain'd all her Retinue, and got Fire-works ready for her Reception. From thence we went to Frankfurt upon the Oder in the E. of Brandenburgh's Country, where his Electoral Highness sent his chief Officers to attend and compliment her: from thence we went to Berlin, where the Elector and Electoress came two Miles out of TownHer Re∣ception as Berlin. with a numerous Attendance to receive her; they took her into their own Coach, and march'd in order to the Palace, giving her with roaring of Cannons, and ringing of Bells, all Demonstrations of Respect: Here she lay two Nights; the Court appear'd most splendid and very numerous, and the Elector got some Fire-works which represented the King and Queen of Poland, and the Elector and Electoress of Bavaria's Names; there were Balls both Nights, and English Country-Dances, which the Electoress of Brandenburg, being descended from the Blood-Royal of England, delighted extreamly in; it was the first time the Princess of Poland had seen any, and therefore was extreamly pleas'd. I was glad to see some of our English Gentlemen, who travell'd in Italy in my time, as Mr. Ar∣cher, Mr. Ward, Mr. Duncomb, and the late deceased Mr. Tent, made so much of at this Court, and behave themselves so handsomly at the Balls. The Princess of Poland made Presents to the Electoress of Brandenburg, and to most of the chief Officers of the Court; and the Electoress of Brandenburg likewise made her a rich Present of a Poesie set with Diamonds, and to the rest of her chief Officers
other Presents. Afterwards we set forwards on our Journey, and were entertain'd for twelve days together in the Elector's Country; it's usual with him to defray the Charges of all Princes while they are within the limits of the Marquisate of Brandenburg: But when the Princess of Poland went out of it into the other Territories of his Electoral Highness, she bore her own Expences; the chief Towns notwithstanding, as Magdeburgh and Menden, entertain'd her, as did likewise the Elector of Hanover, the Bishop of Heidelsheim, and the Bishop of Munster, for we past through some Skirts of their Territories. I must take notice to your Lordship, that passing through a part of the Elector of Hanover's Country, we receiv'd News that Count Koningsmark, a Swede, thought to have been familiar with the Princess of Hanover, the Elector's Daughter-in-law, was made a∣way with at that Court, and never heard of since. At last we arriv'd about the latter end of December at Wesel, a fortified Town be∣longing to the E. of Brandenburg, upon the Borders of the Rhine, near six days Journey from Brussels; the Elector of Bavaria with his Court came hither to receive his Princess, but the River being full of great Flakes of Ice, he could not pass it in two days: but at last being impatient to see his Bride, he ven∣tur'd over in a little Boat with Prince Chimay,Is met by the Elector. Baron Simeoni, and two or three more of his Courtiers; I hapned to be in the Room when he came in alone by way of the back Stairs, and saluted his Princess with all the tender Ex∣pressions of Joy and Affection; and after
having spent about half an hour with her in Compliments, he turn'd to the Embassador and to the rest of the Company, and thank'd us all for the Trouble and Fatigue of so long a Journey; then he and the Princess with the Embassador and Embassadress withdrew into another Room, where they past about an hour and an half. In the mean time a great many o∣ther of the Elector's Retinue came in, so that the Court was very numerous at Nine of the Clock at Night; and thus the Elector past till Ten of the Clock, then went to sup abroad, and immediately after Supper came to wait on the Princess again, and about One of the Clock in the Morning he left her and went to Bed to his Inn. He came to her the next Morning to make his Court, and to desire her Consent that the Marriage might be con∣summated that Night, which being according∣ly done, he sent a Courier after Midnight to the King his Father-in-law, to acquaint him therewith. The next Morning there was a rich Hungarian Sute of Clothes given him to wear that day from the King of Poland, valued at 30000 Rix Dollars; it was a long Coat of Crimson Velvet, the Button-holes set with Clasps of Massy Gold, and a Wastcoat of Cloth of Gold set with Diamond Buttons, and a Girdle of fine Turky Leather wrought with Gold, with massy Gold Clasps likewise set with Jewels, a Scimiter with the Handle richly adorn'd with Diamonds and Rubies, and an Emerald Ring of great Value, with a rich Zibelin Muff. In the Afternoon we allProceeds on her Journey. past the River, and next day the Baggage followed: all the Coaches, the King's Guards,
and most of the Retinue return'd back into Poland; for by the Articles of Marriage no body was to stay with her except two Pages, two Women, and a she Dwarf. The Elector's Guards and Coaches were on the other side of the River to receive the Princess: She went through Antwerp to Mecklin, and from thence to Brussels, where we arriv'd, after two Months Journey, on the 12th of January. I need not acquaint your Lordship with all the Preparations made here by his Highness for the Reception of his Electoress, nor of the Presents he gave to her Retinue, nor the Ope∣ra's and Comedies purposely made for the So∣lemnity of her Marriage; I will only say, that I never saw a genteeler Court, bet∣ter Order, more Formalities, more variety of Dresses, nor the Punctilio's of Honour and Courtesy more strictly observ'd. There were great Rejoicings all the first Week, until the Court receiv'd the unwelcome News of the Death of our late Queen Mary. Sometime afterwards, having left the Care of the Princess's Health to Monsieur Pistorini the Elector's Physician, I took my Leave of her Highness, and went for Holland, from whence I arriv'd at London in the Month of February, in the Year 1694/5. The King's Sister. The King of Poland had no near Relations except one Sister, who was married to that Duke Radzivil, who writ in Latin his Travels into the Holy Land, and describes the Pyra∣mids of Egypt; he has been dead several Years, and his Dutchess died at Warsaw in my time. What small Reputation I got in that Country in the Practice of Physick was by her
Death; for when I arriv'd at Warsaw, theA Consul∣tation of Physicians. King made me consult with all the Physicians of the Town, which were about ten, con∣cerning her Disease. His Majesty's first Phy∣sician was Dr. Jonas an Italian and professed Jew; for your Lordship must understand, that in Poland, particularly at Court, Religion is no Objection against any Person, especially a Physician, since the King at his Coronation promises to protect four Religions, the Ro∣man, which he must seem to be of himself, the Protestant, the Greek, and that of the Jews. I examined the Princess's Disease, and found it was an Ague fomented by an Abscess in the Liver, which made her vomit up all that she took; I thought her Case very desperate, tho her ordinary Physicians made no account of it, thinking it was only an Ague which the constant use of Jesuits Pou∣der would infallibly cure. I discover'd they were not acquainted with the inward Cause of her Disease, being not vers'd in Anatomy; wherefore I desir'd that most of the Learned Gentlemen at Court would be present to hear their Reasons and mine. Dr. Jonas, who spoke first, gave his Opinion that there was no fear; and that she should persist only in the use of the Bark, with which they had cram'd her for three Months before; all the rest follow'd his Opinion. I spoke last, and summ'd up all their Arguments, to com∣pare them with her Distemper, and declar'd against their Method, and intimated that I believ'd she could not live long let them change their Method ever so much for the better. This alarm'd the whole Court in a
quarter of an hour. The Physicians assur'd the contrary, and urged that I was a Stranger to the Climate, and to the Princess's Con∣stitution and Disease; and they promised in a little time, tho some of them began to be dissident, to set her upon her Legs again: notwithstanding she grew worse and worse every day, and died in a Month's time in the 62d Year of her Age. The Queen order'd her to be open'd, and three Bishops were present, but none of the Physicians would come but my self; we found not only an Abscess in her Liver, but likewise a great many square Stones like Dice in her Gall, Bladder, and other Stones in one of her Kid∣nies, besides a great deal of Gravel in her Liver, which grated and crumbled its whole Substance into putrid Matter. Her Issue. This Princess left only a Son and a Daugh∣ter: Duke Radzivil her Son married a Rela∣tion of Prince Sapieha; and her Daughter was married to Prince Lubomirski. Duke Radzivil told me that he travell'd here in England when King James II. was Crown'd, and that the King his Uncle sent him the Cha∣racter of Envoy to compliment him upon his Accession to the Throne: He us'd to admire the Government of England, and to say that it was the best in Europe, except that of his own Country; and the chief Reason he gave me why he preferr'd the Constitution of Po∣land, was, that the King of England had a Power of turning People out of Employ∣ments, and the common People had the Bene∣fit of the Law, and could buy Estates as well as the greatest Noble-man. This Prince
shew'd me an old Roman Scimiter which his Father brought from Jerusalem, and told me it was that with which St. Peter cut off Mal∣cus's Ear: which a great many had either Faith or Superstition enough to believe, and paid it a great deal of Respect. The year after I came into England, the King of Poland's Symptoms encreasing more and more, the Embassador Monsieur Zalowski, Bishop of Ploskow, sent me from Warsaw to London the following Letter, desiring Advice concerning his Majesty's Distemper, which was very uncommon and extraordinary. A Monsieur le Docteur Connor à Londres. Varsovie 2 Juin 1696. Monsieur, EN Attendant que Je vous Envoye les Memoires que vous Souhaitez pour l' Histoire de Pologne & de nôtre Roy, qui requierent quêque loisir, que Je n'ay pas encore pû prendre, comme Je tache∣ray de faire le plutôt qu'il me serà possible, Vous obligeriez beaucoup sa Majesté si sur l' Informa∣tion, que vous verrez au bas de cette Lettre tou∣chant l' Etat de sa Santé, Vous vouliez bien pren∣dre la peine d'en donner vos Avis, & Conseils, & d'en prendre aussi des plus habiles Gens de la Pro∣fession, dont votre Royaume est si fertile; Vous asseurant que vous en aurez du Merite auprez de leurs Majestez, & que vous travaillerez à votre propre Gloire, que Je Soûhaiteray de voir par là augmentée, étant Monsieur, Votre tres-humble Serviteur, E. de Ploskow.
Information de l'Etat de la Santé du Roy de Pologne. SA Majesté à les pies, les jambes, & les cuis∣ses, même la Region Inferieure du bas ventre tumifiées considerablement depuis quêque tems, que ces Tumeurs sont augmenteezde jour en jour depuis cette Eté quelles avoient commencé à pa∣roitre, quoique l'on appliquât les plus efficaces re∣medes interieurs & exterieurs pour en empecber le Progrez, & pour les dissiper. Lors qu'on presse du doit ces Tumeurs, il ne reste aucun vestige du doit; Carces Tumeurs ont la dureté du Fer & la pesanteur du Plomb: Quand sa Majesté marche elle croit avoir un poid pesant attaché à ses jambes, la dureté de ces Tumeurs ne peut étre amollie, cependant lors qu'on frotte avec un linge chaûd les parties embarrassées & affligées, elles semblent d'abord être Degagées & Soûlagées. Mais peu apres elles retournent à leur premier Etat: La Couleur de ces Parties tumiflées n'est point Pale, mais Pourprée tirant vers le rouge. English'd thus. Warsaw the 2d of June 1696. SIR, I Will send you as soon as possible the Memoirs you desire for the History of Poland and of our King, which require more leisure than I could have hitherto had. In the mean time you would mighti∣ly
oblige his Majesty, if upon the Information you will find at the bottom of this Letter concerning the State of his Health, you would please to give your Opinion and Advice thereupon, and likewise con∣sult with the Ablest of your Profession, who are so very numerous in your Kingdom, about it. I as∣sure you, you will greatly gain their Majesties E∣steem thereby, and advance your own Reputation, which I wish encreas'd by these means. Being, SIR, Your most humble Servant, E. Ploskow. An Account of the State of Health of the King of Poland. HIS Majesty's Feet, Legs, and Thighs, as likewise the lower Part of his Belly, have been considerably swell'd for a good while. These Swellings have daily encreas'd since they began this Summer, notwithstanding the most effectual Remedies, both Inward and Outward, which have been made use of to prevent their Progress, and to discuss them. When these Tumors are press'd with one's Finger, they do not pit, for they are al∣most as hard as Iron, and as heavy as Lead. When his Majesty walks, he imagins he has a great Weight ty'd to his Legs. The hardness of these Tumours cannot be softned: Nevertheless, when the swoln Parts are rubb'd a little with a hot Cloth, they seem immediately to be abated and
eas'd; but soon after they return to their former condition. The Colour of the Swellings is not pale, but reddish, something enclining to Purple. The King's Death. A Week after I receiv'd this Letter, news came that this Prince was dead, as I could not but reasonably expect he would be, labouring under so rare and dangerous a Disease, being a Dropsy turn'd into a Schirrus, or into a hard and insensible Tumor. Cases of this nature, my Lord, are very seldom seen. I have spoke lately with some old Practitioners in Physick that had never met with any; for my part, I have never observ'd any Disease like it; and I was at first surpriz'd that the King's Legs, that us'd to pit an Inch deep when I was at his Court, should become so very hard and so heavy afterwards; but considering that in our Mass of Blood there is, even naturally, a great deal of earthy Parts or Dregs, and that these Lees may, by way of Sediment, fall into the Legs, and that their Weight and Quanti∣ty can hinder them from ascending to the Heart with the circulating Fluids, I rather admir'd why Cases of this nature do not more frequently happen, particularly in old and Plethoric People, as the King was. These hard Swellings of his Legs hinder'd the Blood to circulate downwards, and so drove up all the Humours to the Head; which oppressing and overflowing the Brain, caus'd an Apoplexy, of which he died the 17th of June, fifteen days after the date of my Letter, in the Year 1696, in the sixty sixth Year of his Age, and the 22d of his Reign. He was the oldest King
then in Christendom. He kept his Subjects in great Awe, and the greatest Noblemen paid him all the Respect imaginable; they never us'd at Court to eat with him at his Table. He din'd always in Publick, and the Great Men waited upon him, serv'd him with drink, and none of his Subjects ever cover'd themselves in his Presence. And I admir'd to see the Persons that abus'd him in the Parliament-house, and spoke to him with all freedom when he sat on the Throne, pay him so great a Submission and Respect every-where else. But the Liber∣ty of a Member of that Parliament is such, that he can speak what he thinks, and think what he pleases, without any Fear of the King. The Inter∣regnum. After the King's Death, Cardinal Radzi∣ouski, Archbishop of Gnesna, and Primate of the Kingdom, took the Administration of the Government, as is usual, upon him, and noti∣fy'd the King's Death to foreign Princes, and to all the Governours of the Provinces, and advis'd with the Senators that were then at Warsaw of the proper Method and fit Time to ohoose a new King. They fix'd upon the 29th of August 1696, for the Convocation of the Grand Diet; but there appearing several Competitors, which made powerful Factions, it was thought necessary to take more time to ap∣pease the Dissensions of the Nobility. Where∣fore the Overture of the Diet was deferr'd to the 15th of May 1697. They chose the Sieur Belinski for their Speaker, whom they call their Marshal. The chief Competitors were at firstCompeti∣tors for the Crown. Prince James of Poland, and his Brother Prince Alexander; the Prince of Conti; Don Livio Odeschalchi, and Prince Lewis of Baden: but at
last the Elector of Saxony unexpectedly came to the Frontiers of Poland with 8000 Men, and declar'd himself Candidate, having a twelve-month before privately abjur'd his Religion to qualify himself for this Crown, which procur'd him the Interest of the Pope and Clergy. So that at length no considera∣ble Party appear'd but for him, the Prince of Conti, and Prince James. The Cardinal Pri∣mate, with a great Number of the Palatins, supported with all their Interest the Prince of Conti, the French having for several years be∣fore, as I observ'd when I was in that King∣dom, given a great Character of his Merit and Valour, which made the King of France believe that he would undoubtedly carry that Crown against all Opposers; as it is proba∣ble he would have done, had he been in Per∣son as near the Place of Election as the Elec∣tor of Saxony was: For on the 26th of June, being the day of Election, the Diet drew out into the Field, and he had that day more Votes than either the Elector of Saxony or Prince James; which the Primate observing, went with his Party, and immediately pro∣claim'd him King: but the two other Parties knowing this could not be legally done with∣out the universal Consent of the Diet, pro∣tested against it as Illegal; and Prince James perceiving his Party to be the weakest, and having always been in the Interest of the House of Austria, as being marry'd to the Empress and Queen of Spain's Sister, resign'd all his Interest to the Elector of Saxony, who was likewise supported by the Emperour. These two Parties being thus united into one,
were more numerous than that of the Prince of Conti: Wherefore coming next day into the field, they got the Bishop of Cujavia, after the Primate had refus'd it, to pro∣claim Frederic Augustus. 1697. FREDERIC AUGUSTUS, Elector of Saxo∣ny, King of Poland, and sent Embassadors to acquaint him therewith, and to desire him to accept of the Crown. All this while the Pri∣mate and Prince of Conti's Party stood firm to the first Election, and dispatch'd Couriers in∣to France to desire that Prince to come with all speed into Poland. The Generals of the Army were divided. Count Jablonowski, Great General of the Kingdom, declar'd for the Elector of Saxony; Prince Sapieha, Great Ge∣neral of Lithuania, seem'd to favour the Prince of Conti: but the Governour of Cracow being for the Elector of Saxony, invited him and his Army to take possession of that capital City, where he was crown'd the 15th of SeptemberCrown'd K. of Po∣land. following, which did extreamly facilitate the good Success he has since had in that King∣dom. For tho the Primate and many other con∣siderable Persons did insist on the pretended Legality of their Election; tho the Prince of Conti himself came in Person to Dantzic with a Fleet, vast Sums of Money, and some dis∣ciplin'd Troops; tho the French Embassador Monsieur de Polignac had manag'd a good part of the Army, and a great many of the Sena∣tors, with great Art and Policy; tho the Turks and Tartars threatned an Invasion to support his Election; and tho the Hungarians made an Insurrection in their Country, to divert the
Saxon Forces: yet the Poles seeing the Elector of Saxony was actually Crown'd; that he was in possession of the Metropolis Cracow, the strongest Town in Poland; that 8000 of his disciplin'd Troops were in the Kingdom; that the major part of the Army had declar'd for him, and that the Czar of Muscovy threatned an Invasion if they persisted to support the Prince of Conti; they thought it more advisa∣ble to quit his Interest than to give occasion for a Civil War: for I have often heard▪ them say, That Kings were easy enough to be had with∣out shedding Blood for any; and that they were easily depos'd if they usurp'd any greater Authority than the Laws allow'd. And therefore they think it more prudent, after having sufficiently emp∣ty'd the Candidates Pockets, to declare for the first of them that joins his Party, and appears in Arms, since he is deem'd qualify'd, than to expose their Country to ruin and devastation, by adhering to an illegal Election, of which the success is always doubtful: for by their Constitution no Election can be really lawful, nor any Law can be legally made without the universal Consent of the Lords and Com∣mons of both States, Poland and Lithuania, assembl'd in Parliament. The Prince of Conti having full Intelligence of the Posture of Affairs in Poland, did not think it politick to conside any longer in the Promises of the Great Men, who in that Coun∣try are naturally sickle, and biass'd more to their own Interest than any Inclination they have to serve any Prince; for they have no o∣ther Notion of Princes than of Tools to raise their own Fortune by. Wherefore this Prince
foreseeing no probability of success, the Town of Dantzic having declar'd for the Elector of Saxony, he thought it more prudent timely to quit his Pretensions by sailing back into France, than to expose his Reputation by be∣ing forc'd to retire when the New King's Au∣thority was more confirm'd, as it is look'd upon to be at present. King Frederick Augustus the IId, being thus left in sole Possession of the Kingdom, is likely to restore the decaying State thereof; for having large hereditary Dominions of his own, out of which he can have both Men and Mo∣ney, and being likewise naturally animated with a martial Spirit, and moreover King over a most Warlike Nation, which is at present in league against the Infidels with the Emperour, Muscovites, Pope and Venetians: He has opportunity sufficient to enlarge that Kingdom, and extend it to its antient Bounds the Euxine Sea, by retaking Caminiec and the Ʋkrain. I may here take notice that this is the first time the Poles have elected a German Prince, and likewise the first that they have excluded their King's Son; for from the Year 550, when this Monarchy began, to this present E∣lection, the King's Children have been always chosen, and the Crown, tho elective, has been in the same Family successively for above eight hundred Years. But hereafter it is likely to prove otherwise, for the Gentry of Poland are so jealous of their own Kings, and so covetous to be enrich'd by foreign Princes, that pro∣bably henceforward they will choose no Na∣tive. Besides, the Pope will undoubtedly al∣ways
use his utmost Authority and Interest in that Kingdom to get Protestant Princes elec∣ted. For when I was formerly at Rome, I heard the Politicians say, that the best method to make the Protestant Princes of the North Roman Catholicks, was to elect them succes∣sively to the Crown of Poland. So that if the Pope sees that the present King of Poland's Children are confirm'd in the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, he will doubtless after his Death make the same Endeavours to ad∣vance to that Throne either the King of Swe∣den, the Elector of Brandenburg, or the Elec∣tor of Hanover, as he has done in favour of the Elector of Saxony; who has been elected to the Crown of Poland, not so much by the Power of his Wealth and Credit in the Kingdom, as by the Influence of the Clergy, privately instigated by the Authority of the Pope. This I gather from a Letter sent me last Summer from Warsaw by my Friend Baron Scarlati, Envoy Extraordinary at that Court from the Elector of Bavaria. Thus, my Lord, I have given you as large an Account of John the IIId's Life, and of what pass'd remarkable at Warsaw in my time, as we need perhaps know of so remote a Coun∣try, or I could my self learn in so short a time as I had the honour to reside at that Prince's Court; where I was so much taken up in the Practice of Physick, that I had neither Op∣portunity nor Time to make all the Political Remarks, which another perhaps that had nothing else to do but to converse with Cour∣tiers and Ladies, might have leisurely done.
I cannot therefore pretend to give (as is usual) a Character of the King's Favourites, nor of other Great Men about him, nor to acquaint your Lordship with the different Ca∣bals and private Intrigues of that numerous Court. That were a Subject fitter for a States∣man than for me to write of, my Genius and Profession prompting me only to make Ob∣servations in Physick, and not in State-Affairs. I hope therefore your Lordship will excuse the deficiency of this Letter, when you consi∣der it was writ by a Physician, and one who values himself only upon it in being with all Respect, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, B. C.
LETTER V. To the Right Honourable CHARLES Lord Townsend. Of the Extent and Products of Poland; to∣gether with a Description of the chief Towns and Provinces of the Kingdom. My LORD; I Know your natural Sagacity, improv'd so much by your Travels, and constant Ap∣plication to Sciences and Politicks, is no less inquisitive after the Extent and Products of Countries, than after their Maxims of State and Forms of Government: And this I dis∣cover'd in your Lordship, as well when I met you some years ago in Holland, as since your return to England; and because you then dis∣cours'd me often about my Travels into Po∣land, I thought a Geographical Description of that Country might not be unacceptable to you. I must confess I were not long enough in that Kingdom to survey it exactly, there∣fore have taken pains to learn not only from the Natives themselves, but also from their correctest Authors, an Account of such Parts of that Kingdom which I could not visit my self.
I must first take notice to your Lordship, that the King of Poland's Dominions are di∣vided into two different States, which are the Kingdom of Poland, and the Great Dutchy of Lithuania. The Constitutions, Language, Customs and Genius of both which Nations are as different as those of England and Scot∣land, except that one Parliament or Diet serves both, which must nevertheless have one Session in Lithuania to two in Poland, and the Sena∣tors and Deputies of each Nation must meet together, as well in the Great Dutchy, as in the Kingdom; for no Law can be legally made without the mutual Consent of both. Poland therefore being a distinct Nation of it self, I will here, as I have promis'd, present your Lordship with a short Description of it alone. My Lord; The Anti∣ent Extent of Poland. POLAND, when first founded by Lechus in the Year 550, like all other Nations in their minority, was but a small Tract of Land, in respect of what it afterwards grew to be: for at first it contain'd only High and Low Poland with Silesia; but in process of time, either through Marriages or Conquests, it be∣came the largest and most powerful Kingdom in Europe, and rais'd as well the Envy as Jea∣lousy of its Neighbours. Its In∣crease by Conquests: The first Acquisition to this Crown was the Province of Pomerania, conquer'd by Le∣chus, by his having kill'd Regulus its Prince. Boleslaus Chrobry likewise made Bohemia, Rus∣sia, Moravia and Prussia Tributary: But Ca∣simir II. entirely conquer'd all Prussia in the
Year 1183, and Casimir the Great subdu'd all Russia in the Year 1338, when Maslaus the Duke of Masovia also submitted to the Polish Crown. Some time after, Valachia and Moldavia were united to Poland by Conquest; and the Great Dutchy of Lithuania added by Jagello's Marriage with Hedwigis Queen of Poland. The large and fertile Province of Livonia was conquer'd about the Year 1500; and after∣wards the Poles extended their Conquests to∣wards Moscovy, when they took the Great Dutchies of Smolensko, Severia and Czernicovia, and in Ʋladislaus the VIIth's time conquer'd all that Country. They in like manner en∣larg'd their Dominions towards the Black Sea, for they made themselves Masters of all Ʋkraina. By Policy. Over and above these vast Conquests, the Poles likewise grew very considerable by elec∣ting several potent Neighbours for their Kings, whereby they added to their own Strength that of Bohemia, Hungary, Sweden, and Tran∣sylvania, as they have likewise at this juncture that of the Electorate of Saxony. In short, the Poles, in process of time, grew so exorbitantly Powerful, from the XIIIth, to the middle of the XVIIth Century, having in their possession all the Lands between Austria, Moscovy, and the Baltic and Euxine Seas, that they gave their Neighbours the Turks, Tartars, Musco∣vites, Swedes and Germans, just reason to grow jealous of them: Whereupon these several Potentates, at different times, made most bloody Wars upon them, till by degrees they had brought their Territories to a narrower
Compass, and made themselves Masters of the greater part of them. For the Emperour got from them the several Countries of Hungary, Bohemia, Transylvania, Silesia, and Moravia. Valachia and Moldavia now chuse Hospodars or Governours of their own, tho they are never∣theless Tributary to the Turk. The Turks and Tartars are Masters of Podolia, and the best part of Ʋkraina, which they over-run in King Michael Korybuth's time; and the Muscovites conquer'd the other part of it, Kiovia, as like∣wise all the vast Dutchies of Severia, Smolensko and Czernicovia. The King of Sweden also is now in possession of all Livonia, except the Dutchy of Curland, which is left still Tribu∣tary to Poland. Ducal Prussia is entirely in the Elector of Brandenburg's hands, of which he is of late an Independent Soveraign. Pomerania is now possess'd by the Swedes and Germans between them; and Dantzic is in the Nature of a little Republic or Hans-Town, yet under the Protection of Po∣land. Present Extent. Thus your Lordship may observe, that the neighbouring Princes have clip'd so close the Skirts of this vast Empire, that they have re∣duc'd it to one Third of what it has hereto∣fore been. Yet notwithstanding all these Losses, it is still reckon'd to the full as large as the Kingdom of France; but its Frontiers towards Tartary are altogether desolate, most of the Inhabitants having been carry'd away into Captivity, either by the Turks or Tar∣tars.
To give your Lordship a just Account of the present Extent of Poland, I must divide it into its several remaining Provinces, which are but Eight, Viz. Little & Great Poland. Regal Prussia. Russia. Masovia. Samogitia. Volhynia & Podlachia. But first a word or two of the Country in general. Its Bounds. Poland, together with the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, is now bounded on the North by Moscovy, Livonia, and the Baltic Sea; On the South by Moldavia, Transylvania, and Hungary; On the East by Ʋkraina, which belongs to the Turks, and the Dutchies of Smolensko, Severia, Czernicovia, and Kiovia, which are now in possession of the Muscovites; and on the West by Pomerania, Brandenburg, Bohemia, and Silesia. It extends it self from South to North, that is, from the Carpathian Mountains to the Gulph of Riga, about 200 Leagues, from the 45 Degree 36 Minutes, to the 55 Degree 29 Minutes of Latitude; and from East to West, that is, from Smoleusko and the Ʋkraine, to the Frontiers of Pomera∣nia, Bohemia, and Silesia, above 240. Soil. Its Soil, for the most part, is Champain, tho towards the Borders of Hungary very mountainous and woody; yet as it declines from thence, it generally grows more fruit∣ful. There is only one great Mountain in the middle of Lesser Poland, call'd Mons Cal∣vus,
The Bald Mountain, tho it has a Monaste∣ry on the top of it, surnam'd the Holy Cross, and dedicated to our Saviour. What others you shall meet with may be rather term'd little Hills than Mountains. The Eastern Part of this Kingdom is full of Forests, Woods, Marshes, Lakes and Rivers which af∣ford a delightful Vista to the open Coun∣try. Its Pro∣ducts. Heretofore Poland is said to have been al∣most all Woods; but now, being cultivated by the Industry of its Inhabitants, it produ∣ces every-where all kinds of Fruits, Grains, and Herbs: Nay, it wants for neither Fowl nor Fish; and moreover, abounds with all sorts of tame and wild Beasts. There are also Vines in many Places, whose Grapes are not ungrateful to the Palat, especially if the Summer and Autumn are never so little fa∣vourable; but the Wine is generally very sharp when it has once been drawn off. In the Mountains are to be found Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead, and Iron, with divers other kinds of Minerals; as also Salt, which is commonly taken out in huge Masses, like Stones out of a Quarry. The Western part of this Kingdom produces a great deal of Corn, which is transported in considerable Quanti∣ties into foreign Countries; and besides, it abounds with Honey, Wax, Hemp, and Linen for Sails: All which are carry'd to Dantzic, and from thence transported. Number of Towns and Villages. The greatest Part of the Towns, and all the Villages of this Kingdom, are of Tim∣ber and Thatch'd, the Gentlemens Houses in the Country being also of the same Make.
The whole Number of Cities, Towns, Bo∣roughs and Villages in Poland amounts to near a hundred and seventy thousand, whereof there are not much above twenty wall'd. There are two sorts of Cities in this King∣dom; the First belong to the Republick, of which the King names the Governours and other Officers; and the Second are under the Dominion of particular Seigneurs by hereditary Succession, of which there can be no other Starostas but their own peculiar Lords. Climate. The Air of this Country is sutable to the Climate, and sometimes so exceeding cold, that Water freezes ere it falls to the ground. And Lakes and Rivers are so frozen up, that Coaches and loaded Carts pass over them for five or six Months together, even to the end of March. Rivers, The most remarkable Rivers of this Coun∣try are, The Weissel  or Vistula. The Wart or Varta. The Nieper or Boristbenes. The Niester or Tyra. The Dwina or Duna. The Bog or Bobus. The Bug or Bugus. The Niemen or Nemenus. Their se∣veral Courses. The Weissel or Vistula takes its rise in the Dutchy of Teschen in Silesia, out of Mount Car∣pathus (now Crapack) and runs by the seve∣ral Cities and Towns of Oswieczin, Cracow, Sendomir, Casimir, Lublin, Warsaw, Plocskow, Ʋladislaw, Thorn, Culm, Bromberg, Grandentz,
Newenburg, Elbing, Marienburg, and Dantzic. This River antiently separated Sarmatia Eu∣ropea from Germany, and having continu'd its Course for above a hundred Polish Miles, di∣vides it self into two Streams, emptying one into the Bay of Frisch-Haff, and the other into the Baltic Sea, vulgarly call'd De Oost Zee. The Wart or Varta arises in Lesser Poland; and after having water'd Siradia, Kalisch, Pos∣nan, Olstin, &c. falls into the Oder, a River of Silesia. The Nieper or Boristhenes, waters Smolensko, traverses part of Lithuania, runs through Kiow or Kiovia, crosses the Ʋkraine, and at length rolls into the Black Sea near Ockza∣kow. The Niester rises near the Lake of Leopol; and having run by Halitz, Caminiec, &c. dis∣charges it self in like manner into the Black or Euxine Sea near Bialogrod. The Duna, or Dwina, springs near Biata in Moscovy; when having pass'd by Witebsko, Polocz, Dunenburg, Kokenhauz, &c. with a Course of 130 Leagues, it at last throws it self into the Gulph of Riga in Livonia. The Bog, or Bobus, takes its Origin from a Lake in the Frontiers of Podolia; and having pass'd by Constantinow, Bar, and Braclaw, it falls into the Nieper near Ockzakow. The Bug springs in Red-Russia, near Olesko, or Zborow; and having run by the several Places of Glituani, Beltz, Sokal, Ʋlodzimierz, Chelm, Bresty, and Warsaw, falls into the Weis∣sel by Wischegrod.
The Niemen, or Nemenus, arises near Slo∣nim, or rather Nessivicz, in the Palatinate of Novogrodec, and waters the Sides of Novo∣grodec, Bielcz, Grodna, Troki, Vilna, and after runs into the Baltic near Tylsa. Its Lakes. In Lower or Greater Poland, Cujavia, and the Territory of Lublin, there are several consi∣derable Lakes, replenish'd with all sorts of fresh Fish. The chief of these Lakes is Goplo, five Miles long, and half a Mile broad. Next there is Biale, otherwise nam'd The White Lake; which might be so call'd by an Anti∣phrasis, because in the Months of April and May it dyes Skins with a sort of swarthy Tincture. To proceed according to my Division of this Country, in which I have follow'd Staro∣volscius, I must begin with the first Province of this Kingdom, which is I. PRO∣VINCE. Great or Low Poland, bounded on the North by Pomerania and Prussia, on the South by Upper or Lesser Poland, on the East by Maso∣via, and towards the West by Silesia, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg. It is call'd Great Poland, because Lechus, the Founder of this Kingdom, first settled there, and divided it into two Parts: Viz.Its Divi∣sion. 1. Greater Poland, properly so call'd; and 2. Cujavia. Both which contain seven Palatinates; Viz.
The Palatinates of Posnania, to which be∣longs the Territory of Wschow. Kalisch. Siradia, to which belongs the Territory of Vie∣lunia. Rava. Lanschet. Bresty, and Inowlocz. Of these, the two last only belong to Cu∣javia. The chief of all these seven Palatinates is I. Palati∣nate. Posnania, in which are these several Cities and Towns; Viz. Posnan Bishoprick. Palatinate, and Castellany. Gnesna Archbishoprick, and Castellany. Koscien. Ʋskow. Sremsk. Miedzyrzeeze. Nacum. Curnic. Slupeia. Pysdra. Kcina. Conin. Premecz, and Ragozno. Cities and Towns of Posnan. The capital City of all which is Posnan, call'd by the Germans Posen, situate upon the River Varta in the 39th Degree of Longitude, and 52 of Latitude. It is 7 Miles
distant from Gnesna to the West, 20 German Miles from Ʋratislaw to the North, and 50 from Cracow to the South. It lies in the midst of several little Hills environ'd with a strong double Wall, and a very deep Ditch. The City it self, it must be confess'd, it but small, yet nevertheless exceeding beautiful and well-built, its Edifices being for the most part of Free-stone. Among the publick Structures, the most considerable is the Castle rais'd upon a small Eminence between the Rivers Varta and Prosna. It is generally provided with all sorts of Ammunition, and wants for neither Strength nor Beauty. The rest of the Pub∣lick Edifices may justly claim the like Charac∣ter, tho the most stately lie on the other side the River Varta in the Suburbs, which are very large. Here is the Cathedral Church with a College of Prebends, and the Bishop's Palace situate among the Marshes. This Pile of Building is commonly call'd Valisovia, and built so strong, that like the Town, it is able to withstand a Siege. John Lubranscius, a Bishop of this See, founded here a College to be visited by that of Cracow, and which was afterwards very much augmented and beautify'd by Adam Conarius his Successor, and farther enrich'd by one Rosrasevius with seve∣ral noble Gifts: So that now the Jesuits have a College in the City, where Learning is greatly encourag'd. Yet this also in the Suburbs does not want for noble Youth, who daily flock thither to be instructed by the Lectures of Mathematicks and Law. These Suburbs are all surrounded by a Morass and a great Lake. They are frequently laid under
water by the overflowing of the Varta, inso∣much that sometimes with the neighbouring Villages for several Miles together, the tops of the Houses are only to be seen. This Inundation likewise often extends to the Town it self, notwithstanding its high Walls, in a manner that Boats have been known to swim about the Streets: But this lasts not long, for the Waters commonly retire in two or three days at farthest. There are three very famous Fairs kept in this City, whither the Germans, both Traders and Gentry, come in great Numbers. The first of these is kept about the beginning of Lent, and lasts a Month. The second at Michaelmas, and con∣tinues five Weeks; and the last at Midsum∣mer, which is for the same time. The Inhabitants of this City are generally Roman Catholicks, tho vast Numbers of Jews live also among them. The Government is executed by a Starosta, chosen yearly out of the Schipins, or Aldermen, who, as long as this Office lasts, enjoys also the Title of Gene∣ral of Great POLAND. Gnesna. Seven Miles from hence lies Gnesna, situate among Bogs and Hills, and call'd also by the Germans Gnicsen. It is an Archbishop's See, and gives Title to the Primate of all Poland. It is distant three Polish Miles from the River Varta to the North, seven from Kalisch to the South, as many from Posnan to the East, and about thirteen from Thorn, thirty from Dant∣zic, and thirty three from Warsaw to the North-west. It was formerly Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, having been built by Lechus, the first Founder thereof, and so
nam'd from an Eagle's Nest, as is to be seen in the Life of that King. This City was almost consum'd by Fire in the Year 1613. and is at present chiefly consi∣derable for being the usual Residence of the Arch-bishop and Primate of Poland, who yet enjoys very great Privileges. In the Cathe∣dral is reposited a great quantity of inestima∣ble Treasure, most of which is owing to the Tomb of St. Adalbert raised in the middle of the Church, cas'd about with Silver by Si∣gisnund III. and to the Gifts of Henry Frleius, late Arch-bishop of that See, who, among other Rarities, gave his own Mitre, valued at 24000 Polish Gilders, or near 2000 l. Sterling. The Gates opening to this Church are all of Corinthian Brass curiously wrought, which were first taken from the Monastery of Corsuna in Taurica Chersonesus, afterwards re∣moved to Kiow, and thence brought hither by order of Boleslaus II. Here are several Fairs kept, the chief whereof is that on the Feast of St. Adalbert. Koscien. Koscien, a Town built in a Plain among Marshes, and defended with a double Wall and a broad and deep Ditch: It is about seven Miles from Posnan. Uskow. Ʋskow, a wall'd Town situate in a Plain like∣wise, and about eleven Miles from Posnan. Sremsk, &c. Sremsk, Premeez and Ragozno, three Tim∣ber built Towns belonging to the Jurisdiction of Posnan. Miedzyr∣zecze. Miedzyrzecze, a Town built for the most part with Wood in a Plain amongst Rivulets and Marshes, and which also its Name im∣ports: It is situate upon the onfiries of Si∣lesia
and Pomerania, and has a strong Castle fortified both by Art and Nature, and, which 'tis commonly conjectur'd, could hardly be taken unless it were starv'd. This several German Princes have experienc'd at their Costs, who after a long and fruitless Siege of it, have at length been forc'd to return home again re infectâ. It is about 15 Miles from Posnan. Slupcza. Slupcza, a Town upon the Wart with a ve∣ry strong Wall, and other sutable Fortifica∣tions. Pysdra. Pysdra, a Wall'd Town upon the Wart like∣wise, built in a Plain among Woods, and nine Miles from Kalisch. The other Towns of this Palatinate are some of them wall'd, and chiefly built with Wood, except only the publick Edifices, such as Castles, Towns, Churches, Monasteries, Abbies, &c. which are all either Stone or Brick. Senators of Posnania. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Arch-bishop of Gnesna, The Bishop Palatine and Castellan of Posnania. The Castellans of Sremsk, Miedzyrzecze, Premecz, Ragozno, Kriven, and Zandoc.
There are moreover several other Officers in this Palatinate, as well Civil as Military. The Starostas or Governours of Cities have some of them Jurisdiction, and some none, as it is likewise all the Kingdom over. Its Arms. The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle expanded Argent in a Field Gules. II. Palati∣nate. The second Palatinate of Great Poland, is that of Kalisch, in which are these Cities and Towns, Kalisch Metropolis, and Castellany, Kolo, Land, Naklo, Odolanovia, Chocia, Stave, Cosmin, Dohra, Grabow, Opatovec, and Plesovia. Cities and Towns of Kalisch. The Chief City of all which is Kalisch, built among Marshes upon the River Prosna, and fortified only with a Brick-Wall, and some low Towers. It has in it some Religious Houses, and a very magnifi∣cent College for Jesuits, founded by Stanislaw Karncovius, Arch-bishop of Gnesna. Here are the Ruins of a strong Castle remaining, which had formerly been destroy'd by the Teuto∣nick Knights. Kolo. Kolo, a Timber-built Town, wall'd with Mud and Dirt: At certain times it is encom∣pass'd and wash'd by the River Wart, near
which it is built. It is about eight Miles from Kalisch. Land. Land, a Town upon the Wart, about four Miles from Gnesna. Naklo. Naklo, a Timber'd Town near the Lake Goplo, with a wall'd Castle situate among the Marshes. Odolano∣via. Odolanovia, a Town with a Castle, built likewise among the Marshes. Chocia. Chocia, in which Andrew Lipski, Bishop of Cracow, founded a Collegiate Church with vast Expence. The other Towns of this Palatinate are not very considerable, and therefore are omitted. Senators of Kalisch. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Kalisch, The Castellans of Land, Naklo, and Kamin. The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate, Its Arms. are a Buffaloes Head eras'd, Sables, with a Crown between his Horns, all in a checky Field, Ar∣gent and Gules. III. Pala∣tinate. The third Palatinate of Great Poland is that of Siradia, situate along the River Varta, or Wart, being divided into four Districts, viz. The Districts of Siradia, Schadkow, Radomsko, and Petricovia.
In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Siradia Cap. Rosprza, Spicemir, Petricovia, Konarzew, Wart, Lask, Vidavia, and Pabianice. The Cities and Towns of Siradia. The chief City of all which is Siradia, si∣tuate in a Plain, and fortified with a strong Wall, with a Castle built on the Wart. Sub∣ject to the Jurisdiction of this City are the following Cities and Towns. Rosprza. Rosprza, a Timber'd Town seated amongst the Marshes. Spicimir. Spicimir, a Town built likewise with Wood. Petricovia. Petricovia, a Wall'd City by no means in∣considerable, situate among Rivulets and Bogs. Once a Year one of the great Tribu∣nals of the Kingdom is kept in the Suburbs of this City in one of the King's Palaces. Not far off there is another Palace of the King's call'd Byki of a regular Structure, whither his Majesty with his Court sometimes retires for his Pleasure at the time of the meeting of the Tribuaal. There are several other Emi∣nent Edifices built about this City, belonging to Bishops and other Great Men, among which the most famous is the Abby of Vitrovia, and the Palace of Crusmen, after the Italian manner. Konarzew. Konarzew, a Town of no great Impor∣tance. Wart. Wart, a large City built upon a River of the same Name.
Lask. Lask, where formerly Johannes Lascus Arch∣bishop of Gnesna, founded a Collegiate Church, and richly endow'd it at his own Costs. To this Palatinate also belongs the Terri∣tory of Territory of Vielu∣nia. Vielunia, which has a Castellan and other Magistrates of its own, and is divided into two parts, viz. Vielunia, and Ostresow. Both which contain some Towns, and a great number of Villages. Towns of Vielunia. The principal of the Towns is Boleslaw, which is defended with a very strong Castle. Vielun, environ'd with a high Wall and a very deep Ditch, having likewise a Castle on the River Prosna. Its Buildings are generally of Brick, whereof there are several very stately. Ostresow, a Timber-built City on the Bor∣ders of Silesia, situate in a very large Plain, and encompass'd almost every way with Woods. In this Palatinate the Gentry formerly had a Privilege of sealing their Letters with Red Wax, which was only allow'd to the Senators in all the rest of the Kingdom, and which they obtain'd by recovering the Standard of the Pa∣latinate of Lanschet, after it had been lost to the Prussians, and Teutonick Knights. Senators of Siradia. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Siradia.
The Castellans of Rosprza, Spicimir, and Konarzew. Its Arms. The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are in a Field Vert, a Lion Gules, and Eagle Sables, both counter-coup'd in the middle. Arms of Vielunia. The Territory of Vielunia has its own Ensigns, which are an Agnus Dei with a Cross Argent in a Field Guiles. IV. palati∣nate. The fourth Palatinate of Great Poland is that of Rava, which is divided into three Districts, viz. The Districts of Rava, Sochaczow, and Gostinin. In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Rava, Cap. Lowitz, Volboria, Gombin, Sochaczow, Gostinin, Viasdum, and Biala. Cities and Towns of Rava.The Capital City of this Palatinate is Rava, situate in a Plain, built for the most part with Wood, and tolerably populous. It has a Castle on a small River of the same Name, in which Prisoners of the best Rank are kept. The fourth part of the Revenue of this Castle goes towards the Payment of the Souldiers. The same Constitution was in Po∣dolia, where former Kings thought fit to esta∣blish the best Guard they could against the
frequent Incursions of the Tartars. In this City is a very considerable College of Jesuits, much visited by Learned Men. Lowitz. Lowitz, a City much more populous than the former, and about five Miles distant from it: It is famous for being sometimes the Resi∣dence of the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, or Pri∣mate of Poland. His Palace there is built a∣mong the Marshes, yet nevertheless consists of several fair Piles of Building: The Church also is a beautiful Structure, and enrich'd with several noble Gifts. It has likewise a great many considerable Monasteries, Ab∣bies, &c. In this City are divers famous Fairs kept, which the Gentry very much frequent from all Parts. Volboria. Volboria, a Town wherein the Bishop of Cujavia commonly resides, and where he has a Noble Palace. This Place is also very po∣pulous. Gombin. Gombin, a large Timber-built Town, si∣tuate in a Plain. Sochac∣zow. Sochaczow, a Place defended with Palisades, and a Castle built on a Rock, which is wash'd by the River Bsura. Gostinin. Gostinin, a Wooden City built in a Plain among Marshes. This Place is famous for having in it the Prison where Demetrius Suski the Czar of Muscovy, was kept for a long time, and where he at length dy'd. Viasdum. Viasdum, remarkable for its Strength and Beauty of its Castle, and situate not far from Rava on the Left-hand. Biala. Biala, a Town belonging to the Bishop of Chelm. This Palatinate contains likewise a Noble
Palace of the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, call'd Squernevicid. Senators of Rava. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Rava, The Castellans of Sochaczow, and Gostinin. Its Arms. The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle Sables, with the letter R on his Breast in a Field Gules. V. Palati∣nate. The fifth Palatinate of Great Poland is that of Lanschet, divided likewise into three Di∣stricts, viz. The Districts of Lanschet, Brezini, and Orlow. In all which the most considerable Cities and Towns are, Lanschet, Cap. Orlow, Bresina, Piontkum, and Ʋniejovia. Cities and Towns of Lanschet. The Capital Place of this Palatinate is Lanschet, a wall'd City built among the Marshes in a Plain, and surrounded with a very broad and deep Ditch; it has a Castle well fortify'd on a Rock, and which is wash'd by the River Bsura. Not far off in a Village call'd Kosciol there is a very neat Church built with Free-stone. There are several famous
Fairs kept in this City, where one of the Little Diets is also conven'd pursuant to the King's Command. Orlow. Orlow, a Timber-built Town seated be∣tween several small Lakes and a large muddy River. It is four Miles from Lanschet. Bresina. Bresina, a wooden-built Town, indifferent∣ly large, situate among Bogs, and about seven Miles from Lanschet. Piatek. Piontkum or Piatek, built among the Marshes on the Banks of the River Bsura. This Place is famous for well-tasted Beer, which is trans∣ported from hence all the Kingdom over. Here is a Monastery erected to the Honour of St. Paul. Uniejovia. Ʋniejovia, a Town where there is a very famous Castle founded on the Wart. Both these Places belong to the Arch-bishop of Gnesna. Senators of Lanschet. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Lanschet. The Castellans of Bresina, Brezina, and Biechovia. Its Arms. The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle Argent, and Lion Sables, both counter-coup'd in the middle, and the latter crown'd Or, all in a Field Gules. The sixth and seventh Palatinates are com∣prehendedTerritory of Cujavia. in Cujavia, whereof the former is
I. Palati∣nate of Cujavia. The Palatinate of Bresty, which is divided into four Districts, viz. The Districts of Bresty, Cruswick, Coval, and Predek. In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Ʋladislaw, Cap. Bresty, Nisavia, Radzieow, Voisinow, Kowalow, and Sluzevia. Cities and Towns of Uladislaw.The Capital City of this Palatinate is Ʋladislaw, built among the Marshes near the Vistula. This City is famous for being the Episcopal See of the Bishop of Cujavia, who always crowns the King in case either of the Death, Indisposition or Obstinacy of the Pri∣mate: It has a neat Cathedral built after the Gothick manner, and about it stand the Pre∣bends and Canons Houses, with a large Free-School. The Buildings of this City are gene∣rally of Brick, with which the Castle is also built on the River Vistula. The Country hereabouts is all Boggy, and there is so great scarcity of Wood, that the Inhabitants suffer very much for want of it. Bresty. Bresty, a City seated in a Plain among Marshes, and defended with a very strong Wall and deep Ditch. The Houses here are for the most part of Brick. Upon the same shore with Ʋladislaw lies
Nisavia. Nisavia, being not far off from it; it is a wall'd Town. Radzieow. Radzieow, a Timber-built Town, situate in an open Country near a very large Lake. Koisinow. Koisinow, a Town defended with a strong Castle. Kowalow. Kowalow, a Timber-built Town, seated a∣mongst the Marshes. This Palatinate is very fertile, and abounds with all sorts of Corn, which not only suffices the Inhabitants, but is also transported in vast quantities to Dantzic by several Navigable Rivers, whence it is carried out of the King∣dom. II. Palati∣nate. The latter and seventh Palatinate of the Province of Great Poland is that of Inowlocz, which is divided likewise into three Districts, viz. The Districts of Bydgosty, Bobrounitz, and Inowlocz. This Palatinate extends it self from the Lake of Goplo and the City of Cruswick, to the Vistula, and Confines of Pomerania, and has several Cities and Towns, whereof the chief are, Cruswick, Bydgosty, Gnieukow, Ʋratislaw, Solec, Dibow, and Strelce. Cities and Towns of Cruswick.Cruswick, an antient City next to Gnesna for Antiquity, built upon the Borders of Bresty, with a strong wall'd Castle near the Lake Goplo, out of which it is said the Rats
came that devour'd King Popiel II. his Wife and Family by a Divine Judgment. In the Suburbs of this City is the Church of St. Peter, built with Free-stone, together with a College of twenty four Canons. Here formerly the Court resided, but was afterwards remov'd to Cracow. Bydgosty. Bydgosty, a wall'd Town, in a Plain, wash'd by the River Barda; by which several things are transported to Ʋladislaw, being only six Miles distant. The other Towns are not to be despis'd, being generally very populous. Senators of Cujavia. The Senators of Cujavia are, The Palatin, and Castellan of Bresty. the Palatin, and Castellan of Inowlocz. The Castellans of Kowalow, Cruswic, and Bydgosty. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of Cujavia is in a Field Or, an Eagle Gules, and Lion Sables, counter-coup'd in the middle. II. PRO∣VINCE. Lesser Po∣land. Its Bounds. The Second PROVINCE of this King∣dom is Upper or Lesser Poland, which is bounded on the North by Masovia and Podlachia; on the West by Lower Poland; on the South by Hungary, and on the East by Russia; and is about fifty German Miles as well in length as breadth. It is generally divided into three Palati∣nates, Viz.
The Palatinates of Cracovia, Sendomir, and Lublin. I. . The first Palatinate of Lesser Poland is that of Cracovia, which besides four Districts, con∣tains also three Dutchies and one County. The four Districts are Cracovia, wherein are two Subdivisions, Viz. The Subdi∣visions of Xianzen, and Prossovia. Lelovia, Briecz, and Sandecz. The three Dutchies are, Oswieczin, Zator, and Severia. Which are part of Silesia, and the County is that of Scepuz, which belongs to Hungary, and contains thirteen Towns, the chief of which is Luboul, having a well-fortify'd Castle, wherein constant Guard is kept. The chief Cities and Towns of this Palati∣nate are, Cracow Bishoprick and Metropolis. Biecz. Wounitz. Sandecz. Lelow. Kyaz. Oswieczin. Zator. Seueria. Proszovice. Czenstochova. Slaucovia. Ilcussia. Wicliczka. Bocknia, and Dobcitia.
Cities and Towns of Cracow. Of all which, the Capital of the Province and Metropolis of the Kingdom is, Cracow, a famous City, seated in a spacious Plain near the Weissel, by which Merchandizes are transported to Dantzic. It lies nine Polish Miles East of the Frontiers of Silesia, eleven from those of Upper Hungary, twenty three from Sendomir, thirty from Olmitz, thirty five South-East of Ʋratislaw, forty from ienna, and about fifty from Buda, and is plac'd in the 42 Degree of Longitude, and 50 of Lati∣tude. Why so call'd. It takes its Name from Cracus, Gracus or Gracchus, one of the first Dukes of Poland, tho some others will have it to be the Cawdanum of Ptolomy corrupted into Cracow. But let its Name come from whence it will, it is certain that now, considering the stateliness both of its publick and private Edifices, and the great Plenty of all manner of Necessaries, it is equal to most Towns of either Germany or Italy. If this Character given to it by Starovolscius be disputed, no body can deny but that it is the largest and best built Town in all Poland, being divided into four Quarters, Viz. Cracow, properly so call'd. Casimir. Stradomia, and Cleparia. The first Cracow is encompass'd with a very high Wall, and flank'd with round brick Towers, with a broad deep Ditch, wall'd like∣wise,The Castle. and a stately Castle about a Mile in Compass, sounded on a Rock call'd Vavel,
on the Banks of the River Vistula. It is a large stone Building, consisting of two Wings, magnificently rais'd about a Square-Court, having Galleries, supported with Pillars, and pav'd with black and white Marble. The King's Appartments, with some others, are adorn'd with divers curious Paintings and Sta∣tues, and the Country round about affords one of the most delightful Prospects in Eu∣rope. The Cathe∣dral. Here is the Cathedral of St. Stanislaus, in which a late Bishop of Cracow, Martin Szysco∣vius, repair'd and beautify'd his Tomb, which before had been all of Silver. This, Sigis∣mund III. and his Son Ʋladislaus VII. greatly augmented, bestowing on it many Offerings of Gold and Silver Vessels. Sigismund I. also in honour of this Saint, built a Silver Al∣tar near his Tomb, bestowing on it several Golden Crucifixes, and as many Vestments richly embroider'd with Gems of all sorts. His Daughter Ann likewise, Wife to King Stephen, built another Silver Altar in the Chapel of the Annunciation, whose Roof is all gilded, and wherein the Kings of Poland are wont to be interr'd. This Cathedral is principally to be noted for its Chapter and Treasury. I pass by several other inestimable Riches which are to be seen here; but I cannot omit one thing, which is, that God is so incessantly prais'd in this Church, that the Priests are never silent Night nor Day. The Bishop ofThe Bishop and Chap∣ter. this Diocess is Lord over thirteen Cities, and Prince of the Dutchy of Severia. His Chap∣ter, which consists of about thirty Canons, with several other inferiour Priests, having
a proportionable Revenue. This City was erected into a Metropolitan See upon the first Planting of the Christian Religion in Poland by Miecislaus I. but within a hundred Years after it degenerated into a Bishoprick under the Archbishop of Gnesna, in regard that Lam∣pert Zula could not be persuaded to receive his Pall from the See of Rome; yet upon sub∣mission he was afterwards restor'd to that Dignity, but which lasted only for his Life, his Successors having been ever since only Bishops. Other Churches. There are about fifty other Parish-Chur∣ches, as well in the Castle as the Town: whereof the most celebrated is that of the Virgin Mary in the Circle of Cracow, which is govern'd by an Arch-Presbyter, and fronts ten large Streets, having moreover on all sides four Rows of magnificent Structures. The Uni∣versity. A University was first begun here by Ca∣simir the Great, and finish'd not till the Year 1401, by Ʋladislaus Jagello, conformable to the last Will and Testament of his Queen Hedwi∣gis, and had its Privileges soon after confirm'd by Pope Ʋrban VI. However the Scholars for∣sook it in 1549, by reason that the Magi∣strates had refus'd to do Justice on the Ser∣vants of Andrew Czarnkowski, who in a Quarrel had slain a great Number of them. They af∣terwards dispers'd themselves into several Parts of Germany, and becoming Protestants, spread the Lutheran Religion throughout Po∣land, and gain'd a great Number of Proselites. Yet notwithstanding all this, at last they re∣turn'd to the Obedience of the See of Rome.
In this University are taught all sorts of Learning, and which is now as great an Or∣nament to the Polish Kingdom, as Athens was formerly to Greece. It contains in all elevenIts Colle∣ges. Colleges, which are, The Great College, which is only for Philosophers. The Law-College, where the Professors of that Art cohabit and read Lec∣tures. The Physick-College, which the Physici∣ans do not live in, because they are generally marry'd, and have Families. The College of Dlugossus for young Stu∣dents in the Law. The College of the Poor, for such as we call King's-Scholars here. The College of Nascovius for other Sci∣ences. The College of Jerusalem or of Olesnicius. The College of Zisinius, newly erected. The College of Staringilius. The College of Smiescovicius, and The College for Human Learning. To these may be added fourteen Grammar-Schools, scatter'd throughout the City; in which also sometimes University-Learning is taught. Vice-Chan∣cellor. All these Colleges and Schools are govern'd by a Rector or Vice-Chancellor, who takes care that Orders be duly observ'd, and Functions rightly administred; which is so great Encou∣ragement, that there is scarce any Ecclesiasti∣cal
or Political Dignity in the Kingdom but is fill'd by Persons that have been educated in this University. Monaste∣ries. In the Monasteries also are taught both Phi∣losophy and Divinity, but more especially in that of the Dominicans of the Trinity, where there are daily Lectures kept, and several kinds of Moral Learning also promoted. Mendi∣cants. There are likewise several sorts of Mendi∣cant Friers in this City, who upon solemn Feasts, according to the antient Custom, go in Procession, cloth'd in divers Colours, such as Mendicants of the Rosary in Red. Mendicants of Mercy in Green. Mendicants of the Mantle in Blew. Mendicants of the Passion in Black. Mendicants of the Body of Christ in White. Mendicants of Saint Sophia in Purple. Mendicants of Saint Ann in Ash-colour. Mendicants of Saint Monica in Crimson. Houses of this City. The Houses of this City are for the most part of Free-stone, and four or five Stories high, but cover'd on the Top only with Boards in∣stead of Slate or Tiles. The Quarter of Casimir is join'd to the rest by a fair Timber Bridg, erected over the Ri∣ver Rudawka, a Branch of the Weissel, whilst the other two, Stradomia and Cleparia, are water'd by the Weissel, and lie between Cracow and the aforesaid Bridg. Biecz. Biecz, in the Territory of the same Name, is a wall'd City in a Plain, water'd by the Ri∣ver Rapa, a Branch of the Vistula, out of the Froth of which they make Sulphur. It is about
fifteen Polish Miles from Cracow, and five from Sandecz. Wounitz. Wounitz or Woynicz, a Timber-built Town on the River Dunaiecz, from Cracow about nine Miles. Sandecz. Sandecz, a wall'd Town, in a very pleasant Plain, in the Territory of the same Name, wash'd by the River Dunaiecx, and about eleven Miles from Cracow. It has a Colle∣giute Church and several Monasteries, &c. Its Inhabitants are Active and Industri∣ous. Lelow. Lelow, in the Territory of Lelovia, of which it is the Capital, environ'd with an old Wall, and a strong Castle built upon a Hill, wherein is a Palace and several Gardens after the Italian manner. It is wash'd by the River Biala, and about eleven Miles from Cracow. Kyaz. Kyaz, a wooden-built Town about seven Miles from Cracow. Osvieczin. Osvieczin, Capital of the Dutchy of the same Name, a Timber-built City in a Plain among the Marshes, with a wooden Castle plaister'd only with Clay. It is about seven Miles from Cracow. Zator. Zator, Capital of that Dutchy, built with Wood in a Plain near the River Vistula, and about five Miles from Cracow. Severia. Severia, Capital of the large Dutchy of the same Name. It has a very strong Castle in an Island in the middle of a very broad Lake, and a∣nother at Lipovecia upon a high Rock, famous for being the Prison of the insolent Clergy of the Diocess of Cracow; for that Bishop being Tem∣poral Prince of this Dutchy, which contains some Towns, and Lipovecia among the rest near
Cracow, it is most convenient for him to im∣prison Dclinquents there. Czento∣chova. Czentochova, a Town famous for good Beer, which is not only fetch'd from all Parts of Poland, but also from the neighbouring Pro∣vinces of Germany. Without this Place is a very famous Monastery, situate upon a Hill, where is a Picture of the Virgin Mary, said to be painted by Saint Luke, and to which Pil∣grims from all Parts come to make their Of∣ferings. We went upon our Journey from Silesia to Cracow to see this Convent, where they shew'd us vast Quantities of Gold and Silver Plate, of rich Ornaments for Altars and Habits, enrich'd with all sorts of Jewels, particularly with Pearls; for the great Families in Poland think it a mighty Honour for their Posterity to have given any thing of value to this Place, to be a Monument of their Devotion as well as Liberality. The Monks told us of a great many Miracles that were wrought here, with which they work'd such Effects upon the Minds of those credulous People, that they scruple not to impoverish themselves to enrich this Place. Not only the Church is very rich, but likewise the Monks are Masters of a great Territory round about it, and they maintain a Garison of 300 Men upon their own Charges, whom I have observ'd to be in a better Condi∣tion than any other Soldiers of the Kingdom. I can compare this Place to none more pro∣perly than Loretto in Italy, both for Wealth and Bigotry.
Slaucovia. Slaucovia, in the same Dutchy, famous for Silver Mines, which bring great Profit to this Bishop. Ilcussia. Near to this City lies Ilcussia, a Royal Town, abounding also with Silver and Lead. Its Citi∣zens are very Luxurious, but notwithstand∣ing no less Devout. This Town is encompass'd with a Wall, and its Houses are for the greatest part of Brick. The Bread here is extraor∣dinary, and Beef not to be equall'd in Cracow, whence it is scarce distant above five Miles▪ On the Eastern side of the City of Cracow lies Velisca or Wieliczka, not above two orWieliczka. three Miles from thence; a Town abounding with Christal Salt, but which is not so trans∣parent as that of Bochnia. Bochnia, about five Miles from Cracow, where Salt is dug out in great Masses, and ex∣ceeding clear. Dobcitia. Next towards Hungary lies Dobcitia, a strong Town with a Castle. Proszovice. To the North of Cracow lies Proszovice, a Timber-built Town, seated in a Plain, where there is a Palace of the King's rais'd on the Banks of the River Sozeniava, about four Miles from Cracow, in which is kept a Provincial Diet. There are several other Cities and Towns belonging to Noblemen, as likewise a great Number of Castles, Palaces, Religious Houses, &c. of no ordinary Structure in this Palati∣nate: but all which, for brevity's sake, I have omitted. Mines of Poland. This Palatinate excels all the rest in Mines, except that of Sendomir only. Silver and Lead are found about Ilcussia, Slaucovia, Severia,
and Novogora; and Copper and Gold at Novo∣targus, and in the Mountains about Sandecz; Mineral Salt, like to huge Masses of Stone, at Bochna and Wieliczka; Marble of all Co∣lours at Selecia, belonging to the Bare-footed Friers; Nitre at Wislicz; Vitriol at Becia; Pit-coal at Tencinum; Iron-Mine and Glass∣houses at Obstinia, as likewise at several other Places in this Kingdom. But what I shall give your Lordship a more particular Account of, will be of Salt and Glass, which I have taken from my Observa∣tion in the Country. That of Salt properly comes in here. Account of Salt Mines. You go down into the Salt Mines near Cra∣cow by four or five pair of wooden Stairs, by which you go from one into the other. The Horses also descend the same way. The whole Depth of this Mine is thought to be near three hundred Geometrical Paces. Below you may meet with a thousand Turnings and Windings, and many Alleys and Streets like to a Town; all which the Proprietor and hereditary Go∣vernour, Monsieur Morstin Covalski, told me would require above a Week's time to go over. In some Places there is a great deal of fresh Water in these Mines which the Miners drink, but in most it is salt, of which they make Salt by Evaporation; but still the best sort is that which is natural, without Preparation. Sometimes there are such fierce Winds in these Mines, that nothing almost can with∣stand them; and generally there is so much Cold, that it is hardly to be endur'd. Whilst it rains, the Salt is commonly insipid. They have Engines to crane up the Water that
it may not any ways incommode the Miners. The Revenue of this Mine amounts to about eight hundred thousand Timfs or Polish Florins annually, which makes about 400000 French Livres, whereof 50000 go to the King, 10000 to the Queen, and some thousands more to the Officers of the Crown, and the Miners and other Labourers; yet over and above all this, the Proprietor is oblig'd to make a year∣ly Present to all the Cities and Towns of Po∣land, and more particularly to their Starostas. A Cobler about the Year 1548, first found out this Mine, who digging a Well near this Place, perceiv'd a Fountain with a thin Wall of Salt in the middle of it; which breaking, and not knowing what to make of, he disco∣ver'd to the Owners of the Land, who were then the Family of Morstin; who digging deeper, by reason they did not meet with much Salt near the Surface, found it in so great Quantity, that they have not been able to exhaust it during the Space of 150 Years. The Miners say, that the Lumps of Salt weigh a great deal less in the Mine than when taken out, which I have not seen confirm'd. There are four sorts of Salt in the Mine, where∣of one is extream hard and rocky, like Chris∣tal. Another less hard, and clearer. A third brittle and softer, as also white and pure. All these three sorts are brackish, when the fourth only is somewhat fresher. In these Mines you shall have on one side a stream of salt Water, and on the other one of fresh. There are some places in these Mines where you can't work, because you dare not carry a Candle for fear of setting the Vapours on fire, which
are always Nitrous, and easily susceptible of Flame. Manna found. In this Palatinate, and in some others, there is a particular sort of Manna, which they ga∣ther in the Months of May and June by sweep∣ing it off the Grass with Sives, together with the Dew. They eat this Manna, and make several sorts of Dishes with it for their Tables. More of this I shall take occasion to speak of hereafter. Senators of The Senators of this Palatinate are, Cracovia. The Bishop Castellan, and Palatin of Cracow. The Castellans of Wounitz. Oswieczin. Sandecz, and Biecz. The Castel∣lans Power. The Castellan of Cracow precedes the Pala∣tin for Reasons given before in the Life of Bo∣leslaus III. otherwise call'd Krivoustus. This Palatin's Jurisdiction is very large, and extends several ways, not only over the Citizens and Countrymen, but also the Nobility or Gen∣try of his Palatinate. Mayor of Cracow. Next is the Pretor or Mayor of Cracow, which Office, Guagnini says, has been disconti∣nu'd ever since a Pretor, in the time of Ʋladis∣laus, betray'd that City to Boleslaus Duke of Oppelin; for which he, together with his Ac∣complices, afterwards underwent deserv'd Punishment, and the Pretorship devolv'd to the King, who now thinks fit to name a Mayor
himself, who, in my time, was a Scotch∣man. Govern∣ment of the Castle. The Castle of Cracow is principally under the Command of the Palatin, who has ten De∣puties or Burgraves, who, both in time of Peace and War, cause a strict Guard to be kept therein both Night and Day. These Burgraves, must always be chosen out of the Gentry. Here the Crown and other Regalia are kept. Arms of this Pala∣tinate. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle expanded Argent, crown'd Or in a Field Gules, with a Baton cross its Wings of the Second. Of San∣decz. The District of Sandecz has a peculiar En∣sign, which is Party per Pale, Argent and A∣zure. Of the Dutchy of Oswieczin. The Dutchy of Oswieczin has for Arms in a Field Gules, an Eagle expanded Sables, bear∣ing an O in its Breast. Of that of Zator. The Dutchy of Zator has also a peculiar Scucheon, which is an Eagle expans'd Azure, with a Z in its Breast. II. Palati∣nate. The Second Palatinate of Lesser Poland is that of Sendomir, which is divided into eight Di∣stricts, Viz. The Districts of Sendomir. Radom. Stenziecz. Corzin. Wislicz. Chencin. Opoczno, and Pilzno.
In all which are the Cities and Towns of Sendomir, Cap. Opatovia or Opoczno. Viazden. Radom. Jedbinsk. Solecia. Ilza. Cunovia. ozontin. Kielcz. Malogost, Cast. Sulovia. Drevicz. Inowlodz. Sydlovecz. Janovecz. Slupez. Lagovia. Racovia. Corzin. Wislicz. Pilzno. Chencin. Poloviec. Zawicost. Zarnow. Zaclicin. Lezaisk. Osiec. Stasow. Polanecz. Stobnicz. Olesnicz. Ossolin. Paczanovia. Sendisow. Zarnovec. Sokolow. Praeclavia, and Zaclycin. Cities and Towns of Sendomir. The chief City of this Palatinate is Sendomir, a very pleasant City, seated on a Bank or small Hill of the River Vistula, en∣joying a very delightful Prospect, and being much frequented by the Gentry on occasion of several Assizes of Justice held there by the Magistrates of this Palatinate. It lies near the Confluence of the San with the Weissel, and is twenty eight Polish Miles East from Cra∣cow, and thirty-two South from Warsaw. It is fortify'd with strong Walls, and a conside∣rable
Castle built to the South, and wash'd by the Vistula, in which the Palatin resides, with some other regular Works rais'd by Casimir the Great. Among the Publick Buildings, the Monastery of Dominican Friers, founded by Ivo, formerly Archbishop of Cracow, is most remarkable. A Synod was conven'd here a∣gainst the Heresy of Stancarus in the Year 1570; and another, wherein the Confession of Ausburg, Bohemia, and Switzerland, were re∣prov'd. This Town was sack'd by the Tar∣tars in the Year 1240, and taken by the Swedes in 1655, but restor'd to the Poles the Year fol∣lowing. Opatovia. Opatovia, four Miles from Sendomir, situate in a very pleasant Country, and wash'd by the River Pilcza. It has several famous Reli∣gious Edifices. Viazden. Viazden, a new-built Town, much fre∣quented, and well fortify'd. Radom. Radom, Capital of that District, built in a Plain, and environ'd with a strong Wall and other Fortifications. Jedlinsk. Jedlinsk, famous for a School, and a well∣built Church. Solecia. Solecia, situate upon the Vistula, and cele∣brated for its Castle; repair'd and beautify'd by its antient Duke Christopher Zboravius. Ilza. Ilza, a neat Town, built with Brick, and belonging to the Bishop of Cracow. It is famous for Earthen Ware, with which it furnishes all Poland. It has a Castle adjoining, consisting for the most part of old Buildings; yet the Bishop's Palace is all new, and very stately.
Cunovia. To this Town belongs Cunovia, or Kunow, celebrated for all sorts of Marble, and that of all Colours. Iron is exceeding plentiful in this Palatinate,Bozentin. but more especially at Bozentin, the Bishop of Cracow's City and Residence. This is a very beautiful Place, well fortify'd, in which the aforesaid Bishop has a very neat Palace with exceeding delightful Gardens. This City is seated near the bottom of the Bald Mountain, by much the highest in Poland. Kielcz. Towards the West lies Kielcz, famous for Mines of Copper, and Lapis-Lazuli. These two belong to the Bishop of Cracow, who has here a very fair Collegiate Church and Episcopal See. Chencin. Chencin, about three Miles from Kielcz, abounding likewise with Silver, Lead, and divers kinds of Marble. This Place belongs to the King. Here is a Castle seated on a Rock, where Justice is distributed to the District of the same Name. Malogost. Malogost, or as some will have it, Malogsch, noted for being a Castellany. It is a wooden∣built Town, and has nothing in it very re∣markable. Sulovia. Sulovia, a Town of some Note, by having Command over several neighbouring Places. Drevicz, and Inow∣lodz. Drevicz and Inowlodz, two Towns remark∣able for the superb Ruin of two old Castles. Sydlovecz. Sydlovecz, the Name of a County former∣ly belonging to the Dukes of the Family of Radzivil, abounding with Iron Mines, good store of Fish, and vast Quantities of Wood. Its chief Town is encompass'd with an old Wall, and a Castle pretty well fortify'd. Neverthe∣less,
it is not to be despis'd, having in it a great many fair Edifices. Stenzicz. Stenzicz, Capital of the District of the same Name, and adorn'd with a very stately Monastery of Benedictin Monks. Janovecz. A little higher lies Janovecz, with a Castle on the other side of the River. Slupecz. Slupecz, belonging to the Abby of the Holy Cross, on the Top of the Bald Mountain, this Town being situate at the Bottom of it. Lagovia. Lagovia, a City belonging to the Bishop of Cujavia, famous for making Earthen Ware. Racovia. Racovia, a Nest of the Socinians, formerly a City indifferently populous, with a consi∣derable Academy to instruct Youth: but which being now prohibited by a Publick Edict, the Catholick Religion is restor'd, but not therewithal the Grandeur of the Place. Corzin. Corzin, Capital of the District of the same Name, a new Timber-built Town with a Castle, seated near the River Vislock, and sur∣rounded every way with Marshes. Wislicz. Wislicz, a Town built with Wood, and water'd by the River Nida. It has a strong Wall, and is moreover situate upon a Rock in the midst of a boggy Country. Here is to be seen a Cathedral Church, built with square Stone, with a very beautiful Close for the Habitations of the Canons. The Country round about this Place abounds with all kind of Serpents and Insects; but as the Inhabitants tell you, being interdicted by the See of Rome, they have no power to do you any harm, and being transported out of that Place they im∣mediately die. This City is a Castellany.
Pilzno. Pilzno, a Timber-Town built on the River Wislock. Poloviec. Poloviec, a Timber-built Town lying a∣mong the Hills. This is a Castellany. Zawichost. Zawichost, a Wooden City on the River Vistula, with a double wall'd Castle on the other side: This is likewise a Castellany. Zarnow. Zarnow, a Town built with Wood, in which there is nothing remarkable, but that it is a Castellany. Zaclicin. Zaclicin, famous for a very considerable Market. Lezaisk. Lezaisk, a Town celebrated for a Monaste∣ry, wherein they pretend are miraculously kept several Relicks, and which draw great Crouds of Pilgrims from all Parts. Senators of Sendomir. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Sendomir. The Castellans of Wislicz, Radom, Zawichost, Zarnow, Malogosch, Poloviec, and Sechow. Its Arms. The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are Party per Pale Argent and Azure, in the first three Bars Gules, and in the second three Stars Sables, two and one. III. Pala∣tinate. The third Palatinate of Poland, is Lublin, join'd also by the Territory of Lu∣covia,
which contains near two thousand Gen∣tlemens Houses. This Palatinate, with both the others, is within the Diocess of Cracow, which comprehends a thousand and eighteen Churches, thirteen whereof are Collegiate. In this Palatinate are the several Cities and Towns of Lublin, Cap. Casimir, Czemiernikow, Ʋrzendow, Lulow, Parkow, Opolia, Curovia, Crasnicz, Levartovia, and Lenczna. Cities and Towns of Lublin. Whereof the Capital City is Lublin, situate in the 45th degree of Lon∣gitude, and 51 of Latitude, and which lies five Miles from the Confines of Red Russia, twelve West of Chelm, fourteen from Sendo∣mir, twenty four South of Warsaw, and thirty six North-East of Cracow. It is seated at the foot of a Hill, water'd by the River Bystricza, and defended by a high Wall, a broad Ditch, and a huge strong Castle, which owes its Foundation to the Russians. This City is not very large, but nevertheless ex∣ceeding healthy, and well built, and much frequented by the Turkish, Armenian, Musco∣vitish and German Merchants, especially at the time of the four famous Fairs that are annually kept there. It is encompass'd every way almost by Marshes, and was wall'd round by Casimir the Great. The Jews generally inhabit the Suburbs, where they have a Sy∣nagogue. The principal Church here was
erected by Lescus Niger on occasion of a sig∣nal Victory he gain'd over the Lithuanians near this place. This Church he dedicated to St. Michael, who, 'tis said, had promis'd him good Success the Night before he fought. There are several other well-built Churches in this City, as likewise divers magnificent Monasteries, the chiefest of which was found∣ed by Ʋladislaus Jagello. This City is noted for two Courts of Justice, or great Tribunals for all Poland, which occasions a great Con∣course of the Gentry to this Place. Casimir. Casimir, a very fair Wooden City built a∣mong Rocks near the Vistula, whose over∣flowing sometimes lays the Houses above half under Water. It is about seven Miles from Lublin. Czemier∣nikow. Czemiernikow, famous for a very beautiful Palace, formerly built by the prudent and illustrious Henry Firleius Arch-bishop of Gnes∣na, and adorn'd with several delightful Gar∣dens. Urzendow Ʋrzendow, a large Timber-built Town, si∣tuate on a Lake, and about seven Miles from Lublin. Lulow. Lulow, Capital of the Territory of Leuco∣via, a City built with Wood in a Plain, partly defended by a Bog, and partly by Pali∣sadoes: It is about fourteen Miles from Lublin, and has a very considerable Jurisdiction. Parkow. Parkow, a Wood-built Town, seated in a Plain near a very large Lake, and about nine Miles from Lublin. Senators of Lublin. This Palatinate sends only two Senators, viz. The Palatin and Castellan of Lublin.
Its Arms. Its Standard or Arms is a Stag Passant, Argent, Collard Or, in a Field Gules. III. PRO∣VINCE. The third PROVINCE of Poland is Prussia, which depends only in part on the Jurisdiction of the Crown of Poland; for it has its peculiar Laws, Customs and Courts of Justice. It is a Country of great Extent, and every-where water'd with commodious Ri∣vers, and moreover towards the Baltic en∣rich'd with many convenient Ports and Ha∣vens. In length it is about sixty Polish Miles, and near fifty in breadth, and is bounded onIts Bounds. the West by Pomerania, on the South by Cu∣javia and Masovia, on the East by Lithuania and Samogitia, and on the North by the Bal∣tic Sea. Its Pro∣ducts. This Province, tho it has no great store of Mines, yet it abounds with all sorts of Cattle, wild Beasts, Fish and Fruit, and enjoys a very temperate Climate. The Merchandizes which it has from Poland, Russia and Lithuania, it transports in great quantities, and likewise imports whatever either Europe or the Indies afford, and that chiefly by way of Exchange. Hence it comes to pass that its Inhabitants are generally richer, and live better than in any of the other Provinces of Poland. In this Province they make Glass of certain Wood-Ashes, or of the largest sort of Pe∣bles. These they boil for twelve hours before they will vitrify. When they would have their Glass clearer than ordinary, they mix a certain Earth with the Ashes of the Colour and Hardness of Tartre, which renders the Glass of different Colours, according to the
quantity of this Earth mixt with it. Here may be remark'd, that if Salt be mixt with Glass, it becomes much easier to be blown by the Artificer. Its Rivers. The principal Rivers of this Province are, The Weissel, or Vistula. The Niemen, The Nogat, The Elbing, The Wesser, The Passar, The Alla, The Pregel, The Ossa, The Drebnicz, The Lica, and The Lavia. Its Lakes. Together with a great many Lakes reple∣nish'd with all sorts of Fish, the chief of which are, 1. Habus, near fifteen Miles long, and about two in breadth, disjoin'd from the Sea only by the Isthmus Neringa, or rather a small Neck of Land; for I find it has Communica∣tion with the Sea, where the Inhabitants ga∣ther Amber in small Nets of a Conick Figure, with a large Mouth, and narrow at the bot∣tom. This Net they tie to a long Pole, and set out in the Sea when the Waves begin to come in, wherewith they take pieces some∣times as big as ones Fist. This Amber is thought to be form'd by the great number of Fir-Trees that grow along this Lake, which dropping great quantities of Resina, or Tur∣pentine, into it, is carried into the Baltic Sea,
where being labour'd by the Waves it is con∣geal'd into Amber, wherein are found Flies and other Insects. But I am since better in∣form'd, that Amber is a Mineral Juice that runs into the Sea; which at first taking is soft, but quickly hardens in the Air. It is also to be got all along the Sea-coast in this Province. 2. Curona, another Lake something larger than the former in Ducal Prussia. Prussia is generally divided into Regal and Ducal. This Province was at first subject to certain Soveraign Dukes, until the Knights of the Teutonick Order got possession of it in the XIIIth Century after a tedious War. In the Year 1454, the Western Part was subdued by the Poles; and in 1520, Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, the 34th and last Master of that Order, having shaken off the Polish Yoke, ob∣tain'd the Eastern Part under the Title of a Dutchy; so that ever since it has been divided as abovesaid. The same Albert embrac'd Lu∣theranism, perswaded most of the Knights to marry, and introduc'd the Reform'd Religi∣on into this Country, whereof the antient Inhabitants are long since extirpated; and the present Prussians are a mixt People sprung from the several Colonies of the Swedes, Poles, Germans, and other Neighbouring Nations. Royal Prussia. Regal or Royal Prussia is divided into four Palatinates, viz. The Palatinate of Pomerania, Culm, Marienburg, and Varmia.
I. Palati∣nate. The first Palatinate, Pomerania, being not in possession of the Poles, requires no De∣scription. II. Palati∣nate. The second Palatinate of Royal Prussia is that of Culm (to which also the Territory of Michalovia, lying to the South, belongs) and has in it these Cities and Towns, viz. Culm Bish. & Cap. Thorn, Graudentz, Colmensee, Brodnicz, Radin, Golubia, Rogozna, Brathian, Lubavia, and Kopriunicza. Cities and Towns of Culm. Of all which the chief City is Culm, an antient and famous Place built on a Hill, the foot whereof is water'd by the River Vistula. It lies about four German Miles from Thorn to the South, and fifteen from Dantzic to the North. It was built by the Knights of the Teutonic Order in the Year 1223, who likewise fortified it against the Irruptions of the Heathen Prussians; and Her∣man Desalza, Master of that Order, gave Laws and Constitutions for its Government. This City suffer'd much Damage during the Swedish Invasion, and is now very thin of Inhabitants; insomuch that the Episcopal See, subject to the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, has been for some time remov'd to the neighbouring Town of Colmensee. It has in it very fair Churches, en∣rich'd with many valuable Ornaments and precious Offerings.
Thorn. Thorn, seated upon the Bank of the Vistula, by which it is divided into two parts: It lies four Polish Miles from Culm to the South, thirteen from Marienburg, twenty two from Dantzic, fifteen from Lanschet, and twenty nine from Warsaw. It was heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but was afterwards exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Em∣pire, and as yet enjoys very many Privileges. Its Name seems to have been taken from the German word Thor, signifying a Gate, be∣cause built by the Teutonick Order as it were for a Gate to let Forces into Prussia whenever occasion serv'd: Whence its Arms are sup∣pos'dIts Arms. to have been taken, being a Castle and Gate half open. This City does not stand in the same place where the old one did, that having been seated a Mile Westward from hence, where are now to be seen the Ruins of an antient Castle, and some other Monu∣ments. However this City at present is the fairest and best built of any in Royal Prussia, the Streets being much broader, and Houses more stately than at Dantzic. It was very much beautisied by one of its Burgermasters Henry Stwband in the Year 1609, who built a small University here, and endow'd it with a considerable Revenue. He likewise founded an Hospital, and a Publick Library, where two of Cicero's Epistles are preserv'd written upon Tables of Wax, and a Town-house built in the middle of the Market-place. The Inha∣bitants revolted from the Knights of the Teutonick Order in the Year 1454, and put themselves under the Protection of Poland.Native Town of Coperni∣cus. In this City the famous Astronomer Nicholas
Copernicus was born; and John Albert King of Poland died here in the Year 1501. It was taken by the Swedes in the Year 1655, and regain'd by the Poles in 1658. Afterwards the Swedes recover'd it, and the Poles sur∣priz'd and retook it in 1665. Grau∣dentz. Graudentz, only famous for a Castle and very strong Wall. Colmen∣see. Colmensee, or Culmensee▪ the Episcopal Seat of the Bishop of Culm, translated hither from Culm. It is distant nine Miles from Thorn to the North, nineteen from Graudentz, and twelve from Culm to the South-East. Territory of Michalo∣via. The Territory of Michalovia is a strait Neck of Land between the Rivers Brodna and Drebnicz, which was the occasion of bloody Wars between the Teutonick Knights and Poles: The chief Town is Michalovia, which, with some others that are in this Ter∣ritory, deserves no Description. III. Palati∣nate. The third Palatinate of Royal Prussia is that of Marienburg, in which are these Cities and Towns, viz Marienburg, Cap. Elbing, Stuma, Mewa, Gniew, Now, Stargardie, and Ornet. Cities and Towns of Marien∣burg. Of all which the chief City is Marienburg, seated upon the Nogat, a Branch of the Vistula, about six Miles from Dantzic: It is defended by strong Walls and high Towers, together with a very large Castle,
wherein the better sort of Prisoners in time of War are kept. This City receives no small Benefit from the Neighbourhood of the Island Zulava, which is a very rich spot of Earth. This Island is divided into two parts, viz. 1. The Greater, which lies next Ma∣rienburg, and 2. The Lesser, next to Dantzic, to whose Inhabitants at present belongs Elbing. Elbing, a well fortified and trading Town, in which the English they say had formerly a Consul. Here Albert, first Duke of Prussia, founded an Academy in the Year 1542. but of no great moment. The other Towns I find no Description of. IV. Palati∣nate. The fourth Palatinate of Royal Prussia is The Bishoprick of Varmia, whose Gentry are exempt from all Regal Jurisdiction, being wholly govern'd by the Laws and Customs of Prussia, and by the Bishop who is a Tem∣poral Prince: It has in it these Cities and Towns; Heilsberg, Cap. Fraumberg, Brunsberg, Gutestadt, Allestein, Resla, Vormitz, Messac, Vatemberg, Seberg, &c. Cities and Towns ofOf all which the chief City is Heilsberg. Heilsberg, famous for being the Residence of the Bishop, and defended with strong Walls and other sutable Fortifications. Fraum∣berg. Fraumberg, celebrated for the Cathedral of the Bishoprick of Varmia there built, of
which the famous Astronomer Copernicus was Canon. Brunsberg. Brunsberg, situate on the River Passar, so much frequented, and so worthily esteem'd, that it is reckon'd among the chief Towns of Prussia. It has a College of Jesuits built by Cardinal Hosius. There are several other Cities and Towns of which I find no Description, and therefore have omitted them. Ducal Prussia. Ducal Prussia, now entirely belonging to the Elector of Brandenburg, has these Towns in it, viz. Koningsberg, Cap. Pilaw, Memel, Welaw, Tilsa, Marienwerder, &c. To the number of 60. Town of Konings∣berg.The Metropolis Koningsberg is a Market Town divided into three parts, and defended with a very considerable Castle: It lies in the 43d degree of Longitude, and 54 of Lati∣tude, and has a small Academy founded by Albert Great Master of the Teutonick Order, and first Duke of this Country in the Year 1544. The Citizens are generally Lutherans, as are likewise most part of this Country, which occasion'd Sigismund III. when he re∣ceiv'd Homage of this Duke in the Year 1621, to impose a Law, that the Catholicks should have free Exercise for their Religion there.
Senators of Prussia. The Senators of Prussia are, The Bishop of Varmia, who is the Chief. The Bishop Palatin, and Castellan of Culm. The Palatins of Marienburg, and Pomerania. The Castellans of Elbing, and Dantzic. There are other Officers which belong to the Senate or Great Council of Prussia, which they hold among themselves, except when they are commanded to the Grand Diet of the Kingdom. These are The Vice-Chamberlains of Culm, Marienburg, Pomerania, Thorn, Elbing, and Dantzic. Besides these several Magistrates, the Prus∣sians have also a Treasurer, Burgraves of Castles, Sword-Bearers, Judges, and Sheriffs; but none of all these have any Place in the Council. The Palatins of Prussia have far greater Power than those in any other Province of Poland. Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of Prussia are an Eagle expans'd, Sables, with a Sword evagina∣ted,
and held by a dexter Hand Argent: Both in a Field Or. IV. PRO∣VINCE. The Fourth PROVINCE of this King∣dom is Red-Rus∣sia. Red-Russia, the other being White-Russia, and belonging to Lithuania. This ProvinceIts Extent. extends it self from the Frontiers of Li∣thuania, as far as the Mouth of the Nieper in the Black Sea; which River separates it from Moscovy to the East, as likewise do the Carpa∣thian Mountains from Hungary to the South-West. It is extreamly fruitful in Corn, Beasts of all kinds, Fish, and Honey. In this Province there are several Trees daily found along the Shore of the River San, which are very hard, and black as Ebony. The Coun∣try People say they have lain there ever since the Deluge, but it is probable they might have been wash'd down by the Course of the River a great while since. It is bounded on the South by Hungary, Moldavia, and Bessarabia; on the East by the Scythian Desarts, and espe∣cially Moscovy; on the North by Russia Alba, separated by the Rivers Stiro and Pripecz; and on the West by Lesser Poland, from which it is divided by the Rivers Vislocz and Vepre. This Province comprehends seven Palati∣nates, Viz. The Palatinates of Russia, Podolia, Braslaw, Kiovia, Volhynia, Belsko, and Chelm.
I. Palati∣nate. The first Palatinate of this Province is that of Russia, which is divided into four Districts, which are, The Districts of Leopol, Premislaw, Halicz, and Sanoch. I. District. The first of these Districts has in it these remarkable Cities and Towns, Viz. Leopol Archbish. Cap. Grodeck, Javorisvia, Zolkiew, Gliniani, Zloczow, and Komarna. Cities and Towns ofOf all which, the chief City is Leopol. Leopol, call'd Lwow or Luwow by the Po∣landers, and Lemberg or Russe-Lemberg by the Germans. It is the Metropolis of this Palati∣nate, and lies in the 46 Degree of Longitude, and 49 of Latitude. It is built amongst the Hills, on the Banks of the River Peltaw, fif∣teen Polish Miles from Mount Carpathus to the South, and as many from Premislaw to the West, thirty from Caminiec, forty from Cra∣cow, and about fifty from Warsaw to the South-East. This City is large and well fortify'd, having two Castles, one within the Walls, and one without on a rising Ground, which com∣mands the Town; both which, together with the City, were founded by Leo (or, as they call him, Loo) Duke of Russia, about the Year 1289. The Archbishop of Leopol is both Spi∣ritual
and Temporal Lord of his Diocess. His See was translated hither from Halicz in 1361, by Order of King Casimir. Here also reside an Armenian Archbishop, and a Russian Bishop depending on the Patriarch of Constantinople, with several Churches belonging to each Bishoprick. The Armenian Roman-Catholicks have inhabited here time out of mind, and are govern'd wholly by their own Prelat. They enjoy very great Privileges on ac∣count of the considerable Commerce they maintain with the Persians and other Eastern People. This City is famous for severalSeveral times be∣sieg'd. Sieges it has sustain'd. As first, it was be∣sieg'd by the Cosacks and Tartars with a dread∣ful Army. Secondly, by the Moscovites and Cosacks in the Year 1648, with an Army of above 120 thousand Men, without being able to take it in two Months and a half; but the last time the Turks became almost Masters of it in the Year 1672, yet by an Agreement ob∣lig'd themselves to quit it. This hapned un∣der the Reign of King Michael Wiesnowiski, who dy'd here in the Year 1673. This City gives great Encouragement to Learned Men, who are very civilly receiv'd by their Acade∣my, which is supply'd with Professors from that of Cracow. Here is kept a very famous Win∣ter-Fair, whither the Hungarian, Moldavian, and, in time of Peace, Turkish Merchants re∣sort in great Numbers. Amongst other Rivers, it has Roxolania, wherein Barbels are taken of a great Size. It has likewise an innume∣rable Company of Fish-ponds all about it, re∣plenish'd with several sorts of very fat Fish, which are salted up in great Numbers, and
transported all over Poland. The Churches here are generally very fair and well-built, and abound with all kinds of costly Ornaments. Grodeck. Grodeck, a palisado'd City, with a Castle built in a Plain, and surrounded with Bogs. It lies about four Miles from Leopol. Javorisvia. Javorisvia, famous for a natural Bath ari∣sing in the next adjoining Village of Sclovia. This alone suffices to disperse several stub∣born Distempers, as Sixtus Leo, a Physician of great Experience, testifies in his Treatise con∣cerning it. Zolkiew. Zolkiew, a Town adorn'd and defended by a Castle, and intermix'd with several delight∣ful Gardens, with a fair Church in the middle of it, built with various sorts of Marble. It was the Seat of the late King John Sobieski, where my Lord of Rochester had Audience of him. Its Arms. The Standard and Arms of this District are a Lion Passant Crown'd Or, by a Rock Sables, all in a Field Azure. II. District. The second District of this Palatinate is Premislia, which has in it these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Premislaw, Bish. Sambor, Jaroslaw, Lancut, Resovia, Fulstin, Visnia, Zidaczow, Moscisca, Dubiecz, Canczuga, and Prevorscia. Cities and Towns ofWhereof the capital City is Premislaw. Premislaw, built on the River San with good strong Walls and a Castle, situate upon
a Rock on the other side of the River. This City lies about six Leagues above Jaroslaw, and twelve from Leopol towards the West. There are in it two Bishops, one of the Place, and the other a Russian Prelat of the Greek Church. Orichowski, a Canon of this Cathedral, main∣tain'd▪ that Priests might marry. Here is a College belonging to the Jesuits for the E∣ducation of Youth. The Citizens are very much addicted to Trade, and have several famous Fairs every Year. Near this City is a very spatious Park of the King's, full of all kinds of wild Beasts, and strongly wall'd in, that they might do no mischief. The Country hereabouts abounds with Castles for defence against the Incursions of the Tartars; the chief of all which is the Castle Crassici, lately built on the River San. Sambor. Sambor, a Palisado'd City upon the River Tyra, with a Castle built near the Borders of Hungary. Jaroslaw. Jaroslaw, famous for a Fair kept on Lady-Day, and the most celebrated of any in all Poland. Where, besides several Merchan∣dizes brought from Persia, Constantinople, Venice, Muscovy and Amsterdam, they say, it is wont to have above four hundred thou∣sand Head of Cattle, and half as many Horses. In this Town the Jesuits have a College for Students, and without it there is a very state∣ly Nunnery of modern Architecture. Nei∣ther is its Castle to be despis'd, which is seat∣ed to the East on the River San. Lancut. Lancut, famous for several magnificent Churches, founded by Stanislaus Lubomirski, Palatin of Cracow, together with a Castle well fortify'd against the Tartars.
Resovia. Resovia has in it a considerable Castle, with several Monasteries, and a Fair kept on the Feast of St. Albert. This Town is famous for a Linen Manufacture perform'd by the Germans, whose Ancestors having been taken Prisoners by Casimir the Great, were settled in and about this Place. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this District are an Eagle expans'd with two Heads, both Crown'd Or, in a Field Azure. III. District. The third District of the Palatinate of Russia is that of Halicz, encompass'd towards the West with the Mountains of Transylvania, to the South by the Boechy-Woods of Walachia, and towards the East is divided into two Parts by the Tyra or Niester, a rapid River, which arises among the Carpathian Mountains, and discharges it self into the Euxine Sea. The South Division of this District is call'd Procutia. The whole District contains these remarkable Cities and Towns, Viz. Halicz, Cap. Sniatin, Cap. of Procutia. Colom. Martinow. Dolina. Strium. Podock. Brezana. Buczavia or Busko, and Podhajecia. Cities and Towns ofThe chief all which is Halicz. Halicz, formerly Metropolis of the Russian Kingdom, which was then divided into seve∣ral Tetrarchies, each of which had its pro∣per Duke. It is a large Timber-built City, divided from Moldavia by the River Prud,
and on the other side wash'd by the Niester. It has a wooden Castle situated on an Emi∣nence hard by the Niester. Its Inhabitants are somewhat Rustical, and addicted more to A∣griculture than Trade. Sniatin. Sniatin, a wooden Palisado'd Town on the Borders of Walachia, water'd by the Prud, and is Capital of Procutia. In it were wont to be Fairs kept, which the Valachians made their Magazine; whence it became very well fur∣nish'd with Cattle, Honey, Wax, and an ex∣cellent Breed of brave Horses in great Num∣bers. Colom. Colom, a wooden Town, built under a Hill near the River Prud. It is very much fre∣quented on account of its Refining Salt, with which it furnishes all the rest of Russia and Li∣thuania, there being none in those two Pro∣vinces, except only in the District of Premis∣law. Almost all over this District there are deep Wells, whose Water is boil'd up into Salt. In the Desarts likewise of the Ʋkraine, near the Boristhenes, there is a certain Lake, whose Water by the power of the Sun is congeal'd into solid Lumps of Salt, and which the In∣habitants thereabouts only use. Martinow. Martinow, a Town in Procutia, having a Castle built among the Marshes. Dolina. Dolina, a wooden-built Town, situated among the Hills. Strium. Strium, built likewise with Wood, near the River of its own Name. Podock. Podock, on the other side of the Niester, defended by a Castle, and adorn'd by a fair Monastery, built by Steven Potucius, Palatin of Braclaw, who dy'd and lies bury'd there.
Brezana. Brezana, a populous Town, built with Wood, having a wall'd Castle on a Hill hard by. Buczavia. Buczavia, or Busko, built among the Mar∣shes, near which the River Bug has its Rise; by means of which several Merchandizes are transported to Leopol. Podhaje∣cia. Podhajecia, environ'd with a Wall, and other Fortifications, having not far off the fa∣mous Castle of Zavalovia. IV. District. The fourth District of the Palatinate of Rus∣sia is that of Sanoch, near the Mountains of Hungary and Transylvania, and consequently abounding in little Hills except only towards Crosna. In it are these Cities and Towns, Viz. Sanoch, Cap. Crosna, Brozovia, Rimanovia, Dinovia, and Lesko, Cities and Towns ofOf all which the principal City is Sanoch. Sanoch, built with Wood, among the Hills, and near the River San. It has a no-ways contemptible Castle, founded upon a Rock. Crosna. Crosna, the Staple of the Hungarians, whi∣ther they bring all their Merchandizes and Wines; and therefore the Fairs and Marts here are more celebrated than those of their Neighbours. In this City likewise the Jesuits have a College for Human Learning. It ex∣ceeds Sanoch in its Number of Inhabitants, and Concourse of Strangers. Brozovia, &c. The other Cities and Towns of Brozovia, Rimanovia, Dinovia and Lesko, are Places of no small Strength against the Incursions of the Tartars.
Senators of Sanoch. The Senators of the Palatinate of Russia are The Archbishop of Leopol. The Bishops of Premislaw, and Kiovia. The Palatin of Russia. The Castellans of Leopol. Premislaw. Halicz, and Sanoch. II. Palati∣nate. The Second Palatinate of the Province of Red-Russia, is that of Podolia, famous for the frequent Irruptions of Barbarians, and the many Battles fought with them there. If these People (says Staro∣volscius) might enjoy a wish'd-for Peace like the Western Countries of Europe, they would have no reason to envy either the Plenty or Riches of Italy or Hungary. This Palatinate has in it divers sorts of Marble and Alabaster in se∣veral Places, and is divided into three Di∣stricts, Viz. The Districts of Caminiec, Trembowla, and Laticzow. In all which are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Caminiec, Cap. Trembowla. Laticzow. Bar. Husiatinow. Czartikow. Janow. Czvaniec. Chmielnic. Miedzibosz, or Misdzibozia. Zinkow. Jesupolis. Jacloveck. Satanow. Tarnopolia. Kitaigrod, and Dunaigrod.
Cities and Towns of The Chief City of all which is Caminiec, situate on the Confines of Wala∣chia,Caminiec. among Rocks and Hills. It is well for∣tify'd both by Nature and Art, and has a very strong Castle, built on an adjacent Rock which commands the Town. Its Avenue is cover'd with a Horn-work, which is separated from the Body of the Place by a deep Moat. Both City and Castle are almost encompass'd by the River Smotrzick, which a little below falls into the Niester. The Rocks lie every way so high about this City, that you can discover only the Tops of the highest Houses. It lies fifteen Polish Miles from Bar to the West, thirty from Leopol, thirty six from Jassy, thirty from Kiow, eighty from Warsaw, and about a hundred and seventy from Constantinople. This strong City, which is the See of a Prelat, Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of Leopol, was very much damag'd by a Fire in the Year 1669, and has been often in vain attackt by the utmost Fury of the Turks and Tartars, till in the Year 1672 it fell into the possession of the former, in which it still continues. It was blockt up by Motula, General of the Cosacks, in the Year 1687; and the Poles afterwards made great Prepa∣rations to join his Troops, but were both ob∣lig'd to retire upon the Approaches of the Ot∣toman Forces. Afterwards another Blockade was form'd by the Polish Army in 1688, and the next year they actually invested the Place, and began a formal Attack in the Month of August; but the Siege was rais'd in September following, and never since attempted, so that the Infidels remain at present in quiet possessi∣on hereof, together with several other conside∣rable Places in this Palatinate.
Trem∣bowla. Trembowla, a City lying under a great Moun∣tain, with a Castle built upon an adjoining Hill. Laticzow. Laticzow, well fortify'd against Incursions, with an adjoining Castle and Warlike Inha∣tants. Bar. Bar, a City built and palisado'd round by Buona, Daughter of John Sforza Duke of Mi∣lan, and Queen to Sigismund King of Poland, so naming it from the Place where she was born. It has a Castle on a Hill, surrounded every way with Bogs and Lakes. Husiati∣now. Husiatinow, well fortify'd also against In∣cursions. Czartikow. Czartikow, with the like strong Fortificati∣ons and a Castle. Janow, &c. Janow and Czvaniec, with several others, are very strong Places. Chmiel∣nick. Chmielnick, a Timber-built Town, defend∣ed only with Palisado's, with a wooden Castle, built upon the River Bog. Miedzi∣bosz. Miedzibosz, a Town with a large Timber Castle, situate among the Marshes, to which there is no Avenue but over Bridges. This Place was formerly much infested by the Tar∣tars. Senators of Podolia. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop, The Palatin, and The Castellan of Caminiec, Podolia, Caminiec. s Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are the Sun in its full Glory in a Field Azure.
III. Palati∣nate. The Third Palatinate of the Province of Red-Russia, is that of Braslaw, or Braclaw, lying beyond Podolia, upon the Borders of Tartary, now out of pos∣session of the Poles; in which are these Cities and Towns, Viz. Braclaw, Cap. Vinnicza, Zitomir, Sarogrod, Morachua, Jarosow, Felstin, and Chmielnic. Cities ofOf which the capital City is Braclaw. Braclaw, built on the River Bog, with a wooden Castle and other Fortifications. It lies a hundred and ten Miles from Caminiec to the East, fifty five from Bar, and fifty from the Confines of Walachia to the North, to∣wards Kiow. It was taken, and miserably wasted by the Turks in the Year 1672. Vinnicza. Vinnicza, a wooden City likewise, built on the River Bog, and defended with a Castle and a Wall. This City is famous for a Meet∣ing of the Gentry and a Court of Justice; where the Jesuits also have a College to in∣struct Youth. These two Cities have been very much infested by the Tartars. I find no Description of the rest. Senators of Braslaw. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin, and Castellan of Braslaw. IV. Pala∣tinate. The Fourth Palatinate of the Province of Red-Russia, is that of Kiovia, bordering on one side on Tartary,
and on the other on Moscovy. It is divided in the middle by the famous River Boristhenes. This Palatinate extends a great way towards the Euxine Sea, to the Confines of White-Russia in Lithuania. In it are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Kiow Bish. Cap. Kaniow, Circassia, Oczakow, Stepanow, Fastovia, Bohuslaw, Pereslaw and Bialerkiow. Cities and Towns of The chief City of all which is Kiow.Kiow, or Kiouf, according to the Pronun∣ciation of the Inhabitants, an antient, large, and very populous City, fortify'd with strong Palisado's, a Castle, Trench, and some other Regular Works, and situate on the Boristhenes or Nieper. The old Kiow was built on a Hill a little beyond the River, where are still to be seen the Ruins of many Arches, high Walls, Churches, and Burying-places of divers Kings with Greek Inscriptions. Of these Churches, two remain in tolerable good Condition, viz. those of St. Sophia and St. Michael. The Walls of the former are lin'd with curious Mosaic Work, and the Dome consists of Earthen Pots, well cemented and fill'd with Mortar. St. Michael's Church is chiefly remarkable for its gilded Roof. The Burying-places of the antient great Men of Russia were in several Caves near this City, some of which are said to extend into the Borders of Moscovy above eighty Miles in length. The Bodies here are
preserv'd whole and entire, especially those of two certain Princes, which are drest in An∣tique Habits, and have been not long since shewn to Travellers by the Russian Monks. The Place where these Sepulchers are made is of a sandy Stone, very dry, and seems to be of the same Nature with the Catacombs of Rome. Kiow was heretofore an exceeding large City, as may appear from the Ruins of the Walls, which extend themselves above eight Miles in compass. It is said to have been first found∣ed by a Russian Prince nam'd Kius, in the Year of Christ 861, and then constituted Metropo∣lis of Tauro-Scythia. Next it became the Seat of the Russian Empire, and was afterwards govern'd by its own Princes. It was storm'd and pillag'd by the Tartars in the Year 1615, and has ever since declin'd from its primitive Grandeur. It has been often taken and re∣taken within the Space of thirty Years, but now remains wholly in possession of the Ozar of Moscovy, to whom it was lately pawn'd by the Cosacks. The Episcopal See of Kiow is subject to the Metropolitan of Leopol. Here resides the Russian Archbishop, supream over all of the same Persuasion throughout Poland. Here are divers Roman and Russian Churches, and a great many Monasteries, &c. Kaniow. Kaniow, seventeen Miles from Kiow, whose Inhabitants with its Neighbours round about, are a very Warlike People. Circassia. Circassia, a Timber-built City on the River Boristhenes, about twenty five Polish Miles from Kiow. Its Inhabitants were formerly the Circassi, a Warlike People, and much celebrated in History, who likewise dwelt all along the Boristhenes.
Oczakow. Oczakow, built upon the Mouth of the Boris∣thenes, and inhabited by Tartars, tho com∣manded and govern'd by Turks. Stepanow. Stepanow, fortify'd with a Castle, a Wall, and a Ditch. Fastovia. Fastovia, famous only for being the Resi∣dence of the Bishop of Kiow, and the Jesuits College translated from Kiow. Bohuslaw. Bohuslaw, Pereslaw, and Bialerkiow, are all Towns indifferently populous, and each de∣fended by a Castle. The Sena∣tors of Kiovia. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop Palatin, and Castellan of Kiovia. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are Party per Pale Argent and Azure. In the former the Charge of Lithuania, and in the latter a Bear Passant. V. Palati∣nate. The Fifth Palatinate of the Province of Red-Russia, is that of Belsko, joining to the District of Leopol, and Palatinate of Chelm, and plac'd about the middle of Red-Russia. It is divided into four Districts, Viz. The Districts of Belsko, Busko, Grodlow, and Grabow.
In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Belsko, Cap. of the Palatinate. Busko, Cap. of its District. Grodlow, Cap. of its District. Grabow, Cap. of its District. Sokal, &c. Cities and Towns of The chief of all which is Belsko. Belsko, or Belz, a Timber-built City, in∣differently large, and situate among the Mar∣shes, between Leopol and Zamoisk, and about five Miles from the River Bug. It has a wooden Castle, built on a Hill, surrounded every way with Bogs. Busko. Busko, or Busk, a Town seated in a Moor, where the River  g takes its Rise, by which Merchandizes are ansported to Leopol only five Miles distant. Grodlow. Grodlow, a palisado'd Town, with a Castle upon a Hill wash'd by the River Bug. Grabow. Grabow, a wooden Town, seated in a large Plain, with a Castle fortify'd both by Nature and Art, and of very difficult Access. Sokal. Sokal, a Town seated on the Bug, and de∣fended only with Palisado's. Senators of Belsko. The Senators of this Palatinate are The Palatin and Castellan of Belsko. Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are a Griffin Volant, Argent in a Field Gules.
VI. Palati∣nate. The Sixth Palatinate of Red-Russia is that of Chelm, lying between Lublin, Lithuania, and Volhynia, and is divided into two Districts, Viz. The Districts of Chelm, and Crasnistaw. In both which are these Cities and Towns, Viz. Chelm Bish. Cap. Crasnistaw, Zamoisk, Ratno, Lynbowlya, Rozana, Ʋlodavia. Scebresin, Turobin, Tamogrod, Tomasow, and Ctesow. Cities and Towns ofThe Capital of all which is Chelm. Chelm, a small City defended with a Castle, the Outworks whereof are made of Wood. It lies about ten Miles from Lublin to the East, twenty four from Premistaw to the North, and twelve from Belsko. It has been sack'd and burnt by the Muscovites and Tartars during the late Wars, which occasion'd the Residence of its Bishop to be translated to Crasnistaw. Nevertheless, an Oriental or Russian Bishop still resides there. Crasnis∣taw. Crasnistaw, a wall'd Town upon the River Vepre, where the Bishop of Chelm at present has his Residence in a Palace of modern Ar∣chitecture. Near this place the Arch-Duke Maximilian, when he came with an Army to seize the Crown of Poland, was shamefully repuls'd by John Zamoiski, who immediately
afterwards built a Town in that Neighbour∣hood, calling it after his own Name, Zamoisk. Zamoisk, well defended by high Walls, deep Ditches, and other strong Fortifications, af∣ter the modern Manner. He likewise built a fair Cathedral here, and enrich'd it with all manner of Necessaries; also a noble Acade∣my, furnish'd with Learned Masters from the famous University of Cracow. This Person was so great a favourer of Learning. that not only Zamoisk, but also several other Places of the Province of Russia found the Effects of his Bounty. Ratno. Ratno, a wooden Town, built among the Marshes, with a Castle wash'd by the River Perepet on one side, and defended on the other by a Bog and the Niester. It lies bout twenty four Miles from Chelm. Lynbow∣lya. Lynbowlya, a Town upon the Bug, with a tolerably fortify'd Castle. Senators of Chelm. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop and Castellan of Chelm. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are a Bear Argent passant between three Trees proper in a Field Or. V. PRO∣VINCE. The Fifth PROVINCE of this Kingdom is Masovia, situate almost in the Heart of the Kingdom of Poland, and bounded on the NorthIts Bounds. by Prussia, on the East by Lithuania, on the South by Upper Poland, and on the West by Lower Poland. It was formerly govern'd by its own Princes, but in the Year 1526▪ by
the Death of its Dukes John and Stanislaus, that Dutchy fell to the Kings of Poland. TheInhabi∣tants. Inhabitants hereof are generally Warlike: They speak the same Language with the Poles, only they differ in some few guttural Accents: Their Manners, Habits and Religion are much the same. This Province is divided into three Palatinates, which are, Division. The Palatinates of Masovia, properly so call'd. Ploczkow, and Dobrina. I. Palati∣nate. The first Palatinate of this Province is that of Masovia properly so call'd, which in spiri∣tual Matters is subject only to the Bishop of Posnan, but in Temporal is divided into twelve Districts, viz. The Districts of Warsaw, Wisna, Cyrna, Zembrow, Nuren, Wissegrod, Zakrow, Cickanow, Lombze, Rozan, Makow, and Liw. In all which the principal Cities and Towns are those of the same Name with the Districts, adding moreover these following, viz.
Pultovia, Czerniensk, Czersko, Akroczim, Varka, Blonye, Pultowsko, Tarcin, Grodzyec, Prasniz, Garvolinia, Vengrovia, Stanislanovia, Broc, Viskow, and Seroicz. Cities and Towns of The chief City of all which, and Metropo∣lis of the Province is Warsaw. Warsaw, defended with a Castle, Wall and Ditch, seated in a Plain in the very Center of the Kingdom, and therefore pitch'd upon for the convening of the Diet. It lies upon the River Vistula, in the 43d degree of Lon∣gitude, and 52 of Latitude, and is divided into four Parts, viz. The Old and New Town, with The Suburbs of Cracow, and Prag. This City is adorn'd with divers stately Piles of Buildings, particularly a spacious four∣square Palace founded by Sigismund III. and much improv'd by his Successors, where the Kings of Poland most commonly reside. Op∣posite to this on the other side of the River, stands another Royal Palace in the middle of delightful Groves and Gardens, built by Ʋla∣dislaus VII. and call'd by the Name of Viasdow, where the States or Diet of Poland former∣ly us'd to sit and debate the most important
Affairs of the Kingdom. There is more∣over the Palace of King John Casimir, as like∣wise a very stately one built by Count Morstin, Great Treasurer of Poland. Also a League from this City King John Sobieski built a neat Country Palace by the Name of Villa Nova. The other Publick Edifices are no less re∣markable, being the Church of St. John Bap∣tist, where Secular Canons officiate; the Arse∣nal, Castle, Market-place, &c. Divers kinds of Merchandizes are convey'd hither along a River from the neighbouring Provinces, and from hence carried to Dantzic to be transported into Foreign Countries. In the Suburbs of Cracow is a small Chappel built on purpose for the Burial of John Demetrius Suski, Great Duke of Muscovy, who died Prisoner in the Castle of Gostinin, together with his two Brothers. This City was taken by the Swedes in the Year 1655, and is scarce three Polish Miles distant from Lesser Poland, about twenty four from Lanschet, as many North-East of Lublin, twenty nine South-East of Thorn, thirty to the North from Sendomir, thirty three West of Gnesna, and forty to the North-East from Cracow and Posnan. Wisna. Wisna, a Town in a Plain near the River Narew, with a Castle upon an adjoining Hill. Wissegrod. Wissegrod, a Wooden Town built in a Plain near the Vistula, with a considerable Castle: It lies about twelve Miles from Warsaw. Ciekanow. Ciekanow, about the same distance from War∣saw, being a Town built in a Plain likewise, with a Castle among the Marshes. Lombze. Lombze, a large City upon the navigable River Narew, consisting of fair Buildings, and
about twenty Miles from Warsaw. Rozan. Rozan, a Town built in a Plain near the River Narew. Liw. Liw, a Timber-built Town, with a Castle founded on the Banks of the River Liwijecz. Pultovia. Pultovia, famous for being the Residence of the Bishop of Plosko. It is a Town built with Brick, with a good Castle, and some other tolerable Edifices. Czerni∣ensk. Czerniensk, a large Wooden Town built on the Vistula. Akroczim. Akroczim, a Wooden Town likewise seated on the Vistula, with a Castle. It is about eight Miles from Warsaw. Varka. Varka, a large Town built in a Plain near the River Pilza, and about eight Miles from Warsaw another way. Blonye. Blonye, a Town about four Miles from Warsaw. Pultowsko. Pultowsko, a Wall'd Town with a Castle, situate on the River Narew. Tarcin. Tarcin, a Timber-built Town, about five Miles from Warsaw. Grodzyec. Grodzyec, about seven Miles from Warsaw, and two from Tarcin. Prasniz. Prasniz, a large Town, intermix'd with a great many fair Stone Edifices. Senators of the Pal. of Masovia. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatine of Masovia. The Castellans of Cyrna, Warsaw, Wisna, Wissegrod, Zakrow, Ciekanow, and Liw.
Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate, are an Eagle expanded Argent in a Field Gules. II. Palati∣nate. The second Palatinate of the Province of Masovia is that of Ploskow, lying towards the East between the Vistula and Prussia. It is divided into four Districts, viz. The Districts of Ploczkow, Zancren, Mlava, and Stenen. In all which are these principal Cities and Towns viz., Ploczkow Bish. Cap. Sieprcz, Srensko, Mlaw, and Radzanow. The Capital of all which is Ploczko. Ploczkow, or Ploczko, Metropolis of the Pa∣latinate of that Name, which stands on a high Bank of the Weissel or Vistula, from whence one may have a very fair Prospect of a plea∣sant and fruitful Country. This City is con∣siderably inrich'd by the Navigableness of its River, is very populous, and has been long dignified with a Bishop's See. Besides the Ca∣thedral, there are divers other Churches and Monasteries richly endow'd, especially the Abby of Benedictins in the Suburbs, where amongst other Relicks, the Head of St. Sigis∣mund is kept in Gold which was given by King Sigismund III.
Sieprcz. Sieprcz, a Wooden Town built on a Hill among the Marshes, and about five Miles from Ploczkow. Srensko. Srensko, a Timber-built Town, seated in a Plain, with a Castle founded among the Bogs. This Place is about ten Miles from Ploczko. Mlaw. Mlaw, a Town built on the Confines of Prussia, and wash'd by the River of its own Name. It is also about ten Miles from Ploczkow. Radzanow. Radzanow, a Timber-built Town on the River Ʋkra, with a Castle founded upon a Rock amongst the Marshes. This Town is about eight Miles from Ploczkow. Senators of Ploskow. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop Palatin and Castellan of Ploskow. The Castellans of Sieprcz, and Radzanow. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate, are an Eagle expans'd Sables with a P on the Breast: All in a Field Gules. III. Palati∣nate. The third Palatinate of the Province of Masovia, is that of Dobrina, lying towards the West between Cujavia and Prussia: It abounds with all sorts of Fruit and Fish, and is divided into three Districts, viz. The District of Dobrina, Ripin, and Slonsk.
In all which are these principal Cities and Towns, viz. Dobrina, Cap. Ripin, Slonsk, and Gorzno. Cities and Towns ofThe Capital City of this Palatinate is Dobrina. Dobrina, a Timber-built City, seated on a Rock near the River Vistula. It had former∣ly a Castle which was demolish'd by the Teu∣tonick Knights. Ripin. Ripin, a Wooden Town, built in a Plain on the River Odleck: It is about five Miles from Dobrina. Slonsk. Slonsk, a Town in a Plain, situate upon the River Vistula, and about two Miles from Dobrina. Gorzno. Gorzno, or Gurzno, a Wood-built Town, tolerably well defended by Nature and Art: It is about six Polish Miles from Dobrina. This Palatinate was formerly the cause of frequent Wars between the Poles, Teuto∣nick Knights, and Prussians. Senators of Dobrina. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Castellans of Dobrina, Ripin, and Slonsk. Its Arms. The Arms and Standard of this Palatinate, are a Man's Head proper, doubly crown'd Or and Argent: All in a Field Gules. VI. PRO∣VINCE. The Sixth PROVINCE of this Kingdom is Samogitia, having in it no Palatinate, tho many Capitanies, of which the chief Starosta
is he of the Province who has a Place in the Senate, tho no other of the same Dignity have the like throughout the whole Kingdom, except he be otherwise qualified. This Pro∣vince is indifferently large and fruitful, tho it be very much over-run with Woods. To the North it is bounded by Curland and theIts Bounds. Baltic Sea: On the West it has Ducal Prussia and the Baltic; and towards the South and East it borders on Lithuania. It has several Cities as well belonging to the King as the Gentry, which for the most part are all built with Wood. This Province takes its Name from its Situation, which is low and marshy; the word Samogitz in the Language of this Country denoting as much. It abounds with Lakes and inaccessible Mountains, yet affords great quantities of Honey, purer than that either of Lithuania or Livonia, and breeds Horses which are very much admir'd for their Swiftness. The ordinary People here live inManners of the People. Cottages for the most part seated near Lakes or Rivers, and cover'd either with Thatch or Boards. They plough the Ground not with Iron but Wood, tho the Soil be most com∣monly fat and stiff; which Custom they are addicted to even to Superstition: for when a certain Starosta of that Country thought to introduce Iron Plowshares among them, and the Season not happening to prove as kind as usual, they attributed all the cause to this change of Instrument; whereupon they were permitted to return to their old way for fear of an Insurrection. Their Horses are gene∣rally so small, that one would wonder how they could undergo the Fatigue they put 'em
to. Most of the Inhabitants of this Country differ little in Manners, Habit or Language from the Lithuanians; yet some of them still retain several Idolatrous Worships, especiallyTheir Su∣perstition. in the Deserts, where they pay Devotion to a four-footed Serpent, under the Name of Givosit; and you'll hardly find a Family in these Parts without one of these Houshold Gods. Nay, even at this day in many Villa∣ges both of Prussia and Lithuania, the poor Peasants, altho they profess Christianity, yet keep Adders in their Houses, to which they pay a more than ordinary Veneration, ima∣gining that some great Mischief would befal them if these Idols should come to any harm. To be more particular with this Country, your Lordship may understand that their Houses (except only those of the Gentry) are built low and long-ways, with an Hearth in the middle, and but one Room, which serves not only for themselves but their Cattel. The better sort drink out of Horn Cups, and eat out of Wooden Platters. The Honey here is extraordinary, having but little Wax; and some of it is perfectly white, with which the Woods are every where almost lin'd.Manrer of sacrificing. The manner of the Pagan Sacrifices and Feasts in Samogitia kept at this day about the end of October, is as follows. First, the Place of meeting being assign'd, the Men with their Wives, Children and Servants, punctually ap∣pear thereat, when spreading a Cloth upon the Straw, several Loaves are set in due order, and between each Loaf a large Pot of Beer; then Beasts of divers kinds both Male and Fe∣male are brought in, and sacrific'd after the
antient Custom, thus. First, the Augur or Priest, after having mumbled over some few words, strikes 'em with a Wand he holds in his hand on the Back, Belly, &c. when all that are present likewise follow his Example, crying out, O Zimiennick! (for so they call their God) these Offerings we make to thee for protecting us so mercifully hitherto, and we most humbly implore thee to have the like Compassion on us for the future, as to preserve us from Fire, Sword, Pestilence and our Enemies: Which said, they immediately fall to, but first cut off a bit from every Plate, and throw 'em about the Room, crying, O Zimiennick, graciously par∣take of our Sacrifices, and favour thy Adorers! After which they eat and drink heartily, and so the Ceremony concludes. These Sacrifi∣ces are also still observ'd by the Country-People in several places of Lithuania and Russia. This Province is divided into three Districts, which are, The Districts of Rosienia, Mednick, and Poniviess. In all which are these principal Towns, viz. Rosienia, Cap. Mednick, Poniviess, and Cowna. Towns of The Capital of all which is Rosienia Rosienia, a small ill-built Town, tho the chief of the Province of Samogitia, being seated on the River Dubiss, about twelve Po∣lish Miles from Cowna to the North, thirty from Riga, and twenty seven from Vilna to the West.
Mednick. Mednick, somewhat better built than the former, and famous for a Suffragan's See be∣longing to the Arch-bishop of Gnesna. This Town is seated on the River Wirwitz. Poniviess. Poniviess, Capital only of the District of that Name. Cowna. Cowna, situate on the River Niemen, and famous for a College of Jesuits, and several considerable Monasteries. This Town was formerly much frequented by the German Mer∣chants, who built here divers splendid Edi∣fices both with Stone and Brick, which the Inhabitants have since imitated, and in some things excell'd. Senators of Samogitia. The Senators of this Province are, The Bishop Starosta, and Castellan of Samogitia. VII. PRO∣VINCE. The Seventh PROVINCE of this King∣dom is Volhynia, which is divided into two large Districts, viz. The Districts of Luccoria, and Cremen. In both which are these principal Cities and Towns, viz. Lutzko Bish. Cap. of Luceoria. Ʋlodimir, or Woldzimiers. Krzemenec, Cap. of Cremen.
Brodi, Olika, Constantinow, Zsbarasz, Ostropium, Wisniovec, Zaslaw, Basilea, Miedirecz, Rubesow, Dubna, Czartorisk, Olesk, and Krilow. Cities and Towns of The Capital City of the District of Luceo∣ria, and Metropolis of Volhynia, is that of Lutzko. Lutzko, or Luzuk, a Timber-built City, si∣tuate on the Banks of the River Ster, near a Lake which encompasses part of the Castle. It is hardly seven Miles from the Frontiers of Red Russia to the East, and twenty from Leo∣pol to the North-East. It is a large City, and is an Episcopal See, and the Residence of a Bishop subject to the Metropolitan of Gnesna. The Cathedral and Chapter-house are in one of the Castles, there being two built on ad∣joining Hills near this City. Here likewise resides a Russian Bishop. Ulodimir. Ʋlodimir, a Wooden Town, with Wooden Fortifications, and built among the Marshes. It lies not far from Lutzko, and is the Resi∣dence of a Russian Bishop with a considerable Jurisdiction. Krzeme∣nec. Krzemenec, Capital of the District of Cre∣men, a large Timber City with a Wooden Castle and Mud Walls. Brodi. Brodi, a Town built by Stanislaus Konicepo∣liski, Castellan of Cracovia, with strong Forti∣fications, a Collegiate Church, and a publick Academy. Olika. Olika, a Town belonging to the House of Radzivil, adorn'd with a fair Cathedral, and Academy for all sorts of Arts and Sciences.
Constan∣tinow. Constantinow, adorn'd and defended by a well-fortified Castle. Zsbarasz. Zsbarasz, formerly a Free City, with a Ter∣ritory or District of its own, but now subject to that of Cremen. Senators of Volhynia. The Senators of this Province are, The Bishop of Luceoria. The Palatin, and The Castellansof Volhynia. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Province of Volhynia are Party per Pale, Argent and Azure, the former containing the Arms of Lithuania. VIII. PRO∣VINCE. The Eighth PROVINCE of this King∣dom is Podlachia, a large Province and Palatinate, bounded on the West by Masovia, and on theIts Bounds. East by Lithuania, to which it formerly be∣long'd till Sigismundus Augustus in the Year 1569 united it to Poland. In Spiritual Mat∣ters it is wholly subject to the Bishop of Lu∣ceoria, but as to Temporal it is divided into three Districts, viz. The Districts of Byclsko, Drogiczynen, and Mielnick. In all which there are these Principal Cities and Towns, viz. Byelsko, Cap. Drogiczin, Myelnick, Tykoczin, Knyssin, Augustow, Mordi, Wasilkow, Narew, Bransko, Visokie, and Holovacz.
Cities and Towns of Of all which the Capital is Byelsko. Byelsko, a large Timber-built City, Metro∣polis of this Province, and seated on the Ri∣ver Byala dividing it from Lithuania. Its Castle was burnt down by Lightning, and ne∣ver since rebuilt. Drogiczin. Drogiczin, Capital of the District of that Name, and built on a small Rising near the River Bug. This City is famous for a Court of Justice, wherein the Causes of the Gentry are tried. It lies about ten Miles from Biel∣sko, and thirty from Warsaw. Myelnick. Mielnick, a Town on the Bug likewise, on∣ly famous for being Capital of its District. It is about five Miles from Drogiczin. Tykoczin. Tykoczin, a Town built in a Plain upon the River Narew. It has a Castle well fortified both by Art and Nature, being surrounded by vast Bogs, and defended every way with several large Cannon. Here part of the King's Treasure is kept; and here likewise Si∣gismundus Augustus caus'd Money to be coin'd. It lies about ten Miles from Byelsko, and forty two from Vilna. Knyssin. Knyssin, a Wood-built Town, seated among Marshes and Woods. Here the King has a Palace, and a very large Park, abounding with Deers of all sorts; and huge Fish-ponds, replenish'd with all kinds of fresh-Water Fish. Augustow. Augustow a very large City, built by Sigis∣mundus Augustus, and which lies about twen∣ty Miles from Byelsko. Mordi. Mordi a Timber-built Town, seated on a very large Lake, and about five Miles from Drogiczin.
Wasilkow. Wasilkow a Wood-built Town on the River Narew, where the King's Starosta resides. Narew. Narew situate in the midst of Woods, and near the River of that Name. This Town lies about four Miles from Byelsko. Bransko. Bransko built on the River Nar, only famous for a Court of Justice held there. It lies a∣bout three Polish Miles from Byelsko. Suras. Suras a Town built at the foot of a Hill near the River Narew. It has a Castle which commands the Town. Senators of the Pro∣vince of Podlachia. The Senators of this Province are, The Palatine, and Castellan of Podlachia. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Province are Party per Pale, Argent and Gules: In the former the Arms of Lithuania, and in the lat∣ter an Eagle Expans'd of the first. Thus far, my Lord, have I trac'd the Ex∣tent of Poland, and the Divisions of its Pro∣vinces, and have taken notice of what I have both observ'd and heard to be most remarka∣ble in them; whereby your Lordship may find that this vast Kingdom is not so contemp∣tible as we of the Western Parts of Europe have imagin'd: for this Country abounds with all Necessaries to support it self, both in Peace and War, without the help of its Neighbours; and had it been as well improv'd by Art, and enrich'd by Trade, as it is made fruitful by Nature, it would doubtless have been able to vie with any Kingdom in Europe:
Which the King of France, and other Prin∣ces, are now sensible of, since they have pro∣fusely spent vast Sums of Money, to advance either themselves or Friends to that Crown, tho they were no ways certain of Success, knowing, that let the Sums they spent be e∣ver so considerable, they would be fully re∣compens'd when they obtain'd their Ends; for a King of Poland can raise as consider∣able an Army, and that chiefly of Horse, as any Christian Prince. He has ever had a great Reputation with the Eastern Princes; and considering their History, I find as re∣markable Transactions and Exploits in the Lives of the Kings of Poland, as in any other History whatever. I must confess, the Poles have not been such refin'd Politicians, nor so prudently manag'd their own Interest as some of their Neigh∣bours have done; for by their ill Conduct, and supine Negligence, they have lost the best Part of their Antient Dominions: which yet has hapned to them, neither on account of their Deficiency in Courage or Bravery; but at present the Poles beginning to enquire into the State of Foreign Countries, and into their Maxims of Government, they are become more Vigilant and Political, and are likely, under the Command of their present King, as well to retrieve their Honour, as recover their lost Dominions. I would, my Lord, have presented you with a great many other entertaining Matters re∣lating to the Geography and Natural History
of this Country, had I either seen them my self, or been secure of the Relation of others; but I would rather chuse to be deficient in this Account, than to give your Lordship just rea∣son to believe that I were too credulous. I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, B. C.
LETTER VI. To GEORGE STEPNEY Esq; late Envoy Extraordinary from his Majesty to the Electors and Princes of the Empire. Of the Origin and Extent of the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, with the Succession of its Great Dukes, and Description of its chief Towns and Provinces. SIR, THE Zeal you have shew'd for his Maje∣sty's Service in your Ministry at the Courts of the Empire, and the Reputation I found you left behind you in those Places, to the Honour of so great a Master, deserve not only the repeated Proofs of his usual Bounty, and the Choice he wisely made of you a se∣cond time to represent his Royal Person, but likewise the Esteem of all those that are ac∣quainted with your Merits. To pretend to inform you of the Constitution of any State in Europe, would not be only the calling in question your Experience in Foreign Affairs, and your undoubted Knowledg in Politicks, but likewise exposing my own Judgment to the just Censure of the World. Wherefore, Sir, thinking by our late Discourse about Po∣land,
that nothing could be new to you, but what was either very remote or very antient; I will endeavour only to give what I know of the Origin and Extent of the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, which is that vast Tract of Land that lies between the Kingdom of Po∣land, and the Frontiers of Moscovy. Lithuania how call'd by the Inha∣bitants. The Great Dutchy of LITHUANIA, call'd by the Inhabitants Litwa, tho subject to the King of Poland, as Scotland to the King of England, yet is a distinct Nation from this Kingdom, having different Customs, a dif∣ferent Dialect, and particular Privileges, tho one Diet serves them both. It lies betweenIts present Bounds. Moscovy on the East, Livonia, the Baltic Sea, and part of Moscovy to the North; Sa∣mogitia, Prussia and Podlachia to the West; and Russia, Volhynia and Podolia towards the South. It extends near ninety German Miles in length, that is, from the Borders of the Palatinate of Lublin to the Confines of Livo∣nia, and about eighty in breadth from the River Niemen to the Nieper. In the time ofAntient Extent. its Great Duke Vitoldus it was of much larger Extent, for then it reached from the Euxine Sea to almost all along the Baltic. Soil and Products. This Province is a flat and Champain Coun∣try, formerly all over-run with Woods, and of which a great Number still remain: Yet what with the Industry of the Inhabitants, and the Peace they have enjoy'd ever since Si∣gismund the First's time, it is now very fruit∣ful, and produces all sorts of Grain; as like∣wise affords great quantities of Honey, Pitch▪ Tar and Timber, with good store of Fish
and Flesh: Nevertheless the Air is gene∣rally unhealthy, which occasions many pla∣ces to be little inhabited, and some quite De∣sert. Ʋnion with Poland, and Privi∣leges. This great Dutchy was only begun to be united to Poland by Jagello, in the Year 1386; for tho that Union was afterwards renew'd at Grodno in the Year 1413, yet Lithuania still retain'd its own proper Dukes till the Year 1501, when the great Duke Albert was cho∣sen King of Poland, by whose means this Country became absolutely under the Domi∣nion of that Crown, and which was after∣wards confirm'd by a Diet held at Lublin in 1569, under the Reign of Sigismundus Au∣gustus, where it was agreed that Lithuania should enjoy its own peculiar Laws and Privi∣leges, and be constituted a part of the Polish Common-wealth; insomuch that nothing of Importance was for the future to be trans∣acted therein, without the voluntary Concur∣rence of these States. Division. This Country consists of two Parts, viz. 1. Lithuania properly so call'd; and, 2. Lithuanic, or White-Russia. Both which are divided into several Palati∣nates, and those again into Districts; and all of them may be properly term'd Dutchies, each having formerly had its peculiar Duke. Arms. The Arms or Standard of Lithuania are, Party per Pale, Gules and Azure: In the former a Horse in full career Argent, with a Warrior insiding Proper, brandishing a Sword over his head. And in the second the Virgin Mary with our Saviour in her Arms, surrounded by a Glory.
Before I proceed to a Topographical De∣scription of this State, I hope a short Ac∣count of the Origin of Lithuania, with the Lives and most remarkable Actions of the se∣veral Dukes, and Great Dukes of that Dut∣chy, Samogitia, &c. may not be unaccepta∣ble, which are as follows. Lithuania, whence so called. Lithuania, as Guagnini thinks, took its Name from this Occasion. When the first Prince thereof Palaemon left Italy, on account of Nero's Tyranny, he together with several of his Countrymen, fled, by a long Voyage, into these Parts: Where after some time having been saluted Prince by the Inhabitants thereof, he call'd their Country after the Name of his own, La Italia; which in pro∣cess of time, by mixing with the Idiom of those Barbarians, might (as he says) have de∣generated into Lithuania. Others will have it to be so nam'd from the Latin word Littus a Shoar, because, say they, this Prince set∣tled along the Shoar of the Baltic Sea beforeDifferent Opinions. he descended into Lithuania. To confirm this Prince's Expedition into this Country, there are several Italian and Latin words intermixt with its present Language. As likewise most of the Noble Families have great similitude with the Roman Names, tho the Vulgar sort are altogether Sclavonian. Notwithstanding this Assertion, Hartknoch, with several o∣thers, positively affirm, that this Country had its Name from Littuo, one of the Alani, a certain Duke therefore long before Palaemon's Voyage: So that from Littuo Alanus they call'd his Country Littualania, which after∣wards was contracted to Lithuania.
Palamon. Palaemon first Duke of Lithuania being de∣scended from the Roman Patricii, after having undergon great Dangers, and effected many glorious Enterprizes, died peaceably, leaving three Nephews Borcus, Cunossus and Spera, all which separately succeeded him in his Domi∣nions. Borcus. Borcus took for his Share part of Samogitia, where he built a Castle on the River Juria, a Branch of the Niemen, and call'd it after his own Name, and that of the River where∣on it stood, Jurburg, which continues even at this day. Cunossus. Cunossus extending his Dominion a different way, built Kunossow another Castle, calling it after his own Name, and which remains to this day. Spera. Spera likewise built a Castle near the River Swenta, where he began his Reign. At length Borcus and Spera dying, Cunossus seiz'd on both their Dominions; but soon af∣ter di'd also, and left two Sons, Kyernus and Gybutus; whereof Kyernus. Kyernus settled in Lithuania, and built the Castle Kyernow, which he made the Place of his Residence; and Gybutus. Gybutus resided in Samogitia, which he like∣wise govern'd. Both these Brother's joining to∣gether, made huge Devastations in Russia, and carried away great Booty; but upon their return home, found Samogitia serv'd the like Sauce by the Livonians: To revenge which, they forthwith enter'd Livonia, and burnt and plunder'd all that Country wherever they came. Kyernus dying, was succeeded in Lithuania
Zivibun∣dus. Muntwil. by his Son Zivibundus, and Gybutus in Samo∣gitia by his Son Muntwil; which last having reign'd but little, dy'd and left his Son Uikint. Ʋikint to succeed him in Samogitia; but Zivibun∣dus. Zivibundus liv'd a great while after, and prov'd no small Victor over the Russians and Tartars: for being willing to shake off the Russian Yoke, he sent his Brother WikintiErdzivil. Erdzivil to invade that Country; who so far succeeded as to take the City and Castle of Novogrodec, and to fix the Seat of a Dutchy there: And after proceeding further, he built the strong Castle of Grodno on the River Niemen. Then he descended into Podlachia, where he took several Towns, and soon re∣duced all that Province. Afterwards he con∣quer'd Kurdassus Prince of the Tartars, at a Town call'd Mozera, near the River Okuniow∣ka. This Erdzivil, after many Heroick Acti∣ons, and succeeding his Brother Zivibundus, di'd and left two Sons, Mingailus and Algi∣muntus, and divided his Dominions between them. Algimun∣tus. Algimuntus chose for his part Samogitia; and Mingailus. Mingailus rul'd over Lithuania and Polocz; which last Country he took from the Russians, and likewise extended his Dominion over all the Dutchy of Novogrodec. This Duke died, and left two Sons, Skirmunt and Ginvil. Skirmunt. Skirmunt having perform'd his Father's Ob∣sequies, enter'd upon the Government of Li∣thuania, with the Dutchy of Novogrodec. And Ginvil. Ginvil by natural Right seiz'd upon Polocz; which having govern'd for some time, he died and left to his Son
Boris. Boris, who rul'd a great while in Polocz, and built a famous Church there with Brick, calling it Sancta Sophia. He likewise founded several other famous Edisces, with the Town and Castle of Borissow upon the Ri∣ver Beresina. To him succeeded his Son Basilius Rechwold. Basilius Rechwold, who liv'd to a great Age, and left behind him a Son called Hlebus, and a Daughter nam'd Poroskavia. Hlebus and Poroska∣via. Hlebus surviv'd his Father but a little while, and Poroskavia wholly devoted her self to the Greek Religion; but afterwards went to Rome where she died, and was Canonized for a Saint. Now to return to the Dukes of Li∣thuania. Skirmunt obtain'd great Conquests over the Tartars and Russians, and dying, left his Uncle Kukovoi∣tus. Kukovoitus to succeed him in Lithuania and Samogitia; who having govern'd a good while, died, and left his Dominions to his Son-in-Law Giedrus∣sus. Giedrussus who had marri'd his Daughter Poiata. This Duke dying, left for his Succes∣sor his Son Ringolt. Ringolt, who having perform'd his Father's Funeral-Rites after the Pagan manner, en∣ter'd upon the Government of Lithuania and Samogitia. Against this Duke the Russians, join'd y the Tartars, march'd with great fu∣ry to reduce him to pay Tribute; but he timely opposing them with equal Force, gave them a signal Overthrow near Mohilna on the River Niemen. At length this Ringolt, fa∣mous likewise for several other Victories, died and left his Dominions to his Son
Mindog, 1240. Mindog, or Mendog, in the Year 1240, who had various Conflicts with the Dukes of Smolensko and Volhynia, both which at last he totally subdu'd. He likewise fought several Battels with Boleslaus the Chast King of Po∣land, and Daniel Emperor of Moscovy, in most of which the Christians were worsted with great slaughter. He frequently made Incursions into Masovia, Dobrina, Cuja∣via, &c. and return'd with great Booty. He also had bloody Wars with the Teutonic Knights of Prussia and Livonia: But at length in the Year 1252, being over-perswaded by the then Great Master Henricus de Zalcza, he gave up all his Dominions to that Order, in acknowledgment of several Honours and Ser∣vices done him, and moreover consented to turn Christian, and afterwards sent to Rome to pay his Devoir to that See. Whereupon Innocent IV. deputed his Brother Heinderic to consecrate him King. But whether it were that Mindog repented the loss of his Domini∣ons, or for any other Cause, it is certain that he refus'd to receive this Nuncio; and the very same Year, together with all his Coun∣try, returned to their former Idolatry. Ne∣verthelessAcknow∣ledg'd King. the Teutonic Knights suffer'd him to continue King, and under him, in con∣junction with the Lithuanians, Samogitians, &c. invaded Masovia, and made great Ha∣vock of that Country. But afterwards Men∣dog being unmindful any farther of the Ci∣vility of those Knights, turn'd his Arms a∣gainst their Country, destroying most of their Cities, and returning with great Spoils.
Next Mendog having gathered together a great Army, and being likewise assisted by Swarno Duke of Russia, marched against Se∣movitus Duke of Masovia, whom together with his Son Conrade, he surpriz'd in his Pa∣lace of Jasdow; where Swarno struck off Semovitus his Head with his own hand; but Conrade was preserv'd by Mendog, and after∣wards ransom'd by his Countrymen. Soon after this the Lithuanians and Russians hav∣ing made great Devastations in Masovia, re∣tir'd with the Spoils and Captives into their several Countries. The next Year the same People not being content with their former Irruptions, march'd again into Masovia; but scarce finding any thing left to prey upon by reason of their last Year's Work, they only burnt and plunder'd a House belonging to the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, and so return'd home. At length Heaven thought fit to favour the Polish Christians, by taking away King Min∣dog, who was murder'd by his NephewK. Mindog murder'd. Stroinat, and his Son-in-Law Dowmant, in the Year 1263. Stroinat, 1263. Stroinat begun his Reign in the Year 1263, by the murder of his Brother Towcivil Duke of Polocz; but not long afterwards Woisalk Son of Mendog, tho then a Russian Monk, being mindful of his Father's Death, depriv'd him also of Life, and immediately seiz'd on his Dominions. Woisalk, 1264. Woisalk took upon him only the Title of Duke, and began his Government with fre∣quent Irruptions into Poland, Mascovia and Prussia: But in the Year 1267, endeavouring
to subdue Russia, he was circumvented by Leo Duke thereof, (who built Leopol) and slain in the Monastery of Wrowsko. Great Dukes of Lithuania. With him the Family of the Dukes of Li∣thuania being extinct, Ʋtenus, or Ʋcienus,Utenus. descended from the Kitauri, Princes in that Country, was unanimously elected first Great Duke of Lithuania and Samogitia; who hav∣ing had divers Wars with the Russians and Prussians, died, and left his Dominions to his Son Swintoro∣hus. Swintorohus, who reigning but little, tho very well, died, and left behind him his Son Germon∣tus. Germontus, who rul'd also a very little while, and was succeeded by his Son Trahus. Trahus, who govern'd well both in War and Peace for some time, and built a Town and Castle after his own Name. This Great Duke left behind him five Legitimate Children, viz. Narimundus, Dowmantus, Holsanus, Giedru∣tus, and Troidenus, who all separately succeed∣ed their Father in his Dominions. Narimun∣dus. Narimundus the Eldest had for his part the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, with Samogitia; both which he had a Right to by the Preroga∣tive of his Birth. He translated the Ducal Seat from Novogrodec to Kiernow. His first Wars were in conjunction with his Brothers upon Poland, Russia, Masovia and Prussia. Then he declar'd War against his Brother Dowmant for taking away his Wife, whom he soon recovered, and drove his Brother out of his Dominions; who flying to the Russians of Polocz, was universally receiv'd for their Prince.
This Duke is recorded, in the Russian An∣nals, to have been the first Inventor of the Lithuanian Arms; which are in a Field Gules, a Person arm'd Cap-a-pe, Sables, riding full speed on a Horse Argent, and flourishing a Sword over his head of the third. To him succeeded his Brother Troidenus; but first an Account of the other Brothers. Dowmant. Dowmant had for his Share the District of Cosnia, where he built the Castle of Ʋcian. Holsanus. Holsanus, the third Brother, was allotted his Division beyond the River Wilia towards the East. Giedrutus. Giedrutus, or Giedrotus, the fourth Brother, built a Castle upon a Lake, calling it after his own Name, and where he fixt the Seat of his Dutchy. Whose Descendants are famous e∣ven to this day. Troidenus. The fifth Brother Troidenus, succeeded Na∣rimundus in Lithuania and Samogitia; who having gathered together an Army of about 30000 Men, divided them into three Parts; one whereof he sent against Masovia, and the other two against the Teutonick Knights in Prussia; where having destroy'd divers Towns, he return'd with a great Booty of Captives and Cattle. The same Year Cu∣javia was over-run by the Lithuanians. Some small time after which, Dowmant Prince of Polocz, being provok'd to see his younger Brother on his Father's Throne, hir'd three Rusticks to murder him as he went into a Bath; which they effected. But Dowmant marching with a formidable Army to take possession of Lithuania, was met and van∣quish'd by
Rimunt. Rimunt Son to Troidenus; who thereupon succeeded his Father for a while: but after∣wards calling a Diet at Kiernow, he publickly renounc'd his Right, and retir'd to a Monas∣tical Life, constituting Vithenes, 1281. Vithenes, of the Family of the Kitauri, de∣scended of the Roman Princes, Great Duke. This Prince was a Person of a brave and war∣like Spirit. Wherefore Rimunt, when it was demanded of him, Why he put by the Families of his Ʋncles, Giedrutus and Holsanus? an∣swered, Because there were none but Children a∣mong them, when a Prince of Lithuania ought to correspond with the Arms of that Country, in∣vented by his Ʋncle Narimund, which were a Warrior on Horseback, arm'd Cap-a-pe, and post∣ing to subdue his Enemies. This Great Duke Vithenes began his Reign in the Year 1281. The Year following he invaded the Palatinate of Lublin, and continued destroying it for fifteen days together; till at length Lescus the Black, King of Poland, being animated thereto by a Vision, met and fought him be∣tween the Rivers Narew and Niemen, where the latter gain'd a signal Victory. In testi∣mony whereof he founded a Parochial Church at Lublin, and dedicated it to St. Michael the Arch-Angel. 1287. In the Year 1287, the Lithuanians, Prus∣sians, and Samogitians, made a Descent upon Dobrina; and surprizing the Capital City thereof on Sunday, when its Inhabitants were busi'd at Devotion, kill'd and carry'd a∣way great Numbers of them into Slave∣ry.
1289. Afterwards in 1289, the Lithuanians, to the number only of 8000, invaded a part of Prussia, burning, killing, and destroying wherever they came; but before the Country could make head against them, they were re∣tired with great Spoils. To requite which, next Year the Prussians march'd into Lithua∣nia, where they kill'd and took vast numbers of the Inhabitants, as likewise possessed them∣selves, under the Conduct of the Commenda∣dor of Koningsberg, of the strong Castle Me∣rabde. Afterwards Memer, great Master of Prussia, enter'd Lithuania with a formidable Army, and entirely destroy'd two Districts. Not long after this Vithenes invaded Cuja∣via, and burnt and destroy'd all the Country about Bressici, and likewise carried away great Numbers into Captivity. 1293. In the Year 1293, Conradus Stange, Com∣mendador of Ragneta, took the Castle of Mindog in Lithuania; which Vithenes soon re∣quited by entring Prussia, and destroying it eighty days together. 1294. Afterwards in 1294, Vithenes, with a Body only of 1800 Horse, marching thro' Woods and By-roads, surpriz'd a great Concourse of People met in the Collegiate Church of Lans∣chet, whereof the greatest part he kill'd, and the others, consisting chiefly of Ecclesiasticks, he carri'd away for Slaves. The Church he rob'd, and those that fled he stifled by fir∣ing all the House around them. After which marching about the Country, he drove away all their Cattel; but upon his return, meet∣ing with Casimir Palatine of Lanschet, he was bravely oppos'd for a while, till Numbers sup∣pli'd
the defect of Valour, and he entirely routed the Christians near Soaczow; which having effected, he return'd peaceably into his Country. This Vithenes had a Master of the Horse nam'd Gediminus, who being of a haughty and ambitious Temper, conspir'd, together with the Great Dutchess, to take away his Mas∣ter's Life, which in a short time he brought about; and having marry'd his Princess, he seiz'd upon the Crown. Gedemi∣nus. 1300. Gedeminus became Great Duke of Lithuania in the Year 1300; in the beginning of whose Reign the Prussian and Livonian Knights, hav∣ing got together a numerous Army, invaded Samogitia, which they soon over-run, burning and destroying wherever they came, and tak∣ing the strong Castle of Kunossow by Assault, wherein they made Prisoner the Grand Gene∣ral of Lithuania. The Year following Gede∣minus, to revenge these insupportable Inju∣ries, having rais'd a considerable Body of his own Subjects, together with the Assistance of the Russians and Tartars, march'd directly a∣gainst the Teutonic Knights; when meeting them near the River Okmiena, both Armies came to Blows, and so continu'd for several Hours, till at length the Samogitians forsaking the Knights side, came over to Gedeminus; whose Strength thereby being greatly aug∣mented, as that of his Enemies weakned, he fell furiously in among them, and soon put them to flight. This Victory being thus luckily obtain'd, Gedeminus prosecuted it into the very heart of Prussia, where he found no∣thing
able to withstand him, except only the two Castles of Ragneta and Cilza; but which nevertheless he took in a short time. After∣wards having made a miserable havock in that Country, as also totally regain'd his Dutchy of Samogitia, he return'd peaceably home. 1304. In the Year 1304, this Great Duke having a Quarrel with some of the Russian Princes, made great Preparations against them; when marching forthwith into Russia, he first met and fought Ʋlodomirus Duke of Volhynia, whom he slew, and routed his whole Army. Then he bent his force against Leo Duke of Luceoria, whom he also vanquish'd, and took his chief City Lutzko: both which Princes being thus defeated, made him absolute Master of all Volhynia. Next Spring, being tir'd out with Idleness, he carry'd his Arms against Stanis∣laus Duke of Kiovia, whom he overthrew, to∣gether with several Princes his Neighbours that came to assist him. With this Victory Gedeminus being not a little encourag'd, pro∣ceeded and took most of the Cities and Towns of Russia; when after having compleated a glorious Conquest, he return'd Triumphantly into his own Country. Afterwards Gedeminus going to hunt about five Miles beyond the River Wilia, occasio∣nally built a Castle there near a Lake, and a City, naming it Troki, whither he then trans∣latedTroki built. his Court from Kicrnow. After this, in the Year 1305, Gedeminus going a Hunting again towards the East, after various For∣tune became greatly fatigu'd with that sport. Whereupon, Night drawing on, he was forc'd to take up a Lodging upon a Mountain, then
call'd Krzyunagora, now Turzagoria or Lissa; where soon falling asleep, he dreamt that he saw and heard roar a huge Iron Wolf, which had above a hundred Wolves of the same Mettle in his Belly, which roar'd like∣wise after an amazing manner: whereat be∣ing extreamly frighted, he wak'd, and next Morning put this Dream to his Courtiers to expound; when every one having deliver'd his Opinion a different way, at last a Pagan Priest nam'd Ledzieiko (said to have been found in an Eagle's Nest) whose Practice was to foretel Futurities, expounded it thus: The Iron Wolf (quoth he) denotes a strong City, and the other Wolves in his Belly a formidable Multi∣tude of Inhabitants. Hereupon he immediately advises Gedeminus to build a fortify'd City and Castle there. Whence this Priest came to have the Name of Radzivil, that is, A Counsellor to build Vilna. From this Person's Family have descended a great many famous Heroes, who have all sufficiently distinguish'd themselves both in times of Peace and War. Gedeminus being easily mov'd by these Persua∣sions, forthwith erected two Castles near that Place, one on a high Hill, and the other inVilna built. a Plain; adding moreover a City call'd Vilna, from the River Wilia, running by it; which is now very populous, and Capital of that Great Dutchy; to which City he not long after transferr'd his Residence from Troki. 1306. In 1306, the Lithuanians having had Intel∣ligence that the Poles were lull'd in Sloth and Security, march'd through Woods and By∣roads into Lower Poland, where they burnt and plunder'd Kalisch, with several other Ci∣ties
and Towns, killing the old People and Children, and carrying the others away Cap∣tive. The same Year Henry de Pleczko, a Saxon, Great Master of the Teutonic Order in Prussia, surpriz'd and took the Castle of Gar∣tin in Samogitia, and put all the Lithuanians, found therein, to the Sword. They likewise proceeded in this War by help of the Germans; and after having totally destroy'd the District of Karsouin, return'd with great Numbers of Spoils and Captives into Prussia. 1307. In 1307, the Lithuanians made an Irruption into Siradia and Kalisch, where doing a great deal of Mischief, they suddenly return'd into their own Country. 1308. In 1308, Olgerdus, Son of Gedeminus, march'd with a great Army into Prussia, where he made havock with Fire and Sword where∣ever he came, carrying off likewise great Booty. These Favours the Lithuanians and Prussians did frequently and alternatively for one another within the space of few years. In 1315, the Lithuanians surpriz'd the Terri∣tory1315. of Dobrina, where they made great De∣vastations, and likewise took the City of that Name, and burnt and plunder'd it. In 1322,1322. they likewise enter'd Livonia, laying all wast for many Miles together. In the same Year, in Winter-time, David, Starosta of Gartin, not being discourag'd by Cold, destroy'd that Country up as far as Raval, carrying away great Spoils and many Prisoners. After∣wards, in the same Winter, they took the Castle of Memel, and also enter'd Prussia, and kill'd the Comendador of Capion in a set Battle. David of Gartin likewise invaded Masovia at
the same time, and entirely ruin'd a great ma∣ny Towns and Villages. 1323. In 1323, the Lithuanians came clandestinely upon Dobrina again, and did a great deal of Damage there. In the following Year the Starosta of Gartin enter'd Masovia again near Ploczko, wherein he destroy'd and burnt above one hundred and thirty Villages, thirty Towns, and carry'd away about four thousand Cap∣tives; whilst another Army made a Descent upon Livonia, and serv'd that Country after the like manner. 1325. In 1325, Ann Daughter to Gedeminus mar∣ry'd Casimir, Son to Ʋladislaus King of Poland, by which all that had been formerly taken from the Polanders was restor'd, and a Peace concluded between those two Nations. Afterwards, at the Siege of the Castle of Fribourg, belonging to the Teutonic Knights in Samogitia, this Great Duke Gedeminus re∣ceiv'd a Wound with an Arrow which costHis Death. him his Life. This Prince had seven Sons, Viz. Montividus, Narimundus, Olgerdus, Keijstutus, Koriatus, Jauunutus, and Lubartus, with some Daughters, one of which was marry'd as before. Among these Sons, he divided his Dominions while he liv'd; gi∣ving to Montivi∣dus. Montividus his eldest, Kyernow and Slonim, with the Territories thereunto belonging. To
Narimun∣dus. Narimundus his Conquests, and other Ac∣quisitions in Russia. On Olgerdus. Olgerdus he bestow'd Krewo, and all from thence to Beresina. To Keijstutus. Keijstutus he gave Samogitia, Troki, Witeb∣sko, &c. To Koriatus. Koriatus the City of Novogrodec, with its Territories. But on his Beloved Jauunu∣tus. Jauunutus he conferr'd the Metropolis of Lithuania, Vilna, as also Osmian and Braslaw, together with the supream Command over all his Brothers Dominions. Lubartus. The youngest Son Lubartus had no share with his Brothers, because by his Marriage with the Duke of Russia's Daughter, in his Fa∣ther's Life-time, he had obtain'd the Succession to that Dutchy. Among these Brothers, Olgerdus and Keijstu∣tus being most vex'd to see their younger Bro∣ther Jauunutus so highly promoted, conspir'd together, after their Father's Death, to drive him out of Vilna; for the execution of which, they fix'd a certain time: but Olgerdus hap∣pening then to be absent on some extraordi∣nary Occasion, was forc'd to fail of his Ap∣pointment. Nevertheless, Keijstutus firmly adhering to his Vow, resolv'd to accomplish the Design alone, and consequently marching secretly towards Vilna, surpriz'd and took it, with both its Castles. When Jauunutus, fly∣ing towards a neighbouring Wood, was there taken by Keijstutus his Men; and being brought back to his Brother, was by him or∣der'd to be clapt in Chains. A little while afterwards Olgerdus returning, Keijstutus would have surrender'd to him the Crown, as being
his elder Brother; but which Olgerdus re∣fus'd, saying, It was due neither to his Fortune nor Merit, and therefore he would not pretend to de∣serve it by Birth. But at length they both agreed to divide those Dominions between them, and Vilna, with the supream Authority, fell to Olgerdus; but nevertheless, they both bound themselves by Oath to intrench upon nei∣ther's Dominions. To their Brother Jauunu∣tus they yielded the Palatinate of Braslaw in Russia. Olgerdus. Olgerdus, being thus possess'd of the Throne, began his Reign with invading Prussia and Livonia, where the Teutonic Knights did not dare to oppose him; so that having over-run all those Countries, and loaded his Army with Spoils, he return'd triumphantly to Lithuania, where he sacrific'd the Captive Knights to his Father's Ghost whom they had kill'd. The same Year Olgerdus march'd silently a∣gainst the Marquisate of Brandenburg, which he destroy'd and plunder'd up as far as Frank∣furt, and all along the Banks of the River Oder. Next he drove the Tartars out of Podolia,Caminiec built. about which time Caminiec was built by his Brother's Sons. Afterwards Janowitz, Czar of Muscovy, being puff'd up with his great Power, sent to Olgerdus, then lying sick of a Fe∣ver at Witebsko, That before a Month were at an end, he would make him such Visit as should fright him into an Ague. To which haughty Mes∣sage Olgerdus only return'd, That since he knew his Mind, he would prevent his Journey, and wait on him at Moscow. Whereupon leaping out of his Bed, he expos'd his Life to his Ho∣nour,
(but which, as it hapned, did well enough, for he recover'd in few days) and getting speedily together a considerable Ar∣my, he march'd forthwith into Moscovy, laid Siege to Moscow, and took it, together with the baffled Czar, whom he forc'd, before he left him, to agree to a dishonourable Peace, and leave him in possession of great part of his Empire. After which he reduc'd the ma∣jor part of Russia, which he join'd to his Do∣minions, they having formerly been only wont to pay Tribute to Lithuania. This Prince had by Mary his Wife twelve Sons, of which Jagello and Skiergelo only were Great Dukes of Lithuania after him. His Bro∣ther Keijstutus had six Sons, whereof Vitol∣dus and Sigismundus came to be Great Dukes of Lithuania. Jagello 1381. Olgerdus dying in the Year 1381, Jagello ascended his Throne with consent of his Un∣cle Keijstutus. This Duke had a favourite Courtier, one Voidilus, a Man of an obscure Descent, and whom he had rais'd from his Ba∣ker to be his Secretary and prime Minister. This Person he affected so dearly, that he gave him his Sister in Marriage, which was highly displeasing to his Uncle, who protested earnestly against it: whereupon this subtle Upstart, fearing lest Keijstutus might one day or other put him out of favour with his Prince, he prevail'd with Jagello to look up∣on his Uncle as his Enemy, and to proceed against him accordingly; which Jagello, being young, was easily persuaded to do: there∣fore clapping up a secret Truce with the Teu∣tonic Knights, with whom he was before in
War, he made all imaginable Preparations against his Uncle: which Keijstutus being in∣form'd of, was immediately alarm'd at, till his Son Vitoldus quieted his Suspicions, by per∣suading him that Jagello would never attempt any such thing: but at length Jagello march∣ing against the Russians of Polocz, which were then his Uncle's Subjects, his design was past all doubt; and therefore Keijstutus got toge∣ther what Forces he could upon so short a Warning, and invaded his Nephew's Terri∣tories, where he took Vilna, and would have proceeded, had it not been for his Son Vitol∣dus, who still continu'd Jagello's Friend. But afterwards Keijstutus being busy'd in subduing the Traitor Koributh Jagello, not only retook Vilna, but also besieg'd and gain'd Troki by Treachery; which Keijstutus marching to re∣cover, he, together with his Son Vitoldus, was betray'd into Jagello's hands by means of his Brother Skergelo, who pretended to bring these two Princes amicably together; but Jagello having once got his Uncle into his Clutches, detain'd him, and threw him into Chains, and afterwards order'd him to be strangled in his Prison at Kreva. His Cousin German Vitoldus he ungratefully kept a long while in Bonds at Vilna; who afterwards being remov'd to Kreva, and a time appoint∣ed for his Death, escap'd by means of his Wife, who always having free Access to him, by exchanging Habits with one▪ of her Ser∣vants, got her Husband away in her own. Hence he fled to his Kinsman John Duke of Masovia; but not thinking himself secure there, he afterwards went into Prussia, where
at first he was reprov'd by the Knights of the Teutonic Order for having recourse to them only in time of Adversity; but afterwards he was more courteously receiv'd, and promis'd their Assistance to re-establish him in his pater∣nal Dominions. Whereupon, together with the Samogitians, who favour'd Vitoldus his In∣terest, they made an Inroad into Lithuania, and took Troki; but they were afterwards nevertheless forc'd to surrender it. At length Jagello by secret Messages, recall'd his Kinsman out of Prussia; and upon his Promise to be faithful to him, settled him in his He∣reditary Estate. A little while after this, the Throne of Poland becoming vacant by Lewis of Hungary's Death, Jagello was invited thi∣ther to accept that Crown under certain Conditions, which may appear more at large in his Life among those Kings. Whilst Jagello was thus absent in Poland with great Numbers of his Subjects, who went to wait on him into that Kingdom, the Great Masters of Prussia and Livonia finding a fit opportunity, enter'd Lithuania, destroying with Fire and Sword as far as the Castle of Lucom in Russia, which also they took, and having furnish'd with all necessary Defence, plac'd in it Andrew Jagello's Brother, upon whose Request this Expedition had been un∣dertaken. About the same time Swetoslaus, Duke of Smolensko, invaded Russia, and took Mscislaw and several other Places by force; both which Actions Jagello being soon in∣form'd of, immediately dispatch'd away his Brother Skirgelo, and Kinsman Vitoldus, into Lithuania; who finding the Teutonic Army
retir'd, forthwith laid Siege to the Castle of Lucom; which having taken, they proceeded to Mscislaw, which they likewise took, and kill'd Swetoslaus, who was in possession of it. Af∣terwards having recover'd all the other re∣volted Dominions which had sided with Duke Andrew, they made him Prisoner; and carry∣ing him into Poland, he was order'd by his Brother Jagello to be cast into a noisom Dun∣geon, whence, upon the request of the good-natur'd Vitoldus, he was not long after deli∣ver'd. After Jagello's Death, tho there were seve∣ral Great Dukes of Lithuania; yet seeing they were Tributary to the Kings of Poland, and Lithuania it self was afterwards united to Poland under one Form of Government, I need not insist any longer upon the Succession of its Dukes, since what past remarkable in their Time, is comprehended in the History of the Kings of the Jagellonic Family, who reign'd in Poland from Jagello's time to the late King Michael Wiesnowiski; therefore I will proceed to enter upon the Geographical De∣scription of this great Dutchy. The two Provinces of Lithuania contain these Palatinates, Viz. I. PRO∣VINCE. Lithuania Proper contains the Palatinates of Vilna, Troki, and Briescia or Polesia. II. PRO∣VINCE. Lithuanic-Russia contains the Palatinates of Novogrodec. Mscislaw. Vitebsko or Witebsko. Minski, and Polocz.
Lithuanic-Russia is commonly call'd Russia-Alba, or White-Russia, either because its Hills are generally cover'd with Snow, and which lasts longer there than in any other Parts of this Country; or else by reason that the Animals bred there are generally enclin'd to be white, tho in other Countries the same Species be of another Colour. Both these Provinces abound with all manner of Neces∣saries, besides several Merchandizes, part of which they transport by the River Duna to Riga in Livonia, and part by the River Nie∣men to Koningsberg in Prussia. I. Palati∣nate. The first Palatinate of Lithuania Proper is that of Vilna, whose Palatin is chief Governour of the City of that Name. This Palatinate com∣prehends three large Districts, which are The Districts of Osmian, Bratislaw or Braslaw, & Wilkomitz. In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Vilna Cap. Bish. Osmian, Bratislaw or Braslaw. Wilkomitz, Ikaznia, and Drizwiatz. Cities and Towns of The chief City of all which, and Metropo∣lis of the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, is Vilna. Vilna, call'd also Vilenski by the Inhabitants, and Wildaw or Die Wilde by the Germans, and is situated near the Conflux of the Rivers Wilia
and Wiln, from whence it has its Name. It lies about 130 Polish Miles from Cracow to the North-East, 48 from Riga to the North, 70 from Warsaw, and a hundred from Smo∣lensko to the East. It is a large and very po∣pulous City, well fortify'd with two Castles, whereof one is built in a Plain, and the other on a Hill; the former wash'd by the River Wilia, and the latter by the Wiln. The first of these Rivers is large and navigable, where∣by the Inhabitants transport Merchandizes to Dantzic; and the other small and inconside∣rable. The Houses of this City are generally low and mean, being most built with Wood, except some belonging to the Gentry, others to Foreign Merchants, and several publick Edifices, which are all either of Stone or Brick. Of the two Castles, that on a Hill is very antient, and almost ruin'd; but the other is a Pile of beautiful modern Architecture. The Churches here are all of Stone, both those belonging to the Roman and Russian Per∣suasions. The Cathedral stands in the Lower Castle, wherein lies the Body of St. Casimir, canoniz'd by Leo X.▪ in a large Silver Tomb of great Value. Here also is a very large Bell, like to that of Cracow, which requires above four and twenty strong Men to ring it. Within this Castle is the Archiepiscopal See of the Metropolitan of Russia. Among the other publick Edifices is the Great Duke's Pa∣lace, in which is a famous Guard-Chamber, furnish'd with all sorts of Arms; and about two English Miles from this City stands ano∣ther Ducal Palace, nam'd from its Situation Rudnick, that is, Near the Water. This Palace
is entirely built with Wood, and beautify'd with a Park, pleasant Gardens, Orchards, &c. Next comes the Academy of this City, found∣ed by King Stephen in the Year 1579, and erected into a University by Gregory XIII. the same Year, at the Request of the Founder Va∣lerian Bishop of Vilna. In this University are six Professors of Divinity, five of Philosophy, four of Laws, and seven of Human Learning. Among the Merchants Houses, there is one particularly neat, erected by the Moscovite Company for the Repository of their Furs, Ermins, and other rich Merchandizes brought from Moscow. Here are also many other fair Edifices, which I pass by for brevity's sake. In this City Guns of all sorts are cast, and likewise divers other Warlike Instruments of excellent Workmanship made. Vilna has the Honour to have a Tribunal for all Lithu∣ania. The Moscovites found means to make themselves Masters of this City in the Year 1655, but were soon forc'd to surrender it to the Poles, who are at present in possession of it. Osmian. Osmian, a wooden Town, Capital of its District, about seven Miles from Vilna; to which belongs a large Jurisdiction, with seve∣ral eminent Towns. Bratislaw. Bratislaw or Braslaw, a Timber-built City, situate on a large Lake, with a Castle founded on a Rock. This Place lies about twenty Miles from Vilna with a considerable Juris∣diction. Wilko∣mitz. Wilkomitz, a Wood-built Town upon the River Swienta. Here is kept a Court of Jus∣tice to try the Causes of the Gentry. To
this District belongs a very large Jurisdiction, in which are several considerable Towns be∣longing to the King, Bishops, and Gentry. Ikaznia. Ikaznia, a Town built with Wood near a River of the same Name. It lies about three Polish Miles from Bratislaw. Drizwiatz. Drizwiatz, a Town built on a Lake near a River of the same Name, and about five Miles from Bratislaw. Senators of Vilna. The Senators of this Palatinate are only The Palatin, and  Castellan of Vilna. For it must here be observ'd, that there are no Minor Castellans in all Lithuania. Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are of four sorts: The first of the Palatinate it self, which are Argent and Azure; in the former the Arms of Lithuania, and in the lat∣ter two Pillars of the first. Besides these, each District has its Arms, which are, First, of Osmian, those of Vilna differing only in changing the Columns or Pillars to erected Swords. That of Bratislaw a Field Gules, with no Charge. Thirdly, That of Wilkomitz the same with that of the Palatinate, changing only the Pillars to the Image of St. Michael. II. Palati∣nate. The Second Palatinate of Lithuania Proper, is that of Troki, which has in it these four large Dis∣tricts, Viz. The Districts of Grodno, Lida, Cowno, and Ʋpita.
In all which are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Troki, Cap. Grodno, Lida, Cowno, and Ʋpita. Cities and Towns of The chief City of all which is Troki. Troki, otherwise call'd Troccum or Trocum, built with Wood, and seated on a Point of Land that shoots out into a Lake, and which lies about four Miles from Vilna to the West. This City had formerly a strong Wall to de∣fend it, but which was long since destroy'd by the Prussian Knights; but yet it still has a Castle founded in the Lake, and sufficiently fortify'd both by Nature and Art. Gedemi∣nus, Great Duke of Lithuania, laid the first Foundation of this City, which was the Ducal Seat before it came to be translated to Vilna. The Moscovites storm'd, burnt, and pillag'd this Place in the Year 1655. Grodno. Grodno, a Timber-built City on the River Niemen or Cronon, having a strong Castle on a Rock near adjoining, founded by King Stephen, who was wont to reside here for conveniency of Hunting. Sigismund III. built a fair Bridg here over the Niemen, which is thought not to have an Equal in all Poland. The Jesuits have a College or Academy in this City for Instruct∣ing of Youth. From hence divers kinds of Merchandizes are transported from several Parts of Lithuania to Dantzic. The District of Grodno is indifferently large, having been formerly a considerable Dutchy.
Lida. Lida, a Town, Capital of its District, built with Wood, having in it a tolerable Castle, and a Court of Justice for the Gentry. Cowno. Cowno, a famous Timber-Town, tho there are several Houses in it built with Stone, si∣tuate on the Conflux of the Rivers Niemen and Wilia, with a strong antient Castle founded on a Rock. Upita. Ʋpita, a Wood-built Town, and Capital of a very large District, wherein are several Towns. Senators of Troki. The Senators of this Palatinate are The Palatin, and Castellan of Troki. Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are the Arms of Lithuania in a Field Azure. III. Pala∣tinate. The third Palatinate of Lithuania Proper, is that of Briescia or Polesia, adjoining to the Palatinate of Lublin, and partaking in all respects of the Manners thereof. It has but one very large District, which is that of Pinsko. This Palatinate contains these Cities and Towns, Viz. Briescia, Pinsko, Biala, Prepetus, Camenecia, Cobrinia, Janovia, Voinia, Rososia, and Ʋlodava.
Cities and Towns of The chief of all which is Brescia. Brescia or Briescia, a large wooden City, built on the Confines of Lithuania, on the Banks of the River Bug, with a Timber Castle founded on a Rock, and wash'd by the River Muchavecz. This City is distant about twenty five Miles from Lublin, and thirty from War∣saw to the East. In it is the most famous A∣cademy for Jews of any in Europe, whither that People resort from Italy, Germany, Mo∣ravia, Silesia, &c. not only to study, but take Degrees in that Religion. Without this City also is a Regal Palace of Modern Architecture, with variety of pleasant Gar∣dens. Pinsko. Pinsko, a Timber-built City, and indif∣ferently large, seated on the River Perepet; which passing by divers Towns in Russia, falls into the Boristhenes. The Inhabitants of this Place are very Industrious, and make frequent Journeys into Muscovy and Germany on account of Merchandizing. They are ge∣nerally of the Greek Persuasion, and have a Bishop of that Sect who resides among them. Biala. Biala, famous only for a Palace built by the Dukes of the Family of Radzivil, which is now converted into a College for the In∣structing of Youth. Prepetus. Prepetus, a Town with an old Castle, built on the River of the same Name. Senators of Briescia. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin, and Castellan. of Briescia.
Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are the same with the former, differing only by a B in the middle. I. Palati∣nate. The first Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia, is that of Novogrodec, which is divided into two Districts, which are The Districts of Novogrodec, and Slonim. In both which are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Novogrodec, Cap. Slonim, Wolkowisko, Lacowickz, Mysza, Zlucz, Rozan, Neswitz, and Selecz. Cities and Towns ofThe Capital of all which is Novogro∣dec. Novogrodec, a large Timber-City, which formerly belong'd to the second Sons of the Princes of Lithuania. Here interchangeably with the Town of Minski, is held a Parliament for the Great Dutchy of Lithuania. Slonim. Slonim, a wooden City, whose District was formerly a Dutchy. Wolko∣wisko. Wolkowisko, a large Town containing a Court of justice or Tribunal for the Gentry. Laco∣wickz. Lacowickz, famous for a very fair Palace, built by a Grand General of Lithuania, and well fortify'd after the Modern way. Mysza. Mysza, a Town with a Castle, seated by a Lake, and all surrounded by a Plain.
Zlucz. Zlucz, one of the largest Cities in this Coun∣try, but nevertheless is all of Wood, except only the Cathedral and Ducal Palace. This City had not long since a Soveraign Prince with large Territories, but he was always Tributary to Poland. It is at present in possession of the Family of Radzivil. Rozan. Rozan, a well-built Town with very fair Streets. Neswitz. Neswitz, where Nicholas Radzivil, surnam'd the Pilgrim, has founded several noble Pub∣lick Edifices; a Description whereof I have omitted for brevity's sake. Senators of Novogro∣dec. The Senators of this Palatinate are The Palatin, and Castellan of Novogrodec. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate, are that of the Great Dutchy in an Azure Field. II. Palati∣nate. The Second Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia, is that of Mscislaw, lying between the River Peripet to the South, and the Boristhenes to the East, in a kind of Triangular form, being, for the most part, either over-run with Woods, or over-flow'd with Water. What plain Land it has, is generally very fruitful. It likewise abounds with Cattle of all sorts, and great Numbers of excellent Fowl, and is divided into two very large Districts, which are The Districts of Mscislaw, and Modziria.
In all which are these Cities and Towns, viz. Mscislaw, Cap. Modzir, Dambrownuna, Bychow, Kopysz, Sklow, Reczycza, Viszchorod, Strissin, Cleckum, Ouruckum, Homlia, Criczow, and Ostrskum. Cities and Towns of The Capital of all which is Mscislaw. Mscislaw, a Timber'd City built on the River Sosa, with a Castle defended by Palisa∣does. It lies upon the Borders of Moscovy, and therefore is strongly garison'd. This District was formerly a Soveraignty, but it is now reduc'd. Modzir. Modzir, a City, Capital of its District, built among the Marshes. Dambrow∣nuna. Dambrownuna, a Town with a strong Castle built upon the Confines of Moscovy, about fourteen Miles from Smolensko. Bychow. Bychow, a Town with a Castle seated on the River Boristhenes, about twelve Miles from Mohilow. Kopysz. Kopysz, a Town with a Castle on the Bo∣risthenes. Sklow. Sklow, a Town with a Castle on the Bo∣risthenes, reputed to be a County, and of which the magnificent John Chodkiewil writes himself Hereditary Palatin. Reczycza. Reczycza, a Town with a Castle situate on the Boristhenes. Viszeho∣rod. Viszehorod, situate upon the Boristhenes about three Miles from Kiow.
Strissin. Strissin, a Town and Castle on the Bo∣risthenes. Senators of Mscislaw. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Mscislaw. Its Arms. The Arms and Standard of this Palatinate, are the same with those of the Great Dutchy, differing only in an M plac'd in the middle. III. Pala∣tinate. The third Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia is that of Vitebsko, like the former, bordering upon the Duna towards the East, having but one large District, which is The District of Orsha. In this Palatinate are these several Cities and Towns, viz. Witebsko, Cap. Orsha, Mohilow, Czasniki, Sienno, Leplo, and Woroniec. The Capital of all which is Cities and Towns of Witebsko. Witebsko, a Timber-built City, indifferent∣ly large, situate on the River Dwina, by which divers sorts of Merchandizes are transported from hence to Riga in Livonia. It has two large Castles well defended both by Nature and Art against the Incursions of the Mosco∣vites, who have been often repuls'd thence with considerable Loss. In this City there are always four Companies of Foot Souldiers,
each consisting of 500 Men, one whereof (says Guagnini) I my self commanded for near ten Years. This Place lies about fourscore Miles from Vilna, and had formerly a Prince of its own. Orsha. Orsha, a large Wooden City, defended on one side with sharp and strong Palisadoes, and on the other by the River Boristhenes, toge∣ther with a Stone Castle wash'd by the River Orshicza. This Place lies about eighteen Miles from Witebsko. Mohilow. Mohilow, a very large Market-Town much frequented by the Moscovites, whence they transmit their Firs into Poland and Germany. Czasniki. Czasniki, a Wood-built Town lying on the River Ʋla. Sienno. Sienno, a Town with a Castle, about six Miles from Czasniki. Leplo. Leplo, a Town with a Castle well defended, situate on a Lake, and about seven Miles from Czasniki. Woroniec. Woroniec, a Town with a Castle lying upon the River Ʋsacza, and about three Miles from Polocz. Senators of Vitebsko. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Vitebsko. Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate, are the Arms of the Great Dutchy, in a Field Vert. IV. Palati∣nate. The fourth Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia is that of
Minski, which is divided into two Districts, viz. The Districts of Minski, and Borissow. In both which are these several Cities and Towns, viz. Minski, Cap. Borissow, Koidanow, Radoskowice, Lohoisko, Swislocz, Bobroisko, Odruczko, Smolniany, and Turkow. Cities and Towns ofThe Capital of all which is Minski. Minski, a large Timber-built City, with a double Wall, a strong Castle, and a very deep Ditch, with other Fortifications. It is wash'd by a River that turns a great many Mills. It was formerly the Custom in Russia, under whose Dominions this Palatinate was when this City was built, to fortify their principal Towns with a double Wall and two Castles. Here formerly the Diet was kept alternative∣ly with Vilna and Novogrodeck. Borissow. Borissow, a Wooden Town seated on the River Beresina, which has a Castle well for∣tified: It lies about forty Miles from Vilna, and has in it a good Garison against the In∣cursions of the Moscovites. Koidanow. Koidanow, a Town with a Castle about twenty five Miles from Vilna. Radosko∣wice. Radoskowice, a Town with a Castle, where Sigismundus Augustus muster'd above 100000 Men at once in the Year 1568.
Lohoisko. Lohoisko, a Town and Castle about eight Miles from Borissow. Swislocz. Swislocz, a Town situate upon a River of the same Name. Bobroisko. Bobroisko, a Town lying on the River Be∣resina. Odruczko, Odruczko, a Town and Castle which for∣merly gave Name to a Dutchy, whereof seve∣ral Noble Russians had the Title. Senators of Minski. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Minski. Its Arms. The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are the same with Lithuania, only an M plac'd side-ways. V. Palati∣nate. The fifth Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia is that of Polocz, which is divided into two Districts, viz. The Districts of Polocz, and Ʋsacz. In both which are these Cities and Towns, viz. Polocz, Cap. Ʋsacz, or Ʋsalza, Disna, Drissa, Druha, Starzitia, and Volisia. Cities and Towns of The Capital of all which is Polocz. Polocz, seated on the River Duna, or Dwina. It was formerly a City very considerable, but in the Year 1562, John Basilowitz Great Duke
of Moscovy took it, and carried most of its Inhabitants away Prisoners. This Place re∣main'd in the hands of the Moscovites to the Year 1579, when Stephen Batori recover'd it, together with its whole Territory. It was formerly a Dutchy, and subject only to its own Princes. Here at present resides a Russian Pre∣lat. The Jesuits also have a very fair Founda∣tion in this City built and endow'd by Stephen Batori. Usacz. Ʋsacz, distant about three Polish Miles from Polocz, and situate on a River of its own Name. Disna. Disna, built on the Duna, and tolerably fortified. It lies about six Miles from Polocz, and forty from Vilna. Druha. Druha, upon a River of the same Name. Senators of Polocz. The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Polocz. Its Arms. The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate, are the Arms of the Great Dutchy, with a P• sideways plac'd in the middle of the Coat. Having thus, Sir, describ'd to you the pre∣sent Extent, and chief Towns of the Great Dutchy of Lithuania, it would seem requisite (as usual) to give you a particular Character of this Nation; but having a design to proceed to a second Volume of this Undertaking, where I will examine into the Genius, Manners and Customs of both Poles and Lithuanians, at present I can only take notice, that to Ja∣gell's time, being the XIVth Century, the Li∣thuanian
were Pagans, and worshipp'd many Gods, or rather Devils. First, they paid Di∣vine Adoration to Fire (which they call'd in their Language Znicz, signifying sacred) and kept it always alight in some of their most famous Towns. For thi end they assign'd se∣veral Priests, by whose Neglect, or otherwise, if ever it came to be extinguish'd, they were immediately beheaded. Next, they worshipp'd Thunder, calling it in the Sclavonian Tongue Perunum. Also they had divers Groves where they pray'd to tall streight Trees, which they held it Sacrilege but to touch. The Devil, (or rather the cunning Priest) it seems was so poli∣tick in those days, as to promote all these Su∣perstitions, by frightning these Idolaters when they offer'd in the least to forsake them. When the Sky was clouded, they were of opinion the Sun was angry with them, and therefore us'd their utmost Art to appease him by Prayers, Musick, &c. They likewise believ'd Serpents to be Gods, which were their Lares, or Do∣mestick Deities, and therefore each Family kept one in their House, to which they daily sacrificed Milk, Fowls, and the like; and one of which if they happen'd at any time to offend, they look'd upon it to be an Omen of Destruction to their whole Progeny. They had also a set time appointed for a Solemn Sa∣crifice, being about the beginning of October, when together with their Wives and Chil∣dren, they feasted riotously for three days, in like manner as we have said before in Sa∣mogitia. Upon their return from the Wars they were wont to sacrifice one of the chief of their Captives with all their Booty to the
Fire. They us'd to burn their Dead with all their richest Ornaments on, which they wore whilst living, together with one of their most faithful Servants, their Horses, Arms, Dogs, &c. whilst all their Relations and Friends brought Milk, Honey, Beer, and the like, and merrily feasted and danc'd about their Funeral-Pile to Musick of various kinds. All these Pagan Superstitions and Errors Jagello, after he became Christian, in great measure abolish'd; to effect which, He, toge∣ther with his Queen Hedwigis, the Arch-bishop of Gnesna, a vast number of Priests, and se∣veral other Learned Men went into Lithuania about the beginning of Lent in the Year 1387, where at Vilna he first caus'd the sacred Fire to be extinguish'd, and the place wherein it was kept to be converted into the Church of St. Stanislaus; then he proceeded to kill the Serpents, cut down the Groves, pull down their Altars, and the like, which the poor bigotted Lithuanians wondring at, cry'd out, How can our Gods dissemble with these wicked Christians, so far as to suffer 'em to profane their Divinities with unhallowed hands, when if we had but offer'd to injure them in the least, we always immediately underwent their Revenge! But at length when they perceiv'd no Judgment to follow the suppos'd Sacrilege of the Poles, they unani∣mously acknowlegd'd their false Worship, and consented to be baptiz'd, whereof about thirty thousand were brought to the Font in one day. From henceforward the Lithuanians have for the major part continued Christians, tho there are yet some Idolaters among them of different Beliefs towards the Frontiers of
Moscovy and Samogitia, in the great Woods, who still worship Serpents, &c. as they used to do. There are also in this Great Dutchy about thirty thousand Tartars with liberty of the Turkish Religion, who have en∣joy'd this Privilege for some hundreds of Years, on condition that they shall send every Year twelve hundred Men to the Wars against the Turks and Tartars. These Mahometans call their Churches Meczets. No part of the King of Poland's Dominions abounds more in Woods and Deserts than Li∣thuania, and there is one Forest of above a hundred Miles long, in which People are very wild and ignorant, tho the Gentry of Lithuania for the most part are more polite, more sociable, and more active and sprightly than the Poles. It was assur'd me often at Court, and it is certainly believ'd all over the Kingdom, that Children have been frequently nurtur'd by Bears, who are very numerous in these Woods. There was one kept in a Convent in my time who was taken among them, as I have de∣scrib'd in my LatinEvangel. Medici, Art. 15. pag. 181. Treatise, Of the Suspen∣sions of the Laws of Nature. He was about ten Years of Age (which might be guess'd only by his Stature and Aspect) of a hideous Countenance, and had neither the use of Rea∣son, nor Speech: He went upon all four, and had nothing in him like a Man, except his Human Structure: But seeing he resembled a Rational Creature, he was admitted to the Font, and christen'd; yet still he was restless and uneasy, and often inclin'd to flight. But
depiction of child with bear in cave. Page 342.
at length, being taught to stand upright, by clapping up his Body against a Wall, and holding him after the manner that Dogs are taught to beg; and being by little and little accustom'd to eat at Table, he after some time became indifferently tame, and began to ex∣press his Mind with a hoarse and unhuman Tone; but being ask'd concerning his course of Life in the Woods, he could not give much better account of it, than we can do of our Actions in the Cradle. Upon this occasion I was assur'd by the King himself, several Senators and other Great Men of that Kingdom; and more∣over, it is the common and undisputed Re∣port, that Children are oftentimes nourish'd and brought up by Bears in these Parts. They say likewise, that if a hungry He-Bear finds a Child that has been carelesly left any where, he will immediately tear it to pieces; but on the contrary, had it been a She-Bear then giving Suck, she would undoubtedly have car∣ried it safe to her Den, and nourish'd it among her Cubs, which after some time might probably have been rescued from her and been taken by Hunters, as it happen'd in another Case of this nature in the Year 1669, which has been positively asserted to me in a Letter from his Excellency Monsieur de Cleverskerk, now Embassador here to his Majesty King William from the States of Hol∣lond, which Letter I thought not amiss to in∣sert.
A Monsieur Connor. Monsieur, JE veux satisfaire en partie à votre desir, & vous rendre conte d'un Enfant que J'ay veu à Varsovie, en l'an 1669. Me rencontrant en cette Ville de Pologne pour étre present au tems de l'Election d'un Roy, qui se devoit faire à la place du Roy Jean Casimir, qui s'étoit démis de la Cou∣ronne: Je m'informay à cette occasion de ce qu'il y avoit à voir en ce lieu, & J'ay appris, entre autres choses, qu'il se trouvoit au Fauxbourg de la Ville (qui va vers le Palais que le Roy Casimir y avoit fait batir) chez des Religieuses un Enfant Male qui avoit été nourri des Ours, ayant été pris, quêques tems auparauant, à la chasse de ces Ani∣maux. J'allay à ce lieu pour Satisfaire ma Cu∣riosité, & trouvay a la Porte le dit Enfant jou∣ant dans les Sables, sous l'Auvent qui étoit devant la Maison. Il étoit, selon ma meilleure Me∣moire, de l'age de douze à treize ans. Quand Je l'approchay il vint sauter, comme par surprise à mon habit, & prit par la main avec beaucoup de precipitation un des boutons d'Argent que Je por∣tois à mon Justaucorps, & approcha le Nez pour le Sentir. Puis Jl se jetta, tout d'un coup, à un coin par terre, faisant quêque bruit comme une espece d' Hurlement. J'entray dans la Maison, ou une Fille m' informa plus particulierement de lá Prise de cet Enfant; Mais comme Je n'ay point a∣vec moy le Livre ou J'ay écrit les Observations que J'ay fait dans mes Voyages, Je ne s&ccedil;aurois vous en faire le dêtail. Cette Fille appella & fit en∣trer,
le dit Enfant, & luy montra un grand Mor∣&ccedil;eau de pain; ce que luy voyant il se jetta sur un Plancher qui étoit fait contre la muraille dans cette Chambre; Il y marcha comme à quatre pattes: Il se leva avec une grande vitesse; prit par les deux mains le pain qui luy fut presentè; le porta ainsi au nez, & se Jetta en bas faisant encore un bruit étrange comme auparavant. On m'informa qu'il ne parloit point encore des paroles, mais qu'on esperoit avec le tems luy en apprendre, d'autant qu'il avoit l'ouiè bonne: Il avoit quêques marques au visage qu'on pensoit avoir été des Egratigneures de l'Ours. Voilà Monsieur tout ce que ma Memoire me peut fournir d'une Particularité qu'il y à si long tems que J'ay veüe, Mais Personne ne doit trouver étrange que cela soit arrivé d'autant qu'on a d'au∣tres Exemples dans les Histories: Et on m'a in∣formé en ce Pais, que les Tartares y font souvent des Invasions par des courses qu'ils font avec unc si grande vitesse qu'ils entrent n peu de tems bien avant dans le Pais qui est ouvert, leurs chevaux étant capables de faire un tres-grand cheminsans manger ni boire; qu'étant allez jusques où ils ont proposé, la ils Etendent leur grande Troupe & prennent, comme dans les filets, toutes les Per∣sonnes qu'ils rencontrent en leur retraite, & les menent en Esclavage: qu' d ces occasions les Hom∣mes & les Femmes tachants fuir n'ont bien sou∣vent pas de tems de sauver leurs Enfants, & qu'∣ainsi celuicy peut avoir été laissé, & trouvé par quêques Ours, qui sont en ces lieux de Lituanie ou de Pologne. Je suis marri, Monsieur, ne vous pouvoir pas informer & satisfaire à votre Curiosité avec plus d'exactitude: cependant, vous recevrez,
s'il vous plait, cette Relation comme un petit témoignage de ma bonne Volonté, comme etant, Ce 1, Jan. 1698. Monsieur, Votre tres-Affectionné Serviteur, J. P. Van den Brande de Cleverskerk. Thus in English. SIR, I Shall endeavour partly to satisfy your Request, and to give you an Account of a Boy that I saw at Warsaw in the Year 1661, who had been brought up by Bears. Coming to this City of Po∣land with design to be Present at the Election of a King after John Casimir, who had Abdicated the Crown, I enquir'd what was worth seeing in or about this Place: whereupon I was inform'd, among other things, that there was in the Suburbs of this City (which go towards King Casimir's Palace) in a Nunnery, a certain Male Child, who had been brought up among Bears, and who had been taken some time before at a Bear-hunting. Ʋpon this Information I went immediately to that place to satisfy my Curiosity, where I found the aforesaid Boy playing under the Pent-house before the Nun∣nery Gate. His Age, as well as I remember, I guess'd to be about twelve or thirteen. As soon as I came near him he leap'd towards me as if surpriz'd and pleas'd with my Habit. First, be caught one of my Silver Buttons in his hand with a great deal of eagerness, which he held up to his Nose to smell;
Afterwards he leap'd all of a sudden into a Corner, where he made a strange sort of Noise not unlike to Howling. I went into the House, where a Maid∣servant inform'd me more particularly of the Man∣ner of his being taken. But having not with me the Book wherein I wrot my Observations in my Travels, I cannot possibly give you an exact Ac∣count of it. This Maid call'd the Boy in, and show'd him a good large piece of Bread; which when he saw, he immediately leap'd upon a Bench that was joyn'd to the Wall of the Room, where he walk'd about upon all-four: After which, he rais'd himself upright with a great Spring, and took the Bread in his two Hands, put it up to his Nose, and afterwards leap'd off from the Bench upon the Ground, making the same odd sort of Noise as before. I was told that he was not yet brought to speak, but that they hop'd in a short time he would, having his Hearing good. He had some Scars on his Face, which were commonly thought to be Scratches of the Bears. Thus, Sir, you have all that I can remember of a Curiosity, which I saw so long time since; the Truth of which no body ought to question, since there are several parallel Examples in History; and I have been inform'd in this Country, that whenas the Tartars make frequent Incursions there, which they perform with such extraordinary Swiftness, that they can over-run great part of the Country in a very short time, their Horses being able to Tra∣vel a whole Day together without drawing Bit; being arriv'd at the propos'd Place, they immedi∣ately quarter themselves in a great Circle, where∣by, as it were in a Net, they take all that come within their Clutches, and carry them into Slavery.
So that either the Men or Women finding them∣selves thus ensnar'd, and endeavouring to escape, have oftentimes not leisure to take care of their Infants, and therefore probably this Boy might have been left behind after the like manner, and found and born away by the Bears; Of which there are a great Number both in Lithuania and Po∣land. I am sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a more satisfactory Account of this matter, but I hope this will suffice for a Testimony of my good Will, and to assure you that I am, Jan. 1. 1697/8. SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, J. P. Van den Brande de Cleverskerk. For another Confirmation of this Matter of fact, I have the Testimony of an authentic Author, M. Christopher Hartknoch of Passenheim in Ducal-Prussia, who writ two Books of the State of Poland. He says, that during the Reign of King John Casimir, in the Year 1669, there hapned an Accident which perhaps might hardly be credited by Posterity; which was, that there were then two Boys found by a Company of Soldiers among the Bears in the Woods near Grodna; one of which, as soon as he saw the Bears assaulted, fled into the neigh∣bouring Morass, whilst the other endeavour∣ing likewise to escape, was taken by the Sol∣diers
and brought to Warsaw, where he was afterwards christen'd by the Name of Joseph. He was about twelve or thirteen years old, as might be guest by his height, but his Man∣ners were altogether bestial; for he not on∣ly fed upon raw Flesh, wild Honey, Crab-Apples, and such like Dainties which Bears are us'd to feast with, but also went, like them, upon all-four. After his Baptism he was not taught to go upright without a great deal of difficulty, and there was less hopes of ever making him learn the Polish Language, for he always continu'd to express his Mind in a kind of Bear-like Tone. Some time after King Casimir made a Present of him to Peter Adam Opalinski, Vice-Chamberlain of Posnan, by whom he was employ'd in the Offices of his Kitchin, as to carry Wood, Water, &c. but yet could he never be brought to relin∣quish his native Wildness, which he retain'd to his dying-day; for he would often go into the Woods amongst the Bears, and freely keep company with them without any fear, or harm done him, being, as was suppos'd, constant∣ly acknowledg'd for their Fosterling. I might here, Sir, give you several o∣ther Accounts of this Nature, which I had related to me when I was in Poland; and I am told Mr. Gibson, a Parliament-man, has formerly seen some other Examples of this kind in that Kingdom; but by what I have already mention'd, I believe you will be sufficiently convinc'd, that the History of Romulus and Remus is not so fabulous as it
is generally conjectured to be, and as I thought my self it was before I had been in this Coun∣try; for considering that Brutes (since Phi∣losophers and Divines will allow them no Ra∣tional Souls) breed up their Young meerly out of a Natural Instinct or Sympathy, which I need not describe here, I see no Improba∣bility why they may not likewise bring up those of another Kind, as we have several Instances daily. But I will not insist longer upon these Philosophical Matters, nor examin here whe∣ther Examples of this nature refute or establish innate Ideas, as I have done in my Medicina Mystica, but will conclude, SIR, Your very Obedient Servant, B. C.
A Chronological Table of the Succession, Reigns and Deaths of the Dukes, Gover∣nours, Princes and Kings of Poland; together with an exact reference to the Page where they are treated of.     Began his Reign. Reign'd Years. Dv'd A. D. pag. I. LEchus, I.— 550 uncertain 10 II. Visimirus— Guagnini only mentions. III. XII. Woievods—     Depos'd. 12 IV. Cracus— 700 — — ib. V. Lechus, II.— — — — 13 VI. Venda— 750 — — ib. VII. XII. Woievods— — — depos'd 14 VIII. Lescus, I.— 760 16 776 ib. IX. Lescus, II.— 776 28 804 16 X. Lescus III.— 804 6 810 ib. XI. Popiel, I.— 810 5 815 ib. XII. Popiel, II.— 815 15 830 ib. XIII. Piastus— 830 31 861 21 XIV. Ziemovitus— 861 31 892 23 XV. Lescus, IV.— 892 21 913 ib. XVI. Ziemovistus— 913 51 964 ib. XVII. Miecislaus, I.— 964 35 999 24 XVIII. Boleslaus Chroby— 999 26 1025 26 XIX. Miecislaus, II.— 1025 9 1034 ib. XX. Casimir, I.— 1034 25 1059 27 XXI. Boleslaus, II.— 1059 23 1082 29 XXII. Ʋladislaus Hermannus 1082 21 1103 30 XXIII. Boleslaus, III.— 1103 37 1140 31 XXIV. Ʋladislaus Sputator 1140 6 1146 33 XXV. Boleslaus Crispus— 1146 28 1174 35 XXVI. Miecislaus, III.— 1174 4 1178 36 XXVII. Casimir, II.— 1178 17 1195 37 XXVIII. Lescus, V.— 1195 8 1203 39 XXIX. Ʋladislaus Lasconogus 1203 3 1206 42
    Began his Reign. Reign'd Years. Dy'd A. D. pag. XXX. Lescus V. Reestablish'd 1206 22 1228 ib. XXXI. Boleslaus, V.— 1228 51 1279 43 XXXII. Lescus Niger— 1279 11 1290 46 XXXIII. Henry I.— 1290 6 1296 48 XXXIV. Premislus— 1296 7 Mon. 1296 ib. XXXV. Ʋladislaus Locticus 1296 4 1300 49 XXXVI. Winceslaus K. of Bo∣mia— 1300 5 1305 ib. XXXVII. Locticus restor'd— 1305 28 1333 50 XXXVIII. Casimir III. the Great 1333 37 1370 54 XXXIX. Lewis K. of Hungary 1370 12 1382 56 XL. Queen Hedwigis— 1382 4 1386 58 XLI. Jagello, or Ʋladi∣slaus, V.— 1386 49 1435 59 XLII. Ʋladislaus, VI.— 1435 21 1446 60 XLIII. Casimir, IV.— 1446 43 1493 63 XLIV. John Albert— 1493 8 1501 66 XLV. Alexander— 1501 6 1507 67 XLVI. Sigismund, I.— 1507 41 1548 69 XLVII. Sigismund, II.— 1548 26 1574 75 XLVIII. Henry of Valois— 1574 5 Mon. 1577 85 XLIX. Stephen Batori— 1577 10 1587 88 L. Sigismund, III.— 1587 45 1632 106 LI. Ʋladislaus, VII.— 1632 16 1648 121 LII. John Casimir— 1648 22 1670 124 LIII. Michael Wiesnowiski 1670 4 1674 145 LIV. John Sobieski— 1674 23 1697 163 LV. Frederic Augustus now reigning— 1697 5 Mon. — 207 FINIS Partis Prima.
A Compendious Plan OF THE Body of Physick. A Letter from a Gentleman in Cambridg to Dr. Connor, concerning the Method he us'd in his Physical and Anatomical Lectures, and in explaining the Materia Medica, at Oxford, in the Year 1695. SIR, WE have here some Account of the accurate Course of the Chymical and Anatomical Lectures which you perform'd last Spring at Oxford, and of your new method of explaining the Virtues of Medicines there, with the Appro∣bation and Improvement of all that had the Happi∣ness to assist at them. I have spoke with some cu∣rious Genntlemen that some Years ago saw your Dissections at Paris with the like good Success: And I doubt not but your Skill and Insight in all the Parts of Physick is considerably augmented since, by your Travels into Italy, Germany, Poland, and the Low Countries, having had thereby the Oppor∣tunity of conversing with Malpighi, Bellini, Redi,
and the most celebrated Physicians of those Places. I have also, with a great deal of Pleasure, perused your ingenious Dissertationes Medico-Physicae, or La∣tin Treatises lately printed at Oxford, concerning malignant Damps, pestilential Steams, infectious Air, and Subterraneous Poisons, with certain other stu∣pendous and rare Phaenomena. From all this I con∣clude, that you not only understand Chymistry, Anatomy, and the Materia Medica very well your self, but that also you are capable to lead others into the Knowledg of them, by a most easy and compendious Method; in which Opinion I am confirmed by my Correspondent in Oxford: Many besides my self in this University do earnestly wish, that your other Occupations would permit you to pass some Months here with us, as indeed we ex∣pected you should, when you left Oxford last Sum∣mer. But since it so falls out that your Practice keeps you at London, we intreat the Favour of you to let us understand, whether we may obtain a Scheme of your Method in those Physical Exercises, or whether at London you can spare any time to such as are desirous to wait upon you to this pur∣pose. Sir, by so doing, you are like to oblige se∣veral, but more particularly, Cambridg, Octob. 15. 1695. Your most humble, and obedient Servant, C. P.
Dr. Connor's Answer, containing a Plan of his Corpus Rationale Medicum; or of his new and compendious Method Chymical and Anato∣mical, for understanding the Oeconomia Ani∣malis, the nature of Diseases, and the Mate∣ria Medica. SIR, WHatever you are pleased to say in Commenda∣tion of me or my Book, I must wholly at∣tribute to your Civility, and will return no other Compliment to you for it, but that I shall endea∣vour to deserve your good Opinion. I am extream∣ly oblig'd to your Correspondent in Oxon for the advantagious Character he gives of me; and I assure you that I have not met with better Discipline, nor with Persons more universally learned in any Uni∣versity of Europe. As for the Method or Scheme I observed at Ox∣ford to lead the Proficients in Physick, and other ingenious Gentlemen there into the Knowledg of the Fabrick, natural Functions, and Distempers of the Human Body, as likewise into the Knowledg of the Materia Medica to cure the same Diseases, it is as follows. I consider'd Man, in the first place, as a Being compounded of Spirit and Matter: But seeing it is only the last of these Parts wherein our Faculty is concern'd, I took a stricter veiw of the Human Body, and find the Structure of it like that of most other Animals. But to have any accurate Know∣ledg of Man, we must not only have a distinct Ac∣count of his constituent Parts, but likewise of all the external Bodies which any way affect him, or contribute to his Preservation. Since therefore he cannot live without Earth to tread upon, Air to breath, Animals and Vegitables to feed upon, Sun and Stars to afford him Warmth and Light, &c.
we must by consequence examine the System and Elements of the World, and particularly as they concur to the Preservation or Destruction of Man. We must be very well acquainted with the nature of the three mixt Bodies of our Globe, viz. Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, before we can give any tolerable Account of the Generation, Nourishment, Health, Diseases, or Death of Man; before we can discover the admirable Fabrick and Contexture, the Mechanick and Hydraulical Actions, Chymical Pre∣parations, the various Operations of Medicines, and an infinite number of other surprizing Phoenomena in the Human Body. The best Method therefore, I presume, is to pro∣ceed Analytically from the previous Examination of all the known Parts of the great World, to parti∣cular Enquiries into the Microcosm. Now the first step to this Method, is a good Insight by Chymical Experiments into the Nature, more especially the Figuration and Qualities of the Principles of mixt Bodies, and chiefly of the Blood: For the want of such a Discovery (which is not impossible) has hi∣therto been a great Obstruction to the Improvement of Natural Philosophy, and the Practice of Physick. It is plain to me, that a Man void of all Prejudice, and who considers that all the Operations of Bodies are perform'd by natural Causes without Miracles, may be easily convinc'd that the Causes of Diseases, and the true use of Applications to cure them, can be render'd very intelligible; so that vulgar Axiom, That there's no certainty in Physick, will be found most erroneous. I don't, Sir, pretend to have discover'd this just Method, which I hold necessary to lead us into the abstruse Secrets of Nature; but I would fain hope that the following Scheme, which is that I observ'd at Oxford, may approach it in some degree; which Method, tho it may be call'd altogether new, may perhaps be a just Model for others to imitate here∣after in the true Theory and Practice of Physick, which rightly consider'd are one and the same thing.
A NEW PLAN OF AN Animal Oeconomy: Demonstrated at Oxford in the Spring An∣no 1695, at London the Winter follow∣ing, and at Cambridg in the Year 1696. 1. OF the Elements, Fabrick, and System of the World, with the mutual Cohesion, Influence, and Dependance of its Parts. 2. Of the Elements of Terrestrial Bodies, where (after various Chymical Experiments) are consi∣der'd the Nature, Properties, Figures and Effects of the four Chymical Principles, Earth, Water, Salt and Sulphur, and their main mutual Action, Fermentation; as also the Productions of Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals. 3. Of the Structure of the Human Body, and its division into fluid and solid Parts; where a par∣ticular and new Account is given of the Nature and Contexture of the solid Parts, being all made of Vascular Fibres, and demonstrated to the Eye by Dissection. 4. Of the fluid Parts of the Human Body; of the Nature, Principles, Fermentation, and Circu∣lation
of the Blood; of Nutrition, of the Tempe∣raments, of the Humours contain'd in the Blood, of the seat and nature of Fevers, where likewise of Youth, old Age, and Death. 5. Of the Reparation of the Blood, of the Chyle, Lacteous Vessels, Chyliferous Duct; of Appetite, Mastication, Digestion, and the Ferment of the Stomach; of the Precipitation or Separation of the Excrements from the Chyle, where of the Structure of the Oesophagu. Or Gullet, of that of the Sto∣mach, and all the Intestines, of the Peristaltic and Antiperistaltic Motions of the Guts, of the Glands, of the Mesentery, of the Lympha, and the Lymphatic Vessels. 6. Of the Structure, Motion, and Ʋse of the Heart, where of the various kinds of Pulses, of the Polypus in the Heart, Palpitation, and Swooning; likewise a new Hypothesis of the Mo∣tion of the Heart, and of Sanguification. 7. Of the Contexture of the Windpipe, or Trachea Arteria, and the Lungs, where of the Cause and Ʋse of Respiration; a new Account of the Nature of the Air, Nitre, and of the Ʋnvo∣luntariness of Respiration, of the Hiccock. 8. Of the Praecordi. Or sanguiferous Vessels appended to the Heart, where the Structure, Mo∣tion, and Difference of the Veins and Arterics are demonstrated. 9. Of the numerous Ramifications of the Vena Porta, and both the Vena Cava's, of Varix's, Hemorrhoides, Bleeding, &c. 10. Of the Ramifications of both the Aor∣ta's throughout the whole Body; of an Anev∣rism. 11. Of the Brain and Cerebellum; a new Account of the Animal Spirits, their Generation,
Motion, and Ʋse; of Perception, Sleeping Waking, and the Influence of the Soul upon the Body, where of Sensation, and the five Senses. 12. Of the Eye, Tears, Nasal and Aqueous Ducts; Of Sight, Blindness, Light, Colours and the sharp Sight of some Animals. 13. Of the Fabrick of the Nose, the Mem∣brana Pituitaria, Snot, Smelling, and Sneezing; Of the mutual Influence of the Nose and Tongue. 14. Of the Tongue, Palat, and Gums; of the Muscles and Motions of the Tongue; of Taste, Voice, Stuttering, and Dumbness. 15. Of the Larynx, Pharynx, the Os Hyoides. Of the Glands, Salivation and Spittle; of the Al∣monds, and Uvula, &c. 16. Of Feeling, the Cuticula, Skin, Hairs, milliary Glands, the mucous and reticular Bodies; of Fat, Transpiration, Sweat, the Itch, cutaneous Diseases, Palsy, and Plica Polonica. 17. Of the Ear, Aquaeduct, Hearing, Deaf∣ness, Tinnitus, &c. 18. Of the Structure, Ʋse and Number of the Nerves; of Motion and Sense; of the Par vagum, and the Intercostal Nerves spread over all the Viscer. Of the Breast and Abdomen. 19. Of the Structure and various Figures of the Muscles, the vascular Fibres, where Muscu∣lar, Natural, and free Motion are explain'd, as likewise stretching and gaping, leaping, swimming, and flying, with Convulsive, Tonic, Systaltic, Epilectic, and Hysteric Motions; of Vapours and Rheumatisin. 20. Of the Liver, Gall, and Pancreas, where the Secretion, Motion and Mixture of the Bile, and Pancreatic Juice, with the Chyle are shewn; of the Green Sickness, Yellow Jau idice and Pica.
21. Of the Nature and Differences of all the Glands or Strainers of the Body; a new account of the various Filtrations of the excrementitious and recrementitious Humours, as Lympha, Spittle, Gall, Ʋrine, Seed, &c. Of Obstructions and Dropsies. 22. Of the Structure and Ʋse of the Spleen, and what Melancholy is; what Symptoms happen when the Spleen is taken out of the Body. 23. Of the Reins or Kidneys, the Atrabilary Glands, the Ʋreters and Bladder; where of the Scrum of the Blood, Ʋrine, and what is con∣tained therein; of the Stone and Gravel. 24. Of the Structure and Ʋse of the Bones, Marrow, Ligaments, Periosteum, and Apophy∣ses; of the different Articulations or Joints; of the Nature and Seat of the Gout, Spina Ventosa, Caries, Exfoliation, and Rachitis. 25. Of the Parts of Generation in Man; of the Nature and Formation of the Seed, with its Effects in the Body of the Woman; the Cause and Seat of Venereal Diseases. 26. Of the Parts of Generation in the Woman, of the Eggs and Ovarium; of Generation, Con∣ception, going with Child, Flowers, Birth, Mon∣sters, Floodings, false Conceptions, Whites, &c. 27. Of the Posture and Nourishment of the Embryo in the Womb; of the Ʋmbilical Vessels, the After-birth, the Force of the Mother's Imagi∣nation, and the peculiar way of the Circulation of the Blood in the Foetus; of Longings. 28. Some Considerations of the Ʋnion of the Soul and Body, where the Laws and Effects of that Ʋnion are inquired into.
You see, Sir, that after having examin'd the different Parts of the World, and the Elements of Bodies by Chymistry, I have divided the Human Body into solid and fluid Parts. Before I consi∣der'd the solid Parts in particular, I thought it ne∣cessary by way of Chymistry, to be acquainted with all the Humours, and specially with the Prin∣ciples and Motions of the Blood, which is the Primum Mobile of the whole Machine; for which purpose it is fit to know how by Digestion the Meat becomes Chyle, the Chyle becomes Blood, how the Blood becomes Flesh and Bone, and consequent∣ly how it must be continually repaired by Aliment; how the Heart is put in motion to communicate the same to the Blood; how the Blood expelled by the Heart, after having been rarefied by the Air in the Lungs, is convey'd by Arterial Tubes to all the Parts of the Body, and from these Parts is brought back again by the Veins to the Heart. To know why this Blood is carried to all the Parts, and what Alteration it receives in them, we must by ocular Inspection see the different Structure of all the Parts of the Body, and first follow the Blood to the Brain, to generate Animal Spirits, which Spirits furnish the Soul with Ideas in the Brain, and con∣vey'd through the Nerves to all the Parts of the Bo∣dy, they are the Causes of Motion in the Muscles, and of Sense in the five Organs, which convey the Impression of exteriour Bodies to the Soul. I fol∣low the same Blood into the Liver, where it dis∣charges its Bilious Juice; and into all other Glands, where it leaves some superfluous Humonr, into the Spleen, where its Motion is moderated; into the Reins, where it leaves its serous Particles; into the Testicles, where is strained from it a glutinous oily Substance called Seed. In short, after knowing Man in himself, I examine the natural Ways which he uses to propagate his Kind, in begetting another by way of Generation.
Man, as I said before, is made of two Substances, Soul and Body. The Soul preserves the Body by Reason, and governs it by voluntary Motion. The Body furnishes the Soul with Ideas of Corpo∣real Beings. The Life of Man is the Correspon∣dence between Soul and Body; but the Life of the Body is the natural Motion of the Blood and Spl∣rits, the Cessation of which Motion is Death. The solid Parts of the Body have no Motion (or Life) of their own, but such as they borrow from the Blood and Spirits. The Blood and Spirits have none neither, but such as they are allowed by the general Laws of Nature establish'd by a Supreme Being. To maintain this mutual Correspondence and Dependance between Soul and Body, all the Organs, Springs and Humours of the body, must be in their due Disposition; for the Death of the Body is properly the loss of this Disposition, and not the Separation of the Soul, as is commonly be∣liev'd: for the Body is dead before the Soul is gone out of it; and the going out of the Soul is but the Cessation of its Correspondence with the Body for want of Motion in the latter. This Disposition is disordered or ruined by Diseases, all which Diseases have their first Seat in the Blood, from whence they are communicated to the solid Parts; and the solid Parts being affected, they reciprocally insect the Blood. But tho the Blood was never infected, and Man never sick, yet he should die of course, by the Relaxation and Attrition of his solid Parts, from the long and continual Circulation of the hu∣mours through them, which we call Old Age. As to what relates to the Materia Medica, or the Account I have given of the Virtue and due Application of inward Medicines in the Practice of Physick, I should likewise give you a Series of the different Subjects I treated of, as I have in my Plan of the Animal Oeconomy; but finding it too tedious, and needless, I will only mention in ge∣neral,
that all inward Diseases have their first Seat in the Mass of Blood, that they are caused by a Ferment or Matter hid in it, which deriv'd its Origin from some outward Causes: That there are no Specific Medicines for any part of the Body, as for the Head, Heart, Liver, Stomach, Spleen, but that they must all operate upon the whole Mass of Blood; that consequently outward Applications can∣not avail much for inward Distempers, that the Me∣dicines must be carried in a convenient Vehicle through the Blood to the place where the Distem∣per lies, and that then they either carry its Cause out of the Body by Evacuation, or change the Na∣ture of it within by altering the Mass of Blood. I may therefore reasonably divide all the Ma∣teria Medica, described by so many voluminous Authors, only into two Classes of Medicines, Eva∣cuating and Alterating. I did not so much talk of those Remedies that evacuate only from some parts of the Body, as Bleeding, Clysters, Leeches, Issues, Blisters, Setons, Gargles, Snush, and the like, for they can hardly ever cure any inward Disease; but of such as evacuate the Morbific Matter from the whole Mass of Blood by the five general ways, Stool, Vomit, Ʋrine, Sweat and Salivation; where, without re∣curring to occult or precarious Qualities, I reduced to the Principles of Chymistry and Reason, the Na∣ture and Operations of Purgatives, Emetics, Diu∣retics, Diaphoretics▪ of Antimony and Mercury, of Venereal and other Diseases, as likewise the Nature and Usefulness of Baths, and other Mineral Waters. I have likewise examin'd and endeavour'd to ex∣plain the Nature and different Effects of Alterating Medicaments, which operate in the Mass of Blood without any Evacuation, such as sweeten the Blood when sowr, that thin it when gross and thick, that hasten its too slow Circulation, that stop its too rapid Motion, as in Fevers; that cool the Blood, that heat it, and raise the Spirits, as Cordials; that calm the Spirits, as Narcotics; that strengthen the Tone of the
Parts, as Styptics and Astringents; that open Ob∣structions, as Aperitives. Here therefore I had occasion to consider the Vertues and Operations of Steel, Opium, Jesuits Powder, of Alcalious and Acid Medicines, and of the whole Tribe of other alte∣rating Remedies. It would, Sir, be too prolix and needless to men∣tion to you all that can be said in this nice and weighty Subject, which includes in a manner the whole Machine of the Universe, which requires se∣veral Years fervent Application for any one to at∣tain a tolerable Knowledge of, and which cost me some Months Labour to demonstrate at Oxford what small Insight I was thought to have in it: Yet still I am not unwilling to comply with your Desires, and to spare some time from my other Business here, to communicate what I know of these Matters to any Persons of both Universities, or to such other ingenious Gentlemen as have a Curiosity for things of this Nature. And I shall take care that all be perform'd in such a decent and creditable manner, as may be for the Benefit and Satisfaction of others, as well as my own par∣ticular Reputation. For not only my Duty, but likewise the Usefulness and Agreeableness of my Profession, tho in it self very abstruse and difficult, inclines me naturally to improve it as much as I can; and I hope I shall be able in few Years to pub∣lish a Latin Treatise of the Principles of Physick, and of the Oeconomia Animals, which perhaps then will give You and the Publick more Satisfacti∣on than they or your self can at present expect from, From Bow-street in Covent-Garden, London, Nov. 2. 1695. SIR, Your very Obedient Servant, B. Connor.
A LETTER to James Tyrrel, Esq; from Dr. Connor, Fellow of the Royal Society. Containing a further Explanation and Vin∣dication of the Plan of the Animal Oeco∣nomy, or of the Chymical and Anatomical Method for understanding the Fabrick, Springs, Tempers and Diseases of the Hu∣man Body. SIR, IT is upon all hands acknowledg'd, that the Ac∣quaintance of Men of Learning and Worth is of great benefit towards acquiring not only the Knowledg of Men and Manners, but of Na∣ture too. But of all the Advantages to be reap'd from their Conversation, that of correcting our Prejudices or Mistakes, and of setting us in the right way is the most valuable. I should be too disinge∣nuous, Sir, if I should not concur with the Publick, in justly allowing you to be as discerning a Judg as you are a true Friend. The World is convinc'd of the first by your shewing your self so great a Master as well of the Laws of Nature and Nations, as of those of your own Country; and none that have the Honour to know you can be ignorant of your Sincerity ad Zeal, in correcting the Errors and Oversights of your Friends. To whom then should I more allowably communicate my Designs? After begging your Pardon therefore for the Ambi∣tion of numbring my self with your Friends, I
must tell you, that being desir'd by several, and willing my self, not to conceal the small Insight I was thought to have in Anatomy, Chymistry, and the other parts of Physick; I thought first conve∣nient to borrow from some Antient or Modern Authors the most easy and compendious Method, for the benefit of my Auditors. But I was frustra∣ted of my Expectations; for after having examined the voluminous Works of most Writers in our Fa∣culty, I did not find it altogether fit to follow their Method, nor safe to espouse their Opinions. But the best course, I think, is to pick the best out of each, especially what relates to Matters of Fact, applying their Observations to my own Design, and taking Reason and Experience to be my surest Guides. But seeing several Persons either out of Malice or Rashness, have very industriously mis∣represented my Undertaking; I shall now give a larger Account of it than formerly, as well to satis∣fy my Friends, as for my own Justification. My Design therefore, Sir, is to find a short, easy, and clear Method, to be acquainted with the Fa∣brick, Functions, Tempers, and Diseases of the Human Body: For which purpose I must not only know Man in himself, but must also know all Bo∣dies that are about him, and concur to his Preser∣vation or Destruction. For as I cannot understand all that belong to my Finger, without I understand my whole Body, which seres to nourish and move it; so I cannot understand my Body without I un∣derstand the whole Universe: And as I cannot reasonably know any one Distemper of my Body, without I know the general Sources of all Distem∣pers; so I cannot methodically cure any one Distem∣per without I understand the Rules of curing all Distempers: Which shews that Quacks, and other ignorant Pretenders, may not presume to have me∣thodical Cures for any one Distemper whatsoever. Since therefore it is necessary to have a general view of the whole Universe to be competently ac∣quainted
with Man, the first thing we must exa∣mine is Matter, which is the general Principle of all Bodies, or rather all Bodies are Matter. Matter is the only thing, in my mind, that we have any clear Notion of, if we have of any. We conceive very well that an Atom has at least six Sides or Surfaces, of which one is nearer the East than the West, another nearer the South than the North, and another nearer the Zenith than the Nadir: consequently between all the six Surfaces we conceive a Space or Extension, which we call Matter or Body, tho never so little; and since we consider a real Space between them, we can men∣tally divide it into several lesser Spaces, and each lesser Space into as many other lesser ones as we please; so that every minute Particle will be infi∣nitely divisible. Besides, the distance between the six Sides of the Atom is so filled up and occupied by the Atom or its Extension, that it is impenetrable by any other Extension whatsoever. By an Atom I mean the minutest part in a Body actually divided from others, and still divisible in it self. Then the Properties of Matter will be Divisibility and Im∣penetrability. There is no essential Difference between one piece of Matter and another, since all Matter is extended, divisible and impenetrable. But since the Machine of the World is form'd of different Bodies, and all Bodies form'd of Matter, we must derive their difference at least from the Accidents of Matter: We find then that one part of Mat∣ter cannot be different from another, but in Bulk, Motion or Figure; and according as it differs from others in one or more of these Qualities, they will constitute different Bodies: By these three Qualities of Matter we can give a general account of the different parts of the World, as the Aethe∣real Fluid, and Terrestrial Bodies. We may ob∣serve that the Stars and Planets, the Air, the Earth, and the Water, are made of three different sorts
of Matter. The Atoms of the first Matter have a lesser Bulk and more Motion than all the rest. The Atoms of the second Matter are probably spherical, have as little Bulk as the first, and less Mo∣tion: The Atoms of the third Matter are of an irregular Figure, but have greater Bulk, and have none, or a slower Motion than all the rest. We may lawfully suppose all the Stars to be made up of the first Matter: The Aetherial Fluid, or the Heavens of the second, and the Planets and Ter∣restrial Bodies to be made of the third. For the Parts of the first being extream subtile, and ex∣treamly rapid, must be fluid and thin enough to pass through the Pores and Intestices of all other Bodies, and leave no Vacuities; and influence up∣on us the same way as the Sun does, by keeping the Air in a perpetual Fluidity, and by producing Fermentations in the Ground in such solid Bodies as have no invincible Resistance in their Parts. The Parts of the second Matter being likewise subtile, round, and consequently agitated perpe∣tually by the Subtilty and Rapidity of the first Matter which pass through it, must form a Fluid and Transparent Extension, as the Expansum or the Heavens are. The Parts of the third Element be∣ing more bulky, more irregular, and having no Mo∣tion, or at least an inconsiderable one, must form gross, irregular, solid, opaque, and sensible Bodies, such as we see the Planets and Terrestrial Bodies to be. The two first Matters which I made mention of, are exterior Agents, which Nature, or God makes use of rather to influence a Motion into Ter∣restrial Bodies, than to enter into their Composi∣tion, contrary to Monsier des Cartes. So this last Element of the World, is that which I am to con∣sider most, being the only thing that our Faculty is concern'd in, because it constitutes Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, which are the three Things that I design chiefly to examine, because they furnish us with Aliments and Remedies, and are the Causes of most Distempers.
Tho we find an innumerable variety of Ter∣restrial Bodies, and this variety depending upon the difference of their Atoms, yet by tracing ex∣actly the particular Effects of these Atoms, and by several Experiments of Chymistry, I can reduce all parts of Bodies to four only, viz. Atoms of Earth, Atoms of Water, Atoms of Salt, and Atoms of Sulphur. But when, for Example, I am to give Rhubarb, Jesuits Powder, or any other Remedy to a Patient, to be sure of its Effects, and due Ap∣plication, it is not enough to know that it is made of Earth, Water, Salt, and Sulphur, but also I must know what Earth, Water, Salt, and Oil themselves are: Besides, I am to know their Proportion, and which of them predominates in it; which Physi∣cians neglecting to discover, have left the Practice of Physick very obscure, and will ever continue so, until they give themselves the trouble to examine with more Exactness and Nicety the Nature (I mean the Figure) and Effects of the Principles of the Blood, and of all Remedies likewise. I know that the Chymists will immediately an∣swer, That they have with a great deal of Toil and Labour, not only separated from mixt Bodies the before mentioned four Principles, but also disco∣vered their Nature; for they confidently tell us, that the nature of Earth is to be porous, to ab∣sorb Water, Salt and Oil; that the nature of Wa∣ter is to dissolve Salt; of Sulphur to be inflammable; and of Salt to prick, and be dissolved by Water. But they need not take so much pains to tell us of a thing that every body knows without the least insight in Chymistry. A Country-man knows that a Pot full of Ashes will soak a great deal of Wa∣ter, or any other fluid Body: That Water dis∣solves Sugar and Salt; that Oil burns, and Salt pricks the Tongue. This is not answering the Question, for they take the Effects of those Elements for their Nature. To say that Earth absorbs, that Water dissolves Salt, that Oil takes flame, and
that Salt bites, is to tell me only what these Princi∣ples are capable of doing, not what they really are in themselves. If being asked by a Person, What is Man? I should answer, that he is a reasonable Animal, or an Animal capable of Reason; he should not doubtless be satisfied with my Answer, because I tell him what Man can do, not what he is, since he exists before he can reason. I desire to know what is the particular Figure, the Specifick Fa∣brick, and the inward Nature of Earth, that makes it produce an Effect different to that of Water; and of Salt, to produce a different Effect to that of Oil. Until therefore we are more intimately acquaint∣ed with the different Bulk, Texture, and Figure, which are the ground of the Virmes and Qualities of all these Elements, we can give no satisfactory Account of their Effects; and we must consequent∣ly be uncertain as to the Operation of a Remedy, which has any of 'em predominating in it. I con∣fess it will be a difficult matter to determine the different bulk and figure of the Atoms of Princi∣ples, à priori, as they term it; for they are so small and imperceptible, that we cannot discern any of 'em even with the most refin'd Microscopes: Yet I do not despair, but by calculating and sum∣ming up all the Effects and Proprieties of each of 'em by Reason, I may discover at least à posteriori, as they call it, their different Bulk and Figure, which are the only primary Qualities they differ in. For it is plain to me, that when I consider that a drop of Water is insipid, transparent, easily evaporated, that it penetrates most Bodies, and dis∣solves all Salts; I can reasonably determine the Fi∣gure and Bulk of its Particles that are sutable to these Phenomena. I can say as much of a spoonful of Earth, when I observe that it is spongy, solid, poroud, friable, opaque, insipid; that it sinks in Water; that it cannot be raised by Fire in Distillation; that it is the Matrix and Support of the rest of the Principles of any mixt Body. Likewise of Oil or
Sulphur, when I find it is fluid, insipid, ropy, in∣flammable, extreamly penetrating, and immiscible with Water; I can guess the Nature or Texture of Parts, which is capable of such Effects. When I see that an Acid Salt is always of its own nature, fluid, sharp, transparent, penetrating; that it dissolves solid Bodies, and coagulates sulphureous ones, as Blood, Milk, &c. When I consider that an Alkali Salt is always of its own nature solid, white, porous, friable, sharp, dissolvable by Water, easily movable; that it fer∣ments with Acids, absorbs them, and dissolves sul∣phureous Bodies; I can reasonably conjecture the Figure that renders both Salts capable of produ∣cing such different, nay contrary Effects; which I endeavour to perform in the Chymical and Anato∣mical Experiments, which I make at present in my Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury's Library, which his Grace, out of his wonted Inclination to serve the Publick, has been pleased to give me the use of for this purpose. After having examin'd the nature of the diffe∣rent Atoms of Matter, I trace their Effects and O∣perations, all which I find are perform'd by Motion, which is the only Cause of all things, and which has no other Cause or Nature it self (that I know) but the pure Will of the Deity. For a Body cannot be moved without it receives all its Motion from another Body that is in motion; which Motion this second Body receiv'd from a third, that was put in motion by a fourth, and this fourth by a fifth. So tracing backward to the Creation the successive Transit of Motion from one Body to another, we must come to a first Motion of Bodies, which flowed immediately from the Creator. A Body cannot lose its Motion without communicating it all to another Body; consequently there must be the same quantity of Motion now in the World as was in the beginning. For no Motion can be lost, and no new Motion can be produced. By examining the Laws and Occasions of Motion, I
consider the Nature, Conditions, and Effects of Fermentation, which is the chiefest and most uni∣versal Motion in Nature; by the means of which are formed so many different Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals of the different Proportion, different Situation, and different Application of our four Elements, Earth, Water, Salt and Sulphur. But my chief Design is to shew how the different Parts of Man's Body, which is the principal Subject of this Animal Oeconomy, are made of them: For out of his Bones, his Flesh, his Viscera, and even his Blood and other Humours, I draw in more or less quantity, first Water, then Volatil Spirit, or Salt, afterwards an inflammable Oil; and there re∣mains the Earth, out of which I draw by Water a fixt Salt. I do not only examine the Nature and Proportion of the four essential Principles of our Body, but also, what is more necessary, I design by Anatomy to demonstrate to the Eye the Struc∣ture, Texture, and Use of its solid, sensible and integrant Parts, as Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Muscles, Membranes, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Lymphatic Vessels, and Glands; all which I find to be formed of vascular Fibres of the same kind: for I do not see that the Fibres of a Muscle differ from them of a Tendon, nor the Fibres of a Mem∣brane from them of a Ligament, nor them of a Cartilage from the Fibres of a Bone, nor the Fi∣bres of any part, as for their Structure, from the Fibres of all the parts. I confess the Fibres of some parts of the Body are more strictly united together than others, which makes the Compact∣ness of some Parts, and the Limberness of others; so all parts differ from one another, only in a stricter or looser Union of their Fibres; since we find by Experience, that Flesh becomes as hard as Bone, and Bone as soft as Flesh: For we frequently discover in dissecting dead Bodies, that the Center of the Heart, which is naturally fleshy, that the Aorta near the Heart, that Ligaments, and Carti∣lages
turn to solid Bone; we observe likewise that Bones in the Rickets, and by Monsieur Papin's way of boiling them, become as pliable as the Flesh of Muscles. Before I shew the Parts of the Body, I shall first examine the Humours, and chiefly the Prin∣ciples, Texture, Fluidity, Circulation, and Fer∣mentation of the Blood, the Seat of the different Constitutions and Distempers of Mankind. After∣wards I shall consider how the Blood is repaired by Digestion and Chyle; how it is rarefied by the Air in the Lungs, how it furnisheth Animal Spirits in the Brain for motion in the Muscles, and Sensa∣tion in the five Organs: What Alteration it re∣ceives in the Liver, in all Lymphatick Glands, in the Spleen, Kidnies, and in the Parts of Genera∣tion; how it nourisheth so many different Parts of the Body at the same time, as the same Water seeds several thousands of different Plants in the same Garden; and how after some Periods of Years the Springs of the solid Parts must be worn out, the Vigor of the Body decay, old Age must come on, and be necessarily followed by Death; where I must examine the Laws of the Union, Cor∣respondence, and Separation of the Soul and Body. You have here, Sir, a short Extract of my Ani∣mal Oeconomy, by which you may perceive that my Design in it, is, by dissecting many Animals, (as they shall best serve my purpose) and by seve∣ral Experiments of Chymistry, to discover and explain the Fabrick, Springs, Humours, and Functi∣ons of Organical Bodies, but chiefly of the Human, which, I hope, will considerably facilitate the Practice of Physick, and satisfy the Enquiries of the Curious. But those Gentlemen do me an Injury, who give it out that this is a bare Course of Ana∣tomy. Truly that were a mean and useless Business: for, as I have often hinted, I am of opinion that Anatomy can never be well understood without not only Chymistry, but a tolerable Insight into the
other parts of Natural Philosophy; for which rea∣son I comprehend them all together, to shew their mutual dependance, and how they contribute to the knowledg of one another, which is perhaps a Method not commonly followed. Tho several may be more capable of it, yet none can be more willing to communicate it to the Publick than I am. As for what other Persons have taught or asserted in I hysick, I am not to consider their Authority, or the number of their Followers, but how well they have performed what they pretended to. Without this liberty, there would be no hopes of Improve∣ment, or any further progress in Physick, nor no other Labour be necessary to attain it, but much Reading and a happy Memory. It would be need∣less for us to be at the Pains and Expences of tra∣velling into foreign and remote Countries, to con∣verse with learned and experienc'd Persons, to learn their different Methods and Maxims of curing Dis∣eases, to observe a great variety of Distempers and Symptoms in infectious Hospitals, to open so many dead Carcases, and to try a great number of Ex∣periments, if the Dictates of Hippocrates, or Galen, or any other Author, were infallible Rules for us to follow in the Practice of Physick. Since there∣fore Experience and Reason are our only Guides, no Body is to take it amiss if I censure such as wrote before me, with as much Justice as they did their Predecessors; for I'm sworn to no Master. You know, Sir, that the Place and Time are most convenient, and I hope you may give us often the ho∣nour of your Company, and according to your won∣ted Candor, both do me Justice to your curious Friends, and, where I speak amiss, convince me of it, in which you will oblige, Lond. Feb. 12. 1695. Worthy Sir, Your very Humble Servant, Bernard Connor.
A LETTER to his Reverend Friend Dean J. R. concerning Evangelium Medici, seu Medicina mysti∣ca de suspensis Naturae Legibus: OR, A Latin Treatise lately published at London, in which supernatural Effects are philo∣sophically compar'd with natural ones, and explain'd by the Principles of Physick, the not consider'd within the reach of Natu∣ral Causes. SIR, I Should be proud to meet with some occasion to give you a Testimony of my Respect and Gratitude, and to shew you how sensible I am of the Happiness of having been educated in my Youth by so learned a Master: I am sorry the distance between us, and the difficulty of Carriage gives me no opportunity of sending you the Trea∣tise you heard of concerning the Suspensions of the Laws of Nature. I can only at present promise to give you a general Idea of my Design in that Book, and of the occasion that put me upon examining these Matters. I have been present often at some Disputes about supernatural Effects, in which some main∣tain'd that there could have never been any per∣form'd: and last Year I happen'd to be accidental∣ly ingag'd against the Objections of some Persons, who pretended they could not conceive either the possibility, or the manner of them.
These Objections I looked upon as weak in them∣selves, and seeming to imply, That either a Su∣pream Being cou'd do nothing but what their Fa∣culties were capable to comprehend; or, that there was a necessity, that, to convince Unbelievers, to confirm some important Truth, or to bring about some other great or weighty End, it were requisite that the Deity should not only work an extraordi∣nary and surprizing Effect, but also shew them the way and manner how it was perform'd. We freely own'd, That such Operations as are look'd upon supernatural, cannot be perform'd by the stated Laws of Nature, but immediately by a Supream Power, for some great Design. This Answer, as being undeniably true, they could not but admit: and tho where the Relaters were of an undoubted Credit and Veracity, they could not but believe those Performances were su∣pernatural; yet, for their clearer Satisfaction, they desir'd my further Thoughts concerning the manner of such Supernatural Effects. This being above my Sphere, which reaches no fur∣ther than Physick, or Nature in its ordinary Operati∣ons, wherein, however, I find Matter more than suffi∣cient to imploy my Time and Thoughts, and where∣in I plainly see the Existence, and can never suffi∣ciently admire the constant Providence of a Deity; yet being willing to comply with their Desires, I promised I would give them what Satisfaction I could therein. This, indeed, was not the first time the very same Difficulties had been proposed in my hearing; for I had formerly discoursed with others, both in this and other Countries, upon the same Subject, and had some Years ago drawn up a rude Scheme of an Essay towards the clearing of this Point. But if this, or the like occasion, had not put me upon reviewing this Paper, I might never have given my self, or any body else, the trouble of reading it. But having thus unwarily engag'd my self, I resolved
to revise this Design, and to give those Persons a sight of it: This I did accordingly, and after∣wards shew'd it to some Friends. They owned the Notions I advanced, and the ways of Explication I proposed were new to them, and might be so to others; and tho they were not, nor could be convinc'd that these were the very ways the Supream Power proceeded in the effect∣ing of such Operations, yet they seemed inclinable to imagine, that upon these Principles supernatural Effects, and the Operations of them, were con∣ceivable by such as know any thing of the Nature and Laws of Motion. This Communication of my Thoughts gave oe∣casion to others to discourse with me about them, and to desire that if I did intend to publish them, I would in the mean time give them, at least, the general Heads of my Design. This I was willing to have been excused in, as having not digested them into that Order I might at last publish them in, and was willing to reserve to my self a Power of making what Additions or Retrenchments I should afterwards think fit to make; but the Plan of the Essay happening not to be fully represented, and afterwards being worse un∣derstood and commented upon, I at last resolv'd to publish it as soon as I could, seeing Persons in∣dustriously reported things I never thought of. My Design therefore, Sir, is to endeavour to make it no longer a Difficulty to conceive, and make evident by Reason, and the Principles of Physick, I mean the Principles of Nature, all the supernatural Effects authentically delivered to us concerning Bodies chiefly, but particularly the Hu∣mane: I mean, supposing those Effects to be true Matters of Fact, and all Matters of Fact, as well Natural as Supernatural, to be immediate Effects of a Supream Being, which must be granted; it is as easy to conceive the manner how this Infinite Power may be apply'd to Bodies, to work supernatural
Effects, as to produce the common Phaenomena of Nature. By this I hope to convince our Scepticks, the Deists, who must give their Assent, when they have the same evident Reason to conceive the Possibility, and consequently to believe the Truth of such mi∣raculous Effects, that are authentically related, as they have to conceive that Straw can burn in a flaming Fire. The Foundation I go upon, is the Structure of the Human Body, which I have often taken to pieces by Anatomy, and resolv'd into its essential Elements, or minute Particles by Chymistry: for I find it as necessary to be acquainted with its Fa∣brick, to give an Account of the miraculous States it is supposed to have been in supernaturally, as it is to explain the natural Effects commonly pro∣duc'd in it. For want of a sufficient Insight in this matter, several Divines of the latter Ages have given very gross Ideas of the supernatural Effects they have pretended to explain; and in several places where I have been, I saw them, either through Ignorance, or for Interest, give out for Miracles, Phaenomena, that were only surprizing Effects of Natural Causes, which has given so great an occa∣sion to Scepticism, and increase of Deism. Having laid down for my Basis the Structure of the Human Body, as far as I could discover from my Senses, Anatomy, Fire, Microscopes, and Ex∣periments, I proceed to examine, and endeavour to explain the different ways its natural State is sup∣pos'd to have been supernaturally alter'd by an In∣finite Power: For, finding that the Human Body is all Matter, and that all this Matter is nothing but a Union of Particles with Bulk, Figure, and respective Situation, I thought that all the Alterations that could supernaturally happen to this Bulk, Figure, or situation, could be conceiv'd. But before I en∣ter upon those nice Subjects, I find it first necessary to enquire into the Cause, Nature, and Laws of Mo∣tion, because Motion is the only true Cause of all Na∣tural
Phaenomena; and the Suspensions of the Laws of this Motion, are the only Causes of all super∣natural Effects. I conceive the Laws of Motion can be suspended three different ways; and by one or more of those Laws of Suspension, it is as easy to solve clearly all supernatural Effects, as it is to ex∣plain the most evident Effects of Natural Causes by the common Laws of Motion. Tho I mention, that all supernatural Effects what∣soever can be easily reduc'd to some of the three Laws of Suspension of Motion, notwithstanding I do not design to speak of them all in particular, but of such only as are most in dispute among the Learned: Yet any understanding Man may easily make his Application, and resolve all other mira∣culous Effects into one or other of 'em. By the Suspension of the Laws of Motion, I do not mean that these Laws are changed or abrogated, but only that their Course is stopt, while an Effect is produc'd by the immediate Action of the Deity, without any Influence of theirs, for some particular end: and it cannot be denied but that the Supream Legislator, who made first the Laws, may suspend them when he pleases; and in that state of Suspen∣sion produce of himself alone, without their Con∣currence, the same Effects, which are wont to be produced only by the same Laws put in Execution. So that tho a Body, for Example, of a hundred Pound Weight, by the established Laws of Motion must be moved by another that has several degrees of Motion, yet an Infinite Power may of himself, either move it without the Concurrence of ano∣ther Body, or hinder its being moved by any other Body of what weight soever, tho put into the most rapid Motion; as if combustible Matter should be in a flaming Fire without burning. Because my Design in that Book is to explain all the supernatural States that our Body is supposed to have been put into; and since its being in two places at once, is the State the most disputed and doubted
of, I thought it convenient to examine the Reasons of those that assert it capable of being in several places at once, to see whether they are reconcileable with our Senses, and with the Nature and Structure of a Human Body, which is the chief thing to be con∣sider'd. I find it impostible to conceive that a Hu∣man Body can be in two places at the same time, after the manner they have hitherto describ'd, since the same Human Body can never be in two places at once, with the same Bulk, and with the same quantity of Matter. It is true, that considering the Divisibility of Matter, the Structure of the Human Body, the smalness of the first Stamina of the Embryo and Foetus, and the Principles and Mechanism of Genera∣tion, I have thought of one particular way, different from all that has ever been said upon this Subject, by which I may conceive, that tho the self-same nume∣rical Particles of Matter can never be in two places at once, yet a Human Body, tho not the rational Soul, can be multiplied by an Infinite Power: But since we have no evident Proof, or Experience, that any Human Body has ever been thus multiplied; and because from conceiving the poslibility of it, it is thought People may perhaps hereafter take oc∣casion to draw several Consequences that may be liable to dangerous Constructions, and lead into er∣roneous Speculations, I was advised, and was wil∣ling to decline treating of this Subject, having no mind to meddle with Scripture or Religion, being not my Province. Wherefore I have endeavour'd only  explain those supernatural Effects that most People agree upon, submitting my Judgment to greater Capacities: For I had no other Design in that Book, but to enquire how far we may look into, and confirm Supernatural Effects, those chiefly that rte to Organical Bodies, by the Principles of Physick. Sir, the Learned and Judicious Gentlemen of your Gown can have no reason to complain that I
have invaded their Province, or encroached upon their Prerogatives: For I do not undertake to prove that there were ever any supernatural Effects produced, that matter I think belongs entirely to Divines to make evident from authentick Testi∣mony; I only endeavour to demonstrate the Possi∣bility of them, and if there were ever any, to ex∣plain the Mode and Mechanism with which we may conceive how they might have been perform'd: This is not doing any Prejudice to your Profesti∣on; for I have that Respect to the Church, and that Deference to the Clergy, that I did nothing in this matter without the Advice and Approbation of those of them that are in the highest Station: And they own'd, that tho this Subject had never been yet handled by any Physician, nor indeed by any Divine that I know of, yet it was only a Phy∣sician's business to treat of, according to the Prin∣ciples of Natural Philosophy and Physick. For since it is on all sides acknowledged, that miraculous Effects are above Natural Causes, no People can better judg whether any Effect is really supernatu∣ral, than those that make it their Business and Pro∣fession to know how far the Activity of Natural Causes can reach. For Physicians may find some∣times that what the wilful Mistakes of some, and the Ignorance of others take for supernatural, is the visible Effect of a Natural Cause, as I observ'd once at Rome some Years since: passing by chance through the Strada del Popolo, I saw a multitude of People hurrying a Man to St. Mark's Chappel, which belongs to the Venetian Embassadors; they told me that he was possess'd with the Devil, and that they, were carrying him to be exorcis'd: I crowded thro the Throng into the Church, and felt the Man's Pulse; I found him in a Fever, making hideous Grimaces and Motions with his Face, Eyes, Tongue, and all his Limbs, which were nothing else but a fit of Convulsive Motions all over his Body, occasion'd by disorder of his Blood and Spirits, being a Hypo∣chondriacal
Person. The Clergy and People began very devoutly to fright the pretended Devil out of him, and in a little time his disorderly Motions ceased, which, as they thought to be the miraculous Effect of their Prayers, I attributed to the natural abatement and usual cessation of such Fits. Every understanding Naturalist knows that an able Chymist can work such surprizing Effects in his Art as may very easily pass for Miracles with such as are unacquainted how far the force of Natural Causes can extend. It would seem to 'em very astonishing to see two Liquors, that are cold of their own na∣ture, ferment, boil, and become very hot, without any visible Cause to put them in motion: To see Aqua Regalis dissolve Massy Gold, Aqua Fortis dissolve Silver, Iron, Mercury, and most other Mi∣nerals; to see the Spirit of Nitre, and the Oil of Cloves, which separately are very quiet, turn into a burning Flame when mixed together; to see transparent Liquors when mixed, turn red, green, white, and into all sorts of Colours. I say nothing of the Phosphorus, of the surprizing Effects of the, Air Pump, of the Elasticity of the Air, of the Magnet, nor of an infinite number of other won∣derful Phaenomena in Nature: which tho they may be common, yet they are not the less surprizing, because their Cause is as hid from those that do not, and even to those that do study Nature, as that of supernatural Effects is to those Naturalists who trace Natural Causes to their highest Sphere of Activity. I do not doubt but that if the Missiona∣ries that are sent from the Western Churches to convert the Pagans of the Eastern Nations, were as well vers'd in Anatomy and Chymistry, as they are in the Tenets of the Christian Religion, and in the Mathematicks; and that if they did but dazel the Eyes of these ignorant People with a great many curious and useful Experiments in these two funda∣mental Branches of Physick, they would perhaps make as deep Impressions upon their Minds, and
give them as convincing Testimonies of the Power and Legality of their Mission, as they can at pre∣sent by the spiritual or indelible Character, they say is inherent in them by virtue of their Com∣mission. Pope Clement the Tenth knew well the Effects Chymistry artfully applied might produce in the minds of ignorant People, when he secured the Per∣son of the famous Italian Signor Borri, who about five and thirty Years ago by his Skill in Chymistry did work several extraordinary Cures on Diseases in Germany, and gain'd such universal Reputation all over the Empire and the Northern Kingdoms, that (as it was reported of him) he thought he had Credit and Opportunity sufficient to invent and pro∣pagate a new Religion, by making his surprizing Ex∣periments in Chymistry pass for Miracles; which he might easily have done, since Chymistry being then in its Minority, was not much known in the World. But the Pope foreseeing the ill Consequence such a Design might produce, gave timely Orders to his Nuncio, then at Vienna, to desire the present Em∣peror to get him seiz'd; which being accordingly done, he was sent Prisoner to Rome, on condition nevertheless that his Life should be safe, here he lived in Castello St. Angelo for several Years, where I saw him, and his curious Laboratory for Chy∣mistry allowed him for his Diversion; no body was admitted to discourse him without special leave, for fear, I suppose, he should inform the World either of his pretended new Doctrine, or of the Injustice he might intimate that was done to him. He died lately in this close Confinement since I have been at Rome. Thus, Sir, I have given you as succinct and comprehensive an Account of my Design in that Book as I could well express in so few Lines, by which you will believe perhaps that I have done nothing in treating of those Matters, but what
belongs peculiarly to one of my Profession to ex¦amine; and tho I do not pretend to have explain'd this nice Subject with that Satisfaction the Publick might perhaps expect, yet I hope that having been the first Person that has ever handled it after this manner, no body will blame me for having at least given occasion to others to examine it better after me, and to give a more satisfactory Expla∣nation of it. I conceive the Subject I have under∣taken to treat of in that Book is nice as well as un∣grateful, wherein the Principles of Physick, the Experiments of Chymistry, and the Anatomy of the Humane Body are philosophically made use of as a Foundation to illustrate the Metaphysical Ac∣count I have given of these Supernatural Effects, which perhaps makes it not so much universally understood as I design'd; however I am resolv'd not to meddle any more with Matters of this kind, but to apply my self entirely to the Practice of Physick. I am, London, the 21st of January, 1697/8. Worthy Sir, Your Obliged Friend, and Humble Servant, B. C. FINIS.
