v267 c716a 12388630 60920
VERSES Made upon the several FESTIVALS OF NOVEMBER, And Remarkable Days in the Whiggish-Calender, By Way of Remembrance to all Loyalists, and Caution to all Turks, Infidels, Jews, and other Dissenters. By Merlynnius Redivivus. THou Sun that shewest the Days, look down and see A Month more shining by Events than thee: Departed Saints and Souls, Sign'd it before,All Saints All Souls. But now the Living Sign it more.
Bate us that Ushering Curse so dearly known, And then the Moneth is all our own: So at the first Darkness was thrown about, The unshaven Earth and Light was thence struck out.The 3d day, The Assembly of the un∣happy Parli∣ament. Draw the first Curtain, and the Scene is then, A triple State of cull'd and trusted Men. Men,Rump. in whose hands 'twas once to have given us more Than our bold Fathers ever asked before. Who had they used their Princes Grace, had got What no Arms could, and theirs shall not What more than Witchcraft did our Blessing curse, And made the Cure make evils worse; 'Tis the third day, throw in the blackest Stone, Mark it for curs'd, and let it stand alone. But hold! speak gentler things, this fourth was seen, The softest Image of our Beauteous Queen:The 4th day, The Birth of the Princess Mary. Bring me a Lamb not used to Elder Food, That hath as yet more Milk then Blood, That to the Honour of this early Bride, like Thetis joyned to Peleus side: Some tender thing may fall, though none can be, So white so tender as is she, Whilst we at home our little Turffe debate, She spreads our Glories to another State. Next view a Treason of the worst intent,The 5th day, delivery from the Gunpow∣der Treason. Had not our own done more then others meant. Religion is the thing both sides pretend, But either to a different end; They out of Zeal labour to rear their own, These out of Zeal to pull all down:
Bless us from these as them; But yet compare Those in the Vault, these in the Chair, Though the just Lot of unsuccessful sin, Fix their's without, you'll find worse heads within. But heark! what Thunder's that,The 12th day King Charles the First, Victory at Branford. who those Men Flying towards Heaven, but falling down agen? Whose those black Corps cast on the guilty Shore, 'Tis sin that swim'd to it's own Door. Tis the third scourge of Rebels, which allow'd Our Army like the Prophets Cloud, Did from an handful rear, until at last Their Skie was by it over-east. But as Snakes hifs after they have lost their Sting, The Traytors called this Treachery in the King. Away and view the Graces and the Hours,The 16th day The Birth of our Gracious Queen Mary King Charles the First his Queen. Hovering aloof, and dropping mingled Flowers Upon a Cradle where an Infant lay, More Grace more Goddess then were they. Thrice did they destine her to pass the Seas, Love made her thrice to pass't with case: To raise a strength of Princes first, and then To raise another strength of Men; Most fruitful Queen, we boast both Gifts, and thus The Day was meant to you, the Joy to us. Next to this Mother stands a Virgin Queen,The 17th day The begin∣ning of Queen Elizabeths Reign. Courting and Courted wheresoever seen. The Peoples Love first from her Troubles grew, Her Reign then made that Love her due: That comely Order that did then Adorn, Both Fabricks novv by Factions Torn.
That form by her allowed of Common Prayer, Is stiled now, Vain beating of the Air: How do they Honour, how forsake her Crown, Her times are still cry'd up, but practis'd down. Reach last the whitest Stone the World yet knew,The 19th day The Birth of our Gracious King Charles the First, that blessed Martyr. White as his Soul to whom the day is due; Son of the Peaceful James, how is he blest With all his Blessings, but his rest; Though undeserved times call all his Powers, And Troubles season other Hours, Let this day Flovv to him as void of care, As Feasts to Gods and Poets are. The which is just, O Heavens! All our strife Hath added to his Glories, add ye to his life; And now since his large heart with hers is met, Whose day the Stars on purpose near his set. November shall to me for ever shine, Red in its Ink, Redder in its Wine; And since the Third, who almost hath made shift To absolve the Treason of the Fift, Cannot be well remembred or forgot, By Loyal hearts as if 'twere not, The last extream against the first wee'll bring, That gave us many Tyrants, this a King. FINIS. Printed in the Year 1685.
