10343.5 99900271 150599
ARTICLES TO BE ENQVI∣RED OF IN THE ORDINARY VISITATION OF THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER DOCTOR PEARSON, Archdeacon of Suffolke, Anno Domini 1637. insignia with two snakes entwined around a scepter and two hands clasping F K PAX OPVLENTIAM SAPIENTIA PACEM LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kingston. 1627
The Tenor of the Oath of the Church∣wardens and Sworne-men. YOu shall sweare, that after due consideration had of these articles given you now in charge, that you will diligent∣ly enquire, and true presentment make of all and every such Person of or within your Parish, which you shall know to have committed any offence, or omitted any duty mentioned in the said Articles; or which are publiquely defamed or vehe∣mently suspected of any such offence or negligence. So helpe you God, by the Contents of the holy Gospell. Answere distinctly and severally to every Article. The Minister (be he Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, Preacher or Curate) may ioyne with the Sworne-men in their Presentments, and he is to in∣forme the Ordinary under his hand, of such faults as the Sworne-men shall leave unpresented. It is lawfull for the Minister alone, or for the Sworne Officers, to present as often as occasion requireth: and it is meet that notorious offences should in due time be presented and punished.
ARTICLES TO BE ENQVIRED OF BY THE CHVRCH∣WARDENS AND QUESTMEN IN THE ordinary Visitation of the right Worshipfull M. RO∣BERT PEARSON, Doctor of Divinity, and Arch-Deacon of Suffolke, or his Officiall. Anno Dom. 1637 Articles concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches Possessions. Tit. 1. FIrst, whether have you in your Church or Chappell, the whole Bible of the largest Volume, and of the last Trans∣lation, the Booke of Common Prayer lately set forth by his Majesties authority, the two Bookes of Homilies, and Bishop Iewels Apology, all well and fairely bound: a Font of stone set up in the antientusuall place, with a hole in the bottome of it to convey away the water: a conve∣nient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silke, or some other decent stuffe continually laid upon the Table at time of Divine Service, and a faire linnen cloth, at the time of administring the holy Communion: and whether is the same Table placed conveniently as it ought: and whether is it so used, in, or out of the time of Divine Service or Sermon, as is not agreea∣ble to the holy use of it, as by sitting on it, or throwing hats thereon: or is it abused by any other prophane uses? Are the ten Commandements set up on the East end of your parish Church, with other sentences of Scripture about them? 2, Item, whether have you in your Church or Chappell, a convenient feat for your Minister to reade Divine Service in, together with a comely pulpit, set up in a convenient place, with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the same, a comely, large and faire Surplesse, a faire Communion cup, a Flagon of Silver or pewter, with all other things and ornaments fit and necessary for the cele∣bration of Divine Service, and administration of the sacraments? And whe∣ther have you a Chest for almes, with the lockes and keys, and another chest for keeping the Books and ornaments of the Church, & the register Book, and have you a Register Booke in Parchment, for Christenings, Weddings, and Burials, and is the same kept in all points according to the Canons; and
have you a Table set in your Church of the degrees wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry? 3. Item, whether is your Church or Chappell, with the Chancell ther∣of, and all your Parsonage or Vicarage houses in good reparations, and are they imployed to godly and their right holy uses? if any of them be ruinated and wasted, in whom is the default? Is your Church or Chappell, or Chan∣cell decently and comely kept, as well within as without; and are the seates well maintained, the windowes well glazed, the floore kept paved, plaine and even, and all things in decent sort, without dust, or any thing that is ei∣ther noisome, or unseemly for the house of God, as is prescribed in a Homi∣ly to that effect, and the 85. Canon. 4. Item, whether be your Church-yard, well fenced and kept without abuse? If not, whose default is it? Hath any person incroched upon the ground of the Church-yard: have any used a place consecrated to holy use prophane∣ly or wickedly; have any quarrelled or stricken another in the Church, or Church-yard: have any annoyed your Church-yard, or the fence thereof, by putting in of cattell, by hanging of clothes, or by laying there any dust, dung or other filthinesse? 5. Item, what Legacies have bin given to the use and benefit of your Church, how they have been bestowed, who received them, and detaineth them without due imployment? Doth any detaine or embezell any of the Church goods, or any other gifts given to charitable uses? 6. Item, whether is there any erecting of pues, or minuating of seates in your Church, by any privat man of his owne authority, and what seats have been so built, and by whose procurement, and by what authority? 7. Item, whether hath any popish Recusant, being lawfully excommuni∣cated, beene interred or buried in the Church or Church-yard, before abso∣lution of the censure and excommunication? if yea, then by whom, & when? Articles touching the Steeple. Tit. 2. FIrst have you a Steeple belonging unto your Church, and is it well cove∣red with lead, or some other good and sufficient tecture, & are the walls thereof in sufficient reparations? 2. Item, how many Bels have you in your Steeple, and of what weight are they, and are they all wel hanged up in frames in the Steeple; have they good ropes belonging to them, wherewith to ring them, and are they tuneable? 3. Item, are the frames and wheels of the said Bels sound and strong, & are the planchers of your steeple good, & not broken, and are there a good paire of stairs or good ladders, wherwith to go up readily into the said steeple? 4. Item, whether have any of your Bels within this twenty yeres, or more last past, been alienated or sold? If yea, by whom, and to whom, and of what weight were the said Bels, and of what value by common estimation? 5. Item, have your Bels or any of them been made lesse upon the last yoa∣ting of them? If yea, by whose default, and what is become of the metall that was so saved out of them?
Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine. Tit. 3. FIrst, whether there be any abiding in, or resorting to your parish, that have, or doe maintaine or defend any heresies, errours, or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and the holy Scripture? 2. Item, whether doth any in your parish being sixteene yeares of age and upwards, or others lodging, or commonly resorting to any house in your pa∣rish, absent themselves from the parish Church, Chappell, or Oratory upon Sundayes and Holy daies, and other dayes appointed, at morning and Eve∣ning prayer? Or what person doth usually come late to Church, or depart from Church before Divine Service & Sermon be ended? Or whether bee there any that perswade others to forbeare and abstaine comming to their parish Church to heare Divine Service, and to receive the holy Communion, according to his Majesties Law in that behalfe enacted? 3. Item, whether be there any in your parish, that hath beene or is vehe∣mently suspected to have been present at any unlawfull assemblies, conven∣ticles or meetings under colour or pretence of any exercise of Religion, or doth any affirme or maintaine such meetings to be lawfull? 4. Item, whether be there any within your parish, that deny or perswade any to deny or impugne the Kings Majesties authority and supremacy in causes Ecclesiasticall? 5. Item, whether be there any abiding or resorting to your parish, that be, or are commonly reputed or taken to be ill affected in matters of Religion professed in our Church, or taken to be Recusant papists, refusing to repaire to Church to heare Divine Service, and receive the holy Communion, and disobedient to his Highnesse lawes in that behalfe established? present their names, qualities and conditions. Doth any papist keepe a Schoole-master in his house which repaireth not to your parish Church as is required, what is his name, and how long hath he so taught there, or elsewhere? 6. Item, is there any in your parish, who in the manner of preaching hath taken upon him to repeat any Sermon in any privat house, in any assembling or meeting together of people? Articles concerning publique Praier, and administration of the Sacraments. Tit. 4. FIrst, whether any of your parish hath spoken or declared anything in de∣rogation or depraving of the forme of Gods Worship in the Church of England, and administration of the Sacraments, rites & ceremonies set forth and prescribed in the Booke of Common prayer, by the Kings Majesty au∣thorized and confirmed? Do any preach, speake or declare that it containeth any thing which is not agreeable to the holy Scriptures? 2. Item, whether hath any in your parish caused, procured, or maintained any Minister to say any common or publique prayer, or to administer either of the Sacraments, of Baptisme and the Lords Supper, otherwise or in any other manner and forme than is mentioned in the said Booke of Common prayer? or whether hath any interrupted, hindred, let, or disturbed the Mini∣ster
to reade divine service, & administer the Sacraments, in such maner and forme as is mentioned in the said booke, or interrupted him in his sermons? 3. Item, whether is the Sacrament of Baptisme rightly and duely admi∣nistred, according to the prescript forme expressed in the Booke of Common Prayer, with due observation of all rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the administration of the same, without adding or altering any part or parcell of any prayers, interrogatories, or not using the signe of the Crosse in the ad∣ministration of the same? 4. Item, whether is the administration of the Sacrament of Baptisme de∣ferred longer than the next Sunday or Holy-day immediatly following the birth of the childe? 5. Item, whether is the Sacrament of Baptisme refused to be administred to any children borne in, or out of Wedlock, their birth being made known to the Minister of the parish, and offered unto him to be baptized; or have any such children dyed unbaptized? 6. Item, whether be the parents of any childe to be baptized, admitted to be God-fathers and God-mothers to the same? 7. Item, whether have there any children been baptized in privat houses by any Lay person, or Midwife, or popish Priest, or by any other Minister, without urgent occasion, when the childe was in danger of death? 8. Item, whether have the children which have been borne to any popish Recusants, or begotten by them, beene publiquely baptized in your Parish Church, by your Parson, Vicar or Curate, or by whom were they so bapti∣zed, or where, to your knowledge? 9. Item, whether hath the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper beene duly and reverently administred every moneth, or thrice every yeare at least; whereof once at Easter, within your Parish Church to every Parishioner, being of the age of 16 yeares, or upwards? 10. Item, whether is the said holy Sacrament delivered unto, or received by any of the Communicants within your Parish, that unreverently sit or stand, and do not devoutly and humbly kneele upon their knees at the time of the administration of the same? 11. Item, whether have any excommunicate persons or Schismatickes, common and notorious depravers of the Religion and government of this Realme, without unfained sorrow shewn for their impiety and wickednesse, been admitted to receive the holy Communion within your Parish? present their names. 12. Item, whether hath any of your Parish been debarred from receiving the said holy Communion without just cause, and without intimation first given to the Ordinary, viz. the Bishop of the Diocese, Chancellor, or Com∣missary, and by whose default? 13. Item, whether hath any affirmed, that any of the 39. Articles agreed upon by the Archbishop and Bishops in the yeare of our Lord God, 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of opinions, are in any part superstitious or
erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience subscribe unto? Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers. Tit.  FIrst, whether doth your Minister distinctly and reverently say Divine ser∣vice upon Sundaies and Holy-daies, and other dayes appointed to bee observed by the Booke of Common Praiers, at fit and usuall houres of the day: and doth your Minister duly observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the Booke of Common Prayer, as well in reading all publique Prayers & the Letany, as also in administring of the Sacraments, solemniza∣tion of Matrimony, visitation of the sick, burying the dead, churching of wo∣men, and all other like Rites and Offices of the Church, in such manner and forme, as in the said Booke of Common Prayer is injoyned, without any o∣mission or addition of any thing. 2. Item, whether doth your Minister alwayes, viz. every Sunday and Ho∣ly-day, both Morning and Evening reading Divine Service, & administring the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, weare the Surplesse, accor∣ding to the Canons, and doth he never omit the wearing thereof at the times aforesaid? if at any time he have omitted, specifie the times. 3. Item, whether doth your Minister bid Holy-dayes, and fasting dayes, as is appointed? Doth he administer the holy communion every moneth, or thrice in the yeare at least, whereof once at Easter, to every parishioner? doth he receive the same himselfe on every day that he doth administer the same to others, and doth he use the words of institution, according to the Book of Common Prayer, without alteration at every time that the Bread & Wine is renewed; doth he use and never omit the Signe of the Crosse in Baptisme, or doth he ever baptize in any bason or any other thing but the usuall Font? If yea, then is the bason set within the Font, and doth hee baptize out of the same bason standing in the Font? Doth he marry any couple without a ring; or in times prohibited, or without the Banes three times published, without a speciall licence from the Archbishop, or the Bishop of the Diocesse, or his Chancellour or Commissary, first had and attained? 4. Item, whether doth your Minister, being learned & sufficient, confer with the popish Recusants of your parish (if any there be) & endevour to reclaime them from their errors, and present them being obstinat, for their recusancy. 5. Item, whether doth your Minister in the Rogation weeke goe the per∣ambulation of the circuit and bounds of your Parish, saying and using the praiers and suffrages, & thanksgiving to God, appointed by law, according to his duty? And did he give warning the Sunday before, when the Parishio∣ners should meet to go? 6. Item, hath your Minister, or any other Preacher within your parish made any Sermons in any private house, administred the Sacraments, or churched women in any private houses, otherwise than by law is allowed? 7. Item, what Preachers and Curates do reade prayers, or administer the Sacraments within your parish, without lawfull licence from the Bishop of the diocese, his chancellor or commissary? or doth any Lay man (not having
holy Orders) presume to reade publique prayers in the Church? 8. Item, whether have you any Preacher or Lecturer in your parish? If yea, whether doth he twice at the least every yeare reade himselfe Divine Service both Morning and Evening two severall Sundaies publiquely in his Surplesse, and also twice in every yeare administer both the Sacraments, with such rites and ceremonies as are prescribed in the Booke of Common Prayer, according to the 46. Canon? 9. Item, whether is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Preacher given to drun∣kennesse, or idlenesse of life, a hunter of Tavernes, Alehouses, or suspected places, a Dicer, Carder, Tabler, Swearer, given to base and servile labour, or otherwise giveth any ill example of life? 10. Item, whether is the Parson, Vicar, Curate or Preacher of any other Parish, knowne to be a frequenter of Tavernes, Innes, Alehouses which are situated within your own, or any other Parish? Or is he publiquely defamed of such resorting and frequenting, as is aforesaid? 11. Item, whether doth your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday and Holy day, before Evening Prayer halfe an houre or more, examine and instruct the youth, and ignorant persons of his parish, in the Commande∣ments, the Articles of Beliefe, and in the Lords prayer? And doth he usually upon the said daies diligently heare, instruct & teach them the Catechisme, set forth in the Booke of Common prayer and none other? 12. Item, whether have your Preachers & Readers of Divinity Lectures declared foure times at the least every yeare in their Sermons or other col∣lations and Lectures, that all usurped and forreigne power is, for most just causes taken away and abolished, & that therefore no manner of obedience or subjection within his Majesties Realms, is due unto any forreigne power? 13. Item, whether have your Ministers used continually before their Ser∣mons and Lectures, the forme of prayer prescribed in the 55. Canon, especi∣ally in praying for the Kings Majesty, and the Archbishops and Bishops, and in ending with the Lords prayer? 14. Item, whether hath your Minister, after that he had received any let∣ters of Excommunication, under the seale of an Ecclesiasticall Iudge, suffered the party excommunicated to abide in the Church or Chancell, in the time of Divine Service or Sermon? 15. Item, whether hath your Minister in any of his sermons or Lectures preached against any of the ceremonies cōmanded to be used by the Church of England, or hath so preached against ceremonies in generall, that by com∣mon acceptation at the least of the weaker, his words might be taken to tend to the depraving of the ceremonies established by the Church of England? 16. Item, whether hath any one in his Sermon or Lecture, declared, limi∣ted, or bounded out, by way of positive Doctrine, the power, prerogative, authority, and duties of Soveraigne princes, or otherwise intermedled with matters of State? 17. Item, whether hath any Preacher in his Sermon used any undecent
rayling speeches, or bitter invectives against the person of either Papist or Puritanes? 18. Item, whether hath your Minister when a dead body is brought to be buried, met the corps at the Church doore; and when the corps was making ready to be laid into the earth, Hath he stood by the grave, or hath he read the Praiers or Psalmes appointed to be read by the Booke of Common prayer, standing or sitting in his Deske? 19. Item, whether hath your Minister churched any woman but when he himselfe stood by the Communion Table, and she kneeled downe by the said Table or neere unto it? Articles concerning Matrimony. Tit. 6. FIrst, whether be there any in your Parish, that have married within the degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity, by the Law of God forbidden, and what be their names? 2. Item, whether have any within your Parish beene married secretly in private houses, or without their parents or governors consent signified, being under the age of 21. yeares? 3. Item, whether do any married Couples live asunder unlawfully, and do not cohabit together, as becommeth Man and wife? And if yea, what bee their names, and in whom is the default? 4. Item, whether any persons (the banes not thrice published in the Church) have been married without licence, who were present at such Mar∣riage, and what Minister married them? 5. Item, what popish Recusants or their children have bin married within your parish, in what sort was their matrimony solemnized, whē & by whom 6. Item, whether have there been any persons married in your Church in the times prohibited by the Lawes, viz. from Advent Sunday, untill eight dayes after the Epiphany, from Septuagesima untill eight dayes after Easter day, from three dayes before the Ascension untill Trinity Sunday, without a lawfull licence or dispensation first obtained from the Bishop of the diocese, his Chancellor or Commissary? 7. Item, whether hath the Minister said all the Praiers & Psalmes appoin∣ted to be said by the Booke of Common Praier at the time of the solemniza∣tion of Marriage, and hath the Minister standing by the Lords Table (& the married couple kneeling) before the same, said those praiers which follow next after the Psalm, Deus miserere: and hath he omitted any part of them? if yea, then specifie the parties betweene whom marriage was solemnized, and the time when the minister did omit any part of his said duty therein. Articles concerning the keeping of Christenings, Weddings, and Burials. Tit, 7. FIrst, is there in your parish Church or Chappell, a parchment Booke, for the Registring of Christenings, Weddings and Burials? 2. Item, hath the said booke been kept in your parish Church or Chappell in a Coffer with three lockes and keies, and hath one of the said keies beene
kept by the Minister, and the other two with the Church-wardens severally? 3. Item, hath the Minister without the Church-wardens, or have the Church-wardens without the Minister, at any time taken out the said Book out of the said Coffer, or hath the Minister kept the said Booke in his privat house? 4. Item, hath your Minister, in the presence of the Church-wardens upon every Sabbath day, immediatly after Morning or Evening Prayer, written and recorded in the said Book the names of all persons Christened, together with the names and sirnames of their parents, and also the names of all per∣sons married and buried in that parish in the weeke before? Articles concerning Schoolemasters. Tit. 8. FIrst, doth any in your parish openly or privatly take upon him to teach schoole without licence of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the re∣ligion now established? and doth he bring his Schollers to the Church to heare Divine Service and Sermons? and doth he instruct his Schollers in the grounds of the Religion now established in the Church of England, and is he carefull and diligent to benefit his Schollers in learning? 2. Item, doth your Schoole-master teach and instruct his youth in any Catechisme than is allowed by publique Authority, and what Catechisme it is that he so teacheth? 3. Item, doth any keepe Schoole in the Chauncell or Church, by which meanes that holy place, and the Communion Table are many waies profa∣ned and the windowes broken? Articles concerning the Parishioners? Tit. 9. FIrst, whether doe any of your Parish or any other, that hath resorted, or doth resort to your parish, prophane the Sabbath day, or Holy-dayes, by drinking and tipling in Iunes, or Ale-houses, or by playing at unlawfull games? 2. Item, is there any in your parish that doe impugne or speak against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawfull use of them, and the governement of this Church under his Majesty, by Arch-bishops, Bishops and other Ecclesiasticall Officers? 3. Item, who in your parish do come to the Sermon onely, and not to di∣vine Service, and who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of Divine Service, kneeling when the generall confession of sinnes, the Leta∣ny, the ten Commandements, and all praiers and Collects are read, and using all due and lowly reverence when the blessed name of the Lord Iesus is men∣tioned in the time of Divine Service, & standing up when the Articles of the beleefe and the Gospell are read? And who do cover their heads in time of Divine service, unlesse it be in case of necessity, in which case they may weare a night cap? And who do give themselves to babbling, talking, or walking, and are not attentive to heare the Word read and preached? 4. Item, is there any in your parish that refuse to have their children bap∣tized; or themselves to receive the Communion of your Minister, taking ex∣ception
against him, because he is no preacher? Or have any wives refused to come to Church, to give thankes to God for their safe deliverance, in a de∣cent habit, with a rayle, as hath been anciently accustomed? 5. Item, have any of your parish spoken slanderous and reprochful words against your Minister, to the scandal of his vocation, or against their marriage or wives, or defaming him, touching any crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance? 6. Item, whether do any in your parish exercise any trade or labour, buy, or sell, or keepe open their shops, or set out any wares to be sold upon Sundaies and Holy-dayes, by themselves, their servants or apprentises, or have other∣wise prophaned the Sunday, or Holy-dayes? 7. Item, is there any in your parish that be, or are commonly knowne, or reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy Name, or accustomed swearers, or to use any ribaldry in their talke, or be drunkards, adulterers, fornicators, in∣cestuous persons? And have any been detected of any such notorious crimes and offences; and whether have they done penance for the same? 8. Item, is there any in your parish who is publiquely defamed, or vehe∣mently suspected of getting his, or their wives with childe before Marriage? 9. Item, whether have any persons dyed within your parish; whose Will and Testament (if any were made) is not proved, or administration of their goods taken, according to law; and whether is there any in your parish, who do administer the goods of any person deceased, without lawfull authority, and before he or they have proved the Will and Testament of the party de∣ceased, or have obtained Commission from the Ordinary, viz. the Bishops Chancellor or Commissary, to dispose the said moveable goods? 10. Item, what excommunicate persons be within your parish, and for what causes are they excommunicate, to your knowledge? And whether do any such excommunicate persons repaire to your parish Church in time of Divine service or sermon, not being absolved? 11. Item, if there be any persons excommunicate within your parish, which is made notorious by denouncing them excommunicate in the face of the Church: who, and what person and persons do keepe or frequent their com∣pany, eat or drinke, or have any thing to do with any such excommunicate person? present their names, for it is not lawfull for them so to doe, so long as they remaine under the sentence of excommunication. 12. Item, whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, cause their Children, Servants and Apprentises, both males & females, which have not learned their Catechisme to come to the Church upon Sundayes and Holy-daies, before Evening Prayer, obediently to heare, and to be ordered by the Minister, untill they have learned the same? 13. Item, is there any House-holder within your parish, that doth not du∣ly goe in perambulation with the Minister, and the rest of the parishioners, the circuit and bounds of your parish? What are the names of such as made, or suffered default to be made therein? 14. Item, do the old Church-wardens, or any other persons, that were
Church-wardens, retaine any goods belonging to the Church, and have not made the just account of their receits and expences about the executing of their office? 15. Item, what person or persons is, or are chosen Chuch-warden, or Church-wardens of your parish for this yere, 1637 and when were they so chosen, and by whom? 16. Item, whether is there a Booke in your Parish, wherein the name of every strange Preacher that preacheth in your parish, should subscribe his name, the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom hee had licence to preach? & whether hath every Preacher that was a stranger, so subscribed before he preached in your Church? 17. Item, whether doth not every one dwelling within your Parish, ob∣serve all those days for fasting daies, which are appointed by a statute made in the fifth and sixth yeare of Edw. 6. or shall eat flesh upon those dayes? 18. Item, whether you the Church-wardens and Assistants have accor∣ding to the 28. Canon, marked whether all and every of your parishioners in your parish come so often every yere to the holy Communion, as the law and his Majesties Constitutions Ecclesiasticall do require? And whether any stranger have come often & commonly from other parishes to your church, and whether have you shewed your Minister of them, least they should bee admitted there to the Lords table? and whether such person or persons have been forbidden and remitted home to his or their own parish church, there to receive the communion? or hath he or they notwithstanding received the same in your Church? Declare their names, and who admitted them thereunto. 19. Item, whether do the people say audibly with the Minister the Con∣fession, the Lords Praier, and the Creed, and make such other answers to the publique Praiers as are appointed in the Book of Common Praiers? or who faileth therein? 20. Item, whether hath any one in your Parish answered as God-father for his owne childe? Or hath any been a Godfather or God-mother, before he or she have received the holy Communion? Declare their names. 21. Item, whether there be any married women in your parish who after Childe-birth have refused to come to the Church to give God thanks for their safe deliverance, and to have the praiers publiquely appointed on that behalfe by the Booke of Common prayer, to be used? 22. Item, whether hath any woman been churched sitting in her seat, and not kneeling downe in some covenient place nigh unto the place where the Communion Table standeth? 23. Item, How many have you in your parish that do practise as Physi∣cians or Chirurgians, and by what authority? specifie their severall names. FINIS.
