E1053_3 50922811 168987
THE Wandring whore CONTINUED: A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Magdalena a Crafty Bawd, Julietta an Exquisie VVhore, Francion a Lascivious Gallant, And Gusman a Pimping Hector. Discovering their diabolical Practises at the Half-crown CHUCK-OFFICE. With a more perfect LIST of the names of the Crafty Bawds, Common Whores, Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-walkers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners. Delivered to the Publisher hereof by a late Hector, several deep Pyemen, and decayed Gamesters amongst them. Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus. London: Printed in the Year 1660.
THE WANDRING WHORE. Gusman. HAve you any work for the Coopers daughters in Katherine-wheel Ally in Bishopsgate-street, they cure the Priapismus, Satyriasis, and Standing-Ague infallibly, with an Universal Medicine, dancing Bobb-in-jo, stark naked into the bargain: In their absence (which is sel∣dom) Betty Lawrence, their neighbor and Sister in iniquity, will serve the Cure, suffering you to whip the skin off her buttocks, as Wats the Hosier (besides two others) did, onely paying her Crowns apiece for her patience and punishment. All such as are too hot in the God-piece, may have right-cooling Snow-water at the New-house without the Postern by Moor-gate, the vertues whereof are choice and singular, in so much that it cures any of the above-mentioned distempers, if you take a dose morning and evening after this man∣ner. Recipe Mamillarum duarum manipules duos, ventris inferioris (prope vnlvum) quantitatem sufficientem, pone linguam intra labra, rem in re, fiat ejectio & mix∣tio seminis secundum artem. Had this Receit the vertue and quality of curing the French-pox, Running of the Reins, filthy corrupt con∣stitutions in the bodyes of our society, it might be put down and received by them for the true Aqua Mirabilis, with which, should Thom. Lawton in Petty-France
but wash his face with before a Looking-glass, he might read the hainousness of his crimes imprinted in his forehead, if he did not expect to see old Nicks picture there instead of his own: First, for deceiving Mr. Hodgson an honest man and lawful husband of an unchaste wife: secondly, for tempting her to be a whore with him, when there is no question but she was so with others, for all she cry'd out O! I love that pretty black Rogues face of thine, who for her fact must be enrolled with our society, of whom you may read a per∣fect List of names, and Habitations. A more Perfect List of the names of the Crafty Bauds, Common Whores, Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-Walkers, Decoys, Hectors and Trap∣panners, in and about the City, and Sub∣urbs of London. Crafty Bawds. DAmrose Page Priss, Fotheringham at the Chuck Office Mal. Ceco Mrs. Stone Mrs. Creswel Mrs. Garrish Mrs. Habbiger Turks head in Moorfields Mother Baker Su. Lemmon Mrs. Whetston Mrs. George Mother Lockyer Mother Baxter Mrs. Adams Mrs. Jones Mrs. Salmon Mrs. Saunders Mrs. Kemp Mrs. Abigail Mrs Simpson Black Pegg Doctor Sherleys wife Mrs. Dennis Mrs Glover Mrs. Love Betty Buly Mrs Windbo Mrs Roberts Mrs Sammond Nel Lawrence Mrs Woodhurst Mrs Lockyer Mrs Themzin Mrs Pickering Mrs Kempster Mrs Brooks Virginia, going to Hack∣ney Grow, white-cross-street Mrs Osbeidg, Bedlam Mrs Gletherel Mrs Waller, Thomazin in white Chappel Mrs Thomas, Stepney Jeremyes and Servicess Booths by Hackney river Mrs Bull Mrs Halspenny Mrs Harrison Three Sugar-loaves in Grub-street Ship, George, and three turns long Ally Jones, at the Cock in long Acre
Mrs Davies a Midwife Mrs Barber, a Midwife in Holborn Mrs Howard, in Lincolns In-fild Mrs Hughes Mother Cunny The Cherry Garden Black Swan, in St. Mar∣tins-Le-grand Mrs Broks, Mile-end Hanna Hickman, Baud and Whre Margaret Leech Margery Wilson Mrs Page, Old-street Ann Price Houkins, Baud Paskin, at the Armitage Margery Lawton Alice Hulburt Mrs Burges Joyce Ebbs Nel Yate Mrs Wellaston Ms Stockwel Mrs Lawton, by Hatton∣wll Mal Ledger Mrs Sadler Mrs Gibbins Rose Caddin Frank Tilt Jane Hayward Nan Bennes Bess Mundel, keeps three Baudy-houses in Dogand Bitch-ard Jacobs Well, in Jewen∣street Nan Evans Mrs Jones in Cross-lane The Last and Lyon, in East-smith-feild. Common Whores, Wanderers, Pick-pockets and Night-walkers. Mrs. Snow Nan Langsden Mrs Reading Betty Edwards Betty Holly Mal. Nun Welsh Nan Mal Avory Esther Clark Nan Love Mrs. Warren Nell Gulliford Sarah & Nan Fullam Betty Yong Faith Clayton — Cross Betty Orange Mrs. Curtes Betty Laurence Mrs. Honor Queen of Morocc Mrs. Holliland Mrs. Diamond Mrs. Sherley the yonger Mrs Smith Jane Stamford Mrs. Spencer Mrs. Taverner Mrs. Marten Mrs Watson Mrs. Berry Mrs. Green Green Mall, alias Joan Godfrey Mal Chauncy Ketty Cox Moll Hegg Mall Horsfield Mall Savory Peg Williams Alice Spilman Kate Hare Mall Tremain Mrs. Westover, Band∣string-seller to the Offices in Chauncery-lane Peg Cross Nan Bret Ursula Higgins Betty White Betty Farmer Margery Noble Jane Dixon Mall Peak Sarah Martin Nan Glscock Mrs Mate Toothless Betty Bess Goring Grizzel Wood Mrs Cupid Mal Grey Nan Cooper Betty Cooper Mrs Ames Nan Wats Betty Bates Betty Eton Mal. Bell Butter and Eggs Jane Thebey Mrs Owen Mal Fink Betty Baxter Betty Gansford
Black Betty Nan Taylor Beck Lunn Mrs Love Mrs Lote Bess Whittle Bes Bluns Mrs Simmonds Bety Downes Luce Brook Nel Syder Mal Craford Mal Bell Mrs Wood Mal Rose Mrs Blower pocky Frank Poulter, alias Ulls Fayth Anderton Dutch Whore Wilkis a weavers Wife at smock Ally-end Mrs awes Denues wife in Shoreditch Mrs Swls maid Bess Ms oy Mrs Blls Daughters Mrs Bourn a Scribes wife Mrs Tippit Shards wife in Dunning-Alley Mrs Mails by the Cur∣tain Play-house Su Hedge Jone Thorn at Newington butts Ensign Websters wife Mrs Harfed — Robinson, Woodst Compter Mr Sweetman Long-haird Ms Spencer in Spittle-fields Mrs Wroth, Grubstreet Mrs Phillips Peg Angel Greens Satchel — Mall Rose Nan Rash Betty Knight Su Hais Nan Braithwait Boulrun the bayliffs wife Wl Martins wife Mrs Fransces, alias M Robinson Pim Hollilands Poekey pug-nasty Mrs Spicer in Mobb-lane, alias Browns Mrs -mroy Mrs Carr in Rose-lane Mrs Bansly Tanners wife Wheeler str. Mrs Di Jone Glisson, alias Roberts Frank Evitt Tracyes ife Mrs Taverner Wheeler∣street Frank Rigs alias Robin∣son, a thieving whore Betty Wilson — King Sarah Price Kate Wilkinson Grace Steel Elizabeth Smith Betty Blunt Mry De-gret, Mobb to Tho. Crouch Allice Jones Mall Cole Nan Lowe — Fox Mary Paget Mrs Cadman Sarah & Joyce Price Bess Cox Cock Birch Sarah Bostwid Jone Bonner Jone Bouden Nan Southern Frank Palmer Silver-lac't Bess Frank Ouden Fair Rosamond Suger-C — a constant wanderer & night-wal∣ker Mrs Dedman Pg Hodgson Nan Stephens Sarah Blades Mrs Bliss Mrs Russel Mrs Sherman Mrs King a Sempstress. Decoys, Hectors, and Trapanners. ARmstrong Pet Fox Tho. Hurst Wil Taverner Dick Cartwright George Clark Barret Holliland, a great Cheat Gladwin, an ignorant whelp Len. Langsden Tho. Stern Barr Higgins Tho. Dodson
Nat Lummocks, Apoth. Anniseed Robbin Wil. Nash. Man Middleton Frank Ashburn Jack Jones Wat. Gulliford Carter, Rabbit-seller Dick. de Lane Jo. Cecks Robin Thrower Tho. Rand Wil. Merrit Wat. Stainton. Ramn, Trump-alley Crone Green by Newgate Harry Martin Vintner Pimp Skipwith. Ned Brooks Tracy a Hector Brown a Chyrurgion Ratford a Trooper Tho. Player Ned Traford Harry Bird Will Dossel Will Usius Jack Daines Taylor the Prigg Little Taffy Sam Pink, a slovenly pimp James at Dog-yard Gundamore Shatterwait, scribe Hopper, Writing-master Winch the Nailer Jack Berry, & Jack Harris Billiard-players Pimp Howard Fair Rosamonds pimp George Paskins, a Kid-iber, at the Crooked-billet at the Armitage Pimp Glover Jack Gould Jack Wallis Ralph Ashington, alias Shitten-arse, Grocer Tho. Ebbs Dick Steckwel Will Ledger Will Sadler Wat. Gibbins Tho. Hayward C— Jackson Pimp Sherman Hammond Will Gill Francion. Many of these are new Madams to me, but old Traders no question with others, I'le visit their Quarters one after another, though I'me clapp't three times over with the Pox, and so become a Gentleman, but hear me Seignior Gusman, do'st know Mrs. G— neer the Coffee-house in the Postern by More-gate? there's a tearing Girl with Silver-lace upon her Petti∣coat a Quarters bredth, with Lemmon-colour'd Rib∣bins a-la-mode-france, with Pendants in her eares, neck-lace of counterfeit pearl, and dress't with a Caul in her hair. Gusman. Know her! There's scarce a Baudy-house, whore, or Hector in London but I either know of them, or will know them, by such as keep them Company, one of them told me, that after G—had faln to decay
in his own trade, his wife set up her's by opening her fore doores, and lying backwards, for sufferance where∣of this Cornudo had two shillings and six-pence a time payed by his wife, who handled the theorick and practick part with such free will that by her Report her husband received seventeen Half-crowns for his part in one day, besides some over-plus Knocks she never reckoned to him. Francion. Had I known this story before-hand, I would never have ventured in her  Low-country, though she would have payd me for the drudgery; for, the Cat-ey'd Cullinder-fac'd Gipsy is onely plea∣sing to the eye in her trick't-up bravery  a distance, and rough sin'd in her Embrces as the Sun-burnt Portugal; there's the Governess of the Chuck Office has been far handsomer, till  had her under his Cure of the Pox: I was told by one Hurst a Farrier by Finsbury and diverse others, that riss, stood upon her head with naked breech & belly whilst four Cully∣rumpers chuck't in siteen Half-crowns into her Comodity: I fear the foul disease is so deeply rooted in her rotten husband, (as appears by his staff since he was at Enfield,) that he will shortly be put in the Bill of Mortality: to prevent which, I advise him to enter Kings-land Hospital, and there make his last Will and Testament, leaving the Estate he hath got by Fools, Whores, and Rogues, to some of his own profession. Gusman. It's a true Proverb, (and as often seen verified amongst us, as upon any other persons in the world,) that ill-gotten Goods never prosper, and though his gettings have been inordinate, his Expen∣ces have over-ballanc't them, so that his estate will
quickly be numbred, and as suddenly distributed: If you fancy variety of faces, Mounsieur Francion, visit the Cherery-garden, Hatton-wall, Blomesbury, Deury-lane, Dog and Birch yard, Fleet-lane, Turn∣ball-street, Rosemary lane, long Acre, Lincolns-in∣fields; Spittle-fields, Wheeler-street, Mobb-lane, Smock-ally, the Row at the six Windmills, Petticoat∣lane, Dunnings-ally, Long-ally, More-fields, Cheap∣side, Cornhill, Leaden-hall-street, &c. Where when you meet with a complete lusty Girl to your minde, say with the witty wanton Poet; Let me thy naked parts feel without light And with sweet sports protract the pleasing night. Francion. I have rang'd thorough most of those quarters already for a fresh C—for, Love hath wings, and loves to range, And I love those that love to change. Therefore if thou canst do the business, here's a Crown, an Angel, a Pound, nay, Five pounds for a pnre untoucht Maiden-head: for I am even surfeited with Citizens wives, who are eager after S— Gusman. I can do the feat for you, paying well be∣fore-hand, onely advising with Magdalena a little, therefore whether will you have a black, brown, flax∣en, tall, short, slender, thick, fat, or lean wench to try your valor on? Francion. I won't have her clarifi'd or pockisi but a pure maid, such as was py'd by her Mr. the B—in the Truckle-bed, nor such as In bred Spend-all in Throckmorton-street, trades with neer the Chuck-Office,
(when he should be at Church,) or in the usur∣ers walk, not playing at Bobb-cherry with his maid the Tell-tale, nor such a one as old Salmons maid, who whilst her Mr. wooed to enter her fort, she stood upon her guard, and called Corporal, bidding him stand off with a Pox of his P—in his hand Magdalena. Thou hast been pretty punctual in thy observations as to the names, persons, and places where our sociery and retinue resoit, but there are other re∣markable persons, such as your running-Bauds, Kid-Nappers, your he and she-Shop lifters, and your foy∣lers, who are forgotten amongst us; there's old Dam∣rose Page has got many a pound by it, therefore let us not loose the benefit of their Acquaintance, we may chance to buyld a Hospital, at our own proper-cost and charges, as well as she did Houses in Radcliff-high∣way. Gusman. That I have ready for you already, which I shall put in rank and file against our next meeting: For by the advice of one of their own society, I took a rough draught of them, from the Collectors Lift for Pole-mony about Dog and Bitch-yard, Turnbull∣street, Cress-lane, with other their Rendezvouzes, and you shall not sail of them, such as Will, and Bess Cox, Bess Norgate, Amy Butler, Peter Goodjeway, and Thom. Orrel, with divers others of whom you shall shortly hear more in the strange and true Conference between Damrose Page and Priss Fotheringham du∣ring their Imprisonment in Newgate, &c. With the manner of Hammonds erecting of the Prick-Office at the Last and Lyon in East-smith-field. It will be very proper to have an additional List of the names, of our
deepest Pyemen and decayed Occupiers, whose names may stand upon record amongst us, as the Benefactors in St. Bartholomews Hospital, as good Examples fot others. But loose not an opportunity which is now offered in the presence of your constant Cully, and deep Pyeman Francion: His teeth water for a new face, mony and Cunny are good Commodities. Magdalena. Show him into a convenient Room, and end in Mrs. Cupid, the Dutch whore, fair Rosamond, Sugar C—who are all as good Maids as any use to be after thirteen amongst us, and let him make his own choice, and I will have my own Price, be diligent in your attendance, carrying Wine and Tobacco, whe∣ther they call or no, come he must pay for't, trading's dead and little, make large improvement on't when 'tis offered. Gusman. Should we once leave our old Custome of Chearing, our best (as well as worst) Cullies, we must leave off to live, but hang Conscience and honesty, 'tis absur'd policy, dishonest actions are proper with other Persons, in other places, and for our profit, dishonsty with Riches is honesty, honesty with Poverty is dis∣honesty, all people know that to be as true as that St. George killed the Dragon: they must therefore finde it, if not expect it, for we have devices and subtilties far exceeding the Mountebanks Orbiton or Balsam, that were our Girles C — as large as Satchel C— Greens wife who has both holes broken into one, we can reduce those preternatural defects, to their Pristine posture and constitution. Magdalena. Thou say'st true Gusman, beware the four wenches smell not rammish (as all whores do) un∣der
their Armpits, or have any Crablice breeding there for fear of discovering the loss of their Maiden-heads, but give them Instructions to paint, Powder, and per∣fume their clothes and carkasses, have fine clean Hol∣land-smocks, kiss with their mouths open, put their tongues, as all wantons do, in his mouth, and suck it, their left hand in his Cod-piece, the right hand in his Pocket, commend his Trap stick, pluck their coats above their thighes, their smocks above their Knees, bidding him thrust his hand to the best C — in chri∣stendom, tickling the Knobs thereof till they burst out with laughing, as W — the Butchers son in the Stocks did Honor Brooks the rammish Scotch whore at D — between her Legs, not forgetting that Ursula had half a crown for showing her Twit-twat there, and half a crown for stroaking the marrow out of a mans Gristle: but stay Gusman read the Proclamation ere you go. Gusman. O Yes! O Yes! O Yes! Any man or woman, in City or in Country, that will see an Ugly she-monster of deformed shape, impudent and brazen∣fac't carriage, uncivil behaviour, filthy constitutions, and preternatural disposition in her body, grindes Gin∣ger in her a—hole betwixt her buttocks, and by that means hath weakned the retentive faculty in her poste∣riors, to the p — and s — of her flesh-stocks, Let all such as fear not the losing of their Eye-sight, come put in their nose, as Chaucers twelve Fryers did at the dividing of a fart amongst them, and they may have it of a sluttish wench at the sign of, Have you any wood to cleave, &c. Magdalena. Well, Ile send her all the Hectors, and oaring Trappanners that love picking of wenches
plackets more then Pockets to plague the jade, unless she enters her name amongst us; come Julietta, what observations were omitted concerning your venetian practises in our first days discouse, deliver me and this auditory a true and brief account. Julietta. Our rules amongst us, are with much strictness observed, for paying an annual tribute to the Senate, we have as secure protection as any people in the Dukedom of Venice, no Tax or imposition exceed∣ing ours in quantity, and what children are got in Bastardy amongst us, are educated at their charge, if you are but minded to go to a certain stately buylding, where is a grate, and one continually there placed to receive it in, the Priests have a place peculiar to them∣selves, for what Brats they get are carried else where, where on the outside of the wall, hangs a rope with a basket at the end on't, where they are drawn up in a basket, if you ring the Bell, which hangs close by: if any Merchant, Gentleman or others, leave his slipper at the door, whilst he is with us, none dares to enter amongst us, for we have our Ruffians (such as your Hectors) that will tear the nations, this Custom's as or∣dinary, as drinking in le-houses and Taverns: then in our private rooms, we have the picture of the Italian padlock, Peter Aretines postures curiously painted, with several beautiful pictures stark-naked (not such Landskips as P — in C — at Priss Fotheringhams) one holding a Chamber-pot betwixt her Legs, another striving might and main to enlarge the Orifice of her Mysrerium magnum that unfathomed bottom, a third laughing at the large pair of cheeks and haunches she hath got, a fourth pointing at one that hath lost the hair
off her Whib-bob, and instead thereof hath a huge black beard for her strummulo or merkin, and if any of our wanton Girles catch the Neaploitan disease, 'tis a constant custom to send them to the Hospitals appoin∣ted where they are clarified before they enter upon any new engagement by our Chyrurgeons. Magdalena. Your account is very concise and com∣plete, I hear Francion call, (after his knocking) 'tis sure∣ly for the Reckoning. Francion. There's ten peces to cleer all charges and expences, does it please old Matron? Magdalena. Most noble Francion, most heartily welcom, the most welcome guest in the whole world, what can be grasp't within my power, shall truckle at your command, for I am your devoted sevant. Julietta. Ah marry Sisters! this is none of your pit∣tiful Sneakesbyes and Raskalls that will offer a study C—but eighteen pence or two shillings, and repent of the business afterwards Gusman. He came in season, his mony is in season. Quod omnium rerum est primum, I onely wish the next days account may end, with so welcome a Conclusion as this. Second Days Action. FINIS
An Advertisement. VVHereas several of the persons concerned in the following Dia∣logues, have threatned the Publisher hereof, and offered large Sums for his Apprehension, fearing the discovery of their bold and impudent practises and Cheatings; Let all persons know the de∣sign and intent hereof, is to rou those Ca∣terpillers, and to give the Magistrate no∣tice of the vileness and wickedness of their Actions, hoping a severe and strict Observance will be taken for their sup∣pression. Farewel.
