E703_6 E703_6* 50796658 166593
The Generall-Good To all PEOPLE: OR, The Lords free love running forth freely to his own people in these latter days, according to his promises made to his people, which he is now fulfilling. John 15.20, 21. 1 Pet 4.13, 14. Luke 6.22, 23. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. And that is the reason why the world hateth them, but it is but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, as he hath said, Ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake; Blessed are you, when men shall hate you, and revile you, and say all manner of evil against you; Rejoyce, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; Blessed are you that suffer for righteousness sake, for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven. WITH Something in answer to the Pe∣tition put up to the Parliament, by many of the City and County of York, even they of the Priests Party. By Richard Farnworth. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the sign of the Black-spread Eagle at the West-end of Pauls. 1653.
The Epistle to the READER. Christian Friend, I Was moved to write this ensuing Treatise in the behalf of a harmless and innocent People, who are hated of the world, but beloved of the Lord, with whom my life is, which the world scorneth, and derideth, and speaketh evil of, both Prists and People, but it is because they know not God; for those that know him, cannot but speak well of his name, and are made content to suffer for his names sake, as thou mayest see, if thou do but read this Paper put into thy hand, what suffering Objects these are, that are thus reproached and reviled, and are not willing only to believe, but also to suffer for his name sake, with whom I am made to bear the burden; Therefore did I write this in the behalf of those that are the suffering Objects as well as my self; and as it is my
bounden duty to declare against all deceits and deceivers, I can∣not but discharge my duty in declaring against all unrighteous∣ness whatsoever; and am I become your Enemy because I tell you the truth? If you cannot receive me, receive the truth for the truths sake, that you may know the truth, that the truth may set you free. York-shire. April. 1653. Richard Farnworth.
The general good to all People: OR, The Lord making known the exceeding riches of his love to his people in these latter days. Friends, THe Lord is now trying his people, as Gold is tried in the fire: Thus saith the Lord, Behold I will send my messen∣ger, and he shall prepare the way before me; Even the messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in; Behold he shall come to his Temple; but who shall abide the day of his comming? For he shall sit as a refiner, and with refiners fire will he purge and purifie the sons of Levi, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness: Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant, and acceptable unto the Lord, and at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which standeth for the Children of thy People, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time; and at that time thy People shall be delivered, Every one that shall be found written in the Book. Daniel 12.1. Hear ye this O priests, and hearken ye house of Israel,Hosea. 5.1, 2, 3. and give ye ear O house of the King; for judgement is toward you, because ye have been a Snare on Miz∣pah, and a Net spread upon Tabor; And the Revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a rebuker of them all, yet they will not frame their doings to turn unto their God; for the spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them, committing Fornication with many lovers, follow∣ing the wayes of Balaam, teaching for gifts and rewards, teaching for hire, and loving this present evil world, and are exceeding proud, and covetous, and cannot be content with their wages, to take such as is set before them; for the workman is worthy of his meat: but they are not content, except
they have great fat benefices, to be Lords and rulers over Gods heritage, feeding themselves with the fat, and cloathing them with the wool, as the false Prophets and false shepherds did, that Ezekiel was sent to cry out against, which God was displeased with, as he is now with all the false Priests, even all the Priests in England that follow the same practise, who are so covetous, that they oppress poor people, and do burden them, so that many groan under their burden of oppression, by the lustfull proud Priests; and they have their wives to go in their Hoods, Vails, Pride and Pomp, as the Mincing daughters of Israel did, which forgot the Lord, and he sent his true Prophet to cry out against them, Isa. 3. as he doth to cry out against these Hirelings, Priests, and proud Prelates, with their Idols, and Images of Clay, which they set up for men to worship, feet of Clay, leggs of Brass, and brests of Silver, and head of Gold: and those that will not fall down to worship the Image that they have made, they rage, and swell in Anger, and Wrath, and Revenge: And now that the Lord doth discover their deceits to us, and let us see them to be as Bell and the Dragon was, swallowing up all upon their lusts, and are never satis∣fied, seeking altogether after the honor of the world, and not after that which is of God; who seek ours, and not us: But by the Lord, we being awaked out of the sleep of carnality, are as one an hungred, who found no life to our souls by their imaginary, fleshly fancies, and con∣jurations, who raised death out of death, dead Reasons, dead Uses, dead Motives, dead Tryalls. And now that they come to the touchstone, they will not abide, and we were left naked, and empty by them, wounded, and half-dead, and the Lord of his bountifull goodness holds out his free love to our souls: and having got a taste of it, we are as little Children, ever hungring and thirsting for more, tasting of the Eternal love of the Lord Jesus Christ; being born again, nothing will satisfie our hungry souls, but the good milk of the Eternal living word of God, which is sweeter to our taste then the Hony-Comb, and we are brought to wait upon the Beloved of our Souls, the Lord Jesus Christ, to take us with him into his garden of pure teachings, and doctrine of life; he speaks good things to our souls, and his word is living and powerfull; every word that he speaketh into our Souls, is the word of eternal life, and they kill the old nature in us, and worketh a Re∣formation, and gives life to our poor Souls, and raiseth them out of the dust of the Earth, to praise and glorifie his great and glorious name, and we have so much light let into our Souls from the Divine power of God, that it lets us see the deceits of all our proud Priests, and blind Guides, that their sins testifie against them to their faces,Hosea. 5.5, 6, 7. that they are a seed of evil doers, and live in the lust and filth of the flesh, Persecuting, Killing, and Slaying the righteous and innocent ones, and drive them away from them by their Envious, Malicious, wicked practises in life and con∣versation, and are evil Examples; they are kings of Pride, and that is one of the seven Abominations which the Lords Soul loatheth.Prov. 6.16, 17, 18. Prov. 6.16, 17, 18. And we are bound in Conscience to testifie against it, and proud Priests are exceeding raging mad, and would not that we should see beyond their Dirty Miry Doctrine of earthly conceivings and Imaginations, wherein
they did deceive us, and have got our mony a long time for that which is no bread, and caused us to spend our labor for that which gave us no sa∣tisfaction to our souls, they were as theeves that wounded us, and left us; they led us into Pride by their evil example, seeing them live in Pride, we saying that if it was not right, they would not do it; and if they did it, we might do it; and so they being blind Guides, led us into blindness, and wounded our consciences, and then they made us this cover for Pride, and said, it was but decency; here they added their own inventions, and we knew it not, so long as we lived in Egypt and Sodom with them, following the customs, and fashions of the world, which we find now we are taught to deny; for the fashion of the world passeth away, but the plagues of God is their portion: Wo to all deceivers: But we find our teacher (the Lord) writing his Law in our hearts, and teaching us by his Spirit,Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11. according to his promises made in the time of old. Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11. And he having established his law in our hearts, sheweth us sin and evil; for we had not known that lust had been a sin, but that the pure Law of God said, thou shalt not lust, neither after Pride, nor Covetousness, nor Envy, nor anger, nor pleasures, nor the love of the world, nor the honor of the world, nor pleasures, nor delights, because the Priests that said they were sent of God, lived in all these things, and if they had been contrary to the mind, and will of God, they saying that they knew it, and spoke his words from his mouth, and we concluding within our selves, said, If they may do it, we may do it; and so they destroyed us for lack of know∣ledge, and drove us from the Lord; but now he is gathering us to himself by his Spirit, according to his promise. Ezek. 34.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.Ezek. 34.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And lets us see whither we were driven, even into the broad way of fleshly de∣lights, but that the Lord of his infinite love hath discovered it to us, and we are brought to see where they left us, in the cloudy and dark day, and would never come to shew us any light, nor to set our feet into the way of peace, but led us further into the wilderness, out of Pride into Covetous∣ness, and so caused us to taste of the forbidden fruit, saying, that Covetous∣ness was but a provident care, but we now find that it was the Devils Doct∣rine that they taught us: For the Lord saith to us by his Spirit, that Cove∣tousness is Idolatry, and draweth the heart from him; but these Covetous, Idolatrous Priests, run with greediness altogether after it, as those greedy dumb dogs did, that Isaiah was sent to cry out against, Isa. 56.10, 11. He said that the watchmen were al blind, as these proud Priests are now blinded with covetousness; For Tythes, Gifts, and rewards hath blinded their eyes, that they see not Pride and Covetousness to be a sin, but greedie after it, Coveting altogether after great means, and if they have not to sa∣tisfie their lusts, to live in pomp and pleasures, they complain of the people: and if any for conscience sake towards God, seeing his Ministry to be free, and no sale set upon it, which Ministry teacheth them to de∣ny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, as Pride, Covetousness, the love of the world, knowing that if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, and that all that is in the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the Pride of life, is not of God, but is of the world, for con∣science sake towards God, who is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
wisdom is not to be bought nor sold.Job 28. Job 28. and the Lords free love running forth to his People; saying, Why do you spend your mony for that which is no bread, and your labour for that which doth not satisfie? Hearken ye diligently to me,Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, 4. Deut. 4.1, 2. Prov. 30.5, 6. and eat ye that which is good, and let your souls delight themselves in fatness, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, 4. And we find it made good to our souls; and every word of God being pure, and a shield to them that trust in it, and he that adds to it, or takes from it is to be reproved, being found a lyar. Prov. 30.5, 6. And he that adds his own Inventions, the Lord is against him. Jer. 23. And we that are of God are against him, and are bound to testifie against his deceits, and deceiveableness, according to the command of the Lord, who saith, have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darkness,Eph. 5.11. Joh. 10.1, 8, 10. Quest. but rather reprove them; and how can we see a thief, and consent unto him, but we shal be guilty of the same crime? I pray you con∣sider of it, you that are spirituall, judge what I say: Are not all the Priests in England thieves? Answer for them, who wil; Do they not study for what they say, and walk by other lines? Did ever the Ministers of Christ so? As he bade them take no thought what they should eat,Luk. 12.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Luke 12.11, 12. Gal. 1.10, 11, 12, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 3.6. nor what they should drink, Luk. 12.22, 23. So he bade them take no thought what they should say, for it should be given them in that hour, Luke 12.11, 12. But these dare neither trust God for their meat, nor drink, nor cloathing, as they did; nor for words to speak, as they did, who were unlearned men, but as they were taught of God, and were made Ministers, not by the will of man, but by the will of God, Gal. 1.11, 12. And were able Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. But these both studie what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and what they shall put on, to make them proud, and what they shall do to oppress poor people, and they study every way how they may make their Ministery burdensome, and studie what to speak, studying old Au∣thors, and some of them writing down that which they speak in papers: See if these do not distrust God,Jer. 23.29, 30, 31, 32. 2 Joh. 9. and do dishonor him, and are no Ministers of the Spirit, but are Unbelievers, and Infidels, who distrust God, and steal the words of their neighbours, as the false Prophets did. Jer. 23.29, 30, 31. But the Lord is against them now, as he was then, and sends to cry out against them now as he did then; and when any is sent by the Lord, to cry out against them now, to tell them of their deceits, and deceivableness,Acts 7.47, 48, 49. Ver. 57, 58, 59. Acts 6.11, 12, 13. Mat. 23.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. and how that they are no Ministers of Christ, who do not abide in his Doctrine, but teach for Doctrine the traditions of men, and call a stone-house a Church, and say that God dwelleth there, and when any is sent by the Lord to cry out against them there, as Steven did, Acts 7. who said, God that made the world did not dwell in Temples made with hands, and that evil generation of the uncircumcised in hearts and ears did murder poor Steven, the Servant of the Lord, and said he was a blasphemer, and came to overturn the Law, and the Statutes that were gi∣ven forth by Moses; and so these persecuting Priests here in Yorkshre espe∣cially, their sins testifie against them to their face, that they are of the Ge∣neration that slew the righteous blood, and they would have all to take notice that they know not God; for when any is sent to them, and says that God doth not dwell in any of those Idol Temples that are made with hands, as in Acts 17.24.Acts 17.25. neither is he worshipped there by Traditions, Customs,
and Rudiments of the world with mens hands, Acts 17.25. But he is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth,Joh. 4.23, 24. 1 Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 3.19. 2 Cor. 6.16. Isa. 54.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. for he seeketh such to worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. And that the Church of Christ is made all of living stones, elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2.5. and that the Saints are made the Temples of the living God, as the Corinthians did witness, and that they shall need no man to teach them, for the Lord is the teacher of his himself alone by his Spirit, and asks them how they came to their Ministry, and bids them prove what they have said, they run away, and will not stand to prove their call to the Ministry, but lets them be beaten, and struck by the uncircumcised in hearts, and ears; for none that are cir∣cumcised by the spirit of the living God cometh there, to stand up to de∣ceive the people. But the hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, Joh. 10.12, 13. And the thief cometh not,Joh. 10.12, 13. but for to kill, and to steal, and to destroy. Joh. 10.10. But the good shepherd, he layeth down his life for the sheep, but these that cannot prove their call to the Ministry of the Gospel, the Ministration of the Spirit, which excells that of Moses and John, they having nothing but what they have stolne, and studied for; Their old Author studied spirit fails them, and the hireling fleeth because he is an hireling, and not the true Shepherd, and the thief kills, steals, and destroyes, and saith to the people, hear him not whom God hath sent, take him Officers, and put him in the stocks, and let him be had to Prison, and so turns Persecutor; and you all know that Persecution is of the Devil; and now those divelish Priests shew themselves what they are now that they are come to be tried, but it is but that they may be made manifest what generation they are of; and when they cannot defend themselves by their old Author-studied Spirit, it failing them, then they Petition to the outward powers of the Land, that they may more plainly appear; but the Foxes are so subtile, that they twine about into the hole of their earthly wisdom in their Petition, that they would cover over them∣selves, as if they were the Ministers of Christ, and would justifie them∣selves, but God will condemn them; And it were better for them that a Mil∣stone were hanged about their necks, and they themselves cast into the Sea, then that they should offend one of these little ones that believeth in the Lord; the Petitioners are many of them Persecutors, and I do not question but that both Parliament, and Army, and all that fear the Lord, and are acquainted with his teachings, the teachings of the Spirit of Grace in the least measure, those that know it, know that it teacheth to deny all un∣godliness, as it is made manifest by the Divine light of God within, where the light of God doth shine in the hearts of any, as it doth in those who are taught of God, who have the heavenly treasure in earthly vessels, as the Saints had. See 2 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7. And those that are enlightned and guided by the same Spirit that they were, which spirit is but one, where it is made manifest: I say, all those that know this spiritual teaching of Jesus Christ, both Parliament, and Army, and all others, know that this blessed Spirit teacheth to deny persecution, and worketh out anger, and envy, and wrath, and revenge, purging out the old nature, working into love, and bowells of Compassion, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, and brotherly kindness, which causeth the old man
to be put off, and the old persecuting nature, and causeth the new man to be put on, and withall to be made partaker of the Divine nature; and those that know this in part, will see that those false Priests have a filthy deceit∣full heart, and will be discovered, and made manifest in their deceivable∣ness, by those that have the Spirit of God, and they have an end to them∣selves, for to have the praise of men, as the Scribes had that sate in Moses seat, as these do, proud Pharisees, they will appear to be fair outsides, but they have insides full of rottenness and deceitfulness of heart, but you know what is the portion of such:Mat. 23.1, 2, 27, 28, 29. See Mat. 23. And it will not be unknown to the Heads, and Rulers of the Nation, what sort of men they were that took counsel together, to take Jesus by subtilty to kill him. And then they may see what Generation these are of, and what seed after the flesh, but not after the Spirit; for they that are after the flesh, they presecute them that are after the Spirit; You heads and Rulers of the people, see that you stand in the Counsel of the Lord, and mind that which is of God in you; that is pure which sheweth you the vanity of your minds, and checks you when you do contrary to it, and it will guide your minds towards God, who is pure, and cause you to stand in his pure fear, which will lead you into the true wisdom of God, to govern the people in righteousness, and to take away that unrighteous Law, or Statute made by Queen Mary, which the Priests, your Petitioners, make their refuge, to persecute and Imprison the Righteous by, and deny the Law of God, or practise of the Saints, the people of God in former ages, as in 1 Cor. 14. When any thing was re∣vealed to him that sate by, the first was to hold his peace, and the other was to speak, and all might speak one by one, that all might be edified; let that of Mary be put forth, and put in one in order to this, which was the practise of the Church of God, that the deceivers may be laid open, and made ma∣nifest what they are; Act in righteousness, that you may receive the bles∣sing; Take heed of holding up that which God is throwing down, now he is making his power known, casting down the mighty out of their Thrones, and bringing down the haughtiness of men, throwing down every high thought, and every high Imagination: Let such Laws be established as tend to the punishment of evil doers, and countenancing those that do well, and then you will see the Foxes, and false Priests, will be found out; Let truth be declared freely by any one where it is made manifest; Who art thou that wouldst limit the holy one of Israel by thy carnal mind? What ever thou art, God will limit thee, and throw thee down out of thy Throne, be what thou wilt; But thou that lovest the truth, and standest up for it, as it is in Jesus, thou shalt be Crowned with Glory. Quest. 1. Is it according either to Conscience, or the Law of Equity and reason, that theeves should make their prey of the Righteous? Con∣sider of it, and lay it to heart. 2. Is it according to Equity, or the truth of God, that any mans Con∣science should be kept under a beastly, corrupt mans will, that swells in anger, and if any go to ease his burdned Conscience, to be beaten, and set in the stocks, and stoned in the streets; is this according to the practise of the Ministers of Jesus Christ? Let the Scriptures be your Rule, and the Lord your judge, and be not upholders of those deceivers; for God will ho∣nor himself in throwing of them down.
3. Is it according to the righteous Law of God, or mans corrupt will, that the righteous should suffer, and the wicked go free, and escape by lies and flatteries? let every thing be brought to light, and let the transgressors be punished, and the Innocent cleared; For God will be honored, and he will not always strive, he will reprove even Kings for his righteous chil∣drens sake, and he will take away the reproach of his people himself, and no deceitfull person shall dwell in his house; God is a Spirit, and none knows him but such as are spiritual, and born again, and the righteous they suffer, and no man layeth it to heart, but God is judge himself, and he will be avenged of all his Enemies. 4. Is there are reason that we should pay, or be compelled to pay for that which we have not? is not this unrighteous? They say they are Mini∣sters, and we do ask them what Scripture they have for their Rule to take tythe Hay, or Corn, tythe Lamb, and Wooll, tythe Eggs, and money for Reak passing up our Chimnies, and money for Mares, and Foals, and Kine, and Calves, and tythe Apples, and Cherries; and to have an end of all our la∣bors, we would have them to give account of their Ministry, and how they came to be made Ministers of the Spirit, and what Scripture they have for their Rule to take tythes, and whether it were ever the practise of the Mi∣nisters of Christ, yea or no? who laboured with their hands, and desired rather to dye, then to make the Gospel burdensom, that they might be ex∣amples to all that come after; and they walking contrary to Christ and his Apostles, have lost their examples, and make the Parliament their spiri∣tual sword, and carnal bulwark for the account of their Ministry, or ground of their Doctrine, and say, the Parliament do allow them, and can no ways clear themselves by Scripture, and we finding the Ministry of Christ to be a free Ministry, and the Gospel not to be burdensom, though they clear themselves to be the Ministers of man and not of God; the Apostle was a Minister, not made by the will of man, but by the will of God: and these walking contrary to the Ministers of Christ, and contrary to the Scriptures, and we never profited by them, they starved our souls by their cold, dark, and barren Ministry of their own Inventions, and they say that we would justle God out of his Throne, but it is but the God of the World, Mammon, which they so much thirst after; for it is the desire of our souls to see the onely true God to sit upon his Throne, ruling by his power, and every Spirit, and as the Lord is large in his love to us, though they call us Pa∣pists, Quakers, or what Nick-name they can invent, and every way seek to cast dirt upon the pure Truth, standing in opposition against the power of truth, in any where it is made manifest, as Jannes and Jambres did, but their folly shall appear to all men, as theirs did; but we cannot in Con∣science pay for that old rotten stuffe, which runs out of their old bottels, old corrupt natures, which poureth forth nothing but corruption, and bitter∣ness, as Railings, and Revilings, and cursed speakings, speaking evil of that which they know not, and because we cannot buy of their old stinking wares, as we did formerly, not questioning them, took them for good upon their words, but now the Fountain of their stinking puddle is made known, and the Lord teacheth us better things, we are ever bound to praise his name, and we receive of his Love, and spiritual teachings, freely receiving,
and Grace for Grace, growing up from Grace to Grace, in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and as we have received freely, we are made to hold it forth freely to others again, not seeking our selves, as they do, but seeking the good, and welfare of one anothers Souls, by the power of the Lord, as it ruleth in us, running forth to seek the good of all, and we cannot hold them up in their deceits, and we cannot pay for that which we have not, neither did we ever receive any spiritual food, or refreshings from them; we testifie against them, as it is our bounden duty to let our light shine forth to others, and though the proud Priests, as in all that which they do, it is for money, which is their Diana, and all that which they look after; They do not seek us, but ours; And as we receive of the Lord freely, we cannot but declare, though they threaten, and do sue, and go to Law for carnal maintenance, which both Jesus Christ and his true Ministers do forbid, as in Mat. 5.40. 1 Cor. 6. ver. 1. but they do not abide in his Doctrine, as is now made plain in our book of Easter Reckonings: And we would reckon with them, as we have there declared about the pure Doctrine, by the Spirit of the Lord made known, and taught to us; And if they could prove themselves warran∣tably by Scriptures to have Rule from them, which we own the Life of, and make it appear to us to be Ministers of the Spirit, they should have their due, and if they will lay open their shamefull dealings to all men, let all take notice of their folly, that God may have the praise, who hath laid open their deceits, and taught us freely by his holy Spirit in these our dayes; to him be all holy praise, both now and for evermore, who is worthy to be praised, God blessed for ever. Reader, I Would have thee to peruse this ensuing Treatise, or something in Answer to the Counties Petition put up to the Parliament by the Priests, and many of their associates here in York-shire, wherein their flatteries, and subtilties, and deceits are discovered and laid open; and although theybe so cunning, that in their Petition they have kept out themselves, and put it up in the name of the People; yet they were the chiefest Actors, and got all as many as they could, Boyes, and Girles in several places, that knew not their left hand from their right, to set their hands to their Petition, and many people that had any knowledge of God in the least measure, denied to joyn with them; But read it over, and it will to thee their deceits more plainly manifest, and fully discover. Rich. Farnworth.
The Counties Petition. To the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England. THe humble Petition of many inhabitants of the County of York, and City of York, and County of the same City, Humbly sheweth, That your Petitioners, who are less then the least of the Mercies they en∣joy, as they desire to be sensible of that good decree of peace and truth which through the good hand of God upon your Counsels and Indeavours, they partake of, and are therefore Petitioners to the Lord for you, that he would remember you for good, and spare you according to the Multitude of his mercies, and so withall they think it their duty humbly to present unto you, the deep sense they have of some evils and dangers which they apprehend very nearly to con∣cern the truth of God, and Gospel of Salvation, or the prosperous course thereof, whereon the glory of peace, and safety of this Nation, besides the eternal welfare of precious souls (more worth then worlds) do much depend. 1. That many scandalous and ignorant Persons, Enemies to the People, and ways of God, upholders and practisers of the abolished Ceremonies, and no friends to the present Government, and peace of this Common∣wealth, are continued in the work of the Ministry, to the prejudice of that calling, the hinderance of Reformation, and danger of Immortal Souls. 2. That the faithfull Ministers of Christ by whom we have believed, whose labors have been so profitable, and yet so necessary to the Church of God, and whose reputations and incouragement ought to be so dear unto us, are daily loaden with contempt and reproach, disturbed in the diligent and peaceable execution of their office, by evil and unreasonable men, and also undermined in their calling and maintenance, whereby the course of the Gospel is much hindred; and the Spirit of Gods people, nay, we doubt not to say the Spirit of God himself grieved and vexed, the precious Ordinances of Christ trodden under foot, and consequently the welfare of this tossed, distracted common-wealth very much endangered; For if the just Lord, who is in the midst of us, spared not his ancient people, the Tribes of his inheritance, when once they began to mock his Messengers, and deal injuriously with those that are sent to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel, whereby they filled up the measure of their sins, and brought upon themselves wrath without remedy, even wrath to the utmost; and we see no reason why the unchangeable God should not proceed by the same measure against gentile Churches, as of such you have had also nearer in∣stance,
in the fall of those persons whom the Lord cast out before you, the rock of whose ruine was their opposition to a Godly and conscientious Mi∣nistry. Lastly, They take boldness to represent, that the liberty granted by the Parliament in matters of Religion, and the worship of God, is very much abused, to the increase of Popery, and prophaness, contrary to your inten∣tions in the same: Your Petitioners seriously considering, and laying to heart these things, think it their further duty, earnestly to beseech you by the glorious, and fearfull name of God, which is every day blasphemed, by the precious Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is much dishonored, and despised, and by whatsoever is dear unto us, which by these and such like evils we believe to be much endangered, That you would take these particulars into serious and speedy consideration. 1. That you would take a more effectual course for removing of scanda∣lous and unworthy Ministers from the office and work of the Ministry, then yet is, or can be taken by the Committee for plundred Ministers sit∣ting at Westminster, in regard of the great distance of this County, that so the Parliament may not be charged, not so much as by neglect, to build again those things they have destroyed. 2. That you would speak comfortably to those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord, seeing that God himself hath given (notwith∣standing manifold infirmities) testimonial seals to many of them, and take care that they may have a comfortable subsistance, that you would support the honor and reverence of the Universities, necessary to the supply of able Ministers, and bear witness against those who daily discover their enmity to the Office and Ordinances of the Gospel, whereby life will be given to your well established Laws, and inferior Magistrates encouraged to vindi∣cate, and further the Gospel in their several stations, and much danger of the Common-wealth prevented, which cannot but be feared; For the op∣pressers of the Ministry, whose Principles are full of confusion, and lead to casting off the Rulings as well as the teachings of men, wherewith they have given much cause of suspition in this, and full evidence in other Nati∣ons. Lastly. That you would take care to build such battlements about your grants of liberty, in matters of Religion, that Popish and prophane Per∣sons may not take advantage thereby, to dishonor God, despise his Ordi∣nances, pollute his Sabboths, and so the land be filled with Atheism, Ignorance, and Idolatry. So shall the Lord, who hitherto hath been a wall of fire round about us, be also for glory in the midst amongst us, and your Petitioners be further engaged to pray for a blessing upon your Counsells, and persons.
To the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England. THe humble Petition of many Inhabitants of the County of York,Petition. the City of York, and County of the same City, humbly sheweth, that your Petitioners, who are less then the least of the mercies they enjoy, as they desire to be sensible of that good decree of peace, and truth, which through the good hand of God upon your counsels, and endeavours they partake of, and are therefore Petitioners to the Lord for you, that he would re∣member you for good, and spare you according to the multitude of his mercies: and so withall they think it their duty humbly to present unto you, the deep sense they have of some evils and dangers which they apprehend very nearly to concern the truth of God, and Gospel of Salvation, for the prosperous course thereof, whereon the glory of peace, and safety of this Nation, besides the eternal well∣fare of precious souls, more worth then worlds, do much depend. These Petitioners are full of flatteries, and subtilty,Answer. and shew themselves to be carnal, that run from the Lord to take counsell of men (for that which they call spiritual) that sit to judge of temporal affairs; and it shews that the Priests of the world are the Ministers of man, and not of God, and dare not trust him, nor take his counsail, neither have they the sword of the Spirit, as the true Ministers had; their weapons were not carnal, but spiri∣tual, and mighty through God, to throw down strong holds, and they were made through him that loved them, more then Conquerors, Rom. 8.37.Rom. 8.37. But these shew themselves to be carnal, and ignorant of the same power that ruled in them, that run to outward power to uphold them, as the Jews, and Scribes, and Pharisees did, that sought for the honor of the world, and the praise of men as these do, and were enemies to Jesus Christ,Joh. 5.42, 43, 44. as these are: For were these Petitioners acquainted with what they do profess, it would draw their minds up to the Lord, who is the mighty Counsellor, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Isai. 9. to direct their Peti∣tions to him, and not to run without, to take Counsell of men,Isaiah 9. Isaiah 30. who sit to judge of temporal things, to ask Counsel about spiritual, and so run from the Lord, the mighty Counsellor, and the judge of the whole Earth, who doth direct all those that trust in him to take his Counsell, both for tem∣porals, and spirituals, and threatneth woe to them that take Counsel, but not of him; and the woe is to the disobedient Children, that go down into Egypt for help, to make flesh their Arm, who do not trust in the living God, but are haters of him, though in their words to him they do profess love, but by their actions they deny him, and are to every good work abo∣minable, and Reprobate, Titus 1. ver. 16. Professing they know God,Titus 1.16. and hate those that are known of him, as by their fruits it doth appear; for they do both Persecute, Envy, Backbite, and are exceeding Proud, and Covetous, and Oppress, grinding the faces of the poor,Rom. 8.8. and it is not unknown what fruits those are; it cannot be denied, but that they are fruits of the flesh; they that are in the flesh, cannot please God; Was it not the great men of the World that did make their suite so much to the Councel of State, or those that sate to judge the People amongst the Jews, who were e∣nemies to Jesus Christ? as Paul was accused for a Blasphemer, & an Heretick,
and was complained against, or petitioned for, by the Scribes and Pharisees, and Elders of the people, to the high Priest that sat in the seat of judge∣ment, to have had his life taken away, and said, he was a seditious fellow: and Steven, they said he was a blasphemer, and they not being able to resist the wisdom,Acts 6.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and the spirit by which he spoke: Acts 6.10, 11, 12. then they suborned men, stirred up the People to swear falsly against him, be∣fore the Councel, and said that they heard him speak blasphemous things against Moses; the Temple, and the Law, when he went to declare the mes∣sage that the Lord sent him withall; As he doth now send many to cry out against the deceits of the Priests, and they not being able to defend themselves by Scripture, nor warrant from God, they stir up the suborned men, and rude multitude, who are utter enemies to God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to Petition against those, to whom the Lord hath manifested his love, and made his power known in some measure, to praise and glorifie his great and glorious name; and those Petitioners are as those were that cried to the high Priest, let us have Barrabas, who was a murderer, set at li∣berty, and Christ Crucified, in whom was found no guile, but because he came to testifie against their deceits, yet they said, he was a deceiver, and a blasphemer: they that were Petitioners against the ttuth of God in that Generation, went under the same colour, and pretence then, that these do now, Petitioning against Seditious fellows that came to overturn their Sta∣tutes, Laws, and Customs; and the Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders of the people cryed out against them for Blasphemy, and Heresie; Nay, they spared not to call the good man of the house Belzebub, and said he was the Prince of Devils; and Paul, they sayd he was a Ring leader of that Sect; and the Silver-shrine-makers, because hey saw that he came to overturn their Diana, which brought them so much gain, they said, that if they did let him alone, all men would be drawn after him, and they should be in danger to suffer the loss of all, not onely their handicraft would be set at naught, but their Goddess Dianah would be overthrown, and then the sense and consideration of that seised deep upon them, whereupon they went, and stirred up all the people against the Servants of the Lord, to have slaughtered them for testifying the truth that struck at their deceits, and stirred up all the whole City, setting them on an uproar, many not know∣ing what they did, but as they were led on by the on-setters to mischief, and cried with a loud voice, great is Diana of the Ephesians; and if it be but rightly considered now, it will be found out that these Petitioners here in York-shire are of the same Generation, and the Priests being with the Scribes and Pharisees, and Leaders of the Petitioners, struck into a deep sense that they have of the loss of their great Goddess Diana, their imagi∣nary way of worship, and beastly wares, that they have had such sale for, shall now come down, and they lose all their gain, and none will buy their wares any longer, that comes to tast of better, that the sense of this doth strike deeply at them, and lye heavy upon them, and the sense of no other evil and danger; that is the greatest, and it is time for the beast to colour over himself neatly, and Petition now, and cry, help Magistrate now, or all is gone, we cannot defend our selves any way else, and if you fail us now, we are utterly undone for ever, we canot defend our selves by Scripture, and
our conversation testifies against us, that we neither follow the example of Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, who were his true Ministers, and the People they begin to see it; and truth it is, we have no right to take tythes, nor to have hire, we cannot justifie our actions any wayes by Scripture, and if you stand not to us now, we lose all, and shall be utterly undone, and ruinated for ever. And, They think it their humble duty to present unto you the deep sense they have of some evils and dangers,Petition. which they apprehend very nearly to concern the truth of God, and Gospel of Salvation, or the prosperous course thereof, whereon the glory of peace, and safety of this Nation, besides the eternal welfare of precious souls, (more worth then worlds) doth depend. Answ. 1. Consider of it, If these Petitioners be not of the same Genera∣tion of evil doers that the Scribes and Pharisees were, that laboured so much and Petitioned, or falsly accused the Son of God, Jesus Christ and his Dis∣ciples and followers to the Counsel of the people Assembled together, time after time, to have destroyed not onely them in whom the truth was declared, but laboured every way to have destroyed the truth it self, but could not, for the more that they were persecuted, they more did grow; and as it was then, so is it now. 2. But the subtilty of the Serpent that ruled in the Jews chief Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees then, ruleth in these Petitioners now in this age, as by their fruits it doth appear. 3. When the Lord sent forth his messengers then to declare his truth, they strucke them, and put them in the stocks, and stoned, and railed, and hated, and shamefully intreated them, and when they were not able to resist the wisdom, and the spirit by which they spake, as in Acts 6. then some of them they im∣prisoned, as Peter, and John, and Paul, and Silas, and stoned Steven, and sought false witness against him to put him to death, and sought to the counsell to have the life of them, all such blood-suckers they were; yet it was under a co∣lour, or cloak, or pretence of godliness, and stirred up the people, telling them that they were seditious fellows, as Steven was, Acts 6. and men that came to overturn the Law, and the Statutes given forth by Moses, and came to speak blasphemous things against the Temple, and under that colour of Schismaticks, and Hereticks, Sedition, and Blasphemy, did the pure truth suffer; and this is the same generation by which it doth suffer now; and let but these wicked Priests have but their corrupt wills fulfilled, and they would murder all, in whom any thing of God was made manifest, under colour or pretence of Papists, or prophane Persons, when as they are themselves the wickedst profane persons of all others, and stir up many to be their Executioners to mischief, that know not the right hand from the left in point of Religion, in strike∣ing, and stoning, and falsly accusing the good Conversation of the righteous, and shamefully entreating them, and Petitioning against them: But, Fourthly, They may justly expect the just hand of God upon them, and the plagues of God to be poured forth upon them for their exceeding great wickedness; for they are the peace-breakers of the Commonwealth, not of England onely, but of Israel also, as much as in them lies. And they may be sensible of it, they may see themselves enemies both to
the Gospel of Salvation, and the prosperous course thereof, every ways hin∣dring the truth from being declared,Ezek. 34.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Hosea 6.9. as much as in them lies, to the utmost of their power, deceivers, or destroyers of souls, which is more worth then worlds; And as a troop of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent: as it is now by their fruits made manifest, Hos. 6.9. Therefore O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I am a∣gainst the shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall they feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from them, that they may not be meat for them, Ezek. 34.8, 9. Ezek. 34.9, 10.Fifthly, Shall you not be visited for these things saith the Lord? Let the wic∣ked joyn hand in hand, yet they shall not go unpunished; for saith the Lord, I will be avenged of all mine enemies; vengeance is mine, and I will repay; Woe to the wicked, It shall go ill with them, both Priests, and people, for the leaders of them cause them to erre.Isa. 9.16. Hosea. 4.9. Isa. 9.16. There is like Priest, like people, Hos. 4.9. All joyn together to persecute the truth, and to hinder the free course of the Gospel, and to break the peace of the Commonwealth, and as much as in them lies, to de∣stroy the souls of the righteous, now that the Lord is sending forth his servants to cry out against the deceits of the world, and the worship of the beast, wor∣shipping the works of their own hands, traditions, and rudiments of the world, which are not after God,Col. 2.20, 21, 22. but by the will of man, Col. 2.20, 21, 22. and mens corrupt wills being crost, and the deceits of the Priests here in York∣shire being discovered, and the Lord sending to them, to testifie it to their fa∣ces, they will not stand to prove themselves neither to be Ministers of the let∣ter, nor of the spirit, but run away, and cause that those whom the Lord sendeth to them, be beaten, and abused, and given up into the hands of the rude multitude, which is contrary both to the practise of Christ, and his A∣postles; they never struck, nor cause any to be struck, but on the contrary, received stripes; Peter and John were beaten, and put in the prison, See Act. 5.26,Acts 5.26, 27, 28, &c. 27, 28, &c. and threatned they should speak no more in the name of Je∣sus. And, Sixthly, These Priests bear testimony to the same deeds here in Yorkshire; for many have been beaten for declaring the truth as it is in Jesus, and many stoned, that stones have flown as fast as bullets in a battel, and the dogs have been set on by their hearers, and they themselves having been in the streets, and being spoken to, would not prove themselves, but got away: Are not these the fruits of the Jews, who were enemies to Jesus Christ? did not they stone Steven to death for witnessing the truth? Act. 7.59, 60. Acts 7.59.And had it not been the Lords power, more then their mercy at that time, their mercies being very cruelties, all had been destroyed: for they stoned a great space out of the Town, and stones did hit on the backs and heads of the people, as if they had clattered on a wall, and none did seek to quench the tu∣mult; see whether these be fruits of Christs Ministery, or of Antichrists? but it is but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, and now it is fulfilling here in York∣shire, and the Priests are the greatest persecutors: was not Jesus Christ him∣self stoned,Joh. 10.31, 32, 33. Joh. 10.31, 32, 33. and persecuted by the high-Priests? and shall the servant be greater then the Lord? Did the Ministers of Christ ever persecute as the Ministers of the world do, and especially here in Yorkshire? the Jews were persecutors, who were enemies to Iesus Christ, and stoned both
him and his, and beat them, and struck them. Paul received five times forty stripes, save one; they struck Iesus, and spit in his face, Matth. 26.Mat. 26.65, 66, 67. And those that stoned and struck them, and did so shamefully entreat them, petitioned or falsly accused them to the Council, several times, to have had their lives; and they were willing to suffer death, rather then deny the truth: Iesus himself witnessed a good Confession before Pilate, which Iesus we are brought to confess before men, for whose sake we are hated and persecuted both by Priests and people here in Yorkshire, who do profess him, as the Iews did, but will not confess or witness him ruling in them by his spirit, but do deny him in their actions, as their fruits make them manifest. Seventhly, Would they stand the tryal, and prove themselves before their people? then let them be laid open what they are, but they will not stand; are they not of a cowardly spirit? Such is the University Spirit, it is a thievish spirit, and will not, nor dare not stand, they not being able to resist the Spi∣rit of God in those who are sent to cry out against the deceits of them, as Steven and the rest did; but these run away: and because they have a Popish Law to flye to, they imprison the servants of the Lord as many are here in pri∣son at York, and have been a long time in prison by these persecuting Priests here in York-shire, and they will not that the truth should come to light, nor they to be tryed by course of Law; see if these be not hinderers of the course of the Gospel, and destroy the righteous, both soul and body, as much as in them lies, but that the Lords love doth more appear in their preservation, then the Priests mercy in delivering; but woe is their portion, and they break the Peace of the Nation, not suffering the truth to be declared, after that they have done speaking, but rather encourage the rude multitude to beat and strike the servants of the living God, and raile and revile them, but wil not stand, but let the rude people break the peace of the Land; and that which they call their Church, is rather a slaughter-house; but the hireling fleeth because he is an hireling, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled; and the thief comes not but to kill, and to steal, and to destroy, as it is now made manifest by their fruits, or the Priests actings here in Yorkshire; and then as the Iews did, they petition, or falsly accuse the good conversation of the righteous, to the Councel of State, but they are made manifest whose servants they are, and the judgement will return upon their own pate: Woe to the Idol-shepherds: they are in a deep sense of losing their Trade, and Handicraft, whereby they have a long time decei∣ved the people, and now they cry out, Great is Diana, or the merchandise of Babylon, wherein we receive our gain, and if these men be letten alone, we shall lose all our profits, but we will cry out against them, that we be not taken notice on our selves, who are the enemies, and hinderers of the Gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, and we want that power amongst us, and thats the reason why our Ministery works no Reformation. And that they may not take notice of us,A confession for the Priests. An exhorta∣tion to the Priests. we will begin at home to cut off all those that are scandalous, but indeed we may say we cannot cleer our selves, for we were never sent, but ran, and we have not profited the people at all, as it is now made manifest by our fruitless Ministery, for all is light and vain, covetous and prophane; therefore let me exhort you by the Lord to be∣gin with your own selves, and see that you do not run on further into wicked∣ness,
now that you are made manifest, your sins testifie to your face, that you are enemies of the truth of God, and he will bruise you with his Iron rod for deceiving poor souls so long, for the highest of you in your fleshly wisdom, is the highest deceiver, and the Lord is against you all, both great and small, though you say, That many scandalous and ignorant persons, enemies to the people and ways of God,Petition. upholders and practizers of the abolished Ceremonies, and no friends to the present Government and peace of this Commonwealth, are continued in the work of the Ministery, to the prejudice of that Calling, the hinderance of Reformation, and danger of Immortal souls. Answer.You may see how you have been deceived all this while, and lived under a Popish Ministery, and now that it is discovered, they would have people to take notice of it, that many of them are of the Popish Clergy, and are scanda∣lous, and enemies both to the ways of God, and the people of God; and if your understandings were enlightened, you may see that there is but little diffe∣rence of them;2 Joh. 9. 1 Cor. 2.14. for they are all contrary both to Christ and his true Ministers, and he that abideth not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God, 2 Joh. 9. & they are all carnal, in their first nature, and the natural man knows not the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned; and no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom he is revealed: The Heathen know not God, and all are Heathens that know him not, in their natural state and condition; the world by wisdom knows not God,1 Cor. 3.18, 19.20. Acts 17.20, 21, 22, 23, &c. but worships an unknown God; and those that live in ignorance, and Papists, are all in one nature, and both worship an un∣known God, as the Athenians did; and every one in his natural state and condi∣tion lives in darkness, Athiesm, Popery, and Idolatry, worshipping the works of their own hands, and following the imaginations of their own hearts, draw∣ing neer to God with their mouth and lips, but their hearts are far from him, as those were that he complained of by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 29.13. First, Let me ask you that profess your selves to be Ministers of the Gos∣pel,Quest. but are not of the letter, for you will not let it be your rule to walk by, but run from it, and will not abide the tryal; but are you not all made mani∣fest by your fruits, what you are? Take notice of it all people, consider, and see how you have been deceived all this while; they will all be found deceivers, and blinde guides, that deceive the people: did God ever send scandalous and ignorant persons, enemies to the people and ways of God, into the work of his Ministery? and do not your fruits declare that you were never sent of him? who are enemies both to him, and his, where he is made manifest. Secondly, Do not your sins testifie against you to your face, that you are none of his, the highest of you? are you not all unprofitable servants? do not you make the people light, and vain? as the false Prophets did, which ran, but the Lord never sent them, as in Jer. 23. Thirdly, Are you not proud? and pride is of the devil, and God doth forbid it, and saith it is an abomination to his soul, and that is contrary to God, and is scandalous; and shews that you are guided by the spirit of error, and are ig∣norant of the spirit of truth; that teacheth to deny pride, which is one of the seven abominations, which the woe is to: Woe to the Crown of pride; for the devil, he is the King of Pride, then woe to you, ye devilish proud-Priests.
Jesus Christ saith, Learn of me, I am meek and lowly in heart; but you shew that you are ignorant of his teachings, and are enemies to those that are brought into the obedience of his teachings, which teacheth self-denyal; and you be∣ing self-lovers, are contrary to the Scriptures, and the practice of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and scandalize the truth where it is manifested in power. Are you not covetous? and God doth forbid it, and the Ministers of Christ do forbid it, and say,Eph. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Tim. 6.6, 7, 8. Let not covetousness be once named amongst you, as it becometh Saints, and let your conversation be without covetousness; for covetousness is Idolatry, and draweth the heart from the Lord; and cove∣tousness is the root of all evil; and you are covetous, (exceeding covetous) the Ministers of Christ said, having food and rayment, therewith let us be content; and the Ministers of Christ laboured to make the Gospel of Christ to be without charge. And coveted no mans silver nor gold, nor were not greedy of filthy lucre,Acts 20.32, 33, 34, 35. 2 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Gal. 1.11, 12, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 3.6. but spoke against it, in obedience to the commands of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Ministers of Jesus Christ were not taught of man, but of God, they were not made Ministers by the will of man, but by the will of God, and they were not Ministers of the letter, but able Ministers of the spirit; and they made full proof of their Ministery, and gave no offence in any thing, that their Ministery might not be blamed, but in all things approving themselves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in di∣stresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long sufferings, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfained, by the word of Truth, and by the power of God, 2 Cor. 6.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.2 Cor. 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The Ministers of Christ were blameless as the Stewards of God, not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no strikers, not given to strong drink, nor filthy lucre, they were lovers of good men, they were holy, just, and temperate; Tit. 1.7, 8.1 Tim 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat. 23.8. 1 Cor. 9.19. The Ministers of Christ were not men-pleasers, neither were they called of men Masters, but became servants to all, in obedience to the Command of Jesus Christ, and they were not persecuters, but were gentle towards all men, even towards them that did oppose them. They were examples to the flock, and exhorted others to follow them, so far as they followed Christ, Eph. 5.1, 2. and saith he, Brethren, be ye followers of me, and mark them that walk so as ye have us for an example, Phil 3.17.Phil. 3.17. for saith he, many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame; who minde earthly things,Phil. 3.18, 19. Phil. 3.18, 19. Now consider the end of your conversation even all ye Priests of Baal, who profess your selves to be Ministers of the Gospel, see where your conver∣sation is, are you not altogether earthly, and walk contrary to the holy practice and conversation of the Ministers of Christ, which were examples to the flock in all things? now see if you have not lost your examples, and walk altogether contrary?
First, As they had received freely, they spoke freely again, and were free from covetousness, they took God to witness it, and so made the Gospel of Christ free, and not burdensome. Secondly, But you are exceeding covetous, and are hirelings, and are a∣mongst the false Prophets, in the same state and condition that those were whom the Lord sent his true Prophets to cry out against, then, as he sendeth to cry out against you false Priests now, which scandalize the truth of God; you are all scandalous; and if you have that which is your right, you must all be cast out, every one great and small for the highest of you in your fleshly wisdom and notions, are the highest deceivers of the people. Do not your fruits make you manifest? Are you not all in the same condition that the false Prophets were in, that ran, but the Lord never sent them? do you not look for your gain from you quarter,Isa. 56.10, 11. place, and parish where you are? as those did that Isaiah was sent to cry out against, Isa. 56.10, 11. Cleer your selves if you can; and do you not take Tythes? which neither Iesus Christ nor his true Mi∣nisters did; and so act contrary to them, both shewing yourselves to be Anti∣christs, as it is now made manifest by your practise; scandalous you are, all of you Tythe-mongers, and hirelings, and ignorant; you are of the same spi∣rit that they were guided by, that spoke for the deceits of the false Prophets, and so are enemies both to the people of God, and the ways of God, and are guided by a spirit of errour; deny it if you can: your works will testifie a∣gainst you; and are you not upholders of the traditions and rudiments of the world, which is a prejudice and hinderance of Reformation, and danger of poor souls, leading them on in blinde ways, worshipping the works of your own hands, teaching for doctrine traditions, and rudiments of the world, telling peo∣ple that they are ordinances of Christ, when they are but your own inventions? How dare any of you say you are the Ministers of Christ, and act contrary to them? blush for shames do you not hold up that filthy horrible thing that was committed in the land, which the Lord sent his true Prophets to cry out a∣gainst? as in Jer. 5.30, 31. The Prophets did prophecy falsly, and the Priests they bore rule by their means,Jer. 5.30, 31. then: But do not all the Priests here in York-shire so now? Following the wayes of Balaam, teaching for gifts and re∣wards,Iude 11. as they did? Shew me but one in all York-shire that does not: Put forth one that is not guilty of it, and cries out against it as the true Ministers did; Come, Where is there one in York-shire that goes not on in the wayes of Cain, to envy, &c. and that teacheth not for money, or Tythes, and bears not rule by their means? and that seeks not for their gain from their quarter, place and parish where they are, as the false Prophets did? or where is there one that teacheth not for some of these? Or that teacheth not for gifts or rewards, as Balaams Priests did, and that cries out of it, and against it, as the true Prophets and servants of the Lord did? Is there not one to be found in all York-shire out of the false Prophets state, and condition, or else found in Balaams Priests state, and condition, which were all enemies to the Servants of God, and to the ways of God, all minding earthly things, whose end is destruction? Phil. 3.18, 19. Sift them all, turn them all out, they are scandalous men, and scandalize the Gospel of Christ which is clear, and free, and hath no sale set upon it, as in Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Ho every one that thirsteth, come and receive freely, without money or without
price: Why do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which doth not satisfie? Hearken ye diligently to me, saith the Lord, and eat ye that which is good, and your souls shall live, and I will make with you an everlasting Covenant, even the sure mercies of David. The Servant of the Lord cries, Come freely, Isa. 55. come eat freely, that your souls may live;Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, 4. As he had re∣ceived freely of the Lord, he spoke freely again, and directed them to the Lord, as he was taught of the Lord, and as the true Ministers did, he watched for their souls, as one that was to give account unto God. But these false Priests, they will do nothing without money, they will have money here in York shire for reek passing up the chimnies, and for servants wages, without money will they do nothing: see if that be not their Diana; and they are here in York shire like unto those false Priests, that Micah the Servant of the Lord was sent to cry out against, Mica. 3. saith he, Put into their mouths, and they cry peace, peace, and say we are good Christians, and are the beloved of the Lord; but now that we try them, and put not into their mouths, they say, we are Seducers, and Hereticks, and Deluded, and Mad, and they can make such Christians (as they call them) for money, and they can change them, and cast them out again for want of money; this is the manner of Balaams Priests here in York-shire; and now that we put not into their mouths, they are so envious, that if it were in their power, they would destroy us, and prepare war against us, suing some at Law, because they will not pay for reek passing up their Chimnies,Mat. 5.40. 1 Cor. 6.1. 2 Ioh. 9. Mich. 3. and threaten others to go to Law with them, which both Jesus Christ and his true Ministers do forbid, plainly shewing themselves to be none of his; for he that abideth not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God, 2 Joh. 9. and are like unto those that Micah cries out against, Put not into their mouths, and they prepare war; and now that they are tried, they manifest themselves. All people, try your Priests everywhere, and be no longer deceived by them; see if York-shire Priests do not manifestly declare themselves to be amongst the false Prophets, and are scandalous all of them, every one, and are ignorant of the Spirit of truth, for they persecute those in whom it is manifested to Rule: and see if these do not prejudice the calling, and hinder the work of Reformation, as much as in them lies, to the endan∣gering of immortal Souls; but God will cut them off out of the work, they have nothing to do with his Ministry, theirs is of man, they are the Ministers of man and not of God, Enemies to the People of God, and wayes of God, as their fruits do make them manifest, every tree being known by its fruits;Mat. 7.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. they are in the flesh, the Lust, the Earth, and the Fall, and persecute those that are after the spirit, who are born again, and worship God in Spirit and in truth, as in John 4.23, 24. Knowing that he seeketh such to worship him. But these are of the first birth, and draw near to God with their mouth, and lips, but their hearts are far of, having their fear taught by the precepts of men, as those had, which the Lord complained of by his servant the Prophet, Isa. 29. ver. 13. And are they not upholders and practizers of old Popish Ceremonies? do they not uphold the Idols temple set up in the time of Popery, or ignorance? for God that made the world, dwelleth not in temples made with hands, Acts 7.47, 48, 49. Acts 17.24.25. Neither is he worshipped there with mens hands; and they do worship there that which their hearts do imagine, sprinkling In∣fants,
which is but a Mark of the Beast. Rev. 13.16, 17, 18. and tell the people it is an ordinance of Christ, when there is not one word in the Scripture for it;Gal 3.27. 1 Cor. 12.13. Eph. 4 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 1.22.23. They that are Christs have put on Christ, and are baptized by one Spirit into one body, where there is but one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one God, and Father of All, and in All, and through All; those that are of the Faith of Abraham, and born again of water and the Spirit; But these are ignorant of it. And they make use of the Popes Law to imprison by, denying the Law of God,1 Cor. 14.29, 30, 31. or practice of the people of God; as in 1 Cor. 14.29 30, 31. when any thing was revealed to him that sat by, the first was to hold his peace, and the other was to speak; but these will binde the Spirit of God under a Popish Law, and deny the Law of God, as by their fruits it doth appear; and so are up∣holders of old Popish Ceremonies, teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of men. And as the Priests here in York-shire make use of the Popish House, and the Popish Law, to imprison by, as you may see in the Statute-Book, in the 1. of Mary, Assertion 2. Chap. 3. That which was set forth by Queen Mary, for the upholding of Popish Clergy, as is more at large in the book of Easter-reckonings, and the Popish Ceremonies, are used amongst the Priests here in York-shire, as sprinkling Infants, making Christians (as they say) by their Imaginations, saying that they enter them then into the Covenant of Christ, when they do but mark them in their foreheads as the Beast did that John speaks of in the Revelations, and so they use their own inventions, calling them Ordinances, but it is but the ordinance of mans beastly corrupt Will, and not the Ordinance of Christ; neither is there any Scripture for it. 4. Have they not the Popes Doctrine here among them? try them well; do they not keep you ever-learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth? as those that Paul foretold of should come in the Last dayes, when there would be perilous times, when men should be lovers of their own selves, Covetous, boasters, proud, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, dispisers of those that are good, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; and are not the Priests here in York-shire, and the Priests of the World these sorts of men, as their fruits make them manifest, And have they not a form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof? Is there any Reformation by their Ministry? now the Apostle bids, Turn away from such: 1 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. &c. Then turn away from all your Priests,1 Tim 3.1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. for they are such that deny the power that reformeth and changeth, and worketh out the old nature, and engrafteth into Christ Jesus, and leadeth up to perfection; they the Priests in Yorkshire, and likewise the Priests of the World, say that they shall never be made perfect whilst they are here, and so teach contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; and, If an Angel from Heaven should bring any other Doctrine, we are forbidden to receive it,Gal. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Gal. 1.8, 9, 10, 11. They say, that they can never over∣come the body of sin, nor be made perfect here, and they say, no unclan thing shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: how will they make these agree together? try them, ask them if they hold Purgatory, and see if this be not the Popes Doctrine? take heed to your selves, call them to an account and try them, for they are found false in these parts, and have deceived us long; but now the Lord ath let us see the deceits of them, and they teach for doctrine the Traditions of men, and rudiments of the world, and not after God; who
say that you shall not overcome your sins here, and that no unclean thing (that cannot be denyed) shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, then ask them if they would have you go into Purgatory to be made clean; see if this be not Po∣pery; and they cry our first, as the thief doth, that saith, turn theif, turn thief, least they should be taken in the snare themselves: I do testifie against them all, that they are deceivers, every one, and no Ministers of Christ, neither were they ever sent of Christ, and so they scandalize the Truth of God, and hinder the work of Reformation, as much as in them lies, and do endanger poor souls, and are (as Hosea speaks of them) Murtherers, and murder the pure seed in themselves and in others, where there is any appearance of it, and deny the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. Jesus Christ taught the people and pressed them to perfection. and said, Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5.48.Mat. 5.48. and the Apostle taught the people, as he was taught of God, and he pressed them to perfection, and said, Let as many as are perfect be thus minded, and the rest to press on to perfection,Phil. 3.15. Gal. 1.15, 16. Col. 1.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Phil. 3.15. this was the Doctrine that the holy men of God preached, And the Apostle who was made a Minister, according to the dispensation of the grace of God that was given him, which was Christ revealed in him, whom we preach, warning every man, everywhere, and teaching every man in all wisdome, that he might present every man perfect in Christ. Col. 1.25.26, 27, 28, 29. This was the doctrine of Christ, to press them on to be perfect, as their Father which is in heaven is perfect; the Apostle who was his true Minister, did press to the same thing, to present every man perfect in Christ; & the Priests here in York∣shire, and the Priests of the World, the Ministry of Antichrist, or of man, and not of God, say that they shall never overcome their sins, and so keeps them ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth; saying that they shall never be perfect here; and see if this be not the Popes doctrine; It is not the doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor his Apostle, who said he did strive, labouring mightily according to the power of God, to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Col. 1.28, 29. and the same man of God,Gal. 1 8 9. who had the power of God working in him, said, He that brings any other doctrine, let him be ac∣cursed; which those Priests do deny, as by their fruits, and doctrine it doth appear, in which Doctrine is the doctrine of the Devil, that doth not purifie and purge the Conscience from dead works to serve the living God, which doctrine is accursed, and they cry out of Popery and Prophaness; now see if they be not as he that cries, turn theif, turn theif; to set the people to look on some other, that he in tht mean time may escape; and those Priests cry out to the Parliament of Popery and prophaness, and live in the same them∣selves that they cry out against, and would be blinding them with their flatte∣ries, and setting them to look on others, whist they themselves should escape; but if they do but turn about, and look on with a single eye, they may have a plain made here to cast out all the Priests in York shire, and do them Justice, accor∣ding to their own desire; light is risen out of darkness and sees them to be all scandalous, and Ignorant, and Enemies both to the people of God, and the ways of God, and upholders and practisers of the abolished Popish Ceremonies, and are hinderers of right reformation, and destroyers of poor souls, as much as in them lieth. 5. And these Priests, they put Davids Conditions into rime and meeter, go∣ing
into the house of Rimmon to worship, where they sing lyes in Hypocrisie, saying, All my bones shake, and all my flesh trembles, when they lye: and lying is dishonour to the Lord; and they say, O Lord my righteousness, when they themselves are the servants of Sin and plead for it, and teach the people to lye, calling that the service of God; but lying is of the Devil, and he is the Father of lyes, and they teach the People to sing, and say, O Lord I am not puft in minde, I have no scornful eye: when they are puft in scorn and derision, and so sing lyes to the dishonour of God, all lyes, howling and lying; when they read Davids conditions, they read them with hats on, and when they turn them into rime and meeter, they put their hats off, and lye singing, and setting that nature on singing, and to rejoyce; which is for the curse, and so worship the works of their own hands, following the Imaginations of their own hearrs, and take a glass and speak an hour by their old Author studyed spirit, and their glass standing by, as if the word of the Lord was to be bound to an hour,1 Cor. 14.15. Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. day, or place; see if this be not errour, or Popery, and hold it not up, be not deceived, God will not be mocked. Let him that sings, sing with the Spirit, and the Ʋnderstanding, to know what he sings; They that are redeemed from the Earth, shall sing new Songs, which none can sing but those that are redeemed out of the Fall up to the Lord God, and to the Lamb, to Praise him for ever. Let not your Priests deceive you, and destroy your souls any longer, and keep you under Popery, Atheism and Ignorance of the Spiritual Ministry; Christ is a Mysterie, and none know him, but they to whom he is revealed: put out all your Priests, they all deceive you, every one. And that you may know the truth, wait upon the Lord for teaching, who is the Teacher of all his by his Spirit, and the ministration is powerful, to re∣deem the soul out of the Fal up to God, and to reform and change your na∣tures and dispositions, which will guide you, and lead you into the way of peace, to know the Lord, to gather out of all the ways and works of darkness, Atheism and Popery, Covetousness and Prophaness, which all are given to Preists, and People, that live in their first nature, and know not God; who is a spi∣rit, and of purer eyes then to behold Iniquity; who is a consuming fire, and is both the heart-searcher and tryer,Petition. and will burn up the wicked in the indignation of his Ire. That the Faithful Ministers of Christ, by whom we have believed, whose la∣bours have been so profitable, and are yet so necessary to the Church of God, and whose reputations and encouragements ought to be so dear unto us, are daily laden with contempt and reproach, disturbed in the diligent and peaceable execu∣tion of their office, by evil and unreasonable men, and also undermined in their cal∣ling and maintenance: whereby the course of the Gospel is much hindered, and the spirit of Gods people, (nay we doubt not to say) the Spirit of God himself is grieved and vexed to see the precious Ordinances of Christ trodden under foot, &c. That the Faithful Ministers of Christ, by whom we have believed, &c. That the Ministers of Yorkshire, or the Ministers of the World, are the Mi∣nisters of Antichrist,Answ. 1. The Priests Practise. as their fruits do make them manifest; and their Mini∣stry is of man, and not of God, and the Faith that is spoken of is corrupt, for it doth not purifie, but worketh into Pride, Covetousness, oppression, and perse∣cution, lust and revenge, hatred, backbiting, scornfulness, cruelty, malice, debate, deceit, malignity and envy, drunkenness, lying and swearing; because
of oaths, the Land mourns, and pride swels, and Covetousness, and op∣pression, and grinding the faces of the poor, and these are the fruits of the reprobate, and are Ordinances of Antichrist and not of Christ, and they are all gone out of the way, both Priests and people, and the people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou hast rejected knowledge, saith the Lord, I will also reject thee; that thou shalt be no Priest to me; seeing thou hast for∣gotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy children; as they were in∣creased, so they sinned against me, saith the Lord; and as it was then, so it is now; therefore thus saith the Lord, I will change their glory into shame, for they eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart to do wickedly; it is not now made manifest by their fruits? for there is like Priest like people,Hosea 4 6, 7, 8, 9. I will punish them for their wayes, and reward them their doings, saith the Lord. Hos. 4.6, 7, 8, 9. 2. It is with the Priests now, as it was with the false Priests and false Prophets; and the people now, as it was with the children of Israel, after they had backslid. and broken the Covenant of the Lord; their sins testifie against them to their faces now, as theirs did then, Hos. 5.5. They call the proud happy: and they that work wickedness are set up; and they that tempt God are even delivered.Mal. 3.15. Mal. 3.15. as it was then so it is now, in this generation; and the Priests of the World are contrary to Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who were his true Mi∣nisters in all things. 1. They are exceeding proud, and are called of men Masters, which Jesus Christ hath taught his to deny: Mat. 23.8. and herein they walk contrary to the Scripture, and the command of Jesus Christ, and shew the spirit of errour, and are no Ministers of Christ, that do not abide in his Doctrine, but are of Antichrist, and are Lords over Gods heritage;Mat. 23.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Proud Pharisees they are, and sit in the same seat, and act the same things as they did; they have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, as the Scribes and Pharisees had, which were enemies to Iesus Christ; they love the greetings in markets, as they did, and to be called of men Masters, as they were, and suffer men to worship them with cap and knee, and are enemies to Iesus Christ, as the Scribes and Pharisees were, and hold up that which he came to throw down, and so walk contrary to Iesus Christ; herein they shew themselves to be Antichrists, and of the sae generation that persecuted Christ when he came in the flesh, as they do now that he is appearing in Spirit, and the chief Priests were the greatest persecuters of him then, as the Priests of York∣shire are now, who follow their steps. 3. They are exceeding covetous, and burden and oppress poor people,Acts 20.33, 34, 35. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 17, 18. Gal. 1.10. Jam. 2.1, 2. and are light and wanton, living in pleasures and wantoness upon earth, which the true Ministers of Christ did forbid, as in all things they were good examples to the people; but these are evil examples, and walk contrary both to the Scriptures, and the practise of Christ, and his true Ministers; herein they shew the spirit of errour, and are enemies to the Truth of God. 4. They are men-pleasers, all the Priests of the world, and have mens persons in admiration because of advantage, denying the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, Iames 2.1, 2. Gal. 1.10. which the true Ministers of Christ did practise; herein they walk contrary to the Scripture, and shew the Spirit of errour, and are enemies to the truth of God. 5. The Priests of the World, or the Ministers of man and of Antichrist, they are blamable, and are soon angry, and are given to wine, strikers, and
are given altogether to filthy lucre,Jer. 23.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Joh. 1.1, 2. &c. Joh. 17.14, 15, 16, 17. Jer. 23.29. Heb. 4.12. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. Rom. 6. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Pet. 1.25. Jam. 1.21, 22. Col. 1.1. 2 Cor. 3.6. Gal. 1.11, 12. Eph. 1.1. 2 Tim. 1.1. Mat. 23. Mat. 26. Jer. 23.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Jer. 23.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Jer. 23.1. Jer. 5.23, 24, 25, &c. Hosea. 4.1, 2, 3, &c. Isa. 59. Isa. 29.9, 10, 11, &c. Gal. 1.8, 9. Mal. 2. to the 10. The two Seeds, one of the Flesh, and the other of the Spirit. contrary to the Ministers of Christ, as in Titus 1.7. 1 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3. walking contrary to the Scripture, and are guided by the spirit of error. 6. The Priests of the world and their Ministry is not of God, but of man; they are the Ministers of man, and not of God, and are no Ministers of the Spirit, but are of the imaginary wayes; what they do conceive of, or imagine, that they hold forth, and know not the word of life, which is eter∣nal, that sanctifieth, and purifieth Soul and Body, which word is invisible, and is as a fire, and a hammer, and is quick, and powerfull, which is the power of God that killeth the old nature, and purgeth out the old leaven, and raiseth up the immortal Soul out of death to praise the Lord. And they that do Administer it, are cleansed, and washed, justified and sanctified by it, which word endureth for ever, being the ingrafted word, that is able to save the souls of those that know the Ministration of it, and the Ministers of it were, and are able Ministers of the Spirit, not taught of man, but by the will of God, and administer to that which is kept in the death, the im∣mortal seed, which the Ministers of the world are ignorant of, but are per∣secuters of those that hold forth the word of life now, as the Jews and Scribes, and Pharisees, chief Priests, and Elders of the people were, and they speak a divination of their own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, and their Ministry will never satisfie nor purifie one soul; it hath been long, but here is no redemption, nor Sanctification by it; Nay, they say themselves that it will never sanctifie them whilst they are here, and by their fruits it doth so appear, and so it doth not profit the people at all; they teach for Doctrine traditions, and rudiments of the world, and they are all confused, so many men, so many minds; when as the Ministers of Christ were and are all of one heart, and one minde, who were taught of God, and are Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the letter, or of man, as the Priests of the world, and all those here in York-shire are, and are contrary both to Christ, and his true Ministers, and load his Servants with Reproachings, and Revilings, and are Enemies both to him and his, and they and their Ministry is accursed, for it is contrary both to Christ and his Apostles, and doth neither sanctifie, nor purifie, but keeps in the lust of the flesh, and in the fall. There are two seeds, one after the flesh, as Ishmael was, and the other after the Spirit, and by promise, as Isaac was; and they that are after the flesh, they persecute them that are after the spirit, and they that are after the spirit, or by promise, are made not onely to believe, but also to suffer what the Lord shall permit, or see good; and they that are of the promised seed are of Abraham now, and are born again, one Seed, one Faith, one God, one Father, one Baptism, one Bread, one Body, all one, and in one, Baptized by one Spirit into that one body, which is spiritual, and made to drink into one Spirit, and their faith doth purifie them, and work∣eth them out of their old nature, and ingrafteth them into the Vine, which is Christ Jesus, the Vine of the Lords free love, and being all one in Christ Jesus, set and ingrafted into their own Vine, the natural branches being cut off, those that are Jews outward, and not inward, who live in the wild-O∣live, and in their natural stock, or state, or condition, know them not who are in the true Vine, being made partakers of the Divine nature, their faith standing out of the wisdom of mans words in the power of God,
groweth with an increase, making fruifull, being in the Vine, the fruits of true faith do shew it forth, as Vertue, and Knowledge, Temperance, Pati∣ence, Godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity, which maketh fruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; so shall all men know, saith he, That ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, continue in my love: for faith without works is dead, as the worlds faith is, or the fruits of the first seed, which is after the flesh, and they that are in the flesh, their old corrupt nature, and in the wild Olive, they cannot please God, and their faith standeth without in the wisdom of mans words, and not in the power of God, which worketh a Reformation, and a change, but as they are in the fall, their fruits make them manifest, and their faith is corrupt, it doth not purifie their conscience from dead works, and so they believe in that which thier priests lead them into for good, as say the Petitioners, we have be∣lieved in them for good, like Priests, like People, as in Hoseas time, Hosea. 4. and all live in one nature, that are in the fall, and are under the curse, in their old nature, both Priests and people, and the Priests are evil ex∣amples to the people. 1. The Priests, they live in Pride, and the people they believe,The Priests are evil ex∣amples. that if they may be proud that are their leaders, they may follow their examples, be∣cause it is suitable to their earthly hearts, and so they believe in them, as they say, for good, calling good evil, and evil good; but the woe is to such. 2. The Priests they live in Covetousness, and the people they follow their examples, and are all given to Covetousness, both Priests and people, and love it, and believe it is good, because it is suitable to their earthly hearts, and that is the good that they believe in them for, all feeding daily on the forbidden fruit, for both Pride and Covetousness is forbidden, and those that live in it, both Priests, and People, are in the broad way, in the fall, and under the curse. 3. The Priests live in rayling, and lying, and speaking evil of that which they know not, and they live in pleasures and wantonness, and heady-high-mindedness, Lust, and revenge to persecution, oppression, and grind∣ing the faces of the poor, and see if these be not fruits of darkness, and whether they do not live in them, and the tree is known by its fruits, and if this be not Atheism, Ignorance, Blindness, Delusion, and Herresie, and errs from the truth; for they are no fruits of the Spirit, but of the flesh, and of the seed of the Serpent, whose head is yet unbruised in them that act those things: And the People they follow the example of the Priests, and believe that if they do such things, that are teachers, and leaders of them, they may do the same, and follow them as Examples, and because those things are delightsome to the flesh, they love them, and believe in them for good, and would not leave the evil of their doings, but cry out against those that speaks against them for their ungodly deeds. And because they cannot but declare against their deceits in speaking the truth, they cry out, saying, that they lade them with contempt, and re∣proach, and disturb them, &c. But the time is come that they cannot endure sound Doctrine;The Priests cannot en∣dure sound Doctrine. are not the Priests here in York-shire, in the same state and condition that the false Priests, and false Prophets were in, whom the Lord sent his true Pro∣phets
to cry out against then, as he sendeth to cry out against these now? Isaiah was sent to cry out against them, and called them dumb dogs, yea greedy dogs, shepherds that could not understand, that never had enough, for they did every one look for their gain from their quarter, Isaiah 56.10, 11. and because he spoke the truth, he was hated of them; as those do hate the Servants of the Lord now, that testifie against their deceits, and disturb them, breaking their carnall peace, and false rest, and now they cry out against it. Jeremiah, he was sent to cry out against them, and said that they held up a filthy, and a horrible thing; for they preached for hire, and did bear rule over the people by their means, Jer. 5.30. and do they not so now? was not Jeremy lade with contempt for declaring the truth, and put in the Prison, and in the Dungeon? and am I become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth? doth that lade you, and disturb you, or do not you lade the servants of the Lord, that are sent to tell you of your deceits, and de∣ceiveableness, and render them odious to the People? but the Lord will clear up the Innocency of his People, and take away the names of reproach from them, and give you the cup of his fury, that you may drink the dreggs of it, and be ashamed of the evil of your doings. Malachi, He was sent to the Priests to tell them that their blessings were curst, Mal. 2. and you are now found in the same state and condition; doth truth lade you, and disturb you, and break your peace? It must be so, for God is against you, and you are those that cause the truth to suffer, and lade it by reproaches, and revilings, and persecutions, as your fruits make it manifest, and so you must drink the cup of trembling, and astonishment; for Jerusalem shall be a burdensome stone to all Nations; for the Spirit of God is grieved by you that burden, and oppress poor creatures, and are never satisfied, crying out for means for your bellies, making your bellies your Gods, seeking after earth and earthly things; Whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things, persecuting, and imprisoning, and shamefully entreating those that are sent to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel, and you fill up the mea∣sure of your fathers Iniquities, as your fruits do witness against you, that you are they that stay the righteous, and persecute the Innocent, and are drawing upon your heads wrath without remedy, even wrath to the utmost; for he will plague the Beast, and the false Prophet, and burn the whore with fire, and confound the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nought the counsel of the prudent, that he may reveale himself to babes, and teach them the knowledge of his truth, for he will rule all Nations with his Iron-rod, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lord God omnipotent, ever praised be his name. Petition.Lastly, They take boldness to represent, that the liberty granted by the Parlia∣ment, in matters of Religion, and the worship of God, is much abused, to the in∣crease of Popery and prophaneness, contrary to your intentions in the same, &c. Answ. It grieveth these persecuting Priests that any liberty should be granted for the Truth to be declared, lest that their deceits should be laid open; and are troubled that the Parliament should see beyond them, to give some liberty, that truth may not alwayes be bound under the powers of
darkness ruling in the proud Priests; but light is rising in Parliament, and people, to see the deceits of the Priests, though they would be giving meanings by their old-author studied spirit, got out of old Authors at the University, where the fountain is corrupted, full of dead mens bones, and now it stinks, now that their deceit is discovered how they have deceived the people in the night time, the time of darkness, whilst the Mysterie of iniquity bore rule in man, now light is risen, and is arising to see how they have a long time blinded the people in giving meanings to the Scriptures, which are true as they speak, who do come to see them fulfilled, can wit∣ness it, as there are many in those parts can bear testimony to the same; and now that the subtile Foxes are beaten out of that hole, they would make the Parliament believe that there stands need of a meaning to be given to their late act, or grant for liberty in matters of Religion, as if they knew not what they did intend in the thing, without they give them a meaning to their intentions, but because it is contrary to their intention, that is the reason that they would not have any to know any thing, but what they suggest, or put into their brain; but brain knowledge is dying, and now the Priests are crying to Magistrates to help, to uphold them; but as light doth arise in the hearts of the Parliament, they will be ready to put out their dim lights, and give such grants for liberty of Conscience, that truth may be declared in every place; that which is revealed in secret, shall be declared on the house top, and that will make a free passage for truth to be declared; and so the corrupt fountain of Oxford, and Cambridge, which is under the curse will have a stop, and then there will be an effectuall course taken, for removing of scandalous Ministers, that run from God to be taught of man, and so all cast out, that none may speak but as they do receive their words from the Lord, which runs out of the pure Fountain, and that is under the blessing of the Almighty, where there is no burthening of poor people for carnal means, seeking after the love and friendship, and honor of the world, and kingdom of the world, as the Priests of the world do, that are in the state and condition of infidelity, Atheism, and profaneness, and dare not trust God, but dishonour him. And they are worthy all to be removed, and cast out; the time draweth nigh, wherein righteousness shall run down all our streets, and knowledge shall fill the earth as the wa∣ters cover the Sea, and righteousness ruling in Magistrates, and Justice and Equity set up, which we honor in our souls, and those that are the acters of it, and we rejoyce to see the Lord declaring his free love through his poor despised creatures, and binding up the broken hearted, but we deny the Priests of Baal, for they have a long time deceived us, and now it is our duty to cry out against their deceits, that all people may con∣sider of them, and see what they are profited by them, and what Reforma∣tion is amongst them; are they not all confused, and live in conceivings, and imaginations? but the Lord is binding his Law upon the Spirits of his people, which will be such battlements of purity, that deceits and deceivers will not be able to enter into the inward Court, but will be kept without, and trodden underfoot, and Popish and profane persons cast out; & Proud, Covetous, Envious, Malicious Priests with their subtilties cannot enter any more with their deceiveableness, and craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive poor people to the dishonor of God, in despising his Ordi∣nances, which is his power, even the power of God unto Salvation; which power they being ignorant of, they do pollute his Sabboths in doing their own work, and not his; speaking their own words, and thinking their own thoughts, which those do not that are entred into their rest, Heb. 4. As these do, that sell their wares at great rates, and compell people to buy, and if they have not money to give them, then they sue, and go to Law, and break the Law of God, and if any come to declare what God hath done for his soul, as David did, though it be after that he hath ended his stage-play, contrary to the Grant for the easing of burdned consciences, he cries, Take him away, and have him to prison, and take boldness to break the Laws of the Land, and run away himself, but the tryall he will not stand; and this is the practice of several of the Priests here in York-shire, when the Lord sends to any of them, and thus they prove themselves to be the Ministers of man, and not of God; but he will bruise them with his Iron rod. Let all that love the Lord, bless the Lord, praise him, and magnifie him for ever: The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Law-giver, the Lord is our King, and doth us teach, preserve, and keep, and out of their cruelties save, and de∣liver, to him alone that sits upon his throne, ruling by his power, each day, and eeke each hour, be all praise, honor, and glory, for ever, and ever. Amen. Hallelujah to the highest: The Lord raigneth, let the earth rejoyce. All ye Saints of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnifie him for ever; and let Justice, and equity be set up, and righteousness established; so shall you have the blessing of the Lord upon all your counsells, and en∣deavours, and rejoyce in him for evermore.
An exhortation to the Magistrates. AWake awake you Magistrates and Rulers, and fear the Lord God Al∣mighty, and do that which is Just, have mercy and walk humbly with your God, and do Justice without partiality: O stand in the Counsel of the Lord, and beware of looking out to the Egyptian studies for Counsel: and you which are set up to be Rulers, cast out all your old Laws, that are contrary to the Law of God, and establish Laws according to the Law of God, that God may be glorified in you, bringing forth the fruits of Righteousness: Beware of being countenancers of evil doers, and punishing the innocent, poor, and harmeless, and let all such who are sound scandalous Mini∣sters, which profess Christ in words, not abiding in his doctrine, let them be cast out, for his Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation, and not their vain In∣ventions, Imaginations, Repetitions, and Divinations of their own Brain; Cease from holding them up, the Lord is against them, for he alone is come to teach his children himself, who is our King, Lawgiver, and Judge, to whom be all praise and thanksgiving now and for ever. Thomas Aldam, By the dark World called a Quaker. An Exhortation to all People that have a desire to know the Truth, that the Truth may make them free. EVery one that hath a desire to know the truth, that the truth may set you free, mind the light of God in you, that shews you sin, and evil, that which checks you when you do amiss, either when you lye, or swear, or are Proud, or Covetous, or Oppress, or Envy, or Hate, or Backbite one another, or use any deceit, there is something in you that will check you, and
tell you that you should not do so, if you hearken to it; that which shews you your vain thoughts, and wondering desires, and wicked Imaginations, if you hearken to it, and let it guide your mindes, it will turn them within, and so shew you how you have spent your time, and bring you to consider of your wayes, and your doings, that you may forsake that which is evil, and turn to the Lord, that he may have mercy upon you; this light within, if you hearken to it, it will not suffer you to do any wrong to any man, but to do to all as you would be done by; and obeying it, it will teach you to deny your selves of Pride, and Covetousness, and Oppression, and Drunkenness, and Lying, and Swearing, and Vain talk, and Foolish jesting, and all vain delights and pleasures whatsoever; and minding this light within, to be obedient to it, it will cross your earthly wills, and turn you out of the lust, and filth of the flesh, and lead you out of all the worlds wayes, and words, and customs, and fashions, and worships, and delights, and vanities whatsoever, and bring you to delight in the Lord, to do his will, in yeilding obedience to his commands, in what the light doth require of you to be done, that you may cast off the works of darkness, as this light within makes them manifest to you; This light within you, will not suffer you to eat and drink to make your selves wanton, if you hearken to it, and let it guide your minds; this light within, will not let you wear apparel to make your selves proud, and burden and oppress poor creatures, if you hearken to it; and here is your teacher, this light, obeying it; and here is your condemnation, this light dis∣obeying it; this light is not without you, a Chapter or a Verse, but the light is within, as it was in them that spoke forth the Chapters; ye have a light, to the whith ye do well to take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts: Take heed to that light, lest you be condemned by it: obeying it, it will shew you the way to Salvation; disobeying this light, it will condemn you. Now you have time, prize it, and take heed of rejecting the Counsel and ad∣monition of the Lord to your souls, as you will answer it before the Lord: Con∣sider of it, and lay it to heart; This is the day of your visitation. VVritten by a Husbandman. FINIS.
