a3126 45097492 171112
THE Form of Consecration OF A Church or Chappel. And Of the Place of Christian Buriall. Exemplified By the R. R. F. in God LANCELOT Late Lord-Bishop of Winchester, In the Consecration of the Chappel of JESƲS in the foresaid Diocess. LONDON, Sold by T. Garthwait at the little North-door of S. Pauls. 1659.
portrait of Lancelot Andrews
Dog of Ecclesiae The Forme-of CONSECRATION of a CHVRCH or Chappel, and of the place of Chris∣tian Buryall, Exemplified, by the R. R. F. in God. LANCEL. ANDREWES late L. Bishop of Winchester.
To the Christian Readers. THat some Memoriall might be transmitted to Po∣sterity of the Piety of the Church of En∣gland, and of the re∣ligious
care of our Reverend Fathers, in seperating se∣lect and speciall places, such are Churches, Chappels, and Oratories, for the Publike Service of God, and Celebra∣tion of the Divine Mysteries, here is presented to you, Christian Readers, a Form of Consecra∣tion
drawn up by the Right Reverend Father in God, Lan∣celot, late Lord Bi∣shop of VVinche∣ster; a person of so great learning and piety; and therefore justly of eminency and honor, not only in this Nationall, but also in the Ca∣tholike Church of God, where He is
admired by all judi∣cious and Knowing-persons, for his most excellent Sermons, acute Discourses, and pious Devoti∣ons, That the Pub∣lisher hereof makes no question, but he shall hereby do an acceptable Service to the Church of God, and in some measure stop the
mouthes of the pro∣fane Novelists, who never more then now, shoot out their arrows, even bitter words, Ps. 64.3. a∣gainst such H. Pla∣ces, as by the Word of God, and Pray∣er are solemnly dedi∣cated and set apart with religious Cere∣monies, to the alone worship and Ser∣vice
of Almighty God. It is not his in∣tent to draw either end of the Saw of contention, to justi∣fie the Consecration of Churches in ge∣nerall, or this Form in particular; as be∣ing well assured that nothing can be rati∣onally objected a∣gainst the One or the
Other, but what hath either been long since answered by the invincible hand of the judicious Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiasticall Poli∣tie; or will fall flat on his face, as Da∣gon before the Ark, at the very mention of the great name of the renowned and victorious Bishop
of VVinchester; a∣gainst whom neither of the Factions be∣twixt which the Church of England hath been Crucified, as her blessed Savi∣our between the two Thieves, hath been ever stirring hand or tongue, but like the Souldiers, which came to apprehend our Lord, they went
backward, and fell to the ground. This said, He re∣commends it to the Publike benefit, not without some confi∣dence that it may, by the blessing of God, have some influence and operation on the stony hearts, and i∣ron hands of the Sa∣crilegious generati∣on of them; VVho
roar in the Congre∣gations, and set up their banners for to∣kens; of them, who break down all the carved work therof with axes and ham∣mers; of them, who have set fire upon the Holy places, and have defiled the dwelling places of Gods name, even to the ground; Ps. 74;
Of them, who say, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in possession; of them, who have cast their heads to∣gether, and are con∣federate against them. But if not, sperabo autem & adhuc meliora, let them beware of the Psalmists impreca∣tion, O my God,
make them like un∣to a wheel; and as the stubble before the winde. Psal. 83. Which curse that by timely repentance it may be prevented, is another ground of the publication here∣of; and a part of his daily prayers who promoted the Impression, with the longings of St. Paul.
Rom. 10.1. Bre∣thren, my hearts desire, and prayer to God for our Israel is, that they may be saved. May 29. 1659.
A Note of the Reve∣rence given to the Wor∣ship of God in the Israe∣lites Ordering their Troopes, out of Sr. Wal∣ter Raleghs History, Book 2. Part 1. Cap. 5. §. 1. pag. 249. Edit. 1648. THis was the Order of the Army of Israel and of their in∣camping, &c. The Ta∣bernacle of God being al∣ways set in the middle
and center thereof The Reverend care which Moses the prophet and Chosen servant of God had in all that belonged even to the outward and least parts of the Tabernacle, Ark and Sanctuary, witnessed well the inward and most humble zeal borne towards God himself. The industry used in the framing thereof, and every the least part thereof; the curious Workmanship thereon bestowed, the
exceeding charge and expence in the provisi∣ons, the dutifull obser∣vance in the laying up and preserving the Ho∣ly vessels, the solemn Removing thereof, the vigilant Attendance thereon, and the provi∣dent defence of the Same, which all Ages have in some degree im∣itated, is now so forgot∣ten in this superfine Age by those of the Family, by the Ana∣baptist, Brownist and o∣ther Sectaries as all
cost and care bestowed and had of the Church wherein God is to be served and worshipped is accounted a kind of Popery and as proceed∣ing from an Idolatrous disposition, in so much as time would soone bring to passe (if it were not resisted) that God would be turned out of Churches into Barns, and from thence again into the Fields and Mountaines, and un∣der the hedges; and the Offices of the mini∣stry
(robbed of all dig∣nity and respect) be as contemptible as those places; All Order, Di∣scipline and Church Government, left to Newness of Opinion and mens fancies: yea and soon after as many kinds of Religions would spring up as there are Parish Chur∣ches in England, every contentious & ignorant person clothing his fan∣cy with the Spirit of God and his imagination with the gift of Revelati∣on,
in so much as when the Truth, which is but one, shall appear to the simple multitude, no less variable then con∣trary to it self, the Faith of men will soon after dye away by degrees and all Religion be held in scorn and contempt, &c.
Consecratio CAPELLAE JESƲ, ET COEMETERII, PER LANCE LOTƲM Episcopum Winton. JƲxta Southamptoni∣ensem villam Ec∣clesia Beatae Mariae collapsa cernitur, solis Cancellis ad sacros usus superstitibus: paucae ali∣quot aedes ibi in propin∣quâ parte numerantur;
coetera Parochianorum multitudo hinc inde spar∣sim inhabitant in villis, tum loci longinquo in∣tervallo, tum aestuario longè periculoso divisi ab Ecclesiâ. Ex eâ acceden∣di difficultate non profa∣nae modo plebeculae animos facilè invasit misera neg∣ligentia atque dispretio divini cultus, sed & vi∣ri proli sedulique pietatis cultores remoram in tra∣jectu saepe experti sunt, haud ipso quidem: capi∣tum discrimine eluctabi∣lem; consortem hujus in∣fortunii cum se factum sentiret (dum ibi loci fa∣miliam poneret) Vir re∣nuus
Richardus Smith Armiger, heroicos planè animos gestans, atque in∣spiratos de Coelo, commune hoc Religionis dispendi∣um privatis quingenta∣rum aliquot librarum ex∣pensis (aut plus eo) re∣demit, & Capellam egre∣giam, quam Deo divinis{que} officiis dicari supplex vo∣vet, in alterâ parte flu∣minis magnificè extruit. Spectato probato{que} Ca∣pellae hujus Jesu omni ad∣paratu, adest tandem Re∣verendissimus in Christo Pater, Honorandissimus Lancelotus, Episcopus Wintoniensis, Septembris
17o. Anno 1620. horâ ectavâ matutinâ aut cir∣citer; erat autem dies Dominicus: Episcopus Capellam statim ingressus induit se pontificalibus, quem secuti itidem (qui ipsi à sacris domesticis ad∣erant,) Matthaeus & Christopherus Wren, SS. Theol. Bacc. Saecer∣dotalibus induuntur; E∣gressus dein cum illis E∣piscopus, convenarum ma∣gnâ stipante catervâ, Fundatorem affari ordi∣tur in haec ferè verba. Captain Smith, you have been an often and earnest Suiter to me,
that I would come hi∣ther to you: now that we are come hither to you, what have you to say to us? Tum ille praefatâ hu∣millime Reverentiâ sche∣dulam porrigit, quam suo nomine recitari cupit per Willielm. Cole, qui Epi∣scopo à Registris erat: e∣am ille (ad nutum Epi∣scopi) clarâ voce sic per∣legit. IN the Name of Ri∣chard Smith of Peer∣tree in the County of Southampton Esq, Right Reverend Father in
God, I present unto you the state of the Village of Weston, and the Ham∣lets, Itchin, Wolston, Ridgeway, and the part of Bittern Mannor (be∣ing all of the Parish of S. Maries, neer Southam∣pton in the Diocess of Winton) as well in his own, as in the name of the Inhabitants of the said Village, Hamlets, &c. wherein are many Housholds, and much people of all sorts, who not only dwell far from the Church, but are al∣so divided from the same by the great Ri∣ver of Itchin, where the
passage is very broad, and often dangerous; and very many times on the dayes appointed for Common-Prayer, and that Service of God, so tempestuous, as the River cannot be pass'd; and so the peo∣ple go not over at all; or if any do, yet they both go and return back in great danger, and sometimes not the same day. Besides, in the fairest weather, at their return from Church, they press so thick into the Boat for haste home, that often it proves dangerous, and ever
fearful, especially to women with childe, old, impotent, sickly people, and to young children; many times also they are forc'd to baptize their Children in pri∣vate Houses, the water not being passable; and when they lye sick, they are without comfort to their souls, and dye without any Ghostly advice or counsel; their own Minister not being able to visit them, by reason of the roughness of the water, and other Ministers being some miles off remote from them.
And thus much for∣merly having been pre∣sented to your Prede∣cessor, he favourably gave leave to the said Richard Smith to erect a Chappel on the East-side of the said River, at the only proper Cost and Charges of him the said Richard Smith: which Chappel being now finish'd with intent and purpose that it may be dedicated to the wor∣ship of God; and that his Holy and Blessed Name might there be honour'd and call'd up∣on, by the said Richard Smith his Family, and
the Inhabitants afore∣said, who cannot with∣out great danger pass over unto their Parish Church, I, in the name of the said Richard Smith, and in the names of them all, do promise hereafter to refuse and renounce to put this Chappel, or any part of it, to any profane or common use whatso∣ever; and desire it may be dedicated and con∣secrated wholly and on∣ly to religious uses, for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of our Souls.
In which respect he humbly beseecheth God to accept of this his sin∣cere intent and purpose, and he and they are to∣gether humble Suiters unto your Lordship, as Gods Minister, the Bi∣shop and Ordinary of this Diocess, in Gods stead to accept of this his Free-will offering; and to decree this Chap∣pel to be severed from all common and pro∣fane uses, & so to sever it: as also by the Word of God and Prayer, and other Spiritual and Re∣ligious Duties to dedi∣cate and consecrate it
to the sacred Name of God, and to his Ser∣vice and Worship only; promising that we will ever hold it as an holy Place, even as Gods House, and use it ac∣cordingly; and that we will from time to time, and ever hereafter, as need shall be, see it con∣veniently repair'd, and decently furnisht in such sort as a Chappel ought to be; And that we will procure us some sufficient Clerk, being in the Holy Order of Priesthood by your Lordship, as Ordinary of that place, and by
your Successors to be allow'd and licenced, and unto him to yield competent Maintenance, to the end that he may take upon him the Cure of the said Chappel; and duely say divine Service in the same at times appointed, and perform all other such offices and duties, as by the Canons of that Church, and the Laws of the Realm every Curate is bound to per∣form. Post haec Episcopus. Captain Smith is this
the Desire of you and your Neighbours? Quo affirmato, Ille: In the Name of God let us begin. Orditur igitur â Psal∣mo 24o THe earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, &c. Alterni verò respon∣dent uterque Sacellanus; & sic deinceps ad finem Psalmi: dictâ autem , paulatim se promo∣vet Episcopus ad portam
Capellae, atque recitat è Psalmo 122o. I Was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the House of the Lord. Our feet shall stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem. Substitit itaque prae fo∣ribus universa multitudo intrante Episcopo et Fun∣datore, cum Sacellanis, qui genua statim flectunt, ubi spectari commodè au∣diríque possint a plebe: atque Episcopus infit. Let us dedicate and offer up unto God this
Place with the same prayer that King Da∣vid did dedicate and of∣fer up his: 1 Chron. 29.10. BLessed be thou O Lord our God, and the God of our Fathers for ever and ever, &c. usque ad finem vers. 18. paucis mutatis. Deinde MOst glorious God, the Heaven is thy Throne, and the Earth is thy Footstool; what house then can be built for thee, or what place is there that thou canst rest in? Howbeit we are
taught by thy Holy Word, that thy will is not to dwell in the dark Cloud, but that thy de∣light hath bin ever with the Sons of Men; so that in any place what∣soever, where two or three are gathered to∣gether in thy name, thou art in the midst of them; But specially in such places as are set apart and sanctified to thy name, and to the memory of it, there thou hast said, thou wilt vouchsafe thy gra∣cious Presence after a more special manner, & come to us and bless us.
Wherefore in all Ages of the world, thy Ser∣vants have separated certain places from all profane and common uses, and hallow'd unto thy Divine Worship and service, either by inspiration of thy bles∣sed Spirit, or by express Commandment from thine own mouth. By inspiration of thy holy Spirit. So didst thou put into the heart of thy Holy Patriarch Jacob to erect a stone in Bethel to be an house to thee, which act of hs thou didst call for, and highly allow of.
By expresse Com∣mandment from thine own mouth. So did Mo∣ses make thee the Ta∣bernacle of the Con∣gregation in the De∣sert, which thou didst honour by covering it with a Cloud, and fill∣ing it with thy Glory. And after, when it came into the heart of thy servant David to think it was in no wise fitting that himself should dwell in an house of Cedar, and the Ark of God remain but in a Tabernacle, thou didst testifie with thine own mouth, that in that Da∣vid
was so minded to build a House to thy Name, it was well done of him, to be so mind∣ed, though he built it not. The material Furni∣ture for which house though his Father plen∣tifully prepared, yet Solomon his Son built it and brought it to per∣fection. To which House thou wer't plea∣sed visibly to send fire from Heaven to con∣sume the Sacrifice, and to fill it with the Glory of thy presence before all the people. And after, when for
the sins of thy people that Temple was de∣stroyed, thou didst by thy Prophets, Aggai and Zachary (by shew∣ing how inconvenient it was that they should dwell in seeled houses, and let thy house lye waste) stir up the spi∣rit of Zorobabel, to build thee the second Tem∣ple anew: which second House likewise by the fulness of the Glory of thy presence, thou didst shew thy self to like and allow of. Neither only wer't thou well pleased with such as did build thee
these Temples, but e∣ven with such of the people afterwards, as being moved with Zeal added unto their Tem∣ple, their Mother Church, lesser places of prayer, by the names of Syna∣gogues, in every Town thorowout the Land; for the Tribes to ascend up to worship thee, to learn thy holy will and to do it. Which very Act of the Centurion, to build thy people a Synagogue, thou didst well approve and com∣mend in the Gospel. And by the bodily presence of thy Son our
Saviour at the feast of the Dedication, testified by S. John, didst really well allow of, and do honour to such devout Religious services, as we are now about to perform. Which also by thy holy Word hast taught us, that thine Apostles themselves, and the Christians in their time, as they had houses to eat and drink in; so had they also where the whole Congre∣gation of the Faith∣ful came together in one place, which they expresly called Gods
Church, and would not have it despised, nor a∣bused, nor eaten, nor drunken in, but had in great Reverence, being the very place of their holy Assemblies. By whose godly ex∣amples the Christians in all Ages successively have erected and con∣secrated sundry godly houses, for the Cele∣bration of Divine Ser∣vice and Worship (Mo∣numents of their Piety and Devotion) as our eyes see this day. We then as Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the Houshold of
God, being built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself be∣ing the head corner∣stone, walking in the steps of their most holy Faith, and ensuing the examples of these thy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles have toge∣ther with them done the same work (I say) in building and dedica∣ting this house, as an habitation for thee, and a place for us to assem∣ble and meet together for the observation of thy Divine Worship, in∣vocation of thy Name
reading, preaching and hearing thy most holy Word, administring thy most holy Sacraments; and above all in thy most holy place, the very gate of Heaven upon earth, as Jacob nam'd it, to do the work of Heaven; to set forth thy most worthy praise, to laud and magnify thy most glorious Maje∣sty, for all thy goodness to all men; especially to us of the Houshold of Faith. Accept there∣fore we beseech thee, most gracious Father, of this our bounden duty and service; ac∣cept
this for thine house; and because Ho∣liness becomes thine house for ever, sanctifie this house with thy gra∣cious presence, which is erected to the honour of thy most glorious Name. Now therefore, arise O Lord, and come into this place of thy rest, thou and the ark of thy strength; Let thine eye be open towards this House day and night; Let thine ears be ready towards the prayers of thy children, which they shall make unto thee in this place, and
let thine heart delight to dwell here perpetu∣ally: And whensoever thy servants shall make to thee their petitions in this House, either to be∣stow thy good graces, & blessings upon them, or to remove thy punish∣ments and judgements from them, hear them from Heaven thy dwel∣ling place, the Throne of the glory of thy Kingdom, and when thou hearest have mer∣cy; and grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that here and elsewhere thy Priests may be cloathed with Righteousnesse,
and thy Saints rejoyce in thy Salvation. And whereas both in the Old and New Te∣stament thou hast con∣secrated the measuring out and building of a material Church, to such an excellent My∣sterie, that in it is si∣gnified and represented the fruition of the joy of thy Heavenly king∣dome, we beseech thee that, in this material Temple made with hands, we may so serve and please thee in all holy Exercises of God∣liness and Christian Re∣ligion, that in the end
we may come to that thy Temple on high, even to the holy places made without hands, whose Builder and Ma∣ker is God; so as when we shall cease to pray to thee on Earth, we may with all those that have in the like manner erected such places to thy Name, and with all thy Saints eternally praise thee in the high∣est Heavens, for all thy goodness vouchsafed us for a time here on earth, and laid up for us there in thy King∣dom for ever and ever; and that for thy dear
Sons sake, our blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom, &c. Blessed Father, who hast promised in thy holy Law, that in every place where the remem∣brance of thy Name shall be put, thou wilt come unto us and bless us,; according to that thy promise come unto us and bless us, who put now upon this place the memorial of thy Name, by dedicating it wholly and only to thy Service and Worship. Blessed Saviour, who in the Gospel, with thy bodily presence, didst
honour and adorn the Feast of the dedication of the Temple; at this dedication of this Tem∣ple unto thee be pre∣sent also, and accept, Good Lord, and pro∣sper the work of our hands. Blessed Spirit, with∣out whom nothing is holy, no person or place is sanctified a∣right, send down upon this place thy sanctify∣ing power and grace, hallow it, and make it to thee an holy habita∣tion for ever. Blessed and glorious Trinity, by whose Pow∣er,
Wisdom and Love all things are purged, lightened, and made perfect; enable us with thy Power, enlighten us with thy Truth, per∣fect us with thy Grace, that both here and else∣where acknowledging the glory of thy eter∣nal Trinity, and in the Power of thy Divine Majesty worshipping the Unity, we may obtain to the fruition of the glorious Godhead, Tri∣nity in Unity, and Uni∣ty in Trinity to be ad∣ored for ever. God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost accept, sanctifie, and bless this place to the end where∣unto, according to his own Ordinance, we have ordain'd it, to be a Sanctuary to the most High, and a Church for the living God: The Lord with his favour ever mercifully behold it, and so send upon it his spiritual Benediction and Grace, that it may be the House of God to him and the Gate of Heaven to us. Amen. Haec precatus Episco∣pus Baptisterium adit, at∣que impositâ manu ait,
REgard, O Lord, the Supplications of thy Servants, and grant that those Children that shall be baptiz'd in this Laver of the New birth, may be sanctified and washed with the Holy Ghost; delivered from thy wrath, recei∣ved into the Ark of Christs Church, receive herein the fulness of Grace, and ever remain in the number of thy faithful and elect Chil∣dren. Suggestum dein: GRant that thy Ho∣ly Word, which
from this place shall be preach'd, may be the savour of life unto life, and as good seed take root and fructify in the hearts of all that shall hear it. quoque. GRant that by thy Holy Word, which from this place shall be read, the hearers may both perceive and know what things they ought to do, and also may have Grace and Power to fulfill the same.
Sacram etiam Mensam. GRant that all they that shall at any time partake at this Table the highest bles∣sing of all, thy Holy Communion, may be fulfill'd with thy Grace and Heavenly Benedi∣ction, and may to their great and endless Com∣fort obtain Remission of their sins and all other Benefits of thy Passion. Locum Nuptiarum. GRant that such per∣sons as shall be here
joyned together in the holy estate of Matrimo∣nie by the Covenant of God, may live together in holy Love unto their lives end. Ʋniversum deni{que} Pavi∣mentum. GRant to such bodies as shall be here in∣terr'd, that they with us, and we with them, may have our perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul in thine everlasting kingdom.
Tune flexis genibus ante sacram Mensam pergit porrò. GRANT that this place which is here dedicated to thee by our Office and Ministry, may also be hallowed by the sanctifying pow∣er of thy holy Spirit, and so for ever continue through thy Mercy, O blessed Lord God, who dost live and govern all things, world without end. Grant as this Chap∣pel is separated from all other common and
profane uses, and dedi∣cated to those that be sacred only, so may all those be that enter into it. Grant that all wan∣dring thoughts, all car∣nal and worldly imagi∣nations, may be farr from them; and all godly and spiritual co∣gitations may come in their place, and may be daily renew'd and grow in them. Grant that those thy servants that shall come into this thy holy Tem∣ple, may themselves be made the Temples of the Holy Ghost, eschew∣ing
all things contrary to their profession, and following all such things as are agreeable to the same. When they pray, that their prayers may a∣scend up into Heaven into thy presence, as the Incense; and the lifting up of their hands be as the morning sacri∣fice; purifie their hearts, and grant them their hearts desire, sanctifie their spirits, and fulfill all their mindes, that what they faithfully ask, they may effectu∣ally obtain the same. When they offer, that
their Oblation and Alms may come up as a Memorial before thee, and they finde and feel that with such Sacrifices thou art well-pleased. When they sing, that their souls may be satis∣fied as with marrow, and fatness, when their mouth praiseth thee with joyful lips. When they hear, that they hear not as the word of man, but as in∣deed it is the Word of God, and not be idle Hearers, but Doers of the same. Populus interea tacitè
ingressus in imis substitit, dum haec in Cancellis a∣gerentur; quibus finitis, sedes quisque suas jussi ca∣pessunt, atque ad solen∣nem Liturgiam Sacellani se parant. Alter Sacellanorum co∣ram sacrâ mensâ vene∣rans sic incipit. IF we say, we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth, &c. Confessionem, Absolu∣tionem, Dominic.  recitant, &c. Psalmos ca∣nunt pro tempore accom∣modos, Ps. 84.122. & 132. alternis respondente popu∣lo quibus facultas erat &
libri: Lectio prima defi∣nitur ex 28. Genes. à ver. primo ad finem. Hymn. Te Deum, &c. Lectio se∣cunda ex secundo capite S. Joh. à versu 13. ad fi∣nem. Hymn. Psal. 100. I Believe in God, &c. & post usitatas Colle∣ctas hanc specialem addi∣dit Episcopus. O Lord God, mighty and glorious, and of incomprehensible Majesty, thou fillest Heaven and earth with the Glory of thy pre∣sence, and canst not be contain'd within any the
largest compass, much less within the narrow walls of this Roome; yet forasmuch as thou hast been pleased to command in thy holy Law, that we should put the Remembrance of thy Name upon places, and in every such place thou wilt come to us and bless us; we are here now assembled to put thy name upon this place, and the Memori∣al of it, to make it thy house, to devote and dedicate it for ever un∣to thee, utterly separa∣ting it from all world∣ly uses, and wholly and
only consecrate it to the invocation of thy glorious Name, where∣in supplications and in∣tercessions may be made for all men; thy sacred Word may be read, preached and heard; the Holy Sacraments, (the Laver of Regene∣ration, and the Com∣memoration of the pretious death of thy dear Son) may be ad∣ministred; thy Praise celebrated and sounded forth, thy people bles∣sed by putting thy Name upon them; we (poor and miserable creatures as we are) be
altogether unfit, and utterly unworthy to appoint any earthly thing to so great a God; And I the least of all thy servants, no wayes meet to appear before thee in so honourable a service, yet being thou hast oft heretofore been pleased to accept such poor of∣ferings from sinful men, most humbly we be∣seech thee, forgiving our manifold sins, and making us worthy by counting us so, to vouchsafe to be present here among us in this religious action, and what we sincerely offer
graciously to accept at our hands, to receive the prayers of us and all others, who either now or hereafter entring in∣to this place, by us hal∣lowed, shall call upon thee; And give us all grace when we shall come into the house of God, we may look to our feet, knowing that the place we stand on is holy ground, bringing hither clean thoughts, & undefiled bodies, that we may wash both our hearts and hands in in∣nocency, and so compass thine Altar.
Jam alter Sacellanus denuò exiens, & venerans ante sacram Mensam, in∣cipit Litaniam; in fine eujus recitavit hoc ipse Episcepus. O Lord God, who dwellest not in Temples made with hands (as saith the Pro∣phet) yet hast ever vouchsafed to accept the devout endeavours of thy poor servants allotting special places for thy Divine Worship, promising, even there, to hear and grant their requests; I humbly be∣seech thee to accept of
this days duty and ser∣vice of dedicating this Chappel to thy great and glorious Name; Fulfill, O Lord, I pray thee thy gracious pro∣mises, that whatsoever prayer in this sacred place shall be made ac∣cording to thy will, may be accepted by thy gra∣cious favour, and retur∣ned with their desir'd success to thy glory and our Comfort. Amen. Post benedictionem po∣puli cantatur Psalm. 132. conscenditque suggestum M. Robinson, Theol. Bac. Fundatoris sum mo roga∣tu;
Episcopus hoc ei tan∣dem concessit; (geminas sorores ille atque Funda∣tor in uxores duxerant, sed utrâque defunctâ jane tertiis gaudebat thalamis Concionator.) Thema ejus desumptum è 28. Cap. Gen. vers. 16, 17. inter coetera doctè egit de omnipraesentiâ Divinâ, ubivi Locorum tum speciatim (pro bene∣placito suo) in Ecclesia, deque reverentiâ & ve∣neratione ibi debitâ. Pergitur in Liturgiâ, quâ Mulier quaedam pau∣percula purificanda ad limen Cancellorum acce∣dens, genua flectit, grati∣ásque
post partum (solenni Ecclesiae ritu) agit: Baptizandus au∣tem vel Matrimonio jun∣gendus, nullus aderat. Itur dein ad Coenae Do∣minicae administratio∣nem, Sacellanorum altero ad Australem, altero ad Septentrionalem partem sacrae mensae genn flectente & dicente; OUr Father, &c. Ante Epistolae lectio∣nem hanc specialem Col∣lectam (unà cum Collectâ solitâ pro Rege) recitat Sacellanorum alter.
MOst blessed Savi∣our, who by thy bodily presence at the Feast of Dedication didst honour and ap∣prove such devout and religious services, as we have now in hand, be thou present also at this time with us, and con∣secrate us into an Holy Temple unto thy self, that thou dwelling in our hearts by Faith, we may be cleansed from all carnal affections, and devoutly given to serve thee in all good works. Amen. Epistolam secundus Sa∣cellanus
ante Sacram Mensam stans, legit ex 1 Cor. cap. 3. à vers. 16. ad fluem: SS. Evange∣lium prior Sacellanus ibi∣dem stans recitat ex 100. cap. S. Johannis, à vers. 22. ad finem: Dein Sym∣bolum Nioenum, omnibus etiam stantibus. Post illa Episcopus sede suâ egressus, coram sacrâ mensâ sese provoluit at{que} ait. Let us pray the pray∣er of King Solomon, wch he prayed in the day of the Dedication of his Temple; the first Tem∣ple that ever was, 2 Chron. 6. ab initio vers.
18. ad versum 42. quo finito ait, THus prayed King Solomon, and the Lord appeared unto him, and answered and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place for my self, to be an house of Sacrifice, 2 Chron. 7.12. Thus did God an∣swer; We have prayed with Solomon, answer us, O Lord, and our prayer, as thou didst him and his. Behold the face of thine Anointed, even Christ our Savi∣our,
and for his sake grant our requests. Dein in Cathedram ibidemse collocat, (assi∣dentibus Thoma Ridley Cancellario Episcopi à dextris, à sinistris vero Doctore Barlo Archidia∣cono Winton.) Actum∣que Consecrationis (pileo tectus) promulgat in hanc formam. IN nomine Domini Amen. Cum strenuus vir Richardus Smith de Peertree in Comitatu Southampt. Armiger, pia & Religiosa Devo∣tione
ductus, Capellam hanc in quodam solo vasto vocato Ridgway-heath, juxta aedes suas commu∣niter nuncupatas Peer∣tree (infra Parodhiam Ecclesiae paroch. Beatae Mariae juxta villam Southampt. Dioceseos & jurisdectionis nostrae, continentem intra muros ejusdem in longitudine ab Oriente ad Occiden∣tem 50 pedes & dimid. aut circiter; in latitu dine vero ab Aquilone ad Austrum 20 pedes & dimid. aut circiter, pro∣priis
sais sumptibus ae∣dificaverit, erexerit, & construxerit; eandem∣que Capellam Cancellis ligneis distinxerit; sa∣cra Mensa decenter in∣structa, Baptisterio, Pul∣pito, sedibus convenien∣tibus, tam infra super solum, quam supra in mo∣dum Galeriae, Campana etiam alliisque necessariis ad divinum cultum suffi∣cienter & decenter or∣naverit; nobisque sup∣plicaverit, tam suo no∣mine quam aliorum inha∣bitantium in villa de
Weston, ac Hamlettis de Itchin, Ridgway, ac quorundam etiam inhabi∣tantium in Manerio no∣stro de Bitterne, de Pa∣rochia praedicta, quatenus nos authoritate nostra or∣dinaria & Episcopali pro nobis & successori∣bus nostris dictam Ca∣pellam ab usibus pristinis communibus & profanis quibuscunque separare, & in usus sacros & di∣vinos consecrare, & de∣dicare dignaremur. Nos Lancelotus per∣missione divina Win∣ton.
Episcopus, pio & re∣ligioso tam ipsius quam aliorum in villa et Ham∣lettis praedictis habitan∣tium desiderio, in hac parte favorabiliter annu∣entes, ad Consecrationem Capellae hujus de novo propriis sumptibus dicti strenui viri Richardi Smith, sic ut praefertur erectae et ornatae authori∣tate nostra ordinaria et Episcopali procedentes, eandem Capellam ab om∣ni communi et profano usu in perpetuum separa∣mus, et soli divino cul∣tui
ac divinorum cele∣brationi in perpetuum addicimus, dicamus, de∣dicamus: Ac insuper eadem authoritate nostra ordinaria et Episco∣pali, pro nobis et Succes∣soribus nostris licentiam pariter et facultatem in Domino concedimus, ad rem divinam ibidem fa∣ciendam, nempe Preces publicas, et sacram Ec∣clesiae Litwrgiam reci∣tandam, ad Verbum Dei sincere proponendum et praedicandum, Sacramen∣ta Sacrae Eucharistiae et
Baptismatis in eadem ministranda, Matrimo∣nia solemnizanda, Mu∣lieres post puerperium ad gratiarum actionem pub∣licam recipiendas et ad∣juvandas, Mortuos sepe∣liendos, caeteraque quae∣canque peragenda, quae in aliis Capellis licite fie∣ri possunt et solent. Ac tam Presbytero in Capel∣la praedicta deservituro preces divinas dicendi, coeteraque praemissa faci∣endi, quam Domino Ric. Smith, et Familiae ejus, reliquisque in dictis locis
habitantibus, preces di∣vinas audiendi, coetera∣que praemissa percipiendi, plenam in Domino po∣testatem concedimus. E∣andemque Capellam ad levamen (Anglice, a Chappel of Ease) sub dicta Ecclesia parochiali B. Mariae juxta villam Southamp. tanquam Ma∣trice Ecclesia sua, quantum in nobis est, et de jure divino, Canonibus Ecclesiae et Statutis hujus Regni Angliae possumus, in honorem Dei et sacros inhabitantium usus, nunc
et in futurum consecra∣mus, per nomen Capellae JESU in Parochia sanctae Mariae juxta villam Southampt. et sic con∣secratam fuisse, et esse, et in futuris perpetuis tem∣poribus remanere debere, palam et publice pronun∣clamus, decernimus, et declaramus; et per no∣men Capellae JESU no∣minamus et appellamus; et sic perpetuis futuris temporibus nominandam et appellandam fore de∣cernimus: Privilegiis insuper omnibus et singu∣lis
in capte usitatis, et Ca∣pellis ab antiquo funda∣tis competentibus, Capel∣lam hanc JESU praedi∣ctam; ad omnem juris effectum munitam muni∣tam et stabilitam esse vo∣lumus; et quantum in no∣bis est, et de jure divino possumus, fic munimus et stabilimus per praesentes; Absque praejudicio ta∣men ullo, et salvo semper jure et interesse Ecclesiae Parochialis sanctae Ma∣riae juxta villam South∣ampton. tanquam Ma∣tricis Ecclesiae; et Recto∣ris,
Guardianorum, alio∣rumque Ministrorum e∣jusdem pro tempore ex∣istentium (in cujus Pa∣rochiu dicta Capella JE∣SU notorie sita & situata est) in omnibus & sin∣gulis decimis, oblationi∣bus, obventionibus, va∣diis, feudis, proficuis, privilegiis, juribus et emolumentis quibuscun{que} ordinariis et extraordi∣nariis eisdem respective debitis vel consuetis, ac infra praecinctum seu li∣mites Capellae JESU prae∣dictae orientibus et prove∣nientibus,
et ad dictam Ecclesiam Matricem sanctae Mariae, Rectori, Guardianis vel aliis Mi∣nistris ejusdem de jure vel consuetudine quoquo modo spectantibus, vel pertinentibus; in tam amplis modo et forma, prout eisdem debebantur, aut solvi solebant, ante hanc nostram consecrati∣onem hujus Capellae prae∣dictae. Proviso, quod praedi∣ctus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, ac ejus haeredes et Assignati, aliique in
dicta villa et Hamlet∣tis, &c. habitantes, non solum dictam Capellam quoties opus fuerit, im∣pensis suis propriis refi∣cere et reparare, sed eti∣am ad reparationes prae∣dictae Matricis Ecclesiae sanctae Mariae juxta vil∣lam Southampon. et Coemeterii ejusdem Ec∣clesiae, ac adomnia alia onera, ad quae coeteri Pa∣rochiani dictae Matricis Ecclefiae teneantur. Proviso etiam, quod tam dictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, haeredes et
assiguati ejus, quam reli∣qui omnes in dictis villis et Hamlettis, &c. habi∣tantes, in signum subje∣ctionis Capellae hujus sub Ecclesiae Matrice Beatae Mariae juxta Southamp. ac senioritatis ejusdem Ecclesiae supra dictam Capellam, singulis annis de tempore ad tempus ad Festum Paschatis, vel ad Festum Pentecostes, ad dictam Ecclesiam Matri∣cem venire, et in dicta Matrice Ecclesia tantum, non in dicta Capella, (si tuto ad Ecclesiam Parc∣chialem
venire possint) Preces audire, et Sacra∣mentum Eucharistiae ibi∣dem percipere; vel si tempestate aut alio impe∣dimento detineantur, quo minus tunc venire possint, tum die Dominico, quo tuto venire possunt, sub∣sequente, venire et Eu∣charistiam accipere om∣nino teneantur, absque speciali Licentia nostra, sen Vicarii nostri gene∣ralis in hac parte ob∣tenta. Proviso etiam quod in dicta Capella Sacramen∣tum
Baptismatis non mi∣nistretur, nec Matrimo∣nia solemnizentur, neque Verbum Dei praedicetur, neque Saecramenta vel Sacramentalia aliquibus profanis conferantur, praeterquam solis inhabi∣tantibus seu degentibus in villa, Hamlettis, &c. praedict. nec etiam reli∣quis dictae Matricis Ec∣clesiae Parochianis in Oc∣cidentali parte ripae in∣habitantibus, inscio vel invito Rectore Ecclesiae Matricis sanctae Mariae juxta villam Southamp.
praedict. seu absque as∣sensu, consensu et licentia ejusdem prius habita et obtenta. Et ulterius dicto stre∣nuo Richardo Smith, Haeredibus et Assignatis suis, liberam et plenam potestatem in Domino concedimus per praesen∣tes, idoneum Presbyterum de tempore in tempus no∣minandi ad deservien∣dum, et divina officia in dicta Capella exequenda, a Nobis et Successoribus nostris de tempore in tempus approbandum, et
licentiandum: Ac quo∣dictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, haeredes & assi∣gnati sui, & reliqui in dictis villa & Hamlet∣tis, &c. inhabitantes de tempore in tempus in fu∣turum propriis suis sum∣ptibus dictum Presbyterum sive Curatum in eadem Capella deserviemem, & authoritate nostra, vei successorum nostrorum ut praefertur approbatum & licentiatum, alent & sustinebunt, ac annuale stipendium viginti mar∣carum ad minimum ei∣eidem
Presbytero vel Curato praestabunt, & solvent ad quatuor Festa; Nativitatis Christi; An∣nuntiationas; Nativita∣tis sancti Johannis Ba∣ptistae; & sancti Mi∣chaelis, per aequales por∣tiones, sine ulla tamen di∣minutione, vel defalca∣tione juris Ecclesiastici, decimarum, oblationum, vel obventionum qua∣rumcunque ad dictam Ecclesiam Parochialem sanctae Mariae, seu ad Rectorem ejus pro tem∣pore existentem, quo modo
de jure vel consuetudine spectantium seu pertinen∣tium. Et ulterius quod pro sepulturis in Capello prae∣dicta, et in Choro seu na∣vi ejusdem, omnibusque aliis in dicta Capella vel extra gerendis, vadia, quoad defunctos tam in domo dicti strenui viri Rich. Smith, Haeredum & Assignatorum suorune, quam in dicta villae, Hamlettis, &c. Rectori dictae Ecclesiae Matricis pro tempore existenti, et successoribus suis, et
Guardianis respective, et Clerico, caeterisque Mi∣nistris dictae Ecclesiae Parochialis debite sol∣vantur, in tam amplis modo et forma, prout pro sepalturis in Choro seu intra Cancellos, seu etiam in navi dictae Ecclesiae Matricis, solvi consue∣tum fuit, et prout solvi solet et deberet, si perso∣nae praedictae intra Can∣cellos seu navim dictae Matricis Ecclesiae sepul∣tae fuissent. Quod si autem ali∣quando defuerit in dicta
Capella Presbyter, Cu∣ratus legitime per nos aut successores nostros licen∣tiatus et approbatus, tune praedictus strenuus vir Rich. Smith, Haeredes et assignati sui ac reliqui in dicta villa, et Ham∣lettis, &c. inhabitantes, ad Matricem Ecclesiam convenire, aut ibidem precibus interesse tenean∣tur, prout ante solebant, donec dicta Capella de legitimo Curato, ad ibi∣dem divina celebrandae idonee provideatur et i∣dem admittatur. Quod si
autem aliquo tempore in posterum, quod Deus a∣vertat, per continuos sex menses per culpam aut negligentiam Parochia∣norum defuerit idoneus Curatus in dicta Capella, qui ibidem divina cele∣bret, aut si Curatus sit qui per sex menses con∣tinuos non celebret, tunc nobis et successoribus no∣stris potestatem reserva∣mus pro ea vice tantum, idoneum Curatum, ad dictam Capellam nomi∣nandi, ad supplendam negligentiam dictorum
Rich. Smith, Haeredum & Assignatorum suorum. Quod si autem dicta Ca∣pella decenter non fuerit reparata vel instructa Li∣bris, aliisque ad cultum divinum necessariis per tempus praedictum (nisi ex legitima in ea parte causa per Episcopum ap∣probanda hoc contigerit) tunc in perpetuum post di∣ctos sex Menses continu∣os sic elapsos, teneantur omnes infra praecinctum, seu limites dictae Capellae inhabitantes ad Matri∣cem Ecclesiam convenire,
pro divinis, audiendis, prout ante hanc nostram consecrationem teneban∣tur; aliqua in hac conces∣sione seu consecratione nostra in contrarium non obstante, ac perinde ac si haec concessio seu conse∣cratio facta nunquam fu∣isset. Postremo reservamus nobis & successoribus no∣stris, Episcopis Winton. potestatem visitandi di∣ctam Capellam, prout a∣lias Capellas infra no∣stram Diocesin situatas, communiter nuncupatas
peculiares, ut nobis eis∣que constet, an decenter in reparationibus aliisque conservetur, & an omnia ibidem decenter & se∣cundum ordinem fiant. Quae omnia et singula sic reservamus; quoad coe∣tera vero praemiss a quate∣nus in nobis est, et de jure possumus, pro nobis et successoribus nostris de∣cernimus et stabilimus per praesentes. Actu demum recitato veneratur denuò, atque infit.
BLessed be thy name O Lord God, for that it pleased thee to have thy Habitation a∣mong the Sons of Men: and to dwell in the midst of the Assembly of thy Saints upon earth; Bless we beseech thee this days action unto thy people, prosper thou the work of our hands unto us, yea prosper thou our handy work. Finitis precationibus istis Dominus Episcopus sedem separatim ca∣pessit (ubi priús) popu∣lúsque universus non com∣municaturus
dimittitur, & Porta clauditur; Pri∣or Sacellanus pergit le∣gendo sèntentias illas hor∣tatorias ad Eleemosynas, interea dum alter Sacel∣lanus singulos Communi∣caturos adit, atque in pa∣tinam argenteam oblatio∣nes colligit: Collecta est summa 4. l. 12. s. 2. d. quam Dominus Episcopus convertendam in Calicem huic Capellae donandum decernit. Caeteris rebus ordine gestis, demum Episcopus ad sacram Mensam redit (Sacellanis utrisque ali∣quantulum recedentibus) lotisque manibus, pane
fracto, vino in Calicem effuso, & aquâ admistâ, stans ait, ALmighty God our Heavenly Fa∣ther, &c. Eucharistiam ipse primo loco accipit, sub utrâque specie: proximo loco tradit Fundatori (quem jam co∣ram sacrâ Mensâ in genua supplicem collocarant) dè∣in utrique Sacellano. Ad coeteros verò pergentem E∣piscopum atque panem iis tradentem, prior Sacella∣nus subsequitur & Cali∣cem ordine porrigit. Cum vinum, quod prius effude∣rat, non sufficeret, Episco∣pus
de novo in Calicem ex poculo, quod in sacrâ Mensâ stabat effundit, admistâque aquâ, recitat clarè verba illa consecra∣toria. Finitâ tandem exhi∣bitione Dominus Episco∣pus ad Sacrae Mensae Se∣ptentrionem in genibus, recitante quoque populo, ait, OUr Father, &c. O Lord our Heavenly Father, &c. GLory be to God on high, &c.
Concludit denique cum hac precatione. BLessed be thy name O Lord, that it hath pleased thee to put into the heart of this thy servant to erect an house to thy worship and service, by whose pains, Care & Cost, this work was begun and finish'd. Bless (O Lord) his substance and ac∣cept the work of his hands: Remember him O our God concerning this, wipe not out this kindnes of his that he hath shew'd for the house of his God; and
the offices thereof, and make them truly thank∣ful to thee, that shall en∣joy the Benefit thereof, and the ease of it; and what is by him well in∣tended, make them rightly to use it, which well be the best fruit and to God most acceptable. Post haec vota populum stans dimittit cum Bene∣dictione hac. THe peace of God which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and Minds in the Knowledg and Love of God, and of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and the Blessing of God Almighty, the Fa∣ther, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst you, and remain with you alwayes. Amen.
Consecratio COEMETERII. STatim à prandio (quod in aedibus suis vicinis Fun∣dator Capellae satìs lautè apparârat Domino Epi∣scopo, atque convenarum magnae frequentiae) ad rem divinam reversis, alter Sacellanorum praeit. OUr Father, &c.
Post Responsas, Psalmus 90 recitatur alternis. Post Psalmum Episco∣pus cum universâ multi∣tudine egreditur Capellâ, atque ad Orientalem Coe∣meterii partem stans, de∣nuò sciscitatur. Captain Smith, for what have you called us hither again? Ille schedulam, ut priùs humillimè porrigit, quam praefatus a Registris reci∣tat in haec verba. IN the name of Rich∣ard Smith of Peertree in the County of Sou∣thamton
Esquire, R. Reverend Father in God, I present unto you the state of the Village of Weston. &c. ut priùs, usque ad, the River can∣not be passed, whereby it often commeth to pass that they have bin con∣strain'd to bury their dead in the open fields, the water not being passable, or if they durst venture over, yet the dead Body was follow'd with so little Company, as was no way seemly. And thus much for∣merly having bin pre∣sented to your Prede∣cessour,
the R. R. F. in God, James late Bi∣shop of Winton; and Petition to him made to give and to grant leave unto the said Ri∣chard Smith, to enclose a piece of ground for a burial place on the East side of the said River, he favourably gave licence and grant∣ed power unto the said Richard Smith so to do, as may appear by an instrument under his Episcopal Seal, bearing date the 23. of February in the year of our Lord God according to the Computation of
the Church of England 1617. Which place of Bu∣rial being now en∣clos'd with a decent Rail of Timber, at the only proper cost and charges of him the said Richard Smith, with intent and pur∣pose that it might be dedicated and conse∣crated only & wholly for Christian burial, for him the said Richard Smith, and his Family, and the said inhabi∣tants, and none other. In which respect I be∣seech God to accept of this sincere intent and
purpose, and both he and they are together humble Suiters to your Lordship, as Gods Mi∣nister, the Bishop and Ordinary of this Dio∣cess, in Gods stead to accept this his free-will offering, and to decree this ground severed from all former com∣mon and profane uses, and to sever it, as by the Word of God and prayer, and other spe∣cial Religious duties to dedicate and conse∣crate it to be a Coeme∣terie or place of Chri∣stian burial, as afore∣said; wherein their
bodies may be laid up until the day of the general Resurrection; promising that they will ever so hold it for holy ground, and use it accordingly, apply∣ing it to no other use, but that only; and that they will from time to time, and ever hereaf∣ter, as need shall be, see it conveniently re∣pair'd and fenced in such sort as a Coemete∣ry or burying place ought to be. Hoc ipsum verò (ab Episcopo paucis interroga∣ti) vivâ voce confirmant
Fundator, & qui è vici∣niâ Lectio prima desumitur è 23. Gen. Secunda Le∣ctio destinabatur è pri∣mâ Epist. ad Cor. cap. 15. à vers. 15. ad finem, propter angustias temporis omissâ. Tum Dominus Episco∣pus in genua ibi submissus precatur. O Lord God thou hast been pleased to teach us in thy holy Word, as to put a diffe∣rence between the soul of a Beast, and the spirit
of a Man; for the soul of a Beast goes down to to the earth from whence it came, and the spirit of man returneth unto God that gave it; so to make diverse ac∣compts of the Bodies of Mankind and the Bodies of other living Crea∣tures; in so much as the Body of Adam was re∣solved on, and was af∣terwards the workman∣ship of thine own hands, and endued with a soul from thine own breath: But much more since the second Adam, thy blessed Son, by taking upon him our nature, ex∣alted
this flesh of ours to be flesh of his flesh, whose flesh thou sufferedst not to see Corruption; so that the Body returns to the earth, and the soul to him that gave it. It shall from thence return again, it is but a rest, and a rest in hope (as saith the Psalmist) for it is a righteous thing with God that the Body which was partaker with the soul both in doing and suffering, should be rais'd again from the Earth to be partaker al∣so with the soul of the reward, or punishment which God in Mercy or
Iustice shall reward, not to one of them alone, but jointly to them both. There being then so great difference, it is not thy will, ô Lord, that our Bodies should be cast out as the Bodies of Beasts to become dung for the earth, or our bones lye scatter'd abroad to the sight of the sun; But when thy servants are gathered to their Fa∣thers, their Bodies should be decently and seemly laid up in the bo∣som of the Earth from whence they were taken. Neither is it thy plea∣sure, ô Lord, that they
should be buryed as an Asse in the open fields but in a place chosen and set apart for that purpose. For even so from the Begining we find that the holy Patriarchs Abraham (the Father of the faithfull) would not bury his dead in the common fields; nay nor amongst the Bodys of the Hethites who were heathen men, but pur∣chased a buriall-place for himself in the plain of Mamre which became as it were the Church-Yard of the Patriarchs, therein they laid the
dead bodies of Sarah his Wife, of himself, his son Isaac, and Rebeccae his wife; after them Ja∣cob and Leah were buri∣ed there. After this manner did the Patriarchs in old time, who trusted in God, sever themselves places for Burial: whose children we are so long as we do their works, and walk in the steps of their most holy Faith. Ensuing then the steps of the Faith of our Father Abraham, we for the same purpose have made choice of the very same place, wherein we
now are; that it may be as the Cave of Mam∣re, even Gods store∣house for the bodies of such our Brethren and Sisters to be laid up in, as he shall ordein there to be interr'd; there to rest in the sleep of peace till the last Trump shall awake them; for they shall awake and rise up that sleep in the dust; for thy dew shall be as the dew of hearbs, and the earth shall yield forth her dead. We beseech thee good Lord to accept this work of ours in shewing mer∣cy to the dead; and
mercifully grant, that they whose bodies shall be here bestowed, and we all, may never for∣get the day of putting off the Tabernacle of this flesh, but that living we may think upon death, and dying we may apprehend life; and rising from the death of Sin to the life of Righ∣teousness, which is the first rising of Grace, we may have our parts in the second, which is the rising to glory by thy Mercy, O most gracious Lord God, who doest live and govern all things, world without end.
Priorem dein formu∣lam per omnia secutus, in Cathedram ibi se collocat, atque Actum consecratio∣nis promulgat. IN DEI Nomine. Amen. Nos Lance∣lotus permissione divina Winton. Episcopus hunc locum jacentem in vasto solo vulgo nuncupatum Ridgway-heath, infra Parochiam Ecclesiae paro∣chialis sanctae Mariae, &c. & jam propriis sumpti∣bus strenui viri Richardi Smith de Peertree Ar∣migeri in circuitu Ca∣pellae
noviter ab co quoque propriis sumptibus suis constitutae, palis inclusum & arboribus consitum; continentem in longitu∣dine 148 pedes, aut cir∣citer, in latitudine 124 pedes, aut circiter, in to∣to vero circuitu 435 pe∣des aut circiter; a pristi∣nis, aliisque quibuscunque communibus usibus & profanis in usus sacros se∣parandum fore decerni∣mus, & sic separamus; ac cundem inhabitantibus vel degentibus in familia Ric. Smith, in villa de
Weston, Hamletti de Itchin, Wolston, Ridg∣way, & in parte Mane∣rii de Bitterne, quae est de Parochia sanctae Ma∣riae juxta Southampton. in Coemeterium sive lo∣cum Sepulturae pro corpo∣ribus inibi decedentium Christiano ritu humandis, quantum in nobis est, ac de jure & Canonibus Ec∣clesiastic is, ac de statutis hujus Regni Angliae pos∣sumus authoritate nostra ordinaria & Episcopali assignamus: ac per no∣men Coemeterii Capellae
JESU designamus, dedi∣camus, & in usum prae∣dictum consecramus: ac sic assignatum, dedicatum, & consecratum fuisse & esse & in futurum, per∣petuis temporibus rema∣nere debere palam ac publice declaramus; Ac Coemeterium Capellae JE∣SU deinceps in perpetuum nuncupandum decerni∣mus: Privilegiis insuper omnibus et singulis Coe∣meteriis et locis sepulturae ab antiquo consecratis et dedicatis competent. Coe∣meterium praedictm sive
locum sepulturae ad om∣nem juris effectum muni∣tum esse volumus, et quan∣tum in nobis est et de jure possumus, sic munimus et stabilimus per praesentes. Proviso tamen, quod praedict. Richardus, Hae∣redes et Assignati sui, ac reliqui in dicta villa, Hamlettis, etc. inhabitan∣tes, propriis suis sumpti∣bus dictum Coemeterium de tempore in tempus, in decenti stau conserva∣bunt, et clausuras ejus quoties opus fuerit suffici∣enter et convenienter re∣parabunt.
Salvis etiam et omnino reservatis Rectori Ecclesiae Parochialis san∣ctae Mariae praedictae, ac Guardianis aliisque Mi∣nistris dictae Ecclesiae pro¦tempore existentibus in perpetuum, omnibus et singulis oblationibus, mor∣tuariis, Feudis et vadiis, pro omnibus et singulis se∣pulturis Mortuorum in hoc Coemeterio; aut ratio∣ne eorundem de jure, sive consuetudine debitis, et in tam amplis modo et for∣ma, ac si personae praedictae sepultae fuissent in Coeme∣terio
Matricis Ecclesiae praedictae. Quas quidem oblationes et mortuaria, feuda et vadia omnia et singula sic de jure ac con∣suetudine debita Rectori, Guardianis et Ministris dictae Matricis Ecclesiae pro tempore existentibus in perpetuum solvendi, quantum in nobis est, et jura patiuntur, reserva∣mus per praesentes: salva item nobis et successoribus nostris, tanquam loci Or∣dinariis, potestate visi∣tandi dictum Coemeterium de tempore in tempus, et
inquirendi an sufficienter reparatum fuerit in clau∣suris; et an omniae ibi decenter et secundum or∣dinem fiant; et, si minus fiant, per censur as Eccle∣siastic as corrigendi. His finitis precatur denuò. LOrd God of Abra∣ham, Isaac and Ja∣cob, who because thou art the God, not of the dead, but of the Living, shewest hereby that they are living and not dead, and that with thee do live the spirits of all
them that dye in the Lord, and in whom the Souls of them that are Elect, after they be de∣livered from the burden of this flesh, be in joy and felicity; Thou hast said thou wilt turn men into small dust, and after that wilt say, Return again you Children of men: Thou art the God of Truth, and hast said it; thou art the God of power and might, and wilt do it; by that pow∣er whereby thou art a∣ble to subdue all things unto thy self, and bring to pass whatsoever plea∣seth thee in Heaven and
Earth, with whom no∣thing is impossible. Lord Jesu Christ, who art the Resurrection and the Life, in whom if we believe, though we be dead yet shall we live; who by thy death hast overcome death, and by thy rsing again hast opened to us the Gate of everlasting life, who shalt send thine Angels and gather the bodies of thine Elect from all the Ends of the Earth, and especially those who by a mysti∣cal union are flesh of thy flesh, and in whose hearts thou hast dwelt
by Faith; We humbly beseech thee for them, whose bodies shall in this place be gathered to their Fathers, that they may rest in this hope of Resurrection to eternal life through thee, O blessed Lord God, who shalt change their vile bodies, that they may be like thy Glorious bo∣dy according to the mighty working where∣by thou art able to bring all things, even death and all into sub∣jection to thy self. Holy and blessed Spi∣rit, the Lord and giver of life, whose Temples
the bodies of thy Ser∣vants are, by thy sancti∣fying Grace dwelling in them; we verily trust that their bodies that have been thy Temples, and those hearts in which Christ hath dwelt by Faith, shall not ever dwell in corruption, but that as by thy sending forth thy Breath at first we received our being, Motion, and Life in the beginning of the Crea∣tion, so at the last by the same Spirit sending forth the same breath in the end of the Con∣summation, Life, Being and Moving shall be re∣stored
us again; so that after our dissolution, as thou didst shew thy ho∣ly Prophet, the dry bones shall come toge∣ther again, Bone to his Bone, and Sinews and Flesh shall come upon them, and thou shalt cause thy Breath to en∣ter into them, and we shall live; and this Cor∣ruption shall put on In∣corruption, and this Mortal shall put on Im∣mortality. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, accept, san∣ctify and bless this place to that end whereunto
according to thine own Ordinance we have or∣dain'd it, even to bestow the Bodies of thy Ser∣vants in, till, the number of thine Elect being ac∣complished, they with us, and we with them, and with all other de∣parted in the true Faith of thy Holy Name, shall have our consummation and Bliss both in Body and Soul in thy eternal and everlasting glory. Blessed Saviour, that didst for this end dye and rise again, that thou mightest be Lord both of the Living and the Dead, whether we live
or die thou art our Lord, and we are thine; living or dying we com∣mend our selves unto thee, have mercy upon us, and keep us thine for evermore. Reintrantes igitur Ca∣pellam cantant priorem partem Psal. 16. Con∣scendit Suggestum Ma∣gister Matthaeus Wren; Thema ei posterior pars vers. 17. cap. 2. S. Joan. Zelus domus tuae, &c. Agit de affectibus in Chri∣sto, Zelo inter coereros; nec illo falso, sed pro Deo; nec coeco, sed secundùm scientiam, pro Domo, pro
Cultu Dei; de praesentiâ Dei, praecipuè in Templis; magno non Morum solum∣modò nostrorum, sed spei quoque et Fidei incremen∣to fulcimentoque: Denm Locorum distinctione gau∣dere confirmat, tum exem∣plo mirifico Jacobi tan∣toperè distinguentis Be∣thel; tum maximo omnium miraculo, quo Christus Mercatores è Templo eje∣cit. Enarratis Christi per hoc factum devotionibus concludit in debitam à nobis Templorum reve: en∣tiam, atque istius Funda∣toris Encomium meritissi∣mum Cantatur pars reliqua;
& Vespertinae precationes (incipiendo jam á Sym∣bolo Apostolico) secundùm communem Ecclesiae for∣mulam, finiuntur. FINIS.
