B2059 E90_8 99872816 125262
The Best NEVVES That ever was PRINTED. 1. Prince Ruperts resolution to bee gone to his Mother who hath sent for him. 2. His Majesties Royall intentions declared to joyne with the Parliament in a treaty for peace. 3. The partculars of the high Court of Parliament drawn up to be sent to his Majesty for peace. 4. Directions from the Lords and Commons, directed to the Commanders for the ordering of the Army. feb: 20 1642 London, Printed for I. A. 1643.
Prince RUPERTS Resolution to be gone to his Mother, who hath sent for him. WE do in the presence of Al∣mighty God, and to all the whole world, and in the sight of all good men, in no manner approve, allow, give consent, or a∣ny way countenance the unjust and unruly actions of my Sonne Prince Rupert now in England; and so do I the same with the Queene, my deare mother, by the same vow disrellish and hate all those outrages and cru∣lties of any brother Prince Rupert, and it
grieves us at our very Soules for his unhu∣mane cruelties we heare he commit, whose passion wee cannot confine, and whose  spirit we cannot calm nor dis him from acting, by the lawfull meanes which we have used, as by Letters, Messages, and intimate friends. And our petition and desire is to the ho∣norable Houses of Parliament, that our an∣nuall pensions may be duely paydus, which is our chiefest lively-hood under God, and that wee may not suffer and languish for his sake, whose actions and behavior we cannot helpe. Hoping that both. Houses of Parlia∣ment will speedily consider of our petition which wee have sent unto them, having con∣tinually found that savour from this King∣dome of England, for their reall loues in our distresse, that we are bound to assist you and your Nation both with our praser & thankes which is onely acceptable and best lsing to God and to all righteous men  And for my particular, I take God to wit¦nesse, so long as I was n England with His
Majesty, I laboured for peace, and a Reconci∣liation betwixt his Majesty and his Parlia∣ment, but finding that I could not prevaile, but I was over borne by a strong faction who had his Majesties care, I took my leave, and went for Holland, obeying and hearkning un∣to my mothers counsel whom I shall willing∣ly obey and abide with. Prince Rupert began to declare his resoluti∣on to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the rest of the Nobles, attending upon his Royal person, which was to this effect. That he had in or mation by letters from Hol∣land that his Royall mother was much discontented and troubled in minde for his residence here in England, and way very desirous that be should take leave of his Royall. Oakle the King of Eng∣land, and to goe to Hosland to her, whereby shee might impart her mind unto him, be bring willing to lfill his mother, desires, and sorry for his first comening over, declared his resolucion to his Ma∣jesly that he was now resolved to leave England, desering his Majesty not to be displeased thereat; and that according to the utmost of his power, hee would endeavour to send over such able Comman∣ders, as should finish what be had begun.
His Majesties Royall intentions declared to joynewith his Parliament in a treaty of Peace. WE will not repeate what meanes we have used to prevent the dangerous, and distracted estate of the Kingdome, nor how those means have been in∣terpreted, because being desirous to avoid effusion of bloud, we are willing to decline all memory of former bitternesse that might make our offer of a treaty lesse readily accepted. We never did declare, nor ever intended to declare both Our houses of Parliament traytours, or set up our Standard against them, We utterly professe against it before God and the world, and further to remove all possible scruples which may hinder the treaty so much desired by us: we hereby promise, so that a day be ap∣pointed by you, for the revoking of your Declarations against all persons as traytours, or otherwise for assist∣ing of us. We shall with all chearfullnesse upon the same day recall our Proclamations, and Declarations, and take down our Standard. In which treaty, we shall be ready to grant any thing, that shall be really for the good of Our Subjects, conjuring you to consider the bleeding condition of Ireland, and the dangerous con∣dition of England, in as high a degree, as by these Our offer. We have declared Our self to do: And assuring you that Our chiefe desire in this world, is to beget a good understanding, and mutuall considence betwixt Us, and Our two Houses of Parliament.
The particulers of the high Court of Parliament drawne up to be sent to his Majesty for peace. THe House of Commons spent much time in debating upon His Majesties Propositions lately sent to the House concerning an Accommodation, there being usually in the House at this debate at least two hundred of the Members, besides many there be which are imployed upon speciall ser∣vice of the Kingdome in severall Countreys, by which it appeares that the Parliament are not so few in num∣ber as some disaffected persons do report they are; and at last it was voted to this effect, viz. 1. That there should bee a speedy disbanding of both Armies. 2. That the Armies in the Northerne and Westerne Counties and other remote part, shall be disbanded by the first of March. 3. That the Armies at Oxford, Redding, Windsore, and the parts adjacent, bee disbanded by the tenth of March. 4. That Messengers bee sent to the King, to treat of the true and manner of disbanding, and that a cessation of
armes shall be assented unto, in reference in the dishanding. 5. That presently after the disbanding of both Armies, a committee shall bee sent to attend His Majesty by an humble Treaty to give him satisfaction concenng the ropsitions sent to them from the King and likewise those Propositions wh were presentied from the Parliament to His Majesty. An order by the Lords and Commons for direction in the Armie. VVHereas there have been divers complaints made unto us of many disorders, commited by the souldiers; in their marching, and in such places where∣in they have been quairered and billered, which dis∣orders (as is informed) have beene partly occasioned by the neglect of their Officers to goe along with them: It is therefore ordered by the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, that the Lord Gene∣rall be desired to give command to all the officers, that they take care to attend, according to the duty of their severall pls, that the souldiers thereby may be here∣after kept from stragling up and down the Countries. And to that end to lay his command upon the Officers of each Company, both in the marching, quartering, and billeting, to bee in person amongst the souldiers, to prevent any disorders whatsoever, and punish such as shall offend. FINIS.
