B3235 E401_18 99862282 160423
A BLOODY FIGHT AT BALRƲD-DERRY IN IRELAND: WHERE Sir Henry Titchburne was shot in the belly, his Sonne slaine, Colonell Trevor, and divers Officers and Gentlemen killed, others taken Prisoners. Many of the Rebels slaine. THE Garrison of TRIM relieved, and the Rebels pursued by Colonell Jones, with 2 Demi-culverins, five field peeces, and 7000 Horse and Foot. Aug: 10th Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.
A Bloody fight at Balrud-Derry in Ire∣land, Sir Henry Titchburne shot in the belly, his Sonne slaine, Collonell Tre∣vor, and divers Officers and Gen∣tlemen killed, others taken prisoners, Many of the Rebels, slaine. Right Honourable, SInce our last from hence, we have had much busi∣nesse and wearied daily with severall imploy∣ments of which here is a briefe account. On Thursday the as of July 1647 Colonel Sir Hen∣ry Titchburne marched out towards Drogheda, and with him rid his Sonne, and divers Gollonels, Ma∣ions, and Gentlemen of note, about fourty is number all Officers, and others of very good quallity. And in their march they were, surprized by a party of the Rebels Horse, passing ere alrud erry, three of the Irish Troopes fell upon them on a suddain our men were all well mounted, but were beset on every side by the Enomy. Yet Sir Nonry Titchburne with the rost) rid up to them, who charged in the Reare, where though our Officers were over powred, yet they fought most
stoutly, and slew divers of the Rebels, the fight be∣ing exceeding violent on both sides. Sir Henry Titchburne got away, by breaking through them, but was shot with a brace of bullets, but (God be praised the wound is not motal, only one of the bullets grased side-long nere his belly) wee doubt not but the wound will bee healed in short time. There was not a man amongst the Officers and Gentlemen that were with him but fought bravely, and all those which are escaped are every man of them sorely wounded. Sir Henry Titchburnes Son a very hopefull young Gentleman, (and one much lamented) was there slain in the incounter and also Lieutenant Collonel Trevor of Carlingford, with some others for whose deaths here is much sadnesse, both in the City and Coun∣try. Major Gore fought bravely, and is hurt by the Rebels, but fought still so long as he was able, but being over powred, the Rebels tooke him prisoner. Major Gibson fell on the Rebels like a Lyon, kil∣ling and wounding many of them, and he is missing but whither hee be slaine, or taken prisoner by the Rebles wee doe not yet certainly know, wee have yet no accompt that he is a live, divers others are slain, and many they tooke prisoners. It was Gods exceeding great mercy (to us) that these Gentlemen were not cut off, every one of them, by those blood-thirsty Villanes, who hunt after the Protestants lives; And they had (at this time) a very great advantage upon these Gentlemen, both by their over powring their number so numerously, and also
in regard of the place where they had so hem'd them in that there was no escaping from them, but by flying through. On the same day all the Horse and Foote were mustered at a general Rendezvouz the place where they not was on St. Stephens Greene, to which they were ordered by the Commissioners directions, and the command of Collonel Jones, the Goverour of Dublin, and the Councel of Warre, upon those Or∣ders, that so the whole body might be viewed be∣fore they marched abroad towards the Enemies quar∣ters. At this Randezvouz there appeared upon Muster above 4000 horse and Foot, and good Equipage, and the Souldiers very resolut. After the army was mustered, and returned home into the City, (which was before the Market was o∣ver, it being Market-day) the English Souldiers be∣gun at the end of the Town to plunder some Market people, where they had some little opposition, but to little purpose, for they carryed away what they laid hands on, and comming up into the City, they plundered all the Market befoe them, which caused the Market people to run with their wares, some into shops, others into houses (as many as could) to se∣cure their goods, hoping that would doe it, and I beleeve there were divers that did save much of their ware so. But the Souldiers (being grown into this disorder) and the City hereby in an hubbub, they stayed not here, but plundered many shops also, and some hou∣ses, though their Officers used what meanes they could to appease them, which they were not able to doe for some houres.
In this their plundering, they made no distinctions, of persons where they came, no difference betwixt English and Irish, Protestants and Papists, all was alike to them, and all fared alike when they were en∣tred upon their booty. They also brake into the Excise House where the Crmmissioners were sitting, and there took what monies they found. And (being not satisfied with that, and something provoked by the Gentlemen who were loath to part with the monies upon those termes) they seased on the Impost-Masters them∣selves, and strip them, and tooke from them not only the monies in their pockets, but their cloakes from their backs, their Hats from their heads, their Shooes from their feet, and their Rings from their fingers, and they also tooke from them their watches, and whatsoever else they found about them that was of value or use for them. So that what with the Enemy abroad and the Soul∣diers at home, Your Lordships may judge in what a most sadde condition we are in here in this City. On Friday July 30 1647. (The Governour ha∣ving the night before appeased these mutinies as well as he could, in which hee deported himselfe with great discretion, and gallently) There were prepa∣rations made for the Army to march out into the field to relieve the besieged Garrison, And force the E∣nemy to a further distance from this place, Onders went out for carriages, and other necessaries, and in∣structions for the march. On Saturday, July 31. we were very busie in setting forward our Army, and all things were appoynted to be in a readinesse to march the next morning against
the . The Lord preferred this , and grant that they may return victorious, which with Gods as∣sistance I make no doubt of. Preston, we heare had threatned the Garrisons of Trim and Maynoth, that if they would not surreder, he would  them, and put all to the sord  they are iresolute within, in  of reliefe from hence, to which these Souldiers haue showed a very great willingness. On the Lords day, August 1. instan, our Army set forard from herce upon their march. They tooke forth with them 2. demi-culverins, and 5. Field- pee∣ces, with carriages, powder, bullet, match, and other  and necessaries to encounter wih the ∣my, and they marched towards Drogheda. Sir Henry Tichburne (who God be thanked is pretty well of his hurt) with his men, Col. Coot with his and also the Scots, were all appoynted to joyne with our Army: and we received letes that day of their ad∣vance towards us. On Munday, August 2. a Post was dispatched from hence to Col. Iones, upon advertisements from London. That day we had Alarms from the Rebels, who made approaches with their horses so neer us, that they took away some of our cattell. On Tuesday, August 3. the enemies were so bold, that they marched up to our very trenches, and that day, and the day before, took away about 300. faire English milch Cowes. We have 3. Troops left here to guard the City, viz. the Lord Lamberts, Sir Iohn Hoges, and Capt. Cressies, which hardly consist of 80. horse. This present Wednesday, Aug. 4. about 9. of the clock, there was an alarm at the end of the New street,
where they took away our Cowes, and killed Lie∣nant Bond, who sallied out to relieve them. This morning our Army met with 2000 Foot, and 600 Horse, which came from the North to joyn with ours, according to the former Instructions: and the the whole Army joyned, consisting of about 7000 Horse and foot, who marched towards the enemy, and forced Preston to raise the siege from Trim, from whence he is led, and Col. Jones having relieved Trim and Maynoth, ntends to try if the enemy will fight him. God give a good issue. So prayes Your Lordships humble Seruant. Dublin Aug. 4. 1647. FINIS.
