b3216b 43663188 173095
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all the Nobility and Gentry of our Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all other our Loving Subjects of what Degree and Quality soever, Greeting. Whereas Richard Blome of London Gent. our Cosmographical Printer, hath represented unto us, that he hath Ʋndertaken the Printing a New Survey, or Description of our Cities of LON∣DON and WESTMINSTER, with the Liberties and Parts adjacent; as also of the several AMERICAN PLANTATIONS, which will be Illustrated with a great many useful Ichnographical Maps of the Respective Wards and Parishes, together with Maps of the several Plantations, and other Ornamental Sculptures: The particulars of which said Work, will be set forth in his Papers of Proposals published in that behalf. And being given to understand by the Certificate of several persons of Honour, that the said Work will be of great use, and very acceptable to all our Loving Subjects, and especially to the Curious; We have thought fit at the Humble Request of the said Richard Blome, to Declare our Royal Approbation of the said Ʋndertaking; And out of our Princely desire to promote all such commendable and useful Works, and the better to enable him to compleat the same, and Collect such Remarks as shall be thought necessary for that end; We do hereby earnestly Recommend the said Richard Blome, and this his Ʋndertaking to you, and every of you, to the end that by your Assisting him in such particulars as shall be desired, together with your generous Sub∣scriptions, he may be encouraged to perfect and finish the said Work. And whereas the said Richard Blome hath informed us, that he shall be at great expences for Printing the said Work, We being willing to give him all the Encouragement such a Work deserves, Do by these Presents, Grant to him the said Richard Blome, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns our Royal Licence for the Sole Printing and Vending the said Volume of the Survey, or Descrip∣tion of our said Cities of London and Westminster, with the Parts adjacent, together with the Description of our American Plantations, for the full Term of fourteen years from the date hereof, strictly charging and forbidding all our Subjects, within our Kingdoms and Dominions to Reprint the said Books in whole, or in part, or in any other Volume, or in any Language whatsoever,  to Copy or counterfeit any of the said Maps or Sculptures in the said Volume, and to vend the same, during the aforesaid Term of fourteen years, without the consent and approbation of the said Richard Blome, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals first obtained, as they will answer the contrary at their Perils; Whereof the Master, Wardens and Company of Stationers are to take notice, that the same may be entred in their Register, and that due obedience be yeilded thereunto. Given at our Court at Kensington the 27th day of November 1695, in the 7th year of our Reign. By his Majesty's Command, WILLIAM TRƲMBALL.
PROPOSALS For the Printing a Description of the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Liberties and Parts adjacent, according to their present State. And for as much as our American Plantations are of such great concern in way of Trade, &c. to this City and Kingdom, there shall be Printed a Description thereof and that according to these particulars, by Richard Blome, his Majesty's Cosmographical Printer, Dwelling in New Weldstreet, at the Green Pallisado Pails, near Clare Market; where Proposals are delivered, and Subscriptions taken for the same, and where the Work may be  very Tuesday and Thursday in the Afternoons. For avoiding of Abuses, no Mony to be paid, without a Printed Receipt Engraven on Copper, and signed by the said Richard Blome. FInding that no Subject is so acceptable to the Generali∣ty, as that which concerns the Nation, and none more wanting, more useful, and more Honour∣able than an Historical Account of the Cities of London and Westminster, as also of the American Plantations; as to their present State: But finding that this Undertaking (which by Computation will make so large a Folio,) could not be so well performed, without his Majesty's Royal Countenance, as well from the several Officers in Church, State, and Civil Affairs, for the giving their Assistance in the Communicating of such things as are necessary to be taken notice of for compleating the Works; as for an Encouragment by Subscriptions, for their private Libraries, and publick Halls, or Court Rooms of the Incorporated Companies and So∣cieties, &c. the better to Embolden the said Richard Blome to carry on so Chargable a Work. And upon the Humble Peti∣tion of the said Richard Blome for the same, his Majesty (well approving of so Good a Work) was Graciously picased to Grant these his Royal Letters Recommendatory, with his Royal Licence for the Sole Printing the said Work; upon which the said Richard Blome hath Undertaken the same, which shall be Digested into a Good Method by able Hands, and divided into three Parts, and that according to these particulars. Part 1. Will be a Topographical Description of the said Cities of London and Westminster, with the Parts ad∣jacent, as to their Situation, Extent, Division into Wards, Liber∣ties and Parishes; giving an Account of the Streets, Lanes, Al∣lies and Courts. Of the Rivers, Aquaeducts, Gates, Posterns, Tow∣ers, Cathedrals and other Churches, the Exchanges, Custom-house and Keys; the Colledges, Freeschools, Halls, Hospitals, Prisons, Houses of Correction, with other Buildings of note. The Inhabi∣tants as to their Government, Trade and Commerce, their Ceremo∣nies used at the Election of their Magistrates, with what is com∣mitted to their Care and Management, as well for the 26 Wards of London, as the Liberties of Westminster: Of the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Recorder, Aldermen and their Deputies, the Common-Council Men: The Steward and Head Bayliff of Westminster: Of Church-wardens, Constables, &c. with the respective Duties to be by them performed. The Courts of Judicature, the Judges and Chief Offices and Officers belong∣ing to each Court. The Inns of Court and Chancery. The Incorporated Societies, and Companies of Merchants and Trades∣men, as to their Immunities, Government, Trade, &c. Part II. Shall be a Geographical Description of the American Plantations, belonging to the Crown of Eng∣land, viz. Barbados, Antego, Mevis, and other the Cariby Islands, Jamaica, Bermudes, Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Pensilvania, New England, New York, New Jersey, &c. and that in a larger manner than hitherto done, as to their Situa∣tion, Climate, Extent, when first discovered, their Fertility, Commodities, Fruits, Plants, Cattle, Fowl, Fish, &c. with a Discourse of the Method of Planting, and making Sugar, Indico, Cotton, Ginger, Cocoa, &c. with the great Trade to the said Plantions, the great Advantages accruing thereby, with what other Improvements may be made in several of the said Plantations, to the Enrichment of the Planters in parti∣cular, and the Kingdom in general; with an account of the first and present Planters of note. And for the better Expla∣nation, and use of those concern'd, there shall be several Maps, taken from the last Surveys or Draughts. Part III. Viz. Honour Civil and Military; for these Cities being the Royal Seat and Chamber of the King, the Residence of the Nobility and Gentry, for the Management of the Affairs of the Nation in Peace and War, with the Grand Assembly of the High Court of Parliament; there shall be given an Account of his Majesty's Royal Preroga∣tives, as extracted out of Authentick Authors; with the chief Offices and Officers of Church and State. And as his Majesty is the Fountain of Honour, there shall be Chapters of each Degree of the Nobility, both Spiritual and Temporal, with their Priviledges, &c. together, with a List of their Names, &c. according to the Parliament Roll. There shall be also given the Priviledges, &c. enjoyed by the Gentry. And for the Explanation, and Illustration of the said VVork, there shall be Ichnographical Maps of the Wards of London, and the Parishes in Westminster, and Parts adjacent, taken from actu∣al Surveys, by able hands, with the Additions of the Streets, Alleys and Courts, Built since the last Survey; together with Maps of the said American Plantations; and other Ornamental Sculptures, as to the prospect of Eminent Buildings, &c. Which said Work thus Embellished, with the Labouriousness in Collecting the several Remarks, by an Actual Survey of all the Streets, Lanes, Alleys, Courts, &c. as to their present State, and dige∣sted into a Geographical Method, never yet attempted by any, cannot but render it useful and acceptable: Yet in this VVork not only Stow, but all Authors of Note shall be consulted as to the Antiquities. For the Face of these Cities are so much altered to what they were, when Stow took his Remarks; Fields, Waste-Grounds, Gardens, and Great Houses being converted into Streets, Alleys, Courts, &c. Nay, Streets themselves altered, so that nothing can in the least be made use of, save only as to the Antiquities; and what shall be found therein Material shall be consulted, and taken notice of in their proper places; to the end that nothing tending to the Honour and Grandure of the Citys may be omitted, for the compleating the said Undertaking. And as this VVork cannot but be acknowledged to be worthy of Encouragment, so 'tis hoped it will not be wanting: Wherefore the Undertaker Richard Blome Publishes these his Proposals. The PROPOSALS. I. Those that please for the Advancement of so Good and Honourable a VVork, to Subscribe and y to the said Richard Blome, or his lawful Assigns Thirty five shillings, shall have one of the said Books in Sheets; Fifteen shillings to be paid upon the delivery of a printed Receipt Engraven on Copper, and signed by the said Richard Blome, and Twenty shillings upon the delivery of one of the said Books in Sheets; and upon the Finishing publick notice shall be given, to the end the Subscribers may repair for their Books, bringing with them their said printed Receipts signed by the said Richard Blome. And as a Memorial of their Encouragments, there shall be printed at the beginning of the Book, a List of the Names and Titles of such Subscribers, that return the same to the said Richard Blome to be so inserted. II. Those that please to be further Encouragers of the said VVork, may have their Names, Titles and Coats of Arms (so as allowed by the Heralds) Engraven to a Sculp∣ture, paying the Charges thereof. And such as please may have the Prospect of their House Engraven, paying the Charges thereof, and supplying, the said Richard Blome with a Draught of the same, and upon the Receipt of the Money for the same; the said Richard Blome to give his Receipt, with an Obligation that the same shall be printed to the said Books, III. Such as procure Subscriptions for six of the said Books, and return the same to the said Richard Blome, shall have one in Sheets gratis. 'Tis desired, that such as think fit to be Subscribers, do return their Subscriptions and first Pay∣ments
to the said Richard Blome, at his House in new VVeld∣street, as aforesaid, by or before our Lady-day 1696, at which time the Book will be put into the Press, in order to a speedy Finishing, hoped not to exceed Michaelmas Term 1696. The Impression being intended to consist but of a suffi∣ent quantity of Books, as-to Accomodate the Subscribers with. And for the conveniency to such as Subscribe, the said Richard Blome hath made choice of these following persons to take Subscriptions, and to receive the first payments, viz. Mr. Samuel Lounds, by the Savoy Gate in the Strand; Mr. Abel Roper, at the Black Boy in Fleetstreet, against St. Dun∣stans Church; Mr. Robert Clavel, at the Peacock at the West end of St. Pauls, and Mr. John Southby at the Harrow in Cornhill, Booksellors. And for the avoiding of mistakes, such as Subscribe are desired to se their Names entred down in a Subscription Book left with each party, with their Titles and Seats, how to be taken notice of in the Book as aforesaid, and upon their first Payment to take a printed Receipt, signed by the said Richard Blome; which is to be kept, as Entituling them to a Book, which upon the Receipt thereof is to be delivered up as aforesaid. For Advancement of the said Work, I promise to take of the said Richard Blome, his Executors, Admini∣strators, or lawful Assigns, One of the said Books, and pay the Mony due according to the first Proposal by me signed unto, Witness my Hand this  day of  Anno Domini 169 An Account of some Volumes Printed for the said Richard Blome, dwelling in New Weldstreet at the Green Pallisado Pails near Clare Market; which the Nobility and Gentry may be accommodated with, at easie Rates. THe History of the Old and New Testament, treating of the most re∣markable Transactions therein, with good and useful Morals, for the bet∣ter government of our Actions in all Conditions. To which are added, the Travels, Voyages and Lives of the Apostles; with a large Historical Chronology of such Matters of Note that are related in the Bible: Collected and Translated by good Hands, from Authentick Authors. The whole Illustrated with about 240 Sculptures, of the most remarkable Passages, performed by good Artists, far surpassing any Collection hitherto done, to the end it may be the more accep∣able to the Curious. This Work is Printed in Two Volumes in large Folio, of a fair Print, and chiefly designed for the Curious. The said Work is likewise Printed in large Octavo, with all the Sculptures, as designed for a more general Sale, to Instruct Youth, in the Historical parts of the Bible: Sculptures being lively Emblems, to imprint the same in their Memories. The Gentleman's Recreation in Two Parts in large Folio. The first, of the Liberal and Mathematical Sciences; which in a brief and clear Method treats of the Doctrin and General Parts of each Art, with Eliptical Tables engraven on Copper Plates, for the better comprehending the same. The Second Part at large treats of Horsmanship, Hawking, Hunting, Fow∣ling, Fishing and Agriculture; all being Collected from the most Authen∣tick Authors, and the many gross Errors therein Corrected, with great En∣largmants made by those well Experienced therein. And for the better Expla∣nation thereof great variety of useful Sculptures, as Nets, Eugins, Traps, &c. are added, for the taking of Beasts, Fowl and Fish, not Published by any: Nothing material being omitted for the rendring them Compleat. The whole Illustrated with about 86 Ornamental Copper Plates; in Folio. Legrand's Body of Philosophy, in Folio, according to the Principles of the Famous Renate Des Cartes, in 3 Books: The first, the Institution in 10 Parts; 1. Logick. 2. Natural Theology. 3. Daemonology or Created Spirits. 4. Physicks or Natural Philosophy, generally considered. 5. Special Natural Philosophy those World and Heavens. 6. Of the sour great Bodies, Earth, Water, Air and Fire, and what have their rise from them, where of Mettals and Meteors. 7. Of Living Creatures in general, and in particular of Plants and Animals. 8. Of Man, in respect of his Body. 9. Man, as to his Mind and Soul. And 10. Ethicks or Moral Philosophy, treating of Man's right ordering his Life. The Second Book, viz. the History of Nature, which Illustrates the Institution, and consists of great variety of Experiments relating thereto, and explained by the same Principles, in 9 Parts; 1. Of Bodies. 2. Of Qualities. 3. Of the Earth and Heavens. 4. Of the Earth, Water, Air and Fire, 5. Of Things dug out of the Earth. 6. Of Meteors. 7. Of Plants. 8. Of Animals: And, 9. Of Man. The Third Book; Being a Dissertation of the want of Sense and Knowledge in Brute Animals, giving a Mechanical account of their Ope∣rations. The whole carefully Translated from the last Corrections, Alterations and large Additions of the said Author Mr. Le Grand, never yet published: And Illustrated with about 96 Ornamental Sculptures, dispersed to such places as best admit thereof; designed and done by good Artists: Besides the Figures and Schemes, for the Explanation of the Philosophical Parts that require the same, by a Mathematical Demonstration. Endeavoured to be so done, as to be of Use and Delight to the Curious of both Sexes. Cosmography and Geography in Two Parts in Folio. The First, of the Arts of Cosmography and Geography, being a Translation of the much Esteemed VARENIUS. The Second Part is a Geographical Description of the World, from the Works of the Famous Geographer Monsieur SANSON; with about 100 Geographical Tables of the Kingdoms and Isles in the World, with their Chief Places, drawn from the Maps of the several Kingdoms, which Illustrates this Work. And to this Impression are added the County Maps of England, drawn from those of Speed's, in a smaller Scale.
