C2790 669.f.14[26] 99869850 163014
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Royal coat of arms of Charles I The Kings Maiesties Speech, Made in the House of PEERS, before he passed the Bill against the Earl of STRAFFORD: May the 1. 1641. And the Earl of Strafftords Letter to His Majestie dated from the Tower, May the 4. 1641. concerning the said Speech. I Had no intention to speak of this businesse this day, which is the great businesse concerning the Lord Strafford, because I would do no∣thing that might seem to hinder your occasions. But now it comes so to passe, that of necessitie I must have part in that judgement I think it most necessarie for me to declare my Conscience in that, because, &c. I am sure ye all know, I have been present at the hearing of this businesse, from the one end to the other; And I must tell you, that, in my Conscience, I cannot condemne him of high Treason, it is not fit for me to argue this businesse, I am sure you will not expect that a positive doctrine best becomes the mouth of a Prince.Note, The average of tumulta many times doth violate the Law: as witnesse when the tumultuous lews brought Iesus be∣fore pilate, and Pilate ex∣amining the cause, said, I find no fault in this man worthy of death, then the tumultuous rage was the more. Luk. 24. (therefore consider) That I must tell you three truths, which I am sure no body can tell, so as my self. 1. That I never had any intention of bringing over the Irish Army, nor never was advised by any body, so to do. 2ly, There was never any debate before me, either in publick Counsell, or private Committee, of the disloyalty of my English Subjects, nor ever had I any suspition of them. 3ly, That I never was counselled by any, to alter the least of any of the Laws of England, much lesse to alter all the Laws; Nay, I tell you, this, I think, no body durst ever be so impudent to move me to it: for if they had, I should have made them such an example, and put such a mark upon them, that all posterities should know my intentions by it; for my intention was ever, to govern according to the Law, and no otherwise. I desire to be rightly understood, for I tell you in My Conscience, I cannot condemne him of high Treason; yet I cannot say, I cannot clear him of misdemeanour; therefore, I hope, that you may find out a way to satisfie Justice, and your own fears, and not to presse my Conscience. My Lords I hope you know what a tender thing Conscience is, and I must declare unto you to satisfie the people, I would do great matters, but in this of Conscience, neither fear, nor respect whatsoever, shall ever make me go against it. Certainly I have. The Earl of STRAFFORDS Letter, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, dated from the Tower, the 4. May, 1641. May it please Your sacred Majesty, IT hath been my greatest grief in all these troubles, to be taken as a person which should endeavour to represent and set things amisse between your Majesty and your people; and to give Counsels tending to the disquiet of the three Kingdoms. Most true it is, that this mine own private condition considered, it had been a great madnesse, since through your gracious favour I was so provided, as not to expect in any kinde to mend my fortune, or please my minde, more, then by resting where your bounteous hands had placed me. Nay, it is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majestie it is well known, my poore, and humble advises concluded still in this, That your Majestie and your people could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt you and them: no other means to effect, and settle this happinesse, but by the Councell, and assent of the Parliament; or to prevent the growing evils upon this State but by intirely putting your self in the last resort, upon the loyalty, and good affections of your English Subjects. Yet such is my misfortune, this truth findeth little credit, the contrary seemeth generally to be beleeved, and my self reputed as some thing of separation between you and your people, under an heavier censure then which I am perswaded no Gentleman can suffer. Now, I understand the minds of men are more incensed against me, notwithstanding your Majestie hath declared, that in your Princely opinion, I am not guilty of Treason, nor are you satisfied in your conscience to passe the Bill. This bringeth me into a very great streight, there in before me the ruine of my Children, and Family, hitherto untouched, in all the branches of it with any foule crimes. Here is before me the many ills, which may befall your sacred person, and the whole Kingdom, should your self, and parliament part lesse satisfied one with the other, then is necessaty for the preservation both of King and people. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared, by mortall man, Life, or Death. To say Sir, that there hath not been a strife in me, were to make me lesse man, than God knoweth, mine infirmities give me. And to call a distruction upon my self, and young Children, where the intentions of my heart (at least have been innocent of this great offence) may be beleeved, will finde no easie content from flesh and blood. But with much sadnesse I am come to a resolution, of that which I take to be best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principall in it self, which doubtlesse is the prosperity of your sacred Person, and the Common-wealth, infinitely before any private mans interest. And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the honour, and justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to have spared that De∣claration of yours on Saturday last, and intirely to have left me to their Lordships; so now, to set your Majesties conscience at liberty, I do most humbly beseech your Ma∣jesty, in prevention of mistakes which may happen, by your refusall, to passe this Bill; And by this means remove (praised be God) I cannot say, this accursed (but I con∣fesse) this unfortunate thing forth of the way, towards that blessed agreement, which God I trust, shall ever establish between you and your Subjects. Sir, my consent shall more acquit you herein to God, than all the world can do besides. To a willing man there is no injury done. And as by Gods grace, I forgive all the world with a calmnesse and meeknesse of infinite contentment to my dislodging soul; So Sir, to you can I give the life of this world, with all the chearfulnesse imaginable; in the just acknowledgement of your favours. And onely beg that in your goodnesse, you would vouchsafe to cast your gracious regard upon my poore Son, and his three Sisters, lesse, or more, and no otherwise, than as their (in present) unfortunate Father, may hereafter appear more or lesse guilty of his death. God long preserve Your Majesty. Your Majesties most faithfull, and humble Subject, and Servant, STRAFFORD. Tower, 4. May, 1641. To the Reader. THe Reason that I represent this His Majesties Speech, with the Earl of Straffords Letter, is to give a clear testimony to the whole world, how His Majesties Conscience was prest and wounded in passing the Bill against that honoured Earl, which did much trouble His Maje∣sties minde, as you may read in His second Meditation, and in that Religious Speech on the Scaffold before that violent and cruell Blowe was struck on his sacred Person; His Posterity and His three Kingdoms which is, and ever will be much lamented by His Majesties religious and royall hearted Subjects. I shall onely speak a word or two may be to some, whose guilty Conscience will take it to themselves. As first, when the kingly Prophet David had King Saul in the Cave at advantage, some of King Davids evill Counsellers then said as some now in these dayes did, saying, that the Lord had delivered their Enemy into his hand by providence, therefore bid David smite Saul:2 Sam. 1.14, 15, 16. so David cut the skirt of Sauls gar∣ment; in so doing, David was troubled in his heart, saying, How can I lay violent hands upon the Lords Anointed, and be guiltlesse? 1 Sam. 24.David said to the man who killed Saul, Wast thou not afraid to put forth thine hand to destroy the lords Anointed? &c. We read here, that yet his evill Counseller Abithai said unto David again, God hath closed thine Enemy into thy hand this day, now therefore I pray thee let me smite him once with a spear to the earth. And David said, Destroy him not: for who can lay his hands on the Lords anointed, and be guiltlesse? The Lord keep me from laying mine hands upon the Lords anointed. David checked Abner which was chief Generall to King Saul, because he slept, and did not guard his Master the King. Here see how David was much troubled in cutting the skirt of king Sauls garment: yet David was a king. Much more should it trouble the hearts of those Subjects, who have layed violent hands in cutting off the life of the Lords Anointed, and their onely lawfull King, and Defender of the faith. But it is now so as St. Paul saith, for as they regarded not to know God;Rom. 1.28, 29, 30, 31. even so God delivered them up unto a reprobate minde, to do those things which are not convenient: Being filled with all unrighteousnesse, fornication, wickednesse, covertousnesse, maliciousnesse, full of envy, of murther, of debate, of de∣ceit, taking all things in the evill part; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud, boasters, inventers of evill things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without naturall affection, such as can never be appeased, mercilesse. Which men though they know the Law of God, how they that commit such things are worthy of death, yet not onely do the same, but also favour them that do them. (therefore) Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel It may now be said, England.: for the Lord hath a controversie with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood toucheth blood. Therefore shall the land mourn.Hosea 4.1, 2, 3. So St. Paul saith, The Spirit speaketh evidently that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed to the spirit of errors, and doctrines of devils: which speak lyes though hy∣pocrisie, and having their conscience burned with an hot iron.1 Tim, 4.1, 2. To conclude with that last Speech of His Majestie, saying, Give God his due, and the King his due, which is my Successor, and the people their due: And so with that saying in the Proverbs, Chap. 24. ver. 21, 22. My son, fear God and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their destruction shall rise suddenly. LONDON: Printed 1649.
