C4025A 45789228 172539
ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED of AND ANSWERED unto BY THE Church-Wardens and Side-Men, IN THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God, NICOLAS Lord Bishop of Chester. M.DC.XCI. Chester, Printed in the Year, MDCXCI.
The Oath to be administred to the Church-wardens and Side-men of each Parish. YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of Church-war∣dens and Side-men within your Parish, and shall diligently enquire, and make true Pre∣sentment of such Things and Persons, as you know to be presentable, by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. So help you God.
ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED of AND ANSWERED unto BY THE Church-Wardens or Side-Men, in the DIOCESS of CHESTER. TIT. I. Concerning Churches, and Chappels, with the things thereunto belonging. I. IS your Parish-Church or Chappel,Can. 85. in good and sufficient repair, both for the Roof, Win∣dows, Floor and Seats; and are all things therein kept in such decent sort as becometh the House of God? II.Can. 81. Is there a Font of Stone in your Church or Chappel, standing in the ancient usual place? Doth your Minister Baptize publickly in the Font?Can. 82. Is there a decent Communion-Table in your Chancel,Rubrick before ye Commu∣nion. covered in time of Divine Service with a decent Carpet; and when the Lord's Supper is administer∣ed, with a fair white Linnen Cloath? Have you a
Rubr. be∣fore the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church. Can. 82. Can. 83. Can. 80. Can. 99. Can. 58. Can. 70.decent Bason to receive the Alms for the Poor? And have you a Chalice or Communion-Cup, with a Cover; and one or more Flaggons? III. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew, where∣in to read Divine Service; a comly and decent Pul∣pit set in a convenient place; a large Bible of the last Translation; a Book of Common-prayer lately published, Anno 1662. the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority; a Printed Table of the Degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited; a Book of Ca∣nons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a decent Surplice? IV. Have you a Register Book in Parchment, for all who are Christened, Married, or Buried in your Parish? And is the same kept in all points ac∣cording to the Canon in that behalf? And is the Transcript thereof yearly; within one month next after the 25th of March, brought into the Bishop's Registry? V.Can. 52. Have you a Paper Book, in which the names of Strangers who preach in your Church or Chap∣pel are set down? And another Book for the Church-wardens Accounts?Can. 70. As also a Chest with three Locks and Keys wherein to keep the said Books, and the fore-mentioned Furniture?Can. 84. And have you a Chest with three Keys for Alms? TIT. II. Concerning the Church-yard, Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging to the Church. I.Can. 85.1. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced, and de∣cently kept? Hath any person encroached upon the same, or made any door into it? And how long since? II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the Out-houses in good repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulied down without Licence? Have there been any encroachments made upon the same? Or any of the Ancient marks or bounds removed or changed? And by whom?
III.Can. 87. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, Tenements or Cot∣tages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As also a note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, & Por∣tions of Tithes, or other yearly profits (either with∣in or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same been with-held from your Mi∣nister? And by whom as you know, or have heard? And is your Terrier laid up in the Bishops Regi∣stry? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I.Act of Unifor∣mity. Can. 48. IS your Minister Vicar or Curate Episcopally ordained, and duly qualified according to the Laws of this Realm? Hath your Minister been le∣gally inducted? Hath he read the 39 Articles within two Months after his Induction upon some Sun∣day or Holy-day in the time of Divine Service,Stat. 13. Eliz. c. 12. and declared his Assent thereto? Is he defamed, or sus∣pected to have obtained either his Benefice or Or∣ders by any Simoniacal Compact? II.Can. 45. Can. 47. Can An. 1571. Hath your Minister any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he constantly resident among you, and doth he preach every Lord's day, having no lawful impediment? How long in one year hath he been absent from his Cure? III.Can. 47. Can. 48. Hath your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate a man of able parts, of a pious and discreet Conversation and Conformable to the Laws of the Church of England? Doth he serve any other Cure besides? What yearly Stipend doth your Minister allow him? IV.Act of Unifor mity. Doth your Person, Vicar or Curate, in read∣ing the Morning and Evening Service, Administra∣tion of the Holy Sacraments, and other Religious Offices, use ye Forms prescrib'd in ye book of Common prayer, & all such Rites and Ceremonies as are ap∣pointed
Can. 58.in that Book, so far as you have observed? Doth he wear the Surplice, together with such other Ha∣bit as is sutable to his Degree? V.Rubr. af∣ter Com∣munion Can. 21. Rubr. be∣fore com∣munion. Can. 26. Can. 22. Rubrick Com, Can. 59 Rubr. af∣ter Cate∣chism. Can. 61. Can. 66. Doth your Minister celebrate the Lord's Sup∣per so often in every Year, that every Parishioner may receive thrice at least? And doth he keep back those who (according to the Rubrick and Canons) ought not to be admitted, giving an Account of them to the Bishop? And doth he on the Sunday or Holy-day before the Communion, give notice thereof in the Church, and read one of the Exhor∣tations fitted for that purpose in the Common-Pray∣er Book? VI. Doth your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the Church Catechism? And doth he prepare and present them, being so in∣structed, to be contirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endeavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of England? VII.Can. 67. Can. 68. Can. 69. Doth he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or bury the Dead, or delay the Baptism of any Infant in danger of Death? Is there any Child past In∣fancy, or other Person grown up through your Mi∣nisters default, yet remaining un-baptized in your Parish?Rubr. be∣fore Pub. Baptism. Can. 62, 63. Can An. 1397. Doth he use to Baptize any without God∣fathers or God-mothers. VIII. Hath he presumed to marry any Persons in private Houses; or such as being under age have not the consent of their Parents or Guardians; or with∣out Banns first published on three Sundays or Ho∣ly-days in the Church, unless he had a Licence so to do; or at any other hours, than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning? IX.Can. 64. Doth your Minister declare to the People eve∣ry Sunday at the time appointed in the Communion Book, the several Holy-days and Fasting days in the Week following? And is he an Example to o∣thers in observing them?
X.Can. 75. Is your Minister or Curate, a man of a stu∣dious, unblamable and exemplary Life? Or is he a frequenter of Taverns, or Ale-Houses, a common Gamester, a Swearer, Railer or Quarreller? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker, or vehe∣mently suspected of Incontinency with any Person? Is his Apparel grave and decent,Can. 74. as the Canons of the Church require? And doth he in all his be∣haviour so carry himself, as that he may adorn the Gospel, whereof he is a Minister? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I.Can. 109. IS there any Person in your Parish, that liveth under a Common fame, or suspition of Adulte∣ry, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any com∣mon Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's name, or any that are noted to be Railers, Vnclean or Filthy Talkers; or sowers of Sedition, Faction and Dis∣cord amongst their Neighbours? II. Do any of your Parish profane the Lords-day;Stat. 29. Car. 2. c 7. Can. 1571 by working in their ordinary Callings; by setting forth, and exposing to sale any Wares, Fruits, Herbs, or Goods on that day, or by Loitering, Tipling, or any other practices. III.Can. 18. Doth every Parishioner in your Church or Chappel, as well during Divine Service, as preach∣ing the Word of God; behave himself with such Re∣verence, Decency and Attention, as the nature of such Holy Duties, and the Order of the Church doth require? IV.Can. 85. Are there any in your Parish, that refuse to pay their duty for Easter Offerings; or refuse to con∣tribute to the Rates made for the Repair of your Church or Chappel, or any thing thereunto belong∣ing?
V. Did any by their last Wills or Testaments, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and cha∣ritable purposes? Which hath been mispent and im∣bezzelled, and by whom? VI.Act for Exempt∣ing their Majesties Prote∣stant Sub∣jects from the Penalty, &c. Ace there any Persons living in your Parish, who under pretence of Liberty of Conscience, whol∣ly neglect all publick Worship of God; neither go∣ing to the Church, nor to any Assembly that meet to∣gether, according to the late Act? VII. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? Have they certified their place of meeting to the Bishop, or such others as that Act appoints? Have their Preachers subscribed the Ar∣ticles of Religion, except those excepted in the Act, and taken the Oaths, and subscribed the Declaration therein required? VIII. Is there any publick Chappel in your Parish, for which your Minister hath provided no supply? Hath any such publick Chappel been lately Vsurped by and sort of Dissenters? IX.Can. 112. Are there any who profess to live in the Com∣munion of the Church of England, who neglect to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being of age fit to receive it? X.Rubr. af∣ter Ca∣techism. Can. 59. Can. An. 1571. Can. 99. Doth every Houshoulder who lives in Com∣munion with the Church of England, cause their Chil∣dren and Servants to come to the Church to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof to their Minister? XI. Are there any living in your Parish, as Man and Wife, who are within the Degrees prohibited? XII. Do you know, or have you heard of any in your Parish, who having the presentation of an Ec∣clesiastical Living, hath made any Simoniacal com∣pact or gain thereby; either in Mony, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes, or Glebe belonging to the Benefice?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks, and Sextons. I.Can 91. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chap∣pel, a Parish-Clerk, aged twenty years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation? And sufficient or able to perform his Duty, in Read∣ing, Writing and Singing? Doth he duly attend your Minister in all Divine Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly paid unto him? Or who with∣holdeth the same from him? II. Doth your Sexton diligently do his Duty, in opening and locking the Doors of the Church at due times; in keeping the Church clean and decent; in Tolling and Ringing the Bells before Divine Service? TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, School-masters, and Schools. I. WHat Hospital, Alms-houses, or Free-school hath been founded in your Parish? Are they so ordered in their Revenue and Vse, as the Foun∣ders appointed, and the Law of the Land allows? II.Can. 77, 78, 79. What School-master private or publick, is there in your Parish? Is he Licensed by the Bishop? Is he of sober and honest Conversation? Doth he teach his Scholars the Church Catechism?Can. An. 1571. And doth he cause them upon Sundays and Holy-days, to repair orderly to the Church; and there see that they quietly and reverently behave themselves dur∣ing the time of Divine Service and Sermon? And doth he at other times train them up with such Sen∣tences of Holy Scriptures, as shall be most expedi∣ent to induce them to all Godliness?
III. Do any in your Parish practice Physick, Chy∣turgery or Mid-wifery, without License from the Ordinary? TIT. VII. Concerning Church-wardens, and Side-men. I.Can. 89. ARe the Church-wardens of your Parish year∣ly and duly chosen by the joint consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? II.Ibid. Have the former and last Church-wardens giv∣en up their Accounts to the Parish, & delivered up to the succeeding Church-wardens the money remain∣ing in their hands; together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. You are further to understand; that according to your Office, you are to provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and good Wine, according to the number of Communicants, at the Charges of the Parish. TIT. VIII. Concerning the Officers in the Ecclesiastical Courts. ICan. 178 DOth the Chancellor or Commissary, substitute any person in his absence to keep Courts for him, who is not either a grave Minister, and a Gra∣duate, or a Licensed publick Preacher, and a Bene∣ficed man near the place where the Courts are kept; or a Batchelor of Law, or a Master of Arts at the least? II.Can. An. 1571. Doth the Chancellor or Commissary (not be∣ing in Holy Orders) pronounce the Sentence of Ex∣communication? Or is the same pronounced only by the Bishop, or by some grave man of his appoint∣ment, which is in the Ministry?
III.Can. 134 Do you know, or have you heard of any Pay∣ment, Composition or Promise, made to any Ec∣clesiastical Officer for conmving at any Foult com∣mited? Hath the Register received any Reward in any Cause whatsoever, in favour of any party? Or hath he been of Counsel directly or indirectly, with either of the parties in Suit? IV.Can. 135 Hath any Register, or any other Ecclesiastical Officer, or any Clerk under them, exacted, or ta∣ken extraordinary, or greater Fees, than those con∣tained in the Table of Fees, for that purpose made?Can. 136 V. Are there two Tables containing the several rates of Fees due to each Officer; the one publickly proposed in the Consistory, the other in the Registry, that every Person whom it concerneth may without difficulty come to the view and perusal thereof? VI.Can An. 1571. & 1597. Can. 133 What money hath been given for commutati∣on of Penance? By whom? To whom? For what Offence? How hath it been employed? VII. Is there any Proctor who doth not behave himself modestly in the Court, and is not presently silent when the Iudge or Advocate speaks? VIII.Can. An. 1597. Can. 138 Is there any Apparitor who executes his Office by a Deputy? Doth any Apparitor exact more or greater Fees then are prescribed? Let these, and all other Abuses and Offences, which any Officer belenging to the Ecclesiastical Courts is chargable with, since the 16th day of May, 1690. be carefully presented to the Bishop. The Church-wardens and Side-men, are required to ad∣vise with their Ministers, concerning their Presentments; and conscionably to discharge their Office, duly consider∣ing the Obligation of their Oath, and the danger of Perju∣ry; and that those Sins and Offences will lie at their Doors, which through their unfaithfulness in not Presenting them, remain un-reformed in their Parishes. If any Minister thing fit to Present, let his Presentment be distinct from that of the Church-wardens.
TO MY BRETHREN OF THE CLERGY. YOU are desired to prepare the Young people of your Parishes for Confirmation. And to the end it may be Administered to the greater Edi∣fication of those who shall receive it. I desire you to take notice, that I intend to Confirm none but those who are of the age of Fourteen Years at the least, and whose Names shall be delivered to me, by the Ministers of the respective Parishes from which they come, with a Certifi∣cate under their Hands that they have Examined them (unless they be Persons of Ripe age) and find them not only capable of repeating the words of the Catechism, but that they understand the meaning of that Solemn Vow, that was made in their Name at their Baptism, and declare themselves resolved, by the Grace of God, to live answer∣able to it. For the better regulateing of Ordinations, I desire you to observe. First, That I will admit none to Holy Orders, but such as be presented to some Ecclesiastical Preferment in this Dio∣cess, or have some other Title specified and allowed in the 33 Canon; amongst which a Curacy under a Parson or Vicar is not to be accounted as one, unless such Parson or
Vicar doth under his Hand and Seal, oblige himself to the Bishop, both to accept that Person bona fide (when he shall be Ordained and Licensed by the Bishop) to serve under him, and allow him such a Sallary as the Bishop shall ap∣prove of, so long as he shall continue to do his Duty there. Secondly, I desire you to signifie to all such as you find de∣sirous to enter into Holy Orders; that I expect they send to me in writing, a Month at least before Ordination-Sunday, their Names and the places of their abode, that I may order Notice to be given of their intentions at the Parish-Churches where they live; that so any who have any impediment to object, why they should not be admitted, may signifie it to me. And I expect, that they all personally repaire to me, and bring with them such Testimonial of their Behaviour for the three years last past, as the Canon requires; on Wed∣nesday in Ember-week, or on Thursday morning at the latest; that I may have sufficient time for the strict and care∣ful examination of every one of them; remembering those dreadful words of St. Paul, Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens Sins, keep thy self pure. FINIS.
