C5170 E425_6 99864030 116249
A COLLECTION OF Passages, concerning his Excellency and Officers, at the TOWER OF LONDON: WHERE They Dined yesterday, being Tuesday Feb. 1. 1647 AND Several Speeches were made by his Ex∣cellency, and the Lieutenant of the Tower and the rest of the Officers. WITH The disbanding of all his Excellencies Life-Guard. ALSO The Copy of a Letter sent from his Ex∣cellency to all Collonels, and Commanders in Chief, in the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, neere the Queens-head Tavern. 1646.
A NARRATIVE Of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX'S Comming To LONDON (to his House in Queenstreet) and his Dinner in the TOWER: To which his Excellency was invited by Col. Tithburn; Lieutenant of the Tower. HIS Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax with a few Gentlemen came from Winsor to London on Sa∣turday January 29 (but had intended a day sooner, onely was stayed to dispatch some businesse of conse∣quence at the Head-quarters,) And lyes at his owne House in Queen-street, But the Head-quarters con∣tinue at Winsor still. And for the ease of the Kingdome is disbanding of His own Life-Guard, that so the Kingdom may be put to as little charges as may be.
His Excellency was by Colonel Titchburne Lieu∣tenant of the Tower of London, invited to dinner to the Tower on Tuesday February the first instant to which His Excellency granted. And on the said Tuesday in the morning Colonell Sir Hardresse Waler, Colonel Baxter, Colonell Wha∣ley and severall other Colonels and Officers waited upon His Excellency at His house in Queene streete where His Excellency received, and answered seve∣rall Petitions. About 11 of the Clocke His Excellency with the Officers went from his House and came to the Tow∣er about 12. where His Excellency was entertained by the Lieutenant thereof, And dined. His Excellency and Officers with the said Leiute∣nant were very cheerefull, and had such good dis∣course of the mercies of God, as may be a patterne to all others in the Kingdome. And this may remind us, and His Excellency and Officers also of that sweet harmony which was in the reciprocall imbraces of all at the thanksgiving dinner which his Excellency lately invited his Officers to, at which time ther was a renumeration of the great mer∣cies of God to them, at which time there was much of Gods goodnesse repeated, and what wonderfull things God had done for them, which was a gene∣rall meeting of above one hundred Officers, with such imbraces and much love, and expressions of mirth and affections. His Excellency on Tuesday aforesaid came onely privately to dinner to the Tower, and kept no Coun∣cell there, onely with the Lieutenant, and some Of∣ficers
viewed the Artillery and the Magazeen, and made some inquiry into the state of things. Some speeches passed from His Excellency, from the Lieutenant, and from the rest, and all tending to love, and peace, and the execution of the Ordi∣nances and Instructions, from the Parliament and to assist the two Houses of Parliament against all op∣posers. His Excellency gave some instructions to the Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, and returned backe to His House in Queene-streete, but the Head quarters are still at Winsor. Dated at the Tower of London Tuesday the 1 of Feb. 1647. The Copy of an ORDER Sent to every Commander in Chiefe, inclosed in a Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Generall of all the Parliaments Forces, in England and VVales. BY vertue of a warrant to me directed from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
Knight Generall of all the Forces in England and Wales, And according to, and in pur∣suance of, the late Resolutions and Orders of Parliament for disbanding of the super∣numerary Forces under my command, I do hereby publish and declare the of under the command of to be from hence forth Disbanded, And all Officers and Souldiers thereof are from henceforth discharged from any further com∣mand or duty relating to each other as Of∣ficers or Souldiers of the said Troop, or otherwise in relation to the Service of the Parliament, And all and every of them are hereby required forth with to depart and re∣paire to their severall houses or places of a∣bode, or where their severall occasions doe lye, Given under my Hand and Seale. By His Excellency Sir Thomas Fair∣fax Knight, Generall of all the Parliaments Forces in England and Wales. WHereas in pursuance of severall Re∣solutions and Orders of Parliament
for the disbanding of supernumerary For∣ces. I have lately given a Warrant or Order to you directed under my Hand and Seal wher∣in under your Command were ap∣pointed to be disbanded as Supernumeraries and all due compliance with the Commissi∣oners of Parliament imployed for that pur∣pose and all ready obedience was required on your part in the dispatch of that Ser∣vice. These are further to authorize and require you That the thing appointed by the Parli∣ament to be don in Order to disbanding be∣ing performed, & so soon as you shall be ther unto required by the said Commissioners you doe cause Proclamation for disband∣ing to be made and published in the head of each that is to be bisbanded, to the effect and according to the forme here in∣closed; it is to passe in your Name, and un∣der your hand and Seale, as by VVarrant from me. And upon the publication thereof, you are to cause all Officers and Souldiers, of the
said respective to seperate and de∣part according to the effect thereof, and for so doing, this shall be your warrant. Given under my Hand and Seale the first day of February, 1647. To Collonel or the Commander in cheife with His For∣ces. FINIS. Feb. 1. 1647. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot
