H3586 E108_1 99872882 125328
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE VVRETCHED, And most contemptible, the poore Commons of England, To the blessed ELIZABETH of famous memory. Also a most gratious Answer, with a Divine Admonition and Propheticall Conclusion. LONDON, Ptinted for E. P. and E. B. July 23. 1642.
TO THE BLESSED St. ELIZABETH OF FAMOUS MEMORY; The humble Petitions of the wretched and most con∣temtible, the poore Commonöns of England. IF Saints in Heaven can eather see or heare Or helpe poore mortals, O then lend an eare; Looke downe blest Saint, O heare, O heare us now, Whose humble hearts, low as our knees doe bow: Looke on our sufferings, thinke but on our wrongs, That hardly can be told with mortall tongues; Oh be not now lesse gratious then of old, When each distressed vassell might be bold Into thine open hand to put his griefe, And timely thence receive a faire reliefe, Be not lesse good, lesse gratious then before, In heaven the supplications of the poore Are heard as soone as suites of greatest Kings: If our Petitions then blest Saint vvant wings To mount them to the Judge of Judges Throne, O helpe then blessed Soveraigne with thine owne, Carry our just complaints, since just they are, And make a tender of them at the Barre, Where no corruption, no friend, no fraud, no bribe, No griping Lawyer, no avaricious Scribe, No favorite, no parrasite, no minnion Can either lead or alter the opinion:
Of that great Chancellor there, O lay them downe And merit praise on earth, in heaven renowne. So intricate is this, our wretched story, Where to begin deserver of all glory. Heaven knowes, We doe not know, nay which is worst; Thy once blest Subjects beene so often curst For offering up petitions of this kinde, That we even tremble till we call to minde Thy wonted goodnesse, that O that doth cheare us, That onely gives us hope, that thou wilt heare us, When heaven was pleas'd great Queen to take thee hence, And make us wretched for our great offence. This sinfull land, O then began our feares, And had we then this Kingdome drown'd in teares, And in those floods conveyed our soules to heaven, To waite on thine, we had not then beene driven, To call and cry thee from thy fellow Saints, To heare and pitty these our just complaints, O pardon, but such is our grosse commission, And daine to further this our poore Petition, And we will make the name of blest Eliza, Equall the Aves of the great Maria: No snuffling Rascall through his hornepipe nose, Shall tell thy story in his ill tun'd prose; Nor shew thy Statue to each penny groome, The monument weele raise, shall make proud Rome On pilgrimage to come, and at thy shrine Offer thier gifts, as to a thing divine, And on an alter, fram'd of richest stones, Weele daily tender teares, and sighes, and groanes Eternally shall sleepe, and long tongu'd same Forget to speake, dare we forget her name? Reade blessed soule, O read d beleeve us, And give it to his hands that can relieve us. Finis Petitions ad Reginam.
To the high and mightiest, most Just, and yet most mercifull, the great Chancellor of Heaven, and chiefest Judge of all the Earth. IF bleeding hearts, detected soules want grace, Thou all-disposer, turne not backe thy face From thy suppliants, thrice seaven sonnes have worne Their summer suits, since we began to mourne; Egypts ten plagues we have indur'd twice told, Since blest Eliza was with Saints inroul'd; Thy messengers of wrath their vvalls power Each day upon our heads, nay every hower Plagues beget plagues and fearefull vengeance growes As if there were no end set to our woes: Have our great sinnes raised up such a cloud, 'Twixt us and heaven, as cryes, though ne're so loud, Can get no entrance to thy mercy seat; Are our iniquities good God so great, So infinite, as neither greatnesse, nor teares Can get a passage, remember but the yeares Of our afflictions, then forget we crave, Our sinnes, and bury them in deepest grave Of darke oblivion, hide them in the side Of our Redeeme, O let them be tide In chaines that they may never rise againe, Let us no longer sue, and begge in vaine, Let this our supplication, this our plaint, Tendred by our blest Soveraigne now thy Saint At last finde grace; wast not enough we pray That at the first thou took'st that Queene away, VVa not that done, that lambe of innocence Sufficient sacrifice for our offence.
O no, our sinnes outlive her, and our crimes Did threaten to outlive the last of times, Thou didst remove her that he might not see The sad beginning of our misery: Then like the showers of hailestones fell the darts Of angry death, how many thousand hearts Were wounded in one yeare, how many bled And wisht to die, since that they lov'd was dead, Mothers left childlesse, children quite bereft Of carefull parents, nay there was not left A paire of friends to comfort one another, Who wanted not a Sister, who a Brother? VVhere was the husband, where the wife could say VVe shall not be devorc't this night, this day, Death so his power and large commission shew'd, That men on earth like corne on ground lay strew'd The sad remembrance of this still remaines Next thy stretch't hand of vengeance bound in chaines, The fruitfull fields, both birds, beasts, plants, fruits, trees, Did famish, faint, droope, die, wither and freeze, So nothing issued from the barren earth, But that leane monster, pale and thinfac't death; Next inundations rose, such as before, Since Noahs flood, never topt our brittish shore, VVhere men and beasts alike engrav'd their bones Under moyst waves, in stead of marble stones, How often hath the Sunne withdrawne his light And turn'd our day into the shape of night. Had Egypt greater darkenesse then had we, VVhen clearest eyes at midnight could not see Vnwholesome nights, strange fogs, rumors of warres, Evill portending Comets, Blazing Starres, Prodigious births, and most unnaturall seasons, Spurning Philosophers beyond their reasons, Frighting the poore, the rich likewise exhorting From their soft beds whereon they lay a snorting: Heaven seem'd in combustion, the skie in armes The Spheares beate Drums, the Orbes did sound Alarmes.
The ayre did often bloody colours spread, And all to Rouze us from the blowne up bed, Of base securitie, yet nought could fright us, Till heaven had rob'd us of what did most delight us. Henry our Joy, Henry whose every limbe, Threatned to conquer death, and not death him, In whom great Britaine set up her last rest, Henry our pride, ever Henry the blest, Resolving, loosing him, to play no more, But live for ever wretched, ever poore, VVho had not in that one an ample share, VVhat Subject had not rather lost his heire, VVhat tender mother did not wish that Dart Had glaunc't from him, and pearst his darlings heart: All that were vertuous, all that lived good Turned their eyes rivers into Seas of blood. The Egyptian waters, bitter were, but know, This toucht the heart that did not so: O pardon heaven, all plagues that went before Have left themselves in this, and never more To be remembred, this, O this alone, Might well have made us weepe our selves to stone. The spawne of Pharaoh, could their bloods be priz'd All the first borne that so were sacrifiz'd, All that base Fry, compared to our Henry Deserve no mentioning, no thoutht, no memory: Lustfull Sodome, such hath thy mercy been, Although she did abound in crying sinne Could not take fire untill they were remov'd, That thou in mercy, like in goodnesse lov'd, And thy annointed she may save this Citie Before it was destroyed, such was thy pittie, Such was thy goodnesse: Ah is there yet full tenne, Is there yet good God a number yet of men, VVhose innocence may slake thy kindled ire, And save this Sodom Britain from the fire Of thy just anger, is there yet a soule VVhose vertue hath but power to controule
Thy heav'd up hand of Justice if there be, For his or their sake, rouse thy clemency, Awake thy mercy, let thy Justice slumber, And save the greater by the lester number; For his or her sake, we doe humbly pray Respite of time, give us a longer day. And then enabled by thy grace and favour, VVeele purchase pardon by our good behaviour: Plague, famine, darkenesse, inundations VVe have indured, feare of innovations VVith expectation of the worst can fllow, Daily torment us that we hourely swallow Our very spittle, even with feare and horrour; We might slepe in feare, awake in terrour, Nor are we all this while from vermin free, Ther's Catterpillars hangs on every tree, Lousie projectors, monopoly-mongers, A crew of upstart Rascalls, whose sharpe hangers Can ne're be satisfied, a sort of slaves, More greedy farre, then either whores or graves, A crew of upstart parasites, that rise, And doe more mischiefe then the Egyptian slies: Cankers in gardens, and in our houses swarme, One drinkes a Mannor, another eates a Farme, This with a Lordship warmes his lusting whore, This by the fall of Justice doth procure A Tenement or two, which being got By violence, he drownes it in a pot, They enter Cities, Corporations, Worke not, but live by occupations, They have no trade, and yet no trade is free From paying them a tax a sine, a fee. Egypt did Gashoppers bring forth, and yeeld, That eate the fruite and corne of every field, And we have Skip-Jacke Courtiers I dare say, That devoure farre more in one poore day, Then they in Pharaohs age could e're have done, They bounded were, praid but from Sun to Sun:
But these for three apprentiships, have eate The fruite of all our labours, all our meate; Have we no Frogs? Oh yes in every ditch, Devouring the poore, impo verishing the rich, Busie Intelligencers, base informers, Like Toades and Frogs, lie croaking in all corners, Promooting Rascalls, whose venomous tongues Have done thy suppliants infinite wrongs: Where they desire to enter, ther's no fence, No ancient Title, no inheritance Can serve for plea, they wresh the Law, Keepe Majestrates and Officers in awe. They plucke the ballance from faire Justice first. And make her ministers doe what they list: There is no equitie, no law, no right, All causes goe by favour, or by might. Oh God of mercy, what more can be said, Justice is bought and sold, become a trade, Honor's confen'd on base unworthy groomes, And Clownes for coyne may pearch in highest roomes. Job he had many scalds, but none so bad As we these one and twentie yeares have a. Egypt had Botches, Murrians, sores that sinarted, But yet they lasted not but soone departed. Halfe fortie yeares in this vaste Wildernesse We now have travelled, and yet ther's no redresse. Bowman and Fowler, Ringwood and his mate Compar'd to us, are in a better state. They can be heard, tis they can be revvarded, When we are slighted, curst and unregarded; Is there a people, (heaven) fallen a degree Below the condition of a dog but vve? Was there a nation in this universe More daring, once, more stout, more bold more fierce, And is there now upon the vvorlds broad face Any that can be reckoned halfe so base? Is there a people so scorn'd, so much dispis'd, So laught at, trod on, and so vassalis'd?
Where is our antient Nobilitie become? Alas they are supprest, and in their rome Like proud usurping Lucifers, there sis A sort of upstart, fawning parasites; Where is the gentry? all opprest, disgrac't, And Errant Knights, above them now are plac't, Fidlers and fooles, with dancers and with rimers Are now in England here the greatest climbers; VVe had a Parliament, a cure for sores, A Magna Charta, all's cast out of dores; The bold and hardy Britaines conquered are VVithout a Drum, a Sword, or sound of warre: If without cause, just heaven we doe complaine, Then send our supplications backe againe; Much more we could say, much more we could speake, But with the thought of this, our hearts even breake. As humbly then, as we began we crave A gratious Answer: O be pleas'd to save The remnant of thy flocke, and turne thy face, And let us once more taste thy saving grace; Forsake us not for ever Lord, but give New life to those, that now desire to live. Deo finis petitionis.
A most gracious answer, procured by the blessed Saint Elizabeth, with a divine admonition and Propheticall conclusion. YOur bold Petitions mortalls I have seene, And find them full of passions, full of spleene, Prayers that enter heaven, and gaine a hearing Are wing'd with charitie, here's no appearing With supplications stuft with Rue or Gall, I doe confesse poore soules, the truth of all, And wish a period to your miseries, But first your infinite iniquities Must have an end; alas you must begin To love faire vertue, as you have done sinne, You must redeeme the time that's lost, and know, As heaven hath ever beene to vengeance slow, So by degrees is grace and mercy wonne: Eyes that are foule by gazing on the Sunne Increase their paine, if you will mercy gaine From unjust actions, you must first refraine, How dares an unjust servant once require Of his just master, either grace, or hire. You must off with the shooes wherewith you trod The wayes of sinne, ere you discourse with God; Give me but ground for commendations, Encourage me, and then your supplications I shall deliver, I left you rich 'tis true, But proud withall, you feare none, all feare you, You were so farre from feare, that you denyed To pay him feare that gave you cause of pride, You must be humble, he ever punisht yet All kind of rankenesse with an opposit:
He that vvill surfet 'ere he gaine his health, Must strangely fast; had you still sat in vvealth, You never vvould have bovved your stubborne knee Either to God, to Saint in Heaven, nor me. I vvill not grieve your troubled soule too much Yet gently your ingratitude Ile tutch, And that the better you may knovv your errours I'le bring into your memory all favours By you received, ungratefully forgotten Long time before the flesh I vvore vvas rotten: It is no ostentation to relate Courtesies done to such as are ungrate, I found you like a hunted scattered flocke, Your very soules beating against the rocke Of ignorance and superstition, Just in the high way of the soules perdition I playd the shepheard, and the Pilat too, And yet no Lambe, no Fleece more then my due Was e're exacted from the common store, Where all alike vvere rich, alike vvere poore, For thine and mine: and mine and thine are things Not for to be, twixt Subjects and their Kings: Princes like the Sunne should from the floods exhale The wealth they raise therein, and let it fall In every place, as they have cause a share, And not consume it, like the vvanton heire, The'r full Exchequers must like Conduits be, Open to all, to rich and poore, like free. And subjects should like fields be full of Springs, And naturally should fall towards their Kings, The common-wealth should alwayes be in motion, Seas fall to brookes, and brookes should to the Ocean, Such royall and such loyall communitie Keepe Kings and subjects still in unitie. I cannot say I grieve, this place is free From passion, as from all iniquitie; But yet I muse since Scotland's to it joyn'd, Englands Exchequer should be no better coyn'd,
Sure ther's false play. I feare the younger brother Is growne too vvise, too craftie for the other; It is an ill made marriage vvhere the bride Spends all, before the husband can provide, I did maintaine, farre be vaine glory hence, A well Rig'd Navie, for your owne defence, A royall Fleet, that like a Brazen vvall Circled the Land, the Armies vvere not small, The Garrisons and Forts I did uphold, Kept you like sheepe in peace vvithin your fold. What vvell deserving Souldier vvent away VVithout reward, much lesse vvithout his pay: To neighbour States in amitie vve lent Mony and men, vvhat servant ever vvent VVithout his hier, what pension vvas denyed From the first hower, untill the hower I dyed: In briefe I seldome borrowed, oft did lend, Yet left enough to give, enough to spend; How comes it then, that neither Fleete nor Fort, Mony nor Garrison, nor House nor Court, VVages nor debts, nothing repaid or paid, Nought purchast, nought lent, nought built, wrought, playd, And yet ther's nought remaines, nought to be found, All is not perfect sure, all is not sound. I no lesse muse to see the vvoods cut downe The ancient vvoods, revenues of the Crovvne Dispos'd of so to favorite or friend, That should hereditarily descend From King to King, as doth the dyadem, The Lands of the Crovvne, are the Crovvnes chiefest Jem; Customes, subsidies, sines and accidents, Nought is substantiall but the annuall Rents; There are deservers sure that service doe, That vvould not be made knovvne to heaven nor you, Princes are gods on earth, and subjects eyes Upon their actions should not stand as spies, It is dangerous and ungodly thing To pry into the Chamber of a King.
The arke of State is sanctified, and must Be onely toucht by them are put in trust, But you expect an answer to your petition? Then know poore soules, 'tis given me in commission From heavens great King, to tell you all that's past To what's to come, is but a sparke, a blast, Your sorrowes yet alas, like womens throwes Doe come and goe, but there will follow blowes, Ere England will be delivered, it will make Your very entralls bleed, your soules to quake, The time shall come when bravest mindes shall mourne And children wish they never had beene borne. The Sword shall eate, what plagues have over-slipt And sier consume what famine hath not nipt; The Gospel sound shall loose his glorious light, And ignorance as blacke as darkest night, Shall spread her sable wings about our Ile, And Babylons great Whore once more defile Albions white cliffe, the Israelites shall double The bricke they made, yet be allow'd no stubble. The Egyptian with an Hebrew shall contend, And the Hebrew want a Moses to his friend. There is an execrable sinne lies hid, Such a thing as modesty doth forbid. My Sex to mine, till that he brought to light, And Acan punisht, looke to be put to fight. Before the men of Ahi you shall not stand, Nor shall ought prosper that you take in hand; The Levite from his wife shall be devorc't, And every poore mans virgin shall be forc't: Ʋriah shall be murthered for his wife, And Naball sleepe in danger of his life. You lusted for a King, heavens King relieve you And grant you pardon, as I here forgive you. You tooke a surfet of my happy raigne, And paid my well deserving with disdaine; But Oh you cast not me away, 'twas not I You slighted, 'twas the Lord of hosts most high,
And therefore you shall call and cry in vaine, Bootlesse you shall lament, bootlesse complaine; From forth the North the Plague is come at last, The Lyon is rowz'd from's Den, tht shall lay wast Your townes and cities, who stands up alas To stop the gap, where such his wrath shall passe, Englands disease is desperate, and 'tis decreed That e're shee can recover, she must bleed, Harke, harke, heavens trumpet summons me away, Now my commission's ended, I must not stay: Farewell poore soules, goe pray, repent and fast, The deafe and unjust Judge is won at last By importunitie, much more is he That is inclin'd and prone to clemency. I shall attend your prayers every hower, And to the utmost will extend my power With him, that one, that can and may relieve you, Ther's hope of pardon if he doe reprieve you. Greeve for what's past with resolution To mend your lives, deferre not th' execution; Then to the hornes of th' Altar timely flie, Timely repent least you untimely die; How wretched is the state you all are in, That sleepe secure in unrepented sinne, When not the greatest King on earth can say That we shall live untill the breake of day, No Saints in heaven, or blessed Angells know Whether the last and dreadfull trumpe shall blow To judgement of the living and the dead, Before these words I speake be uttered; Awake, O watch, O weepe, repent and pray, And have in minde the last and dreadfull day. FINIS.
