M324 E298_8 R200233 99861039 113166
Clergy, and the Kingdome of England, as the Pope arrogateth to himselfe over the whole Christendome: which made him to keepe faire correspondency with the Queene, who pos∣sessed the Kings heart: and with the Pope himselfe, lest he should traverse his designe; but all this with a peradven∣ture. Do but observe, what cunning hath beene used to bring Popery again into England. Some demie Papists which were Jacobus Arminius Sectaries, did in the beginning of this Kings reigne preach, and maintaine Free-Will in their wri∣tings. Well, the businesse being scandalous, and too open, there was an order made, That none should either teach or preach such a doctrine, with a Proviso that none should preach against it. A thing much like unto the Order, which the Pope made concerning scientiamedia, and almost about the same time. They who preached against Arminianisme, were censured, but they, that preached for it, were tolerated in Bishop Williams time: but not during honest Abbots life. The doctrine of meritorious workes followed that of Free-Will. I have heard it maintained at a Commencement in Cambridge, by one Dr. Duncobm; and afterwards, one Roger did preach for the necessity of Auricular Confession. Were not these pretty preparations for the rest of the Popish er∣rours? The Pope having got so much, he changed his bat∣teries; he sendes one Suta Clara to treat about agreement, that his Church, and ours might be but one. He knew that halfe of the eminent men in the Clergy were above halfe his already. Yet, all his plots could not prevaile for the totall ruine of the Protestant Religion in England. Many brave, pious, and learned Divines did preach against the errours, which were crept in too far amongst us: and they did give notice, and warning to the people, that Popery was at hand. Many heark∣ned unto them, and joyned forces to oppose it, as well as o∣ther innovations in the State. The Popish faction perceiving
that their devises were like to be confounded; went another way to worke; they perswaded the King to leave his Parlia∣ment upon a pretended feare of his owne Person, to go to raise forces in the Country; knowing that their were a good many, who were altogether Papists; and others who did not care much for Religion; who fearing a Reformation, would rather joyne with them, than to adhere to the Parliament. Great assistance was expected from beyond seas; but it plea∣sed God, that some, who were solicited to send ayde to the King, would send none; and that others could not send any, by reason of the warres they had themselves. Now, if the King had shewed himselfe at the very first a favourer of the Popish party, and inclining to an arbitrary government; most of them, who followed him, would have left him: because, few men desire to fight to bring themselves into slavery: and moreover many, who were none of the best Protestants, were loath to advance the Popish Religion: but the way to make all the Protestant cavaliers to believe, that the King was one of theirs; was to possesse the great ones, and especially some of the honest sort of Clergy-men with that opinion. The old Bishop of Armagh was cudgell'd into that beliefe: The King protested in his presence, in Christ-Church at Ox∣ford, that he would maintaine the Protestant Religion, and tooke the Sacrament upon it; I know not how the Prote∣stant Religion can be well maintained when the Papists are favoured, and when the King is constant to the Queeneu grounds, and documents. That Bishop being one of the preaching Bishops, and a man of good and honest conversa∣tion, being first deceived, deceived many thousands more. As for those, who had rather to loose Christ than their hon∣ours; and who had rather to be Popish Bishops, than no Bi∣shops, we meddle not with them; nor with any one else, who is not a true Protestant indeed. For, it cannot be said that they were deceived, by reason that things have proved according to their expectation.
But alas for us poore silly, and ignorant men, could wee thinke otherwise, but that our King meant as he said, when our Parsons, & Curates did read so bravely his fine Declara∣tions, and Protestations after Evening prayers, although our minds were either for cudgell-playes, for dauncing, and pipeing, and for drinking of a cup of good-ale as soone as we could get out of the Church, and before the Priest could have put off his surplice. Yet, we stayed longer very willingly to heare them read; and if they had beene twice as long as they were, we would not have been weary a jot. If we had heard any one of the Round-heads pray, but halfe so long, we would have left him to preach to the vvalls. We heard so many times the Preservation of the Protestant Religion; the redemption of our brethren in Ireland; the happinesse, and prosperity of these Kingdomes; and the dignity, and freedome of the Parliament, named in the Kings declarations, vvith Protestations of his Majestie to defend and maintaine all these things: That vve vvould have beene very hard of beliefe, if we had not given credit unto his words: nay, most of our Land lords told us, that they were very true, and that the Kings heart went along with his mouth. And we can tell you, that many of them were men of good understanding, and of note. Why? Some were Bishops, Doctors in Divinity, brave Deanes, rich Can∣nons, and Prebends; we thought that these men would have knowne the Kings mind: because, we knew that he loved them intirely. But alas! they are deluded as well we; and they are in a worse case, than we are: for, they shalbe no more what they were, and we may perhaps be once in a better con∣dition, than we are now. Yet we must confesse ingeniously that vve vvere not alto∣gether so ignorant, but that vve knevv, or at least doubted of something. For vve heard some of the Parliaments Declara∣tions read, and many good, and honest Divines, and others told us, that the Jesuites vvere very povverfull in the Kings privie Councell; That Popery vvas a comming in apace, if
Now gentlemen, you that are of the true Protestant Re∣ligion, and who are not ill-affected to the publike good of your owne Country; but are a litle led away by your owne private Interests, by vain hopes of preferments, and have been deceived by the Kings faire Protestations. If you understand your selves well; make use of your former mis-understand∣ings, and plead Ignoramus. The King does in his letters de∣clare you not guilty in some points; and therefore you may with your honour submit your selves to the Parliaments mer∣cy, who will pittie you like ignorant, and decieved men: if by your sudden returning to your duty; you shew that you are willing to leave a bad party, when you know it to be so: and to believe the truth, when it is evidently manifested unto you. Seeke not for excuses to make the matter better, than it is. The King hath made a bridge for you, to come all to the Parliament: And now especially that he is with his Co∣sens the Welsh-men. His Majestie, that has detained you so long with him, with his faire words, cannot keepe you per∣force. Now I heare the Complaint of other Cavaliers, who are meere Carnall men. Alas! alas! say they, we tooke up armes, because wee would not suffer the Round-heads to pull downe our crosses, our babies, and our Organs; and to take the surplices from our Priests. Was it not a very fine thing, to go of a Sunday in the afternoone, to heare the Organs, and many other brave instruments of musicke in some Cathedral Church: and to see the Deane, the Canons, the singing-men, and the very Cheristers boyes in fine surplices? It was a fine thing indeed, and much like unto a play. Whilest the eare was ravished with the melody of musicke, the heart did litle thinke of God. We lost much now, that Clergy-men weare no surplices; for our wives got them many times to make clouts, and now wee must buy them new ones. But our com∣fort is, that Clergy-men visit not our wives so often as they did in former time. Alas! wee would rather have lost our
lives, than to see our May-poles put downe; what a cruell thing is this, that we must have no more playes, no more mo∣risdancers, and no more Whit-sunday-ale? what all sports taken away from us? but the worst is, that we cannot reme∣dy it. The Round-heads are growne so strong, that we cannot withstand them: vve are affraid that vve must all turne Round or else it vvill be vvorse for us. That's the onely thing, that vexes us vvorst of all; vve could finde in our hearts to be vvith them, if they vvould but alovv us our former sports, and pastimes. Some others complaine thus. Alas! vve thought vvhen vve did first take up armes, that the King vvould get the mastery over the Parliament vvithin a very short time. They made us to believe it at least. We vvere told after the taking of Bristoll, the routing of Sir William Waller, and of my Lord Fairfaxes armie: that the businesse was as good as done: and that we should see London shortly. Alas! many of us do see it now to our griefe, and in another way than we expected. All our trouble was afore to thinke upon what street in London we should have fallen first. For, they amongst us, who knew London, had all a mind to Cheapside, and to Lumbard street; because they thought to find there, more money ready coined than else-where: and vve vvho heard them naming those tvvo streets, said vvithin our selves vve vvill be in them as soone as you, for all your hast. I thinke it is vvell, that vve have not taken London; for I believe that vve should have slaine one another for bootie-sake. The businesse of Glocester, and the besieging of Hull sticks still to our stomacks. Yet vvee vvere in a pretty vvay after our victory in the West. We marched fast enough towards London, but they stopt us at Dennington; yet wee did passe afterwards: let that passe: our new, and greatest hopes were, that whilest their new armie was a raising; we would have advanced, and made use of the unsetlement of their affaires.
But nothing prospers with us, surely God is not with us, and we do not fight for his Cause. For, in all humane probabili∣ties, vve have had many advantages over the Round-heads; and yet they are novv more povverfull than ever they vvere: our commanders told us afore Naseby fight, that Sir Thomas Fairfax Armie consisted of men, that knevv better hovv to pray, than hovv to fight: vvhich made us to believe that the day vvould be ours; but vve vvere deceived, for they did fight vvith as much earnest, as they could ever have pray'd: our horse left us in the lurch, and that Prince Rupert, vvhom vve thought to be so couragious, and so valiant, did spurre his horse as quicke as any of the rest. But alas! our last hopes is gone: Goring is beaten by Sir Thomas Fairfax: vve that vvere ever conquerours in the West, do begin to be conquered there. The very club-men rise against our men: Wee might expect some reliefe from Wales, but the blevv-bonners are too neere the Welsh; the Kings boats are taken, and they keepe him from passing the Severne over againe. What lamentable businesse is this? What pittifull passe are vve come to? Wee that vvere but ordinary fellovves did make full account to be made gentlemen at least by the King. We that were but esquires did looke for a knight-hood. We that were lords could not expect any thing lesse than to be made earles: and we that were earles already, did aspire to the honour of Marquesses. Well, some of us have got such dignities, as we did looke for: but, where have we meanes to live, and to maintaine a traine accordingly? we would wil∣lingly give the King his new titles back againe; if he would but restore us the money, they cost us. We are like those whom they call the Kings Doctors, who buy their degrees with money, and are litle regarded afterwards by the Univer∣sitie. For indeed, we have (most of us) taken our new de∣grees in Oxford. Believe me Gentlemen, you have beene very simple to hope for great preferments, and for large rewards from the King;
If he had got the day by the sword, you know that the Jewels of his Crowne are in pawne; and you are not ignorant that it was fit that he should redeeme his owne, before he could thinke of satisfying others. They, unto whom he was most ingaged (to wit the Papists) would have look't to be reward∣ed first of all: and then afterwards some few of your Prote∣stants would have had what they could catch; and some no∣thing at all: most of you, did thinke to be one time or ano∣ther the Kings favourites. I dare say, that if things had proved according to the expectation of his Majestie: the very Ca∣valiers would have raised warres against them, some out of vexation to see themselves deluded, and undone; and some out of spight to see others preferred afore them. Let it be for the comfort of you that are Protestants, that you had bin all undone in your liberties, Estates, & Religion, if the Kings partie had not beene undone; you shall find at last, that you are, and have beene beholding to the Parlia∣ment, who have sought hitherto to preserve your persons from a Popish slavery; and your estates, from an Arbitrary government. You shall once confesse (I trust) that they have been better to you, than you have bin to your selves in follow∣ing pernicious leaders. They look for the generall good of this Kingdome which is intrusted to them: of which you must needs participate soon, or late, if you will be ruled by them. Now, for the Welsh Cavaliers complaint in Tuttle fields. What do you talke to her of Religion? her is, and will be still of her Cozen the King his Religion. Her stands not up∣on scruples, nor understand not what scruples meane: her is vexed for nothing but that her Cozen the King is not come along with her to London. Her was told that her should see her Cozens fine house, which they call White-hall; her did see nothing but the wals of it: her was told, that her would get money, to buy her a fine suite of cloathes, gilded spurres, a beaver, with a plume of feathers, and a sword to walke like a gentleman as her was borne: and that her should live in a
brave house: but her lies upon the ground, hath no cloathes, and is still bare-foot, as her was in her owne Country. Her Cozen was very unkind to ride away from her, and to leave her amongst the Roundheads. If her had had but a horse as well as some of the rest, her woud have rode away into her owne Country, where her would have stollen a sheepe or two, but her would have made her Cozen welcome. But alas for us power Papists! we are in the very worst case of all. We have spent, and wasted our meanes to helpe the King, and we see now, that he cannot helpe himselfe, nor us neither. We have beene deceived as well, nay worse, than the rest. For, although the end of our helping the King, was to set up our Religion, and to destroy the Protestants totally Yet, we must needs say, that we love honours, dignities, and wealth as well as the rest. We had large promises made unto us, and we were fed up with brave hopes: we made full ac∣count to see all Penall Statutes against us repealed, and now they will be put in execution more than afore. We thought to see shortly, that the way to come to preferment would have beene to turne Papists; and that none but they that would go to Masse, should have beene regarded: we were told that it would be shortly La mode de la Cour. And now we see that we must go over into Ireland, France, Italy, or Spaine to heare Masse. But how shall we live there? shall we beg in France? they have beggers enough of their owne; and besides, the French Catholiques are not so well affected to us. As for the Spaniards, Alas poore people! how can they helpe us, when they have much a do to live themselves; now that they have warres in so many places with the French? But perhaps our holy father, and his blessed Cardinals will relieve us. Alas! alas! The Pope, and all his Cardinals have need of their moneyes to defend themselves against the Turke. And moreover, (though we be never so great Catholiques) vvee must confesse ingeniously that the Pope, and the Cardinalls vvould make us more vvelcome if vve should carry money to
Rome, than if vve should go thither peny-lesse. We might ex∣pect some comfort from our Brethren in Ireland; but that vve knovv, that they are a lasie nation, vvho vvould rather live upon other men; than to extend their charity upon others. They have litle enough for themselves, their Country having beene the stage of vvarres these foure yeares. We cannot tell vvhat to do, and vve knovv not vvhich vvay to turne our selves; vve have no heart to turne Protestants, novv that they have pull'd dovvne Images, and that we can neither heare the Or∣gans play, nor see the Priests with their surplices, and some∣times with their copes; for, then we did in a manner thinke we were at masse, and many of us did expect to heare a masse after all that brave service. And now, we can heare nothing but a minister praying, and preaching the Word of God, co∣ting, and expounding many passages of the Scripture in our owne mothers tongue; we had rather to heare our Priests speake them in Latin, as we wonted to do, that we might not understand them. Now you that are Malignants, you may plainly see that God is not for you, and that he will maintain his cause against all your plots and conspiracies: you see how he prospereth Sir Thomas Fairfax his honest Army. Round dealings used to be best afore these Wars, and will be so still when the Wars are ended. As for you that are Papists, if God hath not as yet enlightned your darknesse, if you know not the errours of your Superstition; yet resolve to leave off plotting against your own native Country, wean your selves from the fond love you have to the Spaniard, and to the Jesuites: and by these meanes (If the Parliament be pleased to take you to mercy) you may in Gods due time, enjoy a peaceable tranquility with us in our sweet England. FJNJS.
