S4877 E2135_1 99863499 115703
ADAM OUT OF EDEN, OR, An abstract of divers excellent Experiments tou∣ching the advancement of Husbandry. SHEWING, Among very many other things, an Aprovement of Ground by Rabbiss, from 200 l. annual Rent, to 2000 l. yearly profit, all charges deduct∣ed. By Ad. Speed. Gent. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1659.
A Digression to the usage of di∣vers Countries concern∣ing the Tillage. EAch soyl hath no liking of every Grain, Nor Barly nor Wheat is for every vain; Yet know I no Country so barren of soyl, But some kind of coin may be gotten with toyl. Though Husband at home be to count the was what, Yet Huswife within is as needfull as that; What helpeth in store, to have never so much Half lost by ill usage? ill Huswifes and such?
To the Reader. HOw excellent and how innocent the art of Husbandry is, has been sufficiently made out by the best of Authors; God himself, who chose out that employment for the best of the Creatures, Man, whom he placed in Eden, not only to enjoy, but to labour, without both which no place can be a Paradise. Perpetual enjoy∣ments without bodily exercise breed∣ing nothing but loathing and diseases; For which cause the actions of body or mind are called Recreations, as carrying on the grand design of God himself. Nor can there be found in Nature a more ingenuous, necessary, delightfull, or honourable employment, than Agri∣culture; a Calling born with us, and bred in us, affording matter for the most
refined Wits, without which Man∣kind cannot be preserved; by which we are both sustained and delighted. An Art wherein renowned Scholars have employed their parts, and Princes with∣out dishonour their time and pains. Yet such is the pride and folly of our Nation, that most aspire to collateral Vocations, which owe their life and suste∣nance to the Husband-man, and con∣sist only in over-reaching each other. And scarce any are left to study the Ge∣orgicks, but such as can do nothing else. For which cause our Ancestors have left the rules and observations by which our skill herein should be improved only by tradition, except Virgil and some o∣thers, who have eternized their names by transmitting to posterity their know∣ledge herein. For the promotion of which great and needfull work our ingenuous Author hath exposed his Observations and Experiences to the publick view, which have long been smothered in private
hands, till by the good nature of a Pub∣lick-spirited Gentleman, (to whose in∣dustry in several other things our Age is obliged) they have blest our eyes. Embrace this opportunity, and reduce these Precepts to practice: England affords Land enough for the Inhabi∣tants, and if men did but industrious∣ly and skilfully improve and manure it, we need not go to Jamaica for new plantations. Farewell.
Chap. 1. Of Improvement of ground by Rabbits. IT is in Husbandry, as in other practical Professions, Art, In∣dustry, and Experi∣ence adde every day new supplies to the better, either by contracting the charge, and then the improvement is in the Method, or by multiplying
the advantage, and then it is in the increase. How many rare secrets are there now discovered, whereby the Publick is enriched, whereof our Fore-fathers never dreamed? and some doubtless are as yet concealed from us, being left to posterity and the next age to find out. Because amongst many others relating to Husbandry some are of more excellent use, I have here made a select choyce of them, reporting nothing but what observation and experience, to which my Genius hath been long addicted, have found certainly true. And first I shall begin with the improvement of ground by Rab∣bits. There is to be taken five hundred acres of ground within fifteen miles of London, for eight shillings the a∣cre, which being stored with twen∣ty Rabbits per acre, highly bred, sixteen of them being Breeders, ca∣cording to direction, will in all
probability afford either of them twelve Rabbits at three litters. I have known those so bred, that one Rabbit hath brought at one litter sometimes ten, and commonly eleven, and hath brought them up very well, and fat, and at a Lords ground I have known the like increase, besides those of my own whereof I have had sufficient experience; admit sixteen Rabbits bring either of them but ten at three litters, they come to one hundred and sixty Rabbits, for the which after six weeks of age I know a Poulterer that giveth eight pence the Rabbit, and constantly untill Michaelmas, and some Poulte∣rers more after Michaelmas, which may be sold so then between one shilling and one shilling eight pence the Rabbit; admit them but at eight pence the Rabbit all the year, one hundred and sixty Rabbits come to five pound, six shillings, and eight pence the acre, and I am
confident that in grounds not pro∣per for them, they brought the last unseasonable years before this, four, five, and seven at three litters. I have been sufficiently resolved in this de∣sign by the most of the Warreners throughout England, though I need∣ed not their judgement. In five hundred acres at five pound, six shillings, eight pence per acre, to be considered the herbage for sheep and other cattel at least one hundred pound per annum, besides the keeping of Poultery, Pheasants, Partridge and other fowl, with Pi∣geons, Bees, &c. and places for di∣vers other plantations at twenty, thirty, forty, fifty pound an acre profit per annum and upward, with fish-ponds accordingly stored; be∣sides, there is an other profit in this design very considerable, and of no small consequence, with house∣keeping compleat for all occasions, and great conveniency for a Dairy, and very conveniently near London.
Sum total, two thousand, seven hundred, sixty and six pound, rent for the ground, two hundred pound salaries sixty, five pound food for the Rabbits, in Hutches one hun∣dred pound, admit though more than needs by far, being there are now better preventions than formerly, one thousand Rabbits at eight pence the Rabbit three hun∣dred thirty three pounds, total six hundred ninety eight pounds, de claro two thousand sixty five pounds. If the number of the Rab∣bits be thought too high, and the casualties too low that followeth, to make up all, and to obstruct all ob∣jections, the first litter will breed the same year, being rightly bred and disposed of, allow three of the last litters from every one of the first breeders (the Buck being first de∣stroyed) bring ten Rabbits, which come to one hundred and sixty Rab∣bits per acre, and amount unto five pounds, six shillings, eight pence
per acre, total six hundred sixty and six pounds as before. There are two Gentlemen now in London of great ability and repute, that will justifie these proportions, and that they made out of two seve∣ral five acres of ground either of them at least ten pounds an acre per annum. That there is to be taken fifteen hundred acres, for one shil∣ling per acre, that will after the like proportion, according to the num∣ber of acres, bring many thousand pounds more. That two thousand acres may be had at the same rate, that will very near render the same emolument according to the number of the a∣cres, the same I leave to conside∣ration. It matters not whether the ground afford any grass at all in a manner, so it be warm and dry, be∣ing there are several waies to feed
them, as formerly I have done, with very little charge, which will pre∣serve them very high, and make them breed extraordinarily, and maintain more Rabbits by half than any Warren in England was ever known to do, they having to∣tally neglected, and never orde∣red the right ways, Rabbits being of the most profitable creatures of Eng∣land rightly used, the several sorts of food that may be provided for them being not considerable, as may be perceived hereafter, the later they are kept the better are the Rabbits, and the richer the fur. I have known five hundred Bree∣ders kept at a time in an house, as may be within the 500 acres in Hutches, which would bring seven, eight, nine, or ten at a litter, but accounting only five at a litter one with another, being I formerly have destroyed the rest, they are com∣pleated to two thousand five hun∣dred
Rabbits per Month, and in ten Months per annum twenty five thou∣sand, which at eight pence a Rab∣bit comes to about eight hundred thirty and three pounds, the charge indifferent, and with the same charge doubled, one thousand Bree∣ders may be kept, and they proba∣bly amount to one thousand six hun∣dred sixty and six, the Rabbits in the house we turn out at liberty to go out and come in when they please. At a Months age, and at six weeks of age, when they shall be doubtless exceeding fat with such food as shall be easily provided for them, they are then at the dispose of the Poul∣terer, only such as are preserved especially for store. It. A sort of Rabbits to be had, their fur beingworth near 3 s. 4 d. the skin, and in goodness near Be∣ver, which I am confident may be made very near equal to Bever.
That upon tryal I found the diffe∣rence between the weight of the or∣dinary Rabbits usually in Warrens, and the breed which may be provi∣ded otherwise, to be half in half, be∣sides the great difference in the goodness of them. If the ground want Covert shel∣ter, or be too naked, they may be made warmer by sowing French furze seeds, which will grow very spacious and to great flockt bodies in few years, and will prosper very well here in England, and extend to great profit yearly; there may be Malt made within the housing be∣longing to the five hundred acres, that with other emoluments may sufficiently advance five hundred pounds per annum, beyond excepti∣ons, by a discreet and provident way of buying Barley at the best hand, and by the disposing of the Malt, both in making and selling thereof, there being great plenty of
the best fewel therefore being fearn. There may be many Swine kept within the compass, and several sorts of food to preserve and fatten them not considerable. Item Geese, Turkeys, Ducks that will lay two egges a day throughout the year, Pheasants, Partridges, Coots, and all other sorts of Fowl kept with such several wholsome foods, so easily prepared, and so lit∣tle charge, the benefit may be made of them may arise to be exceeding great. And for Bees, being a place so con∣venient, the profit of them may be maintainable under God, one hun∣dred pounds per annum. Item Pigeons, &c. And for the too much neglected Creature the Silk vorm, whereas there are divers at this time that make a very great profit of them in a very high degree.
I am confidently assured, that by them may be (only in one room) advanced 500 pounds per annum and upwards; whereas the only cause of not keeping them more plentifully is for want of Mulberry leaves, the Trees whereof may be planted here with the stocks and branches there∣of being brought for the most part beyond the Seas, which are dear, and most commonly spoyled with bringing. There is a leaf lately disco∣vered growing here in England, and to be preserved constantly in every Garden, that doth and hath maintained them better by far than the other leaves, which will like∣wise cost nothing, being that the ground in the five hundred acres may be justifiably advanced to a∣bove twenty, thirty, forty, fifty pounds an acre, per annum, as may appear by the several discove∣ries at large, as followeth in the o∣ther papers. When you would have
Rabbits fat to the desire, geld the Bucks that you intend to slaughter, which the Warrener may easily do, turn them out a while longer, and they will exceed in fatness, and eat more pleasantly by far, than other∣wise. The first breed, charges and con∣tingencies allowed may probably come to as before specified, two thousand, sixty and eight pounds. The second breed, allowing some abatement for charges, comes to two thousand six hundred sixty and six pounds. Item Rabbits in Hutches, charges to be abated, 1 thousand six hun∣dred sixty and six pounds. Malt per annum, five hundred pounds. Benefit of fearn, furze, and other. fewel, five hundred pounds. Swine, fowl, &c. two hundred pounds.
Bees, &c. one hundred pounds. Silk worms, five hundred pounds. All these I cast in to make up the first design, with two hundred pounds to advance two thousand pounds per annum.
Chap. 2. An undeniable proportion of Coles to be had from the Pits near No∣tingham to the Trents side, and so by Boats to Newark and the Towns adjacent, with the benefit may apparently accrew thereby beyond contradiction. FIve double Waggons and five Boats to convey to Newark down the Trent eight thousand loads per annum, for which they have paid at the pits five shillings the load: and
whereas they pay commonly nine shillings and upwards the hundred most part of the year, and much under weight, and but sixteen, se∣venteen, or eighteen hundred weight to the load, which should be twen∣ty hundred weight, being a mi∣serable griping to the poorer sort of people, to allow them con∣stantly at six pence the hundred, being ten shillings the load, will be a very great publique good, and an Act of charity in the undertakers, and will render much honor to them, together with the prayers of the poor, &c. The eight thousand loads at five shillings the load benefit, comes to two thousand pounds carriage, by the return of Boats, at the least three hundred pounds. It. five hundred weight over∣plus which are to he had at the Pits by agreement, allowing two hundred thereof waste, six hundred pounds, total two thousand, nine
hundred pounds. That with a reasonable sum deposited to have the Coals de∣livered at two shillings six pence per load, the rest amounting to one thousand pound de claro dis∣bursements for horses, wains, and boats, being the standing stock, upon considerable computations, five hundred pounds or there a∣bouts. Charges for horses, servants, &c. per annum under seven hundred pounds, which will be defrayed by the week, though deducted there re∣mains de claro besides the one thou∣sand pounds, two thousand two hun∣dred pounds. If Coals be raised to a high∣er price at the Pits than for∣merly, then the Hundreds and Loads must be sold dearer at New∣ark, &c. and the same profit will remain. There are divers other benefits to
be instanced and added to this de∣sign too tedious to specifie, a∣mounting to above one thousand pounds per annum, and sufficiently maintainable.
Chap. 3. Concerning Turnips. A Gentleman not far from Lon∣don having dealt for store of ground, part whereof being a meer dry sand, and over-grown with moss, that it was not worth two shillings the acre, I advised him to cause a cutting-Knife to be made ac∣cording to a new devised way, wher∣with with more conveniency than
formerly they pare up such sour rushy ground as they lately farm &c. and call it Devonshire Land and a Workman set about it he cut this ground some two inches thick, and turned it up, and layd the inside outwards that done, letting the ground dry for the space of a week, being formerly good neither for corn nor grass, the Workman with a strong Iron rake raked the ground all over, then cast it over with Turnip-seeds, and raked it over again, which came up so well, the leaves and roots did so well rot, cool, mellow, and meliorate the ground, that the year following and after the crop of Turnips there came very good grass. The ground being afterwards fit for corn or grass, part of which ground he again sowed with Turnips the same year, and had two very great crops, and made at least thirty pounds an acre there∣of; besides as I came to him he recei∣ved
10 s. an acre for the leaves only being from the very tops of the bindings, when they are bound up in bundles, and for the other part of the bindings, he selling the Turnips by measure, made at the least twen∣shillings the acre, wherewith they now feed their milch Cattel, which they having plenty thereof will cause them to give milk three times a day with full vessels, and constantly throughout the year, and better milk by far than any other, and al∣though the roots may be sold in most places as dear, as near London, and with the same benefit, yet the commodity of them is so exceeding great being known, they will not be parted with by any, for they are excellent for all sorts of Cattel, and will feed them very fat in a short time, and will likewise feed Calves and Lambs very fat, besides, they being boyled will feed Swine to the height of fatness in a fortnights space, and the liquor wherein they
are boyled will feed them better than the best whey. And I have seen Cows exceedingly greedy for the liquor and the Turnips boyled, they have eat and drunk of them continually, and without any other food, have afforded Milk in a∣boundance more than with any o∣ther food whatsoever, and became likewise fat therewith; the Tur∣nips boyled will feed all sorts of Poultty fat, and cause them to lay their egges constantly without any corn at all, whereby may be kept both Geese, Turkeys, Pheasants, Partridges, Coots, Moor-cocks, in abundance without any charge, so that 'tis clear Turnips will grow on the meanest ground with little labor, & without muck. I have known those that have kept their horses fat by sli∣cing them & so casting them into the Manger, and of all food whatsoever there is nothing so wholesom and so healthfull as they be for Cattel, &c. for thereby may be avoided the Mur∣rain
& all other dangerous diseases. There is a Knight row in this City that did preserve and keep all sorts of Poultry (and Rabbits) by a paste as followeth, which was made of Beasts liver, the coursest last corn ground and bran, with a com∣petent commixture: but I have for∣merly left out the Liver, and made a paste with the rest compounded with Turnips: but I found in conclu∣sion Turnips of themselves is the only food both for Cattel, Swine, and Poultry. Probatum est. The Swine being kept in an Or∣chard constantly bearing, the ground will fructifie the Fruit-trees exceedingly, and make them yield great store of fruit yearly larger than formerly, and they need no o∣ther food than this Liquor, without the roots, or they may be kept up in a house with it constantly. There was a Gentleman well known, that would cause his Ser∣vants sometimes to scatter on the
ground some small store of Tares, and the Swine by taking pains to get them would drink the oftner of the Liquor, and be fat the sooner. I have known milch Cows kept con∣stantly in a Yard, and never fed with any thing but Turnips, wherby a man might soon inrich himself, and having place convenient for Poultry, &c. this may appear to be as thriving for them as corn. Turnips likewise boyled and mingled with bran will feed Hun∣ting dogs very highly without any other relief. About seven years since I caused a woman here in Lon∣don to buy a peck of meal, and to divide it into two parts, in the one, I advised her to put a peny-worth of Turnips boyled, and work it and knead it by it self, and the two par∣cels being baked, the Meal that had the Turuips in, that proved to be the better bread by far, and whiter, & e∣very way more pleasant to the eye, & more toothsom; it is in the judgement
of most Physicians very healthfull; besides, it cuts far better than the other, and will last as long a∣gain very moist, the parcel that had the Turnips in it was in weight above five pounds more than the o∣ther, and what advantage might redound hereby to publique and private families it may easily re∣sult, when they may keep both Cattel, Swine, and Poultry, with little or no charge. There is as much difference al∣most in the roots as is in Apples, therefore care is to be had in the seed; there are those which are cal∣led Hackney Turnips, which far ex∣ceed all other, especially for bread, & that seed may be had as cheap as the other; a paste likewise might be made with turnips to continue long, which all Poultry would like very well of, and excellent Horse-bread might be made of it, being other∣wise used thereunto; all sorts of Cattel and Poultry wil take suf∣ficient
without further trou∣ble, the paste will be excellent usefull food for Rabbits both in over-stored Warrens, and likewise when they are preserved with other moist meats, as you may understand hereafter. Turnips will afford two very good crops in one year, and the crops of them are worth to be sold thirty pounds an acre, as will be confirmed: besides, some ground they will in my knowledge afford a 3d. crop the same year, & although the roots of the last crop come not to full maturity, yet the roots and leaves being suffered to grow thick∣er without cutting, or pulling, will be better at the present than an acre of the best Grass, and compass of ground where a sheaf of Wheat doth grow which yieldeth a small quantity of wheat, it will afford one hundred of Turnips, near two hun∣dred, so that the profit of two crops thereof will far transcend the profit
of the wheat, and the charge of the wheat far greater ordinarily. Turnips may be sown in heathy ground at the first breaking up, and some have sowed them immediatly after rye, flax, and especially after pease. With their tops, and Rape∣cakes or Lynt-seed cakes, and grains you may make Pottage and wholesome food for your Cows, which being warm they will eat ex∣ceeding greedily, and by this means give milk in abundance, and for the same purpose the Holland Mer∣chants did lately buy up all the Rape-seed here in England after the oyl was prest out, and made up into great Cakes, which hath been a very great commodity in Holland; The roots and leaves being made very clean and stamped together, then boyled in water, and then gi∣ven to the Cows may make them a∣bound with Milk, and yet grow very fat, if they are kept up all the year.
A worthy Gentleman doth every year sow a very large field with tur∣nips, according to my directions, and in the middest thereof he cau∣seth to be built a little sleight shade or loppel with poles covered with straw or some sleight stuff on the top where he ties up his oxen, and other feeding Cattel, and giveth them the Turnips and the leaves cleanly washed, and with them only seed∣eth his Cattel very fat to the Markets, he continueth the same course constantly every year, and preserveth all his grass for other uses to his very great advan∣tage. Turnips also with some small ad∣dition will make very good Syder, and exceeding good Oyl hath been made thereof, which may be very advantagious and will prove no drug. Probatum est. You may boyl Barly chaff in the Liquor of Turnips, together with the Turnips and their leaves,
which makes it as feeding, and as fatning as any foood whatsoever; Rabbits may be kept with Turnip∣bread or past of Turnips all the year, either in the fields or house, and better than with Turnips them∣selves, being a most wholesom food for them, and the roots and leaves will feed and preserve sheep to the highest condition, and the Calves which you shall breed up by hand with these Turnips, their leaves, with their Liquor, will be constant∣ly fat, and will much exceed their breed in largeness, and with in∣crease of Milk. Let your Turnips grow little less than half a foot di∣stance, and less than ten quarts will sow an acre.
Chap. 4. Of Sow-Thistles. ONe sleight plowing and har∣rowing, or but raising the round in the least kind to have two crops in one year proportio∣nably to the fruitfullest grass, and so constantly every year with∣out any further trouble, or charge at all, which is so wonderfully fruitfull for milch Cows that be∣sides
the double increase of milk, it is better than any other, for it will afford two scimmings of excellent cream, this exceeds all other for Cheese, and when all the Cream is taken off, the milk will be as good as any other milk; this seed will cost nothing, and will sow it felf after the first year, it will afford in seed above one thousand for one; this is vulgarly called Sow-Thistle, it will yield great store of seed, the first crop letting it grow a while longer for that purpose; it will be ripe very timely in the year, you may gather the seeds which may be sowen presently, and will af∣ford a crop within a Month or a lit∣tle more, and may be cut every month during Summer, if it be not prejudiced by cattel; you may sow a small parcel of ground therewith, preserving that for seed that will serve your turn; it will grow upon any ordinary ground, and the oftner you cut it the thicker it will be, and
be very tender, and excellent fruit∣full food; you may feed your Cat∣tel therewith by parcels in Racks or Houses, and maintain them all the Summer in the highest manner. It hath been observed formerly, that when Sows could not maintain their Pigs for want of milk, the Country people would find out these Sow-thistles which would ex∣ceedingly advantage them for the increase of their Milk; and I have known the like performed by Rab∣bits in a very strange manner: whilst the Thistles are young they willmaintain Calves, Lambs, Pigs, &c. which you may wean, and raise to the highest perfection without any other food; when they be come old and seedy, Cattel will eat on∣ly the tops, and therefore the oftner you cut themthemore use∣full they are; when the down is up∣on them ready to flye, then gather the seeds when the Sun is up, the seed being dry you may find suffici∣ent
of them in Corn-fields & upon Ditches where Cattel cannot come at them; the benefit might be made so great thereof, that the worth can∣not be with brevity exprest. Sow up sheets of Paper, and gather up the seeds into them, or some other such way as may keep them from flying from you, and take hold of the knot and pull the seeds, and put them together, and when you sow them mingle amongst them mould as they are with the down, because they can hardly be severed; those Thist∣les being planted in a barren ground, and given to Rabbits, would maintain millions of them, all the Summer, for want of grass in the Warrens, Turnips and the paste thereof all the Winter.
Chap. 5. Of Clover-gras. ONe Sir Richard Weston, hath a think between thirty and forty acres, about ten acres thereof he sowed this year with Barly, which Barly being in cutting, and pro∣ved so great, adjudged worth ten pound an acre, he feared it might hinder the Clover-grass, not∣notwithstanding we viewing it nar∣rowly
did perceive the grass, much of it, as it were begining to look out of the ground, the which leaves were not bigger than an Onion, which yet Sir Richard was glad to see, he intends that nothing comes in that untill Michaelmas, and by that time he hopes especially with a good shower, soon after the Bar∣ly is taken off, it will cover the ground: the last year he sowed two Fields, each about eight acres, one with Flanders seed, the other with his own in the Husks, the for∣mer was so fair upon the ground at the felling in mid May last, that he protested he would not have taken ten pound for the seed only he ex∣pected therefrom, nevertheless the Summers draught especially soon after the cutting, before it could get head again to shade it self, and the ground so scorchd it together, with his hopes, at length be resolved to feed his Cattel with, and reserve for seed the Cotten close being colder &
a moyster soyl, and thereupon the better enduring the heat, which o∣therwise he made far less esteem of, because it came up unevenly or in Banks like Mr. Houghtons, or rather worse, which I conceive was to be attributed partly to the wetness, but perhaps chiefly the seeds in the Husks, which could not be but une∣qual experience, shewing that some of the Husks are empty, others full; Sir Richard himself told me, that he had found eight score seeds as I remember he said, or at least eighty I am sure he said, in one head, and then he resolved to cut it, and because hay is dear in those parts this year, near three pound a load, Sir Richard told me he sold it near that rate one hundred and fifty Loads of his extraordina∣ry hay, which his meadows water∣ed with his new River, and thereby continuing the draught did yield he intends to get off the head of the grass, as he doth those of the Flax, and dry them in the Sun to
get out the seed more easily, and withall to save his hay: for he says that when once he can get suffici∣ent seed of his own, he shall then, and not before then be Master of the work, for he suspects sophisticati∣on of the out-landish seed, that it is mixed with old, and some not fully ripe baked in Ovens, the easier to make it unhusk it self; for the manner of sowing of it he having experimented divers wayes finds the best peece that ever he had to be sowed alone without any o∣ther grain for the time, the begin∣ning of the mid April is the best, and therefore he would advice Mr. Houghton not to venture his Sum∣mer fallow at Autumn, unless it be a little quantity to make experi∣ment; besides, he did much disap∣prove the laying sheep upon it two or three nights, as he intended to do last May as soon as it was cut, be∣cause it would prove a hinderance to the next crop, which with a
shower would (as he says) in six days grow half a foot high, for the quan∣tity of the hay it yielded two load and an half on an acre at a selling rate, for the nature of the ground that is most proper for it, which will bear little other grass; To conclude, he findeth that the grass improves the ground, for he hath this year ex∣ceeding great buck Wheat upon a piece of heathy ground, not one shilling the acre before, which hath been Clove grass three years, for flax, he said, that requires a dry soyl, &c. Lastly, he saith that at St. Foyn it is exceeding profitable, and may be cut seven or eight times in a year, but that it requires a very rich Land, and must not be fed at all; And now I hope that my faithfull desires to relate fully all that I had learned in this will plead excuse for me.
Concerning Esperate or Clover-grass. THe Country where Esperate or Clovergrass is most in use at this day is Daphine towards the quarter of Day; It is a grass very hardy, not much inferionr to Luceran, it ren∣ders abundance of very exquisite hay very great substantial and much de∣sired, proper to nourish and fatten all sorts of four footed Beasts, young and old Lambs, and Calves, making their Dams exceedingly to abound with milk, it also produceth seed every year, that serveth the Cattel instead of Oats, and fat∣tens Poultry, it makes them to prove and quickly to lay egges, it will grow in a poor sandy Land, and it leaves a certain fatning vertue in it for the profit of Corn being sown after it, which makes it more in request, it desires not watering,
it fears the biting of the Beasts, the delicacy of it draws them in such am anner that having once tasted of it they will go three leagues to feed of it, if it be not well inclosed; the hay of this grass is little higher than two foot, but it is so much the thicker, it is cut three times a year, provided that the place agree with it, and that the grass be noteaten with beasts, the first time is at the end of March, the second towards Ju∣ly, the last about the midle of Septem∣ber; the hay of the first cuts not so great as the second, because that in this place it produceth seeds, and by consequence it groweth bigger, this being cut, the seed is taken up like Oats, and then is thrust toge∣ther with the first, expecting the last, that these three mingled toge∣may serve for profitable provision for the beasts all the year; a Ma∣ster of a Family may be well advi∣sed to use this Husbandry, conside∣ring the notable profit which will
come to him thereby in regard of the Hay, the Oats, and the grass of the Field, he will find the seed of this exquisite pasture, is a thing one may well send to enquire after in Daphine although it be as far al∣most as the utmost of France, with∣out fear of introducing a novelty, seeing these will so exceedingly countenance his labour, which principally he doth regard, assuring himself that in what part soever of these three Countries he shall re∣main, this grass will profit him, for its faculty, to grow neverthe∣less in a temperate air than in a hot, and in a land more light than hea∣vy; and to effect this business (I give you notice) that this seed of Clover-grass is sold commonly at the double price of Oats; to plant it must be appointed for some acres of Land; chosen as aforesaid, not stony, because of cutting of the grass, then it must be in a place commodiously inclosed, for the rea∣sons
aforesaid, and after that he hath well, and to the purpose la∣boured the land during Winter, the Spring approaching, at the end of February, or the beginning of March, he shall sow the seeds, but very thick, it being necessary four times more of that than of wheat, that it may grow to cover all the ground with the grass, without lea∣ving place for any malignant grass, which may come to grow there, to its detriment; the flower of the land must be well plowed, like a meadow, so that without hinde∣rance the Sythe may go up and down freely; the first year, this grass makes no great increase, being al∣most wholly imployed to take hold and strengthen it self, but the three years following it recompenceth the slackness, producing abundance of good hay, also all the time it stays in the ground it imyloys all the meās to be profitable unto it, (which in times past) it comes to nothing,
for which cause, the place where the Clover-grass grows is then conver∣ted into tillage, and by that means the ground being deep plowed pro∣duce very fair Winter and Summer corn, for three or four years. And for that you shall be accommodated with such good pasture, and fair corn with it, you should manage this Husbandry so, that you should alwaies have new and old Clover-grass, to make some serve for hay, and other for corn, whereby you can neither want for one nor the o∣ther. Probatum est. The second Experiment. First sow Flax, then a crop of Turnips, and after about April fol∣lowing, you may sow the ground with Oats, and upon Clover-grass seeds, only harrowing it with Bush∣es or bushed harrows, which will come up after the Oats are mow∣ed, and will yield you a very great
pasture till Christmas, and the next year following you may cut the grass three times, and it will every year bear such burden, and so good, to feed all the sorts of Cattel, that the best meadows do not yield the like, so it will continue four or five years together without sowing it. Probatum est. One acre of Clover-grass, being made part into hay, and the rest ea∣ten green, will keep four Cows winter and summer, and one acre laid for seed, might carry five bushels, and I am confident that here are thousands in England would give five shillings the pound for such as grow here in this Nati∣on, being indeed the very best. The hay of an acre, is about seven loads and one half, no man will sell for six pound, six shillings, and eight pence the load. Besides the after pasture in the Summer, mow the Clover-grass, and give it the Cattel by parcels.
One Mr. Bromley a Minister did as∣sure me that he lately knew a very large field of Clover-grass, which grew naturally in Glocester shire, and was yearly very much advantageous to the owner thereof. When the ground is laid down it will fatten Cattel, and feed them very lusty, and fit for the Butcher in a short time, especially Sheep; the seed may be provided and sow∣ed, and will thrive in most grounds being exceeding sweet and pleasant will very much advantage pasture grounds, and raise to great improve∣ment. There is a Gentleman in Essex who makes great store of Soap with the Ashes thereof, spread upon base baren ground, and hath many acres thereof wonderfully rich with the best and sweetest Tree-soyl, the like was never seen in England upon any ground, chiefly downs, being com∣monly reputed most proper for such grass, the Ashes being formerly of
so base an esteem, that they would have given mony for the carrying them away out of the Country. There is a strange kind of Grass growing in Wilt-shire with which they fat hogs, being four and twen∣ty foot long, if the seed of this grass were sown in other rich and fertile meadows, that would thrive and prosper as well as where I saw it grow, it is of a very great conse∣quence, and may be so well appro∣ved of by those that shall make try∣al thereof.
Chap. 6. Of Potatoes. THe like benefit as with Turnips may be made of Potatoes, which usually grow here in England, they will encrease exceedingly, & are ex∣cellent food several waies, they will make very good bread, cakes, paste, and Pyes, and both crust without and food within; they will hardly be destroyed but increase of themselves in a very plentifull manner, with very little labour; they will like∣wise
grow and thrive very well, be∣ing cut in slices, and so put into the earth, and the very threds comming from the roots will increase to great roots. The like benefit may be made for Poultry and Swine, of Arti∣choaks Jerusalem.
Chap. 7. Of Pumpions. THe next are Pumpions, which may be occasioned to grow in the coarsest ground, even all stone in a manner, as followeth. First make several holes, a foot and a half one from an other, and fill either hole about the bigness of a peck with mold that you may get from hedge-rows, mixed with a
little good muck purposely prepa∣red, or with Cow-dung, you may cut up the Mole-hils within the neighbouring grounds, sowing the places again with hay seeds or tree∣foyl seeds, then plant in one of the holes being well tempered with muck, mold, or some of the best composed muck, some three Pompi∣on seeds, you need not care for the seed the first year, for they will af∣terwards be plentifull enough, and suffer one of the best to continue growing, the rest pull up and plant them in hedge-rows, or cast them away; And this manner you may (if you please) dispose of an acre of ground or more at the first, which in all likelihood may produce some four large Pumpions, on a plant, the rest may be cut off being newly planted, with the superfinous bran∣ches, and the other will grow the bigger, and in all probability will amount to at vendible rates 30 and 40 pound per acre, and will sell dea∣rer
in the Country than near Lon∣don, and if not sold they will (with the greater advantage) serve for Poultry, Swine, and Cattel, being boyled and used as Turnips, which may accordingly be contriv'd into paste, as before specified, with more advantage for feeding than with the best grass or corn, and whereas I have known dry grounds that have been so barren, that they would bear no grass, at all, in compari∣son, yet being laid all the year long used, and no Cattel turned therein, that little grass that was rotting upon the ground, and the seed shedding thereon hath afford∣ed the years following very good grass, & admitting the ground wher the Pompions grow are very poor, yet the grass being suffered to grow, though but little, the Pumpion leaves shadowing the ground, and keeping it cool in hot weather, and warm in cool seasons, a year or two, especially with the help of the Muck water.
Yet such soyls the ground will afford very good grass, and the seeds of the Pumpions, being shif∣ted into new holes, will improve the basest ground whatsoever to great perfection. You may likewise use the Root of the Pumpions, which will occasion them to be as large again as otherwise. You may cause a large bed to be made of rich mold, &c. whereby you may plant great store of Pum∣pion seeds, and then transplant them according to your uttermost accommodation, but by all means they must be well watered with the muck water, of the fattest sort as followeth hereafter. Suffer but two or three main run∣ners, according to discretion, and cut off the rest of the branches, a∣bout the time they begin to flower, carefully preserving the other main runners from prejudice. In like manner may be planted Cabbages, which will afford the
like profit upon such kind of ground, and although they may af∣ford a great benefit by the sale ther∣of yet they will be less trouble and more advantagious, for feeding of Cattel, especially those that give milk, which will make them excee∣dingly abound therewith, and one acre of ground so planted will be far better than an acre of hay, and the ground much benefited thereby, af∣ter the Cabbages are cut up, there will be a crop of Coleworts, &c.
Chap. 8. Of the Roman Bean and Liquorish. THere is a Grain called by some the Roman Bean, which are excel∣lent for Horses, Dogs, Poultry, and Swine, and will as is made apparent beyond contradiction afford above one hundred pound per acre benefit, as they may be ordered. They are to be set once, and they will continue four years after exceedingly, without the use of
muck, this Grain is indeed the grea∣test advantage that ever was heard of, considering the little charge and trouble; I dare not profess the won∣derfull increase they will afford, being rightly used, what benefit may be made thereof, I leave it to judge∣ment, when if five hundred acres were planted therewith they might be all sold. There is a Gentleman in London, that hath found out a new way for the planting of Liquorish, which grows naturally in many places of England, and whereas formerly contrary to judgement of those that planted it, used to dig the ground very deep, even into the crust of earth, and then planted the Liquo∣rish downwards, and too deep; This Gentleman hath caused his Ground not to be mucked, nor to be used, therefore had that been muck∣ed formerly, and the roots placed side-waies, not perpendicularly, but above the crust of the earth, which
by that means will run a very great length, and grow with greater roots by far than o∣therwise, insomuch that the Gen∣tlemans Servant hath observed, for five acres of Liquorish to make two hundred pound an a∣cre; Besides there was a crop of Onions growing upon the five a∣cres of Liquorish, for which there was offered twenty pound an acre; half thereof being for∣merly pick'd out and sold for at least twenty pound more, and this may be confirmed for a truth at any time, so that there is but one year of three void of profit; and some benefit may be made that year. This with the Roman Bean would be excellent commodities in di∣vers Countries, in regard of the conveniency by water, they be∣ing no Drugg, at all times ven∣dible, and the ground much ad∣vanced
thereby for other uses, which may be done in a mere dry and warm sand, &c. this to be con∣firmed to an hundred pound per annum.
Chap. 9. Of Saffron. THere are grounds (in my know∣ledge) in most parts of England, where Saffron will grow, being rightly prepared, as well as in any place, and once having the roots which may easily be gotten, and as cheap as the other seeds, and plants, you will ever after abound therewith, and they will render very great profit, with very little
charge, and much inrich the ground for corn after them several years, for the planting and disposing of them, you may have sufficient di∣rections at pleasure, and so for the other defects, better Saffron grow∣eth not in the world than here in England, being worth forty pound an acre skilfully and carefully plan∣ted, that will last several years, and afford divers crops every year, and must be gathered every morning for a months space. A worthy Gentleman in whose Garden had been planted some Saf∣fron roots for ornament sake, and the rather, because the flowers were very sweet, of various colours, and very pleasant to the eye, they did exceedingly increase on the ground, that the Gardner could by no means destroy them although with great diligence they weeded them up con∣stantly when they drest and renew∣ed their Garden, yet do what they could they would grow there still;
at last as they drew them up still, set them in some remote places in the Garden, being ground very much neglected, where they pro∣spered so well, that it is to be ad∣mired what benefit so little ground did afford, which was a mere sand, as is to be found in most Shires in England, only the ground having been formerly baren, I advised the Gentleman, he having Com∣mons of such kind of ground hardly worth one shilling an acre, and se∣veral other waste ground, with great convenience, of water, &c. to compose some kind of soyl, as I instance in my discourse following of muck, and mingled earth, and to lay it a foot thick on the worst part, of his barren ground he might in the easiest manner con∣contrive a thousand loads in a year & thereby questionless have divers acres of the best sort of Saffron; and this soyl will so fertilize the waste ground under it with the addition
of the muck water in case of dry weather, that the lands will be fit for any advantagious uses whatsoe∣ver, &c. Probatum est. Observ. 1. Item French Pease will yield thir∣ty pound per acre, charge little, and much inrich the ground for corn afterwards they have been known afford five hundred for one. Observ. 2. Mustard seed thirty pound an a∣cre de claro, and will afford very good crops, for several years with∣out replanting upon ordinary ground, and will thrive very well upon Ditches newly cast up. Observ. 3. Tassels for Cloath-workers, a∣bout thirty pound an acre de claro,
and will thrive and prove very well here in England, and very usefull, being rightly planted, and with the best seed. Observ. 4. Madder for dying for the Apo∣thecary worth 7 d. per pound, & will grow very thick on the ground and advance five pound an acre and up∣wards de claro, it will thrive best in sandy ground as the other, and is constanly vendible at high rates. Observ. 5. Osiars above twenty pound an acre on wet ground, without trou∣ble or charge, after the first plant∣ing, and when there are store of them there will be no want of Ma∣nufactorr, for thither they will que∣stionless resort and inhabit.
Observ. 6. There is a Tree called the Abel, there being none of the Plants to be had, unless they be sent for out of France, but in one place in England, thirty pounds being laid out about these plants will render at the least ten thousand pound at eighten years, and without any other charge, trouble, or impairing, the Grass in the field where they grow: This is confirmed by an Honorable Knight here in London, every Tree of them, so being rightly planted, will afford in a short time thirty plants, and every one of these thir∣ty will afford thirty more, and these Trees are at their full growth in twenty years, and after seven years growth improveth every year twelve pence, untill the time is up, it groweth very streight, and
is most comely either in the Fields or walks, this Timber hardly hath its parallel, for all sorts of wodden Vessels, as Trayes, Bowls, &c. and so likewise for Carts, it being exceedingly light, very tall in growth, and a very white wood. The manner of the planting them I shall hereafter more at large discover, with the conditi∣on of the soyl where they are to be planted, their usual distance one from another, under ten foot, you may likewise provide French furze seeds, and sow them amongst these Trees, where there is want of such fewell, they will grow very fast and bigge in a short time, with great stock'd bodies, and will soon spread their tops, and become very large and high, far transcending our English Furze, and these, together with the other Trees, will afford a considerable profit, and this place may like∣wise
be very much for pleasure, and very profitable for the shel∣tering of Pheasants and other Fowls.
Chap. 10. To illustrate the profit of Ground, by planting of Woods. I Knew a Gentleman that set an Ash-tree before his House, which forty years after he was offered for it thirty pounds, and it is certainly to be proved, that a Gentleman in Holland sold five hundred Ashes at fifty years groweth at a far higher
rate, and that another man in the same Country planted so much wood inhis life time for the which he was offered fifty thousand pound. There is a Gentleman now li∣ving in Essex that can lop off his own ground two thousand Willows e∣very year out of the number he for∣merly planted. His improvements of grounds for Orchards twenty pound an acre per annum, twenty a∣cres four hundred pound. A Gentleman in Kent, besides the great benefit he converteth the ground to otherwise, advanceth to himself yearly for Cherries and o∣ther fruit of his own planting at least five hundred pounds. Certain Observations. There is a Knight now living in England that got a thousand pounds per annum by planting Car∣rets in a mere sandy ground.
2. There are divers in London that will give thirty pound an a∣cre to sowe Clove Gilly flowers, and so for many years. I especially by means of the Muck water, and the muck, the like benefit made per annum of red Roses. 3. There are about London that do make two hundred pound an acre by gardening, and exceeding great profit may be made there∣by in most places of England, which may be performed, only an experienced Gardner of London told me they usually fat their Cows and Swine with the offal of Gardening∣stuff
Chap. 11. To preserve Horses in a very good Condition without hay. AN honorable Knight in Kent, and a Doctor there of fifteen hundred pound per annum, have not given their Horses any hay these twelve years, but only chopt straw, cut small, with such a Knife as they
cut hay withall, they mingle with a handfull of Oats, half a peck of this Straw so cut, and put into the Manger, several times in the day, and let them drink often, and in this manner they use all their Horses both that work and travel; you may put in the paste of Turnips instead of the Oats, which being used there∣unto will do as well and better, and satisfie all expectations with very great success, without any additional food; cut, chop, and shred all your Furs-tops, and give them to your Horses, and they will exceedingly thrive therewith, this I received from the greatest Lord of Scotland, which was the continual custom of his Servants. Item a Gentleman traveling much, when others gave their Horses that travelled at the least half a peck of Oats, he gave his Horse but one half penyworth of Carrets, where he could have them.
I have know the like increase with Turnips, no food exceeding them for health and feeding. In Kent and Hurtford-shire they u∣sual cut all their Oats and Pease small, and give them their Horses, with chaff or cut straw; by which means they eat up all and thrive ex∣ceedingly therewith, and feed ther∣on the more greedily.
Chap. 12. Of Hops. OUt of a small plot of ground, scarce an acre and an half, a Gentleman got by Hops in one year at least one hundred and eightie pound. A worthy Friend of mine, out of less than a quarter of an acre of Ground received hately for Hops in one year ten pound, and for several years besides; which ground in my
knowledge was very much neglect∣ed, otherwaies would have return∣ed many more, being they stood much protected from the Nothern winds. The last year a Gentleman expe∣rienced, used Muck-water, by wa∣tering his Hops therewith, only at the very roots, whereby he had a return beyond expectation, and is resolved thereupon to take in more grounds for that purpose; the im∣provement that may happen there∣by cannot in any rational mans judgement, but be exceeding great, being the liquor doth exceed your ordinary muck. He likewise planted upon the Hop-hills divers seeds of Pumpions, the running branches thereof being turned into the paths with sticks, and causing the superfluous bran∣ches to be cut off, leaving only about three of them that were well knot∣ted; he made a double benefit there∣by, part whereof was sold at good
rates, the rest were boyled in the manner of Turnips, & he caused his Cattel & Swine to be sed therwith, to his great advantage, so with these and with Turnips, he boyled all the Barly chaff he could get, which made the Liquor the thicker, and proved more commodious to his Cattel, and sometimes when bran was to be had at reasonable rate, he caused it to be boyled ther∣in, otherwise the Liquor was only used. The usual way of keeping the roots of his Pumpion plants, was to get all the pieces of Pots, Dishes, and old Vessels, that would hold Water, and filling them with the former Liquor, he caused the end of an old rotten list or rag to be put into the Vessel, and the other end unto the Pumpion plant; which would descend unto the root, and the Liquor being thereby dreyned out of the old Vessels they were sea∣sonably replenish'd, from which
occasion he had the fairest Pumpi∣ons that ever were beheld, and the Hops wonderfully improved there∣by: he had also by vertue of this Liquor white Straw-berries, six in∣ches compass, which may at any time be attested, and such kind of roots, and Gardening-stuff, that the like for the generality was never seen before.
Chap. 13. Of Flax. FLax will yield thirty or forty pound an acre, sandy, baren, and heathy ground is best for it, and after Flax, Turnips, one acre of good Flax accounted worth three or four acres of the best Wheat, and the Liquor hath much advanced the goodness thereof. The best time for the sowing ther∣of is about the beginning of April,
presently after a shower of rain, which may abundantly be supply∣ed by the Engine, and Muck-wa∣ter following; some do usually sowe Flax untill the end of May, and some after. Observ. 1. Of Bees. There are divers places in Eng∣land that would maintain one hun∣dred hives of Bees, without provi∣ding conveniency of food for them, and it was an easiy thing to get five hundred pound per annum by Bees in places convenient. Observ. 2. To make trees bear much and ex∣cellent fruit, and to advantage them in their growth half in half, is on∣ly by the scasonable application of the Muck-water, and the water fol∣lowing for worms.
Observ. 3. A way how to recover an old Tree. When a tree is spent and hath done bearing, under-prop it so as that it may be stedfastly supported that the body may not sink, then take away the earth under the roots, and adde thereunto good rich Mould to the empty places, or your best mixed earth, with the Muck-water, and you shall perceive the tree to revive again, flourish, pros∣per, and bear fruit more plentiful∣ly than ever it did, so may you do with a tree that is fallen down. Observ. 4. To make barren Trees bear much, and exceeding good fruit. First split the root of an old tree, and adde thereunto Pingeons dung, Lees of Wine  and a little
Brimstone, or any such thing, as you shall understand to be destru∣ctive to worms, which composition hath been often tryed. Observ. 5. I have known a Vine planted up∣on the top of an Oak that did yield aboundance of excellent Grapes, very large, pleasant and full of Juyce, and why not many Oaks so planted. In ground fit to be digged up, to set corn, and thereby to reap an hundred for one, and all charges born, and less than a peck of wheat will fat an acre, and with the use of Muck-water, a far greater increase. That one good digging being it goeth deeper than the Plow, and thereby destructive to all sorts of weeds, and Grass, is as good as three plowings, if the Land be mellow, and the charge is no more. This course would imploy hun∣dreds
& thousands, and the ground be made convenienter for other crops, which would be far greater. If we set a grain of Corn, as Wheat, Bar∣ly, &c. it usually produceth three hundred and four hundred for one, according to experience, but if you sowe Wheat the accustomed way six for one is accounted a good crop. If the same quantity of acres of poor, heathy, barren Land, by pro∣ducing Flax, Turnips, and Clover-grass will yield more profit than the richest Land that beareth, wheat, Barly, Meadow, and good pasture, then by consequence the poor Land is better than the rich. It is also justified that two acres of corn being equally sowen, if the Muck-water be in time cast over the one acre, sufficiently either with the Engine, or otherwise, that acre shall exceed the other five for one, and upwards. You may have six times more
Hay, in a Meadow when it is turned up with the Plow, or a Cut∣ting-knife, and sowed thick with the Ashes, burnt of out the substance thereof. But the rain must follow first, o∣therwise use the Muck-water or or∣dinary water, with the Engine, then sowe the Meadow with the seed of Trefoyl, and plow and har∣row them, or in some ground you may use a strong Iron rake; let the first Grass that groweth thereon be very ripe that it may fall off it self, then let some pass over it rakes and cords, and stir it that it may fall out afterward, let it be mowed off, and carried to a certain place where it may be con∣veniently dryed, and the Grass will grow again presently, and may be mowed again in that year. Observ. 6. There are waies to make rushy
ground bear very good grasse, first plow it up, then Marl it, or plow and burn it, according to the usual custome, and being wet trench it, and then add a proportion of the muck following thereunto, with being rightly ordered will exceed the ordinary muck five for one, and upwards. Obser. 7. To make Corn-ground, quite out of heart, and worn out, to af∣ford as good a Crop on the last yeer of the lease as ever it did be∣fore, and this hath been performed by steeping the Corn, and muck Water. Sow with your Oats, the bot∣tom of a Hay-mow, and although your Land be out o sheart, and very poor, you may have that yeer, not
onely a Crop of Oats, but also a Crop of Grass likewise, which was spared till the next yeer, that it might beget a good sword, &c. There is a workman that made a Cart to draw as much with one horse as with five, and is still living at Dedford. An Honourable person neer Lon∣don, hath devised a Plough that with one horse, and a boy, will per∣form as much in a day, as his neighbours, onely with the parti∣tion of a hedge between them, upon the same sort of ground, can di∣spatch with four or five horses, and two men besides; the Gentleman doth advance, twenty for one, in an Acre, more than his neighbours can do, and these people, when they have been very much cast behinde, have been offered the help of this Plough, but they have refused it, because they would not alter their antient course.
The same Gentleman hath like, wise a Cart with three wheeles, wherewith one horse will draw, about fourty loads of Muck in a day, to a field of some distance, neither is the horse put to any hardnesse of labour, for a man may draw the Cart with his hand, & it will passe with great facility, the horse doth not bear any weight at all, he hath likewise a very large Cart with three wheels, where∣with one horse can draw a full load. This Gentleman hath likewise a Chariot with three wheeles being like the hinder part of a Coach, and hath a seat behinde the chair, where his foot-boy may sit, if the wayes prove foul, in which Cha∣riot his wife and himself have tra∣velled eighty Miles, in two dayes, with one horse, and although he be sufficiently provided with hor∣ses, yet he commonly useth his Chariot, and guideth the horse,
by the reigns himself with much ease and delight. And therewith he hath outgone a Coach and six horses; he con∣stantly useth the same Chariot up∣on any occasion from his house to London.
Chap. 11. To make Clay burn as clear as any other fire, and as usefull. TAke one third part of small pit Coal, or sea Coal, and mingle them together as you would Mor∣ter, then make them up in round balls lesse than your head, and lay them upon a place, to dry, then lay them upon the fire one upon ano∣ther
and observe the conclusion. There is also a sort of Lome, which is of it self combustible, and will with the addition of a few Charcoales; burn very clear and prove exceeding usefull. Pbatum est.
Chap. 12. A way to convay Water un∣der ground up to a very high hill and so to the top of the highest house. THis must be performed as it may be seeen, at Barkhamsted, in Hartfordshire, by a wheele, lea∣ving the rest (to avoid prolixity) to be demonstrated by discourse.
Observ. 1. Out of two pecks and a half of Rape seeds, sown neer York the last yeer, there was sould as much of the seed as came to fourty pounds. Observ. 2. There is a sure way to feed old cattell fat in a short time, and to make the meat as tender as the youngest. First make them as poore as you can possible, then turn them to very good fresh grass, by which means you may enjoy your desire.
Observ. 3. To make Heifers as large again as their dams, and as formal as the fayrest Oxen, onely by spaying them while they are young, and they will sell at the rates equal with Oxen. Observ. 4. I Have known Gentlemen that have caused Tares to be sowed amongsts their Grasse in their Med∣dowes, which thereby have afforded a double proportion of fodder for their Cattell, and to very great ad∣vantage. There is a Gentleman who doth usually sow several Acres of Fen∣nell, wherewith he feedeth, and
fatteneth his Cattell in a very short time, and one Acre thereof will ex∣tend very farre, and will afford se∣veral Crops in one yeer, according to the Sowe-thistle, the oftner you cut it, the thicker it will grow, and once sowen it will continue many yeers without trouble, you may give it your Cattle in Racks by bundles as you cut it. Observ. 5. Another doth usually and pri∣uately, every yeer, sow divers Bush∣ells of Bay salt on his Corn ground, and to the admiration of all his neighbours, he hath constantly bet∣ter Crops of Corne, by far than any of them, they being wholy ig∣norant of his wayes. This being made known to a Gentleman, he hath bought great store of Bay Salt at two shillings six-penee per bush∣ell, and being a great husband, and
very knowing in husbandry, is con∣fident, to advantage himself much thereby: for there is no Muck or soyle Comparable thereunto, both for Grasse and Corn, as may evidently appear by the Salt Marshes, in severall places of this Nation.
Chap. 13. To make a sufficient fence, of Sallowes, or VVil∣lowes, or both, in a ve∣ry short time. LEt your ditch, be ordered accor∣ding to the usual manner, and and if it may be with good Mould, and take small sticks of Willowes, or Sallowes, cut from the trees, and cut the Bark round with the
knife, about three inches distant, the one from the other, and place two of the sticks sidewaies, one foot distant, the one from the other, then cover them with earth, and with Mould, and they will soon shoot forth to very good perfection, and from every place so cut round will spring forth a branch, which after they are grown about half a yard, you may cut them off a∣bout three inches from the ground, and they will thereby grow the thicker, and become a very com∣pleat fence suddenly, and especi∣ally if you water them with the muck Water.
Chap. 14. Of Muskmelons. THe way to have as good Musk∣melons, as are any in Italy, without the unwholsome use of the muck∣beds here in London, is confirmed by the Earl of Dorset. Plant them under a Wall, Pale, or Hedge, on the Sunny side, with very good mould, purposely pre∣pared,
and underneath the Mold, lay a quantity of fresh Barly straw, and by this easie meanes, using the seasonable Covertures, and neces∣sary futherance, you may attain to your uttermost desire, without any further trouble; but if you do dis∣cern the straw to make the earth too hot, thrust in a stake through the mould to the straw, that the vapour and heat evaporate, and passe forth, this from the Earl of Te∣nett. I shall more copiously inlarge my self herein, with the ready way to ripen them, and such other fruits, before their season, by plant∣ing them in dry weather, and every third or fourth day, watering them with warm water. Whereas there hath happened an exceeing great destruction of Beanes, Pease, and other corn of
late yeers, by Wormes, and other creeping things, both about the City and in most places of the Countrey, there being no means imagined by any for the preventi∣on thereof, you may observe how to avoid them, both in Fields, Gar∣dens, and at the roots of trees. Take sliced, or bruised Onions, and steep them in Water, all night or longer; add thereunto a proportion of Salt and Soot, and Lime (if you please) or Ashes, in your Gardens you may use it with your watering Pots, especially to the roots of trees. And for the Corn fields the engine following is most proper, which I refer to my after discourse. This composition will not leave a Worm in the ground, where it is used, besides it will strengthen the Land very much for Corn, and bring the Trees to much fruitful∣nesse, that were formerly decayed at the roots; if there be Wormes,
take but a drop or two of the Onion water, and some Salt, put it into a Worm-hole, and the worm will come out, and dye pre∣sently; and the same water, with Onions and Salt, by drinking a lit∣tle of it in a morning fasting, at the full of the Moon, will destroy all Wormes in men, women and children; you may use onely the Onions which will be suffici∣ent. A remedy for the worms in men, women and children, you must three mornings before the full of the Moon, give them to drink a quantity of new Milk, and give it them in the morning of the full Moon, and the worms then expect∣ing breakfast as before, they having then as Physicians say, their mouths open, are destroyed. To bring into one place, and destroy all Worms, that are hurt∣full in a Gardens, take the belly or
panch of a Weather newly killed, and all the filth and dung that is in it, and bury the same in the place were they be, cover it a little with the earth, and within two dayes you may see all the hurtfull things resort thither, which you may destroy, as you please, Cen∣taury, Colloquintida and Wormewod are good ingredients to adde if need were to the former designe to de∣stroy Wormes. You may at the end of March or February make the ground very wet by casting water thereon, and about eight or nine of the clock, by candle light gather up all the wormes, whereby you may destroy them in Gardens. Water wherein the leaves and seed of Hemp is sodden, being cast and sprinkled on the earth, will make the wormes come out of the ground, if there be any.
Cabbages puld up by the roots, & set in sand, in a Cellar or some other room, may be kept all the Winter, or you may hang them up with strings, and so may you keep Artichokes, and other plants, and roots, for constant use, as Carets, Parsnips, and Turnips. In dry wea∣ther in October, and November, make a layr of Sand, and a layr of Carrets, cutting away the tops close to the roots, with some of the small ends of the Carrets, and about the last of December, when there is no frost, uncover them, and you may keep them longer if you pare off the the shootings of the upper end of the root, and then lay them in Sand, and so Parsnips, and Tur∣nips.
Obser. 1. In Herefordshire they feed their Swine with Elm-tree-leaves, ga∣thering them in bags. There was fifty pound an Acre offered for Tobacco lately in Wor∣cestershire, and at that rate, for se∣verall Acres.
Chap. 14. To get off the Smutt from VVheat. FIrst lay a lay of Barly Chaff, then a layer of smutty Wheat, then a layer of Chaff again, then a layer of VVheat, &c. and so thrash it, and it will break very fair.
Obser. 2. Bury Hawthorn Berries deep in the ground all the winter, then sow them in February, and water them with muck-water, as followeth, and you shall finde wonderfull ex∣pedition in the growth. Observ. 3. Quicksets are not to be weeded at all after Mich. Obser. 4. That VVheat being newly sown upon ground, on a hill side, very poor and not worth two shillings an Acre, and never mucked, there was Clover Grasse sown amongst the VVheat, which proved to be as rich, and as good a Crop, as ever was seen in England, or ever was
known to grow without muck, and after the VVheat was cut, the Clover grew up beyond expectati∣on, and served for excellent pasture, all the yeer following; A very good crop of Clover Grasse was cut in the same yeer, which was performed by steeping the VVheat (in Salt Brine) and Lime, which hindred the prejudice of the Crowes, birds, worms, &c. The seed was steeped in strong Brine, that would bear an Egge, about twenty four hours. First there was laid a lay of the steeped seed spread upon a floor, then a lay of Lyme, upon the corn, then a layer of corn again, &c. The like benefit was made with part of this ground, by sow∣ing of Barley steeped, and ming∣led with Clover Grasse, which ground hath lately afforded three Crops a yeer of Clover, as high as hath been seen in England, one
crop thereof transcending VVheat. And that after the wheat is steeped, as before with Lyme, A Gentleman cast the Clover Grasle seeds thereon, often stirring them together with a Shovell, the seed did so Concorporate with the VVheat, and Lyme, that it made a wonderfull improvement, and doth very much enrich the ground, and totally prevent the Smuttiness of VVheat. A Gentleman in Kent would usually with Barley, which being cut, & the VVoold which was left standing, and there was very good pasture that yeer on the ground, in June the yeer following, the seed of divers acres thereof was sold for six pound an acre being more com∣modious than wheat, and without charge, which hath been sold for∣merly for fifteen and sixteen pound an acre.
VVhereas there hath been a thousand bushels of corn utterly spoiled that hath been laid up in store-houses, with an ordinary small black creeping worm which doth usually breed in malt, and have been often seen to cover the Malt all over, and are of that dan∣gerous consequence that part of them will destroy the Malt, and corrupt the Beer that is made there∣of, and make it very unwholsome, worms which have been often seen in the like manner to breed a∣mongst VVheat, laid up in great heaps, to the great spoil thereof, the way to destroy them is to get about a Sack full of horse Auts, which be covered in the fields with great heaps of dust, and little sticks; Then shovelling the Corn from the sides of the roomes, and divi∣ding the heaps of corn into seve∣rall floors, and spaces, lay about a quart af Ants in several of the
bare places, leaving there the full quantity of them, in like manner, and they will become destructive to the wormes Immediately. The Malt will be by this means restored and rectified, and the Ants have been observed to vanish suddenly. Sowe Oates, and Tares together, and the Oates will there∣by grow very rank and high, and the Tares will Climbe up with the Oats, and thrive the better, be it far in May, you may cut this Crop, and dispose of it for fodder, and the same summer you may have another crop which will come up more advantagiously than the other. A Gentleman of Richmond, hath this yeer about thirty acres of S. Foyne which is of exceeding great estimation with him, and with di∣versothers, not without sufficient cause, he preserveth his seed to be ordered for greater Crops, the be∣nefit
it affordeth on that sort of ground, being a very dry hard soyl is two Crops in a Summer, and two loads on an acre, and for pa∣sture, it is of most admirable repute, and equally fruitfull for Milch∣kine, with the other, being com∣monly on dry barren ground, not worth twelve pence an Acre. Virginia wheat will yeeld here in England five hundred for one, being discreetly ordered, with muck, and then muck water; A Gentleman not far from London doth usually sow these seeds in the bellies of Sprats, or some other fish, where∣by they come to a more seasonable maturity, and with greater advan∣tage.
Chap. 15. To recover old Trees. TAke the quantity of a quarter of a peck of Horse blood, or Oxe blood tempered, with about half a peck of Pigeons dung, make it up into soft paste, which will be rare to apply to the greater roots, and aged Trees, fastning the same paste about the roots after they have been lay'n
bare, and have taken ayr some few dayes, which course will cer∣tainly recover a Tree or Vine that is near dead, & will make them put forth blossoms and fruits afresh, which must be done about the mid∣dle of February. Apply it to the Vine about the beginning of March; you may like∣wise recover old Trees, by applying to the Roots, before the Sap cometh up, & to make your trees florish, and prosper very well, round about the body of the Trees make many holes with a crow of Iron, about six weeks after Michaelmas, and powr into the holes your rich muck water, or Oxe blood, and fill them up with good mould, &c. Observ. 1. If you would have Poles, Posts, & Stakes, Pales, whch you drive into water last long, burn them well at
the ends, so far as they are to be in the ground, and they will continue without decaying many yeers; this course a Gentleman in Cheshire used about five yeers since, and the Posts, and Pales, are still stand∣ing without repair. Obser. 2. To help a Chimney that is dangerosly on fire, let two or three persons, take a Blanket, or Cover∣let, and hold it close to the mouth of the Chimney, that no ayr may enter, and with a close board, cover the the top of the Chimney, and the fire for want of ayr, will soon be extinguished. A Gentleman of great worth in Hartfordshire, did lately confidently affirm unto me that at Hutcher in that shire, they did bestow three thou∣sand
pound per Annum in Rags in London, and altough they have been infected vvith the plague, very of∣ten, they finde such benefit by them, that they constantly use them, vvhich they chop into pieces and then dispose them upon their Corn ground, they likevvise buy all the shaved Rabbets skins they can get for money, and all the shaved horn, and Sheeps trotters, the last being best of all, excep∣ting Sprats, which when they are sold at a penny or 2 pence a peck, being often thrown about streets, upon muckhills, there cannot be a more fruitfull Manure than they are, and every other unsound fish. Obser. 3. Chaff will heat and ripen un∣ripe Apples.
The drosseor that which is left after the pressing out of Lyntseeds, is exceeding profitable for the feeding of Cattell, as the other Rapeseeds, with turnips. Hempseeds given to Hens in Winter will make them lay oftner than ordinary seeds or corn.
Chap. 16. To feed and fatten all sorts of Poultry and Fowl. BOyl Butchers blood, which is easily to be had, with a good qantity of Bran, mingsed there∣with, or grains, which is not so good, untill it come to the manner of a blood pudding, which will feed your Fowl as fat as you will desire them to be.
Some do use to feed Fowl with Carrets, Turnips, Parsnips and Pumpions sodden and mingled, with Bran, or coarse Pollard Turkies will become very fat in a short time, and prosper exceeding∣ly with bruised Acorns. You may soak Chippings, and o∣ther Crusts of bread in broken beer or fleeten Milk, and feed your Ca∣pons and Hens fat presently. Obser. 1. To prevent blasting of Corn under God, is to change the seed, or by soaking it in the best muck wa∣ter, or mixing it with Lyme, and water as before, and the Corn be∣ing seasonably steeped, to adde thereunto the Lyme, or Ashes, or both, and being thereby fixed unto them and so sown, hath been a spe∣ciall remedy these many yeers.
Obser. 2. Concerning muck, and muck water. Land floods are of gallant im∣provement, and such as come from the washing down of rode wayes, great towns, the soyl of pastures, fertile fields, commons dung∣hills, &c. If Marl be good for grass and corn, which is most cer∣tain, then water mingled therewith must necessarily be of the same ver∣tue. Obser. 3. And if tainted water, couloured water, and water putrified, water thick, and fat waters in ponds, &c. the riches of all these being allowed to be unvaluable for steeping of corn &c.
Obser. 4. And if the sea from the fat and brackish nature of it self do so won∣derfully enrich the lands, and salt mingled with corn hath a very good operation because its brackish∣nesse is fruitfull to the land, and if steeping the corn either in fat water, Lyme water, Dung water, &c. be of wonderfull effect to make strange things which is most true. Obser. 5. The residence of water that comes from Chalkie and Lyme∣stone grounds, or be coloured with land floods, doth fatten the ground exceedingly, these being all con∣firmed by those of great judgement and experience.
Obser. 6. By some part of these experi∣ments, a Gentleman which had but five or sixe acres of Hay, he had twenty four loads in the same meddow, which may be made apparent. Obser. 7. By Flooding (as Master Plat saith) who was a man of the great∣est judgement and experience in Husbandry, who improved lands from three hundred shillings to three hundred pound per annum. He likewise highly commendeth Moats, and standing Pooles, which may yeeld (as he saith) great store of excellent manure, and that by the blessing of God, most wonderfull and miraculous things have been ef∣fected by those means.
Obser. 8. And farther great vertue, and worth, tis Concluded, there is in Mud of Rivers, standing Pools, and Ditches, being the soyl of pastures, and fields, common wayes, yards, and dunghills. Shovelling of streets, highwaies, yards, and overswathes, of com∣mon land, and other lands of com∣mons, neer hedges, is very good both of themselves, and also com∣pounded with other soyl. Mingling of grounds is exceed∣ingly advantageous, &c. Which may be conceiv'd of the muck water following, tis effected in Case of drought in time of Summer, and in the heat thereof, now and then wet∣ting over the Land, which had it been known and used this Summer might have done millions of good. These being Concluded, to be all
excellent helps, and exceeding great advantages, I could wish that those that have great proportions of lands, should be provided with a convenient Moat or standing Pool, in some part of their grounds, and if they have not any such pond, rather than to be without it, to dig one that will contain water, and may be supplied constantly therewith by a chanel from a river, or from Moats, that are maintained by springs, and rather than fail from a Pump, or some other devise or∣conveniencie with pipes of Lead, Wood, or earth, or with the En∣gine that followeth in the subse∣quent papers. This being Compleated, and ha∣ving water sufficient, let the first in∣gredient be a quantity of crumbling Marl, if there be any near, and with a strong Iron Rake fixed to a long Pose, let the Marle be stirred at some times of leasure to and
from you, to thicken the water, then having store of Poultry Fowl, and Pigeons, to be very carefull to preserve their dung; especially the dung of Rabbits, if any be to be had, all which, or part thereof, be∣ing cast into the Pond, to stir it som∣times as before, then having sheep, where they sit a nights in fold, you may get store of their dung, and use as the other, In the like manner dispose of all your Cow and Horse dung with∣out the straw, and spare as many of your graines, after brewing as you can, seeing you may provide suffici∣ent food for your Swine otherwise, and to get as much of these sorts, as you can conveniently, or if you have any of these following, that you can conveniently spare, viz. Lynt∣seed, Oyl, Lees of Wine, Ale, Bear, Perry, Syder, Beef-broth, the Brine of Poudring-tubs, scra∣pings of  or sweepings
thereof, or any liquid brackish fat∣nesse, greasy matter, or any thing that comes from or is of the fleshly matter of the create, whether by Sea or Land, that hath a secret operation in it to the Earth, like∣wise to cast into the pond a propor∣tion of Lyme, fat Chalke that is not stoned, and some bay Salt, and what blood you can get, and urine, which is most excellent for all sorts of ground, and whatsoever you shall think in your own judgement to be helpfull and advantagious there∣unto. This work being performed, you are to provide a vessell containing a Tun, or there abouts, and being pla∣ced in a Cart, with broad wheels without Iron, such as are in Lon∣don, that they may not Root the ground much, bringing the Cart to the Pond, fill the vessell with a Tun∣nell and a Pail at a Staffs end, such as Brewers use for that purpose, or
you may cause a little scaffold to be made, such as Brewers have at the Thames side, by which means you may soon fill it and Carry it to the fields, or hill sides, and then to pro∣vide an Engine which I am now finishing, in part like that they use in London, when houses are on fire, which being placed in the middst of the street, will cast water to the ap∣permost part of the highest house, and after this manner I have seen them water sufficiently a great plat of grasse: An Engine contrived in manner like this, will water an Acre compasse at one standing, and then being drawn with low wheels, or otherwise may be removed to any other place. A reasonable quantity of the Muck water will serve an Acre compleat∣ly, and what vertue this commixture may have in it, I leave to all impar∣tial Judgments, which I confidently have experimented in small parcels,
& but with a Gardning water-pot, I have found that it hath exceeded the best sort of muck by many degrees, which liquor must be applied to the Land, when it is fed as low as may be, and the hill sides being watered in this Manner the lower grounds will fare the better, by showers of rain, and the washings from thence. And for Corn ground, there is an other way to be used with this Engine, being it may be contrived in manner of a Sedan with four legs, carried empty with two men, and set down without prejudice at all, the men passing with it onely in the furrowes, and then being set down and used there, may after∣wards be removed to another place, as occasion requireth, the Cart be∣ing drawn to some lane and place in the field, with the vessell of wa∣ter where it may do no hurt to the tylled lands: I have concluded in my
thoughts, how to convey the water from the vessell, to the Engine, with∣out treading or soyling the lands at all, which is so facil, and will be allowable in any mans judgement, & so continuing alway with so little charge, that I am not able at the pre∣sent to impart it with my pen, with∣out too much prolixity, and there∣fore I crave leave otherwise to finish my discourse. This Engine being placed in a Centre, will cast the Liquor before and behinde, and on both sides, that it will mildely fall down, like a shower of rain with wonderfull successe, and may be used with or∣dinary water very advantageously, the Compasse of an Acre, of ground, at a time, on a dry time in summer both to growing Corn, and Grasse, with very much ad∣vantage. I have known Husbandmen, after they have sowen their Corn, they
would pray that it would please God to send a shower of rain, and this Engin, with the blessing of God, will at any time comply with their desires, and make the earth so fruit∣full, that in my knowledge one acre so watered, I mean with the muck water, will render neer, if not fully twenty times more benefit, than any other acre, being tylled in the same manner, which will be (I am con∣fident) as great a benefit to this Na∣tion as ever was devised, besides I shall be able to help any man with an Engine for a small matter that will be very usefull to water grounds in this nature, and exceed∣ing convenient and commodious for Gardens, which will likewise wash off Caterpillars from all man∣ner of Fruit-Trees, and those that grow against the Walls, and those that will alter the leaves and fruit beyond belief, experience shall con∣firm as much unto you.
When your Corn is likewise steeped in the Liquor about some four and twenty hours, according to my after directions, you may expect a far greater fertility and profit, which hath been seen above one hundred for one in Corn. When you have emptied your Pond, for these purposes, you are then before you fill it again to get out the mud, I mean the residence of the commixture, and to rake it out upon the bank side, which you may perform with the back of an old Armor; these, or one of them, being strongly fixed upon a Poles end with Iron, the inward part of the Armour bending to∣wards you, will rake up all the mud by degrees, with much fa∣cility, and thereby you may cleanse any River or Moat, without divert∣ing the Water-course going into the water, or let the water out of Moats, &c.
I have known Rivers about Cole∣brook, above forty years since, let a yard lower, besides the great be∣nefit of drawing the Rivers, and the mudd so taken out of the Ri∣vers, called small Codd was so ex∣ceeding rich, that they were mira∣culously advantagious otherwise, which I shall hereafter discover. When you have gotten out this mudd you are before to provide a convenient place for your Straw, muck from the Stables, and Cow-Houses, &c. which must be con∣trived in this manner, or other such way according to the fancy of the Owner, viz. to incompass the place where you lay your muck with a Brick wall, about four foot high, only leaving a place for en∣trance, to fill out the muck in Carts, and by any means to cause the flooring to be stanch, not to soak, and drink in the water of the Muck-hill at all, but rather for the
prevention thereof, to make such a pavement of Brick-stone or Free∣stone if it may be had near, and the floor to be made with a little de∣scent on both sides to the middle, that the water may pass out in a Chanel into some wooden Vessel, or Cestern that may stand in the Ground near, and so low, that the Muck-water may pass into it, which may be contrived so full of vertue and fertility, that the worth of it is of high esteem, (being once truly experienced) will transcend exceedingly, and cannot be bought at too dear a rate. There are many places where the Ground is so firm it needs not any other bottom, and the Liquor may be made by the meaner sort in Vessels, without a Pond, for small parcels of ground, and there∣by the other charges might be sa∣ved, but I first conceive it to be more proper to lay in the same quantity.
Then by digging a pit to cast certain Loads of good Sand upon the Straw, and then loads of o∣ther Earth to concorporate with it, which if it were commixed at the first it were better, but I leave the disposing of that to knowing Hus∣bandmen, to be ordered according to the condition of the soyls, be∣ing certain that any kind of earth that is moist digged out of pits without stones, may be so mingle as it may be excellent fruit full soyl, as Sand with Clay, Loam with Chalk, &c. the one very much enriching the other, as gravel ground Dung'd with Chalk, and Chalk mingled with Gravel for want of Dung; but you may use if you please only Sand, then the muck out of the Pond or Earth of Commons near the Ditch-sides, and Hedges, mud of standing Pools, Sea-weeds, which are excellent soyl, shovelings of Streets, Yards, High-waies, and
leaves of Trees: as also Sea sand, or any liquid brackish fatness, greasie or oyly matter, tarry stuff, pitch∣marks, the blood and offall of Beasts, empty marrow-bones, the dressing and remainder of Trotters of sheep, which are most excellent, the cuttings or shavings of Horns, hair, which is best to lay them up∣on the ground before the Corn is sown; then fuffer the Swine to musle it up and down. Pilchers after the oyl is taken from them, the garbage of stinking Sprats, or the best of them when they are plentifull and cheap, they being cryed sometimes for a peny a peck about the Streets in Lon∣don. Upon your mudd lay more straw, then more loads of Sand, &c. and as your judgement shall direct you, some Lyme properly disposed, and some fat Chalk or Marl in equal wreathes, you may likewise cast it
over in the right place with some Bay salt, and sometimes when the Straw is uppermost, or other∣wise you may spare some of your Pond water, and scatter on all the mass that will occasion the other to concorporate the better; and afford more, and richer Dung∣water. By this means, and with in∣different charge, you may have manure sufficient to serve all your Land, and such, that one load be∣ing rightly ordered shall maintain it as well as some ten loads of your common sort of muck, and the wa∣ter that comes from it will be so rich for the steeping of your seed, that the discourse thereof till ex∣perimented would be incredible. A Gentleman did lately assure me, that the brine of powdering Tubs did afford him as good a crop of Corn, as ever was seen grow; urine of Mankind is of very great
worth to cast upon the Muck∣hill. Wood-ashes are best next to Soap ashes, which hath a vigorous ope∣ration of it self, and Soot is excel∣lent good also, and likewise for Pasture, being only strewed o∣ver it. You may sometimes cast the wa∣ter that drayneth from the Muck, upon the muck heaps again, which will afford the more vegetative salt, and desend to the former receptacle more fructiferously, upon which mass and heap of muck, I must in∣stance the necessary and most be∣neficial way of a covering or sha∣dow, which I will not insist upon, but leave the result thereof, to the consideration of profounder Judge∣ments, only thus much I desire to impart to the apprehensions of others, that the salt muck heaps being exposed in Winter, to the constant showers of rain, do lose
much of their strength, the uppe part thereof being hardly worth the carriage, and spreading upon the ground. There are ordinary muck places that have very stanch bottoms, and will contain the water without any farther charge, although the ver∣tue and goodness of the liquor in a short time make restitution to coun∣tervail all expences. And farther, concerning the steeping of Corn to manifest the benefit of muck water. In the heat of Summer, when the Sun hath ex∣haled a great part of the coloured water from their moats and Dung∣hill-pools, and that it groweth thick∣ish and far, then reserve a good pit∣full thereof well bottomed with Clay, that will hold water, and in seed time steep your seed in it, but put the far water to it by little and little, as it drinkerh it up, that at the last it may be almost dry, sift a
small quantity of Lime amongst it, that so it may grow dry with the Lyme, then with this seed sow or set your most remote grounds from your dunghill, and by this means you will save ten times as much labour in carriage of the Dung. Hereby excellent crops have been obtained beyond expectation, and not subject, being new sowen, to be devoured with Fowls. I have sometimes occasioned the splitting of the Corn, as they use to do for malt, and then have sowen it, and it came up speedily, and got the predomination of the weeds at first, and so kept the same, where∣by it became of better encrease than ordinary, and it hath been suffici∣ently experimented, that when a dry season came upon sowing, that the Corn thus ordered took root far better than other mens. It hath been an antient Custom to steep. Beans in salt water, being
usual in Kent to steep the Barly when they sow late, that it might grow the faster, and also to take a∣way the soyl from wild Oats, Cockle, &c. which will swim, also much of the light Corn, which is necessary to be taken away. If you put Pigeons dung into the water, and let it steep all night, it will be as it were half a dunging. Mr. Platt doth highly commend the often macerating and drying of Corn, and it is an excellent way, ac∣cording to his observation to steep Corn. If you cover the ground in Win∣ter which you mean to break up at the Spring with good store of Fearn, it is and hath been a long time ge∣nerally commended, that it undoubt∣edly suppresseth the weeds for springing up in Winter, which would much confound part of the heart of the Ground, and doth also much fructifie the Ground for all
mannes of Roots and herbs, and very good to spread about the Al∣lies of Hop-yards, to keep the Ground warm, and to destroy the weeds and grass that would prein∣dice the fertility of the earth. Some will burn to Ashes, Roots, and Stubble, the sword and swarth of the Ground together with Fearn, straw, stubble, thistles, heath, sedge, rushes, furs, bean stalks, which do very much advance barren Grounds, and make them most fructiferous. Wood mingled with Clods, and superfluous earth, and so burnt, and the Ashes added to some sorts of Clay may be used with no less advantage than Marl. And to manifest the benefit of steeping Wheat, &c. it may be performed with less plowing, and without muck, being provided with a convenient Vessel of Wood, mingle water, Dung, and Corn together, which must be stirred very well se∣veral
times, in and about Noon, the next day let the water pass away at the top as much as may be, then stir the Dung and Corn very well together, and sow it in a barren soyl, and you shall have a very plentifull crop, equal, if not tran∣scending the Corn that hath been fully Husbanded. And further, to fortifie the waies of steeping Corn to be most admi∣rable, I desire to remember unto you what Mr. Hartlih doth illustrate, viz. put into Quick and unslack'd Lyme as much water as sufficeth to make it swim four inches above the Lyme. And unto ten pound of the said water powred off, mix one pound of Aquavitae, and in that liquor steep or soak wheat or other Corn four and twenty hours, which being dryed in the Sun or Ayr, steep it again in the same liquor, four and twenty hours more; and so
likewise the third time, afterwards sow them at a great diffance the one from the other, about a foot be∣tween each grain, so you will find one grain will produce thirty, thir∣ty six, forty two, fifty two ears, and those very fruitfull, with a stalk equalling the stature of a man in height. Beat off your Wallnuts after they are full ripe, and in the green husks, or without put them into good ordi∣nary earth in a Barrel or a Basket untill the begining of mid March fol∣lowing, get as much warm milk from the Cow as will steep them four and twenty hours, then set them in ground well digged, and natural for such fruit, with their little ends upwards, about three or four inches deep, and they will ac∣cording to experience exceedingly prosper, set them near one foot a∣sunder, and in a right line to weed them, at four years growth trans∣plant
them, and use the Muck wa∣ter to the roots, according to dis∣cretion, which will exceedingly advantage them in their growth, and so likewise all other plants and trees, Quicksets, &c. being well molded, which will put them for∣ward to such perfection, that you will comfortably admire thereat, which hath sufficiently been tryed of late, these are excellent for Oyl, preserves, and conserves, choose the fairest Wallnuts you can get, when you transplant, do the utmost to preserve the top roots, that being bruised expect not the tree to thrive, but it will dye and fail at the best.
Chap. 16. A Discovery of the benefit might be made with part of 500 a∣cres formerly limited; and so ac∣cordingly by other parcels. IMpr. Rape-seed 20 acres. 0400 l. Mustard-seed 20 acres. 0400 Liquorish 20 acres. 1600 Hops and Pumpions 20 acres. 1000 Saffron 20 acres. 0400
Flax 20 acres. 0400 Clover grass 20 acres. 1000 Roman Beans 20 acres. 1060 Tobacco 20 acres. 0600 Improvement of Ground for Or∣chards, woade. 20 acres. Madder 20 acres. 0400 French Beans 20 acres. 0400 Pumpions and Cabbages 40 acres. 0400 Tassels 2 acres. 0050 Osiers 5 acres. 0125 Clove July Flowers, and red Roses 5 acres. 0100 Milch Kine. 0100 Feeding Cattel. 0100 Rabbits in Hutches. 0500 Malt. Poultery and Fowl. 0020 Pidgeons. 0020 Swine. 0020 Bees. 0100 Silk worms. 0500 A Decoy. 0040 Oats hath been made 300 l. per a∣cre,
the times being still seasonable therefore, Coriander seed need no Dung, and will grow very well here. Anniseeds will grow very well in England, and so Commin seed, Fennel-seed, and Canary seed. Asparagus once sown will last twelve years. These before specified, one with a∣nother, will afford twenty pound an acre yearly. When you have composed good store of muck with earth, as before, you may lay of the best mould, some thickness upon the basest Ground, and thereon set wheat, and you may have as good crops as you can desire, or ever was known in England, the upper sourd of that Ground by means of the mould will be much improved thereby, and the soyl likewise underneath, and you may farther at pleasure advantage
the mould to the greatest height with your Muck water, and by this means you may have all other com∣modities in aboundance, proper for such rich soyl, or appertaining to Gardening, as Saffron, &c. Observ. 1. Graft Apples upon Cherry stocks, and the fruit will be exceeding red. Observ. 2. To make Roses by inoculation grow upon Cherry stocks.
Chap. 17. To make Ʋines grow upon Cherry stocks. PLant them together, and when the Vines have put out long small branches, bore a hole in the Cher∣ry stock, that the branch may easi∣ly go through; take up the upper bark, untill it come to the Green,
and let it grow there, when it is well grown cut off the Vine below, stroak the Ground according to the ordinary wayes,  it well and you will have your .
Chap. 18. To make five sorts of Roses grow upon one Stock without inocula∣tion. WHen they begin to knot, bore with an Aul under the knot, and with a feather put Green in one, and Yellow in another, Red in the third, and Blew in the fourth, and close up all the holes hand∣somely.
Put the blood of Pikes before you put in the Grafts, dip the end of the Graft in it, and you shall have red Apples; but they will be redder by far, if you graft them up∣on Cherrie stocks.
Chap. 19. To make Roses smell strong, and unsavoury. PUt Garlick close to the Root, and so with Lillies, for they have all a sympathy. To make a red Rose become white, as it groweth, kindle Brim∣stone, and smoak the Rose with it at your pleasure, and it will become white presently.
Take the roots of divers colours of Gillyflowers, bind them together, and set them in the ground in good mould, and you shall have them various in one stock. Obser. 1. Put Rosemary in Juniper, and it will endure the Winter the better, and smell more fragrantly. Obser. 2. To make Parsly spring up in few hours; steep the seed in sweet milk, and straw your bed you mean to sow with unquenc'd Lime upon it three times, then sow your feed, and strew once more of your Lime upon it, and upon that earth well prepared, then water it well with temperat Muck water as followeth, and you may according to discreti∣on enjoy your expectation.
Obser. 3. Lay Beans and Pease in warm Oyl, or in the best Muck water, let them lye nine daies, then dry them, and in the mean time to try them; you may be assured, that what you set in any mans presence, they shall spring up in few hours, or in a short time. Obser. 4. To make white Lillies become red, you must very neatly open the clifts of the roots, and fill the same with any red colour, then set them in fat dunged earth. Obser. 5. Bore holes in Bay-berries, and put into every hole the seed of Ar∣tichoaks, wrap them in dung, and
put them into the ground, whence come such sweet and pleasant Arti∣choaks, that better were never ea∣ten. The like may be if you steep seeds three daies in sweet smelling water, when you set your Cabbage Plants wrap them at the roots round about with fresh Cows muck, and when they are ripe they will smell most delicioufly like Musk, and thrive exceedingly. Obser. 6. If Roses and Lillies be planted nigh together, or that they touch one another, the flowers of them will smell the more curiously, and thrive the better. Obser. 7. Gather green Beans from the stalks, being ripe and fully grown,
and ready to eat, then immediatly cut off the stalks, within a hand∣full of the root; and if the weather be dry, apply unto the roots some of your muck water and more bran∣ches will shortly spring out, where∣upon will spring forth new Beans, & more plentifull, and rather better than before; whereby you may have near three-fold encreafe, and two several gatherings of Beans in one year: but by any means take heed that the first gathering and cutting away of the stalks be when the stalks be green, and it is verily believed that Pease will do the like. Obser. 8. Gather Roses when they be ripe, and presently cut away the new sprung tops, and the uppermost branches of that year, and you shall have new fresh Roses grow again out of the same ear about Michaelmas,
& the more plentiful by applying the Muck water seasonably to the roots. Graft Roses in the bud upon sweet Bryer, and they will smell most deliciously. The roots of Roses, with their slips and knots removed and set a∣mongst Broom, will bring forth yellow Roses.
Chap. 20. To preserve Chesnuts, and keep them sound. LAy them together with Wall∣nuts, and they will drink up and consume the humours, whereby they corrupt, and will not suffer them to be moldy. I remember about thirty years since, I set at least half a peck of choice Filberts in a Garden, on
dry sandy borders, and finding not one of them to come up, at the latter end of the year I caused the banks to be digged up again, where I found all my Filberts fresh, full, and as pleasant to eat as at any time before, whence you may learn, that burying them in fresh sand, you may preserve them fresh for your cating all the year, especially being kept in the Ground in an earthen pot, so may you use Wallnuts and small nuts, and the reason why the Fill∣berts came not up, was for want of moysture, therefore the muck water following wil be of excellent use, &c.
Chap. 21 ELm tree chips set in Ditches, will in a short time become young Trees, and make a very good fence, and the slips that grow from the roots of Elms being taing off, will grow to great perfection in few years. Wild Oats destroyed only by wheat fallow.
Chap. 22. To keep Cloaths from Moaths. SEeth the Dregs, or mother, or fome of Oyl, to the half, and ther∣with anoint the bottom corners and feet of any Chest or Press, and the Cloaths that you lay therein will be freefrom any hurt with Moaths, but
before you put the Cloaths in the Chest, or Press, it must be dry. Obser. 1. Provide store of Wallnut leaves, and hang them upon thred, one di∣stant from another, when they are throughly dry, strip them in the Chest, or amongst the other Cloaths, and beds, and within the folds of e∣very Garment; lay Wormwood or Lavender amongst the Cloaths, and they will be safe from Moaths. Obser. 2. The branches of Bay-rres wrapt up, laid amongst Cloaths and Books, will keep them safe from Moaths and other corruption.
Obser. 3. To keep Apparel, hangings, &c. from moaths, brush them several times in the year, with a Brush made of Wormwood tops, and you may rub them with Wormwood, especially when you discern the moaths to haunt amongst Hangings.
Chap. 23. To take out spots of Oyl, or Grease. TAke the bones of Sheeps trot∣ters, and burn them almost to Ashes, then bruise them to powder, and apply it to the spot, and lay all before the Sun when it shines very hot, and when the powder appears to be very black, lay on fresh in
the place till it suck out the spots, which may suddenly be effected by the water wherein Lavender is sod, doth take away all spots in Cloath or Hats, if the place be washed and rubbed therewith. Chap. 24. To destroy Caterpillars. BEsmear all the bottom of the Tree with Tar, then get store of Ants, put them in a bag, and draw the same with a cord unto the Tree, and let it hang there, so that it touch the body of the Tree, and the Ants being prevented to go from the Tree by reason of the tar, will for want of food eat, and de∣stroy
the Caterpillars, withour hurt∣ing any of the fruit or leaves. No Pismires will touch the same Tree that shall have the lower part thereof rubbed round about with Lupines stamped. Chap. 25. To preserve your Trees and Plants from being barked with Cows or Hares. BEsmear the bodies of the Trees round about with Lyme, so far as the Cows can possible reach, or you may have Vessels made of pan metal, more than two foot in length,
equally round about the compass of a Pottle pot and more, but divided lengthwise in the middle, and so fet together about the Tree. Set a Horse head upon a pole in the Garden, and it will banish all Flies that destroy Cabbages and o∣ther tender Herbs. If you desire to have a white spot, or any part of a Beast turned white, first shave off the hairs, and make the place bare with the fume of Brimstone, and white hairs will come thereon. Observ. 1. To make a black Star in a white Horses forehead, take an earthen pan, seeth it well with wa∣ter, and bray it well in a Morter, bind this to the Horses forehead a day and a night, and in few daies the white will fall off, and black hairs will grow in place thereof.
There is likewise a water to be made that hath many admirable vertues, which I shall otherwise re∣late; lay it on a Horse, and it will eat out the hair, and white hair will grow in the place of it. Chap. 26. To take Fish. SEt a Candle in a piece of a Cork as even as may be with the water, which will stupifie and attract the fishes unto it, so that with a little hoop Net upon the end of a Cane or Staff you may take them with much facility, or with a shovel∣net,
&c. which must be in the night. Where mudd and water is taken out of the Ponds, if the rain water do after come into them, there will become multitude of Eels in a short time; and by this course you many abundantly encrease Carps. In May dig up two Turfs of new grown Grass, when the dew is on them, then tye the Grassy sides to∣gether, and place them in water on the side of a Pond, then let them re∣main there unmoved, about ten daies, and taking up the Turfs, untying or loosing them you shall find great store of young Eels within the Turfs, although there were not an Eel in the Pond before, and by ty∣ing the turfs together again, and placing them in the same water, a greater encrease will come thereof. Obser. 1. To get the seed of all sorts of fish,
take roots of the weeds that grow on the water sides, wash the earth clean from them, bind them to a pole, and set them in a pond, and they will spawn upon them: but observe with∣in a fortnight that they will be a∣live, and will go off, therefore when you find that they have spawned, lift up the pole, with the weeds, and you may carry them twenty miles to fill other ponds. Obser. 2. To bring all the Fish in a pond to∣gether, take Plattaria or Dioscorides, lay either of them in Hony a day and a night, then let them dry in the Sun, bind them to a string, and cast them into thepond, and all the fish will come to it. Obser. 3. Sorts of Fish, especially
that have been brought our of Ire∣land, by placing them sidewaies in a Basket of wet hay, to carry them in Vessels of water, they will bruise and spoyl themselves. Chap. 27. To take Moles. GEt a pot or glass, which may ea∣sily be had in London, that is nar∣row at the top, and wide at the bot∣tom, and place one of these deep in the ground in the Fields where the moles are, the top of the pot being even with the ground, and
in the pot or glass put a stinking Crab, which they will eagerly smell after, and so fall into the pot, and be∣ing imprisoned they will call for aid of their fellows, and so be all ta∣ken. And to bring them all to a place in this manner, fire Brimstone in the like not so placed. But first put a live Mole therein, and she will call all the Moles that are near to come to her release, and so be taken; you may use only a live Mole in the pot, without the Crab or Brimstone. And you may destroy them by degrees after this manner with a good Spade, and watching the pla∣ces where they work, observing their constant times, strike upon the Hill with the backside of your Spade, which will amaze them so, that you may dig them up with your Spades, and find them in a manner dead, but they will suddenly recover again,
and so you may provide them for your pots. I have seen some taken in that manner with ordinary Clunchi∣ons, and some only by stamping your foot upon the place where they work, and to take them with traps when they run back, as is common∣ly known, you may likewise get some light stocks like arrows, and at the lower end with a white rag on the tops of them, stick lightly in se∣veral places of their walk, and as they pass by, the sticks will fall down, and then use your Spade as be∣fore. At breeding time dig up there Hills where their young ones are in the places where their nests are, be∣ing as big again as their ordinary Hills, which you may soon discern, and by that means. And so you may destroy all their young, and may take their old by watching a short time for them, after you have made their nests bare.
A Gentleman caused some two penyworth of red Herrings to be bought, and cut them into several parts, about six pieces of one Her∣ring, and burning those pieces se∣verally on the Mole hills and other walks about the ground, there was not a Mole ever after seen in that ground. Put Garlick, leeks, or an Onion in the mouths of the Mole hills, or in their entrings into the ground, and you shall see them come and leap out presently amazed. To take Foxes. Chap. 28. TAke off the skin of a Kat, smear the body all over with hony, and
rost her at the fire, powder it with powder of young Frogs, train it with a rope about the Foxes haunts to the place you desire to bring them, and they will follow the sent, and may easily be taken. I have known some that have used a red Herring, and trayned it in that manner, others have used tosted Cheese, and both with very good success.
Chap. 29. To take Fallow or red Dear, that range in other mens Grounds, or in any other place. TAke a mellow Apple, or a mel∣low Crab, and bait it with a hook, without a beard, in compass of your singer, leaving it in their walk, and fixing it to a pack thred,
or whip cord, fasten the other end unto the root of the hedge, or some short stake, if it be in the middle of a Field or Park, then strike a hooked wooden pin into the ground, and the ablest Dear will soon smell the bait a far off, and with very great greediness will swallow it up, to pre∣vent their fellows. In this manner Gentlemen have taken divers stags in a Forest; if they be remote from the bait, you may go at a distance from them, and so cause them to incline that way by degrees, when they have received the bait, they will stand as quiet as Lambs, and you may do what you please with them. Opium laid in a place where the Dear do haunt or resort, the best of them will soon sent it, and swal∣low it, and instantly fall down as if they were dead, and yet no harm at all, when you may take them before they recover, and act your pleasure with them.
If they do not frame their course towards the bait, you may occasi∣on them to incline that way as be∣fore. I know a Gentleman that took a brace of very fat Bucks in an After∣noon by the former way. Chap. 30. To destroy Rooks, Crows, Daws or Magpies. PRovide little pieces of Flesh, where you may put the powder of Arsnick, or sublimate, and you will soon be rid of them all, if you lay them in several places where they resort, but you must be care∣full your Swine eat none of the
Crows or Flesh, lest they be like∣wise poisoned, therefore they must be all either buried or burned. Observ. 1. Lay a dead Dog, or any Piece of Carriou in a field where they re∣sort, place little pieces of Flesh something near, so poysoned as be∣fore, and thereby you may make a sudden dispatch of them all, but keep your Dogs and Swine from that Field, till you have effected your desire. Observ. 2. You may likewise break an Egge into half, and divide the yolk and the white, and mingle them with a little of the stuff, as before, and pla∣cing them in a Garden, or any field where these do usually prejudice you, and they will be destroyed suddenly in the place.
Observ. 3. Or get the Liver of a Beast and cut it in pieces, and put into them the powder of Nux vomica, which being laid in open places, the ver∣min that eat thereof, cannot fly a∣way, and then you may take them easily. Chap. 31. TO make Pidgeons stay and not stray abroad from their Houses, smear their holes with Arsafetida, mingled with butter. Observ. 1. To cause them to resort and con∣tinue at your Pidgeon-Houses, kill a fat Dog, fley him, and fill his belly
full of Cummin-seeds, and rost him dry, then wash the Pidgeon holes with water, wherein Cummin seed is sodden: but first cleanse the holes from all filthiness, then lay the roasted Dog upon a broad stone in the Dove-House, and hang a great Glass in the top of the Lover, and three or four looking Glasses in the Dove-House, by some of the holes. Observ. 2. Also take good Clay, and mingle with the Clay Bay-salt and Cum∣min-seed, and make a great lump thereof like unto a Sugar loaf, then bake it hard, and set it by the dead Dog, and you may have Pidgeons enough. FINIS.
Books printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. THe Souls Conflict, being eight Sermons, six whereof were preached in Oxford, and attested by the late Reverend Doctor Hewyt. Two Essays of Love and Mari∣age. The Queens Exchange, a Comedy, by R. Brome. The Life and Tryal of James Nay∣ler. The Souls Turn-key, being a Con∣ference betwixt Mr. Hanum and
Mr. Tuke Moderator of W. Coll. in London. Poems, Epigrams, Satyrs, on seve∣ral persons, and occasions, by No Body must know whom, to be had Every Body knows where, and for Any Body knows what. Doctor Brown of Sepulchral urnes, and his Garden of Cyrus. Five new Plays by Richard Brome, never before publish'd. Shepheards Duty of Constables in 8. St. Benaventures Soliloquies, contain∣ing Meditations and Prayers, in 24. Books now in the Press, which will shortly be extant. THe Alliance of Holy Offices, by Hamon L' Estrange, Esq
A Learned and long desired Commentary on the whole E∣pistle to the Philipians, by Nath. Tucker, late Preacher of the Go∣spel at Portsmouth.
Speeds Husbandry.
Horum fabulosorum hominum hoc minùs fe∣renda est impietas, quod Prophetarum Di∣vinorum & Evangelistarum  scripta ad stabiliendas Vanitaets suas de∣torquent; & ea Ezekieli, Danieli, & A∣pocalypseos authori affingunt, quae San∣ctissimis Viris ne in mentum quidem vene∣runt unquam. Scultetus in 2 Tim. 3.1. Aureum seculum in Caelis, ferreum in terris expectandum. Idem.
