S5944 E144_18 99860016 156627
A LETTER SENT TO MY LORD MAIOR. AND His Venerable BRETHEREN: By no Athist, no Papist, no Arminian, no Ana∣baptist, no Familist, no Separatist, or Brownist; but an honest beleeving Protestant, and that because that Sepa∣ratist otherwise called Brownist, was in many mens account said and held to be worse then Papist. Written by A. S. depiction of a pig being bled LONDON, Printed in the yeare, MDCXLII.
A COPIE OF A LETTER Sent to my Lord Ma∣jor, and his Brethren. MAY your Honour with the rest of your Worshipfull Brethren, with all that shall see heare or read this writing, consider and understand, how that Separatists caled Brownists, why they should bee courted and imprisoned, for the way they walk in, I much marvel at. Truth may be blamed, but it can never be shamed: these reasons I give for it. First, they are a people very desirous to make the Scripture the rule, and patterne of their lives and acti∣ons
during their extancy in this mortall life. And King James of blessed memory told Master Burton, that those men that did so walke as neere as the frail∣tie of the flesh would let them, in avoyding the vani∣ty and vitiousnes of the times, hee loved immutably, and so do I: and so should we all doe, if we will doe as we ought, Saint Peters rule comprehends the whole Law of God for a good Christian to imitate. 1. Is Sobriety in respect of ones selfe? 2. Vprightnes in respect of our Christian Brethren? 3. Of Holinesse towards God, and this three-fould cord is not quickly broke. And according to these rules do that Sect of Separatists, called Brownists walke, and those good Christian Protestants called Puritants, or round-heads prick cares walk: but shame∣lesse ruffians past grace and good manners, with black mouthed Tertullus will bee babling: when the shame lieth in length of their owne haire. Is it not a shame for a man to weare long haire, if they will not be∣leeve me they may Saint Paul: I have digressed a lit∣tle to my mtter, This Sect of Seperatists called Brow∣nists endevour according to Saint Peters Rule to live. First, soberly, in respect of themselves, and so are no drunkards, or at least no common ones if they fall; and which of us Protestants doe not, in a large field; yet I am confident they rise againe by serious contri∣tion and repentance. Secondly, they live uprightly in respect of their Christian Brethren, using faire and honest dealing betweene man and man; if there be a close Hypocrite amongst them, as Iudas amongst the Apostles, and is
our owne wheat so cleane as to have no cokell, or kernell in it, let us not then condemne all for some a generality for a particularity. Thirdly they live holily towards God, and it ex∣cellently appeareth in their frequent receiving of the Sacrament, and in having a reverend regard of the name of God, not daring to take it in vaine; much lesse to curse sweare or blaspheme that holy name, by which they are sealed to the day of Redemption: besides the Sun-day most properly named the Saboth day, or Lords day they celibrate, not in luxury or wan∣tonesse, not in ryot or excesse, not in hobihorsing morris dancing, carding diceing bowling, wrestling, tip∣ling, sporting, gaming, or unnecessary idleing or vain spending that day, or the evening thereof in unnesse∣sarie walking to take the ayre, and so forth: but in sanctifying that day as the Lord requireth, & as is pre∣scribed in the Practice of Piety, a Book we allow good, and made by the Spirit of God: which tells that if we doe not sanctifie that day, and every part thereof, we shall never keepe a Saboth with the Lord in Heaven. Me thinks whenwe consider our neglects in this du∣tie, we should tremble to punish these good and god∣ly people by courting or imprisoning them. Object. These are good things, and wee like the people well, being so carefull to please God, but why will they not come to heare our Lyturgie, or our Mi∣nisters preach? Answ. Time would not give way to satisfie in an∣swer to that, but their reasons shall bee given as spee∣dily as may bee, they shall bee so plaine that hee that runs may read.
And now because they are counted, and said to be by too many of us Protestants worse then Papists, I shall here prove the contrary. First it is one thing to erre in opinion, and tell mee which of us Protestants Divines, and others do not? Secondly it is another thing to erre in fundamen∣tall truths; in the first they may as wee our selves, in the latter for fundamentalls they doe not, and so are not worse, but better then the Papists. Reall presence in the Eucharist. Merit of Heaven by good works. Purgatorie for soules to rest in after death. Pardon for sinnes present and to come. Prohibiting Mariage to the Clergie, with a vow to it. Originall sin, nor actuall transgression in the blessed Virgin Mary; and that shee is glorified in body, and sits at her sons right hand in Heaven, making interces∣sion for them. That those that die in veniall sinnes on the want of satisfaction, are by prayer delivered out of Purgato∣rie, and so passe immediately into Heaven. Maintaining Stewes, taking a million of mony, or more yearely by the sin of whoredomes and unclean∣nesse. These though many more might bee named, all contrary to fundamentall truths, the Papists hold and beleeve. Now I hope never a one of us Protestants will ever cenfure, or acknowledge, that Separa∣tists (otherwise called from Browne Brownists, as we call from Luther Lutherans, or from Calvin Calvinists, not but they were long before ever Master Browne
was) I say, ever beleeve any of this Sect to be guilty of these, or other fundamentall truths, and so are better then Papists: and shall I say, looking on our own lives and wayes, (would God I could not) better then many of us prophane, and luke-warme Protestants: It is e∣ver good to speake truth, and to set the saddle on the right horse, and I pray God grant, that wee Pro∣testants may make their lives, and actions in all godli∣nesse our rules and patternes to walke by, however never prove railing Rabshakes, or scoffing Shimeis a∣gainst our brothren, and I verily beleeve to Gods deare ones. And I am confident these Separatists called Brownists, doe tender the person and welfare of his Majestie, so highly, that to doe him good and service, they would stake estate and life for it: many have prote∣sted it seriously, and as really I beleeve it, and they that doe not, I question whether they be good Christi∣ans to God, or good subjects to his anoynted: had this Sect ever their hearts dipt in bloud in all their per∣secutions, or molestations, or were ever Traytors to the Crowne and Sate? Object. They have beene kept under, and could not hurt us. Ans. And so have the Papists, but would have hurt us; but these people would have endured wrong, and suffered patiently, knowing they have thanks with God thereunto, were they called, and if they could they would not, for their Religion is no bloudy one, and so long wee need not be afraid, for wee shall ne∣ver be hurt I warrant you by them, either in estate or life, if there were ten times more then there are of them.
God blesse and preserve our Gracious King, our Royall Queene, the Noble Off-spring, all the Honou∣rable Lords, Right worshipfull and worshipfull. Bur∣gesses▪ now assembled in the High Court of Parlie∣ment, and the whole Realme, and send us peace and truth in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ARON STREATER Divine, and licensed Physitian. FINIS.
