t2967 99896030 153692
A TRUE RELATION, of the Horrid and Barbarous MURTHER, Committed on the Bodys of Mr. Loggins, Gent. and the Ostler of the King's-Head in COLESHILL, in the County of WARWICK, By Four Persons; whereof Three were Appre∣hended, and Committed to the County-Goal. STRANGE it is, to see how frequent of late, Murthers are Committed, and nothing can deter the Blood-thirsty; and it is as often observed, that the Actors of those Cruelties seldome or never go undiscovered, by one
means or other, if they are not taken in the Act before they can make their Escape; for as the Devil is the Instigator of all Wickedness, and bringeth man-kind into Snares by his Delu∣sions, as by Drunkeness many times Murther is Committed, and other Acts of Violence, so at last he leaveth them, when they have acted their utmost parts of Wickedness, and nothing is so certain as Death; and therefore, if Man would consider aright, what answer he must give at the last Day, for imbruing his hands in the Blood of his Fellow Creature Man, and the Ma∣ster-piece of his Creator: I say, if he would consider aright, he rather ought to Love, Assist, Protect, and Help, than to Wound and Destroy: But Wickedness is grown to the highest in this our Age, and Acts of the blackest Hue and deepest Dye, as that of Murther, are accounted the greatest Acts of Bravery. But not to be too long in the Prologue of this Bloody Tra∣gedy, the Story is as follows. There is a considerable Town in Warwick-shire, called Cole∣shill, Scituate high upon an Hill, well known to all Travellers that Ride the North-West Road, it being a Through-fare, and the Randevouze of the Neighbouring Gentry; Scituate near the Mid-way, between the two great Towns of Coventry and Lich∣field; it happened lately to be the Scene on which was Acted the following Bloody Murther; the manner as follows. The Ostler of the King's-Head in the aforesaid Town, having done some Courtisie for a Gentleman Stranger, was invited over by the same Gentleman to the Swan-Tavern over the way, to take share of a Pint of Wine, till Supper might be made ready at the King's-Head; they were no sooner seated in the Room to Drink, when came into the same Room four Persons, Strangers, who seemed to be Gentlemen by their Habits, though only one of them had a Sword; they had been drinking very hard, and presently began to shew the dire Effects of their De∣bauchery: First, they began to quarrel with the Ostler, and to abuse him, calling him a Saucy Fellow for offering to stay in their Room, and likewise to revile the Gentleman, for be∣ing of so low a Spirit, to keep such a mean person Company;
the Gentleman seeing them in such a drunken condition, gave them good Words, wisely thinking he should have been as mad as they if he should have done otherwise, but the Ostler was not so smooth, upon which, they began to be very boy∣sterous in Words, and threat'ned him very sore, upon which, he slip'd out of the Room, as conceiving himself to be in great dan∣ger, whip'd over to his Masters House, the King's-Head, and went up to a Room above, where some Neighbouring Gentlemen were drinking, to give them an account of what a Danger he had escaped at the Swan-Tavern; but he had scarce well began his Story, when the Persons that had been so boysterous at the Swan Tavern, came swaggering up the Stairs, crying, Where is the Rogue, where is the Rogue that has affronted us, we will have his Hearts Blood; at last they staggered into the Chamber where they saw the Ostler, upon which, the three that had no Swords, presently cryed to the other that had a Sword, draw and Kill him, Kill them all, so he presently fell upon the Ostler, and ran him through the Body, at which, the Gentlemen in the Room being unarmed were astonished, and shewed themselves much concerned at so bloody a business, particularly one Mr. Log∣gins, a Gentleman of a very civil Carriage and considerable Estate, well beloved by the Neighbouring Gentry, shewing by a compassionate gesture, his resentment of this bloody Tra∣gedy, which the Murtherer perceiving, and being instigated by the other three, he presently fell upon Mr. Loggins, and woun∣ded him mortally three times, so that he presently dyed; while this last Murther was acting, the other persons that were in the Room made their escape, or else it's probable they had born a share in this dismal Story; after they had Killed these two a∣foresaid Persons, they began to think of making their escape, but three of them were presently seized, and are now in War∣wick Goal, but the fourth who was the Sword man, and the principal Actor, got to the Stable, got out his Horse and fled, it being Night through the Town, without his Hat, and is not as yet Apprehended, where we leave him pursued by the Guilt of his own Conscience till Justice Apprehend him, when time which brings all things to light, especially Murthers discover this abominable Assassine; the three that are in the Goal are very Penitent, but it's thought they must expiate the Crime
with their own blood, as being Abettors and Instigators of this Execrable Fact. FINIS. This may be Printed, R. P. March the 16th. 1686. The Truth of this Relation is attested by a very Credible Person. LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, next Door to Mr. Shipton's Coffee-House, near Fleet-Bridge, 1686. ADVERTISEMENT These are to give notice, that the Tryal of Charles Bateman Chirurgeon, together with the Tryals of John Holland, William Davis, and Agnes Wearing, who were Tryed at the Old-Bayly, for a Felony and Burglary committed on the House of Mr. Leonel Gatford, Minister of Lyme-street; may be bad at E. Mallets as above directed.
