A3435 52212060 175404
AN ANSWER To the PRETENDED Refutation OF Dr. Olyphant's DEFENCE EDINBURGH, Printed by J. W. for Thomas Carruthers, and Sold at his Shop in the Parliament Closs, M.DC.XC.IX.
An Answer to the pretended Refutation, &c. ONE might very justly imagine, that this Refutation had been rather de∣sign'd for that of the Melius Inqui∣rendum, than of Dr. O's Defence, if it was not for the Title-Page: And I appeal to any Man that had any Confidence in the Refu∣r's Ingenuity, if the Matter of Fact as it is ow set down in the Refutation, be not ite different from what he imagined it was y the Melius Inquirendum. The Apotheca∣y and the File in his Shop before appealed  as Witnesses, to testifie the Patient's be∣ing several times Vomited, are now declin∣ed; the File he confesseth proves no such thing, nd the Apothecary, says he, cannot purge himself of partial Counsel, which is calling in estion the Honesty of that Gentleman, hom all of his Acquaintance know to be of ch steddy and firm Principles; that even his wn Interest when at Stake, or that of his earest Relations, could never byass him to do ny thing he thought unjust or disingenuous. But it is pleasant to hear how he Declines the Patient, because, sayes he (if we may believe himself) a very mannerly Supposition by
the by, He remembers nothing that passed for Four or Five days together after the taking the Vomit. Why, what if he did not; does that prove he remembred nothing before he took the Vomit? Now I hope, the Refuter doth not pretend he Vomited the Patient after the Dr. had done it. It was unlucky indeed the Patient should have remembered the Dr's Vomit, and the great Benefit he found by it (which he as justly as Generously, own'd on all Occasions, and frequently to the Dr. himself) and in the mean time have forgot that the Ordinary had given him severals be∣fore. However, I do assure the Refuter, had the Dr. known any thing of his giving warm Water or Whey for Vomits, he would have been far from denying them place a∣mong his other Achillean Cures and Pen-gun-Artillery. And here I must take notice of a most admirable turn of Gigantick Wit in the Refutation; the Dr. in his Defence is speak∣ing of the Answerer's Remedies as no better Artillery to attack the Disease, than Pen-Guns would be to take a Fort; and here the Refut∣er most waggishly turns the Cannon on the Dr. by turning the Body of the Patient into the Cannon: I do confess indeed, sayes he, they are but Pen-Guns in Respect of the Dr's Artillery, the Discharging of which had in stead of taking the Fort, almost split the Can∣non,
which was no great mark of a very good unner. Now, had the Ordinary by an o∣vercharge of Milk and Sugar, burst his Cli∣er-pipe, and at the same time taken the ort, I am certain the Dr. would have been r from upbraiding him with his small Skill n Gunnery. I shall say nothing to the Refuter's most Christian way of defaming a Man safely, by making his Words have a double meaning, s he does also the Representation of the Matter of Fact, especially after his own fair Confession in the Refutation, where he flat∣y acknowledgeth he had answered both un∣ustly and Irregularly. And if, says he, in any thing I have Transgress'd, my Adversary is to blame, who attacked me both unjustly and ir∣regularly; and every man must defend as he is attacked. I am now come to these few Answers given to the Dr's Authorities in the Refuta∣tion, and shall begin with what is said to that of Fernel, which I find the Refuter looks on as the most Material thing he has to say. He alledgeth that in the first Quotation brought by the Dr. from Fernel, that Au∣thor speaks only of intermitting Fevers. Now to cut off all further Debate, I shall grant it be true; but in the mean time, if the Rea∣sons that moved Fernel to Vomit in inter∣mitting
Fevers, can be used for doing the same in continued ones when attended with Vomiting and overflowing of Gall, is it not the same thing for the Dr's purpose. And that it is, so is evident by the Quotation which I shall again insert Quum per accessiones mul∣toe bilis spontanea vacuatio contingit, febris si∣ne Medicamento integre solvi potest. At quum ea aut nulla aut parcior existit medicatio adhi∣benda, ne neglecta Febris speciem mutet & de∣terior vel prolixior evadat. When, says he, there happens by turns a great Evacuation of Bile if its own accord, the Fever may end with∣out any Medicine; but when that is either none at all or too little, Medicaments are to be giv∣en, lest the Fever by being neglected, change its Species, and become worse and of longer con∣tinuance. And afterwards, Quum enim pre∣cipue impura sit prima corporis Regio, in qua & humor noxius fluctuat, statim initio ejus nonnihil tempestive expurgandum est, preser∣tim si vel oris amaror, vel Cordis dolor, vel Nausea vel in appetentia vel suffocatio acrius urget. For seeing the Stomach and intestins (which is the Prima Corporis Regio) in which the Noxious Humour fluctuats, are most unclean, some of it is to be timeously evacuated in the beginning, especially if there be bitter∣ness in the Mouth, Oppression of the Heart, or squeamishness or want of Appetite or suffocati∣on.
Now, I would gladly know if any Man a show the least Reason, why all that may  be applyed to Continued Fevers that ve Remissions, and are attended with dounding Choller, as are these Fevers e Dr. first discoursed of. And in ef∣fect the Affinity between Agues and most f our Fevers is so great, that not only Vo∣miting, but the Kinkina or Jesuit's Bark, e true Specifick Cure of Agues has been ery succesfully introduced into the Cure of them. He comes next to Celsus, whom the Dr. own'd both in his first discourse and defence o have used warm Water for a Vo∣mit, and gives a good Reason for it; but to ive that now for one in any case, except erhaps after a slight Surfeit, is truely to reat the practice of Medicine in Ridicule. And I wonder if the Refuter would use the Kinkina in an Ague, or the Ipeca Coanha in  Dysentery, because Celsus knew nothing of them. After that he passeth over those pat Quo∣tations of Willis, Sylvius, Etmuller, Micha∣el Hartman, and Dr. Tournefort's Testimo∣ny, that it was the Practice of the best Phy∣icians in France, not only to give Antimoni∣al Vomits, and the other most Drastick Me∣dicines; but to mix Vomiting and Purging
Medicines together, all which the Dr. had Riveted in his Defence; until he comes o Sydenham. Neither doth he Answer the Quo∣tations brought from him, but tells us from the Schedula Monitoria, that he used Blooding & Purging in Febribus quamplurimarum specierum, in very many sorts of Fevers, & not in most part of Fevers, as the Refuter Translates it; which is very true, but these were properly Symp∣tomatical Fevers of the Inflammatory kind, and quite different from these the Dr. speaks of, which are ten to one the most ordinary here, and even Sydenham had practised a long time before he had seen any other, as he tells himself in the Preface to these Fevers he Cures by Vomiting, Quo quidem tempore, says he, nondum mihi innotuerat, aliam aliquam Febris speciem in rerum natura inveniri. At which time (which was a good time after he had Practised Physick) it was not known to me, there was any other sort of Fever to be found in Nature. And how much a Kin those Fevers were to Agues he tells in the same Preface in these Words. Dicta itaque Febris continua Intermittentium quasi Compendium quoddam, & e contra singuli earum Paroxysmi Compendium hujusce mi videbantur; atque adeo discrimen in hoc maxime versari, quod continuae conceptam semel effervescentiam Sunechoos eodemque sem∣per tenore perficerent; intermittentes autem
partitis vicibus ac diversis temporibus eadem ungerentur. Therefore, says he, the fore∣said continued Fever seemed to me as a sort of compend of the Intermitting Ones, and on the other hand, each Fit of those seemed a Compend of this; so that the Difference lay mostly in this, that the continued Fevers did hold out in the me Tenor, and did perfect without Intermissi∣on the Effervescence they had begun; whereas the Intermitting Fevers did the same at diffe∣rent times and by Intervals. And that this is positively true in most Fevers we have, and most remarkably so in these we have had this Season, every Man that hath accuratly ob∣served will easily be convinced. At last he comes to Dr. P's Dissertation of the Cure of Fevers by Evacuation, and tells us, that there Sweating is proposed as the best and eadiest Evacuation for Curing all Fevers, with∣out any respect to the Seat of the Morbifick Mat∣ter. I Answer, that Dr. P. did not Design that Discourse for the Use of any who did not know that nothing could be Evacuated by Sweating which did not immediatly come from the Blood, so that the Morbifick Matter must of necessity be Seated in the Blood and Blood-Vessels, before it could be brought a∣way by Sweating, and not in the Stomach as Dr. O. supposed.
I have now done with my Answer to that Refutation of the Defence, and leave it to be judged by any Man that is Impartial, whe∣ther or not it deserves that Title. I am quite Tired with the Subject, and shall conclude all with a Letter the Dr. received from a Phy∣sician at London of his Acquaintance, concern∣ing his Short Discourse, which I hope the Read∣er will neither find Impertinent nor Tedious, it being written by one whose Wit and Good Humor are equal to his Learning and Inge∣nuity.
DEAR SIR. I Thank you for the Present of your small Treatise about Vomiting in Fevers, ut at the same time, I approve of your Reasons, you must give me leave to condemn your Conduct: I know you begin to storm at this; But have a little Patience. There was a Physician of this Town, perhaps the most Famous in his time, being called to his Patient, complaining (it may be) of an Oppression at his Stomach; he would very safely and cautiously order him a Gentle De∣coction of Carduus, sometimes hot Water; I don't know but he would allow now and then fat Mutton Broth too. The Patient was Vomited, and the Doctor could justifie himself that he had not omitted that ne∣cessary evacuation; this was his constant Practice. Being Chid by his Collegues, who well knew he neglected Antimony, not out of Ignorance or Fear, he would Roguish∣ly tell them, Come, come Gentlemen, that might cure my Patient, but it would kill the Distemper, and I should have less Money in my Pocket. A pretty Business indeed, a Rich Citizen overgorges himself, which by Management may be improv'd into a good substantial Fever, worth at least Twenty Guineas; and you would have me nip the
Plant in the Bud, have a Guinea for my Pains, and lose the Reputation of a safe Pra∣ctitioner to boot. The Gentleman had Rea∣son; all Trades must live. Alas! our People here are grown too quick-sighted, they will have Antimonial Vomits, and a Physician dares not omit them, tho' it is many a good Fee out of his Pocket. Join I say with these Wise Gentlemen; they wish well to the Fa∣culty; procure an Order of the Colledge, and banish Antimony the City of Edinburgh, and the liberties thereof. 'Tis a Barbarous thing in these hard times to strangle an In∣fant Distemper; they ought no more to be murdered than young Cattle in Lent. Let it be as great a Crime to kill a Fever with an Antimonial Vomit, as to Fish in Spawning time. The Dutch Physicians are like the rest of their Nation, Wise; they banish that Heathenish Jesuitical Drug that would quick∣ly reduce their Practice to a narrow Compass in the hopefulest Distemper of the Countrey. These Rogues that Dream of nothing but Spe∣cificks and Panaceas, I would have them all hang'd, not so much for the folly of the At∣tempt, as the Malice of their Intention; Rascals, to starve so many worthy Gentle∣men, that perhaps know no otherwise to get their Liveliehood. Will the Glasiers e∣ver puzle themselves to make Glass Malle∣able,
would the Knitters ever so much as ave dreamed of a Stocking-Loom, or the oung Writers Petition'd to have Informati∣ons Printed; All those are Wise in their Ge∣neration, and must the Physicians be the on∣y Fools? We all know here there is no danger in Antimonial Vomits, but this is inter nos; you must not tell your Patient so, let them believe as I said before, that Antimonial Vo∣mits are dangerous, deleterial, break the ibres of the Stomach, &c. and that you cannot safely give them. So shall you be iled a cautious safe Physician, one that on't spoil the Curll of a Man's Hair to pull him out of a River. We have some dan∣gerous Dogs here, that in a Quinsy, when a Man is ready to be chock'd, will blood him fourty Ounces at once; is not this extream∣ly hazardous? They cut off Limbs, cut for the Stone; is this safe? I tell you the Repu∣tation of a wary safe Physician is worth all the Parts of his Character besides. Now I hope you will allow I have Reason for what I said. I have seen the Melius Inquirendum, and am too well acquainted with the Stile and Spelling, not to know that it is Dr. Eyzat's; but here I must be with you again, how come you to write against one that says two
Drams of Emetick Wine is a sufficient Dose for a Man. Suffer not such things to come abroad; they will imagine you are not got so far as the Circulation of the Blood in Scot∣land; write seriously against such People. Fy upon't, I will never allow them to be a∣bove the Dispensation of Ballads and Doggrel, &c. I am Sir Yours, &c. London, August 23, 1699. FINIS.
