C2746A 49520856 174101
The Kings Maiesties RESOLVTION CONCERNING HVLL. With his Determination concerning Sir John Hotham. Wherein is declared how and in what manner he hath besieged it and stopt all passages by Sea and Land, with intention to starve them. Whereunto is annexed The Copie of a Letter sent from the Earle of Warwicke, intimating that he had taken a Ship called the Lyon, laden with all sorts of Ammuni∣tion, And it is reported that the Lord Finch, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England is taken in that Ship. Likewise that he had received intelligence of a great Fleet of Spaniards landed in Dunkirke, which were bound for England, but intercepted by the Hollanders. Ordered to be forthwith published and Printed. Hen. Elsinge, Cler. D.C. July, 13. LONDON, Printed by T. F. for F. S. 1642.
The Kings Maiesties Resoluti∣on concerning Hull, and his deter∣mination concerning Sir Iohn Hotham. ON Saturday at Night newes was brought to the King that a Pinnace was sent from the Queene, la∣den with Money and Ammunition, which was intercepted at the mouth of Humber, by one of the Kings Ships, called the May-flower, but by the helpe of a Hull Pilot, she got into a Creeke, and so esca∣ped. His Majesty having intelligence, on Sunday morning at foure of the Clocke. he sent three Trumpeters into all parts of
the City, to summon 2. Troopes of Horse which were under the Command of the Prince, which was sent towards Hull, to protect the Ship from violence, after them was sent 3000. Foote Souldiers which were billited in Yorke. Vpon Tuesday the Lord Digby came to the Court. Wednesday, the King went to Bever∣ley, attended by three Lords, to see the Amunition that came from Holland, where he received intelligence that Sir Iohn. Ho∣tham had ceased on all the Cattell and Sheepe within foure Miles, and that he had drowned the Country three miles round, in regard his Majesty had resolu'd to besiege him in Hull. Thursday there was a great meeting of Light Horse on Heworth-Moore, who was commanded to repaire towards Hull this day the King with a great power of Horse and Foote, tooke his Journey towards Beverley, and hath besieged Hull with 6000. Horse and Foote, which
have intrencht themselves about the Towne, Sir John Hotham made 40. shots in one night with his great Ordnance, against the Batteries which were ma∣king by the Kings Forces, but none could reach or doe any execution. Foure pieces of Ordnance are plan∣ted on a Cliffe, neere the Towne of Paul, to binder all reliefe by water, al∣so the Earle of Lindsey hath mounted Ordnance at Barton on Humber, to stop the passage on that side of the Towne, it is generally reported, that the King intends to starve them, for he caused a Spring to be cut off, which runs to Hull, that it is feared they will want fresh water, for the Towne affords but little, and that not very good. The Earle of Kingstone proffers to lend the King a hundred Thousand pounds, at foure pound in the hun∣dred. The People here within this City sticke not to say, they hope to see Sir
John Hotham hang'd, casting out op∣probrious Speeches against the Parlia∣ment. Also there was Newes brought to the House by a Letter from the Earle of Warwicke, intimating that he had ta∣ken the Lyon laden with Ammunition of all sorts, and that Prince Robert was in her whom he had conveigh'd againe into Holland. Also there was a Letter sent to the Earle of Warwicke, certifying that Prince Maurice, Lord Denby, Captaine Oneale, Captaine Hide, Sir Lewes Dives, Colo∣nell Wilson, and divers other Gentle∣men and Commanders sent for out of Germany. Like wise a Report was made to the Parliament, of agreat Fleet of Spaniards which lay before Dunkirke, and it is thought that they are bound for Eng∣land, but the Hollander having intelli∣gence, thereof, sent out their Fleet, and surrounded them, that they cannot stir.
His Majesty taking into considerati∣on, the Government of his Navie Roy∣all, his will and pleasure was, That Sir John Pennington should have the place of Admiralship resigned unto him, being against his Majesties will and pleasure, that the Earle of Warwicke should enjoy that place any longer, and to that end and purpose did send a Message to the Earle of Warwicke to give up his place, and that hee should obey his speciall Command, which was, that hee should resigne his place to Sir Iohn Pennington, the said Sir John being neere unto him, expecting the Receit thereof. His Majesty was likewise resolved, that he should not enjoy that place any longer, but that he should obey His Command therein. These are the troubles and distractions which threaten an inundation of de∣struction, yea an almost unavoidable
ruine both to the King and Kingdome, these Forraigne preparations and do∣mesticke distentions are almost growne to a Head, a civill Warre is begun in this Kingdome, and it is justly to be feared that it will in the end, produce a most dangerous and fatall effect. God grant that the truth may pre∣vaile, and get the upper hand, and that Peace may have a peaceable habit on in this distracted Kingdome. Ordered that this be Printed, and published. Hen. Elsing D.C. FINIS.
