c6556 99889623 181797
The Country Mans Paradice. See George and Nell that Love full well say kissing is no Vice, The Country and making Hay He calls a PARADICE. To the Tune of Philander. NOw Sols bright shining beams dryes up the Watery Flood, Hay Harvest will draw near, it is well understood. Then I with Nell do know full well, some youthful trick must play, And lay her down upon the ground as we are making Hay. And when the Parching heat doth force us to give o're, We to the Shades retreat, and there we'l o're and o're Repeat the favours we have shown at several times at play, Which to our selves were only known, When we were making Hay. When we are rested well. we to our work again, I keep close to my Nell, my sight she'l not refrain: When we to the Lands end do come most prettily we play, Her Waist I clip and kiss her Lip as we are maing Hay. ANd at the Evening tide, our days-work we do cock, If we are not espied, then I take up her smock: And what doth after follow then I am asham'd to say, But thus we do I tell to you as we do make the Hay. If she doth prove with Child, as she perhaps may do, She cries she's then beguil'd, perswades me to be true: Unknown to any of our Friends we married are straitway, And none doth know that it was so when we were making Hay. And thus we carry on our Country jests and sport, No dread we think upon, we value not report; Report hath long a Lyar been, I have heard many say, And now I long till we begin again to make the Hay, Our Life more pleasure yields, and brings to us such sport, More pleasure in the Fields than in a Princes Court; For all the day long from morn to night, we merrily do play, And thus our hearts we do delight, as we are making Hay. Before the Sun doth rise, we Musick have at will, The pretty Lark up flies our pleasures to fulfill; We with our Bag and Bottle too do Feast us every day, We hear no strife; this pleasant Life we have in making Hay. Who then doth not delight to lead a Country life, Our pains it doth requite, each man injoys his wife. Yea, hand in hand to labouring work they go both night and day, And sometimes they together play, besides their making Hay. No Citizen I say can be from care more free, Although they go more gay, and finer drest then we. Such pleasures they but seldom meet, as we have every day, That walk the Meadows brave and sweet, and help to make the Hay. Printed for J. Wright. J. Clark, W. Thackery and T. Passenger.
