E544 99884918 182680
THE ATHEIST ANSWERED, AND HIS ERROUR CONFUTED By George Elliot, Author of Gods Warning-Piece to London. Each Spire of Grass, and every silly Flie, Bias us take heed how we a God deny; This whole Creation with a sweet conseat, Proclaim a Being that's Omnipotent. DEny a God!? blind Athiest cast thine Eye Up to the Sun, View well the Starry Sky, Those glittering Orbs, how they in Order stand, Each in his place, since Heavens mighty hand, First set them there; See how the watry Cloud Flies swiftly o're thy Head, proclaiming loud, Its Makers praise: there's not one drop doth fall Till God bids go, and then he numbers all That comes from thence, yea Heavens Eye doth look On every single Drop: Contrary to the Nature of the Element. in Gods great Book It is Recorded: and when they have done, How swift to other Regions they do run? For to refresh the dry and parchy Ground, And thus they fly about this mighty Round, For not a Minute will they longer stay, In any place when God bids come away, What thing can make it self before it be? That is impossible, 'tis onely he Who nere beginning had that doth and can (VVhose fist doth Fathom Heaven with a Span) Mark tris. Create all things; can that a being give? Unto it self? or make another Live? Thats void of life it self? O fools and blind! VVhat frantick Folly doth possess your mind? VVholly besotted? Nothing can make it self. void of common sence? To let a Beast have the preheminence Above a Man: by what way doth the Light? Divide it self? how comes the day and Night? Such order for to keep? the Sun to Rise? At his appointed time? in one day flies About this mighty Globe, can any stay, His fiery Chariot? who dare in his way, Vouchsafe to stand? with what Majestique Ire? (This Lamp of Lights, the Element of fire?) Views all the Heathen World? and on their face Doth set a Brand, and stamps a foul disgrace On every Athiest, who doth God deny; To let us see how Heaven doth defy That sin Athiesticall. Observe the Snow, How soft it falls: and how the winds do blow At Gods command, and when he faith be still They cease their rage, most humbly to his Will They do submit: for all things him obey, He speaks the word, and who dare say him nay? Can any stop the Tide? how doth it keep Its constant custome when we are asleep? So doth the Sun, Moon, Stars, and every thing Which from the Bowells of the Earth doth Spring, As Corn and Grass: Observe this & believe. without our care doth grow, The Heavens o're our heads, all things below Cries our there is a God; this mighty round On which we live and die, the very Ground VVhereoe we tread, proclaimes a God, yea all That live and move on this vast massy Ball VVith joynt consent their Makers praise doth sing. (It is absur'd to think that any thing, Can make it self:) the Lilly and the Rose, One to the Eye the other to the Nose Gives sweet content: theres not the smallest Clod We trample on: but proves there is a God. What fragrant Flowers doth the earth produce? And all things necessary for our use? Can it take care for us? or know what need We have of things? or how can fruit proceed From out its Bowells without Providence? That man must needs be void of common Sence, As stupid as a Stone, to think it can By its own Power for the use of Man Produce all things, and wisely to provide For Man and Beast. And in each order guide Each Species in its kind: how can a Clod? (Without the Blessing of Almighty God Wh is Omnipotent) have any power? Unto a Spire of Grass, or smallest Flower To give a being? no that cannot be, It is impossible, theres none but he, VVho with a word did out of nothing call This mighty Round, Earths vast and Massy Ball The goodly Golden Canopy the Skies With every Fowl that under Heaven flies. Who in the twinkling of an Eye can turn Earth into nothing: in a moment burn The Heavens o're our Heads, who with a frown Can pull the Pillars of Earths Fabrick down Unhinge the Heavens, (and the lowest Hell Wherein the Devils and the Damned dwell) In far less space than th' twinkling of an Eye Gods infinite Power. Can make those fierce, unruly Spirits lye As dead as any Stone. Tis by his Power And his alone, that every fragrant Flower Hath its peculiar Scent, that bread doth give Such strength to Man, so that he cannot live VVithout it long; that Cloaths do keep us warm, Lest that the Cold should do our Bodies harm▪ VVhat care can Nature take? can she provide? For all things living? or how can she Guide This Great Creation? and in Order keep All this vast Bulk? and when we be asleep Doth she watch o're us? or can she defend In time of danger? on a sudden send? A speedy help? that's void of Life and Sence? It is in vain to expect Providence From such a one: did she make Earth to hang 'Ith open Air? when all the Angels Sang Aloud for Joy, and clapt their Heavenly Wings, To see how God in order plac'd all things VVherein they keep: and in that order stand, E're since that day that Heavens mighty hand First plac'd them there: with what equality, Both Sexes in all things produced be, Men, Beasts, and Birds, and every kind of thing, This utterly convinceth the Athiest, for by Nature it is impossible. VVhich do by Carnal Copulation bring Their Young ones forth: there is not any lack Of Male or Female, Nature unto wrrck Long before this VVorld run. (It is not she, That can appoint what every thing shall be, VVhen in the VVomb its put) if she were left To Guide her self, she soon would be bereft Of all her Children: She'd not long remain, But to a Chaos quickly turn again. How many thousands with their Lips confess The practicall Atheist. The being of a God? who neverless Are perfect Athiests? for they him deny (As well as those who openly defy Their Great Creator) for to wish a Curse Upon our selves, how can the Devil worse Deprive us of all hopes? for how can we? At that Great Day expect to Saved be? Pray to be Damn'd? and in this time of Grace, That execrable Oath. Defy Salvation, and in Heavens Face In Scorn to Spit? is such a horrid Sin, (Though in this Age too many live therein) The Devils dare not own: they would be glad That any gracious prossers might be had VVhereby they might be Sav'd, though all in vain. Against Blas∣phemy. Nor can we Read the Devi's do blaspheme Gods Holy Name: or any where deny, Their Great Creator, but doth give the Lye To every Athiest: for they fear and quake Like Aspen Leaves: with horrid tremblings shake And do believe a God: when on a Flame, He sets this World: then his most Holy Name VVill be admir'd, every Athiest then Unto his praise will freely say Amen. FINIS. LONDON, Printed by E.  for for Thomas  Book Seller
