L2902 99887195 181903
The London lasses Hue-and-Cry After Her Dearly Beloved Robin, Whom she unluckily lost last Saturday Night. To the Tune of the Rant. Licensed according to Order. GOod People pray give your Attention, Vnto this my new Hue-and-cry, Tis after my Love, and I'll mention his Form, and Apparrel, for why, Without him I can't be contented, he is the Sole-joy of my life, For him I have went, and lamented, I fear I shall ne'er be a Wife. O he is my joy, love and honey, I lost im last Saturday night, I'd give twenty Shillings in Money to those that bring him to light. He has I must tell ye, two Faces, his head it stands quite all awry, He Amb's and hth all his Paces, likewise he is seven hands high. YOu'll say that there is not a sweeter young man in the Kingdom than he, I now will dribe e'ry Feature, if that you will listen to me. His Skin is as fair as tann'd Leather, likewise his sweet Face to adorn, His Nose and his Hat meets together turn'd up like a Sow-gelders-Hon. His Teeth they are black, green and yellow, those changeable Colours are fine, And like to the fair Crimson allow, his Cheeks too with Beauty does thine. His pretty sweet Mouth I admire, which froaths like a Tankard of Purt, The hair of his Head like soft Wire, you'll find than of aggot-stick Curl, His pretty sweet Eyes like two Saweers, his wounded my heart now I see, His Ears they stand out like two awers, a pretty sweet Creature is he. Now having described his Beauty, his Body must no ways escape, For here I account it my Duty, is tell ye his delicate shape. I think in the waste he is smaller than the largest  of a Drum, Besides I am sure he is taller by the head, than honest Tom Thumb. O he s a most delicate Ogre, his Hips they do stand out behind As broad as a Bushel and bigger, would I this sweet Creature could find. Some Uillains his death has contrected, he'd not have left me I'm sure, I shall go quite mad and distracted, this loss I can never endure. Look after my love Friends and mind him. his Age is about twenty five, A Guinay I'll gie those that find him, and bring him now dead or alive. Perhaps they have prest my sweet Iewel, to give him as rers place, But sure they wou'd ne'er be so cruel, to take such a pretty sweet fce. Goods People with pitty be fill'd o, and seek  all with one accord, Then come to the sign of the Dildoe, and there you shall have your Reward. Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, and . Yack.
