L3383 99887220 183464
Loyalty unfeigned, Or, The true Protestants Admonition. Being a Pleasant News SONG. Two dangerous Rocks on either hand appear, We now 'twixt Scilla and Caribdis steer, Our Pilot's Care (you'l say) had need be great It had so, for on each hand stands a Fate. On either hand to Saile we suffer wrack, Either to Starboard or the arboard Tack, Therefore in Wisdom he has thought it best To Saile foretight, for there the danger's least. To the Tune of, Busie Fame, Young Pheon, or, The Fathers Exhortation. HOld fast thy Sword & Scepter Charles sad Times may else come on The murmurs that do dayly rise smell Rank of Forty One. When Subjects gve their Kings advice what their Errence should be But mark the Papists wills a while and you will find them great How willing they are to a a new, from forty one to eight; The world against them doth complain, their cruelties abhor They Plotted our late troubles here, though others pushed them on, Fanaticks they were in the Keer, but Papists in the Van: Whilst those who first embroyl'd the Stats did laugh at our sad woes, When they beheld our strong debate turn'd to unfriendly blows. Till three great Nations sweat in blood, and many thousands slain, The bosome of the Earth bestrew'd, like dewey drops of Rain; Then was the time that Rome laugh'd loud, stand sported with our rage, Till thrusting in amongst the Croud, that did fierce Battel wage. Against the Lords anointed King, perswading 'twas the way The Royal Power to nought to bring, by killing him bore sway, This Iesuitick Doctrine soon, (Oh fatal for to tell) Trampl'd upon the sacred Crown, by it the Mitre fell. Thus Church & State bled whilst Rom's whore the Scarlet Beast did ride, The many headed factions bore her in her greatest Pride; And patiently sustain'd the Yoak from which they deem d them free, For then Religion was a Cloak Nor can it be more grievous sure then when the proud Command Of Vsurpation we indure, curb'd by our Equals hands: Princes are noble, and what they impose we can disgust, In their commands we God obey, for they dispence Heav'ns trust. Then let us all beware in time, that Rome don't us deceive, And evermore abhor the crime of such as seek Geneve: Let the blood-thirsty Papists all, and slaughter seeking Crew, Of Scismaticks before the fall, great Monarch just and true. Then will the Nation rest in peace, both Church and State will be Founded on perfect happiness Great Charles's Monarchy Will then its former Lusire gain, France then will stand in awe, Who now does triumph o're the slain, and gives the Nations Law. Remember Kings are gods on Earth, for Heaven 'tis they bear sway, And are most sacred from their Birth, which binds us to obey: Then let such perish who deny obedience to the Laws, That do repine at Majesty,
