M2923D 47012538 174508
A most sweet Song of an English Merchant born Chichester. To an Excellent new Tune. A Rich Marchant-man that was both grave and wise Did kill a man at Embden Town, through quarrels that did rise, Through quarrels that did rise, the German being dead; And for that fact te Merchant-man, was judg'd to lose his head. A sweet thing love, it rules both heart and mind, There is no comfort in this world, to women that are kind. A Scaffold builded was, within the Market place, And all the people far and néer did thither flock apace: Did thither flock apace, this doleful sight to sée, Who all in Velvet black as jet, unto the place came he: A sweet, &c. Bare-headed was he brought, his hands were bound before, A Cambrick Ruff about his neck, as white as milk he wore, His Stockings were of silk, as fine as fine might be, Of person and of countenance, a proper man was he; A sweet thing, &c. When he was mounted up, upon the Scaffold high, All women said great pitty it was, so swéet a men should dye: The Merchants of the Town, from death to set him frée, Did proffer there a thousand pound, but yet all would not be: A sweet thing, &c. The Prisoner hereupon began to speak his mind: (Quoth he) I have deserved death in conscience I do find: Yet sore against my will, this man I kill'd (quoth he) As Christ doth know, which of my soul, must only Saviour be. A sweet thing, &c. With heart I do repent, this most unhappy déed, And for his wife and Children small, my very heart doth bléed: The déed is done and past, my hope of life is vain, And yet the loss of this my life, to them is little gain. A sweet thing, &c. Vnto the Widdow poor, and to the babes therefore, I give a hundred pound a piece, their comforts to restore: Desiring at their hands, no one request but this, They will speaks well of Englishmen though I have done anisse: A sweet thing, &c. This was no sooner done, but that to stint the strife, Four goodly Maids did roffer him, for love to save his lie: This is our law (quoth they) we may your death remove, So you in lieu of our good will, will grant to us your love: A sweet thing, &c. Brave English-man (quoth one) 'tis I will beg thy life; Nay, quoth the second it is I, so I may be thy wife: 'Tis I the third did say; nay, quoth the fourth, 'tis I, So each one after other said, still waiting his reply; A sweet thing is love, &c. The Second Part, To the same Tune. FAir Maidens every one, I must confesse and say, That each of you well worthy is, to be a Lady gay: And I unworthy far, the worst of you to have, though you have preffered willingly, my loathed life to save: A sweet thing is love, it rules both heart and mind, There is no comfort in his world, to women that are kind. Then take a thousand thanks, of me a dying men, But speak no more of love nor life, for why my life is gone: To Christ my soul I give, my body unto death: For none of you my heart can have, sith I must loose my breath: A sweet thing, &c. Fair Maids lament no more, your Country Law is such, It takes but hold upon my life, my goods it cannot touch: Within one Chest I have, in gold a thousand pound, I give it equal to you all, for love that I have found. A sweet thing, &c. And now dear friends farewel, swéet England now adieu, And Chichester where I was born, where first this breath I drew: And now thou man of death, unto thy Weapon stand; Oh nay, another Damsel said; swéet Heads-man hold thy hand. A sweet thing, &c. Now hear a Maidens plaint, brave English-man (quoth she) And grant me love for love again, that craves but love of thée: I wooe and sue for love, that have been woo'd e'r this: Then grant me love, & there withal, she proffered him a kiss, A sweet thing, &c. I'le dye within thy arms, if thou wilt dye (quoth she) Yet live or dye swéet English-man, I'le live and dye with thee: But can it be (quoth he) that thou dost love me so: 'Tis not by long acquaintance sir, whereby true love doth grow: A sweet thing, &c. Then beg my life (quoth he) and I will be thy own: If I should séek the world for love, more love cannot be shown: The people at that word, did give a joyful cry, And said great pitty it had béen, so swéet a man should dye; A sweet thing, &c. I go my love she said: I run, I flye for thée, And gentle heads-man spare a while my Lovers head for me: Vnto the Duke she went, who did her grief remove, And with an hundred Maidens more she went to fetch her love: A sweet thing, &c. With musick sounding swéet, the foremost of that train, The gallant Maiden like a Bride, did fetch him back again; Yea, hand in hand they went unto the Church that day, And they were Married presently, in sumptuons rich array: A sweet thing, &c. To England came he then, with this his lady Bride, A fairer women never lay by any Merchants side: Where I must leave them now in pleasure and delight, But of their names & dwelling place I must not here recite. A sweet thing is love, it rules both heart and mind, &c. FINIS. London, Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and J. Wright.
