P1471A R219232 52614831 176022
A perfect and true ACCOUNT Of the Rising of the REBELS In the WEST of SCOTLAND Together with their DECLARATION. With Allowance. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.
A true ACCOUNT OF The Rebels IN The WEST of SCOTLAND. Edenburgh,  June 4. ON Saturday the 29th. past, a Com∣pany of men, to the number of 80, well Mounted and Armed, came to Ruglan, Proclaimed the Covenant, and burnt several Acts of Parliament, viz. The Act concerning the Kings Supremacy, the Recissory Act, the Act for Establishing Epi∣scopacy, and the Act appointing the Anniver∣sary of the 29th. of May; and that done, they affixed a certain Scandalous and Traite∣rous Paper, or Declaration, on the Market-cross;
and intended to have done the ilke at Glasgow, but were prevented by the Kings Forces there. On Sunday las Captain Graham of Cae∣verhouse, upon the notice he had of a great number of Men being gathered together upon Loudown-hill, marched thither with his Trop, and a Company of Dragoons, and ound there 1 or 1500 Men well arm'd, and in good order; the Foot com∣manded by one Weir, and the Horse by Rob. Hamilton, one ton, Belfoor & Haxston (these two last being of the Murderers of the Arch-bishop of St. Andrews.) The Rebels upon Cap. Grahams aproach, sent out two parties to skirmish with him which he beat into their main Body; the they advanced with their whole Force up∣on him; who after a considerable slaugh∣ter of the Rebels, and the loss of his Cor∣net, two Brigadiers, and about Eigh Horse and twenty Dragoons, (his own Horse be∣ing killed under him, and mounting ano∣ther,) he being so much over-power'd with number, he made his retreat towards Glas∣gow,
being in his way forced to fight his passage through the Towns-men of Streuin, who were got together to oppose it, leaving Ten or Twelve of them dead on the place. On Munday morning the Rebels had the condence to attack the City of Glasgow, at, two several times, but all the streets were so well barrocaded by the Lord Rss, and the Soldiers were put in so good a po∣sture, that the Rebels were beat off with a considerable loss, besides many Prisoners that were taken; And thereupon the Horse and Dragoons in the Town sallied out, and when our last Letters came away, were in pursuit of their Reer. His Majesties Privy-Council has put out a Proclamation, and all other care is taking by them to suppress these Rebels, which we hope very suddenly to give you a fur∣ther account of.
The DECLARATION of the REBELS, in the very words as it was designed to have been put up by them at Glasgow, and was actually put up at Rug∣lan. AS the Lord had been pleased still to keep and preserve his Interest in the Land, by the testimony of some faithful witnesses from the beginning, so in our dayes, some have not bn wanting, who through the greatest of hazard had added their Testimonies to those who have gone before them, by suffering Death, Banish∣ments, Torturings, Finings, Forfeitures, Im∣prisonment, &c. flowing from cruel and perfi∣dious Adversaries, to the Kirk and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Land. Therefore we owning the Interest of Christ according to the Word of the Lord, and the Na∣tional and Solemn League and Covenant, desire to adde our Testimony to the Testimonies of the Worthies that has gone before; (though unwor∣thy, yet hoping as true Members of the Church
of Christ in Scotland;) and that against all things that has been done prejudicial to his In∣terest, from the beginning of the Work of Refor∣mation in Scotland; especially from the year 48, to the year 1660, against these following Acts. As first, The Act of Supremacy, 2. The Declaration whereby the Covenants are Condemned. 3. The Act for Eversion of the Establisht Government of the Church, and for Establishing of Prelacy, and for out∣ing of Christ's Ministers who could not con∣form thereto. By an Act Recissory of all Acts of Parliament and Assemblies, for the Establishment of the Government of the Church of Scotland, according to the Word. As likewise, that Act of Council at Glasgow, putting that Act Recissory in Execution; where at one time were violently cast out above 300 Ministers, without all legal procedure. Likewise, the Act appointing a Holy Anniver∣sary-day to be kept upon the 29th. day of May, for giving Thanks for the Upsetting of one Usurping Power, destroying the Interest of the Church of Christ in the Land: Which is to set up the Creature to be worshipped in the
room of our great Redeemer, and to consent to the Assuming of the Power lhat is proper to the Lord alone; for the appointing of Ordi∣dances in his Church, as particularly to the Government thereof, and the keeping of Ho∣ly-days, and all other sinful and unlawful Acts emitted and executed by them. And for Confirmation of this our Testimony, we do this day being the 29th. day of May 1679. publickly burn them at the Cross of Glosgow most justly, as they perfidiously and blasphe∣monsly had burnt our Holy Covenants, through several Cities of the Covenanted Kingdom. We judge none will take Exception at our not subscribing this our Testimony being so solemn∣ly gone about: for we are ready always to do it, if judged necessary, with all the faithful suffering Brethren in the Land. FINIS.
