p2613 99887259 183413
The Plovvmans Art in VVoeing The brisk young plowman doth believe If he were put to tryal, There's not a maid in all the Shire Could give him the denyal. Tune of, Cupid's Trappan. I Am a young man that do follow the Plow But of late I have found out an art, And can when I please with abundance of ease, Deprive any maid of her heart, brave boys Deprive &c. To think how they'l yield as I walk in the field My thinks is so pleasant to me, I long to be nigh her who'l burn like a fire, If she but my favour doth see, brave boys If she &c. Such wenches I think must be certainly mad, Whose hearts are betray'd with a smile, But they quickly find such a change in my mind That will them of all pleasure beguile, brave That &c. And will make them look pale like maidens so stale That for a good Husband doth long, And this unto me such pleasure will be That I shall thereof make a song, brave That &c. For who can delight in a thing that is fond 'Tis a thing that I never could do, My passion is gone when she doates upon John, Then another Girl I must go woe, brave That I &c. And in a months space it will be her case If she can be easily wonn, To mourn and bewail beneath the Milk-Pale, And to cry she's forsook and undone, brave And to cry &c. I could ne'r understand there's a man in the land Could delight in whats easily gain'd, But if it be so that Love they long stow, Then they'r passion must surely be feignd, brave Then &c. Then give me the wench that has so much sence When a Youngster doth come upon tryal. Will so cunningly deal that his heart she may steal; And seemingly give the denyall, brave And &c. She surely will find young men be more kind, If she be but strange and untoward, For men like the fire do burn with desire, If they meet with a maid that is froward, brave If &c. But it is the fashion throughout all the nation, And chiefly in Country Townes, Men maidens beguil who are won with a smile And then they'r destroy'd with their frowns brave And &c. And it may be said there's not a milk maid, Although she be never so fair, But if once I begin, her heart I would win And by my fair words would betray her, brave And by &c. It is a rare thing to hear the Girls sing Oh! my love hath forsaken me quite, And for his dear sake my heart it doth ake, I languish by day and by night, brave boys I languish &c. As I follow the Plow my thinks I see how They look pale and their lips they do tremble Cause they were mistaken and are forsaken By Youngsters that much did dissemble, brave. By Youngsters &c. I will have tother bout and without any doubt Ile compass the thing I desire, For I cannot well pass if I meet with a Lass, Till her heart it be set on a fire, brave Till her &c. There's Marget and Jone who still lye all alone But ile venture to lay twenty shilling, If a motion I make to cure their heart ake To lye with me both will be willing, brave To lye &c. There's Susan and Kate that long for to ha't And are vigorous in their desire, But before they are mad let some lusty young lad Make haste and Extinguish their fire, brave Make. &c. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden Ball in West-Smith-field.
