P588 R181481 52614818 176001
A Particular ACCOUNT Of the Taking of BUDA On the Second of September, by the Impe∣rial and Auxiliary Forces, &c. THe first Instant the Count de Scherffenberg arrived in the Imperial camp with the rest of the Forces that had served under his Command in Transilvania; They were in all 10000 Men, and 2000 of them mounted the same day the ad∣vanced Posts at the Duke of Lorrain's Attack. The second a Council of War was held, where it was unanimously resolved to make that day a General As∣sault upon the Town; for which all things were accordingly disposed; We continued from all our Batterles to play upon the Breaches, and the Flanks of the Enemies Retrenchments with Chain Shot; at the same time we threw a great many Bombs, and Carcasses into the Town, and to amuse the Turks, our Troops made several Movements, as if we had design∣ed to fight the Grand Visier, and part of those that guarded our Works toward the Town were in the Enemies sight drawn from thence towards our Lines, while double their number were detached by covered ways to supply their places. About three in the after∣noon the Palisadoes that secured the Breaches being beaten down by our Cannon, 3000 Men, divided in several Detatchments, and supported by 3000 more, made the Assault at the Duke of Lorrain's Attack, commanded by the Great Master of the Teutonick Order, and the Prince de Croy Lieutenant-General of Foot; at the Bavarian and Brandenburgh At∣tacks 1500 were appointed at each to begin the Assault, seconded by a reserve of the same Number; and 2000 Men were ordered to make two false Attacks. The Detachments, the Signal being given advaneed and amounted the Breaches with as great Order as Cour∣age; The Besieged defended them with the same Resolution they had made in former oc∣casions, and with their Fougades, Bombes, Stones, Bags, filled with Powder, Pikes and other Arms, forced our Men at the Duke of Lorrain's Attack twice to retire; but these being supported by the presence of the Duke, who led them on himself to the foot of the Breach going on the third time entered the Town with the slaughter of 800 Janisaries that defended the Breach on that side, the Visier Bassa was there during the whole action to encourage his Men, and gave great proofs of his Bravery, till having received several wounds, he fell among the slain. The Brandenburgers entered the Town almost at the same time, and the Bavarians soon after; so that forcing the Enemy from their several Poss and Retrenchments, the Assailiants advanced to the Market-place, and in an hours time were absolute Masters of the Place. The Turks after our Men were in the Town, pug a Mie, and by the means of a Train they had layn for that purpose, set several Houses on ie, which continued till the next Morning, and consumed abundance of rich Houshold goods and Merchandise; However, the Soldiers found a great deal of plunder of Plate, Jewels, Money, &c. insomuch, that many of them got 2 or 3000 Ducats a Man. It's reckoned that in the Asiault, and first sury of the Soldiers, after they were Masters of the Town about 2500 Turks were slain with their Arms in their hands, and about 1500 retired into a Redoubt on the side of the Castle, where they put up a white Flag, and beg∣ged
for Quartors, which after holding of a Council of War, was in confideration of the appoach∣ing night, and the confusion occasioned by the Fire in the Town, granted them. The Vice-Bassa, who was wounded, and the Aga of the Janisaries, with several other Officers of Note were of this number; the fist is the Elector of Bevaria's Prisoner, & the Aga the Duke of Lor∣rain's. A great many Women and Children, and 4 or 500 Jews were likewise saved; These are commanded to bury the Turks that were slain, and to cleanse the streets. We found in the place above 400 pleces of Cannon and Mortars (of the first 170 are fit for Service, but most of them dismounted) with a great quantity of Arms, Cannon bullets, Bombs, Grenadoes, and Carcasses, and other sorts of Ammunition. Of the Christians there were not killed in the Assault above 100 at the Duke of Lorrain's Attack, among which were the Marquis Spinola, and the Lieutenant-Colonel of the Regiment of Aspremont; but at the Bavarian Attack, the los was greater, three hundred being killed there, and about four hundred wounded. The Grand Visier, who was encamped within a Mile of Buda, and had possessed himself of a Hill, from whence he pretended, to inconvenience us with his Cannon, understanding the Town was taken, set fire to his Camp, and retired towards Al∣ba Regalis, upon which the Duke of Lorrain sent out 6000 Hungarians, commanded by the Count de Badiani, and 8000 Imperial Horse, under the Orders of General Caprara, to attack their Rear. And it was resolved in a Council of War, that 10 or 12000 Foot should pass down the Danube with several pseces of Cannon, towards the Bridge of Es∣secke, and that Orders should be sent to the Forces of Croatia, to join them, in order to cut off the Enemies retreat, while the rest of the Imperial and Auxiliary Forces (except 6000 which are put as a Garrison unto Buda, under the Command of Major-General Becke) should March after the Grand Visier. Hague, Sept. 20. An Envoy who arrived here some days ago from the Emperor of Mo∣rocco, had yesterday Audience of the States-General; his business is to make a Com∣plement of Friendship from his Master, and to offer an Exchange of Slaves for so many Guns. The Letters from Hamourgh give great hopes of an Accommodation. Those from Vienna of the eighth Instant▪ say, That above 3000 Turks had been killed at the taking of Buda; That the Visier Bassa was of that number, who was slain after having received di∣vers Wounds upon the Breach; that the Vice Bassa, the Aga of the Janisaries, the Muf∣ti, and several Officers of Note, and about 1500 Soldiers, and 500 Jews were Prisoners. That there was in the Town at the beginning of the Slege, a Garrison of 10000 Men, besides the Inhabitants that bore Arms. That the Christians had found a great deal of rich Plun∣der, that many of the common Soldiers got 2000 Ducats, and a Servant of the Duke de Croy, is said to have made a Booty of 9000 Ducats. That the Grand Visier so soon as he knew the Town was taken, retired towards Alba Regalis, and leaving a sufficient Garrison in that place, continued his retreat towards the Bridge of Essecke; That the Duke of Lorrain had sent out great Detachments to attack his Rear, and intended to march after him with the whole Army. Brussels, Sept. 17. We have had here for ten days together, such publick Rejoicing and Feast∣ing, that the like hath not been known. On Sunday night the Prince de la Tour, Treated our Governor-General, and the whole Court very splendidly, and afterwards entertained them with very fine Fire-works: And yesterday his Excellency gave a very magnificent Dinner to all the Grandees, Ministers, Generals and Counsellors of State. Our last Let∣ters from Vienna informed us, that the Duke of Lorrain had sent a Detachment of 8000 Horse, under the Command of General Caprara to pursue the Grand Visier, who retired with all the diligence he could towards the Bridge of Essecke, and that his Highness was preparing to follow with the whole Army. These Letters say, That the most considerable Jews of Buda had, during the Assault, gotten into Boats, hoping to escape with their Rich∣es down the Danube, but that they were discovered, and taken by the Hungarians, who got a Booty of unestee mable value. Edinburgh, Re-Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred MAJESTY, 1686.
