s1759 52529273 179025
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Exportation of Broken-brass and Copper. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, To,  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our She∣riffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, albeit by the fourty Sixth Act of the first Parliament of Our Royal Predecessor, King Charles the Second; all Merchants, Trades-men and others whatsoever, as well Strangers as Natives, upon any Col∣lour or Pretext whatsoever, are discharged to export furth of this Kingdom, any Broken-copper, or Brass, under the pain of Confiscation of what shall be appre∣hended in the Exporting; the one half to be applyed for Our use, and the o∣ther half for the use of the Discoverer and Apprehender of the same: Neverthe∣less, sundry of Our Leidges, and others within this Our Antient Kingdom, in manifest Contempt and Defraud of the said Act of Parliament, as if the samine were in desuetude, have presumed to export Broken-brass and Copper furth of this Realm, to the great prejudice of this Kingdom, and Discouragment of the Trades-men and Artists within the same. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, for puting the said Act of Parliament in Execution; Do expresly prohibit and discharge all Merchants, Trades-men and others whatsoe∣ver, as well Strangers as Natives, upon any collour or pretext whatsoever, to export furth of this Kingdom, any Broken-copper or Brass, under the pain above-set∣down, contained in the foresaid Act of Parliament; And We with advice fore∣said, Require and Command the respective Collectors and Surveyers at their se∣veral Ports, to use exact diligence, that there be no Contravention of the Pre∣mises by any of Our Leidges, as they and each of them will be answerable. OUR WILL IS HEIREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontenent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the several Sea-towns, Ports, or Burghs within this Kingdom, or other places needful, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance; And ordains these presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty sixth day of January, and of Our Reign the fourth Year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum Signeti. GILB ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno Dom. 1693.
