S1940 52529314 179101
PROCLAMATION, Indemnifying Deserters, and declaring what Passes will be sufficient. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; To  Macers of Our Pri∣vy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: For∣asmuch as, VVe have allowed and Ordained, that all Deserters from Our Re∣giments in Flanders, since their being there, be seized as Deserters by Our Officers, lately come from Flanders for Recruits; As also, that such of these Deserters who ingaged in any of Our Regiments abiding in Scotland, be de∣livered to the saids Officers, to be transported again to Flanders; And least the foresaids Deserters may apprehend that they may still be lyable to punish∣ment as Deserters; Therefore VVe with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby fully Pardon and Indemnifie all such of the saids Deser∣ters as shall happen to be transported to Flanders in manner foresaid for their said Desertion, remitting to the saids Deserters their foresaid Crime of Desertion, as fully and freely in all respects, as if the said Crime had never been committed and incurred, but that all other Deserters may be duly punished, and none may presume for hereafter to Desert on any pretence. VVe further hereby with Ad∣vice foresaid, Ratifie and Revive all former Proclamations against Deserters, ordaining the same to be put to execution against all Deserters not hereby par∣doned, or presently engaged in Our Service, with all rigour; And that for hereafter no question may be moved about Passes, VVe hereby with Advice foresaid, Ordain all Collonels of the Regiments in Our Service, to intimat to their inferiour Officers, that none of them presume to give a Pass to any Soul∣dier under their Command, unless the said inferiour Officer be a Field Officer, and in absence of the saids Collonels out of the Kingdom: Declaring, likeas it is hereby Declared, That all Passes to be hereafter given contrair to the present Order, shall be void and of no effect to the persons bearers and users thereof: OUR VVILL IS herefore, and we Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this King∣dom, and there, in Our Name and Authority make publication hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty sixth day of February,and of Our Reign the sixth year, 1695. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB: ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1695.
