N642 R180935 [ocm]62369504 188032
A New game at Cards. OR, The three Nimble Shuffling Cheaters. To a pleasant new tune, Or, what you please. Two men, one of them holding a spear YOu Gallants all that love to play, At Cards to pass the time away, I will tell you a new game, If you will please to learn the same, Such a game you have not seen, Play with all the Knaves without King or Queen There were three cheaters met together, To sée if they could cheat each other, The first was an Irish-man so bot, The second was a cheating Scot, The third an English-man so round, Yet he would play for an English Crown, The game it was so strange yet true The standers by as ne'r yet knew, How the game was to be plaid, Or how the Cards were cut and laid, For there was a secret in the thing, That the Knave of Clubs should beat the King▪ The Irish-man began the game, But knew not how to play the same, But quarrelled with the English-man, For holding the Cards so under-hand For he dd not know the thing, Tht the Knave of Clubs should be above the King The Scotch-man he began to deal, He shuffled and cut and away dd steal, The King then from the Enlish-man, Then many thought the game was done, For he did not know the thing, That the Knave should be above the King. The English-man was at a stand, To sée the King in the Scotch-mans hand, Then he began to cast about, What he must do to fetch him out, He thought that mony must do the thing, And make the Knave to be above the King.
the devil approaching a group of men holding a globe THe Scotch-man like a cheating Knave, when he knew what mony he should have Like a clown he cast him back, Vnder the Knave into the pack, And by this meanes he thought to win, When he plad the game no King no King. The English-man was greatly glad, When the King again in hand he had, He cockt his Braver and did jump, Because the Knaves of Clubs was trump, Now quoth he I'm sure to win. I know th knave o clubs will beat the King For Country-men then plaid about, For j y the King was quite left out, Quoth one observe with due regards. The Knave is master of the Cards, And we rejoce now at this thing, And glad they were they had left out the King We care not for the King a pin, If by the Knave we thrive and win, For tis well known and justify'd. We ever lov'd the stronest side. They all rejoyc'd now at this thing, And glad they were they had left out the King A Gun-man gave a mighty crack, To sée the King cut of the pack, And said your knave of Clubs i'th end, When all is done must stand our friend, And I rejoyce now at this thing That you kind friends have quite left out the King The knave of clubs as you him call, Shall one day win the love of all, Those that abuse him and his Banners, Wée'l beat them into better manners But I rejoyce now at this thing. That you kind friends have quite left out the King
