R529 R182444 [ocm]62369624 188105
REASONS Humbly offered against The frequent Naturalization of Aliens. IT has been the Prudence of the Princes of this Nation, always to take care to make a Distinction between Natural born Subjects and Aliens of other Kingdoms, and have never incouraged, nor indeed tolerated them in any thing futher than that which might directly or collaterally be judged and esteemed for the Interest of their Natives: Neither were Aliens, in any Age, for any proposed Advantages, favoured and eased in any thing, but Experience immediately discovered many great Mischiefs to attend. Some of which are enu∣merated in an Act made for redressing these Grievances, Anno Henrici septimi, Cap. 2. and are hereafter mentioned. First and Principally, The advancing Aliens in Riches and Honour, and impoverishing the Native Subjects, Secondly, The exhausting the Treasure of the Nation, and remitting the same into Foreign Nations. Thirdly, The great hurt in imparing and lessening the King's Customs, the Publick Revenue of the Nation. Fourthly, That Merchants Aliens colour the Goods and Merchandizes of other Strangers (not Naturalized or made Denizons) and Export great and considerable Substance in their Names. Herewith agree the Statutes of 11 H. 7. cap. 14. and 22 H. 8. cap. 8. pursuant to the design of which Laws, few or no Aliens were Natura∣lized during the Reigns of King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James. And how greatly the Trade and Wealth of the Nation were thereby increased, during the prosperous Reigns of the two latter of the said Princes, none that are conversant in History can be ignorant of. Besides which Mischiefs, Experience hath discovered further Inconveniencies, in admitting Aliens and Strangers to have and enjoy a free Trade upon equal Terms with His Majesties Native Subjects. As, That the Trade, by Commission would be by Aliens taken out of the Hands of His Majesties Subjects, both at home and abroad, and the English Merchants would be undersold in the Prizes of their Commodities by Aliens, who can live more hardly, and at less Charges, in Lodg∣ings, &c. then the King's Subjects, to the Discouragement of the Gentry, in training up their younger Sons in Trade, which was formerly esteemed and proved a good Provision for them, and many arrived thereby to great Estates and Preferment, which few now do. By the second Rule in the Book of Rates, annexed to the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, Goods Imported, and again Exported by English in Twelve Months, and Aliens in Nine Months, draw from Their Majesties half the Customs paid by them on the Importation and in some Cases more than half. By the Act of Tonnage and Poundange, Merchants English sustaining loss in their Goods Exported, by Enemies, Pirates, or perishing in the Sea, draw back the whole Custom from His Majesty, which Prejudice His Majestie will sustain from Aliens Naturalized. By the Act of Navigation for the increase of Mariners and Shipping, it is provided, That sundry Commodities, such as Masts Timber-boards, Foreign Salt, Pitch, Tar, &c. imported in any other Ship or Vessel than what is English Built, or truly and without fraud, belonging to the People of England, and which is otherwise Navigated and Manned than the said Act directs, viz. The Master, and three Fourths of the Mariners (not being English) shall be deemed Aliens Goods, and pay Customs, and City, Town, and Port Duties, and the Goods of Alies. Now if Aliens be Naturalized, the true intent of this Act is frustrated, the Mariners discouraged, and driven into Foreign Parts for a Lively-hood, and the Building of Shipping (the strength of the Nation) made of little or no advantage. The Increasing the Importation of Commodities, and thereby His Majesties Customs, the only Advantage proposed by the Naturalizing Aliens, will in half a Years time, at furthest, be frustrated; Inasmuch as this Nation cannot consume all the Commodities Imported, which will occasion the Price to fall, and so the Importation by consequence to cease: For it is evident, that no Commodity bears a Price, and turns to Accompt, but the Supplies are so considerable in three Months, in the same becomes a Drug. And moreover, it is not to be forgotten, That even in Holland, where for Reasons inconsistent with the Nature and Constitution of this Kingdom, they have admitted Foreigners to a free Trade with them, yet even there a very considerable difference is made between Aliens and Natives: For Aliens pay there, upon Importation and Exportation of their Commodities, considerable Duties and Tolls to the City, Town, and Port, where the unlade their Goods, which are not paid by Natives. In fine, It is conceived to be great Prudence for all English Subjects, for the Benefit of themselves and their Posterity, to use all discreet and lawful means to prevent these frequent Naturalizations of Aliens, as well for keeping up and increase of His Majesties Revenue, for preserving and maintaining the Honour and Interest of the English and Native Merchants, and preferring the younger Sons of the English Gentry, as ge∣nerally for advancing the good of all His Majesties Subjects, and keeping up the Magistracy in all Corporations in its due Honour and Repu∣tation, by preserving their Tolls, City, Town, and Port Duties. But if it shall be thought fit still to continue this great favour to Strangers, it is Humbly Desired that it may be with this Provisoe; (That they may not be in better Circumstances than our Natives Freemen,) Viz. Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that nothing in this present Act contained shall exempt or be construed to exempt any of the said Persons whatsoever who shall claim or receive any Benefit by this Act, from the Payment unto the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, any Tolls or Du∣ties whatsoever heretofore Lawfully Enjoyed or Received by them; But the same shall still be Paid, as it this Act had not been made.
