P3773a R224411 [ocm]64551610 184729
PROPOSALS Touching SUBSCRIPTIONS for the Lord Cokes Reports in French, and the TABLE. WHereas these Eminent Books of great Authority and use in the Law to all the Students and Professors thereof, by reason of the long intermission of re-printing, have been for many years very scarce, but now are undertaken to be re-printed: And that all persons, well-wishers to this undertaking, may have a fair and ample benefit from the Undertakers. It is proposed, That whosoever will be pleased to deposite ten shillings in the hands of any one of the persons here∣in after-named, for encouraging the Work, shall be entitled to one of each of the Eleven Parts of the Reports, with the Table, in Quires: And when the Books are finished, upon the further payment of four and thirty shillings more, shall receive the same. The Subscribers may please to understand for their better encouragement, that the said Books will not be sold for less than three pounds to any but the Subscribers upon such their Subscriptions, and are now sold for four pounds ten shillings. Whosoever, for himself or friends, depositeth three pounds, and subscribeth for six, shall be entitled to a seventh Book; and at the reception of seven shall pay but for six. The Books are now printing of the same Letter and Paper, as the sheet already printed for a pattern; and will be finished with all speed, and may be bound in one Volume, and will be folio for folio with the former Editions. Henry Twyford, in Vine Court in the Middle-Temple. George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Lud-gate Hill. John Place, at Furnivals-Inn Gate in Holbourn. John Bellinger, in Cliffords-Inn Lane in Fleet-street. Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet-steet. William Place, at Grayes-Inn Gate in Holbourn. Robert Pawlet, at the Bible in Chancery-Lane. Christopher Wilkinson, at the Black-Boy in Fleet-street. Thomas Dring, at the White-Lyon in Fleet-street. William Jacob, next Bernards-Inn Gate in Holbourn. Allan Bankes, and Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-Luce in Fleet-street. John Leigh, at the Bell in Fleet-street. John Amery, over against St. Clements Church, and John Pole, at Clements-Inne Gate. Any of the Persons above mentioned, upon Subscriptions, as aforesaid, will give Security under his Hand and Seal, for the respective Book and Books subscribed for.
