T2159 R217943 [ocm]61297165 180675
THE TRYAL AND CONDEMNATION, Together with thee EXECUTION OF CApt. ASHTOUN FOR HIGH-TREASON, In Conspiring the Dethroning of Their Majesties, and the Landing of a French Army in England. Trayed January the 19. THe unsatisfied World being now Curious to be Informed of the Truth of the Plot, (wherein they have doubted of for some time) let them but peruse this small Scheme of this Persons Tryal, and consider the few Quo∣tations, conained in the Letters found about his Person at the time of his Seasure. Cnd then they need not any longer doubt the Truth of of the Conspiracy against the Peace and Tranquillity of Their Majesties Government in these Kingdoms, whom God hath appointed Them to Rule over. The Prisoner being brought to the Bar, and the Jury being Impanelled, the Court proceeded to have the Indictment read, which were words much to the Effect follow∣ing, viz. THat the Prisoner not having the Fear of God before his Eyes, did in and between the last September, most Traiterously and Maliciously Conspire the Dethroning Their Majesties, the Subversion of the Government, and the Total overthrowing of the Protestant Religion; by keeping Correspondence by Lerters frequently with the late King James: And the Introducing of a French Army to be Landed in England and Scotland; together with his wicked Advice expressed in Letters of his own Hand Writing to the French Court, for the Destruction of our Fleet in our own Channel. The Prisoner being desired to plead to his Indictment, he pleaded not Guilty; and so the Court went on to the proof of it. The Attorney General opened the Case very clearly, in order to the Courts going on in the Tryal. The next who spoke was one of the Kings Learned Council in the Law, laying the matter of Fact fully home to the Prisoner at the Bar, in all its several Branches, accord-to the Nature of the Crime.
The first thing which was produced against him in Court, were Letters of his o Hand-Writing; which were taken on him when he was apprehended by Captain ¦lups and committed to Prison. Capin Billups being called into Court and Examined, whether these were the L¦ters that he took on the Prisoner when he seazed him, who gave the Court a great d of satisfaction as to the Truth of the matter, that they were the very Letters. Whereupon they proceeded to the reading of them in open Court, wherein w contained these Treasons among others. 1st. That it would be convenient for the French Fleet to come into our Channel,  prevent the Dutch Fleet from joyning ours. 2dly. That the late Kings Friends Encreased, and had Advanced a considera sum of Money to pay his Army when raised. 3dly. That the City of London was not so much for his Interest as might be wis they were. 4thly. That it would be necessary to send 6000 Men into Scotland, to keep the busie. There was a great deal of more Evidence produced in Court, too long here to be ¦serted, this being sufficient to satisfie any reasonable person as to the justness of his Se¦tence, and the Legality of the Tryal. Then the Lord Chief Justice gave the Charge to the Jury, in a Discourse touchi Nature of the Treasons laid to the Prisoners charge, as to the evil that might have e¦sued, if his Designs had taken effect. The Jury withdrew for some time, and then returning, brought in the Prisoner G¦ty of High-Treason. After some few questions ask'd the Prisoner, who gave no satisfactory answer t what was demanded of him. The Court wnt on to give Sentence, which was acco¦ingly done in the words following. That you shall return to the place from whence you came, from thence to be draw upon a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there to be Hanged up by the Neck, an to be cut down Alive, and your Privy-Members to be cut off and Burnt before yo Face; and your Quarters to be Disposed of as Their Majesties shall think fit, and th Lord have Mercy on your Soul. On January the 28. Captain Ashtoun was drawn upon a Hurdle to the place  Execution, and there Hanged, his Friends having beged his Body in order to its I¦terment, Printed at London, and Re-printed at Edinburgh, Anno, Dom. 1691.
