7072.2 S116575 99851791 176303
A BRIEFE DISCOVERIE OF THE CRAFTE & POLLICIE Which Protestant Mini∣sters vse in seducing theire Followers By Preaching and Publishing theire owne words for the word of God. WRITTEN By IOHN HVNT a Romaine Catholique, in defence of the true GOSPELL OR WORD OF GOD. For we are not as very many Adulterating the word of God, but of sincerity and as of God, before God, in Christ we speake. 2. Cor. 2. 17. Printed with Permission of Superiours M. DC. XXI.
A Discouerie OF THE CRAFTE and POLLICIE VVHICH Protestant Ministers vse in seducing theire Followers: By Preaching and Publishing their owne wordes for the word of God. THE greatest Crafte and chiefest Pollicie which the Protestant Mi∣nisters vse, in seducing theire Fol∣lowers, is the Preaching and Pu∣blishing theire owne words, for the word of God, and that in as many places of Scripture, and pointes of Religion as they differ from vs Catholikes For the vnderstan∣ding wherof, it is necessarie to obserue, that materiall written words, and materiall articu∣late voyces, are like soft wax: and the senses and significations are like vnto different sort of Seales: As vpon soft wax, you may imprint diuerse kinds of Seales, one after another: and
all put out the impression one of the other: So to the same materiall words, or voyces, you may giue a hundred senses, and all of them distroy one another, as is manifest by experi∣ence: seing Catholickes, Protestants, Puritans, and Pagans, all pronounce, and write a like this materiall laten word EPISCOPVS, yet giuing it different senses, make it a Catholicke word, a Protestant word, a Puritan word, or a Pagan word: Wher-vpon our Lord and Sa∣uiour IESVS CHRIST, descending from Heauen, to fullfill the promises, and to teache all Nations the Gospell, Word, and Will of Isa: 54. Ioh: 6. 45. God the Father in Heauen, did not write ma∣teriall Caracters, or speake materiall voices, differing from the materiall Caracters, or voi∣ces vsed by the Iewes, and Gentiles vpon earth, vnles it weare very few: but changed the signi∣fications of theire materiall Caracters, and voi∣ces into diuine senses, as EPISCOPVS, a Ca∣tholicke Christian Bishop: and so without al∣tering the materiall Caracters, or voices vsed amongst the Gentiles, he planted by himselfe his Apostles, and Disciples, the Gospell, or word of God in all Nations: there to remaine vntill the end of the world according to the Gen: 22. Gen: 26. Gen: 28. Matt: 5. 18. promises: in such sorte as noe man could become an Hereticke, or Protestant, to preach Heresy, and make a Schisme in the Church, but he should be forced to change the Diuine common sense of Christian materiall words vsed ouer the world, into priuate, or prophane: as EPI∣SCOPVS an ouerseer (in which sense CICE∣RO
a Gentile vseth it in his 7. booke of Epi∣stles ad Atticum) and then preach or publish it for the true word of God, therby to corrupte the vnderstandings of his credulous Auditors, and make them become so blind, that he may leade them to beleeue for Articles of their Faith, euen what he pleaseth, as if he weare their God vpon earth: which diuerse ambiti∣ous men perceauing, desirous to make them∣selues like Gods vpon earth, and to haue their words imbraced, and esteemed as the word of God, or Bible: they take the materiall word, or Bible, and giue it a priuate sense of their owne Coyninge, either by marginall notes, ex∣positions, or sermons vpon it, or else by chan∣ging the materiall Ecclesiasticall word it self into another materiall word of another sense, and that done, then diuulge it abroade amongst boyes and girles, men, and women of all sor∣tes: and perswade them that it is the true word of God: and they beleeuing it to be so, doe imbrace the words of these ambitious men, for the word of God, and fall into Spirituall Idolatrie, and Heresy; many times without perceauing that they doe amisse. Soe Luther de∣sirous to haue his words to be beleeued, and esteemed as the words of God changed the Common Christian sense of these words, This is my Body, into this priuate sense of Consubstan∣tiation, or reall being of both the body and bread in the Sacrament, and others imbracing them with this priuate sense as the word of God: he became Author of their Faith, and
as it were their God vpon earth: which Zuinglius perceauing, desirous to haue his word, to be estee∣med, as the words of God, to these materiall words of God, this is my body, he put his priuate sese: This is a signe of my body: or this doth signify my body: and finding many who would with this sense accept these wordes for the word of God, he became the Father and author of the Zu∣inglians, and of the Communion now vsed in England. Others seing that Luther and Zuinglius, had gotten by this Pollicie, so much creditt, and fame amongst men, as that they were esteemed Apostles immediatly sent from GOD, to re∣forme the Christian world, and publish the light of the Gospell, which for many hun∣dred yeares had laine hidden in darknesse, they also put in practise this Pollicie, and gaue priuate senses to the materiall word of GOD, and then published it for the Gospell, and so began all the other sects, and heresies in Ger∣manie, France, England, Polonie, Hungarie, and Flaunders, as Elizabethians, Caluinists, Arians, Ana∣baptists, Arminians, Gomarists &c. The word being his, whose sense, or signification it hath, and they giuing their owne priuate senses vnto the materiall word of God: made it theire owne priuate word: and then preaching, and publi∣shing it for the word of GOD: they became authors of theire Sects, and as it weare the God of theire Followers. By this Pollicie King HENRY the eight, obtained to be esteemed of the common vul∣gar
people Supreame head of the Church; for wheras the word of God is: Be subiect to euery humane creature for God, whether it be to the King 1. Pet: 2. 13. as excelling: in the latter end of his raigne, & during the raigne of King EDVVARD the sixth the only translation of the English Bible was, Submit your selues vnto all manner ordinaunce of man, whether it be vnto the King as vnto the chiefe Head: And so by changing the cōmon Christian sense of these words, and the proper materiall Caracter, he easily brought all them who be∣leeued those Bibles to be the word of God, to acknowledge him chiefe head of the Church (as hauing a manifest place, or text of Scrip∣ture for it) and to confesse that they ought to submit themselues, vnto him in all man∣ner of ordinances whervpon he did euen what hee lifted, both in Spirituall and Temporall matters: putting to death men of all sorts & sects, taking the Lands, and goods of the Church, into his owne handes: and brought the King∣dome to that passe, that he might dispose of it to whom he would by will or Testament: and so by Testament gaue the Kingdome, vn∣to the heires of his yonger sister: and exclu∣ded the elder; contrarie to the fundamentall Lawes and right of the Kingdome. In Queene ELIZABETHS time because as CAMDEN writeth in her life, she would not be called head of the Church, but Suprea∣me Bible 1577. Bible 1579. Gouernour the text was altered thus: To the King as hauing preheminence, And to the King as Su∣perior. The late Bibles of 1612 & 1618 haue To
the King as Supreame, leauing it in their choise, to make the addition as they please. By this Pollicie the Puritane Ministers haue put downe Catholicke Priests, and the Sacrifice of the Al∣ter, and haue established theire gouerment by elders for chāging this materiall word of God (Priest) togeather with the sense it receaued from God, into their priuate of (Elder) all those who receaued theire Bibles for the word of God: could not doubt, but that God had in∣stituted Puritane Elders to gouerne his Church, and not Catholicke Priests, they finding Elders e∣uery where ordained in the Scriptures: But Priests scarcelie spoken of vnlesse it be in dis∣grace, as Baalles Priests, or Priests of the old Law, in the new Testament they should commonlie find Elder thrust into the place of Priest, As Acts 13. 23. Acts 15. 2. Acts 15. 4. Acts 15. 16. Acts 15. 22. Acts 16. 4. Titus 1. 5. in the 1. of Timoth. 1. 17. the 1. Timoth. 5. 19 S. Iames 5. 14. and that not only in the Bibles printed in Queene Elizabeths time: but also in the Bibles printed by Robert Bib: 1612. Bib: 1518. Barker, and Bonham Nortan, and Iohn Bill. In such sort, as these late Bibles, make S. Paul say to Titus, I lest thee in Creete that thou shouldest ordaine Elders: and S. Luke to say, Paul and Barnabas Tit: 1. 5. Act: ordained Elders in euery Church, or as the Bible of 1562 hath in euery Congregation, and by this crafte simple people, who read these Bibles for the word of God (without perceauing what they doe) become Puritanes, and not only hate the Catholicke Church, and Catholicke Priests, because they find no such thing in their Scri∣ptures,
as the ordaining of Priests: But also e∣steeme the common English Church, and Re∣ligion, which is established by Parlament, to to be a Prophane Church, and impure Reli∣gion: Because it hath no Elders ordained in it, according to the words of theire supposed Bi∣bles. By this Pollicie, Protestant Ministers haue made the common people beleeue, that holy Order is no Sacrament, saying for, Neglect not the grace (Timothie) which is giuen thee by Prophe∣cie, Tim: 4 14. Bib: 1612. Bib: 1618. 2. Tim. 1. 16. with imposition of the hands of the Priesthood: Dispise not the guifte: and neglect not the guifte. A∣gaine for, I admonish thee (Timothie) that thou resuscitate the grace of God which is in thee, by the imposition of my hands: The latter BIBLE haue: I put thee in remembrance that thou stirre vp the guift: Bib: 1612. Bib: 1618. and soe both by changing the matter, and sense of this word Grace, into Guift: they ea∣sily bring the common people to beleeue, that Holy Order is noe Sacrament, conferring grace: but only a Guift, as the guift of a Benefice, or pension, which is assigned by the laieng on of the hands of the Elders: and so in like man∣ner, for imposition of handes of the Priesthood: they say in theire Bibles of 1577 and 1579 laieng on the hands of the Eldership. And by this tricke of Pollicie they haue brought the common people to beleeue that all Christian Catholicks are Idolaters, saing: Bib: 1562. 2. Cor. 6. 16. How agreeth the Temple of God with images: for a∣greeth the Temple of God with Idolls. And for VVorshiper of Idolls: they put Worshiper of I∣mages. 1. Cor: 5.
And Bible 1577 they say, Couetousnes is VVoorshiping of images. And a Couetous man is a wor∣shiper Col: 3. 5. Bibles 1609 1612 1618 Exod. 20. 4. of Images; for Couetousnes is worshiping of Idolls; and a Couetous man is a worshiper of Idolls. And likewise for grauen thinge, and moulten thing, they translate Image, saing: Thou shalt make to thee no grauen Image, and soe make God Almightie contradict himself, who a lit∣tle after commaunded Images to be made, sa∣ing: Two Cherubins also thou shalt make of beaten gold. Againe: Make a brasen Serpent, soe likewise they Exod: 25. 18. Num: 21. 8. Isa: 30. 22. Bibles 1612. 1614. 1618. Ose: 13. 2. Abac: 2. 18. Rom: 11. 4. say: Ye shall defile also the couering of thy grauen Images of siluer, and the ornament of thy moulten I∣mages of gold: thou shalt cast them away as a men∣struous cloth, thou shalt say vnto it get thee hence: Againe: They sinne more and more, and haue made them moulten Images of their Siluer. Againe: VVhat profitteth the grauen Images, that the maker therof hath grauen it, the moulten Images, and a teacher of lies. And for Bowed the knee to Baal they say, Bowed the knee to the Image of Baal. Whervpon those who read these Bibles for the word of God, easily beleeue, that God hath forbiden the sacred vse of Images; when there is no such thing: but that Protestant Ministers haue set forth their owne words for the word of God, and by these meanes haue made Scrip∣ture 1. Iohn 5. The Bible ap∣pointed to the vse of the Churches in the Queenes time. Isa: 31. against the sacred vse of Images, and so belying the Holy GHOST say: Babes keepe your selues from Images: for Children keepe your selues from Idolls. And by this crafte, though GOD Almightie say in the time of the new Testa∣ment, Man shall cast out his Idolls of Siluer, and
Idolls of Gold, and that he will destroy the names of Zach: 13. Idolls out of the earth, so that they shall no more be had in remembrance: yet these men would make it, that all the world after the comming of Bib: 1612. Bib: 1618. Act. 19. 24. our Sauiour, was more giuen to Idolatrie then before. And to make the Shrines of Saincts odi∣ous, for: Demetrius a Siluer-smith made siluer Tem∣ples of Diana: they say: made siluer Shrines of Di∣ana: Act. 19. 35. And for: VVhat man knoweth not the Cittie of the Ephesians to be a VVorshiper of Great Diana and Iupiters child: they say: Of the great Goddesse Diana, and of the Image which fell downe from Iu∣peter. And that which will seeme strange; the ve∣ry same place of Scripture, by which Catho∣licke Christians doe proue, that Priests after Holy ORDERS taken taken may not marry: they by this Pollicy haue made a very excel∣lent place of Scripture, to proue that Priests after order taken may marry: S. Paul saying: 1. Cor. 9. 5. Haue we not power to leade about a woman Sister, as also the rest of the Apostles, and also our Lords Brethren, and Cephas: By this text we proue that S. Paul might not marry: for if he might haue married, he would neuer haue made it a que∣stion, whether he might lead about with him a woman a sister to administer necessaries vn∣to him, as the rest of the Apostles had, and our Sauiour vsed: But because he might not marry: yet he saieth he might lead about, a woman to liue with him as his sister, to ad∣minister necessaries vnto him. And likewise by this place we proue that S. Peter though he
weare married before his vocation to the Apo∣stelshipe, yet after he was an Apostle, he liued with his wife, as with his sister. Now come Protestant Ministers, and not only chang the Catholicke sense of these words, a woman sister, but also the materiall words, and put in their Bibles of 1580, and 1589, a wise being a Sister, and in their Bibles of 1612 & 1618: a Sister a wife, and by this Pollicie, make it an excellent place to proue, that Priestes after Orders taken may marry: seing S. Paul being an Apostle, had power to marry, and might lead about with him a wife being a Sister, or a sister a wife, and that S. Iohn, S. Iames and S. Peeter had wiues, and liued with them as mar∣ried men, when there is no such thing: But that Ministers haue sett forth theire owne words for the word of God, and so haue de∣luded their Followers. And to make it more euident, that Priests after Order taken may marry, they corrupt another place of S. Paul, and make him say, for I beseech thee sincere Com∣panion Phi: 4. 3. help these women that laboured with me: I in∣treat thee true Yoke-fellow help these women, as if S. Paul had bene married in deed, and had a Yoke-fellow, Bible 1612. Bible 1618. 1. Cor. 7. 27. or weare as he calleth it tied to a wife. And least any one out of Ciuill honestie, should blush, to see Bishops, Priests, and Reli∣gious men of all sorts, breake their Cloisters, violate their Faith to God, and neglect theire regular Discipline of singing Hymnes, and Psal∣mes, night and day in the Quier, fasting, and meditating vpon the word of God, to lead a∣bout
a sister a wife to feasts, banquets, come∣dies, marketts, faires, and merriments, and bestow the goods of the Church, (which was ordeined to relieue the poore, and succour the King in his warres) vpon yong wanton wo∣men, & children begotten by hereticall whore∣dome: for these words of S. Paul Marriage ho∣norable in all, and the bed vndefiled: they write, Heb. 13. 4. Bib. 1612. Bib. 1618. Marriage is honorable in all: and soe by adding vnto the word of God, this word (is) they haue made Scripture, and word of GOD to proue, that not only all men, and women of what sort soeuer may marry without sinne: but also that it is an honorable thing for them to marry. And by this pollicie they cloake their wickednes: and easily defend those mar∣riages to be honorable, which Catholicke Chri∣stians condemne as hereticall whoredome, and whoredome of Diuells. When the Catholike sense of these words are, as S. Paul saith in an∣other place. That euery man may know to passe 1. Thes. 4. 4. his vessell in Sanctification, and honor: and not in the passion of lust, as also the Gentills that know not God. That the man and wife vse one another ho∣norablie, according to the Christian intent of marriage: and not beastly or silthily according to all kind of lust, or concupiscence. And to haue an excuse for theire wreat∣chednes: for these words of God, All men doe Matt: 19. 11. Bib. 1612. Bib. 1618. not receaue this saing (that it is not expedient to marrie: or as Protestants translate it, it is not good to marry) they say, All men cannot receaue this saing: And so by changing these materiall
words of God (doe not) together with the sense into their owne word (cannot) they haue made God Almightie to excuse their hereti∣call whoredome, and say they cannot liue vn∣married. Whervpon Luther in his sermon of Matrimonie Tom. 5. VVittemb. pag. 119. saieth: As it is not in my power, that I should be no man; Soe it is not in my power, that I shouldbe without a woman, excusing his Diuelishe Whoredome with the Nunne Catherine Bore, in affirming that it was im∣possible for him to liue chaste, belying GOD when the fault was in himself, for that he would not vse the meanes, which hevsed when he was a Catholicke Christian, and liued in his Monasterie: punishing his hody, with watching, fasting, and prayer: though a yong man, yet as he himself confesseth in his Commentarie v∣pon the Epistle to the Galathians chap. 1. pag. 35, He kept chastitie, pouertie, and obedience. And what∣soeuer (saith he) I did, I did it with a single hart, of good zeale, and for the glorie of God: fearing grieuou∣sly the last day, and desirous to be saued from the bot∣tome of my hart: But after he had cast of the feare of God, and abandoned fasting, watching, & praier: to coyne a false word of God, and to carry about with him a sister a wife, then it was no maruaile, though the Diuell soe en∣tred into him, that he could not as S. Paul saith, Extinguish the fiery dart of the most wicked one, or Eph. 6. satisfie his inraged lust, but by committing he∣reticall Whoredome, and Whoredome of Di∣uells. The Diuells, not hauing bodies, cannot com∣mitt
carnall Adulterie, or take carnall delight, or fall into this sinne, through frailtie of the Flesh: since they haue no flesh: but by applau∣ding it in their vnderstandings, and by sugge∣sting it as lawfull vnto Priests, and vowed Religious men, and women, (as Protestant Ministers do) they committ by the consent of their wills hereticall whoredome, or whore∣dome of Diuells, whervpon in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths raigne, when Apostata Priests became married Protestant Ministers, there arose this prouerb: She that lieth with a Minister, lieth in the Diuells bed: because Ministers doe not only committ that fact, out of lust, or concupiscence of the Flesh, or for procreati∣on, as other men generally doe: but also with an intente to practise their hereticall opinions, as diuells doe, and so do commit the whore∣dome of Diuells. And I desire thee deare READER what∣soeuer thou art, to consider, what a disho∣nour it is to the most chaste sonne of God; to haue hereticall whoredome, and whoredome of Diuelles, publickly preached for his Gospell vpon earth. If for euery idle word that man shall Matt. 12. 36. speake, he shall render an account for it, in the day of Iudgment; what will become of these Spirituall of Wickednes (as S. Paul calleth them) Of these fiery darts, This adulterous generation? Fire, Eph: 6. 26. Psal. 10. Apoc. 14. and brimstone, and blast of stormes, the portion of their Cup, and the smoke of their torments shall ascend for e∣uer and euer. And by this pollicie they bring their Au∣ditours,
and all those who beleeue their Bibles to be the word of God, to deny Purgatory and firmely to beleeue that they ought not to pray for the dead. The Scriptures making mention of two hells: the one, the hell of the dam∣ned, from whence There is no redemption, which is also called the Lower-hell. As: Thou hast deli∣uered Psal. 85. 13. Proub. 15 24. my soule from the lower-hell. Againe The way of life is on high to the prudent, to auoide from Hell beneath. The other a Hell from whence there is Redemption: wherof the Scripture speaking, say: Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hell: Againe, Psal. 15. Act. 2 Gen: 37. 35. Gen: 42. 39. I will goe downe to my sonne into Hell. Againe, You shall bring my gray head with sorrow vnto Hell: Not that the Patriarcke IACOB ment to be dam∣ned: but Heauen not being opened before the Ascention of our Sauiour (as he witnesseth, Matt. 3. 2. saying: The Kingdome of God is at hand) he ment to go downe into the Hell of Redemption, into which our Sauiour after his passion was to enter, and to redeeme the soules there de∣teined prisoners, according to the Scriptures, saying: As Ionas was in the whales belly, three dayes Matt. 12. 40. and three nights, so shall the Sonne of man be in the hart of the earth: and of his actions there, the Scriptures say: He was loosing the sorrowes of Hell: Againe, Christ also died &c. and comming he prea∣ched to them also weare in prison. Whervpon Ose: 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 54. it is said in the person of our Sauiour, I wilbe thy destruction ô Hell; Not that our Sauiour after his passion, was to destroy the hell of the dam∣ned, or Lower Hell: that all men of what sect, or sort soeuer should be saued, and none
damned: But that he would redeeme the sou∣les in the Hell of Redemption, which we call Limbus Patrum, and Purgatorie: loosing theire sorrowes, by taking them with him into Heauen. Now come Protestant Ministers, and in their Bibles put in place of Hell: Graue, and by this meanes easily destroy our Catho∣licke Bib. 1612. Bib. 1618. doctrine of Purgatorie, and prayer for the dead, and make no distinction of places for soules departed out of this life, but Hell; Gen: 37. 35. or Heauen; and the graue: and so make the Patriarcke Iacob say: I will goe downe into the graue vnto my Sonne. As if soules weare buried with Ose: 13 14. 1. Cor. 15 55. the bodies of men in the graue. Againe they say, I will ransomme them from the power of the graue: and O Graue I wilbe thy destruction. Againe O death where is thy sting, o graue where is thy victorie; In all these places putting Graue, for Hell, and Act: 2. Psal. 48. 16. so likewise for, Loosing the sorrowes of Hell: they say hauing loosed the paines of death. And for, God will redeeme my soule out of the hand of hell: they say, God will redeeme my Soule from the power Psal 8. 3. Psa. 8. 41. of the graue: and for my life hath aproached to hell, they say, my life draweth nigh vnto the Graue. And so likewise say: VVhat man liueth, and shall not see death? shall he deliuer his soule from the hand of the Graue: So putting graue for hell, as though the soules of men were buried in granes: and by this crafte, they make silly people beleeue, that there is no Purgatorie, or Hell of Redemp∣tion after death, but graues, hell of the dam∣ned, and Heauen By this Pollicie they induce theire Fol∣lowers
to Beleeue that the Saincts haue no in∣herent Iustice: but that the best actions of men, are of theire owne natures mortall sinnes: and that the Saincts are not truly, and really iust, but haue Gods iustice imputed vnto them, on∣ly, and so become iust in the sight of God, not with the iustice that is within themselues, but with the iustice of God imputed vnto them, and so put for Iust, righteous, for Iustice, righ∣teousnes, for Iustifications, ordinances, Heathen words for Christian: as though there were no more inherent Iustice in vertuous Christians, then in vitious Pagans, as for example: where the word of God is: They weare both iust before Luc. 1. 5. Bib. 1612. Bib. 1618. God, walking in all the commaundemements, and Iu∣stifications of our Lord. They say: They were hoth righteous before God walking in all the Commaunde∣ments, and ordinances. Againe for Iustice of the Law: Rom. 2. 26. Rom. 5. 27. they say righteousnes of the Law: Againe for They which receaue abundance of grace, and of donation, and of Iustice shall raigne in life: they say: Abun∣dance of grace, and of the free guift of righteousnes. Againe, for as by the offense of one, vnto all men to Rom. 5: 18. condemnation: So also by the iustice of one vnto all men to iustification: They say, By the righteousnes of one the free guift came vpon all men vnto iustification. A∣gaine for we might be made the Iustice of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21. They say: VVe might be made the righteousnes of God. And by this crafte though God Almigh∣ty say in both Testaments, That he will giue his Lawes in their harts, and in their minds he will su∣perscribe Heb. 10. 16. Hier. 33. 34. Heb. 8. 8. them: Yet they perswade theire Fol∣lowers, that it is impossible, to keepe the law,
or to be iust with inherent Iustice. By this pol∣licie they induce their Followers to deny Free-will, saing for; not all take this word: All men Matt: 19. 11. cannot receaue this saing: that it is not expe∣dient to marry. Againe, for: I haue laboured 1. Cor. 15. 10 more aboundly then all they: yet not, I but the grace of God with me, they say the grace of God which was with me. As though the Apostle did not concurre with the grace of God, but was mo∣ued as a thing without life: Againe where the Scripture saith, As many as receaued him, he gaue them power to be made the sonnes of God. In the Ioh. 1. 12. margent they put for power right or priui∣ledge, as though he did not giue them Free-will, or power indeed to become the sonnes of God, but only a right, or priuiledge. By this Pollicie they haue abolished the Sacrament of Pennance, and all penall Satis∣faction for Sinne, and made only repentance, without confessing the fact, or satisfaction for iniuries, to be sufficient for the remission of offences: putting almost euery where, repen∣tance in place of pennance, as Matth. 3. 2 Mar. 3. 8 Luc. 3. 5 Luc. 5 32. Luc. 13. 3. Luc. 24. 47. Act. 26. 20. Act. 2. 37. And so for, To the Gentills I did preach that they should do pennance, and turne to God, doing Bible 1612. Bible 1618. workes worthie of pennance, they say: that they should repent and turne to God, and doe workes meete for repentance. And for God denounceth vnto men that all euery where doe pennance: they say, Commaun∣deth Act. 17. 30. all men euery where to repent. As though it were sufficient for one that reteineth his neigh∣bours goods, or lands, wrongfully: to repent
only that he had done amisse, without ack∣nowledging that he had done wrong, or re∣storing the thing vniustly reteined: And from this wicked crafte of Protestant Ministers, as from the fountaine, ariseth this cankred ci∣uill warre of perpetuall suites in Law, and contentions amongst the people: there scarcely being any one family in all England, that hath not some strife, or suite in law against their Neighbours. Wherby they are forced to spend their witts, and substance, in defending them∣selues against their Neighbours: which they should spend in honest studies, and honour of their country: as we see practised in other Na∣tions. By this Pollicie they haue induced their Followers to beleeue, that Bishops haue no authority to rule theire Flocke, but only to o∣uersee them, and giue them meate and so mainteine their disobedience, against their spi∣rituall Parents: saing for Take heed to your selues, Bib: 1612. Bib: 16 8. Act. 20. 28. and to the whole Hock wherin the holy Ghost hath placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God: Take heed therefore vnto your selues, and to all the Flocke, ouer the which the Holy Ghost hath made you ouerseers to feed the Church of God: changing this Christian word Bishop into this prophane word Ouerseer, and this word Rule in∣to Feede: they destroy Episcopall dignitie, and make the holy Ghost, establish an office, which neuer was vsed in the Church: for who euer read, or heard of any such Officers amongst Christians, as Ouerseers to feed them.
By this Pollicie they maintaine their Iusti∣fication Bib: 1612. Bib: 1618. Luc. 17. 42. by Faith only, saing for: Thy Faith hath made thee whole: Thy faith hath saued thee. By this crafte they maintaine their assured∣nes of Saluation: saing, for: Let vs aproache with a true hart in the fulnes of Faith: Lett vs draw Heb. 10. 22. neare with a true heart in full assurance of Faith. And to conclude for Clergie, they put He∣ritage to anoyd the distinction betweene the 1. Pet: 5. Bib: 1612. Bib: 1618. Clergy, & the Laitie: they being for the most part all laie men: and for Schismes which is a Christian Catholicke word, signifying spiritu∣all diuisions, from the vnity of the Church: 1 Cor. 1. 10. they put Dissentions, which arise aswell about wordly things as in matters of Religion. For VVorthy they put Meete, to take away meritr for good workes. For this Christian word Catho∣licke Matt. 38. & Act. 26. 20. they put this prophane word Generall, as the Generall Epistle of lames. The first Epistle gene∣rall of Peter. The second Epistle generall of Peter. The first Epistle generall of Iohn: in the beginning of the Epistles. For this Christian word Tradi∣tion, they put this prophane word Ordinance, 1. Cor: 15. 2. and so make S. Paul to say: Keepe the ordinances, as I deliucred them: for Keepe the Traditions: for Ia∣cob Heb. 11. 2. adored the toppe of his rod, they put: Iacob wor∣shiped leaning vpon the top of his staffe, to the denying of the adoration of creatures. And for: This is the word which is Euangelized amongst 1. Pet. 1. 25. you: They adde to the text and say: this is the word, which by the Gospell is preached vn∣to you, in fauour of their Heresie, when they
say: that there is no other word of God, but the written word only. And this is sufficient in particuler to shew how Protestante Mini∣sters, doe deceaue their Followers, and make them beleeue their owne words for the word of God. And of the corruptions of the En∣glish Protestant Bibles in generall; his Maiestie in the conference at Hampton-Court page 49. saieth, That he could neuer yet see a Bible well tran∣slated into English. But the worst of all he thought the Geneua to be. Carlile in his booke that Christ went downe into Hell, pag. 116. saieth: That our English Protestants in many places, detort the Scrip∣ture from the right sence, and shew themselues to loue darkenesse more then light, and falshood more then truth. The Protestant authour of the booke cal∣led Aduertissement in anno 1604. saieth, The English Protestant Bible is inferior to the Turkish Alcaron, And so Christianity is diuided in England by publicke authority. M. BVRGES Apologie pag. 93. in Couells answere, saieth, That the approued English transla∣tion, is a translation which hath many omissions, many additions, which sometime obscureth, sometime peruer∣teth the sense. Two and twenty Protestant London Prea∣chers in their petition except: 11 12. say, The English Protestants in their publicke procedings translate Scriptures corruptly by leauing out of words, peruerting the meaning of the Holy GHOST, misaplying places of Scriptures, to the countenance of errour. And the same forraine Protestants write one of another: Zuingsius in resp. ad Luth. lib. de
Sacram. Tom 2. fol. 412. saieth to Luther: Thou dost corrupt and adulterate the word of God, immita∣ting surely in this, the Disciples of Marcion, and Arius. Againe, See how thy case standeth Luther, that in the eies of all men, thou art seene, a manifest, and com∣mon corrupter, and peruerter of holy Scripture, which thing thou canst neuer deny. Conradus Schleasselburge in his Theologia Caluini∣starum lib. 2. cap 6. fol. 43. saieth of Zuinglius, that he was shaken with the spirit of giddines, and blindnesse, as all Heretickes are, daring to corrupt the Testament of our Lord. Luth in Epist. ad Ioan: Heruag. tipogra. Argent. saieth of the Sacra∣mentaries: Their opinion of the Sacrament, they be∣gan with lies, and with lies they defend the same, and they broach it abroade by the wicked fraude, of corrup∣ting other mens bookes. Carolus Molineus a Protestant in Transt: Testam: noui, saith of Caluin: That he made the text of the Gospell leape vp and downe at his pleasure, that he v∣sed violence to the same, and added of his owne to the very sacred letter, for drawing it to his purpose. And the same Author afirmeth of Beza, that, Actually he changeth the text. Likewise Ca∣stalio in defens: pag. 182. & 183. saieth of Beza: This is true that oftentimes he erreth not only in words (which is not so daungerous, and might be tollerated) but also in the things, and the same most weightie. And Beza in Praef. Testament. anno 1556, con∣demneth the translation of Castalio, as false and corrupt. Thus these Protestants the one of the other. The word, or writing being his whose
sense, and signification it hath, as we haue proued in the beginning of this booke: Prote∣stant Ministers desirous to make themselues the Gods of theire Followers, and to haue theire owne words, to passe currant amongst them for the word of God, doe make theire Bibles theire wone word, either by giuing priuate or prophane senses vnto the materiall words of Scripture, or else by changing the text: and they diuulge it for the true word of God, and their followers reading, and receauing it for the word of God: they obteine theire desires, and bring theire followers to beleeue euen what they please, for articles of faith. And for further proofe hereof, if it please you to take any part of the Scriptures, and vse the same liberty in translating and explicating it, which Protestant Ministers doe vse, that is change some Christian words into Pagan and the common sense, into a priuate, or prophane, and you shall find by experience, that you may make the Scriptures say what you please. And if after that you haue done so, others would beleeue it, to be the word of God, you may make them to beleeue for Articles of Faith, what you will. Common sense, is that which followed, in true forme of Argument, beget∣teth one veritie, after another, without num∣ber, and without stay, vntill it light vpon pri∣uate sense, as common sense in visible demen∣sions. The whole is greater then his part: A right line is the shortest betweene two pointes.
One or a point, is that which hath no parte. THese and the like granted, which all men generally do grant to be true, we may proceede to teach visible demonstrations, in Mathematicks, without number, and with∣out stay, vntill we light vpon priuate sense. Priuate sense is, that which followed, be∣getteth one falshood after another, without stay or number, vntill you light vpon com∣mon sense, as The parte is greater then the whole. Graunt but this exchange of words, Part for VVhole, or let the words stand, and change but the common sense, into a priuate, distincte from the common sense of words vsed a∣mongst Mathematicians, and beleeue it, and if you weare as greate a Mathematician as Eu∣clid, it would so corrupt your iudgment, that it would depriue you of all truthes and know∣ledge in the Mathematicks. And the same in Musicke, grant but the concordances, and discordance of audible qua∣lities, according to common sense, as these to be concordants 1. 3. 5. 6. 8. 10. 12. 13. 15. 17. 19. 20. and these imperfect discordants 4. 7. 9. 11. 14. 16. 18. 21. and the Tones which are the rules, and dispositions, by which we direct songes, and the Moodes, which is the distance of voices, one from another, and there is no end of Musicke, and Melody. But if we deny common sense, in audible qualities, and ad∣mitt of a priuate, that a consonante, is a dis∣sonant, and Diapason, which is the distance of one voice from another, by octaues, and
tritones, which doth containe three tones, are both one, then all Melodie is made like the howlinge of boyes and girles in the Con∣gregation of Protestants, where some sing high, some low, some soft, same hard, all out of tune: howle in their priuate senses, like the Diuells in hell, where there is no order but an euer∣lasting horrour. Ioh: 10. 21. And the same in diuinity, change but the com∣mon sense of diuine words, into a priuate, or prophane sense and follow it, as true in any one word, and it will turne you out of all the articles of your Creed. As for example ad∣mitt of this priuate sense, that Imago signifieth an Idoll, and Idoll an Image, as Protestant Ministers would make theire followers belee∣ue, and so translate for: Couetousnes is Idolatrie, and the Couetous man is an Idolater. Couetousnes is Bib: 1577. Eph. 5. 4. Col. 3. 5. worshiping of Images, and the Couetous man is a worshipper of Images, and for: VVhat a∣greement hath the Temple of God with Idolls: say, how agreeth the Temple of God with Images, or 2. Cor. 6. Bib. 1562. let the materiall word Image stand, and giue it this signification Idoll, as Protestants doe in their later translated Bibles, hauing now suf∣ficiently perswaded their followers, that I∣mages, and Idolls, are all one, and wheare we finde Image, let vs vnderstand Idoll: as in this place, Christ is the Image of the inuisible God: A∣gaine, God created man to his owne Image, to the Col. 1. Gen: 1. Image of God created he him, it would bring vs to beleeue, that God had an Idoll, that Christ IESVS was an Idoll, that all men are Idolls,
that no reuerence or respect men of what sort soeuer, weare Idolatry, and to deny all points of Christianitie, and diuine knowledge, and be∣leeue one Heresie after another, without end or number, vntill we beleeued, that the diuell weare God, and for such, was of all men to be serued, and adored, for that he is not the Image of any thing. In so much as if Protestant Ministers had in all places of their Bibles, changed the com∣mon senses of Images, and Idoll, into a priuate, they had put no stay vnto their heresies, vn∣till they had brought the people, publickly to adore the diuell for God, as Witches and Ma∣gitians. Againe though S. Matthew, S. Marke, S. Luke, S. Paule speaking of the blessed Sacrament say: that our Lord said This is my body: Yet the Caluinists, Puritanes, and Elizabethians, who deny the Reall presence, and being of the true and reall body, and bloud of our Lord, in the blessed Sacrament, doe vnderstand by (is) doth signify, and make this priuate sense of these words. This doth signify my body. Now doe but admitt of the like priuate sense of (is) in an∣other place like vnto this, and for This is my Matt. 17. beloued Sonne, make it, this doth signify my be∣loued Sonne, it would bring vs to deny the diuinity of Christ, his Resurrection, and Ascen∣tion and destroy our whole Faith as Protestant Ministers haue destroyed by this shift, the Re∣all Presence in the blessed Sacrament. And these are the shiftes and meanes by which Protestant Ministers haue planted Pro∣testantisme,
and doe daily plante new sects, and opinions in this Kingdome, to the making of his Maiesties subiects beleeue for Articles of Faith, and Word of GOD, euen what they please. And this was the crafte of the Here∣ticks in the Apostles times, as witnesseth S. Paul to Timothy, saying: Prophane and vaine speaches auoide, for they doe much grow to impietie, and their 2. Tim. 2. 16. speach, spreadeth as a canker, of whome is Himmene∣us, and Philectus, who haue erred from the truth, sa∣ing: that the resurrection is done alreadie, and haue subuerted the faith of some, by changing Christi∣an words and senses, into priuate and pro∣phane, Himmeneus, and Philetus so peruerted the Iudgment of some Christians, that they be∣leeued as Articles of their faith, that the re∣surrection was past and done euen in the time of the Apostles. That thou deare Reader be not deceaued, with this, or the like Pollicie of Protestant Ministers, to the eternall damnation of thy soule: it is necessary for thee to obserue, first: that the word is his whose sense, and signi∣fication it hath, as giue Pagan words Christi∣an sense, and they become Christian: or giue Christian words Pagan, or priuate sense, and they become Pagan, or priuate mens words, and are no more the word of GOD, but the words of perticuler men, as we haue shewed by example in the beginning of this booke: frō whence it commeth to passe, that the Bibles, Bookes, and Sermons, of PROTESTANT Ministers, are not the vvord of GOD, but
their owne vvords, Bookes, or speaches, in∣uented by themselues, or thine owne Bible, vvord, or inuention, supposing, that reading the Bible, thou giuest it thine owne priuate sense. Secondly that the words of our Sauiour are not his words, vnles they be vnderstood in the same sense in which he spoke them, and so likewise the words of S. PAVL, and all the rest of the word of God: are not the word of God, vnles they be spoken, or vnderstood in the same sense in which S. PAVL, or GOD Almighty spake them. Thirdly that the sense which our Sauiour vsed in his words, is the Catholicke or com∣mon sense, which hath bene vsed most com∣monly amongst Christians, in all ages, and times to the fullfilling of the Prophecies, which say: All thy Children shalbe taught of our Lord: Againe Isa: 54 Ioh: 6. 44 It is writen in the Prophets all shalbe docible of God: Againe: In the later daies the mountaine of the house of our Lord, shalbe prepared in the top of mountaines, and it shalbe eleuated the little hills and all nations shall Isa: 2. 2. flow vnto it, and many people shall go and shall say, come let vs go vp to the mount of our Lord, and to the house of the God of Iacob, and he will teach vs his waies, and we shall walke in his pathes. Fourthly that our Sauiour the sonne of God receaued from his Father, this Catholicke Ioh: 7. 16. Ioh. 4. 24. Rom: 11. 25. sense of words according to the Scriptures, saing: My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. Againe The word which you haue heard is not mine, but his that sent me. Againe: VVho knoweth the
sense of our Lord, or who hath bene his Councellour: No man (saieth our SAVIOVR) knoweth the Matt: 11. 27. Sonne, but the Father, neither doth any man know the Father, but the Sonne, and to whome it shall please the Sonne to reueale. Fiftly that our SAVIOVR, deliuered, re∣uealed or taught this Catholicke sense of words vnto the APOSTLES according to his word, saing: The wordes which thou hast giuen me, I haue Ioh. 17. 9. giuen them (the Apostles). Againe I haue giuen them (the APOSTLES) thy word. Againe: To you (the APOSTLES) it is giuen to know the misteries of the Kingdome of Hea∣uen, Ioh. 17 4. Matt. 13. 18. but to them (the Iewes) it is not giuen. And therefore Seing (the materiall written word) they see not (the sense) and hearing (the materiall vocall voice) they heare not (in the sense is it spo∣ken) neither do they vnderstand, the sense, or mea∣ning of the words of the sonne of God. And the Prophecie of Isay is fulfilled in them, which saieth: with hearing shall you heare, & you shall not vnder∣stand. Sixtly that the Apostles indued (to this end) with all languages, and tongues, preached, planted, and taught, this said sense of words all ouer the world. And they going forth (saith S. Marc. 16. 15. Marke) preached euery where, certes into all the earth, hath the sound of them gone forth, and vnto the end of the world, the words of them. Againe Behould (saieth Rom. 10: 18. Psal. 18. 18. Act. 13. 27. S. Paul we turne to the Gentills, for so our Lord com∣maunded vs, I haue put thee to be a light to the Gen∣tills, that thou maist be saluation vnto the vtter-most of the earth. Whereby this sense of words, which
was before not knowne vnto the Nations: be∣came the Catholicke, or common sense to the Christians of all Nations: according to the words of S. PAVLE saieng, to the COLOSSIANS: Col: 1. 5. The hope which is laide vp, for you in Heauen, which you haue heard in the word of truth of the Gospell, that is come to you, as also in the whole world it is, and fructifieth and groweth. Seuenthly, this sense of words so made Ca∣tholicke, or common to Christians of all Na∣tions, was to remaine, amongst the Christians of all Nations vnto the end of the world: ac∣cording to the Scriptures saing: I haue apointed you (the Apostles) that you goe and bring fruite, and your fruite abide. Iohn 15. 16. Matt. 13. Againe, The Kingdome of Heauen is resembled vnto a man that sowed good seed in his field: But when men where a sleepe, his enemie came, and ouersowed cockle among the wheate. And the seruants said, wilt thou we go, and gather vp the cockle: And he said no: suffer both to grow vntill the haruest: And, he that sowed good seed is the sonne of man: And the field is the world. And the good seed these are the children of the King∣dome. And the cockle these are the children of the wicke∣done. And the enemy that sowed them, is the Diuell. Gen. 22. But the haruest is the end of the world. To the fulfilling of the promises made to the Patriarckes saing: I will blesse thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the starres in Heauen, and as the sand that is by the seashore, thy seed shall possesse the gates of his enemies, and in thy seed shalbe blessed all the people of the earth. Againe: Thy seed shallbe as the dust of the earth Gen. 2. which shalbe dilated, to the VVeast, and to the East,
and to the north, and to the south, and in thee, and thy seed shalbe blessed all the tribes of the earth. Againe: This Gospell of the Kingdome shalbe preached Matt. 24. 14. in the whole world, for a testimony vnto all Nations, and then shall come the consummation. Againe: God Eph: 4. 12. gaue some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Euangelistes, and other some Pastours, and Doctours, to the consummation of the Saints, vnto the worke of the ministery, vnto the edifying of the body of Christ, vntill we meete all in the vnity of Faith, and knowledge of the sonne of God. And shewing the reason why God Almightie would prouide Pastours, and Doctours, at all times for his Church, saieth: That now we be not children wauering, and carried a∣bout, with euery wind of Doctrine in the wickednesse of men, in craftinesse to the circumuention of errour. And Col: 2. 27. for this cause S. PAVIE saieth: you shalbe, holy, and immaculate, and blamelesse before God, if yet you remaine in the faith grounded, and stable, and vn∣moueable, from the hope of the Gospell, which you haue heard, which is preached amongst all Nations, that are vnder Heauen. From hence you may also obserue, what a peruerse & wretched a thing it is to be a Pro∣testant, and pray, or preach in Protestantisme, since first he must deny common sense, and the signification of Christian words, vsed in all ages and times amongst Catholicke Chri∣stians, and pray, and speake his owne or other mens lying inuentions: to the verifying of the words of the Prophet Isay, saieng in the per∣son Isa: 59. 13. of Heretickes: we conceiued and spake from the heart words of lying: from hence they are also cal∣led Gal 3. 1.
sencelesse. As: O sencelesse Galathians, who hath be∣witched you, not to obey the truth. And so in Hell perceauing their errour they cry out VVe sen∣celesse esteemed their liues (the liues of Catholickes) VVis. 5. 4: madnes, and there end (in prisons, or in publicke Martyrdome) without honour. Secondly it is the language of the Diuell, according to the words of our Sauiour, saing: The enemies that sowed them is the Diuell: as GOD Matt: 13. 37. Almightie is the authour of the common sense of wordes, to the planting of truth, and ve∣ritie amongst men: So the Diuell of priuate sense, to the planting of lies, because he is a liar Ioh: 8. 44. and the Father therof. But you will say, how shall I know which is common sense of words, and which is priuate? To which I answer that common sense of words, is the sense which now com∣monly, and heretofore generally hath bene giuen to Christian words, by Christians: as when our Sauiour tooke breade and said: This is my body. The common sense of these our Sa∣uiours words are, and heretofore hath bene amongst Christians, in Europe, Asia, Affrica, and America, that it was his true and reall body: the priuate sense, of these words, is the sense which is giuen by some one or few; as: this is a signe of my body, or, this doth signi∣fy my body, which senss few do giue vnto these words. But you will say the sense which Protestants doe giue to Christian words are more common, then the sense which Catho∣lickes giue. To which I answere, that lear∣ned
Protestants confesse the contrarie: as Perkins vpon the creed pag. 307. where he affirmeth: That during the space of nine hundreth yeares, the Po∣pish heresy hath spread it selfe ouer the whole earth: Fulke in his booke against Stapleton &c. pag. 25. where he saith, That some Protestants haue written, that the Pope hath blinded the world, these many hun∣dreth yeares, some say a thousand, some say one thousand two hundreth, some nine hundreth yeares, and Napper in his Treatise vpon the Reuelations. page 68. saith, that Papistry, hath reigned, Vniuersallie, and without any debatable contradiction twelue hundreth, and three skore yeares. Thus these English Protestantes: wherby you may see, that the Catholicke sense of words is the common sense, and Protestantisme is a priuate, or prophane sense. And moreouer whether our Catholicke sense of words, or Protestantisme be prophane, I referre you to any auncient Lexicon Heathen, or Christian Authour, and you shall find that the sense which Protestant Ministers doe giue vnto Christian words, are not to be found in any auncient Christian mans writings, as Episcopus an Ouer∣seer, Presbiter an Elder: Penitentia Repentance: Imago an Idoll: Gratia a Guift &c. taking Ouer∣seer, Elder, Repentance, Idoll, and Guift in the same sense with Protestant Ministers doe now take them. For here we speake of the sense of Christian words, and not of the ma∣teriall word: for otherwise Christians some∣times by Paenitentia &c. vnderstand Repentance, as of Iudas they say: Penitentia ductus, returned the Matth. 27. 3.
thirty siluer peeces to the chief Priests, saing I haue sin∣ned betraing iust Blood: Where by penance they vn∣derstand repentance: but yet do not take re∣pentance in that sense, Protestant Ministers do vse to take it, that is for an act sufficient to remitt sinnes: for so Iudas should haue bene saued: but for one part of pennance, that is to say, for sorrow only, which auaileth not to the remission of sinnes without the other parts. And this you must obserue in all other words in Controuersie betweene vs, other∣wise you may be deceaued, if you take the words without the sense: for many times Ro∣mane Catholickes, and Protestants agree in the materiall translation and interpretation of words, and yet differ in the sense, or formall interpretation, as in the sense of these words, Auncients, Repentance &c. And this is sufficient to shew vnto thee deare Reader how Protestant Ministers seduce their Hearers, Readers, and Followers by changing the common Catholicke sense of Christian words into priuate or prophane, and so expose vnto their Followers theire owne words, or Heathen mens words, for the word of God, and by these meanes become, as it weare the God of their Followers: and in∣duce them to beleeue for Articles of Faith euen what they please. FINIS.
The Errours escaped in the printinting are thus amended. Page. 4. line. 4. read destroy. P. 7. line. Latine. P. 9. l. 23. & 26. laying. & l. 30. saying. P. 11. l. 17. dele taken. P. 13. l. 21. passe. lege possesse. P. 15. l. 10. Queene. P. 18. l. 15. commaundements. P. 19. l. 6. aboundantly. P. 27. l. 1. that to reuerence or respect. P, 30. in annotat. Ioh. 17. 14. Matt: 13. 11. P. 31. l. 18. were. Other small faults the Reader in courtesy may please to excuse.
