18507.30 S119544 99854751 177437
Corante, or weekely newes from Italy, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, France and the Low Countreys. From Vienna the 2. of September. 1621. FRrom Vienna is written the 2. hereof, that 1000 of the Emperors souldiers horse and loote, were sent out of his army with 500. waggons to the Hoye to fetch in forrage, and hauing laden their wagons with hay, corne, and oates, were set vpon by the Hungers: who though they ensconced themselues within their wagons, and stoutly defende them, yet in the end, the Hungars ouercame and fiue them, set fire on the wagons, tooke many prisoners and few escaped. The garrison in Presburge are 5000. strong who defend the towne valiantly hauing sallied out vp∣on Bethlems army, and set vpon those that lay en∣sconced in the suburbs, beat and slue 200. of them & nayled vp foure peeces of artillery being not able to carry them away, yet finding themselues too weake to stay, hauing lost many of their company were glad to retire. The like attempt they made yesterday vpon the sconce of Bethlems at my, but with the losse of ma∣ny of the Neapolitans were forced to retire. In the meane time the Budian Hungers rob and ransack the countrey euen within two miles of this citty Vienna, all ouer betweene that and Newstad, where they haue burnt downe to the ground 20. of the Em∣perors speciall villages and dorpes, killed many of the people, driuing away the cattle with them, very pittifull to behold. So as in these quarters no body tarryeth in any parishes or hamlets, and there is no safe passing to Newstad and Stermarke: vnto these proceedings there is none to oppose, which maketh this city to be pestered with beggars and poore people where many starue with hunger, whereby appeareth the wrath of God to be ouer these countries. From Vienna the 4. of September. FRom Vienna is also written, that many people going to S. Mary cloyster to be shriuen, the Hun∣gars fell vpon and slue them. And present newes is come, that Bethlem hauing formerly left Iagerens-dorfein his stead in the army, was risen and marched to meete with the Spaniards, appointed out of Mo∣rauia to march to the Schat, and meeting them set vpon them all. The Emperour hath also sent 10. en∣signes of countrey people to the towne of Lintz to guard the countrey about Ense (formarly mor∣gaged to Bauaria by the Emperour) from the inua∣sion of the Hungers. From Prague the 2. of September. FRom Prague is written of the second hereof that the Burgers in al the three townes of Prague are warned to appeare at the towne hall, where euery one (especially the companies) that they out of the stockes, and euery Burger to his vttermost power and ability to take care to be well prouided of store of victuals, to the end least by this sorrowfull warre we fall into great necessity, the rather by reason of the continuance of the robberies and ransackings vp∣on the passages. As also but the other day certaine waggons with merchanoise within a mile of this cit∣ty were taken and spoyled. Wherefore it is thought meet to haue 1000. horsemen leuyed to serue there at the charge of Burgers. It is also written frō Prague the towne of Tabor in Bohemia (so long besiegd by Baltazar) hauing preuailed nothing, will leaue it, the most of the countrey people being run away, hauing lost many of his small army in the last assault. From Vienna the 3. of September. FRom Vienna is also written that the coyne is raised by publicke proclamation, to wit, the ducket valued at 5. Florens, the gold crowne at 4. Florens and ten crutzets, the gold doller at 3. Florens and 40 trutzers, the Philips doller at 3. Florins, and 30. crut∣zers, the Rex doller at 3. Florins and 15. cutzars, and the golden Doller at 2. Florins and 50 crutzers. From Weydhausin the 6. of September. FRom the townes of Ambergh in the vpper Paits 3. Weydhaysin is little written, onely that Mans fields with 8. peeces of ordinance sent him, shot out of his sconce, hath spoyles and mard 4. péeces of the Bauers artillery, whereupon they haue left of shoo∣ting, & in setting their watch without stroke of drum or triumphing as they were wont, no maruell for in both armyes they die many of the bloody flixe: there Centinels on both fides watch so neere on to the o∣ther, as they talke to one another; the Bauars soul∣diers shrinke away dayly, and there is exspectation of the 2. Colonels Bawr and Smith and their two regi∣ments in a while remooue (to Mansfield) hauing great want of victuals and water. There is some at∣tēpt to bedon ere long, for there are seueral Ambas∣sadors come fyom Blethlem Gabor, Prince Maurice and other Potentates to Mansfield. The Emperor hath written to the city of Nurem∣burge commanding them vpon a great penalty to suffer no victuals to passe to Mansfields army, wher∣upon Mansfield hath taken order to make price of all Nuremburgers, so as no man dares looke out of the gates, as also they can send no goods to Frankford-being already diuers wagons taken with goods com¦ming to Nuremburge. From Wesell the 8. of September, THe Marquesse Spinola at his comming to We∣sell, thought here and there to worke wonders, but the coming of the illustrious Prince of Orange, whose eye pries so narrowly into his prodeedings, as he knowes not where to begin, and therefore hath sent most of his army to Guylicke, where he will bée as well looked vnto as he was at Wesell, and will find Gulicke furnished with famous experienced souldiers; and so farre as we it perceiue, the army he hath there is not sufficient wholy to besiege it, but if he can get it with threatnings to hang them if he get it, as he got the castle of Reede by Gulicke by like threateinge: but captaine Ditford the commaun∣der thereof is taken and brought to the Princes ar∣my, and there lost his head by sentence of the Court of warre, his Lieftenant and Ancient are in prison. The towne of Gulick is besieged vpon on side by the graue Vandenbergh, but 2. gates of the town ar free to go in and out without let. They haue made a sally out vpon the enemy, and skirmished with them, which the Spaniard had a sower tast of, wherein the
towne lost a Lieftenant Colonell. The towne plyeth the enemy with their artillery, but they come neare with their frenches, and exspect out of Flanders from diuers parts more forces. From Breslaw the 2. of September. FRom the towne of Breslaw is written, that the Lords and States of Silecia contune their leauy∣ing of souldiers to resist Bethlem Gabor and Iage∣rensdorse. From whō they haue receiued threatning letters, that if they conforme not themselues to the deuotion of King Fredericke, they are to exspect them with fire & sword, which resolution is yet vnknown is the people. There comes dayly more people into the land, and already march towards the towne of Glotse to besiege it wherin Iagerensdorpe ft 800. souldiers and a yeares prouision of vict, and o∣therwise so well prouided, as they feare not the siege of twenty thousand men: likewise it is written that in Silecia dayly are seene wonderfull signes in the yre. From Vienna the 7. of September. FRom Vienna it is written that the bridge which the Turks caused to be made ouer the riuer of Da¦nube is finished, and that he hath sent his whole amy to a place in Poland, but left behind to guard the bridge 50000. and there followeth him 15000. carts or waggons with munition and victuals for the maine army, besides he hath appodnted 10000. Turks and Tartars to ransacke the couny, with whom the Cassock Polaks being 15000 et, where betweene them was a great conflict, but the Polacks got the victory. From Zurich in Switzerland the 1. of September. FRom Zurich in Zwitzerland is written, that they with their confederate Grisons and Bunte∣s are marched towards Veltolin to set vpon the Spaniards and their confederats: it is also writ∣ten from Geneua that the French King threatneth that town as others of ye religion to prosecute them and that the Duke Leopaldus souldiers haue taken in Eugedin, the vilage and castle Rauin, and driuen away 400. shéeps: also there marcheth dayly many souldiers of Loraine to the duke of Bauare. Also it is written out of Switzorland, from the towne of Cleuen, those of the religion in that towne hauing appointed ten dayes fast and prayers, the Spaniard had a secret parpose to fall vpon them in their Churches with horse and foot, which being disco∣uered to them by a Signal, put themselues in arms, issued out, and méeting them, fought and fiue 140. of them, among whom was a Neopolitane Captaine brought dead to Cleuen, and about him found in writing their whole conspiracy. From Dnswicke in Denmarke the 30. of August. FRom Danswicke the letters mention, that there aduice out of Holand is, that the Turk with his whole army is entred 18-miles into Poland very strongly, which causeth great feare in that countrey and thereupon they put them in armes man for man and the kings sonne with an army of 100000. appoin∣ted to attend him. The head towne Rig in Lieand is hardly besiged by the king of Sweden, in such sort as they will be forced to yeeld. It is soyd also that the Emperor of Muscoui is also in armes to besiege the towne of Smalenske, taking aduantage of the Po∣lonians present necessity of his forces against the Turke, that he cannot rayse them. From Gulicke the 10. of September. IN Spinolas army is great want of forrage, where∣by how longer the dearer, and little mony to pay, which cause his souldiers to run away. And out of Spaine it is sayd that the Councell there haue con∣cluded to send into the Netherlands a choyse Noble∣man to assist the Infanta in the gouernment. We vnderstand from the Princes army that a Seant of the enemies army was come away, who hath re∣lated that he was practised withall to haue set on fire all the ships in the Waell at Amsterdam, which he refusing, another by nane, Ammerathgin hath with other his confederates vnder taken it And touching the enemies attempt vpon Isendick and those quarters neere sluce, and repulsed by Gods hand, it is hoped it will proceed no further, the rather for that they fayled in their first purpose, and all pla∣ces with souldiers are better prouided, whereunto the States of Holand haue indeuoured to pruent the enemy by sending certaine companies of Burgers to Sluce to strengthen that and the rest, that where 200 were before, is now added 300. more together with many lusty martiners. who labour in cutting of wals to let in water to ouerflow the low grounds. The e∣enemy is sayd to be at present betweene Haste gras skonce and Sluce, where he would attempt to get in∣to the Ile of Cadlant if he could to straiten Sluce, but by the comming of the aforesayd supplyes, and the care of the Prince of Orange in granting out of euery company in the army a certain number which he hath sent, is hoped will suffice to frustrate the e∣nemies purpose. From Bergstrate the 12. of September. OUt of the Pallitynatis written of the 10. herof, that the B. of Spier leuieth souldiers in Lorain to defend his countrey from the Palts; and general Vere is with his flying army horse and foote gone to Bristat and Bergstrad, to lye there to attend the Spaniards issuing out of the Castle of Stein. The Spanish army lyeth enquartered about Rein Turk∣seym, against hom Collonell Ney with his horsemen accompanyed with the garrison of Frankendall and Norhem, which is reasonable strong. The Bores lye about Nachem in great number, who if they come in∣to eld, there is exspected some conflict. From Paris the 14. of September. BY letters it is certified from Paris that they of Mountabon haue slaine of the kings forces 16. Marquesses and Earles, and about 300. other Com∣manders, the Duke de Marquesse his brother and his kinsman are flaine, the next man to his owne person was beaten to péeces with a shot of great or∣dinance. It is thought there hath bin neere 4000. men aine on the kings side in this assault, where∣upon they are so encouraged by their ancient Cap∣taine Mounsieur de la Force that they caused to be set vpon the gates, La Roy Sans foy, la velle sans plure: which is to say, a faithlesse king, and fearelesse subiects. Printed at London for N. B. according to the Dutch copy, the 30. of Septemb. 1621.
