A465C 1851.c.11[105] R225833 99886322 188502
Guildhald. Civit. Exon. Ad General. Session. Pacis tent. apud Guildhaldam Civitat. praedict. in & pro Civitat. & Com. Civitat. Exon, decimo sexto die Aprilis, Anno Regni Dom. nostri Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae, Regis, fidei Defensor. &c. Tricessimo quinto, Annoque Dom. 1683. WE have with great satisfaction observed what good success the vigorous prosecution of our Laws against Dissenters hath had in other places, and we well hoped that either the fear of the like prosecution, or a due sense of their Duty might have brought the Dissenters of this place to a due Confor∣mity; but to our grief we find them so strangely settled upon their Lees and wedded to their faction and Schism, that nothing but a seasonable and vigorous application of our Laws can bring them to partake of the blessings of the best Reformed Church in the World, to become Dutiful Subjects to his Majesty, and to make them friends to our publick peace. In all Duty and thankfulness we humbly acknowledge, we of this City have by a Succession of gracious Kings been more particularly obliged then other places, and the great Priviledges we now enjoy should raise us to an higher pitch of Loyalty. And therefore we take this opportunity to declare that for the safe∣ty of his Majesties Sacred Person, and security of the publick Peace, we will henceforward put the Laws effectually in execution against all Dissenters, whe∣ther Papists or other Sectaries, as being fully satisfied that the continuance of Faction and Sedition will end in nothing else, then the ruin of our Church and State Imprimis, We resolve, order and agree in pursuance of a Statute, made in the seventeenth year of this King, Intituled an Act for the restraining Non-con∣formist Ministers, from inhabiting in Corporations, to issue out our Warrants to the several Constables of this City and County, strictly requiring them to ap∣prehend and take into custody all Non-conformist Preachers, and from time to time to make diligent search in all places where they may have any cause to suspect they may lurk or hide, against whom we resolve to proceed as the said Law directs, as knowing that they are the Springs that set the mischievous Engine of Faction on work and under the plausible pretences of Religion, poyson the people with Seditious principles. Secondly, We will likewise order our Constables every Sunday and other days when there shall be any cause of suspicion, to make diligent search in all places within their several Parishes, where Conventicles have been usually held, or where they are suspected to be held, and if they shall find any persons so unlaw∣fully assembled, to give us, or one of us Information thereof, to the intent they may be proceeded against as the Law directs. Thirdly, We resolve strictly to enjoyn all our Constables to make presentments unto us, of all persons within the City and County, who are above the age of sixteen years, and do repair every Sunday to their Parish Church, and there abide orderly and soberly during the whole time of Divine service. And we intend to that purpose to have a meeting once every Month, within the Guildhall of this City, for the taking of their presentments as aforesaid. Fourthly, As the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is one of the most Sacred Ordinances in Religion, so it is the best Test as well to discriminate the Papists as other dangerous Sectaries, who have swallowed so many Rebellious Leagues and Covenants, and have engaged themselves in so many factious Con∣federacies and Associations, against the Government. And many of them (we fear) have not in Testimony of their Repentance, received the Holy Sa∣crament, according to the constitution of our Church, since its happy re-establishment. We do therefore Order that the several Church-Wardens and Con∣stables of every Parish of this City and County shall present unto us the Names of all such persons as shall absent themselves from their Parish Church by the space of a Month, and have not within the year last past received the Holy Sacrament against all which we will proceed, according to the direction of the Law. Fifthly, That our Schismaticks may not have any just cause to upbraid us, with the countenancing of Lewdness and Debauchery, (of which many of themselves are too much guilty) we resolve as severely to punish all Swearers, Drunkards, and Atheistical persons, that we shall receive any Information against. And we will License none to keep Ale-houses, but honest, sober and Loyal persons, and such as shall bring a Certificate from their Minister, that they have once at least in the year last past, received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. And we will order our Constables to make frequent searches in all Taverns, Inns and Ale-houses, within this City and County, and to give us an account of all disorderly persons, that they shall find Tipling there upon the Sunday or other unseasonable times. And because some of our Coffee-Houses are places where idle and disaffected persons, neglecting their Trades and Imployments, dayly resort, and Insolently censure their Governors, and boldly debate matters of State, and spread abroad false news, and where they are commonly supplyed with Seditious Papers, and news Letters, we will strictly enjoyn all Keepers of Coffee-Houses, upon pain of having the severity of the Law inflicted on them, not to permit any such Seditious Papers or discourses to be had within their Houses, and we doubt not but all good Men will comply with us in these our resolutions, which tend to the Honour of Almighty God, and the good Government of this City. Under God's Provi∣dence it is Obedience and submission to Government, that preserves the Peace and Order of the World: But Faction and Sedition was always the Devils business, who in all ages hath cheated Mankind with the false shows and glaring pretences of Religion, let us who have by this means so lately suffered all the miseries of a Civil War, and the horrid mischiefs of a Rebellion be no more so cheated, but let us take the Wise Man's advice to fear God and the King, and not to meddle with those that are given to change, Endim. Walker, Mayor. John Beare, Recorder. Isaac Mwdit. Henry Gandy. George Tuthill. William Sanford. John Parr. Henry Smith. WE the Grand Inquest of the City and County of Exon, do give our humble thanks unto this Honourable Bench and do heartily concur with them in this their Order, John Warren. Edward Cheeke. Edward Dally. Jonathan Gunry. Jos. Long. William Smith. Ellis Pinsent. Edward Parsons. Sam. Calle. Charles Alden. Edmund Nott. William Jope. William Norris. Thomas Potter. Ed. Bampfield. Nicolas Roe. Gilbert Yard. Robert Buckland. That the concerns of this Ancient and Loyal City, for the safety of his Majesties most Sacred Person, and for the Pious, Peaceable, and Orderly Government of all the Inhabitants thereof, may be better known, and taken notice of, We, require all the Ministers, within the Precincts of this City, deliberately to publish this excellent Order of theirs (made the last Quarter Sessions) the very next Lord's day after it shall be tendered to them. THO. EXON. Printed for George May Book-seller in Exon, Anno Dom. 1683.
