A3272 [ocm]12175242 197190
Another ORDER FOR CONTRIBVTIONS For Maymed and diseased Souldiers, who have been employed under the Command of his Excellencie the Earl of Essex, in the Army set forth by both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Together with an Order of the sayd House, for the Authorizing of severall persons to make diligent search in their se∣verall Precincts, for the apprehending and disarming dangerous and suspected persons, and them o bring before the COMMITTEE of Examinations. Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That these Orders be forthwith Printd and published. Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the middle Temple. Aprill 21. 1643.
Die Veneris; 21. April: 1643. An other Order for Contributions for such Maymed and decayed Souldiers who have been employed under the Command of his Excellencie the Earle of ESSEX. WHereas many well-affected people out of zeale and faithfullnesse to the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom, have gone forth under the command of his Excellency the Earl of Essex, in the Army set forth by the Parliament: and divers of them have in severall Battles and Fights with the ene∣mies of the King and Kingdom, been sore wounded and maymed, and others fallen into
severall diseases and sicknesses, by reason of watch∣ing and other casualty in War, whereby the are for the present dis-inabled from the said ser∣vice, or releeving themselves any other way till it shall please God they be recovered. It is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That a generall collection by way of contribution for, and towards the defraying the charge of releiving the said may med and sick souldiers, during the time of their cure be made in every parish Church of all those parishes that are mentioned within the weekly Bill of London, together with the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, by the Church-wardens, Collectors for the poor, Sidesmen, or Constables of each of the aforesaid Parishes, on the next generall Fast-day, being the six and twentieth of this instant April; and the monies so collected by them, to pay unto Master Holland and Master Iennor, Members of the said House of COM∣MONS, or their Deputies at Goldsmiths-Hall in London, on the Friday next after the said Fast∣day, by them to be disposed of to the uses afore∣said, in such manner as the Committee appoin∣ted by the House of Commons for maymed Souldiers shall from time to time direct. And
it is further ordered that the Minister of every the said Parishes shall publish this Order in the Churches immediatly after Sermon on the said Fast-day; and shall exhort the People to a li∣berall contribution to this so pious and cha∣ritable aworke. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Die Veneris 21. April. 1643. IT is ordered by the House of Commons, That the per∣sons here under written, ta∣king with them the Consta∣bles of each severall parish, shall be au∣thorised (and are hereby required) to make dilligent search in all such hou∣ses and places in their severall and re∣spective parishes as they shall think fit; for the finding, apprehending, and disarming of such dangerous and other suspected persons as do remain and lurk within the said parishes and cannot give an account of any just cause of their being there. And that they bring them before the Committee of Examinations, there to
be further dealt withall as the case shall require. And it is further ordered, that for the better execution of this Order, Co∣lonell Manwaring, Captain Harvey; and Captain Titchburn, and every of them, with a competent number of souldiers shall be ayding and assisting to the said Parishioners upon all occasions, (timely notice being first given to the said Colo∣nell and Captains, by the said severall and respective Parishioners.) H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FJNJS.
