C1011 99832241 198949
THE CASE OF THE Antient Hackney-Coachmen, And such Coachmen as have been Sufferers for his are Majesty, and his Majesty that now is, and the Widows of them, Humbly Presented to the Honourable House of Commons; THE Kings Majesty, by an Act of this present Parliament, is graciously pleased to Enact, that 400. Hack∣ney-Coaches should be Licenced, and each of them to pay the yearly Rent of 5 l. and no more; By which said Act it was Ordained, That the Commissioners for the Hackney-Coaches, should take an especial care, in the first place, to Licence antient Hackney-Coachmen, and such Coachmen as have been Sufferers for their service and affections to his late Majesty, or his Majesty that now is; or the Widowes of them that have Coaches of their own. Upon the Licencing of the 400. Hackney-Coaches, in pursuance of the said Act, the then Commissioners for the Coaches, did make an Order, and accordingly suffer their Clerk (in their presence) to exact, and take 10 s. of each Coachman for his Licence; and soon after made another Order, for James Spelman, the Clerk's Assistant, to take 2 s. 6 d. of each Coachman, for a new-invented Mark. In March following, some of the Coachmen made a Complaint in Parliament, of the last mentioned, and other ex∣acted Moneys; all which were adjudged Grievances, and several Offenders ordered to be Indicted, by the Votes of the House of Commons, of the 30th. of March 1663. In December following, new Commissioners being appointed, summon the Coachmen to take new Licences; at which time, according to their pre-intention, they grant Licences to divers other Persons, to drive, with the Figures belonging to several Licenced Coachmen (especially those that had sollicited the above-mentioned Complaints against them, and their Officers) thereby intending to take away their Licences, and Livelyhoods, which is humbly conceived, was intended them, by the Parliament, as a Privilege and Gratuity (without Oppressi∣on or infringement) for their service and sufferings. Ever since that time the streets have been thronged with a multitude of Coaches, by reason many un-licenced Coachmen have thereby taken liberty, and do drive without contradiction, to the great Impoverishment of the Li∣cenced Coachmen. The Commissioners, the last Session of Parliament, endeavoured to have an Act pass in the House of Commons to create them such a power as they had already exercised beyond their Authority, but for just reasons then offered they were frustrated. The Commissioners, this present Session of Parliament, have obtained a Bill to pass in the House of Lords to their desired purpose, whereby they have power from time to time to grant such, and so many Licences (not exceeding 400. at one time) and for so long time as they shall think fit. To summon, and upon Oath to Convict Offenders, and to punish them by Fines, as they shall think fit, not exceeding 40 s. And in relati∣on to Hackney-Coaches, to have a full and ample power to examine, and punish in such manner as the Commissioners have power for the Streets and High-wayes, only leaving any person or persons agrieved, to be relieved in the Exchequer, according to Equity and Justice. It is humbly conceived, the Parliament did not intend by their first Act to leave Antient Hackney-Coachmen and Sufferers to the Commissioners upon any small distast, at their will and pleasure, to put them out of their Lively∣hoods (as they have done) being rightly qualified and Licensed, and thereupon have straightned themselves, and their Friends, in obtaining Leases of Habitations convenient for Coach-Houses, Stables, and sufficient Coaches & Horses; all which (if suppress'd in their Occupations) are little worth; and themselves, Wives and Families, left in a miserable Condition; having no other way upon the Earth whereby to get Bread. And if the Parliament shall think fit to grant the Commissioners this large Power, there is no doubt, by the instigation of their selfish Officers, it will be exceeded, as the former was; and the Parliament (as hitherto) at every Session, troubled with Complaints, to the hinderance of greater Affairs. And if the Commissioners shall have Power to punish Offenders, as they shall think fit, . Partiality will alwayes attend them, as hath been all along experienced, without any such Power: And in the mean time, whilst any poor man (not in favour with the Commissioners Officers, lyes under their rigour and oppression) is prosecuting his Appeal, for relief in the Exchequer, must perhaps beg his Food, or run away (as hath happened to divers) the Commissioners having declared, they have 2000 l. a Year, to wage Law with the Coachmen. It may be Objected, The Coachmen are abusive to Gentlemen; Which may be admitted: But the civil Coachmen only suffer for such; being most of them civil House-keepers, and responsible for any Abuse; those Abuses being com∣mitted only by the Servants and Drivers for some of them, of which their Masters are innocent; and will sometimes happen, unless the Coachmen have some Government, by, and among themselves, not to employ such, under a Pe∣nalty; Which Regulation can never be expected from the Commissioners. For remedy of all which, It is humbly propounded, That the Power of the Commissioners may be transferred to the Government of the City of London, with Power, from time to time, to make and publish such necessary By-Laws, as the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, shall think fit; being Commissioners named, to all intents and purposes, in the first Act; where the Coachmen can assure themselves to have their Complaints heard, and redressed: and do expect nothing but just Punishment for Offences, without partiality or favour; which they most desire to sub∣mit unto; a great number of the Coachmen being Freemen, and Inhabitants within the City.
