C1919 190.g.12[184] R229742 99888417 201757
To the PARLIAMENT of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The brief Remonstrance and humble Petition of Richard Chambers Merchant, late Al∣derman and Sheriffe of the City of London; SHEVVING, THat in the Parliament held in the years 1627 and 1628. it was Voted and declared by the Honourable House of Commons, that whosoever shall counsell or advise the taking or leyving of the Subsidie of Tonnage and Poundage, not granted by Parliament, or shall be any actor or instrument therein, shall be reputed an Innovator in the Government, and a capitall enemy to the Kingdome and Common-wealth; And if any Merchant or person whatsoever shall voluntarily yeeld or pay the said Subsidie of Tonnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, they shall likewise be reputed betrayers of the liberties of England, and enemies to the same, as may appear by the said Order upon Record. In submission and obedience whereunto, the Petitioner first opposed and withstood the payment of Tonnage and Poundage (untill they were setled by Parliament) and all other illegall Taxes; for which submission and obedience, in the years 1628, & 1629. the Petitioner had 7060. pounds of his Goods wrongfully taken and detained from him by the late Kings Officers and Farmers of the Custome-house of London for pretended duties, and a heavie sentence and fine in the Star-Chamber which was imposed upon him in the year 1629. besides which losses the Petitioner further suffered in his person by six whole years imprisonment in the Fleet, for not submitting to that Sentence and Fine: and in the year 1637. nine moneths imprisonment in Newgate for withstanding Ship-money; by which losses and imprisonments, the Petitioner was put by the exercise of his calling, and was wounded in his credit and reputation. Which sufferings the Honourable House of Commons (upon the Petitioners complaint in the year, 1640.) taking into their grave considerations) were pleased to refer the examination thereof to a Committee of 50. Members, wherein were included the Committee for the Navie and Customes, who being well satisfied of the truth thereof, by oath and other good sufficient proofs upon Record, drew up their Report, that the Petiti∣oner ought then to have 13680. pounds in part of Reparation, leaving the rest of those reparations to the fur∣ther judgement of the honourable House, as by the annexed copy of that report may further appear. In pursuit of which report, the Parliament then levied and received from the old Farmers and Officers of the Customes, 50. thousand pounds for wrongs and abuses done to the Petitioner (chiefly) and other Mer∣chants, intending first to give to the Petitioner satisfaction out of the same, because he was the first man that opposed the pretended duties, and the greatest sufferer. Whereupon, in the year 1642. the Petitioner was chosen Alderman, and in the year 1644. Sheriffe of the City of London; which places the Petitioner earnestly endevoured to shun, but such were the earnest im∣portunities, and perswasive incouragements, of divers Members of the honourable House, (who then desired to have the Petitioner in place of Trust, for his former service to the Common-wealth) that the Petitioner was constrained to accept not only the place of Alderman, but further underwent the office and charge of Sheriffe of London, which stood the Petitioner in 4000. pounds that year. But notwithstanding the aforesaid promises and intents of the Parliament to give the Petitioner satisfaction, such were the great compulsive exigents, and urgent necessities, of those times, caused by the publick distractions, that the said moneys were converted to the publick use; therefore the Parliament desired the Petitioner to have a little patience, promising him speedy satisfaction as well for the forbearance as for the principal debt; but the distractions continuing, and Petitioner had neither interest nor any part of his principal: the Parliament in the year 1648. in part of satisfaction; setled the Petitioner in the office of Surveyor and Check in the Custome-house of London, then worth at least 600. pounds per annum, but the Petitioner having en∣joyed that place only 8. moneths, was causlesly outed by sinister information of intruders, who have enjoyed that office and divided the profit thereof between them ever since that intrusion. Moreover, the late King by Privy Seal, owes to the Petitioners wife, (who is the Relict of Mr. Thomas Fer∣rer) for Linnen Cloth, 5000. pounds, and for money lent, 1200. pounds, for which she was assigned satisfaction out of the Customes of Tobacco; besides she was further assigned out of Sir Thomas Dawes Office 100 marks per annum, all which debts likewise lie wholly unsatisfied, to the Petitioners great prejudice. Besides theaforesaid losses, hinderances, expences, sufferings, and forbearances of the profit of the said Office, the Petitioner, from time to time hath laid out himself for the common good, in acting, lending, spending, (and serving) when others refused; exposed himself to that eminent danger at Brandford, by leading out a Troop of Horse for the Priviledges, Liberties, and Rights of the City of London and Common-wealth, inso∣much, that thereby and for want of his satisfaction aforesaid, the Petitioner having consumed his estate, hath been constrained to sell and morgage some part of his Lands to pay Creditors and to maintain his Family, having a Wife and nine Children, and is likely to be undone for obeying the Parliaments Commands, unlesse by the justice and commiseration of this honourable Assembly he be speedily relieved and righted, for that ever since the said reported summe, the Petitioner from time to time hath made his humble addresses to the Su∣preme powers for the time being, for satisfaction thereof; and to be restored to the said Office, but could not prevail. The Petitioner therefore humbly prayes, that he may not perish for acting for the publick good according to the declaration of Parliament, but that now after 26. years suffering, where∣of 12. years in fruitlesse and wearisome waitings; this honourable Assembly would now be pleased to take the unparallel'd sufferings of the Petitioner into their grave considerations, for some speedy course for the Petitioners satisfaction, to pay his Debts and redeem his Lands, by ordering him the one moity of his Debt in ready money out of the daily Customes of London, (from whence his first losses and sufferings sprang) and the other moity to be discompted upon such Goods as the Petitioner shall make entries off by Exportation and Importation in the Custome-house London, untill his debt with the interest be fully satisfied and paid, or any other speedy way, as in your grave wisdomes shall seem meet; and in like manner for his wives Debt, which is to pay Debts and Legacies, and that the Petitioner may forthwith be restored to, and setled in the said Office, and have Reparations from the Intruders. And the Petitioner with his, shall as in all duty ever pray, &c. Richard Chambers. September, 6. 1654.
