C2549 [ocm]12206053 197482
THE KINGS PROCLAMATION AND DETERMINATION Concerning THE EARLE OF ESSEX, and all who go under his command. With the Resolution of both Houses of Parlia∣ment concerning the said Earle of Essex, and the same Proclamation. ALSO JOYFVLL NEWES FROM THE EARLE OF WARVVICKE, Concerning his takeing of many ships with Horse and other Ammunition for VVrr. ALSO, The summe or substance of a speech spoken by the Earl of Essex, at a Conference in the painted Chamber, be∣tween the Lords and the House of Commons, in de∣fence of his own integrity, and his readinesse to proceed in this present cause. Joh. Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for T. Thomson. 1642. August 16.
THE KINGS PROCLAMATION AND DETERMINATION Concerning THE EARLE OF ESSEX, and all who go under his Command. With the Resolution of both Houses of Par∣liament concerning the said Earle of Essex, and the same Proclamation. Also the summe or substance of a speech spoken by the Earle of Essex, at a Conference in the pain∣ted Chamber, between the Lords and the House of Commons, in defence of his owne inte∣grity, and his readinesse to proceed in this present cause. THe industrious vigilancie of the Parliament, for the preservation and establishment of Religion, for the liberty of the Subiect, and the priviledges of Parlia∣ment, we all know, have been most violently opposed, and in such extreme
measure resisted, so that His Maiestie hath intended and levied warre against them. Whereupon in their owne, and the defence of the common-wealth, they were constrain∣ed to provide and raise present strength and de∣fensive power for the vindication of themselves, the Liberty of the subiect, and the priviledges of Parliament. And upon these considerati∣ons did make choice of the Earle of Essex to be Generall, if these present forces which are raised and levied for the generall preservation of the kingdome, who hath resolved with his ut∣termost power and endeavours to discharge with all integrity of conscience that trust im∣posed upon him, and did provide himselfe with as much expedition as could be, with all convenient necessaries fit for so great an imploy∣ment. His Maiesty being informed of this great provision which was made against all opposers of the priviledges of Parliament, sent forth a Proclamation, wherein hee proclaimed the Earle of Essex, and all that should any way adhere unto him, or give any aid or assistance unto him in this imployment, whether that as∣sistance were personall or pecuniary, to be ipso facto traytors, unlesse (his Excellence) the Earle of Essex should lay down his armes within six dayes. Vpon the thirteenth of August a Post came
from Yorke unto the House, with a Proclama∣tion from His Maiesty, wherein the Earle of Essex, and all that serve under his command for this present service and expedirion, or any way whatsoever adhere unto him, were also pro∣claimed traytors, if they did not lay downe their armes within the space of six dayes next ensuing. This being read and published in the House of Commons, after some debate and consul∣tation had thereof, it was put to the Question, Whether they would assist the said Earle of Essex, as Generall of those forces which were now raised, or were to be raised for this pre∣sent service and expedirion, or not: and it was voted with an unanimous consent, that they would assist him. Vpon which a conference was desired of both Houses, and their meeting was concluded and had in the painted chamber. At which meet∣ing and conference the Proclamation was read, dated at York the ninth of August 1642. and after the reading thereof it was declared in the behalf of the whole House of Commons, and all the Commons throughout every Coun∣ty within the circumference of England, that they had taken into most serious consideration and mature deliberation, the grounds & reasons that did move and induce them to take up armes, which was for the defence of religion,
the Lawes of the land, the safety of the whole Kingdome, and the priviledges of Parliament. Upon which due consideration of the afore∣named reasons, they were resolved that all the words of terrour and threatning in that His Maiesties Proclamation, should not make them desist from the maintaining of so just a cause, but that thereby they should double their reso∣lution concerning the same; unto which the Lords voted, and gave their approbation and consent, it being voted una voce in their house before. Then the Earle of Essex stood up, and delivered himselfe in the defence of his integri∣ty, and his resolution concerning his present imployment, and declared, that although it had pleased His Maiesty to proclaime him trai∣ror, yet his heart was as true and upright both to his King and Countrey, as any subiects in England whatsoever. And as the Lords and Commons had promised and declared, that they would assist him, and to their power justi∣fie his proceedings and undertakings, as Gene∣rall for the Army raised for this present expedi∣tion, so he would use his best and most faithfull endeavours and skill in the managing and put∣ting into execution the trust they reposed in him, and that neither threatnings, favour, nor any thing else should divert or discourage him from his intentions in the behalf of this cause, although it were to the hazard and losse of his
dearest blood. The house also received infor∣mation that one M. Talbot brother to the Earle of Shrewesburie, and some others imployed in the Commission of Array for the County of Worcester, had sent out warrants to the chiefe Constables, commanding the trained bands, and all those that were charged with horse and armes, to appeare before them at Worcester on thursday, but the whole County did generally and with one consent refuse to come, only some few gentlemen and some of their tenants appea∣red: whereupon this Talbot and the rest who were of the same Commission with him, went away very much discontented. Thursday Morning the House of Commons being met, an Ambassadour came to the House from Hamborough concerning a treaty of di∣vers matters of consequence, between the States of Holland and the Parliament, and he presented some Lettes to the House from the States, de∣claring their true affection to the Parliament; and although there is great plotting in other Countries against England, yet will not be want∣ing to use all possible meanes for the prevention thereof. Now that the world may see that God doth alway crown their designes with successe, whose cause is iust, and whose principall aime is for his true Religion and Gospell, and disap∣point the subtill devices of those ill affected spi∣rits that oppose them, is obvious to every eye,
witnesse the frustrating of their attempts against Hull, Wels, Warwick, &c. so more especially in their manifold enterprises at sea, as you may see in a letter from the Earle of Warwick upon the twelfth of this present moneth, intimating that he met with two ships coming from Holland, the one of them was laden with armour and Ammunition, which being but a small ship, and swift of saile, could not take it, but the other he drove into Hull, which had in it three hundred thousand pound, which was sent from the Queen to His Maiesty, with an intent to land at Newcastle. Great is the mallice of the enemy, but grea∣ter is the providence of God, as hath appeared at this present by the Earle of Warwicke, who hath taken diverse ships where in a was troop of Horse and other Ammunition for Warr. Also it is manifest that a Knight named Ro∣per, was bound and brought to the House in a Coach from Kent and with him 5 or 6 loade of Ammunition which is now in Guild-Hall. Ordered, that Sir Iohn Girlington, Sir George Middleton, and Sir Edward Fitton be sent for as delinquents. Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parliament. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
