C4586 [ocm]11179489 204872
THE COUNT d' Soissons. A Gallant NOVEL. Translated out of French. Licensed, June 21. 1687. R. L'ESTRANGE. LONDON, Printed by J. B. for R. Bently, and S. Magnes in Russel-street in Covent-Garden, 1688.
The Count De SOISSONS: A Gallant Novel. NEver was Prince made Re∣commendable by such a World of fine Qualities, as the Late Count de Soissons; I mean not him that dy'd last, but him that was kill'd at the Battle of Sedan. All was answerable to the Grandeur of his Birth, and tho' he was, without Contest, of the first House of the World,The House of Bourbon We may nevertheless say that his heart was Infinitely above his Birth. His Person had all the Perfections of Make, His face Ma∣jesty and Sweetness, His Wit, Niceness and Penetration; His
Carriage was stately towards Princes of his own Ranck, but his Civility such towards Others, as that all People made their Court to him, not so much in Conside∣ration of the favours they thence expected, as of the Pleasure there was in loving him. He was Libe∣ral beyond Imagination, and tho' he had a vast Estate, and the finest Charge of the Court,Great Master of the Kings Hou∣shold yet his never-failing Generosity often left him not a Penny in his Coffers. There are those that will needs have all these fine Qualities to have been tarnish'd by an Over-great Ambition. They ground their Opinion upon his having several times put the Court to the fatall Necessity of reducing him to his Duty by the Dint of Arms; But, alas! They knew not all that pass'd in Private. They were ig∣norant that it was Love that oc∣casion'd all the false steps he made,
or the Power this Unhappy Pas∣sion has over the greatest Hearts. He was more submissive than any Man to the Kings Orders, He was thereunto Oblig'd both in the Quality of Subject and of Rela∣tion, since he had the honour to wear the August Name of Bour∣bon: But it being his ill fate to have his Princes Minister for his Rival, it is not to be wondered, if the World has often to Dis-obe∣dience imputed the things he was prompted to by the fear of a man that had little Less Power then the King himself. The Relation I am going to give, will unfold this Better than all I might be a∣ble to say here; wherefore with∣out dwelling longer up his Ju∣stification, I imagine it will be sufficient to read this History to be persuaded, that if he was not altogether Exempt from Crime, he was at least more unfortunate than Culpable.
We cannot say that Gallantry did at that time Publiquely ob∣tain in the Court of France. The King being a Prince extremly Pi∣ous, express'd so much aversion for such sort of Weaknesses, that whoever lay under such failings, us'd his utmost Endeavours not on∣ly to conceal them from his Eyes, but also from the Whole Court. Beauties were, nevertheless, as Common there as at this day, there were Montbasons, Hautesorts, and several other Ladies, whose Merit was Capable of making a thou∣sand Conquests. Nay, and their fetters were but the stronger; the reason is that Men made a My∣stery of declaring their Love to them, Not but that they were very willing as well as now adays, to ease themselves of so heavy a Burden, as is a Concern of that Nature; but because they were afraid of becoming Ungratefull to the King, who, as I have newly
said, disapprov'd of all that had the name of Love. But the Power of Kings does not extend so far as to force Peo∣ples inclinations, principally in this matter, wherein most com∣monly we have no Power upon our selves. The Cardinal de Ri∣chelieu does sufficiently justify what I here assert; He, who was more than any man oblig'd to stu∣dy to please the King, and who, besides, had important amuze∣ments, that a man would never have said that he had time to make Love, did, nevertheless, find the liesure to cast his Eyes upon the Dutchess of Elboeuf, and as she was a Princess of a Most Extraordina∣ry Beauty, he made her quickly sensible, that neither the Purple, nor the Quality of Chief Minister were a secure defence against her Merit. This Cardinal was under great Obligations to Nature, that had al∣lotted
him such infinite Parts, that he pass'd for the Principal Genius of the Age. If he had had as much occasion to pride him∣self for Advantages of Body, he would have been the first Man of the Universe. But there wanting much of th' One's being answer∣able to th' Other; tho' he was pretty well Shap'd, yet there was nothing gracefull in his Deport∣ment; Besides he was so strange∣ly unprovided of that Majesty, so much to be desired in the Coun∣tenance, that if People had not known the station to which the King had call'd him, they would never have said by his Physiogno∣my he ought to possess so advan∣tageous a Place. However tho' he knew it to be one of the Qualities the most necessary to please La∣dies, yet either that he knew not himself, the Case of many Persons, or, in short, that he thought his Wit and Fortune were capable of
repairing that Defect, he resolv'd no longer to languish in expecta∣tion of what he was to hope. Wherefore after having several times let her know as well by his looks, as by the most singular fa∣vours he had granted her, that he distinguish'd her from all the Per∣sons of her sex, he entreated that he might see her in Private, and us'd as a Pretence an affair her husband had at Court. Madam d' Elboeuf, who had hi∣therto interpreted as good Breed∣ing all he had done in her Behalf, still thinking him to be animated with the same Sentiments, she highly extoll'd his Carriage, so far as to say in a Numerous Com∣pany, that she knew not how this Minister came to have Enemies, since nothing could be added to his Civility. Upon this Ground she granted him the Rendezvous he required, and as he was in Pos∣session of making no Visits, she
went to his own House. As soon as he knew of her coming he went out to meet her; But with such a ruffled look, that had she minded him in the least, she might easily have guess'd, that he had not his wonted serenity of mind. After he had caus'd a Chair to be reach'd her, and bid all their Attendants withdraw, Madam de Elboeuf go∣ing about to discourse upon the concern that had brought her thi∣ther; That's needless Madam, he made her answer, and what I am to tell you, is, that hitherto I have ever thought that the Place I stand possess'd of, was the thing in the World the most heavy and Ʋngratefull. The Im∣portant Sollicitudes with which a mind is fretted from Morning to Evening, the repose of the Night, disturb'd by affairs that arise, the fear of an ill success, which the Master most com∣monly lays at the Ministers Door, tho he has done his best, the Jelousy of the Grandees, the Odium of the
Pe ple. What more shall I say, in short, the Difficulty of giving every body content? All this I say is an ample matter to cause a Man to make Reflexion, that is in such a Post as mine. Nay, and I own that these Con∣siderations had so pawl'd me, that if the King had not several times ex∣press'd to me that he desired I would continue him my services, I should in∣fallibly have giv'n way to the Temp∣tation I was under of beseeching him to get another to supply my Place. But, Madam, may I dare to tell it you, the pleasure there is in sometimes having the Occasion of doing you service is so great a Blessing, that all the annoyances I have newly instanc'd are nothing in Comparison. Having such Sentiments it is needless for you to give me a long account of your Concerns, I make 'em my own, and in this, as in all Other things you shall see, that I va∣lue My Lady Dutchess of Elboeuf a∣bove all Persons in the World. These Words were too significa∣tive▪ to leave that ad
to doubt of what he thereby meant. But suppose her Mind so otherwise diverted as not to apprehend their Sense, she needed only to have look'd upon him to have guess'd with what sentiments he was ani∣mated. His Eyes Sparkled, and the Purple he had on was not brighter than the Colour that was painted on his face. Tho' Madam de Elboeuf had an infinite stock of Wit, she had it not so ready as immediately to determine upon the answer it best became her to make. She seem'd Nonpluss'd, and this Minister being in no wise sor∣ry for that, seeing it to be occa∣sion'd only by her having pene∣trated into his most secret Senti∣ments. Wherefore thinking it be∣hov'd him to finish what he had begun; I must explain my self bet∣ter Madam, he renew'd, and since you are come to attack my Liberty in my very Closet, why should I conceal from you that it was a Miracle only
due to the most Lovely Person Living. As the Dutchess had appeared perplex'd, when she might as yet make semblanee of being unac∣quainted with his Passion, her Disorder was strangely augmented when she saw it to be past all Re∣medy. One while her spirit ad∣vis'd her to put him in Mind of what was owing to a Person of her Rank, another she thought convenient to dissemble on the score of the need her Husband had of him; but judging that Indul∣gence might be as prejudicial to her as a scornfull statelyness, She took a Medium, which was to turn what he said into Raillery. Your Eminency, she made him answer, Courts your Diversion at my Cost, I never had any of these Gallantries from any other than my Lord the Car∣dinal, and I am so little us'd t'em, as that I must have been very easy of Belief, if I took the least notice of what he says to me in that matter.
The Cardinal fearing a sharper answer, was overjoy'd at this, which he interpreted to his ad∣vantage. And imagining that he had nothing more then her Incre∣dulity to Combate; Would to God, Madam, said he to her, that what you say were true; But I know the Contrary. The Duke your Husband lov'd you before you were his Wife, and I am much afraid that in giving your self to him, you rather Consulted your Inclination than your Duty. Nor yet is this all I dread, those fervencies have had time to cool, that are no longer valu'd from the Moment that they no longer cost any trouble. I should much rather fear some happy Rival, and I am very much mistaken, if I know not one much more formidable than your Husband. The Dutchess blusht at these words, and the Cardinal inter∣preting this Action to the Confu∣sion she was under at her having been detected; I have hit the Mark
to a hair, he added, and is it not true, Madam, that you love your Husband far less then the Count de — He paus'd without thinking fit to name him, and the Dutchess, who had only blusht, for that she saw her self oblig'd to listen to another Conversation than that on whose account she came, being no longer able to endure he should thus wrong her Virtue; Proceed, said she to him, and inform me of what I know not my self, tho' I ought to know it better than any body. You'd be cau∣tious how ye own'd it to me, the Car∣dinal immediately retorted, a Se∣crt of that Consequence is not easily communicated, & especially to a Person so much concern'd in't as I. But no matter, I shall know it, in spight of all the Precautions that either of ye may take, and if the World thinks me able to penetrate into the very Cabinets of the Princes of Europe, when the King my Master's Interest is only con∣cern'd, what would I not do in an oc∣casion
that concerns my whole repose. Now it was somewhat an ex∣traordinary thing, that such a De∣claration as this, should at the same time be accompany'd with threats. A Lover, commonly, vails his hu∣mour at the first; and that Course might, principally, be expected from his Eminency, who so well knew how to Counterfeit in all sorts of occasions. But as it is the Property of Love to lay Reason a∣side, it is not to be wond'red if his Conduct was so surprizing. Ma∣dam d' Elboeuf knew not how to reconcile her self to this his Carri∣age, and though he stood upon such a Level as debarr'd Expostu∣lation, she quickly chang'd the Resolution she had taken of Hus∣banding him. I stand in need of you, she said to him, but not any Conside∣ration shall ever hinder me from cau∣sing those regards to be paid me that are my due, and it's a very pleasant business to see a man of your Character
become an Inamorato, nay and of a Person of my Quality. But what I find most extrrordinary is, that you dare to offend me upon so ridiculous a Prepos∣session, which only you can admit into ones Imagination. The Cardinal was extremely sur∣priz'd to see the Disdain with which she utter'd these words. He us'd his utmost Endeavours to mollify what he had said to her, giving her to understand, that it was only thro' an excess of Love. But she prov'd to be as little tracta∣ble upon that word, as upon his Je∣lousy; Insomuch that after having said several disobliging things to him, she went away without vouchsafing to hearken any longer to his Justifications. The way be∣tween his Eminency's Palace and Elboeuf-Hall gave her time to reco∣ver her self from the Disorder this bus'ness had put her in. She found the Count de Soissons with her Husband, and as the latter had
told the former of her being gone to the Cardinal's Palace upon a matter of Moment to him, the first Question they both put to her, was whether she was satisfy'd with the Minister. Not over-well, Madam d' Elboeuf made 'em answer, and I am very much mistaken if our Concern does not miscarry. They ask'd her the Reason, and as she did not think convenient to boast of what was befall'n her, she study'd an E∣vasion, which she presently caus'd to pass currant with 'em. This is strange, the Count de Soissons said, he seems to make it his whole Delight to disoblige all People, and whereas he ought to Court the Amity of Persons of our Quality, he only contrives how to in∣jure them. He thereupon told an oc∣casion or two wherein himself had reason to complain of him, and the Duke d' Elboeuf was of his opinion. While they were upon this To∣pick, word was brought the Duke d' Elboeuf that a Person ask'd to
speak with him, and being free with the Count de Soissons, he en∣treated him to stay with his Wife, 'till he had dispatch'd the Con∣cern in hand. The Duke being gone, the Count fell again to talk of the Car∣dinal, and while they were both saying several things that were not overmuch to his Advantage, a Message came to my Lady Dutchess d' Elboeuf that a Gentle∣man ask'd to speak with her from the Cardinal. She gave order for his being introduc'd, and going to meet him, that she might know what he had to say to her, he pre∣sented her a Paper, telling her, that by it she would find, that the Business was done she came upon to his Eminency. As she was not willing the Count should know the least of what had pass'd be∣tween 'em; Be pleas'd to tell him, said she to this Gentleman, that I am vry much oblig'd to him, and that
Mr. d'Elboeuf and I will come to make him our Acknowledgments. The Count de Soissons to make his Court to the Dutchess; tell his E∣minency also, said he to the Gentle∣man, that you found me here, and that I so far espouse the Concerns of Mr. and Madam d'Elboeuf, that if I had thought I could have been usefull to them in joyning my Entreaties to theirs, I would have gone with 'em to Sollicit the favour he has newly granted them. The Gentleman withdrew, af∣ter having made his Leg, and the Count de Soissons who had no good opinion of the Cardinal, Let's see Madam, said he to the Dutchess d' Elboeuf, if matters go according to your Desire; but for my part I must own t'ye, that as he does not willingly oblige, I believe him no farther than I see him. At these words he took the Paper out of her hands that was seal'd, and having broke open the Seal, without her hindring him
from so doing, not thinking it con∣tain'd any thing but what he might see, he found two Papers in the Cover much of the same big∣ness He open'd the first at hand, and the first thing he read was his own Name; Insomuch that think∣ing he was mistaken, he view'd it more fixedly; but in short, af∣ter having read it over and over, he plainly perceiv'd that he was more concern'd in the matter than he expected. After that he had not the Curiosity to read the other, which, indeed, was not worth the trouble, since it was only the Ex∣pedition of the Affair before-men∣tion'd: And contenting himself with this, Truly Madam, said he to this Princess, the Cardinal is much more my Friend than I imagin'd. You may here if you please see a thing which I should never have dared to have spo∣ken to you of, so very Powerfull o'er my Soul was the Respect I shall ever have for you; but since the occasion is
so seasonably offer'd, give me leave to tell you that it is impossible but that you must have taken notice of the Love I have for you, since he that is not half so much concern'd in't does positively declare to you that I love you. This is a piece of Service, he added, which I shall never forget, and tho' the Passion he expresses for you himself in the same Letter ought to Allarum me, I must own to you that he has freed me out of so perplexing a Bus'ness for me, that to take all I bear him more good than ill will. In saying that, he presented the Letter to the Dutchess; but beside, as what had pass'd between his Emi∣nency & her, made her Conjecture what he had been capable of Wri∣ting to her, he had newly told her sufficient, as to render needless her shrifting any farther into it's Con∣tents; I thought you, said she, so much my Friend as with me to have laught at the Cardinal's Passion, and in case of need to have offer'd me your
assistance against him, supposing he should make use of his Power, so as to revenge himself for the Contempt, with which I pretend to reward him. But by what I perceive, you thnk me so silly, as to give Credit to your Discourse, as if I knew not how to discern what de∣parts from Truth and what from Rail∣lery. I Railly you, Madam, the Count reply'd; You whom I consider as the Person in the World, that in all kinds merits the most Distinction: My past Actions do they give you that Idea of me? And if you would vouch∣safe to recall 'em to mind, wou'd you not be the first to say, that you must have been very blind, if you have not been sensible that they had another source than the Amity I have for My Lord Duke your Husband? I have Suck'd with my Milk that the greatest Enemies we had to our Family were the Princes of his. Nevertheless I have admitted him my Confident, and I may say that I have no Secret that is so to him, unless it be that I have conceal'd
the Passion from him that I have ever been sensible of for you But what did I say? Would to God I had ever Lov'd you, he should never have had you, or he should first have had my Life. But you know Love has not the start of Knowledge, and that having only seen you after your Marriage, my Affection could only bear date from that time. To what then do you attribute this Re∣union that was impossible without you, but you occasion much more difficult things, and after having in spight of me, made me be silent, what is there that you are not capable of bringing about? He would have enlarg'd much in his Discourse, had not the Duke return'd. His Wife, who was mightily disorder'd, that she might not give him time to ob∣serve her, nor the Count, who was in the like condition, pre∣sented him one of the Papers she had receiv'd from the Cardinal, and suppress'd that which it was
not convenient he should be in∣form'd of. He stood at gaze to see what it contain'd, after what his Wife had told him a moment be∣fore, and not being able to conceal his surprize. Did not you tell me, Madam, said he to her, that we had nothing to hope, and how can so sud∣den a change have come about in so short a time? The Count de Soissons pretended to strike in with his A∣mazement, and after having rea∣son'd thereupon, he told him, he needed not to care how the thing came about, since he had what he demanded. In the mean while the Gentle∣man the Cardinal had sent to this Dutchess, being return'd to his Master, he inform'd him how he had found her with the Count de Soissons, and of the Complement made him by that Prince. This was no small matter of vexation to his Eminency, who had no mind he should Interest himself so far in the Dutchesses Concerns, whence
he Prognosticated ill Consequen∣ces for himself. I knew very well, said he to himself, that he Lov'd her, but I knew not that she made him the like returns. This is but too true, otherwise he would have let her make her Complements by her self, without medling in the Matter. I have migh∣ty Occasion, forsooth, for his acknow∣ledgments, and why may not I resent the Obstacle he interposes to my desires. Nevertheless as he was less pro∣per to make Complaints, than to contrive his ease, his lasted not long, and his whole drift was to free himself of so dangerous a Ri∣val. Two means he fancy'd he had to bring this about, One to dis∣patch him out of the way, under Colour of giving him an Employ, th' Other of marrying him so ad∣vantageously, and with a Person so accomplisht in Body and Mind, as might be capable of making him forget the Dutchess. Howe∣ver Policy thwarted both these
ways. The Count, who had so great a heart, that never would buckle under him, as the rest of the Kingdom had done, made him presume that since his Conduct was such in his Present Circum∣stances, he would be much more haughty, when he had attain'd to a greater degree of Power. On an∣other side he was not willing to give matter of jelousy to the Prince of Conde, who would not have fail'd to have fomented the dis∣content of several who boar envy to his Fortune, If be had seen him advance a Prince, who properly speaking was the greatest enemy he had. And indeed he expostula∣ted him the Quality of Prince of the Blood, for reasons that are sufficiently known in History, and which it would be superfluous to insert in this Place. Thus not knowing on what to determine, he let some time slip, during which the Count de Sois∣sons
us'd his utmost Endeavours to see the Dutchess again. But she shun'd him with that Care, that few People but took notice on't. Only her Husband relying, calmly, upon her Conduct, made not any Reflexion upon this her Carriage; On the Contrary he often brought the Count to Eat at his House, but as often as he did so, she pre∣tended indisposition; Insomuch that the hopes vanish'd he had of seeing her. The Cardinal, who in matter of Love, as well as of Policy, thought there was no∣thing like having good spies, be∣ing inform'd by one he had about the Dutchess, that far from making returns to the Count's Passion, she avoided him with a most incon∣ceivable Care, was in some man∣ner solac'd for the anxious hours she made him pass himself. How∣ever experience having taught him that there is nothing impos∣sible to a Lover that does not de∣sist,
he resolv'd to deliver himself out of fear, by a Proposition that seem'd very advantageous for the Count, but which in the bottom, instead of advancing him, would have cover'd him with infamy. He had a Niece, Madam de Com∣ballet, by Name, and who since has worn the Title of Dutchess d' Aiguillon. She was a Person of a singular Beauty, and if we may be∣lieve Detraction, he himself had not been able to resist her Charms, tho' nearness of Blood did forbid him to look otherwise on her than as a Relation. The Scandalizing Chronicle adds further, that on this account he had unwedded her from her Husband, under Colour of Impotency, and that the desire of enjoying her himself alone, had made him employ his Credit to break off that marriage. But whe∣ther all this was Detraction, or else that Enjoyment had pawl'd his Appetite, as is usual, it was upon
her he cast his Eyes, to put the Change upon the Count. For this purpose he resolv'd to annex such great advantages to her Person, as might dazzle him, notwithstand∣ing the vast Difference of their Births, nay & the dis-advantageous rumours that ran about to the Prejudice of her Reputation. The greatest he could annex was to make him gain the Process he had depending against the Prince of Conde, whom he pretended to have declared a Bastard, and in Conse∣quence cause himself to be declar'd the First Prince of the Blood, that is to say for Presumtive Heir of the Crown, since neither the King nor the Duke of Orleans had then any Children capacitated to sup∣ply that Place. Such a Proposition as this was something so engaging as that he did not doubt but that it would be an Infallible Bait. Yet as the best concerns become ill in the
hands of certain Persons, that know not how to manage 'em, The Cardinal gain'd Seneterre, the Intendant of this Princes Hous∣hold, a man, naturally able, and who, besides, after having acqui∣red some Credit with his Master by several years services, let him understand, that what he could not speed in, it was not for Others to meddle withall. And indeed ex∣pecting to be receiv'd with open arms: Good News, Cry'd he, as soon as he saw the Count, and this Prince asking him what he meant; Why, answer'd he, your Process, if you please your self is Won, and what is more, I bring you tydings of a Beau∣tyfull Wife, and of a support that can∣not fail you upon Occasion. The Count hearing him talk at this rate, imagin'd he had Letters to deliver him from some forreign Prince that desired his Allyance, & full of Impatience to know from whom it might be, he nam'd cer∣tain
Princes to him, that were' of the Number of his friends. We have no need of going so far, then Seneterre said to him, and when you find all this in Cardinal Richelieus Allyance, why should you think of People that at most can only give you fine Promises, and when it shall come to Execution, cannot be in a Condition to perform them. But for his part, added he, can he promise you any thing, but what he can do a thousand fold more? He need only speak to the Parliament, to make it pass an Arrest in your favour: Be∣sides he holds all the Forces of the Kingdom in his Power, Insomuch that when you shall have occasion for them, nothing will fail you. In fine, what shall I say to you? the Crown, if you please, is at your Disposal, and all that he re∣quires, is, that you would Marry Ma∣dam de Comballet, that he may be, henceforward, assured of your being his Friend. I Marry Madam de Com∣ballet, the Count answer'd all in
amaze, and all in a rage at the same time! What the Mistress of her own Uncle, the Mistress of a Priest, a Sa∣crilegious, an Incestuous Wretch, and in a word, the shame of the whole Realm, and of all humane kind! I say nothing of her Birth, the one makes me omit the other, but my greatest sub∣ject of amazement is, that Seneterre, whom I thought mine, should be such a Traytor as to make me such a Proposal. Seneterre would have reply'd, nay and make him apprehend that he would find his Advantage in the Overture he made him; but the Count losing Patience, commanded him to hold his peace. And for that he would, nevertheless, con∣tinue speaking, he gave him some blows with his Cane, and then turn'd him out of his Family. This business made a great noise in the World, those that knew the Count's great heart, imputed it to his high Spirit, and to tell the truth it was in some manner, the
occasion. But for all that, the Love he had for the Dutchess contribu∣ted more thereunto than all other things. It's needless to say how angry the Cardinal was at him, it is easy to apprehend, that he that saw all the Grandees buckle under his Will, did, impatiently, bear such Instances of Contempt. Yet tho' he had such a mighty flock of Vanity, and must for that reason have been terribly mortify'd, we may, however, assert, that Jelousy was the thing that created him the most trouble. He imagin'd, and not without ground, that the Dutchess shar'd deep in this refu∣sal, and tho' he could not reconcile this thought, with the account continually given him by his Spies, that he stood not in over∣good terms with her, it, neverthe∣less, made deep impressions in his mind. For surplusage of Misfortune he intercepted a Letter the Count
writ her, wherein he gave her an exact account of the Conversation he had had with Seneterre, and wherein he did not omit to repre-present the offers that had been made him, of causing him to be de∣clared not only First Prince of the Bloud, but, likewise, to give him what share he pleased in the Ad∣ministration of the Kingdom, of which the Minister oblig'd him∣self to cause him to be own'd as Presumptive Heir by all the Gran∣dees, nay and by all the Parlia∣ments. Yet for the Love of her, would he not in any wise close hands with such alluring Offers. That, true indeed, he had us'd as a pretext, Madam de Comballets ill reputation, of whom, perhaps, all the Stories that had gone about were only Calumny, but which he was willing, nevertheless, to make pass for as many Truths, that so he might have his Ears no longer dinn'd with an Affar to which he
could not hearken, as he had hin∣ted, for her sake. Furthermore that he thought her too shrewd a Person to believe that tho' he were persuaded of the Ladies Debauche∣ry, it would have been capable of making him refuse her. That a thousand Princes before him had shew'd him the way, and among those Crowned Heads; So true it is that Ambition serves for an ex∣cuse to the greatest Defects. That nothing but Love could have done this Miracle, a Miracle so much the greater, as that the matter in agitation was not a meer Establish∣ment, but the greatest Crown in the Universe. Such were the Contents of this Letter, upon which it is easy to guess the excess of the Persona∣ges Jelousy. He sent for the Spy he had about the Dutchess, and making him read it: You see now, said he to him immediately. if I ought not to have thee hang'd for the
false accounts thou giv'st me. Thou hast hitherto assured me that he got no ground with her, and yet he makes her a Sacrifice of his Refusals. What greater token can there be of their Re∣fusals? and must not I be the most Ʋnfortunate of all men? The Spy did what he could to excuse him∣self, and wanted not good Rea∣sons. He said that by this Letter, it was plain that the Count endea∣voured to insinuate into the Dutchess, that it was for her sake he had refus'd so fair a Fortune; but that this did not imply that the Sacrifice was gratefull to her: That the worst us'd Lovers were those that were to study the best reasons to gain the Confidence of their Mistresses; but that once ob∣tain'd, it was not seen that their Letters entertain'd 'em with such riff-raff stuff: That if the Count stood as well with the Dutchess as his Eminency pretended; his Let∣ter would have been quite in ano∣ther
Stile: That it would have been made up of Raillery, in lieu of those Amorous terms, and if a∣ny such had been let fall, they would have been only by the by. These Reasons would have been good to any man that had had his mind at liberty enough as to apprehend them; But the Car∣dinal walking hastily as if he had receiv'd some Currier that had brought him the News of the loss of some great Battel: Ah! if he had not been afraid of furnishing matter of talk to his Enemies, he would have done much more. But in short, the care of ones repute is a thing more perplexing than ma∣ny do imagine. How many People are there that are thereby kept within bounds, and who in the bottom of their Soul do not think the less? It is upon this bottom, that Moliere rais'd his Tartuff, and if he had been upon the Scene at the time I speak of, perhaps he
would not have waited so long. In the mean while the Spy was dismiss'd, and far from causing him to be hang'd, as he had at first threatned to do, he made him a large Present that he might con∣tinue him his Service. Then went he directly to the King, whither he was call'd by an Affair of Moment: and as he was full of his Passion; Yes, Sir, he said to him, you must make him lose his Process, and if your Majesty should proceed to De∣clare in his favour, he would after∣wards drive you from off your Throne. The King understood well enough that he meant the Count de Sois∣sons; but as far from having said any thing that had relation to his Person, they had quite another matter in hand, he was mightily surpriz'd at this sally. The Cardi∣nal plainly perceiv'd by the Kings Countenance that some Novelty was depending, and the Words I have repeated, having started from
him, without his making the least reflexion, he ask'd him what he re∣volv'd in his mind. It's for me to ask you, the King made him an∣swer, what you revolve in yours, whence it comes that you interrupt our Discourse to speak of the Count de Soissons. I, I thought not of him, the Cardinal answer'd, and your Maje∣sty must needs be mistaken. I am not mistaken, the King retorted, and if you have receiv'd any Advertisement of Consequence, why d'ye any longer deferr imparting it to me? The Car∣dinal still retrencht himself upon the Negative, and as he was tax'd with having little Vertigo's ever and anon, during which he was wont not to appear in Publick, the King imputed all this to their co∣ming upon him, and dismiss'd him sooner than he would other∣wise have done. In the mean time Mr. d'Elboeuf had all he desired of him, and those that were not inform'd of the end
of things, could not apprehend whence he acquired so much fa∣vour. The Cardinal did several times invite him to come and see his fine House of Ruel, and bid him bring his Wife along, and his Children too that it seem'd as if he would take his whole Family into his Protection. If Madam d'Elboeuf had dared, she would have desired her Husband to have dispens'd her from going; but that not being to be done, without letting him know, what it's fit a Husband should ever be a Sranger to, she suffer'd her self to be led along to that Stately House, where they met with the best Entertainment imaginable from the Cardinal. His Eminency had also invited thither the Sieur Desnoiers Secre∣tary of State, the Person that after him had the greatest share in the Affairs of the Kingdom. Not that he meant to regule him, or had a∣ny thing of Moment to impart to
him; But you must know that the Duke of Elboeuf had a Concern in the Council, of which it was con∣venient that Mr. Desnoiers should be throughly inform'd, and as he was commonly overwhelm'd with Affairs, the Duke had not yet been able to find the means of discour∣sing him particularly upon that matter. Now as the Cardinal had his Designs, he started the bus'∣ness, and as it was a matter of long Discussion, he bid Mr. Desnoiers go into a Closet where he would find a Pen and Ink, to make an Extract of all Mr. d' Elboeuf had to say to him. This Prince took as a mark of goodness, what was neverthe∣less only the effect of a self-Inte∣rested Lover. Madam d' Elboeuf plainly perceiv'd the meaning of this, and would, perhaps, have contriv'd to parry the blow, by following her Husband: but he prevented her Design, by telling Mr. d'Elboeuf, that while he was
Closetted up with Mr. Desnoiers he would play a Game at Chess with his Lady. Mr. d'Elboeuf, who made a scruple of leaving him all alone, was overjoy'd that he himself pro∣pos'd him the means of not being uncivil, and having shut himself up with Mr. Desnoiers, he left him all the freedom he desired. Madam d'Elboeuf seeing her self all alone with him (for he had nodded to his People to go out af∣ter having set the Chess-men upon the Table) became as red as fire, which the Cardinal perceiving, Certainly, Madam, he said to her, you must needs hate me, as much as I love you, since you are as much in pain in being with me, as I have pleasure in being with you. Nevertheless I had e∣ver heard say, that Hatred was not the fruit of Amity, and that on the con∣trary the means to render one's self a∣greeable, was to have for a Person the Sentiments I have for you. But, by what I perceive, my Unhappyness is
such, that what is the Lot of others, is not mine; and that Nature must first run Counter before that I can be happy. If you make your Happyness consist, Madam d Elboeuf answer'd him faintly, in being belov'd by me, I franckly own that you never will be happy. Nay and it is strange you dare to offend me in this Case, you who know my Duty, and by Consequence can∣not invite me to fail in it, at least without shewing the little Con∣sideration you have for me. What, Madam, you n proch me withal, is no Crime, he answer'd, or at least, if it be one, it is so on the account of its being annex'd to my Person. If it were the Count of Soissons that held you the like discourses, the thing would change its Nature. We know very well that you are not alltogether so Cruel to him; Yet, if I durst say it, it is an effect of your little Judg∣ment: I can do as much as he, tho' I am no Prince, and in Case you were in any wise wedded to Ambition, I should
much more than he turn to your ac∣count. But what do I say, I am not so happy as to have any Consideration enter into the Love you bear him. If you love him, it is only because he seems lovely to you, whereas it is my ill luck to have you hate me, because you think me the Most Odious of all Men. Madam d'Elboeuf who had only hitherto look'd with indifference upon the Count de Soissons was terribly Scandaliz'd that he dar'd to tell her to her Face that she lov'd any other then her Husband. She put on her serious looks, but he to whom jelousy represented as so many Truths all that whirl'd his Phancy. Be angry, Madam, or not angry, he said to her, that shall not make me believe the more or less. I have good Proofs in my Pocket of what I now say, and when matters stand so, would you have me belye such certain. Testimonies as those, for Words that you think your self Oblig'd
to say for your Reputation. A dis∣course of this Nature was still ag∣gravating his Offence; and in∣deed it having scandaliz'd Madam d' Elboeuf still more then before; This is too much, said she to him all in anger, and pray'e, tell me what you mean by those Proofs you have in your Pocket. A Letter Madam, the Cardinal replyed, since you will needs know it, but a Letter that speaks and against which you have nothing to alledge. She presently imagin'd he meant to accuse her of having written it, and as she well knew the Contrary, If you shew me that, she said to him, I'le allow of all you please, but that as I know that cannot be, I think it very strange, you should make use of this Imposture, in all pro∣babillity to force my secret from me, supposing I had one. This is no Imposture, Madam, the Cardinal replyed, 'tis matter of Fact, and of which you your self are going to be a Witness. I have the Letter as I told
you in my Pocket, and there needs no more then my taking it out. The Dutchess without affording her self the time to see it, thinking that he meant that it was she that had writ it, It must be forg'd then, she retorted, and as I know you capa∣ble of such a forgery, you must not take it ill if I tell you that my Suspicions only center in your Person. These words, which let the Cardinal see, the little esteem she had for him, had like to have made him mad. I use not, Madam, said he to her, any of those sort of Tricks, and my Misfortune is but too reall and too True. At these Words he presented her the Letter, we have been talking of, and the Dutchess seeing it a hand very different from hers. What's the meaning of all this? said she to him, and did you not tell me that your were a going to shew me a Letter of mine: I said no such thing, the Cardinal made an∣swer, but that I would shew you a
Love-Letter that was written to you. Do but open it, he added, and you will see, that it is not Love that you Shun, but the Persons that Love you, when they are so dis-agreeable to you as I am. Tho' nothing could be more dis-obliging then this reproach, the Dutchess nevertheless, was much less sensible to it, then to the pleasure of seeing that she was under Cover from those forgeries, which as gross as they were, do however sometimes create trouble. Lets see, said she to him, in much col∣der blood, than in Probability she was like to be in, whence this Love-Letter comes to us, for my part I know not who can have Written it to me, & still less, who can have made use of a Stile, by which one may guess of our good Correspondence. At these words she open'd t ter, whose hand she was a stranger to, but she could not disown it to be from the Count de Soissons, which was ma∣nifest from the Signing, which
was really his. This was the Letter, I before mention'd. Thus it would be need∣less to renew what it contain'd, since I acquitted my self of that before. This I may say, that it was fatal to the Cardinal to serve his Rival instead of injuring him. I said before that he it was that had occasion'd his having dar'd to de∣clare his Passion to Madam d' El∣boeuf. It was also he, who by ob∣liging that Lady to read this letter, caus'd her to make reflexion that this Prince must needs be in love to refuse the Advantages that were offer'd him by the Marriage of Madam de Comballet. Tho' she was in the Presence of a jealous Man, who examin'd her, as I may say, to the bottom of her soul, she in a moment told her self a thou∣sand things to the Count's advan∣tage, and it so much the more startled her, as that she was wont to make a scruple of those that
would not have been of any Con∣sequence for Others. However not being so far sunk into these sorts of Reflexions, but that she had the Judgement left to see that she was to answer the Cardinal upon this Letter, she let him see the inju∣stice of his Accusation, since if it had been true, that she had been in as good terms with the Count as he had supposed, he would have written to her in other terms than he did. Two or three hours slipt away in this and the like Altercations, with which the Cardinal had no greater reason to be satisfy'd. At the end of that time, the Duke d'Elboeuf, who had giv'n his Me∣moirs to Mr. Desnoiers, return'd, and thus chang'd the Conversati∣on. If that Prince had had the least Suspitions, he had needed on∣ly to have ey'd either of them, to see that they had Concerns in their heads; but being far from
any such thought, he propos'd to the Cardinal the going to see the Water-works Play, and his Emi∣nence fearing he might discover his Disorder in Conversation, was overjoy'd that he had this Curio∣sity, that so he might come off from that bad step. Then the Duke return'd to Pa∣ris with his wife, and some days after the Dutchess of Savoy sent a Courrier to the King to entreat him to send her the Queens Pi∣cture in Miniature, with that of all the Ladys of the Court. She meant to put them in a Cabinet, which she had caus'd to be made on purpose in one of the Duke of Savoys Country-houses; and she had made the like Request at all the Courts of Europe, that so with∣out stirring from her own home, she might see all that was Beauti∣full in Europe. The King was far from denying the Dutchess this. A Painter came from Italy, who
drew all these Ladyes, and their Pourtraicts being finisht, the King took a view of them, then put 'em into the Courriers hands, who was come to Paris on pur∣pose to fetch 'em. All the Princes and Grandees of the Court, found not any handsomer than that of Madam D'Elboeuf, and that Prin∣cesse added a Box of Diamonds thereunto, which she was very willing to make a Present of to the Dutchess of Savoy. The Count De Soissons and the Cardinal who had done all they had been able with the Painter to get him draw a Second by it, but which he had excus'd himself from, upon his not drawing any Copies, and that Madam D' Elboeuf would not con∣sent that he should draw two Ori∣ginals, they resolve to have it at any rate whatever. The Cardinal, who was all full of finesse, invent∣ed a means for that purpose, which he thought indubitable,
which was to have the Courrier robb'd, when he was passing thorough a Wood. For this purpose he sent Spies abroad and they were to wait his coming in the Forrest of Fontainebleau. As concerning the Count de Soissons, he manag'd his design with less artifice, on the evening before the Courriers Departure, he went to him incognito, told him it should be his own fault if he did not make his fortune, and to shorten matters he offer'd him ten Thou∣sand Crowns ready Cash, if he would give him Madam D'Elboeufs Picture. Such offers are very ca∣pable of tempting a Miserable Courrier, he said he was willing, and resolv'd to say when once ar∣riv'd in Savoy, that he had been robb'd on the way. This Bargain being thus struck, the Courrier departed the next day, and when he was in the Forrest of Fontain∣bleau, four Horse-men surrounded
him, (being those of the Cardi∣nals) and askt to search his male. There are those that do not love such sorts of Encounters, nay and that Number must be reduc'd to very few, since all People are of this Opinion; but this man ha∣ving his reasons not to be of the tast of all others, open'd his Male with mighty Satisfaction, letting them see that he carry'd neither Gold nor Silver, but things indeed of greater vallue. They Examin'd Every Pourtraict in its turn, and not finding that they sought for: Where is then that of Madam D' Elboeufs they ask'd him? He perceiv'd by this Question by Whom they had been sent, and as he was afraid of Violence, he made them answer that they came too late, if they only sought for that: That he had met with such Other Sparks as themselves, in the Plain of Song-boiou that has Seiz'd on it, on which account he had
been upon the point of returning to Paris to make his Complaint. In the mean while that he knew very well why so many People were so fond of that Picture, that it was on the account of the Box, which, however, those that had taken it might repent of; since such things, commonly discover'd such like Persons. If the Courrier had had to do with real Robbers, he would have been Cautious how he had talk'd in this manner; but as he knew those to whom he spoke, he was willing to give a loose to his Wit, which they were much less con∣cern'd at, than at their having sped so ill in the Commission that had been given them. In the mean while, they really believ'd all that he told them of the loss of the Picture, remaining Persuaded that it was the Box that occasion'd his being robb'd. Full of this Ima∣gination they return'd back to
give an Account to the Cardinal; but this Minister being cunninger then they, told 'em they were fools, and that if the Courier had really lost the Picture, he would not have fail'd to have return'd to Paris, tho' it were only for the sake of the Box. Thereupon he caus'd a Person to be call'd in in whom he put great Confidence, bid him take the Best of his Horses, go instantly in pursuit of the Cour∣rier, and if he could overtake him, to clap a Pistol to his throat, to make him Confess what he had done with the Picture. This Per∣son departed immediately, and Spurring his Horse at the first, he went Thirty Leagues in Six hours time; which was an Extraordi∣nary Expedition; and which he must have fall'n much short of, had he taken Post. But at length his Horse being not able to go any further, he was oblig'd to take Post, and leave him in an Inn.
However the time which the others had spent in returning to Paris, having afforded the Cou∣rier a great advance, he arriv'd at Lyons Six hours before the other could get thither, and as when one is got thither it requires but little time to get out of the Kingdom, He that the Cardinal had dispatcht stopp'd there judging it then too late to pursue the other. As much as he had been fed with hopes in his going, as full was he of sadness in returning; for, in short, he knew the Cardinal, who without doing any justice, would have those he Employ'd to remain re∣sponsible for Unhappy Events. And indeed, he was no sooner arriv'd, but that his Eminency having known that he had miss'd his aim, he commanded him ne∣ver to come more into his sight, as if it had been his fault. Every One was curious to know of this Man, what Occasion'd his Dis∣grace;
but as he was still in hopes of being re-instated, he was cau∣tious of blabbing, after which he had been lost past recovery. The Dutchess of Savoys Courier being return'd to her, this Prin∣cess, who had receiv'd a Letter of Civility from Madam D' Elboeuf upon the Pourtraict-Box she sent her, ask'd him what was become of it, as well as the Picture. To which the Courier made answer, that he had been robb'd of both in the Forrest of Fountaine-Bleau, and that he had Witnesses of it. These Witnesses were People that had pass'd, when he was stopp'd, and these having in their passing seen how he was made to open his Mail, he had run after them, when he was again at Liberty, that they might give their Evi∣dence upon time, and Occasion. The Dutchess of Savoy was much vex'd at this Adventure, not so much, however, in Consideration
of the Box, as of the Picture. Ne∣vertheless as the thing might be retriev'd, she gave Madam D, El∣boeuf notice of the Couriers bd rencounter, entreating her that she would remedy it, by causing her self to be drawn anew. The Spy, the Cardinal had about the Dutchesse, inform'd him of what pass'd, and his Eminency was ve∣ry much Surpriz'd to hear that the Courier affirm'd the Pour∣traict to have been taken from him in the Forrest of Fontainbleau. He sent immediately to seek out those whom he had given or∣der to go thither, and having ask'd them the meaning of all this, he knew by their answer, that the Courier must needs have dispos'd of it himself, and that he had been glad to reject the thing upon them, for the Concealing of his Roguery. The witnesses he had call'd upon that Occasion, nay and whom he had caus'd to signe
a Paper, which he had put into the Dutchess of Savoys hands, con∣firm'd him strongly in this Opini∣on; and as he was persuaded that he had dispos'd of it in favour of no other than of the Count De Soissons, the first time he met that Prince; I should never have thought, said he to him, after a Drolling manner, that you would have given Occasion of Complaint to a Beautifull Lady. Madam D' Elboeuf will needs have it, that you have her Picture, and she is not at all Satisfi'd that you detain it against her will. Madam D' Elboeuf, the Count made him answer, has no such thought of me, and she rather believes it to be the Person that has discourst her of Love, and has had the Boldnss to Expresse his jelousie to her by a Letter. These Words absolutely Un∣hing'd the Cardinal; he was ig∣norant of his having discover'd his Intrigue by the Letter I menti∣on'd awhile ago, and thining it
to be Madam D' Elboeuf that had imparted it to him: Madam D' Elboeuf has reson, he said to him, to confide a Secret in you, and discreet as you are, it was impossible she could put it into better hands. Ma∣dam D' Elboeuf the Count made answer, does not pretend to make a Secret of that, It is only a Secret when things please, and I should loose above half of the Esteem I have for her, if she had the least tast for that I speak of. Then he went away and left the Cardinal so picqu'd, that he was not to be known again. And indeed, however great his wit was, it was too much at a time for him to have a Rival that slight∣ed him in his own Presence, and a Mistresse by whom he thought himself Sacrific'd. Affairs of State went not the better, during his be∣ing in this Perturbation of mind, and as he knew himself incapable of directing them in due manner, as long as his mind was in that
Scite, he counterfieted Sickness for two or three days, and would have done so much longer, if he had not been relieved by a desire of revenge which he thought in his Power to Exert. I have said that the Dutchess of Savoy had entreated Madam d' Elboeuf to send her her Picture a-new, they were actually at work upon it, and he gave his spies order to give him Notice when it was sinisht, and by whom it was to be sent into Savoy. The Spy having perform∣ed his Commission, the Cardinal caus'd two men to be ready to take Post at the same time as he that was Encharg'd with it, and that no body might have notice of the Robbery he pretended to Commit, he commanded them to follow him to the very frontiers of Savoy. There they Seiz'd him, and that they might not give him any Occasion to believe that they only aim'd at the Picture, they
likewise took all his Money away. The Courier, who was a Savoyard, being arriv'd at the other Post, made his Complaint to the Justice, but as he had no Money to have the Robbers pursu'd, they return'd in all safety to Paris, where the Cardinal gave each of them a thousand Pistols, for a Reward of their Pains. The Dutchess of Savoy knowing the Accident that was again be∣fall'n the Courier, did not think Convenient to re-demand a new Picture, and the rather as being in hopes of repairing suddenly her self into Dauphine, to Confer with the King her Brother. She was then in hopes to see Madam D' Elboeuf, and acquaint her her self with what fatality she had been depriv'd of her hopes, en∣treating her to remedy it by a new Present. In the mean while, the Car∣dinal having the Picture in his
hands, sent for the Man of most repute in Paris for making of Boxes, and having caus'd him to enter into his Closet, he told him that he would make his fortune, if he had the Wit to do him a Service he desired of him. The Man did not fail to promise him all things, and the Cardinal be∣ing assured of his Good Will; You must then, said he to him, make me a Picture-Box, the richest you ever made, and Expose it to the Eyes of those that come to see you, untill that the Count de Soissons be enform'd of it. He will, doubtless, have the curiosity to know whose it is; but have a Care how you tell it him; Excusing your self upon it's being absolutely forbidden you, and that it belongs to a Person so Considerable, that you should be undone without re∣covery, if you fail'd in what he had Commanded you. Shew him only, but after several Importunities, and that he shall have Sworn to you that he
will never mention it to any Body, the Picture I mean to put into it; and at the same time he gave him that of Madam D' Elboeuf. The Man having promis'd him to do all he Commanded him, he gave him to the value of two hundred thousand Crowns in Diamonds, with which he was minded the Box should be en∣rich'd, recommending to him ne∣ver to cease working. The work-man laid all other Bus'ness aside for this; and those that set him to work, pressing him to serve them, he told them that it was impos∣sible; that he had something to do for a Person, of such great Consideration, that he was ob∣lig'd to work for him to the pre∣judice of all the World. People had the curiosity to know, what this bus'ness was, and for whom it might be, to which he answer'd, that it was a Box of Dia∣monds; but that as fr the Per∣son
he was forbidden to name him. If the King had been a Prince Gallant, People would have be∣liev'd not only by this man's Discourse; but by the worth of the Diamonds, which he shew'd to all comers, that it was for him he Workt; but as that Prince led a Life altogether retir'd; and that besides Kings are too much Expos'd to the Eyes of the Pub∣lick, to have any Intrigue out of the Verge of their knowledge, they were oblig'd to let their suspicions fall upon another. In the mean while, all Paris was quickly full of this Bus'ness, and it being come to the Ears of the Count de Soissons, he fancy'd, that since he knew the Jeweller, and whom he commonly set to Work, that he would not be so Myste∣rious with him. In confidence of this, he went to him, and after having askt him to see that Ra∣rity, which made such a noise in
the World, he was himself in∣duc'd to admire it, not so much on the account of the Richness of the Diamonds, as of the Minia∣ture which was admirable. This is very fine, truly, said the Count to him, and if the Picture that is to be in it has something proportionate, We must needs own that nothing can be comparable to it. And that too is beyond all doubt; the Jeweller re∣partee'd; But tho' it were not so, Your Highness knows very well, that Lovers ever esteem their Mistresses. By this answer, I judge, the Count de Soissons reply'd, that the Lady does not merit this Expence; but thou speakest very just, in saying, that what pleases us is ever the handsom∣est to us. I said not that, the Workman answer'd, with Relation to the Lady here in Question; as she appears the most Beauteous to the Eyes of him that set me to Work, she will also appear so doubtless to all those that shall see her. For my part I
own that I never saw any thing that ravisht me more, and if I was King, I believe he that employs me would have a dangerous Rival in me. By what I perceive, the Count retor∣ted, you do not then work for him. I thought from the Vastness of the Expence, that he only was capable of it; but since I am Mistaken, you must needs tell me for whom it is. That is impossible, the Workman made answer, I have made Oath not to reveal the least tittle; and besides, the being thereunto bound by my Conscience, it concerns no less than my Life. What, the Count repartee'd, Cannot I then secure thee, and when thou shalt say that I it was that oblig'd thee thereunto, dost thou not think, that they will be very Cautious, since it is not the King, how they exercise any Violence upon thee. I know Sir, the Workman reply'd, the respect all the World ought to have for you; but you'le be pleas'd to give me leave to tell you,
that whatever protection you may grant me, my Life would not be in safety, if I had broke the Secret I had promis'd. The more the Workman en∣larg'd in the like Discourse, the more it flusht the Counts Curi∣osity to discover this Mystery; but what augmented it the more is, that hearing him talk in this manner, he began to entertain a Suspicion that it might be the Cardinal. He thought that he only could be dreaded to such a Degree as to slight the Protection of a Prince of the Blood; joyn'd to this, that he only could put Jewels of such great Value upon a Picture Case. All this Confirming him still more and more in his Opinion, he did all he could to tear the Secret from the Jeweller; but he being cautious of going beyond his or∣ders; continuing still upon the Defensive, the Count contented
himself with asking him to see the Picture. The Jeweller wav'd doing it for some time. At the long run, as if he had yielded part∣ly to his entreaties, and partly to several great promises he made him, he went to fetch a little trunck that contained what he re∣quired. The Count full of impa∣tience, Snatcht it out of his hands, with the key, and opening it him∣self, he found at the top, a Picture in a Chagreen Case. He ask'd the Jeweller if that was what he sought for, and the other having answer'd him in the affirmative, he undid two little Claps that hin∣dred him from seeing that Picture. As soon as he had cast his eyes up∣on it, he had like to have let it fall, so strangely seiz'd was he, and be∣ginning to eye the Workman: What's this I see, said he to him, and is it possible that the Case thou art making is for the Picture I have in my hands? It is for the very same Sir,
the Jeweller made answer, But whence proceeds such a Surprize, since your Highness might well imagine that it was for a Person whose Condition was Equal to her Beauty. The Count did not think Con∣venient to tell him through what Motive he was so affected; but de∣taining the Picture; Make me no longer any Mistery of the matter, said he to the Jeweller, I know as well as thee Who set thee to work, and since it is the Cardinal, go tell him from me, that as I know him Unworthy of the favour the Duchess D' Elboeuf has done him, I do not pretend he shall in∣joy it. Tell him also that he be very carefull never to let this Bus'ness be known, which would ruine that Princesse's Reputation; I own that after so shamefull a Choice in her, she does not deserve it should be in any wise spar'd; but if I do it, it is perhaps, more in Consideration of her Husband than of her. After all, if he is so hardy as to do any thing to
the Prejudice of what I Signify to him, he shall be answerable for it to me. The Jeweller was very much Surpriz'd when he heard him talk in this manner: He had indeed, order to shew him the Picture, but not to let him take it. Thus alrea∣dy thinking himself undone, he threw himself at the Counts feet, conjuring him to take pity of him. But this Prince whom jealousy did not allow to grant him his re∣quest, went out at the same time, giving him no other comfort then the telling him, that he was in Se∣curity sufficient being under the Cover of his name. The Jeweller all trembling went directly to the Cardinal, acquainted him how the thing had pass'd, and letting him understand, that having to do with a Prince of the Blood, it was impossible for him to do in his regard, what he would have done in regard of any Other. In the mean while the Poor man was
under a Mortal Apprehension how he would treat him after this, but he was as greatly Surpriz'd, when instead of seeing him burst out into menaces, he saw him burst out into a great fit of Laugh∣ter. So much the Better, the Car∣dinal said to him at the same time, Nothing more acceptable could have befall'n me, and all I expect of thee is, thou wouldst tell the Count, that I have threatned thy Life, unless thou bring'st me back my Picture. I know very well, added he, that all Thou canst say to him will be ineffectuall: but again no matter, provided he thinks me much more angry than I am. The Jeweller not expecting to have come off at so easy a rate, promised him all he had a mind to, and the Cardinal having in∣structed him more at length of what he was to do, he went to find out the Count De Soissons, and told him, there was no safety for him, at least without bringing back the
Picture. Whereupon he made all the faces and Grimaces requisite to work upon him, but the Count, who would sooner have given his Life than have restor'd it, made him answer, that it was all in vain he thus tormented himself; that he advis'd him as a friend not to insist upon it any longer, and to contrive some expedient to get himself off from the Bus'ness. Ne∣vertheless to appease him, he made him a present of a Thousand Pi∣stols, telling him, that had he fi∣nisht his work, he would not per∣haps, have got so much. The work∣man pretended to be very much vex'd, but nevertheless was not such a fool as to refuse the Mony. He took it however Conditional∣ly, and repairing again to the Car∣dinal, he was by him recompenc'd still more largely than by the Count, for having acted his part so well. The Dutchess D' Elboeuf was all
this while ignorant of this Come∣dy, which to her would have been mighty matter of Vexation, since upon the noise it might make, she was not sure but that her Husband might possibly inter∣pret things in the worst Sense. Nevertheless, she wanted not matter of trouble, since the Car∣dinal had shew'd her the Letter before-mention'd. She had made such Reflexions upon the Counts Person and Passion, as began to Entangle her. She, who before had only look'd upon him as a Person indifferent, found occasi∣on to look upon him with more Attention. His refusal of Madam de Comballet, to whose Person so many Grandeurs were annex'd, appear'd to her an Instance of Love so much the more extraor∣dinary, as that Persons of his Birth, do suffer themselves to be absolutely govern'd by their Am∣bition. Whereupon she told her
self, that for the Love of her, he not only renounc'd the Quality of first Prince of the Bloud; but like∣wise to the Crown, that seem'd reserv'd for him that should pos∣sess that Quality. And, indeed, since that, as I have already said, neither the King, nor the Duke of Orleans his Brother, had any Chil∣dren capable of Succeeding them, it is beyond Contest that tho' at all times it is a great advantage to be the first Prince of the Bloud, it was a thing of much greater Mo∣ment at that Juncture. Nothing is there so dangerous in a woman as the making of these sort of Reflexions: Tho' they do not absolutely level her Virtue, yet they so stagger it, that upon the least jogg after∣wards she runs a great risque of being undone. The Duchess being not ignorant of the Precipice be∣fore her, did all that was possible for her to avoid it. She set her
Husbands Merit in opposition to that of her Love; and to lend her self Forces, she endeavoured to re∣present to her Heart that there was not so much Difference be∣tween them two, as that she ought to be susceptible of the Impressi∣ons that tormented her. Not con∣tent with thus representing her Duty to her self, she shunn'd such occasions as might ruine the Re∣solution she had taken of conser∣ving her self wholly to her Hus∣band. Where-ever she fear'd meeting the Count, she kept a-loof off as from a Contagious Place. She knew that what Preseryes In∣nocence, is avoiding the Occasion. Yet this Course was very incom∣mode to her, and the Queen be∣gan already to complain that she no longer came to the Circle with the other Ladies of her Qua∣lity. But how could she repair thi∣ther, unless she was minded to see
the Count? He who seeing her in no place, thinking that she could not, at least, dispense her self from making her Court to the Queen, went daily to that Princess's Lodgings, where he did all that was possible to conceal the ill humour he was in, as well because he found her not there, as because since the adventure of the Picture, he was possess'd that the Cardinal stood in better terms with her then any body. What still augmented his suspicion was, that Mr d' Elboeuf often oblig'd her to go to his Eminencies House, where he had Bus'ness still depen∣ding; and tho' this Princess would have been glad to have been dispens'd from going thither after what had befall'n her, yet she durst not tell him the Reasons she had for such a reluctance, because that must not only have ruin'd the Interests of their Family, but like∣wise because that all those sorts of
things are never gratefull to a Husband. Being possess'd with these Sentiments, she made her visits as short as was possible for her; But had she done no more than go in and out, the Count coming to know it, it was suffici∣ent to sink him into Desponden∣cy: What still further confirm'd him that there was a good under∣standing between them, was that the Cardinal granted the Duke D' Elboeuf a favour which he had long refus'd him, and which in∣deed, was not so much as justice. He at the same time imagin'd it to be the reward of the Complei∣sance the Duchesse had for him, and could not sufficiently admire how the Duke D' Elboeuf, who was a generous Prince, and all full of honour, did not open his eyes upon his Infamy. Being in this anxiety, all his hopes aim'd at getting a particu∣lar Conversation with Madam
D' Elboeuf wherein to reproach her with the Shamefull Preference she gave the Cardinal to his Preju∣dice. It had not been so strange to him had she inviolably main∣tain'd her fidelity to her Husband; but to be faithless to him for a man of the Cardinals mein and Cha∣racter, is what he could not bear. Being possess'd with such like Sentiments, he redoubl'd his care to meet her, but being as little a∣ble to effect it as before, he ima∣gin'd that she shunn'd him out of fear of Creating a jealousy in the Cardinal, and that if he made sem∣blance of Loving any other than she, that he should possibly speed better in his Intentions. It was sufficient for him that he had con∣ceiv'd this thought to execute it; Nevertheless, as People ever flat∣ter themselves in whatever estate they be, he would not that the Person he had in his eye to serve to his Designs, should be of the
number of those that may Envy a man for being inconstant. On the Contrary he Chose her with so little merit and Beauty, that it was a wonder People did not find out there was only disguise in this Bus|'ness. His reason was, that he was not willing that a Maid that might have a thousand good Qualities, should have Occasion to reproach him that he had made her to serve for a Laughing-stock to the whole Court: Besides that he told him∣self that since the Dutchess might perchance, fall off from the Passion he imputed to her for the Cardi∣nal, he ought not to barr his ad∣mittance into her heart. The she on whom he cast his eyes was Mademoiselle de Chau∣mont, Maid of honour to the Queen, a Person in truth of one of the Best Families in the Kingdom; but in whom all the other Qualitys were wanting saving Birth. First of all in respect of what was seen, she
had all the reason imaginable to Complain of nature: Far from be∣ing Beautifull, and well made: she had a face and a shape, that warranted her from ever being the occasion of an amorous ruine. As for the one she was short and thick; and as for the other, she rather resembled a Man then a woman. Besides she was Crimson∣fac'd and Copper nos'd. And yet if neatness had been her talent, One might have said that she had not been void of all sorts of good Qua∣lities: But as if she had delighted in being ridiculous in all things; she ever dress'd her self like a Country Gentlewoman, for which her Companions rallying her one day before the whole Court, the Queen, who was one of the Best-natur'd Princesses in the world; Forbear this, Mesdemoi∣selles, said she to them, Chaumont ought to be so far from being your Laughing-stock, that I will have you
to know that she does you honour. If you doubt it, I must tell you that she has an Advantage, which none of you will ever have, which is, that she has the ho∣nour to be related to the King. Such an Expression as this, and coming from the Queens own Mouth, Stopp'd all farther Drol∣ling, how ridiculous soever she might appear in the eyes of all People. In the mean while the Count De Soissons was not Sorry at this Circumstance, that so it might at least be said that if he did not Love a Maid of Merit, he Lov'd one of Quality. As soon as his Designs appear'd in the Eyes of the Court, not a Person was there, that was not Surpriz'd: They Imagin'd that thinking himself above the Queens Cor∣rection, he was minded to divert himself for a day or two; and that this Intrigue would quickly be at an End: But seeing that time Expired and he still conti∣nuing
to seek out Mademoiselle de Chaumont, to take her aside, and whisper in her Ear, and in short to do all that a man is wont to do when he loves a Nymph, they were oblig'd to shrug their Shoulders, as People commonly do, when they cannot find out the reason of what they see. And indeed, all that can be said to this is, that Wisdom being none of the Inamorato's Province, it is not to be Wonder'd that the Count de Soissons had laid it so much aside. The thing was told to the Queen, who had already perceiv'd it her self, and who knowing the weak∣ness of the Sex, would have stopp'd the Course of it at the same Mo∣ment, but that she was very wil∣ling to mortify her other Maids who after having slighted Chau∣mont so very much, were heartily vex'd to see her have a Lover of that Rank. In the mean while, this Maid
neither of Rock nor Brass, having taken fire at this Princes Dis∣courses, she made some Assignati∣ons with him, wherein perchance, several things would possibly have pass'd, had he been minded to im∣prove the Disposition he met withall to receive so deep an Im∣pression in her mind. But he be∣ing far from any such thought, did in all those Occasions com∣port himself so secreetly, that sa∣ving the Noise it made among her Companions, she came off thence as found and as whole as she went thither. These Maids being discreet after the mode of Courtiers, did not fail to proclaim it on all Occasions, and Madam D' Elboeuf, who had already heard some talk of this Intrigue; and yet without being able to give any Credit to't, by reason of the Young Ladies little merit, was concern'd to such a dgree as startled her. The truth is, she
knew very well that she had a Consideration for this Prince, but she did not imagine it to be so strong as to make her so uneasy. Nevertheless being not able to overcome it, whatever represen∣tations she could make to her self, she appear'd sad and Melan∣cholly to her Husband, who askt her the Occasion. She was cauti∣ous, as you may imagine, of in∣forming him in that matter, and one while imputed it to a feign'd Indisposition, another while to humours that cannot be ever E∣qual'd; but seeing she could not ever put him off with such like Excuses, and that in the mean time, she continu'd in her droop∣ing Condition, she entreated him to allow her to go take the Air in the Countrey. The Duke D' Elboeuf found this Demand so Extraordinary that it put him into a mighty Amaze∣ment. He made her nswer, that
in that, she desired a thing which far from diverting her, would on∣ly serve to feed her Melancholly; that she would do much better in going often to the Queen, where she would meet with opportuni∣ties of pleasantly whiling away her time. And that she might not come to be dejected by her anxiety, he induc'd her to go thither at that very instant. The Duchess did not stand upon much entreaty, & the easier was she prevail'd upon, for that she imagin'd two things must needs be her security. One the Love the Count had for Chaumont, the Other the Resent∣ment she had to see her self for∣gotten for such a Maid as she. For in short, tho' she was ex∣empt from most of the weaknesses that are so usual in those of her sex, she did not differ from them in one thing, namely, that she was not vex'd, that People lov'd her, principally when they were
Persons of Merit Being come to the Queen, she receiv'd Re∣proaches from her Majesty, upon the account of her not seeing her, for which she contriv'd some sor∣ry excuses, with which the Queen did nevertheless remain satisfy'd. The Count de Soissons came in a moment after, and having seated himself by the Dutchess, It is a miracle, Madam, laid he softly to her, to find you here, sure my Lord the Cardinal is a Coming, otherwise we should never have had the honour of seeing you in this Place. Madam D' Elboeuf blusht at these words, but that not making her lose a presence of mind, which she possess'd in a most peculiar manner; Have a care, Sir, she made him answer, of Made∣moiselle de Chaumont's perceiving you So fine a Conquest is too Dear a Purchase not to husband it; she'le be undoubtedly jelous, and the more, for that, possibly, she knows it is not
long since you were upon a strain of Courtship with me. The Queen, who was this while talking to a Lady, returning then again to Madam D' Elboeuf, this Conver∣sation was thus let fall; but tho' it was very short, yet it led both of 'em to make great Reflexions. To what purpose these reproaches, said the Count in himself, unless she be toucht at my Proceedings. Few meddle in other Peoples mat∣ters, unless set on by some self-con∣cern. And, perhaps, I am not so in∣different as I imagine, to this Lady. The Dutchess Entertain'd her thoughts much in the same man∣ner, and while they were both busy'd in these Reflexions, the Count went and plac'd himself in a Corner, whence he might view the Dutchess, who on her side, ever and anon darted him a look. While he was in this Posture, in came Mademoiselle de Chaumont, and being far from
imagining that he thought of any other than her, she stole softly behind him, and gave him a tap upon the shoulder. Madam D Elboeuf having her Eyes turn'd that way, perceiv'd it, and this would sensibly have vex'd her, had she not perceiv'd that the Count de Soissons, after having turn'd his head towards her, turn'd again another way, as if he had not per∣ceiv'd her. This Maid being down∣right in Love with him; This Action of his went to her very heart, and as she was not so wary in her Demeanure, as another of more Wt would have been, she pull'd him by the Cloak, and did all she could to get him aside, that he might give her the rea∣son of this Contempt; but he repuls'd her so Cruelly, that she went away with such an Anguish of mind, as is difficult to be Express'd.
Madam D'Elboeuf saw all this plainly, without taking the least notice, and tho' she was very glad of it in the bottom, yet it only serv'd to augment her dis∣quiet. True, indeed, that this dis∣quiet was of another kind than that shew as sensible of before. If she told her self but an hour before, that she was unhappy in having an Esteem for a Man, that Lov'd another, she did not find that she was the more happy in believing now that it was she her self he Lov'd. And to compleat her Trouble; her Husband did of late make her a thousand Caresses, even to the telling her severall kind things that are seldom pra∣ctis'd between a Husband and a Wife. Thus the least thought that intruded into her head, that was contrary to her Duty, seem'd to her a Crime so horrible, that she could not support it. At her go∣ing from the Queens Lodgings,
she return'd to her own home, and having found the Duke reading, she snatcht away his Book, and threw her Arms about his Neck, as if she meant to make him reparation for having dar'd to look upon any other than him∣self. The Duke receiv'd her Ca∣resses with great affection, and was so far from believing what pass'd, that he told her Laughing, that they Lov'd one another too much for Courtiers; that they ought at least to be carefull not to shew it so much before the World, since it might be capable of affording matter of talk. These words caus'd the Dutchess to sigh in Secret, and the Confidence her Husband did so unseasonably harbour, troubled her afresh. To render her self Worthy of him, she did all she could to tell her self that it was Chaumont the Prince Loved; but tho' she had been minded to abase her self any
longer, it would have been im∣possible for her to have done it, since that this Prince broke-off with that Maid of Honour, but after a manner so disobliging, that those who thought he had really Lov'd her, plainly perceiv'd their Mistake. This Maid at her going out of the Queens Cham∣ber, went to wait for him in the Anti-Chamber, her heart so piqu'd at what had befall'n her, that without considering that she had Enemies that observ'd her Con∣duct, she had plac'd her self in a Corner, where keeping her Nose in her Handkerchief she had shed an infinity of Tears. Nevertheless she ever and anon turn'd her head to watch his coming out, and having perceiv'd him, she would needs have stopp'd him: But he walking on still, as if he had not taken notice of her being there, she was oblig'd to call out to him, Go not so fast Mr.
le Count, I have a Word to say to you. This Prince was oblig'd to turn his head about at these words; but having other matters to do, than to speak to her; Pardon me, Mademoisselle, said he to her, if I cannot satisfy you for the present, I have something that calls me else∣where, and it shall be for another Occasion. After this he pretended to have gone his ways; but she stopping him by the Cloak, drew him against his will to a Window, where she began to load him with so many Reproaches, that to pre∣vent the being any longer exposed thereunto for the future, he resol∣ved to undeceive her. But as he had the Civility not to State the Case flat and plain to her, she would by no means apprehend them. Insomuch that seeing he lost his time; This is too much, Ma∣demoiselle, he said to her, and since you will have me speak outright, I ad∣vise you to seek for another Lover.
For I can no longer love you, and without its being necessary for me to tell you why, I have my reasons to leave you. You leave me, answer'd Chaumont all in a rage, no, faith, but you shan't, and you must not have en∣gag'd me to love you, if you meant to have playd me such a Pranck. I shall make my Complaints to the Queen, and we shall see if she will allow you shou'd put such an affront upon a Rela∣tion of the Kings. This Answer gave the Count Compassion at her foolishness, and fearing she might be so silly as to do what she said, he remon∣strated that no surer means were there to dishonour her self then to do as she pretended. Any Maid that had had but so much as a grain of good sense would have told herself the same, without it's being ne∣cessary for him to have put her in mind of it; but she, notwithstan∣ding so faithfull a Counsel run∣ning only upon her own head,
went and threw her self at the Queens feet, whom she besought to do her Justice. After such a Request not a Person was there but imagin'd that strange things had pass'd between 'em; and, in∣deed, the Queen and the whole Court were at first of the same O∣pinion, and Madam d' Elboeuf ha∣ving Intimation of the thing, en∣deavour'd more than any body to imprint it in her Belief, that so it might be a kind of Antidote to the Passion she was sensible of for him, notwithstanding all she could do to hinder it. But she quickly per∣ceiv'd there was more sillyness than Lewdness in that Girle, and she with so much Innocence told the Queen after what manner things had pass'd, that one must not have been over-clear-sighted to accuse her of Disguise. As she could not after this stay any longer at Court, at least without serving for a Laughing-stock
to all People, the Queen con∣triv'd to marry her to a Normand, who being a man of Petty Quali∣ty, and yet very willing to pass for quite another than he was in the world, ought to repute him∣self as honoured in marrying a Maid whom the King own'd for his Relation. This was the Bait that tempted him, the Queen ad∣ding a Present thereunto, after which they were married. The Normand fed himself that the Children he was going to have by such a Wife would be of so good a Family, that there would not be one in the Province that could go cheek by jowle with them. Nay, and he thought that without wai∣ting 'till that time, he might do like Persons of the highest Quali∣ty. He took Pages as well for himself as for his Wie; and with∣out considering that what had pass'd at Court would reach Nor∣mandy, his thoughts were wholly
set upon playing the Great Lord among his Bumpkins. After an Illustration of this Na∣ture, the least suspicion not re∣maining in the Duchesse's mind, it came to pass that her Melan∣cholly augmented still the more, upon her knowing that she was the only Person beloved by the Count. This Prince on his part suffer'd himself to be overwhelm'd with his Grief, continuing to be∣lieve that he had a beloved Rival, wherein the Cardinal endea∣vour'd to keep him, as well for the Pleasure of seeing him Jelous as well as himself, as out of a certain Aversion he had ever born him, and which had still been won∣derfully augmented, since their Vows had appear'd for one and the same Object. This Cardinal who took delight in imposing upon all the World, had not any greater Pleasure, than when he could accost Madam D'Elboeuf
in any place where he might be seen by the Count. Then, tho' most commonly he only discourst her upon Indifferent matters, he manifested such a Contentedness of mind, as had been sufficient to allarum a Person of a much less jealous Temper than the Count's. But herein consisted his greatest Address, he order'd matters so, as to place Madam d' Elboeuf after such a manner, as that this Prince could not see her face, by which he might have perceiv'd that she gave him not so much occasion to rejoyce. The same thing befell the Count twice or thrice, and he was temp∣ted to interrupt a Conversation that madded him to the heart. However the Respect he bore to Madam d'Elboeuf, rather than that he owed to the Louvre where this pass'd, having witheld him, he watcht the time of her going out, and getting up so near her, as that
the rest might not understand what he said to her: If Madam d'Elboeuf knew, said he to her, that I have the Picture she gave the Car∣dinal, perhaps she would be afraid, that having in my hands wherewithall to convict her of Infidelity to her Hus∣band, that I would put him in mind that he ought no longer to suffer those long Conversations she has with that Minister, and still less to send her to his House upon the Pretence of Bus'∣ness. Madam d'Elboeuf was much sur∣priz'd at so unexpected a Compli∣ment. Nevertheless the place and the People that might follow them not permitting her to illustrate this matter: You tell me things, she said to him, which I can make no An∣swer to at present, but which I think of sufficient Consequence as to tell you, that if you will be a while hence at Ma∣dam's, I'le promise you to be there, and to give you reasons for every thing you can desire of me. There
needs only one bare word to sa∣tisfy a Lover. The Count who thought himself the most Unfor∣tunate of all men, made her a Bow, as if she had restor'd him his Life, and having now no other Impa∣tience, save for the coming of the Hour of repairing to Madam's, he went thither so early, that there was no Company there as yet. His Quality caus'd the Attendants to tell him that he might go to her very Closet; but he made them answer that he was not come to incommode her, and that he had wherewithall agreably to pass a∣way his time, until such time as that she was to be seen. At the same time he took a Book out of his Pocket, and the Attendants seeing he drew near a Window, and fixt his eyes upon it, they withdrew out of Respect, really thinking he design'd to read. But he no sooner saw 'em out of the way, but that he employ'd his
mind in quite another thing than reading. He examin'd himself up∣on what he had to say to Madam d' Elboeuf, and he was so affected by the air of Goodness, with which she had made him answer, that he thought he could not without ill grace, say any thing Disobliging to her. But after ha∣ving thus taken her part in his Heart, he took out of his Pocket the Picture he had taken from the Jeweller, and the remembrance he had that Madam d'Elboeuf had given it to another, overturn'd all the Resolutions he had newly ta∣ken. As thoughts succeed one ano∣ther in a moment, all this passed, as I may say, in a tricc. And doubtless the later would have continued no longer than the for∣mer, if Madam d' Elboeuf had not come. This Princess, who did, in∣deed, expect that he would come betimes to the Rendezvouze,
would not defer repairing thither, not only that she might have time to be thoroughly inform'd of what he had said to her; but, likewise, that she might do it before that Madam, who was daily wont to shew her self at one and the same hour, came out of her Closet. The Attendants made her the same Complement they had done to the Count de Soissons, but having made 'em answer, that she would dis∣course with him 'till that Madam came out, she went towards the place where he stood, and found him in so deep a musing, that he did not turn his head, 'till that she was just by him. He held her Pi∣cture still in his hands, and going to put it again into his Pocket: What have you there, Sir, said she to him, and am not I come unseasonably to disturb the Pleasure you took in viewing that Pourtraict? There is indeed, Madam, a great deal in viewing it, the Count made her
answer, and I should lye did I not grant it, but there is so little in remem∣bring the Parties Cruelty, that if I was wise, I should never think of her as long as I liv'd. Madam d'Elboeuf was come thi∣ther, upon what he had said to her of her Picture; but as he had al∣so told her at the same time, that she had giv'n it to the Cardinal, and that she very well knew the Contrary, she so little suspected that it might be hers he held, that she almost lost all Patience to hear him talk in this manner. Yet was she far from letting him know how much it spighted her, & on the contrary pretending a freedom of mind which she certainly had not; It's usual, said she to him, with Lovers to complain: Thus far from being surpris'd at this Discourse of yours, I should be much more sur∣priz'd if you talk'd otherwise. Let's only see whether there is as much De∣light, as you say, in viewing your Mi∣stress,
and I assure you, that tho' I am not capable of having for her the same sentiments you have, I shall neverthe∣less, render her so much Justice, as to own to you downright whether she me∣rits the Pains of your loving her. At these words she reacht forth her hand to receive the Picture, and the Count making no difficulty of giving it her, she was strangely surpriz'd when she saw it to be her own, nay and the same she had caus'd to be drawn for the Dut∣chess of Savoy. She ask'd him im∣mediately by what means it fell into his hands, not being able to forbear manifesting her Amaze∣ment to him. But he interpreting her surprize altogether in a wrong sense: You have reason, Ma∣dam, he said to her, not to be able to apprehend how it came into my hands, after having made a Present of it as you did to the Cardinal. It was so precious a Pledge that he ought to have taken more Care of it: Indeed,
I told you a while ago, that I had mat∣ter to Convict you of Infidelity to your Husband, but God forbid, I should harbour any such thought, and if you knew what pass'd in my Bosom, you'd be confident that I shou'd much sooner Sacrifice my own Life, than put yours in Danger. The Duchesse's astonishment augmented gradually as she heard him utter these Reproches. She cast her eyes from time to time upon this Picture, as if she had thought she had been mistaken; Then when she saw it was cer∣tainly the same, then she ey'd the Count in all probability to ask him how he could come to have it in his hands. All this pass'd in mighty silence, and the Count ta∣king it for a Conviction of her be∣ing tardy; Ah! Madam, Cry'd he, this Confusion I see you under is too much for me. Why did ye not rather stand upon the Negative. All Easy as I am I should have been the first to
have deceiv'd my self, and d'ye not know that the greatest Misfortune for a Lover, is to be ascertain'd of his Misfortune? You take for Confusion, the Princess reply'd, what is only an effct of my Surprize. I cannot com∣prehend how the Duchess of Savoy, to whom I sent this Picture, came to put it into other hands, and if she receiv'd it not, that she did not give me No∣tice, since she did of the first which was taken away by Robbers upon the Road? Phy, to others, Madam, the Count retorted, I am not so easily impos'd upon. You your self gave it to the Car∣dinal, but his Love is very small, since he has not employ'd his whole Credit to get it again out of my hands. I tell you again, Madam d'Elboeuf re∣ply'd, that I cannot understand the least tittle of all you say to me: If the Cardinal told you I gave it him, when∣ever you please I'le give him the Lye before your face; but to spare so much Clutter, I should be very much oblig'd to you, if you'de content your self wish
sending a Courrier to the Duchess o Savoy. I'le write to her to discover this whole Mystery; you shall see all I intimate to her, and as the Person that carries my Letter, shall be by your ap∣pointment, you cannot think to be de∣ceiv'd. Nothing could be more obli∣ging than this answer, and to take things aright, it spoke a certain Complaisance for him, which a Woman never has, unless she re∣ally esteems a man. But he was so possess'd of his misfortune, that in∣stead of taking things as he ought, he still made fresh Reproaches. I plainly perceive, Madam, the Reason, he said to her, why you sooth me up thus; you are afraid I should make such a noise as might undo you, and you endeavour to lull me asleep by prolong∣ing of time. But this shews you don't know me: for as I am incapable of a∣ny Baseness, my Destiny will have me to love you, n twithstanding that your Carriage renders you so unworthy of
me. I tell my self in spight of all my Concern, that your heart is your own, and that you may dispose of it in fa∣vour of whom you please. Neverthe∣less, I know not whether it be Reason or self-love, but methinks you might have dispos'd of it in favour of a Per∣son that would not have caused you to blush so much for shame. The Duchess, tho' she ought not willingly to have suffer'd so many Reproches, knew not yet whether she ought to be vex'd, or take the Course of entring into new Justifications; but after ha∣ving pardon'd him his first Sallies, being not able to suffer him to persist therein, after what she had said to him, and the Offers she had made him. Y'are i'th' Right, said she to him, and I love the Cardinal. After all do not People love out of different motives? And what hinders but that he may Conferr Benefits upon me and my Husband, He that h all those of the Kingdom at his Disposal,
These are very sordid views, the Count reply'd, for a Princess of your Rank, and I can hardly believe your Husband will own you in 'em. It is not fit to tell ones Husband all, the Prin∣cess retorted, and ought not they to be much glad that we promote their In∣terests without telling 'em ought, and that we keep from 'em a secret, the knowing of which would thwart their Advancement and Repose? She said this with a certain spightfull air, mingled with so much Disdain, that if the Count had retain'd the least good Sense, he would have plainly perceiv'd that all she did was meerly out of scorn. But the Property of Lovers being to blind themselves, I had indeed ever heard, Madam, said he to her, that there were self interessed Ladies, and that Princesses were not exempted no more than oher People. But I knew not, that they took a Pride as you do, to boast of it. So singular a Sentiment ought to Cure me, and I
bear a mortal ill will to my self for ha∣ving eyes still favourable for you after this. But no Madam, this will not last long, and I must be the poorest Spirited of all men, if I continued to love so Unworthy a Person. The Dutchess d'Elboeuf seeing him in this rage, instead of falling her self into the like, she put on calmer looks and less full of Dis∣dain. Your Carriage, does strangely surprize me, said she to him, and if I only consider'd you, I should let you alone to believe all you pleas'd; But since my Honour is at stake, which you could never have a good Opinion of after this, I'le go directly to find out my Husband, and he shall know from the Cardinal, whether all you say be true. Ah! Madam, have a care of that, the Count reply'd, and can he make such an Inquest as that, without discovering things that would disturb his Quiet? Would he not know that the Cardinal loves you, and that I a∣dore you? &c.— Yes, the Dut∣chess
interrupted, but will he not know at the same time, that I abhorr the Cardinal, and that I do not love you? I know it very well, Madam, that you do not love me, the Count renew'd, and it's not necessary to tell me so. But can it be true that the Car∣dinal is no happier than I? Notwithstanding the Dutchess's high Spirit, she did not stck to in∣sinuate this truth into him, and what is more, she did not keep up her Courage: I mean that in this coming to a Right understanding, the Count observ'd such great marks of distinction, that he had occasion to think himself happy. However the greatest in my Opi∣nion, was, that tho' he protested to the Dutchess that he remain'd fully persuaded of her Innocency, she would by no means he should trust to her word, obliging him to appoint her a Person in whom she could put Confidence, to know of the Dutchess of Savoy, the whole
unravelling of this Mystery. This Conversation lasted 'till Company came, and a little after Madam came out of her Closet, on which account they could no lon∣ger continue their Discourse. The Dutchess went away first, and af∣ter she was gone, the Count staid not long with Madam. He was o∣verjoy'd at what had newly hap∣pen'd, principally when he made Reflexion, that he ought not only to lay aside his Jelousy, but fur∣ther that Madam d'Elboeuf had spoke to him after a manner alto∣gether obliging. As for her part, she was far from being so well sa∣tisfy'd. Two things were there that made her in pain, and which nevertheless, were opposite to each other. One that she had found the Count too agreeable, that is to say, her virtue did not agree with what she was sensible of for him. The other, that he had not ap∣pear'd sufficiently an Inamorato.
The fault she found in his Love, is, that after having giv'n her her Picture, he had not said so much as one word to her to have it a∣gain; which she could not recon∣cile with all the Instances of Affe∣ction he had manifested. No, he does not love me, said she to her self, or, at least, if he has any kindness for me, it is so small, that it Creates him no great trouble. If he had been really in Love, would he have let such an oc∣casion as that slip? He who thought me capable of having made a Present of it to the Cardinal, could not he pre∣sume that I would grant him that fa∣vour? Had not he a Right to demand it of me, since that he possess'd it, before he deliver'd it me? Besides could not he pretend he was afraid I would re∣store it to the Cardinal? Whence comes it then, that he has fail'd, un∣less it be that he cares not for it? This thought was follow'd with some Reflections upon the Infi∣delity of all Men in General, and
sometimes also upon the Chara∣cter of some, that delight in im∣posing upon Ladies. She was in∣finitely afraid he might be of this last Number; nay, and very often for ought she knew she had rea∣son to believe, that having inhe∣rited from his Ancestors the a∣version they had born to the house of Lorraine, of which was her Husband, he lay at watch to let it fall upon her, by provoking her to some weakness unworthy of a Virtuous Person, and of her Ranck, tho' he might afterwards make a Trophey of it. If these sort of thoughts had come in after to her assistance, it is certain they were capable of banishing from her mind all that she could say to her self in favour of the Count; But as it is not Customary that suspicions gain the Victory over Love, it is not to be wondered if a full Confidence did in a little time set her mind at Rest.
What much contributed to this, was that after the Couriers return that was gone into Savoy, the Count being fully inform'd that he had wrongfully suspe∣cted her, gave her such convin∣cing proofs of his Passion that one must have contriv'd to create trouble to one's self, to have re∣main'd any longer in Diffidence. But if on one side she recovered her Tranquillity, her Diffidence encreased on the Other, telling her self instantly that it became her not to carry her self in that manner towards her Husband, that had such fine Qualities, as that when she marry'd him, had made her incurr the Envy of all those that might have pretended to him. Now these Reflexions be∣ing as I have newly said, ever present to her mind, they wrought such a Change in her humour, that she became quite another Person, and was not to
be known again ev'n by those that frequented her the most fa∣miliarly. Her Husband, who lov'd her with great Tenderness, was continually at her feet to ask her what she ail'd, and as she was far from making a Confi∣dent in a matter of that nature, and that, nevertheless, she dread∣ed his finding it out she thought Convenient to make him run riot. After several sighs, whose source proceeded from quite an∣other thing than what she was going to alledge. The Truth is, My Lord, said she to him, I won∣der after such a Carriage as yours, you should still ask me what I aile. Are you ignorant of the Kindness I have for you, and since you are per∣suaded of it, d'ye not know that the frequent visits you pay to my Lady Dutchess d'Usez are capable of plunging me into still far greater Disquiets than those I am now under. The Duke d'Dlboeaf was so
good natur'd as to think she spoke her mind, and pressing her tenderly in his Arms; How, Ma∣dam, said he to her, Do you do me the injustice to believe that I can leave you for Another? D'ye find so little fondness in my Caresses, that you think 'em almost at an End? Whence comes it that you spoke to me no soon∣er of it? And since it lay in my Power to calm the troubles of your Mind, why did you not put my Af∣fection to the Test before you accus'd me: Tho' I went so often to Madam d' Usez's House, that as it was less on her account then for the sake of the Good Company I there met withal, so by Consequence I should not have been much concern'd to deprive my self of seeing her, and all that I am vext at is, that you did not ask me a thing more difficult to grant you, I mean that for your sake, there is nothing but what is easy to me. Ths Protestation was followed with a thousand such tender Caresses,
that Madam d'Elboeuf not being able to think how much to blame she was to offend so Lovely and Complaisant a Husband, became as motionless in his Arms. The Duke perceiv'd it not at first, but at the long run, seeing that she did not in any wise an∣swer his fondness; What signifies this, Madam, he said to her, and were it true, as it is not, that I had really offended you, would not such a Protestation as mine be Capable of putting it out of your Mind: With much more reason how much ought you to be Satisfy'd, who know my In∣nocence and my Love? For in short you plainly see by the tenderness I now Express to you, that I have all the Desires of a Lover, and all the Amity of a Husband, what can you desire more? As on my side, what can I desire more but that you'd love me, as much as you know I love you? These Tender and passionate discourses were as so many stabbs
with a Ponyard into that Prin∣cesses heart, and she melting all into tears, took her Husband a∣bout the neck; the regret she had for having offended him ma∣king her believe that she really lov'd him. But tho' she plainly perceiv'd that there was a great Difference between the Senti∣ments she had for him, and those she had for the Count, she re∣solv'd, nevertheless, to make her Love give way to her Duty. It shall not be said, cry'd she to her self, that I no longer Love a Hus∣band that Loves me so Tenderly, for a Prince, that perhaps, in deed loves me, but who, however, has no Other design then his Pleasure. Who knows if I was so base, as to grant him any favour, whether it would not paule him at the same Moment? Whereas M. d' Elboeuf loves me dayly more and more. Whence comes it that I do not make my Duty my Delight; and tho' ev'n the least
Weakness should not be an Occasion of shame for a Princess, could I, I say, conceal from my Self the sub∣ject of my Confusion, who shall secure me that the Consequences will not be fatall to me; I, that from the little Experience I have, do know that trouble does Closely attend the least false step? The having such thoughts as these, was in some manner, retur∣ning to her Duty: Yet as the fear of what was to come had much contributed to the framing of them, Madam d'Elboeuf was very angry with her self, that she was not capable of taking such as were more Noble and more lofty. This gave her to understand that not∣withstanding the Caresses, with which she cajoll'd her Husband she did not love him so much as she thought, and daily perceiving that this was but too true for her Repose, she fell again under such an affliction as is not possible to
express. The Count de Soissons, who lov'd her no less then her Husband, perceiv'd her Melan∣cholly as much as the Other could have done, and the goodness she had express'd to him at the time when they came to a Right un∣derstanding; making him presume that he might possibly discover the occasion, he sought her out with great eagerness, being fully resolv'd to let her know how deeply he shar'd in it. The Oc∣casion offer'd it self some few days after, He met her at the Dutchess of Ventadours house, to whom he went to pay a Visit, and as if Chance would needs have favour'd him, it so hap∣pen'd, that while they were there one of that Ladies Children fell down Stairs, and was very much hurt. This being told to Madam de Ventadour; Pardon me, Madam, she said to Madam d' Elboeuf, if such an Accident as this Obliges me
to leave you for a Moment. Excuse the Tenderness of a Mother, I leave you with the Count, and I believe he will have the Goodness to Excuse me in like Manner. Upon these words she went out, leaving them all manner of freedom of discoursing together. The Count meaning to avail himself of this happy moment, drew near Madam d'Elboeuf with the Confidence that might be created in him by the Conversa∣tion I intimated a while ago. But receiving him with a most Extraordinary Coldness; If I did not follow Madam d'Ventadour said she to him, it was because I was very willing to speak two words to you, while I had time. Be so kind to me as never to tell me that you Love me, and if I have hitherto born with it, take my word I did it only on the account of the Suspicion you had of me. Now that you can∣not have any Left, My honour re∣quires
that I change my Conduct. I have besides several reasons, and by this I shall know whether you really love me. The Count was upon the point of telling her a thousand things to make her revoke this Order which he reckon'd Barba∣rous and full of Cruelty; But that Princess suspecting the Count would urge reasons upon reasons on this occasion, and not presu∣ming so far upon her strength, as to believe she could stand such a Brunt as that, without danger, went immediately to find out Ma∣dam de Ventadour, and all his en∣treaties could not induce her to afford him one Moments Audi∣ence. Unnecessary is it here to repre∣sent the Counts Grief and Asto∣nishment. It is easy to imagine both, since I have already said he was infinitely in Love, and that he had conceived hopes in all points advantageous; however
as he fear'd that if he staid any longer in that place, it would be impossible for him to conceal the Disorder that Command had put him in, he went away instantly, his mind fill'd with so much Di∣straction; that when his Footmen ask'd him whither he would have his Coachman drive, he made them answer to Madam d'Elboeufs. And indeed he let himself be car∣ried thither, without knowing whither he went, which he did not perceive 'till he was at the Gate. Then his Coachman stop∣ping, and this Prince having had time to make Reflexion where he was, he remain'd for some time thinking what answer to make his Footmen, that came up to re∣ceive his Orders. At length ha∣ving taken his Resolution, he bid  ask if Mr. d'Elboeuf was at home, and they bringing him word he was, he mounted up in∣to his Apartme ill so possess'd
with what had befall'n him, that Mr. d'Elboeuf plainly perceiv'd that he had something extraordi∣nary in his head. As they were in∣timate friends, without staying for his speaking of it to him; Some Accident has befall'n you, said he to him, and if you fancied that I was capable of doing you Service, you was not mistaken in coming hither di∣rectly, since that I assure you that your Interests shall ever be as dear to me as my own. By what do you perceive that, the Count made answer, who did not imagine that his Disorder ap∣pear'd so manifest as it did, and who besides pretended to conceal it from all People, and particularly from him. By your Eyes, the Duke reply'd to him, by your Demeanour, by your Air; what shall I say to you in short, by your whole Person. They ne∣vertheless deceive you, the Count repartu'd; But all I can say to you is, that I have been ill these two or three days. On this account have I resolv'd to
go for some time into the Country, and am come hither on purpose to take my leave of you. The Duke by these words was still more than before confirm'd in his Opinion, and imagining his Discontent to proceed from the Court, he having been his friend so long, and making him offers of Service, He could not forbear Expressing his wonder to him: But the Count still con∣tinuing to tell him the same thing they parted somewhat coldly on the Dukes Part, who could not rellish his having this reserved∣ness to him, after they had been so intimate. However, that he might find out whether he guest aright, he took Coach as soon as the Count was gone, and repair∣ing to the Louvre, he enquired under hand of those he thought might be best inform'd, if any thing had befall'n the Count. But all were ignorant in the matter,
which put him in amaze, so that he return'd home; and presently after came Madam d' Elboeuf. You are a stranger, said he to her, to a peice of News that will Surprize you, the Count goes away tomorrow very much dissatisfy'd with the Court, and what's most strange, is, that he con∣tented himself with coming to bid me Adieu, without acquainting me with the Occasion of his Discontent. I come now directly from the Louvre, whither I went to see if I could get any Item in the matter, hut I found all there as much strangers to it as my self, so that I perceive his Disgrace is kept very Secret. Madam D' Elboeuf presently judg'd herself more concern'd in t th the Court: But as she was not fond of owning the matter, she fell to arguing upon the point, rather contriving to augment than to dissipate his Suspicions. Nevertheless when she came to be alone the Truth display'd it
self in its full Colours to her Minde. 'Tis for my sake, said she, that he banishes himself from Court, and after having occasion'd his re∣nouncing of Grandures, which he might with a just Title have laid Claim to. Ought not I to have so much Consideration as to prevent the fatal Resolutions he may take on my Ac∣count. What will he go do in his Soli∣tude, or rather what must I do when I shall no longer see him? she paws'd upon this Reflection, and never had she so much Occasion for her virtue as at that time. And indeed her Imagination represented this Prince as the most enamour'd of al men, asking her what he had done to occasion his being treated with so much Cruelty. Is the Esteem he has for thee a Crime, said she to her self, & whereas thou ought'st to take it kindly, is it possible that thou canst doom him to Banishment? Couldst not thou be honest without reducing him to Despondency. This is all thy Hus∣band
could ask of thee, and after all, canst not thou be Mistress of Love & Hatred? was it not sufficient for thee that thou endeavourest to Love what thou dost not Love, and endeavourest to hate what thou dost not hate, what∣ever effort thou mayst use? She endeavour'd to conceal the Sadness she lay under upon this news, for fear of her Husbands coming to know how far she was concern'd in't. Ah! If she durst have writ to him, doubtless she had done it to have made him break off his Departure; But the regard she had for her Honour be∣ing still more prevalent then all Other things, she repell'd that thought that recoyl'd upon her e∣ver and anon, and she got the Ma∣stery of it at the long run. In the mean while the Count De Soissons did not fail to depart the next day, and went to his House Blandi ten Leagues from Paris, whence he would have
gone much farther, but that the Court might have taken umbrage at so precipitated a Retreat. There to disperse his Melancholly he fel to Hunting; but as that was not capable of easing his Disquiet, he often stray'd all alone into the Woods, where alighting he ty'd his Horse to some Tree, while thereby he lay muzing upon Ma∣dam D' Elboeuf. That he might think of her with the more plea∣sure, he ever carry'd the Picture about him he had bought of the Courier, and which having in his Possession, he had not minded to redemand the Other of that Prin∣cess. He took it out of his Pocket, and as if it could have given him a reason for her Cruelty, he made the most melting Complaints I∣maginable. When he had conti∣nued a pretty space of time in Consulting it, he return'd again to his People, whom he made be∣lieve, he had lost them through In∣advertency.
Those days he went not a Hunting, he walk'd in a Grove adjoyning his Castle, with∣out other entertainment than that of his sad thoughts which the love he had for Solitariness made him fond of harbouring. Madam d' Elboeuf on her part pass'd her time as ill. That Prin∣ces's Passion was ever present to her memory, and especially the prompt Obedience he paid to her Commands. Yet did she use the faculties of her Mind to repell these thoughts, well knowing that the more she dwelt upon them, the more matter should she have to upbraid her self withal. Ʋnhappy Princess, said she to her self, Thy Husband then, it seems is not worth the pains that thou shouldst think of him! Thou very well kow'st, that thou can st not think of any O∣ther without being Criminal, and yet thou dost th quite Contrary of what thy Duty directs thee. What
has the Count de Soissons, that the Duke D'Elboeuf has not? Examine all well from one End to the Other, and thou wilt know that all the Difference thou puts between them, only proceeds from the Corruption of Nature? If the Count de Soissons was thy Husband, thou wouldst love the Duke d' Elboeuf, didst not thou love him, when he was no more then thy Lover, and for that thu hast held him a thousand times in thy Arms, must be seem less Aimable to thee than he formerly did? Beware of desiring to be in the same Condition with the Count, his Dislike would at∣tend upon Enjoyment, and all that would remain to thee from thy Crime, would be so dismal a Confusion, that thou wouldst not know where to hide thy self, much better is it that thou fall in again with thy Duty, and if thou in∣tendest that the Count should not lose the respect he has for thee, thou ought∣est to be more Especially Sollicious to maintain thy Virtue. When she had urg'd such sort
of things as these to herself, she found her self very much eas'd, so far as to phancy she had no∣thing more to apprehend: But that to have effected, she should not have giv'n admittance to any other thoughts in her heart; from which not being able to refrain, it is not to be wondred if she was reduc'd ever and anon to stand the Brunt of new Conflicts. Ne∣vertheless she made all possible re∣sistance; yet as this could not be done, but to the prejudice of her health, she pin'd away in such manner as made it believ'd she must suddenly betake her self to her Bed. Mr. d'Elboeuf, whose Love far from having been sub∣ject to the distaste that seems an∣nex'd to Possession, had been there∣by the more augmented, not be∣ing able to see her in that Condi∣tion without an extreme Afflicti∣on, consulted all the Physicians that they might endeavour to af∣ford
some Remedy to her Distem∣per. At last they concluded that Asses Milk would be good for her; but that to render it the more use∣full, it was necessary she should go take it in the Country. Mr. d'Elboeuf had a very fine House two Leagues from Paris, but as his Dependence upon Court was such as did not allow of his Ab∣sence, he resolv'd to send his Wife thither, that he might go see her every day, and thus at the same time gratify his Love and his Ambition. Madam d'Elboeuf was overjoy'd at the Prescription of the Physicians, having no other kindness save for solitariness. She sought out the most lonely Places, which that fine house had no want of, and they being to be tru∣sted with the occasion of her trou∣ble, without fear of their revea∣ling it again to any body, she found a certain quiet of mind, which she did not enjoy amid the
Court and Town. In the mean while the Cardi∣nal, who was still possess'd with the same Passion, being in no wise able to bear with her absence, dai∣ly sent his Physicians, thinking that as they were the most expert of all the Kingdom, they would contribute to her health, on which he reckon'd her return de∣pended, more than on all those that saw her. This was his first Mo∣tive; but he had another, that had still a more peculiar regard to her Person. His Quality of first Mini∣ster, and Sovereign Dispenser of all the Graces of the Kingdom, rendering all People Complaisant to his Wills, he encharg'd one of those Physicians with a Letter for Madam d'Elboeuf, and this man building much greater hopes up∣on this piece of Service, than upon all the Advantages he might de∣rive from his Profession, fancy'd that with a little Address, it
would be Easy for him to get her to peruse it. For that purpose he went from Paris before his Com∣panions, and being arriv'd at that house; Madam, said he to the Du∣chesse D' Elboeuf, Our Calling is a strange sort of Bus'ness. Those that are best Skill'd in it are often esteem'd less able than Others. The Quality of a Senior among us is commonly his whole Merit. Since I had the honour to see you, I have a Specifique reme∣dy to give; yet my Companions have not deem'd it good, because it Surpasses their Capacity; So as that I am now forc'd to come hither, as it were in stealth to discourse with you. At these words he took a Paper out of his Pocket, wherein he had really set down a Prescription, and reading it to her as the best thing in the World: Now this Madam, added he, is what your health con∣sists in In case you make use of it. I'le venture my head you re∣cover in three days time. But
be sure you keep the secret till then, Otherwise it will set my Seniors so against me, as will put us beyond all Reconciliation. He discourst the Princess upon this pretended secret, till such time as that he heard some Body coming in the Anti-Chamber. Then slily taking his opportunity he slipt another Paper into the Princesses hand, entreating her that she would receive it and put it under her Pillow, untill that she could read it in privatc; that he would go in the mean while for fear it might be his Compani∣ons, and so stealing down a little back pair of Stairs, he fancy'd his trick was going to have all the success he could wish; and the ra∣ther, for that the Princess, who had never car'd to disoblige any Body, had really put it where he had bid her. The Noise they had heard in the Anti-Chamber had been Oc∣casion'd
by some Ladies, that were come from Paris on purpose to vi∣sit the Princess, and as she was not willing to make known the nature of her Malady, she did not quit her Bed, as long as they staid with her. However their visit was somewhat long, nay, and they invited themselves to Dinner; which made the Princess quite forget the Physicians Pre∣scription, which besides she thought to be of so little Conse∣quence, that had she lost it, it would in no wise have troubled her. After these Ladies had din'd they talk'd of returning, & as they were going out, Mr. D'Elboeuf arriv'd, who seeing his Wife still in Bed, he was afraid she grew worse and worse. And going to her to enquire of her her self, as he was caressing of her, he per∣ceiv'd the Corner of a Paper that pass'd from under the Pillow, and taking it without dreaming of any
thing; What's this, Madam, said he to her, and viewing it, he per∣ceiv'd it to be the Cardinals hand. Madam d' Elboeuf being sincere, told him what she thought it to be, and being willing to read to her her self that pretended Pre∣scription, she made up to take it out of his hands. But he begin∣ning to enter into great Suspition, that still augmented, at this new Action of hers, step'd three paces back, and opening that Paper, he read these Words therein. The Cardinals Letter to Madam d'Elboeuf. I send you my Physicians, but I have little hopes of their curing you. If they understood any thing, they ought to begin to shew it in my Person, I be∣lieve you sick of the same Distemper I have for this long while lain under, and nevertheless they have not as yet been able to find out any Remedy for their Master. But how should they find any, since my Cure depends only
on You? Would to God I had brought you to a Condition to say as much of me, the zeal I should have to serve you, would be a Secret Reproach to you for the Contempt you have ever had for my Passion. The more I examine my self, the less do I find my self Wor∣thy of this Treatment. So perfect a Love as mine never incurr'd so much Hatred; and indeed to tell you my thoughts plainly, I do not think my self the only Occasion of my misfortune. Though I am no Lovely Person, yet I have some Qualities that ought to Di∣stiguish me. The least is that of Mini∣ster, and I reckon much more upon a Passion that admits of no Comparison. But either that I came too late to offer you my services, or that you naturally hate me, or as is more probable a more happy Person is come across, I may say, that while the Whole World looks up with Envy at my fortune, I am never∣theless the most unfortunate of all men Mr. d' Elboeuf blusht and then turn'd pale, while he was reading
this Letter, and his Wife knew not the meaning of the Different Motions that appear d in his Countenance. At length when he had done, he sat himself down in a Chair, falling back like a man that had not the Power to support himself. This was still matter of greater Amazement to this Prin∣cess; and indeed being no longer able to curb her Curiosity; tell me for Gods sake, said she to him, what there is Misterious in that Paper, and you must sure have found very Sur∣prizing things in it, and very touching at the same time, for it to bring you in the Condition I see you: Is there in it that I must dye, speak and let me know. It ought to be so, Madam, the Duke answer'd her, if I had more regard to the affront you put upon me, than to the affection I have ever had for you, yes, I ought now to think only of revenging my self, but either that I have but little honour, or that there are reasons of weakness that do detain
me, and which nevertheless I do not approve of, I see my Infamy as a man void of all sense. At these Words he flew out of the Chamber all in a rage, which Madam D' Elboeuf seeing, who was in an inconcei∣vable pain to know the meaning of all this; she threw her self from off the Bed and begg'd of him to Stay. But this Prince who wanted only to get away from a place, where he had newly made so vex∣atious a Discovery, Stopping his Ears to her entreaties, lock'd the Door too after him, and by this means hindred her from follow∣ing him, he immediately had his horses put into the Coach, and stepping, in he went and Closetted himself up in Elboeuf Hall, order∣ing that if any one came to see him to say that he was in the Country. Madam D' Elboeuf having seen him go away in this manner, and having besides undergone the re∣proaches I mention'd, follow'd
him within less than half an hour, tho' her condition was such as not to do it without hazzarding her health. She went directly to his Chamber, & falling at his feet; Take away my Life, Sir, said she to him, rather than conceal from me a∣ny longer the occasion of your Discon∣tent. I have nothing upon my heart that upbraids me in the least, and if I was, as you tac me, perfidious, you could not carry your self otherwise. I advise ye, Madam, the Duke made answer, to Condemn me: What would ye have more of me, than to leave you at liberty to do all you Please? Return into the Country, if you'l take my Counsel, 'tis a place much fitter than this for your Gallantries, & all I require of you is to leave me at quiet. He turn'd his back upon her at the same time, & opening a win∣dow that look'd out upon a Gar∣den, he fell to gazing there, but so possess'd with his misfortune, that if he had been ask'd what he
look'd at, he could in no wise have told. His Wife notwithstanding his obstinacy to conceal what he ail'd from her, went to him again, and as she still press'd him upon the same thing, he was so weary, that he told her how that unless she left him at quiet, he would throw himself out of the Win∣dows. But I'le forestall you, Madam D' Elboeuf reparty'd, being in the utmost Despondency at this usage: and indeed it would be much better for me that I tumbled my self down headlong, than any longer suffer what I have not incurr'd by any ill Conduct of mine. At these words either that she really meant to throw her self out of the Windows, or that she would only make a shew to fright him, she did what was re∣quisite to get up, at which the Duke being very much startled, he seiz'd on her Petticoats, then ta∣king her about the Waste, he in spight of her strugling carry'd her
off from that place. This Princess whose Despair could not be grea∣ter than viewing him with eyes capable of instilling Compassion; Why do you hinder me from dying, said she to him, when you kill me with a Death a thousand times more Cruel than that I might inflict upon my self? But know that all your efforts will be in vain, you will not be always with me, and unless you tell me wherein I am faulty, I shall sooner or later find an opportunity to affranchize my self from all your Cruelties. The Duke having a thousand reasons to keep his Secret, or at least thought he had, not that he imagin'd he had any thing new to tell, but thought at least that his Case required secrecy, that so he might detect things which as yet he was a stranger to, seeing him∣self nevertheless perplext by these menaces, endeavour'd to fence off this sttroak, by taking another Course. Wherefore making a
shew of yielding to her Persecuti∣ons; I must then Satisfy you Ma∣dam, said he to her, since you oblige me thereunto; but as it is a thing I cannot do without great Reluctancy, and that I have naturally an Aversion for Reproaches, afford me this Night to consult my Pillow upon the matter. I promise you to unbosom my heart to you to morrow morning; but on Con∣dition that what shall pass between us two shall not go farther. Madam D' Elboeuf thought it strange that he thus deferr'd ac∣quainting her with a thing which she so ardently desir'd to know; however thinking she had but one night to wait, she consented to the proposal. And the night be∣ing pass'd without her having so much as clos'd her eyes, she im∣patiently waited for the Dukes coming out of his Chamber, when they came to tell her that he had taken horse two hours before day. Taken Horse; she retorted in a dis∣mal
amaze: Ah! This is too much, she added fainting, and I must dye. She said no more; but before the rest of the day was spent, a vio∣lent feavour seiz'd her, Whose Symptomes appear'd so danger∣ous to the Physicians, that they thought it requisite to send in search of Mr. d' Elboeuf. He was gone to Blandi to see the Count de Soissons, Whom he reckon'd for one of his best Friends. He at first endeavour'd to conceal the Melancholly under which he labour'd, and made him believe that thinking the time te∣dious that he had not seen him of so long a while, he was come on purpose to invite him to return to Court. To back what he said, he made use of a world of Plausible reasons, by which he let him see that a Prince of his Birth far from making any advantage by keep∣ing at a distance, hazzarded the losing of All. That at least he could
not deny but that this was the di∣rect way to be abandon'd by all his friends; that he was not to learn that most men fuffering themselves to be led on by Interest, would remain affected, so far only as that they saw a Person was of use to them for their fortune; that however Rich a Prince of the Blood might be, certain People were there that nothing could be procured for but by the Channel of the Court: That thus it was beyond all Question that those People having nothing more to hope, would fall off by degrees; that this was such a Truth that it was the Loadstone of the greater part; that it was commonly seen that the Court of the Ministers was much more numerous then that of the Princes themselves; & whence does this proceed, but from the reason newly urg'd; that as for his part, he was as little fond as Others of doing any thing Un∣worthy
of his Birth, which ne∣vertheless, necessity had several times oblig'd him to. The Count de Soissons after ha∣ving giv'n him the hearing, seeing that he press'd him still on by rea∣sons full as strong as these, and be∣ing desirous to conceal from him his inducements to retirement, told him he jump'd in accord with all he said but that, nevertheless things there were too difficult to be born withall, that there was no standing the Brunt of them That no longer to hide his Discontent from him, he must needs tell him, that Cardinal Richelieu abus'd his fortune: that far from giving the Princes of the Blood that Consi∣deration he was oblig'd to, he be∣hav'd himself in such manner to∣wards them, that if it had not as a man may say, been casting imputa∣tions upon the King to have corre∣cted that Minister into his Duty, he should long since have giv'n way
to the Temptation. And thereup∣on taking him to Witness whe∣ther or no he spoke the Truth, this being as it were touching the Dukes Wound, who was much more envenom'd against his Emi∣nency, he perceiv'd that he Chan∣ged Colour. And certain it is, that the Duke being no longer able to bear a Conversation of this kind; Let's talk no more of him, said he to him, my reasons are weak in Compa∣rison of yos, and though I was of another mind at my Coming hither, Truth does now oblige me to side with your Opinion. After this he would have discourst of something else, but us'd such great violence upon himself in doing it, that the Count, whom it was not easy to put the Change upon, taking notice of it: My Lord Duke, said he to him, You have something at heart, which you do not utter, and though I had been less Conversant with you than I have, yet could I not have miss'd of obser∣ving
it. Why with your friends d'ye put this Constraint upon your self? And to whom would you unbosom your heart, if you are thus reserv'd to me, You that know, that I have no Secret that is so to you? tell me not so, the Duke made answer, and pray'e re∣member that before you left Paris; I press'd you to tell me the Occasion, but without being gratify'd? Your Secret, nevertheless, was of no great Impor∣tance, whereas that mine — This word having started from him, without making Reflection on it he would willingly have re∣call'd it, as soon as he perceiv'd it; Finish, said he to him, without hesita∣tion, and since your Secret is incompa∣rably of greater Consequence than mine, for that very reason ought you the rather to lay your self open. I did not indeed, acquaint you with the Cause of my retreat, since to what purpose was it, either to You or I? On the Contrary the ma∣king of you a Confident in that
Case, was it not capable of injuring you? If the Cardinal had known that I had Consulted you, would you now, as you are, be upon the List of his friends, and would it not be the means of making you lose a World of Cour∣tesies, which you your self have own'd to me that you are indebted to him for? He has Sold 'em to me at a very Dear rate, the Duke retorted, and it would have been much better for me, he had been my greatest Enemy: In uttering these words he gave a great sigh, and the Count, who fancy'd that such motions only suited with amourous Passions, presently imagin'd that he had discover'd that which the Cardi∣nal had for his Wife, he urg'd him so much the more to tell him what the matter was, as that he fear'd he had also discover'd that this Princess made returns. The Duke after having said so much, no longer knew how to decline pro∣ceeding further, tho' to speak the
truth, he was persuaded, that a Secret of that nature is never to be divulg'd. But the Count, whose Curiosity could not be greater, re∣proaching him that his being so reserv'd, was not acting like a freind, he induced him to ease his heart. Yet was he so very loath to make a step of this kind, that he was going to take a vast Circum∣locution; when the Count judg∣ing by all he said, that certain Se∣crets were there that were to be pull'd out: The truth is, said he to him, You raise my Pitty, and by the Perplexity I see you in, I know not whether I ought not to believe some∣thing of Madam d' Elboeuf. It is but too true, the Duke reply'd, being seiz'd with so great an affliction, that there was not the like. Persi∣dious as she is, she has suffer'd the Car∣dinal to talk of Love to her, and blind∣ed as I was, I did not so much as take notice of it, but have still my self sent her to his house several times. Alas! I
no longer wonder at the Easiness I met withall in dispatching my Bus'ness, I was then a stranger to the Cause; but I now but too plainly see into my mis∣fortune. However tell me, my Prince, If being in my Place, you would have thought to have had any thing to ap∣prehend on that side. Is He such a Temptation for a Woman, & must not a She be very termagantly loose to en∣tertain such a Spark. The Count, with Whom this Discourse was a kind of Progno∣stication that the Duke had de∣tected things criminal to all In∣tents, found himself no less struck with jealousy than the Duke d' El∣boeuf. Nevertheless thinking e was under an obligation to keep it better conceal'd; You are too hasty, said he to him, and whoever should rely upon what you say would be possest that your Honour was lost past all Remedy. Soft and far, Good y Lord Duke, and you shoud not if I might advise you, proed so far upon
a bare Suspicion, How! a Suspicion The Duke made answer, D' ye know upon what grounds I speak? No true∣ly, the Count reply'd, and that is what I'de fain know. It is upon Con∣vincing proofs, the Duke retorted, and when you know it is from a Letter I my self found under her Pillow; What will you have to say? If the Duke had look'd upon the Count at that Moment, or ra∣ther if he had been in a Conditi∣on to observe the different moti∣ons with which he was animated, it is beyond all Question that he would have been still more un∣happy than he was, since he must have perceiv'd that his Wife had two Lovers instead of One, and that this was the Rival his Emi∣nency complain'd so much off in his Letter: But his misfortune de∣priving him of judgement, his thoughts were wholly taken up in justifying what he had newly said. Wherefore taking his Let∣ter
out of his Pocket; Here is what, said he to him, makes me speak in this manner, and which I confide in you, as a Person from whom I expect friendship, and of Whom I require good Council. At these Words he gave him that Letter, and the Count opening it with a Dread I shall not undertake to Express, was strangely surpriz'd and overjoy'd at the same time, that he did not by it find the state of things to be as the Duke had reported 'em. On the Contrary he saw himself pointed out therein, as the Party to whom that Princess had given her heart: an happiness he would much rather have heard utter'd from the Dutchess'es own Mouth, than by that of a Rival. However as it wanted much of his being so wretched as he had imagin'd, this wrought another manifest altera∣tion in his face, and by which the Duke might again have perceiv'd how much he was affected by all
that concern'd his Wife, if, as I have already said, his misfortune had not depriv'd him of the use of Reason. In the mean while the Count having made an end of reading this Letter, told the Duke how that he was in the wrong in thinking himself so unhappy, that if he made his ill fortune consist in having a Wife that had Ado∣rers, he had drawn it upon him∣self: that he must not then have chosen one of so much Beauty, and merit. That it's usual to love such Persons; But what he should vex at was, if it was true that his wife lov'd any Other than himself: That this did not appar by the Letter he had newly put into his hands, but on the Con∣trary, that she hated the Cardinal. That it was only stuff'd with Complaints and jealousy; an indu∣bitable mark that she was virtu∣ous. Ah! my Dear Count, the Duke
reply'd, do not seek as you do to blind me: God be thank'd, I am not na∣turally jealous; but withall I see Clear when there is occasion for so doing. The Lover that has most reason to ap∣plaud his fortune, does he not ever Complain? 'Tis the very way to bring a Woman to one's hand, and the Sex that ever makes a Lurry before it yields to our desires would it be wil∣ling to have its favours proclaim'd to it's self. It's much better to make it Cruel at the time it is least so, and af∣ter this manner is it that you ought to Explain what you see. Otherwise how should Madam d' Elboeuf have re∣ceived this Letter? Does she not know that this is Contrary to her Duty? But what do I say, she not only receiv'd it, but likewise hid it under her Pillow, and which is worse she would have hindered me from taking it. If you would have me to discover my malady still further to you, would she have gone to his house if she had done what a Virtuous Woman ought to do? She
knew well enough that he lov'd her, and that alone was sufficient to have hindred her from ever setting foot there. I must needs own that she some∣times declin'd going, telling me she should be very glad if I would exempt her from that trouble; but this is a finess as gross as the Other, and by which I was not to be trepann'd. She spoke in this manner to me, that in case I came to make a Discovery, she might tell me, and don't you know that you would needs put me up∣on it, and that I never went but against my will. And yet the Per∣fidious Woman went, and after all I have now said to you, I beg of you to tell me sincerely what you would think were you in my place, While these things occurr'd at Blandi, the Court that had not been in any wise uneasy at the Count de Soisson's retirement, was not exempt from allarums, when they knew the Duke de Elboeuf was gone to him. The Cardinal
notwithstanding the Passion of Love had another of no less Pre∣valency. I mean that he was gnaw'd by so great an Ambition, that all the rest was nothing in Comparison of that. Thus ima∣gining that these two Princes plotted to drive him away from the Ministry, he went to the house of the Countess Dowager of Sois∣sons, and told her that the King sent for her to answer to him for the Conduct of her Son. This Princess not having the Complai∣sance to study to please the favou∣rites, made him answer, that her son was too wise ever to be want∣ing in the respect he ow'd to his Majesty; that she would engage Body for Body; but that she must needs tell him at the same time, that he had too much hart ever to buckle under a Minister that understood not himself. This an∣swer vex'd the Cardinal, and tho' he was bound in her to respect
the Quality of Princess of the Bloud, he lash'd out so far as to say, that she it was, perhaps, that gave her son ill Counsell. From thence he went to my Lady Dutchess of Elboeuf, where notwithstanding that they told how that she was indispos'd, and that it was impossible to see her, he mounted up into her Apartment. He there found the Physicians that had newly been passing their Judgements; as I have intimated, that she was in great danger, and that it became 'em to acquaint Mr. Elboeuf with her Conditi∣on. But none of 'em knowing whither he was gone, he ran a risque of knowing nothing of the matter, if the Cardinal had not heard of his being at Blandi. The State he saw the Dutchess in was the cause that instead of making her the same Complement as he had done to Madam de Soissons, he was toucht with all Compassion.
Wherefore drawing near her Bed, and all withdrawing out of Respect, he express'd his Grief to her for the Condition he saw her reduc'd to. At the same time a Gentleman was dispatcht away to go find out the Duke, and be∣ing arriv'd at Blandi, he acquain∣ted him how that his Wife was nearer being dead than alive. He was concern'd at this News not∣withstanding this Prejudice, and after having enquired into the Circumstances of her illness, and what hour it took her, he askt him by what means he came to know where he was. By the Car∣dinal, the Gentleman made him answer, whom I left at my Lady's Bed-side, and who came to see her, knowing she lay a dying. This was sufficient to plunge this Prince into Despair, and after having bid this Gentleman go rest himself for a while 'till such time as he had his answer. Well
my Dear Prince, said he to the Count de Soissons, needs there any thing more to persuade you of the re∣ality of my misfortune? She is not content with being a Perfidious and an Ingrate, she likewise forgets in her present extremity, that it is impossible but that he or she must needs shew such Weaknesses as will make known my Infamy. I say nothing of the little Care she has taken of her salvation, and yet this is what pierces my very heart: I have still so much Love for her, nowtithstanding the reason I have to hate her, as to desire that while she is going to make me lead a Languishing Life, she should enjoy Eternal happiness, if it be the Will of God to take her out of this World. Maugre all I can say to my self, I allready bewaile her, both as sick, and as threatned with dying very sudden∣ly. In fine, what shall I say more, I must needs own to you that I no longer know my self, and you must needs be much surpriz'd after what I've decla∣red
to you, when I tell you that I am going this very instant to afford her all the assistance I possibly can? At these words he took leave of the Count, who entreated him not to har∣bour any such Phancies in his head, and that his wife was more virtuous then he imagin'd. He had like to have kill'd his Horse, so over-impatient was he, and being coming to Elboeuf Hall, he found her still worse then he had been told. And indeed, she had lost all sort of Knowledge, insomuch that making up to her, & seeing that she hardly breath'd▪ How Madam, said he to her, with a voice interrupted with sighs and sobs, will you dye without me? Don't you know that our days are insepara∣ble? Why must you have the Cruelty to leave me: And is this what you pro∣mis'd me? But this was for all the world the same as if he had spoke to the Walls: she was not in a Condition to make him an an∣swer,
nor even to understand him, which he still more and more per∣ceiving, he began to tear his hair: This created so much pitty in all the By-standers, that they knew not which was most to be pitty'd, he or her: she to dye at an age, as a Man may say, when People begin to live; He to lose a Wife, without whom they were very sensible Life would be a Burden to him. Two or three days pass'd in this manner without any hopes of her recovery, after which she seem'd to be a little bet∣ter. Madam de Guise her Re∣lation and Friend, who had con∣stantly been with her since her ill∣ness, told her then the Affliction her Husband was under, which had brought him to keep his Bed as well as her self. That's not possi∣ble, the Duchess immediately an∣swered: Why say ye so, Madam de Guise retorted, and has Monsieur
d' Elboeuf carry'd himself so ill to∣wards you, that you ought to be sur∣pris'd at this Tenderness? Madam d' Elboeuf saw plainly she had said too much; nevertheless the thing being done, and past all Remedy: I have my reasons, Madam, she re∣ply'd, to say what I do, and once again, is it possible that what you tell me is true? Madam d' Guise without shrifting further than she was willing into her secret, having confirm'd the thing to her a∣new: Ah Madam, said Madam d' Elboeuf to her, if you'l oblige me, let me hear this from Monsieur d' El∣boeuf's own mouth, and if he cannot come hither, let him be told that I have still strength enough to go to him. These words being related to the Duke, he would by no means she should rise from her Bed, and overjoy'd that she was better, he went into her Chamber, guessing aright that if he went not to hers, she would come to his. After
what had pass'd you may well think he was mightily at a loss where to begin the Conversation; and indeed he made his appear∣ance with a down-cast look, not that he thought he was too blame, but because he reproach'd him∣self as guilty of a weakness in ha∣ving any regard for a faithless wo∣man. But Madam d' Elboeuf ha∣ving nothing to upbraid her self withall. Well sir, said she to him, you see me here ready to dye, and what comforts me is, that if I do not dye for you, I dye at least for the love of you, I was not able to suffer your suspicions without sinking under the Reflexion, and to my highest happiness I may now discourse you upon my Innocency. You would by no means give me Cre∣dit, when I would have entertain'd you upon that point at another Occasion: God knows however that I did not intend to impose upon you, no more than I do now; I never wrong'd you in any manner, and if I have had but
so much as any such thought, I beseech him never to pardon me. One day will come that you will know my Inno∣cence, and that you will have a regret for having unjustly suspected me. 'Tis the Consolation I carry along with me now I am dying, nay, and I tell you that I dye the most satisfy'd Person in the World. Ah! Madam, said the Duke to her, his heart being pierc'd with so touching a discourse, Live ra∣ther to see my Repentance. I may have been jealous without wounding your honour, and beauteous as you are, might not I apprehend some or other should undertake to sup∣plant me! There needs no more then seeing you to cause such a Design to be entertain'd, your discretion is not capa∣ble of quashing it; and if notwith∣standing the little likelyhood there is of obtaining such ends upon so Virtu∣ous a Person, there are nevertheless such People as will keep their Intenti∣ons alive upon the least glimmering of
hopes, why will you not give me leave to tremble when I see them harbour any such thoughts? You will doubtless, tell me that I have no reason to trem∣ble; But I must answer you at the same time that their hopes being as ill grounded as my fear, it is pardonable in me that I take the Allarum, seeing that they contrive to robb me of my only Blessing. This is all I can say in my Justification, to which I add an extreme Repentance, and a sincere Confession of my fault. Madam d' Elboeuf being over∣joy'd to see him harbour such sentiments: And I for my part par∣don you, said she to him, because I love you; and I believe you to be only jealous because you love me. Whe∣ther God disposes of me, or restores me to my health, you shall never hear a word of it from me. I believe you to do the Like, since if I should see you relapse into the same fault you could never obtain my pardon. Mr. d' El∣boeuf vow'd he would never speak
to her upon any such account, and after having Caress'd her to a high degree, which was still more persuasive to this Lady than his words, he withdrew into his own Chamber, whereabout an hour after he was seiz'd with a terrible Feaver. This was kept as a secret from Madam d' Elboeuf, for fear of making her worse, and as it was impossible but that she must enquire after him, Madam de Guise continuing still to be a∣bout her, thought convenient to make her believe, that the King was gone to Fontainebleau, and that he had taken him along with him. How, without saying anything to me, Madam d' Elboeuf retorted, and this is quickly giving the lye to his last Conversation! Nevertheless, that she might not find so much fault with his absence, Madam de Guise gave a Gentleman order to come once in two days, as if sent by the Duke to enquire after her
health. This Trick sped for the first time; but the Dutchess ha∣ving taken it ill that he had not writ to her, the Gentleman was forc'd to contrive another Sham, upon the account of his not bringing any Letter as yet. The same pretence was us'd in four or five several Visits he paid her: One while the King had sent for him to play at Tennis, when he had just his Pen in his hand: another while, that he had sent for him to go a Stagg-hunting, or to engage him in some other business, and still that great name interpos'd it's Assistance, as the only Cloak they had to Cover the Reality. But the Dutchess at the long run, after having once or twice been thus deluded, suspecting she was impos'd upon, design'd to repair herself to Fontainbleau, whither her strength that was very much re∣stor'd, since the Conversation she had had with her Husband, made
her believe she might go with∣out prejudicing her health. Many resolutions are there that are not attended with perfor∣mance, but the Dutchess had no sooner fram'd hers, but that she would have taken Coach, not∣withstanding all they could say to her to divert her from it. Thus were they oblig'd to own her Hus∣bands Condition to her, and tho' her knowing him in danger af∣flicted her extremly, she neverthe∣less receiv'd some comfort for the reason I am going to alledge. She had attributed his absence and si∣lence to his slights for her; Now there being no room for any such thought since she knew the occa∣sion, she bent her mind wholly upon giving him assistance. She went directly to his Apartment, & finding him in a much more dan∣gerous Condition then they had inform'd her he was, she gusht out into tears. Not satisfy'd with
giving him these Instances of af∣fection, she would suffer no Body besides her self to give him what was requisite. Mr. d' Elboeuf not being able to endure to see her take so much pains, conjur'd her to leave those offices to the Peo∣ple that were about him; but as if she had been afraid that the Re∣medys would lose their virtue in their hands, she would by no means obey him. In the mean while the Duke's illness proceeded to such an Ex∣tremity, that the Physicians desired his Confessor to bid him think of his Conscience. He receiv'd this news without appearing to be in any wise concern'd, and af∣ter having dispos'd himself for death, he bid Madam d' Elboeuf, whom he saw all in Tears, to draw near him, and that he had some∣thing to say to her. She caus'd the Attendants to withdraw into an∣other Room, and sitting upon his
Bed-side: Cease bewailing Madam, said he to her, a Person that thinks himself a thousand times more happy in dying than if God restor'd him his health. It is now time or never to own to you, that I can no longer love you; So that tho' you may have heard me tell you the contrary in your illness, attribute it to a Remnant of Com∣passion and not to a real Love. Since you have rendered your self unworthy of me, I am afraid so much as to look upon you: I shall not tell you that you have absolutely divested me of honour, nothing of that has fal∣len within my knowledge, and it is not in my power to Convict you of it; but know that a Civil woman ought to be as exempt from suspicion as from Crime. But what's this I say? It is not vpon a bare suspicion I accuse you; it is upon a Letter I my self found under your Pillow. What is more, you have receiv'd at your House the Person that writ it to you, and that in the very time, that I had newly specify'd, both
by my Reproches and my Conduct, that there was a great deal to be bla∣med in your Carriage. He has been seen at your Beds feet, expressing to you his Concern at your illness, and you had not so much as the Precaution to forbid the man to mention it to me, that had order to acquaint me with your sickness. Madam d' Elboeuf who from the beginning of this Discourse had been surpriz'd to a degree as is more easy to be imagin'd then re∣presented by the Pen, would needs several times have interrup∣ted him; but he had entreated her to let him make an end, without her interfering, promising after that to hear her as long as she pleased. Thus having not as yet absolutely unburthen'd his heart: Is this, Madam, continued he, what I was to expect from a Woman whom I tenderly lov'd before I marry'd her, whom I have passionately lov'd since that time, and whom I should
all my Life have lov'd more than my self, if she had not giv'n me reason to hate her. Nevertheless since God calls me out of this world, and would have me forgive as he has forgiv'n us, draw near me, and embrace me, I be∣seech him to give you the Grace to know your self, and that calling me to mind, you tell your self sometimes that I merited another guess usage. Madam d' Elboeuf was seiz'd with so violent a grief, hearing him talk in this manner, that it was a wonder she had the power to make him any answer. Never∣theless it being her Interest not to let him depart this Life without justifying her self; It's with an un∣paralelld amazement, Sir, said she to him, that I hear all these Reproa∣ches, and if I might have interrupted you, I should long since have done it, to have required of you the sight of a Letter so fatal to your repose and mine. For if I know what it is, I wish God may punish me immediatly,
and the Paper you took from under my Pillow was only a Prescription of a certain Physician, who pretended to cure me without the others knowledge. He is still living to tell the truth of the matter, and if you found a Letter in∣stead of that Prescription, the Devil must needs have a hand in the busi∣ness. This is a wretched Evasion, Madam, the Duke reply'd, for a Woman of Wit, and tell me seriously if I ought to feed my self with this Chimaera. Hold, added he, giving her the Letter, here's the thing in Debate: This is not the Devil you talk of, that writ it, but the Cardinal himself. You pretend now to be sur∣priz'd; But what can you now say to this? Must a Princess of your Rank dishonour her self by so scandalous an Amour; For after all if you take a∣way from the Cardinal the lustre that proceeds from his favour, what would all the rest be? Am not I, without va∣nity, as much to be valued as he? And were it only that this has reduc'd me
to my present Condition, have you no regret for having quitted me for him? Madam d' Elboeuf was so amaz'd at this Letter, that she knew not what answer to make. However having open'd her mouth in order to her Justification. Ah! I very much suspected, said the Duke to her, that the Course you would take would be to deny all; But as I am not so very silly as to give Credit to your words, gratify me so far as to let me dye in quiet. At these words he turn'd himself to the other side, and either that he fell into a swoon, or that the Passion with which he had spoke was injurious to him in that Condition, he was taken with a Convulsion fit, which oblig'd Madam d' Elboeuf to call in People to his Assistance. As the loss wherewith she was threatned, was so great as that she might well be allarum'd, they took no notice of her sorrow, which was imputed to quite ano∣ther
source, then what was the real one. Mr. D' Elboeuf was very ill, and when his fit was over, the Physicians gave order that he should be left at Rest; and told Madam d' Elboeuf that she must forber seeing him, unless she had a mind to hasten his Death. She could not but look upon this or∣der as very Cruel, but tho' she could not enjoy any repose, untill that she had justify'd her self, ne∣vertheless as nothing was dear to her in comparison of his Life, she abstain'd from going to see him. Thus the Duke after having had one foot in his Grave, re∣turn'd thence as it were by mira∣cle, and having still the present misfortune before his eyes, he was very glad they had sav'd him the trouble of seeing a Person, whom he could not look upon without Resentment. And that she might not come to distrub his quiet, now that he was better, he desired the
Physicians that they would con∣tinue the same Prohibitions to her, using as a pretence that the sight of her too tenderly affected him, nay, and was capable of making him relapse. The Physicians with∣out shrifting into the secret, did what he bid them, and Madam d' Elboeuf thinking him to be still in the same Condition, did with Pa∣tience attend upon the Recovery of his health. But he without gi∣ving her time to see him, no soon∣er saw himself fit to take the air but that he return'd to Blandi, where the Count de Soissons had still continued his abode. This Count after the Duke d' Elboeuf's departure which I alrea∣dy intimated, had labour'd under an extraordinary Temptation of returning to Paris, whither he was summon'd by the Dutchesses sickness: Nothing hindred him from so doing save the fear of displeasing her, especially consi∣dering
how matters then stood, between her and her Husband. Nevertheless to free himself out of pain, he dayly sent two Cou∣riers to enquire alter her health, & was not at rest, till he knew her to be out of danger; he did the like when the Duke was ill, and since Madam d' Elboeuf could not be ignorant of this, since she her self had seen the Couriers that came to her Husband, she some∣times told her self, notwithstand∣ing the sorrow it became her to be under, that these Devoirs should rather have been due to Love then to friendship; which she would not however have said had she known that he had done the same for her as for him. However these sorts of Phancies had but one mo∣ment between Life and Death, I mean that she immediately reje∣cted them, as things unworthy of a Princess, and employing her thoughts wholly in recovering
her Husbands Affection. For this purpose she would have gone to have found him out, as I may say, to the very end of the World, if he had not been in a house dange∣rous for her. The Count, notwith∣standing her Resolutions, and her Duty, came dayly into her mind, with all his Merit, & she was un∣der apprehensions that if she came nearer him, it would be still worse. Yet perchance she would have pass'd over this Consideration in hopes her virtue would have brought her off, if she had not had another reason to Combat. She knew what had pass'd between the Count and Her, and she repre∣sented to her self that she could to go with a premeditated design not a Place where he was, without giving him the occasion of belie∣ving that he was the Principal oc∣casion of her coming. Little did it avail her representing to her self in Contradiction to this Opinion,
that the presence of her Husband authorized that step, this reflexion vanish'd within a Moment after, by the Consequences which she drew that were absolutely oppo∣site to it. In this Perplexity, she chose what she thought most conforma∣ble to her Duty, and as this was not to stir from Paris, it happened that Mr. d' Elboeuf, whose jelousy made every thing a shadow, ima∣gin'd that her staying in Town was occasion'd by the love she had for the Cardinal. This was new matter of sorrow for him, and the Count de Soissons seeing his grief daily augment, and knowing the reason of it, he partak'd therein, not as a Friend, but as a Party con∣cern'd. He fancy'd that this sad∣ness could only proceed from some new Discovery he had made, and this Opinion taking every mo∣ment deeper root than other; at the long run his trouble was no
less than that of Mr. d' Elboeuf. He made the same reflexions this Prince had done, and after ha∣ving weigh'd in his mind all there was pro & con, as Jelousy hinder'd him from doing the Dutchess Ju∣stice, he derived the same Conse∣quences from thence. Mr. D' El∣boeuf could have clear'd that mat∣ter to him sufficiently, but since his return he shunn'd all Conver∣sations that had any relation that way; Insomuch that the Count fearing to violate the Laws of Hospitality, was oblig'd to shew himself less curious. At last Monsieur d' Elboeuf being no longer able to endure himself, and fearing that if he stay'd any longer there, he might happen upon some occasion or other to make the Count further acquain∣ted with his Misfortune, which he had been vex'd several times since he had imparted it to him, took leave of him, and retired to
Joinville upon the Frontiers of Lorraine, being a Lordship be∣longing to the Duke de Guise. As soon as Madam d' Elboeuf knew what Road he had taken, she de∣sign'd to follow him, and having accordingly spoke her mind to Madam de Guise, this Princess would needs conduct her a small days Journey from Paris, that is to say, as far as Villemareuil, a House of the Duke of Elboeufs, where the Dutchess his Wife fell sick, insomuch that she was forc'd to stop there against her will. The Cardinal who was ever extreamly in love with her, tho' as often as he had dar'd to speak to her upon that matter, he had met with such usage as should have been capable of curing him of his Passion, no sooner knew of this her departure, but that it al∣larum'd him. All Unfortunate as he was, he had still the pleasure of seeing her sometimes at Court,
and not being able to renounce that satisfaction, he resolv'd to hinder her further Progress. Knowing that her illness detain'd her at Villemareuil, he prevail'd with the King to go to Monceaux, a Pallace Royal in those parts, and under Colour of being Godfather to a Child half way from Villema∣reuil, he continued his way by that House, going so slowly as that being overtaken by the Night a∣bout half a League thence, he sent to Madam d' Elboeuf to entreat her that she would afford him a Bed. This Princess found great matter of vexation in being thus oblig'd to receive his Eminency, and she told Madam d' Guise that it was a strange thing that he had not the Discretion to see that he would incommode her in her Pre∣sent Condition. Nevertheless he came, and as this Princess was not willing to let Madam de Guise perceive, that
she had secret reasons that in∣duc'd her to speak in that man∣ner, she prevail'd upon her self to make him a gracious Reception; that is to say, she receiv'd him, as she was oblig'd to receive the first Minister of the Crown. As for Madam de Guise having almost continually Occasion for him, she caress'd him to a high Degree, nay and her Complaisance proceeded so far, that seeing Madam d' El∣boeufs Indisposition hinder'd her from taking Care her self to have him well treated, she took it upon her. On this account she entreat∣ed him to Excuse her, if for cer∣tain reasons she was oblig'd to in∣termit his Company. The Cardinal, to whom she could not do a greater kindness, having made her answer that she was Mistress, and that he came not to incomode her, turned then towards Madam de' Elboeuf, whom he began to make some tender re∣proaches,
for having so left Paris, withou considering how much it would afflict him. But she, whom such like Discourses did in no wise please, entreated him that he would abstain from them. I shall so, Madam said he to her, since you will have it so; but I guess from whence so unjust a Command proceeds. If I was the Count de Soissons, you'd have more Complaisance for me: and besides I very well know that it is for the love of him you quit the Court. Se∣veral are so Silly as to believe that Monsieur d' Elboeuf has some share therein, I also know that you endea∣vour to keep them in that Opinion; But take notice that though you can easily impose upon them what you please, it is not so with me. It might be so, if I had only the assistance of naturall Lights: But with those of Love, I dare tell you that you are mi∣staken, if you ever think to put the Change upon me. I know the Result of all that pass'd at Blandi. The Count
seeing he should ever find in me, not a Rival dangerous by my merit, but by my Love, has prevail'd with M. de Elboeuf & you, to go to Joinville, that so he may suddenly follow you thither. He fancy'd, that when he was once there, he should easily impose upon a Credulous Husband: but let him know that a Rival has more piercing eyes, and that I shall take care to prevent his effecting his Designs. Madam de Elboeuf had much a∣do to endure such like Discourses without interupting him; never∣theless having us'd so much vio∣lence upon her self as to hear him out, he had no sooner done his Extravagant way of talking, but that she told him that by his man∣ner of speech, he must needs Phancy that he had over her Heart the same Empire he had over all France, that he must also needs think that the Quality of Minister, or the Porple, gave him a right to be wanting in Respect
towards Persons of her Rank; But that to put an end to all at once, she was glad to tell him to his face, that it was not to him she was oblig'd to give an ac∣count, whether it was the Count de Soissons she lov'd or her Hus∣band; that nevertheless she was willing to tell him, that on what∣ever side her heart turn'd, it would never be on his: That this being so it was to no purpose for him to continue his Importuni∣ties, that they had for a long while been troublesome to her, and that the longer he therein persever'd, the more insupportable he would be to her. This answer that was capable of curing the most passionate man, could not however extinguish the love of this Minister. True it is indeed, that in that very moment, he was so full of spight and vexa∣tion, that he thought he hated her as much as ever he lov'd her.
Thus looking on her with a furi∣ous eye; I plainly perceive, Ma∣dam, said he to her, that I suffer'd my self to be dazzell'd with a certain false glisterig. After all, your Merit is not greater than that of other People, and all well consider'd, the Difference there is only consists in my Opinion. Now that I am undeceiv'd, what can I say more to you, but that you are of the humour of all Women, Who de∣spise whats Solid, and run after tri∣fles. Wee shall se what the Count de Soissons will be capable of for your Service, and within a little while nei∣ther You nor your Husband shall find me, when you shall have Occasion for me. These were the Cardinals first motions, and having utter'd some further menaces, he went out tell∣ing her that she might pursue her jorney when she pleas'd, and that henceforward her Conduct should be indifferen to him. Neverthe∣less as it is usuall that a Lovers an∣ger
is but of short Continuance, it came to pass that he was no soon∣er out of her Chamber, but his passion recover'd the same vigour it had, before. He as it were instant∣ly forgot all she had said to him, and this did not better appear, than in his returning to her Chamber, as soon as he had supp'd. By ill luck for him, Madam de Guise kept her Company, and that Princesses presence, who af∣ter having taken care, as I have said, of entertaining him magni∣ficently, had nothing more to hin∣der her from satisfying the Rights of Decency, having hinder'd him from saying what he had in his mind, he reserv'd himself for the next day, in hopes that he should perhaps meet with the Occasion of discoursing Madam de Elboeuf in private. But the same Obstacle still interpos'd, insomuch that he was oblig'd to take his leave of her after an indifferent manner.
As his mind was wholly taken up with his Passion, he had no o∣ther thoughts on the way, than how to hinder her from going to Joinoille. This not being to be ef∣fected, without interposing the Kings Authority, he was no soon∣er arriv'd at Monceaux, but that he insinuated into his Majesty, that since the Duke d' Elboeuf's Retreat could have no other Tendency then to involve the State in trou∣bles, he must of all necessity hin∣der the Dutchess from following him, that so she might serve for an Hostage of his fidelity, that the two Journies that Prince had ta∣ken to Blandi, denoted an under∣hand design, which it was neces∣sary to prevent; that in a word in so doing consisted the safety of his Royal Person, and the Publique Tranquillity. Thus did the Car∣dinal slily cover the Motive that set him to work. The King im∣mediately dispatcht away a Privy
Signet directing that Princess to stay at Villemareuil till farther or∣ders, and the Person that was commanded to Carry it being in∣formed that she was already de∣parted, spurr'd on after her, and oblig'd her to return. During all these Intrigues the Duke her Husband was at Join∣ville still possess'd with the same anxieties; and as if Destiny had Delighted in giving him new troubles, it happen'd that one of his Gentlemen, who was of the neighbourhood of Villemareuil, & with his leave had been some time at his own house, came to him four or five days after what had newly occurr'd. The Duke with∣out dreaming of any thing; ask'd if he had no news to tell him, he who came from a place so near the Court; and this Gentleman think∣ing he could tell him nothing more positive than what has been newly recounted, acquainted him
how the Cardinal had lain at Vil∣lemareuil, where were the Ladys Dutchesses of Guise and Elboeuf: that Madam De' Elboeuf going thence the next day to come to him, a Courier had been sent af∣ter her with a Privy-Signet to command her staying there till further order. This was Sufficient for the Duke d' Elboeuf who had nothing but his jealousy in his head, to make him believe that his Wife meaning to excuse her self toward him, had her self procured that order. If it was not so, said he to himself, Why was the Cardinal with her the Night afore. This is the result of their private Conversation, and the btter to Cloak their Contrivance, she must receive this order on the Road,  she forsooth, might not be suspe∣cted to be in any wise concern'd in't. The more he muz'd upon this ad∣venture, the more did he extend this thought, that is to say, he
studied to render himself still more unhappy. In the mean while after having spent eight days in all the anguish that jealousie can create, he grew in danger of sink∣ing under it, when a Desire of re∣venge came in to his relief: A thought of that Nature is a kind of Consolation to a wretched Per∣son, the Duke finding himself in some manner Solac'd by it, did ab∣solutely resign himself up to it. He knew the Cardinal, according to the misfortune of all Favourits. had almost as many Enemies as there were Persons in the King∣dom; Thus his first thought was to make himself the head of a Par∣ty against him, and he did not doubt of being Seconded by Per∣sons of great consideration. He fix'd his eyes principally upon M. de Bovillon, who had several rea∣sons to complain of his Eminen∣cy; considering that not only he a a Personage that had many
friends, but who could also afford him a retreat at Sedan, a Consider∣able Place of it self, but still more by it's scituation, which being up∣on the frontiers of Germany and Lorrain, it follow'd that whoever was Master of it, might maintain a Close Correspondence with those two States. One thing alone perplex'd him in this Enterprize, namely he very much doubted whether the Duke of Bovillon would depend on him, not that his Birth was equall to his; but because that fortune having made his Circumstances such as that he might equall himself to many Princes, he might prevail of the Advantages she gave him. This thought having put him to some pause, as he still perceiv'd himself more and more inflam'd with the desire of Revenge, he endeavoured to surmount this Difficulty, which he saw no o∣ther ways of doing, but by giving
that Duke and himself a Head, whose Birth might be above them both. The Count de Soissons seem'd to him altogether fit for this Design, his Quality of Prince of the Blood took away all sort of jealousy; Thus Bending his thoughts wholly upon engaging them Both, he sent Secretly to them to animate them against the Cardinal. But before I proceed to the result of these Intrigues, I should think it convenient to re∣late the posture of affairs at Mon∣ceaux, Blandi; and Villemareuil. As concerning Monceaux, the Cardinal notwithstanding he was the Guardian of the Sovereign Authority, plainly perceiving that it did not extend over Peo∣ples very hearts, did the more re∣sent the Dutchesses Cruelty, that notwithstanding all the ill usage he met with from her, it was im∣possible for him to wrest her from his mind. She pierc'd into his ve∣ry
Cabinet, where amidst Af∣fairs of greatest Consequence, she came to tell him that the Place he possess'd might indeed Satisfy an Ambitious Spirit, but that when it was possess'd with Love and ill us'd by his Mi∣stress, one might indeed pass for a happy Person in the minds of all Mankind, but that far from being effectually so, one might affirm him to be very unhappy. And in truth the Cardinal did so little va∣lue his fortune, that when he was alone he did nought else, then la∣ment his Condition. When he was even in the exercise of his Charge, he was so possess'd with his Passi∣on, that he was often so plung'd in thought, as occasion'd some to say that his great Wit degene∣rated into Folly. Those that spoke modestly of him, contented them∣selves with saying that his Verti∣go's seiz'd him oftner than was u∣sual. And what made way to this
Opinion, is that he began to be fond of Solitaryness; whence it was inferr'd that he was willing to conceal his Infirmites. But they never appear'd more, tho' to speak the truth, they were not the same he was suspected of, than one day that the Sweedish Ambassadour had caus'd Audience to be deman∣ded of him. He came from the Park of Monceaux, and as he had there only entertain'd himself with his Passion, his mind was still so full of it, when the Am∣bassadour came, that in the midst of the Discourse, he chanc'd to say Have not I done well in stopping the journey; But if gone, where should I now be? This Discourse sur∣priz'd the Ambassadour, who knew not what to adapt it to, and having entreated him to tell him what it signify'd, as the Cardinal had perceiv'd his own Start, and had a presence of mind: This is not so much besides the purpose as you
imagine, he replied to him. I mean that there was a Carriage of Money just ready for your Master, and it was just a going but for a Secret hint I had of it's being necessary to renew his Allyance before it was sent him. Now you interpose so much Difficulty in this Case that I am glad the money is still here. At least it shall not escape us, if your Master escapes us, and I care not tho' you know it, since I said it so loud. Now you must know that the Ambassadour did really cause Ob∣stacles to intervene in the renew∣ing the Allyance that was between the two Crowns, not so much however out of the Desire his Ma∣ster had of breaking with the King, as to oblige him to pay him more punctually the Subsidies he had promis'd him by the former Treaty. Thus hearing talk of mo∣ney, which was the main hinge of the Affair, it was quickly con∣cluded to Both sides Content. Ne∣vertheless
as the Cardinal was happy in all things, save in Love; The Ambassadour was so far from Imputing as an Absence of mind the Discourse he had begun with so little reason, he fancy'd he had only done it out of Policy, and to shew that his Master did not want money. This is what pass'd at Mon∣ceaux: as concerning Villemareuil, the Dutchess was there under an inconceivable uneasiness, suspect∣ing what was true, that is to say, that her Husband would be capa∣ble of believing, that the Privy▪ Signet by which she was stopt, had been Expedited with her Conni∣vance. This thought, as may be guess'd, was but too sufficient to rob her of her Quiet; Neverthe∣less she would have had where∣withall to comfort her self in the testimony of her own Consci∣ence, if unluckily for her the Count de Siossons had not likewise
come to disturb her in her Soli∣tude. The Image of this Prince return'd every moment before her eyes, one while as having given her several expressions of Affecti∣on, another as an inconstant, who after having contented himself with having violated her heart, had us'd no further endeavours to persuade her that he had ever the same sensibility for her. This thought pleas'd her much more than the other, because she found it to be the means of driving a∣way an Idea, which though it had not as yet caus'd her to make any step that shock'd her virtue, did nevertheless appear to her allto∣gether Criminal. It was not Suf∣ficient for her to be exempt from Crimes in the eyes of all the world, she would likewise that her Conscience should not have any reproach to make her. Pos∣sess'd with these sentiments she was as far as Blandi to find him
out, where she ask't him whether it was possible he could have re∣main'd silent so long, if it had been true that he had been struck with the Passion, which he had had the Boldness to discourse her upon. But in the very time she thus did her Duty, she had reason to know, that the will to be Virtuous is not always sufficient. She her self made answer for this Prince, and told her self that he who had been capable of refusing such advanta∣ges as he had done for the Love of her, was not capable of forgeting her. She represented to her self further, that she had entreated him not to speak to her of his pas∣sion, after which he went to con∣fine himself in solitaryness, a cer∣tain testimony that he knew it would be impossible for him to obey her, at least without shun∣ning the sight of her. It is easy to imagine the Effect which these sorts of thoughts pro∣duc'd
they insensibly reduc'd her from the Love of her Duty to the Love of the Prince; and this with∣out her reflecting on it in the least: so true it is that when we have a Propensity to any thing we go a great way in a little time. Never∣theless what hindred her Passion from making still a greater Pro∣gress, is that she conceiv'd that it became not a Lover to have so much Obedience. I did indeed for∣bid him, said she to her self, the con∣tinuing to speak to me of Love; But did I forbid him the seeing me? It had been Sufficient in him to have obey'd me for two or three days, nay, and he ought highly to have valu'd that piece of Constraint to me; but thus to re∣main for near three Months without my hearing any News of him, is what I do not apprehend, and which he will also find a hard matter to justify to me. One day that she had spent two hours in such sort of Reflexions,
she ferreted her Cabinet, where she had for a long time kept seve∣rall Letters her Husband had for∣merly writ to her; but of so Pas∣sionate a Style, that whoever had read them, would have thought they had been from another than a Lover. She open'd one of them, and that affecting her, she put 'em all into her Pocket; fancying that the perusing of them would be capable of bringing her back to her Duty. She likewise perceiv'd the Duke's Picture, and after ha∣ving view'd and withall besought that Resemblance to pardon in her the Love she had for another, she put it up with the Letters. Thence she went into a Wood near her House, where after ha∣ving entertain'd her self still upon the same Subject, during a good space of time, she went into an Arbour, which the Duke had caus'd to be made on purpose to eat in, when he should have a
Phancy that way. She laid upon a Stone Table that was there, the Picture and the Letters; and then first viewing one and then the o∣thers: I was innocent at that time, said she to her self, and why may not I say the same thing now? Is my Hus∣band less Lovely than he was in those days? What is there I can find fault withall in him? And if he is Jelous, is it not on that very account princi∣pally that I ought to love him? Do I not know that Jelousy only proceeds from Love? Why then do I not take his Delicacy as a kindness? Let's still Examine his Conduct on another side. Notwithstanding his Discontent, he never gave me any ill language. He has only lamented his misfortune. What could he do less? And I would feign know, in case I had had to do with another, whether I should not have suffer'd more from his ill humour. Such were the Lady Dutchess of Elbaufs Reflections, when she saw her self in an Imminent dan∣ger,
and whence she was free'd by the hand that was most grate∣full to her. But for the recoun∣ting this bus'ness in due manner, it is requisite to speak of what was done on another side. The Duke d'Elboeuf being tormented to the highest point of Jelousy, resolved to depart secretly from Joinville, and to draw near the place of his Wife's Residence. Whereupon he took Horse with barely a Valet∣de Chambre, and instead of fol∣lowing the High-Road, when he was got to Chalons, he turn'd upon the Left, resolving to pass by Blandi, where indeed he had also Bus'ness, by reason the Count de Soissons scrupled to declare him∣self the Head of a Party, which tho' it had no other aim than the Cardinals ruine, would never∣theless be accounted Criminal in the Opinion of many Persons. He found the Count who led a very retired Life, and for the making
him approve of his Designs, he re∣presented to him the Cardinal's violence, who made use of the Authority he had in his hands to indulge his Passion: That it was not extraordinary that a man in his Post had delivered a Privy Sig∣net for the making sure of a Wo∣man for whom he had a kindness; but that it would be very extra∣ordinary if He who was her Hus∣band, and whose Honour was therein concern'd, should suffer it without using his utmost endea∣vours to put a stop to this vio∣lence: Nevertheless that the In∣nocent might not be confounded with the Culpable, he was re∣solv'd to proceed to Villemareuil, where he would remain conceal'd in a place he knew very well, till such time as that he could disco∣ver whether his Wife conniv'd at the Cardinal's Designs. The Count to whom he had al∣ready spoken of his Jelousy, had
been for a time as well as he pre∣possess'd against his Eminency; But since the Conversation he had had with Madam d'Elboeuf, he had been in some manner cured of it. Nevertheless as a small matter is capable of opening such like wounds a-new, it came to pass that the Duke's suspicions fixt themselves so deeply in his mind, that there needed nothing more to make him vow the Cardinal's Ruine. Without, in any wise, re∣membring the reasons that had hinder'd him from declaring him∣self the Head of a Party against him, he promis'd the Duke of El∣boeuf more than he meant to ask of him, even so far as to swear that his Eminency should never pe∣rish by any other hand than his. After the Duke d'Elboeuf had dis∣patcht a Courier to the Duke de Bouillon to acquaint him with what pass'd, he would have taken leave of the Count de Soissons to
go to Villemareuil; but the Count told him that after having united his fortune to his, as he had new∣ly done, he would not suffer that he should expose himself all alone in a place so near his enemy: that he would keep him Company, and that he should at least judge by these beginnings, with how much heat he would embrace his Inte∣rests. He thus slily covered under the pretext of friendship, the desire he had to see the Dutchess, to whom besides he resolv'd to give notice to be upon her guard as to her Conduct, that so if she had really some underhand Correspondence with the Cardinal, she might be wary in her Carriage. Few Je∣lous Lovers are so obliging, and it's well known that this Passion commonly breaths Murder and Revenge. But this difference is to be made, that a man usually de∣sires no more than his Rival's
Death; but as for that of the Mi∣stress, the Cruelty does not pro∣ceed so far, as to wish to see her buried under the same Ruines. At least there is more of this Senti∣ment, than of the other, & what's most certain is that the Count was of the same here asserted. Thus still insisting to accom∣pany the Duke, notwithstanding that this latter would have de∣clin'd it out of Reasons of Decen∣cy, and perchance also because he should have been vex'd, should he come to discover any thing, at length he gain'd his point. Then they both took Horse, & alighted by night in the Burrough of Ville∣mareuil, at a mans house that kept an Inn, and who had been for∣merly the Duke d' Elboeufs Foot∣man. This Duke forbid him to tell any body of their coming, & having spent the rest of the night there, the went out the next morning by a back door, which
was not far from the Wood, where the Dutchess commonly walk'd. This happen'd to be the very day she was there, and they en∣ter'd that Grove thro' a Breach that was in the Wall. They went about Twenty five or thirty paces together, speaking softly to one another, nay and hi∣ding themselves behind the Trees for fear any one should perceive 'em. But when they came pretty near the Arbour, the Duke went before, beckoning the Count to follow him. The Duke being come thither without making a∣ny noise, lookt thro' the leaves, and perceiv'd his Wife, who had display'd, as I have said, all her Merchandize. The Picture was on one side, the Letters on ano∣ther, and she held one in her hand which she was reading. I leave it to be guess'd what he fan∣cy'd at this sight; he imagin'd it
to be the Cardinals Letters and Picture, and I wonder he broke not in upon her, as he did within a moment after, to have run his Sword through her body. But ha∣ving been stopt by his Good An∣gel, he still continued looking, as if he could have seen more. Ma∣dam d'Elboeuf after having done reading that Letter, which was extremely tender, it so very much affected her, that the tears gushing from her eyes, she took out her handkerchief to wipe 'em. This was again a fresh signal sufficient∣ly provoking to make the Duke launch in upon her, but he re∣frain'd so doing; But for rea∣sons I can't imagine, and the less, since to speak the truth, methinks if I had been in his place, I should not have had so much Patience. In the mean while the Count advanced softly, tho' the Posture he saw him in, must needs have giv'n him occasion to believe that
he view'd something that chal∣lenged Attention. Step by step however he came up to him, and it was just in the time that the Duke being no longer able to con∣tain himself, thought convenient to burst in. Now you must know that the Dutchess after having wip'd her eyes, had taken up the Picture I mention'd, and having view'd it, as it were to make it reparation for the Sentiments she had sometimes entertained for the Count: No, there's only you, said she, who merits to be beloved; and finding her self seiz'd with a rem∣nant of dying Affection, she took and kiss'd it. Ah! This is too much, cry'd out the Duke at the same time, who could no longer con∣tain himself, at this Action, and taking his Sword in his hand he rusht towards the Arbour-door, and was infallibly going to kill this Princess, if the Count, who made up immediately, had
with held his Arm. The Princess fell into a Swoon, perhaps as much from the surprize she was in to see the Count, as at her Husbands rage. The Duke on his part let fall his Sword out of grief at his being bound to kill a Woman whom he tenderly loved, but whom he thought he was no lon∣ger bound to love after what he had seen. The Count only put a good face upon the matter, tho' to speak the truth, he had no more reason to laugh than the rest. He guess'd by the Letters he saw up∣on the Table, and the Picture the Dutchess still held in her hands, whence the Duke's rage procee∣ded, and thinking he had no less reason than he to be Jelous, he was so much the more to be pit∣tied, as that he was oblig d not to let the least appear of what he had at heart. The Dutchess's Swoon was not long, and the first thing she did
after, having open'd her eyes, was this: What have I done to you, Sir, that you would needs kill me, and that you must needs take the Count for a Witness of your Jelousy? How, what you have done to me? the Duke re∣ply'd, What, joyn Impudence to Shame? This is what I can ne're en∣dure, and which indeed is insuppor∣table. Upon these words he en∣deavoured to burst out of the Count's hands, to Sacrifice her to his Resentment, and Madam d'El∣boeuf let fall the Picture out of fear, endeavouring to save her self around the Table. This Pi∣cture fell pretty near the Count, and endeavouring to take it up, yet without letting Mr. d'Elboeuf go, he did so tho' with some dif∣ficulty. He immediately cast his eyes upon it; but his surprize was not small, when he saw it to be the Dukes. Nor small was that of this Prince, when he perceiv'd it to be his own Picture, and what
would he not have giv'n to have repaired what he had done? He threw himself at his Wifes feet, protesting to her that he would remain there eternally, unless she would pardon him. In the mean while the Count being as jealous of the Duke as he could have been of a Lover, endeavour'd to con∣tain himself, that he might not make known what pass'd in his heart; not being however able to contain his Curiosity, he cast his eyes upon the Letters, while the Duke who was in the posture of a Supplicant had his back turn'd, and he really saw that they were Love-Letters, which the Dutchess had formerly received from her Husband. This was new matter of vexation to him, especially when he saw that the Dutchess, without otherwise remembring what had happened, threw her Arms about the Duke's Neck, not only promising him never to re∣member
what had newly hap∣pen'd, but also to impute all to the Affection he had for her. This Reconciliation having thus been made in the Count's presence, they all went to the Castle, where the Duke forbid all to speak of his arrival. The Count was there witness of several Ca∣resses they made one another, which cast him under the utmost Despondency. To free himself from so ungratefull a Scene, he would needs take leave of the Duke, and return to Blandi; But the Duke, who could not stay long so near the Court, without it's being known, and who fear'd the worst from the Cardinals ill will, entreated him to deferr a day or two, & that he would go along with him. Tho' the Term was short, it lasted a long time to the Count de Soissons, who that he might no longer be a Witness of the same things he had seen, since
he had been in that House, was al∣most continually in the Wood, pos∣sess'd with his amorous thoughts. One day that he went thither very early, Madam d'Elboeuf, who not∣withstanding her Reconciliation with her Husband, had neverthe∣less an ee to all he did, being cu∣rious of knowing what he did there, went thither presently af∣ter him, and having walk'd from one end of the Grove to the other without finding him, she be∣thought her self of going to the Arbour where her Husband had met her. He had gone in there, as a place befitting his pensive thoughts, and having plac'd him∣self upon the Bank that went round the table, he lean'd his Head upon his hand, making it evident by his Countenance, that he had some great matter of Sadness. Madam d'Elboeuf who was plac'd exactly to look him in the face, at the same time made the
Application of his musing to her self, and tho' by all I have alrea∣dy said, it is manifest that such a sight could not be over-gratefull to her, she nevertheless felt some satisfaction in telling her self that it was for her sake that this Prince sigh'd. While she was wholly possess'd with this thought the Prince gave several sighs, which melted her still the more. But she was quick∣ly diverted from these tender movements by an action of his, for he took a Picture out of his Pocket, and viewing it amorous∣ly he said some words, but so low that she could not understand them; after which kissing it still more amourously than he had veiw'd it, he did the same thing five or six times with such a Trans∣port, that it strangely amaz'd her. However it had been nothing had she proceeded no farther than A∣mazement, but she was sensible
notwithstanding all she could say to her self, that she was more con∣cern'd at it than became her. She a thousand times call'd him faith∣less in her heart, which still more amazing her, than at what she had seen, she fanci'd she could not too soon get away from a place where her virtue ran so much risque of being undone. This was her Resolution; but which was quickly bely'd by her heart. She again in spight of her self peept through the Arbour, and seeing the Count there still in the same Posture, her jelousy redoubl'd to such a point as made her do what her virtue had not done. Let's fly, whisper'd she to her self, the sight of a Man that is Ʋnworthy of the Trouble he darts into my heart, and whose Infidelity ought to render him a thousand times more odious than he e∣ver appear'd lovely to me. In saying this away went she from that Place, but so besides her self, that
she did not mind that her Gown was fasten'd upon a Branch. And as she brusht through hastily, she made a noise in tearing off her Cloaths, and this noise having rouz'd the Count out of his Amo∣rous thoughts he put again his Picture hastily into his Pocket, and coming out of the Arbour∣door to see whence it proceeded, he was strangely Surpriz'd when he saw the Duchess whom he could not but know, though her back was turn'd. He ran after her, and having quickly overtaken her: Whither do you run Madam, said he to her, and after having had the Cruelty to forbid me to speak to you of a Passion that has tormented me so long, would you still be so Cruell as to deprive me of your Presence, when Fortune does afford it me? Consider what violence I have done my self, in refraining to see you: Consider my Af∣fliction in knowing you sick, & incapa∣citated from giving you any ease. Add
to this my vexation at my not being permitted to go to your Door to En∣quire after your health, & you will cer∣tainly conclude that never any trou∣ble was comparable to mine. Never∣theless this is not all that I have been oblig'd to Suffer, I have been forc'd to be my self a Witness of your tender∣ness for a Husband, I must compose my looks, Shun your eyes; what shall I say? In short, appear quite dif∣ferent from what I am, and when for to ease my mind after so many tor∣ments, which any other than I would have sunk under, Heaven now permits that I might see you one moment with out somuch Constraint; you fly me Ma∣dam, as if all I have now said did not merit some Pitty. Madam de Elboeuf had stood still at his first words, and she was very much Surpriz'd after what she her self had seen, to hear him speak in that manner, yet thinking that it became her rather to give Credit to what she
had seen then to what she now heard, she arm'd her self with a Certain Haughtiness that was na∣tural to her, and looking upon him with great Contempt; Your Birth, said she to him, sets you a∣bove me; but in short, mine is not so Inferiour to yours as to allow you with impunity to make a Mock of a Prin∣cess. The Count who expected quite another answer, was migh∣tily surpriz'd at this, wherein the Dutchess seem'd to him more in∣credulous then Cruel. Insomuch that imagining all he had to do was to undeceive her. Ah! would to God Madam, said he to her, that I had only to Combat the un∣just Suspicion I now observe in your Answer; With how much case could I bring that about, I that have done for you more then ever Man will do for a Mistress: Where shall you see, not a Prince of the Bloud as I am, but a Meer Gentleman, that would have renounc'd so great an Establishment as
I have done? Who would banish him∣self from Court for fear of displeasing you, and who after having pass'd a long time in that Exile, returns as fond and as Passionate as ever, to tell you, that it is only you he Loves? Where is the Lover that after having been Witness as I have been these two days of the Affection you have for your Husband should still Persevere in his Passion? What can I say to my self upon such a sight, save that there are no hopes for me, yet has not this been Capable of making me desist, and you still see me the same you ever saw me. The Princess knew not how to reconcile these words with the action she had seen him do, but what troubl'd her still more, was how to reconcile her Virtue with a Conversation so Contrary to it. In this Perplexity she remain'd sad and Confused, and the Count being strangely amaz'd at her si∣lence, and at the State he saw her in. What is the Meaning of this Ma∣dam,
he answered, and are you sorry for having unjustly accus'd me, or do Persevere you in your injustice? speak, let not Pitty make you silent, and know that in the Present Extremity of my Affliction, you can render me but little more Miserable. The Dut∣chess still laboring under the same Perplexity, knew not what to resolve on; But at last being pro∣vok'd to the highest degree, that a man that she had seen kiss ano∣thers picture, should dare to dis∣course her in this manner, she no longer gave ear save to her resent∣ment. Wherefore darting him a look, wherein Anger sparkled amid Jelousy: This is too much, said she to him, thus to offend me doubly; I know that my Circumstances do not allow me to admit any such Dis∣course, and as you your self know it, 'tis a reason that should impose silence on you, and which by Consequence, when you break it, you make me sensi∣ble of the little Consideration you
have for me. But to do it, when you have no inclinations to induce you, and that might excuse you, is, properly speaking, a Trepan, and for which I must own to you, that I should be over∣joy'd to have the opportunity of being reveng'd. The Count would have interrupted her, & shewn her the injustice of her accusation, but the Dutchess to prevent him; Let's lay aside, said she to him, so many needless Discourses, and to make an end of all at once, know that I my self saw you kiss a Picture but a mo∣ment ago; and as I know very well it is none of mine, you must not take it ill if I refer you to it as often, & when∣ever for the passing your time, your fancy shall lead you to entertain me with your Amorous Discourses. The Count, who attributed to his misfortune, all the harsh words he had newly heard from the Princess, was overjoy'd to find the source of them in another sub∣ject. And unwilling to undeceive
her without first discovering why she appear'd so sensible to that sight; True, indeed, Madam, said he to her, I did put a Picture near my face; but who told you it was that of a Mistress? I never thought of kissing it; but finding that it smelt very finely, I was willing to recreate my self with the scent of it; and yet this is the whole matter upon which you ground your accusation. Pish, pish, Madam, d' Elboeuf cry'd, you might thus perhaps impose upon o∣thers, but I am not to be caught by so slender a wile, and assure your self you'l find no such easy Creatures here. The Count was transported with joy at his hearing all these reproaches, whence he inferr'd, that peradventure he was not in∣different to her. Wherefore still more and more to detect how his case was, Yet what I told you, Ma∣dam, was true, he said to her; Be∣sides, Madam, what would my insin∣cerity avail with you? You that have
eyes only for your Husband, and not content with the expressions you might give him of it in Private, cannot refrain from rend'ring me my self Witn ss of it? After this, what hopes can I have, and can any thing else be∣sides the Power of Truth oblige me to pitty my self? 'Tis you that I love; and tho' I were reduc'd to dissemble, it would nevertheless easily be percei∣ved, that 'tis you that possesses my heart, tho' my Desires should seem ten∣ding for another. That is to say, Ma∣dam d' Elboeuf reply'd, that I ought not to have any regard to what I have seen, and that I ought rather to credit your words. Yes, Madam, the Count renew'd, and if I was so happy, as it is far from it, that you had the least of those Weaknesses for me, which you have for your Husband, I assure you, that you far from having any Jelousy of that Picture, would be overjoy'd that I had it ever in my hands. How! is it a Remedy of Love, Madam d' Elboeuf immediately repartee'd?
and perchance without making reflexion on her promptness, since this alone was capable of discove∣ring what she was willing to con∣ceal. I say not so, Madam, the Count retorted, but all I can say to you is, that tho' your Husband himself should have this Picture, I assure you it would not give you one moments disturbance. This had been a sufficient hint, had Madam d' Elboeuf the least sus∣pected his having her Picture; but being very far from any such thought; 'Tis matter of Fact, then, said she to him, and if you'l give me leave to view it, I shall be able to judge how far you are i'th' Right. This is what the Count waited for, and deriving from her Curi∣osity most advantageous Conse∣quences for himself: Yes, Ma∣dam, said he to her, I'le shew it you; But give me leave first to make it the due Reparation of Honour. I told you a while ago that I did not kiss it, and now I must tell you that I adore it's
Original, and which is more, that I shall adore it as long as I live, not∣withstanding her Cruelty. Upon these words he gave her that Picture, and the Dutchess mightily con∣cern'd at what she had newly heard, lookt upon it with so much Precipitation, that it alone was sufficient to give him to under∣stand that she acted out of ano∣ther motive than that of Curiosi∣ty. But oh the Operation when she saw it was her own Picture! She not only changed Colour, but also casting down her eyes, as if she had been caught doing some ill Action: Ah! Prince, she said to him, what delight can you take in Creating trouble to your self? And if it be true that you love me, what do you expect from a Passion that cannot be approved of, and for which it is still more difficult to be gratefull? I know it very well, Madam, the Count made answer, and you also see that I had the Discretion never to speak of
it to you more; I confin'd my Griefs within my own Bosom, and if I had not perceiv'd that you was going to think of me that I lov'd another, my silence should have express'd to you, that let it have cost me what it would to have obey'd you, I had so much Love and Respect for your Commands, that I would have dy'd a thousand times sooner than have disobey'd you. Thus you must blame your self if I did it; It was for you to have believ'd that I could love no other after having lov'd you: If you do not believe me, you need only view your own Picture, it represents the most lovely Person that ever was, and would you not own that I had but very little Judgment, did I not preferr it before all things? The Occasion that was offer'd for the Count to express his Passi∣on, was so very Charming to him, that he did not remember to re∣demand his Picture. The surprize also that Princess was in, or per∣haps her joy to see him faithfull,
when she had imagin'd him far from being so, did so possess her thoughts that she had not as yet dreamt of asking him whence he had it. But when these first Trans∣ports were Evaporated on Both sides, the Count with great rea∣son apprehending that she would not restore it him, requir'd it of her at the same time that she had her mouth open to know of him whence he had it. The Duchess did not stand to Consider what Course to take, she absolutely re∣fus'd it him, and after having known by what means he had had it, she said it was not reasonable he should availe him∣self of a thing that belong'd to an∣other, and which would engage her Conscience. That she intend∣ed to send it again to the Dutchess of Savoy; but that she would take her measures so well that it should not have the same Destiny on the way. She said these last
words to him smiling, as if she had a mind to sweeten his Con∣cern for her Denyal, or rather as if she was minded to give him the hint, that since he had been able to get it so dexterously, the same ways were open to him, since he was refus'd in his Request. The Count did not consider this at first, and was so possess'd with the Desire of having it again, that his aim lay wholly upon Employing his Rhetorick to prevaile with her; but not speeding in that, he made it his Bus'ness to enquire when the Picture was to be dis∣patch'd, and laid People in Am∣buscade, that so he might not faile of it. While all this pass'd, the Car∣dinal being ever possess'd with the same thoughts, that is to say, being ever in Love with the Dut∣chess, he gain'd a maid of Hers, whom she honour'd so far as to make her her Confident. she let
him know that the Count and the Duke were at Villemareuil, and as he had the Address to make the King believe all he was minded, he insinuated to him that those two Princes being so near his Court, not only without coming to pay him their Respects, but al∣so incognito, they must have some ill Design against his Person; This was sufficient for the obtain∣ing an order to take them into Custody: But Mr. de Chavigny Secretary of State, who was to sign it, being the Count de Soissons particular friend, had no sooner expedited it, but that before it was deliver'd into their hands, who were to put it into Execution, he by an express Courier sent to ac∣quaint him of what occur'd. The Count having shew'd the Intima∣tion he had newly receiv'd to the Duke of Elboeuf, This Prince who dreaded the Cardinal so much the more, as knowing that to indulge
the Passion he had for his Wife, he would omit no manner of means, said at the same time that it was necessary to be gone, but that they must first put themselves in disguise. The Count de Soissons was somewhat of the same opini∣on, tho' to speak the truth he was very loath to quit an abode, where he saw all he had most dear, the Dutchess who was of the Coun∣cil, went her self to fetch two ha∣bits, which with some others she had caus'd to be made for the Ca∣puchins of Meaux, who receiv'd of her Charity, and caus'd these two Princes to put them on. But both finding that there wanted Beards to these Robes, they sent to seek for false ones in the Duke's Guard∣robe, where some were by chance, by reason of a Masquerade he had made some years before at Mon∣ceaux, the habits of which had been carried to Villemaruel. Tho' Considering their Cir∣cumstances
it was no very season∣able time to make love, it is ne∣vertheless certain that the Count ever & anon cast his eyes upon the Dutchess, to give her to under∣stand, that all unhappy as he was in her presence, he was going to be infinitely more, when he should be remote from her. The Dutchess on her part was not ex∣empt from the uneasiness that an approaching absence is wont to create, and though she us'd her utmost endeavours to repress those sentiments, it was impossible for her to effect it, she was surpriz'd at her Weakness, and as she was in such a Disorder as was easy to be perceiv'd, she was overjoy'd that she had a pretence to cloak it. The Privation of her Husband being the finest Pretext she could use, she fail'd not to improve it. In the mean while her heart eve∣ry moment giving her the lye, she cast her eyes ever and anon upon
the Count, and finding his in∣cessantly fix'd upon her, it was impossible for her to hinder hers from being affected. Nothing convinc'd him better of it than what she did. After having Em∣brac'd her Husband several times, not only to bid him Adieu, but likewise to make him a kind of re∣paration for what she dar'd to do in his Presence, as she drew near the Count, who made up to Sa∣lute her, she dexterously restor'd him her Picture; a favour which so rejoyc'd that Prince, that he now thought not the least of the misfortune under which he had like to have sunck before. But for as much as that the Princess was mightily out of Countenance at what she had newly done, she on∣ly sought to conceal her Disor∣der, and as after such an Action as that, she had much ado to bear his looks, she feign'd that her Af∣fliction for the Departure of so
Dear a Husband, did not allow her to be present at it. Thus can Persons of address dissemble upon Occasion: And indeed the Duke presuming him∣self to be the only Cause of her be∣ing in that Condition, went a way so very sorrowfull, that one would have said that he had parted from her for all his Life. I shall not say how the Count laid it to heart, it is easy to apprehend that as the Desires of a Lover are incompara∣bly stronger than those of a Hus∣band, in like manner there was a vast difference as to what they Both underwent upon the thoughts of the ensuing Absence. On the way they met with the Guards that were sent to take them into Custody, and if they had not been disguis'd as they were, certain it is that they had not escap'd their Cluches: But they far from suspecting that they had what they sought for, before
their eyes, they let em pass, with∣out taking the least notice of their Persons. These two Princes were not without some apprehensions at this sight, and at first imagin'd that these Guards had had notice of their march, for as much as that the way they took was not that of Monceaux. But this had been done by meer hazzard, and the Guards had thought fitting to go a by Road, that no suspition might be harbour'd where their aim lay. By good luck the Duchess had not as yet reveal'd their retreat, or Disguise to her Confident, and after the Guards had invested the Castle, He who Commanded them, enter'd with some of them, and ask'd the Domesticks for the Count and the Duke d' Elboeuf. But they giving him no account, he went up to the Duchesses Chamber, to whom he made the same Compliment. But as she was at a loss what answer to
make them, as whether they had been in the Castle, or were gone, she remain'd some time without replying; which vexing the Of∣ficer: What I ask of you, Madam, said he to her, is only to spare you the vexation of seeing me ferret every Corner. If I do not find them in one place I shall find them in another, and you may easily judge that having caus'd your Castle to be invested, they cannot escape me, since I am certain of their being here. Madam d' El∣boeuf, who during this Comple∣ment had had time to make re∣flexion that the longer she de∣tain'd him, the fairer would the opportunity be for the Count and her Husband to make their es∣cape, bid him then search where he pleas'd, and that for her part, she knew nothing of what he en∣quir'd. Upon this the Officer left not a Corner unsearcht, but no body being to be found, he left his Guards a round the Castle,
and posted away to give the Car∣dinal an account of what he had done. This put his Eminency into a Passion against him, and after having told him that his head should answer for his Com∣mission, he sent him back with a Letter for the Dutchess's Confi∣dent, whom he entreated to tell the Bearer what was become of the Count and Duke. The Officer being return d to the Castle perform'd his Message and the Damzel, who as I have said, had not been made privy to the Secret, thinking those two Princes to be still there, bid him search, and that he would find them. In the mean while the got to the Frontiers of Champagne and being come into the House o a Gentleman, who was th Count's friend, they shifted thei Cloaths and took others mor conformable to their State Thence they withdrew to Seda
where luckily for them they ar∣riv'd the moment they did; an hour or two later had been too late. And indeed, the Officer af∣ter having search'd Villemareud from one end to the other, had no sooner perceiv'd the rest of the Cloaths which Madam d'Elboeuf had caus'd to be made for the Ca∣puchins, but that he suspected that those two Princes had made their escape in those Equipages, nay, and that they were the two Religious he had met. Now this suspicion growing still stronger and stronger in his mind, he trac'd 'em to the very Gentelmans house, where they had made a halt, and finding there also the two Habits that had serv'd for their Disguise, he endeavour'd to find out which way they had taken thence, and finding it to be that of Sedan, he pursued them, but in vain, even as far as under the Walls of that Town.
Having related all these Cir∣cumstances to the Cardinal, his Eminency being very willing to Cloak his Love with the good of the State, left Guards at Villema∣reuil to secure the Dutchess for himself. Nay he went to see her, as he told the King, to shrift into her Husbands Designs Yet when with her, that was the least of his Discourse. On the contrary he told her that he was very unhap∣py, in that Love oblig'd him a∣gainst his will, to use violence, which was in no wise his Inclina∣tion; that a word of her mouth would call back her Husband when she pleas'd but that as for the Count de Scissons, he was too jelous of him ever to suffer his re∣turn, Madam d'Elboeuf, who had but little kindness for him be∣fore, hated him still more upon his letting her know that he was the Author of the Persecution that Prince suffer'd, on the account of
his loving her, desired him to discontinue this discourse. She told him that it ill became him to deceive the King, as he did, and that if she did not know that he had so enchanted the King's Sen∣ses, that all she could tell him would be to no purpose, she would go directly to inform him that what occurr'd had quite another source than that he was made to believe. I do not doubt it, Madam, the Cardinal made answer, and your Concern for the Count de Sois∣sons would make you do far more; but you who thus threaten me, are not you afraid that I should inform your Hus∣band that you have no mind he should return, unless it be in the Count's Company? Go, Madam, added he, there needs no more for a man that has some experience of the world, and if I was not withheld by Sentiments that you long since was acquainted withall, what a Tempest might I not raise in your family. But if you are not ca∣pable
of managing your self for my sake, at least do it for your own. True, I love you with so much Passion, that it can never enter into my mind that I should be ever capable of doing you any Injury; But after all, Who can answer for the Discretion of an Unfor∣tunate, and is it not your part to be a∣fraid of my Despair? Madam d'Elboeuf was in some perplexity how to retort to this Discourse. Though he had no rea∣son to threaten her as he did, she could not deny but that he had more in reproaching her, that she did not wish for her Husbands liberty without the Counts. How∣ever being almost assur'd that Mr. d'Elboeuf would hold suspected all that came from him, she little minded to manage him any lon∣ger, and quite the contrary she said so many disobliging things to him that he went away almost mad. He was still full of his Re∣sentment when he arriv'd at Mon∣ceaux;
So that when he came to make his Report to the King, he envenomed his mind against that Princess, Insomuch that his Ma∣jesty was of Opinion to have her taken into Custody. He would have consented to it in that Rage, if the thing had been conforma∣ble to his Interests; but conside∣ring that this would not be only pushing it too far, but also the de∣priving himself of the Conveni∣ency of seeing her with the same ease he might do at Villemareuil, he insinuated into the King that it would be sufficient to set Guards upon her, so that those who were in her House had orders to stay there. Madam d'Elboeuf was high∣ly provok'd at these Proceedings, and not being suffer'd to go one step, without being every where accompany'd by these Guards, her Aversion for the Cardinal aug∣mented in such manner, that now she could not hear him mention'd
without shivering. His Eminency's Confident, who was well paid for minding his Interests, did frequently inti∣mate to him that this Princess'es Spirit was hereby so exasperated, that unless he very quickly inter∣pos'd some necessary remedy, it would be past all Reconciliation; that being, as she was, wholly de∣voted to him, he must needs think, she would have as strict an eye to her Conduct as all the Guards in the world could have: That it was therefore expedient to re∣move 'em out of hand, nay and express some repentance to her, rejecting all upon the Passion with which she had inflam'd him. The Cardinal found a great deal of reason in this Council, and af∣ter having recommended Fidelity and exactness to her, the Guards were taken away, to the Princess's satisfaction; but with order to her not to stirr from Villemareuil.
As soon as the Princes were ar∣riv'd at Sedan, the Spaniards lying at watch to plunge the Kingdom into a Civil War, had sent a Per∣son of Wit & Authority to them, to offer them to assist them with all their Forces, if they were minded to take up Arms. But Mr. de Soif∣sons being unwilling to swerve from his Duty, unless thereun∣to forc'd by the greatest Perse∣cutions, gave this Envoy for an∣swer, that he was much oblig'd to him for the pains he had taken; but that he could not give him a∣ny positive answer untill he had seen the measures the Court should take against him. The Spaniards, who were very glad to give a Jelousy to the Crown, were cautious of publishing this An∣swer, and quite the contrary, they endeavoured every where to insi∣nuate that they had made a se∣cret Treaty with him. The Car∣dinal was the first that was im∣pos'd
on by this Artifice, and not being so much in Love but that he thought of preserving his Autho∣rity, which would have run a risque of being subverted during a Civil War, he dispatcht the Count de Fiesque to Sedan, to per∣suade the Princes to return to Court. This Lord had ever been one of the Count's intimate Friends, nay and was still as much as he had ever been On this score was it the Cardinal had pitcht up∣on him, preferably to many o∣thers, hoping the Engagement between them two, would give the more weight to his Negocia∣tion. Besides he himself had a Confidence in him: This Lord be∣ing poor, had of late made his Court to him, as the only Chan∣nel by which Grants and favours could pass. Thus to oblige him to make him speed in this Affair, he promis'd him Mountains and Wonders, and the Count de
Fiesque on his part gave him hopes that he would so efficaciously in∣terpose, that he should have all manner of reason to applaud him for his Services. Matters being ordered in this manner on both sides, the Count de Fresque was ready to take horse, when he received a Letter by which he had notice given him that if he was still a friend of the Count's, he should be cautious of persuading him to return to Court; that he would be no sooner arrived there, than that he would be clapt up; that the Car∣dinal who was a Cheat had not made him privy to the Secret; that it was nevertheless a Truth, which some had been willing to intimate to him, that so all inno∣cent as he might be of his Friends misfortune, he might not have oc∣casion to upbraid himself as long as he liv'd of having contributed thereunto. This Letter was not
Sign'd, and it was deliver'd by a man who knew not what he brought himself, having receiv'd it from an unknown Person. De Fiesque not knowing whether he ought to give Credit thereunto, was very much perplex'd at the sight of it. He was afraid it might be a prank plaid him by some E∣nemy, who being jealous upon seeing him employ'd by the Mi∣nister, made use of this stratagem only to put a stop to the Course of his good fortune. Nevertheless as on the other side he would by no means that it should be impu∣ted to him that he had betray'd the Count, he was no sooner ar∣riv'd at Sedan, than after having notify'd to the Prince on what occasion he came, be imparted to him at the same time the intimati∣on he receiv'd at his taking Horse. The Count did not seem much surpriz'd, and all the answer he made Mr. de Fiesque, was, that the
worst was to be expected from the Cardinal, Insomuch that too much Precaution could not be u∣sed against him; that neverthe∣less as the thing might come from some one that had an Interest to thwart his return, all things were to be well examin'd, before any body was to be condemn'd: That he did not doubt but that he had kept that Letter, that he begg'd of him to shew it him, that he should perhaps know the hand if not that they then should know what they had to do upon it. The Count de Fiesque took out the Letter at the same time, which he kept ve∣ry preciously, and the Count had no sooner lookt upon it but that he knew whence it came. He had agreed with Mr. de Chavigny, that when he should have any thing to signify to him, he would make use of a borrowed hand; but to let him know that it came from him, he would thereunto add a certain
stroke, which they had agreed on together. Now this stroke being upon this Letter: The advice is good, said he to the Count de Fies∣que, and I am overjoy'd to see that notwithstanding my Enemies Credit, I have still faithfull Friends, In say∣ing this he embrac'd the Count, and this Lord having receiv'd that Princes Caresses with a be∣coming respect: A service of such Moment, cry'd the Count de Sois∣sons, does well merit that I should have no reserve for those that pay it me, and as I have the same Obligation to you as to the Author of the Letter, I shall not only tell you his name, but likewise what helps to render the Car∣dinal and me Enemies. Wee both Love the same Beauty, added he, and as it is usual not to bear any good will to an Enemy, it is not to be won∣der'd if he Persecutes me and I hate him. You know I scap'd narrowly of falling into his hands at Villema∣reuil: But you know that he is in Love
with Madam d' Elboeuf, and that I have the same Sentiments for that Princess. It's impossible, cry'd out the Count de Fiesque at the same time. How! his Eminency, who so devoutly acts the Sage and the Philosopher, and who besides has some years o'er his Head, should he Mingle with his im∣portant occupations, a Passion that seems reserv'd to youth only, nay and to needless Youth: I mean for those that like you and I pass the three Quarters of the year without knowing how to Employ it. It's however true, The Count made answer, and that he might leave him no room to question it, he acquainted him with all he knew of the matter, giving him to understand that his thought was better grounded than upon a Bare suspicion. This was the subject of their whole dis∣course while the Count staid at Sedan. In the mean while they both resolv'd to feed the Cardinal
with hopes, and the Count de Fiesque being got back, he made him believe that upon certain Conditions this Prince was ready to return; but that he demanded to retire to some one of his Lands in Picard, and the Duke of El∣boeuf unto his Government, whi∣ther he pretended his wife should be sent to him. In saying this, he Ey'd the Cardinal, to fee if he would change colour, for after what he had now heard, he did ex∣pect he would not approve of these Conditions. And indeed, the Cardinal did thereupon burst out into an Exclamation, as if there had been a Design to have excluded him from the Ministry: How, answer'd he him all in a fury Did I encharge you to propose such a Treaty, and when you took leave of me, did I not tell you that it was to Court I was minded they should re∣turn? True, the Count reply'd, but if I gave ear to these Proposals, it
was because that when I was with them I perceiv'd that nothing could Sceure them against their Suspicions, more than a Retreat wherein they might think themselves under shelter against your Power. And as I know you will never harbour any ill Design against their Persons, as long as they shall not Em∣broil the State, I thought that you would rather choose to see them Both where they require, than in a Place where bad Council may pervert them. The Duke of Bouillon stands not over-well Affected to your Eminency. Lamboy besides, who commands the Enemies forces in those Parts only wants to be in Action. Wherefore I should think it to be requisite to hinder those Princes from having Commerce with two such Dangerous Men, and which you'l do if you grant them what they require. The Count de Fiesque, after ha∣ving thus taken delight in thwart∣ing him, seeing that he became angry in good earnest, did not
think fitting to push things far∣ther. He told him, that having advanc'd nothing that was subject to ratification, it was sufficient that it did not please him to let it drop so: that he had promis'd the Count de Soissons to return to Se∣dan, in case his Eminency ap∣prov'd of his Propositions, that not going thither would be sufi∣cient to let him know that they were ungratefull. You say right, the Cardinal made answer, but you do not see that I would have him return to Court, and as that is not the Right Course which you have taken, you must return thither to endeavour to set all things to Rights. Thus did the Count take a se∣cond Journey to Sedan, and seve∣ral others after that to endeavour to bring the Prince back to Court. In the mean while the King and Cardinal were return'd to Paris, and his Eminency being far from permitting Madam d' Elboeuf to
stay at Villemaruel, while he was at a distance from it, caus'd a Pri∣vy-Seal to be dispatcht, by which she was enjoyn'd to follow the Court. Repairing to Paris in con∣formity to this order she there lead a most languishing Life, which her friends attributed to her Husbands Absence. But she could easily undeceive them, if she had been minded, and she dayly per∣ceiv'd that the Count de Soissons shar'd as deep in her sadness as the Duke d'Elboeuf. She represent∣ed him to her self as a Prince not only of an accomplish merit, but likewise of a most extraordinary Tenderness. But what still im∣printed him deeper in her heart, was the Persecution he was ex∣pos'd to for the Love of her, and which he nevertheless prefer'd be∣fore all things. This is what he had assur'd her of ever, & as often as he found the Occasion to dis∣course her, and the remembrance
of which he would fain have re∣new'd to her by his Letters, prin¦cipally since the favour he had re∣ceived from her. But this Prin∣cess reproaching her self continu∣ally for the favour she had gran∣ted him, not being willing he should have an ill opinion of her Virtues, had not only refus'd all the Letters he had sent her, but she farther writ to him the follow∣ing one. Madam d' Elboeuf's Letter to the Count de Soissons. Nothing hinders me from telling you that I wish your Esteem before that of all other People, were I not afraid that you should Interpret it too much to your advantage After what I have done for you, your
vantity would be excusable, and you may have so ill an O∣pinion of me, as to think, me ca∣pable of all. However suspend your Judgment, till you know me thoroughly. In giving you my Picture, I thought much less making you a Present, then a Restitution. Perhaps I may be mistaken, I own that I did it without much Reflexion. But let it be as it will, I assure you the uncertainty I am under of having done well or ill, makes me so uneasy, that I have no rpose Day nor Night. If you have any value for me, pitty the State I have brought my self to. Send me back what I gave you, and thereby shall I
Judge whether you really Love me. The Bearer of this Letter, ha∣ving let the Count know that he should be glad to speak with him in private, and from whom he came, this Prince was so seiz'd with joy, that all I can say to ex∣press it would be nothing in Com∣parison. He at first imagin'd, as ma∣ny would have imagin'd as well as he, after the favour the Dutchess had conferr'd on him, that it wa some new one that she had pre∣par'd for him. But what a strange reverse for him, when he had rea what I have repeated? He re¦solv'd a thousand variou thoughts in his mind at the sam time, and that he dwelt on mos was that the Cardinal had at th long run triumph'd o're her Cr¦elty, or by his Perseverance o his Presents. After these sad R¦flexions,
he was at a Loss, what to say to the Man who demanded an Answer, and after several Con∣flicts he writ at follows. The Count de Soissons Letter to Madam d' Elboeuf. If you had only ask'd my Life, I should have sent it you, as soon as I had known your Will: But as what you require of me, is infinitely dear∣er to me, do not think it strange that I am longer in resolving upon it. Nevertheless I must tell you that I am determin'd to satisfy you, let it cost me what it will; It is an effort which you could only expect from such an affection as mine.
I say no more to you Madam, and indeed what can I say that can in the least Express my Affections: Great it is certainly, not to say it is Ex∣treme, God grant I may quick∣ly sinck under it But after all this shall not hinder me from gratifying you at a time you least expect it. Having dispatcht the Man back, he was contriving how he might go to Paris, notwithstand∣ing the danger, and especially how he might deceive Mrs d' Elboeuf, and de Bouillon, who would not know what to think if they saw him distance himself from the Town. And after ha∣ving duely consider'd on it he found no better means then to act the Inamorato of a certain Citt, who had some Beauty, and
who spent part of the year at a Country-house she had about half a League from Sdan. He went to see her there several times, that so it might not be look'd on as strange, when he should be some days without appearing, and ha∣ving thereby prepared Peoples minds, he one fine night took Post; but so well disguis'd, that tho' he had met a thousand of his acquaintance upon the way, not one would have known him. He arriv'd by night at Paris, for fear of Accident, and found in a certain Inn where he alighted, a man whom he had dispatch'd a∣way before, and in whom he con∣fided; this Person had bought up all that he found rare at Paris in matter of knick-knacks, with a little Male to put 'em in. He had also provided a Suit of Cloaths to disguise him, & this Prince having put 'em on, and his Load upon his Back, he resolv'd to go attend
upon Madam d'Elboeuf's Leavy. This Princess was extremely curious of those sort of things, and not once only had he seen her visit all Paris to indulge that hu∣mour. Thus not doubting but that he should be wellcome, he went to Elboeuf-Hall, and had her inform'd of what he brought. This Princess commanded his ad∣mittance, and without minding his Person, & the less for that she was at her Toilette, she bid him go into a Closet, where she would all alone view his Toys, for fear that if she took any one a∣long with her, they should go tell what she had bought, before she had had the pleasure of speaking of it her self. And forasmuch as that Curiosity did not allow her to deferr any longer, she got up just in the Condition she was in, and went to this new Merchant. As he was disguis'd, no less than Divination could have suspected
who he was. Besides be Coun∣terfeited his voice so well, that the Princess did not imagine she had any reason to make the least reflexion upon his Person. By this means all her eyes were wholly taken up with contemplating his Merchandize, among which she found a thousand things with which she was Enchanted. What most pleas'd her, were the Pi∣ctures of some Princesses of Eu∣rope, whose Beauty was such, that after having considered them, she told the Merchant, that it was not possible they should be so handsom as the Painter made them. Pardon me, Madam, the pretended Merchant made an∣swer, I have seen the most part of them, and if there be anything to be said between the Originals and the Copies, it is that the Painter with all his Art his not been able to attain to make 'em as perfect as they really are. He disguis'd his voice so well in say∣ing
this, that the Princess did not in any wise distrust who he was. However in case she had in the least observ'd his Eyes, and the divers Motions of his Counte∣nance, it had been impossible but that she must have perceiv'd that he was quite another Person than what he was minded to appear. He was inflam'd to such a De∣gree, not only at the Personage he was obliged to act, but also thro' his Passion, that his looks, as I may say, pierc'd to the very bottom of her heart. And indeed, how could he, who was Passi∣onately in Love, behold her in the manner she was, without dying of Love, since any other, how indifferently soever he might have been would have become sensible in seeing her. She had only one Petticoat on, and a Holland Wastcoat, cover'd with Lace, thro' which one saw things capable of enflaming the most
frigid, with much more reason, him who was passionately in Love. Besides her neck that was of an Extraordinary whiteness, appear'd so then a thousand times more, by reason of the blackness of her Hair, that hung down upon her shoulders. Her Complexion re∣ceiv'd the same advanage from this undress, and they were as so many Charms, that the more fas∣cinated a Lover. Thus the Count being no lon∣ger able to resist them, meant to cut short without dallying any longer; and finding he had a fair occasion for so doing: All these Pictures, Madam, he renew'd, which you so much admire, are fine in∣deed, and you are not the first that thought at the first sight of them, that the Painter had thereunto added something of his own. However to shew you that he is faithfully, I'le shew you some that I have of this Court, by the viewing of which you will judge
that his whole aim has been to imitate Nature. In saying this he took out those of the Queen, of the Princess of Conde, and of some Ladies of the Court, who might pass for handsome; but which the Dutchess however found no∣thing in Comparison of those she had seen: Thus she fell to viewing 'em again, and the Count seeing how wedded she was to them: Cease Madam, he interpos'd, con∣sidering so attentively things that so little deserve the pains, and since your judgment is so good, reserve your ad∣miration for all that is most Beauty∣full in Nature. I have kept you the most excellent for the last, and with∣out being oblig'd to part with it by a Power whom I am constrain'd to obey in spight of me, all the Riches in the world are not of the worth I esteem it. If the Dutchess had had the least Distrust of what pass'd, what he now said had been more than needfull a thousand times to make
her apprehend the rest: But as this was what she least dreamt of: Let's see, said she to him, that Toy you prize so hihly, and after what I have seen it must be something very fine to deface all the rest. After these words she reach'd forth her hand to the Pretended Merchant to re∣ceive the Picture he held in his, and having it done up in a Box, the largeness of the Diamonds that were upon it amaz'd her, yet without imagining what it could be. But she had no sooner open'd that Box, but that her Amaze∣ment was incomparably greater, as soon as she found her own Pi∣cture. She cast her eyes at the same time upon him that had given it her, and tho' she should still have remain'd in ignorance as to his Person, she could not now have remain'd any longer in the dark. For the Count judging that a longer Disguise would be in no wise for his turn, threw him∣self
at her feet, and embracing her knees: Yes, Madam, he said to her, There's a Picture I value a∣bove all the Riches in the World, nay more than my own Life. Yet would you deprive me of it, tho' you very well know, that the parting with it will occasion my Death. But no matter, I was resolv'd at any rate to content you, being sure that tho' I am so un∣happy as not to draw your Compassion while I live, it will be impossible for you to refuse it me after my Death. He said this with a certain Ac∣cent that was still more affecting than his words, and the Dutchess being toucht to the very heart, had only the power to answer him: How, Prince, is it then you, and do not my eyes deceive me? In saying this she went to fit her self down in a Chair that was near the Window, and the Count ha∣ving followed her: Yes Madam, 'tis me, to her he said, who am come to shew you by a Blind Obedience, how
submissive I shall ever be to your will. What Command could you have laid upon me more ungratefull than that of sending your Picture back? Yet, what greater Obedience can you de∣sire, than the bringing of it my self? But Madam, he added, do not push your Cruelty further; Let it be suf∣ficient that you have Experienc'd what I was capable of doing fr your sake; a greater Sacrifice cannot but be prejudicial to you as well as to me. I should lose my Life, and for your part, you would lose a Prince, whose Conservation must be of importance to you, if it be true that you in the least Esteem those that Esteem you above all the World together. The Dutchess perceiving that this Conversation instill'd strange tendernesses in oher heart, and apprehending it might make her commit some Weakness unbe∣coming a Princess, turn'd her Eyes from off him, and seeking to speak of other matters: Ho
does my Husband? to him she said, Is he not much concern'd, much trou∣bled at my absence? Ah! Madam, the Count retorted at these words, is this a Discourse for the present time? Does he not write t'ye when he pleases? And is it not his bus'∣ness to give you an account of all you ask me? Why am I allow'd to do the same, and would you after that think it necessary to inform you of the Sentiments I should have in your absence? Why not, the Dutchess made him answer, if you were my Husband? Do not you know that People ever doubt of their happiness, and whatever assurance they may have, they are glad to have still new proofs of it? Ah! Madam, the Count repartee'd, Why, am not I in his Place? I should certainly spare you the trouble of enquiring that of any other than my self? I would tell it you that you should be weary of it at the long run; but I perceive the happiness of others makes
me forget my own Ʋnhappiness, far from possessing the Original, you have the Cruelty as not to leave me so much as the Copy. Is it possible you should continue in this Injustice; Nay, and though you should not suf∣fer your self to be wrought upon by my Love, would you be insensible to my Obedience. While they were upon this Subject, word was brought to Madam d'Elboeuf that the Cardi∣nal came to see her. This Visit at so indecent an hour for the visi∣ting of Ladies, did so surprize her that she imagin'd he had got some secret notice of the Counts coming. She had not sufficient Power over her mind as to hide her fears, and she that had the hard heart to take her Picture from him again, could not for∣bear saying something to him then that was most obliging. The Count, who was less susceptible of Apprehension, bid her take
heart, and go meet the Cardinal for fear he should come into the Closet. But he, wing'd with Love, being mounted into the Cham∣ber, without any Body's introdu∣cing him, as he had been told that she was in her Closet, he went thither also without asking any Body's leave. He wanted little of catching the Count upon his knees, and he was but just got up upon the noise he had heard, when he came near the door. As his shop was displaid upon a Table, the Cardinal, all distrust∣full as he naturally was, did not harbour any suspicion, and after having cast his Eyes upon the Pictures, I mention'd before, he ask'd the Dutchess whose that was she held in her hands. It was her own which she had not had the foecast to hide, so amaz'd was she at his coming; and the ardinal hang cast  Eyes up∣n it: Ah! Madam, sad he to her,
here's one that out vies all the Rest, however beautifull they may be, and if you had taken it to confront 'em together, it was not necessary you should give your self that Trouble, since you must needs know that there is nothing in any wise to be compared to your Beauty. I leave you to think how much this discourse was displeasing to the pretended Merchant, who tho' he tacitly jump'd in Opinion, that it contain'd nothing but the truth, yet did not he think it lookt well in any bodys Mouth but his own. Nevertheless it was not so disa∣greeable to the Princess. In her present surprize she was very much perplex'd how to answer the Cardinal; but what he had newly started opening her the way: I really took it, said she to him, for what you say, but I have found it so little to my advantage that quite out of Countenance, I am going to lock it up again. At these
words she put it in her Pocket, which equally vex'd the Count and the Cardinal; the later pre∣tending to enjoy the sight of it lon∣ger, & the former hoping for some∣thing more reall. The Cardinal who was at Liberty to speak, told her, that as she was a Party in the Cause, her Judgment of it was to be waved: That she ought much rather to referr it to him. Whereupon he ask'd of her again the sight of her Picture, to con∣front it with the Others: That it was not however requisite for the giving it the advantage, having before his eyes the original, which was a sure warrant that nothing was comparable to it; unless they went about to judge not only of the features, but also of the paint∣ing; that it was only on this ac∣count, that he ask'd her her repre∣sentation, not to make a Compari∣son of her Beauty, but to decide of the Painters ability.
The Cardinal, who had wit as well for entertainment of Gallan∣try as for matters of state said a thousand pretty things more up∣on this Subject. In the mean while he was so enflam'd by beholding the Beauties which the Princess expos'd to view, that being eager to tell her a great many more soft things, he only wanted to dispatch the Sham Merchant out of the Way. For this purpose he ask'd what pleas'd her of his shop, and she extolling all in the Lump, that she might not be oblig'd to dismiss the Count so soon, the Cardinal being desirous to cut short, ask'd the pretended Merchant what he would have for the whole. The Sum the Count said, was imme∣diately agreed to by the Cardinal, and he bid him seeing after this he did not as yet go his ways, that he needed only come to his house at two of the Clock, and he should have his money paid him. The
Count had nothing to say, and being heartily vex'd that he was thus oblig'd to give ground, he went and planted himself at a gate that was just opposite to Elboeuf Hall The Cardinals visit was very long; but as it is with reason that People commonly say the time is Tedious to him that dances atten∣dance, it is easy to believe me when I shall say that it seem'd much longer to the Count then it in reality was. His Eminency who was ever in Love with the Princess, was glad of meeting with a Pretence of seeing her, and was that time come to tell her a∣new that her Husband should re∣turn when she pleased; but that she must intimate to him that he must absolutely divorce himself from the Count's Interests, who with just reason was become su∣spected by the King, not only by the retreat he had chosen out of
the Kingdom, but likewise by the Practices he kept on foot with the Enemies of the State. Madam d' Elboeuf could not endure he should thus speak ill of a Prince that had too much honour to be wanting to his Duty & without taking notice that she was going to give him matter of making her reproaches. Pardon me, my Lord, said she to him, if I interrupt you; I know the Count to be uncapable of what you say; And his greatest Misfortune is the Aver∣sion you bear him, nay and if you would but own the truth to me, you hate him because he would not marry Madam de Comballet. But tell me, would you have done it, had you been in his Place? And all Prejudice aside, is it a reason to persecute him? No, Madam, I should not have done it, the Cardi∣nal made answer, and I'le tell you why. He lov'd you at that time, and it was impossible for him to Love ano∣ther. But now he Loves a Citizen's Wife of Sedan, and no longer
Loves you; now that he abandons the most Lovely Princess in the World, for a Woman so much Inferiour to you in all kinds; I very much wonder you still take his Part. The Cardinal held this Dis∣course upon a secret notice he had receiv'd, that the Count was gone from Sedan to visit the Person he mention'd. This was a Fair oc∣casion for the taking him up, sup∣posing from the moment he ceas'd being in Love with Madam d' El∣boeuf, the Cardinal had been so far from thinking of securing him; that he bent his thoughts only upon carrying this news. But he could not have worse tim'd his Bus'ness, the Count's arrival justify'd his Innocence; and in∣deed Madam d' Elboeuf being fully persuaded of it, made him no an∣swer, save that it was indifferent to her who the Count Lov'd; that he was very much mistaken if he fancy'd that she was in any wise
concern'd in it; that she had told him the same thing several times, and that she not only wondred at his having forgotten it, but like∣wise that he dar'd to express su∣spicions to her, which only be∣longed to a Person that had some Power over her. As she said all this to him without any concern, the Cardinal could not say all to her he would have done had he seen her in another temper; how∣ever having found the means of turning the Discourse upon what reguarded himself he would needs discourse her of his Passion; But his Reception was such that he went away terribly vex'd. The Count, who was still in Ambuscade in the same Place, ha∣ving observ'd him as he took Coach, perceiv'd he was not sa∣tisfy'd; and as he partly guess'd at the subject of his Discontent, the jelousy he hd entertain'd upon so long a Visit, vanish'd
immediately: But another dis∣quiet succeeded to this; The Cardinals coming had interrup∣ted the Conversation he had with the Dutchess, and he knew not how to renew it. At length as he wou'd as soon have chose to dye as not to be truly inform'd how he stood in her heart, he resolv'd upon going again into the house, thinking he might with safety do it, no body know∣ing that the Cardinal had bought all his Merchandize. The Dutchess was no sooner inform'd of his return, but that she return'd into her Closet with him, where without his entrea∣ting her to tell him the Occasion of the Cardinal's Visit, she gave him an Account of it word for word. He interrupted her when she came to speak of the Citi∣zen's Wife of Sedan, and he own'd to her that he had seen one, that so he might eclipse him∣self,
as he had done, under Co∣lour of some Intrigue with her. The Dutchess being not min∣ded to shew the inclination she had for him, ask'd him on what account he said that, and that it had been good if he were to justify himself; but that for her part, she did not enquire after what he did. These words made him almost mad, and after ha∣ving complain'd of the little ac∣knowledgement, she had for him, he set on foot again the Dis∣course of the Picture, asking her if she would have the Cruelty to keep it. He said a thousand soft things to her upon this oc∣casion, but which the Princess did not yield to, so that seeing he lost his time, he would have taken leave of her. The Dutchess seeing him in Despair at her refu∣al, was very much perplex'd how o reconcile her Virtue with her Love, and seeking a Medium to
all this, she bid him stay a mo∣ment longer, during which, ma∣king semblance of musing on something else, she took her Pi∣cture out of her Pocket, and fell a confronting it again with the others. The Count knew not what this meant, and said no∣thing more to her, either thro' Affliction at her Denyal, or for that he found himself oblig'd to quit her. But this Princess being willing he should go away with more hopes; Prince, said she to him, I mean to make you a Pre∣sent in lieu of that you ask of me, 'tis a Stone that is said to have a mighty virtue for the stopping of Blood. It must needs be precious to you who are so often engag'd in the midst of Battels, and who may hour¦ly have occasion for it. Upon these words she went into her Cham¦ber, as it were to fetch it, and pur¦posely leaving her Picture among the others, this was a secret him
to him, that there are certain things which the Ladies will not give; but which they'd be sorry should we not take. The Count, who had continu∣ally his eyes upon this Picture, seiz'd on it at the same time, and putting it very preciously into his Pocket, he resolv'd not to be so honest as to restore it. In the mean while the Dutchess return'd, holding in her hand the Stone she had mention'd, and casting her eyes, without making sem∣blance of any thing, where she had left the Picture, she was o∣verjoy'd to see that he had had the wit to improve the Occasion. For in short, she had been afraid that the force of Love might make him do a thing which Novice-Lovers impute to a great respect, while their Mistresses impute it to a great Blockishness. The Count after having seiz'd on what he de∣sir'd, most willingly receiv'd what
she was content to give him, which otherwise he should not have much valued, & being afraid farther Discourse might open the way to some pique, he went away, after having assur'd her of a Love that was proof against absence, nay and against her Cruelty. The Lady not daring to discover to him what pass'd secretly in her heart, contented her self with wishing him a good Journey, but when he was gone, she found her self over whelm'd with a pro∣found sadness. The Cardinal's Confident having observ'd it in dressing her, suspected there was something in the wind, and the Toy Merchant's second Visit, with the private Conversation the Dutchess had had with him, making her Conjecture that he was peradventure some Messen∣ger from the Count de Soissons, she was no sooner over the Service she was oblig'd to pay at her Lady's
Toilet, but that she went to the Cardinal: She declar'd her suspi∣cions to him, and that Minister understanding how that pretend∣ed Merchant return'd again to see Madam d' Elboeuf, he sent for the Count de Fiesque, and ask'd him if he would be faithfull to him in a Command he had to lay up∣on him. The Count after having made him answer that his Emi∣nency wrong'd him in question∣ing it: Goe then this very moment and take Post, the Cardinal re∣new'd, and endeavour to get before a Courrier the Count de Soissons has here. If he be departed when you take Horse, overtake him before he rea∣ches Rheims; if you go first stay there till he arrives; for in short, he can take no other Road, but above all remember that your fortune is at stake in acquitting your self well of what I require. The Count did not fail to as∣sure him that he would do his
Best. Nevertheless he was at a very great loss how to come off with Honour from this affair, which put him under a Necessity either of losing that Ministers fa∣vour, or that of the Count de Soissons, who was his friend. To reconcile so difficult a thing, he repair'd immediately to an Offi∣cer of his Acquaintance, and having open'd his heart to him, he begg'd of him to serve him in that Occasion. The Officer told him he needed only to Command. Thus the Count having acquain∣ted him with what was to be done, the Count took Post, and Enquired on the way if there was no Courrier before. He was answer'd in the Negative, which made him go more at his Ease, and he arriv'd at Rheims in the Dusk of the Evening, an hour after the Officer, whom he had caus'd to put on such another suit of Cloaths as the Merchant
was describ'd to him to wear, arriv'd, and was no sooner a∣lighted, but that he was Seiz'd. He ask'd what they meant to do with him, and the Count having told him that he must return to Paris, he protested that he should remain responsible for his Delay. But all he said was meer Grim∣mace, the Count made no sem∣blance of hearing him, and had him kept in sight, under a safe Guard 'till the next Morning. These Precautions made the Guards believe that he was a Pris'ner of Importance, and this was what the Count studyed to insinuate into them, that so, when they were arriv'd at Paris, they might give the Cardinal an account of his Zeal in Executing his Orders. In the mean while, instead of going to Rest he went out of the Inn, and staying upon the Avenues by which the Post was to pass, he heard a Courier
coming, that had much outstript his Postillon. He bid him stop when he came near him, and that he had something of Consequence to say to him. Now it was just the Count de Soissons, and fancying he knew the Count de Fiesques voice again, he made a halt, stand∣ing however upon his guard. De Fiesque notwithstanding it's being dark could perceive that he had Cloaths on of the colour express'd to him, and not doubting but this was the Person he had order to seize: Draw near, he said to him, I have something of Consequence to say to you. This repetition confirm∣ing the Count of it's being the Party he imagin'd: Is it you Count de Fiesque, he said to him, and by what Adventure do I fid you here? These words let the Count de Fiesque know that it was not only the Courier he sought, but also the Count de Soissons. Thus being no longer able to retain his joy?
Yes Sir, 'tis I, he said to him, with∣out flattering my self I may assure you that I have newly done you a Signal piece of Service. Upon these words they drew near each Other, and after a more particular Examina∣tion they Embrac'd with no less fondness, then if they had not seen one another in a thousand Years. Those Embraces being over, the Count de Fiesque accquainted him with the Order he had received from the Cardinal, and how he had put another man in his room, that so he might not lose his Cre∣dit with him. However that he must advise him not to change Horses at Rheims, that they might not mind his Passage, and that the Cardinal should not have matter to reproach him that he should have secur'd him as well as the Other. The Count having found he had reason, took leave of him, after having express'd a mighty
sence for the service he had done him. De Fiesque return'd to the Inn, and the Count de Soissons staid for the coming up of his Post-boy, whom he gave some mo∣ny that he might not be obstinate for staying in that Town. In the mean while de Fiesque having staid the time, or much therea∣bouts that the Counts passing must take up, departed from Rheims with the Guard that con∣ducted the Pris'ner, and being come to Paris, he put him into the Bastile according to the order he had from the Cardinal. This Minister understanding the Suc∣cess of his journey, went imme∣diately from his Pallace, to go himself and Examine the Prisoner; and as he did not doubt but that it was the Toy-Merchant, whom he had heard no talk of since, which however he must needs have done, had he been really a Merchant, since he was to receive
of him the price of his Shop, he entred Elboeuf Hall, which was on his way. Madam d'Elboeuf who did not delight in his Vi∣sits, was surpriz'd to see him, but she was much more so, at his discourse to her. I own to you, Madam, said he to her, as soon as he had taken a Seat, that you and your Toy Merchant have deceived me, I like a silly fool was Shamm'd upon, but this is my Comfort that my silliness is of no long Continuance: But that disguised Merchant shall rue the Cheat, and I am come on purpose to acquaint you, that I have Lodg'd him in the Bastile, where I shall treat him as he deserves. Madam d'Elboeuf chang'd Co∣lour at this Compliment; Ne∣vertheless making reflexion at the same time, that a Woman ought never to own a thing of that Nature: Secure who you will, she made him answer, what's that to me, and I would feign know, how
far you would have me concern'd in't? How! Madam, Cry'd the Cardinal, d'ye pretend to make me believe that you are not concern'd in a thing, when I see you are a Principal Party in the Plot? You don't think me so simple, sure, as to believe it, you may indeed, deceive a Husband, but not a Lover. I have allready told you the one has more piercing Eyes than the other, and since you will not sincerely own the Cheat, within a moment I shall tell it you from one end to the other. In saying this out went he, and so to the Bastile, where he had the Prisoner brought before him. He being instructed in all he was to say, did not wait for the Car∣dinals speaking to him, and as soon as he saw him, he preven∣ted him by Complaints, beseech∣ing him to do him justice upon those that had taken him up. The Cardinal at first, imagin'd he made such a noise only to elude
the accusation he had reason to apprehend; Nevertheless he be∣gan to be diffident when he had view'd him, that possibly they had been mistaken, principally when he had ask'd him who he was? what he did at Paris? and whither he was going, when that he had been caught running Post? This man answer'd him upon all, and the Cardinal remaining sa∣tisfy'd that this was none of the Person he sought for, withdrew very much out of Countenance, nay and highly incens'd at the Count de Fiesque, whom he tax'd with not having done his duty. He sent for him at the same time, and vented his anger upon him. De Fiesque endeavour'd to insi∣nuate to him, that he had done what he could, and excus'd him∣self upon the resemblance of Cloaths that had deceiv'd him; but his Eminency not rellishing his Excuses, look'd sowr, nay,
and would not see him for some time. During these Transactions, the Dutchess was under mortal Ap∣prehensions occasion'd by several Reasons. The strongest procee∣ded from her Presumptions of the Counts being a Prisoner, and for that she was afraid the Car∣dinal might underhand, publish how he had discover'd him. Wherefore she durst not stay at home, for fear some one should come to tell her this sad News: But in short, the Count de Fiesque gues∣sing at her anxiety, thought it would be much better to let her know that he was Privy to the Count de Soissons Loving her, than to leave her any longer in pain. For this purpose, he went in quest of her every where, where he imagin'd he might find her; and having found her walking in the Evening in Lux∣embourg Garden; Madam, said he
to her, d'ye know that I am fall'n out with the Cardinal, and that a friend of yours is the Cause of it? The Dutchess not knowing what he aim'd at, blusht at this Dis∣course, and Mr. de Fiesque seeing her Perplexity, was willing to spare her the pains of an answer. He pretended, added he, to cause a man to be secur'd, whom he imagin'd came to see you from the Count de Soissons, and having cull'd me out for this feat, the Engagement I have with that Prince did not per∣mit me to Obey him. I did indeed, encharge my self with the Commission; but with design to do the Count-Ser∣vice. I caus'd another man to act the part of him whom I was to se∣cure; and after having secur'd him, which was no difficult matter, since he went to deliver himself up where I had bid him, I posted my self upon the High-way, to give the o∣ther notice that he should out of hand make his Escape, and that he
should tell the Count de Soissons the Service I had done him. But I was much surpriz'd, when, instead of the Party I expected, I found it to be him himself, and as it has been buzz'd about that he was taken up, and that it is impossible but that it must render you uneasy, I am very glad I can disperse your Disquiets. The Dutchess not knowing whether she might confide in him, gazing upon him before she would utter her mind, to endeavour to discover whether he was sincere or not, did at length Phancy she perceiv'd something that was for her turn. However meaning to shrift him further: Are ye in good Earnest, said she to him, and can ye be so Unmodish as to be sincere? The Count very seriously affirm'd the thing to her, and the Dutchess no longer questioning it, own'd to him how that the Count de Soissons came to see her, but made
great asseverations of her not having any esteem for him, I do not require, de Fiesque repartee'd, to be your Confident in that matter; nor shall I ever require to be further your Confident than you of your own motion shall please to make me. I am nevertheless the Counts and your Ser∣vant, and this is what I am proud to assure you of: But let him say what he would, the Dutchess would ne∣ver own any thing to him; and he did not think it, seeming by further arguing as it were, to wreck her secret out of her. In the mean while, the Cardi∣nal, who had much ado to digest what had befall'n him, had still new matter of disquiet, by an Intimation given him by the Count de St. Chaumont. This Lord in his return from Germany, met the Count de Soissons in his return to Sedan, and having known him again, notwithstan∣ding that Disguise, he ask'd him
whence that Change proceeded, and whether it lay in his way to do him Service. But as he was of the like Temper with all the Great Lords of the Kingdom, who with Emulation strove to make their Court to the Cardi∣nal, he was no sooner at Paris, but that he inform'd him of his Rencounter. That Minister was much surpriz'd, when he per∣ceiv'd by the Description of the Person, that it was the Count himself he had seen at the Dut∣chesses. He was mortally angry at himself for not having known him, and recalling his features in∣to his memory, he could only at∣tribute his mistake, to the little care he had taken to view him. In the mean while, tho' extreme was his vexation, he would not take any notice, even forbidding the Count to speak to any Body of what he had told him. For he pretended to catch the Count in
the same Snare, wherefore that he might the sooner lure him to undertake to see Madam d' Elboeuf he sent a Privy-Seal to that Lady, for her to retire to Villemareuil, Any other would have taken such an Order for a Disgrace, and it's well known that most Ladies look upon the Necessity of with∣drawing from Court, as the grea∣test misfortune that can befall them; but she having her reasons to Love Solitariness, departed from Paris with the greatest plea∣sure imaginable. This News was quickly carried to Sedan; but at the same time it arriv'd, Mr. de Fiesque gave no∣tice to the Count de Soissons that this pretended Exile was only a Snare, cunningly laid to surprize him: that the safest for him was to stay where he was, and that in case he stood in need of a Confi∣dent he offer'd him his service. The Count de Soissons would have
been glad, the Case had stood so with him, for it's a sign a man's in no ill terms with his Mistress. However as he was unable to bring matters to that pass, he thank'd him for his good will, and according to his advice he re∣solv'd to be upon his Guard. In the mean while he continued his Visits to his Mistress of Se∣dan, and that woman taking for marks of Love, what she ought at most to have only attributed to his Civility, she became so charm'd with that Prince, that her Passion shew'd it self in all her Actions. The Count observ'd it several times, and as it would ill become a Man to be cruel, he so caress'd her, as made that poor woman believe that she was really belov'd by him. Nay and there came something more of it than I have yet said; for she pro∣ved with Child, which however was not presently discover'd, for
the Count being afraid of it's co∣ming to the Dutchess's ears, re∣commended to her above all things carefully to conceal it. While these things occurr'd at Sedan, the Dutchess having no news of the Count, was extremely amaz'd at it in her solitude. What she had done did in her Opinion merit a greater remembrance; for in short she could not imagine, but that he had sense enough as to think that she had purposely for∣got her Picture, that he might have the opportunity of taking it. Now her niceness upon the point could not reconcile it self with the Tranquillity he was in after such a favour, often saying in her self that she was much mistaken if he was not unworthy of it. As these thoughts possest her mind, & which she could not communi∣cate to any body, she sought out the most solitary places, there to indulge her pensive humour. Most
commonly was it in the Ha∣zel Arbour, I have before men∣tion'd, and being there, she let her sorrow so prevail upon her, that she gusht out into abun∣dance of tears. The Court was then return'd to Monceaux, the Cardinal having thought expedi∣ent to be near at hand to her a∣bode, that he might the better sur∣prize the Count de Soissons in case he came to see her. In the mean while, being glad also to see her himself, he pretended to go a hun∣ting, and straying on purpose from his People, he came to Villema∣reuil incognito, where he knew the Dutchess to be in the Arbour. He entreated her Confident, being the same who had told him where her Lady was, that she would shew him the way to the Arbour, and seeing it at a distance, he bid the Confident go back, and he stole up to it as softly as was possi∣ble.
Before he entred the Arbour, he must needs peep thro' the leaves to see what the Dutchess was doing; but he saw her not there, and, indeed, she was alrea∣dy gone out. He thought fitting to attend her coming there a mo∣ment, and that perhaps she was not as yet come; Thus muzing he stay'd at least a quarter of an hour, during which the Dutchess was walking in a shady Alley, a hundred Paces distant. Just in the time she was there, it happened that the Count de Soissons, after having secretly left Sedan, was come into this Grove, where af∣ter having taken some turns, he directed his steps into this Alley. By chance the Dutchess had her back turn'd that way whence he came; Thus not having perceiv'd him, she continued to go on, and being weary of walking in that Alley, she went on towards the Arbour. The Count, who upon
the first blush knew her, followed her thither step by step, nay and so close, that it is a wonder that she did not hear him walking af∣ter her. In the mean while, she was strangely startled at sinding the Cardinal there, and instantly going out again, her surprize was still much greater, when she saw the Count de Soissons before her. As for his part, he was not so much at first, and was just open∣ing his mouth to tell her that he had not been able to continue ab∣sent any longer, when the Car∣dinal's presence, who rusht out to run after the Dutchess, lockt up his tongue as to all matters of that nature. Now the Cardinal was no less amaz'd than they, and the first thought that came into his mind was, that the Count and the Dutchess having made an Assig∣nation, he followed her into the Arbour, when his presence had interrupted their Designs. As for
the Count he on his part ima∣gin'd that the Dutchess knew of the Cardinal's coming, and that repairing to him, she would by no means stay in the Arbour, for fear of being found out there by some or other. Thus you see two men jelous to the utmost extremi∣ty, and as they both hated one a∣nother, hard words presently pass'd between them. Madam d' Elboeuf above all things dreading the being made a subject of the publique talk, begg'd of 'em to curb their Tem∣pers for her sake, and as she did not manifest more distinction for the one than for the other: this so piqu'd the Count de Soissons, that he forbore saying any thing disobliging to the Cardinal, and made his Resentment fall upon her. You have reason, Madam, he said to her, to be sollicitous for a Man with whom I find you at an Assignation. Not that you fear the
prejudice this may do you, for if it were so, your Conduct would be dif∣ferent, but you apprehend that being a Priest and a Cardinal as he is, his Reputation must be ruin'd in the World, if what is here transacted came to be divulg'd? These Reproaches went deep into the Dutchess's heart, and were the more sensibly afflicting, for that it was then no season for her to make a due Justification. Thus having only giv'n a General answer, the Count did so imprint it in his head, that what he had newly said was true, that after ha∣ving added some other reproaches to those, he went away with a most desperate sorrow. Then was the Dutchess at a terrible loss, her heart would by no means have had him gone away with such thoughts, but on the other side, it was contrary to all Decency to retain him in the presence of a Man whom it became her to di∣strust
more than any Person li∣ving, and this Consideration be∣ing the strongest, she let him go without saying a word to him. If the Cardinal had not had  thousand things in his head, see∣ing this he would have triumph'd tho' he had not any share in the Sacrifice, but besides his believing that he had not any more reason than the Count to be satisfy'd, fear began to seize him; It came into his Head that the Count would lye in wait to Assassinate him, and this apprehension kept him with the Dutchess, tho' he design'd at first to have gone a∣way presently, with intent to have had him taken into Custody. By this means the Count found no obstacle in his return to Sedan, where he was no sooner arriv'd, but that all People were surpriz'd at the Melancholly he labour'd under. As they presum'd he then came from his Sedan Mistresses
Country-house; those who had a Right to speak to him familiar∣ly, askt him whether she was Cruel to him; but how could ey imagine that, since accord∣ing as she grew big, it was im∣possible for her, notwithstanding all the Care she took, so to con∣ceal it, as to hinder it from be∣ing the publick discourse. And indeed it was not only at Sedan where she began to pass for the Counts Mistress, but also through∣out the whole Kingdom, where the report of her Condition was quickly spread abroad. The Dutchess would not be∣lieve it at first, imagining it to be a Calumny invented by the Cardinal; besides the journeys he had undertaken to Paris and Villemareuil with so much danger for him, was a strong Proof, that she it was he lov'd. But at the long run, after having a thousand times taken his part in her heart,
she was forc'd to acquiesce upon a Letter she receiv'd from her Husband, by which he let her know the Truth. Her spight made her Phancy at first, that far from being concern'd at this news it ought to be gratefull to her, since it helpt from her mind to banish a thousand thoughts that were contrary to her repose, nay and to her Honour. But she did not long persist in these senti∣ments, and that Princes infidelity affected her to such a Degree, that after having revolv'd a thousand things in her head, she dwelt upon revenge, which flatter'd her more then all the rest. Now imagining that the most just of all the measures she could use, was to take her Husband off from his Interests, she went to the Cardi∣nal, to whom she offer'd to do what he before had propos'd, the Cardinal surpriz'd at so unex∣pected a Complyance, endea∣vour'd
to dive into the reason, & with his Wit was not long with∣out discovering it. Seeing that nothing but spight caus'd her to make this step, he would not all at once grant her some advantages she demanded of him in favour of her Husbands return, and only endeavour'd to put this matter in∣to negotiation, so to create a je∣lousy in the Count, to whom he expected some friend or other would not fail to signify these fre∣quent Interviews. And indeed, the Count de Fiesque, seeing so ma∣ny goings and comings of Madam d' Elboeuf, accordingly writ him word of it. The Count was easily persuad∣ed of the Truth of what he writ to him, after what he himself had seen, and this news still augment∣ing his Melancholly, he became so chang'd that his friends could hardly know him. The only so∣lace he found was the writing a
Letter of Complaint to the Dut∣chess, who on her part having reason to be Jelous made him so bitter an answer, that far from minding to excuse her self as to the Love he attributed to her for the Cardinal, she left him to be∣lieve all he pleas'd. In the mean while the Count de Fiesque was not the only Person that took notice of the frequent visits the Dutchess made the Cardinal; One of her Husbands friends was for his sake in like manner alla∣rum'd at it, and tho' we ought never to give such intimations, he nevertheless advertis'd the Duke of it, whom he proffer'd to steal away his Wife, and bring her to him. The Duke who was cur'd of his Jelousy, found it re∣vive upon this notice, he took that friend at his word, and as the thing could not be done without a great deal of noise, he impar∣ted the Design to the Count de
Soissons. This was an accumula∣tion of Grief for that Prince to whom such a secret was a fresh proof of his unhappyness; ne∣vertheless as the Duke who was bitterly incens'd against his Wife, had manifested at the same time some ill design upon her, as soon as ever he got her into his hands, a remaining spark of Affection made him believe, that he should highly oblige that Lady if he gave her notice of it. Madam d' Elboeuf, having had no desire save for the rendring him alone jelous, was very much surpriz'd when she came to know that her design had operated as well upon her Husband as upon him, and as she knew the Duke to be of a Turbulent Spirit, and capable of pushing things to the utmost Extremity in his first fu∣ry, she thought Convenient to a∣void his first Motions. For this purpose she stir'd not abroad o∣therwise
than well attended, which the Dukes friend being mightily amaz'd at, he signify'd to him, that their design was dis∣covered and that it was impos∣sible to accomplish what he had promis'd him. The Duke knew not whom to tax with this; Nevertheless seeing he could not be reveng'd on his Wife, he re∣solv'd to be so on the Cardinal, and knowing that without the Count de Soissons he could do no∣thing of himself, he did in such manner animate him against his Eminency, that they agreed to∣gether to take up Arms to drive him from Court, Mr. de Bouillon, who was his Eminency's declar'd enemy, promis'd not only to joyn with them, but likewise to cause several Potentates to declare in their behalf. The War being thus ready to break out, the Car∣dinal who could make use of the Royal Authority to reduce th
did not much trouble his head about their Projects, and being more sollicitous to know how he stood in the Dutchess's Opinion, than for any thing else, he went to see her on the pretence of con∣cluding her Husbands Affair; but going about to speak to her of Love, he was so ill us'd by her, that he went away very much out of Countenance. He imagin'd, notwithstanding all that had happen'd, that the Count de Soissons was still in as good terms with her, as he had ever been, and that he was the Cause of his being so ill us'd. This Opinion, together with the De∣signs which that Prince was up∣on the point of proclaiming, did so exasperate him, that he re∣solv'd to have him rid out of the world, let it cost what it would. For this purpose he not only sent a considerable Army around Se∣dan, but also contriv'd to engage
an Assassinate. Money, the usual source of the greatest Crimes, not failing him for the bringing a∣bout his Design, he found one of that Prince's Guard, who pro∣mis'd to do so horrible and so abo∣minable an Act. In the mean while the Kings Army advancing under the Con∣duct of the Mareschal de Chatil∣lon, and the Count de Soissons not being willing it should be said of him, that he had not dar'd to stirr out of the Walls of Sedan, went out to meet him with some Troups that he had rais'd at his own Cost. The two Armies met two Leagues thence, and engaging in a Battel, the Count de Soissons being anima∣ted with Love, fought with so much Courage, that he put the Royal Army to the Rout. But when that this Prince imagin'd that nothing could any longer
hinder him from giving the Law to his Enemy, the wretched Guard, watching an occasion to do his feat, follow'd him to the corner of a Wood, where seeing him all alone: Return, Sir, re∣turn, said he to him, the Ene∣mies stand firm still at a Musket's Shot hence. The Count knew the Guards voice, whom he had allways seen by him during the Battel, and thinking that he spoke in good earnest, he turn'd his head about, and lift up the Viser of his Helmet, to view where the Enemies were. But this Traytor fir'd his Pistol at him, and having hit him where the Count had expos'd by lifting up his Viser, he render'd him∣self worthy of the Reward that had been promis'd him, by the greatest and most enormous of all Crimes. This News being brought to
the Dutchess, it so over-whelm'd her with grief, that she plainly perceiv'd that the Jelousy that had spirited her against him, had not extinguish'd her Love. Ne∣vertheless having many measures to keep in the World she was forc'd to constrain her self. As to the Cardinal, she could ne∣ver win so far upon her self, as to give him a good look; and tho' he studied to disguise that Death, which he endeavour'd to have it believ'd that it happen'd after quite another manner, she ever look'd upon him as the Author of that Homicide. In fine, tho' some time after her Husband made his Peace at Court, his Presence could not af∣ford her any joy. Where ever she went, she still bore in her heart so sensible a sorrow for the Death of that Prince, that after having languish'd some
years, she dy'd, to the great grief of her Husband, who all his Life long was Ignorant that it was the Count who had pos∣sess'd her real Affections. The End.
