H3011 C.20.f.9[72] C.20.f.9[73] R216052 99884614 192645
An Old Song of the Old Courtier of the Kings, With a New Song of a new Courtier of the Kings. The Tune is, The Queens Old Courtier. woodcut of new courtier woodcut of old courtier Old. AN old song made, of an Old aged pate, Of an old Gentlemen, who had a wealthy estate; Who kept an old House, at a bountiful rats, Like an old Courtier of the Kings, And the Kings old courtier. New. A new flourishing Gallant newly come to his Land, And can take up a thousand pound on his own new Band, Who keeps two painted creatures at his own command, Like a new courtier of the Kings, And the Kings new courtier. Old. An old Lady whose anger, one word asswages, And every quarter pays her old Servants their wages, Who never knew what belongs to Coach, Footmen, nor Pages, But keeps fifty two stout fellows in blew Coats and badges, Like an old courtier, &c. N w. A new Lady whose face is beauti∣ful and fair, And never knew what belong to house-keeping nor care; But buys a new Fan to play with the wanton Air, And several new dressings of other womens hair. Like a new courtier, &c. Old. An old Hall hung round, with Pikes, Bills, and Bowes, Swords, blades, nd bucklers, that have endured stout blows, And an old Frizadow Coat to cover his worships Trunck-hose, And an old cup of Sherry to bur∣nish up his honourable Nose, Like an old courtier, &c.
The second Part, to the same tune. New. A New Hall built where the Old Hall stood, Hung round with pictures, that does the poor but little good, And a new Chimney that never burnt Cole nor Wood, And a new Shufle-board-table whereon meat never stood. Like a new Courtier of the Kings, And the Kings new courtier. Old. And an old Study stuft full of Old, learned books, And an old reverend Chaplain, you might know him by his looke And an old Kitching that main∣tains half a dozen old Cooks, And an old buttry hatch worn of the old hooks, Like an old courtier, &c. New. A new study stuft full of Pam∣phlets and plays, And a new drunken Chaplain swears faster then he prays. And a new battery hatch opens once in four or five days, Like a new courtier, &c. Old. An old faulkner, a Huntsman, and a kennel of hounds, And his worship did never hawk nor hunt, But in his Grane-Fathers grounds, And when he dyed left every child, a thousand of old pounds, Like an old courtier, &c. New. A new fashion when Christmas was drawing on, This new Knight and his Lady to London must be gone, And left none at home, but the new Porter John, To relieve poor people with a thump on the back with a cold stone, Like a new courtier, &c. Old. An old fashion when Christmas was drawing on, Calls all his Neighbours and tenants together with bagpipe and drum, And meat enough to furnish every old room, And Beer that will make a Cat speak, and a wise man dumb. Like an old courtier, &c. Old. And when he dyed, to his Son and heir he assign'd, To be good to his Neighbors, and to his Tennants kind. And to keep still the same bountiful mind, Like an old courtier, &c. New. A new Gentleman Vsher, whose carriage is compleat, And the Coachman, Greams, & Foot∣men to carry up th eat, And when they din'd loft them little to eat. Like a new Courtier of the Kings, And the Kings new courtier. FINIS. Written by T. Howard, Gt. London, Printed for F. Coles, in Wine-street, on Saffron-Hill, neer Hatton-Garden.
