H3453 [ocm]12244430 197390
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF DIVERS BARONETS, KNIGHTS, ESQVIERS, GEN∣TLEMEN, CLRGY, AND FREE∣HOLDERS OF THE COVNTY OF LINCOLNE: To the Right Honorable the House of COMMONS, now in the High Court of Parliament Assembled. WITH A Letter sent to Master SPEAKER, From the Knights, Esquiers, Gentry, and Freeholders of the same County. For the presenting of their Petition to the Honourable House of COMMONS, now in PARLIA∣MENT Assembled. First Pinted at Yorke, and now reprinted for Iohn Thomas, 642. August 1.
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF Divers Baronets, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Freeholders of the County of LINCOLNE. To the Right Honourable the House of Commons, now in the High Court of Parliament Assembled. Humbly Sheweth, THat whereas we are truely sensible of, and gratefull for, your great and unwearied Industry and Paines, And many happy fruits which we have reaped by His Maiesties gra∣cious concurrence with you, in those many late Excellent Lawes of Publique security, ease, and advantage to the Kingdome. We do likewise presume (in the midst of our present, and great distractions, where the Wounds will prove Mor∣tall,
if ot speedily cloased) to present our Hum∣ble desires to you, in away of Accommodation, the only means (under God) to Unite us i our Duties to God, our Soveraign, and hearty affecti∣ons to one another, the very Pillers of Govern∣ment without which, all Estates are in a totter∣ing, if not ruinous condition. Which your Wise∣domes (being the greatest Architects) we hope will (with His Maiesties gracious Assistnce) hap∣pily prevent by Cimmenting the whole Fabricke into a Blessed Combination, which we anstly pay for, and Humbly after these our desires, as the only Materials we can contribute to so good a Worke. 1. That his Majesty may have HVLL (one of the bones of our unhappy divisions) delivered up, with the Magazine remaining there, that it may be disposed ff, for the defence of the Northerne parts (in case of Invasion or Insurrection) to some such Person as His Majesty shall Command, which we are confident His goodnesse will Order for the Publique good. 2. That all Iealousies may be laid downe with their effects, so as all Guars may be dischar∣ged, all Forces Disbanded, and the Militia Wa∣ved, it being the Wall of atition betwixt His Majesty and you; And we fr, likely to endan∣ger the Peace of the Kingdome, instead of Pre∣serving it. 3. That the necessity being Voted by both the Honourabl Houses o Parliament, of putting the Kingdome into a Posture of War; His Ma∣jesty
might be Petitioned by his just power (which we conceive is to worke in such cases) to continue it in such Hands, As your selves shall have no Iust cause to accept against, till some Bill be passed for the future Regulation of it; by which way all Men (we hope) will be United in their Obedience to it. 4. That some way may be thought off, for the burying of all the misunderstanding between His Maiesty and both Houses, so as the Members may meet with confidence and freedome; And that His Maiesties gracious Message of the twentieth of Ianuary, may be taken into consideration that it may produce it's wished effects. 5. That you will be pleased to make a Decla∣ration that no Commands or Orders whatsoever, wherein His Maiesties consent is not, or not grounded upon the knowne Lawes of the Realme, may be pressed to require the Subiects Obedience, but that the Lawes may have their force, and go∣verne us by the sworn Iudges and ordinary courts of Iustice, unlesse in such cases as are proper for the Parliament only. 6. That you would declare with His Maiesty, That the Church Government as it now stands in force, may be put in execucion for the suppressing of those unparalled Prophanesses, Schismes, and Disorders, that are broken in amongst us, and will prove distructive to all Piety, and endanger the very subversion both of King and State (if not speedily prevented) till some wholesome remedy be applied to heale these distempers, by a Natio∣nall
Synod legally called and chosen, whose reso∣lution and determination (being formed into a Law) may exact Obedience. 7. That the licenciousnesse of the Presse and Pulpet, which His Maiesty hath iustly complai∣ned of, as the great Incendiaiss & Causes of our present Distractions, may be restrained, and no∣thing suffered in either way, to be Published, scan∣dalous to the Governement and Liturgy of our Church, but to expect a Legall Reformation, if any thing shall be found of iust exception. 3. That all tumultuous Assemblies may be for∣bidden, however countenanced with Petitions: And for satisfaction of his Majestie, and the Ho∣nour of Government, that some exemplary Pun∣ishment may be inflicted upon the principall fomenters of them, when they shall be discove∣red: and His Maiestie thereby invited to concur with you for the making such further Lawes, as may justy tend to the Peace and stability of the Church, His Crowne and State. And that you would (for the putting a period to these unhap∣py Distractions, according to his Maiesties de∣sires) to adjourne this Parliament to some other place, where you may enjoy His grarious pre∣sence, as he hath declared. And your Petitioners shall be ready with their Lives and fortunes to maintaine his Maiesties iust Prerogatives, the Protestant Religion as it is now established a∣mongst us, the Lawes of the Land, the Libertie and propriety of the Subiect, the iust Priviledges of arliament, and the Peace of the Kingdome,
according to our Oathes of Supremacy, and Al∣legiance, and the late Protestation taken amongst us, and shall ever pray for a happy issue to all your consultations as becommeth Your most humble Petitioners. A Letter sent to Mr. Speaker, FROM THE Knights, Esquiers, Gentry, and Freeholders of the County of LINCOLNE. For the Presenting of their Petition to the Honorable House of Commons, now in Parliament Assembled. Master Speaker, VPon his Maiesties gracious Sum∣mons, the greater and more con∣siderable part of this countie hath appeared at Lincoln, and being in∣vited by our present Distractions to endevour some timely remedy of them, Many of the Gentry here Appearing, unanimously with the generall Approbation of the Clergy and Comminaltie (as they beleeve) conceived and agreed, this inclosed to be repre∣sented
to the Honourable House of Commons; as their sence and Petition both to disabuse the World and Vindicate the Countie from some o∣ther inrpretations which have been attempted to be fastned pn them by other Petitions (as we have heard) and humbly presume with the tender of our Services, to present it by Your Had to the Honorable House of Commons, a way in which we are confident it will not misarry, as some oher Petitions (as we have heard) have done, by which favour you shall obilge. Your Friends to serve you. Sir, VVE presume to send you this inclo∣sed signed only by the Baronets, Knights, and Gentlemn whose occasions would give them leave to Attend this Service, because we desire to give it a spedy addresse, least loste of time should take from us the wished effects of our Endeavours, but are con∣fident we shall attest it with many thousand pounds, when it shll be required from us: In the meane time we pesume to offer it to you, with the names of the Gentlemen and Clergy onely, though there be many other Subscripti∣ons. Lincoln, Iuly 14. 1642. FINIS
