H3746A 99828221 207790
Libellus Orthographicus: OR, The diligent School-boy's DIRECTORY. Being certain plain and profitable Dialogue-wise-placed Rules and Directions, for the better Un∣standing of (especially) the Eng∣lish-orthography. By Thomas Hunt, Mr. of Arts of Pembroke Colledge in Oxford, and School-Master at St. Dunstans in the East. Quint. Perveniri ad summum, nisi ex prin∣cipiis, non potest. LONDON: Printed by T. Johnson, and are to be sold by John Hancock at the first shop of Popes-Head Alley in Cornhil, and Francis Cossinet at the Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street. 1661.
To the much Honor'd Sir Laurence Bromfield Knight and Colonel, all Heath and Happiness. Honor'd Sir, ALthough the Piece I now present you, as it is in its self, and as it may relate to you, be but a weak and worthless Work: ; not at all worthy your view, even in
the least: yet, quale quale est, since at the earnest request of some, that are well-wish∣ers to the publike, I am somewhat encouraged to be (though unwillingly) wil∣ling therewith to trouble the Press a little; Let me a little press you to the trouble, so far (I beseech you) as to accept of its Patronage; which, that you may the less unwillingly accept of, I can assure you, no St. Peters Bonds abide is here, that is,
nothing that tends, either to Schism in Church, or Sedi∣tion in State. VVere it (I confess) such an one as Aelian's Tacticks, a Discourse of ordering and embattelling an Army, of ranking of Soldiers, a some∣thing de Arte Militaria, or so, perchance it might a lit∣tle please you (Sir) my spe∣cial, good, and onely true Friend, as being in some small measure Opus par Pa∣trono: But being onely cer∣tain
DIALOGUES of or∣dering the Alphabet, of rank∣ing of Syllables, a something de Arte Lieraria, and the like; I presume it will profit your Grand-childe, my to∣wardly Scholar; he being (had this been directed to him) altogether Patronus par operi. And in very deed for his sake, (a something to shew my thankfulness, for the many undeserv'd favors received from you, and by your means from others,)
was it first thought on: for his sake, (to use Homers ex∣pression, ) first, though crassa Minerva rude∣ly (as we say) penn'd, and now at last publish't. But whatsoever it be, such as it is, thus penn'd, thus publish'd, your protection is humbly pray'd, at leastwise your courteous Acceptance thereof: for although Chry∣sippus his  holds not good here; this being (as I have already confes∣sed)
none of the best, and therefore not at all praise-worthy: yet since there is in it something that may benefit your Sonne and other young Scholars; yea Apprentices, and some others also; provided they be not altogether , your courteous Acceptance (in my esteem, hujus, quic∣quid est scriptiunculae, Genius) will put a value on, and plena manu (as we say) sufficiently crown both it, and me its
Author; who am exceed∣ingly glad of this opportuni∣ty, to witness to you, yea, and to our English-world too, (so far as I am able) how deeply I am (SIR,) Your most engaged friend, and most ready servant; Thomas Hunt.
To the READER. Courteous Reader, VVHat was more than twenty years ago by the by, (onely as a by-work) practised among my weaker mi∣nor-Scholars in private, I now take the boldness to print for the publike. Many of my abler then-Scholars (now Fathers of children, I had almost said Grand-fathers) by their often (and that very lately too) in my hearing, lovingly and li∣kingly repeating what I did to
then, have (in part) put me upon what I do now; of which, if any be well-done, 'tis well, if otherwise, let me be blamed for the failings, censured for the faults; yet so blamed, so censu∣red (I beseech thee) as that I be not altogether discouraged to amend what's amiss: if this (now blushingly exposed to publike view) chance to have the happiness to deserve a Re∣impression: in the mean while I remain thine, Tho: Hunt.
Gratulatory ex-tempore Ver∣ses of three, quondam-Scho∣lars to T. H. BAd times, bad Books, most commonly produce; Times better, better Books, of better use: And now (if any) trust me! this is one Deserves Youth's commendations: for 'tis none Of those that slily teach boys, youth, & men Rebelliously to handle Pike, or Pen. This, this hint's Loyalty; this, this is good, And Hunt's, hunt's not for praise, (much less) for blood. Accept it then; upon it (School-boy) pore; For, for Orthography thou needst no more; And since, like This, none extant was be∣fore, 'Tis worth thy pains to read it o're & o're. S. T i. c.
REader, this School-boy's Directory's none Of the THE Directory: that was one, (Though for a while, the same some did dore) Just worth three farthings twice told, and no more: Of more worth's this by far; this, this is one Learns all to spell all, but Rebellion. May't prosper then! And, as by it before I better'd was, so now let thousands more. R. W. g. ALl sorts of words this little Book spells: none Excepted are, onely Rebellion. Since then 'tis loyal, carp not at it, (Sir!) Lest (like T. H.) it prove a Sufferer. W. B. c. p.
T. H. his School-boyes to MOMUS. MOmus! since this small Book will profit us, Commend it, or come mend it, O Mo∣mus! Wilt not? Canst frown? frown then, for thy frown more Commends it than thy smile can: frown therefore.
Libellus Orthographicus: Or, The School boy's Directory. DIALOGUE I. Adam, Benjamin. Of Orthography. A. BEn. what Book is that? B. Libellus Orthographicus. A Why is it call'd so? B Because it containeth Rules for the better understanding of Orthography. A. What is Orthography? B. Orthography is that part of Grammar that teacheth with what Letters any word is to be spell'd. A. How many things doth it treat of? B. Four things. A. Which be they? B. First Letters, Secondly Syllables, (to which I shall also ad Words. Thirdly, Right utterance. And fourthly, Points of sentences▪ of all which in their order.
A. First then of the first, to wit. Letters. B. Of letters, see the following-Dialogue. DIALOGUE II. Charls, David. Of letters in general. C. DAvid what is a letter? D. Honest Charls, a letter is the least part of a word C. How many letters are there? D. Twenty four. C. Name them. D. A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z. C. How many things belong to every letter? D. Three things. C. Which be they? D 1. Name whereby it's call'd. 2. Figure whereby it's known. 3 Force whereby it's pronounc'd. C. What are made of letters? D. Syllables. C. What of Syllables? D. Words. C. What of words? D. A speech, which is either prose, or verse. C. How many waies are letters distinguish∣ed? D. Two waies, according to 1. shape, 2. sound.
C. Let us hear what can be said of letters distinguished according to their shape? D. That you shall, but because Emanuel and Francis have undertaken that task, I shall leave it to them to discourse of. DIALOGUE III. Emanuel, Francis. Of letters distinguished according to shape. E. FRancis, how are letters distinguished ac∣cording to their shape? F. First into great, as A, B, C, or secondly small as a b c. E. When must we write great letters? when small? F. We must write great letters in the be∣ginning of, I. Sentences, as Fear God, Honor the King: II. Proper names as Henry, Thomas, Severn, Oxford: to which we may ad also names of 1. Arts, as Grammar, Logick. 2. Trades, as Clothier, Sadler. 3. Offices, as Bishop, Major. 4. Dignities, as Majesty, Highness. III. The more eminent words of sentences, as this of Calvin's: Never did man truely fear God, but he like∣wise honor'd the King: here the more eminent words, to wit, God, and King, are written with
great letters, as you see: also that of Quarles's: Durable is that State where Aaron commands the people, and where Moses commands Aa∣ron: but mst happy in the continuance, where God commands both: here State, Aaron, Moses, God are written also with great letters. 4. Every verse in a Poem; as, May we all live more loyal and more true, To give to Caesar and to God their due. E. Now I perceive that the beginning of sentences of proper names, of the more emi∣nent words of sentences, and lastly of every verse are written with great letters; but (friend,) concerning proper names, are there many kindes of them? F. Yea, as the names 1. of heathenish Gods, Jupiter, Neptune, 2. Men Charls, James. 3. Rivers, Thames, Avon. 4 Winds, East-wind, North-wind, of which there are 32 according to the Sea mans Card. 5. Moneths, which are 12. in number, as you know. 6. Heathenish Goddesses, Juno, Venus. 7. Women, Alice, Mary. 8. Cities, London, Worcester. 9. Islands, Britain, Cyprus: 10. Countries, France, Spain▪ these ten are all proper names, and therefore must be written with great letters. E. What say you to all other names or words? F I say that all other words are commonly written with small letters.
E. When great letters are set alone, or but few together, what do they signifie, o stand sometime for? F. They stand sometimes, 1. For whole words, so M. T. C. stand for Mark, Tully, Cicero, L for Lord, LL. for Lords, B. for Bishop▪ BB. for Bishops; or, 2. For a Number, so (I) standeth for one, (V) for five, (X) ten (L) fifty, (C) an hundred, (D five hundred, (M) a thousand, and all these are called numeral letters. E. What doth a lesser numeral letter (pla∣ced before a greater) take away? F. It taketh away just so much as it is in its self, so (i) set before (v) as thus (iv) makes four. E. What doth it, being set after? F. Ad so much as it is in its self, so (i) set after (v) thus (vi) maketh six: after (x) thus (xi) eleven. E If a cros-line be made over a numeral letter, what doth it imply? F. Thousands, so a cros-line over v̄ is five thousand, over x̄ ten thousand and so of the rest. E So much of Letters distinguished ac∣cording to their shape; can you say any thing of letters distinguished according to their sound? F. Yes, that I can, but I shall leave that to George and Henry, the two next speakers.
DIALOGUE IV. George, Henry. Of letters distinguished according to sound. G. Henry, how are letters distinguished ac∣cording to their sound▪ H. Into 1. vowels, (of which are made dipththongs) or 2. consonants. G. How are consonants divided? H. Into 1. Mutes, or 2 half-vowels. G How are half-vowels divided? H. Into 1. liquids, or 2. double-consonants. G. Your distinguishing of letters thus ac∣cording to their sound, I like very well, but hear me one word. H. Well, I hear you, say on. G. Shall we have any thing of all these, to wit, of vowels, dipththongs, consonants, and the rest, as they lye in their order? H. Yea, you shall have a Dialogue of each one of them. G. Your Dialogue then of vowels in the first place. H. Attend to James and Kellam. DIALOGUE V. James, Kellam. Of Vowels. J. PLay-fellow what is a vowel? K. A vowel is a letter which maketh a full and perfect sound of its self.
I. How many vowels are there? K. Five, to wit, a, e, i, o, u, to which also is added the greek vowel (y) I. Are a, e, i, o, u, alwaies vowels? K. No, for (i) and (u) in the same syllable, placed either before themselves, or other vowels, are consonants. I. How are they written when they are vo∣wels? how when consonants? K When vowels thus, (i, u,) when conso∣nants thus, (j v.) I. Are (j) and (v) when they are conso∣nants, set before all the vowels? K. Yea. I. Your example of (j) K. Ja, je, ji, jo▪ ju: jack, jet, jig, jog, jug. I Your example of (v.) K. Va, ve, vi, vo, vu: vast, verse, vine, vomit▪ vulgar, also (y) is a consonant when it is pla∣ced before a, e, o, as ya, ye, yo▪ yate, yet, yoak. I. But tell me one thing. K. What is it? I. When j, and y are consonants, are they sounded alike? K. No; for (j) before a, e, o, makes jack, jet, jog, as you have heard even now: but y before them makes yate, yet, yoak, and that is the rea∣son why (yet) differs so from (et) as to jet up and down. I. But what say you of y, as also of w, com∣ing after a, e, o?
K. I say that (y) as also (w) coming after a, e, o, become vowels, and make diphthongs, as ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow. I. What more? K. That y, is never set before (i) or (u) therefore I said even now, ya, ye, yo, leaving out (i) and (u); also that (w) never comes be∣fore (u). I. But by your favour, (y) doth sometimes come before (i), as this word (yield) can wit∣ness. K. True, in this word (y) cometh before (i) but you must take notice, that the found of (ee) in that word is expressed by (ie) so is it also in shield, field, and in many other such like words. I. To go on then, have you any thing else to say of y, and w? K. Onely this, that after (i) neither (w) nor (y) can stand in the same syllable; nor after (u) neither, except (v) become a consonant, and (y) a vowel; as to vy, with any one: the word vy here makes it good. I. Now let's hear the Dialogue of dipth∣thongs, Kellam. K. You shall Iames, but it must be out of the mouths of Luke and Michael.
DIALOGUE VI. Luke, Michael. Of Dipththongs. L. MIchael, how are dipththongs made? M. Of the vowels diversly placed. L. Will any two vowels make a dipththong? M. No, i, and u, before any vowels will not make dipththongs. L. Why so? M. Because they must either, 1 be separated, as in this word pi-ety: i, is separated from (e); or else 2. they must be turned into consonants, as in this word in-vent (v) is a consonant; or 3. one of the vowels is but little sounded, so we sound (u) but very little in these words, guid∣ance, guide, guift, and the like. L. What vowels then coming before other vowels will make dipththongs? M. These three, to wit, a, e, o, set before (i) make ai, ei, oi, set before (u) au, eu, ou. L. But ae, oe, are dipthongs, and yet there is neither (i) nor (u) in them. M. These are dipththongs 'tis true, but such that are onely used in Latine: as (aetas) with ae, coelum with (oe) and in some few english words borrowed from the Greek as oeconomy, &c. L. What is a dipththong? M. A dipththong is the sound of two vowels in one syllable.
L. How are dipththongs divided? M. Into 1 six, perfect or proper, as ai, ei, oi, au eu, ou: or 2 four imperfect or improper, as ea, ee, oa, oo L. What is the difference betwixt perfect, and imperfect dipththongs? M. This, in perfect dpththongs both the vow∣els make a perfect sound; but in the imperfect ones, one of the vowels is but little sounded. L. What vowels (set before others) do make the four imperfect dipththongs? M. These two vowels (e and o.) L. As how, I pray? M. (e) set before (a) maketh (ea), before it self (ee) so (o) before (a) maketh (oa), be∣fore it self (oo,) and so you have the four imper∣fect dipthongs, ea, ee, oa, oo. L. But 'twas said before (as I remember) that (y) and (w) coming after a, e, o, became vowels, and so made these dipththongs, to wit, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow, now what is the difference between ai, ei, oi, with an (i) and ay, ey, oy, with a y? as also between au, eu, ou, with an (u) and aw, ew, ow, with (w?) M. This: dipthongs made with (i and u) are pronounced short, those with (y and w) long: so that there are six perfect short, and six perfect dipthongs that are long. L. Have you any thing else to say of dip∣thongs? M. Nothing at present.
L. Having done then with dipthongs, a word or two of consonants, and first of them in general, what say you to it Michael, what say you? M. What say I? what say Nicholas and Obadiah? for they are the two next-appointed speakers. DIALOGUE VII. Nicholas, Obadiah. Of Consonants in general. N. OBadiah, how were we taught at first to finde out the natural sound of con∣sonants? O. How? by the speech of some Stutterer, or stammerer, I think, who in labouring to ex∣press the first letter of a word, doubleth or tre∣bleth it, before he can expressively tell us the word it self. N. Your instance in one or two words I pray. O. Thus then, l l l lame, so b b b b big; now letters being first divised according to sounds, the stammerer (labouring to sound (l.) in lame (b) in big, as you see) taught us how to finde out the natural sound of (l) and (b) here, and so of the rest. N. How many consonants are there? O. Nineteen, b c d f g h k l m n p q r s t w x y z.
N. What is a consonant? O. A Consonant is a letter that must needs be sounded with a vowell. N. Cannot the consonants make a syllable without a vowel? O. They cannot, for without a vowel all the consonants put together, (onely (st), the note of silence▪ or so excepted) make not so much as one syllable; hence it is that (strn) spelleth nothing because there is no vowel. N: How are consonants divided? O. Into 1 mutes which are nine, b c d f g k p q t, or 2 half-vowels, of which four, to wit, l m u r, are called liquids, these two, x z, dou∣ble consonants. N. But stay (str) 9. mutes, 4. liquids 2. double consonants makes but 15. consonants, so that there are four of the 19. consonants wanting, to wit, (h s w and y, (when i t s a con∣sonant) O. True, these are (as you say) wanting, but as the letter s is a letter of its own power, and pronuntiation; that is, neither mute, nor liquid, nor double consonant, (as you shall hear by and by,) so we shall term the other three, to wit, h w y, to be like this (s) yet we shall call them consonants: but more shall be said of them hereafter. N. But why said you even now (y) the con∣sonant?
O Because both it and (w) also are (as hath been spoken before) sometimes vowels, some∣times consonants; but of them, as also of (h and s) more in some of the following Dialogues. N. So much of consonants in general, now what say you of mutes? O. What concerneth (mutes) let Peter and Robert say what they can of them, for 'tis theirs so to do. DIALOGUE VIII. Peter, Robert. Of Mutes P. RObert what is a mute? R. A mute is a letter which hath the sound of the vowel (e) after it, and so forth. P. How many mutes are there? R. Nine, b c d f g k p q t. P. But hath not the mute (f) the ound of the vowel (e) before it? R. No. P. Why so? R. It answereth to (φ) fi the Greek letter, which hath the vowel sounding after it, now this rub (as we say) being removed, all the rest are so plain, and smooth, that none can stumble at them. P What say you of the mute (q?) R. That onely (u) with another vowel will
immediately follow it, hence it is that we say, qua, que, qui, quo, as quart, quern, quick, que∣tidian. P. But why not (quu?) R. Because no English word will have (quu) though some latine will, as loquuntur, &c. P. Now for half-vowels, what of them? R. What is to be said of them, Samuel and Thomas are in readiness, to make plain to you in their Dialogue. DIALOGUE IX. Samuel, Thomas. Of Half-vowels. S. THomas, what is an half-vowel? T. An half vowel is a letter which hath the sound of the vowl (e) before it. S. How many half-vowels are there? T. Seven, l m n r s x z▪ S. What is the half-vowel (s) generally accounted? T. Neither a mute, nor a liquid; but a let∣ter of its own power and pronunciation. S. When is long (s) to be written? when short (s?) T. Long s is written in the beginning and middle of words; but short (s) when it is the last letter in the word. S. Your example.
T. In this word (siste s the two former are long (ss) the last is short (s) S. But by your leave (Thomas) this that you say of short (s) as that it onely should be written in the end of a word, is not true. T. How prove you that? S. Thus, (to lees, to rais, to paus,) these three, to name no more, to wit, lees, rais, paus, have long (s) the last letter of the word there∣fore your rule faileth. T. For answer, There is no general Rule, but hath its exception, besides long (s) in these (and the like) words, is to difference them from o∣thers, else short (s) would take place. S. From what words doth long (s) diffe∣rence them? can you shew us? T. Yes, that I can, mark then: These with long (s) are usualy verbs, and are so written (I suppose) to difference them from plurals of Nunes; so then we write (to lees, to rais, to paus, &c.) as you see, lest they should be taken for these plurals: lees of wine, raies of the Sun, pawes of a beast. S. Can you name more words of this kind▪ T. Yea, that I can, but you must not expect them all to be verbs. S. Well, I will not. T. Mark then, to feel ones puls, puls at a rope.) the claus of a sentence, a birds claws, a duns, know not the duns from other colours,
physical dos, does in the park.) what els? ten els, 'tis fals, foul fals) sweet saus, blunt saws) good sows: fat sows) a tens in Gammer, to rec∣kon by tens, or telves, but you must note one thing by the way. S. What is that? T. That these and others are often written with (e) after long (s), for instance to rouse Mr. Rous, and so of others. S. So words with long (s) difference words from those that end with (ce) and other let∣ters. T. True, hence we say to neese, my neece: good pease, lasting peace; &c. S. Now you have pleased me to the full. T. I am glad on't. S Having done with half-vowels, come we to liquids. T. Of liquids, hear Vincent and William, in the tenth Dialogue. DIALOGUE X. Vincent, William. Of Liquids. V. WIlliam, you know that half-vowels are divided into liquids and dou∣ble-consonants. W. Yea, (Vin.) that I do, for the fourth Dia∣logue says as much.
V. How many liquids are there? W. Four, to wit, l m n r. V. What are liquids? W. Liquids, are letters that do melt or lose their force after a mute in the same syllable; hence 'tis that in the word (blame l the liquid loos∣eth its force coming after the mute b.) V. But why are these liquids call'd (some∣times) mutables? W. Because of their various changes. V. How is that? W. By their several and manifold change of place, they make most variety of speech V. Tis like so, now a word or two of dou∣ble-consonants, and then we have done with letters, to wit, the first thing (Orthography) treateth of. W. Of them, hear Zachary, and Abel. DIALOGUE XI. Zachary, Abel. Of Double consonants. Z. ABel, how many double-consonants are there? A. Two, to wit, (x and z) and (i) also be∣twixt two vowels is reckoned a double-conso∣nant among Latinists. Z. Then belike (i) is sometimes a vowel, sometimes a consonant, and sometimes a dou∣ble-consonant.
A. It is so, as you may see in this word (je∣junium,) the first (j) is a consonant, because it cometh before the vowel [e]: the second (i) is a double-consonant, because it cometh between two vowels, to wit, [e and u] the last (i) is a vowel, but no more of this, as belonging to the latine Orthography. Z. To go on then, what is a double-conso∣nant? A. A double-consonant is a letter that hath the force of two letters. Z. Hath (x and z) then the force of two letters? A. Yea, x hath the force of (cs,) or as some of (gs) z of (ss.) Z. But stay, since there are 9 mutes, to wit, b c d f g k p q t, and 7 half-vowels, which sub∣divided again into four liquids, viz. l m n r, and two double-consonants (x and z) onely (s) being a letter of its own power, (as hath been said before) what is the reason there is no mention made of (h w y:) A. These indeed are not reckoned among mutes or half-vowels. Z. Can you tell me why? A. Yea, (w and y) are sometimes vowels, sometimes consonants, therefore (as others) so I also shall account them in a manner like (s) letters of their own power; and so to be neither mutes nor half-vowels.
Z. But what say you of (h?) A. I say (h) is not properly a letter, but a note of aspiration or breathing, yet (for avoy∣ding of multiplicity of rules) it shall be call'd a consonant, but like (s) too, of its own power and pronuntiation. Z. Is (h) pronounced before Hebrew and Greek words? A. It is seldom pronounced before words, that are either in whole, or in part, borrowed from Hebrew. Therefore we say (Hierusalem) with four Syllables, though written with an (H): but before Greek words (H) is pronoun∣ced. So we say (Hierarchy) with four Sylla∣bles, pronouncing (H) in the first Syllable. Z. Now you name the word Syllable, what is a Syllable? Which is the second thing Orthography treateth off. A. Barnard and Clement shall tell you what a Syllable is, therefore I shall spare my labour. DIALOGUE XII. Barnard. Clement. Of Syllables. B. CLement what is a Syllable? C. A Syllable is the pronouncing of one letter or more with one breath B. How are Syllables divided?
C. Syllables are divided into 1 proper, or 2 improper B What call you an improper Syllable? C. That I call an improper Syllable, which is made either 1. with a vowel alone, or 2 with a dipthong alone. B. Shew us first how with a vowel alone. C. I will in this word (a-ble) a is an im∣proper Syllable, may not the rest of the vowels, to wit, a. e. i. o. u. be improper Syllables as well as a? C. Yea, that they may. For in this sentence (a-gainst, e-ne-mies, i-deots, o-penly, u-nite,) the first Syllable of every word is a vowel alone, and therefore an improper Syllable. B. Now shew us how also with a dipth∣thong alone? C. Thus, in this word (au-dience) au, is an improper Syllable. B. What is a proper Syllable? C. That which consisteth of one or more consonants taken together with a vowel or a dipthong. So the Syllables of this word (boun∣ti-ful) all are proper Syllables because they have a consonant (at least) in each Syllable. B. Having now spoken of letters and sylla∣bles, the two first things Orthography treateth∣of; come we now to words, which are made of Syllables, and first of them in general. C. With all my heart Bernard; but Da∣niel
and his partner Ezechiah have undertaken that business: therefore attend them? DIALOGUE XIII. Daniel. Ezechiah. Of words (more especially one-Syllable ones) in general. D. EZechiah, What things are principally to be learnt about words? E. These two things. 1 to spell truly any word of one Syllable. 2 to divide truly any word of many Syllables. D. Are words then divided into words, 1 of one Syllable, and 2 of many Syllables? E. They are so. D. How many letters may be in a word of one Syllable? E. Any number under nine. D. What example have you for it? E. This. (I do not know these rogues strange thoughts) in this sentence, the first word hath but one letter, the second two, the third three, and so forth. D. By this then (I perceive) that an english word of one Syllable may have eight letters in it, though the latine one syllable word will have (I think) but six, as stirps.
E. It is as you say, and these eight letters may be placed three ways. D. As how? E. First three consonants before three dip∣thongs, and three behind, as (straight,) or secondly two before, and four behinde, as (thoughts,) or lastly three before the vowel, and four behinde, as (strength.) D. Very good (friend) but hold a little. The first word of the sentence (I do not know, &c. (I) is a letter, and can a letter be a word? E. That it may, but an improper word D. May a word then of one Syllable be di∣vided into 1 proper, 2 improper? E. Yes. But more of this in Ferdinand's and Gregory's dialogue. DIALOGUE XIIII. Ferdinand. Gregory. Of a word of one syllable proper or improper. F. GRegory, in the fore-going Dialogue an one-syllable word was divided into 1 improper, or 2 proper. G. It was so. F. But may we divide a word so? G. In my opinion we may. So a word of
one Syllable, (made of an improper Syllable) may be said to be an improper word, and of a proper Syllable, to be a proper word. F Make this a little plainer. G Thus. In this sentence, O sirs I always said God send us a King These three word (o I a) are words of one Syllable but improper ones. F And in this sentence, Let the King live for ay, and ey whom he should aw, are not these three words, to wit, ay, ey, aw, because made onely of dipthongs, improper one-Syllable words also? G. Yea, doubtless, they are. F. What call you then a proper word of one Syllable? G A word that hath one or more conson∣nts in it. So all the words in this sentence, (God bless King Charles) are proper words; because they have consonants in each of them. F. To pass by then an improper word of one Syllable, what have you to say of that, that is called proper? G. I have something to say of, 1 the begin∣ning. Something of 2 the end. Something of 3 the middle part of it. F Begin now with the beginning of it. G. Content But that of the two next, lest they should be discontented.
DIALOGUE XV. Humphrey. John. Of the beginning (more especially) of a proper one-Syllable word with a Vowel. H. JOhn How may a proper one-syllable word begin? J. Either 1 with a vowel, or 2 with a dp∣thong, or 3 with a consonant. H. Your example for it. J. This: in this short sentence of three words, (All s our King's) the first word begins with a vowel, the second with a dipththong, and the last with a Consonant. H Indeed the word (all's) in your example begins with the vowel (a:) may also all the rest of the vowels begin words as well as a? J. Queionless they may. H. Your sentence (I pray) then with all the vowels. J This. An end, is of us.) in this sentence you see that each ord begins with a vowel the first with (a,) the second with e, and so forth. H. So then (I perceive) that all the vowels may be placed before consonants, or may be the first letters in a word, but may all the vo∣wels be placed before all the consonants? J. No.
H I confess, we may place all the vowels before the consonant (b,) for we can say ab, eb, ib, ob, ub. But you say all the consonants (though b doth here) will not admit of all the vowels before them. J. I say so, for h) will not admit of (i or u) before it; nor q of i o u. H. Make this a little more plain to us. J. I will thus then; we can say ah, eh, oh, with a, e, o, before h, but not ih, uh with i and u before it. So we say aquosity, Equity with a and e before (q) but not any word (as I can call to mind) will begin with i o. or u. before (q). H. Will all the rest of the consonants (h and q onely excepted,) admit of all the vowels be∣fore them in the beginning of a word? J. All will, none excepted. H. You said a little before, that all the vo∣wels would begin words. J. I did so. H. Yet, when w and y are vowels they will not begin words. J. True. And the reason for (w) is, because it cannot be a vowel except another vowel go before it, therefore it cannot be the first letter in a word. H. What say you of y? J. That in English it is never the first letter of a word, no nor of words borrowed from Hebrew or Greek, as I remember.
H. But some are wont to write (y) for (l) in the beginning of some words; as yron, ynough, and diverse others. J In so writing they do amiss; since that no word begins with a (y.) Therefore (Numps) you should write (iron, inough) with an (i,) not (y) at all. H. So much for a words beginning with a vowel, have you any thing to say of it's begin∣ning with a dipththong? J. Yes, that I have; but I shall leave that to Laurence and Matthew, lest they should mutter at us. DIALOGUE XVI. Laurence. Matthew. Of a words beginning with any of the dipththongs. L. MAy the six perfect (called) short dipth∣thongs, to wit, ai. ei. oi. au. eu. ou. begin a word? M. Yes, that they may. L. May the six long ones also, to wit, ay. ey. oy. aw. ew, ow. do so too? M. Yes, that they may. L. But are not the short dipththongs (as we call them) oftner used in the beginning of words then the others (which we call long) are?
M. That they are. L. And are not some of the imperfect dip∣thongs used oftner in the beginnings of words, then others are? M. Yea, for (ea. oa) are more often used, as Earth. Eat. oar oats. aten, &c. But ee seldom; as in this word (eel,) and few others. but (oo) so seldom, that I know (at present) no words, that begins with it. L. To pass then from a word's beginning with a howel, and also with a dipthong, come we to a word's beginning with a consonant. M. Agreed. But Nathaniel and Oliver are resolved to see what they can say to it. DIALOGUE XVII. Nathaniel. Oliver. Of a word beginning with consonants, and first with one consonant. N. OLiver; with how many consonants may a word of one, (yea and of many Syllables too) begin? O. Either with one, two, or three at most. N. Can you give me an example? O. Yea these three words (King, bring, spring,) the first begins with one, the second with two, the last with three Consonants. N. What? Did the spring bring the King?
O Nay, then, (I perceive) for one unparral∣lel'd rogue and grand tyrants sake of my name, you are leaving the matter in hand, and fall to jesting. N Well then, though that (of the three (almost undone) kingdoms (hated) Villain, and his matchless Villanes, be never to be forgot∣te, whilst the world lasteth, yet because thou and many more of thy name (I suppose) be loyal and honest, I have done. To go on then. When a word begins with a Consonant, may it be with any of the Consonants? O. Yes, that it may with any, whatsoever it be. N. I confess, we can say ba. be. bi bo. bu. but will all the rest of the Consonants go before all the vowels, as (b) doth here? O. No, q will not go before any but (u), as you may see in the dialogue of Mutes. Nei∣ther will y, (when it is a Consonant) be placed before (i and u.) nor will (w) before (u), as hath been formerly proved by some of the speakers. N. Well, but I do not very well under¦stand what you say, therefore pray make it (if you can) a little plainer to me. O. That I will: thus then, we can say ya. ye yo but not yi. nor yu. also wa. we. wi. wo. but not wu. N. Now I understand you. Have you also
any thing to say concerning any other singl Consonant's beginning a word? O. Yea, something concerning the Conson∣ant c. N. What is it? O. This that (c) in the beginning of a word before a. o. u. if no other letter come between) is pronounced short like (K) but (c.) before (e and i) is sounded long like (s) hence 'tis that we pronounce ca. ce. ci co. cu. as if written Ka. se, si. ko▪ ku. N. But what if other letters, as (h. l. r.) come between c and e, or c and i? O. Then this rule failes, hence we say (chest. clew crest) with h. l. r. between (c and e): and ship. clip. crip) with the same three again be∣twixt c and i. N. Have you any thing else to say of the Consonant c? O. Yes that (e) in words of one Syllable is placed before a. o. u. as cap. cope cup, &c. K be∣fore e. and i. as key. ken. kid. kiss. N. Doth this always hold true? O. Yes, except when we shorten some words or names; as Cis for Cisly, Kate, for Katherine. N. Having done with the Consonant c: what say you to the Consonant f? O. That in words borrowed from the Greek, ph. is used for it.
N. Name some of those words O. Phantasy, Phenice, Philip, Physick, are four of them. N Next what have you to say of g? O. That (g) when (e or i) follow it, doth bring great hardness to learners. N Why so? O. Because g before e or i is sometimes sounded long, as (gender, giant) as if written with (ie. ji): sometimes short, as (get, give) so sounding like the Greek (γ) Gamma. N. Truly g before e and i sounded long (as you say) doth bring no small hardness; but (Nol) how shall we be sure when to write gi? when ji? O. Because ji is rarely found in English, gi with g is to be written more useally. N. But when shall we write g with (ie)? O. When the sound is long, as (gentle sounds) then write (ie) except onely in some words. N. What words? O. These, gest (or noble act) gem, gentility, generosity, gentile, generation, gender, genealogy, genitor, geometry, gesture, and few others. N. What say you of Gifford, with a g or Jifford with an J? Germine with a g or Jir∣mine with an J? and some other proper names; which some write with G some with J? O. I say that our english proper names are
usually written as pleaseth the painter (as we say), therefore we must be content to let them alone. N. Have you any thing else to say of g, or any other Single consonant, placed at the be∣ginning of a word? O. At present, nothing. N. Let's proceed then to the beginning of words with two Consonants? O. Let's do so; but Paul and Richard are pleased to do that for us, &c. DIALOGUE. XVIII. Paul. Richard. Of the beginning of one-Syllable (as also of many-Syllable) words with two Consonants. P. RIchard, what if a word begin with two Consonants? R. The first of them must be a Mute, or the letter (s) or (w), which two we call letters of their own power. P. Then the four Liquids (l m. n r.) and the two double Consonants (x z) (belike) can∣not be the first letter of a word, that begins with two Consonants. R. They cannot. Neither can the mute (q) because no letter will immediately follow it but (u) with another vowel, as hath been said be∣fore.
P. Are there not other Consonants besides (q) that will require vowels immediately after them, and not Consonants, when they are the first letters of words? R. Yea, all these eight; and these eight are all, to wit (h l. m n. r. x. y. z.) when any of these are the first letters of a word, the next letter must be a vowel or dipthong, hence 'tis that we say (h) hate, (l) lame (m) much, (n) night, (r) rash, (x) xenophon, (y) yes, z zealous. All which have vowels immediately after them as you see. P. But (m) will have (n) after it some∣times; therefore your rule failes. For we read this word (mnason.) R. That is a Greek word, and Grecians joyn Consonants in the beginning of words, that are not joyn'd so in the English. P. I am fully satisfied about (mn); which (indeed) is but rarely used. But what say you to R? Will not that sometimes have (h) af∣ter it? R. It will not have (h) after it. P No? What say you to these words Rhythms, Rhume, and others? R. True. The letter (h) doth come after (R) in these words, but they are Greek ones too, now we (chiefly) are to speak of English-ortho∣graphy. P. Since we are now in a digression, to
digress a little farther, may we not give a guess at some other Greek-words by the let∣ters as well as of this, that begins with (hh?) R. Yes: usually these that begin with (th) though not all (thr. ph. phr. pn. ps. pt. ch. ct.) and some others; as also, these that have (y) in any (especially) of the first, or second syllables (though not all also) all these I say, now and then, nay often times are originally Greek words, so also (stl) begins the word (stlata), but cannot begin an English-word. P. But Richard; when you answered me about (th), why did you ad these words, though not all? are not all then that begin with (th) originally Greek? R. No. For most monosyllables are mere English: as thank thief, that, the, and so forth. P. But (friend) in your last instance you do not pronounce, thank, thief, like as you do that the. R. 'Tis true, I do not, therefore you must take notice, that some words with (th) are soun∣ded sharp like (ϑ) theta the Greek (th): other flat, and little or nothing. P. Give (I pray) an example of some of them, that are sounded sharp. R. I will: thank, thief, third, throat, and the like. P. Now also of some, that are flat. R. That, the, then, them, there, their, these,
thine, this, thou, thus, and others: ad to these words ending in (ther, thed, theth, thest, thing al flat: but I should rather speak of these, when I, or some other come to discourse of the end∣ings of words. P. However; give me now some words that end in ther, thed &c. R. Father, breathed, breatheth, farthest, far∣thing all being flat in the last sylable. P. Have yo any more to say of any two con∣sonants, that begin words? R. Yea, something of (ch) which hath two several forces belonging to it. P Pray, what are they? Name them. R. I will; one belongs to English words, the other to Hebrew or Greek words, or english ones borrowed from them. P. Your instance now then for it's force in English words. R. Change, chest, chip, chop, choose, and the like. P. Now also the force of (ch) in Hebrew or Greek, or English words, borrowed from them. R. These, chaos, cherith, chios, choos, chusa, choler, and others: where (ch) is pronounced like (k), as if written (Kaos, &c. P. What else have you of (ch)? R. This that (ch) in the names of 1 men, 2 women, 3 places throughout the old and new
Testament is pronounced alwaies like (K); as also in borrowed words from Hebrew and Greek, as was said before. P. But are there not words, that cross this rule? R. Yea, some few; onely exempted by cu∣stom, as (cherubim) and Rachel, (which some will pronounce Rahel), these in the old, Tychi∣cus in the new Testament, and so forth, ad to these Architect, and all words beginning with (arch), (arch-angel onely excepted.) P. Zh begins a word sometimes, yet is no Greek word. R Perchance (zh) doth so in some forrraign languages, but not in English. P. To digress no longer, may not (a double ll) and the like, begin a word in English? R. No consonant doubled will begin a word in English, but in Welch they may, and do sometimes, so they write (llan) in Welch; and the like. P. Now then to return again to our Eng∣lish-orthography, will the rest of the Conson∣ants (but these eight you named before) have either consonants or vowels after them, when they begin a word? R. Yea, hence these ten to wit (b. c. d. f. g. k. p. s t. w.) if they begin a word, may have a vowel, or a consonant follow them. P. One example for all.
R. This▪ (to instance in (b) we may say black with a consonant (l) or back with the vowel (a) after (b) as you see: and this holds true in the other nine to wit (c d, &c. P Yet before we come to discourse of a words beginning with three consonants, (for that is the next business) a word or two more of what we are about, to wit, the beginning of them with two consonants. P. What you please, Paul. R. What consonants (in the beginning of a word) will onely follow (b)? what (c?) and so of the rest of the afore-named ten: for a word beginning with two consonants, (as you said even now) must begin, (if your rule be true) with one of these ten, viz. (b, c, d, f, g, k, p, s, t, w.) R. To answer briefly, no Consonants but (l) and (r) will follow (b) in the beginning of a word. P. Pray shew us how? R. Why, (bca, bda, bfa.) and so down along the alphabet, all spell nothing, until you come to (l): then we say bla, ble, bli, blo, blu, as blast, bless, &c and so with (r) bra, bre, &c. as bran, bread, &c. P. But will no more Consonants follow (b) but onely (l and r?) R. No more will follow (b) but onely those two.
P. Say you so? Why (d) will follow (b) as bdelium. R. One swallow (as we say) maketh no Sum∣mer: besides that is no Engl sh word; and it's a so sounded without (b) as if it were written delium. P. What will follow (c)? R. Onely these three, (h. l. r.) hence we can say (running through the vowels) cha, che, chi, cho, chu, chap, cheap, chip, chop, chub, so cla, cle, &c. clad, clean, &c. So also, cra, cre, cri, &c. As crane, crest, cringe, &c. P. To go on, what consonants will follow (d?) R. Onely (r w) as drag, dwell. P. What f? R. (L and r) Flesh, frost. P. What g? R. H (but of it a few,) l. n. r. as ghost ghuest, glase, gnat, grace. P. What K? R. Onely (n) as know. P. What p? R. In English words, (c. l.) as plot, pride, but in Greekish ones, (h. n. s t) P: What followes s? R. A jolly company, to wit, (c, h, k, l, m, n, p, q, t, w) all these, (if no more) as scand, shame, &c. P. What followes t?
R. (H. r. w.) as that, trot, twist. P. Lastly, (for now I am come to the last of the ten Consonants, that will begin a a word of, or with two Consonants,) what will follow w? R. (h. r.) as what, wrath, and so I have done with a words beginning with two Consonants. P. Truly you have done very well (I think,) now let's go on to the words beginning with three Consonants. R Agreed, but what will Stephen and Ti∣mothy say; if they should be deprived of the next, which is theirs. DIALOGUE XIX. Stephen. Timothy. Of an one, or many syllable words, begin∣ning with three Consonants. S. TImothy, what say you, if a word begin with three Consonants? T. I say, that the first of the three Conso∣nants must be, either, c. p. s, or t, which are four of the aforenamed ten Consonants. S. Your Example. T. Christ, with c. phrase, with p. strive, with s thrust, with t. S. But what two Consonants will fol∣low c?
T. I suppose onely (hr) as christian. S. What two will follow p? T. Hl. or hr. as phlebotomy phrase, S. What will s? T. These: ch, cl, cr, hr, ph, pl, pr, tr, if no more; as, sch, scl, scr, shr, sph, spl, spr, str, hence we say or write School, Sclander, scribe, &c. S. What will follow t, which is the last of the four, which will begin a word with three Consonants? T. Hr, as thrust: hw, as thwart. S. But will not other Consonants have two Consonants after them in the beginning of a word, besides these four c. p s t? T. Others will not, for ought I know. S. Yet, by your favour, there are some words that will begin with four Consonants, as phthoe phthisis, &c. Therefore the seven∣teenth dialogue (that says, that a word begins but with three at most) is not true. T. For answer, these have four Consonants, but they are Greek words, therefore do not at all cross our rule, no, nor our intention nei∣ther. S. Having done then with the beginning of an (especially) one-syllable word, which was either with a vowel, or with a dipthong, or with one, or two, or three Consonants at most; come we now to the ending of such words.
T. Be it as you say, but Valentine and Abra∣ham's turnes are next to be served, and see, see, here they be. DIALOGUE XX. Valentine. Abraham. Of a word's ending first with a vowel. V. ABraham how doth a word end? A. Almost alike as it begins. V. How is that? A. Either with a vowel, or with a dipththong, or with one, or two, or three, or four conso∣nants at most. V. What is your example? A. This, (to say an oath brings strength:) the first word in this sentence ends with a vowel, the second with a dipthong, the four last with consonants: the first with one, the second with two, the third with three; and the last with four consonants▪ V. Let us then in the first place speak something of a word's ending with a vowel, and first of all, what say you to the vowel (a? will any word end in (a?) A. Though in other languages, as Italian, Spanish, French, the three daughters of the Latine) and in some others; very many words do end in (a,) yet (setting aside some Scripture-names
of persons, as Rebecca; of places, as Cana, Beersheba, and the like) it is not so in English: for in that tongue few will do so. V. Pray name some of those few, that will end in (a) A. These herbs (though not properly Eng∣lish words) Angelica, Galanga, &c. end in (a,) so also fa la. notes of musick. adde to these ha. ha. he) the interjection (as Scholars call it) of laughter), these and few others end in (a). V. I see then, there are but few that end in (a) but will many end in (e)? A. (Setting aside some Scripture-names as Phebe, Cloe, and so forth, onely (he) to wit, the last of ha ha he, and (the) few else will end in e. V. What say you to, he, she, me, we, ye, be, se, and others, are not all these ending in e? A. Yea, we do often write them so, (I con∣fess,) but it is (as I may so say) through custom against rule, for all these should be written with the imperfect dipthong (ee), and not with single (e): hence is it, that we distinguish (thee) from (the), saying, I tell thee the king is mer∣ciful. V. One thing by the way, many words that end with a vowel, or dipthong, or con∣sonant, have also an e after them. A. They have so, but you shall have the
reasons of it at full, as they fall into our dis∣course, and when we come to speak more large∣ly of the vowel e, at the end of a word. V. To proceed, do words end in i, o, or u? A. Yea, but usually those that end in i, o, or u, have e after them, hence we say crie, see, true, &c. V. What's the reason? A. I suppose this may be some small reason: because words in latine end in (i, o, u▪) without e after them; therefore in English we ad e for distinction-sake of those two languages. V. Well be it so as you say, but to return to the vowel (i), do not you finde that words do end sometimes with (ie) or (y)? Some∣times with (y) onely? A. Yes that I do. V. Pray name some of them, that end one∣ly with (y) A. These, my, by, thy, why,) are (through custom) onely written with y. V. Name also some that are written either with (ie or y. A. These, die, tie, crie with ie; or dy, ty, cry with y. V. But you (perchance) can tell us when to use ie when y? A. If you will follow my direction, write (ie) at the end of a Noune; as a lie, a crie, and y at the end of a Verb: as to ly, to cry, &c. V. This that you say (indeed,) is some∣thing,
but why should we write (ie) after nounes rather then after verbs? and e con∣tra? A. I'le tell you, in so doing, by adding (s) to the noune, you may handsomly make the plural, thus a lie singular, by adding s is made lies: so also by adding (ing) to y in the verbs (to ly, to cry, &c. these participles (lying, cry∣ing, are more hansomely made also. V. But may we not write y befoe other endings, as (ed. eth. est. er, &c. as well as be∣fore ing? A. Yes, hence we may say or write, (sayed, sayeth, sayest, sayer, but this last with er, be∣cause it is a Noun, we may write with (ie too, as saier, crier, &c. if we please. V. May all words be written with y in stead of ie except substantives or nouns as you call them? A. Yes, all in mine opinion, hence we write very, heady, happy, &c which is far better then to write (verie, headie, happie, &c. V. What more have you now to say of the vowel (o?) A. Very little, onely thus much; that some∣times single o is put for (oo) doubled: as do for dooe &c. also that some write (so, lo, &c. with∣out e sometimes, and sometimes with it: especi∣ally the toe of the foot, left we should mistake it for to, as, To pray God to bless the King.
V What now of the vowel u? A. That u also is indifferently written by some, either with, or without (e), as tru, or true, argu, or argue, especially if it be a consonant v as receiv. leav. V. Having done with a words ending with the vowels, come we to its ending with Dipthongs, and first with perfect dipthongs, which are either short, as, ai. ei oi. au. eu. ou. or long, as, ay. ey. oy. aw. ew. ow. will all these dipthongs end words? A. Yes, but none more fit to handle that, then Bennet and Christopher. DIALOGUE XXI. Bennet. Christopher. Of a words ending with perfect short or long dipthongs. B. CHristopher will perfect short dipthongs end words? C. Yes, but very few words, besides you must take notice— B. Of what I pray? C. That when (ai. ei. oi.) end words. 1 ei∣ther e follows, as (staie. preie. boie: or 2 that most commonly they are turned into long dipthongs
to wit, ay. ey. oy: as stay, pray▪ boy. B. What say you of au, eu, ou? C. I say they also may end some words, yet usually the three long dipthongs are used for them two, hence we write for gnau, with au the short dipthong, (gnaw) with aw the long dip∣thong, but the word (thou) is excepted. B. Can you give us some directions when to write (ai, ei, oi, with i? when ay, ey, oy, with y? So also when au, eu, ou, with (u?) When aw, ew, ow, with w)? C. Though I dare not put it down for abso∣lutely infallible, yet take this for a general di∣rection. B. What is it? C. This: that usually the dipthongs with (i and u,) are written in the beginning of words, and those with (y and w) in the ending of words, especially if no consonant follow. B. Make this plain by some instance. C. Thus, (aid, either, oile) you see begin with diphthongs, made with (i) day, valley, boy, those three end with dipthongs made with y, this that hath been said holds true also in the other six diphthongs, made with u and w. B. But what mean you by saying if no con∣sonant follow, will dipthongs made with y and w be more used in the end of words when there is no consonant after them? C. Yes, and if a consonant follow, then (i
and u) are oftner used, hence we say law, low, no consonant following, but laud, loud, the con∣sonant d following as you see, though this also holdeth not always, nor in all too without ex∣ception. B. But stay, before I take leave of these dipthongs, and come to a word's ending with the other, (called imperfect dipthongs) with your good leave, a word or two more of y and w as they make dipthongs. C. What you please Bennet. B. May we write e after y in the end of a word? As thus, staye? C. No verily, that is needless. B. May we after w? C. No neither (although for distinguishing some words (in my small judgement) one may put e after w sometimes, as when we say (he cannot bowe the bow, bowe with e would the better be known from bow without e, but custom oft prevails against Rule, yea, and against rea∣son too sometimes. B. But hear you me, y as it makes the dip∣thong ay, may it be used both in nounes and verbs? As (a stay) which is the noun, (to stay) which is the verb? C. Yes, it may, and that constantly too, yea, and in nouns both singularly and plurally, so we may write a stay, a day in the Singular, and stays, days in the plural number, nay in this
word which I named last, to wit, nay, and in any other we may use ay, as gay, may, lay, &c. B But in substantives or nouns you say we should always write ie, (those ending in ay here onely excepted.) C. Yes, except (l and e) or (n and e) go before as (valley, alley, journey, Atturney, and by adding s their plurals valleys, alleys, journeys, Atturneys. B. Now you have pretty well contented me, and somewhat satisfied me about perfect both short and long dipthongs, what say you now to the four imperfect dipthongs. C. I say, that some of them (if not all) will end words, but hearken to the two next that follow. DIALOGUE XXII. Dennis. Edward. Of a words ending with imperfect dipthongs. D. EDward what say you to the four imper∣fect dipthongs? and first of ea. E. I say that ea may end a word, without having an e after it, as yea, plea, sea, and so forth. D. What say you of ee? E. I say that it also endeth many words, as as Hee, thee, see, tree, glee, &c.
D. Concerning oa what of it? E. That very few (if any) will end with it (for ought I know.) D. What of oo? E. That not many will end with that too, but the word I last named, to wit, (too) with∣out an e, and shooe dooe with an e (though we write now (do) as being better, these I say are with oo, and perchance some few others. D. Having done with vowels, perfect dip∣thongs, both short and long, as also with im∣perfect dipthongs their ending words; come we now to the ending of a word with a con∣sonant. E. With all my heart, but Frederick and Gervase perchance will fret at it, if they should have a put-by. DIALOGUE XXIII. Frederick. Gervase. Of a words ending with consonants, and first with one Consonant. F. WIth how many Consonants may a proper one-syllable or many-sylla∣ble word end? G. With one, or two, or three, or four consonants, and no more.
F. Well; but may any of the Consonants end a word? G. Yes, any may end an English word ex∣cept e, (having no e after it.) and q, to which we may ad (y and w) when they are Conson∣ants. F. But (Isaac,) and other Scripture-names end in c? G True, but you must note that these are not English-names. F. Why may not c end a word? G. Because though c and k are of like force, yet since c ends latine-words as lac, nec, sic, &c. and k english ones, as lack, neck, sick & there∣fore we use c in the latine, and k onely in the English, which when it is long hath e after it, as lake, bake▪ when short, no e as lack, back, &c. F. But hold, in your example you spell the english-word lack with ck why might not it be spell'd with c alone or k alone, since c, and k you say are of like force? G. Why?  cannot (as I have said before) because it ends words in latine, and although k alone might do it, yet custom will not admit of k without c before it except— F. Except what? G. Except 1 After oo or any other dipthong as cook bleak, &c. which have no c before them as you see. Or 2 when e at the end of k draweth the word long, as lake, blake, bake,
where there is also no (c) before (k), F. But now we talk of (ck) what is the reason that Rhetorick, relick, and others are written with (ck) and sometimes with (que) as Rhtorique, relique? G. Truly both ways cannot be right, there∣fore to know how to write such words right, you must observe the words from whence those, and such-like words are derived. F. Shew us then (I pray) from what words these two afore-named are derived. G Rhetorick comes from Rhetorica, which being written with (c) therefore (c) is best in that word, relique comes from reliquus, which being with (que,) therefore (que) is best here also: ad to this last, the word traffique coming from the French too? G. Having done with (c) that end's no english-word, come we to (q) which (as you say,) ends no word also, but why will it not? G. Because either in the beginning or ending of a word, this (q) hath (u,) immediately after it: the word relique which we spake of even now, makes true what I say for the ending; and what hath been formerly spoken of (q,) in the dialogue of Consonants, makes it no less true also for it's beginning. F. I am very well pleased with what you have said concerning the Consonants (c and q,) but why cannot (y and w,) when they are
Consonants, be the last letters of a word? G. Because when they are Consonants, they must have a vowel after them, and if so, they cannot be the last letters in a word, as is most apparent. F. Well then c, q, y, w, excepted, I hope all the rest may be last, and end words. G. That they may, onely the letter (e) cometh after some of them sometimes. F. Truly this letter (e) is a busy letter in the end of words, for it comes after some vo∣wels, some dipthongs, some consonants; but hear me, will all the Consonants at the end of words, admit of (e) after them? G. No, onely some will as (k) when a vo∣wel goeth immediately before it, as bake, like, and the like. F. Which will not? G. (x and z,) when they are the last letters in words, will not have (e) after them at ax, buz. F. Will all the rest have (e) sometimes af∣ter them, sometimes not? G. Yes, yes. F. When will they not have (e) after them? G. When the word is to be pronounced short, as lad, cap, fat, dam, and the like. F. Now again, when will they have it af∣ter them?
G. When the word is to be drawn long as lade, cape, fate, dame, and the like. F. But what? Doth (e) draw the word long? G. It doth, for to draw the word long, is one of its uses. F Now I think on't 'twas formerly pro∣mised, that we should know the reasons why (e was placed so at the end of words, or iefly all that might be known of (e) when we came to speak more largely of (e.) G. 'is very true. F. Pray let this be the place then. G. It shall, but why are you so earnest to have me tell you what I know of (e?) F. That I may the better understand what hath been spoken already of this letter, as al∣so of what may be spoken of it hereafter. G Well then, for your satisfaction take notice in the first place, that (e) (though sel∣dom sounded at the end of words,) hath seve∣ral uses, when it is placed at the end of them. F. But before you proceed to the uses, tell us what words will sound (e) at the end of them. G. 1 At the end of these proper names, Jesse (Davids father) Penelophe, Phebe, and other. 2 after bl, cl, dl, &c. (e) in mine opinion (under correction,) say others what they please, maketh them to be syllables: so that (stable, shacle, ladle, &c. and others of this kind
are all words of two Syllables. F. What if these particles (ed, eth, est, ing,) be added to these kind of words, as also to some words ending in (er?) G. They are still but words of two syllables, hence we say or write stabling, entred, wond∣ring, ordring, tendreth, all derived from, stable, enter, wonder, order, tender, and so forth. F. So then, to proceed to your uses; how many are there? G. Principally two. F. Which be they? G. 1 First, it draweth the syllable long, as you have heard before. 2 Second, it changeth the sound of some letters. F. What letters? G. These three, to wit (u, c, g) so in (sau) which is with (u) the vowel, by putting (e) to it, it is (save) (u) the vowel, being changed into (v) the Consonant: may, and the sence of the word is changed also, hence we say, I will saue the sau, which we did saw with. F. Now for (c) what of it? G. Since (c) is like (k) suppose English words (though) (as you know) none will end so,) yet suppose them for this once to end with (c), and then thus (lic) ad (e) to it, 'tis lice, (lac,) lace. F. (g) also (which is the last of the three,) how doth (e) change it?
G. It changeth (hug) by adding (e) to it, into huge, and stag into stage: both these words with (e) at the end being dravvn long, but if the syllable be short, then (d) comes before (g) vvithout (e) as badg, lodg, ridg, before (a, e, i,) (or as some vvill vvith (e,) and before (o, u,) as lodge, judge vvith (e) also. F. Having done with (e) (for present,) as also with the ending of a word with one con∣sonant; come we to the ending of it with two. G. Be it so, but Hugh, and his companion Joseph vvill jear us, if vve give them a regardless pass by therefore hearken to them DIALOGUE XXIIII. Hugh. Joseph. Of a vvord's ending vvith two consonants. H. JOseph may a word end with any two con∣sonants? J. A vvord cannot end vvith (e or q) there∣fort it cannot end, vvith any tvvo consonants. H. May any two consonants that will begin a word, end a word also? J. No, (sc, dw,) and other tvvo consonants begin vvords, yet vvill not end them. H. In some one or other of the former dia∣logues, we are told that no liquid before a mute will begin a word of two consonants,
but cannot some liquids before mutes end words? J. Yes, very often for instance (ld, bold, lf, self, lk, stalk, these three vvords do make good vvhat I say. H. But why say you very often? J. I say so, and that vvith good reason: for as the mute very often in the beginning of words of tvvo consonants, is placed before the liquid, so in the ending of vvords, the liquid (as if it vvould quit scores) very often comes be∣fore the mute. H. May two liquids (though they will not begin) end a word? J. That they may, so (lm as balm, rm as charm, rn as barn,) these three (to name no more,) ending vvith tvvo liquids, prove the truth of vvhat I say. H. Once more, you have told me that all two consonants, that begin words, will not end words, also that some (though not all) li∣quids before mutes, or before themselves, may (though not begin) yet end words: in brief Io) will any two consonants, that will not begin, (for all that) end words? J. Yea, some vvill do so, for instance (bs, ft, dg,) and the like, albeit they vvill not begin vvords (for bsa, fta, dga) spell nothing, yet these vvill end vvords, vvitness these three to vvit (crabs: vvith bs. shaft vvith ft, badg vvith dg,
all ending so as you see. H. But tell me one thing J. What is that? H. May (e) follow words that end with two consonants? J. Indeed Hugh (e) followeth many of them; but this is done out of beauty rather then ne∣cessity, onely two hve a kind of necessity of having (e) after them H. Which a e these two? J. (l and g) for if either of these two be the latter of the two consonants, in the end of a word, (e) followeth very handsomly. H. Your instance first for (l) J. This (bl, pl,) as able, people where (e) you see comes after (l) H. Your instance next for (g) J. Words ending in (lg, rg, dg,) as divulge, purge, judge, have e after them, so also some with [ng] as plunge but in words derived from them you may leave out [e] as plungeth, judg∣ment, &c. H. Why said you some with [ng] may not all with it have e after them? J. No, for if you place [e] after sing, 'tis singe, as to singe a swine. H. May e folow a word that endeth in [ck]? J. No, for 'tis needless, as also to put [e] af∣ter words ending in st, th, rn, nd,] and the like. H. Say you so? Do not we read haste, paste,
taste, breathe, and others with [e] at the end? J. I confess we do so, but these [and the like] have [e] onely [as 'tis said else-where] to distinguish them from other words, especially the verbs from the nouns. H. As how? J. Thus, thou hast made haste, to toste a tost, thou wast to blame to waste, past making the paste, to bathe in the bath, to breathe short breath, to blinde the blind, to minde with the mind, to taste a tast, and others. H. Well, now I suppose you have done with words that end with two diverse Con∣sonants. J. I have. H. Yet tell me, may a word end with (ll, nn, rr,) or any other Consonants doubled? J. Lancelot and Mark, the two next intend to tell you, therefore I shall be silent. DIALOGUE XXV. Lancelot. Mark▪ Of a word's ending with a Consonant doubled. L. MArk may a word end with a Conson∣ant doubled? M. Truly, (according to the opinion of the learned) there is little or no need of a Conson∣ant doubled, at least wise of some of them) at the end of words, and therefore they write not ladde, rodde, barre, catt, but lad, rod, bar, cat,
and their plurals, lads, rods, bars, cats, which is accounted the better of the two kinds of wri∣ting. L. But there are, that use (e) after a con∣sonant doubled. M. I confess there are such, yet there is no necessity of using (e) so, for the word may be written with a single Consonant without (e) as (war,) but when they use the Consonant doub∣led (e,) doth no hurt at the end then, as (warre, barre, &c. L. Now we talk of Consonants doubled, pray tell me what Consonants may be doub∣led? What not? M. In short, (c. q.) cannot be doubled, be∣cause these cannot be the last letters, (as you have heard before) in the word, neither can (w and y) (when Consonants) be so too, for the like reason. L. May (k and t) be doubled? M. (K) cannot, and (t) if at all, but very seldom, and onely to distinguish some words as to bat, the bird called a Batt, but the cow will butt, and so forth, if you please. L. May what is said of (t) be spoken of some others? M. Yes, yes. L. Well then, of those that may be doub∣led, there must be an (e) after them; must there not?
M. Yes, onely double (tt) and ll) excepted, and off with double (ff) which comes at the ends of verbs as thus to cut off, knock off, &c. L. But why except you (ll?) M. Because (ll) at the end of a word never hath (e) after it, though some in writing take no notice of it. L. But you said in the beginning of the dialogue, that there was no need of doubling at least wise of some of them, are any to be doub∣led sometimes of necessity? M. Yea, these two Anne, Emme: and some other proper names. L. Are there any else? M. Yea, such as these, asse, masse, mosse, &c. L. But why are these doubled? M. If a childish conjecture may take place, lest being spell'd with single Consonants (which are onely used in Latine) they should be taken for latine words; to wit, for as which signifies apound weight, mas the male-kind mos a man∣ner, &c. So (ll] more especially in words of one syllable is used, and single [l] in the latine, as mel or Hebrew as Daniel, hence we say fel with single l in latine, and fell with ll in English, so also sonnes the plural of son we write as you see, to difference it from sons which is sounded like [mons pons,] so a curre dog differs from cur the latine word, and curres the plural from curs, but these petty nicities are not observed by
very many, therefore let them pass. L. You say that (ll.) and some other con∣sonants doubled have not (e?) M. I say so, as the word full sheweth plainly to us. L. Well, but may they not be (though this be not I confess) the place for it) may they not I say be doubled in the middle of a word? M. No, if a Consonant follow as you may see by this word ful-fil where the Syllable ful is with single (l). L. What if a vowel follow? M. Then they must, as (ful filling) where the syllable (fill) hath (ll.) L. Once more what say you to masse, passe, and the like (which now of late are written without (e) also, as (mass, pass,) will such have (e) also besides the (ss) when a vowel doth follow? M. No, therefore we write pass-ing, pass-eth, pass-ed, leaving out the (e) that is at the end of passe. L. So much for words ending with con∣sonants doubled, now of words ending with three Consonants. M. Of them, hear Nathan and Philip.
DIALOGUE XXVI. Nathan. Philip. Of a word's ending with three Consonants. N. SChool-fellow, what say you of word's ending with three Consonants? P First, I say they are not so many, as those that end with two Consonants are: put case I could reckon them all to you. N. May any of the four liquids, be either first, or second or last Consonant of words that end with three Consonants? P. Any of the four may be the first, onely (l and n) the second, and none of them the last Consonant in these kind of words. N. May all the rest of the Consonants be the first of the three? P. No, not all. N. Name those that cannot. P. I will (b, h, k, q, z,) these five cannot. N. All the rest then, but these five may? P. Yea, shall I name them. N. No, that would take up too much time, but tell me what Consonants will be the last of the three that words end with? P. Onely these five (d, h, k, s, t,) as I take it. N. What will be the second Consonants?
or thus, what Consonants may be placed immediately before (d)? P. Onely (h) as (hd.) N. What will go before (h?) P. These four (c as ch, p, as ph: s as sh: t as th.) N. What will go before (k? P. (s) as sk: though (seldom or never) sk is found to be the two last of the three Con∣sonants in English N. What goes before (s?) P. These three, [k as ks, p as ps, t as ts:] N. Lastly what goeth before [t?] for that is the last of the afore-named five? P. These and perchance others, to wit, [h as ht: c as ct: p as pt: s as st: k as kt: l as lt: n as nt: r as rt:) N. Now I am satisfied about these Con∣sonants, as what and how many may be the first or second or third consonant in words that end with three Consonants, but are not some of these to be used figuratively, that is when a vowel is left out in the midst? P. Yea, all these (if not more) to wit, (lct, nct, rct, lpt, mpt, rpt, rnt, rld, sh'd, sh't, ckt, lkt, nkt, rkt,) these 14 I say, for the most part are so used, as help't for helped, crush't for cru∣shed, bedeck't for bedecked, &c. N. Can you say any thing else of words that end with three Consonants?
P. Yes, this; that those are plurals that have (s) for their last letter, and that some of these plurals may be words of many syllables; as these words patients, deservings, sayings, and the like, prove it to be true. N But what say you of them, that end with (d, h, k, or s?) P. I say they are not usually plurals, but for the most part, nay, I had almost said altogether, they are words of one syllable. N. What more have you of words that end with three Consonants? P. Onely this, that none of them will have the busy letter (e) (as we call it) after them. N. So much for a word's ending with three consonants, come we to those that end with four. P. Roland and Simon will tell you what they have to say of such, though I hold my peace. DIALOGUE XXVII. Roland. Simon. Of a word's ending with four Consonants. R. WHat say you to words that end with four Consonants? S. I say in the first place that words of four Consonants are fewest, being not so many by
far as those of three, or two, or one, are. R May the four liquids (l, m, n, r,) be the first of the four Consonants? S. Yea, that they may. R. What other Consonants may be the first of the four also? S. Onely (g as I can call to mind. R. What may be the last of the four? S (h s or t.) R. What may be the two middlemost? S. Why, (ft, gt, ht, mt, gs, ph,) these six and no more, for ought I know. R. To be short, can you reckon unto us all or at leastwise most of the endings of words with four Consonants? S. That I can: words with four Consonants either end with (though rarely) lfth, ngth, rmth, or else with ghes, ghth, mphs or lastly ngst. R. But may not a word end with five Con∣sonants? S. It may, but this is done figuratively, to wit, when some vowel is cast away from be∣tween them, as thought'st brought'st. R. Pray what vowel is cast away in these two words? S. The vowel (e) for they should be writ∣ten thus, thoughtest, broughtest, with (e) as you see R. What more have you to say of words
ending with four Consonants? S. That the word (strength) as it begins with three Consonants (which are as many as can begin a word,) so also it ends with four, which are as many as can end a word. R. What else? S. I say, (to bundle up all,) 1 that words ending with four Consonants, especially those that end with (s) are plurals. 2 that they are for the most part words of one syllable. 3 that none of them will have the busy-letter (e) af∣ter them also. R. In your last answer, you said that those that ended with the letter (s) were plurals, wil you here take an occasion to tell us something of plurals? Though this I confess be a kind of digression. S. Though I will not, yet the two next shall take the occasion to tell you what of plurals shall satisfy and content you. DIALOGUE XXVIII. Tobias. Alexander. Concerning words that are plurals: T. ALexander, what call you a plural? A. That that speaks but of one, as one whip, one dog, you know is a Singular: but that
that speaks of more then one, as whips, dogs, we call plurals. T. Very good, I see that the two plurals, you mention here, to wit, whips, dogs, both of them end with (s) having no (e) before the (s) as these plurals trades, spades, lakes, and the like have, now how shall one know when to write plurals without (e,) when with (e) before (s?) A. How? Why by these directions. T. What directions? A. First, mark where there is no need of (e) in the end of a word in the singular number, there is no need of it in the plural also: as hat, hats, land, lands, &c. T. But is there not some exception? A. Yea, when the singular endeth with 1 a vowel or dipththong, as fly, or 2 with (w.) as crow, then (e) must go before (s) in the plurals, as flies, crowes, &c. T. When there is need of (e) in the singular, there must be in the plural also, must there not? A. Yea, questionless, so trade, spade, lake, (the words that I used even now) their plurals are (trades, spades, lakes, with (e) before (s) as you see. T. You say right, but what if the singular end either, 1 with two Consonants, as (ld) fold, (nd) hand. or 2 with a Consonant doub∣led without (e) as bell with (ll) or 3 with a
Consonant doubled with (e) at the end, as sonne with (nne) pray how must (e) be placed in the plurals of such as these? A. I answer, that the two first, to wit, fold, hand, (and the like) are made plurals by putting (s without e:) saying folds, hands, next that bell, (and the like) is by leaving out the last (l) as bell, bels, but in the word sonne, (and the like lest it should be taken for (sons) (as hath been said before) we keep in (e) and write (sonnes). T. I have observed here all along that your plurals, have no more syllables then the singulars, but is it so always? A. No, sometimes the plurals have more syllables then their singulars. T. When is that? A. When the singular ends in (ce, ch, ge, dg, se, or sh,) as grace, church, cage, ledg, case, dish, all singulars of one Syllable, have graces, churches, cages, ledges, cases, dishes, all plurals of two syllables. T. What else can you say of singulars and plurals? A. This, that (f) in the singular is turned to (v) in the plural, as wife, wives; knife, knives, calf, calves, &c. T. But let me ask you one question more? Do all plurals end in (es?) for all hitherto have done so: A. No, these, lice, mice, men, oxen, teeth,
feet, kine, and others do not end in (es) as you see. T. I see so, but may not the same word be sometimes singular, and sometimes plural? A. Yes, yes, these two, to wit, sheep, mile, can witness it. T. As how? A. Thus, we can say one sheep, five sheep, one mile, ten mile, or miles. T. So much for plurals, let's now proceed to what follows, to wit, the middle part of the word, and first let's say something of the en∣closed vowel. A. You say well, but Basil and Geoffry must not lose their turns, therefore expect them. DIALOGUE XXIX. Basil. Geoffrey. Of the middle-part of the word, and first of the Enclosed-vowel. B GEoffry; (though you spell your name Jeoffrey) in some of the afore-going dialogues, we have had the beginning of a word with a vowel or dipthong made plain to us; as also the end of a word with a vowel or diphthong: now let's have the vowel or dip∣thong in the middle-part of the word (out of
hand,) explain'd to us? G. You shall, and first here are words with all the vowels, set down Rhymingly for me∣mory's sake. B. Let's hear them? G. (a) bat, cat, fat, mat, sprat. (e) bell, cell, fell, hell, tell. (i) bid, did, hid, lid, rid. (o) block, crock, dock, lock, mock. (u) bug, hug, lug, snug, tug. B. Well friend) I have heard your rhy∣ming-words as you call them, and that with all the vowels: have you any thing else to say, to words enclosing vowels in the mid'st, be∣fore you come to such as enclose dipthongs in the midst? G. Yea, this I have to say, if one doubt of the enclosed vowel (as some do) I shall tell him how to help himself. B. Shew how G. Suppose one should doubt whether bud be to be written with (o) or (u,) let him run tho∣row the vowels, as thus, (bad, bed, bid, bod, bud) and he shall quickly finde which of the vowels it must be written with; as for example 'tis here with (u) as bud. B. Very good, have you any thing else to say of words enclosing vowels? G. Yes, of some words, of which I shall say something.
B. Pray let's hear them. G. You shall, and they are these. a call, fall, branch, panch, cram, to damn. e. debt, get. i. Kiln, chil, spilt, guilt of sin. o. gold, bold, com, som. u. hutch, much. B. Now what say to the two first (call, fall?) G. I say, that these two, and all such like, are pronounced as if they were written thus (caul, faul, the vowel (a) sounding as the dipthong (au) B. So then, that may be the reason why branch, panch, and the like, France, prance, and the like were anceintly, nay are now very often written by some with (au,) as braunch, fraunce, &c. G. Truly I think so. B. But is not (a) comming before (lt or ld) in the end of words pronounced like (au?) G. It is hence we pronounce shalt, scald, as if written shault scauld, nay more, whensoever the vowel (a) cometh before (lm, lf, lk) we pro∣nounce it like (au) but the (l) then must be silent. B. What's your example? G. This, qualm, qualms, half, halves, (balk balks;) are pronounced quaum, quaums, hauf, hauves, bauk, bauks) as if they were so written. B. To go on, why put you an (n) to damn, and not to cram? G. To preserve the word's Etymology; for it
comes from—damno, which hath (n) in it as you see. B. So then; that may be the reason why autumn, coming from autumnus; hymn from hymnus; and diverse others, are so written; as also that sepulchre, lucre, lustre, and such∣like; have the letter (r) before the (e) be∣cause they come from Sepulchrum, lucrum, lustro. G. I believe it. B. But why put you (b) in the word debt, and not in get? G. There are some letters put into words, yet not sounded, of which this is one; but of them more hereafter. B. Why ad you (n) to kiln, and yet not sound it? G. To distinguish it from kill as to kill a man, so also (u) is found in the word guilt of sin: to difference it from gilt, as a gilt-cup. B Hitherto I like your answers, pretty well, what say you to the words (gold, bold)? G. I say, that anciently they (and the like) were wrote with the dipthong (ou) as thus, gould bould, but to write them so now, is (as I may so say) quite out of fashion. B. What say you to these words (com, som? G. I say indeed they are pronounced as if wrote with (u) for sometimes we do pronounce
(o) before (m) and n (like (u) I think also 'tis to difference them from other words. B. What words? G Com and som with (o) differ from cum and sum the latine words; and so also son of man with (o) from sun in the firmament with (u). B, Very good, but why write you hutch with a (t)? G. Indeed when a dipthong goeth before (ch) as pouch, slouch, and the like; or when ano∣ther Consonant cometh between the vowel, and (ch) as belch, melch, and the like, there is no need of (t), otherwise there is, as in hutch here. B. But this word much, which was your other word hath not (t), and yet that word hath neither a dipthong nor another Conso∣nant betwixt the vowel and (ch) G. For answer, there are some few words (through custome) excepted, of which this is one. B. Can you name some of these excepted-words? G. Yea, rich, which, such, much, to which I shall ad touch, (though written with a dip∣thong) because 'tis pronounced (tuch) B Having said somthing of the vowels en∣closed, come we to the dipthongs enclosed so also; and first of the perfect dipthongs, to wit, (ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou.)
G. Let Hannibal and Jeremy handle that matter. DIALOGUE XXX. Hannibal, Jeremy. Of the six perfect dipthongs enclosed. H. HAve you any thing to say of the per∣fect dipthongs? I Yea, that I have. H Tell us what it is? I I will for your better satisfaction, begin∣ning first with the three first, to wit, (ai, ei, oi) so (ai) bait▪ pait, wait, straight. (ei) a vein, to reigne. (oi) boil, droil, moil, spoil, toil. H. Why in your instance of words in (ai) hath straight (gh) in it, and none of the rest so too? I Because (gh) doth distinguish that word from strait, which is opposed to crooked, so (to digress a little) (gh) in might differenceth it from widows mite, right from a rite, or cere∣mony, and the like. H. Well said, but to proceed; why hath reigne a (g) in it when the other word hath not?
I. To distinguish it from rein of a bridle, without (g.) H Why hath it (e) at the end, when the other hath not? I To difference it from the noun: thus, to reigne, a reign to veine, a vein. H What say you to those in (oi?) I That some men do write some of them with (oy) long sometimes; as loyn &c. H So much of the three first; what now of the other three? I Something of them too; thus. au fault, vault. eu. — ou. hour, pour, flour. H What say you to fault, vault? I I say that these two are always pronoun∣ced as if written faut, vaut, (l) being silent H But why do you give no example to (eu?) I The reason is, because (eu) short is often turned to (ew) long. H. It may be so, now tell us why the word hour hath an )h?) I Because the latine of it is hora, or, if you will, to difference it from the pronoun (our.) H Well, but (h) in that word is not soun∣ded, are there other words that are not soun∣ded? I Yea, these; heir of land, honesty, honest,
honour, host, hostisse, humble, and others. H What say you of pour, flour: the two last having (ou) enclosed in them? I I conceive they are so written to differ∣ence them from power and might, flower of the field H I like well what you say; but because, these childishly-lisping conjectures may not please others; let's pass over the six long diphthongs; to wit, (ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow,) and come to the four imperfect ones. I Well, content, but Leonard and Maurice, will be mad if they do not do it; and that presently. DIALOGUE XXXI. Leonard. Maurice. Of the four imperfect dipthongs inclosed, to wit, (ea, ee, oa, oo.) L. MAurice; have you any thing to say of the four imperfect diphthongs? M. Yea, something, as thus. (ea) reade, spreade, bead, bread. (ee) bleed, feed, need, speed, reed, (oa) choak, cloak, moat, (oo) blood, flood, stood, good. L. But why hath reade, spreade, (e) at the end, the other two not? Is it to difference
the verb from the noune? M. No, 'tis here to distinguish the present tense I do reade, I do spreade, with (e) which is long; from the preter perfect I have read, I have spread, without (e) which is short. L. We have been formerly told, that a con∣sonant comming after a diphthong, needeth not (e) after it: neither doth a Consonant doubled, for the most part, nor lastly two di∣verse Consonants. M Indeed, without it be to difference word, or so, they need not have (e) in the end of them, I think. L. I think so too, but shew us some that will admit of (e) at the end. M. To braine; there's a diphthong in the words, and yet hath (e) in the end. To tappe; there's a Consonant doubled with (e) at the end. To taste; there's two diverse Consonants with (e) at the end also, and you must note, that there are many of these last that will have (e) after it. L. But why is (e) put at the end of such words? M. As formerly, so now again, I tell you; 'tis to difference or distinguish words from words, especially verbs from nouns. L. To say nothing of the words which you named with (ee;) what say you of (cloak, choak?
M. I say that (a) in the in-side of these words answereth (c) in the end of others: there∣fore such words as these need no (e) at the end of them. L. Shew us how it answer's (e.) M. choak, cloak, with (a) is answerable to poke, soke, stroke, which have (e) at the end, and so need not (a) at all. L. What say you of moat? M. That the letter (a) doth difference it from mote in the sun, which hath onely (e) at the end. L. What say you of the words, blood, flood? M. Onely this, that some of these words are written sometimes with (ou), as bloud, floud, and some are not; as good, stood &c. L. But by the way, why do we write (a thy my,) before words that begin with Con∣sonants, as (a) dog, (thy) cock (my) lamb, and (an, thine, mine) before words that begin with vowels, as an elbow, thine eye, mine arme? M. 'Tis so done to avoyd a gaping sound. L. Now I suppose you have done with dip∣thongs enclosed in words, (especially in those of one syllable▪) shall we now come to words of many syllables, and what concerns them more particularly? M. I confess, 'tis high time to do so; un∣less we intend to tire-out the reader's patience, but let's hear what Nehemiah and his fellow-speaker,
(that are the next,) will say to it. DIALOGUE XXXII. Nehemiah. Philemon. A brief repetition of what hath been spoken in several dialogues. N. WHat is our business Philemon at this time? P To repeat (briefly) what hath been al∣ready spoken of (especially) one syllable words; and then to proceed to what, more particularly concerns many-syllables ones. N To begin then, there hath been spoken something of letters, of which we make sylla∣bles. P. True; and of syllables, of which we make words. N. Right; and of words of one-syllable which are proper or imprper. P. Very well; and of proper words as how they began with a vowel, or dipthong, or Conso∣nant. N. Good; and that those that began with a Consonant, began either with one, or two, or three Consonants at most. P. As also, how that all words end, either with a vowel, or dipthong, or consonant: and so either with one, or two, or three, or four Consonants at most.
N. All this cannot be denyed, but what else? P. Lastly, that the middle-part of the word, that is concerning the vowel or dipthong en∣closed, hath been said somewhat to. N. Now let's come to words of many syl∣lables. P. With a good will, but Roger and Titus, will take it ill at our hands, if we should balk them at this time. DIALOGUE XXXIII. Roger. Titus. Of many-syllable words in general. R. TItus; can you tell me how many sylla∣bles may be in a word of many syllables? T. Yes, that I can, as any number of let∣ters under nine, may be in a word of one-sylable; so any number of syllables under nine may be in a word of many-syllables. R. What example have you for it? T. This▪ (ho nest, tra-vel lers, u-su-al-ly, re-li-gi-ous-ly, (not) ir-re-li-gi ous ly, (walk) ex-tra or di na ri-ly, (with) ir-re-pre-hen-si-bi-li-ty,) in this sentence, the (three words to wit, (not walk with) which are put in onely to make up the sense) excepted) the first word hath two syllables, the second three, and so forth
R Are not words of (eight) syllables very few? T. Yea, very few. R. Are not words of (seven) syllables more in number then those of (eight:) T. Yea, and those of (six) then those of (se∣ven; and so of the rest. R. Words of one syllable (I know) for the most part are english, but what are those of two, three, four syllables, and all the rest? T. Some are English, some are borrowed from the French, or Greek, or Latine, or some other languages. R. Let's have a taste of them that are bor∣rowed from French, Greek, or Latine. T. Victor and Walter (though I be silent) shall satisfy your appetite in this thing. DIALOGUE XXXIIII. Victor. Walter. Of words of many syllables borrowed from the French, Greek, or Latine. V. WAlter, what words are borrowed from the French? W. These, (and the like,) accrew, adieu, assail, attainder, lege-demain, yea, and most of our law-termes, but— V. But what?
W. But you must note, that 1 some of these words are with difference made English; as accomplish in English, is accompler in the french, and 2 some are without difference, as legerde∣main, accrew, adieu, (if I be not mistaken) are the same both in English and French. V. Let us also have some directions how to guess at words borrowed from the Greek; both by their beginnings and endings. W. You shall, and first for the beginnings of words, besides (chr. ps. pt,) and others, (that have been spoken of in the dialogue, of the be∣ginning of an one-syllable word with two con∣sonants) I say besides these; these also that be∣gin with, (ana, caco, cata, dia, eu, cpi, hyper,) and the like, as Anagram, Cacophony, Catalogue, Dialogue, Euphony, Epilogue, Hyperbole, &c. are Greek words. V. Now how to guess at them by their endings. W. Words ending in (ogue, arch, uch, isme,) and the like, as prologue, monarch, Eunuch, baptisme, &c. are also Greek, but this you must note by the way. V. What I pray? W. That these comming from Greece through Rome, are new stampt, and we also (when with us) coyne them after our fashion. V. Shew us how. W. Thus, in Greek , is baptismus
in latine, baptisme in English. V. Well then, you have given us tastes now of words borrowed both from french, and Greek: let's have a taste also by the begin∣nings and endings of such that are derived from the latine. W. You shall. Thus then; words (though not all) that begin with (ab, ad, bene, circum, super, trans,) and the like, as abuse, adhere, be∣nevolence, circumstance, superlative, transgress, &c. are from the latine: to which we may ad many, words also, that begin with (am, di, dis, re, se, cno) V. Now how to guess at them by their endings? W. Most words ending in ence or ance, are in latine in entia and antia, as patience, patien∣tia, temperance, temperantia, so most words in (ion) being verbals; derived (as Scholars know) from the latter supine, are in (io) in latine, to go through all the vowels; action, connexion, derision, extortion, percussion, &c actio, con∣nexio, derisio, extortio, percussio, &c. V. What words else? W. Words in (ty) are in (tas,) as charity, charitas, in (ous,) are in latine (vs or osus:) as pious, pius, religious, religiosus, so our in or:) as honour, honor, (ble) in bilis: as flexible, flexi∣bilis, and many more; but here also you must note by the way,
V. What I pray? W. That all these rules, are not so generally true, as to admit of no exceptions: for (to in∣stance in one for all) these words (fashion, onion) end in (ion,) but the latine words are not fashio, onio, thus much each Abecedarian can tell you. V. I believe you, but can you give us more of these? W. Yea, that I can; very many more, but (to avoyd tediousness) I shall referre you to Mr. Willis his vestibulum linguae latinae, or as he al∣so call's it, his dictionary for children, where you may be satisfyed to the full. V. So much for guesses of words by the be∣ginnings, and endings, borrowed from the latine, but one thing by the way, may not what was said formerly about the beginnings, and endings (chiefly) of one-syllable words, belong also to words of many syllables? W. Yea, doubtless they may, onely words of many syllables, will not end with four con∣sonants, (as I take it.) V. What else have you to say of many syl∣lable words? W. Many things, but there are others, that will be angry, if their turnes should not be served.
DIALOGUE XXXV. Andrew. Barnaby. Of things in some sort more properly belonging to many-syllable words, and first of their beginnings. A. BArnaby, are there not somethings, that may be said of many-syllable words, that do not so properly belong to one-syllable ones? B. Yes, that there are: A. Who will treat of them? B. I will, considering once again the begin∣nings, then the endings, and lastly the middle-syllables, of such words of many syllables. A. Do so then; beginning with the be∣ginnings. B. Content, Andrew. A. Now then, what say you in the first place? B. I say, to know when to write (ce or se.) when (ei or si) is doubtful, but because most are written with (s) as seated, sealed, sidelong service, &c. therefore (for the most part) write (s) be∣fore (e and i) and not (c.) A. But are there none excepted words? B. Yea, these, and perchance some few others:
celebrate, celestial, celerity, censor, censure, Cen∣turian, ceasing, cement, center, ceremony, cer∣tain, certify, ceruse, these I say with (e) are ex∣cepted? A. What are excepted with (i) pray tell us also. B. These, cited, cistern, cider, Cinnamon, cir∣cle, circuit, cirren, city, citizen, and all words beginning with circum, as circumstance, cir∣cumvent, &c. also civit, civil, with (i) are also excepted, hence 'tis, because cited is written with (c,) therefore incited, citation, incitation, are written with (c) also. A. But I find some words beginning with (e or i) as enquire or inquire, now which is the best way to write such words as these? B. If the derivatives be written with (i) then write always (i); for that is best: if with (e) then (e) still. A. Shew how? B. Thus, because we write inquisition, with (i) information with (i) also, therefore to write inquire, inform is best, and the like may be said of all others of like kind. A. What say you of a word that begins with a vowel, having but one consonant after it? B. I say the vowel is commonly spell'd alone, as a-postle, e-quity. A. But is there not exceptions?
B. Yes, words of one syllable as (one,) and compound words as (un-able) are excepted. A. Now since you mention compounds, simples, primitives, derivatives; pray tell me (for my better understanding of them) what they are? B. Mark then. A primitive is the first word not derived of others. A. What is a derivative? B. A derivative is a word drawn from the primitive; or thus, a primitive is the root, or fountain; derivatives, are the branches, or streams: the primitive, (if there be any) is, usu∣ally the verb; as to love all the rest of the family, (if I may so call them,) are the deri∣vatives: so the noun 1 of the person, to wit, a a lover. 2 of the thing, to wit, love, also the participles, lovng, loved, the adverb, lovingly, and if any other, all are derivatives. A. What call you now a Compound? B. A compound is either, 1 when two simple words are joyn'd together, as heref, wherein, safegard, and the like, or 2 when prepositions are added to beginnings of words, as with (dis.) disjoyne, circum, &c. A. When particles unsignificant, as nesse, lesse, ly, &c. be added to the end of words, what then? B. What then? Then we may call such
vvords a kinde of Compounds also. A. What call you a simple word? B. That, that is not compounded, and in∣deed the parts of a compound word are simple words properly. A. I am now sufficiently informed, can you (to return to our plough again as we say,) tell us something of the endings of many syl∣lable words? B. If I cannot, Edmund and Giles can; the two next. DIALOGUE XXXVI. Edmund. Giles. Of the endings of such like words. E. WHat have you to say of the endings which are more proper to many syllable words? G. Something: As first that some of them end in (ie or ey,) as monie, journie, tansie, with (ie) or money, journey, tansey with (ey.) E. What else? G. That words in (or and ors,) short, are differently written with (or and ors,) else with (our and ours:) as savor, savour, Savors, Sa∣vours, and these are commonly pronounced—
E. How? G. Like (ur and urz:) as if written savur, savurz. E But are not monosyllables, (for, nor, dor) and some others, as (abhor,) excepted? G. Yes, that they are. E. What say you of words in [ous?] G That they, and their derivatives are commonly pronounced like [us,] so we say va∣rious▪ variously, as if written varius, variusly, &c. E. But are mono-syllables as [thus, truss] excepted? G. Yea, yea. E. What say you of words ending with [er and ers with e?] G. I say that they are commonly pronoun∣ced lke [ur and urz] with [u:] as laver, la∣vers, like lavur, lavurz, &c. E. But such that have their accent on the last syllable, I hope are excepted. G. Yes, hence 'tis that averre, referre, de∣ferre, and the like, are never sounded as if wrote with [ur.] E. What say you of words that end in [eth?] G. We pronounce such as if written with [s,]  and sometimes with [z] so bolteth, holdeth, are pronounced, as if written; bolts, holdz, so also leadeth, noteth, taketh, we commonly pro∣nounce,
nay, and the learned write them; leads notes, takes. E. But are there not some, that will not be thus pronounced? G. Yea, such as have either (c. s. sh. ch. g. or x.) going before (eth:) all these remain as two syllables, so placeth, pleaseth, washeth, watcheth, wageth, waxeth, make good what I say, yet some there are that say, (though not very well) washes, watches, and so of the rest. E. Have you any thing else to say of these words endings? G. Yea, that words ending in (ance, ence, ince, once, unce, ancy, ency,) are most common∣ly written with (c.) E. What more? G. That the vowel (a) hath usually (c not s) after it: as grace, space, place, except— E. What? G. Except, 1 case, base, chase, and few others or 2 when (s) (coming between two vowels) is sounded like (z:) as amase, as if wrote amaze. E. You said even now, that words written with (ance or ence), were written with (c:) but by your favour, many words in (ence) are wrote with (s,) as to recompense, to fense, and the like. G. True, but these are verbs, and are so
written, to difference them from the xonnes, which we write with ence with a (c:) hence we say▪ to fense a fence: to recompense a recom∣pence: to devise a device. E. And are there not other words, that are so differenced? G. Yea, as to practise, a practice, the first with (s,) the last with (c.) E. But there are some, that are not so dif∣ferenced; for what, say you, to these? To excuse, an excuse, to abuse, an abuse,) to use an use, to rise a rise?) G. True, in these the noun is not differenced from the verb by (c,) yet they are by accent, for the verbs have their accent in the last sylla∣ble, the nouns in the first, as you may see. E. What say you of the one syllables words (use, rise?) G. I say, that the verb is sounded in these vvords, as if wrote vvith (z): as to use; as if it vvere vvritten thus; (to vse, a vse,) to rize a rise.) E. Are there no more words of this kinde, thus differenced by accent? G. Yes. To convert, a convert,) to rebel, a rebel) to incense, the incense, here the nounes (vvhich are knovvn by having (a an or the) be∣fore them) these (I say) are lifted up in the first syllable, the verbs in the last.
E. Again, there are some words, that are like these, that are sounded, and written alike; how shall we difference such? G. Onely by their differing in signification; so (a well) differs from, (I am well,) and a bell-weather, from fair weather vvhich holds the same in others also, ad to these General of an army vvith great G, and general rule vvith a lit∣tle g, and the like. E. But to draw to a conclusion of this Dialogue, there are some words (most of them not write alike, I confess) yet so nere in sound, that I know not (almost) how to differ∣ence them. G. These also are usually differenced by their signification: and if you vvill, you shall have here a little Catalogue vvorth your rea∣ding. E. Content. G. But let the tvvo next repeat it, for I am vveary. DIALOGUE XXXVII. Isaac. Marmaduke. A Catalogue of vvords near in sound, differing in writing and signification. I. PLay-fellow, you are appointed to repeat the Catalogue.
M. I am so, and my method shall be to give you a sentence in the several letters of the Al∣phabet. I. Pray then begin with the letter (a,) and so proceed to one of (b,) and so forth. M. I vvill do as you vvill have me, so that you vvill not be too strict an observer of the sense of these sentences, vvhich (for bringing in of these kind of vvords) must needs be lamish, frivolous, and faulty. I. Well then, I will not, proceed to your Catalogue, beginning with a sentence in the letter (a.) M. At the (ascent) of (an) hill (Anne) and I, did (assent) to break (all,) the Shoe-makers (awle,) because he vvould (alter) the place vvhere the (Altar) stood. I. I like this sentence of (a) very well, now one of (b.) M. Mr. (Ball) (by) vvhose meanes I did (buy) a (barque,) (or little ship), had a dog that did (bark) and (baul) at the maid, that vvas vvont to (bolt] the door, and (boult the meal; lest the vvind [vvhich [blew] avvay the [blue] cloth] should offend her. I. Have you another of [b?] M. Yea. Our man, vvhose name is (Brute) [bred] up vvith brovvn (bread,) being drunk vvith (beer) like a (brute) beast thought it
best to (bruit) it abroad, that we did (bore) the (boar's) ear, and did (bear the dead (Bear) on a (bier.) I. Proceed to (c?) M. Mr. Cox that kept cocks, told one Cotes that sold coats, that for all he was a culler of ap∣ples of a good colour, and his Cousin: and (quoted) scripture as well as coated children: yet neither he nor the butcher that did call for the caul of the liver, should cozen him of his dogs coller, unless they would be willing to pro∣voke him so to choler as to take counsel of the King's Council against them. I. Have you another of (c?) M. Yes. The cruel Mr. whose cap was wrought with crewel, with his wicked crue, be∣fore the cock crew, gave consent to have a con∣cent of musick, as also to chase the dear that were in the chace. I. Now one in the letter (d.) M. Mr. Deyer the dyer of cloth, my dear friend, that kept a fallow-deer, he (I say) never saw the Daulphin of France ride on a Dolphin-fish through the deep to the town of Diep. I. Your little one of (e) next. M. When Mr. Eaton went to Aeton colledge at Easter, his bread was eaten by his maid Esther I. Your sentence in the letter (f.) M. I would fain give Philip that went far∣ther
then the further bank, a fillip on the brow, because he did like a foul fool go far for his fa∣thers feather, and then run away with the great fowle, and after that did stick the sweet-smel∣ling flower in the wheat flour, that lay on the floor, and then did feigne himself sick. I. Now one of (g.) M. I ever guest, that he that did fish with a gentil (or maggot,) and then did steal the gente-mans gilt cup, and through the guilt of sin, did afterwards gage it to him that did gauge vessels, I say, I guest that he could never be a welcome ghest, to the owner of it; who now doth grone because his corn is not well grown. I. Of (h) next. M. Haply black Hugh, that will never change bue had happily an heir, here in this place, as I hear, who with his long hair did run after an hare or a hart in the hollow part of the hallowed ground, tell he had almost broke his heart, whom at last having caught, he did hy him home, to tell it to high and lovv, singing a hymn not heigh-ho, to the men in the hoy, and other higher persons; whom he durst not hire at all, to run (as I heard,) in that vvay hard vvay, vvhere his goos did hiss. I. Come we to (I) the vowel. M. (I) say he that did (incite) the man (in) the (Inne) to (ire) (to vvit anger,) and to be an (eyer) of us, so as to (ey) us vvith his (eye,)
had but small in-(sight either of (iles) in the churches, or of (isles) in the sea. I. Of (J) the consonant next. M. To do a (gest) (or vvorthy act) in jest, to jet up and dovvn vvith a jeat-stone: to pour juice of fruit on a joice, that bears up the boards, is the part rather of a foolish carpenter, that knovvs a jointer, (or tool to vvork with,) and not of a man, that can make his vvife a joynture, and may fish in the river Jorden, vvhere a jur∣den is throvvn sometimes. I. Now (k's) sentence. M. I gave knok our boy many knocks, be∣cause he made the dogs kennel in the (chanel), of filthy water, and did hide the deer, vvhich he did kill, in the Kiln vvhere the bricks vvere burnt. I. L's next. M. A Seller of (Latten) ladles nere learneth the (latine) tongue, and he that giveth his (le∣man) (or concubine) a (limon) or Orenge, vvill not sell the (lease) of his house, for a (leash) of hounds, or an horse-(licter,) for a (litter) of vvhelps. I. Have you another of (l)? M. Yes, he that is a (luster) after vvomen, shall never have the bright (lustre) of a good name, he may be a good (leaper) not a (leper) full of sores, yet one of a (lower) stature, may
have more of vvisdoms (lore) then he, if he be careless, let him take heed (lest) the (least) in the school of christianity, out-strip him in the (lesson) of goodness, and so God (lessen) his revvard. I. Shall we have one of (m?) M. Yes, our man, vvho once gave a mite to shevv his might, did mete, vvith a yard the meat he did eat, his name being Martin, he did catch a bird called a marten vvhilst Maurice the other man, dancing the morrice (by reason of a mote in his eye) fell into the moat (or ditch,) of those meads vvhere the Medes, and Persians vvere. I Let that of (N) be next. M. Yes, It shall. Though Mr. (Nye) that dvvels (nigh) or (near) this place, (nere) say (nay); yet a horse, that is so (naught,) that he is good for nought,) vvill seldom (neigh.) I. One now of (o.) M. The vvater man being an ower of debts, vvith his oar can never get gold ore: and the country-man that put's his ordure on one, of the lands in good order can tell us that every (hour) of our life so hastneth avvay, that vve ought not to spend aught thereof idly. I. One of (P.) M. Mr. Paul Pierse, the poor parson, (though a comely person or a prophet) must not count it
profit to wear the robe call'd a Pall, or to think that he hath power to pierce with a sword, or to pour-out of the palate of his mouth, when he lyeth on a pallet, words against the pastor of sheep in his pasture, where he doth pray, that the wolf may not prey upon them. I. (Q's) little one. M. She must needs be a quean, that is quite against the Queen, and yet thinketh to be quit. I What is (R's?) M. Every (wheel-wright) cannot (write) right a rite or ceremony, neither can good man Rice, though he take a rise, leap over the place where the rice was sowen, and where in the rain, the King that now doth reigne, did hold the rein of his horse's bridle, neer the great room, though not in the city of Rome. I. What is the sentence in (s?) This, Mr. Shute did shoot at a bird, and fol∣low the suit in law, in his new sute, the same day that his man Sligh that sly fellow, did sue in law him that did sew the skin of the sowe, and sow corn, and at his answer, swear on a Shooe-sole, pawning his soul for some small summe of mony, as one did shew, or declare to us. I. Now there are but few of the letters left that must have their sentences. M. You say true Isaac, but shall I go on to the rest? I. Pray do, and say the sentence that be∣longeth
to (t) for that is the next letter. M. We (two) (then,) (rather (than) you), were (too) blame to, hurt the man's (toe,) and to lay no fax or (tow) upon it. I. (v) also hath it's sentence, hath it not? M. Yea, and there is a little Rhyme for it, which is; That every thing might (vain) appear. We have a (vein) for each day in the year. And you cannot fill a (vial,) and play on the (viol) at the same instant. I. (W's) I pray you. M. If you ask whether I went any whither yesterday? I tell you that when I did wait upon my Mr. with a gold weight in mine hand, at the town of Wich, there were some that did see a witch covered with woad, and in a wad of straw to wear the man's shirt, that had a wey of chees, in the way as you go to the house of him that doth weigh gold. I. Now one of (y,) and I have done. M. You must not hang your Basin and Ewr in the yew-tree, neither must ye that say yea, do the like. Now (in good sooth,) how like you the Catalogue? I. So well, that I think he is not well in his wits, that findes fault with it, (although you have brought the words ey, in the letter I, and write in that of R to explain others in those, and in some other letters.)
M. I am very glad to hear you say so. I. But stay Marmaduke, before this Cata∣logue's repetition, something was spoken both of the beginnings, and also of the endings of many-syllable words, was there not? M. Yea, verily, there was. I. But nothing of the middle-syllables, as I can call to remembrance. M. Nothing, indeed nothing. I. Shall we now go and say something of them? M. Shall we go aside, and let the two next take their turns, that have undertaken it? DIALOGUE XXXVIII. Ralph Sebastian. Of the middle-syllables of many-syllable words. R. BEd-fellow, what do you call middle-syl∣lables? S. I call all middle-syllables, except the first and last syllables in the longest word whatso∣ever. R. Give us an example. S. In this word (commemoration,) these four, to wit, (me-mo-ra-ti) are middle syllables in mine account R. Good, now what say you of middle syl∣lables?
S. I say first; that some of them have (c) in them, some (s) some (t,) as capacity infusion, nation, the first with (c,) the second with (s,) the last with (t,) as you see. R. But how shall I know when to write (c,) when (s,) when (t?) S. From the primitive word, as to instance in the three fore named, capacity comes from capax, capacis, with a (c) therefore write that with (c:) infusion comes from infusus with an (s) therefore write that with (s:) nation from na∣tus, therefore write that also with (t.) R. Have you any thing else to say of mid∣dle syllables with a (c?) S. Yes, that some of them have (ci) with a (c,) as suspicion, some (si) with an (s) at version, some (ti) with a (t) as redemption, some (xi) with an (x) as complexion. R. But how shall we know when to write all these? S. (ci and xi,) (with c and x,) are seldom, but (si with s,) more often used, as casion, ces∣sion, passion, rision, vision, &c. R. Is this all? S. No, you must observe too, that most of these words are verbals comming from the lat∣ter supine (as Grammarians can tell you,) and are made by changing (u) into (io) in latine, in∣to (ion) in english, so from complexu cometh complexo, complexion, and so of the rest.
R. Now what say you of (ti?) Is it before a vowel pronounced always like (si with s?) S. No. R. When is it not? S. 1 when (s) goeth immediately before (t) as question, or 2 when (x) as mixt on, 3 when the particles (est, ing, ed, eth) are added to the word ending in (ti,) as loft i-est, pitty ing, pitty-ed pitty-eth, 4 when it is the first syllable of a word as (ti-able.) R. What more of middle syllables? S. This, that be, ce, de, fe, ge, le, me, ne, pe, re, se, te, que,) these thirteen are not usually spelled by themselves in the middle of a word, if a vowel go before, hence 'tis sure-ty not su∣re-ty, pure-ly, not pu-re-ly, and so forth, be∣sides all these too, (though this be not the right place for it,) are never the last syllables in the word, but must have other letters joyn'd with them, onely some proper names, as Phebe, Mamre, and the like, exceped. R. Your example. S. Mark then, we say or spell, genu-ine, not genui ne, as-sure, not as-su-re, forti-tude, not forti tu-de, infi-nite, not in-fi-ni-te, &c. R. Hitherto what hath been spoken of the beginnings and endings, of many syllable words, and what you have now spoken of the middle syllables of words, is very good I con∣fess, yet there remain two things worth ob∣servation.
S. What are they? R. Why: the one is to know certainly, (at first sight) how many syllables there are in any word of many syllables, and the other is (when known once) how to divide them truly. S. Indeed these are two things worthy to be known, but let the following speakers speak what they have to speak of them. DIALOGUE XXXIX. Theodore. Anthony. To know certainly (at first sight) how many syllables there are in any word of many Syllables. T. ANthony, can you shew how I, or any may have a certain knowledge of the number of Syllables in a word of many syl∣lables? A: Yea, that I can. T. Let it appear then, I pray. A. Thus, mark how many vowels are in the word, just so many syllables the word is of. T, But by your good leave, these six words, to wit, (make, meat, maid, names, quilt, gual∣ter,) seem to, nay do contradict your assertion. A. Verily they do, therefore know, that there is hardly any general rule without some exceptions.
T. Pray how many exceptions are there here? A. Six, just so many as you have named exceptive words, nay each of your words makes a several exception. T. What is the first exception? A. This, when (e) (not sounded) endeth a word, as for example, the first of your excep∣tive-words, to wit, (make) maketh good what I say. T. A second exception what is it? A. When a vowel in a word is but little sounded, so (meat) another of your words hath (a) but little sounded in it. T. But are there not other vowels that are little sounded besides (a?) A. There are, and Consonants too, but more of such as these by and by. T. To go on, what is your third exception? A. When there is a perfect dipthong in a word, as (ai) is in your word (maid.) T. What is your fourth? A. When the word ends in (es,) as your word (names) doth. T. But is not (es) spell'd by it self at the end of a word? A. It is spelled very seldom by it self; ex∣cept the letters going before it make a perfect word, as (rich-es.) T. To go on then, the fifth what is it?
A. When the word begins with (q,) for then (u) with another vowel must follow of necessity, (as hath been said before,) and your word (quilt) can testify as much. T. What is the sixth or last exception? A. When (g) begins a word sometimes, for that like (q) will have two vowels after it some∣times, witness Gualter) the last of yours. T. Me thinks, by what you have said, I certainly know now, how many syllables are in a word: but how shall I know how to di∣vide them? A. Nay, let Gilbert and Job, (the two next) tell you how to divide them. DIALOGUE XL. Gilbert. Job. How to divide a many-syllable word, as first by considering the vowel or dipthong between two consonants. G. WHat if a vowel come between two consonants in a many syllable word, as in this word gra-ti-fy (i,) doth be∣twixt (t and f?) J. It must be placed with, or put to the for∣mer consonant. G. Why so?
J. Because, the latter syllable cannot begin with a vowel, except the former syllable do end with a vowel. And by the way note— G What? J. That every syllable in a long word must (if it can) begin with a consonant. G. What if a diphthong or two vowels (one of them little sounded,) come between two Consonants, as (oi) in the word em-broi∣derer doth between (r and d,) (ie) in the word mis chie-vous doth between, (h and v conso∣nant,) must they also be put to the former con∣sonants? J. Yea, that they must. T. What if two vowels come together that will not make a diphthong (both fully sounded) how will you place them? J. The former must be placed in the former syllable, the latter in the latter syllable, as in this word valiant (i) is in the former, (a) is in the latter syllable, as you see. G. If two vowels come together, that will make diphthongs either perfect or im∣perfect, must they remain always diphthongs? J. Yea, I suppose they must, except in some proper names, as Shepharva-im, where the dip∣thong (ai) is divided, Caper-na-um, where the perfect dipthong (au,) also is divided, Gile ad, Be-ersheba, Jo athan, Bo-oz, where you see the four imperfect diphthongs (ea. ee. ea oe, divided also.
G. Now I am satisfied about a vowel's or dipthongs coming between two Consonants; something I pray now of a Consonant's coming between two vowels J. Pray not me, pray the two next, to wit, Lewis and Martin. DIALOGUE XLI. Lewis. Martin. Or secondly by considering the consonant, or consonants between two vowels. L. MArtin, what if one single Consonant be placed betwéen two vowels? As (m) the consonant is in the word a-ma-rous? M. It must be put to the latter vowel, or syllable, (onely (x) as ox-en is excepted.) L. Why so? M. Because, the former syllable cannot end with a consonant, except the latter syllable begin with a consonant. L. What if two consonants that will begin a word, come between two vowels, as in bro∣ther (th) doth? M. They must be placed with the latter vow∣el or Syllable. L. Why so? M. Because, those that will begin a word,
must begin any syllable in a word. L. What if two consonants that will not begin a word, come between two vowels, as calum-ny, cen-ter? M. They must be divided, the former going to the former, and the latter to the latter syl∣lable, so these two words before mentioned do prove it, as also the word (bun-dle,) and the like. L. Why may not both of them be pced with the former syllable? M. Because, the former syllable cannot end with a consonant, when the latter syllable doth not begin with a consonant. L. What if three consonants come betwixt two vowels? M. If they be such that will begin a word, they must be placed with the latter syllable as (fru-strate) if not; they must be divided as (em∣blem.) L. What if four consonants or more come betwixt two vowels, as con-strain? M. They must be divided of necessity. L. Why so? M. Because, as four consonants cannot begin a word, so four also cannot begin a syllable in any part of the word. L. What if a consonant doubled come be∣tween two vowels? M. They must be divided, as in dif-fer, the
double (ff) is divided, as you see. L. But doth this hold always so? M. Yea, except when the consonant is need∣lesly doubled, as in some plurals, as barres, plummes, and the like, whereas plums bars, with a single (m o r) would serve turn well enough. L. But may not the syllables of some com∣pounded-words thwart some of these rules: M. Yea, that they may. L. Your reason for it. M. My reason is; because the simple word when it is compounded, will (for all that) keep the same letters, as when it was simple. L. Pray instance in some compound-words, that thwart these rules. M. I will, un-apt,) where the former syl∣lable endeth with a consonant, against this rule. The former syllable cannot end with a consonant, except the latter syllable begin with a consonant. (dis lke, where (sl) are divided, though they will begin a word, as (slo-ven.) L. Do not these and the like derivatives (speak-ing, strength-en-ing,) cross your rules? M. Indeed they do, but because it would be troublesome to make new rules for them, we will reckon them (at present) amongst the compounded ones, and so these (like the others) being found in a kind of composition, every word must have it's own letters, not mingled with others.
L. Are there more kinds of such words, besides what you have named? M. Yea, many more, but (for brevity's, sake I shall omit them, onely by the way— L. What? M. That all compound-words, written with (sh, th or ph,) (though these three will be∣gin the word in simple words,) yet found in composition will be divided, thus (hous-hold, priest-hood, up-hold,) and not thus (houshold, priesthood, uphold,) not separating the syllable, and this holds true also in any other of this kinde. L. But when (i or u,) come betwixt two vo∣wels, what say you to them? M. I say, that they are, (especially) (i taken sometimes for dipthongs, when placed with the former syllable: sometimes for consonants when placed with the latter, hence we say Jehoi-adah, or Jeho-jadah. L. Now you have also pleased me about division of words, both with the vowel or dip∣thong, between two consonants, and also with the consonant between two vowels: have you any more to say, before you come to the third thing Orthography treateth of? M. Any thing more, yea, that I have; but Randolph and Sampson, will say it for me.
DIALOGUE XLII. Randolph. Sampson. Of some letters that are but a little sounded in the word. R. SAmpson, in one of the former dialogues, the thirty-ninth as I take it,) Anthony promised some larger discourse of letters, that were little sounded; will you do it at this time? S. I will, ask what you please R. Are all the vowels in some words little sounded? S. Yes, and some Consonants also. R. Your example first of the five vowels, beginning with the vowel (a.) S. When (ea or oa) come together, as earth, wealth, beat, beauty, these with (ea:) boat, coat, moat, abroad, these with (oa,) (a) is little soun∣ded, and here you must take notice that (a,) in these kind of words draweth the syllable long, (as hath been said elsewhere) like (e) in the end of other words. R. Now let's have an example of (e.) S. (e) is not pronounced in George, trueth, moneth. R. In what words is not (i) pronounced? S. In these, shield, field, priest, chief, brief, shrieve, grieve, sieg, maister, their, view, mis∣chief, grief, friese, achieve, marveil, fierce, adieu,
interfier, kerchief, lieutenant, fruit, suit, bruise, buit, &c. R. What words sound not (o? S. These, people, bloud, yeoman, jeopardy. R. What not (u?) S. Guest, guise, buy, guide, prologue, build, tongue, guilty, conduit, league, plague, &c. R. Having satisfied me about words that have the vowels not pronounced, what say you to the Consonants, that are not sounded? Pray which are not? S. (b) is not sounded in lamb, comb, debt, bdelium, doubt, dumb, thumb, &c. R. What else? S. (c) is not sounded (as some will have it) in back, beck, lick, lock, luck, but of that letter enough elsewhere. R. Are there any other Consonants not, or but little sounded? S. Yea, (g) in signe, resigne, ensigne, flegme, reigne, soveraigne, Gascoigne. R. Is (h) also little or nothing at all soun∣ded in some words? S. Yes, as in Christ myrrhe, whole; Scholar, Eu∣nuch, Chronicles, authority, anchor, choler, chrystal, Rhine, Rhenish, Rhetorick, abhominable, melan∣choly, also in these proper names, John, Thomas, Achiah, Chinah, Zachariah, Zichri, Chios, Ari∣starchus, and such as end in (arch) as monarch, &c. R. What say you of (gh?) S. I say that it is little sounded in Borrough,
might, bright, sight, &c. so (n) in solemn, con∣demn, autumn, hymne, R. What of (p,) and of (s?) S. I say that (p) is little sounded in psalm, receipt, accompt, and (s) as little in isle, island, Viscount, Lisle. R. Now we have done with letters that are little sounded in words, shall we now speak something of the third thing, orthography treateth of, to wit, right utterance? S. Before that can be done, two things (I suppose) must first be toucheth on by the next speakers. R What are they? S. First, those that we call abreviations, and secondly, words that are not pronounced as they are written. DIALOGUE XLIII. Theophilact. Ambrose. Of Abreviations. T. HOw do you write Abreviations? A. Thus, a stroke over any vowel stands for (m or n,) as dā. mā. for dam, man, so yr for your: Mr. for master, Mris. for Mistris, Mrs. for masters: ye for the: yt for that: yu for thou: wt for what: wth for with: wch for which: or for our, &c.
T. Are there not others too? A. Yea (&. &. &) these three for and, (&c. &c. &c.) these three for and so forth, (xt.) for Christ. T. What if a vowel end a word, and the next word begin with a vowel? A. The ending vowel is cut off by the vo∣wel that begins the following word, as th' in∣tent, for the intent; I'm, for I am, and many more such-like cuttings off there are, which you may meet with in play-books and poets. T. Have you now named all the words which you call Abreviations? A. No, in written-hand you may finde many more, which you may take notice of as you meet with them. T. Now lastly: shew us some of them that are pronounced otherwise then they are writ∣ten. A. Bartholomew and Gabriel, do ye shew them it. DIALOGUE XLIII. Bartholomew. Gabriel. Of words that are not pronounced as they are written. B GAbriel, what words are not pronoun∣ced as they are written?
G. These, (besides qualm, shalt &c. which have been spoken of already in the twentieth Dia∣logue, besides others spoken of in the thirtieth Dialogue) these I say, (would, could, should) are pronounced (wood, cood shood,) as if so written: so some words that end with (gh,) are pronoun∣ced as if wrote with (f,) hence we write laugh pronounce it laf. cough. cof. B. Are not some with (gh) pronounced o∣therwise? G. Yea, thus, bough, bou, sigh, sieth, thigh, thie, &c. A. Are not words with (i or o) pronounced sometimes as if wrote with (u?) G. Yea, so shirt, chirp, with (i) work, wort, with (o) sound as if wrote, shurt, churp, wurk wurt, with (u. B. May we ad more to these? G. Yea many, as iron, which we sound iurm, victuals, vittles, apron, apurn; mutton, fasten, as muttne fastne; so words in ed, as beloved, delive∣red, we sound belov'd, deliver'd, so wont as woont, subtilo as suttle, epistle as episle, tongue, as tong schedule as sedule, schismatick as sizmatick, bloud, as blud, people as peeple, shovel, as shuul, conie as kunnee, discretion, (to name no more) as d screshon. B. By all these examples a man may plain∣ly sée that there is great difference betwixt the speaking and the writing of some english words.
G. Yea truly so a man may. B. Can you give us more of these? G. That I can, but I shall referre you to a book which is to this purpose of Mr. Hodges's as I take it. B Well said, now I sée that according to the latine-saying, scribendum ad doctos, loquen∣dum ad vulgus, we must write as the priest, but speak as the people. G. You are in the right, now 'tis high-time to come to the third thing Orthography trea∣teth of, to wit, right utterance. B. 'Tis so. G. And with all my heart I would under∣take it, but that I know (for certain,) that the two next will handle it for us. DIALOGUE XXXXV. Josuah. Moses. Of Right-utterance. J. MOses, what is right utterance? M. Right utterance is the manner of right speaking out. J. May not boys by speaking too fast, or too slow, and by other usual faults in pronouncing offend many ways? M. Yea many ways, but especially three wayes.
J. By what way first? M By a Traulism, which is when one stam∣mereth or stuttereth as babababy for baby. J. How is that fault amended? M. By pattering over some ribble-rable made hard to pronounce, one purpose: as, Arx tri∣dens rostris sphinx prester torrida seps strix. J. By what way next? M. By a Plateasme, which is when one spea∣keth too broad; as yow for you (the country-man's fault.) J. What corrupt pronountiation else do such kind of men use? M. This, mell hell for mill hill, knat for knit, belk for belch, to spat for to spit, sur suster, for sir sister, leash for lease, certen or sarten, for certain, kerchar for carchief, parfit for perfect, sample for example, stomp for stamp, gurt for girth, griffe for graffe, yelk for yolk, yerb for herb, bredg for bridg, knat for gnat, and a thou∣sand more of such like corrupt kind of speakings have they, which I shall pass by, giving you onely here a taste (as it were) of them. I. Do they not also oft-times use (f) for v,) and v for f? M. Yea; saying feal for veal, and vather for father, and the like. I. What more? M. They say a nox, my naunt; for an ox, mine Aunt.
I. What more? M. The northernly folk pronounce (ed like it) pleadit, intendit, unitit, belovit, for pleaded, intended, united, beloved: also gid and gad, for good and god: leard for lord, also the scots say, mercat, for market, wes for was, publict for pub∣lick, wer on lyff, for were alive: swa that like∣wayes, for so that likewise, and there be many others which I shall omit. I. What else? M. Some also put (e for i) as pietee for pietie, and some write or say a cup a wine, for a cup of wine, and other like absurdities. I. But may we not (writing to our coun∣trey-friend) make use of our countrey-terms? M You may, so that they be peculiar terms, and such as do not corrupt words; so the northern-man may write such termes as these to his friend or country-man: lathe for barn, bern for childe, kirk for church, garth for yard, sark for shirt, and the like. I. What should he or any do, if they should write publikely? M. Truly, use the most usual and known termes. I. Come we now to the third; which is called Ichnotes: and what is that? M. It is, when one speaketh, either. 1 too-mincingly; as weter for water, lerd for lard, a strea for a straw, that is; sounding (e for a) or
2 to lispingly, as cannoth for cannot, sounding (th) for (t,) and the like, the citizen's fault. J. Now, the last thing Orthrography trea∣teth of? M. That, the two last, Sylvester and Brom∣field will satisfie you to the full in. DIALOGUE XLVI. Sylvester. Bromfield. Of the Points of Sentences. S. BRomfield, what is a Point or Pause, which is used in distinguishing writing? B. A point or pause is a note of distinction, signifying the space of breathing, or how long one may stay ones breath. S. Are there not many of these Points, or Pauses? B. There are, especially eight are worth the noting. S. What call you the first? B. Comma, which is a short pause, distingui∣shing the shorter parts of the sentence, and is marked thus—(,) S. What call you the second? B. Semicolon, which stays a sentence longer than a Comma, though not so long as a Colon, and is marked thus—(;)
S. What call you the third? B. Colon, which is a longer stay, dividing the sentence (as it were) in the midst, and is marked thus— (:) S. What the fourth? B. A Period, which (being placed at the end of a sentence) makes a full stay or stop, and is marked thus—(.) S. The fifth, what is it? B. Parenthesis, which is used to enclose such words as may be left out, and yet the sentence will be perfect, and is marked thus—() S. The sixth, what is it? B. The Interrogation point, which is onely used when a question is asked, and usually requires a full stop, and is marked thus—(?) S. What's the seventh? B The Admiration point, (called also the note of Exclamation) which is used with a kinde of wondering, being also a full stop, and is marked thus— (!) S. The eighth or last, what is it? B. Hyphen, which is a little stroke interpo∣sed, either 1 in a word divided at the end of a line: as Tho mas; or 2 is used in words that are united, but not compounded; as blood-sucking, King-killing, Common-wealth. S. Now you have shew'd us all the eight points, Honest Bromfield wil you now give us examples of them all out of the Scripture?
B. That I will, if you please. S. First then, let's hear a Scripture-sen∣tence with a comma in it—, B. You shall: I exhort therefore, that first of all, suppcatons, prayers, intercessions, and gi∣ving of thanks be made for all men, for kings, &c. 1 Tim. chap. 2. verse 1, 2. S. Now one with a semicolon.—; B. My sonne, fear thou the Lord and the king; &c. Prov. chap. 24. verse 21. S. Now one with a colon.—: B. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers: &c. Rom chap. 13. verse 1. S. One also with a period.— (.) B. Honor all men. Love the brother-hood. Fear God. Honor the King. 1 Peter, chap. 2. verse 17. S. In what verse finde you a parenthe∣sis?— () B. And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear (for the battel is the Lords) 1 Sam. 17 47. S. In what is the Interrogation point?—(!) B. Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What dost thou? Ec∣cles 8 4. S. The Admiration point—! B. O the depth of the riches both of the wis∣dom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his judgements, and his ways past finding out! Rom. 11.33. S. To draw to a conclusion (both of this Dialogue, as also of the whole Book) shew me Hyphen —(-) and I have done. B. Love the brother-hood: this word bro∣ther hood makes good what I have said. And now (Sylvester) we have run through all the things Orthography treateth of, to wit, 1 Let∣ters. 2 Syllables. (to which were added words) 3 Right utterance. 4 Points of sen∣tences.
A Table of the Persons, and heads of their prattle, &c. Dialogue. 1. ADam Benjamin. Of Orthography. Page. 1 Dialogue. 2. Charls. David. Of Letters in gene∣ral. Page. 2 Dialogue. 3. Emanuel Francis Of Letters distinguished according to shape. Page. 3 Dialogue. 4. George. Henry. Of Letters distinguished according to sound. Page. 6 Dialogue. 5. James. Kellam. Of Vowels. ibid. Dialogue. 6. Luke Michael. Of Diphthongs. Page. 9 Dialogue. 7. Nicholas. Obadiah. Of Consonants in ge∣neral. Page. 11 Dialogue. 8. Peter Robert. Of Mutes. Page. 13 Dialogue. 9. Samuel Thomas. Of Half-vowels. Page. 14 Dialogue. 10. Vincent. William. Of Liquids. Page. 16 Dialogue. 11. Zachary. Abe. O double Consonants. Page. 17 Dialogue. 12. Bernard. Cement. Of Syllables Page. 19 Dialogue. 13. Daniel. Ezekiah. Of words (more espe∣cially one-syllable ones) in general. Page. 21 Dialogue. 14. Ferdinand Gregory. Of a word of one syllable, proper, or improper. Page. 22 Dialogue. 15. Humphrey. John. Of the beginning (more
especially) of a proper one-syllable word with a vowel. Page. 24 Dialogue. 16. Laurence. Matthew. Of a word's begin∣ning with any of the Diphthongs. Page. 26 Dialogue. 17. Nathaniel. Oliver. Of a word's, begin∣ning with consonants, and first with one consonant. Page. 27 Dialogue. 18. Paul. Richard. Of the beginning of one syllable (as also of many-syllable) word with two consonants. Page. 31 Dialogue. 19. Stephen. Timothy. Of an one, or many-syllable word's beginning with three con∣sonants. Page. 38 Dialogue. 20. Valentine. Abraham. Of a word's ending first with a vowel. Page. 40 Dialogue. 21. Bennet. Christopher. Of a word's ending with perfect short, or long diphthongs. Page. 44 Dialogue. 22. Dennis. Edward. Of a word's ending with imperfect diphthongs. Page. 47 Dialogue. 23. Frederick. Gervas. Of a word's ending with consonants, and first with one conso∣nant. Page. 48 Dialogue. 24. Hugh. Joseph. Of a word's ending with two consonants. Page. 54 Dialogue. 25. Lancelot. Mark. Of a word's ending with a consonant doubled. Page. 57 Dialogue. 26. Nathan. Philip. Of a word's ending with three consonants. Page. 61 Dialogue. 27. Rowland. Simon. Of a word's ending
vvith four consonants. Page. 63 Dialogue. 28. Tobias. Alexander. Concerning words that are plurals. Page. 65 Dialogue. 29. Basil. Geoffrey. Of the middle-part of the wod, and first of the enclosed vowel. Page. 68 Dialogue. 30. Hannibal. Jeremy. Of the six perfect dip∣thongs encloed. Page. 73 Leonard. Maurice Of the four imperfect dipthongs enclosed, to wit, (ea, ee, oa, oo.) Page. 75 Dialogue. 32. Nehemiah. Philemon. A brief Repetition of what hath been spoken in several Dialogues. Page. 78 Dialogue. 33. Roger. Titus. Of many-syllable vvords in gene al Page. 79 Dialogue. 34▪ Victor. Walter. Of vvords of many sylla∣bles, borrovved from the French, Greek, or Latine. Page. 80 Dialogue. 35. Andrew. Barnaby. Of things in some sort more poperly belonging to many-syllable vvords, and first of their beginnings. Page. 84 Dialogue. 36. Edmund. Giles. Of the endings of such like vvords. Page. 87 Dialogue. 37. Isaac. Mamaduke. A Catalogue of words near in sound, differing in writing and sig∣nification. Page. 91 Dialogue. 38. Ralph. Sebastian. Of the middle syllables of many-syllable vvords. Page. 99 Dialogue. 39. Theodore. Anthony. To knovv certainly
(at first sight) how many syllables there are in any word of many syllables. Page. 102 Dialogue. 40. Gilbert. Job. How to divide a many-syllable word, as first by considering the vowel or dipthong between two consoants. Dialogue. 41. Lewis Martin. Or secondy, by con¦ing the consonant, or consonants betwee vowels. Page. Dialogue. 42. Randolph. Sampson. Of some letters, that are but little sounded in the word. Page. 110 Dialogue. 43. Theophilact. Ambrose. Of Abreviations. Page. 112 Dialogue. 44. Bartholomew. Gabriel. Of words that are not pronounced as they are written Page. 113 Dialogue. 45. Josuah. Moses. Of Right utterance. Page. 115 Dialogue. 46. Sylvester, Bromfield. Of the Points of Sentences. Page. 118 FINIS.
Faults escaped the Press. Dalogue 13. page 22. for (before three dipthongs) read (before the dipthong) Dial. 18. p. 33. for (that begins with (hh) read (that begins with (Rh). Dia∣logue 21. p. 45. for two, read too. Dial. 34. p 82. for (re, ce, cno, read re, ce, con. Dial. 36. p. 88. accent aver're, &c. also p. 90. accent, To excu'se, an ex'cuse, &c. also for to use, read to vze a vse. Dial. 37. p. 94. blot out way. and in p. 95. for Knok our boy, read Knox. Oher faults, which remain behind; I pray thee, (gentle Reader,) to mark, and amend them.
