M1742 C.20.f.9[162] C.20.f.9[163] R228343 99887779 192693
The Merchant of Scotland, AND The Ʋnfortunate Damosel. A Damosel fair in Scotland born, Being full of grief and left forlorn, 'Twas an English-man that she did love, Who left her and unkind did prove: In private she did make great moan. Because her English-man was gone. An Edenborough-Merchant there, Her sighs and groans did chance to hear: And married her, but in short time, Was forc'd to leave his Native chine; And fail unto some forraign shore, Leaving her sadder then before. To a pleasant Countrey Tune. a ship a man and woman holding hands A Broad as I was walking, all by the Park side Abroad as I was walking, so merry merrily; Oh I heard a fair maid make great moan, And still she did weep for good company, And still she did weep for good company. Oh what do you weep for? my wellfavour'd Maid What do you weep for, so sore and bitterly? Quoth she, I weep for an English-man, That is quite banisht out of this Country, &c. Come I am the Burgess of Edenborough town, And I pray thee Sweet-heart lay thy love to me, oh then this Merchant-Man draws forth a bag of gold And he laid it on this fair Maids knee; Saying sweet-heart, take thou this, And afterwards lay thy love to me, &c. I pray you take up your money, your money, I pray you take up your gold and all your fee, For if that I prove false to Kester a Wait, Oh how should I prove true to thee? Oh how should I prove true to thee? At length this fair Maid did behold, The Merchants great baggs, & his comely face, She also did cast an eye upon his Gold, And willing she was the same for to embrace, And willing she was the same for to embrace, Kind sir, quoth she, since my first love is gone, And if that you will make much of me, I'le cheer up my heart & i'le live with you alone, And to morrow your married wife I will be, And to morrow your married wife I will be.
a man blazon or coat of arms DEVS INDICAT DEO DVCENTE, NIL NOCET. A Greed, agreed, the Merchant-man did say, I do love thee with all my heart, I could wish that we might have been married to day, For I from my dearest will never depart, For I from my dearest will never depart. the next day being come, they were Married both, Being cloathed in rich array, And being at the Church they both plighted their troth and Kept a most jovial wedding-day, &c. But they had not been a month Married, Not a Month Married were they, But there came News from Edenborough-town That all Merchant-Men must go to Sea, &c. This grieved the Merchant piteously, That he must so soon bid adieu to his dear, But alas the poor Bride, how grieved was she? And at every word fell many a tear, &c. He bid her adieu, for to Sea he must go, But she held him fast in her arms, You must not, you shall not, my dearest now, I will keep you at home without harms, &c. Oh I must go to Sea my Honey, my Honey, Oh I must go to Sea my dearest Honey, But when I am gone to Sea, and to Sea, I prithee look after my little Conney, &c. Then giving her many Kisses so sweet, He bid her farewell with a sorrowful heart, Saying, be of good cheer till again we do méet And then from my Love I will never depart, &c. When thus he had said, then away he did go, And now he is sailing over the Main, He leaves her behind, full of sorrow and woe, But more you shall know, when he comes back again, But more you shall know when he comes back again. FINIS. With Allowance, Ro. L'Estrange. Printed for E. Oliver, at the Golden Key, on Snow∣hill, over-against St. Sepulchres-Church, neer the Sarazens-head.
