M1848A C.112.f.9[68] [ocn]226318285 195872
EVIDENT SATISFACTION to the SICK and LAME; By NATH. MERRY, Student in Physick, dwelling at the Star in Bow-lane, near Cheapside. IN regard there are very many grievously afflicted in and about this City, that groan under Sicknesses, Great Dolours, and divers Calamitous Diseases, who have been long Sick and labour under despair of their Cure; and he having had much Experience both in the Operative and Administrative part of Physick, and long exercis'd in the most difficult and most deplorable Diseases; as the following instances will fully demonstrate: For your incouragement, These are therefore to inform you, that by Gods Blessing you may have proper and homogenial Medicines at reasonable rates, in order to your Relief, Ease, and speedy Cure, according to the time and nature of your Distemper, in the most deplorable Diseases curable, either inward or outward, acute or chronical, if you come to my House as abovesaid, at any time from Eight till Eleven, and from One to Six. And in respect matter of fact, Cures done and faithfully performed, carries greater satisfaction in it, than the Pen or Tongue of any man can give, as Quintlian rightly said, That Observation was the Original of Physick; so also is it the life and continuance of it: the surest and most demonstrating part and practice arising thence, (viz.) from Experience, the chiefest and last part of Physick: I have here therefore given you an account of some Eminent Cures done by me; and not only the Cures, but the Persons Names so cur'd, voluntarily subscribed by themselves to each Cure, for your assurance of the Truth, that others may reap like bene∣fit, and to stop the mouth of thr envious: some of which were put off as incurable by others, and some of their own and their Friends hopes failing them: This I have done, in respect to Mankind, and it cannot be good to conceal it; because it would bespeak cruelty. I could add a multitude more, but these may meritorioussy satisfie the most Intelligent and most Curious Persons, who certainly know that these Cures could not be perfor∣med but by Medicines that have a power to alter Ferments and rectifie the Archeus or Spirit of Life: Notwithstanding, those that desire it, may see at my House an Account of many more Cures, wherein, let your Case be almost what it will, it's ten to one but you may see some one Case or other like your own. All which Cures (by the blessing of God, to whom let the praise be) were faithfully performed by me as followeth: Mr. John Croften, living in the upper ground on the Banks-side, next door to the Sign of the Ship, his Child, John Craften, aged three years and half, was by Gods blessing cur'd by my means a∣bout June 75. of a violent Contraction, being drawn backward Head and Heels, as if he had been broken in the middle, his Breast bending forward like the corner of a Trirngle, and the Pole of his Head drawn back upon his Back, that he seem'd like a Child drawn to a heap; he groan'd as if he had been dying, and a very vehement heat attended it: perfectly cur'd, and now as straight and active as most Children in London, to be seen by any that desire it. I cur'd another Child of his of sore Eyes. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 22th. of Sept. 76. John Craften. Mr. Robert Reynold, a Joyner at the Fox and Crown in White-Cross-street; his Child, one year and half old, was taken with vi∣lent Vomitings, Loosness, and Griping of the Guts, insomuch that ever thing past through him as they were taken, or came up∣ward immediately; and with the burning and violence of pains was almost spent in one night, and in great Danger of Death; con∣tinually screeching with vehemence of his pain: who by Gods blessing was cur'd and restor'd to perfect health by my means a∣bout Mty 76. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 18th of October 76. Robert Reynolds. Mr. Thomas Barthlet, dwelling in New-market at the Sign of the White Horse, his Wife by the blessing of God was cur'd by my means, about May 75. of an Ulcer in the Womb, which begat as sharp pains, as if Knives had been thrust into the parts; and by the influence of those pains, her Thighs and Back were exceeding∣ly tortur'd: she had great pains in her Stomak, was brought very low, and had a general weakness; which render'd her case very dan∣gerous to her self and those Artists which observ'd her condi∣tion. To the truth of which I voruntory put my hand rhis 20th of Octob. 76. Anne Barthlet. Mr Charles Merry Ginger-bread-baker, living in Colledg-yard in Southwark, near Margarets-hill, his Child was by the blessing of God cur'd by my means of very sore Eyes, which her Parents were inform'd by many was the Kings-Evil in the Eyes. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 2d. of Octob. 76. Charles Merry. Mr Robert Hooper, living in White-Chappel in Last Ally, near the Church, his Wife was by Gods blessing cur'd by my means, about Sept. 75. of great oppression on her Heart and Stomack, shortness of Breath, which she thought alone would have kill'd her; she was very Dropsical, complicated with the Scurvy, three Fingers of one Hand swoln and Useless, and one of them broken out, which she feared the loss of; her Thgh, Leg, and Foot was swoln from her Flanck down to her Toes; three of her Toes were tumified and ulcerated, and the Chyrurg on that had her in hand, said they must be all cut off; he cut off one Joynt of one Toe, but could not subject it to healing; when she came to me she came with dfficulity wth two Crurches, and indeed was in a very deplorable condition; yet notwithstanding, in a little time by Gods blessing I cur'd her, and shh brought me eir Crurches with greot joy. To the truth of which I voluntarily subscribe my and, Sept. 25th. 76. Anne Hooper. Mrs. Mary Savage, aged fourscore, living by Masons-Stairs on the Bank-side, was by Gods blessing cured by my means about May 76. of the Scurvy and Dropsie, great shortness of Breath, great pains in her Stomack, her Belly and Legs much swoln and pain'd; her Hams as if they had been bound with Cords, attended with great weakness, not able to go nor scarce stir, and if she did stsr, was nigh ready to lose her breath. To the truth of which I volun∣tarily put my hand Sept. 21th. 76 Mary Savage. Mrs. Joane Clark, in Holbourn in Plow-yard, near Field-lane-end, against the Sign of the George, her Daughter aged ten years and an half, by Gods blessing was cured by me, about May 76. having one Arm and Hand useless, and her Fingers continually trembling, and her right side and Leg benum'd and useless, so that she drag'd it af∣ter her; and of a wity and active child, was become very ull and foolish like a Changling, all occasion'd by a fright: who was restored by my means to her former understanding and activity, together with the perfect use of her Arm, Hand, Side & Leg, to the truth of which I have voluntarily put my hand this 26th. of Sept. 76. Joane Clark. William Beard, A labourer, living in White-Chappel▪ Church-Lane, next door to the Monks-head, his Child about four years old, was by Gods blessing cured by me about March 75, having no use of his Limbs, a very great head, a great belly, and vey narrow brest; his Legs would turn about, as if he had been disjoynted; and so weak withal, that he could not stand upon them; and inwardly very weak: he brought out of his Stomack pieces like Liver and other very foul matter; he went with difficulty with two Crtches, which
mother, when he was cured, brought truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 25th of Sept. 76. William Beard. Mr. Henry Gardener, living in the Pie-Garden on the Banks-side, near the sign of the King David, his wife was by Gods blessing cured by my means of the Wind-Collick, of pains in her stomack, which lay like a bar thwart her stomack; great shortness of breath, in so much that she her self and those that were about her, thought she would have died with that sickness. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my handthis 23th of Sept. 76. Mary Gardener. Thomas Fletcher a Turner, living in East-Smithfield, against Parrat-Ally, at the sign of the Still, by Gods blessing was cured by me about Octob. 75. of a Consumption, Cough, and Phtisick; he was even like an Anantomy, the Calves of his Legs become almost as small as the wrist of his Arme; very hot and sweat exceedingly from his belly upward, and very cold and cold sweats from his belly downwards, in so much that he could scarce feel hot bricks which they had before applied to no purpose; he had very little sleep or rest for fourteen dayes: he was brought so weak that he was not able to go over a room. His wife also cured by me at the same time of a great Cough, pains in her back and side, faint∣ness and much weakness. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 29th of Sept. 76. Thomas Fletcher. Edward Adams A Colour-maker living in Golden-Lane in Harts∣horn-Court near the Sugar-loaf, was by Gods blessing cur'd by me about Octob. 75. of a Malignant Feaver, attended with much drought, a vehement heat, great weight on his Stomack, a terrible pain in his left side, great lightness in his head, and talkt Idle; he was not able to stir but as mov'd by others, and lookt upon as a man a dy∣ing: was restored to perfect health by my means. To the truth of which I voluntarily subscribe my hand this 28th of Sept. 76. Edward Adams. Joseph Street in Kathern-Wheel Yard in Leather-Lane in Hatton∣garden, a Lodger at Mr. Enslys, his Wife was by Gods blessing cur'd by my means, about June 76. of a very great Tympany, of two years standing; in the mean time she had a child, and after her delivery, her belly continu'd as great as if she had not been delivered, and increased in bigness till she came to me; some told her if ever she were cured she must be tapt, but she refus'd it; and when she came to me her belly was swoln up to her breasts in an extraordinary manner: there was some appearance of swelling, even to her throat, she had little or no stomack to her meat, but a she did eat or drink she would be ready to burst; she had a vehe∣ment pain in her left side and in the small of her back, an exceeding stoppage of her water, and not able to turn in her bed; restored by my means to perfect health, and to her ordinary proportion. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 27th of Novemb. 76. Dorcas Street. Mrs. Susanna Deane, aged sixty eight years, living in Charter-house-Lane, a Lodger at Mr. Thomas Temples a Tallow Chandler at the Green-man, by the blessing of God was cur'd by my means about Feb. 75. of Deafness in one Ear of fourteen years standing, in the other Ear of a moneths standing, in a little time. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 29th of Novemb. 76. Susanna Deane. Mrs. Elizabeth Brooks Widdow, living in the Pie Garden by Masons-Stairs, on the Banks-Side, was by Gods blessing cured by ay means in July 76. of a Feaver and Ague, great swimming in her head, grievous pains in her Stomack; she wanted rest through her extream pain: her Child also cured by me of the Worms. To the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 22 of Sept. 76. Elizabeth Brooks. s-Browne a Silk-weaver in Bottle and Axe-yard, at the lower f the Yard in the Burrough in Southwark, his VVife was thanks , cured by my  which an Artist told her would kill her, and would not meddl with it; another let her blood under the tongue, which made he tongue sore, itching, burning, and somewhat swollen, and Jaw fal¦len; that she could open her mouth but a very little, and coul not swallow a drop but with great difficulty; what she recei¦ved in at her mouth would come forth at her nostrils: she was hal an hour lying on her back with great struggling, ere she could swal¦low the Medicine, which was but half a spoonful, both dose an vehicle. I brake the imposthume, brought out abundance of blood corruption, and very ill scented matter, and heal'd it in a very littl time. To the truth of vvhich I voluntarily put my hand this 10th of Novemb. 76. Anne Browne. Thomas Hill a Shoe-maker in Barnaby-street near the Christopher, in Chapmans-rents, vvas by Gods blessing cur'd by me about Sept. 76 of the Scurvy, very great pains in his Limbs, very great faint∣ness and vveakness, scarce able to cross a room; and these miseries attended vvith a very sore Throat, and a terrible Cough, vvhich he thought vvould have rent his Throat. To the truth of vvhich voluntarily put my hand this 6th of Octob. 76. Thomas Hill. Roger Kelly, aged about 60 years, in Carpenters-yard, i Rosemary-Lane, at the backside of the White-Lion, by the blessin of God vvas cured by me about Sept. 76. of an imposthume in hi stomack (occasioned by a fall) vvhich caused much pain both upvvar and dovvnvvard, and almost stopt his throat, that he could no eat nor drink; he could only chevv his food and spit it out again he had also griping of the guts, stoppage of his water, shortnes of breath, and much vvasted, and scarce able to go or stand. I brak the imposthume, brought off abundance of blood and corruption, and cur'd him perfectly. To the truth of vvhich I voluntarily pu my hand this 7th of Decemb. 76. Roger Kelly. Richard Wagat in Moore-Lane nigh Cripplegate, in Sugar-loaf Ally, near the Cutlers Arms, his vvife aged 64 years, by Gods blessing was cur'd by my means about Midsummer 76 of a feaver, great pains in her head and stomack, much vveakness, and general pains all over her, that she could not rest any vvhere; her self and those that vvere about her, thought she vvould have died thereof: His servant, aged about 15 years vvas cur'd by me, a little before that time, of a Consumption vvhereby he vvas much vvasted; he had very great pains in his head and stomack, and vvas so far spent that every body that knew him despair'd of his cure; both thanks be to God perfectly cured by me. To the truth of vvhich I voluntarily put my hand this 25th of November. 76. Richard Wagat. Mr. John Beacham in Bishops-gate-street, in Swan-yard, was by the blessing of God, cured by my means about June 75 of a Con∣sumption, great shortness of Breath, an exceeding violent Cough a Coldness within the Skin, as if Ice had lain there, both in hi Back and Sides; much pain in his Stomach, and brought up every thing that he took; not able to follow his business: he brough out of his Stomach great clods of Blood. He had made use of di∣vers, but found no relief; netwithstanding was restored by my means in a little time. To the truth of which I voluntarily put  hand this 6th. of December 76. John Beacham. Joan Jennings a Butchers Widdow in Saints Alley by the Counter in Southwark, about August last was by Gods blessing cured by me of a violent pain in her head and one of her ears, as if spears had been run into her head; to the truth of which I voluntarily put my hand this 11th. of October 1676. Joan Jennings. Mr. William Scarce, near Shoreditch Church, in Cock-lane, in Kings head Court, was by Gods blessing, cured by my means of the Scia∣ca and great pains in his back and sides, which were so sharp, that to use his own words, he would have given any body leave to knock him in the head; the other circumstances here is no room to insert. Witness my hand William Scarce.
