P57 E4:2[165] [ocn]226856955 195587
THE MERCHANTS Daily Companion: Treating: 1. Of TRAFFICK in General. 2. Of COYNES, WEIGHTS and MEASURES, with Tables shewing the Agreement of the English Foot and Ounce with the Weights and Measures of Forreign Parts. 3. Of EXCHANGES, shewing the several places with which London Exchanges, and how Accompts are kept in those places. Also Copies of Bills of Exchange in most Languages. The Copy of a Protest for Non-Acceptance in English, and for Non-payment in French: shewing also what places keep the New, and what the Old stile. 4. Of CUSTOMES, under which Head are comprised se∣veral useful Notes, relating to the Customes payable in Forreign Lands. Also a Copy of a Bill of Health, of a Debenture, of an Indenture of Appraisment, of a Certificate for Damaged Goods, of Bond given by Strangers for Imployment of their Monys on the Commodities of this Realm, of an Affidavit for Goods lost, and of a Certificate for Goods that have paid Custom. Perticulars of Linnen-Cloath, with their Denomination and Length English Measure. Also Tables or Accompts ready cast up, for the Nett Subsidy and Additional-Duty, payable in Ready Mony upon all sorts of Linnens, Wrought-Silks, Tobacco and Wines, Imported either into London or the Out-Parts, by Na∣tives or Strangers. Also Tables for the Nett Subsidy payable upon all sorts of Ʋnwrought-Silks, Tobacco (not of English Plantations) all sorts of Fustians, Thredd, Grocery-Ware, Beads, Anchoves, Bell-Mettal, Bacon, Hemp, Flax, Quiits, Furs, Hides, Leather, Skins, Druggs, &c. Imported, with perticulars of all other Merchandize Imported, which are
not mencioned in any of the Tables, but are referrable thereun∣to for the Subsidy payable, from 1 Pound, 1 Piece, 1 Dozen, 1 Hundr. &c. to 500 or 1000 Pounds, Pieces, Doz. Hun. &c. of every such sort of Merchandize. Also an exact Calculation of the Nett Subsidy, payable on all sorts of Merchandize Ex∣ported. Likewise an Abridgment of the Statutes relating to Goods Prohibited to be Imported or Exported, and of the Sta∣tutes relating to the Customes, with the true Copy of Charta Marcatoria, both in Latin and English. 5. Perticular Directions to the Young Merchant how to en∣ter Goods Inwards or Outwards at the Custom-House, to get Bills of Ladeing signed, to proceed about Insuring Goods In∣wards or Outwards. Likewise shewing what is meant by Factorage, Commission and Discompt, with the several Rates thereof as now practifed amongst Merchants, 6. An Account of the several Merchants Incorporate in the City of London, with the several Commodities by them Exported or Imported. Likewise an account of the Trade of those Merchants not Incorporate, as the Canary, Spa∣nish, Dutch, French, Italian and West-India Merchants, and of the several Commodities by them Exported or Imported. 7 An Abridgment of the Statues, relating to the Post-Office, with the price of Letters to (or from) any part of England, Scot∣land or Ireland, & to (or from) any part of the World where Letters per Post are conveyed; the Methods used by the Post-Master General, for the Conveyance of Letters to (or from) For∣reign Parts, and the Allowances given to Merchants upon For∣reign Letters. 8. The Rates of Carr-Men and Water-Men, and Orders concerning both. A Work highly necessary, as well for all Merchants, ☜ Wholesale-Men, or any other Persons that either Import or Export any Commodities whatsoever, to or from any part of the World. Printed for Thomas Malthus, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sun in the Poultry, 1684, Price Bound Two Shilling Six Pence.
