11886 S114969 99850190 15377
A COMMEN∣tarye vpon the Praphet Mycha. Wrytten by Anto∣ny Gilby. Anno domi. M.D. Li.
☞ A preface wyth the sum of the Chapters and the tyme and lyfe of the Prophet. ¶The word of God to Micha of Maresha in ye dayes of Io¦tham, Achas, Iehiskiah kings of Iuda, whyche he dyd see o∣uer Samaria and Ierusalē. WE do nede no newe Pro∣phets. We do nede no mo Prophecyes. We do nead no mo Miracles, sygnes, or tokens, whyche nowe do lyue in these latter dayes: if we will call olde thynges to memorye: neither of wee wyll beleue the olde hystoryes reported by Moyses, and the terryble threatnynges of the Prophets. Could wee beleue if the greateste miracles of raysinge the deade, to speake amongs vs were wroughte in oure dayes (as Christe oure sauyoure saythe too the ryche glotten.) Wherfore suffer me, I beseeche the, too renewe olde thynges wrytten by thys Prophete Micha, the mooste earneste rebuker of vyce in hys tyme, and the mooste dylygente watch man to warne bothe of good and euyl,
for to come vpō his people, and if so be that the wordes of this olde truthe, do chayfe your olde sores in thys perilous tyme, wherein all olde euyls seme too haue dysgysed them selues wyth new vysers: rather suffer them to be ripped to the hearde coore then to spurne im∣pudentlye against the prycke, to striue agaynst the streame. For the time is at hande by the vnchaungeable appoynt¦mente of the euerliuinge Lord & moste myghtye Iudge, when euery man shal be tryed and Iudged, approued of re∣fused by the thoughtes of hys hearte, by the woordes of hys mouthe, and by the fruyts of his owne imaginacions. Therfore this diligent watchman, warneth especiallye of this iudgment in the entrye into his prophecye, in the fyrste Chapter sayinge: that the Lord hym selfe wyll come downe moste ter∣rybly to the wycked, & the mountains shall melte, the valeis shall vade and vanish like waxe before the firy flame. And in the seconde chapter he crieth forthe woo, dampnacion, and the sore vengaunce of God agaynste the vaine thoughtes and Imaginacions of thee mighty men of the world, against their wicked workes and threatenynges of
the true Prophetes. In the thyrde Chapter he rypeth  more neare the coare of theyr crueltye and extorsion. He vttereth the flattery of their chaplaines (as we do cal them) the false prophetes, flearynge vppon them for aduauntage and bolsterynge them vp in wyckednesse, the lynkynge together of the Iudges and high Of∣fycers theyr brybery and auarice, and for theyr wyckednes he threatneth vt∣ter desolacion to their cities. In the .iiii. he promiseth a kingdom  farre contrarye to thys kyngedome to come vppon earthe, full of knowledge quietnes, and peace, which is the king¦dome of Messiah, wherin all the chosē Iacob shal be restored to theyr honour promysed, and theyr ennemyes vtter∣lye destroyed. In the .v. he threatneth the desolaci¦on  of Ierusalem, the robbers dough∣ters (as Iherome dothe translate) and immediatlye adioyneth a large & plain promise of Messiah oure sauiour to be borne in Bethlē, a despised vyllage, he declareth hym to be both God & man, and sheweth howe he shall fede Iacob and be his peace. But he shall fede the land of Nimroth with their ennemies
wyth theyr owne swearde poyntes. In the sixte he contendeth wyth the people in the person of God for their ingratitude, teachynge the true wor∣shyppe of God to stande in iudgmente, mercye, and the reuerēce of the sacrate magesty of the almyghtie. He detesteth in the parson of God al dysceytful dea∣lyng and promiseth worthy recompens and iust rewardes for al euyll doers. In the .vii. and last Chapter, the pro∣phet bewaileth the skarsitye of ye good, the smal truste of worldely frendeshyp, he teacheth paciēce, he geueth comfort, he promyseth delyueraunce to fayth∣full Iacob, to the shame and confusy∣on of God hys ennemyes, and the land and prayse of God hys greate mercye & truthe. Amen, This haue we heare in this Prophet holesome doctryne for al ages. For the spyryte of God seeth from time to time contynuallye oure iniquytyes, and stry¦ueth euermore there agaynste, No hyll is so hyghe, no valleye so low, that he se¦eth not. He shaketh the foundacyōs of the earthe, when he rebuketh the world in the rygoure of his wrath. Let vs therfore remember the olde world before vs plaged for synne, drow∣ned
for theyr wyckednes, and feare the fyre of goddes wrath, threatned by the Prophetes, to be kyndled in these laste tymes, to the euerlastynge destruccion of all euyll doers, who wyth the deuyll and his aungels shal haue aworme, the whyche shal hereafter gnaw and grate theyr conscience for euer, and a fyry tor¦mente whyche shall neuer be quenched whereof our Prophet warneth the wyc¦ked worlde, threatnyng woo and dam∣nacyon wyth feruente spryt and sorow of hearte, brastynge forth into teares, yellynge and syghinge for the euils he dyd saye towardes them. Micha. i. For thys Prophet Micha semeth to be another Eliah feruent in spyryt and zeloous for the glory of God, he was of the pryncelye trybe of Iuda, and there∣fore acquaynted wyth the pryuy prac∣tises of the potentates & prynces, he did wel inoughe know theyr ydle deuyses, theyr vayne imagynacyons: and cold es¦pye the lynkynge together of the highe officers and Iudges. He liued in ye time of Esaiah, Hoseah, and Amos, vnder these .iii. kinges. Iothana Achas & He∣zechiah. A man of suche an hygh reuela¦cyon that Esaiah dare alledg the grea∣teste mysteryes of his hole prophecy of
the spiritual kyngedome of Christe and of the greate tranquyllytye vnder him by the same woordes that thys manne of God Micha hadde spoken theym. It shalbe in the laste daies, and so forth Esa .ii. Hieremiah also alledgeth hym by name sayinge, Micha of Marescha was a Prophet in the dayes of Ezeki∣ah and saythe to al the people of Iuda. Thus saythe the Lorde of hostes, Sion shalbe plowed lyke the feilde, and Ihe∣rusalem shallbe an heape of stones, and the hyll of the house of the Lord shalbe an hyghe woode. Hierem .xxvi. and the came is red the thyrde Chapter of oure Prophet worde for word. We do reade of ii. Prophetes of this name. The fyrst is named Micha the sō of Iemla an Israelite, whom Achab did saye that he had onlye lefte one a lyue amonges all the Prophets of the lord, but I do hate hym (saythe he) for he ne¦uer Prophecyed good towardes me .iii. kynges .xxii. The other is of Iuda (our prophet) which liued almost .ii. C. yeres after ye first Micha. He was borne in a ci¦ty called Maresha, which is in the trybe of Iuda. Iosua .xv. Hys propheci is ge∣neral to al cities & cuntries, but vnto Ie¦rusalē & to Samaria, he chiefly vttereth
hys threatninges because there he dyd knowe and see theyr wyckednes to bee great, amongs whom he dyd see cruelti, extorsiō, tyranni, couetousnes, auarice, ambicion, the cōtempt of God his true religion, Idolatry, and lyke abhomina∣ciōs to raygne (not onely vnpunyshed) but by the chiefe Lordes, greatest Pea∣res, and Prynces, practysed, vsed, and frequented. In hys tyme both these .ii. kingdōs wer greuousli vexed wt wars wt¦out, & treasōs within themselues. They wer polluted & defyled wyth Idolatry. So far geuē ouer to mindes reprobate, that forgetting al true worship of God and al natural inclinacion, they did sa∣crifice theyr owne children by fyre vnto Baal. These wycked tymes wherein he liued vnder Iotham, Achas, and Ichis∣kiah, ar set forth in the .iiii. booke of the Kynges .xv.xvi. and .xvii. Chapters. As for Samaria, it was geuen ouer to al wyckednes. zacharia the wycked & Idolatrous kyng raigning but .vi. mo∣nethes, was traytorously slaine by Sel∣lum, whych Sellum vsurping ye crowne but one moneth, was slayne by Mana∣hen, which also slew al the enhabitants of Thapsa and most cruelly murthered al the women wyth chyld, & rypte theyr
bellyes, and tyrannouslye wyth taxes & trybutes dyd vexe all hys subiectes, to mayntaine hys wyckednes, which cau∣seth our Prophet to saye, that they dyd flay theyr skyns of theyr backs and the flesh of theyr boanes. Then Phacea his sonne raygned after hym one yeare, as wycked as hys father, and they al wal∣ked in the wycked wayes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, whyche set vp the golden calfe. Thefore were they geuen ouer to myndes reprobate wyth gredy∣nes to fulfyl al theyr wycked lustes. In the second yeare of the raygne of Phacea the son of Manahea, Phacea the sonne Romalia wrought treason a¦gaynst hym, slewe hym, and vsurped the crowne and departed not from the wic∣ked wayes of hys predecessors kynges of Samaria. Vnder him Theglathphal¦lassar the king of Assiria, inuadeth Ga∣lile, and carieth away captiue the trybe of Nephthalim. Agayn Osee the son of Hela wrought treasō against this Pha¦cea, slew hym, & vsurped his crowne, A∣gaīst whō Salmanasser moueth war, do¦eth beseige his chiefe city Samaria, ta¦keth & destroieth it, & so leadeth ye .x. tri∣bes captiue into Assyria. Thus wt wars & wickednes was Samaria destroied, &
as oure Prophete warned in hys tyme, broughte to an heape of stones whyche myght haue caused Ierusalem to haue taken heede to his threatnings. But no warninge can serue the wicked and stif¦necked. For Iotham the king of Iuda and Ierusalem in manye thyngs, a mā praise worthye (thoughe he did se many of these great plages fal vpō Samaria for theyr Idolatry) yet did he suffer his people to sacrifice in the hill altars, con¦trary to God his holy commaundemēt. As for Achas kynge of Ierusalem. He was worsse thē wycked Achab kyng of Samaria, for beside al other abhomina∣cions he dyd offer hys sonne in fire vn∣to Baal, after the maner of the heathen Cananees, & spoyled ye treasures of the house of the Lord to geue them to The¦glathphelasser. And thoughe Ezechiah ye good king folowing him destroied ye i∣dols, did breake doun the hil alters, and ye brasē serpent, thoughe I say ye kinge himself, fauored true religion, yet was their olde wickednes so roted in ye herts of his nobles & cōmons, that besides cō¦spiracies & pertakings within his own realm, & also much war of forē nacions without wherwith God worthely pla∣ged his subiectes for their stobernes. Al
theire walled Cytyes were taken by Senacheryb from the vttermoste bor∣ders vnto Lakis, wherof our Prophet speaketh in the fyrste chapter: yea, Ieru¦salē was obsessed and beseged as he al∣so prophecieth that thys plage shoulde come to the gates of Ierusalem. Nowe we that reade and heare these olde thynges of Samaria and Ierusa∣salem, their kings and Prynces. In the ende of the worlde, muste knowe that they are wrytten for our learnyng, that we beynge warned by theyre scourge, Plage, and fall: shulde feare to doo the lyke wyckednes. And heare in this pro¦phet cheiflye we are warned of Idola∣try, ambition, and extorsion. As for I∣dolatry (thoughe our gouernours here in Englande through the mighty hand of God haue forthe comforte of hys e∣lecte banyshed the outwarde shewe ther¦of) Yet one sorte makynge thys mooste godlye and glorious fact to serue their luker & gayne: to the sclaunder of such a notable enterpryse: haue seemed too chaunge the kinde of Idolatri, making ye muck which they found heaped about those idols, to be their god. So that they maye worthely be called Idolaters, so lōg as thei haue it, kepe it, & set so much
store by it, nether is it anye newe leare∣nyng to cal this their auarice Idolatry, for so Paul calleth it to Ephesians the v. Chapter. Another sort there is which in their heartes haue Idolles styll, and vtter it when occasion serueth, saying: that it was a good worlde when theese Idols of Wasyngeham, Canterburye, and theyr blessed Masse were worship∣ped and regarded. There be moo sortes whyche wyll be called Gospellers, that haue some their bellye for theyre God, some theyr subtile wittes and worldlye policies, some one thing, some another so that in effecte Idolatrye is not bany¦shed, but raigneth more clokedly amōgs vs, too the ignominye and shame of the truthe of one God, whyche wee woulde seame to set forthe and maineteyne. As for ambicion & extorcion the deuil prac∣tiseth at this daye too stoppe the glory∣ous kingdome of Christe by thyem, and rayseth ambytyous stomackes, haulte, and proude mindes amongs those, whi¦che would seeme the stoutest captaines of godlye cheualrye, whyche thorowe theyr vnsacyable ambicion and gready desire of gathering althings into their hāds, robbeth, & reaueth, pilleth, polleth and oppresseth theyr felow sougiours.
So that vnder theyr holy professiō and pretensed religion, they do betray theyr graūd captaine and master of religion, and worketh more wyckedly of the de∣uyls part, for the contempt of God his word: then doth any one whych openly beareth hys badge and cognisaunce. A¦gaynst such therfore bryngeth our pro∣phete sore threatenynges, yea terryble thoundrynges. Wherunto it behoueth hye and low, the earthe and all earthlye creatures to geue eare, and to harken. For it is the woord of the Lorde, not of man whych Micha bringeth. The Lord hym selfe doth speake it from the holye temple of hys maiesty, from whence he shal come downe ryghte shortelye to be bothe a wytnes and Iudge agaynst vs. Wherefore lette vs iudge oure sel∣ues, nowe warned by God hys woorde, that we be not iudged of the Lorde, and so for our wyckednes wyth the worlde cōdempned. For our God, whose worde is now sent amongs vs, is a consu∣ming fyre, before whome no syn can be cloked. Hys worde is the hāmer breakynge the hard stone.
¶ The word of God to Micha. THe worde or message of the euer∣lyuyng Io∣uah (yt is) of him whiche now s, that hath beene, that shalbe. By whome also al thin∣ges haue theyr beyng: for so much con∣tayneth that hye name of God, whyche we do for the most part translate (lord) thorowout the Byble, because the Ie∣wes not daring to pronoūce it, neyther by any other woorde beinge able to ex∣pres so much of God, doth place in the stede therof Adonai, which doth sygny∣fy Lord. Which I do note to thys ende to admonysh the reader to auoyde such cauillacions as the enemyes of the gos∣pell haue here to fore styrred about thee Lord, and our Lorde, and to teache the ignoraunt to haue a deepe consideraci∣on of the magesty of thys Lord, whych is, whych hath bene, and whych shalbe, by whom al creatures haue theyr being
so oft as they do heare the Lord named and so cal them to the reuerence of the name of God, so longe bi vs Christians contempned, dispised, and vyllanously blasphemed, with vsual othes and abho¦minable periurie. Where as the Iewes dare not speake nor wryte thys greate name wyth meruelous obseruacaons & muche reuerence, to oure great shame I do speake it, whyche do tosse lyke a ten¦nes ball wythout al feare and reuerēce the name of oure Lord God frō mouth to mouth, accountinge him vnmete for all good companye, especyallye for a kynges court whyche wyl not take the name of god in vain at eueri other word Oh ye blasphemers muste this be the firste entrye into your Courts and com¦panye, to shake of the feare of God. So despitefullye to breake hys hollye pre∣cept and commaundemente? so contu∣melyouslye to abuse hys holye name, greate before all creatures, hygh before the aungels, and terryble to the deuils. Learne some other couretynge before thys Lord in his dreadful maiesty come downe amonges you. You can talke re∣uerentlye of the kynges Maiestye, hys hyghnes, hys hanorable counsayle, my Lordes grace, my Lorde Bishops grace
and my ladyes grace, & is ther nothinge left for the Lord of al Lords, the kynge of all kynges, but Gods bloude, Gods woūds, Gods passiō, blasphemyng out¦ragiously both God the father & his son Christ (who for to saue vs, shed his blud, suffered these woundes and bitter passi¦on) Is neyther God, who created thee? nor Iesus Christ, who redemed thee, of no more reputacion? Is this right cour∣tyng? to set so light by thy creacion? thy redempcion, thy saluacion? Then cur∣sed be courtyng, wo worthe the wycked companye. Here al people,The Text. hearken thou earth, and al that therin is. The Lord God be a wytnes against you, the Lord frō his holy tēple. Loo, no kynges course is excepted, but al people muste doo reuerence vnto thys Lorde, al knees muste bowe before hys magesty. The heauen is hys seate, the earth is hys foote stoole. The kynge in hys pryuy chamber hath thys Lorde a wytnes of hys dooynges. The Lords of the priuay counsayle, can not shutte foorth of the counsayle chamber, thys vnreprouable wytnesse. No Kynge, no
Courte, no Emperoure, no Poope, Pre¦late shal woorcke so pryuelye, but thys Lord shal espye and se, shal both wyt∣nes and iudge al their doinges. Let vs therfore tremble and diligent¦ly gyue eare when the Lord speaketh, and wyth feare and reuerence humble oure selues to his name. Desiringe as his sonne taughte vs, his name too bee sanctified, halowed, renowmed, reuerē¦sed and magnified, and waitinge most obedientlie whyles hys holye wyll bee fulfylled. Moyses dothe cal heauen and earth to witnes against vs, as doth our Pro∣phete Micha. Deuternomi. iiii. xxx. and xxxii. So dothe Esaie also in hys firste Chapter, teachinge vs that the hea∣uens, that is to say: the heauenly spy∣rytes and aungels, the earthe, that is too saye: al menne create vppon thee earth: shallbeare wytnesse at the great and terryble tyme of God hys laste Iudgemente, wythall trewe preachers and Prophetes, agaynste oure synfull stubbernes, whyche wyl not repent, be¦ynge so ofte admonished. Yea the euer∣liuinge and euerlastynge Lorde in his dreadefull Magestye commeth as an vnreproueable wytnesse too aduenge
the contempte of his hollye name, and all other abhominations, as this oure watche manne warneth, wyll wee not yet stoupe? abate oure Pryde, plucke downe oure highe courtlie lokes, halte coūtenaunces, and leaue oure bleather blowne bragges, sette forth wyth sham¦lesse othes, too the contempte of God his holye name, and that bytter passi∣on whiche Christe oure sauioure, suf∣fered for vs. Well, the Lorde is higher then al, and hee wil shortlye come downe from his holly temple. Then wo to the exn of pryde, the blasphemers of his name. Wo to the ambicious Tiraunts and co¦uetous caitifes. Wo to the dronken in theyr lustes, eyther heare in Englande, or elles wher, for there is one God whych ha∣teth synne euer sence he made manne, and one sprite whyche hath by the ho∣lye woorde vttered synne, rebuked it, and foughten againste it frome the be¦gynnynge, one Lorde, whyche shall bee boothe wytnesse and iudge ouer all fleshe, whyche shall come sodayne∣lye vppon the wycked, strongelye, and myghtely, lyke an hayle storme, lyke a whyrle wynde, or lyke a sooden floude
of waters fallynge vpon a great plaine Esay. xxvii. The Text.For loo God shal come forthe of hys place, he shal come down and walcke vppon the hyghe places of the earth. And the hils shall melte vnder hys feete, the valaies shal cleaue in sonder, e∣uē as the waxe melteth against the fyre and as the waters whi∣che fal downe with violence. Oure Prophete Micha doothe paint the commyng of the Lord to iudgment boothe wyth the Iewes and also wyth the hole worlde wyth mooste euydent si¦militudes of comming downe and wal¦kynge, whyche canne be applyed vnto God, who fylleth all places but only bi borowed speache as Moises did saye. Gen. iii. God did walke in Paradyse at the euentyde because he did then open his Magestye mooste presentlye vnto A¦dam, howbeit vpon our sauiour Christ whome we beleue bodilye too be in one place, not in al: according to the saying of the angel vnto the wemen. He is not
heare after hys resurreccyon, but the men of Galile stode and beheld his hu∣mane body, go vp into the heauens, and the aungels saide agayne vnto them: ye mē of Galile, this same Iesus shal com againe, as ye haue seene hym go vp in to the heauens. Actes. i. and God hathe appoynted a day, saythe Paule: when he wyll iudge the worlde wyth ryghte∣ousnes, by thys man whom he hath ray¦sed from deathe. Act. xvii. The whyche daye and tyme of the Lordes comming seemeth here to be chieflye and pryncy∣pallye descrybed, thoughe the destruc∣cyon of the Iewes be therewyth insu∣mate, for thus dothe Christe hym selfe cople bothe together .xxiiii. of Mathew and Dauid in the .xvii. Psalme doothe adioyne the daye of hys perticuler deli∣ueraunce to thys daye of the Lordes cō¦minge, sayinge: the Lorde hathe hearde my voyce frome hys holye temple. The earthe was moued and trembled, and the foundacyons of the Mountaynes were troubled, & shaken. The smoke did come forthe in hys wrathe and the fyre dyd flame from hys face, so that cooles were kindled therwith, he bowed down the heauens & came down and darknes vnder his fete.
Of this daye and of these hygh pla∣ces whereupon the Lorde shall walke, speaketh Esay the Prophete. In that daye the Lord alone shalbe exalted for it shall come vppon all the hyghe and proud, vpon al them that ar arrogant, and they shalbe broughte lowe, and vp on all the hyghe Ceder trees of Lyba∣nus, and vpō al the Okes of Basan, & vpon al the high hilles, and vpon eue∣rye high tower, the pryde of mē shalbe brought downe, and theyr highe lokes be brought lowe saythe Esay, which is the meaninge of oure Prophete. The TextAnd the hils shal melt. For oure God is a consuminge fyre and who is able to abide the heat of his heauye displeasure? and as Esay saith the Lorde shall come in fyre, and hys Chariot shallbe lyke a whyrle winde, to vtter forthe hys furye wyth greate rage, & hys rebuke in the flame of fyre. For in the fyre and the sweard shal the Lorde Iudge all fleshe. Esay. lxvi. Now, where the proude world dothe thinke yt the lord liueth in the heauēs, not seing, nether regardīg their doings vpō earth, our Prophet rebuketh that grosse opinion, and telleth thē that as he dyd come terryble downe vpon the
mounte Sinai when he dyd geue the lawe of the .x. commaundementes. So wyll he come wyth fyre, to make theyr heartes to melte, when he wyll aske accomptes of the kepynge and fulfil∣lynge of these holye commaundemēts. The whiche fearefull communication and threatninge maye worthely cause vs in these latter daies, vpon whom the end of the world is come, to quake and tremble, consideringe oure careles life, whiche do al thinges so wilfullye and wickedlye as thoughe either ther were no God at al, or no daye appoynted to make aunswere for oure doinges. But the Lorde wyll come spedely from hys holye temple. For the wickednes of Iacob,The Text. all this and for the synne of the house of Israel. After the Prophet haue threatned vtter destruccyon of the .ii. kingdomes Samaria & Ierusalē, set forthe by open similitude of the moūtaines melting, ye vallies cleauing in sondre, like as wax doth before the fyrye flame, he sheweth the cause of the ruin of thē bothe & of ye greate wrathe of God, & as all prophe∣cies bee generall beynge geuen by one
spirit, whych seeth to the end euermore stryuyng agaynst the syn of al nacions. So doth the spirite teach vs that the on¦ly cause of Gods wrath in al ages, and al places, is the synne and wyckednesse of the world, for the which he said once: It repenteth me that I made man. Ge¦nesis .vi. For synne God destroyed the whole world, whych he had made, bothe man and beast, saue only a seede reser∣ued in the Arke, to preach hys iustyce, & hys mercy, in a new world, renewed by hys spirit. For the proude synful words of the old Giantes, did the great plage of the confusion of languages come vp on the world, whyche we doo feele vnto thys day, so that one man vnto another beyng of a straunge nacion, is made as it were a dombe and speecheles beaste. For syn were the .v. cytyes brente wyth fyre. For synne wer the old Giants Og kynge of Basan, and the monstruous seede of Suachim destroyed. For synne the Cananites, the Heuites, the Hethi∣tes, the Iebusites, and to be short after them who were placed in theyr Coun∣tryes, the chosen Israelites beynge in noumber lyke the sande of the sea, were myserably wasted, destroyed, and consumed. The .iiii. pryncipall Monar∣chies
whyche Daniel descrybeth, be all beaten downe for sinne. And the .x. litle hornes or kingdomes also, hathe beene euery one of them, ofter then once chan¦ged and translated. Finally al realmes countryes, townes and cities, shall for synne haue the like ruine and destrucci∣on. Some sooner and sorar, to cause the rest to repent, and at the length all be∣cause the reward of synne is destrucciō by the myghty Lord hys vnchangeable ordynaunce. So sore a thynge is synne in the syghte of God, that who so euer synneth, deserueth death. This was the old learning which the Lord taught A∣dam in Paradise, whych al the seede of Adam feeleth and tasteth continuallye, and yet can neyther see nor auoyde the cause of theyr destruccion, but as Me∣dia dyd say: Euen seyng, wittyng, and wyllyng we do perysh. Who was the cause of synne to Iacob? was it not Samaria?The Text and who of the hie places of Iu∣da? was it not Ierusalem? Thys sentence can not stand as it is cōmonly translate, what is the syn? be∣cause the interogatiue in the Hebrew is the Masculine gēder, & therfore must be
referred to the author of the synne, and hye places, wherunto the aunswer also serueth that Samaria and Ierusalem, that is to say: the chefe cities and kings courtes are the causes of al wyckednes & Idolatrous abhominacion. Euen so so said Elias to king Achab: Thou and thy fathers house hath troubled Israel whych haue forsaken the commaunde∣ments of God, and followed Baalam. For lyke as the kyng and court is, such are the people, as the experience of al a∣ges playnelye teacheth. For the people alwayes by flatteryng and counterfai∣tyng kynges and princes, doth imitate & follow their maners & condiciōs. And thys is nothing vnnatural, that the bo∣dy and inferiour members shuld follow the qualities & disposicion of the heade, but rather impossible that it shuld be in¦clined any other waies. Here is to be no¦ted for the variety of trāslacion, of thys text that it is a defectiue sentence, and by sondry interpreters is diuerstye sup∣plied lyke as many mo are in the old te∣stamēt. For the Hebrue tonge in sētēces of vehemencye, and also of great haste doth leaue out certain words easy to be vnderstād. itti mi, who wyth me, ha sha∣lam, how peace, such eclypsed phrasies
haue we in the Englishe tong, as howe nowe? horsse, horsse. Samaria was the kyngs of Israels seate, as we reade .iii. Kyng .xvi. Amry king of Israel bought the hyl Thamor of Themer, and buylte it for his palace, wher as the kyngs wer named before to raygne in Thyrsa, as appeareth in the same chapter. This Samaria is much blamed in scrip¦ture, because of the goldē calfes which Ieroboam set vp, & al the kings of Isra¦el in this city chiefely maintained after hym. And Ierusalem is annexed as her sister by byrth, being both of one people, brought forth of Egipt, and also like of condiciō in al kynde of abhominacions, as the thyrde chapter of Ieremye, and xxiii. of Ezechiel dothe at large vnder ye names of Ahola and Aholiba declare. Wher as Ierusalē is accompted muche more wycked, because she could not be∣ware by her systers fall, but encreased her abhominacions, and therfore much more greuouslye to be iudged and con∣dempned. In what case then are we lyuyng in these euil daies, in our great cities, cour¦tes, and kyngs houses, whych haue not the terryble example of one of thē only, but of infinite other set before our eies.
We do reade of the wycked kynges in Ierusalem Achas and Manasse, which dyd not onlye excede in wyckednes the kynges of Israell and prynces of Sa∣maria, but they are charged yt they far passe the wyckednesse of that people whyche the Lorde dyd driue forthe be∣fore them for theyr synnes. And abho∣minations the wicked Cananees, wher the kynges and Prynces were so euyl, the people coulde not be good, therfore did come vpon them horrible destruccy¦on at the ende. What shall we saye in these perilous tymes wherin al men cō¦plaineth, religion to be neglected, chari¦ty to be clene quēched, al good maners & orders peruerted and corrupted, coue∣tousnes so depelye grounded, and ryot so rooted in theyr hartes, whyche haue authorytye ouer vs, that these poysons are spred lyke smyttinge lepryes, from the heade to the hole bodye euen to the soules of the feete and lowest mēbers. Repente (we saye) O you prynces & iudges of the earth, remember these ex¦amples of olde, consyder that al is laid vpon your backes, for you must answer for the sinnes of the people, euen you I saye, whiche shuld be as it wer earth¦lye goddes vnto the people, to minister
all goodnes. Become not deuils the au¦thors of euil and wickednes, haue ofte in minde the godli sayings of the boke of wisdome, that power is geuen vnto you of the Lord, & authoriti frō the hi∣est, which shal examine your woorkes & shal serch your very thoughts, because that you being the ministers of his kīg¦dome, haue not vsed righte iudgement, nor kept ye law of righteousnes, nether haue you walked after the wil of God. Horribly therfore and spedelye shal he appeare vnto you, for a moste straite iudgment shalbe to them in authoritie. Vnto the smal mercye shal be shewed, but the mighty shalbe mightely tormē∣ted. &c as in. Sapi. vi. Repente we crie again O ye lords of the earthe of your former negligens in religion. Lay downe your couetouse ambicion, sease from ryot and your las∣ciuious wantonnes. Awaye with your stinkinge fornycacyon. Let go your op¦pression and extorsion. Sease to do euil. Learne to doo good. Least you do perish with these .ii. cities afore named Samaria & Ierusalē. The pore people your subiects muste nedes folow your exāple, if you do vnfainedly repēt as did ye kīgs & princes of Niniue.
Lyke as they can not eskape vnpuni∣shed if you do sinke in sin with the prin¦ces of Sodō. But oh, wher be ye exāpls & proclamaciōs of the kings & prynces of Niniue, which admonished of theyr syns by Ionah only, proclaimed a fast for yong & olde, mā & beast, cōmanding most straitly yt they shuld crye vnto the Lord with al theyr might, & euery man torne frō his euil way, & frō the wicked¦nesse, wherein he was practised. That God might repent of his word & turne awa his wrath. But you contrariwise, not repenting, but forgetting how you haue offēded God with your old idola∣try, do abuse his light, now sent amōgs you, to the satitfying of your lusts, & to condēnaciō of your owne soules, cause god his holy word, & ye preachers therof to serue your couetusnes. You do make proclamaciōs daily I do graūt against the couetous dealings of your inferior members & subiects: but be sure, ye body can not be deliuered of this disease ex∣cept ye head be first pourged. Wherfore be warned in tyme by the prophets and preachers, for if we stil both head & fote, continue in euil, we must loke to gether to perish wt the wicked world before vs. The TextI wyll laye Samaria in fo∣rowes
to plant vines, I wil cast down her stones into the valei & raise her foundacyons. Lo, vtter destrucciō is threatned to this cytye for the wickednes of the inhabi∣tantes. And it was performed which ye prophet speketh by Salmanasar, San herib, Phul, & Theglathphelaser, as ap¦peareth in ye .iiii. boke of the kinges the xvii. & .xviii. chap. And shal our polluted Samaritās of Londō escape vnpuni∣shed, the Iewes could not medle wt the Samaritās wtout polluciō, neither cā ye faithful come to London but they are contaminate. Their eies with filthye sightes, are ful of adultery, their eares with wicked tales & blasphemies, ar ob¦turate & made deaffe, theyr mindes wt infinite errours occupied, with ye diuer¦sity of diuilish delucions demēted, that neither Samaria, neither Sodō it self, hath deserued before god & mā any so∣rar, or more extreme punishment. God is ther none amōgs thē, nether yet erth¦ly king, as appeareth by their lawes cō¦tēpned, no loue amongs mē, no shame fastnes amonges women, no fayth, no fear, no trust, no cōfidēce, no master cō¦tent wyth one offyce and callynge, no seruaunt for loue, doth shew obediēce.
In shadow and outward shewe, haue banished Idolatry, and changed theyr religion, yet do they serue the deuil styll as much as euer they dyd in al kynde of abhominaciō. Therfore shal thys Eng∣lysh Samaria be wasted and destroyed, because from this sea all sinful poodles of England doth flow & spread abrode. And al the grauen ymages of Samaria shall bee broken in peeces,The Text the gyftes and offerings shall be brent wyth fyre, and all her temples shal I make deso∣late, for she hath gathered all of the hyre of an harlot, and to the hyre of the harlot, they shall bee returned. The grauen Images, the goldē cal∣ues, & what so euer the Assyryans foūd∣in Samaria, they spoiled and waisted it, they destroied theyr townes & tēples as is towched .iiii. Kynges .xvii. They dyd take away their golden calues. Hosea .viii. wherby the lying Lord would vt∣ter the weakenes of those fayned gods whych could not helpe them selues, and the foolyshnes of all men whyche wyll
worshyp such broken cesterns that can hold no water. Yea, theyr foolyshnes & shameles abhominacion is muche more vttered in that the Prophet sayth that Samaria had gathered all thys of the hyre of the harlot: charging thē as doth Ezechiel .xvi. Chap. that where vnto all common whores, ther is geuē rewards. Israel lokinge for no rewarde of her I∣dols, with whom she hathe ren of who∣ringe, hath contrariwise made thē riche with her giftes and rewardes. But as goodes euill gotten muste nedes be euil spente (according to the common Pro∣uerbe) so now commeth it to passe, that these ryche Iewels golde and siluer of∣fered Idols in Samaria, are caried into Babilon to be dedicate to their Idoles againe, or elsse are readye to be conuer∣ted vpon suche harlottes as commune∣lye foloweth suche garrisons of order∣les sowgioures and by the cursse of god and mooste heauy temptacion (as we do se in our time) that whiche was gotten by spiritual fornicacion is spent in beast¦ly and bodely whoredome. Wherefore I shal mourne and yel,The Text I shal go spoiled & na∣ked,
I must murne lyke the dra∣gōs, & wayle lyke the Estriches. The Prophet brasteth forth wyth tea¦res, wyth sighing, sobbing, yelling, and criyng, to lament the state of these my∣serable tymes, which he dyd see and be∣hold to hang ouer the heades of his peo¦ple. So doth Christ our Sauiour seynge Ierusalem, wept ouer it. So doth Esai¦ah. So doth Ieremiah, and al true pro∣phets and preachers lamēt and bewaile the miseries, whych nedes must followe the synneful stubbernes of the wycked. Thus alwayes, the wycked worlde gre∣ueth the holy spirit of God, in these ho∣lye men: but neuer wyl they mourne for theyr own sins, vnles it be so as our pro¦phet may be ryght wel vnderstand, that afflyccion, daunger, and distres, do giue them vnderstandyng, as in theyr feare∣ful famine, when the delycate women, were fayne to eate theyr owne tender babes, to eate rates, horsse heades, the verye dounge of Asses when their king was caryed captyue, and hys eyes put foorthe, when the bewtye of theyr fayre women was wythered wyth waylyng, wyth heate and burnynge of the wea∣ther, when the playtynge of theyr haire
was turned into baldnes, and all theyr strong men slayne in battayle. Then as Esaiah sayth: theyr gates shal mourne and the citye beyng spoyled, shal syt vp¦on the earth. Esay. iii. Thus maye it be verye aptly vnderstande, eyther of the Prophet or of the people. Of thys spoyle and nakednes Moyses by the mouthe of God, dyd Prophecye. Deuterno. xxix. Because they haue forsaken the couenaunt of God, whych he hath made wyth theyr fathers, when he broughte them out of the land of Egyptte, shall theyr lande lye spoyled and wa∣sted. Agayne. Hos. cha. iii. A long time sayth he, shal the chyldren of Israell syt wythout kynge, wythout Prynce, with¦out sacrifice, wythoute altar, Ephot, & Ieraphim. Wherin is to be marked that the fall and destruccion of al cityes & coūtryes are for seene to the spyryte of God, and the cause of theyr ruyne is onely synne and wyckednesse, euen the forsakynge of the Lorde. This it is whiche shall make the proude Dragons whiche fometh forthe fyre frō
theyr mouthes to yel and cry at the end, for the misery whiche shall come vppon them. This shal cause the greate Estri∣ches to grone and mourne for verye dis∣tres and anguishe. Fynallye, this sinne shal cause al the earth to shake & quake, to yell and wayle, when the word of god shalbe poured forthe vpon it. O Lorde be merciful vnto vs, for our sinnes sake doo we fele at this daye thy heauye dyspleasure, too rage and rayne throughe our hole realme, and especial¦lye at this presente, vppon thy house of Suffolke, once beautifyed by thy glory¦ous Gospell but nowe by oure vnwor∣thynes spoyled naked and byryued of the crowne of glorye of thy chosen ves∣sels, the hope, honoure, and comlines of that house. O Lorde why dothe not the wycked peryshe whyche knoweth not the nor careth for thy commaundmēts? But the iudgmente beginneth at thyne houshould chyldren, the heard hearted Estriches and deuourynge Dragones shall yel and mourne in the ende. The proude tirauntes are lykened to Dragons Ezechiel .xxxii. Iob. xl. For the Dragons howe they dye pressed to deathe by the huge Elephante Plinius declareth. Lib. viii. Cap. xi. The Estry∣ches
ar described. Lib. x. Cap. i. Strabo. Liber. xvi. Because her woūdes ar in cu¦rable:The Text For to Iehuda is it nowe come: it is come too the gates of my people euen to Ierusalem, Lo, this is the cause worthy of much moureninge, weepinge, and wailinge (saithe oure Prophetes) because Iehu∣da hath sinned, and as Esay saith from the heade to the foote, there is nothing but swelling soores, stripes and wonds, no place lefte where they maye be pla∣ged anye more. The wrathe of the Lord is so soore kindled, that he hathe geuen thē vp to their owne sinful lustes & ther¦fore worthely hath also brought vpō thē miserable plagues, the fyre of hys ven∣gaunce canne not be quenshed but styll the Idolatrous people of Samaria too the chosen kyngedome, it rageth from Iehuda euen to Ierusalem that holy ci¦tie, whereunto the perpetual priesthode and kingedome vnto the comminge of Messiah was promised, so yt as Esay la¦menteth the cities rounde aboute Ieru¦salem beinge destroied. Ierusalem was lefte alone lyke a watche house in the
vineyarde or the cottage in the garden of Cucummers, and cleare withoute a∣ny sucoure obsessed & besieged by Rab∣sace as appeareth .iiii. kings .xviii. Here by nowe Englande and all those peo∣ple whome God hathe speciallye called in these oure times by the lighte of hys Gospel hathe greate cause too tremble and fear God his secrete iudgment, con¦sydering yt we haue not so many promy¦ses as hadde Ierusalem and theyr fall was for theyr vnthankefulnes and for∣getfulnes of their duties towards god, as appeareth by oure Prophete. What shal we thē loke for: like fal with ye Ger¦maines. Nay, much worsse & much sorar because wee wyll not yet be warned. Do not declare this in Gath: neyther wepe you nor wayl you there,The Text. in the houses of Sephra¦tumble thy selfe in the duste. A lyke lamentacion maketh Dauid for the deathe of Saull and Ionathas ii. kings .ii. shew not this thing in Gath nor Askalon saithe he, leste the vncircū¦cised Philistins do reioise at ye fal of Is¦rael, Wherein is declared the cause yt in Gathe named a city of the Phelistines, whēce ye great enemy Goliath did come
the fal of god his people shoulde not be knowē least the vncircūcised should say wher is their God. As the great Turck & the prowde Pope with their adherents do not stick at this dai to sai of the Ger¦maines that they were in an euill waye els shuld not god haue geuē thē to their enemies. O let vs beware lest ye name of God or his holye doctrine be by our wic¦ked sinfulnes at anye time so hainous∣lye blasphemed. But as for Ophir whi∣che is hear called Aphra (for the hebrew allusion with Aphar whiche signifieth dust) whiche was in the tribe of Benia∣min one of the hyghe cities of Iuda the prophet byddeth it after the custome of mourners to mourn in dust & ashes. So ought we in our owne cōgregacions a¦mōgs our selues, bewaile our miseries, & the miseries of our brethrē, & thus iud¦ging our selues, we shal not be with the wicked cōdēned, but by our vnfained re¦pētaūce, cause God to shew his mercye vpō vs, as did the Niniuites repēting in ashes & sackloth at the preaching of Io¦nas. But O merciful god what flintish harts haue we? The enemies of Christe do laugh & reioise at these our miseries. Yet we cā not bewaile thē. The proude papists cā say they are plaged for theyr
sinnes, yet will we not espy them. They do say (I doo feare me ouertrulye) that we neither do faste nor praye but cause the Gospell to serue oure folyshe fanta¦syes, and therfore doth God send these plages vpon vs, that we maye bee made newe vessels apte and mete to these spi∣rituall workes, therby to put awaye thy wrath so sore kindled against vs, and to stop the mouthes of oure enemies. The Text.Get the hēce Saphir wt thine enhabitaunce, thou haddest thy name of beauty, but thou art na¦ked with shame. And zaenā whi¦che had the name of goinge for¦ward, shal not go forth to bewail Bethhazell, the ennemye shall take from you through his long seige. For the citizens of Ma∣roth hathe sorowed for their ry∣ches sake, because that euyll is come frō the Lord vnto the gate of Ierusalem. Yoke thi chariote with thi Dromedaries and swift running Camels, O Lakis, for
thou wast the first beginning of the sinne of Israel the doughter of Sion, for in the was foūd the wyckednes of Israell. The Prophete doth reherse the cheife cities whence Ierusalem shoulde haue hadde healpe and succoure, and setteth before her eies the extreme misery wher¦vnto she was brought by sin. The bew∣tiful Saphir was smitten wyth shame. zaenan whiche was not alwaye readye before tyme to go forthe against the e∣nemy, and therof hadde the name, dare not now go forthe to lament her neigh¦boures of Bethhaezel: no, the ennemye hath takē from them both menne, mo∣nye, and al municions by theyre longe siege against them. The ryche cytye of Maroth also dothe mourne for her ry∣ches, wher she hoped for the good bles∣sing of God which is here named, Tob, and doothe signifye all goodnesse. The cōtrary euen the curs & wrath of God threatned in the law, dyd pearce to the portes & gates of Ierusalē. Now La∣kis which is named ye .x. of Iosua to be ye kings seat which is laide also to ye prin∣cely trybe of Iuda. Iosue the .xv. is com¦manded by our Prophet to flye away in
chariots and to be caried wyth mooste swyfte beastes for so dothe all the He∣brew commentaries agree that, Rekes, dothe signifye. Thoughe some do trans¦late mules, some Camels, some Drome¦daries, and some doth say it is the name of a beaste vnknowē to vs. The meanīg of the Prophet is to vtter in how great feare they shalbe before the enemy. And as the Prophet speaketh it was fulfil∣led the .xiiii. yere of the raigne of kynge Esechias, when Senaherib did take all the stronge fenced cities of Iuda, and beinge in the citie of Lakis, Ezechias sente Messengers to desyre him too de∣parte and apoint what tribute he wold, iiii, kynges .xviii. The Prophet doth fur¦ther vtter the cause of this terrible fear, frō which they shuld flye, saying: yt this Lakis was the firste fountayne of the Idolatrye, broughte from Samaria to Ierusalem, whiche ought therfore chief¦lye to tremble, because it was the fyrste and cheife cause of God his wrath thus kyndled. Let al them learn hereby to re∣pente whyche are the authors of euil vn¦too other, for when the almightye shall shake his sweard it shalbe to late to seke for help at horsses and Chariots. The common fame goeth that in Bo∣ston
in Lincolne shere there, was seene a swearde hangynge in the ayre, but wee nede no fayned matters: we do feal the fearce wrath of God and his sore swerd in this sodē death & murren of mē, which myght cause vs to repent, if we wer not indurate & geuē ouer to our own lustes. Our beautie is shent, oure forward men are spente, oure ryches is consumed. Cā we helpe this with the frendshyp of fo∣ran nacions? canne we resiste the wrath of God by oure pollycyes? especyallye ioynyng handes with papystes, the fren¦des of Antechriste by profession, and our auncyente ennemyes. Therfore shal thou send gifts to Moresheth which is in Gath,The Text and the house of Akrib shall lye vnto the kinges of Israell. Yet agayne wyll I brynge an heyre vnto the thou citye of Maresha vnto Adullā shal come the glory of Israel. Make thy self bald & be shauen, for delicate & daintye childrē enlarge thi baldnes & na¦kednes like the Egle because thei
are gon into captiuitie from the. Moresheth & Maresha are .ii. dyuers cities of diuers con̄tries & in the Hebrew playnelye dystyncte by letters and vow elles. Moresheth, Bathe was a cytye of Palastine whiche Dauid brought in subieccion and made tributarye. The whyche oure Prophet dothe nowe say, shall make Ierusalem trybutary in con∣trarye condycion, and Lykewyse Aksib was a citi of Iuda, Iosu .xv. whose citi∣zens were like the lyinge and deceiuable waters geuinge no refreshinge to them which sought relief at their handes. Maresha was in the trybe of Iuda, The prophet b the mouth of god, threat¦neth to bring in a new heyre and owner to Maresha the cytye, wherein he was borne, to geue them knowledge, and to bryng into remembraunce the benefyte of old, when God brought them foorth of Egipt, did driue forth the Cananees, and set theym as heyres and owners in theyr land. The whych woorke of God they nothyng regardyng, but couetyng the spoyle one of another, euerye man takyng house and land from hys owne brother, as foloweth in the second chap¦ter, by worthy punyshmente and iust re∣compence, God bryngeth and setteth in
theyr place newe heyres and owners. And vnto Adullam, whych was a cytye nyght to Ierusalē, shal come thys heyre, thys owner, & new possessioner, whō al Israel shal hold as their lord, & count as theyr kynge. Wherfore he is here called theyr glory, the glory of Israel, whyche was fulfylled in the king of Assur. San¦herib whyche dyd come and conquer all the cityes of Iewry, saue only Ierusa∣lem, which was left like a cotage in the fielde when the haruest was ended, as Esay sayeth: wher the Prophet biddeth the whole land of Iury, so make it selfe bald, & shaue of the hear, for the losse of her chyldren. He setteth forth the great heauines and murnyng which shuld fo∣low this destruccion. Lyke as Ezechiel xxvii. Let them sprynckle theyr handes wyth duste and ashes, and shaue theym whyles they be bald. Also, Ieremy .xvi. of the cōtrary wher ther shalbe no mur∣nyng. They shal dye great and smal to∣gether, they shall not be buryed nor la∣mented, neyther shal any cut them selfe or any baldnes be made for them. Iob is named to haue bene shauen in his great sorow in the fyrst chap. This similitude of ye Egle is broughte in to amplifie and set forth theyr spoile
and destruccion, for as the Egle in ex∣treme age, doth cast al her fayre fethers and loseth them. So Israell naked and spoyled, bald and baren of al ornamēts, shal mourne and lament, the whych sy∣mylytude of the Egle, maye represente also to the spiritual man, the renuynge of the spiritual Israel, whyche can not be any other waye, but by the mortify∣fiyng of the carnal Israel. Whereunto the Prophets as vnto their chefe marke (though darkely for the tyme) doth ap∣ply theyr prophecyes. Of this renewing of the Egle, besydes the prophane wri∣ters, we read Psa. ciii. Esa. xl. of the re∣newyng and restoryng of the spirituall Israel. Esay. lx. Ambrose doth at large set forth this similitude, and apply it to the renewing of the faythful, in a Ser∣mon made principally for the same pur¦pose. Now to appyly thys prophecy to oure tyme and maners. What if wee be lykewise compelled to please wyth gif∣tes our enemyes? what if we beyng dise¦possed, other do inuade our possessions? Whō can we blame, but our own wyc∣kednes? which being so oft warned, wil¦fullye do ren forwarde to prouoke the wrath of God vpon vs. This sore plage of thys sodayne death, send amonge vs
(vnles we do shortely repent and amēd our euyl lyues) semeth to be the weake∣nyng and rootyng out of vs against the commyng of some foraine enemies. For thus God vseth firste to warne by hys word, then by some fatherly correcion. After when the people doth waxe stub∣burne agaynst hys worde, and cruell a∣mongs themselues, he geueth them vp to the cruelty of theyr enemyes, whych causeth baldnes, nakednes, and al my∣series. Therfore let vs praye wyth Da∣uid that we fall into the hand of God, rather then into the handes of men. The second Chapter. WO to them that imagin vanity and worke wyc∣kednes vpon theyr beds and early in the mornynge wyll do the same,The Text because that power is in theyr handes. They couet∣ted fieldes, and haue goten them by extorcion: houses haue they desyred and taken them awaye. They haue by vyolence oppres∣sed the man and hys house, the
man and hys herytage. Oure Prophet here to fore hath chief∣ly rebuked the people for theyr Idola∣try and vnthankfulnes towardes god. Now when he commeth to touch theyr grosse couetousnes agaynste theyr bre∣thren, he is compelled to cry, wo worthe them that thus wyckedlye lyinge vpon theyr soft beds wher they should thank God for hys benefits, and pytye theyr brethern whych haue not the like: doth cleane contrary imagin only, lying vpō theyr beds in the nyghte season, howe they may work wyckedly agaynst their poore brethren, and in the mornynge do speedelye perfourme theyr wycked dy∣uyses. Thys is so playne it needeth no expositour, the Prophet telleth theym what they imagin, only how they maye get theyr neighbours house and liuing. We al graūt thys is playne, we say al ye thys is true, & we do cōfesse an euerlast∣yng wo and cursse shal come vpon such couetous caytyfes, but whych of vs ca∣reth for it. The poore man sayeth thys curs belongeth not to hym. The Lords and riche menne they care but for the tyme. The Bishops and priestes do loke ouer as the deuyll dothe loke ouer Lin∣coln (as is the common prouerb of that
countrye) or els durste they neuer prac∣tise for purchasyng other mens landes and houses to make theyr wifes ladies, and theyr sons Lords. Yet can I prayse the Bishops of the Popishe churche for their clenly cōuetaūce of their matters, in regarde of our protestauntes, whyche thus opēly shame theyr profession. Wil you yet be a church all alone, O English Bishops and and priestes, wyll you ney¦ther folow Christ nor his Apostles, ney∣ther the Bishoppe of Rome and his Bi¦shoppes. At you wyser then the one sort or wyl you be worsse then the other? What shall Isai? You do know inough What shall I heape scrypture and rea∣sons agaynst you? repente or elsse with the Prophete we muste all crye wo, wo, agaynste you, it is youre ambycyon and couetousnesse that maketh oure Lords heades and gouernoures to do so euyll, you can not worthelye rebuke them be∣inge euyll your selues. Therefore our al¦der Master Christe commynge to reform the world, begynneth wyth the Scribes and Pharises, the Byshoppes and thee priests, and thōdereth wo against them. Sayinge the Scribes and Pharises set in Moyses seate whatsoeuer they com∣maunded you, that looke you obserue &
kepe, but do not accordīg to their works for they speake but thei do not. Wo ther¦fore vnto you saith Christe, whiche shut the kyngedome of heauen vnto menne, neyther enterynge youre selues, neyther sufferinge theym that woulde enter. Marcke for thee loue of youre owne soules, howe lyke you be to these Phari¦ses, they did set in Moises seate and dyd teache and preache the lawe of God, as you do somtimes. But because they dyd loue the worldlye kyngdome and Lorde¦shyp more then the kyngdō of heauē, as Christe here chargeth thē, that they wyl be greate and be called Lordes and ma∣sters: by this lewd example, they shut the kyngdome of heauen that neyther they nor other blynded by theyr ambycyon, & led astraye by their euyll example colde enter therin. Woo vnto you Scribes and Pha∣rises, saythe he, you Hypocrytes why∣che doo deuoure the houses of the wyd∣dowes vnder the pretence of longe pray¦er, therfore shal you be more greuouslye punyshed. You knowe that the goodes of your sees and churches, althose lands and rentes whyche you receyue in youre Dioces are the goodes of the poore we∣dowes
and fatherlesse. And he that de∣frawdeth the pore is a Murtherer. How dare you then deuoure thys to purchase landes for youre wyfe and chyldrene? But you dooe it vnder the pretence of the Gospel, as they dyd vnder the pre∣tence of prayer, therefore doothe Christe call you Hipocrites whiche vnder so ho∣lye a clooke dare couer your wickednes, and he saythe forther youre damnacyon shall be greater. Shall we goo forther and say: Wo to you Scribes and Pharises, whyche la¦boure so busylye wyth flearyng and flat¦teryng, wyth threatnynge and pryson∣nynge to gather moo into your felowe∣shyppe too weare youre gaye geare, too take youre vayne tytles wyth you, that when they haue stepte forwarde too one peace of your supersticyon, they become more soorar defenders of youre fonde∣nesse then you were before them. Shall we say? Wo vnto you Scrybes and Pha¦ryseis whych stryue for the gaye golden garmentes too be vsed at the Lords sup¦per and for settynge of the aulter in the quyere and for rounde Cakes, and for the people too gape and take theym in theyr mouthes lyke Babes.
But for the godlye ministracion of this holi supper, and for the church and faith¦full congregacion of Christe scattered a broade with Popyshe Boores, deuoured wyth couetouse and greadye Wolfes, Beares, and Lions, and trodē vnder the fote with stinkinge Goates, you do care nothynge. I wyll goo no further but in the name of thys youre head Bishoppe, whome you professe to folowe: I warne you to repent, least this woo and cursse come vpon you, and for your causes vp∣on vs al. You are the salt of the earth, if the salte be vnsauery what canne be sea¦soned therewyth. I truste verelye there is some good amonges you that be By∣shops and Priestes, but in thys poynt ar you al, that I knowe, fowllye faultye, that wyncke at your felowe Byshoppes and felowe priestes both in purchasing of Landes, gatherynge of ryches, and o∣ther abhominatyons. Awaye wyth coue¦tousnesse the roote of all euilles. Awaye with your Lordlines which maketh you vnlyke Peter, and take vnto you lar∣ges for your gold n Miter, and meke∣nes for youre rotehet. Bewyse as Ser∣pents but simple as Doues. So wicked Achab oppressing Naboth, and his com¦panions, be they Noble menne, be they
penne menne, wherof this worlde is ful. I do cry wyth Esay the Prophet: woo vnto you whych do iine house to house and field to field Esay .v. and with the Prophet Ieremye, woo vnto hym that buyldeth his house in vnrightuousnes, and his parlers not in Iudgement, and wyth the Apostle Iames. Go to nowe you rych men, weepe and howle vpō the miseries whych shal come vpon you. &c. Ia. v. Know thys olde saying to be most true. Euery rych man eyther is wicked, or heyre to the wycked. There be manye secret imaginacions and priuy practy∣ses, wherwyth both Byshops and other myghte here worthelye be charged, but thys do I wryte secretly to admonyshe that they may be moued to repētaunce not openly to publish any pryuy secrete seyng theyr open crymes asketh speedy vengaunce. Wherfore take heede al ye that ima∣gyne vanitye and myckednes in youre secrete chambers, thynkynge to begyle both God and man by your wyly wits. God whych made the eye, dothe he not see? He whych made ye hert, hath he not vnderstandyng? Is any nyght so dark▪ that he can not se therin? na, yght is no nyght, darkenes is lyght before him.
Therfore wo shal be vnto you and your shame shal neuer cease, when he bryng∣eth into lyghte youre pryuye practyses your crafty conueiaunce, youre subtyle inuenciōs, your syne wyts spēt in vaine and vnprofitable ymaginaciōs. Ther is nothyng done so closely in secrete, but it shal be reueiled openly, be you sute, for Christ our aldermaster speaketh it. The rych nygard imagening vainly to build mo barnes and stoare houses, and so to rest in the strength of hys owne labors, had thys answer from the lord: O thou foole how vaynely dost thou ymagyne, thys nyght whyles thou doest ymagyne thus lying vpon thy bed, shal they take thy soule from thee. Nebuchadnezer imagenynge vayne∣ly of his owne strength and power, was so punished and plaged for hys vaine i∣maginacion, that he dyd lose hys reasō, wyt, and vnderstandynge, and became a brute beast, eatyng grasse in the fielde for the space of .vii. yeares. And if so be that these men imagenyng vaine thin∣ges onelye were thus entreated: howe shall wycked Haman and hys felowes eskape? imagenyng myschiefe agaynst
the chosen of God. Howe shall stought Nymrothe auoyde punyshment, which buyldeth his palaces wyth the spoile of hys brethrē. Wher shal become the Cai¦nites whych ymagine how to gette the bloud of theyr brethren. As for the ima∣ginacion of Iezabel, to optayn the vine¦yarde, the enheritaunce of Nabothe, it is no straūge thing in these latter daies but a common practise, and a polytyke inuencion for the kynges aduauntage. For oure wyttes far passeth our prede∣cessers in the imaginacion of mischiefe, as one day therin alwaies teacheth ano∣ther. And the scolers of thys scoole can euer find somwhat to encreace and aug¦ment the wyckednes of theyr masters. As we haue seene mooste euydentlye in the popyshe churche, howe Pope after Pope dyd enlarge the inuencyons of Antechriste wyth newe and straunge deuyses so longe, whyles the grounde of Christes relygyon cleane forgotten, the Champyons and Captaynes of that wycked courte and companye, dyd affyrme and contende that all Chry∣sten Relygyon dydde stande and con∣syste wholy vpon Ceremonies, the ima∣ginacions
of the Idle brayns of Popes and prelates) euen so holelye and fullye as the goodes and substaunce of the rich Marchaunt standeth vpon farthings, so that like as by takynge awaye farthing after farthynge from the ryche manne, al his substaunce is at length consumed euen so (saythe Stephan Gardinet of late a stoute Prelate, of his diuelish So¦phistry in ye very latter ende of his boke standeth oure relygyon vpon the Masse and heape of Ceremonies whiche by de∣uision contempned, the subtance of our religion by prodygal chyldren is wasted and consumed, But praysed be the Lorde God theese vayne imageners, are put to silence, and confounded heare in Englande, & who so lyste to reade of theyr vayne imagina¦cions, No manne hathe more clearly vt∣tered, nor more playnelye paynted them in theyr owne coloures then oute contry man of worthye memory William Tin∣dal in his boke of the practise of prelats. So that I thought it not so mete much to medle wyth theyr inuencyons in thys treatyse as to rebuke the vyces of oure tyme and the vayn imaginacyons of the carnall Gospellers whyche wold fayne serue both God and Mammon, whiche
wyll make theyr, bellye theyr God, & say they serue the Lorde whyche wold seme to be enemies to Popyshe relygyon, but they are aduersaryes to Christ his truth and Gospel, and do more harme there∣unto by euil and lasciuious liberti of the flesh by couetousnes and other crymes, open to the eyes of al the world, thē the other dyd by cruell persecucyon, and all the craftye imagynatyon of the craftye courte of Rome. Therefore cometh this woo vpon vs nowe lyuynge, because we doo imagine how to maintayne by poure our wycked deuyses and iustyfye our euyl doynges. We canne imagine lawes to maintayne oure adulterye. We canne make diuors∣mentes for verye sklenderlye approued causes. Wee canne coloure oure coue∣tusnes with the cloke of religion. Brifly we can establishe al oure vain imaginaci¦on by lawes of oure owne making, that no mā shal dare be so bold as once to  against them, though they be cōtrary to god his own lawes. For wher God hath commaunded in. the .xxii. of Exodus yt thou shal not hurt the widow and the fa¦therles, and if you do hurte or hinder thē by anye meanes eyther in Londes, in goodes, in Cattayle. For the Hebrewe
woorde is generall of all manner of hur¦tynge or hynderyng of them. If thou do hurte or hynder them sayth the Lorde, and they doo crye vnto me. I wyll heare theyr crye, and my wrathe shal be kynd∣led againste you, and I wyll sleye you wyth the swearde, and your wiues shall be widowes & your chyldren fatherlesse wardes. Let vs cōpare oure craftye ima¦ginations and wrong wraisting of laws to thys commaundemente and see howe we shall auoyde the woo and cursse for the breakynge af the same. We doo imagine a lawe how to spoyl the poore wydowe, first plaged of God, with the want of her husbande, with far¦therlosse of the lacke of her eldest childe (whiche shoulde be her synguler comfort in the steade of hys father) soulde frome Chapman to Chapmanne, and to Chap∣manne agayne like an Oxe or an Asse or some bonde slaue. To be broughte vppe in drogerye or handled lyke a warde for both is one thinge by common Prouerb, and at lengthe agaynste hys wyll, which is the moste miserye of al, and farre from the lawe of nature, contrarye to the lawe of God and too all good polytyke lawe of free cytyes, compell hym too Marrye whome he hateth eyther for her owne vn¦towardenes,
for such are appoynted for¦wardes (for the mooste part) as no other manne woulde gladlye chose? ether can not loue for the extremytye of her Pa∣rentes. For no vyolence canne brynge loue, but free and coragyous stomakes, hate compulsion and setteth muche by choyse and lybertye, Especyallye heare where vppon hangeth the comforthe or care of the hoole life, and eyther furthe∣raunce or hinderaunce frome the ende∣lesse felicitie. But beholde what becommeth of oure imaginacions. We heape the curs∣ses and wo threatned againste vs, vpon oure heades, and causeth suche widowes to mourne and crye vnto God for theyr miseryes, we do make these fatherlesse, these wardes, wherof we haue a carefull charge by the mouthe of God in manye places of scripture: too blaspheme God and manne in thee anguishe of theire heartes by oure couetouse cruelty: Cur¦syngethe tyme of theyre byrthe, theyre Parents, theyr Lands and Land Lords Wee cople theim too oure Dough∣ters too cause contynuall Adulterye in boothe partes. Who beynge thus mar∣ryed wyth thee Deuylles Marryage,
seketh for deuorcement when they are foorth of bondage, whych as it maye in some cases be permytted, so for to bee made cōmon and vsual, shalbe the grea∣test plage that come to anye common wealthe. And these men hauynge theyr myndes occupied only in straunge loue, can neuer be apt instrumentes for anye such seruice as myght be for the glorye of God, for the kynges honor, for com∣mon tranquillyty, eyther in warre, or in peace, but vnprofitable to al purposes, as experience proueth, and the plage of God compelleth vs to pronounce. Yt wer to long and tedious to touch the tenth part of your vayne imagina∣cions for the fyllyng of your pursses, ey¦ther in thys courte of the wardes, or in the courtes of augmentacions, and im∣possyble for any man to vtter theym in the other courtes, neyther am I verye skylfull of them or in them, thanked be the Lord: but the euil effectes of them, the pyllyng and the pollyng, the extor∣cion and the brybery, euery poore mā of the country feeleth and cryeth out ther vpon, therfore am I compelled to touch it, in hope that God wyl gyue you hear¦tes to amende these thynges, in whose handes the power resteth.
Wyl you be loued of your subiectes? Wyll you haue no vproates nor commo¦tion of youre commoners? Thē let them see some cause or loue in you, for forced violence and loue which commeth by cō¦pulsio, cannot be longe lastynge, The vaine imaginations or the late vpskips of Englande too make the people pea∣saunts and slaues, is not the right path waye to quyetnes. For euen now the cō¦mons are so base and pore that they cry out of the euil abuse and openly against the Iustices of the bench. And what wil folowe trowe you? in your subtile imagi¦ons & fine wits, O ye vpskippes the de∣uourers of the people, and destroyers of al publique weal, whiche by wardes, by Symonye, by lease mongynge and lyke Marchaundyse, make waste thys hoole realme, before your tyme most welthye. O no le counsaloures, se to the safetye of your selues & youre subiectes in time. The Lord our God hath oft shaken his rodde, Let vs all repente of all vayne i∣maginacions against his holy lawes. Es¦pecyally he to the fatherles as fathers, & to the wydowes as theyr husbādes, and you shal be the obedyente children of the hyghest, and hee shall tender you more then your owne mother, as it is promy∣sed
in the .iiii. of Ecclesiasticus after the whiche rule I do wyshe oure courtes of wardes to be reformed, to ye glory of god the saluacion of your souls, the profit of the common weale. Nowe for the subtyle ymagyna∣cyons of the other courtes. I dooe saye no more, but if you wyll suffer all youre spirituall menne (as they be called) too haue theyr fyrste fruites, therewyth too kepe hospitalitie & maintein ye pore wher¦of this profit aryseth. You shal driue thē home to theyr benefices, and ceas muche slaūder, whych before your cōmons, they do seme worthely to lay vpō your backs. They do come now once or twise in ii. or iii. yeares to theyr Paryshe and saye, O good people we woulde fayne keepe hou¦ses amonges you accordynge to oure du¦tyes: but the kynges Offycers haue so muche of vs that we canne not recouer it thys .iii. yeares at the soonesse. And I wote not what Deuyll is occasyon ther∣of, they take such a custome in this space yt they neuer kepe good hospitality after. If you wyll also reforme the wrong & vnproper vsage of the impropryatyons, fyrste geuen to the cleargye, for tea∣chynge of the people and releyfe of thee poore: but sence that tyme aultered by
subtyll deuyses too the monastaries and Abbayes, and now come into the kyngs hands, some menne canne tell howe. If you wyll restore these and suche lyke to theyr former vses, and leaue such vaine imaginacions as hathe ledde you too a∣buse thē, you shal win the peoples herts, seyng such chāges & reformacyons whi∣che hitherto suspecteth al suppression of Abbaies, of idols, of Colleges, of Chaun¦tryes, of hospitalles, and all reformacy∣on of relygyon, to be made only for your owne pryuate profytes and purposes, whyche their suspycyon and fonde yma¦ginacyon (as you doo accompt it) canne no other wayes be wyped awaye, be you sure, but by the departynge from suche thynges wherein they doo see you take vnlawefull gaynes, whereof parte are here named. The spoyle of the fatherles, and the spoyle of the pore, in the goodes of the churche. But thys geare is agaynst the kyn∣ges profytte and youres, O my Lordes, shall some vayne ymagynours twytle in youre eares? Oh what shall the kynges Mage∣tye gayne if hee wynne the whole world and do lose his own soul by mainteining
agaynst iustyce, against good consciēce, agaynst God hys holy wyl, your vayne ymaginacions, myscheuous marchan∣dyse and Symoniacall sales of youre gayneful chaffer. Our Prophet doothe threaten the endles wo of euerlastynge dampnacion agaynst al vayne ymage∣ners, whyche hauynge power in theyr handes, do hast to perfourme theyr wic∣ked deuyses. For thys is the sence and meanyng, thys is the true vnderstāding of the latten, and of the first verse wher the Hebrue hath, El, & diuers haue trans¦late the same God, and hath therby en∣combred themselues wyth dyuersity of interpretacions. But as it is taken by the best learned in the Hebrue toung, it sygnyfyeth here in thys place power, lyke as. Gene. xxi and Prouerb. iii. So that the prophet speaketh of thē which haue authority and power in theyr han∣des. Neither is the spirit of God afraid of them any more thē of other. Searche your own consciēces therfore you that haue thys power in yuur handes, for all eniuries, violence, oppression, yea of eue¦rye vayne thought and Imagynacyon, you shall gyue a full strayte answer, and the mighty shall be myghtelye tormen∣ted. The Lorde knoweth the thoughtes
and imaginacion of man, that they are but vayne, and he taketh the wyse in theyr owne wylynes. Therfore thus saith the Lord: lo,The Text. I do imagyne euyl agaynste thys family, whence you shal not pluck forth your neckes, neither shal you goo vpryghte, because thys tyme is euyll. At that daye shall the mourner make hys parable vpon you, and mourne lamentably, saying: we are sore waysted and destroyed, the por∣ciō of my people god wyl chāge. How shal he take that is myne? our landes shall be restored, the enemy shal deuyde it. Because that these men of power did abuse theyr power agaynste theyr infe∣riour members, imagenyng myschyefe vpon theyr beds. Lo the Lord of al po∣wer wyl shorten theyr hornes, and les∣sen theyr strengthe. He wyll sette hys thoughtes agaynste theyr thoughtes, hys deuyses shal stande. He wyll laye a
yoke vppon theyr neckes whiche shall cause them to stope and laye down these haute and highe lookes, wherwith they ouerloke euerye pore man whome they wolde oppresse, but beware you proude of the earthe whiche huffe vp youre no∣ses into the wind after the srensh guise, you shall be fayne to hange downe your heades for the shame and miserye which the Lorde shall worthelye bringe vppon you. You haue dyspised the pore, spoiled them of home and harboure, broughte theym into bondage, made theim youre slaues and Pesauntes, haue kylled and slayne them. You muste by the iuste and righteous iudge haue the like vnto you measured. The Lorde dothe euen nowe beginne to bringe his yoke vppon your neckes whiche might cause you to stope with flying away with your fine Phisik with al your inuenciō, you cānot auoide it, he suffereth you yet to liue & behold it in others that he may prouoke you to re¦pētance but the time is at hād if you doo not repēt whē ether wt this or other plage more greuous you shalbe wholy destroy∣ed. Thē shal ye false prophets which haue flatred you in your wickednes make la∣mētaciō & cry out for your destrucciō whi¦che sodēly shal come vpō you. Their idle braines shal muse and meruel how this
land promised to be yours, shuld be take with the enemye? Yea after they shalbe taken together with you by the enemy, they shall promise you to be restored as did Hanamah. Hiere. xxviii. sayeinge: I haue broken the yocke of the kynge of Babilon. But at lenghte he shall se hys hope all vayne whiles the enemye deui∣deth the lande as it was deuided too the Lutheans and Babilonians. iiii, kinges xvii. reade the latter end of the .xxxiii. of Ezechiell for the declaracyon of thys Texte, howe shal he take that is myne? Therefore shall there be none whiche shall deuyde the lotte by lyne vnto the, in the congregaci∣cion of the Lorde.The text. Because you haue imagined mischefe a¦gainst other by couetousnes, extorsion, violēce oppressiō, haue wroght & broght forwarde your wicked deuises, therfore shal you be so spoiled, that you shal haue no hope to haue your possessiōs restored, but shalbe vtterly roted forthe bothe of this cōgregaciō whō the lord hath with such miracles broght forth of Egipt fos¦tered & cherished in wildernes & hitherto so wonderfullye guided and gouerned,
and also with the ryche gloten you shall bee secluded from the holye companye reastynge in Abrahams bosome. For the rotynge oute of the .x. trybes so that o∣ther nacyons occupyed theyr enhery∣taunce rede .iiii. kynges xvii. For the o∣ther .ii. trybes we do know that they cō∣tynue scattered in all countryes vnto thys day. What shal we nowe loke for, onlesse we doo repent, whose syn in nū∣ber dothe farre passe theirs, oure iniqui∣ties are lyke the sand of the sea. Thinke we not that it is the same God which re¦fused his chosen people for theyr sinne? Do not prophecye thus shal they saye.The Text Lette theim not Pro∣phecy least they be put to shame. Thus hathe the wycked worlde al∣wayes resysted the spyryte of God and laboured to quenche the sprytes, to stop the mouthes of the Prophetes, to putte them to shame as they supposed. Ther∣fore saith Ieremy I am made a laugh∣inge stocke all the daye longe. Iere∣mye .xx. They dooe all deryde me be∣cause nowe a longe space I haue cryed agaynste theyr iniquitie and tolde them of destruccion, and the worde of the lord was laid vnto me as a rebuke and shame
all the daye longe. Therefore saythe E∣saye. The people prouoketh my wrathe they are lying chyldren, chyldren which wyll not heare the law of the Lord, whi∣che do saye vnto the Prophetes and se∣ers: see not? and Prophecye not vnto vs thinges, that are lighte, but speake plea¦saunte thynges vnto vs. Esay .xxx. Thus the vnkinde people doth alwai hate the truthe, and rather then they wil departe from theyr beastlye lustes, wher¦in they wallow lyke swyne, they wyl de¦syre Christ hym selfe to depart with the Gaderines and Satazens. This is the condempnacion of the world, that light is come into the worlde, and men loue rather darckenes then lyghte. Therfore are they geuen ouer into myndes repro∣bate to do things vncomely fylled with al vnrightuousnes, whoredome, crafte, and couetousnes. Romaines .i. Thys is the heauye temptacyon from the whyche we oughte too desyre oure heauenlye father at thys presente too delyuer vs, for euen nowe wycked∣nesse hathe so gotten the Masterie, and Flatterers are hadde in suche estimati∣on, that our tender and delycate eares canne not abyde the trewth of goddes spyryte to scrape theym.
But wyth contencion, sedicion, and I wot not what els shal the true Preacher be charged to stoppe his mouthe if it bee possyble. But there is one euen the fa∣ther of sprites whiche alone can eyther open or stop the mouthes of the spirites. Ther was one Phassur in the time of Ie¦remy the Prophete whych with strokes and imprisonmente woulde haue bette downe hys spyryt. We haue hadde lyke Phassurs in our time, mo thē one, wher¦of some of them hath bene plaged wyth Phassur, let the reste be warned. For it is not etmye nor Latimer, nor Lea∣uer, nor Hoper, nor Beacon, nor Horne that speaketh vnto them, but the spirite of God whyche alwaye by suche weake vessels doothe so vtter it self that when theese are gone other commeth of theyr ashes. And if these shuld not speake, the verye stones shoulde crye oute agaynste oure wyckednes. For Ieremye woulde haue holden hys peace when he was so euyll handled, but he saide that the fyre of this spirite was in his heart, and with in his bondes that he was weried wyth holdynge it in and colde refrayn no lon¦ger. Then setteth hee forthe the feare of menne agaynste hym, but streyghte hee addeth theese comfortable woordes.
The Lorde is wyth me lyke a strong Gi¦aunte and therefore shall they fall head long whych persecute me, and they shal not preuaile agaynste me, but shall bee put to shame, because they cannot pros∣per, but an euerlastyng shame shal come vpon them whiche shal neuer be forgot∣ten. O you Englyshe Phassurs fear and tremble for thys is your iudgment from the Lorde of spyrytes. The shame you wold lay vpon the true preachers lasteth but an howre: no it is no shame but the greatest honor, you cā do thē. But your shame is euerlastinge. The Hebrewe Naaph hych is here translate to Prophecye and to speake, is borowed by Metapher from the raine whyche of manye small droppes doothe grow to greaft abundance and maketh the earth fruteful in the ende. So dothe the woorde of God, therefore saythe Moses. Deuteronomi .xxxii. my doctrine shal drop downe like the rayne. O thou that arte called the house of Iacob,The Text is the spyryte of the Lorde shortned, are not these his works, ar not mi words good to him that walketh vpright?
Thou that wyl be called by the name of the chosē people, though thou be not so, thou oughtest to know the power of God, thou should thynke that the same spirite whych hath drawen foorthe the sweard agaynst the old world, the same spirit whych hath foughten wyth Pha∣rao, and drowned hys army, which hath for theyr synnes dryuen forth the Cana¦nees before thee, and hathe not spared the kynges Saule and Ieroboam, the same spirit hath not hys arme shortned that for lacke of power, it shoulde be a∣frayed of the face of any man, to keepe sylence at commaundemente, no, thou knowest that these wonders afore reher¦sed, and the terryble plages now threat¦ned, are the woorkes of the almyghtye. Why then wylte thou suffer thy flatte∣rers styl to bolster the vp in thy wycked¦nes, and bid the procede in thine own i∣maginacions, saying: that God is mer∣cyful, he wyl not stryke. Surely the lord is mercyful, and hys words are comfor∣table, but as the Prophet telleth the, if thou walke vpryght. So doth Moyses in the geuynge of the promyses, at the fyrst adde thys condicion. If thou wylt heare the woorde of the Lorde, keepe it, and do it, thou shalte haue all the bles∣synges
promised. But if thou wylte not heare the woorde of the Lorde to ful∣fyll all hys commaundementes, the cursses wryten in the law shal come vp∣on the. Deue. xxviii. Wherefore neyther the Iewes in theyr tyme, neyther we in our tyme may boast of the promyses, vn¦les in walkyng vprightly we wyl fulfil our condicions and couenantes. And alredy my people is risen agaynst me lyke an enemy,The Text they do rente of the coate and cloke one of another: Euen from hym whyche walketh careles by the waye, as thoughe he were eska∣ped from battayle. The wyues of my people haue you dryuen from theyr houses full of plea∣sures, and from theyr chyldren, haue you taken my glorye for euer. O Lorde was thys the fal of Israell? because they dyd stand agaynste Gods commaundemente, openlye to defende theyr wycked wayes? When Naboth was kylled, Iezabell dyd dryue oute the
pore widow. Yea as the Hebrew semeth to sound whē one againste other, & one frō another. Mimul. did snatch, sctatch take & reno the pore bribing frō the rich, the rych pilling & polling the poore vnto the bare skin. Whē the straūger & trauai¦ling mā was spoiled & robbed as though he had bene takē prisoner in battel. The theues by the hye wayes, & the Sherifes & iudges had part of the spoil, whē their princes wer become lions, & lerned to ra¦ne for theyr pray: to deuour mē, & had learned to make widowes as Ezechiell speaketh of Iehoiakim. Eze. xix. if these crimes wer the cause of the vtter destruc¦ciō of the chosen kingdō (as the prophet vt the mouth of god here vttereth) what cā we loke for which haue filled the mea¦sure of wickednes so ful: ye we may euē now feele it ren oner into our owne bo∣somes: but onli by ye iust iugemēt of god to suffer the like at our enemyes hands, yt we haue done to our brethrē & neygh∣bours. And here might occasiō serue to charge out relm wt the sore hādlīg of wi¦dowes & fatherles childrē, bi our wicked lawes of wardes, & our sore lawes of fe∣lonies, wherby ye poore widow & innocēt childrē ar spoiled, but I haue touched it before, & we cā loke for none other thīg thē the Lord threatneth, if we do not re¦pēt
which is as we do rede Exo. xxii. yt he wil make our wiues widowes, & our chil¦drē fatherles, let vs beware therfore how we do driue forth of theyr lāds & houses ye poore desolate widowes, & cause theyr chyldren by our cruel dealyng, to blas∣pheme God, and cursse theyr parentes, agaynst God hys commaundemēt, and therfore against hys glory and honour, The last sentence. From theyr chyl∣dren haue they taken my glory for euer, is by diuerse interpreters vnderstand of the adultry wherwyth the chyldren wer diffamed, accompted as Bastards, other because yt the childrē robbed of their pa∣rēts had now none to brynge thē vp to ye glory of god. And some because thei had not their parēts whō they might honore in gods stede vnto his glori. Munsterus also in his anotiōs bringeth a very good interpretaciō, which doth answer to the word for euer, wher the Lord had create mā to be immortal, which work was for don by sin, it pleased the lord god by per¦petual procreacion to recouer mākynde frō destrucciō & so to preserue ye world by this lawful procreaciō of chyldrē, to the accōplishing of hys gloryous workes in his church, this thing is mēt by ye sauing of the womā by the bringing foorth of childrē in ye secōd chap. of the first epistle
to Timothe. and in the .cxxvii. Psalme this which Micha calleth the glorye of the Lorde, Dauid dothe call it the enhe∣ritaunce of the Lorde, and Christe con∣fyrmeth it sayinge: that hys kyngdome is of suche, and that theyr aungels doth alwayes sethe face of his father. Wher¦fore whether they be slayne by Herodes solgiers, or by English murtherers, whe¦ther they be made odious by ours or they stinking whoredome, whether the glo∣rye of God be taken frome the chyldren by the court of wardes or other cruelty, better were it for that manne, by whom they bee hurte, be it kinge or Caiser, not onlye to haue forsaken all worlolye glo¦ry, but to haue a milstone tied about his neck & to haue bene cast into the botom of ye sea, if adultery, if oppressiō, if tirā∣nye, if extorsion, finallye, if anye kynde of vyce dooe raigne vnpunished in anye kingdome of the chiefe heades and ma∣gestrates, muste bee charged therewith, whiche as Paule saithe doothe not on∣lye the like, but are fautors and fauo∣rers to thē whych do so wickedly, which thing the spirit of the Lord is not short¦ned to see, to shew, & sharply to punishe. The TextAryse gette you hence. Thys
is not youre reste, because youre land is poluted, therfore shall it destroy you wyth detestable de∣struccion. Lostyl continually the Prophet bea¦teth into our eares, that syn must nedes haue destruccion folowynge, that is the reward of synne from the begynnynge, in so much that thys same land of Iury whych was promysed to be theyr hery∣tage for euer, was spoyled, waysted and destroyed, after that it was wyth Ido∣latry polluted, and as Moyses threate∣ned. Leuiti. xviii. the same land shoulde vomyte them like as it did the Canani∣tes, saying: Beware that the lande doo not like wyse vomit you sorthe agayne if you do the lyke wyckednes, as it dyd vomyte forth the people before you. Wherfore lyke as the Prophetes of al ages, when they dyd see syn raygne vnpunished, dyd cry out against the go∣uernours, pronouncing these and suche like sharpe sentences agaynst them. So may the Prophets and preachers of our tymes, holdlye by the same spirite pro∣nounce and publysh like destrucciō and ruine to ours here in England, especial¦ly seing our country contaminax wyth
couetousnes and polluted wt glotoni, le¦chery & al kynd of filthines doth bringe forth new kyndes of disseases to other contries & old phisiciōs vnknowē. Here appeareth ye Paul writeth to the Roma. that this creature subiect vnto our vani¦ties against her wil mourneth & groneth to be deliuered frō thys corruptible ser∣uitute and semeth thus to saye vnto vs: O my children, whose wyckednes wyth much werines I haue thus long borne & susteined, I must nedes a the lēgth ease my selfe of so vnprofitable a burdē. For your sins am I strikē with steriliti & barā¦nes you do dig so depe in my bowels by your greedy couetousnes yt I must nedes breathe forth sulphuzeal ephalations & poysened breathynges to destroi such a serpentine generacion, whiche toileth & trauaileth so carefullye to kyll me youre mother, youe selfs and your brethren. The TextIf a man walke vaynelye and with opē lies lyinge vnto you do sai: I wil Propheci vnto you for wine and dronkēnes he shalbe a Prophet vnto this people. As though he shulde saye: oh it is a ve∣ry hard and vnpleasaunt thyng for the people to heare their vyces reprehended and destrucciō for syn prophecyed. Ther¦fore
can thei not bear the true prophets, they cannot away wt thē: but as Achab answered vnto king Iosaphat askinge for some one prophet of the Lorde after that .iiii. C. false prophetes had prophe∣cied plesaūt things, Ther is one mā yet left one liue but I do hate him because he doth not propheci vnto me good:iii. Re. xxii but euil, but what foloweth this refusing of the true prophet and chusing of ye false. The Lord sendeth a strōg elusion & cau¦seth Achab to perish by the counsel of ye wicked & lying prohets which wold not be saued by the councel of the good and true prophets read the chapter & see the iudgmēt of god against thē which do re∣fuse true prophets. Agayne of the Pro∣phets which folow wyne & dronkēship. They haue erred, for wyne & gone astray for dronkēnes the preiste & the prophete hath both erred for strong drynke,Esa. xxviii they ar swallowed vp of the wine they haue erred in vision and fallen in iudgement. So doth al that seketh gaine voluptu∣ousnes & plesures, they ought not to be trusted they ar lyinge prophetes yet are they only of ye blinde world magnified & receiued, mi lords wil haue none other to their chaplēs for with a fat prebēd such mai be choked yt thei wil folow mi lord in al his fōd waies and allow al his wicked counsels, but that Micha that telleth ye
truth he is thrust forth of the dores he is of a furious sprit, mylord hateth him as vnmete for his house & al good cōpany. The TextI wyl gather the together O Iacob, I wyl gather the wholy. I wyll gather and ioyne toge∣ther the remnaunte of Israel, I wyll putte them together like the sheepe of Bozra, and lyke as the flock gathered in the fold. They shal hurle together for the great multytude. The spoyler is gone before theym, they haue spoyled & passed the gate, they haue gone forth therby, & theyr kynge hathe gone for the before them, and the Lorde as theire captayne, Such a gloryous Prophecye doth the false prophets bring forth to king Achab Go vppe to Ramoth saye they, and the Lorde wyll gyue it into thy handes. A∣gayne zedechia made him hornes of y∣ron and sayde thus sayth the Lord with these shall thou tosse and folde Siria whiles yu haue destroied it. So doth this
gloryous sentence appere to be brought in of our prophet as a flatterynge illu∣sion of ye false prophet, wherby thei did kepe the people styll in the cōtēpt of god & the true prophets, promisyng thē lyber¦tye and tryumphe ouer their ennemyes, notwithstandinge their enormities and greate wyckednes. Such flatterers we haue in all ages. Therfore take hede (O England) then that thus tell the  the in thy wyc∣kednesse with ayre promyses, they doo deceiue the, and do seeke benefyces and Bishopprickes, that they maye fil theyr bellyes with wyne and strong dryn  as the Prophete said before. I do know that thys texte is for the moost part vn∣derstande as a Prophecye of the com∣mynge of Christe, and it maye wel so be, but I had rather so to expounde the pro¦phetes, that they myght seme to hange together by comelye ordre, then to teare them in peaces. Bozra was a cytye full of people, ful of sheepe and catall, wher¦unto the fals Prophetes therfore dooth lykē theyr felicitie. The iii. Chapter. Vt I sayde heare I praye B you O Princes of Iacob &
dukes of ye house of Israel. Doth it not pertein vnto you to knowe iudgemēt? you do hate ye good & loue ye eul, you do fle of ye skin of their backs and ye fleshe of their bones. You haue deuoured thee flesh of my people & plucked their skin from of them, and haue bro∣ken their bones & crushed thē in peaces, as in a pot, & like the flesh in the middest of the Chaldren. Princes ought to know iudgmēt, thei ought to be wise mē fearing god, yea stā¦ding in gods stede to the people, hauīg ye truth within thē yt thei nede not to seke it at their chaplēs. They ought to be mē which hateth auarice, Exo. xviii. for thei execute the iudgmēt of the lord. Deu. i. & whatsoeuer thei shal iudge, shal redoūd & be required vpo thē .ii. Cori. xix. but you do thīk you mailiue as you list O prīces & dukes of oure wycked time, you do not thinke yt you haue takē an office wherof you must geue answere. But yt you haue attayned to such honoures that ye shuld be accompted as earthly goddes, that no man shulde be so beard ye as to talke of
your doings, and dare followe the Pope in making such proclamations, though they be such in verye deade as our Pro∣phet heare paynteth which ar so plaine they nede no interpretacion. Therefore I do say with the Prophet Esay, heare O ye deaffe men, and sharpē your sights to se O ye blynde. But who is so blynde as my seruaunt? or so deafe as my mes∣sengers whome I sent vnto them? For who is so blinde as my people and they that haue the rule of thē. They ar like as if thou vnderstodest much and kepe no∣thing, or if one herd wel but wer not obe¦diēt. The Lorde be merciful vnto thē for his righteousnes sake yt his word might be magnified & praised. They do boast to knowe the woorde: but beware the ser∣uaūt whiche knoweth & dothe not, shal be beaten with many stripes. You do fle of ye skī of their backs If you do read ye .xxxiiii.The Text of Ezechiel you shal se the difference betwyxt these euill pastors & shepherds which fead thē sel∣ues with ye spoil of ye shepe, & ye good she¦perd which cherysheth his shepe. Nowe wher our prophet sayth that the Pryn∣ces do hate ye good mē and loue the euil: it is the experience of al ages for dicers, dauncers, flatterers and such like ar re∣ceyued into their pryuyc hambers when
true Preachers are prysoned. And yf it chaunce that a noble man haue one ho∣nest man in hys house, he is a sheepe a∣monges Wolues, deluded and decyded by my Lordes owne minions and moste sage counsaylers, at the length, eyther banyshed, or put to sylence, because the whole course of hys lyfe, conuersacion, and cōmunicacion, is cōtrary to theirs, and vnprofitable for theyr purposes. Then shall they crye vnto the Lord,The Text and he wil not heare them, but wyl hide his face from them at that tyme, lyke as they haue don euil in their wicked works. Thus sayth the Lord of the pro∣phets, whych do seduce the peo∣ple, thus the Lord sayth against them: Whē they haue any thing to byte vpon, then they preache that all shalbe well, but if a man put not sōthing in their mouthes they preach of wat against him, Therfore your visiō shalbe tur∣ned
to nyght, and your prophe∣cying to darknes. The sun shall go downe ouer these Prophets, and the day shalbe darcke vnto them. Then shal the vision seers be ashamed, and the sothsayers confoūded, yea they shalbe faine al the packe of them to stop their mouthes, for thei haue not gods woorde. Lyke as the princes, Iudges and go∣uernours hath bene turned from Gods, to minister goodnes vnto Tyrants, wor¦kyng al wickednes. So shall God hym¦selfe brynge vpon theyr heades heauye destruccion. And as the booke of wisdōe sayth: these mighty men shal haue more terrible torment.Sapie. vi. Then thought they cry vnto the Lord, he wyl not heare theym, but hyde his face frō them, lyke as they haue turned theyr faces frō the poore, & rather regarded Hawkes and Hounds dice and cardes, dauncing and tossinge of balles lyke babes, then the pyteous cōplaintes of theyr poore mēbers made of the same molde, & boughte wyth one price with them. And as for theyr chap∣laynes
whych do chop with thē their be¦nefices, & geueth an whol yeres rent or thei enter, or greater gaine peraduēture, & so long as my lord & they can agree of couenaūts, or that my lord wil get them mo promociōs, they wil tel my lord, he may hawke, he mai hunt, he mai bowle, he may play at the bal, & what he wyl, so he do stop their mouthes with somwhat al is wel, & it please youre grace: but a∣gainst theyr poore brethren, which haue nothynge to geue theym, they are cruell and deuouring wolfes. They pole their parishners, they pyl theyr tenauntes, they send polling proctors, & are most re¦dy by al meanes to trouble the poores to moue war against him, both wt theyr good word to my lord, if nede be, & other pretipractise. To these wicked hipocrits shal come darknes, angwish, sorow, he∣uynes, al the wooes and cursses, all the plages spokē of in the scriptures. Thys great misery is ment bi night & darknes as we may perceyue.Esa. v.xiii. Ierem. xv. Mat. xxiiii Here note also the terryble sentence of God, his sincere iu∣stice against the wycked, whych shal cry vnto god, and shal not be herd, wher al∣way he heareth the good before they do crye, Esay .lxv. he reiecteth the wycked wyth theyr sacrifie. Esay .lxvi. The TextBut I am ful of the power of
the spirit of god, ful of iudgemēt and strength, to shew vnto Ia∣cob hys iniquity, and to Israell hys syn. Here this I beseche you O princes of the house of Iacob and dukes of the house of Israel which do make iudgemente ab∣hominable, & do peruert al equi∣ty, building Sion in blud, & Ie¦rusalem in wickednes. Her prin¦ces did iudge for rewarde, & her priestes did preach for wagyes, & her prophets dyd prophecy for mony, & stil made the Lord their staffe, saying: is not the lorde in ye mids of vs? ther shal com none euyll vpō vs. Therfore for your cause Sion shalbe plowed lyke the field, & Ierusalem shalbe an heape of stones, & the hyll of the temple, shalbe an hie woode. Marke the mighty power of god his ho¦ly sprit, o princes, he causeth ye prophets to speake, or els thei do remain spechles,
Ieremye saythe: I can not speake be∣cause I am a chylde. But what answe∣reth the Lorde: saye not so Ieremy that thou arte a chylde, for thou shalte go to all that I shall sende the, and shal speke al that I shall commaunde the Feare not before theyr faces, for I am with the to delyuer the saythe the Lord, ye do set thē ouer the people sayth ye Lord, & ouer kyngdomes to roote vp and to destroy, too waste and scatter, to buylde and too plante. I shall cause the not too feare theyr faces, for I haue made the lyke a walled cytye, an yron pyller, and a bra∣sen wall to the kynges of Iuda to the Prynces and priestes, and to all the peo∣ple of the lande, they shal fyghte against the, but they shall not preuaile for I am wyth the sayethe Lorde to delyuer the. O whye are you faynte hearted, whiche haue the lyke Offyce, what can be sayde more to encorage you? Whye dare you not crye agaynste the wyckednes of our tyme, as the prophets dyd in theyr time. Dothe not oure iusticiaries and iudges peruerte iustyce, and make their iudge∣mentes abhomynable? Is there no re∣wardes in the handes of oure Prynces? are al these fayre houses about Londō or elsse wher gottē with good cōscyence
and buylded without bloude? Nay sure lye, for one of youre greate builders dyd wryte worthelye vpon his walles a con∣fession for al hys felowes. No man wax¦eth ryche but by the discommoditie of o∣thers, but you are but hyrelynges, prea∣chynge for wages and canne espye no faultes. Yet dare you saye for these ram¦ping Lions: haue not they banyshed the Popishe religion? is not God amonges vs? haue not they set forth the Bible? ar not they Gospellers? Yes to theyr open shame doutlesse, for heretofore, ther was some pretence of religion, some colora∣ble cloke of vertue and honestye, that is shaken of I do graunt, and not so much lefte as fyg leaues to couer their shame, howe can God be amonge thys people? amonges whome the Deuyll raygneth and rageth by couetous ambicion, whor¦dome, exhortacion, contempt of true reli¦gion and all uill gouernaunce. They haue set forthe the Bible that al menne may se how far thei do swarue in life frō God hys hollye woorde. They are called Gospellers in spyte (as I doo take it) of the holye Gospell. For the holye Gos∣pell of God is slaundered and euyll spo¦ken of, booth of oure Papistes in Eng¦Lande and in other nacions, so farre as
our Englysh gospellyng is knowen. Be¦cause in the beginning therof al things wer compelled to serue theyr couetous∣nes and lasciuious lybertye and so it is styl continued. True relygion is sought of no body, priuate gayne whyche ary∣seth of the great possessions of the spoi∣led kyngdom, is sought of euery bodye and how perilous a thing it is to bryng such cursed spoyle into out houses, read the .vii. of Iosue of Achan the sonne of Charmy, and repent wyth the Niniuits both kyng, whyche shal aunswer for all these iniquytyes, and Dukes, Earles, Barons, Byshops, whyche do turne to your priuate commodityes thynges de∣dicate to publyke vses. Repente I saye lest wyth Ierusalem your houses be tur¦ned into heapes of stones. Ieremi .xxvi. hath the same sayinge forth of our pro∣phet and our sauiour in .xix. of Luke. The .iiii. Chapter. The TextBVt it shall come in the last dayes that the hil of the house of the lord shal be prepared in the toppe of the mountaynes, and it shal be tay∣sed
aboue all theyr toppes, and the people shall flowe vnto it. Much people shal go and saye: let vs goo vp into the hyll of the Lorde, & to the house of the God of Iacob, and he shall teache vs of hys waies, and we shal walke in hys pathes, for the lawe shall go forth of Sion, and the worde of the Lord from Ierusalē, and he shal iudge many naciōs, and correct strong and myghty peo∣ple for a lōg tyme. And they shal breake theyr swerds into shares and theyr speares into syckles. And one nacion shall not lyfte a sweard against another, neither shal thei lern ye feates of war ani more, but eueri mā shal sit vnder his vyne, & vnder hys fygtree, & no man shal a fraye hym, for the mouth of ye lord hathe spoken it. Esay the Prophet in hys secōd chap.
hathe his same Prophecye the which of all our interpretours and of the Iewes also is vnderstande to be of theyr Messi¦ah, and Christe oure sauiour but after a sondrye sorte. For we do take it that the Prophet in his time, seing in the earth∣lye Ierusalem religion neglected, iudg∣ment peruerted, and iustice banished, did caste vp the eies of his spirite into that great and highe hyl, wherof Ihon spea¦keth in the .xxi. of his reuelacion and did see the house of the Lorde, the spouse of the Lambe, the greate city, the holy Ie∣rusalem comminge down from heauen, hauynge the clearnes of God and al mā¦ner of vertues, and al kynde of know∣ledge, whiche is mente by those many∣folde stones there named. So that al the people whiche shall be saued shall come therunto, shal walke in the lyghte ther¦of, and the kyngs of the earth shal bring theyr glorye vnto it. Nothing polluted or defyled shall enter into it. Apoca. xxi. Thus semeth Saynte Ihon to vtter in other woordes the same Prophecy whi∣che Micheas and Esaias dyd speake lōg before. Euen as the sprite of oure heauē¦lye father for the comforte of the electe shulde thus speake vnto vs. Be of good comforte my chyldren though you se mi
worde despysed, my lytle flocke scatte∣red, my pore oppressed, it shal not be al∣waye thus. I haue appoynted a tyme. when I wyll haue the mastrye, when I wyll rayse vp the hyll of my house (my chosen I do meane) aboue all hylles a∣boue all the hyghe and gloryous things in the worlde, that the Heathen shall flowe vnto it. The whyche thynge was fulfylled partlye when it pleased him at the time appointed to send his sonne so to be exalted that he shuld drawe althin¦ges vnto hym. When he commaunded all his to bee of good courage, for he had ouercome the worlde, when he spoeyled the Prynces and powers, and put them to vtteraunce tryumphynge ouer theim by hym selfe. Collo. ii. That thys hyll of ye Lords house might be exalted. Christe gaue him selfe for it, that he myght sanc¦tyfye it,Epheci. v. that he myght make it for hym¦self a gloryous congregacyon, wythout spotte or wrynkle, agaynst the whyche house, because it standeth of a sure rock the gates of hell canne not preuayle, nei¦ther death nor lyfe, nor angels nor rule, nor power, shalbe able to dryue this spi∣rituall house forthe of gods fauoure, no the Deuyls dare laye nothynge too the charge of thys churche and house of the
faythfull. For the Lorde euen the God of Iacob dwelleth in it and who dare stande againste it. Thus lo the true tem¦ple of God and the house wherin the ho¦ly gost dwelleth, which ar we, so manye as do beleife .i. Cor. iii. at the commynge of oure sauyoure Christe was exalted, & sette aboue all the hyghe mountaynes great glori, pompe, & pride of this world. The whiche glorye beinge published by Christ, and his Apostles it brought forth fruyte throughoute the hole worlde in Asia, Africa, and Europa. Then began they to clyme vppe vnto the hil of God, that is to the hil of know¦ledge to be taughte in the wayes of the Lord and to walke in his pathes as our Prophet dothe declare him selfe. When the gospel dyd fyrste come forth of Sion and the gracious worde and wyll of the Lord did spring from Ierusalem. Then they come from the East to the West to seke this glory, to sit and rest in the bo∣some of faythful Abraham in this glori∣ous Ierusalem. Thys is the reaste that foloweth where all shall bee soo quyet that they shall breake theyr sweardes into Mat∣tockes and theyre speares into sythes neuer to stryue nor fyghte in thys holye
hyll of the heauenlye Ierusalem. Wher¦unto we muste lyfte vp the eyes of oure spyrytes contynuallye stryuinge to mor¦tifye the fleshe whyche canne not enter therein, because it is polluted. Thys reaste is onlye begonne in thee spirituall manne in thys lyfe, and canne not be made perfite tyil the last ennemye be ouercome, whyche is deathe. This is oure beleife grounded vpon scripture of this glorious raising vp of the hil of the house of the lord. Now the Iewes doth stycke to the outwarde letter and naked wordes, bothe in thys and manye other textes touchynge the restitution of their temple and kingdom. And surely as the Lorde God seeth from the begynninge of al hys works to the ende of the same: and hys gyftes are wythoute repen∣taunce, and the sprete of God dothe pro¦myse greate thynges to that nacyon, be¦cause theyr fathers were the roote, and theirs was the adoptyon, glorye and te∣stament to them was the law geuen the ceremonies and the promises of thē was christ concerning the flesh. And so mait be by the secrete woorke of god that by this clear light of the gospel, so wonder fully spred amōges vs in these last daies they shall confesse their greate crymes
and greuous offēces of Christ refused, and theyr blasphemyes agaynst the son of God, and so God in them be glorifi∣ed amongs al nacions which, shal heare the mercies of the Lord towards them, what promises they haue, if they do re∣pent, read .xxx. of Deut. and of theyr re∣turne in the last dayes. Ose. iii. S. Paul also seemeth to delate thys matter. Ro. xi. askynge for what purpose they dyd fall, and aunswereth, God forbyd that they al dyd so fal, that they shoulde all perysh. But by theyr fall saluacion dyd come to the Gentyles, for thys purpose to prouoke them (euen the Iewes) to fo¦low the same, and farther sayth Paul: if theyr fal were the ryches of the world and theyr decay the ryches of the Gen∣tyls, how much more the fulnes of thē. And if the castyng awaye of the Iewes were the reconcilyng of the world, what shall be the receiuinge of them, but lyfe brought from the dead? Agayne I wyll not haue you ignoraunt of this mystery (sayth Paul) that ye be not hye minded among your selues, that blyndnes hath chanced to Israel. But in parse whyles that the fulnes of the Gentyls shoulde enter, and then al Israel shoulde be sa∣ued againe. By the Gospel they ar ene∣myes
for you, but by the eleccion thei are bee loued for theyre fathers. For the gyftes and callynge of God are suche that he can not repent of them. For like as you wer sometimes not beleuyng, but nowe haue obtayned mercy by theyr mis¦beleife: so are they nowe made myscre∣antes, because you haue obtayned mer∣cye that they myghte obtayne mercy al∣so. For God hathe for thys purpose shut al vnder synne that he myghte haue mer¦cie vpon al. The Iewes are chaunced in erroures and kepte in excyle, so that they are talked of & taken as abiects through oute the hole world. We dooe accompte them and theyr doynges, to be fygures of vs and oure doinges, and theyes al∣wayes holye for theyr fathers as Paule saythe. And in what blyndenes? in what and howe grosse darckenes of erroures vnder oure abhominable desolacion, this longe tyme haue we, whyche accompte oure selues the spiritual Iuda, bene shut vp, whiles the iustice, whyche is by fayth in Christe hathe bene forgotten, the iu∣styce of worckes set in place, new sectes founded, newe relygion inuented, open blasphemies agaynste the open woorde of God with swerd & fyre mainteined & fylthye fornicatyon allowed, shamelesse
swearynge permytted and suche abho∣minable Idolatry erected as before this tyme of Antechriste the lyke was neuer imagined. The stynkinge breathe of manne so soone as hym lyked to blowe foorthe a God into a cake, and name it Christ god and manne, wyth other more deuelyshe delusions then euer hadde the Iewes. Howe be it all thys boothe theyr synne∣full blyndenesse and oures, doothe serue too the magnyfyinge of the Magestye, mercye, and power of the euerlyuynge Lorde whyche worketh all for him selfe euen the wycked agaynste the euyl day. Because thee goodnesse of hym is suche that he wyll tourne the stubbernesse of the Iewes hytherto and oure longe con¦tynued blyndenesse vnder Antychriste to hys glorye, too the auauncemente of constancye in mercye and truthe too the greate beautifyinge and gloryous set∣tynge foorthe of the saluacyon of hys chosen, accordynge too the sayeinge of Saynte Paule. All thynges together are ayde and helpes too them that be of purpose called. Romaines .viii. The in∣crudelytye of the Iewes can not make the Faythe and promyse of God voyde
& of none effecte. But rather our iniustice doothe commende hys iustyce, and oure vntruthe causeth his truthe to excel vn∣too hys glorye, that he maye bee founde true and almen lyers, and he ouer comes when he is iudged. Then as the fall of the Iewes muste nedes be confessed by Paules doctryne, too be that they maye attayne mercye, and God to be so gloryfyed, so maye we looke for the fulfyllynge of suche Pro∣phecyes as appertaineth too that pur∣pose at the tyme appoyncted whyche is in these laste dayes when God wil haue hoole Israell saued. When he wyl haue one folde and one flocke, reade the Pro∣phecyes of the restorynge agayne of the Iewes. Esaye .xi.lxvi. Chapters. zacha∣rye .ii. Chapter. Osee .iii. Chapter. Diete xxii.xxxii.xxxiii Chapters. Ezechiell .xx.xxxiiii.xxxvii. Amos .ix. And you shal per¦ceyue that God wyl be yet muche more amonges boothe Iewes and Gentyles gloryfyed. For all Prophecyes bee not who∣lye ended, fulfylled, and therefore are they darcke vnto vs because the appoin¦ted tyme is not come whych shall bring lyghte vnto theym, saue as I sayde be∣fore
before that in the spirituall Israell they may after a sorte be verifyed but so that the Israel bothe by promise and by sede ought not frō such playne promyses to thē made for to be secluded. But because I woulde not be the author of any newe doctryne I doo submyt my iudgemente herein and in al that I do wryte to them that do syt and ar able to geue iudgmēt. Onlye I wold haue vs to thyncke that the Iewes hadde the oracles, the promy¦ses, the testamēt, the Prophets, & Christ oure sauyoure touchynge the fleshe. They are the rote, the true and naturall Olyue. We are wylde and be but graf∣ted in theym. They are reiecte and blyn¦ded a longe tyme. So haue wee beene also. They are banyshed from theyr con¦try, we lyue banyshed also from our na∣turall countrye. And shal it not be a comforte vnto vs, seynge all chaunceth vnto theym in fy∣gure to see theym restored, the hoope of oure restorynge vnto oure heauenlye countrye? Shal it not make muche for the glorie of God, to perfourme his pro¦messe wyth the largesse, nowe when all thynges semeth boothe vnto them and vnto vs passe all hope and desperate? Shall it not commende and sette forthe
the mercye of God whyche so long time hath suffered and sustayned synners? Shall it not gratlye enlarge the king∣dome of Christe too haue gathered thys scattered flocke of the Iewes into hys foulde? Shall not thys consyderacyon, gyue vs occasyon too prayse and mag∣nyfye thys gloryous kyngdome? too humble oure selues before the myghtye worckinge hande of God whose onlye woorcke it is boothe in them and in vs, too electe and chuse, too reiecte and re∣fuse, to illumynate, to excreate, to caste downe, too rayse vp againe. Shall not thys muche moue vs cha∣rytablye too deale wyth theym, too vse all louynge meanes that may be to wyn them to the fauoure of God agayne? And the rather may we dooe thys wyth good hope of theyre saluacyon, because they do liue in such fear of God. For the moste parte of them as farre as I canne learne, as the lyke is not to be sounde a∣monge vs Christians. Euerye manne, woman and childe a∣monges them is mydste perfyte in thee letter of the lawe, and olde Testamente. They abhorre al Idolles and Idolatry. They reuerence the hygh name of God so wonderfulli, as we blaspheme it light
tye. Thoughe the vale hange yet before theyre eyes in the readynge of the lawe, howebeit thys do I saye to them and al other whyche shall vouchsafe too reade theese rude and playne commentaryes, that as I haue conceyued a hope by the scryptures of the rayesynge agayne of the Iewes too be a fygure & example of oure resurreccyon. So me thyncke it maye be hear iudged against the Iewes by the woordes of oure Prophete, that temple and kyngedome, gouernaunce, beatynge downe of ennemyes, and pro∣mysed tranquilitie, muste be only by the worde of God, and therefore spirytual, not carnal, as they imagine, but muche better then they can yet behold, for first saythe oure Prophete. The TextIn the last dayes the house of the Lord shalbe prepared in the toppe of the mountaynes aboue all mountaynes. And strayghtwaies he declareth howe that shall come to passe. Muche people saythe he shall say: let vs go vp into the hil of ye lorde and he shal teach vs of his
waies & we wil walke in hys pa∣thes, for the lawe shal goo foorth of Syon. And straight adioineth vnto this word and Doctryne of the Lorde the iudge∣ment and correction which are the cheif poyntes of the regymente and kingdom and streyghte after the reast and quyet∣nes frome all forran ennemyes, whyche thinges folowinge so euidently, semeth altogether to hang of the word of God, and therefore shal not be carnal but spi¦ritual and eternall euen suche ioye reast and peace as Christe promysed vnto his Disciples suche as the world canne not gyue. When thys shall be fulfylled our Prophete vttereth in the laste day sayth he: whyche laste dayes are alwaies spo∣ken of the tyme of oure Christ the Mes∣siah promysed. For the Iewes do recken  vi. ages or tymes of most worthye repu∣tacyon. Fyrste from the creation of the world vnto the flud. M.cccccc.lv. yeres. Then from the floude vnto the delyue∣raunce of the chyldrene of Israel forthe  of Egipt, ccccccc.xc.m. yeres. Frome the delyueraunce of Israell  vnto the gloryous buyledynge of the first temple bi Salomon. cccc.lxxx, yeres
From the buildinge of the tēple vnto the Babilonical captiuitie. ccccxix, yeres From the Babilonicall captiuitie to the comminge of Christ the true Messi∣ah. cccccc.xxiii. Frō Christ al these latter daies of his raigne by the Gospell. M.d.Li. yeares whyche is the laste. Into the whyche laste tyme of Christ al prophecies, al historyes the Prophets them selues do loke and behold. There∣fore saith Christ your father Abrahā did desyre to see my day, he dyd see it and re¦ioysed. Againe, blessed ar your eies, whi∣che haue seene that whyche manye haue desired to see and colde not. Therefore sayth Simeon, nowe lette thy seruaunt depart in peace, for myne eies haue sene thy saluaciō. And aiust cause why these laste tymes shuld be loked for and made the marcke too shoote at and ende of all prophecy. For streght after ye fal of Adā, these tymes were promysed. Thys was she second Adam the seede of the womā in whome the worlde agayne shoulde be blessed. Thys tyme was prefygured in the fludde. This Christ shuld deliuer frō the hellye Pharao. Thys is the true Sa¦lomon and kynge of peace, buyldeynge hym a temple wythoute spotte. Prophe¦cye
hys delyuereth frome Babylonycall bondage of Antechriste, and all aduersa¦rye powers, so that there was no further to be loked for but thys tyme before the lawe Melchisedeke wythout father and mother did prefigure this. In the law al ceremonies wer but shadowes, & Christe was the body in whō al prophecies wer fulfylled & al shadows ceassed. So that these tymes of Christe maye worthelye bee called the laste tymes and as Paule calleth it to the Galathians and Ephe¦syans the fulnesse of tyme, wherein all thinges were fulfilled. The laste tymes also may they be called, because they are mooste neare to the commynge of christ vnto iudgement, whiche shalbe the laste daye of al flesh, the laste day of thys hea¦uen and thys earth, as Ihon speaketh, Neyther may we thyncke muche that they were called the laste dayes, and the laste tymes in the tyme of Christ and his Apostles and yet thus longe are continu¦ed. For as Saynte Peter aunswereth to thys folyshe doubte wherwyth the flesh¦ly are deluded. One day with the Lorde is as it wer a thousand yere, and a thou∣sande yere as it were one daye. And the Lorde is not slowe in commynge as the vnwyse do thinke him. But paciente to¦wardes
vs, not wyllynge any to perysh but to receyue all to repentaunce. The TextFor all people shal walke eue¦ry one in the name of their God, and we wyll walke in the name of our god, for euer and euer. This semeth to be spoken of the pro∣phet, for a confirmation, and an assu∣raunce to haue this great promise ful∣fylled, because all nacions set vp some kynde of religin, and haue some gods to whom they credite, whom they do o∣bey and folowe, Yea, the wycked world drowned in Idolatri and al abhomina∣cions, Imagyned of theire owne madde braines euerye one to haue hys seuerall GOD. All theyrs are but fayned gods (sayeth he) naye, they are deuylles and no goddes. But oures is the lyuynge GOD the lorde which hath made hea∣uen and earth, and wrought al the wō∣ders both in heauen and earth, we maye boldelye beleue him, walcke and go for¦ward in the power of his name foreuer, how vnpossible so euer his promises do seme to the fleshe, he is able to performe thē. Though he do long deffer thē to try our fayth, and to shew his power wher∣vnto
nothynge is vnpossible, he lasteth for euer, therfore we may neuer end our hope and trust of that thynge he pro∣myseth. In that day sayth the Lorde:The Text I wyll gather her whyche hal∣teth, and is caste away, her whō I haue punyshed, and I wyll make thee halt to haue a succes∣syon and the outecaste to bee a stronge people, and the Lorde shal raygne ouer them in mount Syon, from hence foorthe for euer. And thou O tower of the flocke, the tower of the daughter of Syon, to thee shall come, to thee shall come I saye the fyrste kyngdome, the kyngdome of the daughter of Ierusalem. In that daye in the laste dayes in the tyme of Messiah, for so doth al interpre¦ters take it. I wyll gather you sayeth youre God thoughe I haue chastened
you, cast you away, and made you lame. I wyl not fayle to make you a stronge people agayne, and geue you a postery∣tye and succession wythoute anye ende and wythoute all noumber. For I my selfe wyl be your kyng in the mount Si¦on for euer. Thus dooth the Prophete contynue in the confyrmacion of these greate promises so darke vnto the flesh that wyth muche busynes it can hardly be perswaded in the promises of heauen¦ly and spiritual works. By the word haltynge, our Prophete would insinuate and bryng into memo∣rye how that Israel haltyng from god and clynshynge after Idols, as Elyas chargeth them .iii. Reg. xxviii. had so pro¦uoked hym to anger that he had worthe¦ly made them halt and lame, that is to say, had greuously afflycted and skour∣ged theym for so is the same woorde of haltynge vsed for greuous afflyccion. Psalm. xxv. xxviii. and thys Prophecye is red also. Esa. xxxv. how the lame shal leape and skyp for ioy. The TextAnd the Lorde shal raygne. Tyrantes shal raygne no longer, but the Lord shal raygne which teacheth vs styl that thys newe restored kyngdome shalbe spiritual, for al men are flesh, and
all theyr kyngdomes crnal, the kyng∣domes of all menne haue an ende, but thys hathe none ende, therefore is thys the kyngdome of God, the kingdom of the sonne of God, whyche God the fa∣ther dyd gyue hym that he shulde occu∣pye the seate of Dauid hys Father and raygne in the house of Iacob for euer & of hys kyngdome there shoulde be none ende as the aungel dyd saye to the bles∣sed Virgin. Heare maye the Iewes by thys place learn that theyr king whom they do looke for to be man of the seede of Dauid shal also be God, for here he is called Iehouah by the hyghe name of God, and his kyngdome named euerla∣styng, whyche onlye can be the kynge∣dome of God and not man. All this we do see fulfylled in oure Christe and hys spyrytuall kyngdome, so manye as doo beleue Christ to be God and mā, and do feale howe by hys spyryte he begynneth to raigne in the heartes of hys chosen. The laste verse is so vehementelye broughte forthe by the Prophete to con¦fyrme thys promyse that euerye worde in it is twyse doubled. That whyche he calleth the tower of the flocke, because the people was gathered thyther thryse by the yere as the flocke is gathered in∣to
a folde he calleth it agayne the towre of the doughter of Sion, and twyse hee saythe shall come that the Iewes shuld not despayre though they do se the time prolonged and defferred. That whyche he called the fyrst king¦dome hee calleth it agayne the kynge∣dom of the daughter of Sion, promising them that the relygyon, noble courage and iustice, the glorye and wysdome of Salomō, or whatsoeuer was praise wor¦thye in the begynnynge: that same shal mooste fullye be restored in thys raygne of Messiah, Esaye hathe the lyke in the ende of hys fyrst Chapter. I shal restore thy iudges as in the beginning and the counsellers as at the fyrste. Nowe whye doste thou crye wyth suche loude voyce,The Text is there no kynge in the? are thy counsa∣loures peryshed? Because sorow is come vppon the as vppon the womanne that trauayleth. As thoughe he shoulde saye I doo knowe my woordes wyll greue the so muche more as all thynges semeth vnto the fleshe desperate. Thou dooste lacke thy noble captaynes and counsaloures
vnto whō thou haste trusted, the whiche heretofore hath delyuered the. And be∣cause thou hast made flesh thy arme trust¦inge to muche to thy kinges and coun∣saloures, and further haste exalted thy selfe (whiche art but dust and ashes) as thoughe thou haddeste power of thyne owne wythoute me, and therefore are these sorowes come vpon the, euen the sore panges and throwes of trauaylyng wemen. Lamente,The Text and sorowe O Doughter of Sion, lyke the wo∣manne trauayelynge for thou shalte nowe goo foorth of the ci∣tye, thou shalte dwell in the feild Thou shalte goo to Babylon. But thence shalte thou be dely∣uered: There shall the Lorde redeme the frome the handes of thyne ennemyes. Thou muste I saye to beate downe thys vayne confydence and hoope thou haste besydes me befoore chastened, but be sure thou shalte bee delyuered in the ende. Thus saythe the Prophete O see of the same delyueraunce.
Along time thou shalt looke for me, and not be coupled to any housband, nether yet ten of whoreyng, and I wyll looke for the, thou shalt be without king, with out Prince and priest, and after returne and seeke the Lord thy God, and Da∣uid thy king, and feare the Lord for thy good in the last dayes. The TextAnd now shall many nacyons of the Heythen be gathered a∣gaynst the, saying: she is pollu∣ted, our eyes shal behold Syon, and haue their desyre vpon her, but they haue not knowen the thoughtes of the Lorde, nor vn∣derstand hys coūsel: For he hath gathered them as a handful in∣to the barne. Aryse and threshe thou daughter of Syon, for I wyl make the hornes of yrō, and hooffes of brasse, and thou shalt breake in peeces muche people. And I shall dedycate vnto the Lorde theyr spoyle and theyr ri∣ches
to the Lord of al the earth. The Prophet gothe forthe to declare the state of the Iewes in the dayes of Messiah, for of that tyme all do take it. Now because ye time is not come wher∣in the Iewes shall receyue oure Christ, as theyr Messiah, theyr God and theyr king, I do iudge it vnmete for any man onlesse he haue some specyall Reuela∣cyon to wade anye farther then the opē woorde of God in the secrete worckes, whyche then shal be shewed, nether may it be accompted as a greate aulte to a∣nye of vs if we do clearlye confesse oure selues ignoraunte, what or howe many nacyons shall be gathered agaynste Is∣raell or howe they shal be destroyed, but rather a greate presumptyon if we shuld rashlye to take vpon vs the cleare lyght of suche secrete misteryes. Like as of the other part I suppose the rashe iudgmente of some whyche do say that the Iewes are so dampned and al together cast away, that they cannot be restored, as it appeareth euydentelye too bee pronounced agaynste the scryp∣tures, so ought it not to be allowed but brotherlye to be reproued. As for those enemyes of theirs whyche reioyseth at
thys longe captiuitie, and maketh them a estynge stocke and a by woorde the Lorde sweareth. Ezechiell .xxxvi. that they shall suffer shame and ewyl sanc∣tyfye hys hyghe name whyche was pol∣luted amonges the Gentiles, and they shal knowe that he is God. In the .xxxvii of Ezechiell God pro∣myseth the restorynge of the Iewes by the raysynge of deade bones, where in e breatheth the spyryt and lyfe why¦che is the receiuinge of them, wherunto Paule alludeth Roma. xi. saying what shalbe theyr receyuynge but lyfe frome the deade? Ezechiel. xxxviii.xxxix. is this Prophecye of Micheas at the full, sette foorthe who so shall haue the Reuela∣cyon of the spryte for to see thys wonde¦rous woorckes, as for vs to whome it is not fullye opened wee dooe praye that too the glorye of God and the renoume of hys hyghe name, it maye in the due tyme be reuealed. Cryinge in the meane season agaynst oure blyndenesse, as did Paule wrytynge vppon the same hyghe mysterye. O the profounde deepenesse of the ryches, wysdom and knowledge, of God, howe vnsearcheable are thy
wayes and incōprehensyble thy iudge∣ments. For who hath known the minde of the Lorde, or who hath bene hys coun¦sayle geuer. Vnto vs it shall be enoughe whyles that tyme do trye the truthe fur¦ther too consyder the ennemyes of Is∣raell all mooste tryumphynge ouer it so∣denly by the mighty hād of God, destroi¦ed such as Pharao, Sāherib, Rabsace, Nebuchadnezer, Antiochus, Herod. And oure ennemyes whyche are the spirituall Israel, wonderfullye vanqui¦shed and by Christe and hys woorde put too confusion The Romyshe Antichrist wyth hys Idoles, hys Cardynalles, hys Byshoppes, hys shauelynges, Monks, Chanons, Fryers, hys Priestes, regu∣lars, and irregulers, oute of al the rules and orders of honestye, whych Heathen companye were entred oure lands, were gathered agaynste vs. Countynge vs polluted Heretikes worthye too satys∣fye theyr bluddy eyes wysh our deathes hangynge and burnynge. But they dydde not knowe the thoughtes of the Lorde that hee suffered theym too rage that hee myghte be glorified in the ende, when they shulde be threshen to powder
geuynge hys faythefull suche power that they shulde treade down al the pow¦er of theyr aduersary lyke chaffe, to geue God the glorye of thys spoyle, and too knowledge thys too bee hys woorcke to the glorye of hys name. God graunte that we vnto whome God hathe geuen thys tryumphe, be not forgetful to paye oure vowes vnto our Lorde. The Pro∣phete voweth in the personne of vs too dedycate, and to geue hym not only the calfes of oure lippes but the riches, and spoyle to be a moment and as he calleth it Anathema a thynge so separate vnto the Lorde that no manne may touch it, much lesse conuert it to any pryuate vse. Neyther is this the vow of our Prophet onelye but a playne commaundemente of God. Deuter. vii. Thou shalte brene wyth fyre theyr grauen Images. Thou shalt not couet theyr syluer & gold wher¦of they are made, nether shalt thou take anye thinge of them vnto the, least thou offende because that it is the abhomina¦cyon of the Lorde thy God, nether shalt thou brynge anye thynge of the Idol in to thy house, leaste thou be accursed like as it is. Thou shalte abhorre it as fylthy¦nes because it is Anathema and accur∣sed. So was Iherico and Amelech, Ana¦thematysed
if I maye be suffered so too speake. And Achan was stoned for tou∣chynge of the one, Saule was put from hys kyngdom for hauynge of the other. God graunte the noble houses of Eng¦lande to suffer no lyke damnage for the turnynge too theyr pryuate vses suche spoyles as they haue gotten of theese theyr spirituall enemyes. I dare say no∣thing but thys onlye that al men canne easylye iudge that if the Idols founde in that Babylon had beene brente wyth all theyr Iewels vnto them offered, and the landes and possessyons putte to the mayntenaunce of true religion. To the fyndyng of the pore, to the setting forth of godlye learnynge and vertue, whiche was abused in supersticion & Hipocrisy: we myghte haue hoped for oure zeale to godward, to haue had his mercy, and for our godli pollici to haue sene a star: shing region. Where nowe that couetousnes that foule beaste, blotteth and spotteth, al oure doinges in the syght of God and man, we do feare the cleane contrarye. God graunte vs eies to se & hartes to re¦pente for the glory of that name & that truthes sake, whyche we do professe. ☞Nowe shalte thou be compas¦sedThe Text
with garisōs, thou doughter of garysons, he hath layed seyge agaynste vs, wyth a staffe wyll thei strike the cheke of the iudge of Israell. After the Prophete haue ended hys wonderfull prophecy of ye last daies, that he may the better be beleued. He telleth them thynges whych many of thē shuld see wyth theyr eyes. Now saith he, euen now is it at hand that Ierusalem ful of people and garysons of sougiers, shalbe obsessed and beseyged wyth many sou∣gyers. And if dyd come so to passe in the dayes of Ezechyas, when Seneheryb sent hys army to Ierusalem, whych did beseyge it and brought great famine vp on them, not wythstandyng there was destroyed of that great army and gary∣son, by the angel of God. C, lxxxv. thou∣sande in one nyghte. Agayne wythin a fewe yeares after, Pharao broughte an army forth of Egypt, and did smite and stay theyr good kyng Iosias and rygh∣teous Iudge of Iuda. Lyke as also the last kynge of Israell. O see was slayne in the dayes of Ezechiah, vnder whome oure Prophet lyued, and dyd wryte this
prophecye, and the chiefe cyty of Isra∣el Samaria, was destroyed the same tyme. And not very many yeares after, the cyty of Ierusalem was besyeged by Nabuchadnezer, Ioakim was taken prysoner, and zedekiah set in hys place, who caused Ierusalem to be agayn be∣seyged and destroyed, and hym selfe had hys eyes put foorth, and so was caryed prysoner. Of the whych zedechias, they do for the most part expound thys  of theyr cheife Iudge stryken vpon the cheeke. And some dothe saye that it is a prophecye of Christe whych shoulde be stryken vpon the chycke before the hye Priestes. But to cause it to agree wyth that which goeth before and followeth. Heare seemeth to bee set forth a prophe∣cye what shal come vpon Ierusalem, e∣uen great misery, and thynges vnto the flesh desperate, and tymes past all hope to the iudgement of man. How be it to the almyghty power of the euerlyuyng Lord, vnto whom al godlye Prophetes and preachers alway prouoketh al thin¦ges that he pleaseth are mooste easye to be fulfylled. The Lorde is mooste neare when he seemeth farre awaye. The Lorde is mooste stronge, when manne is moste weake.
Therefore strayght wayes in the next verse folowinge oure Prophete adioy∣neth howe that in tymes mooste terrible when they shoulde be paste al hope, their lande wyth contynuall warres all wa∣sted, theyr kynges captiued. Foraine na¦cyons bearyng rule ouer them. And that same tyme the Romaine tyraunte Au∣gustus Caiser demaundynge a sore try∣bute vpon theim: Forthe of a lytle vyl∣lage not worthye to beare anye vewe in the musters and assembles of the peo∣ple, shulde come forthe a captayne con∣trarye too mannes iudgmente, whyche shoulde gouerne Israell in the strength of the Lorde and the hyghe and mighty name of God. So that no power of man shalbe able to resyste hym: as is most eui¦dently proued in yt he hath enlarged his kyngdome and spred his name through oute the hole world, magry al tyraunts, al persecutors, al hys enemies, and hath contynued it this .M.d.li. yeres beating downe wt the breath of his mouth with oute swearde or weapon al his aduersa∣ryes, and at this daye moste gloryouslye tryumphynge ouer them. The TextAnd thou Bethlem Euphrata though thou be lytle among the
thousandes of Iuda, forth of the shall come vnto me he that shall be the ruler in Israell, and hys commynge forth from old, from euerlastynge. Therefore he wyl geue theim vnto other vnto the tyme yt she which shal beare, haue borne and the relydue of the bre¦threne shall returne too the chyl∣dren of Israel. And he shal stand and gouern in the strength of the Lorde, and the highe name of the Lorde hys God. O wonderful blindenes of the Iewes, whych do not vnderstand or not regard thys playne prophecye of Christe, princy¦pally spoken for theyr comfort. O more wonderful madnes of the Anabaptistes which wilfully refuseth the knowledge & true vnderstanding hereof turning thē to the folye of theyr owne braines. The Iewish Priestes and Scribes do brynge in thys Prophecye to kynge Herode at the fyrst when he demaunded wher their Messiah, whome we call Christe shoulde
be borne in Bethleem Iuda, they do an∣swere, for thus was it prophecyed that thou Bethelem, though thou be litle. &c. Forth of the shal come a captayne. The wyse Magis so wonderfully by the spirite of God called from far coun¦tryes forth of forayne and Heythen na¦cions, brought bi a stai to Ierusalem, to teache them there of theyr owne kyng, doth folow the sta standyng ouer thys place wher thys Prophet apointeth his natiuitye. There they do fynde him and worshyp hym as God and kyng in this lytle vyllage Bethelem. At hys byrth fyrste of al the Aungels appeared vnto the poore shepeherds to vtter vnto the world that thys kynge∣dome is not of the proude, but for the poore, humble and meeke, vnto whome Messiah is sent. Esay .lxi. and they se a wonderfull lyght, and heare a voice say¦inge: that theyr Messiah was borne in the cyty of Dauid whych is also named Bethelem, in the same chapter the fyrst of Luke, because Dauid was ther born i. Samuell .xvi. and anointed kinge. In the same Chapter Symeon the Pro∣phete whyche had promise made by the spirit, that he should not se death before that he shuld, se this Messiah, cōfesseth
that this is the lyght of the Hethē, and the glorye of the people Israel. Anna the Prophetyse whych night & day serued in the temple wyth praying and fastynge, professed thys to bee the redemer of Israel. Yea the voice of God from heauen in the presence of many people, doth con∣fyrme al thys, saying: thys is my welbe¦loued sonne in whom I am well plea∣sed, heare you hym. The myracles wythout number both in hys lyfe tyme when he cured al dys∣eases both of body and soule. When he caused the wyndes to cease, the seas to obeye, and deathe to geue place, and in hys death, when he caused the heauens to shet, the earth to shake, the sunne to loose hys lyght. And after hys death al∣so when he caused the hels to open, the graues to geue againe theyr prysonats. What wyll you haue more? Hys mooste ennemyes the Scrybes and Pharyseis coulde not saye in con∣science, but that al these wonders were doone by the fyngar of God, and the sougiours wyth theyr captayne whych kepte hym at hys deathe, was compel∣led to crye. Truelye thys is the verye sonne of God. Math. xxvii.
Yea the verye deuyls were dryuen to confesse hym to bee Iesus the sonne of God Math. viii. Mark .v. Luke .viii and yet some whych do beare his name cal∣led Christians, and some twyse christe∣ned, as they cal it, dare denye vnto hym thys glory. O blasphemye intollerable, yea al the power of Sathan and all the gates of hel haue not bene able to beate downe the church buylt vpon thys con∣fession as Christ out sauioure promysed Math. xvi. thoughe contynuallye thys M.D. and .Li. yeares they haue wyth the swerd hangyng and burnyng moste despitefully stryuen agaynst it, and yet these blynde beastes dare attempt such foly. Yea, thoughe the Iewes, thoughe the Turkes, thoughe the Aryans, and the Anababtistes, and al the lying rable of the deuyls sougiers labour and striue al that in them lyeth to hinder and stop the kyngdom of this child borne in des∣pysed Bethelem as he is man, but com∣myng forth from old, from euerlastyng as he is god. Yet lo it is now dilated and spred a longe tyme throughe the whole world, and at thys present moste glory∣ously spreadeth and triumpheth ouer al. Embrace therefore the sonne least he be angrye, and you doo peryshe foorthe of
the way, al you ragyng people and vain imaginers agaynst our Christe. Y you gather you and sette you agaynste thys Messiah the euerlyuing lord, wyl laugh you to scorne. For he hath anointed him kyng vpon Sion hys holye temple. He wryteth it in hys euerlastyng decree. He calleth hym hys sonne, he geueth hym power ouer al people to rule them wyth the yron scepter, and so folowing of the kyngdome of Christ. Psal. ii. Agaynst the aduersaryes therefore of thys kyngdome whyche are the Anty∣christes, wherof we are so oft warned in the scriptures. Suffer me I pray you to make a short digression, not for any so∣tie arguments that I wil bring against them, for that is contrarye bothe to my purpose and profession. But for my zele sake simply to vtter the words of truth, yf by that way we may win but any one of thē. It is not sayd for noughte by the holy Apostle. Heb. iiii. The word of god is lyuelye and myghtye in operacion: sharper then any twoo edged swearde. Therfore wyl I vse the sweard of God hys holy scriptures to cutte of theyr er∣rours, desyryng oure heauenlye father, wil houte whom no man can come vnto Christ, to drawe some of these blynded,
and loste shepe home againe to hys son Christe theyr only shepperde, and to hys fold &, holy felowship of the faithful, ly∣uynge in Christen vnytye to the glorye of hys name and the delatinge and en∣largynge of his glorious kyngdome. There be .ii. sortes of the aduersa∣ryes of thys kingdome, the one denieth him to be God, the other to be mā, wher¦fore I wyll declare, and proue by open scriptures. Christ God and Man. FYrste that the Messiah promy¦sed shulde be verye man euen of the seede of man as we doo reade: Genes. iii. that the wo∣mannes seede shal breake the serpentes heade, agayne, Gen. xii. saythe God vn∣to Abraham, in the shal al the kynredes of the earthe bee blessed, and declaringe howe thys shall come too passe in thee xvii. Chapter he promyseth to Abraham and to Sarai, a sede wyth whom he wil make an euerlastynge leage and coue∣naunte. And in the .xxii. Chapter after he had broughte thys promised seede to be a slaine sacrifice, as the Lorde hadde commaunded, thys was again from hea¦uen pronounced that in the sede of Abra¦ham all nacions shoulde be blessed.
And in the .xxvi. Chapter vnto his sonn Isaac was the same promyse renewed wyth these same words. In thy sede shal al the nacyons be blessed. Againe to his sonne Iacob in the .xxviii. of Genesis al the kynreds of the earthe shalbe blessed in the, and thy seede saythe the Lorde. Agayne saithe Iacob in the spyryte of Prophecye to hys chyldrene. The scep∣ter shall not bee taken frome Iuda, nor the ruler from his seat whyles that Mes¦siah do come, and to him shal the people be gathered. Loo thus by playne testy∣monies mooste auncient, euen from the beginninge maye it bee proued Messiah oure Christ to be appoynted man of the seede of manne. And after the troublous tymes when all theyr captaines fayled, as Micha dyd Prophecy, then forthe of a litle village of the tribe of Iuda shuld come oure Christe, the appointed and a∣noynted ruler ouer the faithful Israel. And to let you vnderstande whyche are the ennemyes to Christ his kyngdome, that you do striue in vayne there against mark that Balaam prouoked bi ye king, Balaac colde speake nothyng agaynste thys kingdome which he did se more thē a thousand .d. yeres to come after hym: but dydde reuerence it a farre of saying:
There shal ryse a starre from Iacob and a rodde from Israel whiche shall stryke the captaynes of Moab. Of Iacob shall come thys greate Lorde whyche shal de∣stroye the remnaunte forthe of the cytye Numer. xxiiii. Thus are the enemyes of oure Christe compelled to knoweledge hym a man of the seede of Iacob, and a gloryous kynge ouer all hys ennemyes tryumphynge. Agayne. Deut. xviii. Mo∣ses the seruaunte of God dare say thus. A Prophete vp frome amonges thy bre∣threne euen lyke me shall the Lorde thy God raise vnto the, whosoeuer shall not heare hym I wyll requyre it of him. Loo nowe heare is the humilitie of Christ his man hode set forthe but so that whoso∣euer is the despiser of him and hys doc∣tryne hathe thys playnly promised that he shall gyue accomptes for it, and God hym selfe wyll questyon wyth hym the cause whye he hathe refused him. For so standeth the Hebrewe. Beware therfore as Esay sayth, and take hede vnto your selues from the man whose breathe is in hys nostrelles for wherin he is reputed, though he be very man and therfore des∣pised, yet is he of the Lorde onlye regar∣ded. Agayne in the Psalme lxxxviii. We do reade I haue sworn to Dauid my ser∣uaunte,
for euer wyll I prepare thy sede and wyl stablish thy seate frō generaciō to generaciō. And in the Psal. cxxx. most playnelye. The Lorde hathe sworne to Dauid and wyll not deceyue. I wyll set vpon thy seate the fruite of thy wombe the whyche place holy Peter alledginge to the Iewes. Actes .ii. doth name it the fruyte of the loynes of Dauid forseinge by the spyryte that suche an Artycle of oure faythe whyche shoulde be so much impugned, hadde neade to bee payneted wyth moost playne woordes. And what canne be more playne I praye you to de¦clare hym too haue bene verye fleshe and verye manne, then thus to haue named him too haue come of thee seede of thee loynes, and forthe of the wome of Da∣uid. And if you do stycke of the woorde and name of a manne, reade .iii. kinges .ii. chapter. Thou shalte alwaye haue a manne to sit in thy seat ouer Israel, and in the ende, the seate of Dauid shall bee stable before the Lorde for euer. So that thys maye be suffycyente too all theym whyche wyth anye thynge wyll be satis¦fied, that the Messiah and sauyoure pro¦mysed is verye man. Who so wyl search mo scryptures lette hym read the .vii. of Esaye where is playnelye Prophecyed
that he shall be borne of a Virgin, in the iiii. Chapter he is called the braunche of the Lorde and the fruyte of the earthe, where bothe hys natures are touched. Like as oure Prophete dothe mooste plainelye painte him foorthe in boothe kindes, also sayinge that he shoulde be borne in Bethlem, a village of small re∣putacion, because it was able too make but a small noumber in the musters and taxes when the people were noum∣bred by hondrethes and thousandes as was then vsed, and we doo vse the same styll to thys daye. The whyche woordes of oure Prophete that hee shoulde come foorthe of lytle Bethlehem to rule ouer Israell doothe declare hys mannehode lyke as the woordes folowing. His com¦minge foorthe is from old, from euerla∣stinge vttereth hys Godhead. For only God hathe bene frome euerlastynge. Thus is your Messiah painted vnto you God and manne, O vnbeleuinge nacy∣on. The stone whiche you doo refuse be∣ing folishe builders is made the chief cor¦nor stone of God his holy buildinge. E∣say did also vtter this vnto you in moste plaine wordes saying. A child is born vn¦to vs, a son is geuē vnto vs, vpō his shul¦der shalbe the kingdome, and he shall be
called meruelous, the counsel geuer, the myghtye God, the euerlastynge father, the Prince of Peace, of the multiplying of his kingdome and of hys peace there shalbe no ende. He shall sette vppon the seate of Dauid and vpon his kingdome to sette vp the same and too stablyshe it in equitie and rightuousnes from hens∣forthe for euermore. Esaye .ix. Heare is he named a childe borne, whiche shoulde be king, which oppresseth his manhode. All the other wordes do moste playnelye describe the pore and propertyes of hys God heade, who so shall worthelye pon¦der them, and if nothinge canne serue to satyfye your styffe stomackes, onles you haue the hyghe name of God Iouah as∣cribed to oure Christe youre Messiah as some of you impudently canne answer, Vouchsafe to reade the Prophet Iere∣my in the .xxiii. chapter and ther you shal most plainly find it so. Lo the daies shal come faith the Lord and I will raise vp to Dauid a rightuous braunche and he shall raigne kinge and prospere. He shal do iudgemente and iustice in the earthe. In those dayes shal Iuda be saued, & Is¦rael shal dwell boldly & this is hys name wherewyth they shall call hym Iouah Sidkenu, by interpretacion God whych is, whiche hathe beene, whyche shall be
by whome all thynges haue theyr being is oure ryghteousnes for so muche is cō¦prehended in the Hebrew Iouah as was sayde in the fyrste leafe. And thys is the hyghe name whyche the Iewes do agre, neuer to be geuen to any creature. Ther¦fore we do conclude against thē that our Christ is God the only creatour, of whō al creatures haue their essēce, substaūce, & beyng as thys word importeth, Agayn wher as it is wrytten Psalme .c.ix. The Lorde sayed vnto my Lord sytte of my right hand whiles yt I make thyne ene∣mies thy fotestole. And Christ our Lord demaundeth of your Doctoures & Pha¦ryses, if Christe were Dauid sonne as the scriptures compelled them too con∣fesse. How then calleth Dauid hym lord by the spyryte so longe afore? And if he be Dauides Lorde howe then is he hys sonne? The whiche questyon hath vex∣ed your braynes whyche denye hym too be God thys .M.ccccc. yeres. Therfore fall downe and worshyppe oure Christe as God, lyke as the .xc.vi. Psalme doth teache you, that al the aungels of hea∣uen shall worshyp hym, and you shal vn¦derstande not onlye thys questyon, but al those same places of the Psalms and Prophetes, whyche you doo nowe reade
wyth a vayle and myste before your eyes Psalme .xliiii.lxxxviii, cix.cxxxi. Esa. iiii vii.viii.ix.xi.xxviii.xl.xlii.xlv.xlvi.xlix.lii liii.lxii. Ieremy .xxiiii.xxx.xxxiii. Ezech. xvii.xxxiiii.xxxvii. Daniel. ii.ix. Mich. v. Agge. ii. Baruch. iii. Osee. xiii.vi. Ioel. ii Amos. ix. zacharye. iii.xiii. Malache. iii. Ionah the fygure of Christ hys deathe and resurreccion. Whych places I doo note for ye godly, that they may se Christ to haue beene the shoote anker of the Prophetes▪ and chyefe marke of theyr Prophecyes. What shall I nede to brynge forth anye place of the newe Testament? se∣inge that standeth hollye vpon this doc¦tryne that Iesus Christe is God and manne, and by thys you maye knowe the spirite of God saythe Saynt Ihon. Euerye spirite whych confesseth Iesus Christ to become in the flesh, is of God.Ihon. iiii. And euery spirit which doth not confes Iesu Christ to becom in ye flesh, is not of God. And this is the spirit of Antechrist saythe Saynt Ihon. And before in the thyrde Chap. Who is a lyer but he that denyeth Iesus too bee Christe. Thys same is Antychryste whyche denyeth boothe the father and the sonne. And who so denyeth the sonne, neither hath
the father. Therefore embrace the sonne and receyue hym wyth a kysse leaste hee be angry and you do perysh forth of the way. Psal. ii. We do know that the son of God is come, and hath geuen vs har∣tes to know hym, whych is true and we are in thys truthe, in hys sonne Iesus Christ. Thys is the true God and euer∣lastyng lyfe. i. Ihon. v. We doo confesse wyth S. Paule that Christe is borne of the Iewes, as touchyng the flesh which is God in al thynges to be praysed for euer. Rom. ix. We do professe thys faith whych holye Ihon Baptyste preached. That our sauiour Christ, though he dyd come after Ihon as touchyng the car∣nal natiuity. Yet is he far mightiar then Ihon, and Baptiseth vs wyth the holy Gost, and wyth fyre. Hys fan is in hys hand to pourge hys flower, and he wyll gather hys wheate into hys barne, and burne the chaffe wyth vnquenshed fyre. We do beleue that at hys Baptyme the holye Goste dyd come downe inuisible forme vpon hym, and a voice was heard from heauen, sayinge: Thys is my be∣loued sonne in whome is my delyte. Mathew. iii. and .xvii. Marke .i. and .ix. Luke iii. and .ix. and all the Gospell of Saynte Ihon wrytten for the same pur¦pose
agaynste the Ebeonites. Agayne Romaynes .i.viii.ix. and .xi. Corinthy∣ans .v. Galathyans .iiii. Philippians .ii. Collossians .ii.i. Timothe .ii.iii. Tytus. ii. Hebrues .i.v. Yf the testymony of one of your Rab¦bynes, O Iewes, or of your phantasty∣cal Prophetes, O you rennagates, Ana¦baptystes seme great vnto you. Let the voyce of God from heauen, the testemo∣nye of all hys holye Prophetes, Patri∣akes, Martyrs, Apostles, doctours and faythful wytnesses of all ages, be grea∣ter and of more wayghte vnto you. Let your own saluacion be more deare, then the deuyles delusion. Let the author of truth be heard, and banysh the authour of lyes. The Lord God sayth by his ho∣lye Prophete Ezechiel. Ezechiel. xxxiiii. I alone wyll feede my flocke, & straight he addeth, My seruaunte Dauyd shall feede, so that you maye see that boothe theese are but one, whose feedynge you muste desyre, yf you bee not of the loste sheepe for there is no waye to God the father, but by Christe, whyche is heare called the seruaunte Dauyd, neyther canne anye manne come to Christe the onelye shepehearde of sowles, vnles the father drawe hym.
A Prayer. VVherefore O Lord God and hea∣uēly father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Ia∣cob, whiche dyddest promise vnto Abra∣ham, that thou wouldest bee the God of hys seede for euer. Whyche haste promy¦sed also too subdue Moab & Esau, that is to saye, all heathen miscreauntes too thy chosen Israel, and to gather vnder one shephearde thy seruaunte Dauid Christe oure sauioure all they scattered shepe bothe of the Iewes and Gentyls, that there myghte bee one sheppehearde and one folde. Mercyfullye beholde thy flocke amonges them, boothe dyspersed and scattered, erryng, wanderynge, and goynge astraye wyth peruerse myndes and erronyous opinions, farre from thy foulde, not knowinge as yet nor regar∣dynge the voyce of thy sonne the onlye good shepherd, which did geue hys soule for his shepe. And draw them, we besech the, home agayne to the fold of thy son Iesus Christ, wythoute whō there is no saluaciō, no cōforte, no health, no hope, no stay of cōscience. But imserable wan¦derynge from erroure to erroure, and in in the ende vtter desperacion. Haue mer¦cye therfore of thy miserable stray shepe
for theyr shepherde sake, for thy prayse sake, and for the glorye of thyne owne name for the amplyfyinge and enlar∣gyng the kyngdome of thy sonne Christ who is declared God all readye in the flesh by hys manyfest miracles, iustified in spyryte, sene of the angels, preached amonge the people, beleued vpon in the world and receyued in glory, and shortly shal come in the same glory to make hys ennemyes hys footestole. So be it. Nowe to oure Prophete from whom we maye seme to haue made ouer longe a digression, same that this wicked time requireth it. Therefore wil he geue them.The Text He wyll geue them to the Babiloni∣ans and Romaines to be vexed, oppres∣sed, and euyll entreated. And then whē all semeth mooste myserable and despe¦rate, shal thys chylde bee borne, whyche shall gather together this scattered peo¦ple, thys is it whiche we laboured to de∣clare in the .iiii. Chapter. Howe Messiah shoulde come in a tyme mooste mysera∣ble, whē the scepter shuld be taken from Iuda and geuen to a foran Tyraunt as it was geuen to Herode a Romayne at the commyng of Christ. And euer before was it in the hand of some of theyr own
Prynces, eyther of theyr kinges, either of theyr Machabees, either of theyr coū¦salours whome they called Sanhedrin, How be it Herod hauing the whole na∣cion, suspected, dyd take away all their offycers, and set in hys captaynes. But here is promysed a newe delyuerance when thys chylde commeth, a restoryng and gatheryng of the chyldren of Isra∣ell together. Whych we do vnderstande to be already begone, when he did come into the worlde in fleshe, to preache the glad tydynges of hys kingdome, in ope¦nynge hys fathers greate mercye and good wyll towardes vs mooste vile and wretched synners, and too make of vs Gentylles (whych were lykedomme and dead stones, touchynge the know∣ledge of GOD) chyldren vnto Abra∣ham, and true Israelytes. To make vs whych were not his people to be ac∣cepted as hys people, and then shal it be most perfitely fulfylled in the end, when ther shalbe but one shepeherd & one foldThe Text And he shal stand and feede in the strengthe of the Lord, and in the hyghe name of the Lorde hys God, and they shal returne,
for nowe shall he be magnyfyed to the endes of the earth. Loo, the power of Messiah it shalbe, no fleshly or humane power, but it shall be the power of the euerlyuynge Lorde, and the hye name of God, wherein he shal feede hys flocke as Christ sayeth in the .x. of Ihon: I am the good shepherd and I do know mi shepe, & I am knowē of mine, euen as the father knoweth me euen so do I know the father, and I do laye downe my soule for my sheepe. No man taketh it from me, but I do laye it downe of my selfe. I haue power too laye it downe, and I haue power too take it agayne. My sheepe dooe knowe my voyce and folow me, and I do giue them euerlast∣yng lyfe, neyther shal they perysh for e∣uer. Neyther shal any man take theym forth of my hād. My father which gaue me thē is greater then all, and no man can take them forth of my fathers hād. I and my father are al all one. Who can bring a more cleare exposi∣cion of the feadynge and power of Mes¦siah thē he here doth hymselfe. Neither may it trouble any scrupulous cōsciēce that ye prophet nameth him (his god) for
so sayth Christe that his father did giue him thys shepe, meanynge, as he beinge fyrste in the forme of God wythoute all wronge, equal vnto God, did make hym self of no reputaciō like vnto man, in ye forme and shape of manne, so dyd God gyue hym all thynges, and was named hys God. As he was man humbled and broughte downe euen too verye deathe wherein hee cryed bearynge oure myse∣ryes, and fealynge the wrathe of God a∣gainste vs for oure synnes, Eloi, Eloi. My God, my God, whye haste thou for∣saken me, wherefore also God hathe ex∣alted hym to the hyghest authoryty and geuen hym a name whyche is aboue all names, that in ye name of Iesu al knees shoulde bowe of heauenlye thynges, of earthlye thynges, and of infernall spy∣rytes. And all tounges shoulde confesse that Iesu is the Lorde too the glorye of God the father, lo the manhode in that he calleth his God and receyueth of the father and Godhead of Messiah in that all knees shall bowe and worshyp hym, lyke as in the .xlv. Psalme. He is thy Lorde thou shalte worship hym. Where as in Deuteronomi .vi. it is written thou shalt worship the Lorde thy God only. And they shall retourne,The Text for now
shal he be magnified to the ends of the earthe. Hear is the promise of the restoring of Israell and magnifyinge of the king¦dome of Christ rehearsed, which is more at large set forth in the latter end of the laste Chapter of Esay the Prophet and Ezechiell .xxxvii. And herein shal be peace.The Text If As¦sur shall come into our land, and if he shall come to treade in our palaces, we shall rayse agaynste hym .vii. Pastoures and .viii. Princelike men, and they shall fede the lande of Assur wyth the swearde, and the lande of Nim∣rodde wyth theyre owne sweard poyntes. And shall delyuer vs from Assur if hee come into oure lande, or if he treade vpon oure borders. In thys raygne and gloryous kyng¦dome of Messiah shall be peace. And as the Hebrewe demonstratiue Oz serueth because it is of the masculyne gender.
Thys Messiah is thys peace and peace maker vnto vs accordinge to the saying of the Apostle. He is oure peace whyche hathe made two people one, and hathe broken down the wal, whych was a stop betwixte vs, takinge awaye the strife e∣uen the lawe of the commaundementes standinge in decrees by his fleshe. For to make vs .ii. boothe in him selfe one newe man, makynge peace and reconcylynge bothe in one bodye by the crosse takinge awaye all enemyte by it. And thus dyd come and preache peace to the gentiles whyche were farre of and to the Iewes whiche were neare. Ephesi. ii. Loo thys is the peace whereof we shoulde reioyse, that we beinge iustified by fayth in him haue peace wyth God. Romaynes .v. and by hym are pacyfyed, thynges hea∣uenlye and earthlye. Thys shorte sen∣tence doothe insynuate so greate a mysterye lyke as doothe the outewarde ennemye, and outewarde delyueraunce folowinge importe and signify the won¦derfull worekes of Christe in his church Thys peace was it that Aaron was ap∣poyneted by God too wyshe vnto the people in all hys blessynges. Numerye. vi. A lyke promyse of peace is made. Le∣uiticus .xxvi. I wyll geue peace in your
borders you shall steape and no manne shall afraye you, I shall take awaye e∣uyll beastes, and the swearde shall not goo thorow your borders. You shal per∣secute your ennemyes, and they shal fal before you. Fiue of you shal put to flight an hundreth, and a hundreth shall pur∣sue ten thousande. Your ennemyes shal fall wyth the swearde in your syghte. Whyche is lyke thys promyse of the de∣struccion of Assur, and the lande of Nim¦rod, whyche are boothe one thyng. For thys Nimrod was the begynner of the kingedome of Babilon the cheife citye of the Assirians, and vnder the destruc∣cyon of hym and hys lande is insumate the destruccyon of all Tyrauntes and ennemyes, boothe spyrytuall and tem∣poral. Agaynste whome the Lorde oure God at hys appoyncted tyme rayeseth vppe .vii. for one too destroye theym and hathe alwaye viii. foulde so manye too helpe hys electe, as the ennemye canne haue to hurt thē. Yea, God of hys migh¦ty power, and stretched out arme, canne bryng al hys ennemyes to vtter confu∣sion in the twynkling of an eye, as it is moste manyfest in manye places of the old Testament. So that the power of ye ennemye can be reckened but a .ix. or .x.
parte a verye small thynge to the po∣wer of the faythfull. As dothe appeare mooste not ablye .iiii. kynges .vi. by He∣leseus whiche seinge his cytye Dotha∣im beseged wyth manye Garrisons of sowgioutes, biddeth hys seruaunte not to be afraied, forther is mo with vs saith he then with them, and prayeth for the o¦peninge of his seruauntes eies. And lo, they were opened and he did see the hyll full of horsse and fyrye Chariots round aboute Heliseus. And the Lorde at the prayer of thys manne of God, did smite all the Sirians with blindenes and cau¦sed theim so to be ledde by the Prophete vnto the kynge of Israel, whose destruc¦cyon they soughte. The lyke powre of God agaynst the Assirians is red .ii. Re. xix. ii. Chronicles .xxxiii. Esay .xxxvi. and manye such pastoures and Princes hath the Lorde set vppe for the delyueraunce of hys in all ages, especyallye to beate downe Assur. He sent Cirus hys annoin¦ted, in whome wee maye see a fygure of Christ. Esay. xlvi. & of the delyueraunce by Messiah, reade. Ezechi .xxxvi.xxxviii.xxxix. Whereby as by all the other, thou mayste vnderstand the spirytual delyue¦raunce from al helly powers. This Phrase of .vii. and .viii. betoke¦neth
abūdaūce & plenteth of captaynes lyke as ye xi. chap of Eccle. you may read the same. The feadinge with thesweard and the swearde poyntes, is a manyfeste Ironye and scorne of the ennemyes al∣ludynge too the name of pastoure and feadynge. And the remnaunte of Iacob shall be in the myddeste of many people,The Text as thee dewe frome thee Lorde, as the droppes vppon the herbe, whyche looketh for no mā neyther trusteth in the chyldren of menne. Loo .ii. goodlye propertyes where∣wyth God beautyfieth thys chosen Ia∣cob thys scattered, and despised people, faythe haue they, howe farre soeuer they be scattered abrode, whyche looketh vp to the heauens, not regardyng the help of anye manne, no more then dothe the dewe whyche falleth downe vppon the hearbe, wythoute the ayde of manne. And like as the dewye drops after great heate dothe cheryshe the grasse: euen so they do brynge forthe woorckes of mer∣cye, pyty, comforte and refreshynge, to the people amonges whom they do liue
and are conuersaunt. These be the two tokens of the true Iacob, but these rem¦nantes of Iacob must be tryed with the fyre. As zachary sayth .xiii. I wyl bryng in the thyrd part of Israel by fyre, and wyl try them lyke as syluer is tried, and fyne them as gold is fyned. Thys is the remnaunt whych are saued by free elec∣cion, as Saynte Paule sayth. Romay∣nes .xi. Chapter, and howe the rem∣naunt of Israell shal be watered wyth pure water frome heauen, and thereby looke vp toward heauen to kepe and ful¦fyl the lawes of theyr Lorde, and so en∣creased and waxe gloryous, reade Eze∣chyell .xxxvi. Chapter. The TextAnd the remnaunt of Iacob shall bee amonges the people, lyke the Lyon amongs the wid Beastes, and lyke the Lyons whelpe amonges the flockes of sheepe, whyche when hee com∣meth by, doothe teare in peeces and trample vnder hys feete, and there shall be none to dely∣uer. Thy handes shall be lyfted
vp vpon thyne ennemy, and all that hate the shall be rooted vp. Thys is it that Iacob dyd Prophecy of hys posterytye in the latter dayes to be fulfylled. Genesis .xlix. shewynge to hys chyldren that whyche God had ope¦ned vnto hym of Iuda, whome he na∣meth to be lyke a Lyon, a Lyonesse, a Lyons whelpe, to vtter hys power a∣monges men. As the Lyon is called the chiefe amonges the beastes, he shall de∣stroye hys ennemyes and bynd hys colt to the vyne, and washe hys garmente in the bloude of the grape. Whereby is vttered the greate power and glorye that he hathe prepared for hys chosen Iacob after he haue made theyr ennemyes theyr footestoole, why∣che all the Prophetes doo make as the chyefe marke and ende of theyr Pro∣phecyes, for the comforte of the chosen Israel, as is at large before wrytten, and wonderfullye set forth in Ezechiel. xxxvii.xxxviii. and .xxxix. Chapter And it shall bee in thatThe Text
same day sayth the Lord, and I wyl destroy thy horse forth of the myddst of thee, and breake thy charyots. I wyl destroye thy cy∣tyes, and ouercome al thy muni∣cions. I wyll destroye thyne en∣chauntmentes, and thou shalte haue no sothlaiers. I wil destroi thyne Idols and thyne ymages, forth of the myddes of thee, and thou shalt not worship any more the worke of thyne owne hands. And I wyl pluck vp thy groues forth of the middes of the, and I wyl destroy thy cityes. And I wyll bee auenged in my wrathe and fury vpon the people which hath not heard me. Although thys prophecy be by many expounded of the Iewes, yet had I ra∣ther to take it, as spoken of the Hethē, and so it very wel agreeth wyth all the other prophetes, whych strayghte after
the deliueraunce of Israel frō amongs the heythen, dothe alwayes threaten a terryble destruccion to theyr enemyes. Of whom so euer it is spoken, we muste marke for what cause it is spoken, to teach vs that syn is the cause of destruc¦cion to al kyngdomes. The trust in cha∣ryotes, in horses, in walled cytyes and strong holdes. In enchauntmentes and Idols, are the cause of God hys wrath, indygnacion and heauy dyspleasure. Especially Idolatry, enchantment and couniuryng, whych are the spiritual for¦nicacion, these are the crymes that God heare and euery wher dothe threaten to auenge in hys wrath and fury. Deut. iiii vii. And thorow the whole booke. Iosue xxiii.xxv. Dyd he not wōderfuly destroi xxiii. thousand of the Israelytes vppon one day by theyr owne pristes & Leuits, for Idolatry? Exod. xxxii. Did not God geue them into theyr enemyes handes, for folowing the wayes of the Hethen? Iudges .ii.iii.iiii.vi.viii.x. Dothe he not threaten alwaies to take thē of the face of the earth, and destroy thē for it? Exo∣dus, Leuiticus, Numeri, Deuteronomi, and in al the Prophets? Doth not God appeare vnto Solomon afterward & de¦clare ye same vnto him .iii. Re. ix. saying:
that if Israell shulde worship straunge gods he wold take him away and make him a by word amongs the heathē. And when it shulde be demaunded why God had destroied this people whome he had chosen, this shulde be answered, because they haue worshipped straunge goddes, therefore hathe the Lorde broughte vp∣on vs al this euil .iii. kinges .ix. This we knowe now liuinge especi∣ally in this realme and se and ar taught to be mooste true by the mouthe of God in our time as was Solomō. But a great parte of vs haue Idolatrye hidde in our hearts as hadde Solomon, and none of vs do earnestlye repent of the Idolatry by vs committed, no more then did So∣lomō, therfore shal we suffer shame with Solomon and oure posteritie shalbe des∣pised as it shalbe taughte more at large. Nowe for the stronge doctrine and spi∣rituall fornicacion of enchauntemente and coniuracyon, of sothesaying, or di∣uinacion, on lesse it be spedelye stopped by the wyl of God, workinge the care of such thinges in the harte of our kinge & counsalers, it shal shortlye braste forthe so farre amonges vs as it dyd amonges
the Iewes a lyttle before theyr laste de∣struccyon, whereof Iosephus wryteth Ant. xx. cap. iiii.xi.xii. yt they dyd forsake the true Prophetes of God, and sought after Sorcerers and soothe sayers. So saythe Esay, that the Lorde hadde for∣saken his people the house of Iacob, be∣cause they were more full of enchaunte∣mentes then was the Arabians, and as full of sothsaiers as the Philistines and wyth straunge doctryne they hadde sa∣tisfied their selues. Esaye .ii. So canne I come into no corner of thys realme where I finde not, or heare not of some of theese. In Oxforde and in Cambridge, wher God hys holy word shoulde banyshe thys blyndenesse, there be masters for ye nonest, which after they haue studyed Astronomye, whyche after they haue studied Astronomye and come to the iudicials of Astrology and found some experiments true and some false, when the placynge of the Planettes in theyr appoynted houses, and theyr as∣pectes and respectes wyl not serue their fonde purposes. Then loo muste they en¦ter in too Necromancye, and call some deade spirit forth of hys graue wyth the bind of a swalow or a cat  please ye de¦uill
to accepte that lewde sacrifice and hear haue they infinite supersticiōs of times, of wordes, of places, of the putrefacty∣on of that bloude, and other lyke mad∣nes whiche I am a shamed too rehearse and sorye too remember, consyderynge that manne was made by God to beare hys image, and therefore too looke and to do seruice to no suche vyle creatures, especyallye to hys auncyente ennemye the Deuill, for whose acquaintaunce all these Coniurers hath suche care and ma¦keth suche preparacye, wyth watching, wyth fastinge, with crossynge, wyth .M cccccc. supersticions, obseruacyons, for the destruccion of theyr owne soules, as no man wyl for theyr owne saluacyon. They saye they vse good woordes the greate name of God Iehouah, Adonai, Otheos, Sotor, Manuel, Sabaoth and I wot not what. So did oure Coniurers in the kyngdome of the Romyshe Ante christe vse some good woordes and the lyke names aboute the coniurynges, of Belles, of salt, of water, of oile, of wine, of breade, of Palmes and such lyke, but they dyd mixt therwyth many blasphe∣myes, yea and the good wordes whatso¦euer they dyd speake, were neuer appli∣ed to that purpose whyche God appoin¦ted
but too theese their owne imagined phantasyes of coniurynge God his crea¦tures, whyche alwaye hath bene accoun¦ted abhomination before God. Deuter. xviii. For looke howe farre the heauens are from the earthe, and so farre are my waies frō your waies, and mi thoughtes from your rhoughtes, saythe the Lorde. Esaye .lv. yea too the sinner saythe the Lorde, why doste thou take my name in thy mouthe? Psalm .l. That theese open euyl doers and manyfest transgressours agaynste God hys holye commaunde∣mente, oughte rather too tremble at the magnyfycente magestye of God his ho∣lye name, then thus lewdlye too alledge it in theyre charmes. These Cambredge coniurers haue sco¦lers in the countryes abroade, whych se¦keth howe to haue familier spirites, whi¦che they doo tearme too haue a Bee in a boxe to teache them to play at the Dice & Cardes, and other leud pastimes. And some muste haue Marcurius well pla∣ced to helpe at a pynsh, when they canne fynde no monye vnder crosses, to brynge it by some other vnshamefull shyftes. Some muste haue Venus in her fauora∣ble aspecte coniured into an aple to wyll the sauoure of wemen. Some must haue
Saturne for wysdome, Iupiter for ho∣noures, Mars for battel, whiche ar the verye Deuelyshe delusyons wherewyth the Deuyll blyneded the Babylonyans Egiptians and Cananees. And in oure Popyshe tyme broughte in lyke dysho∣noure of God in oure George of Enge∣land, oure Ladye of Walsingham, oure Daruelgadder of Wales, whereby wee muste vnderstande that there is one olde ennemye of oures, the oulde Serpente whych hathe enuyed the honoure of one God, and laboured too drawe vs there∣frome, euen frome the begynninge, whi∣che wyth holye woordes and gloryous names, and far fetched tearmes, semeth too vtter hys wysdome lyke an aungell of light. as Paule warneth. But marke the ende of theym whyche suffer theym selues, by hym too bee deluded, desiring the deuyll too geue thē of hys Counsel. Oure fyrste Parentes were by this craf∣tye Serpentes subtyll Counsel, dryuen forthe of Paradyse & adiudged to death with al their posteritie. Genes. iii. King Saul counsayling wt the sothesayer the wise womanne, whome onlye he hadde lefte in hys lande, was slayne wyth hys
iii. sonnes the daye folowinge. So muche doothe it aduayle too aske counsell of the deade for the liuinge or of the wicked spirites whyche do trans∣forme them selues into the lykenesse of the deade, as was heare in thys place of Samuel. For as the deuyl hath no pow∣er of the good soules, so canne hee not styrre theym too geue aunswere, but as we haue sayde he canne transforme him selfe into anye lykenesse that he maye myghtelye woorcke in theese chyldrene of mischeife. But marcke the ende I saye of al na∣cyons, whiche doo leaue the Lorde, and hys holye woorde for suche delucyons. In hope to get some thynge thereby to satisfye theyr dyuelyshe myndes. Some for the loue of women do trye it, and o∣ther some for the grydy desyre of goods do practise it, wyth manye other thyn∣ges, whyche were to longe to tell nowe. Was not this one of the greatest crimes wherfore Egipte was scourged and pla∣ged? Esaiah .xix. Wherefore was the Empyre of the Chaldees destroyed? and proud Babilon brought down? Esay aunswereth. Al the euils did come vpon the O Babilon for ye
multitude of thyne owne charmes and the stobbourne of malyce of thy coun∣iurers, for thou haste comforted thy self in thy disceatfulnes and haste sayde: no man seeth me. Thyne owne connynge and thy wysdō haue disceiued the. Ther¦fore shal trouble tal vpon the, and thou shalte not knowe from whence it shal a∣ryse. Doo you beleife that God telleth truthe O you coniurars? What is there but you can knowe it, if it please youre great master the deuil? But the Prophet sayth againe to your cōtrary. Mischeife shall fall vppon the whyche thou shalte not be able to put of. A sodayne myserye shal come vpon yt or euer thou be aware. Wherefore now go to the coniurers and to the multitude of thy wytches, whom thou hast bene acquainted with al from thy youth, if they mai help the or streng∣then the? Thou haste bene wearied with the multitude of thine owne counsels. Nowe let thy heauen gasers thy starre starers, thy Moone markers stande vp and saue the frome the thynges whyche shall come vpon the. Beholde they are stuble, the fire hath brente them, they cannot delyuer theyr own souls from the power of the flame, and so foorthe too the ende. Are not the
Philistines and Canaces alwaye char∣ged for these crimes, to haue hadde their worthy desolacyon? As for Israel Esay saith plainly that God old forsake it for thys, Esay .ii. & dyd lay the line of Sama¦ria vppon Ierusalem therefore, and the burthene of the house of Achab and dyd raise it as it were a wrytyng table .ii. Re xxi. ii. Chronicles .xxxiii. Yea when the Lorde wyll vtter his an¦ger agaynste them, he calleth them char¦mers chyldrene. Come hither saythe he by hys Prophete you charmers childrē, you aduouterous seede. Esaye: lvii. A∣broade in all places of Englande wher¦as I haue taryed, haue I heard of wyse menne and wyse wemenne, whyche can tell of thynges that are lost, and canne saye manye sayinges for childrene, and cattel, whyche are forspoken and haue blessinges to saye ouer certaine herbes as ouer vernine and dil, if they be gathe¦red betwixte the mary dayes. And about wemen wyth childe, they can saye oure Ladye with the whyte smocke, thy syde smock, and such mad charmes .v. C. are vsed in the countryes, whyche the spy∣rituall eies mighte espy, if they had not theyr Greke name for nought. And our Preachers shulde plucke away oure po∣lytycall
magistrates should punysh, for the Lord sayth: that these are the thyn∣ges, and not the handlynge of the cha∣lyce wherewyth the people are polluted Leuiti. xix. You shall not declyne to the charmers, and of the wytches aske no∣thyng, lest you be polluted by them. A∣gaine Leui. xx. The soule which loketh after any sothsayer or charmer to com∣myt fornicacion wyth them, I wyll set my face agaynst that soule, and I wyll destroye hym from the myddes of hys people, sayth the Lorde. Agayne. Deut. xviii. the Lord commaundeth whē thou entrest the lande whyche the Lorde thy God geueth the, beware thou doo not folow the abhominacions of that peo∣ple. Let none be founde amonges the whych caryeth hys chylde throughe the fyre, or that asketh of the charmers, ey∣ther that obserueth dreames or dayes and times, or of them whyche do marke the flying and crying of byrdes, or of a∣ny enchaunters, or of any deuyl coun∣iurar or any soythsayer or any that haue familiar spirites or anye wyse menne, or wise womenne. eyther any that asketh councel at the deade, for who so doothe theese, he is abhomynable before God,
and for these abhominacions the Lorde thy God dothe roote them forthe before thy face. Loo with how sore wordes and threatenynges the Lorde God detes∣teth & forbiddeth all the kindes of these deuelishe inuencions, whereby men doo runne a whorynge from God too abuse hys creatures in spirituall fornicacion. These thinges haue I written oc∣casyoned by oure Prophete of thys spy∣rituall fornicatyon, Idolatrye and all kynde of diuynacyon whyche wee call so the saying, prophecyinge, charminge, enchauntement, wytchcrafte, Magyke, Astrologye, Necromancye, Chiroman∣cy, Geomanci, or what other name so e∣uer ye deuyl shal inuēt to driue vs frō god to vayne creatures, for the Deuyll hathe euer thys one woorcke in hande but hee deceyueth the symple with the shyfte of hys deskante by vanytye of woordes. And I do warne all people to repente kynges, Lordes, Bishoppes, Commons For none canne excuse theym selues of that spyrytuall fornycacyon wyth the late deposed Idole that Waser Cake. Naye shall I call it deposed whyche is scantlye transposed wythoute anye feruent zeale or signe of repentaunce?
We haue not fealte Moises to make vs drink ye bitter ashes therof with teares. We haue not had Iehu to auenge God of hys ennemyes the Priestes of Baall. ii. kinges .x. We haue not wept and wai¦led, and torne oure garmentes for verye anguishe of oure heartes. We haue not caste awaye the ornamentes of our olde idolles, & the vessels that serued them as did ye good yong king Iosiah. We haue not destroied the sacrificers and steiers of oure Christe, as yong Iosiah did with the Priestes of the hyghe places wyth al charmers, witches, and enchaunters? To be shorte. We haue not earnestlye repented with mourninge and fastinge for theese abhomininacions as did the Niniuites. Therefore as Olda answe∣red too the good kinge Iosiah, that the Lorde woulde shewe of his mercies vn∣to him, because he did cutte his clothes, and wepte when he hearde the threate∣ninges of God againste his countries. Neuerthelesse he woulde bring al those euilles vppon that place and vppon the inhabitauntes of the land: because thei hadde forsaken God, and worshipped straunge Goddes, prouokinge God vn¦to wrathe in al the workes of their own handes. So canne oure people and con¦trye
nothynge at all repentyng of theyr former euyll, but styll euer more and more prouokinge the wrathe of God vp¦pon them, Some by the desyre thei haue to theyr olde Idolles, Some by theyr Sorcerers, Charmes, Enchantmentes, soothesayinges: Manye by adulterye, lasciuious wantonnes, and fleshlye ly∣bertye, and all by ambicion or couetous¦nesse, pillinge, pollinge, and brybynge-from their brethren. Looke for none o∣ther thynge, onlesse they vnfaynedlye, forthewith shewe the worckes of repen∣taunce, but miserye, calamitie, destruc∣tion, famine, darthe, diseases, pestilence and theswearde in the ende of forayne¦nacyons. Yea whyche is mooste terrible of al, we do feale the wrathe of God so kendled amonges vs all readye, that we are lyke Pharao, hardened in our sinnes euen plaged contynuallye with the en∣crease of new vices, and newe dyleases folowing. Was there euer suche inuen∣cions in any worlde for pollynge of the people? was there euer suche shamelesse whordome? suche wedlocke breakinge? Can it be denied that Paul writeth to ye Romains, because they haue chaunged ye glory of ye God immortal in ye lykenes of mortal & corruptible creatures. Ther¦fore
hathe God geuen theym to folowe the lustes of theyr owne heartes in vn∣clennes, with shame to abuse theyr own bodies together. Reade the Chapter to the ende, and you shall see the wrath of God greuously kindled, in that al the vy¦ces ther named, as the punishmentes of sinne by sinne are moste euidentlye fal∣len vpon vs. And we maye feale the say∣ing of the Prophet Ose to be most true, The spirit of fornicacion hath deceiued you & you haue gon a whoring frō your God. Therfore shal your doughters bee harlots, and your wises be whores. O mercyfull Lorde leade vs not into thys greuous temptacion, that oure sin shoulde be punyshed wyth the encrease of syn, by the geuyng ouer of vs misera∣ble sinners to our owne lustes. For who canne bee able too beate hys synnes, if thou strayght obserue them O Lord? Make vs not lyke Caine, Pharao, and Iudas whiche dyd heape synne vppon sinne. But giue vs heartes lyke the Ni¦niuites too repente for oure synnes. Haue pytye vppon oure yonge Kynge whō yu of thy mercy diddest wonderful∣lye vouchsafe to gyue vnto vs at what time wee waited worthelye for thy sore
scourge, whome thou dyddeste fashyon and preserue in hys mothers wōbe, and bryng forth into thys lyght, wyth lyke maruel of thy almighty power. Whom thou haste defended and kept wyth thy myghtye arme, thys tyme of hys infan∣cye, from domestical and for an enemies. Vnder home in hys weake and moste tē¦der age thou haste caused to shyne forth the cleare lighte of thys Gospell, which hathe bet downe the Idolles and Idola¦trous aulters, through oute hys ealme, whereby amonges the Papists, Turkes and Iewes thou hast made thi Britains to be bruted. How be it al this hast thou so wroughte vnder a yonge chylde, that the glorye myghte come holye vnto the and to no man mortall. For the glorye of thy name there∣fore and for Iesus Christe hys sake whose honoure we doo seeke, and king∣dome wee desyre, haue mercye vppon hym most mercyful father. Make hym faythful as Dauid, zealus lyke Heze∣chiah, repentāt as Iosiah & to hys peo¦ple the professoures & maynetayners of thy truth against all papistes Tuckes & Iewes, against al ye powers of Antichrist
Graunt thy manyfold and great mer∣cyes that they may abhorre theyr owne wickednes, and the wyckednes of their forefathers, and walke nowe lyke the chyldren of thys great lyght, the chyl∣dren of thy kyngdome. Graunte we be∣sech thee, O most mercyful father, vnto al them whych do professe the truth of thy Gospel, vnfayned repentaunce of al theyr syns, fast confydence vpon thy great mercyes, the renuing of theyr ly∣ues according to the truth of thy word, whych they do professe, that they maye exhort one another to walk in thy light saying wyth the Prophete Osee. Come and let vs returne vnto the Lord, for he hath begone and wyll heale vs, he wyll stryke vs and make vs whole. Graunte this O Lord God that thy name be not euyl spoken of amonges thy enemyes So be it. The .vi. Chapter. HEare now what the euer liuing Lord sayth:The Text Arise and contende wyth the mountaynes, & let the hyls heare thy voyce. Heare O ye hyls the
iudgement of the lord, by whom al thynges haue theyr beynge: and you strong foundacions of the earth, geue eare, for the lord hath a quarel wyth hys people, and wyth Israel, he wyl try hym selfe. My people what haue I done to you? or what greuous thynge haue I appoynted the? āswer vnto me. Because I haue brought the forth of the land of Egypte, and from the house of bondage, I haue redemed thee, and I haue sent Moyses, Aarō and Miriam before the. O my people, remēber I prai the what counsel Balake the king of Mo¦ab did begyn, and what Bileam the son of Be or did answer hym from Siftim vnto Gilgal, that thou myghtest know the ryghte∣ousnes of the lorde.
After the sore threatenynges of the Gentyls the prophete returneth to re∣proue Israel, the elect & chosē people of ingratitude and vnthankefulnes, cal∣lyng as it were heauen and earth to wit¦nes, as in the fyrst chapter, and Esay .i. And first he sayth: Geue good eare for you shal heare the euerlyuyng Lord the almyghtye, by whome all thinges were create and do consist, speake playnelye vnto you, content to humble hym selfe so low as to opē hys quarel, to vtter the causes of hys wrath, and to try him self in your owne cōsciences to be faultles. The Prophetes of all ages, they are here cōmaunded to contende and striue wyth the moūtaines and mighty mē of the world, so is it theyr great labour, pe¦ril & danger to cause thē by any meanes to here the word of God. Therfore was it sayd in the last verse of the fyft chap. I wil be aduenged in my wrath, & in my fury vpō the people that hath not herd. So that to harken to the voyce of God is better thē any sacrifice. Therefore is heare so oft bet into the Iewes heades, Here what ye lord saith. Let the hils here heare O ye mountaines, thus ye prophet warneth as it were a Bedle or Cryar of
the common place to kepe sylence, and to geue dylygent harkning to the voice of the almyghty. He warneth the earth and al that therin is, euen the very foun¦dacions therof to gyue good eare. Shal man then be deafe and stop hys eares? The Lord calleth the heauens, and thei obey. The earthe frome nothynge, and strayght it was presente. The ragynge seas and rough floudes, do harken to hys commaundement. Dare man deny to heare hys Lorde, by whom he lyueth and hath hys beyng? shal he be brutysh and wythout vnderstandyng, when all brute beastes are obedyent to the lords commaundmente? Dyd not Balaams Asse both speake and vnderstāded whē the Lorde called and commaunded? O mā, wylt thou not heare him with out whom thou art not? Doest thou not feare to fal agayne into dust and ashes, when thou art at hys voyce so dul & in∣sensible? Or cā thou forget his benefits by whom thou hast thy being? Yea this Lord calleth the thyngs that be not, as though they wer alredy He maketh the dead hodies to harkē to his voice. Howe dare thou O mā, turne away & not geue care, seyng the breath of thy bodye is in his hand? He sleieth and geueth lyfe.
See howe the Lorde doothe humble hym selfe to thyne infirmyty and weak¦nesse. He is contente not onelye too speake vnto thee whyche arte but duste and ashes, full of syn, but to shewe hys quarrell and as it were too pleate hys cause with vs, that he mighte be founde true and all menne liers, and therefore iustified in hys woordes and ouercome when he is iudged. Let al menne there∣fore tremble before his face and crye vn¦to God, to geue them eares that canne hear, & eyes that can se & thē say wt Da∣uid I wil hear what the Lord speaketh. The Lorde calleth into their remem∣braunce, & therewith their benefites of old theyr deliuerāce, How he plaged the Egiptiās & preserued thē, How he made thē passage through the red sea, & drow∣ned theyr ennemies, How he fedde them wyth Manna frome heauen, not suffe∣rynge theyr garmentes too be olde, nor theyr shooes torne for ye space of .xl. yeres in the wildernes: he geueth thē the good meeke and louinge captaine Moyses to guyde them, Aaron to preache his wyll vnto them and to praye for theym. Mi∣riam a Prophetisse, a comforte too the womenne in theyr longe iournye Exo. dye throughe oute.
And when kynge Balacke had coun∣sell to hyre Bilham to accursse the saith the Lord, I dyd turn thy curs into bles¦syng, who beinge thus disapointed dyd take newe Counsell of Bilham too en∣tice the people by flatterye too Idola∣trye and fornication, therby to prouoke my wrathe agaynste thee, wherefore I plaged the vntyll I hadde slaine .xxiiii. thousand. When Pinhas the Priest styr¦red wyth the zeale of my glorye slewe Duke zambrye the captaine of the tribe of Simeon, and Cospye the doughter of Sur, the cheif Prince of the Madianits & throughe ye zelous enterpryse, caused mi wrath to cease. Nu. xxii.xxiii.xxiiii.xxv In Sittam dyd I staye Balacke, and Bilham. I caused Moyses too destroye the Midianites withoute mercy, and did gyue vnto you theyr godes cattayle and substaunce. Numeri .xxxi. In Gilgall I dyd take awaye the reproche of Egipte from you. I caused you to be cyrcumcy∣sed and dyd giue you of the fruits of the promysed lande. Iosue. v. Al thys dyd I for the, that thou myghteste knowe my ryghtuousnesse, that I would keepe my promyse, notwyth standynge thys ma∣nyfolde wyckednesse. The lyke rebuke of their ingratitude maiste thou read E∣say
.i. Eze. xx. Now if we wold hereby in our wycked tyme lerne to behold the in estimable goodnes of God toward vs, and our vnthankefulnes agaynst so lo∣uyng a Lord: We myght fully perceaue and see most euydently the wonderfull mercies of our heauenly father, calling vs to repentaunce whych hath not on∣ly giuen vs bodely benefytes as he dyd vnto Israell, but he hathe delyuered vs from the helly Pharao, from the curses of Antichriste, from the sea of erroures and erronions opinions, and caused vs to eate the heauenly Manna, the fleshe of hys owne sonne, thereby to geue vs lyfe euerlastynge. O the vnspeakeable goodnes of our heauēly father, and wo to our sturdy stomakes stifeled in euyl. The TextWith what acceptable thing shal I present the Lord? Shall I bow my selfe before the highe God? Shal I come before hym wyth brent offerings, wyth cal∣ues of one yeare olde? Hathe the lord his pleasure in M. of rams either hys delyte in .x. M. strea∣mes of oyle? Or shal I geue my
first borne for myne iniquity, euē the fruite of my wombe, for the syn of my soule? I wyl tel the mā what is good and what the Lord requireth of the: euē to do iudge¦ment, to loue mercy, and to walk reuerently before thy God. Because yt here is so iust occasion of∣fered to declare what is ye true worshyp of god, & which is the false and vntrue. I desyre thee gentle reader to suffer me somthyng to declare this dout, because it hath troubled the cōsciences of many in al worlds. And also that it maye be a testimony & wytnes vnto ye worlds ende of our cōsciēce towards God & hys true worship, which haue wryttē or spoken a¦gainst the false worship of the Romysh Antichrist. Wherin fyrst I pray thee to marke & cōsider how the cōsciēce strykē with the feare of gods iudgemētes see∣keth some stay, & euermore would haue succour against his heauy indignacion, but vnles it be quieted & setled bi ye truth of God his holy word, it renueth astray frō god more & more. & at lengthe folo∣weth fond imaginaciōs. As the Hethen before the law geuen, did stay theyr chil¦dren to please God as they ymagened.
Wherfore the Lorde did dryue thē forth of theyr contries, and dydde geue them to Israell in possession and warned thē of heythrush abhominacions. The Iewes after the law of Moises was geuen, not vnderstandyng the end of their Ceremonies, dyd heape vp infy∣nyte sacrifices. Vnto whō God saith dy Esaiah: he yt offereth vnto me an Oxe is lyke hym that stayeth a mā, and he that kylleth a beaste as hee that brayneth a dogge. And hee that Offereth sacryfyce as hee that Offereth swynes fleshe, hee that remembreth incence as he that of∣fereth vnto an Idolle. Theese thynges haue they chosē in their waies & in their abhominacions theyr soule is delyted. Oure Papistes not vnderstanding, or rather not regardinge what our master Christe hadde taughte vs. Mat. xv. that in vayne we do worshyp God teachinge the Doctrynes, the Preceptes of men. Hadde sette vppe a newe holynesse, e∣uen theyr hoole relygyon in outewarde Ceremonies of dayes and times, of can¦delles and Belles, of towchynge and of handling, of blowynge and kyssyng, creapynge, knealynge and knockynge, of gyrdles and garmentes, of geuynge
to theyr Idolles and aulters fyne orna∣ments, of buylding of Chappels, chaun¦tryes and Abbayes, of gaddinge to Wal¦singham, to Canterbury, to Compostel¦la, to Ierusalem, to fetch Iames shels, Walsingham Kynges, Becketes Bro∣ches, and pardon Beades, where vppon muste be sayde I wote not howe manye lady Psalters. And alway ten Aue Ma¦ries to one Pasternoster, or elsse al was marred, and infinite other madde inuen¦cyons of mans idle braine. By the whi∣che maddynge of mannes heade in al a∣ges, whyche I haue but lyghtelye tou∣ched, we maye perceiue that no teste can be founde for mannes soule in our own inuencions. But the farther manne wa∣deth in hys fonde intentes and fantasti¦cal imaginacion, the farther he slydeth from God, vnsure that he hathe done a∣ny thing acceptable in the sight of God. Therfore must we which are seruaunts and creatures, learning our own weak∣nes by ye fal of others, turne to our ma∣ster, lord and creator, to know what his word cōmaundeth in ye agony of cōsciēce & cōsidering that the turnīg frō the crea¦tor to creatures hath bene the groūd of al Idolatry, euery mā chusing to hīself the Idol of his own hart. Some the son
some the Moone, some the .vii. starres, some Saturn, some Iupiter, some Mars some Venus, some Marcurye, And do∣tinge farther, some haue worshypped Calfes, some Cockes, some Serpents, some Dogges, some Asses, some Gotes, And in oure Popyshe wickednesse wee oure selues, haue worshypped stockes & stones, and geuen diuine honours almost to all manner of creatures, a vyle wafer cake did we honour as our God in dede, and when that was lifte vppe betwyxte the Priestes fingers, we saide we dyd se oure maker, and knocked and kneeled, crowched and kyssed withoute all mea∣sure. And the Priest when he did eate it, thoughte he did receiue hys maker, and made so manye fonde gestures ioyened with infinite supersticions that there∣by we may marcke, if we haue nothinge elsse too leade vs that the fayened and false worshyppe of God hathe no ende not staye, can neuer tell where too con∣syste, doothe alwaye disquiet and neuer satysfye nor quiet the conscience. There¦fore for the loue of our own souls, of the quiettinge of oure owne conscyence, let vs vnfainedlye repente of al oure falsed goddes and fayned worshyppe of God,
and knowledg that ther is but one God whyche broughte the children of Israel forthe of Egipte from the house of bon∣dage, and hath deliuered vs the spiritu∣all Israell frome the Egypte of synne end erroures from the bondage of the de¦uyll, Deathe and hel, and broughte vs into the lybertye of hys chyldren, by the deathe of his owne sonne. And by his ho¦lye spyryte poured into our heartes doth teache vs to crye father father. Let vs knowledge (I saye) that thys Lorde our God is but one God, whome we muste loue with all oure hearte, with all our soule, with all oure strength, him must we feare, and hym onlye must we worshippe and in hys name onlye maye we sweare. By the whiche woordes wee maye learne that ther is but one God only, who onlye oughte to be worshyp∣ped, feared, loued, trusted and hooped vpon, which the wordes of swearing in his name importeth. Thys oure God then whose wor∣shyppe wee doo teache is that almygh∣tye power, whyche made heauen and earthe by hys woorde and by the same throughe hys spyryte doothe gouerne
al creatures therin. Sauing Israel, and drowning Pharao. Sauyng hys chosen of free mercy and grace, and condemp∣nynge the wycked hypocrytes by iuste iudgement. Thys our God is a spyrite, as Christ our aldermaster teacheth vs, & they whych worshyp hym, must worship in spirite and truthe. Ihon .iiii. And see∣yng he is a spirit, pure from bodyly cor∣rupcion, and therfore hauyng no neede of our bodely seruice. Hys true worshyp can not consist in bodely exercise whych lasteth but the tyme it is in doinge, but in the inward holines of the hart which euermore encreaseth & spryngeth forth into life euerlasting. Such a worshyppe therfore our Prophet teacheth, whyche ariseth and springeth forth of the secret reuerence and feare of God, hys sacrate magesty, whych is not seruyse, but child lyke, wherby we are not onlye affrayed to dysplease God oure father, but also prompt and redy, lyke obediente chyl∣dren to expresse in our lyuyng, Iudge∣ment and merci, the two special proper∣tyes & greatest shew of hys image which appeareth vnto hys creatures. Prouer. i.Therfore is thys feare called the be∣gynnyng of wysedome, and the spyryte of feare. Esaa .ix. begynneth the worke
whyche the other sprytes of wysdome & vnderstandyng, the spyryte of counsell and strengthe, the spirite of knowledge and true holinesse and accomplisheth & fulfilleth. So that thys spirite of feare dothe go before in al the hartes of them whiche God dothe chuse to worship him in spirite and truth, makinge theym a∣fraied to do homage and worship to any thinge saue their Lorde God onlye, ey∣ther anye otherwise then hee requireth and commandeth. Afraied euermore to do any thing wherin they do not know hys open pleasure. Thys feare was in Cornelius befor he had the perfit know¦ledge of God, and in the menne of Isra¦ell vnto whome Peter did saye. O bre∣thren and children of Abraham and thei amonges you which feareth God, vnto you is the woord of saluacion sent, & in ye Psas. ciii. Euē as the father hath mer¦cye of his children, so hath the Lord mer¦cye of them that feare him, and the merci of the Lorde is for euermore vpon them whyche feare him. The cause is that they whiche do fear the Lorde are alwaies ready with heart and minde to do thinges pleasaunt vn∣to him, and to abstaine from the contra∣ry. His displeasure do they feare like lo∣uynge
chyldrene. If theyr heauenly fa∣ther be pleased they do reioice, if he be of¦fended they doo crye for mercye, so that of hym they do teast in prosperiti, of him they do hange in aduersitie, accordinge to hys owne commaundemente by hys chosen vessell Dauid. Call vppon me in the daye of thy trouble and I shal deli∣uer the, and thou shalte worshippe me. So that this inuocacion after some in∣terpretoures is the true worship of God. And surelye seinge Paule. Romaines .x affirmeth that who soeuer calleth vpon the name of the Lorde, shall be saued. No manne canne denye but an eare∣neste callynge vppon God comprehen∣deth the true worshippe which God re∣quyreth and contayneth in it perfyte re¦ligion, because it hath fayth the ground of all vertues, for howe canne they call vppon God whyche dooe not beleue in hym? Romaynes .x. And they whyche dooe call vppon other creatures hathe affiance truste and faythe in those thin∣ges, elsse woulde they neuer call vppon theym. Thys faythe spryngynge of the fyrste parte whiche was the feare and re∣uerence of God his hygh Maiesty, sup∣plyeth the seconde poynte of the wor∣shippe
of God whych requyreth a know¦ledge of God. For how can we beleue in hym whō we haue not knowē. Rom. x. Hereby doo wee gyue glorye and wor∣shyppe vnto God, that is too say: we knoweledge hym too be true in all hys promyses. And because without faythe it is impossible to please God, this faith maketh vs suer that wee doo worshippe hym as wee shoulde, and certifieth vs that wee bee the chyldrene of God and that oure woorckes are acceptable in hys syghte. Hereby did Abell in hys sa∣cryfyce more truly worshyppe God then dyd hys brother Caine. Abraham also and hys wyfe Sarai by faythe were the true worshyppers of God and receyued the promyse. Elizabeth also gaue more glorye and worshippe vnto God in that she beleued hys promyse, then dyd her husband zachary, who because he doub∣ted was striken dumme whiles the child was borne. Shortelye too conclude, this faith is it that causeth true worshyppe. For whatsoeuer commeth not of faythe the fame is synne. And because faythe com∣meth of the hearyng of the word of God only & of no mans fansy, we may boldly
pronounce that al suche worshyp as is set vp by mannes imaginacion without the scriptures of God is without faith, and therefore synneful, & consequently abhominable in the sight of God, whe∣ther they be sacrifices before the lawe, or in the time of the lawe or Ceremonyes sence the lawe ceassed. The thyrde and last parte of this wor¦ship standeth in vnfayned loue towarde oure neighboure, wythoute the whyche oure Master Christe commaundeth too laye downe all sacrifice, before the alter, and first go & be reconciled. Mat. v. And withoute this hee despiseth all sacrifice saying by his Prophete Ose I wil haue mercie and not sacrifice and the knowe∣ledg of God, rather thē brent offerings. And by the Prophete Esay of them that hathe not this loue, your incense is abho¦minacion vnto me. And when you shall lifte vp your handes, I shal turne away myne eyes, for youre handes are ful of bloude, whyche laste woordes are more plainelye vnderstand by saint Ihon say¦ing: He that hateth his brother is a mur¦therer, who for the vnclennesse of hys handes hathe no parte in the kyngdom of God. And where as other whyche are not spotted with theyr neyghboures
bloude but are clensed by the bloude of the Lambe are the very temples of God wherein he wyll be worshipped, theese bloudy Caintes whych loueth not their brethren, canne be no temple for Christ, wherein hee wyll dwell and reaste, but for the Deuill and Antichriste. For thys calleth God his Sabboth and reast plea¦saunte vnto hym. Esaye .xxviii. To re∣freshe the wearye whych he calleth also the refreshinge of his owne selfe. Thus doo we keepe the acceptable holye day, and doo the worshippe that he desyreth when wee shewe mercye, and comforte the poore and neadye. The whyche wor¦shyppe is so greate, that he wyl aske ac∣comptes of none other thynge at the daye of iudgemente, but if we haue clo∣thed him, when we did see him naked, if we haue fedde him when he was hongry and so foorthe. Math. xxv. For because theese dedes of mercye and loue, doothe presuppose, boothe faythe and feare of God. This loue therefore must we bring to the true worshyppynge of God. And as oure Prophete in fewe woordes doth comprehende all kynde of worshyppe, wee muste doo iudgemente, loue, mer∣cye, and walcke humblye and reuerent∣lye before the Lorde. Too do iudgment
may be well vnderstand, to doo as thou wold be don to. What so euer thou iud∣gest that thou wold haue doone to the, that do thou vnto other. To do mercye, is to forgeue as thou wold be forgeuen, and thys hart and mynd must we bring to worshyp god, & to walke before hym. For of thys doth God make tryal whe∣ther we do loue hym or no. If we do not loue our brother whom we se, how can we loue God whom we se not? Ihō .iiii. Then if we do brynge vnto God, as for hys honor and worshyp sacrifices, offe∣rynges, or what so euer it be wythoute the loue of god, what do we but declare our selues detestable hipocrites, dissem¦blyng to loue hym, whō we do not loue, to honour hym, whom we dishonor, and to worshyp hym, who by vs is blasphe∣med. Therefore may we not thyncke to please God wyth any sacrifyce, or out∣warde shewe of holynes, but wee muste walke humblye and obedyentlyee be∣fore the Lorde, as Samuell answered kynge Saule .i. Kynges .xv. Beholde, to obeye is better then sacrifice, and to harkē is better then the fat of wethers. Enok walked thus wyth God, and therefore was taken vp into hys pre∣sence.
Noah humble and obedient, with fayth, feare and reuerence: walked be∣fore the Lorde, and entred into his ark, when all the proude and dysobedyente world was drowned. Lothe walked o∣bedyentlye, and durste not looke backe when hee was taken frome the Sodo∣mites, wher hys wyfe stobernelye brea∣kyng the commaundement was turned into a salte stone. Abraham and Sarai may bee exam∣ples howe we shoulde walke humblye, and reuerentelye, and also faythfullye and obedyentlye before the Lord, which after promise or commaundement, dyd not regard any thyng, not so muche as theyr owne old barran bodyes but only looked vnto God, geuyng him thys ho∣noure, worshyppe and glorye, that hee was able to fulfil whatsoeuer he hadde spoken and promysed. And whyche oughte to be our glasse, therein too see the woorkes of God towarde vs. Isra∣ell so long as they dyd walke humblye, and obedyentlye before theyr Lorde, and worshypped hym after hys woorde and commaundementes, fearyng hym wyth vnfayned and dissemblyng harts, harkenyng vnto hys word, and practi∣sed theyr lyues therafter. He led theym
wyth hys myghtye arme throughe the red sea, fed theym wyth Manna in the wyldernes, destroied many nacions for them. But when they dyd swarue from hys commaundement, and would wor∣shyp hym after theyr owne inuencyōs, he plaged them greuouslye, sente them drought, dearth, famine, pestilence, and the swerd of the Egiptians, Chaldees, and Romaynes. Espicially when God the father sēt hys owne son to cal them to hys obedi∣ence, and to teach them that theyr slain sacrifice was of no force in it selfe, but onelye dyd sygnifye that by hys bloude and sacrifice of hym, beyng as it wer an vnspotted lambe, theyr iniquity should be forgeuen, and the syn of theyr souls washed away, whych was sygnified by hys baptyme. They walkyng proundly not humbly, despysed humble Christe, boasted them selues to bee the chyldren of Abraham, to be the true Israelytes, to haue the oracles, to haue the law wri¦ten, to be obseruers and keepers of the law, to be the only worshyppers of god, to know hys wyl, to be guydes vnto the blynde and all together: but Christ cal∣leth the most holy amonges them, blind guydes, paynted graues, fayned hypo∣crites,
and false worshippers. And after he was refused and vyllanlouslye hand¦led, God sendeth vpon them worthy de∣struccion, famin, hunger, pestilence, and the swerde of the Romaines which did roote them forth, & laye theyr lande deso¦late and scatter them abrode vnto thys daye. So perilous a thynge it is, not to walcke humblye before him, but to gad otherwayes from hym, for the respecte of anye creature. For he onlye canne do all, careth for all, knoweth all, lyke as he onelye hathe create al vnto hym, ther¦fore withoute declininge too any other muste all honoure and worshyp be geuē. And as he hathe saued all theym whiche haue thus walked before him wyth this faythe, feare, and loue too declare that there is one God, euer constant and vn∣changeable, so doothe he nowe requyre the same worship that he did of them be¦fore vs, whiche did neyther consyste in holye causes, nor brente offerynges, as the carnal heithen and grosse Pharyses fancied and supposed, neither in suche thinges wherewith worldlye menne are pleased, as gold, siluer, precious stones, gaye ornamentes, and ryche gyftes, cap¦pynge, knelinge, curtesies, to be sought farre of at Rome, Compostella, or at Ie¦rusalem.
But to worship hym in ye house of hartes in the chamber of out breastes in the temple of oure soule, wherein he hath chosen hys mansion. Ther to wor¦shyp him not wyth mans imaginacyon and chosen holynes, whyche hee calleth vayne worshippe, and abhorreth it. But in the worshyppe whych he appoynteth and commaundeth, that is as his sonne declareth in spirit and truth. By vnfai∣ned reuerence of god hys sacrate mage∣sty. By faythful truste in his vnfallyble promyses. By loue not counterfayte to¦warde oure neyghboures. Whych three frutful braunches growyng forth of the man newe regenerate by the spyryte of god, must needes brynge foorthe manye spiritual workes as inuocacion, prayer, thankesgeuynge, fastynge and mour∣nynges for synnes, almes, and all the woorkes of mercye and pytye. Who so walketh in these woorkes, hee truelye worshyppeth God, and hereby are the true and false worshyppers knowen in sonder, the true churche and the chuche of Hypocrytes, because these woorkes fayth, feare and loue, was not found in the olde world, therefore was it drow∣ned, because theese three partes of the true woorshyppe was not founde a∣monges
the Iewes, therefore wer they destroyed. Because theese woorkes of true woorshippe were not founde in the popyshe church, therefore is it subuer∣ted, and if they be not shortelye founde in oure refourmed churches, they shall wyth lyke shame be subuerted and de∣stroyed. Lette vs walke humblye ther∣fore before oure Lorde, and beware of of oure fall. He doothe not suffer hys chosen, so longe tyme as he doothe the reprobate. The voyce of the Lord dothe crye vnto the cytye.The Text A wyse man wyll feare thy name. Heare the rodde, and who it is whych hath appointed the certaine tyme vn¦to it. Is ther yet in the house of the wycked tresure and the false measure? O abhominacion. Shall I iustyfye the wycked Ballaunce, and the satchell of deceytefull wayghtes?
Her ryche men are replete wyth rauyne, and her enhabytauntes hath spoken lyes, and had deceit¦full tounges in theyr mouthes. Therfore wyl I make the sicke, stryking the and makyng the de¦solate for thy sinnes, Thou shalt eate and not be satisfyed for mi∣serye shall go thorowe thee, thou shalte go vnto thy wyfe, but shee shal he barren, and that whyche she doth brynge foorthe, shall I geue vnto the swerd. Thou shalt sowe, and not reape, thou shalte tread the Oliues, but thou shalt not anoynt thy selfe wyth Oyle, and treade the grapes, but thou shalte not drynke thy wyne. Be∣cause thou haste kepte the ordy∣nance of Amry, and al ye abomy∣naciō of the house of Achab, and hast walked in theyr counsailes.
Therefore wyl I geue the vnto desolacion, and all thy enhaby∣tauntes to be hyssed and skorned and you shall beare the shame of my people. The voyce of the Lorde. The Lorde cryeth by hys preachers,The Text by hys Prophetes, by hys Apostles, by his Messengers in al ages, and al tymes to call vs to repentaunce. He warneth of hys wyl and pleasure. He telleth which is true worshyp, and which is false. And as he sayth by hys Apostle Paule: Al the daye long haue I stretched foorthe my handes vnto an vnbeleuing people, and a people that striueth against me. Rom. x. And by hys owne son he sayth: Ieru∣salem Ierusalem, how oft wold I haue gathered the together, as the hen gathe¦reth her chyckens vnder her wynges, & thou wouldest not. Math. xxiii. Whych doothe vtter the fatherlye care of oure God, alway callyng and crying vpō vs. But who heareth his callynge? who se∣eth hys power? who feareth hys name? Thusiah doth see it, saith our Prophet, that is to say, wisdom, or the wyse man wyl be warned. For so doth the Hebrew
interpreters expounde it. And so it agre∣eth with ye course of God his workīg, at al times God calleth al. His soūd of his voice goeth through the world, yet scātli¦cā ther be one so wise to repent in ye war¦ning of the .vii. cities. No mo wer found fearfull of God hys sore threatenynges but only Loth in the destruccion of the hoole worlde, Noah was onlye founde wyse and obedyent. In Ierusalem how fewe wer found obedyent when the Pro¦phetes warned them to repente. In oure world God graūt some one wise & faith¦ful mā may be found, whych maye pray for vs, as Abrahā did for the Sodomits, and geue warning of gods wrath hefore it fall vpon oure cities. Heare the rodde, the rod of God his great vengeaunce is readye shaken againste your cities. The time is determined for your punishmēt. Wil you not yet be warned to lay away wickednes & repent of your euil waies? wyl you kepe stil your euil gotten goods and treasures heaped bi extorsion? How can your sinnes then ee pardoned? My lawe commaundeth for thynges wrong¦lye taken to paye foure foulde and fyue fould. Haue you satisfyed my lawe and least your selues so greate treasures? Nay you are so farre frome such equyty
that of restitucion, that you maineteyne styll youre bryberye and extorsyon. You keepe styll in youre houses, youre leane and bare measures, your scant and false Bushelles too prouoke my wrathe and indygnatyon vppon you. Your measure is scante of Corne and your chaffer, but it is full of my wrathe and heauye dys∣pleasure. Shall I iustyfye the wycked bal∣launce? Or as the Hebrew staneth wic∣kednesse in the ballaunce. If I shoulde leaue thys vnpunyshed I shoulde seame to iustyfye and alowe al the wickednesse that you do vse therein. Where contrary¦wise, I haue commaunded the too haue iuste ballaunce and euen wayghtes and true measures. Leui. xix. and in Deutero¦nomye .xxv. Thou arte commaunded not too haue dyuers wayghtes a grea∣ter and a smaller, neyther to haue in thy house a bygge bushell and a small, but that thou shalte haue a iuste and true wayghte, an euen and true bushell that thou maye lyue a longe tyme in the land which the lord thi God geueth the. Ther furthermore art thou taught, that I thy Lorde God doo abhorre hym that dothe these thinges, and that I detest al vniust
dealing as a thing abhominable, and so doothe my seruaunte Salomon teache the. Prouerbe .xx that double waightes and dysceitefull ballaunce abhomina∣ble before thy Lord God. Howe dareste thou then kepe in thy house eyther any false measure or thereby anye euyl got∣ten treasure? Doste thou nothynge re∣garde me whyche haue thy lyfe & breath in my hande? Arte thou nothynge moued by my ma¦nyfolde benefytes? nothynge afraied of my threatninges, repente, O repent and herken to my Prophetes or elsse my rod is readye to scourge thy wickednesse. The tyme is determined by me the all∣myghtye measurer of times, onlesse you do repente, O you wicked Marchaunts of London and and all other cities. But O wicked worlde I do knowe your de∣uises. You do hide vp your ware vntil it waxe scāt. You do lessō your measures. You encrease your prices, too make the pore your slaues, yet wil ye be gospellers Can you worship me and youre wycked Mammon boothe together? Canne you serue two Masters? Nay, you are to me defraudinge and oppressinge the poore as they that slaye the childrene in the fa¦thers syghte. Thus do you worshyp me.
O you couetous Marchaunts, building your houses in the bloude of youre bre∣threne. There is no faythe, no feare, nor loue amonges you but youre ryches are repleat wythrauine. The houses of your Lordes, of youre iudges, of chancellers of youre treasurers, of youre receyuers, shortlye of all oure ryches and wealthy are full of the spoyle of the euyll gotten goodes and eyther open or pryuy thefte & robbery. Can I then holde my peace & as it wer iustify your doings? Especiall seinge, lyinge, dissemblinge and disceat is so common that frome the heade too the foote neuer one is fautelesse there is not one ryghteous, no not one that I myghte haue mercye. There is no truth no mercye, no knowledge of God in the earthe, curssinge, lyinge, murther, thefte and adulterye hath ouer runne all toge∣ther. The faythfull are wasted foorth of the earthe. Euery manne telleth hys bro¦ther a lye, wyth desceytefull lyppes and doble hartes. I wil destroy a their lying lips and these tunges that can tell these goodly tales & do thincke yt they at able to ouercome al with theyr tunges. But for thys oppressyon of the pore and for their mourninge I wil nowe aryse. And I wyl make the sycke strykinge
the with famin, sterilite, barrennes, bat¦tayl, aptiuitie and bondage. Thou shalt eate and not be satisfied, whiche is the soorest famyn, the woman shall receiue the seed, and brynge forth no fruite, the fowlest sterilitie, and if she do brynge forth, the swerd shal deuoure thē. Thou shalt be in such bondage, that thou shalt toyl & trauail for other, & haue no parte thy selfe, such affliccion, such mysery, such calamitye shal be in ye myds of the, that thou shalt be wasted for thy syns. Because thou hast kept ye ordy¦naūces of Amri and the abhomi¦natyons of Achab. &c.The Text Loo how peryllous a thyng, and how great a plage it is to haue wicked kings and princes to raign ouer vs. For theyr authoritie doth not harme only whyles they lyue, and haue theyr flatterers fo∣lowyng and counterfaytyng their wyc¦kednes, but in the ages longe after thē and the posteritie folowyng their lawes are alleged, their rites and customes re∣newed. So was idolatry alwaies conty¦nued in the .x. trybes frō their first king Ieroboā to kyng Amry, who built Sa∣maria & to his sonne wicked Acab, who not only alledged the wickednes of his forefathers vnto the people, but addeth
moreouer shamful extorcion & shedding of innocent blud, sleing Naboth for his vineyard, killing the prophets of ye lord. The other princes & people folowynge their wicked abhominaciōs & naughty counsailes,iii. Re. xvi. are here threatned to be wa∣sted & destroied. The people to be hyssed and skorned, & the princes worthely to beare the shame of the people of God, by thē seduced. zedechiah the last kyng ouer Iuda may be a terrible example vn¦to al kings, had fyrst his sons slayne in hys owne sight, then had hys eyes wor∣thely put forth by the Babiloniās, and so kept in lyue by dayly delusion of the Chaldes to beare the shame of ye people of god. Yea they ar without nūber whō the Lord hath more greuosly by his iu∣stice thus plaged. As Nebuchadnezer turned into a brute beast. As Adombeze¦che the king of the Cananees, & the .lxx other princes who had theyr fyngars & toes cut of, & so reserued to their shame to gather crōmes vnder the tables lyke dogs, besides the .xxx.i. Iudges. Iosue. xii. kings whō Iosue hanged and destroied, and innumerable other both in scriptures & prophane hy∣storyes rehearsed. Nowe therefore O Kynges and Princes vnderstande and suffer your selues to be taught and ad∣monyshed, you that iudge the earth.
Serue the Lorde in feare in the gouer∣naunce of hys people, and reioyse wyth tremblyng in the gifts god geueth you, for he wyl haue an accomptes how you do gouern hys people, and how you doo order hys creatures Embrace his poore Christ louyngly in hys members, lest he be angry, and you do peryshe foorthe of the waye. For when hys anger is a lytle kindled, then happy are they that trust in hym. Thē happy are they as the king & Prophet Dauid doth teach you which hath not walked in the counsaile of the wycked, whyche hath not stande in the way of the synner, whych hath not syt∣ten in the seate of the scornful. But in the law of thee Lord hath had hys de∣lyte, and in hys law doth meditate day & nyght. For be shalbe lyke a tree planted by the riuersyde, whych shal bring forth hys fruite in dewe tyme. Hys leafe shal not fall, and hys woorke shall prosper. Wher the wycked far contrary shall be lyke chaffe dryuen wyth the wynde. Therfore the wycked shal not stande in iudgement nor the synners in the com∣pany of the iust. For the Lord knoweth the way of the ryghtuous, and the waye of the wycked shal perysh. The Lorde is no acceptour of persons. But who so
doth euyll be it kyng, be it Emperoure, he shal peryshe as is heare spoken. The .vii. Chapter. WO is me,The Text for I am lyke the gleaners of Som∣mer fruites, and as the braunches after the wyne har∣uest. There is not a Cluster of grapes to eate, my soule desireth type fruite. Thus doth our Prophet bewayle the mesery of hys people, he compareth the good amonges them hym selfe, and the other to the gleaners and gatherers af∣ter haruest is ended, and al cleane gathe¦red into thy barnes. And the best amōgs men to the wyne braunches wythered, dryed, and hauing nothyng vpon them, wherupon the desyrous soule myght be sasiate, Therfore he mourneth and wai¦leth for the mysery whych of necessytie must folow so far spred iniquiti. And he sheweth in the verse folowynge, what fruit it is that he seketh. What grapes they are hys soule desyreth (Biccurah the first ripe frutes) meanynge the fore fathers fist borne & the former age Abra¦ham. Isaac, Iacob, Dauid. These doth
Ieremy cal Israel, whiles they walked in holynes the fyrst fruits vnto the lord. And heare our Prophet dothe complain that al thys good rype fruit is gathered and gone, and nothyng lefte vngathe∣red, but brambles and thornes whyche are fit for nothing but the fyre euen for the fyre of Gods wrath, whych shal shor¦tely be kyndled, and no creature shalbe able to quenche it, or to abyde the heate thereof: For thys oure Prophet way∣leth and cryeth wo. The TextThe good perisheth foorthe of the earth, neyther is any rygh¦tuous vpon earth. Al dooe lye in wayghte for bloud. Euery man hunteth hys brother as wyth a net. They labour to make good the euyll of theyr handes. The prince asketh, and the iudge for reward, and the greate mā spea∣keth the destruccion of his owne soule, and they draw wyckednes as wyth a threfolde cable. The best amongs thē is lyke a bryar & the ryghteous lyke a thorne of
the hedge. The day of thy ouer∣sears, the day of thy vysitaciō is come, nowe shall they bee full of perplexitye. Here may we se how the spirit of god is in hys holy saints & prophets is vexed & trobled for our wickednes.i. King .x. Elias thus wayleth: I haue lyued long inoughe, O Lord, take away my soule, I am no bet¦ter then my fathers. And the Lorde cal∣leth vpon hym, & he answereth againe. I haue bene zelous & feruēt for the lord of hosts, because the children of Israel haue forsakē thy couenaūt. They haue destroied thine altars, slaine thy prophe¦tes with the swerd, & I am left alone & they seke my soul to take it away.Esay. lvii Esay saith: the iust perisheth, & no man regar¦deth it, in his hart. The good & merciful are gathered to their graues,Psal. xii. Psal. liii. & no man vnderstandeth. Dauid crieth also: Saue vs O Lord, for the holy ones do fayle & waste, ye faithful ar cōsumed frō amōgs the childrē of mē. Againe, the lord loked down frō the heauēs, vpon the children of Adā, to se if ther wer any ye dyd vnder stād, or that did seke the Lord. Al ar gon bak together, thei ar abhominable, ther is not one that dooth good, no not one.
Do you knowe nothinge O you worc∣kers of wyckednesse whyche dooe eate vppe my people as men doo eate breade and calleth not vpon God? In al theese thynges that oure Prophete and other holye wryters dothe charge you, O Prin¦ces iudges and Magistrates, examyne your owne conscience, and iudge youre selues, that you be not iudged and con∣demned wyth the wycked. You are here likened to Caine whiche did lye in wayt for his brothers bloude. You are likened to Nimroth huntinge your brethrene to catche them in youre nettes. If you wer not such, we shoulde not heare of suche sodayne tal and ruyne of noble houses. But what soeuer you doo that muste bee well done saythe oure Prophet, so stout¦lye wyll you defende your own doinges too make euyll good, and good euyll as Esaye saythe and to cloke your wycked worckes, if you do feare anye daunger. The Prince that beareth cheyfe rule and maye do the mooste too hyde youre myscheyfe he muste be won wyth gifts, and if he be suche one as will receiue thē he shall haue whatsoeuer hee wyll aske, the iudge must haue part of that whiche is geuen & the greate ryche man by this meanes bryngeth forwarde hys purpose
to the destruccyon of hys owne soule. Whiles this thre folde cable is thus lin∣ked. Therefore dothe Esaye threatning woo and destruccyon to them that thus drawe inquitie with cables of vaniti and wickednes with carte roopes. Whyche counteth euyll good, and good euyll, whyche do iustifye the wycked for gyf∣tes And saythe farther. Lyke as the flame of the fyre dothe deuoure the stu∣ble:Esaye .v. so shal the roote of suche be like the coles, and theyr budde be like the duste. This similitudes of briers and thorns are broughte in for this purpose to vtter the stinginge and prickinge of wicked∣nes. As bryers and thrones do prycke al that handleth thē whiles thei do growe, and when they are hewen vppe they are good for nothinge but to kindle a spea∣dye fyre. So saythe oure Prophete that the best and mooste rightuous amonges them are noisome and harmful vnto mē and fit fire brandes for the furi of God. This shalbe knowen most plainelye on lesse we do repent when the daies of our visitacion commeth (which is at hande) when affliccion sorowe and carefulnesse and pietie and doutfulnes shal come vp∣on al fleshe, as foloweth. Geue no credence to thy frendThe Text
truste not thy brother keepe the doore of thy mouth from hyr that lieth in thy bosome. For the sonne slaundereth the father, the dough¦ter riseth vppe agaynste the mo∣ther, and the daughter in lawe a¦gainste the mother in law. Beholde the sorowe ampietie and doubtfulnesse whiche foloweth by iuste plage the worldlye Tirauntes and euyl dooers. They dooe stynge ano prycke euerye manne that medleth wyth them like thornes, they muste of no necessy∣tye therefore feare, dystrust, and be vn∣doutefull of euerye creature as Diony∣sius the Tiraunte and suche lyke where of some not trustinge theyr owne wifes were compelled to searche theyr pryuye chambers nightelye, and theyre wyfes coffers, & credite therein barbarous and cruell sougioures. Other durst not trust theyr owne doughters, but fearynge all other creatures refused the healpe of theyre Chamberlaynes and other ser∣uauntes. Durste credyte no barboures to shaue theyr beardes, but vsed the help of theyr Doughters whyles they were
yonge to shaue theyr beardes, but when theyr doughters did growe to more age and yeres wherein they were able to dys¦cerne theyr fathers doinges, the fear of theyr owne conscience like Canites for the crueltye they hadde shewed to other, wold not suffer thē to commit thē selues to theyr own flesh and blud, to their bow¦els which did come forthe of theyr owne bodies. But saide within them selues as did cruel Cain. Eueri one that can finde the oportunitie wil slay me, and so wyth their owne handes they were compelled to swing of the hear of theyr own beards with brenninge coles. This is the greate and greuous plage that the almyghtye threatneth to laye vpon the wicked. To make hym lyke a boylynge sea whyche canne haue no rest, whose floudes dooth rage to their owne ruin, ther is no peace nor reste too the wycked saithe the Lord God.Esay. lvii. This did appeare in Cain after he hadde killed his brother as it was sayde before thinkinge by iust iudgmente ther¦fore that euerye manne shoulde slaye him that shoulde mete him. And because in oure peryllous tymes there is so ma∣ny Canites, it is no meruel though eueri man be afraied of his brother, no mā tru¦steth another, the noble feareth ye cōmōs
the commones trusteth not the nobility. These are the last dayes wherein iniqui∣tie dothe abounde, loue is loste, charitye quenshed, faythe and truste are dryuen forthe of mannes company. If there be anye tokens of loue shewed, it is for some wicked purpose, either for the clo∣kinge of some vice or the withdrawing-from vertue and godlinesse, suche there∣fore we muste alwaye suspect. And if thy brother the sonne of thy mother as Moi¦ses saithe, or thy sonne, or thy doughter, or thy wife that is in thy bosome, or thy friende whom thou loueste as thine own life be about to perswade the to the wor∣ship of straunge goddes or anye such ob¦hominacion, thou mayest not onlye not geue credence vnto them but to help to punish them Deu. xiii. If the Emperour should sende his Interim into England or the Pope his decretals that all ye fayr promises that the wicked can imagine, defye them bothe and deteste theyr flat∣terye. If anye Frenshe or Scottishe La¦dye shoulde flatter for lyke purpose, she oughte moost horrible to be detested and abhorred remembring that Salomon by the flattering of his wifes, was brought to Idolatrye. Sampson to his owne de∣struccion. And infinite other that haue
fallē som into one vice, some in an other and ar length to shamefull endes by the flatterye of fayned friendes. Beware of flatterers therefore O kinges and prin¦ces, for be sure when so euer you shal de∣lite in them you shal not long continue withoute shame. The moste present poy¦son to a Prynce is flatterye. Beware I aye therefore. For Iudas when he flat¦tereth mooste fayre, is moost readye too be traye his master. Ioab when hee kis∣seth Amasa and and Abner and sheweth mooste frendshippe is ready to kil them. Abimelech when he flattereth hys .lxx brethrene is all readye throughe ambi∣cion appoyncted too destroye them. Da∣dila when shee flattereth Sampson too knowe his strength hath the Philistines priuilye hid in her house. Absalom dothe call to his feaste by flattery and ther slai his brother Ammon, and withdraweth the heartes of the people by flattery frō hys father Dauid, and at lengthe dry∣ueth him forth of his kingdom. Wherin appeareth the smal trust to be had to the wicked worldlings and crafti flatterers, though they offer great frēdship, though thei be our brethrē, though thei ly in our owne bosōs. And hear mai we set before our eies who ar to be trusted in this wic∣ked
worlde so full of disceit and who are not. They onlye which do seke godlines and vertue and setteth much bi the truth of the woorde of God. for thys truthe is mightier then women, then wine, then the kinge, it ouercommeth all. It con∣quereth falshed, it condempneth flatte∣ry, it driueth away blindnes, it causeth the blinde to se, the yong scoler to be wy¦ser then the great Doctor, it trieth al, it espieth all, it iudgeth, it condemneth al. To the author and geuer of this truth be al glorye for euer. Let vs no longer trust to manne ther¦fore or make fleshe our arme in thys our wicked time wherin al are geuen to fals¦hode, to flatterye, to deceit, to couetous, to ambicion, to lyinge, slaunderynge, to al euils and wickednesse. But contrarye¦wise say with our Prophet euery one of vs bothe kinge and subiecte. The TextI will loke vnto the Lorde. I wil trust vnto God my sauior, & my God wil heare me. Whether it be in the day of my visita∣cion whē aduersitie shal come vpō me, or in ye day of prosperitie whē these flatte∣rers shal folow me. I wil regard nothing but the Lord I wil truste to none but to God my sauiour. The Lorde God is the
measurer of mi trouble he can & wil hear my cry & deliuer me from al peril. Ther∣fore wil I cal vnto the Lord with the ho¦ly king Dauid. Psa. iii.Psalm. iii. O God how are mine ennemies multiplied howe manye doth rise vp against me. Many doth say vnto mi soul: his God shal not saue him, but thou O God act the sheilde ouer me. My glory and the lifting vp of my head. I wil cry vnto the Lord wyth my voyce and he wil hear from his holy hil. O thou mine enemy reioise not a¦gainst me that I am fallē,The Text I am risen vp againe, And thoughe I shuld sit in darknes, the Lord is my lght. I wyl beare the disple∣sure of the Lord, because I haue sinned against him whiles yt hea¦ueng my cause & do iudgmēt for me. For he wil brīg me into light & I shal se his rightousnes. Thē mine enemi shal behold & be asha¦med which saith vnto me: wher is ye lord thy god? mine eies shall be∣hold her and now shall she be tro¦den vnder the foote like the mire of the stretes.
Three thnges are here to be obserued in thys humble confession of the sinner whether thou do vnderstād it in the per¦sō of a perticuler synner, or in the parsō of the multitude of Israel led into cap∣tiuity. Fyrst a consideracion and know ledgynge of the synnes committed a∣gaynst God: and therefore pacience to beare and to suffer what so euer the lord shal lay vpō theyr backs. Secōdly wher such as are chastened of the Lord are al¦wayes of the wycked world despised, re¦uiled and skorned vniustli, and without cause whych doth augment theyr heaui¦nes. Here is the aduenging therof, and the iudgement of theyr innocencye to∣wardes theyr enemies whych do perse∣cute them, committed vnto God. Third¦lye here is ful and perfit fayhte of God hys fauour in the middes of the afflycci¦ons and hope of a comfortable ende of them to the glory of god to the confusi∣on shame and destruccion of al hys ene¦myes to be learned. For the fyrst Dauid cryeth: O Lorde enter not thou into iudgemēte with thy seruaunt, for in thy syghte no lyuynge creature shalbe iustified. For the second part he dare be bold to say, iudge me ac∣cordynge to my ryghtuousnes, and the
xxxv. Psa. thorowe out for this purpose. For the third he saith. Though I do syt in darcknes and in the shadow of death yet arte thou with me. So fyrmelye per∣swaded of God hys fauoure in the mid∣des of the trouble are the elect of God, that they saye alwaye with Paule, who shall separate vs from the fauoure of God? shal affliccyon? shal anguishe? shal persecucion, shall hunger? shall naked∣nesse? shall peryl? daunger or swearde? Naye thou haste thus appointed, ordey¦ned, and therefore warned vs longe be∣fore. That we shoulde bee slayne euerye daye for thy sake and counted like shepe readye to the slaughter, but in al this we do ouercome, by him whiche hathe loued vs. And as Paul saith in another place, we do glorye in oure afflyccion, knowe∣inge that affliccion bringinge pacience, pacience bringeth trial and hoope in the ende whiche is neuer shamed. This lesson of comforte maye eue∣rye pryuate personne fealinge him selfe smitten for hys synne, learn of our Pro¦phet. But farther nowe hee speaketh in the person of the Iewes, and of the hole church chosen of God, and the like thin¦ges for them maye bee marked besydes the fall of the Chaldees, of Antechrist & of
al Tirauntes persecutoures of the elect people whiche shall by the conqueste of Christe theyr heade make all theyr ene∣mies as theyr foote stole, to treade vpon theym lyke the myre of the streate as is here prophecied. Therfore must we bear pacientli a litle while, and we shal satis∣fye our eyes with the sight of theyr fall by the iuste iudgmente of God and ven∣ginge oure cause like as they haue with oute cause vniustly triumphed ouer vs, hated, oppressed and murthered vs, de∣seruing no such cruelty at theyr hands, for too the Lorde longeth vengaunce. And he wyll perfourme it. Reade the .v. Chapter of wisdome to the end. For the declaration of all thys. To note also the Phrases of lyghte and darckenesse, lighte signifieth know¦ledge and comfort. Esaye .ii.ix.xlii.xlix.lx.lxi. Mathew .iiii. Luke .ii. Darkenes the contrary, persecution, blyndenesse, sorowe. Esaye .xiii. Lamentacions .v. Micha. iii. Psam .lxix. To se also and to beholde the ennemye is to reioyse at the fall of hym whiche the iuste dooe for the righteous iudgemente whyche God sen¦deth vpō the enemye. Psa. liiii, the wyc∣ked to satysfy theyr malicious myndes.Psa. xxxv. The Text In the daye when the hedges shall be buylte, that day shal put
awaye thy bondage, That daye shall come frome Assur and the walled cytyes and frome the for¦tresses vnto the floud, frō the sea vnto the sea and to the moun∣taine Hor, The contrye of Iury was spoyled, wasted, and destroied, as ye haue hearde by the Chaldees and by the Romaines, but like as in the .iiii. Chapter, so is hear promised a wonderful deliueraunce of ye Iewes, & a myserable plage to come vpō their enemies. Ther is a day appointed yt thy waste places shall be built. Amos. ix. Ezechiel .xxxvii. A daye when al tiranny cal exaction and tribute shalbe taken a∣waye. Ezechiell .xxxviii. That daye shall thy people which wer caried captiue vn∣too Babilon bee broughte frome theyre strōg fēced cities, fortes, castels & holds, wherin they wer kept prysonners home again to enhabit frō the strong cities to ye flud Iordā & frō ye red sea to ye great sea and so to the hil Carmel and the moun∣tayne called Hor. Esay sayth of thys ga¦thering together Israel frō ye cast I wil bring thy seede & frō the West I wyl ga¦ther the. I wyll saye to the North, geue
and to the Southe hinder not, bryng my sonnes frome farre and my Doughters from the ende of the earthe. And the lande shall bee de∣solate for the enhabytauntes,The Text be∣cause of the fruyte of theyre ima∣gynacyons. Thoughe thys sentence be hear spo¦ken cheiflye of the ennemyes land, yet is it generallye true in all landes and cō¦tryes. The Canances were waysted and destroied therefore. The Iewes thē selfe had theyr lande flowinge wyth mylcke and honye, so longe before promysed to theyre fathers, made so desolate for the fruyte of theyr owne imaginacions that no manne wente thorowe it. The Chal∣dees wer miserably wasted and brought to desolacyon by the Macedonians for the fruite of their labours? What shall I name the desolations of Sodom, Go¦mor and the other cytie, sor the destruc∣cion of the hoole worlde in the time of Noah. Do we not reade. Genesis .vi. That God did se that the malice of man was greate vppon earthe and all the i∣maginacion of his heart was only euil? and therefore he saythe he wyll destroye
from the face of the earthe bothe manne and beaste, and Birde of the ayre. Shall we then walcke styll in the fruyte of our imaginacions? One sorte in fleshlye plea¦sures, deliting in wicked womenne, and madde mariages made for worldlye pur¦poses, imagininge howe to be gyle bothe God and manne, as it wer. Another sort too make theim selfe myghtye menne of greate fame, ryches and renoume, ima∣geninge howe to begile oure yong king and to pyll and poll his poore commons The thyrde and worste sorte are the vnsauerye salte whereof Christe oure master telleth, whiche shoulde season o∣ther, but because they haue loste theyr sa¦uoure and saltenesse, they are fytte for nothinge but the donge hil, and causeth other to stincke by theyr shamelesse lyfe before the face of God, not darringe to rebuke thē, or elsse not regarding them, whiles they doo seeke benefices and Bi¦shopryckes, bi flattering of their Lordes and masters and blineding the pore com¦monnes theyr brethrene. The .iiii. sorte are of these scattered sheepe of theese despysed commonners whyche runneth heare and there they wotte not where for releife and succour
styll wanderynge after theyr owne ima∣ginacion, and not hearkeninge too the worde of God whiche byndeth them to obedience. Lo such are the fruits of our imaginacions in England this dai. The gouernoures despise theyr God, the sub¦iects, their gouernoures, the people, the preistes, the priests neglect their charge ouer the stocke. So now it is come so far that the boy moste commonly dare pre∣sume vpon hys better withoute order a∣gainste honesty and al good disciplyne, O good Lorde shall not oure lande be de¦solate for such wild figge trees, barrē of al good fruts numbe, lame, and voyde of al vertuous studyes & honest exercises. The TextFede thy people with thy staf the flocke of thyne herytage whi¦che abydeth alone in the woodde in the myddes of Harmell lette them be fedde in Basan and Gi∣lead as in the olde time. The Prophete seinge in spyryte the gloryous restorynge and delyueraunce of Israel, praieth for them that the lord woulde voutchsafe to fede theym in the steade of theese euyll pastoures whyche fedeth them selues knowinge mooste as¦suredlye that if the Lord wil be theyr pa¦stor,
shepperde and feader, they shal lack nothinge as Dauid dothe acknowledge Psalme .xxiii. confessing also with king Dauid that his rod and his staffe doothe comforte hys stocke, therefore doothe he saie, feade thy people wyth thy rod. And Dauid dothe saye: thy rod and thy staffe they haue comeforted me. The flocke of his chosen heritage he nameth to abyde alone in the mounetaynes, because they shuld come ouer Carmel and other moū∣taines, like scattered shepe, one abiding and waytynge for another in that glori¦ous restoringe, whiche in spyryte he dyd foresee which shuld be like the gloryous cōquest in Basā & Gilead, whē they fyrst entered ye promysed lande, and Manas∣se hadde these twayne in possessyon Io¦sua .xvii. And our prophet bryngeth in ye answer of the Lorde, fully perswaded that his peticion was already graūted. Euen lyke as in the daye of thy delyueraunce foorthe of E∣gipte I wyl shewe vnto hym my wonders,The Text. The heathen shal be a shamed of their strēgth, they shal lay their hād vpon theyr mouthe and their eares shall bee deafe.
They shal lyk dust lyke the ser∣pent, and lyke the wormes of the earth. They shal come quaking foorth of theyr holes. They shal tremble before oure Lorde god. The shal they feare. In such vehement Prophecies wher ye prophetes do seme rauished the chāge of parsons, is oft vsed, and therefore I haue hitherto passed it as a thing whi∣che may easely be marked by him which wyth any diligence doth read them. In the first verse Israel is spokē vnto both in the first and second persō, and in the last the prophet doth so speake of God, rauished by the seruent spirite. And here is a plaine promise of the restorynge a∣gayne of Israel, wyth sygnes and won¦ders to the shame, confusion and condē¦nacion of the wycked Heythen, as is more at large set forth. Ezechyel .xxxvi. xxxvii.xxxviii.xxxix. Ieremye .xxx.xxxi. Esaye .lxiii. The day of the delyueraunce foorthe of Egypte, was most wonderfull wyth the plages sent vpon Pharao, and the drownyng of him in the red sea with all
hys army, the standynge of the waters lyke walles, the destruction of the cities wythout handes, and other great wor∣kes, wherof the booke of Exodus and Iosue are ful. The dayes of the spiritual deliueraūce from the helly Pharao, as they are won¦derfully begone in our Sauiour Christe the true Messiah, so shal they be by him then most wonderfully fynyshed and en¦ded, when al the power of the aduersary shal be destroyied in ye end of the world, when the helly Pharao shalbe cast into the lake of fyre and brimstone. Ihon .xix To laye the hand vpon the mouth is a common phrase too keepe sylence for shame. Iob. xxxviii. That the Serpente lycke the duste and eateth the earthe, is the cursse of God. Genesis in, and here it is geuen to the serpentes generacion to fal downe for feare and creepe into holes lyke wormes, Wherin appeareth the almyghtye power of God and the weake arme of the wycked. Therefore doth oure prophet ende wyth these ex∣clamacions. They shall tremble before oure Lorde God. Thee shall they feare O Lorde. Agayne. What God is lyke vnto theeThe Text
whyche doest pardon iniquitie and passe ouer synne for the rem¦naunt of thyne enherytaunce he hath not setled hys wrathe for e∣uer, but he hath pleasure in mer¦cy. He wyl returne and haue mer¦cye vpon vs. He wil tread doun our wickednes vnder hys feete, and cast al our syns into the bot¦tom of the seas, Thou wylt per∣forme thy promes to Iacob, and thy mercye to Abraham, whyche thou hast sworne to oure fathers from the dayes of olde. After our prophet hath receaued this comfortable answer from God, he ren∣dreth thankes wyth an admiracion and comparyson of the euer lyuinge God, which hath wrought these wonders the false Gods, whych can dooe nothynge. Wherin also he setteth forth the sinful weakenes of man whyche can attayne nothinge but by pardon and mercy, ac∣cording to the Psalme .xxxi. Blessed are they whose wyckednes are forgeuē and whose
syns are couered. Agayne happy is that man whom the Lord hath not charged wyth syn. Dauid also after the consy∣deracion of the greate maiestye of God maketh lyke comparyson, and asketh what god ther is besydes the lord. Psa. xvii. And Moyses describeth the Lorde by these properties. Exo. xxxiiii. saying: O Lord, Lorde, mercyfull and gracious God, pacient and aboundaunt in pytye and truth. Shewyng mercy vnto thou∣sands takyng awaye iniquitye wycked¦nes and synne. &c. So that God whyche in hys sub∣staunce is vnsearcheable by mercy, py∣tye and truthe, sheweth hym selfe vnto men. Wherin also is comprehended the promes of Messiah made vnto the fa∣thers, by whome thys mercye and lo∣uynge kyndnes shoulde be shewed, and wyth thys he endeth, as doth the moost part of the prophetes, to teache vs al∣wayes to haue confydence in God, thoughe the promyse dooe seeme longe dyfferred, For he is the god that is true, he is faytheful, he performeth wyth the largeste that he dothe promsie, he is also mercifull, he is pytyfull, full of louynge kindenesse, whych we do feale in that he
did geue his own sonne to be made man of the seede of Abraham for our sakes, howe canne hee but giue vs all thynges with hym? To him therefore let vs geue all glorye. Let vs serue hym wyth feare and tremblinge, walckynge before oure God as our Prophet warneth, reuerent¦lye, doinge iudgemente and louinge mer¦cye all the dayes of oure lyfe, so shall the woes and cursses threatned vnto the wic¦ked be turned awaye from vs, and the blessinges promysed too the o∣bedyente chyldrene be mooste aboundauntlie poured vp∣on vs. Graunte that wee maye this do to ye honor of thy name for thy sonne our Lord Iesu Christe his sake. So be it. ¶ Prayse the Lord.
A prayer for the kynge. O Lorde euerlyuynge God Lorde of Lordes, kinge of kinges. Leade oure yonge kynge in thy faythe feare and loue. Teache his heart thy secrete wisdome. Strengthen hym therewith timelye before his people pe∣rish, for the wicked dothe preuayle, they do wallowe in theyr wickednes. Dooe this for thy truthes sake, whiche he doth professe, Let not hys ennemies haue the ouer hande, least they blaspheming thy truthe do saye where is hys God? what relygyon hathe he professed? So be it. O kinge by truthe thou standeste de∣fende thy truthe. By righteouse iudge∣mente thy throne shall be established, by wickednes subuerted. Therfor hast thou the swearde by God oppointed to sette vppe the one, too strike downe the other Thus do, thou shal lyue & se good daies. O you that be subiectes vnder thys kinge of tender age be thanckefull too God for all hys wonders wroughte in hys tyme, knoweledge yt it is God that hathe sente him vnto vs, and hathe sette forthe his truthe in his weake infancy, and mightelye defended hym frome all treasonnes and traytoures rebellyons.
Repent of al former euyls, and praye wythout ceassynge that the Lorde god may vouchsafe to guyde, gouern and preserue him lōg to raigne ouer vs with ye loue of Iustice Iudgement and true holynesse. So be it.
