12067 99839099 3495
THE First booke of the famous Historye of PENARDO and LAISSA other ways callid the watres, of LOVE and AMBI∣TIONE. WHerein is described Penardo his most admira∣ble deeds of arms, his ambition of glore his contempt of loue, with loves mighte assalts & ammorus tempta∣tions: Laissas feareful inchantment hir releif hir tra∣uells and lastly loves admirabel force, In hir releiving Penardo from ye fire, Doone in Heroik verse, by Patrik Gordon. Printed at Dort By George Waters. 1615.
To the most Honorable, and most Accomoplisht Earle GEORGE Earle of ENYIE lorde Gordon, and Badyenoth &c. sone & heire apparent to the most Illustrius Lorde George Marquies of Huntlie. RIght Honorable, finding my selfe inclosed in the labourinth of your al-conquering merits, and dispair¦ing of al reliefe, necessitie encura∣ged me to goe forward, till the in∣finite riches of your worth should choak the pouerty of my neere famisht Wit with abondance, while thus I thirsted for a fatall pe∣riod to my longing desires, I found your Lo. in∣comparable virtues, so seated on the throne of al perfectiō, as your insatiable auarice was onely on the Heauen-infused gifts of the minde. Wheir∣of since I could produce nothing for the release of my boundage but this barren Inuention, soe many be the rare & excellent Wits which exceed in that kinde, as though I was assured that your wonted courtesie wold pardon my rudenes, and accept of my pouerty: Yet wold not theis onely
deime it too meane a present, for soe worthie a personage: But also such multitudes of men seim¦ing Babouns swarmeth euerye wheire now a daies being ignorant of any thing, and yet will needes be Wittie in jesting at eurie mans actions, so that the vprote of my confused thoughts cold not be appeased, but either by obtianing aide of the first or silence, of the last, and as the silence is impossi∣ble, soe is the aide dishonorable; Wherfore I re∣solued, being imboldened by affection to offere this small streame of my Witt, to the boundlesse Ocean of your virtues, vnder the shield of whose most honorable patronage, this my firste borne shall aduenture to the view of the worlde armed with silence against the sensors of the Wise, and with patience againste all the carpinge malice or skoffing jests that theis Appish Monkies can vent from their too curious inuectiue and belabored brains. And because that all my endeuours are tied alreadye with the two-fould chaine of your L. Princely virtues and more then deserued cour¦tesies, to which the extension of my natural duty cannot adde anie suffitient tribut for the interest which your Lo. hath in me: therefore being still in my former dspaire I am forc'd (in such a worlde of bands) for euer to rest. Your L. vn-redeemable seruant Patrik Gordon.
To euerye freendly and Courteous Reader. GENTLE, and courteous Reader, I doubt not but some their are, that wil not gentlye, but rashlie censure those my labours, Nether am I ignorant, how hard a thing it is to please euery one, Some their be that are courious, whom as i is impossible to pleas, so haue I geuē ouer impessibilites, as one, whoes judgement could neuer reatch to the meanest of possible things: Some their be that are invyous, & those as I care lytle for their feid, so hunt I not muche for their fauor: Some also wil be rashe, in geueing their judgement before they haue duely considdered, to whoes temerarious, opinione, as I geue lytle heed, so will I suffer them, to be whipt withe their owne folyes: But you that ar judi∣cieus disereit, & courteous, eune you it is, whom I wold please▪ I confes I writ not of profound, and deip maters, fitting your judgements, bot according to the shallow∣nes of my braine, as their is not much good to be reapt, so shall you not find much evill: Wheirfore, my willingnes I hope, will satisfie a great parte of your contents, & sup∣plie my defects. Looking alwayes (that altho I can not in the greatest measure satisfie your exectation) yit ye wil accept freindlie, of my goodwil; In respect, that vnto your charitable hands only, I cousmit the censure of these my paepers, as the vndoubted touche stone, wheron my trauels must be tryed: And how many so euer my erors be, which I doubt not, but the thrie afore named wil mak to many, yit to you I hope it shall suffice that I acknowledge my owne weaknes. But fearing to deceaue my self, with too muche presuming on your courtesye, I haue left of in the
mids of my labours, for that I was loath to paine my self with to muche trauell, till I wer better certefied, of your fauourable acceptance, (which while I heir of, I haue thought goode to stand at a point, and breath a whyle) as the only rewaird, I craue for al my trauells yit my coun∣sel is, before yow geue judgement, that ze enter, and walk throw all my fielde, look on euery shade, searche throw euery corner, wheir amongst the pople, and tair, yow may find some pure grane, And amongst the thornes and breirs, some roses, that may perhaps haue a pleasant smell: Vpon al aduentures, hoping that suche will be your censur, as my meaning is towards yow, I bid yow fairwel Yours, as you merit. P. G.
THE AVTHOR to his Patrone. YOur Lordshipe when I call to mynd, And your great fauors, whiche I fynd, I plaine, I sighe, my tears doun fall: For this my strenth, my witt, my skill. Not equaleizing my good will, No not my lyfe, my self my all. My self, my seruice, both is due, Both bonde by duety, vnto yow, My wealthe to meane, for to present yow A present then, I shame to mak it, Not with your honor stands, to tak it, Thus nought is myne, that could conten yow. Oft thus I pause, I think, I muse, And tho us and vther things I chuse, Wheirof their's no thing myne to geue, Then geue I ouer my vane contentione, And syues in nought, but apprehensione, So rests your dettore while I leiue. Zit to mak knowne that if I could Faine would I do al that I should, And oft alone on this I mus' de: At last presents unto my vew, This Knight, beit, cold and pale of hew, That seem'd no danger hade refus'de.
His armour rousted, rent, and torne Clift was his sheeld, his sword was worne, A stranger in this countrey strainge Nor aduentures might heir be found, The warr-lyk Knights heir, till the ground, And rights their wrong, with lawes reuenge. Altho this Knight was borne a Prince Zit none wold do him reuerence, Whiche I lamented muche, bevaild▪ And of his sorowes took a pairt, But lo his proud ambitious hairt, Calamiye hade nere assaild. This muche, his giddy braine furth bred If he with armour once wer cled, To searche aduenturs, hunt for fame: Zit wovld he ay heir a whyle, And pouse his fortune, throw this yle, Perhaps to win a famous name. I pitied much his poore estate, His mightie mynd I could not hate, No armour, no equippage fyne, Hade I befaitting such a Knight, Zit to my power, strenth, and might I vsde my moyane, my in gyne.
When he was featted to my strength, On Some he would depend at length, Then come your honour to my mynd Whoes many fauors, I haid founde, Me Nature, lyfe, and duetie bounde, My thankfulnes some way to find. Him then to you I first present, To serue, to please and to content Beneth your wings let him be seine: If he be not so rigged furthe As apperteineth to his worthe, Myne is the fault, whoes wealth was meine, His name Penardo he me told, A youth ambitious, hardy, bold, His trauell, lyfe and deads hes beine▪ A warre, betuixt ambitione strong. And craftie loue, that lested long, Which be the sequel shal be seine. P. G.
To the Right noble Lady Ladye Margret Countes of Marsheale. LOng haue I wishid my Muse, to sound thy prayse The worthe, the fame, the due, to the belonge, But she onlernd vn fit, for such a phrayse, Denyit to doe, say, think, so heighe a songe: Since on thy worthe, both heaune, and earthe still gaize She should but shame her self, and do the wronge Better quod she be sobre silent, still, And spair to speek, then speek, and speek but ill. O but quod I, to speek her praise, her worthe, Out of my faith, my trueth, my zeall my loue, Faith, trueth, lone, zeall, and duetie, breaths it furthe As shal my pure, eleir, simple meining proue: Her nature myld, heighe place, and royall birthe, Her witt, her worthe, her vertue, from aboue. Has croun'd with garlants, of immortall glorye, Then none ean writt amisse, that writts her storye Whill thus my barrene Muse, and I contend Thy worth, wit, vertue, and thy geighe desairt, Commands me write, and speek, and praise furthsen To eurye countrey, province, place, and pairt, But comeing to (what should I say) in end. O then I stand, I pause, I think, in hairt Words does my witt, wit does my words eonfuse Nou this, now that, a thousand things I chuse,
So infinite, thy endles graces be That what I ould, I would, Zit can not doe Witt moketh witt, arte skorneth arte, in me And wealth, deludeth wealth I know not how When I should end, I but begine to sie, A world of worlds rair worthines, in yow, Then this I say, nor will I write no more, None is, shall be, nor was lyk the before To the richt Noble Lady, and full of all verteus Ladye ANNE Countesse of Enyie. FEr Madame, grac'd from hyest heau'ns aboue, With wealth of Fortune, Nature, beautye Loue, Lend not to frowning looks, thy gratious eye, For this bold pryde, and arrogance in me, That darr's breath furthe, or preis to pen thy praise Earths ornament, heaun's obiect, beauties gaize. Nor Maro great, nor Naso sweit, am I, Nor haue I Homers mightie style, wheirby I might to efter aiges e're reveiue, Thy fame; thy worthe, and mak thy glory leiue, Zit wer it but t'awake the braver witts, Whoes loftie quill's thy sweitter praises fitt's, This much I say, nor vanely vaunt I nather, Thy wit, thy beautye, and thy vertue rather
Celestiall is, rair, excellent, devyne, (In whom all woothe, all grace, al goodnes shyne) Then humane, so heaun's croun's, adorn's thy bloode With Naturs wealthe, grace ful, & fortuns goode Then lett the Poëts on their Muses call, To fil their brains, their pen's, their papers all With ornament of methode, witt, and sense, That flowes from thy rair worth, rair excellence. In goldin showrs, whiche fame on her faire winges, To eurye natione, countrey, kingdome bringes, And strowes it heir, and their, in eurye pairt, To beautifye speeche, eloquence, and arte, If on poore me, some, drop's she would doune poure, I'le spend my pains, my witts, soules wasting power To pen thy praise, and thy braue Mates, whoes worthe Thow stryues to mach, as thow hes match'd his birth O wonderous stryfe, blis'd, happie, perfect, pure, Long may that warre myld, pleasant, sweet, indure P.G.
To the ryght worthe and verteous Lady DAME GRISEEL STVARTE Lady Meldrum. MAdame, if I should smouther vp thy praise For most ingrate, thow iustlye might me blame All eyes should sie, all tongues to heau'ne should raise My staine, my blote, my neuer deing shame In me, poore me, if ony vertue growes In the it leius, frome the it springs, it flowes. For lo thyne was the seid, thyne was the tree, Goode reasone wer't that thine should be the gaine, hin the ncrease, the haru'st, the fruct must bee, Zit reapts thoow to to lytle for thy paine But much it is, in such a barten soyle If thow receaue the seid, for al thy toyle. And thought vnhappie I, could nothing kno, Noir pairt of thy great graces could haue gain'd Me by thy sweit example did thow sho, Of thy thryce happie lyfe, pure, cleir vnstam'd My ill my owne, if goode I have in stoir Thyne be the thanks, thyne be the prais, the gloir. Eu'ne as the Eggle learn's her burds tho flie First low, then mean than, heigher still to ryi Till far aboue al vther foulls they be With loftie soaring wings in asure skyis, On Phoebus than, their eyes she maks yame set, Nor his bright birning beam's yair sight mey let.
So Eggle lyk thow taught me as thy chyld To mount to vertue, wisdome, grace deuyne But I thy precept's wyse, sweit, easie, myld Could not conceaue, so grosse was my ingyne Whill Phoebus lyke, vpone my face thow stream' Thy vertues rayes, & wisdomes goldin beam's. And thus thow proues my loftie Eggle fair, But I, poore I, I hade no wings to flie, My Phoebus als thow shynes with vertues rair, Zit Eggle lyke, I daris not looke on the, Then Quene of fowles, & light of sterr's aboue My Eggle, and my Phoebus bothe still proue. And what I haue, eu'ne yat should thow receaue, As propre thyne, and only due to the, Myne be the fault, the wrong, the ill I haue Thyne be the goode, if onie good their be If none, as muche me fears, their's none but ill Zit for thy pain's, i'le praise, the, serue ye, still. P.G.
To the Author. Sonnet. COme forth Laissa spred thy lokes of Gold, Show thy cheekes roses in their virgine Prime And though no gēmes the decke which Indies hold, Yeild not vnto the fairest of thy tyme No ceruse brought farre, farre beyond the seas Noe poisone lyke Cinabre Paints thy face Let them hawe that whose natiue hues displeas Thow graceth nakednesse it doth the grace Thy Syre no pyick purse is of others witt Thoise Iewellis be his oune which the adorne And though thow after greaiter ones be borne Thow mayst be bold eu'en midst the first to sitt For whilst fair Iuliett or the farie quene Doe liue with theirs thy beautie shall be seene, M. William Drommond.
To the Authour. ALtho my shallowe witt sound's nott thy deep, And weakling ey's followes not thy flight: Tho wher thow run's, I can not thether creep, Nor chyldishe weaknes imitat thy might Since in this sacred trade I made a pause. By inter mitting of my Clio's lawes. Yit since I haue most wonderouslie detected A swane whoes Syren-musique me enchant's Yit since I find eune wheir I least suspected A lurking poët in our home-bred haunt's O when I sie him, when I sueetlie hear him. I can not but commend him and admeir him. Thy years (dear frend) ar young, thy wit is old, Thy youth er chyld tyme come is brought a bed, Thy mine in liew of ore, yeilds purest gold Thy basest rob's with crimsone ouerclade How glade am I thoes mythologique flowrs Argue the reconnings of thine Idle hours. Mr. Robert Gordone.
To the Authour. LAissa's bathing in the sacred well With charming beutie wounds the chastest hair. Penardos valour into Plutos cell To basest mynd's dois honour's woorth impairt And moues the Coward to desire the fight: And chastest recluse search for beuteis sight. The fei full ourthrow of thy Sigismund For Vsurpatoune: pryd, and priuatt gaine Show's how the lord the lofie will confound, And in extream's the humb'led soule sustaine For tyrann's proud, loe heir a curbbing bitt For humb'led misers, heir-s a confort fitt. Those sacred lights proceiding foorth frome the In Natours sueetnes staning straned air Maks vs the treasure of thy mynd to sie The ritches rair wheir with thowe furnish'd art: For beuie, Valour, right and hellishe vronge▪ Ar prais'd reprou'd▪ and painted in thy songe. Dear freind with loue whill I admeir thy lyn's Thy braue inuentioune clam's a fresh respect: Thy gracefull method in them both so shyn's That I am doubtfull whither to direct My freindlie ey's, or well affected hart. To playe the lizards, or the pensiue part. Ihone. Wrrey.
To the Authour. TH' Entusiasme, or furie of thy spreit, A grace both great, & dignlie deim'd di∣vyne▪ So fluentlie, into thy front does fleit, Whill all the world admeirs both the and thyne Each word has weght, and full of lyfe ch Quick thy conceapt Emphaticall thy phraise, Thy number's iust▪ judicious thy ingyne, O thow the new adorner of our dayes. Whoes pen or pinsell shall depaint thy praise Since Mare nought, nor the Meonian muse Be with their learned nor their liuery yes Into this wondrous worthie work to vse. Then tak this task, & tune thy trump vnto it: For onlie thow art destinatt to doe it. Mr. Allexander Gardyne.
To the Authour. DEmereits Maro from proud Mars his throne A freindlie look, or yit a thankfull sho? Deserueth Naso from young Venus sone A cheirfull smyll? (if they can haue no mo) Yes faith: I pray then what should be thy hyre? Who maks all men thir monarch gods admyre. Has not thy Pen proclaim'd att lairge to all, Sterne Mars his soldier great Penardo strong? Has not thy layes learn'd how Laissa's thrall To craftie loues allurments too too long? Then both the warreous, & the wanton's theam Should spare no pains, to aeterneize thy name, William. Tod.
THE FIRST BOOKE, OF the Famous Historie, of PENARDO and LAISSA. Caput. 1. Argument. A Visione moues Achaias King, His daughter to haue slaine, The Muses find her, and preserue Her lyfe with care, and paine, In whom such woundrous vertue grew, Such beautie bright, and fair, That those whoe sau'd her lyfe, now soght Her woe, her wrack, her care. 1. IN glorius Greece there lies a firtile land, Of antient time Achaia cald by name Within whose blessed borders brauelie stan▪ Parnassus mont, so much renound of fame. Where Aganippes siluer streames doe spring About the which Ioues brain-bred daughters sing.
2. Sending from thence that which in flamm's the brain Of brauest Spreitts, and beautifies the mynd With end les rare inventions, which obtain The name of wondre, to the humane kynd Who in theire works of learned witt's divyne Make Learnings light, in blakest darknes shyne. 3. Eune heir, and in this natione most renoun'd, The famous Phedro sumtyme rul'd, as King, By iust discent, and regall title croun'd And first in peace enioyd a happie regne, At last hi starrs which bad coniunctions borrow Did turne his sweets in sowrs, his mirth in sorrow. 4. For when the winds in hollow caves containd, Leaue off their sharpest cold, and bitter blast, To slay the tender herbs, when they refraind The talest Cedars torment then was past Then was it not, as when they raige at will Vnder the horns of the lasciuious bull. 5. Eune when the Farthe spreds furth her mantle grein, On which the wanton Flora spreds her treasure, While tyme that wait's one Phoebus goldin eyne Giues lyuelye colours, for the Goddesse pleasure, The hills, the daills, the plain's, ar passing fair Through heat, through moyst, though sueitnes of the Aer.
6. The tries bud furthe before their fructe the flourish The herbs before their seid, the blossom'd floure The corn's, and grane, their, leauie stalks do nourishe The winding vynes their pregnant graips yet sour When as the goldin chariot of the Sune Twixt day, and night, an equall couse doeth rune. 7. Wherfore eache creture bles'd with equall light. Salts the princelye spring with pleasant noys The restles roling heaun, with shyning bright Smyls on the earthe (his loue who does reioys Of such a Mate; and with her mantle grein Was dek't, wheir riche embrodries might be sein. 8. In this delicious pleasant tyme of yeir Which bringes to farmers hope of greatineres When Phoebus gan doun in the west appeir In Thetis lap to coole his fyrie face, And shadowes dark of glomie night opprest All creatur's, with silence, sleip, and rest. 9. King Phedro wrapt in heauie sleip, did ly Free from all trauell, care, all paine, and toyle, Yet so oppesst in his fantassy That rest from rest, and ease from ease, did spoyle His spreitt's, his senses, faculties, and sent A visione that his braine did muche torment.
10. And thus it was, he thought him self did stand On Helicon and vewd a fearfull fire That brightlie burnt ore all Achaia land Which did vndoe burne: waest his whole empyre And their withall it seemd a voyce did say. This night has brought thy kingdome her decay. 11. This fyre he thought did from him self proceid, And to him self againe it did returne The diadem from of his princelie head This fearfulll flamme in melting dops did burne. And when brunt, spent, consumed it had bein No mark no nor no flame was to be sein. 12. Ene as a clothe in aquauitae dyd Or in sum strong and mightie burning oyle If kendled by sum fyre it is espyd To flmme, to shyne to blase, to burne, to boyle, he liquor spent, the cloth retein no staine, Nor pot, nor blot, nor burning does remaine. 13. When as the King awakes frome drousie sleip This woundrous visione did torment his mynd And all his senses from there fauctios keip. His thoughts in vprore now no rest do fynd But when he rangd them hade a thousand wayes, One path he finds in which them all he stayes.
14. For loe eu'ne then his Queene wes brought to bed Of a fair daughter lyke the morning strr. Nor Phoebus liht in glomie darknes spred Might matche with her, she staind that beautie farr. But tho shew is most admirable fair, Her lyfe as strange was as her beautie rae. 15. For finding by his curious searching out Evne at he birth this visione to enswe H thought she wes the flamme (if not put out) That should his croune and kingdome thus subdue Vheirfore resolud for to preuent mischeif Her death must be the way to his releif. 16. The dolfull message of this wofull charge He to a Groome whom he most trusted gau A outh whoes faith he oft had tryd at large Him he commands the infant to reseaue An to tansport her to a woode or montaine And droune her in sum river, Spring, or fontaine. 17. O crewell sentence barbarous decrie! O hapie chyld! but oh vnhappie Father! That for a dreame, a tove, a fantasie A vaine Chimea or hell vision rather Wold spoyle so sweet a creature of breath And kill thy self to saue th elf from death.
18. In Acheron blak Night her selfe did wrapp And heaud her head, aboue the Easterne streame But Titan dyud in Thetis watrie lapp While yow might see him blushing reid for shame. Thence to be chass'd with his fearce foe vnkynd That braith'd furth darknes to the farthest Ind. 19. In darkest shaddowes of the glomie night This Messinger furthe throw the desert goes The harmeles Infante harmefull death to dight That her poore lyfe now got, she now might lose, So suckling lambs by rauening wolfs ar torne And doues by Eggles to their deaths furth borne. 20. This Messinger Kalander heght to name Whoes Syre the greattest Prince beeth the croune Boor rewell o'ur Sparta land of antient fame His witt and valour wan him muh renoune Whoes Sone of these tuo vetewes wanted nether But shewd him self the Sone, of such a Father 21. Who going straight vnto this crewell act And moud with pitie of the infant age Whoes youh to young, for deahe procuring fact And Innocent of Faher wrathfull rage, Yet fearing if he does prolong her breath He should pocure him self a shamefull dah
22. To Helicons fair mont he taks his flight Praying the bloude of this poore Innocent Vpone the Fathers head might alwaes light That in disgrace and shme he might repnt For doating dreams if this pooe Infant die His be the fault, the losse, the infamie. 23. Thus praying he approch'd vnto the place Hypocrene downe wheir the Muses sport Vewing the beautie of this Angels face Againe it moud his pitie in such sort He nought regairds the King, nor lyfe, not all, But saves the babe frome ruine, death, and fall. 24. Leauing her saiflie by the fontane syde Vnder the vmbrage of a loftie Pyne Wishing her frowning Fates for to prouyde Her beautie once into the world might shyne Thus he returns, and thus the King beguyld▪ And craftily, with suggred words him sild. 25. When golden-haitd Apollo furth did glance, His amber loks furth throwes irradint beams And one the esterne waues begins to daunce To murm'ring musick of the roaring streams The Muses for to welcome home their Syre From coutche and secreit Cell did furth retayre
26. Their daylie morning progres is to vew The sacred streams of Aganippe well whoe murmur like sweet lullabies furthdrew Old Morpheus from out his quiet cell Vho had the babe with slumbring sleip bereft whom young Kalander at the fontane left. 27. These sacred Virgins when they did espye The babe; sad fear made all their beautie fade Fearing discouerie by sum wantone eye But vewing well the beautie of the Mayde They vewd admiring, an admid the sight Their sight bred wounder, wounder bed delight 28. Such beautie rare till then they nere had sein But feard it was sum stolne virginiie Wheir With theme selfs so spotles pure and clein They wold not thus defyle in infamie But instruments the Fates did them ordaine Of pleasure, lyfe perplexiie, and paine. 29. For pitie them forbad of creueltie Vnto this harmeles helple innocent Wherefor with graue aduise and modestie The Muses all in vniforme consent Brings vp the babe, with care full obseruation In vertue, grace, and heaunly meditatione.
30. The sacred Muses that in vertue shone. As if they well had knowne the Fates decreit Vnto the infant wold a name impone A name conforme, and to her meritts meit So that a correspondence might be knowne Betuixt her name, and her hid Fate vnshowne. 31. And dyueing then wit drops divyne her heid Fair Lissa or Laissa thay her cald A proppre name for her mishaps indeid Who subiect was to daungers manyfold For Lissa is asmuche to say as rage Vheirin no force her furie could asswage. 32. When with the Musses she remaind weell neir whle she did rune of fyifteine yeares the race Eune or the loue which they to her did beir Eache one of them indued her with a grace But lo these gifts made her enuyd of al Thus loue bought gifts, gifts hate, and hate her fall, 33. Yea to the fair Laissa in her birth The heauns wer all affect'd so feruentlye Looking with myld apect vpon the earth In th horoscope of her natiuitye That all the gift of grace, and goode perfection They pourd on her most beautifull complection.
34. Her face was lyke the sky bothe cleire and fair Her cheeks as whyt with vermeil red did show Lyke roses in a bed of lillies rare Whill they ambrosiall odours from them throw Feiding the gaizers sense with double pleasure Such force his beauties all-celestiall treasure. 35. In whoes bright eyes tuo lyuelie lamps did flame That dairted beam's lyik lightning blasts of thunder Cupid tho blind still ayming at the same Thousands of shafts he sende but with great wounder She breks his wantone dairts with awfull yre And with dreid maiestie she quensh'd has fyre 36. The Graces one her ey-lid's seem'd to sitt Vnder the shadow of her bending browes Her goldin treases couriouslye was knitt With Pelicans of pearle, and siluer doues These hair lyke goldin weir one eurye pairt, Seud as a nett for the beholders hart. 37. Her yuorie fohead was a table fair Wheir Loues triumphs wee cunninglie ingrapht All goodnes, honor, dignitie was their In vertues treasure litle hade she left. Sh was the mirrour of cèlestiall grace That can not be outrune with tym swift pace.
38. And yow might sie that alwaes when sho spak Sweit words lik dropping hony she wold shed Tuo rainge of pearle with rubies tuo wold brak The words betuix them softlye whill they fled Which made sweit siluer sound's whoes noy ent furth Wold deadlie sadnes moue to amarous mirth. 39. And yet her humble and submissiue mind Was neuer moud with hellishe pryde to rise But why should I, poore I, descrybe her kind Which to expres no mortall can deuise Nor can I preis to paint furthe such a feature Least skilles I should wrong so fair a creture. 40. Fair Imps of beautie whoes bright shining eyes Adorn the solid Earth with heaunlie light Ou'r your great conquest do not tyraneize Though yow subdue all by your seemlie sight But with Laissaes meiknes be content And grace your beautie with that orament. 41. To your fair selfs her fairnes first apply Her courtesie her meik and humble mi Tempred with grace and goodly modest It seemd those ertues tuo did striue to find The high est place and stryueig but for dewtie Eache uthe helps and but augments her bewtie.
42. While as the Muses see her vertues rare Her beautie wisdome modestie and all Surmonting them so farr that euriwhere They feard her fame should once procure, their fall Wheirfore the seike with wt, eraft, slight & wrath, Her infamie, her woe, her wrak, her death. 43. And waiting still occasione when they may Find out a fault vnto her faultles mynd That with the sharpest sentence of decay Sum punishment they fithe might outfynd Thus they decreid her death, conspyrd her fall Fauord by, tyme, fate, fortune heau'ns, and all. 44. It chanc'd the Muses once vpone a day Were in an abor neir vnto the fontane While as Laissa at her sport and play Was gone a hunting through the rockie montane For Phoebe-lyke it did delight her mynd To chase, to kill, to wound, the hart, the hynd 45. Alone now comming wearie frome the chace And traueling in heat of all the day Hd sought to bath her in that pleasant place And with enamourd streams a while to play While as the Muses wait, they lye, they lurk Their wrath, their will, their vengeance for to woork.
46. The streams not deip, nor shallow which did glyd With prettie whispring noyes so calme and cleir Therof the moueing skai she could be spyd And yit a heaunly murmur you might heae The Pebles seimd to leap, to swimme, to daunce, While as the streams did tremble, moue, and glance. 47. The Pyns, and Poplars bowed theme selfs from hie From heat and cold that shaddowed all the streame She dip'd her daintie legs vp to the knie That lyke two snow-white marble Pillers seme So polishd Porphyre deckd with purest gold Doth temples tombes and trophees faire vphold. 48. And being now entysed by the cold She taks her bow and quever fome her syds Hung in a lace of purple silk and gold That ouerthuart her snow whit breist diuyds Tuo azur streams of Nectar-feiding fontanas. Springing to tops of Alabastre montanas. 49. And haueing hung her garments on a Pyne O who had sein so fair a silkin skine! So daintie well proportion'd, pure, and fyne, So beautifull, so Quaint, so cleir, so thine The thrife thrie Nymphs whome wath haid now de∣ys'd. To wok her wrak could skarslie be entys'd.
50. Now beauties shopp, vne los'd begins to be And showes her store of treasure to the sight Their all the pleasurs that do pleas the eye And all was their that doeth the tuth delight The Graces had their clothes about her drawen To keip the mayd vnfelt, vnsein, vnknowen. 51. Their thoughts contentment, their was harts delight Their bankets for vnsatiat appetite Their wisdome Conquerour whoes only sight The Tygers tams and Lyons fearce does smit The key of all thir wealh keip't Chastitie Whoes ornament was shamefast modestie. 51. While this fair Iemme vpone the water lyes With cooling streams sh maks a dalleying sport With leges and armes a thousand tricks she tryes Toying with swimming in a seemlie sort As Dolphins do vpone a sunnye day On Thetis glistring back whil they wold play. 53. The Muses that no longer could abyde Out fom their priuie aboir ishew'd all How soone this Paragon has them espyde She smills and sporting thus to thame does call Yow Thesphiane dams go seik some other streame And come not neir this sacred fount for shame.
54. But thay (whill rage within thair brests did suall Not virgine-lyke but bearing Tygers harts Menassing her aloud they gan to call We sie thow thinks to much of thy desarts Foull Fondling does thow think thy beautie such That thou deserus our sacred streams to touch. 55. No, no, these Streams ar only due for vs The dreided Imps of proud Apollos light For since the foote of fleing Pegasus Medusaees birth begot by Neptuns might Let soule the rains of this sole sacred fontane None els but we presum'd to reache this montane. 56. Of fauors we haue showen thee great and many And brought thee vp with cairfull paine and charge Our presens not till now was granted any And we indewd thee with our graces large We that before wer sacred Muses nyne Made thee a tenth though mortall not devyne 57. And then they fled, this Lady for her cryme Whom they so dasht that she as half amas'd Sitts by the fontaine naiked all the tyme When loe her thoughts a rose vermiliane rais'd▪ Now red now pale, her colour changed oft She sigh'd, she grond, she qua'ik'd, & stad loft.
58. While as the syluer stream that softly slyds With silent noyes and sweitest murmur sounds Such heau'nly musick throw the medowes glyds, While rocks with rare eports there noyes rebounds That with ther Diapason so bereft her All naked and a sleip they still had left her. 59. Then Morpheus spred furth his sable wings The virgine fair infolding in his armes Rest, quyet, ease, and sweet repose he brings Dischairging care; gref, sorow, woes, and harmes Yet through soft sobs, deip sighs, sore grones, salt tears, Woe, anger, care, greif, sorow, paine, appears. 60. While as the Nymphs with angre, wrath and yre Her name her fame, her glorie ouer waylling Did sink her shipe (to honor that aspyre) In seas of sweittest vigine pleasurs sayling Extending all their malice craft, and slight, To wrape her Sune in clouds of darkest night,
Caput. II. Argument. THe Muses send Melpomine Doune to the lowest Hell's She meits with Night and askes the wa Which she vnto her tells To Plutoes kingdome when she cam She past by all the pains At last out of her dreidfull De Alecto she constrains 1. THer is nothing beneth the sky insearte More moues my mynd to pitie & compas¦sion Then for to sie a true and vpright hearte Wheir faith & trueth has bult hir only stati By Fortuns snar's and Enuyes craftie baits Dispys'd, disdain'd disgrac'd with falce deceats. 2. And whither it be kyndest pitie loe Or duetie (which I ow all woman kynd) know not, but my hart doeth burst for woe When harme vnto ther harmeles sexe I find And my poore eyes Whil as I writting lay With tears did seeme to washe the lyn's away.
3. Fa'r wemen should be lou'd and not envy'd Whoes substance is so daintie pure and fyne In Naturs triple fonace being try'd Till all the drosse be thence remoud, and syne That Essence pure most Angel-lyk retains No staine, nor blot, but alwayes cleir remains. 4. But this poore Lissa beautifull and fair (Which beautie God did geue her as a gace) Was by decea thowne doune in endles care By Envi Slaine that monstre merciles And suir I think whome God has gac'd with beawtie For them he cars, to them we ought a dewtie 5. For when he made this great and woundrous frame Of Chaos masse that shaples lay confus'd He tooke the purest substance of the same And that which was most beautifull he chus'd And theirof did he make the Angelis bright To glorifie his name, and show his might. 6. He made the purest substance which remaine Vnto his blissed self a Mansione rair Syne thrice thee Orbs, whairof the eight containd Bright shyning starr's, and seu'n the Planets fair Nixt placd the Fyre because n beautie next, Syne Aer, then Water, last the Earthe he fix,
7. Earthe then we sie the dosse of all things yit Which this great Architector singling furth By his geat migt and all for seing witt Is lowest plac'd according to her worth But that which was most beautifull and pure Eune next vnto him self he placed sure. 8. And then that Alcreator did ordaine Eache thing according to their substance pure To bring furthe fruit this all to intertane Which by his powre he caused to indure Nor tyme, nor age, nor restles moueing, may Destroy confound, or weir, or make decay. 9. First then the Heav'ns (as haueing most of bewtie Brought furthe the starr's, the Moone, the Suns great light And aer (conmmanded next to do his dewetie) Brought furthe all sorts of fouls with fehed flight Water brought furth all sort of fishe anone The Earthe brought furthe all beasts that leiue theiron 10. As heauns are of the fynest substance lo So are the starr's most beautifull most cleir But cheiflye Planets seuin theirin doeth show Gods powr'full migh (werin doeth well appeir) He geus them rewll, might, vetue, pow're & strength Our fouls, fishe, beasts, tries, herbs, & men at length.
11. And thus we sie eache creatuere furthe doth bring (According to its essence) ill or g'oode The aer breids foules, in water fishes springe, Herbs tries▪ and liing beasts ar Earhs grosse broode Yea eure thing (coding to hs kynd) Ill fauor'd foule, fair, shynninge, clear, we fynd 12. Altho it pleas'd heigh Ioue from heaune discend Fraill man o make of eath of dosse, of clay, Most fair of all ou'rall to haue command For him, all made to hm, all sold oby Then man should thak him prase him, pray him still To love, to blesse, and to fosie his ill. 13. Yea lyke to his owne Image man he maks In which he shews his loue and eak his might But these to whom most beautie he betaks These maks he lykest to his Image bright Wherefore to hese we owe geat loue, & dewt Remembring God the fontane of all bewtie 14. For why when this great God made all things first To beute did he giue the heighest place Becaus it was the substance worthiest Of the aspect of his most glorious, face Then whoso eu'with beautie is indewd Them shuold we loue, as through Gods loue renued.
15 And if so be in Chaos mas confus'd Sum say their was no lght nor beautie fair But God th fontane of all light) infus'd Such beeos light in all his creturs rare Then vnto whom he beautie geues, to those His grace, hi goodnes, and his loue he shoes 16. Yea in my simple iudgement this I thnk Ou'r beautie God has y a speciall caire So that with Lucifer they do not shrink Away frome grace and thnk them selfs too fair But with meik myds vpon his holy motane Giue God the praue whos of all beautie fontane 17. But o my Muse too heighe thow seem;'s to flie Thy wings ar lag'd with vapos dull and gosse That which thou sing's is too too heigh for thee More meit fo pregnant witt's and learnings force Turne back, least thou repent thy self, advyse, Wade not too deep in Gods heigh misteyes 18. Turne to thy sacred sisters with thy quill Fo to adye with them what must be doone Wh Lissa fair, whoes beautie works her ill For lo Melpomene they do inioyne To bring Alecto frome her dreidfull den Who blood, and warre, and muher maks on men.
19. Melpomene made way throw empty aer And through the wattrie empyrs wyde and deip Through darkest hollow caues she did repair And trough he bowell▪ of the Earth did reip▪ And low where light of day did neue shyne Nor Phoebus show his euerlasting shryne, 20. Wheir Cynthia does steip in siluer dew Her neue cheirfull, euer douping light In Thetis watrie bed whoes a zur hew Her lustre showes in blak etenall ight Through fearfull, soath fume, foull, & filthie fenns, Throgh foggie smook, throgh dark, & dreadfull dens, 21. She haueing past frome Phoebus cheirfull light Came to a Rgione of eternall darknes The habitation of the dun kishe Night It wes indeid, so fearfull was the maknes She meitts that greislye Hagge with visage sadd Who was into a cole blak mantle cladd. 22. And sat into a chariot pitchie blak Four ieatblack steids that braith'd dark clouds of smook Wth ramping noyes made all their harnei crak With braying all the solid earth the, shooke This vnaquainted brightnes when they saw Their Mistres doune to hell they seem'd to draw.
23. At at the Muse so oft aloud did call That vglie Night out of ther chariott looks She sayes most dreidfull Dame so feard of all Melpomene that tragik sadnes brooks Wold know thy wyes, dak paths, & fearfull get That doune to Plutoes loathsum kingdome lets. 24. The aged Hagg, with furious rage thus spake With gostly speche and dreidfull countenance Thow Imp of my old foe who seiks my wrack, Why trubles thow my Regions with thy glance Lo wheir fyre smook and sulphur doe aryse In younder denne of thow dar enterpryse. 25. The greisly gulf of deip Auernus holle Aboue the which my mantle black is spred About the which a fearfull laick doth rolle Doune throw that flamming gulf thow must be led Wheir neuer yit did enter any wight But feirce Aneas and Sibilla bright. 26. Eune that same way the sacred Muse is gone The smook and sulphur ceast their restles flame And doune to Plutoes court she goes anone The brasin getts burst oppen when she came At ther bright looks and at her beautie gnee Feinds spirits and Ghosts fell in a hellische traunce.
27. Ou'r Acheron she past the bitter waues (Wheir damned souls with shiling skreks lament) To Flegithone with fye floods that shewes The tortng torment of that element Wheir Sinners nought but desperatione gains And thou sand thou sands of eternall pains 28. At Plutos gate was dreidfull Cerberus With thrie wyid oppin hollow throats deuoring And curled hair of snaks, most venemous Gnawing blood, fleshe, and bones with fearfull roring But her deuyne, and Sune-shyne beauties such Hells porter dar's not once her vesture tutch. 29. Straight to the house of endles paine she goes Inuiround with that fyrie flamminge floode Tht Phlegithone whoes fearfull laick furth throes A filthie smook out belshing labberd blood Tisiphone the keipar heght to name Mother of murther, Sinn deceat, and shame 30. Ther did the rout of loathsum Harpyis roar Thr Sillaes sound, their seuine moth't Hydras houling, Their Serpents hisse their greisly Gorgons hoar Their Centaur's, Sphinges, fearefull Chymers rouling, All those and many thousand Monsters more Wher set one burning thrones their Prince before
31. Their wofull wailing wretches to'd with pains With ghostlie grones with ouglie yeling sounds With hark and jangling noyes of irone chains Whoes clamors, cryes, and shouts throu hell redounds Those monstres trampling were in daksum shed That horror, dred, fear, death, & terrour bred 32. Their Sulmon crauling was in endles paine For counterfitting thundreflaught & fyre Their Titius (darling of the earth) was flaine A Vulter feidding one his filthie lyre Their was the wheill Ixion turning still For daring tempt heaun's Queine to lechrous ill. 33. Their Tisiphus disioynted one a rack Their Theseus to endles slouth condem'd Their fyfie Sisters drawing water wrack And yet their vessels empie till vnstem'd Thair Tantalus with thrist, and hunger slaine Sees meat and drinck yet nether could he gaine 34. At last a foull and filthie sink she sees Wheir fyre and brimstone pitche and tar were smooking Whoes deipnes dyu'd as far beneth the seas As it was vp to heaune from thence in looking Aboue this sink a dragone still repears Whoes monstrous bodie feftie hids vprairs.
35. Doune in this fearfull smook and filthie hole Wer Titans broode and Earths fearce childring thrust That in their bloodie raige did restles roll In their owne blood whill sulphur smook them burst Tiphon and all the Gyants warr's that maid Against the Gods were their by lightning led. 36. While in this hollow pitt they do remaine They thunder furthe uch fearfull roaring erye Confudly iarring in their endles paine Their bodies hudge in flamms still osting lye Which send a stinking smook furth with the cry That much amazd the Muse in passing by. 37. At last she came vnto a dreidfull caue Wher Furies furthe send many fearfull eryes Their Pryd attended on by wraith as Slaue Their Madnes that on wraith had fixd her eyes Their Envy fals one, Vertue still was railling And their Dispair her owne hairt furth was trailling 38. Their Rage did rune her heid against the wall And their despight satt gnawing of her fingers Their was the thrie commanders of them all Wofull because the Earth from miseheif lingers Alecto, Tisiphon, Megera their Who work mischeif, plague, famin, bloode, & weir.
39. The Muse Alecto furth she calls in ha'st And said I pray the pas vnto Achay Wheir is the Virgine fair Laissa plac'd And work her wrak her ruine her decay She's daugher too the great Achaian King And has defyld our fair caballean spring. 40. This When the Muse hade said she did returne Thow shdow dimme of dark and glomie night Vp to her Sisters who wih anger burne Till wrought was all their veangeance their despigh On Lissa fair whom beautie hade in keiping Who all this whyle lay by the fontane sleiping
Caput. III. Agument. Alecto moues Achaias Prince Fair Helicon to vew Butt Man say of the flamming rock Forbids his iornay new When vnto Helicon he cam Laissa he espyes Whom he for Sister does not know And wold with loue surpryse. 1. MElpomene now gone, the furie streight Directs her course vp to the igh of dy Deuysing what way best to fame this slight And so behinks her on a strainge essay A slght, a fald and a curs'd euenge A creweltie, a plgue, that seemeth strainge 2. And thus it was the for said Phedro had A lau full Sone Phelarnon cald by name Whos prais and merets was so lairgy spred His father ioyid of such a Galants fame Alecto him from rests hey tour broght doune To search for honour and to find renoune.
3. When lazie night with sable wings ou'r-spread The cristall sphers, and dim'd th azure Light Sleip bried men in rest from labo fred In Sleip Phelarnon sies ane Angell bright To him appei and hi waik ie tormnted With vision strange at last those words presented 4. Fair Prince as Nature has ordaind the strong Of goode proportioune with a verteous mynd Yea of thy Martiall self must be the song Of after liuing Poëts as we fynd Nature in the those gifts has no wayes shown To burie them vnto the world vnknowne 5. Who so wold win renoune he thus proeeids Vp to the throne or Theatre of glorie The first rewarde of heigh and noble deids Must be to act the deid (Whos endles storie) shall be reueiu'd with neuer dyng Fame In Tyms steill books to etermize thy nam 6. Yea verteous woorth but glorie can not be Glorie on Vertue waits wheir ere she goes (Evne as thy shaddw followes still on thee) And all Her deids to endles Fame she showes Thus his desyre, his mynd▪ his will, and all She fram'd to worke his wrak, his death his fall
7. Lastlie with flattrie thus the feind essayes Braue Youth begot of royall race and bith How spends thou so into obscure thy dayes; This stains thy valour and thy woundrous woorth Go then to Parnass ment extoll thy name With vertue, wounder, vadour, glorie fame 8. For know Parassus mightie mont retains That which should raise thy glorie to the skyes So fates decreis and so the Heauens ordains Heighe oue the wills from sluggish rest to ryes This said to shaples aershe takes her flight But left his hart impoyson'd with her slight 9. For whill she spak his spreit she did in spyre With hote desyre of hono glorie fame He wa'k't, he Blush't, hs eyes did flamm with fyre Whill strengthe & courge stroaue with slouth & shame Her stronge and venom'd word's suche vertue had They Hope, desyre, strength, courage, valour bred. 10. And by this tyme fair Phoebus ishewing out Did beautifie with brightnes of his beams Fair Leucotheas forehed round about Rysing aboue the wauie Oceane stream's Athon, and Phlegon trampling clouds that powrs Melted by fyre beath in siluer showr's.
11. Getting a tincture to the Spiders wheb's Waueing aboue dame Floras fragrant poses Vpon sweit smeling birkes and tender shob's Greine leaes and prickies of vermiliane oses Whill Aeoll breath, their prettie tops decyning They daunce, they glance, they smyl on Phoebus shyning 12. Not only heir alone fair Phoebus shaw's One Neptuns glassie glisting back he playe Vpon whoes restles neuer ceassing waues He combs his crispe irradiant heir whoes rayes Wold seeme to set the hiest havns on fyre Whill in our Hemispere is his empyte. 13 But suddenlie to darknes turn'd the day From skye heaune theatned earthe with roaring thun∣der That man and beast and feinds in hell affray Heauens fyre did seeme to tear the earthe a sunder Which of this Monarches fall did warning make Of death, of bloode, of ruine, and of wrake 14. Ah flattrie wyld and most pernicious The mask of malice mouer of micheif The Father old of lies most vitious The Nurse of falshood, and the ground of greif The fall of kingdomes, Princes▪ and etates The cause of murther, sinck, of all deceat's
15. The map or purtrat of Hypocresie Vsurping once the office of a feind Thou beirs the name ad voyce so cunninglie As if the knott of freindship wer combin'd In the, (while lyik a Slaue thouw serues the will) Yet fram's desyre to the desing's of ill. 16. Thus vnto man a Slaue thou seem's to be And yet thou still obtains he masters hyre Tho art Conquerour of womens chastitie And ou'r their Sex thow beirs a proud empyre The sharpe rebuk's of freinds ar better far Nor suggred words of anie flatterer 17. As cunning Foullers drawes (with craftie light) The fouls into the traine for theme deuysd Or fishes that allures the fishe by sight Of bai which pray has them to death entys'd So flatie leids a man to his owne fall His shame, his wrack, his death disgrace, and all 18. As Syrens doe (with sweetest sounding songs) Enchaut the Sea-mans hart his ears, his eis. That them to heare ay more & more he longs Thiher diect'd his winged vessel flies. Tll shee is clift vpon he craggie shore And then the monstre does the man deuoure.
19. So Sycophants allures thy mynd and thence In flamm's desyre when from their lip's does flow Stream's riuers floods nay sea's of eloquenee. That drouns the Senses with a pleasant show Of all delight yet proues deceat and pain Which heir is shown'e by falce Alectos train: 20. Whoes fyre in flam'd the braue Phelarnon's mynd That pheroe to vew Parnaessus montane And from his fathers court (insecreir kynd) He stole vnsein to sie the sacred fontane While by the way his hope, his hairt, his thought For praise, woorth, valour, and renoune, they sought 21. While he drew neir the mount he stoode to wonder The earthe begone to tremble quack and rapp As if it would haue rent and brust a sunder With trembling noyes lyik to a thunder clapp At last he on a fearfull flamme did look Cum frome a caue enrold in clouds of smook. 22. He (whoes vndanted spright nought could effray) To know this strange aduenture wold draw neir Frome out the flamme he hard a voyce to say Ah wofull Prince Phelarnon back reteir Death the abyds vpone, Parnassus montane If thow approache too neir the sacred fontane
23. He stoode as one amaz'd to heir his name So cald vpon, by Whome he could not know At last as one awakned frome a dreame He sayd what ghost so er'e thou be but show Thy name, & why thou threattins me with death Their of no sign's appeir, I liue I breath. 24. The voice agane made answer to the Prince My name is Mansay of the flamming rock That in the bowel's of the earth far hence (By magick spell▪) foresaw thy fatall chok For this heaune threatning mont whoes streams falls doun Conteins thy wrack and ruine of thy croune. 25. Wheir fore flie back and leaue thy fond conceat Mar not thy mynd with suche a frantick storie Leane for to eternize thy endles deate In antique roll's of fame with Matiall glorie Leaue to the Muses their diuorc'd empyre Be not ou'r cum with loues alluring fyre 26. And thus fairweel new visions calls me henee At those his words the Prince amazed stands He neids wold now returne but no dfence Was left Alectos flattrie him commands To go and sett all dastard fear a pait It is not words but deids that kills the hairt
27. This was Laissas brother certanlie Achaias king of children hade no more For all men deem'd Laissa for to be Dround by Kalander as ye harde before Alecto (that foull feind the Prince,) has led Of Lissa fair to be enamoured. 28. And so resolud he mounted vp so hye That by this tme the chariot of the Sune Had neir hand reacht the top of all the skye From whoes reflex all creaturs doeth shune Them selfs; and so he sies a groue of tries Whoes loftie tops did seeme to threat the skies. 29. Wheirto Phelarnon hastelie did goe They promeist aide the heat for to with stand Wheir Sommers blossomes made a seemlie show So thick that heat nor cold no ntraunce fand Whose smell a swit ambrosiall odour throues Furth throuw the plains the medowes & the groue. 30. He much admeird those tries so straight & fyne The Cedar Elme, and Oak, the Ciprus fair The Esp, the Esh, the Popler, and the Pyne The Lourell, Ew, the Raintrie, Willow rair The Birk, the, Olyue, Sallow, and the Mirrhe The Mazer, Beitche, the Birsell, and the Firre.
31. There was he led throuw Naturs woundrous store Whill chiming birds did toune their chanting lay's Vnto a syluer brook that sweetlie rore Whoes murmur on the trembling Pebles play's Their roaring musick Echo bak eouds From hollow caues, heigh rock's, & whisling wind 32. And whil he trauel'd throuw these path's vnknown He suddanlie was avish'd with delight Of ane fai Ldie who to him wa showne All naked aife her smok, and sleipping streght Beautie wold neids triumphe & loue should wond Loue bred delight, and courious sight bred wondes 33. Her armes owt' croce her comely brest that hing As if thy wold defend i frome ssault Of frantick Loue who wih displayed wings A boe her in the are was finding falt That Ioue sutch sacred treasur would pas by Whome Iuno skarce could keip aboue the sky. 34. Her long small hands as lillis whitte did seem To ioy for being amorous eache of other Their soft embracements sweit they did esteem Whill as their fingers link't in pair's together Her yourie monts (to whose aspyring top's Blew asure conducts drew sweit Nectar drop's)
35. Humbled them self vnto her corall lipps Who in their pretious purple painting dye Tuo rainge of orietiall pele eclipse From wounding sight of peirsing mortall eye Wht carles sleip neglect's by curos chance In ordour lye her beautie to aduance. 36. Her muskie beah still mounting in the skie Whose smook lyk weit perfume infects the air Her deip nd hollow throat continually Sed furth a dulce and dolful sound of care Wheir wth um skalding sighes wer interlynd▪ Whoes muntig shew the soow of her mynd. 37. Her daintie limbs wer shed with flourie knop's Who loath to part fom ueh a galant pry Made leauie mantes of their lofie top's To hyde her daintie skine fom heat of day Ad flosht fairer then they did before Prouyding crouns and garlands for her glore. 38. Evn'e as the Lyzard through the flourie grase Beholds a mans fair isage will he sleip Thither in hist sh craull's with speedie pase And of her bood her kendlinges, taks no keip. Sh lyes she ooks, she loues, and taks delight To sie his face, and surfeit one the sight
39. So whill the Prince beheld the sleiping Mayde The beautie of her louely countenance Delight, loue, wounder, and amazement bred He stoode he stear'd he gaiz'd at eury glance He blush'd; to looke wheir touche (no looks) haue part Yet lookd, till looks in lust, hade droun'd his hart 40. Whill carles sleip thus naked had her left Left was the Prince in wounder, loue, delight. Delight his hart out throuw his eyes had reft Reft wih each looke each thought each glāce each sight Sight wounder, loue delight, amaizment breidinge Hope, passione, heat, desyre one lust still feiding. 41. At last resolulid with silent noyes drew neir To act this furious wofull tragedie ot knowing tha it was his Sister deir Whom he wold now bereaue of chastitie But o he feird that heauen's reuenging flame Wold plague him if he wrong'd that Virgine Dame. 42. And now he back reteirs with silent pace And shrouds him in a shaddow groue frome sight Wheir he might still behold her loulie face Whill she awaking frome a trubled spright With sobs, with sighes, with grones, with tears she sa∣yes h hauen's too long your justest vengeance stayes.
43. But shameing' thus to sie her self so bare She drawes her to her gramends neir hand bye And being cled she seemed thryce so fair That dimd the sight of any mortall eye None might abyd her blazing starr's bright glance Which back reuerberats their radiance, 44. Not muche vnlyk Apollos goldin light You first his drousie eyes may weel espy When he from wattie Thetis taks his flight And first begins to mount the azure sky But whane on tope of hiest heauen's he stands No ey his ey, no looke his looke, with stands, 45. Eu'ne so whill she did sleip he might descry The louelines and lustre of her face But being wakned now her cheirfull ey Furth throwes his spangling reyes in euery place Whose peircing glance with flamming hote desyre Threw lightnings furth, and set the skyes on fyre 46. The Prince Phelarnon byds no longer sight But goes vnto the fontane by and by She that had neuer seine ane armed Knight (Before that tyme) geue out a fearfull cry And fled he praes'd with flattring praise to poue her She knew no loue, no flattrie then could moue her.
Caput. IIII. Argument. Feirce Tropalance of Datia And Prince Phelarnon feght Laissa and they beth enchanted Ar by Mansay's might Great Sigismund ane armie brings Achaias to invade He vanquisht them and causd them seik To Thessaly for ayde 1. THat griesly chyld of darknes and of Hell Who had so well accomplisht her desyre Her poyson n Phelarnons breist did swell And qyt for to cōsume him with that fyre An othe Prince at thi sam ime she boght Who for the yke desye of glory sought. 2. This other Prince whome she had brought apace Wa wlking throuw thse groues and did espy Laissa who manteind her fearfull chace While as h thought her beautie dim'd the ky This Knight was Sone vnto the Datian Prince And heght to name the mightie Tropolnce
3. Who come he fontane Helicon to vew Whe nme so much throghout the world was known Bt seing ths fair Lady to eschew A Knight that to him now his eyes had shown Or him to mk a conqet then with speid He breath'd furth war with terrour & with dreid▪ 4. The Prince was loath to pairt from such a pray And preast to shun this Knight but all in vaine He lighted doune and stoutlye bad him stay Furh drawes the blad, had many thousand slaine Wheirwih lyke lightning dints, and blasts of hunder. His stroaks bred paine, paine raige, and raige bed wonder. 5. For lo his arme this brand hade raizd on hie And gaue the Prince vpone he armed creist So hudge and heauie blowes that now weel nie He maid his baih forsake his panting breist The Prince almost now braithes fearclie cyits Fals miscreant thow deirlie shall abyitt. 6. And hen his murdring blade did fearcely draw Ad gan the Paganes beist a thrust he sent Whch made him reill hat it appeird (in shew) Hi cursed lyfe out of her lodge was rent His shoulder blade receau'd so deip a wound He groeling fell with bloodie goir to ground.
7. The Prince past by and followed one his loue His loue, his Sister, and his vnknowne freind The Pagaine cursed all the Gods aboue And sweir he was sum feirce infernall feind And yit in this his raige he followed fast Till of the Prince he got a sight at last. 8. Who now hade gote Laissa in his armes And with myld words hade pacified her fear The which to Tropolance bred greatter harmes Then when he did his fleshe and armour tear Her looks he thinks vnto his loue consents Wheirby his courage tuentie fold augments. 9. Now wraith in him began to raige and swell And thus e said fy turne thy feble face Leaue that fair Lady and defend thy self Lo dreidfull death abyds the to embace Wheirwith he strak and peared the Princes syd With strength, the blaid for bloode maid antres wyd. 10. Then from Phelarnon stream'd a luk-warme flood With purple goir that dyed the grassie ground Whill as the Pagane spy'd the streaming blood The victorie he thought he surelie found But as a Lyone moud to raige and wraith. That teirs his prey with bloodie pawes to deith.
11. So now the Prince delt deildlie dints and blowes That nether armes nor sheild might them withhold Like haill and thundre thousand stroakes he throwes At last a stroak he gaue with courage bold This Pagaines breist with this his mightie hand Gaue way vnto the lyff reuenging brand 12. Eune as a mightie Cedar (cutt be-low By sharpned aix (falls trembling to the ground So fell the mightie Tropolance althow Reuenge, raige, furie, stroue with fats last wound And as dry woode when fye has spent the same At his last death sends furth the brightest flame. 13. So he (thogh dead in strength) with angrie pryd And curs'd reuenge renew'd his deing force The courteus Pince Phelarnon step'd a syd No hurt he profer'd but with myld remorce Requird him yeild, who in his dying smart Sheathed his poinyeard in the Prince his hairt. 14 This was the sorow of Achaians all This was the wrak and ruine of their croune This was the ground and causer of their fall This was the deith that dang their Phedro doune This brought great Sigismund from out his soyle With many thousand Datians to their spoyle.
15. But lo the graue magiciane Mansay knew The fatall end of those tuo princelie Knghs Thus in a dak blak cloud of fearfull hw He brought them to his caue with helshe prights Wheir yeat as then they gaspe their lattest breath And dies in paine yet leiues in endles death. 16. he fair Laissa he has thir also Enhaned still in her amaized moode Bcau she was he ground of all thi woe Whylls bnt n flam's & whyls shes dound in bloode That Hell it self no greatter burthene beirs Paine, raige, and greif, hr hait in peices teirs 17. Now Fame began her fether footed race By manie lands and seas she tooke he flight At last (to rest her swift and speedie pac) In Datia land at cour she doune did light And in the ears of mightie Sigismound Those wo full newes she wofullie did sound. 18. How that his deirest Sone dier Tropolance Achaians Prince hade now beref flye And hat into a Ladyes fa defence He bauli died in tha coragious stryfe Then plage on pague the Tyran ear's confoundit Pyd, angre, aige, reueng, blood, muther, soni.
19. Reuenge proceids of iniurie by right A Passione tht fraile man tormenteth much It gnawe the hart with torment of despight By day and eke by night molesting such As ar offendit thus iniust it proues. For the offendar nought at all it moues. 20. Sum in reuenge does alwayes use to kill But that is crewell rage and meir despight For he hat would reuenge must haue the skill To haue a kynd of pleasur and delyht That the reeng'd may feill with shme and pain The weyght of the Reuengers wath and gaine. 21. But Sigismund (of whom we now shall treat) Vs'd only crewell rage and not reuenge Most vitious and detestable deceat Most filthie barbarous and yet more strange A fear, a beastlines, a brutshe passione, An euill of euills, past all imaginatione. 22. A passione which with wemen doeth endur And oftentym's has by that Sex bene vs'd And also by the Vulgare being sure Of stronger backs, o cowards that has chus'd The weaker contrare partie for their fo And therupon theire courage most they show.
23. But lo the braue and mightie mynds (we sie) (Wheir valour dueells) their strength does exerceize Against the strong resisting enemie And those whose deids their fame does eterneize Whome they no soonner to their mercie gett But pitie does their crueltie abett. 24. Such pitie us'd not Sigismund who sweir To mak the Earth with Graecians blood so drunck That all the world yea heaune it self should heir The iust reuenge of his deir Sunnes deid trunck Thus soone he rais'd ane armie void of fear Whoes stomacks stout breath'd furth reuenge & wea 25▪ This Sigismund a mightie Pagane strong The scepter held of many mightie land Which he by right of warre or rather wrong Most Tyranelyk did keip into his hand Who with this armie great to Greece did goe And tour's, and strengths, and touns, did ouerthroe. 26. And comeing to Achaia at the last King Phedro old his furie to with stand An armie did conuein whei whih he past And mett him on the bordours of the land But this proud Pagan (with his multitude) Gott victorie with too much Christiane blood.
27. Twyce efter this the Paganes furious wrath Reuengd too well his ding sones deir blood Whole feftie thousand he did bring to death With fyftiene Princes of the royall brood Their King at last him self in Thebs inclos'd When Princes, lords, and commons all wer los'd. 28. Whom Sigismund incompast round about With wrath, with pryd, with iniurie and wrong He swoor that citie sould not hold him out Tho't wer as Troy as great a fair as strong But he wold mack irt equall with the plaine And theirof should no memorie remaine. 29. But Phedro old his threatninges to preuent (Fearing his wrak his ruine and his fall) Andromadan Embassadour he sent In Thessalie, releif help, ayde, to call Andromodan a great Achaian lord Whome valour, woorthe, & vertue much decoird,
Caput. V. Argment. PEenardo Prince of Thessalye Is heir vnto yow showne Whoes buried deids so long in graue Shall to the world be knowne Achaias great Embassadour Requyrs Thessaliae ayde The wich is granted and anone For warre prouisione made. 1. INto the mightie land of Thessalye Their regn'd a King that Grodane heght to name By mightie force he conquerd Arabie Throw Greciane land so famous grew his fame Earthes terrour, Europs tour, and Africks woe Bulwark of freends, and buriell of his foe. 2. This Grodane had to wyfe a noble Dame That Sister wes vnto the Spanishe King Whoes lyfe gouernd with uch a spotles name Od fme throw emptie ae this song did sing Thy happie Prince of Iasons lyne that regn's And to the world an other Iason breng's.
3. Those tuo wer lou'd with such a lust regarid She lou'd, he feird, she praisd, and he renound The famous citie Eregon he reird And built the princelie Palace Pitemuond And their hi's royall court he intertain'd, Million's of knights and Ladyes their remaind. 4. He had no children but a Sone alone Whoes beautie and proportione of his face Bewrayd his royall Progenie anone His persone Princelye and his comelie grace Most rair, most wyse, most valorous, most fair Most lou'd, most loath'd, still croc'd, with Fortuns sna. 5. Penardo cald the obiect of disdain The skorne of loue, the monument of lothe The mirrour of mischeif, the map of paine, The marck of daunger, and the mold of wrath The Seat of sorrow, and the tombe of care The winges of wrack, the Burtio of dispair. 6. Yet was he well traind vp in feart's of armes Tilt's, turnayes, and all war-lyk exercise Whoes braue vndanted Spright espyes no harmes Whoes mightie force his fame doeth eternize So lou'd of all, and yet that all so feird him That Heaune, and Earth, & Hell, to much admird him.
7. And had his grand-Syre (Iason valorous) Bein now alyue he hade not cron'd the Maine For that his dangling tresses pretious Surmunts the goldin fleece whiche he did gaine His looks, his gesture, and his countenance Would chaistest Phoebe moue to dalliance 8. Dame Nature followed him with sad laments Compleining of her treasurs emptie coffers Proportioune beautie vertues excrements Was left to her and cheirfullie she offers To quyt all those if he would proue so kynd To runder back perfections of they mynd 9. And yet sumtyme she (stairing' in his face) Wold seeme to loue him wowing him with swyll' And proud of this her handie work whoes grace She swoir the glorye of the gods beguyl's And other whills complaining in a rage She lak'd materiall's for ensueing age. 10. Which true did proue for Nature was vndone The earth was lost, and mankynd was forlorne Th'ensewing ages monster's prou'd too soone Some reasone wants some but proportione borne Some dum, some deaf, some blind, some leam'd ar seene Some sensles, witles, strenghtles, hartles bein.
11. Now whill the Earthe was rap't with admiratione Of this fair youthe so muche admeir'd of all (One contrarie remou'd) the confirmatione He seem'd to haue of all that grace men call He that in loues despight him self had showen Yet lou'd at last and loath'd was ouerthrowen, 12. For who can shunn his fortune or his fate All to loues liue tho' lyfe wer but a night Cear, traueel woe, with pleasure does debait Greif sorow, paine, with pastyme, ioy, delight. The truest happimes one earthe remaine Wheir croce is mixt with confort, ioy with paine 13. But Whil fair fame (this royall court to show Throuw spatious Earthe and oceane took her flight Aduentrous Knight's hade (many year's ag'oe) Sleep't in dark silence of eternall night Desyre of honor (to the worlds vew) Calls furthe one Youth, deip Danger to persue, 14. Penardo as ane Gallant would obey Whoes braue heroick spright surpast so farre All youths of Greece that he would oft essay The most and best approued Knight's of warre When tuo at once he caus'd for to effront him They could not find the meins for to dismont him
15. Yet whill he sleip't at home in silent pace Th' Embassadours come to the court in haist Frome out Achaia whom it pleasd his grace To entertaine with many royall feast Who muche admeird the great magnifience Of his fair court and of his excellence 16. Thrie dayes wer spent in feasting or repast When hey desyr'd for to be hard of all The King and counsell being set at last They wer convay'd vnto a princelie hall Yea to vnfold that costlie court so fyne Should pas the might of such a Muse as myn▪ 17. The pillers wer of purest yuorie fram'd With pearle and pretious stone in gold embost Whoes glistring beam's continuall light inflamd That sable Night her entrance their had lost The stones to wall's their glances consecrat's Which ritchest mantles still reuerberat's 18. Whoes maiest was staitlie to behold For round about the walls the tapestrie Was goodlie arace wrought with Indiane gold With purple silk and syluer gloriouslie So viuelie wrought vnto the humane eye Maiestick purtreats lyuelie seemd to be▪
19. Their Cupid painted in his glistring pryd His eyes wer shut, yet in his crewell fist An goldin bow and arrowes did abyd Wheir with he shot at randone when he list He bends, he draw's, he shoots no shaft in vaine He hitt's the Hart, & yet no marks remaine. 20. Ther Ioue and their the Thebane Semale Their jealous Iuno lyke her Nurse appeirs And caus'd her seik that Ioue in majestie Wold come with thundring darts & lightning fyr's Their might you sie when he performd ye same Her birne in heauenlie fyre & schoarcking flamme 21. Their Leucothea. their was Phoebus bright In sheape of old Eurimine her mother Their Orchamus her father tacks her streght, And eard's her quick (til Phoebus coming hither) Vnto a lamp a starre a flamming light He chang'd her for to chace from thence ye night 22. Ther Mars and Venus at ther dallying sports Their Vulcans artificiall yrone nett Wherin he wrapt these louers, their resorts Feir Danaes Sone whome Ioue did erst beget Who cutts Medusa's heid and their the fontane Wheir he had chang'd King Athlas in a montan.
23. Their also feghts he with the monster wyld That persecutes the fair Andronad euer Their Cephey and Cassiope bewayld Their daughters hap, & yet could help her neuer Whom thundring Ioue iniustlie their detaind She weip't, she murnt, she sigh't, she pray'd, she plā'd 24. All these vow might haue sein so perfectlie That nothing els but vitall breath they wanted Whil as they seem'd to lurk so priuely Sum heir sum their in pairs together hanted They seemd to blushe when curious eyes did sie them And shrow'd their yuorie limms in fowlds to flie them 25. So Cynthia does shrood her self frome sight Of wearie Trauelers that wandring strayes Wapt vp in darkest cloud's of silent night Yet through thin clouds oft fhoots out syluer rayes So seem'd they in those fowlds, to creip vn knowne Yet shew them self vnwilling to be showen. 26. Or as the stream's of crooked wynding brooks Now heighe then low, now ryse, then falls againe In darkest corners holes and priuie crooks Will steall vnseene Yet can not skaip the maine Each umbling in hudge heap's their homage does Compleaning on the Earths vnkynd refuse
27. Eune so those mantles glorious riche and rair If strurd will alter chainge and turne in vaine Trembling and wafting mou'd whith shaples aer Heir low their heighe their low heir hyeghe again Whiche maks sum portrats show & sum reteir Sum heighe sum low and sum vnwar's appeir 28. Those strangers stoode amazed at that sight The King to brek their silence low did moue him Vpon a bench of gold that graue great light A Pale lyk heauens-starrd'd can oby aboue him The cheifest bow'd to ground and then began To show the King (who heght Andromadan.) 29. O thouw most mightie Prince of Iasons race Thou skourge of Paganes and of Persians pryd O thow who did by mightie strength deface Arabia foelix and the spoyls deuyd Amongst the Souldours with a princelie mynd Thy seruants come from far, thy help to fynd 30. Know that we ar Archaian's mightie Prince Of antient Greciane bloode we ar discendit Against the Paganes we haue made defence Our realme lost our royall blood is endit Our King our countray kingdome croun & all Arrest and forc'd before our Foes to fall
31, By Sigismund great King of Datia Of Transyluania and Moldauia Prince Of Seruia and of Valachia He holds the septure and the gouernance With armies great to mak his valour knowne Our contrey, tours, and tounes has ouerthrowne 32. This was the caus, Ill hap our Prince let out One day the mont Parnassus for to vew Well arm'd he was both loftie strong and stout Well fauord fair and of a heauenly hew Our King Of Children had no more at all Ther was he lost, and their our strength did fall 33. For their he chanc'd to vew a sacred Muse Enamourd thus he fondlie fell in loue Pre sing her deuyne deitie to abus Whose mynd from chaist desyrs he could not moue By chance a Kinght arryu'd & sought withall His paine, his greif, his lose, his death, his fall 34. And thus they both in combat fought a space Vntill ther fa all howre approched neir And then they both wer slaine into that place Evne then began our woe, our wrack our care This Kinght was Prince of Datia & was Sone To Sigismund for him this warre begane,
35. When he had done in silence still he stoode Abyding answer fom the King who sayde (In greattest ire) he wold reuenge their bloode And willinglie wold lend his freindie ayde Liue happic Prince (sayd thay) in whoes sweitt eyes Wrath, terrour, dreid, reuenge, and glorie lyes. Caput. VI. Argument. THe armie marches to Achai, Encamps on Phocis plaine Grodane seeks peace at Sigismund Who anfwers with disdame Boeotia stayes their garisone For Grodans help they sue Penardo goes to their releef With all the Aenean crew. 1. O Amitie the worlds onlie lyfe Without the which this great & woundrous fram Of heaun & earth should so be wrapt in stryfe That contrare motion's wold cōfund the same It seem's frome mightie Ioue thow art descended He send the doun when this great work was ended.
2. Of man thow art the staff and only guyde Without the, man should walk in darkest nigh Thow art the stay, and ioy of his abyde The worlds lamp her lanterne and her light Of Gods elect the sacred flamme alone Kindled in heaune before his mercies thron. 3. The Nurse of true societie humane Piller of staitts and policies for aw Nor any els saue Tyrans the disdane For wheir thow art their is no neid of law: Law is a second mein deuyed to be And serus for nought but their wheirs want of the. 4. Trew freind ship reulls desyre and the affects The hert, the toung, the mynd, the will, and all But lay the yock of justice on their necks For aw of punishment, and fear of thrall They ar constraind their duetie for to doo Which freind ship wold most willinglie go too. 5. Thus Amitie the sacred flamme has beine That fosters truethe, to duetie geuing lyfe Whih in this following historie is sine By Grodane who had wrapt him self in stryfe In him true Amitie hade sole dominione Which gaue no place to wordlie base opinione.
6. For lo his counsell wold this way proceid They could not thus procur so great a foe Except the King Heyre to Achai succeed Great fools ar they that threatning dangers knoe And rune but hope but help aduyse, delay Headlongs to wrack, to ruine, to decay. 7. This seem'd to grie with reasone but the King Who feard not, caird not, sought not, gaine to craue True vertue, glorye, amitie did rigne In him who could not, should not, wold not leaue His freinds in strait, in danger, in distress His ayde, they sought and they should find no less. 8. Wheirat the legatts (falling one their face) Did weep for verie ioy before them all And reuerentlie againe they thank his grace And Thessaly for armes began to call The Kings will, pleasure, and command declar'd Bands, legions, troups, & squadrons wer prepar'd, 9. Thus throgh the mightie land of Thessalye Theirs nothing hard but murther, bloode, and wear Such tumolts did aryss that presentlye All nighbour nationes gann his force to fear Fame fil their ears eune babling fame too nimble All feard his name, and fearing all did tremble.
10. So feard is Nilus proud and mightie raige That fertill Aegipts land does ouerfloe When by the hatcheing Crocadills presage They know how farr the Princelie stream will goe When ower his bancks he spreds his azure wings All faints, all fears, all flies the force he brings. 11. Then while the floure of Thessally repaird Before Eregon on a pleasant plaine Whoes panting hearts appeald their pow're prepaird To gield their glistring armes with glorious gaine To wrath they yeild, wrath, them to warre commands. Wrath arm'd their heart's, their harts has arm'd their hands. 12. This great and mightie armie was as much One horse and foote as feftie thousand strong Wheirof wer threttie thousand footemen such As any was all Christiandome among The horsemen all wer Princes, Lords, and Knights Great wonders wrought their valours, strētghs & migh 13. In Thessaly and Aeneans did dwell Of all the Greicks those were the most renound In martiall featts of armes they did exeell Their pedegre from braue Achilles found Of those ten thousand to this warre was sent Most braue, most stronge, most fearce, most valient,
14. Those guardes the persone of this mightie King And called his Caualarie alwheir Thus well prouyded all of euerie thing This armie martch'd in goodlie ordour their And being come vnto the frontiers end Grodane his legat to the Datian send. 15. Requiring him from such attemps to cease And let the Graecians brook their natiue soyle Restoiring back their cities and with peace Depart but trouble, pillage, pray, or spoyle And be not proud of Fortuns plesant howres Whoes smyls ar mixt with frouns whoes sweitts with sorwes 16. Altho his Sone Prince Tropolance was slaine Him self too weell reueng'd his death before For he the Prince Phelarnon kild againe The law of armes prouyds reuenge no more Then should he not triumphe and tyrannize Thus in their fall, their wrack, their miseries. 17. Eune as a staitlie ship (her foes to urge) Furth slyds vpon the restles, rolling waw Imperiouslye she cutts the azure surge One Thetis back she ryds with galant shaw But when the angrie Seas begins to roare Waues beats her doune, that beat the waues before,
18. So hie vpone the tope of Fortuns wheell Must neids be throwne doune heidlongs at a bloe In pryd he said he wold make Grodane feell The force of datian arms before he goe Altho his Sone had els reuengd his death That kingdome skair slie could suffeice his wrath. 19. And sure (quod he) if I had knowne the platt That Grodane made this warre to take in hand I wold haue keipt his glorie in fo that Yea and perhaps his furie still with stand For eune before the wall of Eregone My armie ther in armour should haue shoone. 20. Soone after those disdain full speeches past The armie martch'd sum tuentie leggs that so Thy being neir to Phocis at the last Grodane direct'd ane herauld for to show (By sound of tumpet) that he wild them yeild But they refuis'd, wheirfore he man'd the feild. 21. When he haid laid his seige vnto the citie His Skoutts brought in a Messinger in hast Who prayd his Maiestie to tak some pitie Vpon Bieotia that was lost almaist Tuo dayes ago they slew their garysone And maid reuolt frome wicked Sigismune.
22. And lo of Transyluania the Prince (Cald strong Phelaston) comes to raze their wll And kill them selfs, their, Enfants but defence Leaueing no memorie of them at all, This Prince indeid of all the Pagane camps Was most renound and feard for braue attemp▪ 23. Of manly courage stout of body strong Bold was his hart and valorous his hand Crewell his mind enuyous full of wrong Disdaine, pryde, raige, yea furie in him fand A duelling sitt (and last to show him right) Feareles of God, cairles of hells despight. 24. Wheirfore Penardo neids wold show him sel And falling one his kneis before his Syre Desyr'd that he might haue the chairge to quell The furie of that princelie Paganes ire His trembling voice, pale face, and fyrie breath Showes his true valour and his furious wrath 25. So does a gentle Lyon meik and myld (For Princes pleasour team'd with teacher true) If mou'd to raige and wrath he growes so wyld His wonted courage in his breist renew His taill he lifts a loft and uffs his heir. Shoots surth his flamming toung, & pawes to teare.
26. Loath was his father he should vndergoe So greatt a charge in these his tender yeirs Yet knowing courage did his breist ore floe In him strength, might, and valour weell appeirs Whoes sune of glorie can no cloud ow'r vaill Whoes day no night, nor darknes, may assayle. 27 To him he gaue this great and mightie charge And with him sent three Princes stout and bold Whoes name fame, praise, worth, valor shall at large Be showen aboue the notherne starr' enrold And with him went those warrelyk Aenean bands Terror of earth, and strength and Graeciane lands.
Caput. VII. Argument. PEnardo's ayde is cum to lat The toun is set on fyre He followes on the Enemie Revenge is his desyre A visione in his sleip appeirs The whiche he does declear Beneth Apollo's altar, He Hes found an armour fair 1. AMbitioune is a passioune woundrous strong Of noble courage and of mightie force Whiche captive leads all galant spreits along And euen the strongest passions does enfore Yea loue it self whiche seemeth to contend Yet oft ambitione victor proues in end. 2. Ambitione is an flamme that burns the mynd With endles drouth still thristing efter glorye A blind excessiue gredine (of kynd) To be imbost in tym's eternall storie Still hunting after greatnes that we sie Ambitione neuer satisfied to be.
3. Ambition heigh is no a Passione feat For baseborne brain's, or wordlie small attemp's Renoune and glorie stoups not to such bait Those ar not capable but ar contemp's For proud ambioune beats & casts them doune Whill as they sek praise, glory, and renoune. 4. Ambitione after gaine does not persue Nor actions reapping profeit does it cair But ay wheir dreidfull danger does ensu Difficult strainge vnusuall and rare Eu'ne there, ambitione hunts for glorie eue For base and wordlie gaine it caireth neuer. 5. This passione Prince Penardo did bereaue Of whom we write this following historie Who thirsting after honor seem'd to leaue A famous name in Glorious memorie In him ambitione, crewell warre susteind Gainst loue, and famous victorie obtaind 6. Who as we said rece'd that armie small Wheir with he should releiue Beotias neid But Sigismundi (the citie for to thra) Haid send the Transiluaniane Prince with speid Whoes valarous renoune to heaune did munt Wheir for Penardo with ambitione brunt,
7. He freat's) he froun's, he longs to reaue the croune Of fame and glory from Phelastons head And set it on his owne, whih great renoune To beir it though the world vnconqueed More greif he fynds when one goes him before Then ioy in conquing of a thous and skore. 8. Now he right glade in gaining of this chairge Tuo dayes led furth his army one the wy At last drew neir and on a plaine right large Wold neids refresh his weare men a day And then he sends, to learne, to vew to kno Th' estate, the place, the number of his foe. 9. When Phebus drinsh't his sylver shyning hair In Thetis lape they saw a cloud aspyre Whoes smook send suddane darknes throw the ac Wherin appeird reid flashing flamm's of fyre As if the earthe out of her bowells wyde Had send to choak the loftie heauens for pryde. 10. While as the armie vewing stoode amaiz'd Whoes hautie hearts no fear could harbor in Yeit vew's with fear and fearing still they gaz'd Their quyet murmur made a feafull dine At last the skoutts returning told ye treuth Which mou'd them all to, woe, to care, to reuth.
11. Know mightie Prince your enemies ar gone Becaus thy haue fulfild their fearce desyre For they haue raysd the walls of yonder toun And set it all wth skoarching flamm's a fyre Touns tours and walls in cwell fyre doth burne Men, women, babs, by bloodie swords ar torne. 12. This was the caus of their destructione loe They feard the Prince his ayde should come too lait And laking souldiours on their wall's to show For their defence agains thir crewell fate Within a forrest full of lack's and fenn's Thre hundreth robes lay in caues and denns. 13. The cheif of these was once a citizene Who playing bancker out, his goods bade lost Whairfoe he hyed him to the Robers dene Who chus'd him chifane of their theeuishe host Him hyr'd they straight with soum's of Indiane gold To guarde their walls and to defend their Hold 14. But he who had no pitie nor regaird Vnto their lywes but only to their gold Agreid by piuie letter's for reward And to Phelaston has the citie sold Ah haples wretch that caust destoy and kill Men at thy mercie, thy command, and will.
15. Eune as the mightie marlion mounts the sky And soares one loftie wing's with gaizing eyes At last the chirming larke she does espy Cheif chante in the queir of all that flies Whose hollow throat, sends furth a thous and sounds To pearce the azure vaults that back redounds, 16. Her shrill sweit notts, with silent blowing breath Now seing her fearce enemie aspyre Pearcing the emptie aer to flie from death Whil to prolong she mounteth, still the hyer Bot with sad looks, whill thus she bids adue Their she a wearie traueler does vew. 17. Whoes hart she oft had cheird with chirming cleir Awaking him frome drousie sleip to ryse And warnd him that Apollos light drew neir And in his long'sum iorney did deuyse New not's wheiron she curious descant founds Filling his ears with diapason sounds 18. And thinking now that he wold thankfull be She hyes fast doune and seiks his ayde to beild her With feirfull shreiks does in his besome flie Glad that she song to him who now does sheild her But he whoes hairt no pitie harbours loe Deliuers her vnto her mortall foe.
19. So did this fructe of ill this welh of woe This curse of hauene in Whoe vnntutall hart No ptie could haue plac but to her foe The citie yelds (for this her good desert) That oft had song sweit not's of educatione To draw him from his haples constellatione 20. Eu'ne so the rauening wolfe by simple goat Boght vp, with loue, with trauell, care, and, paine And feid vpon her teat (such is her loat) Till strength and force and vigour he retaine Then he whome she brought vp so cairfullie Her deith, het graue, her sepulchre must be 21. The Prinee that pitied suche a sore mischance Admiring much this monstrous crueltie Swoor in a rage his armie to aduance Till he reueng'd Boeotias miserie Which did inrol his praise aboue the skyes His fame, wooth, valour, woundrous victories. 22. When Phebus harbinger in crimsone cled Chaic'd donne to Hell nights hated hew abhorde The flower that murn's for Phebus absence spred Her beautie furhe and smyl's vpone her Lord Whoes birning beams and lyfe infusing rayes Confots the Earth and beautifieis ye skyes
23. Then through the campe a murmur gane to ryse All cryes for armes the trumpets sounds aloud Ther sturdie coursars courage loudly brayes And seemd to cry for lofte ydars proud They forward march't whith ioy & great delight Their willing mynds made heauie armour light 24. And martching thus with suche a restles pace Thre dayes hee nights, a last they com in sight Of thei proud foe who heiring of their chaice Had lyk desyre lyik will to proue their might Shouts, clamours, cryes, on eurye syd descry Their will, desyre, and hope of victory. 25. And yit Phelaston lyk ane champioune wyse Forecasting perrells in his throught alone Feard that Penardo's hardie enter pryse Was but a craftie traine to draw him on And that the armie in some corner lay His campe vpone a suddane to betreay 26. Yet being of a mightie galant mynd He sham'd to flie at his imaginatione Wheir fore in hast to Athens did he send Wheir Brando lay at seige to show the fashione Brando the reull ou'r Seruia did hold Stout, hardy, wight aduentorous and bold
27. Which when he hard his seige he rais'd in hast And to the Prince Phelaston martch'd along Now know that in his camp thei was at least One horse and fute sum tuentie thousand strong To Sigismund those newes he shortlie sends Who rais'd his seige frome Thebs and thither wends. 28. Now Primum mobile hade drawen the light with his swft course out of ou Hemispere And pred the eatblack mantle of the night That summonds all the creatures with fear Vnto their rest then for to be thair sheild They built a canues citie on the feild 29. Whil thus he had incamped in their sight Set furth his watch his campe intrinshit strong This Campioune caus'd disarme them all that night For their refreshment afte iorney long After repast the Prince to sleip is gone And in his sleip appeird this visione. 30. A virgine Nymphe (whoes beautie dimd the sky) Wih saddest looks with sobs with sighs with tears So sorowfull she seem'd with weipping ey Led by tuo feinds of Pluto's griesly fears Her body seem'd all dyed in crimsone blood Her garment skoarch'd in flamm's of hellish brood.
31. Thus leading her hard by him (as he thought) She cryd o sweitt Penardo lend thy ayde Whoes only strength the fates decree has wrought To end the ceasles torments of a Mayde Wheirat him thought he start with suddane fear Drawing his brand those hellishe feinds to tear. 32. But then with myldest speeche she sayd no more Thy willingnes suffeizeth at this tyme A geater danger thow must pas before Thy happie ayde geue end vnto my cryme But mightie Ioue in danger, warre, and styfe Preserue thy fame, thy honor, and thy lyfe. 33. Not farr their stands within a pleasant vaill Ane altar built at Agamemnons cost In honor of fair Pallas sacred Cell When he was captain of the Graetiane host Their, lyes a sword, a sheild, ane armour fair Of woorth, of wounder, and of vertue rare. 34. Feight not before yow haue this armour on Whose woorth shall much aduance thy wondrous fam For know this much before tuo dayes by gone That Pluto has conspyrt to spoyle thy name. For he has send the Feinds in legions foorth To seik to shame, to wrack, to staine, thy woorth.
35. And thus she vanisht quyt out of his sight He wakeing one a suddane from his sleip hought this to be a fantasie too light That from his humor'd braine did fondlie creip Yet warlie did his thoughts one witt attend Weying if good or ill theron depend. 36. Aurora in her purple robe arose Warning poud Titan for to light the dy And drew the courtens that did hm disclose In Thetis louelie armes that dalleing lay Who stole away and in the gloomie East Reard vp aboue the Earth his flamming crest. 37. How soone the Prince espyit his goldine light He cald for Mandadorus Prince of Mesone This Mandadorus was of greattest might Of all his subiects saue the Duik of Thesone To him he told his dreame who said your grace May try't and trying lett the trueth haue place. 38. Wheirfore he send and from his antient roume Causd raise the altar wheir they fand a stone Of Alabastre builded lyk a Toumbe In greik sum letters wer ingraft theron Those we ethe words (ingraph't in gold so fyne That now as first their lustre seem'd to shyne.
39. This pretious stone ane armour does retain Whose woundrous woorth as yit shal no man know Vntill the Spreit of them that liues in pain Eune to a mightie stranger shaell them show Who with the same recalls relents, releifs, Thrie Souls from paine, from death, frō Hells mischeifs 40. Hid was the meaning darck the sentence seemd Of all the trueth they could not rype the ground But this fair costlie armour as they deemd Had at the famous wars of Troy beine found Which graue and wyse Cassandra had inuented For Paris, Troys feirce fall to haue preuented. 41. Lo thus it was she knowing by her art The ruine of heaun threatning Troy drew neir And that proud Paris his vniust deert Should be the caus of such an endles weir To him by art she had this armour wrought That all the Gods decree might turne to nought, 42. Fo she discending to the lowest Hells Her mightie powre in magick force she shew The greislie Ghosts stood trembling whill she tells Her will in frameing of this armour new Loath to prouyd remorce, remeid, releif Who ioy'd in blood, warre, murther, and mischeif.
43. Yitt fear them forc't they durst not disobey Her mightie art and all commanding will For she with strainge characters could a lay The pains of Hell from punishment of ill Yea she the Suns diurnall course culd stay And turne to dakest night the brightest day. 44. And whill these feinds this armour fyne did make They forgd the metall first in Aetnas flame And temperd it into the Stygiane lake With herbs of woundrous force amongs't the same That mightie stong inchantments can with stand Yea sword, and fyre, and water, can command. 45. Ioues douchter brought king Agamemnon furth When she with them returning was to Troy Who seing them of such a woundrous woorth Bereft the graue Cassandra of her ioy Who had with herbs and flams of Flegitone Composd a strange and admirable stone. 46. Which secreitlie she in this armour sett Whose vertue was his owner for to stay From loue, and amorous desyr's to lett Arming the hart gainst all venereall play For princelie Paris she deuys'd this traine That he might render Helene back againe.
Caput. VIII. Argument. AChaians fall fair Pallas doeth Forsie long tyme before And that Penardo should them raise Vnto their former gloir The Aenens tuo batales win And by the Prince alaine The Transyluanian and the Seruian Disput; both ar slaine. 1. WHen as the Greciane gote this armour lo Ioues brain borne girl did gif him this command That of this thing no creatur should know Till he returnd vnto his natiue land Wheir to her name he should ane Altar rear And secreitlie inclose this armour rheir. 2. The which he did with duetifull regaird According to heighe pallas her command For loe tht sacred altar vp he raird Their vnder layd the armour which they fand Wheir it had lyine so many hundreyht yeirs Vn-found vnmark'd vnknowne as it appeirs.
3. Sum sayes that bight warlyk pallas did forsie Eune then, the ruine of Achaias croune And that fair Lissa cause theirof should be Trogh hir great bewtie of so hye renoune Thus she prouyds, forseis, preuents their fall By means vn sought, or unrequeird at all. 4. This brought Penardo out of Thessaly Fom torment this fair virgine to releass So faites ordaind such was his desteny So heauns decreed her torment thus should ceass O mightie Ioue blesd be thy sacred name That so preuents, sorseis, temeids, our shame. 5. When they had brought this armour to the Prence They fitted him so weell on euerie pat A if they had bene made for that pretence Who thus acouter'd with a loftie harte Lyk Mars him self his countenance he ba That thundred furth blood, victorie, and war. 6. This armour was with red vermilione rosd And spangled thick with starrs of Indian gold Whose cornert point with diamonds imbosd And syluer branches that the starrs vphold He goes they glance they shyne while as he sturd Of all hes praisd, regairdt, loud, admyrd.
7. His hautie helmet guildet all with gold Whoes shynning brighnes trembling terror bred Ow'r all his creist an Eggle did vnfold His goldim winges which proudlie ouerspred The shynning helme and wth his tall ones wyde He seemd to tear the metall in his pryde. 8. Vpone his downie cronne their stoode vpright A bunsh of plumes discolored diuerslie Spangled with spangs of gold and pearle whoes light Daizled the sight of the beholders eye Their shaddowes in the Eggls eyes did glance That seemd right glad of this their dalliance. 9. So does a tall and loftie Cedar show That growes on top of mightie Parnass montane The myldest blast that Zephyrus can blow Maks all his leaues to tremble on the fontane Or Cynthia lyk in silent night that shawes Her beam's to daunce and glance one Thetis wawes: 10. Of burnisht steill his glanceing sheild It shone The true presage of his ensewing dayes Wheir sat a lady on a crimsone throne A knight lay prostrat at her feitt who sayes Ah Fates your fearce Decree I surelie proue That keeps her hart from all the darts of loue.
11. His mortall blad did semlie hing with hold Within a syluer sheath wrought curiouslie The hiltes wer of the fynnest burnisht gold Which pearle and saphyre stones did beautefie No metall nor enchantment could resist This murthring blade when euer his owner list. 12. And armed thus he red vpon a steid Whoes pryd with pransing beatts the groneing ground And champing on his foamme bitt with dreid Wold seim with trampling noye the aer to wound. By loftie volts and rauets showing still How glade he was t'obey his masters will, 13. Who manag'd him so weell at wisht contents Wih turns and curbits heir and their remoues And when he slakt the rayns his loftie sprents Wold kaislie tipp the trembling earth with houes And glad of such a Maister matchles rare With swift impetuos speid wold peirce the aer. 14. Off was his helme, his amorous face and eyes Lyke Hesper shynd amongst the lesser lights His countenance still pomest victories Fair smyling, sweitt, and pleasant in their sights A light but fyre a hat but fear or dreid A lamp vnqueinshd a mynd vnconquered
15. Then loue him self more sweit his countenance Wheir grace ay hid in glanceing beauties lap Still sending with each smyle, each look, each glance A thousand amours that the senses rap With all delight at last he breathed forthe True valour vertue wonder glorie wothe. 16. Braue Bretherine and Campanions all in wear Remember your Forefathers loftie feat's Our sweit Thessalian soyle did only bear Those mightie mynds that all the earth abaits Our natione with our Iason left their soyle To gaine the glorie of the goolden spoyle. 17. What brauer spreits in Greece then hath be in ours What greatter glorie then our countrey wan? What manlie mynds and mightie Conquerour's But we may claime ay since the world began Yea if we look our lyns discents and bloods Wei'll shame to flie from worlds of multituds. 18. leaue we honor, fame discent, and blood, Remember onlie whom with all we deall With Pag'anes, spoylars of the christian Good The antient foes of Greece we must assayle Nay foes I shame to call them not but Theues On robrie theft, spoyle, prey, & pillage leeues.
19. Their Captane strong Phelaston strong I know Tho cald so stout so strong so fearce in fight Tho Persians, Syrans, and Arabiams too He foyls yet hes not feltt the Gaecian might Those naked, bare, vnarmmed, fear maks fall Bot hautie Greeks surpas them, him, & all 20. Great victorie hy this braue feght shall come The daunger nothing and the labour small Some fearfull strengthles, hairtles, mightles, some Before our face they fear, they flie, they fall What neid we mor bat kill tak, stay, and chace Enuy, stryf, discord, throw them flies a pace. 21. Whereat the armie gaue a ioyfull cry And willinglie they rank them selfs the whyle Their Captanes and commanders ioyfullie Did cheere them vp with the reward of spoyle Ther breists ar sweld with conquest courage wrath The roaring trumpet's sounds blood, warr, & death. 22. The Prince his battells ordored in this sort By Mandadorus was rhe vnegaird led To whom tuo thousand fotemen did rosurt Of Aneans a thousand horse he had Who looks lyk hungrie Lyons whill they go That wrath warre blood & veangeāce doeth foreshow
23. Phenabon prince of Thays the reirward had Equall in nombre wepins arm's devyce Belmondo duike of Toropeia led The batall great that was as mony twyce All those for warre wer borne in warre they floorisht In trauells great, great paine great danger nurisht 24. The Ptince him self wold not in batteil stand But with tuo thousand mightie men of armes Would geue supplie wheir any want he fand And with fresh ayde would still reuenge their harmes Whille as he said Braue Brotherin let me sie. That if they fle thei'r slaine, if feght they die. 25. Now by this tyme the Prince Phelaston had Hrs armie weel in battel ranck arayed And with new hope their fanting harts he fed That nothing now but eourage in them stay it His venegaird was fyue thousand at the least Led by a migtie Pagane Alphorest. 26. Lagone the reirwaird led a Pagane good Wheir was fyue thousand bold strong hardy stout And with him self the greattest battel stood Ten thousand strong but fear but care but doubt Thus martching both they joune the trumpetts sounds At whoes hudge noyes both heauen'e & eath redoūds
27. Lyke to the blasts of boystrous Boreas Tht hurl's wth haistie wings from hiest heau'ne With thundring royes and threatning glorious To shk the Earths fundatione fondlye dreven Blasting the heauens' that back redounds his blowe Beatting' the earth and billowing Seas that showe. 28. With swelling waues to soare in loftie skye Disdaining the gouernement he keip's Thath causeth all their wtrie empyr's ryes From silent moueing in the lowest deip's Raising hudge mont's one. Neptun's azure plaine In foamie drops he throuws them doune againe. 29. And vp agane through aerie waults from sea's His bloustring blast from North to South he sends Crushing the clouds that fast before him flies Togither dash't their broken ranks discends In tearie drops as if they seem'd to weip That he so great gouernament should keip. 30. Eune so these mightie men of armes did crushe With furious strenght their weapones each on other Hudge drops of bloode in stream's did alwayes gush The streams in floods the fluds brought Seas togethe That drops, and strem's & floods, & seas took pair To drinshe, to dashe, to droune, the Martial hart.
31. The rank's that stiflie stands agenst ther foes Fall's doune in slap's waltring in bloodie stryn'ds Wheron freshe ranks (still marching brauely goes Out ou'r the belies of their deing freinds Not yelding to their foes till ether syde Does sacrafice their soulls to swelling pryde. 32. Now whilst on eurie syd they fearslie sight The wantguards met with mightie strength and bos Wheir Alphorest the Pagane shew his might Before his feit lay manie deing ghoste Till Mandadorus saw such hauok their Wheir Alphorest did feght he did repair. 33 And Alphorest (that lyk a Lyoune bears Him self) espyd the Prince of Meson by To red him self of commone souldeours feirs His bloes seem'd lightning thundert throw the sky. And then he lent the Prince a mightie bloe That almost from his horse he forcd him goe 34. But he acquyts him lighting on his hand That hand and sword, and all, fell to the ground And wheir his visar louse he lykewayes fand He made him, their receaue his fatall wound The Pagans now began to fear and fant When as their mightie leadder thus they want.
35. And by this tyme the greattest battel flies Eune their wheir as the Transysuanian stoode For that Penardo with his freshe supplies Had brok in throw their ranck embrew'd whith blood So that in generall all began to flie Except Phelaston their would brauelie die 36. And sure that day his admirable might If I sould pas vntold I wer to blame For that him self alone in single fight Had slaine thrie knights of great and famous name Lighosthon, Guelpho, Meldabreid, at lenth By cruell death had felt his mighte strength 37. Nor those alone by his accursed hand Depyu'd of lyfe of soule of breath did lye But Oerard, Ormond, Groian, by his brand Were slane all Knights of noble progenie With many mo he in that fatall stryfe Hurt, feld, or bruis'd, or then bereft of lyfe. 38. Penardo still that followed on the chaise Belmondo and Phenabon he espy'd Both by one Knight wer put to great distres Ther armour all with crimsone blood was dy'd In greattest hast if he had not come to theme That Knight alone was lyke for to vndo theme.
39. Yet woundring that such woundrous force could be In one to foyle such fomous Knights as they And piteing that other syde should die He trusts him self betuein and bids them stay And to Phelaston sayes heir ar no foes Bot from his brand he answerd him whith bloes. 40. Then he commands those tuo to stande asyde The furious Pagane feiresie he assaild His thristie blade oft in his bloode he dyed At euerie stroak his armour he dismaild With equall strengthe the Pagane countervaild him Showing his woundrous valour no thing faild him. 41. The Pagane raisd his sanguin sword in hie Discharging blowes vpone his helmet strong Whill fyrie starr's out of his eyes did flie His mouh furth-casting streams of bloode along Wheirfore he now whith wrath shame raige & woun∣dre Send bloes lyik lightning tempest, storme, & thunder. 42. Theirwith redoubled was the Pagans ire Who said shall one poore knight my strenth recall And so agane the Prince receaud his hyre That tuyce he reild and reddie tuyce to fall At last he blush't for shame, & shook for wrath Requyting shame whith foyle, disgrace with death.
43. This was the Transyluaenian fearce and strong Whom he had slaine, and foward then he past And put him self among's the Pag'anes throng Which scattred chac'd, & slaine to ground he cast As sand before the northerne blast futh fleis So fled those troup's, & fleing fall's, and deis, 44. Werie with killing then they sound retrai From sending Pagans soul's to Plutos ports Wheir of a now I cease for to repait Whill as to them more danger still resorts For loe a geatter host they might descry With standarts wafting in the aerie sky. 45. Amaz'd they stoode and knew not what it mein'd At last the Prince vndanted courage shew By trumpets sound he causd them be conueind And thus said he itt is not tyme to rew Keip what your valour courage might & strenth Has brauelie wone, and win you shall at lenthe. 46. nck then your self's while Courage you releeue Let fear flie hence to mynds effeminat These mynds to martiall glory doos atchyue Whoes lyfes to hasards bold ar consecrat Doe from your hands, your swords your harts, your eie Strenth, valour, conquest ictorie furth flies.
47. Then willinglie they call for battell new Still thirsting after glorie to aspyre Their bloodles face and trembling voices shew That wrath within their breist had kendled fyre The warre-lyk noyes of trumpets roaring breath Steird horse to courage and the men to wrath. 48. And now began the feght more sharpe, and thin Now their encounters crewell hand to hand The Datians feghts to keip what they had win The Grecians to releue their natiue land Their vctorie and courage mand the feild Their come reuenge to force those tuo to yeild, 49. Yet wer the Datians stout in daungers strong Their bodies freshe not woundit bruisd nor bleeding Their first assault was fearce and lasted long Them selfs within the Gretians ground intruding But Prince Penardo blamd their fainting harts Whose braue example promeisd heghe deserts. 50. And formast then he led them throw their foes With deip impressiones in theis Squadrons great His sword so broad a way had made for thoes That followed him with hope, strength, raige, despy. While now the Datians seemd to rander back Their new reft ground a reall mends to mack▪
51. But not content with this him self he thrust With his braue guarde of Princes lords and Knights Gainst the great bodie of he battell first The which he shuk and brck with stragling flights Transported so with courage might and strengthe Furth throw his foes he leaues his guarde at lengthe. 52. Wheir he his ouerflowing valour showes His sword that seemd his danger for to know Such hauock made among his fainting foes That he was strongie now intrinsht and foe Deid corps wer forts whoes bloodie ditches shoes Feir, terrour, dreid, and death to all his foes. 58. Braue Brando than the Seruiane drawing neir The great Commander of these mightie maits Began his woundrous valour to admeir He loud his deids though their effects he haits This was the Seruiance Disput whom before Phelaston send his ayde for to implore. 54. Penardo slew and hurt and chac'd his foes None leu'd but these who fled his angrie wrath He lyke a wyld and hungrie Lyone goes From place to place and with him dreidfull death But seing then no foe gainstands his rage He stayes and staying does his wrath asswage.
55. As winds gainstand by woods hills tours or walls The buildings shaks and tries by roots uptears Whil ouer the oppin plains he myldlie swalls Eune so Penardos wrath he calmely beirs When none his strength his will his raige assayld. But Brando him at length to feght appeald. 56. And whill their eyes did draw them both in sigh Their mynds consents to combat not agring Wheirwith they now begine a famous fight Whoes brauery was beheld with thousands deinge Who raird their heids a loft their lyfe enew In deaths despight that combat for to vew. 57. Their noes how much in feriour to the rest So much superiour they in skilfull fight Their courage was by skill gouerned best Their skill secundit by their strength and might Their terrour pleasur showes, vnto the eye Wheir strength with skill & witt with wrath agrie. 58. Both valiant and both despysing death Both confident not vs'd to be ow'r come Yet doubtfull bothe bothe forcd to draw their brait Vniting all their strength they chang'd their roume With leaps' and turn's, their hands wer agill parts Watchfull their eyes and resolute their Harts.
59 Eache stryueing still as Conquerour to be Their bloes lyk thunder lights on eury syde Brando (that nere before such force did sie) Thus to be matcht for rage and swelling pryde He thinks of this their fight to mak ane end With all his force a furious bloe he send▪ 60. Which lighted on Penardos head so sore That his remembrance left her batterd ludge At which aduantage he redoubling more Hd seses leyd him with his bloes so hudge The Prince with shame & paine enduring longe His bloes so heauie great, sore fearce, and strong. 61. But then o then who would haue sein his face Shame in his cheks reuenge into his eyes And now to win his honor lost apace He waits till fitt aduantage he espyes Vniting raige, and kill, & strength in one He lights vpon his helmet which anone. 62. He claue; the murdring blade that doune warde forc' Maks passage for his soule whom he commands To ouerrune Phelastons wearye Ghoste And first to gett a kisse of Plutos hands And tell him from Penardo that he will With Paganes soules his darkest regions fill,
63. The Datians that saw heir Campione fall Began to mak their feit their best defence Penardo and his chosen traine with all So stuft the chace that in their fleing hence Tuelue thousand skars assuadged their furious hair While sable darknes made them sound retrait. 64. This was beginning of Penardos praise This tyme, his fame through all the earthe proceids This day, his tropheis to the heauns did raise This was the birth day of his valorous deids That hard it was to iudge in generall Whither he was most loud, or feird of all. 65. But Night that for her nevoyes did lament In sable black attyre bevayl'd their woe Hanging her head sad, louring, dis content That day their shame vnto the world should show To keip vnknowne their fault, their flight, their fei. She darknes breath'd throw heaune throw earth throw ae 66. And by this tyme the skoutts and watch was set The Captanes brings their lord into his tent Then eury man vnto his rest was let That efer paine sum pleasur might be lent Thus being cairles of their farther stryfe. This first night was the last night of their lyfe.
Caput. IX. Argument. THe Aeneans full of fortitude With valourous dspyt Encounters mightie Sigismund And all his armie gryt But they ar slaine, Penardos deids Wins glorie and renoune Old Grodan comes to his releif And vanquishd Sigismund. 1. WHen of bright heaune the orientall gate Lk glistring gold wyde oppin did appeir Wheir Phoebus in his glorious coathe was sett Fom weare night both heaune and earth to cleir His goldin loks about his shoulders lyes That throwes their glistring beams throw gloomie skyes 2. And daunceing now one trembling Thetis bak Penardos skoutts they doe returne on hast And shew the Prince that they had sein the tract Of more then fourscoir thousands at the least With goldin arm's and syluer shynning sheilds That martch'd within a league out ow'r the feilds,
3, This was great Sigismund ye hard of yore Whom Brando did aduerteis long ago Who hard of these that fled the day before Of all that past into the batrells tuo And haing to reuenge his subiects lost Was come so near with this his mighti host. 4. Great is that woundrous vertue can resist And boldlie feght gainst all extremitie That for no fear of danger will desist From honors deids, disdaining miserie Nor for no foree can euer' be forcd to zeild Bott gainst all daunger proues a mightie sheild. 5. (This vertue rare) feare fortitude does claime As due to her, that for no greif can groane Her works ar constant and she feirs no shame For reassone euls her stayd opinione She works by courage and true valour gyds he She feirs no foe, nor from no hazard hyds her. 6. If fortitude haue in our mynds no place Nor rewil as souering Quene ore all the rest Owr work owr deides our actiones has no grace Sh wyshe ponders both he warst and best To lyfe she geues a lustr tadiant nd croun's our deids with honors ornament.
7. For lo indeid the braue Thessalians Wer cround with all the fructs of Fortitude First in their mynds was great magnificence Attemping things heighe excellent and good Nixt confidence in their most valiant hairts Bred hope of goode euent for their deserts. 8. And thridlie patience was their mightie guyde In suffring for their, countrey and their fame And lastlie with perseueranc'e did abyde In their opinione fermelie fearing shame Yea euie one with oher seemd to stryve Who best should use these vertues four alyve. 9. Which pitie drawes from roode Barbarian haires The feircest Tyrants crewell mynd doeth wound To sie them (whoes vnmatchable deserts Deseruis with endles glory to by cround) Feght in their owne defence half dround in blood Not slaine but smotherd with hiuge multitude. 10. Their matcheles mightie Gen'rall was not last That braue Penardo whom the world admeirs Whom death nor danger could not make agast In him true valorous Fortitude appeirs Who Angel-lyk in voyce, in face, in speiche Thus sweitlie, meiklie, homely did beseiche.
11. My Frends (quod He) of you I made a chose Not for your valours proof so much of fame Bot eu'n becaus I knew you to be those That more aceount did mak of honors Name Nor goods nor riches, wordly welth, nor gaine Nor lyf, nor death, nor pleasure, nor of paine. 12. This Honor now which you so long haue sought Wheirof so cairfully yow mak aceount So well, yow haue atchyu'd tho deirlie bought That to hir throne this last day yow did moun Lo now this day she offers for to croune yow And mak the world yea heav'ne it self renoun yow. 13. For Honors croune so precious is, that nought Within the ten fold orbs of heau'ne, remains Compaird to it, the, whiche has ay bein sought And for it all the world has tane suche pains From age to age from tyme to tyme we sie All sues for Honour glorie dignitie. 14. For eu'ne the basest sort will not refuse Paine trauell danger yea nor death at length For it; whill as the brauer mynds do chuse With hazards great to win that glorious strength So did the Macedonian bold and stout That victor went the solid glob throughout
15. Still carles he, still fearles did he venter Perswadit still to win and neuer to lose No thought of lose into his mynd could enter Such was his courage gainst his fainting foes By hazards, Fotun thus hir walth dispons For hope bred Hap, and Honor both at' ons, 16. Who gainst great Darius Monarch of the east Twyce fought and yet not thryce our number past Four hundreth thousand Perscans at the last Encounterd him yet wan he first and last But you may say they wer the Greeks that wan Ar we not Greeks as well as they wer than. 17. Yes we'ar Greeks Honor for ws preserus The croune he took such trauell to obtaine Tuyce was he proued wheir to his courage sern Vs also twyce, the thrid des yit remains The which she keips that we may win the croune, With al his fame, his glorie, his renoune. 18. Then deirest freinds considder what we do And who we ar, of whom we ar discendit, To win the croune we ventred haue to far If lyf in death, honor in shame be endit This jemme, this croun, this garland yow should haue Shall those weak, feble, faint, from yow bereaue.
19. No no but let vs ayme at Honor euer Base fear dar not assayle a mightie mynd Let honest shame ws guide and let vs neuer Care for this lyfe once we must die by kynd A noble hart has only to his lot To fear for nothing bot dishonors blot 20. The happiest Prince that ou'r a Natione regn Is he whoes people standeth more in aw Of filthie shame or of dishonors stings Then of the streittest or seuerest law Then let me haue that happie Prince his statio And let you be that euer happie Natione. 21. Nether deir Bretherien do as I haue sayde Bot also as my deids shall after show Before your eyes instructioune haue I layde And next myne owne example shall ye know As He who by your valours must obtain The greattest glorie that on erth remain. 22. Then galents show your selfs true Greeks in wea And onlie ask wheir is your Enemis True Greecians disd a e for to inqueir What numbre or what multitude they be For in their multitude their Hope remains Bot truest valour victorie obtains.
23. With those his words his face did shyne so cleir That conquest flow'd in streams from his fair eyes And on his louely forheid did appeit Grace, valours, woorth, triumphant victorie Yea from his look (as from a Dyamont stone) Come victorie that sparkled ganc't & shone. 24. And then this litle handfull did beginne. Whith cheirfull shouts for batel new to call So willing wer they honor for to win That eu'ne the lam'd and deidly woundit all From camp from tent from trinshes came to proue If sicht of deidle wounds reweinge could muoe 25. And such as might for battel did prepair, Others that wanted legges and armes did crye Reuenge our blood whill as their wounds they tear That their hote blood the armie might espy Whoes harts whith angrie wo began to swell All swearing to reuenge or die withall 26. The gallant Prince Penardo did reiois To sie their willing minds And thus he sayde (Eune with a cheifull and couragious voice) Greeks ar not borne (quod he) to be affrayde Thessalians can feir nothing at all While thei'r on earth except the Heaun's doun fall.
27. Eu'ne as the Lyone when he seis his foe Dath raise his taill and beat him self so sore Till kendling wruth his breist does ouer floe And then his couragie hot begins to rore At whoes dreid noyes all beasts with trembling fears His pray with pawes he crushes rents and tears. 28. Eu'ne so Penardo in his princelie mynd Wold neids accuse him self of dastard fear Which so inflam'd his courage stout by kynd The Lyons braue example he wold bear He feghts, he stricks, he turns to eu'ry hand He wounds, he kills who ewet did him whth stand. 29. And thus his back his glistring armour fair He showes his souldiours & his foes his face. Which was the harangue he could best prepair Wheir by he sharps their courage whith sueh grace That roaring trumpet's sounds whith dreidfull fea And thunders furth death murther blood & wear▪ 30. Their mettings terrible on both the sydes Their salutatione was a warre-lyk noyes Of snow whyt lances whill their mightie guyds Hade dy't their why in blood lyk crimsone rose Others in flinders flie to tear the skyes Becaus on earth they mist their enterpryse.
31. Their nothing hard but clashing armour still Crushing of staues and justling bodies loe That sharpest swords resounding bloes did kill Whose harsh and iarring musick mad a show As beautified with greislines of wound's With shours, with cryes, with grones, with ghostlie sounds. 32 Their horses died beeth their Maisters ding And some that in their lyfe their Maisters buir In death wer borne by them their others flying To sek some ryders that wold sit more sue Their some with agoeising death that styue Tears vp the eath entoumbs them selfs alyue 33. And yet no sword did pay to Plutos croune Of Paganes soull's so large a tribut still As did Penardos brand, who sending doune Lgions that emptie kingdome or to fill His wrath his raige his anger cost theme deir Death on his sword most vglie did appeir. 34. Those warlyk Aeneans of Thessaly Wold merhants poue to sell their lyues and all Yea sure te Paganes thought their merchandrie So deir a all their vantage was bot small For fyue to one thy pay whill as they sie A Squadron fresh appeir into their eye.
35. They seemd aboue fyue thousand to appeir That all Achaians wer of courge braw Who of the former victorie did heir For which to rendr hank them selfs they shaw Andromodane le futhe those troups so long Stout hardy bold aduenterous and strong. 36. The Aeneans their rancks wer now bot thinne Till this new force their courage did renew And as they wer but new for to beginne A freshe assault they gaue wherein they shew Tha they from braue Achilles wer discendit Who was so much throughout the world commendit. 37. The Datians their ground begane to lose. Whil Sigismund preuenting when he saw Sent Dinmon that brother germane was Vnto that vmqhile Prince Phelaston braw And with him sent bands, legiones, squadrones stou Encompassing syde, wing, flanck, front about 38. Now was their last destructioune drawing neere Now their incompast in one euery syde Though terrour shew her self at first t'appei Deckd with the gold of shynning armours pryd Yet now for bloode wrath yre & raige she shook Dreidfull her face, and terrible her looke.
39. With earthe with dust with blood wer all imbrev Ther brokin armour and their mangled fleshe Which seemt a burthene to their soul's that rewit Their puest Essence was defyld no less Sum vpwart mountes reuenge in heau'ne to call And others draw'ne by Pluto's guarde to Hell. 40. But neither could those daungers dreidfull be Nor could they seeme as daungers to the mynd Of braue Penardo whoes all conquering eye Shew how his hart to furie was inclynd They fall, they feir, they flie, wheir er'e he fought Death on his sword, reuenge into his thought 41. As thunders beats whith lightning from the sky Heighe tours tall Cedars mightie Roks to ground As fearce tempestuous wind with angrie swey The rypned corne & graine to earth has bound So wheir he goes to earth they tumbel all Sum hurt, sum slaine, & sum for fear does fall 42. When Dinamon his ualour did espy Who knew that by his sword his brother dyi He sought him through the battell couriouslie Whoes deids might easily mak him espyit That whith his sword had made so spatious roum As he had knowne the combat was to cum
43. And thus they both approatching each to other Hate in them both had steird desyre of tryall They thus begane a combat both together Wheir courage, witt, nor strength mak no denyall With rage and furie eache one ather throwes Yet by their witt and skill they deall their bloes. 44. And still the more they feght they more desyre The more they smart the les they feill their paine And quicklie now to know the victors hyre They neids wold try their valour once againe They stryue by might by skill by strength & proues Wheir valour most abyds whom Fortune loues. 45. Penardo lookt about and did espy About thrie hundred of his deirest Mates Whoes mangled fleshe with purple painting dy Had mask'd them vp with horrors dreidfull feates And that no more of all his syd wer left The rest of lyfe (thogh not of honor) reft. 46. Eune now and not till now began his hart To swell with sorow greif and kyndest loue Ah who wold now haue sein his face conuert His eyes that wount with furious flamms to moue His browes wheir anger satt in maiestie His countenance wheir courage wont to lye.
47. All these wer banisht quytt▪ his cheirfull ey Was dound with tears the flamms wer quyt put out His countenance was sorowfull to sic His browes had sdnes louring round a bout His hart the seat of his all conquering mynd To sighes to greiffes to sorowes was inclynd. 48. But Dinamon that saw him so amaiz'd Sayd knight my sword shall chainge the yet moir strainge Wheir would thow flie thow hes but fondlie gaiz'd My Brothers Ghost too long abyds reuenge Wheir fore he reuneitts his force againe And said proud Knight yle make the proue with paine. 49. I send thy brother to the Stygiane laick But to prepair the passage for thy ghoste Thow stayes too long eceaue this for his sake And with the worde the bloes redoubled most That eurie bloe stroaue to be formest still To mak the Paganes soule run post to Hell. 50. Att last one bloe he gaue whoes force was such As ret not lyfe but sensles has him made And as a lyone that dsdains to tuitch A man but weapins at his mercie layde So scornes the Knight to spend his force in vain One foes that flies, or feirs, or faints for paine.
51. With wrath and hote desyre for to reuenge He thrusts him self in throw the ranck's and made A longe broad way, one euerie syde a rainge Lyke to a wall of Paganes corps was layde Such wounders their he wrought that one might say He was the Paganes sepulchre that day, 52. Still preasing forwart at the last he saw Ten Pagane Knights incompast round assayes To kil tuo galan Knights whom he did know Belmundo and Phenabon prince of Thais Who stoode so stronglie to their owne defence That other ten they had dispatched thence. 53. But then he sies Belmundo fall to ground The Prince of Thayis so wearie was withall That he drew neir vnto his fatall wound One him the bloes lyke lightning doune did fall Their Vrson was and Vrsides his Sone That ore Moldauia regn's and beirs the croune. 54. These tuo did Prince Phenabon greattest harme Whose loftie courage still disdaind to yeild Till breathles he, and strengthles was his arme oodles him self but bloodie was the feild Yet feghting stil he still doth scorne to flie Not they but death obtaind the victorie.
55 Their Captains hart with pitie ouersett In him greif sorow rage and furie stay With his fyne sword he maid a spatious gett All these wer kild that did impashe his way At last he came wheir Vrson did most harme Who felt the weyght of his all-conquering arme. 56. One blow did part his body from his heid The which his Sone young Vrsides espyd With furious bloes he one Penardo layde Railling and cursing all his Gods he cryd Ah Vrsone Vrsone deir and with the word In his hart bloode Penardo drinsht his sword. 57. The rest that saw the Prince was so offendit Took them to flight and left him all alone They thought it was sum God that had discendit To punishe them for their presumptione Such woundrous deids as this one Knight had wrough Belong'd to none but to a God they thought. 58. To Sigismound they brought thir newes in hast That Vrsides and Vrson both wer slaine Eune by a God or els sum feind at least For no such strength in mortalls could remaine Euphrastes heiring of this valour strainge Desyre did burne his breist with hote reuenge.
59. Euphrastes was a mightie Pagane strong He had Vrsides sister to his wyfe Who efter wrought Penardo mekle wrong And wrapt him in mischeif and endles stryfe But lett ws show Euphrastes his pretence That called was of Transyluania Prence. 60. Who throw the battell has Penardo sought Till in the bodie of the battell grytt He saw them running heir and their he thought Their ranckes wer brokin & disordred quyt At last he saw and seing did admeir One Knight that wounders wrought as did appeir. 61. une as a wolf amid the fleecie hearde Some chace sum slay some tear crush ryue and tack Or lyk a boare whoes face the ratches feard (Finding the stolne aduantage of his back) Will preas to wound, yet does but moue to wrath Who in his furie crusheth them to death. 62. une so this Knight with furious rage does tear All whom he fand his noble brand dispatcht Such heaps wer slaine that all the rest did fear And now th'aduantage of his back they watcht He stricks he wards he taks he turn's he payes Behind, before, and round about him layes.
63. Euphrastes much admeird his val'rours deids And knew him for Vrsides cuse of deathe Wheirfore he foward vnto him proceids And said leue of Si Knight and turne thy wrath Gainst him who better can abyde thy stength And for thy deids shall chasties thee at length. 64. Indeid Euphrastes was a gallant Knight Who nere before encountred wih a foe But hese whom still he vanques in he fight With foyle, same, death, and euerlesting woe Now breathd he wrah warre, vengeance, furth lyke smook But braue Penardo fom a Pagane took 65. A stronge and mightie launce, into his hand Wheir with so searce enconter did he mak That nehe sheild nor armour could with stand Till the steill head appeird behind his bak Now fell he to the ground alreddie ded Whoes name to all the east great terrour bred. 66. The Paganes feir'd and woundred much to sie That Prince in whom their greattest hope did ly By this one Knight so ouerthrowne to be Wheirfore in great dispaie and rage they cry Ah Gods iniust how long will yow delay With lightning from the heaun's this Knight to slay.
67. Thus running on him mad with furie, beats In euery part and thought with bloes to end him Bt he who litle feard of all heir theats With such a woundrous valour did defend him That they assaill in vaine and mak a choise In seiking of his lyfe their owne to lose. 68. The tribute of his wrath them deirlie cost For all the ground their bodies deid did fill So that it seemd in all this mightie host Their wer not men anew for him to kill At last he came wheir Sigismund abad Wheir threttie thowsand Knights on horsebak rad▪ 69. And their one blow he did not spend in vaine At euerie stroak he send a soule to Hell And still their places being sild againe He serud them all alyk with deing baill When as by Sigismund he was espyde Who send a Squadrone fresh to quell his pryde. 70. And th with long sharpe launces all these bands Bore him and horse and all vnto the ground Yea surelie he had ou'r-schapd their hands But that this purest remainder him found Tho hurt and dilie wounded still they feght Led by that Prince that Mandadorus heght.
71. Whoes woundrous feits I did too long forget Four valiant Pagans slew he hand to hand At last with Sigismund him self he mett Who of his mightie prowes suirlie fand He bett him to the ground with might & maine With strength woorth valour victorie disdaine. 72 But when he seis the Prince he neids wold act The laistest pairt of this sad tragoedie His mangled band still following on his tract Wheir as the Prince defends him valiantlie Oft bet to ground yet still in feght proceids Strange was his valour, wonderfull his deids. 73. Thus while he fought expecting nocht but death This band wold die and by their death releiuie him Showing such valour in their deing wrath They flie they fall they die that first drew neir him And Mandador from his owne horse did light Horsing the Prince with valour strength and might. 74. While this small handfull held them altogethe They red vnto them selfs a spations roume But still fresh bands of men resorting thither Left them their armour for their brauest toumbe Yet fame their Trophees eterneiz'd with ioye Which tyme nor death nor hell could not destroy.
75. But Mandodorus that one foote did rest Who to his Prinee had lent his horse before Whas with the multitude so sore opprest That he to deathe his tribut does restor Thryce happie he who bought whith deaths expe From death his Lord his leadder and his Prince. 76. By this a mightie armie drawing neir Their speedie pace presaigd a sharpe reuenge Whille as the Datians harts begane to feir Els wearied with their battell past so strange Recuilling back with feir fall flight and death But they persue with rage blood murther wrath. 77. This was king Grodane and his mightie host Who raizing, Phocis walls was come to ayde His sone but scing all his armie lost Amaiz'd he gaiz'd astonisht wheir he red The act incredible the murther strainge Wheir valour stroaue with Fortun chance & chaing. 78. Then brunt with greif wo, sorow, wraith & ire Reueinge from wo and pitie did redoune Swelling aboue the bancks of his desye And send vp floods of tears his eyes to droune So brooks ore flowes their banks with late falne raine The brook a riuer, riuer growes a maine
79. Reuenge reuenge, ah deir reuenge ah care Care stopt his breath with greif rage anger wo This hrang so did sharp their mynd's to wear All cryd reuenge reuenge the trumpets blow Ther foes that flies they kill, chace, slay not tak Till night her friends wrapt in her mantle black. 80. Yet still reuenge and kill the armie calls Blood blood kill kill euege reuenge we most Whill tuentie thousand dead bofore them falls The king that feird his only Sone was lost Caus'd sound etreat & sadlie now he murns When lo Penardo fome the chace return. 81. And falling one his kneis before his Syre He craues him pardone for this geat mischeif His willingne for honor to aspyre Had bene the eaus of all their greattest greif▪ Of fourtein thousand which he broght away Their was not tuentie left alyue that day. 82. Wheirof the King was wofull when he hard But glaid his onlie Sone deid liue and lo His ioyfulnes his sorow quyt debard He was desyrous all the trouth to know Which when he heirs of all hat dos poceid He thinkst a bloodie victorie indeid
83. He causd to searche the feild wheir as he found Andromodane and Mandador the fair Belmundo and Phenabon whom entoumbd He causd to be in gloious sepulchair Those lyns insert their fame to testifie To aige to tyme to endles memoie. The Epitaphe of Mandadorus. HEir Mandadorus lyes Of Meson vnqhill Prince That left his natiue soyle to feght In Greciance defence Of braue Achilies stok He haid his Pedegrie The cheifest of the Aeneans That duelt in Thessaly Of suche a mightie mynd And suche a trustie faeith That willinglie he pay'd the ran Soune of his Princes death. The Epitaphe of Andromadan. Heir lyes Andromadane The braue Aehaian loe That payd his lyif for tribut of His countrey to his foe
The Epitaphe of Belmundo HEir lyes Belmundo fair Whoes honorable Name Is left in cronicles of Tyme To eternize his Fame A Greciane, true he ws And died in Greece defence Of Thssaly ane Aneane Of Toropeya Prince So famous for his woorth And woorthie for his works That Tyme and fame in memorie And glorie him inbarks. The Epitaphe of Phenabon. HEir does Phenabon ly That thyce renouned Lord Of Thay's that Paganes mighteli Disdain't defy't abhorde Who diet in the defence Of Grece his natiue land O happie He who deing did His countreyes fall with stand Then who soeu'r beholds Those Tumbs in passing by Learne to defend they Countreys weell Or in defence to dy
Wheirby thow shalft attaine To glorie and renoune To honor fame and digniti To an celestiall croune. 84. This haueing done with cost and large expence The King entoumb'd the Pagane Princes loe The Seruain and the Transiluanian Prince Euphrates Vrson Vrsides also And causd insert their praises due their one Which tyme has rold in blak obluione 45. But we'll returne to Sigismund agane And of his new discomfeit armie shoe Wheir surelye of ane hundreth thousand men Wer skairslie fourtie thousand left and loe These weried hurt, fled, feird, with Feght so strang Had left no hand, sword, hairt, for to reuenge. 46. Wheir fore he hyes him home in greattest hast Whill losse and shame was all the wealth he gain'd Penardo now in sorow sadlie plac'd Eu'ne for his freinds stil murning had remain'd At last he stealls troughout the camp alone In desert wyld for to bewaill and mone.
87. Now am I forc'd to leaue the gratulatione Wheir with the Achaians did commend the King To show Penardo's haples constellatione His angrie Starr's so mightelie did regne But loe his mother died with in short space Whiche made his father home returne his pace 88. Penardo goes throw manie diuerse wayes Till bright Apollo drensht his goldin hayre In westerne steam's then doun him self he lay's His wearie horse to pastur did repair When to our hemisphere the sable night From Erebus blak house hade tane her flight.
Caput. X. Argument. PEnardo by a visione warn'd Does pas trough Pluto's Por He kild a Gyant, when to him A Virgine does resort Who leids him throw a dreidfull cau. Wheir fearfull ghosts abyde He finds a deing Knight that shous What thair should him betyde. 1. THe mightie mynd that harbours hautie deid's And is conceau'd with, child of glorious gaine Can rest no wheir but to the birth proceids Of glorious act's brought futh with endles paine Such restles thought's Penardo did torment Still longing whil the night were over spent. 2. At last Aurora shews wheir she was layd In aiged Tithons arm's and vp did spring Blushing for shame that she so long had stayde Her goldin loks for haist did lously hing Her crimsone chariot made mo longer stay From criestal heaun's to chace dark night away.
3. As Pilot one the seas has stay'd his sight Vpone the fixed Pole his course to guyde Whill foggie smook and tempests cloudie nght The burnisht light of that bright lamp doeh hyde Then to his compas has recourse, wheirby He guyds his hollow veshell stedfastly. 4. Eu'ne so Penardo that was all alone Who hade no seruand nor no trustie guyde One hope he setts his stayd opinione And with that compas constant does abyde And furthe vpone his waye he still proceids Fed with desyre of heighe & glorious deids. 5. Three dayes he traueld finding nought, at last With wearie bones he layde him doune to sleip Whill as with sudden fear he was agast A visione in his restles braine did creip The Lady whiche he saw before tormented Was with those pains agane opprest, presented. 6. This was the ghost of the enchaunted fair Laissa whom Penardo must releeue Ene that fair Mayde who to him did repair Before the battells; to preuent mischeive So much her wrong and her desyre so iust That pitie bad him ayde, & ayde he must
7. And now for to performe his promeis past She comes agane for to emploir his ayde Requesting him that he wold come at last To end the ceasles torments of a Mayde Whom he within the burning caue shall fynd Eune at the foote of proud Parnassus pynd. 8. The Prince awaking from his sleip arose From of the grasse wheiron he softly lay And wheir his horse was feidding their he goes While as Aurora gane, to light the day He trauel'd still till that the Caue he seis Led with reuenge, hope, valour, victories. 9. Whose sulphur flams would fearfull hairts haue stayd The mounting smook such trembling terrour shows But he who was not bone to be effayde Still in the greattest dangers did reioyse And since he saw no entrie but by fyre Valour bred hope, and courage bred desyre. 10. Resolving thus his murdring blade he drawes And thrusts him self withe furie throgh ye same His swords sharpe point directing fordwart shawes His braue assault against the sulphur flamme Which geueing place diuyds it selfe in tuo As if it feird his ualour for to know.
11 Now on he goes till he has past the light Throgh caues wheir glomie darknes still abyds Which seem'd the pallace of eternall Night Wheir she her store of able treasure hyds And eeke from whence her mantles black she brings Whoes dreidfull terrour tams all leiuing things. 12. Yet this our Prince Penardo nothing letts But on he goes, at last he heirs a noyis Lyik to the opning vp of brasin gatts Wheirfro their came this dreidfull sounding voyce Who past throgh Plotos, port without paynes. His due in fyrie Phlegiton remains, 13. Then ishew'd from a deip and hollow Caue Tuo Dwarfs that held in eurie hand a torche By whoes great light the Prince might weel perceaue A monstrous Gyant mounting from a porche Great lyk a tour that braithd furthe smooke and ire His eyes no eyes but tuo great flamm's of fyre. 14. The Prince was not amaized at the sight But rather was desyrous of renoune With sword and sheild him self he brauelie dight With courage braue to him descending doune whose mass, lyke to ane irone Bolt on hight He rair'd, with wraith, powre, furie, strength & might.
15. And beatts with force the Prince his sheild a back. Vpone his face till with that mightie bloe He forcd him tumbling doune the steps, to mack Homage vpone his face vnto his foe Then with ane other bloe vpon his creist He made his lyuevish breath forsaik his breist. 16. Thus being sensles layd vpon the ground His mightie hand his murdring blade forsook The Gyant (that peceaud him in that stound) Vp under hs left arme him lightlie took, So goshaks doe who ceasing on their pray Mounts in the aer and lightlie flies away. 17. He caries him throw many fearfull wayes Till he aryu'd vnto a pleasant plaine Wheir stoode a pallace poynting at the skyes Whoes loftie turretts seem'd for to disdaine The basest earthe and beautifie'd the aer. With brightest Alabastre tours so fair. 18. Then drawing neir vnto the castell gett The Gyant wearie of this burthen strong Threw him to ground and doun him self he sett To breathe a whyle who had not rested long When by the fall the Prince agane reueiu'd Aer brought him breath, breath lyfe from death releu'd
19. And being weel awaked frome his dreame He woundeth at these wounderfull euents When memorie returnd he blusht for shame All his confufed thoughts bred discontents And when he soght vp from the ground to cleir him The gyant with his masse agane drew neir him. 20. Which lighted one his shoulder with such force That one his hands agane he stoupt to ground Who by this rude intreatment raiging worse Raige bought him strength and strength his courage found His armed fist aloft he stronglie rears And beats the Gyants brains about his ears. 21. The gyant fell with such a fearfull noyes As when a thunderbolt from heaune does fall Whoes lightning seems to rent the azure skyes And shaks the powr's of heaune and earth withall Or lyk a wind whoes furious devastatione Doune throw the aer does shak the earth fundatione. 21. Eune with such noyes the Gyant fell to ground While presentlie the earth did him deuour Receaueing him within her hollow wound Then clos'd agane lyke as she was before Wheir at great Iasons Neuoy was amazd And deim'd he was sum feind by magick rais'd.
23. While he in this amazed moode did stand Had at his feitt his sworde he did espy The which how sone he gotte into his hand He marrched fowart most couragiouslye But neirer to the pallace when he came He thought him ay the farther from the same. 24. So thinks the courious man that wold attaine By trauell to heaune threatning Atlas tope Mounting as far as first his eyes hade sein It seems ane other Atlas ryseth upe Whoes tope did aeirs thrid regione proudlie threat Compast with clouds & skoartch'd with Phoebus heat 25. Then is his hope accompanied with doubt Such hope such doubt dwelt in Penardos thought He staid him self and looking round about His gaizing eyes vnto his vew sune brought A Mayd who towards him directs her pase And first saluts him with a modest grace. 26. Then ax'd him whither he was mynd'tt to goe He sayd that galant fotres for to sie Quod she thow finds no entres their but loo If thow would enter thow must goe with me Content was he to goe, to know, to proue, To end the pains of death of lyfe, of loue.
38. At last she came vnto a vault or groat Whoes geslienes was fearfull to behold But he who onlie had vnto his lott A baue vndanted Sprei with courage bold Straight followed he from light of day to darknes And lost her in that vnaquanted marknes. 28. Where he does heir a dreidfull sounding voyce Lyik to the skritching of the nights blak Houle Hisling of sepents, and the greslie noyes Of ghostly spreits in Plutoes court so foule Who if his armours vertue had not saift him Of lyfe, of fame, of glorie, wold had reft him. 29. Whom they begin to buffet heir and their Him beat thay oft vnto the ground agane Ye could he nothing find but filthie aer Whoes smook might weell consume a world of men Such filthie smook it was such vglie blasts As Aetna from his dreidfull mouth forth casts. 30 He drawes his sword and forward still he goe Vowing to sie the end of these euents The fuher in, the thicker grow the bloes At last a fearfull noyes to him presents A thundring sound a fearfull trembling shak Whoes dreidfull voice made all the earth to quak.
31. Yet he procids and thinks them all but toyes And stumbling doune at last to ground he fell While as he hard a pieous groneing voice Lyk to the sore tormented soulls in hell That in this greislie caue, this darksum shade A houling and a yowling sound still made. 32. The deing grones of sum tormented wight He seemd to heir amongs these fearfull sounds Their Soow dwelt, and their eternall Night Of euerlasting horror still resounds But he no tenour fear's nor daunger dreids But forward goes and throw the dark proceids. 33. As does the blind in desert forests wyde Ow'r hazards roks caues, craiges & montanes wander While fear of death has chast his faithfull guyde Eune feir of tempests lightning stome and thunder When as he heirs a noyes, a sound a cy Hope thow the danger guyds him hastilye. 34. So wanders he stout hardy fearles bold Att last vpone a deing Knight he fell Skarce could he speik bott zett this much he told Ah tho thou seiks for death Dispair and Hell Heir duells sad death plagues, torments, heir remains Hell brings from this her euerlasting Pains.
35. Ah crewell death, ah blak dispair alace Wo wo and with the word wo chokd his breath The Prince that pitied such a wofull cace Heau'd vp his heid and said relent from Death Perhaps some hope sum hap, sum help remain He answerd, (nocht but this one word) In vane. 36. Why (quod the Prence) is thy releife in vaine If God so pleas his grace and mercie lend But to this house and to this hell of paine How cams't thow in, or wast thow heir in send Faine would I know wheir with the deing Knight Breathd furth these words thoght weakly as he might. 37. Within this caue their is a virgin Mayde Loue dairteth lightning from her glorious eyes Her beautie bright does all their hairts invade (With death, loue, furie, passione) that her seis Muche is the force, the strength, the vigour much Who seis her, deis for loue, th' enchantments such, 38. Many attempt's this aduenture to end But still they end them selfs and it remains Which I poore I has too too suirlie kend▪ And now must pay my lyf for these my pains My bosume keips her beauties burning fyre That tears my hairt in peeces with desyre.
39. Ah pitie (said the Prence) is their remeid To saue thy lyfe and quensh youths loueing flamme No no (sayd he) theirs naine till I be deid Heir many mo lies buried for the same Wheirfore go back, leaue of, returne againe Heir is no heyre bot death for all thy paine 40 Then said the Prince I surelie wer to blame Not seing danger, for to leaue it soe Quod he then since thow cairs so muche for shame I pray the tak my counsall or thow goe Aboue this dreidfull Caue their stands a laik Whoes restles waues this thundring noyes does mak. 41. The Mayde is on ane altar sacrafeizd With sulpher flamms of fyre to Pluto's Deitie Tuelf hours within that fyre sho's, martyrizd And tuelf houres dround in blood with out all pitie Before her burnes a Taper will not slaik Bot in the water of that thundring laik. 42. This Taper yow must win with mightie force Syne drinsh it in the forsaid laik & lo Her flamm's ar quenshed then with great remorce But how to quenshe the blood yow their shall kno Yet if yow be intangled by her beautie Thy hairt thy eyes thy hands shall leaue their duetie.
43. Now if the burning Tapre thou obtein To get it back shall many wayes be sought As soone as it thou wants by any mein As soone shall she from lyf to death be brought Bot if thow be intangled with her loue The Tapre frome his place thow can not moue. 44. Thus fair you weell▪ and with the word the Knigh Sunck doune with slip of leaddin death oppest Greif woe, and pitie, did he Prince affright His valour, courage, hope, they muche distrest He goes but cofort, whill his guyde was cair His manlie hairt assayld with cold dispair 45. Though he was still urmoyld with cair and gif Though daunger still forbids his ite pyse Tough sad dispair theat's deh without releif And hough Dreid, fame and conquest boh denyes Yet fordward still he gos but cair o paine And hops ane happie succes for to gaine,
Caput. XI. Argument. THe birning Alters Keeper, of His lyfe Penardo spoyls He seis the daylie funerall In blood the Virgine boyll He that by loue could not be win The Tapre does obtaine About the Quene of loue he seis All thois yat Loue had slaine. 1. O Now yow Muses matchles and devyne Help by your sacred skill my gros defects Mak sharpe my wit and pregnant my ingyn That by your freindly ayde in all respects My pen suplied may boldly breath his name Inrold aboue the star's by endles fame. 2, Whoes mynd the feat of royall vertues birth And who all goodnes knew, but knew no ill Admeird of all the world for his rare woorth Which causd Envy for raige her self to kill Eune he vwithout all fear or cair did enter And throw this cave lyk greisslie hell did venter.
3. At last a thirling light he did espy Which from a dure did glanceing furth appeit Wheirto when as the galant Prince drew nye He saw a flamme most pure most bright most clei Vpon ane alter burne and in the same Brint, skoarch'd, tormented, lay a virgine Dame. 4. Whill on this piteous spectacle he gaiz'd From out a corner dark he might perceaue A monstre hudge that maid him much amaiz'd Whoes greatnes seem'd to fill that emptie caue He beathd furthe clouds of smook which dim'd the flamme And darkned all the place about the same 5. So thundring tempests dims the goidin Sunne And darkins all the cristall heauns so hy The reiking clouds lyik smook doun moltin runne By force of fyre that thonderis throw the sky At last such roars he thunders in his ear It seemd the caue, shook, trembled, quaik'd for fear. 6. This monstre fearslie did assaill the Prince Who nimble, quick, sharp, readie, light, auoyding His mightie bloes, so braue was his defence Oft him he harm'd, him self vnharm'd abyding So that the monstre oird for greif and paine Furth casting Floods, of poysond goi a maine.
7. Thus eache perseuing other to the death Wth strength with aige with furie hait & ire That neither geue the other leaue to breath The monstre still threw furth bright flamms of fyre Who's skaills bore furth the Prince his furious dint Lyk tempred Steill, hard diamond, or flint, 8. Wheir for a strangr kynd of feght he chuses Quyting his word he draw's a dagger fyne His skill his slght his might, and strength he uses To ridd this deulishe monstre out of pyne Who lifting vp his armed creist with ire Smook frome his mouth his eyes furth sparkling fyre. 9. Did fearcelie forewart to the Prince furth pace Infolds inrolls in lincks with gaipping iawes But he with foresight, waying, well the case His skaillie gorge in his stronge arme he thrawes And through his burninge ey with fatall knyfe Brought furthe his brains & with his brains his lyfe. 10. Glade was he to be ridd of such a foe Yet pitie, cair and sorow, chac'd delight To sie so fair a Mayde tormented so His eyes with chyld of tears his hairt stil sigh't Taeirs from his eys spring's riuers floods furth sen Sighes from his hairt lyk blustring winds vpwent.
11. When neirer to the alter he was come, Of soow he might he the saddest sound, There greuous gone we inter mix'd with some Wek breathing words, that did sad death resound The words wer sweet and pitiefull to heir The accent soft the voce was sharpe and cleir 12. Those wer the wofull words he pitied most Ah Plo Pluto end this sacrifice Hell Hell douore my souls tormented ghost Ah crewell Heau'ns that gloir's to tyraneize Ah paine paine paine let endles paine remoue Curs death, curs hel, curs earth, curs heaeuns aboue. 13. Whill thus she spak Penardo hard a noyes, And suddenlie appeir'd a greatter light, A hundreth torches borne by litle boyes All cla in murning wid a woful sight. Softlie the prince o vayes him self a syde To sie of these euents what wold betyde 14. After these torches wer tuo horses led Whose Tapers wer of purple sik & gold Such curious work so rich imbrodered Ws admirable air for to behold For greffon lyk thay pceng seem'd to flie With goldin plumed wings right curiously.
15. These horse wer keept by lackaves tuo who had Two sheilds which seem'd of sundrie Knights to hold, And after them tuo Paiges richlie cled Two mightie lances bore with heads of gold Nixt ater them four galant coursers dew A crimsone cotche that seemd of bloodie hew. 16. within this cotche tuo Kinghts wer sadlie plac'd In glisting armoor that was fynelie fram'd The amours shyning lustre was defac'd Wih purple blude tht from their bodies straimde Sad ws their mynds wheir sorow did remaine Great wer their wounds but greatter far their paine. 17. The one still sigh'd and goin'de but spak no word For in hi breit a boodlie dagger stoode The other throughe his bodi had a sword From whoes steill poynt ranne streams of crimson blood Death ou'r them both long since hade spred her wing Yet lyfe by airt, paine, greif and sorow brings. 18. Behind the alter stoode a brasen portch Which oppnd wyde for to receaue this traine Where enters all the boyes with eueye tortch The hors, and all the rest that did remayne, But whill the cotche neir to the alter drew The wofull dame her sorows did renew.
19. Ah Heaun's alace come come I glaidly goe Let deith geue end to Hells tormenting flamme Blood blood glut vp both soule and body lo Stop now my braith and suffocat the same Let these tuo leiue & then impose on me Ten thousand deaths so I may once but die. 20. No sonner did she end her plaints when as Tuo old and aiged Haggs come in then sights Who bore ane huge geat veshell made of bras That keipt the blood of those tormented Knights Long gaizd the Prince on thir hid misteries Whill paine, on paine, & greif on greif he sies. 21. The virgine from the fyre began to moue her The veshell neir, she throw her in the same While as the blood begane to boyle aboue her And vtherwhyls aboue the bloode she come So bubling streams of brooks from hye that fall Raise vp the Pebls pure whyt cleir and small 22. They gone the Prince did with him self deuyce To spill the blood bot now he heirs a sound It seem'd a heighe and bloistring wind did ryse And looking wheir the veshell to haue found He saw a piller raied vp whoes end Reatch'd frome the ground almost vnto the pend.
23. Then did he heare a murmur and a noyes A duilfull murning and a wofull sound So from a hollow pitt resounds a voyce Of one that lyes tormented vnder ground Or lyk the ghostlie and the dreidfull dine That roaring bulls mak hollow Caues within. 24. The piller seem'd to be of marble stone In forme of ane Pyrameid as it stood Wthin the which the virgine was alone Tormented still within the boyling blood Penardo knew but help of humane hand That it was fraimd his furie to with stand. 35. But neirer to the piller when he drew Sum goldin letterd lyns he might espy Whoes meining was as efter doeth ensue Be not so bold this aduenture to try Least Faits who made the most admeird of all Should mak the most in famous for thy fall 36. But cairles who had thus menac'd him so Which serud but to affray a fanting hairt Now round about the piller does he go While as he finds sum other lyns insert Wheirby he knew the former faing'd deny all Was but to stay him from a farther tryall.
27 WHat ere thow be that proues to end the pains Of this tormented Mayde that heir remains And wold vndoe the great and woundrous frame Which Mansays arte has build it for the same The tapre from the birning Altar take And drinsh it in the fearfull thundring lake But first from birning lust search some releiff For These tuo Princes wrapt in all mischeiff, 28. Not half so fast the Tyger swift furth goes Thogh desert wayes for to redeeme hr brood As does the Pene when these glad nwes he knoes Vnto the alta wheir the tapre stoode He hopes yet doubt-sum ill might him be fall To marr his hope, hap, will desyre, and all. 29. Cassandras armour was not now for noght Els of that dame in mour'd hade he beine For the effct of this enchantment wrought On eurie one before that had her seine And being once entangled by her loue Te tortche they could not steir, nor toutch, nor moue 30. Yea surelie if his armours vertue strong Had not resisted the enchantments force Within the caue he should haue stayd so long While he had diet for loue without remorce Her beautie was of force, strength, pow're, to moue Yea massacre a world of Hairts with loue.
31. But he who in his armour does retaine The rare and precious stone of chastitie (Whoes vertue is the owner to restraine Fom loe, or lust, or Venus fantasie) Could not be mou'd, to love, so none but he Could end the fair Laissas miserie. 32. And entring now within the brazen portch The which he thinks to be the only way Ene wth the light of this his lytle tortch He saw some lynes ingaph'd (which made him stay) Vpon the brasen gate he did behold Indeted all with courious warks of gold. If ought thow lose that thow has brauelye win Thow deire shll repent thy comeing in. 33. Now he began to gaize vpon the ground And calling presentlie vnto his mynd The deing Knight whom he before had found Within the Caue and of his counsall kynd He knew it was the taper to defend Or els her sorow should with death haue end, 34. And by this tyme within a goodlie Hall He entred was when vewing weel this sight, The rare proportion was maiesticall. To eurie airt their was a galant light, And glaid their of ioy cheirt his countenance So Phoebus flour spred's when her lord does glance.
35. Long stayd he nought when looking heir and their One his left hand a doore he might espy Within the which he saw a gall'ry fair Wheir pleasur did invite a gaizing ey While throgh this pleasant gall'ry he was walking He thought he hard sum people softlie talking. 36. Whoes murmuring sound hade drawne him now in sight Of a fa chamber that was richelie hung Wheir sporting at their dalleing delight Wer Knights and Ladyes lying all along Vpon he paement wrought of cristall rock Whose glances bright the Prince his sight did chock. 37. But his delight did him thair after lied Vnto ane other chamber much more fair For their the cristall pauement all was spred With crimsone veluet costlie, ritche, and rair, And in the mids a piller stoode vpright Of gold that shynd, flam'd, glāc'd, with sparkling light 38. Adioynd vnto the piller rose a throne Of beattin gold whoes lustre cleir vnstaind The beautifullest Queene did sit theirone That cristall heaune or solid earthe containd And round about her stoode a comlie traine Of kings, queins, lords, knights, dames that loue had slaine.
39 Their was the Queene of Carthage, Dido fair Who for Aeneas loue hade lost her breath, And for Antonius loue with Vipers their Sad Cleopatra Sting'd her self o deathe, Their Ariadne that her self hade slaine For proud vnthankfull Theseus disdaine. 40. Whoes lyfe decre'd to Minotaurus raige She fred and from the Labyrinthe hm gaind Their was Media by whoes counsaill saige Iason the goldin glorious fleice obtaind Their Phillis who did many passiones proue Chuseing sad death for sweet Demophoons loue. 41. Their Iulia the wyfe of great Pompey Who died becaus she feird her husbands death Their Porsia for Brutus loue did stay, Who with hote birning coalls hade choakd her braith Their Pisca with her louer loud to be Who threw them selfs both heidlongs in the Sea. 42. Their might Pandorus loueing dame be seine That chus'd for to be buried quick in graue Rather then be the Persean monarchs Queene Becaus he did her louers lyfe bereaue The Greciane dame fair Camma their did moue Who slew her self and him that flew her loue.
43. These weme with their louers did inioy A pleasant lyfe about this princelie Queene And men that did for loue them selfs distroy Menon that hang'd him self might their by sein For to the proud Assyriane King alone His best beloud Semiramis head gone 44. And their Tiberius Gracchus did remaine That fund tuo Serpents in his chamber floore And knowing if the emell first wer slaine His lyfe should longer not his wyfes indure The Male he slew so well he oude his wyfe And mde his deathe the ransone of her lyfe 45. And Marcus Lepidus did their abyde That slew him self eune for his loues disdaine And Platius Numidius by his syde That for his deir loues death him self hade slaine Their old Syluanus that him self hade hangd Becaus proud Nero wold his loue haue wrang'd. 46. Their Pollio graue and sad, a Germane borne A famous Knight though Fortune wrought his fall This was the Knight that in the Caue beforne Had told the Prince what thi should him befall There many more that died without remorce For Lissaes loue by the enchauntments force,
47. All these and many thousand their remaines Who to that cor doe momenly rsot The winge boy delights in all thei pains And of their geatest geif he maks a sport But lo that glorious Qeene bed ll their ioyes Their loue their fansie and their amorous toyes. 48. For to inthrall the hart that Queene weell knew The soueraigne Maistres of that art she was Her wantoune shyning looks and heaunelie hew Wth sweitt alluements secreitlie wold pas For still the glanceing of her wantone ey Wold mak her trayne, sad, ioyfull, liue, or dy. 49. Her wantoune eyes bewayd her inward mynd Her countenance delaird her harts desye To burning lust she seem'd to be inclynde Consumeing still with neuer quenshing fyre Dissembling all wih such a crafie mynd That anie sae Adonus wold by kynd. 50. Her modest blush wold diuers tyms bewray That which (it seem'd) she sham'd fo to vnfold With amous qeint her wanton eye wold play And from her hairt in sport their message told Her lowing look or cheifull smyls doth moue To laugh to weep, to smyll, to sighe furth loue.
51. Amongs the rest Penardo might espy Phelarnon braue and Tropolance the bold Whom by their wofull look he did discry To be eune far agains their will with hold Phelarnons breist bewray it his ceasles pain Wheirin a bloodie dagger did remain. 52. And Tropolance his wofull hart was rent With bloodie sword, tormented still he goes Yea these tuo princes onlie did lament While as the rest did seeme for to reioes But now sad shaddowes of the dankish night Begane to dryue away the cheir full light.
Caput. XII. Argument. PEnardo's tempted oft and yit The tapre he obtains He chaiseth burning lust to hell And ends the Princes pains He quensheth in the fearfull Lake The Tapers light anone He finds sum tombs and sies sum lyn' Which wer ingraph'd theirone. 1. WHen hells great Grandame ganher self to ryse For anger breathing furth dark clouds of smoo And chaist heaun's cheirfull lamp doun through the skyes Then of his wyde mpyre possessione took Penardo  thundring sound Lyk Neptune raiging gainst a stormie wind. 2. And lo a fearfull ind did now aryse With dreidfull thunder, lightning flamms of fyre, Ane earth-quak and a trmbling in the skyes That seem'd to shk the world's sure fixt empyre From of his cetre & his stedfast statioune And with proud raige to raise his sure fundatione.
3. Wheir with of all this ryne incontinent He, sis not one in twinkling of ane ey But of their feet he might decerne the, pren In the iche cloth that on the gound did ly Wheiat Penardo much a mazed stoode But nothting danted was his courage good 4. And looking round about whill thus he stard Ane other dure he saw wheion he red Tak what thow finds within for the prepairde Thus in the baue Thessaliane was led By courage and a fearce vndanted mynd Not feiring hell it self thairin to fynd. 5. The royaltie of this fair roune was uche As seem'd the lyik on earth could not be found The value of the hngngs was so much That from the syling to the paued ground Did reache all ichlie wrought with pearle & gold Which Hercules great battels did vnfold, 6. Ther hade he slaine the Gyaunt all alone Who sumtyme rewl't fair Europs fairest yle, Of whom it got the name of Albeon And their was seune mouth'd Hydrae feirce e're whyle Whom he by his al-conquering force had slaine His shafts there, in the monstre did remaine.
7. Their in the Naemeane forrest he hade slaine The Lyones fearce' the monstre of the Sea He slew' and fair Exione did obtaine There the Thessalian Centaurs vanqueist he Theie Cerberus he bond and Captiue ld And Prserpine frome Pluto's thraldome fred. 8. Theire did he kill Anhteon feirce and bold And Nessus there, and Gereon proud of Spaine And frome Hesperides renoun'd of old Wheer did the goldin feiced floks remaine He theme Frome Atlas daughters did disseue And bonde Philotes as a slaue for euer. 9. Theer his zuelf works bred terrour to the eye And trembling fear vnto the boldest hairt There hade he thrown'e him headlong in the Sea Who brought to him the strainge Emppyson'd shirt There he in paine raige sorow, did lament Tearing the venome that this flesh did rent. 10. And in the mids a piller stoode vpright Wheiron a rich and glorious armour lay Their hung a sheild ingrapht whoes glancing light The armes of Thessaly did furth display A boue the which a candle-stick of gold Did hing which seem'd but one small lamp to hold.
11. In this fair chamber stoode a glorious bed Of beattin gold Whoes fyrie sparkling flies Frome pretious stones & diamond which spred Thei pearsing beam is that dim'd the Prince his eies The tapers light that in his hand he bure Gaue place to this more shyning cleir & pure. 12. Four mabre pillers did a table bear Of yellow glanceing Topas fynlie drest And of tansparant cristall stoode a chear As if it wold inveit he Prince to rest Who wearied with his toylsum trauell past This profer'd rest accepted at the last. 13. And gaizing still vpone this glorious wark The table suddenlie wes ouer spred By whome he knew not bo he might remark With fructefull Ceres danteis it wes clade Their Bacchus plenie flowe'd till yis braue Prince Was weill suffeiz'd then all remoued thence. 1. And all this tyme the taper did abyde Into his hand wherone he does deuyse How he might sauelie lay the same asyde And rest In the fair bed till Tytan ryse When presentlie did in the table stand Ane candle-stick presented to his hand
15. Which as ze hard did our the amour hing Wheirof when he the wkmnship espy'd He did perceaue ingrauen bout the ring Sum lyn's in azure blew thame selfs bewray'd Whiche if obeyit it ends the ceasles stryfe Of Lissa's paine and with her paine her lyfe. 16. Of me thow only mak a chois Tell thow with sleip thy self repose I am devysd thy light to hold Then but suspitione be thow bold. 17. This youth had goth no sleip tuo dayes ago Wheir for to rest a great desyre he fand Bot woundred who so weel his mynd did kno Assaying if his light theirin wold stand A suddane fear assaild his hawtie hairt He trembled, and he quack'd in euerye pairt. 18. And, as a merchant in a darksum night Does trauell in a forrest all alone Wheir he before has sein a fearfull sight Of robbing Theeues and murtherers, anone Does feare and faint, and tremble yea and quak's So he In eury ioynt, and sineu shak's.
19. And wondred what this accident sould mein When presentlie their come vnto his thought The deing Knight he in the caue had sein Who told him all his trauell was for nought If once the tortche wer tint or gone; or lost Lost wer her lyfe, lost all his paine and cost· 20. Then Night begane to hyde her loathed heid Rendring her place unto her fo so fair Whose messinger was cled in crimsone reid Hurling his fyrie beam's throw glomie aer Melting the clouds in liquid drops that fall Moystninge the thristie pearched earth with all, 21. The royall Knight right ioyfull of the day That he might bring to end his tedious task When to the pillr whair the armour lay Whene Titan did his shyning face vnmask He saw a goldin image which did hold A table of black Iasp al wreit in gold. 22. And towards him the table poynting was The which How soone his arme did rais aloft The image le't it with his hand furth pas Vewing the courious workmanship so oft The lyn's he red which shaddowith all deceat Mischeif, dath, discord, furie, wraith, debait.
ƲOlcane this fair and goodly armour wrought Whiche Venus to her Sone Aneas brought Whoes vertue frome all tempting tounge defends And Hope and courage to she hairt it sends With vigoraus strenth it does the bodie seid And vanquisheth the Enemie with dreid Who wears the same shall victor still remaine And still his hairts desyre he shall obtaine Inchantment strong or ony secreit traine Of subtile Foes shall alwayes proue in vaine No humane strenthe can this enchantment end Except the Trojanes armour him defend. 23. Sure quod the Prince this is a rair devyce That no deceat nor dainger can assaill True valour sould be compted bot a vyce If this wer true the coward should prevaill Then falset crueltie and all deceat Should trueth, woorth, valour, vertue, all abait 24. Falset should banishe purest trueth to hell And wicked wrong all right should ouerthraw Folie should wisdome leid as slaue to Sell And manly mynds of fazards stand in aw Of humane kynd then to preuent the fall This euill of euills I'le cut in peices smal.
25. He cutt's the armour which als soft as brasse He finds and knew it was bot to entape Him in a snair (bot Fates ordaind his glasse To ne his howes of lyfe in Fortuns lape) For lo suche deu'lish strenh the armes retaind As in the shirt of Hercules remaind. 26. And sure too great mischeif should haue betyde If one him self this armour he receau'd For first the tape he must lay a syde Wheir with Laissa's lyfe hade bene bereau'd And also him with furie, raige, and wraith Paine, soow, cair, and greif had brought to death. 27. But Fortune smyld her looks wer gratious And suffred not frost, storme, haill, cold or raine A flour so young, so fair, so pratious With death, decay, or dolour, oo be slaine But ridd of this he searching fand a none Ane rone doore with this inscriptione. That dreidfull Dragone heir within does ly That fosters still the fyre of Lechery Wherin tuo Princes ar tormented still And can not be remou'd frome thence, vntill A Knight shall come whoes chastetie is suche And whoes good Fortune fauours him so muche.
AS can not be by aine meins entys'd To fall into the snairs for him deuys'd He first must lay his sword & sheilld a syd Then vnto him the doore shall oppin wyd Syne proue by strength the weapens for to win That does the Princes wounds remane within Wheirwith he must ow'r cum the dragon fearce Then shall the torments of the Princes cease. 28. This deuelish dragone was ane feind of Hell Bred first in floods of fyie Phlegitone In whom the fyre of birning lust did dwell Which sho broght furth from darkest Acheron And being bred of such infernall broode She leui'd on fyre, in darknes was her foode, 29. This lustfull fyre throgh all the world she send Wheirwith she hade infct the greattest pairt Who lyk vnto their mother does intend In darknes for to quensh their burning smairt There, help they find, but no releif at all Till for their mother they haue searchd' in hell. 30. Whom Mansay by his airt had brought from thence Vnto this place these Princes to torment Whose lustfull fyre had bred their owne offence And first vnto their ruine gaue consent But loath he was hes sword to lay a pairt Which brought his foes to woe, to death, and smairt▪
31. it seing no releefe he layes a syde His sword and sheild and fearles fordwart goes When presentlie th doore brust oppine wyde And their (a fearfull sigh) vnto him shoes A burning caue that thows owt flamms of fyre Which from a dragones mouth did still retyre 32. Eune as the deidfull Salamander liues Amid the fyre while one the fye she feids The fyre her braih her lyfe her essence geues But fye she dies in fye she leues and breids Eune so this feind in smook and flamms so bright Did burn and shyn and glance, and sparkle light. 33. In throgh these flamm's he saw these Princes lay'd On burning beds of steill lyk furies fel Wheir hell thay curst and heaune they did obbraid With many fearfull cry and wofull yell To sie such galant Princes so tormented With tears into his eyes he thus lamented, 34. Ah harmeles Soull so pynd curs'd be the tyme That Mansayes crewell arte deuysd such pains His punishment is more then is your cryme Ah how iniustlie heir he yow detains Your harme done to your self your cryme your owne To him no spight nor malice had yow showne.
35. Ah cursed by that Zoroastes old That first devysd deip incantatioune Of magick arte, whose spells oft being told Brings vp that foule infernall natione The man whoes witt does search furth such ane euill Is foe to man and freind vnto ye Deuill. 36. Ah mightie Ioue that does permit such wrongs And does behold thy creaturs thus pynd Revenge vnto thy glorious self belongs Mercie thow grantes to a repenting mynd Ah for thy glories saik in mercie grant Thow by my hand this feind infernall dant, 37. Nether could fear of terrour yeilding fyre Nor world deuoiring monstre him effray Nor daunt his dauntles hairt that does aspyre Throw daunger for to gaine great glories pray This sayd, he fwiftly to the monstre hyed Feir terrour dreid and daunger he defyed. 38. The monstre now with flamming tounge drew neir With deathe, or lustfull heat him to inflamme But these her flamms did not on him appeir Nor could he be molested be the same She seith that her hoate consumeing fyre Could not inflamme his spotles chaist desyre.
39. Straight did caste furth a dark black foggie smook Which with the flamme made this a secound hell Fixt on the Prince her burning eyes did look Clpping her yrone wings and dreidfull taill In fixed in this taill wer stings anew The Prince the Knight the Champione to persue. 40. These stings if thay be fix'd the fleshe within Does it infect with filthie lustfull fyre Of venamous and poysonable sine And appetites inquenshable desyre Woking throw all the vains, till boyling heat Makes them the heaune yea God him self forgett. 41. Into her tounge ar also stings infixt Whoe poysone breideth sensuall delight Which with a gluttonus desyre is mixt Wallowing in pleasure, plungd in eternall night Of all fogetfullnes and idle slouth And sklaueth man to pleas his daintie mouth. 42. For drounkinnes and gluttonnie alone Drawes efe them a thousand filthie sines Greif▪ anger, loue, extremitie, anone And birning lust thoughe all the bodie rins That memorie, and vnderstanding quyt Extinguisht ar with lecheryes delyt.
43. It maks a dulnes ow'r the mynd to creip A monste maks the bodie fatt with rest And reassone thus it luleth sound a sleep Thus man does differ nothing from a beast These bates in the begining sweitlie moue But in the end a Cocatrice thay proue. 44. This monstre these her stinges infecting heat In mortall mynds, infixeth but releif And howked once allurde with poyson'd baitt She drawes them heidlong vnto all mischeif At last to deathe and hells eternall paine From which all hope of blis'd releiffs in vane. 45. None of these stings could in the Prince haue place With them she him ssayls but all in vane Wheirfore she fearcelie fordwart flies a pace Ayming with tearing pawes him to haue slaine And being now heigh rais'd aboue the ground She beats him with her mightie force a sound. 46. And ayming for to crush him vnto death In her sharpe pawes she taks him gredilie But he (who wa not whole void of breath) Her by the goge gripeth speedilie And had th'enchanted tapre beine a syde She new'r had gone from thence in hell t'abyde.
47. But yet altho he had no hand but one Her greislie gorge so stronglie did he grip That she was forc'd to ryis and with a grone Her hold about his bodie to let slip She roar'd she yeld she brayt she billow't lowd So does the lyons, bulls, boars, coursers prowd. 48. This monsters mouthe lyk to a golfe appeirs And their she thinks him quick for to entomb A filthie smook she throwes befoe his eyes Which forc'd him breathles for to leaue that roume And farther throw the flamms to seek for breath She roaring still, still gaip'd still threatned death. 49. So Neptune in a raiging storme doeth rore When Aeolus his bloystring face ou'r blowes His rolling billowes fearclie beatts the shore Gaipping his hollow greedie gulfs he showes Wher in threts to swallow or to wrak The Plowars of his yrie awfull back. 50. Before she could Penardo ouer reatche He came vnto the steillie burning bed And from Phelarnons breist wheir was the breatche The daggere pull's when with a weappine cled The monstre seem'd more heauie sadd and low Her force, moir feble, wearie, fante, and slow.
51. Thus thinks he of this feght to mak ane end And with the dagger to bereaue her lyfe Who with her oppine jawes does her defend And theirin cacht the dagger which with stryfe From him sho ref and brak in peeces small And thus to him no weappine left at all. 52. Betwixt him and the sword her self she sett Which Tropolance his bloodie breist containd While as such fyre and sulphu  she let That all the hous into a fyre remaind So she a birning Salamander seem'd But nothing of hir fyre the Prince esteem'd. 53. And yet this kynd of fght was verie strange That Hercules the lyk did neuer vew When a the Gyant Cacus (in reuenge Of Italies enormities) he slew Nor when the Minyan force before him falls Raising their mightie seige from Theban walls. 54 Nor when he slew the dragone fearce in fight Yea none of his tuell labours might be match To this for that he vsd his strength and might And with his weapeins did aduantage watch Tuo hands he had, Penardo had but one He weapins als our Champione had none.
55. But now the braue Thessaliane nought amaizd Maks him as he the dragoe wold assaill Who with her winges aboue the ground was rais'd And to the fegh him fearslie did ppaill With opned mouth she reasd on him to flye Who lightlie leaps a syde and letts her bye. 56. Then pulls he out the bloodie weapine streght From out the deidlie wound and their withall Him self addresseth brauelie for the feght Bott loe he sies the dreidfull dragone fall, With roaring low'd the earth she rudelie tear Doune tumbling into hell with greislie fear. 57. A mightie wind made this fair building quai So that the greatter pairt theirof doun fell The earhe began to ryve and with a shak The edfeice sank dounwards vnto hell. When lo he was vpon a pleasant plaine Wheir, of that building did no marck remaine. 58 At last he spyes a fearfull laik in sight Whih restles rowlleth lyk a aiging Sea Whoes billowes baits their bounding banks with might That crubs them from destroying libertie And whoes huge waues with restles noyes did swel Though Aeolus nere breath'd theiron at all.
59. Wherby he knew it was the verie same Wheir he to qvenshe the tapre should returne Which being done the strong enchanted flamme Made all the laik with fear and dreid to burne At last it raise and lyke a thunder-bolt With fearfull noyes it pearc'd the azure volt. 60. When as lyk christal all the streame grew cleir The which before a pitche colour hyd's No waue no surge no billow did appei Bot softlie on the goldin channell slyds The syluer streame with sweittest murnming sound's Which wind's, rocks, caues, woods, montanes back re¦dound▪ 61. He wounder't much at all these strainge euents Amaiz'd he stoode and gaiz'd vpon the grounde When as thrie plesant toumb's to him present's Them self's, wherin he looks what might be foud The toumbs of mabre richelye wrought with gold Wher on these lynes ingraph'd he did behold. J Laughfull loued and yet Vnlanghfall was my loue I'm punisht justlie for my fault And yet I faultles proue I die becaus my cryme Deserueth well to die.
And yit no act nor cryme at all Committed was by me First did I slay my foe And then my foe flew me And deid, my Syre I brought to wrack. Such was my destanie The Palace wheir I dwelt Was fairest of remoune By feftie thousand pillers borne All which my deth threw doune But none can change decrie Of Fates nor NON RAP HEL If anie for my name enquire The former lyne doeth tell. 62. This matchles Champioune was the rat amaiz'd The meining dark he skairslie could descye But that he knew this trophee now was rais'd And that Phelarnon their intoumbd did lye For NON RAP HEL he knew his name to be And on the secound toumbe these ly'ns did sie. Me to my crewell death Ambitione surth did call In my reuenge my natioune wrought A stranger natiouns fall And with their fall thir owne Perpetuall infamie
Thus am I ground of all mischief Ordaind by destanie Ah curs'd vnhappie loue Loue was the caus of all In spoyling of my Riualls lyfe I spoyld myne owne and all Then who so ere shall lock On Tropolance his name Remember loue to be the cause Of ruine, death, and, shame. 63. Penardo was right sorowfull to sie Such galant Princes so bereft of lyfe For that be thought that he had made them fri But at what tyme he took the fatall knyfe From each of them out of his bloodie breist Then death from the enchantment them relest 64. Yet more desyre hade he the third to sie Ane trembling feir through all his bodie goes For that he feird Laissa dead to be And then his longsum trauell should be lose But now in Thetis azure palace fair With her to dally Phebus does repair.
65. Then lowring sad cum frthe the cheirles night Ouer earth to spred her sable canoby Whill as the staitlie biring lamps wer light Shyning in Ioues heghe palace pesentlie Twixt fear and hope doue y the Prince vnsein Vpoune the grss, soft, fresh, wet, easie, grein. Caput. XIII. Argument. ƲPoune the sleiping Toumbe the Prin His trauells seit ingrapht He seis Laiss their ye sword He from the rock out rest A spreit or feind of Hell he meitts Vpoune Danubius fair That in the shap of Mayd him leids To paine, wol greif, and cair. 1. NO sonner goldin Phebus guilds the skyes And shoots furth fyrie beam's throw emptie a Wheas the Prince vp fō the grasse doe ryse And in his hairt a thouand thoughts repair His courage fled he doubts, he fant's, he Floods from his eyes send stream's of sylver tears, fears,
2. Knd was his hairt tho not resolu'd to loue Cairfull hs mynd her yfe for o preseue Constant kyndnes did he alwyes proue Courtes ad caifull Ladie fan to serue His hait a thone fo beauties excellence If a witheld not Natures influence. 3. At last to the desyred toumbe he came Which eem'd not to be wrought with humane hands So riche o rir so wounderfull the same Whh on fou sylue shnning Pilles stands Of beattin gold o pue fair, cleir, and bright Whoe shynning seem'd to skorne fair Phebus light. 4. And round about him self e might behold His traeull's throw the birning caue, it shew No painting colours beautified the gold Bot Emiralds, Pearls, Rubies, Saphirs blew Which lyuee shoes ech putrat & eache pairt So comelie nature helped courious airte. 5. Their was the purtrat of the Sulphure flamme In birning Charbunkles and manye a ostone Whoes glanceing light agains the Sune furthe cam Lyk sparklying fyre that flam'd that brn that shone her whee the Gyn feld him to the ground And caried him through all the cau a sound.
6. A crimsone blush a pourple dy our spred His louely face and made him hing his eyes Shame, raige, reuenge, wraith, furie, anger bred He loths him self he freats he froun's, he fry's He thinks these purtrats in despight wer shorne To show him self vnto him self in skorne. 7. But looking farther of he did espy There wheir The Gyaunt threwe him to the ground And how he rose agane with maiestie Giuing at once his foe his fatall wound. Eache purtrat their to pleas his eye contends And seem'd for former faults to mak amends 8. There all the rest of this his longsum wark Wer fynly graph'd in pretious stones and gold The which frome point to point he did remark And their his woundrous valour might behold Bot lynes effrayed his hairt, his eyes, his ears He feirs to reid yet reids and reids with tear's. All is in vaine all labour is for nought Frome Mansayes charmeing spells can non defend In vaine her lyfe in vaine releif thou sought In ending of her pain her lyfe did end Thow casd her pain and crewell death did send This is the fruct of all thy trauels past Thow wrought her death her death to the shall send·
Greif, sorow, cair woshame, disgrace at last et is thy Sune with clouds of shame or'e cast Spent is thy lamp of glorie praise & fame Thy honor fades dishonor buddeth fast And blossoms beirs of wo, disgrace, and shame Thy glories doone praise dead & fame outworne Go then of heaune, of earth, of hell, the skorne 9. Eune as when fearfull dreams in slumbring sleip Wold mack a man to shout, to cal, to cry Whi fear and horrour ou'r his senses creip Yet speitchles, sightles, mightles does he ly So now it seem'd the Prince was in a traunce And greatlie troubled in his countenance. 10. Thus drunk with sadnes and deuoyde of ioy Amaizd he stoode bereft of speich and sence Dounwarde he casts his looks with sad anoy Greif sorow cair wold lyfe haue chaiced thence Oft did he wishe the solid earthe to ryue And hyd his shame, by swallowing him alyue. 11. But waiking from this dreaming sleip at last His loftie witts agane together flies When as his roaling eyes by chaunce he cast Aboue the toumbe the which he oppin seis As Seaman in a raiging storme of wind A glaid the land and wished shoe to find.
12. So glaid he was hoping to find releefe That sorow's past might haue a happie end Wheirfore to eas his cair, his paine, his greif, A loft vnto the toumb his looks he send Wheir hope with dreid, & dreid with hope made weir He feird in ioy, & ioyde in mids of feir 13. For their Laissa fair he might behold Nay not Laissa bot Penardo rather For eu'ne the sharpest eye could not vnfold The meinest mak of difference tuixt ether And thus not glade whill her he oftin sight' But eu'ne him self to sie him self delight's 14. As that fond boy that gaizd into the wel Wheirin he sies the shaddow of his face And being deip inamoured of him sell Oft looks and oft the image wold embrace So in her face as in a glas or well He lou'd the only image of him sell 15. She sat vpone a bensh of glanceing g'old And lein'd her louelie face vpon her hand Bright look'd her eyes wheir loue & fancie rold But lo no spunk of aer nor breath he fand Yet was her colour lyuelie fair and cleir A sylver tinctour in her cheeks appeir.
16. He cald her oft and nam'd herby her name First soft, then lowd, then whispred in her eare But yet no show of heiring made the Dame Nor anie signe of lyfe could once appeer Wheirfore sad sorow sheltred all his ioy And horried paine his pleasour did distroy. 17. And ean this be (quod he) and art thow dead And has the worlde her cheifest glorie lost Could not my pains thy dearest lyfe remead Oh no, no pains, of noght but shame I bost O shame, O fame, shame brings eternall foyle Shame shall my fame disgrace, my glorie spoyle. 18. Oh could my lyfe thy lyfe (deir lyfe) redeeme Soone should it by discharged from this breist Or wold the heauns so much my soule esteeme That heir it might dislodge and their might rest Or that but sinne my luck les lyfe might smairt I to thy ghost wold sacrafeize my hairt. 19. Oh but the faits denyes I sould haue pairt Of thy sweit ioyes, and heauns denyes my bliss That their fearce wraith may mak me more to smairt For this my fault, my iniurie, my mis Curs'd by the speitt that me deceaued twyce With visions dreams, temptatioune, fantasyes.
20. Curs'd be the tyme I put this armour on Curs'd be the toung that me their to intys'd Curs'd be the hands that fram'd the same alone Curs'd be the witt that armour first deuys'd Curs'd be the spreitts the feinds the furies fell That built this house of shame, of death, of hell. 21. And with the word his birning eyes did roll And shoot furth fearfull flamms & sparkling fyre Dispight raige furie madnes did controle Witt, reasone, shamefast modesties desyre Wyldlie he lookd, he staird he gaizd about Raige hade his witt, and reason quyt put out. 22. Then of his helme and armour did he teir Which in his furious raige he threw away Quod he I am not woorthie airm's to beir If this be all my conquest all my prey Of simple mayds the blameles lyfe to tack Heaune, earth yea hell it self, abhors the fact. 23 Let brightest heaunes a sable hew vnfold Let grasse and hearbes be withert wheir I goe Let Sunne and Moone in duskie clouds be rold Loathing to shyne shameing my faults to shoe Which sould be wrapt in black eternall night In hell in paine in horrour and despight.
24. Thus from the toumb he goes futh throw the plaine And wanders far and wounders at him sell He seiks the flamming rok but all in vaine That led him first vnto that feild of hell Their to gett out but none saue Mansay knew That fearfull caue, and his infernall crew. 25. This valley's walld about by Natures airt With mightie craiges, steip rocks, and montanes hi Except the caue their is no entring pairt Which by that flamming fyre defendit bee Their set by Mansayes art but now the Prence The craigs, rocks, montans, climbs, & flieth thence. 26. While this braue youth torments his mightie mynd With wo, dipair, cair, sorow, greif, and paine A marble rock his roling eyes out fynd Wheir in he sies a glaunceing sword remaine The sword half in the rock, a sheild besyd And vnderneth sum verses he espyid. 27. But in his furie he disdaind to reid Which efter was the caus of all his greif For from these verses did his health proceid His hope, his hape, his ioy, and his releif Yet from the rock the sword & sheild he taks The which, he cutts, he beats, he bowes, he breaks.
28. This was his sword and sheild which he did leaue Behind when Lechers birning fote he wane No weapins now he cairs, nor none did craue He goe he knowes not why, nor wheir, nor when Nor stands, nor sits, nor rets in any place Till Phoebus tuyce had sunck, tuyce showne his face. 29. At last he comes vnto tht rollng floode Heght Danubie whoes tumbling billowes roir His murmring streams in heaps yik montanes shood To shoulder from his place he craggie shoir Discharging Surges throw the clifted rocks With thundring noyes the fearfull crage he Shok. 30. Eune as that mightie yrone ingyne strong His bellie being fild with ulphue broune Casts furth a flamming smookie cloud along With fyrie balls that touns and tow's thow doune And fills the aer with noyes of roaring thunder The heauns with lightning & the earth with woundes 31. Eune so this mightie flood with hiddeous swye Of surges geat beats doune his broki shoirs And ow' the fertill land doe swiftlie flie His sounding streams throw humid aer that roirs Heir stayd the Prince and heir hei forc'd to stand Till he espyes vpon the syluer strand.
32. A litle bairge that fleitted nigh the place The which a Damosell a lone did gyde Bright wa he colour loueie was he face But sorowfull her coutennce he spyde Leauing her barck she quiky to him drew And sighing sayd those ynes whh oeth Insew. 33. Ah vofull miser wretched cre'ture I Wo, Paine, and death, greif, sorow, caír, I find Long haue I gone long sought sum Knight to try Yet nere the neirer to my iourneyes end Ah my poore Lady dies for paine & greif Ow'r cum but caus and vanquisht but releif. 34. Altho the Prence was full of woe and cair Yet for to heir of Ldies one throw Did his old paine the sorow he gott air Reneue augment Incess, and caus ouerflow So doe grein wounds their beidding stensht & gone The mynd once vexd, againe they ryue anone. 35. And thus he said fair Lady if you please The caus of this yor greif  pray you show To gref (in tubled mynds) it i ane ease The same t'vnfod or pairtners fo to know Wrogs blaizd abroade will seeldom kaipe reproofe On gaind sum hope sum confort sum releif.
36. Fair sir (quod she) my wrong, my hope, is done Wrong past releif and hope is turnd dispair And thogh of ayde my comfort al is gone Yet ile vnfold a verie world of cair Tears stop'd her braith, such cunning could she fram Now reid, now pale, her coloe, went, and came. 37. Thus silent did the Lady stay a whyle And sigh'd and grond at last from craftie mynd She breath'd a souggred lye a craftie guyle A fals deceat sprung of malicious kynd Yet could she weell dissemble her fayned feirs With bashfull blushe, with grones, with sighes, & tear 38. And thus begane, In Transalpina fair Their regn'd a Prince that bold Euphrastes heght Who went with Datians to that luckles warre Of Greece their slaine by proud Thessaliane might He left no Heyre his sceptour for to hald But his fair wyfe the fair Philena cald 39. So young, so wyse, so verteous, and so fair All Regiouns fid wer with her glorious fame So excellent in all perfectiones rair That Monarches, Kings and Prences, swed the dame And wow'd, her, sought her, loud her, yet still fynd That none could proue or moue, or match her mynd.
40. At last fame singes her beautie sounds her worthe In th' ears of Antiochs braue Prince anone The round, the sad and solide globe sought furthe Apollo shynd not on a brauer one His might, his strength, his woorth, his val'rous deid Almenas fearce vnconquered Sone exceids. 41. Fame kendled so this Prince with hote desyre Which to Philaenas loue did him prouock That nather could he eeas, nor quenshe the fyre Which death ordaind both loue and lyfe to choc But to our court he come ane errant Knight And saw her fair, and feing loud the fight. 42. He serud her long and by his valour wrought Deids of great wounder, woorthe eternall fame And for his due rewaird of her he sought Her loue, her fauour, maryage was his ayme She no les brunt with loues consumeing fyre Yeilds to his sute consents to his desyre. 43. At last that day, cursd day wnhappie yeir When loues vnsein delight and beauties treasure The fortres which all wemen holds most deir She should haue randred he receaud with pleasure Eune that same day with strēgth, with might, & stryfe She is carred thence and he bereft of lyfe.
44 By tuo strong gyants mightie fearce and bold Which Maro fearce and Bramarano heght That does ow'r Creitt their crewell scepter hold Which they haue won by murther, bloode, and feght Her beautie fame vnto their ears hade soundit Wheir by proud Bramaranos hart was woundit. 45. This Bramarano sone to Maro is Who hearing of Philenas wedding day Come with his Syre and feftie Knight of his While she (poore soule) was but ane easie prey For all the court in pompe in ioy in stait Had nether sword shield armis not feard deceat. 46. Thrie scoir and more into this wofull broyle Wer slaine and their the Prince of Antioch fell Whoes onlie valour long with stude this spoyle Seune airmed Knights he slew vnarm'd him sell On Bramaranos sword at last he smairted O crewell death, o Tyrant crewell hairted. 47. This woefull murther wrought, they thence remoue Philaena fair, with trauell paine and toyle Nor could her car, her greif, her sorow, moue Their harts to pitie, nor their hands from spoyle But Bramarano would haue rapt the prey Which eye should not behold, nor tongue bewray.
48. And yet withe tear's with murninge, and complaint His hairt by Nature furious, fearce, and crwell She mou'd on this conditione to relent Tho loue still brunt, and lust still fond the fewell Where noght but beautie breideth loues desyre Lust feids the flamme, and booldith stil the fyre. 49. He was content if in tuo months she could Find out a knight to vanquish him in fight Vnto her formar libertie she should Be set and he should quyt discharge his right Prouyding if no Knight with stoode his stryfe She should remaine his Concubine or wyfe 50. And now tuo tym has swartishe Cynthia shynd Tuyce showin her spherick face with borrowed light And tuyce agane to horned shape declynd Since I frome fair Philenae took my flight To find sum Knight, sum Champione, or sum Lord That wold to hir his happie ayde afford. 51. Yet haue I fund not one that hade regaird To honor glorie fame or dignitie Altho she geues her self for their rewaird Who conquere shall so fearce ane Enemie And now no more but full tuo weiks remains Of the appointed tyme which he ordains.
52. Thus haue yow hard the somme and heill ffect Of all my toyle, my trauell, and my paine Sure then quod he it seem's that yow neglect To find a Knight or els no Knights remaine Bot if the heau'ns so pleas or it be long I shall abaitt his pryde, reuenge her wrong. 53. Thanks sir quod sho, your great good will I sie But lo yow laik both amour sword and sheild I was but knightd now of lait quod he And swoor to wear none till I wan't in feild Why then quod she if our reuenge ensue The heaun's has smld and I haue done my due. 54. The Prince and she both enters in the bairge But heaun's preserue him fom that deeulishe traine Which falslie is deuys'd fo him at lairge To worke his shame, his fall, his death, his paine Who ou'r that great Danubius is gone A companeid with fals deceat alone.
Caput. XIIII. Argument. THe Prince is by this feind furthled Vnto Philaena's bour He slayes the Gyant seine by fair Philena from her tour Her raige to loue does turne but lou Disdaint turns meir despight She seiks his death he's by an Angell warnd & flies by night. 1. HAppie ar they that can eschew deceat Whoes baits ar beautie glorie flattri gain That vertue pulls frome honors hie estait Alluring them by what they wold obtaine Thus hope of vertue glorie praise & fame Leads them to death destructione foyle & shame. 2. So does the craftie Crocadeill entyse (Beneth the fertile banks of flowing Nile) he trauellers with murnefull platns and cryes s if it wer sum wofull wight that feill The pains of death but when they come to sie With terrour feir and death tomented be.
3. Suche kynd compassione with Penardo wrought He goes bot knowes not to his death deuys'd So was decreid and so Philena sought So with this false deceat she him entys'd For tatling Fame had id it knowne to all That Prince Euphrasies did before him fall. 4. Whaifoe long tyme she murn'd she sigh't she plaind At last she send (when for reuenge she cryes) For Arebo a visarde (who sustain'd And brought her vp in youthe) with him t'aduyse Whoes ait his wit his will to ill entysde Ay ill he wrought ill vsde and ill devysde. 5. He told her that the Prince Penardo was So braue a knight whom heaune so muche did fauour All slights all straits all daunger could he pas Except he chanc'd but sword o armis to wauer In chantment strong his vertue still commands If mou'd to wraith whole armeis he with stands. 6. Whoes might be then had brought to end (he said) The fairest rarest wounderfullest warke That ere be force of magick airt was maid Yet he the wished end shall not remark For that shall be vnsein vnfun'd vnknown Till tyme place fates and fortune leaue to frowne.
7. Wheir for now fits the seasone for reuenge Now fits the tyme to croune thy iust desyre Now trauells he throw desert montanes strainge From whence my arte shall mak him heir reteir For Bramaeran end whoes strenth all knowes To the that Gyaunt great affectione showes. 8. Feid him with showes and shaddowes of delight Whoes valor streth and might so weell is knowen If not by him not by the world hat Knight My be orecu or vanquish or or'e throwen Yea if he hd his armour sword or sheild He nor all Europe could not win the feild. 9. Thus did the wiked wisard her entyse To act thi fals deceat and crewell slight Which was perform'd eune as he did denyse And Bramarano brought was to the fight Whoes furie strength and might so knowne by fame That all those kingdomes trembled at his name. 10. Thus Arebo ane wicked feind hade sent (In shape of Mayde) with whom o're that fair stream Of Danubie, the Prince Penardo went Not doubting ill deceat disg'race nor shame But in her louelie looks deceat did loure So Serpents lurck amidst the fairest floure.
11. When ouer Danubius the Prince was gone With this foule feind this ladie and this guyde Such will hast, zeal, and such desyre alone He had that fast he on his iourney hy'd Ah happie Prince hade it bene know'ne to the. Who train'd the, brought the bure the compaine. 12. In fals report no credit nor no hope Thow wold hau had nor haue beleeud deceat But mightie Ioue who gaue thy rains the skope His Angell send for to preserue thy staitt Els furies feinds ghostes Spreitts & fairies all Had brought shame death & euerlasting fall. 13. Guydit by hell altho preserud by heaun'e At last Philenas palace he spyde Vpoun a rock heighe built wer castells seaue Below a murmuring riuer softlie glyd Ore whiche the rock with rugged airms furth lay Threatning his fall her speedie course to slay. 14. Thrie quarters of this rock the riuer folds And in her asure armes it rudeye taks A ouie plaine thrusts in betuine which holds The streame vnmet whoes roaring billowes braks With surges great vpone the sandie shoare Yet to the rock the plaine a passage boire.
15. The rugged craiges and clifts that seem'd thus brok Was cled with tries with hearb's with flours witgrasse Which garland-wayes bedect'd the mightie rok Pyns Cedars Oaks Palms Eshes Firs Embrase The streame below wheire, Caues, walks groaues, and sheds Erects to Venus chambers galries beds. 16. The Prince with great delight walkd throw the same At ast his ey sight lady sayes Sir Knight On top of yonder rok abyds my dame From whence you must releas her by youre might The gyant by the way will you assail No longer must I stay for fear farweall. 17. And with the word she glyd's throw shaiples aer He gaz'd about to sie whir she was gone But nought he seis yet nothing could he fear But foward still he goes and goes alone By Arebo at last the Prince was knowen And to Philena from heighe turrets showne. 18. Then from hersprings of tears bright flames furth shynd Wher raige reuenge mischeif wraith anger bud With sorow care, woe, greif, and saidnes pyn'd Wyldlie she gaiz'd with rolling eyes as wode Now Bramaran with tears and grones she mou'd She sigh'd she murn'd she plain'd she pray'd she prou'd
19. She mou'd him prou'd him wisht him tak reuenge Of that fearee crewel proud disdainfull Knight Which if he did she promeist to exchainge Her self for guerdone of his strenth & might Her croune her wealth her kingdome al efford All should be his & he should be her Lord. 20. As he who gaizeth one the Sune is seine To haue a weake a dimm and daizled sight So blindit was the gyants hungrie eyne Who all this tyme fed on her beaurie bright Feir not Madame (quod he) be heaune I sweir His bodie frome his cursed head to tear. 21. His looks from loue now chang'd to wraith & ire Soone was he arm'd and soone to battel dight Doune from the rok he goes with great desyre To feght to vanquish and to slay the Knight So does a falcone soaring in the skye Haist doune when as his prey he does espy. 22. By this the Prince was come the rock hard by Winds birds and streams thrie pairts sang in his eare When he that mightie g'yant did espy Lyk Typhon that appeald the gods to weare Nor had the Prince swod sheild nor armour strong But choos'd a club the sturdie Oaks among.
23. Wheirwith he martch'd against his mightie foe Whoes throat send furth a hoarse confused sound So buls and lyons roir to feght that goe Ah God quod he this simple man confound Who naiked bear but armour sword or sheild Dars feght or look or meit me in the feild. 24. Ceas quod the Prince thy threats and babling toung Vse now thy sword thy hand thy strength thy might So pleas the heauns ile mak the know er long T'abaitt thy pryde God has ordain'd a Knight Then do thy worst or best or what thow may Heauns be my hope my strength & thy decay. 25. No longer could feirce Bramarano stay Foame from his mouth fyre sparkled from his eyes Thy spytfull cursed head (quod he) ile lay In fair Philenas lape for thy defyes This sayd together flew the champions bold Their battell strainge rare woundrous to behold. 26. Penardo was of bodie great and strong Quick nimble actiue reddie sharpe and light The gyant lyk a tour as great as long It seem'd if he but fell vpon the Knight That he wold crush his bones to peeces small So Serpents feght with Elephants more tal.
27 Penardo eye his hand his fute goes right He nimble shuns the gyants mightie bloes The Gyants spends his force in vaine, so light And reddie was the Prince who alwayes goes Trauersing heir and their and oft at neid Stricks wards reteirs turns And assails with speid 28. Thus long in equall ballance stoode the feild But farr vnequall in their armes they fall The Gyant arm'd with mass arm's sword and sheild Penardo hade no armes sword sheild at all While thus they stryue to win stout hardy bold Philena from her tour did them behold, 29. Long gaizd she thus and long she lookt thairone At last she said vnto the wisard old Sure wer thy words and sure yone Knight alone If arm'd gainst mightie armeis might be bold It fears me now and sure I dreid his strengthe Shall vnreueng'd my vengeance work at lenghe. 30. This sayde the dame for that she felt her hair From raige reuenge and vengeance to Relen Raige myld became and vengeance did conuert To pitie, then did crueltie repent Of ill the sourse dryd vp the spring did cease What discord ist that loue can not apaise.
31. But Arebo (who had her words mistane) Sayd loe Madame I fear our hope shall chaing If he yone weapine from the Gyant gaine In vaine our toyle in vaine our wish'd reuenge Wheirfore me thinks it best thus to preuent Thy Gyaunts death his lyfe your discontent. 32. In matcheles Macedone their regnes a Queene To Geraldinus sole and onlye Heyre At whoes sad birthe the Destanies wer seine T'ordaine her fate strange wounderfull and rair Clotho odaind of all the earth alone She should be fair and equall vnto none, 33. Nixt Lachesis ordaind and did protest She should be loud of all that vew'd her face And Atrope made her spotles pure and chast Tho loud of all she nere should loue embrace O beautie rair O chastitie, O loue O woundre vertues thrie, thrie vyces proue. 34. For still her beautie praise augments her pryde The loue of all her heighe disdaine still fids Pryd and disdaine the ornaments does hyde That from her spotles chastitie proceids Nor meik nor myld nor humble is her mynde Non she regairds non canc her fauour fynde.
35. Thus manie thousands loues and dies for loue And thousands loues and liues a deing lyfe And thousands mo (that dar not fortune proue) Sum kills them self sum kild by Riualls stryfe Loue breids confusioune warre blood discord death Al loues few liues and none withstands her wraith. 36. She conquers all and yet her gaine is losse When she has vanquisht all she wins but shame Thee she ore cum's these breids her greattest croce This crewell Queene Olindo heght to name Whm by my arte ile mak this Knight to sie▪ Her shall he loue and louing her shall die. 37. But fair Philenas ferce reuenge or now Was ouercome with pitie myldnes loue Sighes grones and tears wer all that she could dow True signes wheirby we true repentance proue At last she sayd shall he depairt ah no Ile haue his cursed hairt before he goe. 38. For if stout Bramaran he chance to kill Eune heir will I inveit him for to rest Then fitts the tyme then must I work my will Then to my wishe shall my reuenge be best Loath wold I be that any should bereaue The lyfe I should I wold and I must haue,
39. This spak the Dame all that her heirs still weining That she decreit by death to work his smairt But subtile wemens words hes double meining Each blow that he receaues lights on her hair Oft lookd she doune oft victorie she prayd him And with her looks her hairt flies furthe to ayd him. 40. And all this tyme still equall stoode the fight The gyants bloes could neuer do him harme He was so agill nimble quick and light At last he lighted on the Gyants airme Wher his left shoulder band it to his back Which with his club lyke Hercules he brack, 41. Wheirat proud Bramarano raiging more Cursd all the Gods and cursd heighe he auns aboue In vaine his blowes in vaine his masse he boir In vaine his force his strength his might to proue Wheirfore in raige his masse away he flong And drawes a curtlax keine sharpe heauie long. 42. Wheirwith he fearslie did assayle the Prence Vniting force strength furie raige and wraith Now gainst his thundring blowes was no defence He geues not Prince Peardo leaue to braith For now his club was no defence at al The Gyant cuts the same in peices smal
43. Nere was the Prince in daunger vntill now Now lytle could his lightnes him defend He geues him wound on wound and blow on blow Wheirfrom the blood in purple streams discend So does a fontane made with arte and cunning His streams in sundre oppin pairts furth running 44. Greats shouts and clamours from the castell came Wheirwith that wicked crew expresse their ioye But cheiflie Arebo who sayde Madame Our skill our wit our flight no more employ Ours is the day the feght the victorie His be the fall the wrak the in famie. 45. Ah quod the Queene it much torments my mynd That Bramarano liues if he should die My loue my self my mariage I assyng'd To him and deathe (ye know) it wer to me Him for to wed which he wil haue perforce Ah deir reuenge ah lait too lait remorce. 46. Ah heauns I wishe yone crewel Knight alyue Till my reuenge my self should vndertake If he the Gyaunt of his lyfe depryue Eune him my thrall and bund slaue wold I mak No more for greif and sorow could she say Her tears her sighes her grones the rest bewray.
47. But she disguysd her loue with showes of hate Altho for loue she trmble pant and quaikt These words againe did to her self repeat Eune him my thrall and bond slaue wold I mak But o sweit loue should be his prisone good My airms should be his bands my lips his foode. 48. And thus did she this doubt sume feght attend With torment fear care sorow greif and paine For eurie drop of blood the Prince did spend Her hairt a sighe her eyes a teare furth straine Still when the Gyan stricks she starts she crye The wounds impressione in her bosome lyes. 49. Amaizement greif and sorow mixt with dout Her change of hewes her thoughts confusioune showes Cold was her blood within but hote without Trew witnes that her hairt her torment knowes Now reid now paile now pale now reid agane Her loue bred fear fear greif & greif bred paine. 50. Hard was the stait wheirin Penardo stood His club now gone long deip and wyde each wound From whenc flou'd riuers of his purple blood Which dyed in sanguein all the flourie ground With weknes now he wearies and he faint His agill leaps and nimble quicknes wants.
51. Oft sought he with the gyant for to close A tho his wounds his strength & lyfe did waist But all in vaine his trauell did he loose Such was the gyants wraith hs raige his haist That him now heir now their now out now in He focd about the field for to rine. 52. At last he stumbled on the yrone masse Wheirof as then great neid great help he fand That he it got the Prince right ioyfull was Now strength reneu'd into hi strengthles hand Reuenge bred ire wraith furie raige and might Wheirwith againe he did renew the fight. 53. Feirslie he faught but feble was his strengthe His might his slght his cunninge all was gone And onlie wratth manteind the feght at lengthe The gyaunt breathles brusd with blowes alone At last eache one so neir to vther drew That breist to breist and airme to airme they threw. 54. Blood moud the Prence a dreid reuenge to tak Shame moud the werie Gyaunt vnto wraith Shame gainst reuenge reuenge gainst shame does wrake Their ire their will their veangeaunce vnto deathe Thryce stroaue the gyaunt in his armes to fold The Prince, but his left airme refusd his hold.
55. Which great eduantage did the Prince espy And in his armes the gyant stronglie greips Whill both their feble forces thus they try Sad night with sable wings their deids eclip's Whill as her daughter darknes their resorts To guyde the gyaunts soule to Plutos port's. 56. Thryce gir't the Prince the Gyant in his armes And thryce againe he's forc'd to let him go With deip and deidlie wounds the gyant harm's The back the leggs the theighs of his strong foe By on vnarm'd so ouercum to be He loath'd he scorn'd and he disdain'd to die 57. Thus strugling long at last to ground they pa Of fallis the Gyants helme the Prince up flies And quicklie with that mightie irone masse Beats furth his brains & with his brains his eyes Thus bold disdainfull fearce prow'd full of wraith He yeelds his soule to hell his lyfe to death. 58. The Prince gaue Ioue his prase his thanks his right But yet this bluddie conquest hade so muhe Febled his strenght his ualour & his might Tyrd wer his trembling legges his waiknes suche He falls at last no differ could ye kno Betuixt the victor and his vanqueist foe.
59. The Queene Philena fair (who all this whyle Hade weel remark'd the valour of the Prince) Cheird vp her wofull looks and with a smyle She haisted doune to bring Penardo thence Whom when she sawly pale cold bloodles dead She grou'nd she sigh'd she sank doune at his head. 60. This sight amaz'd her seruants much but more It troubled Arebo the trueth to fynde At last his science airte and magik loir Reueild to him the secreit of her mynd Wheirfore with cair greif sorow wo & wounde▪ He fear's least deathe pairt lyfe & loue assunder. 61. Altho eun'e to the deathe he haits the Prince, Yet for Philenas cause for him did cair And softlie caus'd them bothe be caied thence Vp to the rock and lay'd in chambers fair Wheir soone he bought by skill arte craftingyne His lyfe his senses and releif from pyne. 62. When lyfe o're death hade got the uictorie And feir Philena hade reuiud againe Loue stroae with shame and shame with in famie And in famie reuiu'd what loue had slaine But shame reuenge hait in famie and all At last by lou was foght foyld bund in thral.
63, Wherfore these words she sadlie did rehears O lawles Loue imperious proud and crewell Vniust vnteamd vnconquerd strong & fearce O thow of goode and bad effects the fewall Thow moues mischeif shame dath warr woe despight And freindsship true true ioy & true delight. 64. And thus thow ar More wold ye dame haue sayde But Arebo she seis who did remoue The Ladies all when she on bed was layde His cure his spells and mightie charme to proue She that her self bewray'd might now behold Discoured al, reueild all al she told. 65. So does a craiftie Traitour to a King Who with his fellowes has conspyrd his death But fearing once discouerie of the thing Repentance faynes in looks in words in breath Discouering all their curs'd, malicious treasone And still him self condemn's him self with reasone. 66. When Arebo had harde the taill she told Still interrup't with grones with sighes with tear's His hairt inclynd to crueltie he wold And could haue bene content to stope his eares But that the loue he bore vnto the Dame Stop'd vp his wraith and quensh'd his furies flamme.
67. Wheirfor this much he promeist her at lenthe That he so weell his phislik wold apply Hi healthe his vigour beautie blood & strenth Should to his senewes vain & arteirs Hie Which in few dayes he hade performed so The Prince began to ryse to walk to goe. 68. Whom to Philena eueie day repairs Her cheifest pleasure was, to dres eache wound Her snow whyte hand she daintelie prepairs To dight to dry to dres to rype the ground Loue smyld to sie his noush thus allurde O happie man so drest so heald so cuerde 69. And whill she tuich'd his soft & snow white skin Which heir and their was staind with purple blood Tears frome her eyes lyk liquid pearle don rinne And on his skin oft trembled old & stood To plead for teir fair dame & seem'd to moue His hairt to yeeld to pitie or to loue. 70. Some tyme she ey'd his fair and louelye face His goldin locks his quick sweet smyling eye His weell proportion'd limms & eurye place She still remarks still feids on what she seis She looks she vewes admir's & still she gaizerb And frome each pait a wound her loue increse
71. Weell might the Prince behold her passiones strong Yet seemd he nought to know or not allow Least by deny all he should do her wrong Whoes martiall mynd to loue could neuer bow Yet courteslie her pofer'd pains with stands Which for vnkyndnes she taks at his hand's 72. Oft by her looks yet would she mak him know The passioune that torments her inwart mynd Oft hy her pettie speeches would she show She caird not muche altho he wold be kynd And often be simlituds would proue How farr her Sex exceedeth his in loue. 73. But nether speeche similituds nor looks Could mak him quick or capable at all He could not sie those baits, allurements hook' a Or seing would not sie nor heir their call Stil Mars his Sogeour he him self had sworne For Cupid he was nather bred not borne. 74. Yet fair Philena could not leaue to loue With new conceats new toyes & questions new Which in ane vthers persone she wold proue By parables his sansie to subdue But seing nother this nor that could moue him With sighes and tear's she told him she did loue him.
75. Wheirat he stood long silent and amaizd At last resolud to tak it but in skorne He sayd Madame i'mt glade yow so ar pleasd To tk your pastyme of a wretche for lorne Whoe birth whoes merit and whoes poore estate Your basest hand mayde wold not chuse for mate. 76. By this his simple answere weel she knew He knew her loue her passione and her mynde Wheirat she sham'd & chang'd to vermeil hew Sham brought in wraith, wraith sweir he was vnkynd Wraith brings in haitt in hait away she flong And whill she flies disdain chac'd loue along. 77. Penardo left in chamber now alone Repents him of his answer rashlie sayde Ah now Philena had yow knowne his mone And sein the grones, the sighes, ye ears he shade Once more thy cruell mynd hade now reented And thy mischeif new bred hade new repented· 78. But heaun's deny'd his pace and her content So prone and bent her mynd was to mischeefe Who now with Arebo has geuen consent To end his dayes and with his dayes her greefe In throw a priuie posterne they should creep And in his bed should murder him a sleep.
79. When bright Apollo sank doun vnder ground And Night look'd vp with manie thousand eyes Penardo in his bed was sleeping sound Ane Angell bright discend from heaune he sies Who sayd vp vp heighe Ioue commands ye flie Flie then in haist for if yow stay thowle die. 80. Then he awaks and leaps vnto the flure His birning eyes old staird & gaizd about At first he could not think him self secure To go from thence or stay such was his dout Not that he feard whole armies their to fynd But cald Philenas restles sutte to mynd 81. Whill dimme weak hale and feble Cynthia shyne Her borrowed light she lends to arme ye Prince With armour bright riche costlie rair and fyne And with a sword & sheild for his defence Which fair Philena gaue him long ago And with them would haue geu'ne her self also. 82. Be chance thén to ye dure he did repair Which to receaue the murtherers oppin stoode And doune a black deip dark and hollow stair Which seem'd to lead to hell and Lethes floode At last benethe the rock wheir waters glyde Furthe their he come doune be the Riuers syde.
83. And thus along the riuer syde he goes Throw rocks craigs tries woods groues and paths vn∣knowne In silence of the night whill Cynhia shoes Her pale weak pure cleir syluer Beam's furth throwne Throw glomie aer tuixt clouds youth Zephyre brings Vpone his soaring swift & loftie wings. Caput. XV. Argument. THe Murderers mis their fals intent Alone Penardo flies He on the banks of Theissa fair The Heyre of Hung'ry seis By Argalantes reft away He kills him brings her thence He foyls Lord Doreo in her sight Shes's amrous of the Prince. 1. GReat harme ensue by ouer great desyre O vaine desyre rediculous and ill That birnes the mynd & setts tbe hairt on fyre From the proceids wode furious fraintik uil A goundles deip of ill if ill abusde Diuerse inconstant infinit confusde
2. Vnnaturall desyres heighe heauens offend And appetits immoderat and vaine As birning lust but limits bounde or end A sink of sin a gulfe a sea a maine Which drawes the soule from heaunlie contemplatione And beastlie bruttshe maks her operatione. 3. Yea who soere or what soere they be Suffing them selfs with lust for to be led They ar no more them selfs, no more ar frie Nor from no trauell paine and labor fred, For their desyre a thousand wayes they vse Nor for it thousand torments will refuse. 4. Their bodie not refusing thousand pains So they obtain their pleasure their desyre Into their mynd a thousand hels remains In quenshing (thought vnquenshable) their fyre And their desyre their fyre incressing still Turns furie seiks for death if want of will. 5. Suche furie in Philena fals abyds Who birnes in fyre of sensuall delight Wanting her will and her desyre prouyds In furie for to murder this her Knight Not loue of him but lust in her remaind And therfore crewell death becaus restraind.
6. For presentlie no sooner was he gone When sextein Knights arryu'd in armour cled And throw that seceit passage goes anone With cleir sharpe swords about the Prince his bed The which if mightie Ioue had not forsein Their had he died their had he murdre'd beine. 7. But he whom heaun's preserud for better hape Did restles on his longsum iourney wend Till Tytan thryce in Thetis watrie lap Had dyu'd and thryce his spherick course did end When he vpone the banks of Teissa fair Lay doune and ends his wearie iorney their. 8. This Teissa is a fair and pleasant floode Which Hungaries east bordour rins a longe Neir to that montanes seuine heighe hoarie rude Which Transyluania fortefie right strong Heir rests the Prince all night & feids his mynd Wih conquest praise and glorie brought from Ind. 9. And wheir he lay the riuer from a rock Pour'd doune his pure cleir syluer streams in stoir Which on the peble channell softlie brok Throw hollow concaues of the crooked shoir Whoes ghostlie roars maks all the craigs to ring Whill tries birds winds with sweit reports does sing.
10. Whoes confort rare of musick sweit and fyne Soung him a sleip till bright Aurora ryse Whoes mantle brght reid whyt & cleir did shyne And alter turne and change in azure skyes A suddan sound (into his ears that rings A waks the Prince with shouts and murmerings. 11. He starts a loft and looking round about He sies ten Knghts come fo a forrest wyde Who Capiue led seaune Ladyes in a rout Whom with away in greattest hast thay ryde He draws his sword and with his sheild he goes To wine that prey be valour death and bloes. 12. One of the ten their passage to mak frie Cums farr before and caught his mightie launce The which he shuns with hand with fute with eye And quicklie did his murdring blade aduance Whih in the Knights hairt bloode he sheathd perforce Then took his launce and quicklie man'd his horse. 13. By this the Ladies and the Knights drew neir And swor their fellow should not die for nough One moir they send the passage for to cleir Who se king for reuenge a vengeance bought The Prince eune with his fellowes lance a pairt Pearst throw his breist his bodie and his hairt,
14. The rest with raige with furie and despight The Ladeis daintie hands and feitt hade bund And taine them fro their horse for feir of flight And left them sadlie weeping on the ground And in their furie mad for their reuenge All with the Prence began a battell stainge. 15. The Prence who saw the ladyes weep and murne His ire and wraith was chang'd to pitie myld But pitie vnreuengd to raige did turne Thus lke a lyone angrie fearce and wyld His flamming sword he tos'd till they all shoke Yet fanting striks and tremble whil they stroke. 16. The Prince rush throw them with his brand heigh born Death by his syde at each bloe one to catche As sythe cutts doune the graine the grasse the corne So cut befoi him fall they eurye wratche Eache bloe a wound eatch wound brought death with paine Him self vntiutch'd vnharm'd vnhurt remaine. 17. Eune as a montane craige or mightie rock Whom raiging seas or blustring winds assayle Gainst seas winds stormes & lightning thunder broke Still vnremou'd abyds and neuer faill So sted fastlye the Prince with stoode their strengthe And hurt feld slew or chac'd them all at lengthe.
18. Not one now left his furie to withstand His bloodie brand he dights and sheaths it then The ladyes he would louse bound fute and hand Tormented sore with sorow greif and payne And she that Mistres seemd of al to be Her lows'd the Prence from bands & set her frie. 19. Mistres she was indeid of all the rest For comelines for beautie and for grace For verteous mynd vnstaind pure cleine and chaist Meik modest myld and sprung of princelie race The feild of loue did modest vertue plow And rypt the fructe vnpuld as yet that grow. 20. Her modest blushe her Sne shyne beauties ray Her fyrie sparkling light cleir bright and shynning Their goldin beams spings furt in wantone playe Streams on the Prence his face whoes eyes refynning Hade recolle'ct' her spredding beams in one And throwes them back and burns her hairt anone 21. So bright Apollo spreds his beam's o're al And sweitlie wams and conforts eurye floure ut in a litle birning glas recal His rayes he shows his might his strength his powre For that to which before he comfort brought He birnes he skortches and consumes to nought.
22. The Prince admeird the beautie of her face She stoode she staird she woundet & she gaiz'd Still from his eyes come lightninge furthe a pace Which brint her hairt dsmayd and much amaiz'd For loue of eurye glance and eurye looke Nw weapins forg'd wheiwith her hairt he strooke. 23. Thus stoode the dame now pale now reid now wane Which weell bewrayde the passiones of he hairt Till floods of tears from her far eyes doune ranne Sighes from her swelling breist vnsolds her smairt Then loue for mend's did change to cristall ball's The syluer globs which fom her eyes doun fall's. 24. And them he throwes at Prince Penardos eyes Theirwith to hit to wound, or worke his smairt But all to weak his chyldishe airme he seis To harme the man that hade a Mars his hairt Wheirsore he sweir in furie raige and ire To fet eyes hairt and all into a fye. 25. Ane arrow fom his quauer furth he drew The which by chance did bear a leaddin head Wheiof he nothing in his furie knew Till in the Pinces hairt he fixt the lead Then Cupid blusht & sighdt and grond full sore Who neuer knew that he was blind before.
26, Ane vther shaft with goldin head he taks Wheirwith he wold vndo his wok ere long But all in vaine his trauell now he maks For that the vthers poysione was too strong Yet mollefied the force and did him moue To pitie her becaus he could not loue▪ 27 Then weiping throw the aer young Cupid flies To show vnto his mother his mischance The dame who now hade cleird hr wattrieeyes With modest blushe and smyling countenance Gaue thnks vnto the Prence for hi releefe When lo appeid more harme & more mischeefe. 28. For that a mightie Gyant they espyde Come from the woode vpone a Cameall strong At whoes hudge fearfull sight the ladyes cry'd O now begins our hell our death ow'r wrong But she that was vnbound with smyling cheir Sayde thus vnto them all, leaue of your fear. 29. In this most braue and gallant Knight remains Our hope, our confort, our releefe, our strengthe Such vertue grace and valour he retains That he must be ou tour and sheild at lengthe Loue bred her courage that the taill hade tolde What one so fear'd but loue can mak them bolde.
30. Such was her loue altho her loue was new Then leaue her secound self she rather die The Prince that saw the Gyant neer drew Sayd thus to her fair lady now I sie I may not stay the rest for to vnbind Wheifoe that wak to yow must be assingde. 31. Go then quod she heauns the preserue from ill So small a wok as this may I performe He hors'd and took a mightie launce him till Then reddie he abyds the furious stome The Gyant neir now dead seis eurye Knight And cryd ah Gods do I behold this sight, 32. Trembling with wraith with anger raige and yre He gnash'd his teith and shook his head a round Out from his eyes flew flamms of sparkling fyr And from his throat a hoarce confused sound His braih within his throat his speeches toi So bulls and lyones billow feght and roir. 33. Thus in his madnes furie wraith and haist He coutcht his mast-lyke launce & furth did runne The Prince that hade before his launce in raist Lyk haist lyk wil hade lyk desyre to win And thus lyke Pegasus grosse earth they spair And flies lyke thunderbolts throw boxin aer,
34. The Gyaunt brak his launce first on the prince Him self not steirt nor hurt nor mou'd at all But gainst the Prince his armes wer no defence Split was his hairt he doune to ground did fall With such a noyes & such a thundring sound As maks a mightie tour that falls to ground. 35. Be this the Ladyes of their bonds werefd And saw this bloodie monsters fatall end Terrour of him and horror of the dead Made them to shrink and fearfull looks futth send They stood amaizd dismay'd affraid they fanted Their timorous hairts in their weak bosums panted. 36. When to the Dam's the Prince reteired back Those Ladyes all fall's doune vpone their kneis First Ioue then him they thank for this kynd act With tears lyke pearle that streams from their fair eye They myldlie him be seeche request and pray Of pitie mercie grace that he wold stay. 37. As he hade freed them from that Tyrann strong To be their gairde their gyde & their defence Against al hazard death mischefe and wrong Till they wer saif at home & far from thence He lighted doune nor stray'd till they had doone But sweitlie meeklie myldlie answer'd soone.
38. First by the hand he raisd them from the ground And then he sayde fair Ladyes leaue to mourne A gyde a guairde a seruant haue ye found Till yow vnto your homes may saif returne They thank him praise him ioyes in suche a guyde Then tak their horse furthe on their way they ryde 39. And whill they traueld throw the forrest wyld The Prince inquir'd how this mischance befell When one of them bothe courtes graue & myld With smyling countenance began to tell Fair fire (quod she) first kno then what we be Whom your great might & valour has made frie. 40. This Lady pointing to the Dame whom he First lowsd from bands (but ty'd in bands of loue) Vdina heght sole Heyre of hungarie Hr Parents ioy delight and pleasure proue And thus our force th' Vngarian hope defend On her we wait we serue and we attend. 41. Into this wood oft tym's she muche delights To chace the loftie harte and simple hynde On her awaits Lords Princes Erl's and Knights That loud her prais'd her serud her to her mynd Amongst the rest that with the Princes came Prince Dorio was a Prince of noble fame.
42. Betuixt tuo famous floods he holds the lands Dravus the one Savas the uther heght And Belgrad that on fair Danubius stand's That mightie toune belongs to him of right This galant Prince should wed Vodina fair And regne with her as sole & only heyre. 43. This mightie Gyant whom yow haplie slew The mightie Argolantes heght to name Ore Misia he regn'd which they may rew He when he hard of fair Vodinas fame Send to the King & proudlie him command's To geue his only daughter in his hands. 44. Whom after he had seene perhaps he wold In mariage tak to be his laughfull wyfe The King disdaind his pryde & sute so bold. And him refus'd the which began this stryfe The Gyant swor in pryd disdaine & skorne Her wold he haue altho the King had sworn. 45. Thus with ten Knights he in this kingdome came And skornd with mo this kingdome to subdue Who thought him self sufficient for the same Such was his hope his pryde his valour trew And knowing by his spyalls eury day Of this our pastyme hunting sport and play.
46. On vs he come before we was awar When heat within our tents made vs reteir Our Knights still wandred throw the forrest farr Sum heir sum their to bring vs in the Deir Except sum on the Princes that attend's Whom in short space he brought vnto their ends, 47. Then vs pooe soules he took vnto his pray We that could mak no more defence but murn'd Vs with his Knights before he send away Whil with our Knights he faught that hade return'd But much it feirs me al our Knights ar slaine Heaun's grant that sweit Prince Dorio yet remaine. 48. And this is al fair Syre that I can shoe Which but your ayde hade beene more tragicall And if so pleas yow would the Princes kno To whome her thanks should randred be for all Since to your aid your valour strength and might Our lyfes our selfs and al belongs of right. 49. Long mus'd the Prince and answer long delay'de For oath he was his name should their be known' At last their Princes fair Vodina say'de Whom al this tyme sadd silence hade or'e blowne On her new loue her fansies new she fed New thoughts new toyes deuyses new that bred,
50. If I presume or should this muche be hold With Maydens modestie for to dispence Eu'ne to your courtasie of whome I hold My lyfe I wil bequeath my roode offence Whoes woundrous woorth stil Midas lyk is such Pure gold to mak of drosse if yow bot toutch. 51. Then this my fault this boldnes then forbeir Tho for not els yet since I am a Mayde For thy blis'd name blisd natione to enquire And that thryce happie soyle wheir yow west bred Resolue me this which to thy woorth adds more More to my bands more to thy fame thy gloire. 52. Not so Madame quod he theirs not in me That merits from your lips to haue a sound Much les a praise yet if their onie be Yow ar the sourse the roote the spring the ground From whence that vertue spring bud bear or grow Such force haue words if from your lips they flow, 52, As for my name my natione soyle or bloode In Thessalye neir Tempe's flowing fontanes Vpone the banks of fair Peneas floode Their was I borne betuixt to famous montanes That Ossa and Olympus heght and so From then Pelympus I, no more, I kno
63. Thus whill be spak attentiue was the Mayde To his sweit braith and his sweet voices sound That peirsd her breast her hait and all affray'de Eache word a dairt eache dairt a crewell wound Eache wound by force a deidlie poysione framme A seiknes a diseas a quen'shles flamme. 55. And whill she thu to him heir speak delights Amid the bushes thick they heir a noyce Of horses trampling and of armed Knights Whil trembling fear bereft the Ladyes ioyes But lo the Prince his sword and sheild prouyds And suddanelie wheir was, the sound he ryds'. 56. Wheir as he seis thrie Knights in armour bright And in his wraith inquyres what they wold haue From the those ladyes sayd the formest knight First sayd the Prince you their goodwill must craue Yes Yes sayd he but for thy fault thy wrong, Death thou deserues death you shall haue or long. 57. Who death so frilie geues & no thing wins Pehaps mey serue him self before another For charite ay at it self begins This said the Prence no answer made the other But eache began to thunder on the bloes Valour alyk lyk strength lyk courage shoes.
58. Yet that which harm'd the Prince Pinardo mos The vther tuo did also him assaill But he whoes neuer-deing valour lost No tyme, his deidlie blowes began to daill Done to the breist the one he cleift in tuo And heidles left the vther at a bloe, 59. His first Apailler feirslie forward ryde Tuo mightie bloes he gaue him for his due One cleift his sheild the vther pears'd his syde And at the thrid his sword in pecees flew Whome at on bloe the Prince hade brought to death But saw him with out a sword and calm'd his wraith. 60. But hee that wants a sword did nimblie prease To greip the Prince and bring him from his horse Which he refuses not bot with a treace Hm in his mightie armes he strains by force He beirs him to Vodina him presented Who all this tyme the battel soir lamented. 61. Yet knew she not those other Knights at all Loue hade her eyes so fix't vpone the Prince The other Dams fled fear'd & fanting fall But loue stout hardy bold was her defence And when the Prince presents to her the Knight Ah stay quod she thy hand wraith ire and might.
62. He is my freind and come to find me out And to releeue me from the Gyants thrall Prince Doreo he heght strong hardie stout Then my offence my wronge my fault & all Quod he deserueth death ah haist I blame Haist cause of murning death repentance shame. 63. Prince Doreo stil amaizd dum sensles stoode Loue and regaird stroaue with disgrace wraith shame Wraith bad reuenge reuenge the others bloode Shame bad reuenge disgrace, loue sayd the same Dismay'd, amaiz'd, he staird & gaiz'd about At last Vodina thus recald him out. 64. Amaizment Dorio leaue and leaue to dreame Thank now this Knight whoes valour courage strenthe Preseru'd my lyfe my honor and my fame The Gyaunt and his knights chastiz'd at length Whome to disgrace to death to shame he send Thus he began what non but he could end. 65. Loue jealousie disdain hade kendled fyre Of wraith to heir his Mistres praise his foe Yet cunninglie he smudden in his ire Till tyme place fate and fortune fauor sho Then quicklie turning to the victor Knight Thus sayde he syre I shame not by thy might.
66. To beore cum, since fates hes the ordaind Most happie and most fortunat of all Nather do I accout my valour staind Since Fortune the her Champione does call Thryce happie thow and famous thryce for why Thow art Vodinas freend hir Seruand I. 67. Be these his laittest words the Prince weell knew Loue was the only passione of his mynd Wheirat within him self he smyld yit shew Great coutesie for these his prayses kynd Nor did he loue nor feard he Riualls spoyle Such proud ambitione in his breist did boyle. 68. Then fordward on their way they still proceed Till they oretack the Ladyes that wer fled Whom heir and their in bushes hid for dreid They find half dead with fear and terror led Yet all with fair Vodina ford wart pas To Buda wheir the King her father was, 69. At last Apollo in the west discendit And chang'd heauns goldin smyls to azure hew When as their iorney with his course was endit Budas heighe tours they look they sie they vew Whoes gliftring splendor fyrie lightnings throwes Throughe glomie heauns so shynning Cynthía sho.
70. Thus neir to fair Danubius they drew Meane while swift fame hade tydinges borne of all How that strainge Knight fearce Argalantes slew And sau'd Vodinus shame disgrace and fall Then from his kinglie throne her father raise And come to geue him honor thanks and praise. 71. They past that famous flood whoes syluer streame Disioyns tuo cities staitlie riche and fair Buda the one Pesth is the others name That on his banks heaune-threatning tops vprair Lift vp from earth as if in skyes they stoode To vew their glanceing beauties in the floode. 72. Arryu'd wheir as the King did them abyde Vodina kneild before her royall Syre And told him that braue Knight kneild by her syde That sau'd her lyif his honour croune empyre Them lifted vp betuixt his armes the Roy Both them he kist and both embracd for ioy. 73. H'is led betuixt Vodina and the King Vnto their court proud staitlie riche and fair Still praises new, new thanks new honors bring Due for his woorthe and happie fortuns rair And eurye day wer new triumphs deuysd That him to pleasur ioy delight entysd.
Caput. XVI. Argument. VOdina shoes her loue but He Fayning base birth refusde She kills her self and Doria him As Murderer accusde From prisone long hes brought at last To burne, But heauns Reuenger A stranger fends that him redeems And he Redeems the Straunger. 1. WHill Prince Penardo heir vnknowne abyds Vnder the title of Pelympus still Inconstant fortune all her fauor hyds And turns her smylls to frouns her good to ill O wordlie pomp: O glorie vane: O fame A waisting lampe A shaddow and A dreame. 2. Long stayt he heir lou'd praist admeird of all Of Dorio disdaind invy'd and feard But poore Vodinas feidle was made thrall By Tyane loue▪ loue sow'd loue reapt loue ear'd All place to her was loathsum day and night Except the braue Lolympus wer in sight▪
3. And whil she wakes his sight her loue augment But oft in sleip sad visiones frights her mynd In sleep he sad and frowning him presents Vnthankfull coy disdainfull prowd vnkynd And death in thousand formes he showes in hate The presage true of her ensueing fate. 4. When she awaks she calls him too vnkynd Tears droune her eyes, and sighes o'reflowe her hair Yet oft she wisht that he hade knowne her mynd, Loue bids her use some meins loue to impairt: But shame forbids her modesty to pas Tuix Loue and shame a crewell warre their was. 5. Shame sayes a simple Virgine and a Mayde Should chastlie loue and modestlye desyre And of audatious words should be afrayde From loue propon'd should shune & thence retyre For Mayds that heir & forts that parly lowd Mak both the louer & the foe grow prow'd. 6. Much more if thow propone will he disdaine Thy want on formes and thy immodest loue The glorious name of Virgins shall thow stain And Maydin hoode a heauie load shall proue Loue by refus all liues but profert dyes A woman conqueres loue when loue she flyes
7. But Loue beguyl'd bothe Modestie and shame And thus he sayd, A woman thow must be O sis thow not what stains a womans Name No thing so muh as Haite and Cruelty Nature hath framd a womans hairt to yeeld And Courtesie and loue to win the feeld, 8. Sure he wold speek if he wer once assurde Of such a Princes fauor as thine owne His birthe too base thy matche to haue procurde Or els long since his fansie hade yow knowne Tho base of birthe he beirs a Monarchs mynd Then do but spek or look and He'll be kynd. 9. What if some new occasione call him hence? Then shall some other Princes win his hairt May thow not once with modestie dispence Befor thy loue and lyfe be death should smairt If health loue ease & pleasur stayeth still Vpone a word theyr'r fools that wants their will. 10. What also if thy father the constraine Prince Doreo to wed against thy will For with a nother doth thy Hairt remane Altho before thou gaue consent their till Pelympus o Pelympus onlie He The sight of Doreo wer but death to ye,
11. Haist then to tell Pelympus that thow loues Els he goes hence and Doreo shall the wed But o what if the Knight disdainfull proues O he wil not disdaine a Princes bed Altho thy beautie could not moue his mynd Yet will the croune of Hungare mak him kynd. 12. Thus on new Hope begyld with loue she fed Resolueing once for to vnfold her mynd Thus argued she thus thought she in her bed Whill Cynthia pale wan and dimlie shynd At last heauns gett aboue the easterne streams Oppins and day shoots furth his syluer beams. 13. With heauns bright syluer hew the Dame op rose When Phoebus beams did guild heaune earth and sea She in a gardine did her self repose Alone saue loue that boire her companie She thence her dames and Ladies all hade sent Till on loues altar she pour'd furth her plaint. 14. Then to ane quyet arbor she reteird Wheir long she murn'd she sighd she plain'd she prayde She honord loue, loue prais'd and loue admeird, For wheir abyds true luoe but in a mayde: Of she complaind that loue hade done her wrong At last she took her Lute and thus she song.
15. The sensles snaik benouwd with Winters cold With storme with frost with haill with snow with raine If her for pitie one inbreist should hold Till cherisht lyfe with heat returne againe Then strength and lyfe and Nature maks her bold To reaue the lyfe that did her lyfe obtaine Of loue this is the true similitude O loue the purtrat of ingratitude. 16. When thow was dead in winters of disdaine And perisht quyt in dark obliuions flood I cherist the with trauell cair and paine And thy sad death my fyrie smylls with stoode But when my breist by heat did lyfe obtaine Thow stingd my hairt and made my bosome bleid Ah loue how can a simple mayde offend That this her loue should bring her lyfe to end. 17. Loue brings dispair dispair brings death & hell Some say that musick oft proud loue withstoode But o how can thy hairt in pleasure seall When as thy verie soule is dround in blood Yet pray perhaps thy pray'r mey loue compell But medit at tone is of pray're the foode And crewell loue by meditation liues Then eury thing Pelympus deir reviues 18. Thus whill she playes thus will she sweitly sings Throw emptie aer the Queir of burds doune flye And spred a round their soft and daintye wings To shrow'd her whill she strains her nots on hye And when they heir her voyce her sound her noyes Lyik hands they clap their wings; in signe of ioyes.
19 When she hade doone about her heir and their Some saye her song and strain her tender throts Some laurell leaus and myrtles sweit prepair In their sharpe beiks and then with merrie nots Vpon her head they lett the leaus doun fall And seem to croun the Virgine their with all. 20. Others wold sitt and from their throats forth send A wofull sund that seemd to moue the skyes To pitie her sad death and wofull end Whil as the birds would straine such doolfull cryes As who would say ah loue ah beautie murne For her whoes death your day to night does turne. 21. But all this tyme she mus'd vpone her loue Her loue her ioy her pleasure her delight Pelympus braue whoes deids did matchles proue Non liue'd lyke him in valour strength and might Who walkt abroade that day to tak the air Whill fate heaune chāce & fortune brought him thai 22. She seis him come throw bushes leaues and wands Then lyk a mabre image vp she stoode The Lute falls doune betuixt her snow white hands And her fair eyes pow'r furth a syluer floode Lyk deaw on roses whyt and reid that falls Or syluer globs or pearle or cristall balls.
23. To wake her frome this dumpe he taks her hand And whill he toutch'd she trembled quakd & shook Now reid for shame then pale for fear she fand How her fant hart his wounted roume forsooke And vpwart fled frome paine wo greif despight True signes of suddane loue or sad afright. 24. At last the Prince her silence thus remoues Some saye that musick does the mynd delight But lo Madame in yow the contrare proues Quod she in hell death horrour and despight Who liues melodious sounds at harmefull still And still augments but ne're remeids their il. 25. To the perhaps my words may seame vn faitt For basheful Mayd's or simple Virgins pure And not agreing with my heighe estait To sue for grace whene I should leiue secure But o quod she if I indecent proue Not I but shameles tyraneizing loue. 26. The ravening wolf, the simple lamb did catche, Whom on he thought to fill, to feid, to prey, When lo the princelie lyone did him watche. First him he slew, then brought the lamb away, Tho once from death he did the lamb releefe, Afarr more crewel death he did it geue,
27. This wolf was Argalantes, I the lambe, And thow the princilie lyone made me fre When lo thyne eyes more crewell bands' did framme And band and chain'd and link't my hairt to the, Ah deir Pelympus, deir, too deir, it feares me, Loue shame, fear, hait, in thousand peicees tears me, 28. Thow stole my hairt out throw my besome poure, But, o, sweit stelth, swit theef, I pardone the, Myne eyes thow too and did their ayde procure And thus I help't to steill my self to the Deip sob, and tears, heir stayd hir wofull speche And with dumbe signes his pitie did beseeche, 29. But all this tyme the Prince look't doune to ground Rueth, reasone, pitie, wo, amaizement bred Yet in his besome loue no place hade founde But myldest pitie hade so far him led, That hardlie he from yeilding was refraind Yet thus he answers, and from loue restraind, 30. Madame (quod he) your luckles loue I rew And would it mend if with my life it stood Too base my birthe fair Princes is for yow My woorth too small to equaleize your blood I will not hait and yet I most not loue Mars doth my hert from Cupid far remoue.
31. Then dryue those fonde affections frome your mynd Let your wyse hairt calme loue & leue secure Loue is, a, monster, furius▪ fer and blynd And I'm an errant Knight base woorthles poor I'le serue yow still if yow but loue for beir In ioy in greif in confort hope in feir. 3 Forbeir quod she and must I then forbeir? O? mad misluck O? loue O? chaunce O Fate! O, loue, O, torment great? O, greif? o fear! O? plague of plagues! O, desperat deceat! O sting, O deadlie Poysione of the hairt O hell of mightie mynds o death O smairt? 33. Forbeir to loue O, word of sad disgrace The task begune by loue must loue not end? Natur had fram'd the fair and sweet alace But the a crewell Tygers mynd did send O crewell nature man▪ O man to crewell To foule a blot to staine so fair a Iewell. 34. And loue forbeir alace that word forbeir O sad decrie O sentence of my death O torment of my soule, from verteus spheir Could suche disdane and loath sum hait tak breth Thou loues to liue in scorn of loue and me I liue to loue, and looth'd, for loue must die.
35. And now alace the houre approched nye When her sweet lyfe that sweet hold must leaue She drawes a knyfe which hange low be her thie And tuix her breist's a flood-gat vp she reaue Wheir pitie loue and beautie long with stoode The fatall knyfe the lyfe the vitall bloode. 36. From him she turn'd her face & did this fact Then turns and say's without, a shrink or paine Receaue this solemne sacrafeize I mak Vpone the altare of thy heighe disdaine Deir sweet receaue my hairt my lyfe my loue My Virgine soule, Fairweell I must remoue. 37. And now the starre light of her eyes grew dimme Her fair sweet face vpone her shoulder fell In her paill looks sad pitie lookt on him Her trembling kneis grew weak & doun she fell Lyik ane fair floure pure beautifull and young By frost new slaine youth had but newly sprung 38. une as discoloured opell's change and turne The whyte now wan now pale heir reid their blew Her louelye whyte grew pale and seem'd to murne The reid in spot's did change to azure hew The Sune grew dimme and smylling heau'ns did lou The cloud's did murne & floods of tears doun powre.
39. The Prince that saw both lyfe and soule was gone His mightie mynd began for to relent His syght his speeche his sense him left a none Woe sorow cair greif sadnes discontent His lyfe and breath clos'd in his hairt withall Pale cold and dead he on her breist did fall. 40. Thow lyes Penardo dead vpoune the ground Whom myghtie armies could not ouerthrow Nor losse of blood nor many greuous wound Could mak the shrink or flie or yeeld or bow Altho she dyed for loue and for thy hait Yet should thow not be blam'd bot crewell fate. 41. But Fortune wold extinguish & put out His shynning lampe of conquest prais and fame For Doreo that long hade sought them out With iclousie and loue despight and shame Was thither led whene he this sight did vew Bothe ioy and greif dispair and hait ensue. 42. Ioyfull he was to sie Pelympus dead But deadlie wofull for his mistres deir Tuix contrar passiones finds he no remead At last reuenge on his dead corpes he sweir That wheir before he was renound & praisde His infamie to heaune should now be rais'd.
43. The fatall knyfe which in her brest he spyed He pulls away and putt's into the place The Princes dagger, then alowd he eryede Ah treassone tresson ah wo wo alace Whoes deidfull noyes thow all the palace ring's And thither Lords Knights Erles & Barones brings. 44. When they had hard & sein this wofull sight Their come the King the Quene the Ladyes all Great was their cair their angwish their despight They weep they murne they sigh they cry they cal That roks wodes montanes sound furth sad dispair Whoes Echos fill the earthe and emptie aer. 45. Yet some more ware and wyse perseauit the Prince No dead but falne a soune the whiche thy tell In chains in cord's in gyues they brought him thence Vnto a dungeone deep and dark lyk Hell When he reveiu'd and fand him self in chains He woundred muche at last he thus complains. Penardo his complaint. WHat? do I liue quod He And speek and sie & breath▪ Whoes damned soule the heaun's abhors And kornes to geue me death And of that guer done due For sin they me depryue
Till I should daylie leiue and die Ten thousand deaths a lyue Come death teir furth my hairt My too too crewell hairt That of my loue more then deseru'd Did skorne she should haue paire But death sence thow art vsde Poore virgins lyfes to tak Thow pities so to ease my paine Since hell abhors my fact Yow fearfull monstres all Yow feends yow furies felt Yow Centaurs Harpy's Hydra's foull Yow Gorgons grim of Hell Come Plutos damned Ghosts Come all since death delayes With legiouns of your greislie troups I'le feght and end my dayes But o yow fear to veiu worse then your selfs can be Mo torments in my soule abyds Then yow in Hell can see Fa'ine would I flie my self Becaus my self I fear For still my self within my self A thousand Hell doth beir But wheir o wheir is she Wheir is that Angell fair With whom abod al grace al good Al loue al beauty rair Ah thryce vnhappie Me Ah my disdane had pow're To reaue the Heaun's thair Darling deir
And earthe her fairest flour My haples slouth before Bereft a Virgi breath And now disdane my mad disdane Ane other brought to death Why stay't I not alace With fair Philena still She would haue geuen me due rewarde And hade preueind this ill O fantasyes! O dreams! O foolish visiones! O Why gaue I credit vnto yow That twyce hes wroght my woe? But wofull monstre I Of luckles loue alace That still must leiue in endles paine Least death my sorowes chace. 46. Thus in this agoneizing greif he lay Long in this doungeone filthie deep and dark Fast bound in chains nor saw he sight of day And still bewaild his lyfe his chance his wrak And this his murning wo greif sorow care Turn'd vnto madnes oft and oft dispair.
47. But all this tyme great wo great paine great greife Prince Doreo took for his deir Ladies death And still his mynd was bent on heighe mischeefe He sought reuenge with furie raige and wraith For in his craft his malice his despight This vitious wrong he wrought that valiant Knight. 48. Whill to this gardyne I did walk (he sayd) I harde a sound a voyce a call a cry Ah Heauns preserue me let me die a Mayde Thither I ranne but when I come hard by The Murderer me saw and faind he fainted And fell as lyfe breath sense and soule he wanted, 49. I litle caird his feir his fate his fall But to the Ladie rann whom soone I knew I cryd and in my wofull airmes withall I took her vp but gone was her fair hew I cald her once onee lookt she in my face Once spak this word ah wofull word ALACE. 50. Into her fair and yuorie breist abaid The instrument of that fearce tyranes wraith I puld it furthe and their with all she said Thow come to lait for to preuent my death Her hand I gote fairweell she wold haue sayde Wheirof but (fair) her laister breath furth-layde,
51. These speeches spak Prince Doreo and with all So wo begone and sorowfull he sem'd Oft stopd by sighes and oft would tears doun fall That eury one him prais'd and much esteem'd And then the King in wraith reuenge and ire Commands Pelympus should be brint in fye. 52. The night before this wofull Prince should dye For her he murnes on her he calls he cryes So does the lap-wing when some Sheiphird by Her brood bereaues all day all night she flies And weips and calls Yet sleips or night be past So weeps the Pince and so he sleps at last. 53. And in his sleep the Angell did appeir That wairn'd him from Philena for to flie And lookt on him with fearce and angrie cheir Saying Penardo O Penardo sie Ioues wraith prononced if thow not soone repent Thy wicked thoughts thy words and thy complain. 54. Thow doest refuse his help his grace his ayde Thow still rebells gainst mightie Ioues decree Thy greif at Hells wyde mouth thy Soule has layde O wrarche O man from sinne refraine or die O sie behold thy plaints and Ioues heighe wraith Leids the to paine to hell to endles death.
55. Thy visiones come from heauns and not from hell Why temps thow then heighe heaune with plaints and tears He hes decreit what e're to the befell Do then what he ordains leaue greifs and fears Eune of thy good he maks thy self the meins But thow his goodnes grace & loue preueins. 56. Vodinas blood on her owne head shall fall A iust rewaird for her vniust desyre For her owne sinne and her fore fathers all That race in her must end their prowd empyre Nor in thy loue no intrest hade ye Dame Ane other of more woorth shall win the same 57. Who shall preserue thy lyfe ere it belong Flie not heauns ioy heauns peace but heaune obey This sayd his face lyk lightning beam's ou flong That fild the house with glorius glistring ray Which doone the Angell thence him self convoye And left him fild with conforts hops and ioyes. 58 Then ioyfull he awaks and watis the houre Of lyfe or death as mightie Ioue thought meit No plaints but prayers did the Prince furthe powre Vpone the altar of repentance sweitt And still he sighd he murn'd he plaind he prayde To God for grace for help releefe and ayd.
59 Now come the tyme wheirin this crewell King Would execute his vengeance on the Knight Furth to be brint with fyre they did him bring When lo a wearyour bold approcht their sight In airmour cled it seem'd dreid warre he brought He finds the King whom throw the thronge he sough 60. And sayde Sir King perhaps my comeing may Dismay yow much yet i'le the trueth vnfold And what my giltie conscience bids me say That none yow wrong as now it seems yow wold I beir the hand that wrought your Daughters fate Yone Knight to saue her came, but came too laitt. 61. Fearce Argalantes was my vncle deir Whoes blood for to reuenge, I thither ca Long waited I into this forrest neir That yoynes vnto your Park your Gardines fram And disper at my wisht reuenge to work At last into thai gardine did I lurk. 62. When bright Apollo gilted had the sky Vodina by misfortune come within The arbor wheir I secreitlie did ly And would haue fled agane but could not win I took her wold haue forcd her gainst her will But she dny't whom I in raige did kill.
63. Her laittest grones yone Knight whom kill yow wold Hade harde and come to sie I fled be twein The Parks and Gardenes to the forrest old The way I come vnhard vnmarkd vnseene Euer since within the forrest did I stray Nor out from thence could euer find the waye. 64. And still her gost vnto me does repair And still presents Hells torments to my mynd And still the greislie feinds throw trubled aer Sounds furthe the pains my wofull soule should fynd In thousand formes her murdred ghoste before me Appeirs; & hell still gaipes for to deuore Me. 65. This day agane she did her self present Commanding me to the the trueth to sho Ane other giltles lyfe for to prevent Els I tormented should in endles woe This is the caus that I my death desyir Then set him frie & leid me to the fyre. 66. All that this warryour hard wer much amaizd And look't and mus'de & gaizd and silent stoode Thought pitie in the King was neuer rais'd Yet sham'd he was to wrongd a Knight so goode And causd to lowse vnbind and set him frie And armour horse and all restoird to be.
67. How soone his horse and armour he receaud They charg'd him to depairt the court and flie But nobly for to dye was all he crau'd For to reuenge his wrong his infamie Yet knew not who with death his lyfe wold by But also sweir him to releeue or dy, 68. Whom they had tyed with cords & with a chaine Had bound him to a staik his armour on So he deyrt and so he did obtaine In armour thus to burne and burne a lone O kyndnes true that feare of death remoue O praise O vertue great o wondrous loue. 69. To sie that sight amaizd Penardo stoode His breist begane to swell with raige waith ire Pitie drew from his eyes of tears a floode Wraith pitie helpt, pitie blew angers fyre And thus his wraith his pitie ire and wo Brought Suddane warre and suddane conquest lo, 70. Heir loue heir proud ambitioune man'd the feild And still contend's who most gouerns the mynde Loue caus'd the stranger to the fyre to yeeld Eune loue of Prince Penardo most vnkynd Who rewld by proud ambitione skornd to be Ore matchd in ought and cheiflie courtesye.
71, He feghts alone amongst a thousand foes And all of them defyes and ouerthrew All whom he fand; to ground with mightie bloes And still his wraith still his reuenge renew Nor gaue them leaue to pray to plaine to call Suche haist he made to kill to murder all. 72, Some at his dreidfull angrie look affay'd Fled heir and their and some in heaps doune fell Those that withstoode slaine on the earth wer layde And those who leauing could not him repell With their dead bodies rais'd a wall a none And thus gainstoode when other means wer gone. 73. But he but ledder skalled or engyne Martchd proudlie o're thoe walls and fortres strong And wold display his sheild for ansigne fyne And tosse his flamming sword his foes among Till he vnto that dreedfull fyre was come Some fear'd some fell all fled to giue him roume. 74. That amorous Knight that to the staik was tyed Bholding his strainge deads and wonders strainge Brek all his bands and through the fyre he hyed Whoes threatning sword did thrist for dreid reuenge Not that he cair'd his lyfe or feard ye fyre But for to ayde or de was his desyre.
75. Be this the King Prince Doreo hade sent With him his guarde for to chasteize their pryde Him self reteir'd that mischeef to preuent He feard some secreitt treasone their t'abyde This armed band and Doreo now assaild These warryours stout but nothing yet preuaild. 76. More deadlie then more crewell grew the fray The Prince and his Companione bak to bak Such valoure shew such wounders wrought that day And with such courage did such hauok mak As Eggles Haulks or rauening Wolfs that rear The simple sheep or sillie fowles that fear. 77. Those warryours tuo stout hardy fearce and bold Wold thus asswage their hunger quensh their thrist With bodies dead in gorie blood inrold Great was the valour of the stranger first That sharpe reuenge and vengeance sharp ordaine Ilk blow a wound eatch wound death vo and paine. 78. Those Champions disseuered wer againe Eache one with warrelyk troups besett a round And stroue to tak them both but all in vaine They beat them back and kill & fell to ground Whose ame straitcht furthe to tak them first wold enter He seis cutt of & darrs no further venter.
81. Penardo still those forces new assaild Whom he with strenth and might still overthrew And lykwayes still the stranger Knight preuaild But Doreo the Prince hi strenth weel knew And theirfore to the stranger Knight he haisted On him both ire and honor to haue faisted. 82. That galant stranger matchles for his woorthe Met him amid the reid blood flowing plaine And raige bloode warre & murther beathed furthe Eatche other stronglie hits & hitts agane At last the stranger's airme alost he bore And Doreo's heid he brak he clift he tore. 83. Dreid horrour fear and terrour of the sight Made all to feir to tremble & to quak Conquest once smeld by that braue stranger Knigh The Squadrones ranks & bands he roodly brak Wholl trops to earth he brings he beats he beirs So winds brinks doune the corne & rypned eer's. 84. As chyldren mak in pastym sport and play Ane spaill to waft to role to tosse to flie About their heid quick speedie nimble lay That of one thundring spaile it seemeth thrie So seemd the straungers sword whoes deids thy thought Strainge wonderfull incredible wer wrought
85. Thi ramping lyoune sought Penardo out And fand him in the mids of all his foes Whom strong & valiant hardie bold & stout The heaps of murdred bodies did inclose So irk't he was and wearie their with all Tho still he faught yet reddie stil to fal, 86. Their Deaths sad court deaths palace their abode Their tropheis wer erect'd vnto his name Their lukwame blood did smook and flow abroade The stranger stood amaizd to sie the same And softlie sayd O valours onlie stoir Whence comes his wealth of conquest fame & gloir. 87. Now Phoebus from his glorious carre doune lyes In Neptuns azure palace whill sad nyght A rose maskd vp and cled in dreidfull gyis With fearfull shad's of darknes and affright The worthie stranger to Penardo haisted And delt so many deaths till Death was waisted. 88. But lo the tumulte munting in the are wold pers, ye clouds with plents and vofull sounds Men wemen bairnes with furie raige dispair Reuenge and vengeans call's till heaune resounds Now wes their daunger greatter then before Thouands by heaps almost to earth them bore.
89. Yet heaun's decried their savetie thus inteir Blk night o're all the earthe spred furth her vai And suche a fearfull darknes did appeir It seem'd their was no darknes left in hell With hands they grap't they wander & they stray So does the blind alone that los't the way, 90. And thus confus'd now heir now their they rine Penardos freind thus to him said but dreid Sheath now thy sword leaue heir thy sheild & win Out throw this lawles multitude with speid I'le gvde the to the forrest heir but stay Why then I go quod he show yow the way 91. Thus throw the throng vnseene vnmark't vnknowne They marche alone but feir but cair but dreid Nor was their feirles flight to anie showen But saiflie to the forrest come with speid Wheir in a groue hard by a fontane syde They rest whill light for saifer flight pouyde.
Caput. XVII. Argment. THe stranger Prince Penardo knoes Of whom he does reioy's Who tellis him many woundrous thing's At last they heir a noyes The Queene of Macedon they sie Led by them as they thought Fals Arbo beguyls the Prince Whome long the stranger sought. 1. WHen Budans could not thus attaine reuenge Of that disgrace & shame was to them wrought With noyes confus'd sad shout's and murmur strainge The slaine & murdred bodies home they brought And to this day Penardo's thought so wyld That with yat name they still yair weeping chyld, . Whill they in wofull murning pas the night Penardo in the forrest did remaine With his true freind his vnaquainted Knight That for him tooke more thn a freindlie paine No wounds they hade but wearyed whill they la Hard b the sounding streame & longd for day,
3. The Prince sayd thus synce heaun's ar pleasd with thise That I must liue who lookt for nought but death Most woorthie Knight think not I doe amise To kno of whoes braue mynd I hold my breath And vnto whome my indeuores and al My lyfe my thought my seuice should be thrall. 4. Or if the heaun's hath sent yow to my aide Since none but heauns my innocence heth known Vodinas death was falslie on me layde Which Ioue this day has of his mercie showne Nor my request becaus too lait yow shune it Long since if tyme hade seru'd wold I haue doone i. 5. Then quod the other, Prince Penardo kno I am that mayde whome thow redeem'd from death From paine from hell from everlasting wo From Mansays mightie charms his craft his wraith Eu'ne I that same Laissa whome throw fred First from the flamme last from the sleipping bed. 6. Her words at once bred wounder and delight Yet in his hairt ther could no credit fynde Till of she tooke her eask of sylver whyte Then bleiz'st her eyes her, looks lyik lightning shyn'd Her shining haire about her face doune flies Through which bright vale lyke starres appeare her eies,
7. As when the Sun throw yealow glase doeth shyne On alabastre toumbs pure cleir and whyt With small and prettie goldin streams deuyne Seem's trembling on the stone to tak delyte Of that whyt obiect deckt with cristall rocks On er fair face so shynd her goldin lock's. 8. Altho the nyght was dark he might behold Her eyes lyk glanceing comets blaizing farre Or dyamonts in whyt enameld gold Penardo thow whoes hairt from dreidfull warre Could not be thrald to womanizing loue How thanks thow now this passion for to poue 9. Wheiron now thinks thow wheiron does thow gaize The same is she whoes louelie self thow saw Within the sleipping toumbe and could not raise Nor from enchaunted sleep her senses draw Whoes bright Idea wanders throw thy mynd Yet can no resting place for loue out fynd. 10. When thoughts assurde him she the same must be Ot tymes he thanks the heaun's for her eleef Has heaun'e fate fotune smyld agane quod he And ar thow now suffes'd with my mischeefe Heighe Ioue his sacred helpe & aide vp steirs When dunger most most harme most wrack appeirs.
11. And fair Madame quod he yours is my name My lyfe m seruice and my all is your's You's be the praise the honor glorie fame Yours be my deads my acts my happie hour' Yours is my lyife by right me shall yow haue To be your knight your seruant and your slaue. 12. The varient stuf that alter change and turne Wrought of discoloured silk soft subtile cleir Heir llie whyte their crimsone reid doeth burne Now mingle boh and now doth red appeir So she that heirs him turn's and changes so Heir reid their whyt & then all reid doeth sho. 13. Sweit wer the sounds that from his lips proceid Which pearst her tender breist & gentle hairt Wheiron her old-bred loue & fansie feid Renewes the flamme first in her mynd insert For first she fell in loue with him when as Enchanted sitting in the toumbe she was. 14. And euer since in loue hade she remaind Far hade she gone far sought to find him out Till prouidence of hyer pow'rs ordaind She should of his sad death remoue the doubt For Cupid of his deads a chaine did famme That captiue led this fair & amorous damme
15. Thus whill she gaisd long on his countenance A modest smyle for answer he receau'd Oft wold her eyes steil furth a secreit glance If not for shame a kisse she would haue crau'd Eache pairt she vew'd she loud she prais'd with smyl∣ling Suche craft can louers vse them selfs beguylling. 16. From secreit pleasurs and from hid delight From gaizing thus at lengthe the Prince awaks her To pas away the long and wearie night With courtes speiche and prayers fair he maks her To tell her lyfe her inuirye her wrong Her fore past labours and her trauells long. 17. First then she rais'd her myld and modest eyes And cleir'd her countenance with heaunely grace A fyrie smyle sweit plesant glade furthe flies That chac'd the clouds of cai and greifs apace While beautie of her foreheid made a throne And sat their to be gaiz'd and woundred on. 18. My Lord quoth she to show my wofull lyfe Would tedious proue and neuer haue ane end For heauens and fortune seime to be at strife Which should against mee most theire forces bend Yet shaell yow kno the Muses crewell hairted And what befell to me since yow departed.
19. My Parents freinds nor blood I do not kno Nor of what house or lyne I am discendit Nor of my wofull birth I can not sho But skairslie well thrie lusters yit ar endit Since swadled by the Heliconian fontane The Muses fand me on that pleasant montane. 20. They brought me vp within that holy mont Taught me their holye reitts and sacred art One day (a wofull day) as I was wount When I hade chac'd the Stage ye Hynd ye Harte In ther swit spring to bath I took delight Which was my ground of wo greif cair despight. 21. The Muses for that caus I do not kno But that was all the fault they did pretend Left me bereft me and decreid my wo And by their Pow're deuyne did thither send Two Knights my loue to win to sue to pray And Riualls both each one did other stay. 22. Then Mansay did his charmes and spirits send Enchaunting them and me as yow haue seene Which by your might and valour brought to end And yow to lett when as he saw no meine Me in the sleipping toumbe he did enchaunt That saw yow knew yow tho my speech did want.
23 When from the rook yow took the sword and shield Then from my paine and prisone you redem'd me I cry'd I cald I sought you throu the field But Mansay that some better then esteem'd me Appeird to me and told me you ver gone Which made me weet my cheekes and sigh and mone. 24. The Wizard then from murning me refrainde And told me you should saif returne againe For you paine cair and sorow was ordaind Whair throw you must to glorie great attaine So heau'ns decreit and so you must obay Thus sayd throw shaiples aer he went away. 25 His words renewd but somwhat easd my greif Still on I went ouer craigs & montanes hoar But hope but hap but help or but releif The wraith of heaune, ne're satisfiet the more And to augment my cair my wo my stryfe I liued this base this poore this serueill lyfe 26. It was my chaunce when I had traueld long In forrests wyde some sheipherds for to find Whoes lyfe content secure from fortuns wrong Would fite my cursd and haitfull dayes to end Wheir long I serued in poore and mein degrie Refusde no paine whill paine refusde not me
27. But Fortun still invying my estait And skorning this my blist tho poore content Disdaning so I should eskape her hait Not suffring death my shame wo greif preuent Nor pitted she my wo my cair my greif But pitied I should thus eshew mischeif. 28. One day as I my shaggie flock furth dreane From fold to groue to medewe and to plain Evandone Prince of Ephyre did persaue Within whoes land thoes shipherds all remain By chaunce from sporthe com and me esteem'd. More beautifull then in effect I seem'd. 29. And thither oft in tyms he did resort To thrall me chaste desire vnto his will But I still cloyde with cairs and vod of sport Denyit his sute and preisd to shune his ill But all in vaine my trauell was for nought Me gainst my will vnto his court he brought. 30 Ane youth he was vnmaried I confes And on my head wold set his diadem But I whoes hairt ane other did posses This spak the dame vnwarrs and bushd for shame And thus she turnd her speeche, from whom all loue My cair my greif my sorrow did remoue.
31. When he perceaud my resolutione strong Vn moud nor vowes, nor prayers could preuaill He neids would haue by force dispight & wrong What he could not obtain by louet' assaill And long he mew'd me vp frome dayes sweet lyght In prisone dark in voes eternall night. 32. Nor could these wrongs his crueltie suffeize Nor could he pitie puire vnhappie me But in the sight of all the Peoples eyes He would bereaue my spotles chastitie Nor could words prayers sighs or tears him moue To leaue so foull so vyld so filthie loue. 33. His vitious mynd so odious had him made That all his Lords and people him detested Then would he haue me bound vpone a bed When on my kneis this one thing I requested He would not suffer Rascalls bind or bow me But his owne hands yat honor wold allow me. 34. Wheirto he yeelds and I resolue to die Then cald I thryce on sweit Penardos Name Thus twyce vnwarrs her passion furth did flie Twyce she her loue bewrayd & tuyce thought shame O loue true loue for speeks she or be mute Her blushe looks smyls or word bewrayt her sute.
35. Yet loue to hyde that had so oft burst out Her eyes tuixt wraith and shame old brint and shynd At last this she excuse she casts about Quod she Thyne ayde would their haue pleasd my mynd I wish'd the when the Tyrane did aspyre To act his filthie foull and vyle desyre. 36. His dagger then I quicklie puld a paire And ere he could him self of me releef I stobd his loue but with his loue his hart Wheir with the people cry'd O sad mischeef Some in a raige me fouriouslie assayld But with the greatter pairt my pairt preuaild. 37. And thus begane a fearce & crewell feght On at her syde wer kild hurt brusd or slaine I pitied for my caus my deid my right They murdred thus should masacred remane Wheirfor with gentle speeche & pleasant words I both appeas'd their wraith & sheathd their swords. 38 When they be thought them on the Tyrans deids His murders great when they to mynd did call They prais'd heighe Ioue from whom ther help proceid To me they gaue yair kingdome croun and all Which long for to enioy I could not stay Whom angrie fates and fortune cald away.
39. I vowd yat' rest my bodie should not find Till I my countrey freinds & parents kn A gouernour their left I me behind Then forward on my iourney did I go Long traueld I and mony dangers past Till in this forest I arryud at last. 40. Wheir whill I lay my weary lims to rest Beneth the vmbrege of a spredding Beche A virgine Nymphish lyk attyrt and drest Presents to me this armour with this speeche Aryse Laissa now the tyme drawes neir Wherein thou must a knight no mayde appeir. 41. Mansay the send this armour sword and shield And thair with bids the go to Buda straight Wheirby thy Fortune Heauns shall to ye yeeld By cunning slight by force and dreidfull feght Thou must that Knight from fire from death detaine That the releeud from fyre from bloode from paine. 42. As for thy Parents this he letts ye kno Thou art sole Heyre vnto a mightie King Which tym and fate, and fortun shall ye sho And end to all thy greif cair sorow bring But kno thy hart's delight and greattest ioy Shall be the greattest caus of thy annoy.
43. This sayd the Nymphe throughe shaples aer does glyd I fond my self well arm'd on euery pairt And forduart fast my spedie steps I hy'd Me thought some fear assailt my pancing hairt Some fear of fortune ill mishap mischeef Wheirat I tremblit shouk & quakt for greif. 44. Whill thus I go tuix dreid wo hope and fear I met By happie chance a Palmer old Who did the mater all to me dcelair And how yow slew stout Agalantes bold And tho your name was chang'd yet weell I knew Your deads your valour shew me it was yow 45. Then Argalantes Nephoy fain'd I me To mak you frie non other mein I saw And to reuell to yow for yow I die Then knew I weell yow all the treuth wold shaw So should yow die I leiue for to be sory That Earths obiect was saift & lost her glory. 46. By this heaun's light Earths confort Darknesse foe From our horisone Night did wairn to pas And lyke transparent cristall gaue to sho The hemisphere or lyk bright azure glas Or lyk a demi-syluer-globe it lyes Vpone the earthe earthe seem's to beir the skye
47. No sooner days faire coach man did appeir When as their talk was interrupt and stayit A noyes of horse and chariots they did heir And suddanly they roise as half affrayit Whill as the sound drew neir they did espy Some threttie Knights that gallopt softlie by, 48. And round about a coatche they seemd to ryde That four whyt fair and galant coursers drew In which a lady sat whos beauties pryd Seemd to contend with bright Apollos hew Yet throw her beautie lookt furthe proud disdaine That shew her mynd displeasure did containe. 49. Her crimsone cheek leandon her snow whyte hand Her eyes Loues fyrie Comets seem'd With chyld With tears which woe and anger did command. And raind downe Tempest from her face so myld On her fair breist lyk diamants whoes rainge Fyr't by hir eyis in thousand colours cheange. 50. Or lyke the rory deaw in May that lyes One snow white lilies and on purple roses So stands the Nectar drops stild from her eyes Vpone her rosie cheeks sweit beauties poses She breath'd sweit balme whoes odore phisick proue To purge grosse sense & sharpe dull witts for loue.
51. And warone Cupid dalieed in her lap Snatching the cristall balls still as they fall And at Penardo throwes, him to intrap Too weell that craftie Cupid knew with all How to reuenge Penardos former wrong Whiche wofully he acted now ere long. 52. O thow Penardo braue Penardo thow What doest thow think or whei on dost you gaize Heth loue o're cum the, has one made the bow Whoes hand o're airmyes gote the conquiring prais But O what hairt so hard or strong to keepe But yeeld's to loue when beautie list to weepe. 53. And whill he stoode in this amaize he seis A simple Groome vpone a galant-horse Who cryes and sighes and weeps with watrie eyes And followes still the raine with great remorce At him he wold enquire and run's a paee Who in few words thus answred him Alace. 54. Sire Knight if ere true pitie pears'd your hair Or if the vow of knight hoode you obey Releeue my Dame and ease her wofull smair By cruell tyranes reft and brought away Tak this my horse and stay my Ladyes flight Thryce happie I if this succeid a right
55. The haples Prince no questione more wold craue But taks the horse and after them he ryd's The wicked Groome that did him so deceaue Was not a Groome but in that shape abyds Fals Arebo so full of all disceat That sought his deathe & fall of his estate 56. For when the Prince eskeap't Philenas traine Wairn'd be the Angell when he fled by nigh She wold haue murdred him for his disdaine But finding he hade sau'd him self by flight With Arebo consults for her reuenge Who hade deuys'd this traine fearce crewell strange. 67. This galant Lady whom the Prince had sein Was faire Olinda whom the fares ordaind Faire crewell chaste & of all hearts the Queene Loue bow'd to her but she all loue disdaind Ore Macedon she regn'd whoes shaip by airt The wisard fraim'd to worke Penardos smairt. 58. Laissa oft requirde the Prince to stay Til she with him the quarrel hade embrac'd, But he impatient of all delay Told herd he would returne agane in haist Yi loue made her vnfit to follow fast Till wandring farre she lost the way at last.
59. And wearied with her heauye armours weyght Dround in displeasure sorowes greifs and harmes She traueld till the dark and dreid full nyght In folds the worlde within her lazie airmes Then rest's she by a fonte▪ bevaills her state Her luck, her chance, her fortune, and her fate. FINIS. Heir ends the first book of the famous History of PENARDO and LAISSA.
To the Authour. NAture and arte contending which should proue Most fauourd of the muses did ordaine Old Orphaeus their Iudge who broght his loue From Plutoes kingdome and from hellish payne But he excus'd him self his workes wer torne And with, tymes rusly Canker cleane outuorne. Yet Sayd that he would wish them to ane vther Whoes lynes could weall decyd their wrangling stryff And soe thy braue Penardo did discover Wheirby aste seem'd to be bereaft of lyff Whilst thou hir conqur'our to thy greater grace Makst arte to nature euin in arte giue place. Then since thu'rt arts Controler, natures Chyld, Stird vp by vertue to encreass thy fame Leaue not Layssa thus from loue exyld For saue thy self non dare attempt the same And as thou dost in vs sweet thoghts Inspyre Soe goe thou one and we shall still admyte.
