18006 99848043 13116
¶ IOYFVLL NEWES out of the newfound world, wherein are declared the rare and singular vertues of diuers and sundrie Herbs, Trees, Oyles, Plants, & Stones, with their applications, aswell to the vse of Phisicke, as Chirurgery: which being wel applied, bring such present remedy for all diseases, as may seeme altoge∣ther incredible: notwith∣standing by practize found out, to be true. Also the portrature of the sayde Herbes, very aptly described: En∣glished by Iohn Frampton Merchant. Newly corrected as by conference with the olde copies may appeare. Wherevnto are added three other bookes treating of the Bezaar stone, the herbe Escuerçomera, the properties of yron and steele, in Medicine and the benefite of snowe. Imprinted at London, in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Quenes Armes, by William Norton. 1580.
¶ To the right worshipfull Maister Edwarde Dier Esquier, Iohn Frampton wi∣sheth much health, with prosperous and perfite felicitie. REturning right worship∣ful, home into Englande out of Spaine, and now not pressed with the for∣mer toiles of my olde trade, to passe the tyme to some benefite of my country, and to auoyde idlenes; I tooke in hande to translate out of Spanish into English, the three bookes of Doctor Monardes of Seuil, the learned Phisition, treating of the singular and rare vertues of certaine Hearbes, Trees, Oyles, Plants, Stoner, & Drugges of the West Indias, for that the same booke is of high commendation in Spaine, and o∣ther countries, in such sorte, that in deede it might bring in tyme rare profite, to my Country folkes of Englande, by wonderful cures of sund great diseases, that otherwise then by these redies, were incurable. And hauing finished he same translation, I determined to dedicate my trauaile
therein, to some rare louer of knowledge, for the worthinesse of the woorke: and not finding any Gentleman of myne acquaintance, that was more studious, and more delighted with learned works, or that more cherished trauellers, and louers of all good knowledge, determined to dedicate the same to your woorshippe before al others, requesting your woorshippe to accept the worke, and to be a patron of the same, and to take it into your prote∣ction, since the matter is of good substance, and of much value, and of me, truly & fithfully transla∣ted into English. And since the aforesaid Medicines mentioned in the same worke of Docto Moar∣des, are now by Marchants & others, brought out of the West Indias into Spain, and from Spaine hither into England, by such as doe dily traffick thither, and that the excellencie of these Hearbes, Trees, Oyles, Plants, stones, &c. haue bin knowen to be so precious a remedie for all manner of dis∣eases, and hurtes, that may happe vnto Man, Wo∣man, or Childe, they haue let of and forsaken very much the olde order and maner of Phisicke, which was vsed before that this was knowen, as thinges not of so present remedie for all manner of diseases, as these nowe late founde owt, are; which by greate experience made in Spayne, and other Countries, were throughly and effe∣ctuously prooued and experimented, to woorke the effectes which are contayned in this Booke.
And thus I leaue your woorshippe to the Al∣mightie, beseeching him to gyue you long lyfe, and for the Common-wealthes sake that ad∣uauncement, that your good nature, and rare vertues doe wel deserue. From London the first of Octo∣ber. 1577. Your worships during lyfe to com∣maunde: Iohn Frampton.
THE FIRST PART OF THIS BOKE TREATETH OF THE thinges that are brought from the Occidentall Indias, which serue for the vse of Medicine, and of the order that must be kept in taking the roote called Mechoacan, wherein are discouered great secretes of Nature, and great experiences: made and compiled by Do∣ctor Monardus, Phisition of Seuill. IN the yere of our Lord God, a thousād, foure hundreth nine∣tie two, our Spaniards were gouerned by sir Christopher Colō, being naturally born in the coūtrie of Genoua, to disco∣uer the Occidētal Indias, that are called at this day, the newe world, and they discouered the first land thereof, the xi. day of October, of the said yere: & from that time vnto this, they haue discouered many & sundry Islandes, and muche firme land, as wel in that coūtrie, which they cal the new Spaine, as in that which is called the Peru, where there are manie Prouinces, many Kingdomes, and many Cities, that haue contrary and diuers customes in them, in which there haue beene founde out, thinges that neuer in these partes, nor in any other partes of the worlde haue beene seene, nor vnto this day knowen: and other thinges which nowe are brought vnto vs in greate abundance, that is to say, Gold, Siluer, Pearles, Emeraldes, Turkeies, & other fine stones of great value. Yet great is the excesse and quantitie that hath come, and euery daie doeth come, and inespecially of Golde and Siluer, that it is a thing woorthy of admirati∣on
the great number of Melons, which haue come from thence, besides the great quantity of pearles which haue sto∣red the whole world: also they doe bring fom those partes, Popingaies, Griffons, Apes, Lions, Gerfaucons, & other kinds of Haukes, Tigers wool, Cotton wool, Graine to die coloues with al, Hides, Sugars, Coppar, Brasill, the wood Ebano Anill: and of all these, there is so great quantity, that there commeth euery yeere, one hundred ships laden there∣with, that it is a great thing, and an incredible riches. And besides these great riches, our Occidentall Indias doe send vnto vs many Trees,Meicines tht our Oc∣cidentall In∣dias doe send vs. Plants, Hearbes, Rootes, Iuices, Gummes, Fruites, Licoures & Stones that are of great mdicinall vertues, in the which there be founde, and haue been found in them, very great effectes that doe exceede much in value and price all the aforesayde thinges, by so muche as the corporall health is more excellent, and neces∣sary then the temporall goodes: the which thinges all the world doth lacke, the want whereof is not a little hurte∣full, according to the greate profite which wee doe see, by the vse of them to follow, not onely in our Spayne, but also in all the world. And this is not too bee meruelled at, that it is so, for the Philosophr doeth say,Aristotle. that all Countries doe not yeelde Plantes and Fruites alike: for one Region yeeldeth such Fruites, Trees, and Plantes as an other doeth not: wee doe see that in Creta onely groweth the Diptamo, and the Incence onely in the region of Saba, and the Almaciga onely in the Islande of Chio, and the Sinamom, Cloues, and Peper, and other spices onely in the Islands of the Ma∣luca, and many other thinges you haue in diuers partes of the worlde, which were not knowne vntill our time, and the people of olde time did lacke them, but Time which is the discouerer of all thinges, hath discouered them vnto vs greatly to our profite, considering the greate neede that wee hd of thm.
And as there are discouered new regions, newe king∣domes, and newe Prouinces, by our Spaniardes,The discoue∣ry of the In∣dias. so they haue brought vnto vs newe Medicines, and newe Reme∣dies, wherewith they doe cure many infirmities, which, if we did lacke them, woulde bee incurable, and without anye remedy: of which thinges although that some haue know∣ledge, yet they be not common too all people, for which cause I did pretend to treate, and to write, of all things that they bring from our Indias, apperteyning to the arte and vse of Medicine, and the remedie of the hurtes and diseases that wee doe suffer and endure, whereof no small profite doeth followe to those of our time, and also vntoo them that shall come after vs: in the bewraying whereof I shall be the first, that the rather the followers may adde herevnto, with this beginning, that which they shal more knowe, and by ex∣perience hereafter finde out. And as in this Citie of Seuill, which is the Porte and skale of all the Occidentall Indias, we doe knowe of them more, then in any other partes of all Spayne, for bicause that al things come first hither, where by better intelligence and greater experience it is learned: so doe I, with practice and vse of them this fourtie yeeres, that which I doe cure in this Citie, where I haue informed my selfe of them, that haue brought these thinges out of those partes with muche care, and I haue made experience thereof, with many and diuers persons, with all diligence and foresight possible, and with much happy successe. Of the Anime and Copall. THey do bring from the new Spaine 2. kinds of Ro∣sine, that be both much alike one to the other,Of the Copal. the one is called Copall, and the other Anime. The Copall is a Rosine verie white, and of muche brightnesse, it is
brought in certaine great peeces, which are like too pee∣ces of Diacitron very cleare, it hath an indifferent smell, but not so good as the Anime: with this Copall, the Indi∣ans did make perfumes in their sacrifices, & so the vse there∣of was frequented in the Temples, by their Priestes. And when the first Spaniardes went too those partes, the Priestes went out to receiue them,Hitorie. with little firepots, burning in them this Copall, and geuing to them the smoke of it at their noses: wee doe vse heere to perfume with it in diseases rising vpon coldenesse of the head, in the place of Incence, or Anime: it is hotte in the seconde degree, and moyst in the first, it is resoluatiue, and softneth by some wa∣trish partes, that it hath. The Anime is a gumme or Rosine of a greate Tree, it is white,What A∣nime is. it draweth neere to the coulour of Incence, it is more oyly then the Copall is, it commeth in graines, as the Incence doeth, although somewhat greater, and beyng bro∣ken, it hath a yellowe collour, as Rosine hath: it is of a ve∣ry acceptable and pleasaunt smell, and put vppon burning coales, it doth consume very quickely. It differeth from our Anime, that is brought from Leuante,Hw it dife∣reth from ours. Of the con∣geled amber. which is not so white, nor so bright, insomuche that some doe say, that it is spice of Charabe or Succino, which is called Amber congeled, wherwith they doe make Beades, but it is not so, for that the Charabe is a kinde of Pitche, that is founde in the Germayne Sea, and it is ta∣ken out of the Sea in great peeces, with a dragge of Iron, so that it seemeth to come foorth of some Fountaines, into the Sea, after the maner of pitch, and beeing come foorthe vnto the colde ayre, it congeleth, for because there is sene in the same, peeces of stickes, & other superfluities of the Sea, cleaning vnto it, and in this they shall see the errour of them, that say that it is Gumme of Alamo; and of others, that it is of the Pinetree. Hemau.Of our Anime Hermolaus Barbarus, a man most excel¦lently
learned doeth saie, that it is gatherd about the place where Incence is founde, and that lande or soile,A arbaian authur. A place that is calld Ani∣mitin, where our Aime is gathered. The vetue therof. is called Amintin and therefore the thing is called Anime. That which is brought from the newe Spaine, is ga∣thered from certaine Trees, of a reasonable greatnesse, by way of incision, as the Incence, and Almasiga are gahe∣red: we do vse thereof for many infirmities, and principally for the griefe of the head, and paines therof, caused of hu∣mours, or of colde causes, and for sluffyng in the head, that thereof doeth proceede, after euacuation, perfuming there∣with the chambers in the Winter season: and where as are generall infirmities, it doeth purifie and correct the Aire, and they doe perfume therewith their head kerchers, when that they doe goe to sleepe: for them that doe suffer paines in the head, and occasions thereof, it doeth profite to per∣fume the head of him that is so diseased, it doeth comforte the head vnto such as haue it debilited, or weakened, and doe suffer paines by occasion thereof: they doe put it also in plaisters, and in seere clothes, where as is neede of com∣fort, and to dissolue, especially cold humours, or windinesse: they doe vse it also in place of Incence, as well in the per∣fumes, as in the aforesaide. It doeth comfort the braine,The comple∣xion that it hath. applied in the forme of a plaister, and euen so likewise the stomacke, and all partes being full of Sinewes, made after the fashion of a Sere cloth with the third parte of Waxe: it taketh out the cold of any member, whatsoeuer, being applied therevntoo for a long time, with refreshing it. It is hotte in the second de∣gree, and moist in the first. Of the gumme called Tacamahaca. AND also they doe bring out of the newe Spaine an other kinde of Gumme or Rosine,Of the Taca∣mahaca. which the Indians doe call Tacamahaca, and the same name did our Spaniardes giue it, it is Rosine
taken out by incision of a tree, being as great, as a Willow tree, and is of a verie sweete smell, it bringeth foorth a red fruite, as the seede of Pionia. How the In∣dians vse it.This Rosine or Gumme, the Indians doe much vse in their infirmities, chiefly in swellinges in any part of the bo∣die, wheresoeuer they bee ingendred, for that it dissolueth, ripeneth, and maruellously desolueth them. And euen so, it taketh awaie any manner of greefe, that is come of a colde cause: as humours, and windinesse: this the Indians doe vse very commonly, and familiarly. And for this effect the Spa∣niardes hath brought it. The propertie that it hath.The colour is as the colour of Galuano, and some doe say that it is the same, it hath white partes like to Amoni∣aco, it is of a good smel, and the tast is like, insomuch that be∣ing cast vpon hotte burning coles, and giuing the smoke thereof at the nose of a woman that doth swoone, or els hath lost her feeling by suffocation of the Mother, it doeth cause her to come quickely, and easily to her selfe. And the Rosine putte to her nuell,Good for the diseases of the Mother. after the manner of a plaister, causeth the Mother to keepe in her place: and the vse thereof is so much amongest women, that the most parte which is spent thereof, is for this effect, for that they doe finde themselues very much eased by it, taking awaie from them all manner of chokinges of the Mother, and comforting the stomacke. Some that bee curious doe adde thereuntoo Amber and Muske, and so it is better then alone. It is alwaies fixed, without melting of it selfe, vntill that it bee al wholie wa∣sted. And where it doeth most profite, is for to take awaie any manner of griefe, caused of colde humours and windie, and beeing applied vnto them in manner of a plaister,In any man∣ner of grief. it ta∣keth them away, and dissolueth them with greate admira∣tion: it doeth cleane in such sorte, that vntill it hath done, and wrought his effect, it can not bee taken away, and the selfe same it doeth, being laide vppon swellinges, for that it
consumeth and desolueth them, and if there bee any desire to ripen them, it doeth it, and that very quickly. It is also a remedie verified, and experimented,The vertue therof. that it doeth profite much in Reumes, and Runnings, wheresoeuer they goe, for it taketh them awaie, put∣ting a small peece of linnen cloth with this Rosine, be∣hinde both the eares, or the eare on the parte which run∣neth, for that it doeth restraine the running of them: and ap∣plied vnto the temples of the head, in manner of a plaister, it doeth withholde the runnings and the fluxe, that runneth to the eyes, and to the partes of the face:In the tooth∣ache. it takethaway the tothe ache, although that the tothe bee hollowe, by putting a little of this Rosine into the hollowe, and if therewith the rotten tothe be burned, it maketh that the corruption goeth no further: and being laide after the maner of a plaister in the hollownesse of the necke, or griefe of the shoulders, it taketh away the paynes: mingled with the thirde parte of storax, and a little Amber made in a plaister, for the sto∣macke, it doeth comfort it, and causeth appetite to meate,It cōforteth the stomack. it helpeth digestion, and dissolueth windines: after the same sort put vpon the moulde of the head, it comforteth, and ta∣keth away the paines thereof. In the Sciatica, or paynes of the hippes put therevnto, the effect thereof is greate:In the griefe of the had. In the Scia∣tica. and likewise it is so in all paynes of the ioyntes: and in any payne of the body whersoeuer it be, chiefly if it come of cold humours, or mixt: For because with his resolution, it hath partes of binding, which doe giue a maruellous comfor∣ting in ioyntes, or in hurtes of Sinewes,In the griefe of the ioints. putting that a∣lone, it doeth heale and cure them, for greate is the expe∣rience, that wee haue of it, igenderyng foorth with matter: it taketh away an extreeme colde:In the hurtes of Sinewes. ordinarily it is applyed to all griefes: I doe mingle therewith the thirde parte of yellowe Waxe, for that will be applied the better, and the vse thereof is so celebrated, that the people knowe no other remedy for any grief, but only the vse of this Rosine,In al griefes. so that
it bee not inflamations very hotte, and also in them after the first furie is past,The comple∣xion therof. and the fearcenesse thereof, it doth pro∣fite much for to dissolue the rest: it is hotte in the beginning of the third degree, and drie in the second. Of the Gumme Caranna. THey doe bring from the firme Lande, by the waie of Cartagena,Caranna. and number de Dios, A Rosin of the coulour of Tacamahaca, somewhat cleare, and thinne, called in the Indians language, Caranna, and this woorde and name our Spaniardes haue geuen it, and it hath in maner the smel of the Tacamahaca, although it bee somewhat more strong of smell, it is very oylie, and it cleaueth fast without melting, for the clamminesse that it hath. It is a newe Medicine, and brought hither about a tenne yeeres past, and the Indians doe vse it in their infir∣mities against swellinges, and in all manner of griefes, and now in our partes it is much esteemed, for the great effects that it doth worke. It doth profit and heale the same infirmities, that the Ta∣camahaca doth,The vertues. but it woorketh more speedily, so that many infirmities, wherein the Tacamahaca doth not so much ef∣fect, the Caranna doth easily heale. There was one that did suffer paines in his shoulders, the wc paines hee had suffered a long time,It healeth an olde griefe of the shoulder. in such sort, that he could not stirre his Armes, & hauing vsed a great time the Tacamahaca, yet hee was not healed, vntil hee had put thereunto the Caranna, and there∣by in three daies he was made whole. In the griefes of the Iointes,In the griefes of the ioints. and the Got Arthetica, it hath a maruellous ef∣fect, being applied vnto the grief, so that it be not an inflam∣mation, of very hotte humour, for it taketh it awaie, with much easinesse. In old swellinges, as well in humours as in windes,In swellings. it dissolueth, in griefes caused by defluxe or run∣ning
of cold humours or mixed, it worketh a meruellous f∣fect: in all paines of the Sinowes, and griefes of the head, and griefes that thereof do proceede, it profiteth much.In griefes of Sinewes. Surely, it is a medicine to dissolue and to take away griefs of great efficacie, and doth make his worke with great cer∣taintie in new greene wounds, especially of the Sinewes: it doeth much profit, and greatly in ioyntes,In newe woundes. in the which I haue seene done only therewith very great workes: it is an intercepting to state the fluxe and running of the eyes, and other partes applied behinde the eares,It staieth the running of the eyes Note. and in the temples of the head. It is very fattie and oylie, and hot more then in the second degree. And it is to be noted, that all these Rosines the Indians doe gather by way of Incision, by geuing cuttes in the Trees, of which forthwith the licour doth droppe out, and from thence they gather it. Of the Oyle of the Figge tree of Hell. FRom Gelisco, a Prouince in the newe Spaine, they bring an Oyle or Licour,Oyle of the Figge tree. that the Spaniards haue called, oyle of the Fig tree of Hell, for that it is taken from a tree that is no more nor lesse thē our Fig tree of Hel, aswel in the Leafe, as in the Fruite: it is the same that wee doe commonlie call Chatapucia, or Cherua, it is also mil∣kish as ours is, for that it is more burning in the Indias for the grosnes of the earth. The Indians doe make this oyle, as Dioscorides doeth shewe, in the first booke, the xxx. Chapter, that is,How this oyle is made. do pounde the seede, & seeth it in water, and after it is sodden, then they gather the Oyle that swimmeth vppon it, with a Spoone, and this is the maner to make Oyle of fruite and Seedes, and Bowes of trees: It is verie much frequented and vsed of the Indians. As for expression or wringing out the iuice,
they doe not knowe how to doe it, for lacke of knowledge, this kind of oyle principally is better drawen out this way, than by expression.The vertues and effectes. This Oyle hath greate vertues, as by the vse thereof hath beene seene, as well in the Indias, as in our partes, and all that I will say, is of very greate experience, and much vse thereof in many persons: it doeth heale and cure all infirmities caused of cold humours,Cures in ge∣nerall. and windines, it doth dissolue al hardnes with mollification, and all inflammations being windie: it taketh away all manner of paine in what parte soeuer it bee, chiefly if it come of any colde cause,It taketh a∣way paine. or windines, for that in this, it maketh a mer∣uellous woorke, dissoluing greate windinesse, wheresoeuer it bee, and especially in the belly: and with this they do heale a windy Dropsie,It healeth a windy dropsy. & lykewyse al kinds therof, annoyu∣ting there withal the Belly, and Stomacke, taking some droppes therof with wine, or other licour appropriated, that it may auoyde the citrine water, and make the winde to be expelled: and if they doe put it in any maner Glister, or Me∣dicine, geuen so it doeth auoyde out the citrine water, and doth expell Windes with more assuraunce than any other Medicine.In griefes of the stomacke and Colike. In the griefes of the Stomacke of cold humors, and windes, and Colicke, it worketh great effect, anointing therewith, and taking some droppes thereof, and principal∣ly they do this in that mortall disease called the Ileon, which is a cetrayne filthines that purgeth at the mouth. It doeth auoyde fleame principally,In griefes of the Iointes. in griefes of the Iointes certain droppes of this oyle taken with the broth of some fat foule, it doeth empt away the humour that causeth the paine, it doeth heale the olde sores of the head,It healeth soares. Historie. that doth yelde much matter. A Gentleman that did vomit his meate the space of ma∣ny yeeres, did anoynt his stomack with this oyle, and there∣with did recouer & neuer vmitted again:It vndoeth o∣pilations. It doth vndoe O∣pilations of the inner parts of the body, & of the stomacke, & of the Mother, anoynting it therewith. And vnto yong chil∣dren
and Boyes, that cannot goe to the Stoole,It maketh them goe to the stoole. anoynting the lower parte of the Nauill with this oyle, it doeth pro∣uoke them to the stoole: and if they haue wormes, it doeth expell and kille them, chiefly if they giue them a droppe or twoo with milke, or with some fat grosse thing. And for those that haue lost their hearing,For thē that haue lost their hea∣ring. In griefes of the Ioyntes. For the mem¦bers drawen together. It taketh a∣way the Morphewe, markes or signes of the face. The cōplexiō therof. it causeth it to be restored to them, with a maruellous worke, as it hath beene seene by many experiences. In griefes of Iointes, and in griefes of swellinges, so that they come not of a very hotte cause, it ta∣keth them away and doeth dissolue them: any of the mēbers beeing drawen together, and annoynted with this Oyle, they doe extende and the Sinowes are mollified with it, ta∣king away the griefe if that there bee any: it taketh away any markes or signes, wheresoeuer they bee in the face, principally, and the Morphewe which women many tymes bee troubled withall, the anoynting with this Oyle, doeth take it away, and consumeth it, not with litle contēt to them that vse it. It is hotte in the first parte of the thirde degree, and moyst in the second. Of the Bitumē which is a kind of pitch. THere is in the Islande of Cuba,Bitumen. certaine Fountaines at the Sea side, that do cast from them a kinde of blacke Pitch of a strong smell, which the Indians doe vse in their cold infirmities. Our people doe vse it there to pitche theyr Shippes withall, for it is well neere lyke vnto Tarre, and they doe mingle therewith Tallowe, to make it Pitch the better. I doe beleeue that this is Napta,Napta. which the auncient wryters doe speake of. Possidonio sayeth, that there are twoo Fountaynes thereof in Babylon, one whyte and the other blacke. That which is brought frō the Indias,The vertues. we do vse against
griefes of the Mother, for that it doeth reduce the Mother to her place. And if it rise on high, then put it to the Nose∣thrilles, and if it come downe to the lower partes, putting thereto a wet tent with this Pitche, it causeth it to go vp∣warde, to her place: and likewise it doeth profite, being ap∣plied to cold Infirmities, as the other Medicines do which we haue spoken of. It is hotte in the second degree, & moist in the first. Of liquid Amber, & the Oyle therof. FRom the newe Spaine they doe bring a Rosine that we call Liquid Amber, and one like Oyle that wee call Oyle of Liquid Amber, that is to say, a thing that wee doe most set by, and as precious as Amber, or Oyle thereof, both of them being of sweete smell & of good sauour, and especially the Oyle of Liquid Amber, which is of sa∣uour more delicate and sweete than Amber.What liquid Amber is. A Rosine taken out by incision from certaine trees very great and faire, and full of leaues, which are like to Iuie, and the Indians doe call them Ococol. They carrie a thicke rinde, of the colour of Ashes, this rinde being cut, doth cast out the Liquid Am∣ber thicke, and so they doe gather it, and because the rinde hath a smell very sweete, they do breake and mingle it with the Rosine, and when it is burned, it hath a better smell, in so much, wheresoeuer the trees are, there is a most sweete smell through all the fields. Historie.When the Spaniardes came the first time, to that place where it groweth, and did feele such a sweete smell, they thought that there had beene spices, and trees thereof. There is brought much quantitie of Liquid Amber in¦to Spaine,The vse of it. insomuch that they do bring many Pipes, and Barelles full thereof to sell for Merchaundise, for heere they raise profite thereof, to perfume in thinges of sweete
smelles, wasting it in place of Storax, for that the smoke and smell doeth seeme to be the same: and also they doe put it into other confections of sweete smelles to burne, and suche like thinges. It casteth from it so muche smell without bur∣ning of it, that wheresoeuer it be, it cannot be hidden, but doth penetrate many houses and streetes with the sweete smell, when there i quantity of it. It serueth much in medicine, & doth therein greate effect, for that it healeth, comforteth, dissolueth,The workes and effectes of it. and mittigateth payne applied vnto the Moulde of the heades by it selfe, or mingled with other thinges Aromaticall, it doth comfort the braines, and taketh away the paines of any manner of griefe, proceeding of a coulde cause layed after the manner of a Playster therevnto, it doeth also mitigate, and take a∣way the paynes, & griefes of the stomake, wherein it doth a marueilous ffect, applied after the maner of a Stoma∣cher. For that it doth comfort the Stomake,A meruel∣lous plaister. and doeth dis∣solue windes, and helpe digestion, and take away rawnesse it causeth the meate to be well digested, it geueth lust to eate: it is made of Liquide Amber, spreade abroade vpon a sheeps skinne, in the forme of a breastplate, mingled with a little Storax, Amber and Muske, it is a Playster which doeth profite muche in all that I haue sayed. There is knowne of this playster very great experience, in this Citie, for the good effect that it worketh: it is hot in the ende of the second degree, and moyst in the first. Out of this Liquid Amber, is taken the Oyle that is cal∣led the oyle of Liquide Amber,Of the Oyle of Liquide Amber, and how it is takē. the which in his smel is more sweet, it is taken out of the Liquide Amber when it is newly gathered, putting it in parte where it may distill of it selfe, (the more subtill) is the perfectest and best of all. Others there be that do presse it, because the more quan∣titie thereof may be taken out, & they bring it for merchaun∣dise, for that they vse to dresse Gloues therwith for the com∣mon people, and in this trade there is much spent.
It is vsed in Medicine for many diseases, and it is of greate vertue to heale colde diseases,The vse of it in medicine. for it healeth excellent∣ly well al partes wheresoeuer it be applied, it dissolueth and mollifieth any maner of hardnes, taking away the paynes: it dissolueth the hardnesse of the Mother, and openeth the o∣pilations thereof. It prouoketh the Monethly course in wo∣men, and it maketh soft any maner of hard thing. It is hotte welneere in the third degree. And it is to be noted, that many doe bring this Storax very thin from the Indias,Note. which is not so good, for because that they make it of the bowes of the trees, cut in peeces, and sodden, and they gather the fatnes that swimmeth vpon: and the Indians doe sell the buddes of the trees whereout the Liquid Amber is taken, made in handfulles, & doe sell it in their market places, for to put amongst their clothes, which causeth them to smell, as of the water of Angels, & for this purpose the Spaniards doe vse it. Of the Balsamo. THey doe bring from the newe Spayne that licour most excellent, which for his excellencie and meruel∣lous effectes, is called Balsamo, an imitation of the true Balsamo, that was in the land of Egypt, and for that it doeth such great workes, and remedie so many infir∣mities, there was geuen to it such a name. It is made of a tree greater than a Powngarnet Tree, it carrieth leaues like to Nettles: the Indians doe call it Xilo, and we doe call the same Balsamo. It is made two maner of waies, the one is by the way of incision, cutting the rynd of the Tree, which is thinne, geuing many small cuttinges, out of the which there commeth a clammish licour, of colour white, but it is little and moste excellent, and very perfect. The other fa∣shion is, whereby the Indians doe vse too take out licour of
the trees, which is a common vse amongst them is this: thy take the bowes and the great peeces of the trees, and make them as small, as they can, and then cast them into a greate kettle, with a good quantity of water, & so boyle them vntill they see it sufficiently done, and afterwarde they let it coole, and gather vp the oyle that doeth swimme therevppon with certayne shelles, and that is the Balsamo that commeth too these partes, and that commonly is vsed: the colour therof is Alborne, which is likened to blacke, it is of most sweet smel, and very excellent. It is not conuenient, nor it ought to bee kept in any other vessel then in siluer, (Glasse or Tinne, or a∣ny other thing glassed, it doeth penitrate and doeth passe through:) the vse thereof is onely in thinges apperteining to Medicine, and it hath been vsed of long time, well neere since the new Spaine ws discouered, for that incontinent the Spaniardes had knowledge of it, because they did heale therewith the woundes that they did receiue of the Indians, being aduised of the vertue thereof by the same Indians, and they did see the saide Indians heale and cure themselues therewith. When it first came into Spayne, it was esteemed as much as it was reason it shoulde be,The estima∣tion that it i had in. for that they did see it make meruellous woorkes, one ownce was woorth tenne Duccates and vpwardes, and now it is better cheape: the first time that they carried it to Rome, it came to be woorth one ounce, one hundreth Duccats: & after that they brought so much and such great quantity, that it is nowe of small va∣lue: this commeth of the abundance of thinges. And when it was very deere all men tooke profite of the profite of it, and since it came to bee of so lowe a Price,Note. it is not so muche esteemed beeyng the slfe same Balsamo, that it was then when it was woorth one hundreth Duccates the ounce. Surely if the Indias had not beene disco∣uered, but onely for the effecte, to send vs this meruellous licour,Note. the labour had been wel employed which our Spani∣ardes
vntill the woundes be whole, and for this cause the vse ther∣of is a common medicine in all surgery for poore folkes, see∣ing that as with one medicine all effectes are wrought there∣with, that are necessary: & it is a common thing to say, that when one is hurt, let Balsamo be put therevnto, and so they doe, & it doth heale them. In the woundes of Sinewes it woorketh a meruellous effect, for that it doeth both cure & heale. It healeth better then any other medicine doeth, it re∣sisteth colde, the wounds of the head it healeth very well, not hauing the Skull broken, nor perished. Any manner of woundes beyng freshe it doeth heale in any parte of the bodie wheresoeuer they bee, so that there be no more in it but a simple wounde. In ioyntes what manner of wounde soeuer it bee, it doeth make a maruel∣lous woorke: The vse thereof is very common in this Ci∣tie, in woundes. For that you haue fewe houses, but you haue Balsamo in them for this effect, so that in wounding of any person foorthwith they goe to the Balsamo, for with lit∣tle quantitie thereof they doe cure and heale, and many times with putting of it once euery thirde day, they finde the wounde whole. In olde sores applied by it selfe, or with any other oyntment, it doeth mundifie, and fill them vppe with fleshe. In large feuers Paroxismales beyng layde halfe an houre before the colde doeth come, vppon the moulde of the head very hot, the patient being very well couered with clothes, and taking forthwith  or sixe droppes thereof in wine, it taketh away the colde, in three or foure times doing it. It is of a sharpe sauour and somewhat bitter, wherby are seen the dy partes and comforatiue that it hath: it is hot and dry in the second degree. Of the berbe Iohn Ifante for woudes.I will not let to write of a certayne Hearbe, which the Conqerours of the newe Spaine doe vse for the remedy of their wounds, and shottes of arrowes, which vnto them was a great remedie in thir troubles, and it was discoured by
an Indian, which was Seruaunt too a Spaniarde called Iohn Infant. He was the first that vsed it, they did call it, and doe call it at this present day, the Heabe of Iohn In∣fant: this hearbe is little, they gather it greene, and beate it, and so they lay it simply vpon the wound: it doth restraine and stoppe the blood, and if it be a wounde in the flshe, it doth cause it to growe together, and health it by glewing the partes. The woundes of the Sinewes, and other partes it doth comfort, mundifie, and ingendreth flesh in them vntill they be whole, and because they doe not find this hearb in all places, they bring it made into pouder, for that it woorketh the same effect as well as being greene, and the pouder, as some say, doth it better than the hearbe. As this hearbe, so likewise haue you many other in all the other partes of the Indias, that haue the same and other properties & doe woorke meruellous effects: and to write of euery one of them particularly, it were needefull to make a greater volume, then wee doe pretende of this that we shall entreate of. Three thinges they bring from our Occidentall Indi∣as, which at this day bee celebrated in all the worlde, and with them they haue made & doe make the greatest workes that euer were made in medicine, & there were neuer the like made, by any other medicine that vnto this day hath beene knowen, for that the nature of al three is to cure infirmities which without this remedy be incurable, and to woorke the effectes that doe seeme to bee thinges of woonder, and these are notorious, not onely in these parts, but in all the worlde: the which thinges are the wood that is called Guaiacan, the China and the Sarcaparillia. And for that it seemeth that the China doth come from Portingall, and that the Portin∣gales doe bring it from their Orientall Indias, and not frō ours, I wil say what is to be said herafter when we do speak thereof. And therefore let vs beginne with Guaiacan, as of  remedie that first came from the Indias, and as first of the
best of all, as experience hath shewed, and the vse thereof in so many yeares. Of the Guaiacan and of the holie Wood. The wood of the Indias.THe Guaiacan, that is called the wood of the Indias was discouered forthwith, whē the first Indias were foūd, which was the Island of Sancto Domingo, where is great quantity thereof. There was an Indian that gaue knowledge thereof to his Mai∣ster, in this maner. Ther was a Spaniard that did suffer great paines of the Poxe, which he had taken by the company of an Indian woman, bt his seruant being out of the Phisitions of that countrie  vnto him the wa∣ter of Guaiacā, wherewith not onely his grieuous paynes were taken away that he did suffer, but he was heald verie well of the euill: with the which many other Spaniardes, that were infected with the same euill were healed also, the which was communicated immediatly, with them that came from thence, hither to Seuill, and from thence it was diuul∣ged throughout all Spaine, and from thence through all the world, for that the infection was sowen abroade throughout all partes thereof: and surely for this euill it is the best, & the most chiefe remedy of as many as hitherto haue been found, and with most assuraunce, and most certeintie, it healeth and cureth the sayde disease, if they be wel handled: and this water gien as it ought to be, it is certaine that it healeth it most perfectly, without turning to fall againe, except the sicke man doe returne to tumble in the same bosome, where he tooke the first infection. Our Lord God would from whence the euill of the Poxe came, from thence shoulde come the remedy for them. Since it is knowne that they came into these parts from the Indi∣as,
and first of all from Sancto Domingo. The Poxe bee as common amongest the Indians, and as familiare, as the Measelles bee vnto vs, and well neere the most part of the Indians, both men and women haue them, without making thereof any scruple, and they came first in this sorte. In the yeere of our Lorde God 1493. in the warres that the Catholike King made in Naples, with King Charles of France, that was called Greathead, in this time sir Christofer Colon, returned from the discouerie that hee had made of the Indias, which was Sancto Domingo, and o∣ther Ilands, & he brought with him from Sancto Domingo, a great number of Indians, both men and women, which he carried with him to Naples, where the Catholike king was at that tyme, who had then concluded the warres, for that there was peace betweene the twoo Kinges, and the hostes did communicate together, the one with the other. And Colon being come thither with his Indians, the most part of them brought with them the fruite of their countrie, which was the Poxe. And the Spaniardes began to haue conuersation with the Indian women, in such sorte, that the men and women of the Indias, did infect the Campe of the Spaniardes, Italians, and Almaines, for the Catholike king had then of all these Nations, and there were many that were infected with the euill. And after the hostes com∣moned together, the fire did kindle in the campe of the king of Fraunce, of which it folowed, that in short tyme the one and the other were infected with this euill seede: and from thence it hath spred abrode into all the worlde. At the beginning it had diuerse names:The names that they gaue to th euil tre. the Spaniards did thinke that it had beene giuen them by the French∣men, and they called it the Frenche euil. The Frenchemen thought that in Naples, and by them of the Countrie, the euill had beene giuen them, and they called it the euil of Na∣ples. And they of Almaine seing that by conuersation with the Spaniardes, they came by it, they called it the Spa∣nishe
Skabbe, and other called it the Measelles of the In∣dias, and that very truely, seing that from thence came the euill in the beginning. Opinions of this euill.Amongest the great Phisitions of that tyme, there were sundry great opinions of the cause, and originall of the in∣firmitie. The one sorte sayde that it came of the euil me∣lancholie meates, that the hostes of necessitie had eaten, as wilde hearbes, and many gardeine hearbes, and rootes of hearbes, Asses, and Horses, and other lyke things, that ingender such lyke infirmities, corrupting and burnyng the blood. Others there were, that did attribute it to the coniunctions of Saturne and Mars, and they did apply it to the heauenly influence, and gaue thereuntoo diuers and sundry names. Some called it the Leprosie, others Swine Poxe, other Mentegra, others the Deathly euill, others Elephansia, without certaine assurance what disease it was. For they were ignoraunt that it was a newe disease, and they would reduce it to some already knowen and writ∣ten of.Guaiacan an Indian name. And nowe we come to our Guaiacan, whose name was giuen by the Indians, and of them very well knowen, and so they haue called it and do call it, in all the world, cal∣ling it also the woodde of the Indias. Of this woodde ma∣ny haue written and much, one sort sayeng that it was Eba∣no, others that it was a kinde of Boxe, with many other names wherby they haue named it. It is a new tree and ne∣uer seene in our partes, nor in any other of the discoueries, & as the country is newe, so is the tree a newe thing also. The descrip∣tion of the Guaiacan.Whatsoeuer it be, it is a great tree, of the greatnesse of an Oke: it casteth out many vowes, the rinde it doth cast from it being dry, greate, and full of Gumme, the hart thereof is very great, it is well neere lyke to blacke, all is very hard as much and more then Ebano is. It casteth forth a little leafe and hard▪ and euery yeere it bringeth foorth yel∣low flowers, out of the which is ingendered a round fruite, with litle kernelles within it, of the greatnesse of a Medler:
of these Trees there is greate aboundance in Sancto Do∣mingo. And after this they haue founde an other Tree, of the kind of this Guaiacan, in Saint Iohn de Puerto Rico, which is an other Ilande neere to that of Sancto Domingo, such an other tree as that is, sauing that it is lesse, & the body of the tree and the bowes are smaller, & it hath scarsely any harte, or if it haue any, it is very little, and that is in the body of the tree, for that the bowes haue none at all: It is of more sweete smel and more bitter then the Guaiacan, that is nowe vsed in our tyme, I meane that of Sancto Domingo, and for his mar∣uellous effectes, they call it the holy Woode, & surely with reason: for that it is of a better working then that of Sancto Domingo, which is seene by experience, but euen aswell the one & the other is a maruellous remedy, to cure the disease of the Poxe: of the which and of euery one of them a wa∣ter is made, and is taken for this infirmitie, and for many others in this forme. They take twelue ounces of the wood made small, and twoo ounces of the Rinde of the same woodde broken,How the wa∣ter of the woodde i made. and they cast it to steepe in three Pottels of Water, in a newe pot, that will holde somwhat more, for the space of xxiiii. houres: and the pot being well stept, they seeth it ouer a soft fire of kindled Coales, vntill the twoo Pottels bee sodde a∣way, and one remayning. And this is to be noted at the time the water is put to it, putting therein one Pottle, they dip in a little Rodde, and doe marke howe high the water of one Pottle reacheth, and by that measure and marke they shall see when the twoo are sodde away, and the one Pottell remayneth. After the water is sodden, they set it to coole, & straine it, and keepe it in a glassed vessell, and forthwith vp∣pon the said sodden woodde, they poure foure Pottels of wa∣ter, and seeth it till one bee sodden away, and this water must bee strayned and kept apart, and it must bee taken in this forme.
After that the sicke man is purged by the counsell of a Phisition,The manner of taking it. let him be put into a warme Chamber, and kept from the colde and from ayre, and beeing laied in his bedde, let him take early in the morning tenne ounces of Water, of that which was first made wel warmed, and let him bee couered so that he may sweate wel, & let him kepe his sweat at the least two houres, & after he hath swet, let him be made cleane from his sweat, & take a warme Shirt, and the rest of his Linen clothes, & foure houres after he hath swette, let him eate Reasings, Almonds and Bisket, and that in reaso∣nable quantitie. Then let him drinke of the water that was made at the second tyme, the quantity that he hath need of, and of the selfe same let him drinke in the day time, & eight houres after hee hath eaten, let him returne to take the first water, and let him take other tenne ounces well warmed, and then sweate other two houres, and after his sweate let him bee made cleane, and then bee couered againe with warme cloathes, and one houre after hee hath swet, let him make his supper of the same Reasings, Almonds, and Bis∣ket, and drinke of the second Water. This order he must ob∣serue the first fiftiene daies, except hee haue some notable weaknesse, and in such case her must bee succoured with ge∣uing him to eate of a young Chicken, iointly, with the rest of the Diet: and in them that be leane, that cannot beare so pre∣cise Diet, it is sufficient that they take it for nine dayes, and at the end of them they may eate a little Chicken rosted, & if in case the sicke person be debilited, and that he cannot suf∣fer the Diet, let him haue from the beginning a very small Chicken, going forwarde increasing in the proces of tyme, and beeing past the 15. dayes, let him returne to purge himselfe at the sixtiene dayes end, & let him take the waight of fiue shillinges of the substaunce of Canafistola, taken out by Strayner or other thing respondent thereunto, and that day let him drinke no strong Water, but of the simple, and the next day after the Purgation, let him returne to
the aforesayde order, taking in the morning and euening the strong water with his sweatinges, and eating and drin∣king the same. Sauing that in place of a Chicken hee may eate halfe a rosted Pullet, or somwhat more, and this seconde tyme let him take it for other xx. daies, in the which tyme hee may ryse, and walke about his chamber, being apparelled and kept warme. And at the end of them, hee shall returne to purge him selfe an other tyme, and must haue a speciall care to keepe good order, and after hee hath takē the water for other fortie dayes, must keepe him∣selfe from women and from wyne especially: and in place of wyne, hee must drinke the simple water of the woodde, which if he wil not doe, then let him drinke of water sodden with Anise seede or Fenell seede, supping little at night and eating no flesh. This is the best way that the water of the wood ought to be taken, which doeth heale many infirmities incurable,The diseases that this wa∣ter doth heale. where other Medicines could not worke the same effect, & this water is the best remedy that is in the worlde, to heale the disease of the Poxe, whatsoeuer or of what kinde soe∣uer it bee, for that it rooteth it out for euer without any more comming againe, and in this it hath his principal pre∣rogatiue and excellencie. This water is also good for the Dropsy, for the shortnes of breath, for the Falling sicknes, for the diseases of the Bladder, and of the Raynes, for the paynes of the Ioynts, for all euils caused of cold humors, for ventositie, and other dangerous and importunate disea∣ses, where the ordinary benefites of Phisicions haue not pro∣fited. Chiefly it excelleth where the euil dispositions be, that haue proceeded at any tyme from the disease of the Poxe. There be many that with this wood haue made sundry mix∣tures, making Syropes therof, and surely with good effect. But my iudgement and opinion is, that he which shall take the water of the wood, ought to take it in the maner as is a∣boue saide, without any mingling thereof, for that by expe∣perience
it hath beene seene so to make the better woorke. This water is good for the teeth, making them white, and fastning them, by continual washing of them therewith: it is hot and dry in the second degree. Of the China. THe Second Medicine that commeth from our In∣dias, is a roote called the China. It seemeth that I should slaunder it, to say that the China groweth in our Occidental Indias, since commonly the Portin∣gales doe bring it from the Orientall Indias. By this you shall vnderstande, that Syr Frauncis de Mendosa, a worhy Knight, when hee came from the newe Spayne and Peru, shewed to mee a greate Roote, and other little rootes, who asked mee, what rootes they were? I aunswer o that they were rootes of the China, but that they seemed to mee to bee very freshe.China of our Indias. Hee sayde to mee, that so they were, and that it was not longe since that they had beene gathered and brought from the new Spaine. I maruelled that they had it there, for I did beleeue that in the China only it had growen: he said vnto mee, that not only there was in the newe Spaine the China, but that also wee shoulde see brought greate quantitie of Spicerie from the place which that China came from.Historie. And I beleued it when I saw the contract that he made with his maiestie, to bring into Spaine great quantitie of spicerie, that hee had begon to set and to plante, and I saw greene Ginger brought from thence, as also the China. This China is a roote lyke to the roote of a cane with certaine knottes within it, whyte and some with the whyte∣nesse hath an alborne colour: it is red without, the best is the freshest, that which hath no holes, if it bee weightie, and not worme eaten, and that it haue a fatnes as if it were congeled, and it hath an vnsauery cast. This Roote doeth
growe in the China, which is the Orientall Indias neere to Siria and Sirciana. It groweth neere to the Sea, onely with the roote they helpe themselues, with the which the Indians bee healed of grieuous diseases. And therfore they haue it in great estimation: they do heale al maner of large diseases therewith: and also the sharpe diseases: especially Agues, with the Water of it, prouoking Sweats, and by this way they heale many. It prouoketh sweat maruel∣lously. It is wel neere xxx. yeeres since that the Portingales brought it to these parts with great estimatiō,Historie. for to heale al manner of diseases, and especially the disease of the Poxe, in the which it hath wrought greate effectes, and the Water is giuen in this forme. The sicke person beeing purged as is most conuenient,The manner how to giue the water of the China. must take one of the Rootes and cut them small vnto the thicknesse and greatnes of a three penny peece, and so being cut, shall way one ounce, and cast it into a newe Pot, and thereupon shall poure three Pottels of Water, and so shall lye a sleeping there xxiiii. houres, and the Pot bee∣ing stopt, let it seeth at a soft fire of kindled Coales, vntill half be sodden away, & one Pottel & half remaine, and this is to be knowen by the order of the Measure as aforesaid, in the water of the Wood. And after that it is colde, let it bee strained and kept in a glassed vessel. There must be care ta∣ken, that it stande in some hotte or warme place neere to the fire, for that therwith it doeth preserue the vertue the better, and dureth longer tyme, before it be corrupted. The sicke man being lodged in a close conuenient Cham∣ber,Howe it must be taken. must take in the morning fasting tenne ounces of the sayde water, as hotte as he can suffer it, and he shall procure sweat, & keepe it two houres at the least. After the sweat hee shal bee made cleane, and shall take a Shirte, and cleane clothes, & warme them, and shall lye downe againe twoo or three houres in the bed quietly, after hee hath swet. And
afterwarde let him apparell himselfe, and beeing well warmed remayne in his Chamber, in the which he shal be kept from cold & the open aye, with all the pleasure of good company and conuersation: he shal eate at xi. of the clocke, halfe a Chicken sodden, or a quarter of a Henne, with a little Salt. At the beginning of dinner he shal drinke a dish∣full of Broth, and foorthwith eate of the Pullet, eating at the beginning a little, and hee shal ende with Marmelade. His drinke shal bee of the water hee tooke in the morning, for that heere is no more then one water, hee may at the be∣ginning after the Broth is taken, begin too eate Rea∣singes, without theyr little Graynes, or Prunes without theyr stones: theyr bread must bee Crustie, well baked, or Bisket. If hee will drinke in the day tyme, hee may doe so with taking of a little Conserua, and drinke of the same water, and beeing ight houres past his Dinner, let him lye downe in his Bedde, and take other tenne ounces of the same water, the which being hotte hee may drinke, and procure sweate: two houres after he hath sweat, let him be made cleane, and take a cleane shirte, and cleane clothes warme, and after one houre let him sup with Cōserua, Rea∣singes and Almondes, with some Bisket, and drinke of the selfe same water, and last of all eate Marmelade, vpon the which he may not drinke. Thus he may continue xxx. dayes continually, without neede of any more Purgation then the first, and hee may sit vp, so that he go wel cloathed, vsing in this tyme all content and mirth, and keeping him selfe from al that may offend him. Note.After that he hath taken this water in this sort, hee must keepe good order, and good gouernement for fortie dayes continually. And hee must drinke no Wine, but water made of the China, that was before sodden, the which hee shall keepe after it is sodden, setting it to dry in a shadowie place, and that China being dry, must be kept to make water for o∣ther 40. dayes, to drinke after the taking of the first water:
seething one ounce thereof in three Pottels of water vnil one halfe be sodden away, and this water let him drinke con∣tinually. And aboue all thinges let him keepe himselfe from women: and he must alwayes haue care, that as well in the water of xxx. dayes, as in the water of the fourty daies, that the China be steeped in the water xxiiii. houres before it be sodden. There be many diseases healed with this water,The disease that be hea∣led by this water. al kinds of euill of the Poxe, all olde Sores, it resolueth all swel∣linges and knobbes, it taketh away the paynes of the ioyntes which they call the Arthetica Goute, and any other kinde of Goute that is in any particular member or place, and especially the Sciatica, it taketh away olde paynes of the head and of the stomake. It healeth all manner of run∣ninges of Rewmes, it dissolueth Opilations and healeth the Dropsie. It maketh a good colour in the face, it taketh a∣waie the Iaundies, and all euill complexion of the Liuer & rectifieth it, and in this it hath a greate prerogatiue. And by this meanes these infirmities are healed. It healeth the Pal∣sey & all infirmities of the Sinewes, it healeth all diseases of Urine, it taketh away Melancholy, and all infirmities comming of colde diseases. It doth comfort the stomake, it doth dissolue windes meruellously, and also Agues long and sharp, as quotidians: the taking of this water as it is conue∣nient, so doth it roote them out, and take them away. The which thing it doeth by prouoking of sweat, in this it doth exceede all other Medicines, and some will say that in Pe∣stilent Agues, by prouoking sweat it healeth them. It is dry in the second degree with very litle heate,The comple∣xion thereof. the which is seene by the other waters of the wood. And as Sarcaparillia which doth heate and drie, so this doth not, nor leaueth any impres∣sion of heate. Surely it is a notable Medicine, in the which I haue founde greate effectes for the Diseases which I haue sp∣ken of.Note.
Of the Sarcaparillia. THE Sarcaparillia is a thing brought into our partes since the China.The tyme since that the Sarcapillia, came vnto vs. It is xx. yeeres since yt the vse thereof came to this city. It first came frō the new Spaine, & the Indians did vse it for great medicine, with the which they did heale many and diuers diseases. It is a plant which doth cast many rootes vnder the ground, being of a yeard long, & of the colour of a cleere Tawny,The descrip∣tion, of the Sarcaparillia & sometimes the rootes shoote so deepe, that to take them out all, it is needfull to dig a Mans length. It casteth foorth certaine bowes full of knottes, that quickly do drie, and we know not that they haue carried flow∣ers or fruite at all. After that the Sarcaparillia of the newe Spayne was founde,Sarcaparillia of the Hun∣duras. there was also found in the Hunduras, an other sort that was better, and of better effectes: it is knowne to be of the Hunduras, because that it is of colour Tawnie, and gros∣ser than that of the newe Spayne, the which is white, and somewhat like to yellowe, and more small, and so the Sar∣caparillia that is most like to blacke is best. It ought to be freshe, and in this is all the goodnes ther∣of,The choosing of it. it is knowne to be fresh by not beyng Worme eaten. For that at the freshe breaking of it long wise, in the middest it maketh a running out to the end, and casteth out no dust, and the heauier it is, the better it is. The Spaniardes did call it Sarcaparillia when they saw it,Of the name. for the great likenes that it hath with the Sarcaparillia of these partes. I haue it for certayne, that the Sarcaparillia of these partes, and of the Indias, is all one, and the verie same that ours is. The which I haue experimented manie times, & ours worketh the effect that the Sarcaparillia of the
new Spaine doth, & it is like vnto that of the Hunduras, but it is of a bitter tast, and not very sharpe, and the water that it yeeldeth hath no more sauour then barley water hath. The vse of this hearbe at the first did differ muche from that which is now in experiment,Hw it was vsed in the beginng. for that they gaue it as the Indians did, in the healing of their sicke folkes, and surely it did worke very great effects. But the delicatenesse of our time doth require that it should be vsed and geuen as the wa∣ter of the wood is. At the beginning they took of the Sarca∣parilla much quantitie, more then halfe a pounde, & did cut it small and breake it, and cast it into a quantitie of water, and being well wet they beate it in a Morter a good while, in suche sorte that it was made like a Iellie, and then did straine it, pressing it very well, for there came out of it the likenesse of a thicke drinke. And of that they tooke in the morning hot, one good Cup full, and then the Pacient clo∣thed him selfe well. And sweete two houres, and if in the day time they woulde drinke any thing, it should bee of the selfe same thicke drinke, so made by expression hot, and then they swete as much in the morning. This order they obserued for three dayes continually, without eating or drinking of other meate, sauing onely that thicke drinke,Take this for three daies. taken out by pressing or straining of the Sarcaparillia: & after this sort I gaue it at the beginning many times, and surely it wrought great effects, and many sicke people did better recouer, then they doe nowe with this other fashion. After there was inuented an other forme and manner to geue it, and is that which is now vsed, in this sort.The son how it is now vsed and ge∣uen. They take two ounces of Sarcaparillia, and wash it and cut it small and then they put it into a newe earthen pot, and there vp∣pon they poure three Pottls of water, and sette it in the water to steepe twentie and foure houres, and afer the Pot being well stopte, it must seeth on a soft fire of kin∣dled coales, vntill the two Pottels bee sodden away, and
the one remaine, the which may be knowne by the order of the measure, that we spake of, and when it is colde, let it be strained into a glassed vessel, and vpon the selfesame Sarca∣parillia that is soddē, let there be so much water powred in a∣gayne that the pot be filled, & let it boyle a reasonable time, and kept in a vessel glassed. Nowe the sicke Man beeyng purged, as it seemeth most conuenient,The maner how to geu t. and placed in a warme Chamber, he must take in the morning ten ounces, of the first water of the Sarcapa∣rillia, and must sweate at the least twoo houres, and after sweate he must be made cleane from his sweate, and take a warme shirt, and warme clothes, and the like hee must doe at night, eight houres after he hath eaten his Dinner, chan∣ging his shirt and hot apparrell. He must dine at eleuen of the clocke, and suppe one houre after he hath sweat, at night eating nothing but Reasinges, Almondes, and Bisket, and drinking of the second water. Let him keepe this order fif∣teene daies, and if he be weake, geue him a little rosted chic∣ken, increasing it in processe of time, & at the least hee must keepe his bed niene dayes at the first beginning, and the rest of the time in his chamber, kept from colde, and from ayre, and on the fifteene day he must be purged, with a soft and an easie medicine, and likewise on the thirty day, in such sorte, that all the order that we haue prescribed, be kept, as in the manner of the taking of the water of the wood is already de∣clared. And likewise after the 30. daes, he must haue good gouernment, for other fourty dayes, not drinking any wine, but simple water made of the said Sarcaparillia, and keeping himselfe from women. This is the ordinarie manner in ta∣king of the water of Sarcaparillia, which at this day is vsed. And because I haue experience of other wayes that bee of great secret, and of great effectes, I will write them heere, to the end that all the vertues which are in the Sarcaparil∣lia, may be set downe and declared, seeyng it is the Me∣dicine that is moste vsed, and that wee doe see in it so
greate and rare effectes. I doe make a Sirupe, that many yeeres hath been cele∣brated, and had in estimation in this citie,A Sirupe or drink of Sar∣caparilla most excellēt. and in all Spaine for that it is xxvi. yeres since I vsed it first for the disease of the Poxe, & for other infirmities: which Syrupe doth not heate nor inflame, but with great temperature, according to the graduation, woorketh his good effects. The first, for whom this thing was ordayned and deuised, was for Pantelion de Negro Ienoues, who was had in cure by many Phisitions, and hauing taken the water of the Wood, and other Medi∣cines, was well neere consumed: and with a grieuous swel∣ling sore vppon his shinne bone, and great paynes in it, hee tooke it, and was healed very well. This sirupe I haue vsed in many people for the infirmitie that the Sarcaparilla doth profite for, and the wood and for many other, and it hath a good effect in woorking by degrees: for that the drinesse of the wood is taken away, and the heate of the Sarcaparilla: and it is made in this forme. There must bee taken two ounces of Sarcaparilla, and foure ounces of Paulo Sancto, which is the holie Wood,The descrip∣tion of the Sirupe or drinke. prepared as it is saide, and three Doozen of Acoseifas, a fruite of Spayne, without their stones, and two Doozen of Prunes, without their stones, and halfe an ounce of the flowres of Borage, and an other halfe ounce of Uiolettes and some graynes of Barley made cleane, that is too say, the huskes taken away. All these thinges let them bee cast into three Pottles of water and lette them bee sod∣den on a soft fire, vntill it come to one Pottell, and then let it be strayned, and vnto tenne ounces of this decoction let there be put one ounce of the Sirupe of Uiolettes. Let it be taken hotte in the morning, and at night in the order aboue sayde. In the rest of the water, keeping sweet if ther bee any, and although there come little, yet they bee healed. They may eate a little Chicken from the first day, with the rest of the diet, & drinke the simple water of the Sarcaparilla,
which is to be made with halfe an ounce of Sarcaparillia, sod∣den in foure Pottls of water, vntill one or somewhat more, be sodden away. This order doeth heale all kinde of euill of the Poxe, and all the infirmities that we haue spoken of,The diseases that this drinke doeth profit in. that the water of the Wood doeth heale, and the China, and the Sarcaparillia. Which to repeate, it shall be too long and too prolixious, be∣cause it it is sufficiētly declared before. For surely in this sim∣ple water, and in the foresaide decoction, I haue found great effectes, a well in the infirmities wherein is suspected the euill of the Poxe, as in large and importunate diseases, in the which the common remedies of Phisice haue not profi∣ted, which although they proceeded not of the French Poxe, yet doeth it cure and heale them, as it is seene by the woorke of him that vseth it. There is an other Sirupe to bee made of the Sarcapa∣rillia,Another drinke of the Sarcaparillia which is: taking eight ounces of Sarcaparillia being broken or cutte, and seething it in foure pottelles of water, vntill three be sodden away and the one remaine, and into the water that shall remayne, to put to foure pounde of Su∣gar, and make a perfect Sirupe. And of this Sirupe too take three ounces in the morning and three at night, eating good meates, and to suppe litle, and drinke onely the sim∣ple water of the Sarcaparillia,The diseases that this drinke hea∣leth. and goyng abrade out of the house, and doyng his buisinesse. There are healed therwith many diseases without geuing any molestation in the hea∣ling of them. And this must be taken till the Sirupe bee all consumed. Also this Sarcaparillia is taken in pouder, in this maner. They take the Sarcaparillia,Sarcaparillia in pouder. and plucke awaie from it the heare within it, and dry it and grynde it, and then sifte it through a syue of silke, and make it in Pouder. Of this Pouder is taken in the infirmity of the Poxe, or spice of them, the weight of sixe pence, drinking it with the simple Water of the Sarcaparillia taking it in the Morning, and as
night, as much when he goeth to bedde. Hee must eate good meates, and drinke no Wine, but the simple water thereof. It shall doe well he be purged that shall begin to vse it. And although that this pouder doth heale many diseases large and temporall, one cure it doth meruellously, which is the salte Fleume of the handes and feete, in this forme. The sicke man being purged, and also without purging, if he cannot otherwise doe, hee shall take the Pouder as it is sayde, and vpon the salt Fleume, he shall lay with a Feather,The Salte Fleume is cu∣red herewith. a little of the water of Sublimatum, delayed with Rosewa∣ter, that it be very simple, and after it is layed on all partes where the salt Fleume is, then let there be put vpon it a plais∣ter, that is called of William Seretis, or Dia Palma spread abroade thin vpon Sattin or Taffeta, too bee applied in all parts where the simple water of Sublimatum was put. This must be done euery day, for that in fifteene daies he shall be perfectly whole. This doth mundifie and incarnate, and skin without hauing need of any other medicine, ioyntly with the Pouder and the simple water of Sarcaparillia, which wee haue spoken of. This is of so great effect, and experimented, as they shall see by the worke that shall vse it, for surely they shall be whole thereby. The vse of the water of the Sarcaparillia is so greate at this day in this forme, as is sayd,The vertue of the water of Sarparil∣lia. that it is applied in anie disease, & it is come into so much credit, that in anie maner of Reumes or runnings, or windinesse, the euill of Wo∣men, of the Mother, or any other cause or occasion whatsoe∣uer, so that it bee not in Feuers or other sharpe diseases, men take the vse of the simple Water of the Sarcaparillia: and this is at this day so put in vse, that in like sort you shall finde the simple sodden Water of Sarcaparillia in manie houses, as ordinary water in yearthen vessels, and surely it woorketh greate effectes, and doeth remedie large and importunate diseases. Trueth it is, that the persons that
bee hotte of complexion, it doeth beate them more then is conuenient, and so they cannot drinke it, and moste of all if that their Liuer be very hotte, for that it heateth too much. In womens diseases as well of the Mother, as of colde humours, it woorketh good effectes, and doeth mruellously dissolue windes. And in persons that bee subiect to manie euilles, and especially of Reumes, and olde greeffes and dis∣eases caused of the euill humours, if they runne this course, with the continuance thereof, they shall receiue manifest profite and benefite, and it doeth heale all deseases whiche they neuer thought to be healed of. The complexion thereof i hotte and drie, well neere in the seconde degree. All these waters must be giuen in Sommer, or in the ende thereof: it is better that the season exceede in heate then in colde. ¶ Of the blood Stone, and of the Stone for the diseases of the Stone of the Kidneies and Reines. Of the blood stone.THEY doe bring from the new Spaine twoo stones of greate vertue, the one is called the Stone of the Bloode, and the other is a Stone for the desease of the Stone in the Kidneis and Raines, The Blood Stone is a kinde of Iasper of di∣uers colours somewhat darke, full of sprincles, like to blood, being of colour redde, of the which stones the Indians doe make certaine Hartes both greate and small. The vse thereof, bothe here and there, is for all fluxes of blood in what partes soeuer it bee, of the Nose, or of the Menstrues, or of the Piles, and of Woundes, or of that which is cast out at the mouth. The stone must bee wette in colde water, and the sicke Man must take it in his right hande, and from time to time wette it in colde wa∣ter.
In this sort the Indians doe vse them. And as touching the Indians, they haue it for certayne, that touching the same stone, in some parte where the blood runneth, it doeth restrayne, it and in this they haue greate trust, for that the effect hath beene seene. It doeth profite also hauing it hol∣den, hanged, or tyed in the same parte where the blood runneth, so that it touch the fleshe. Of this stone wee haue seene great effectes, in staunching of blood. And some that doe suffer the Hemeroidall fluxe, haue remedied themselues with making Ringes of this stone, and wearing them con∣tinually vpon theyr fingers. And likewyse in the Menstruall fluxe of women. The other Stone,The stone for the disease of the grauel & stone in the kidnies or reine. which is for the disease of the stone in the Kidneies or Reines, the finest of them are like vntoo Plasma of Esmeraldes, which are lykened to greene with a Milkishe colour, the greatest are the best: they bring them made in diuers formes and fashions, for so the Indians had them in old tyme, some lyke to fishes, other like to the heads of byrds, other like to billes of Popingaies, other lyke to round Beadstones, but all pearsed through, for that the In∣dians did vse to weare them hanging for the effect to take a∣way the grief of the stone or stomake: for in those twoo sick∣nesses it sheweth maruellous effects. The chief vertue that it hath, is in the paine of the stone in the Kidneis and Reines, and in expelling of Sande and stone. In so much that a Gentleman which had one of them heere, the best of them that I haue seene, hauing laid it to his arme, it made him to expell and cast out much sande, inso∣much that many tymes hee doeth take it away, for that hee thinketh that it doeth hurte him for to voide so much, and in taking it away, hee ceaseth to voyde any from him: and when hee feeleth the paine of the stone, laying it too againe, it doeth take it away incontinent, with expelling of much Sande and small stones. I haue seene it carried to persons that haue beene afflicted with greate griefe, and
paines of the saide disease, who putting it to them, doe forth∣with expell the sande and the little stones, d remain cleare thereof. A propertie hidden.This stone hath a property hidden, by the which meanes it woorketh great effectes, to preserue men that they fall not into the paine of the sayd disease, and after it is come to take it away, or diminish it. It doeth make the sande to bee expel∣led in great abundance, and likewyse stones. It taketh away the heate from the reines of the backe, it profiteth in griefs of the stomake, layde vnto it: and aboue all it preserueth from the sayde grief. My Ladie the Duchesse for that shee had in short space three tymes, exceeding paynes of the stone, shee made a bracelet of them, and vsed to weare it on her arme, and si∣thence she put them to her arme, she neuer had more paynes of the Stone: and so it hath happened to many other that founde the lyke benefite, for the which these stones are much esteemed: and now they be not so soone had, as at the begin∣ning, for that the gentlemen, and rich men haue them onely, and with reason, because they do worke such maruellous ef∣fects. An other stone there is that doth heale the salt fleume, the which I knowe by hearesay only, but I haue seene none of them. Of the VVoodde for the euils of the Reines, and of the Vrine. ALso they bring from the newe Spaine, a certayne woodde that is lyke vnto the woodde of a Peare tree, grosse and without knottes, the which they haue vsed many yeeres in these partes, for the paynes of the Reynes and of the Stone, and for the infirmities of the Urine. The first tyme that I sawe it vsed, may bee about xxxv. yeeres past. There was a Pilot that was sicke of the
Urine and of the Reines, and after that hee had vsed it, hee was whole and very well. And sithence that tyme I haue seene that many haue brought it from the new Spaine, and they doe vse it for these diseases following. For them that cannot pisse liberally,The diseases which it cu∣reth. and for the paines of the Reines, and of the stone, and for them that do pisse wih paine, and for them that doe pisse little. And nowe the thing hath extended vnto opilations, for that the water therof doth cure and heale them, both of the Lunges and the Liuer, and this hath beene founde within these fewe yeres, and they doe finde in it notable profite. The water is made in this forme. They take the wood, and make it into smal peeces very shinne: and small as it is possible,How the wa∣ter is made. and then put thē into faire water of the Foūtaine, & leaue it so vntil the water be soke∣ned into it: and by putting the wood into the water, with∣in halfe an houre the water doeth beginne to change it selfe into a blewe colour very cleare, and the longer that it lyeth in the water, so much the blewer it turneth, although that the wood bee of a white colour. Of this water they doe drinke continually, and therewith they vse to water their wyne, and it worketh maruellous and manifest effectes, without any alteration, so that it needeth but onely good gouernement and regiment. The water hath no more sauour then if there were nothing cast into it, for that the wood doeth chaunge nothing. The complexion thereof is hotte and drye in the first degree. Of the Peper of the Jndias. I Will not let to speake of the Peper that they bring from the Indias,Of the Indiā Peper. which serueth not onely for Medicine, but it is otherwise most excellent, the which is knowen in all Spayne, for there is no Gardeyne, nor Orcharde, but
that it hath plentie thereof in it, for the fairenesse of the fruite that it bringeth foorth. The descrip∣tion of the Plante.It is a greate Plante, insomuch that I haue seene in this Citie some that was equall with many Trees. It doeth cast foorth the leaues greene, after the fashion of Basill of the biggest sort. And it casteth foorth certain white flowers, out of the which commeth the fruite, the which is of di∣uerse formes: some Peper is long, other rounde, others of the making of Mellons, others of Cherries, but all is at the beginning when it is not type very greene, and beeing rype very redde, and with a gracious and good col∣lour. The vse of it.All the sortes are vsed in al manner of meates and pot∣tages, for that it hath a better tast then the common Peper hath. Beaten in peeces, and cast into broth it is an excellent sauce, they doe vse it in al thinges that the aromatike spices are vsed in, which are brought from Maluco, and Calicu. It doeth differ from that of the East Indias, for that costeth many ducates, & this other doth cost no more but to sowe it, for that in one plant you haue spice for one whole yere, with lesse hurte and more profite. The vertues that it hath.It doeth comforte much, it doeth dissolue windes, it is good for the breast, and for them that be colde of com∣plexion: it doth heale and comforte, strengthening the prin∣cipall members. It is hotte and dry, well neere in the fourth degree. They doe bring from diuers partes of our Indias many purgatiue Medicines,Note. that haue beene found and discouered by continuance, whose workes and effectes are great: of the which I wil giue here a short relation, that it may be an en∣trance for to entreate of the roote of Mechoacan, which was our principal intent now to wryte of. Of the Cannafistola.
THere doeth come from the Ilandes of Sancto Do∣mingo,Canafistola. and from Sancte Iohn de Puerto Rico greate quantitie of Canafistola, and it is so much, that not only all Spayne is prouided of it, but all Europe, and well neere all the worlde: for that vnto Leuant, from whence it was accustomably brought, now there goeth moe Shippes loden with it, then come with Iron from Biskeye. That which commeth from our Indias, is much better in comparison then that which is brought from the East In∣dias to Uenis, and that which the Galleons do carry from thence to Genoua, and from Genoua to Spayne, for when the Merchantes brought it hither, it could not bee good, for that it was very small, and also it was not type, and with so long tyme & continuance it became so corrupted, that it did profite little. This of ours that they bring from Sancto Domingo and Saincte Iohn is rype, great, full, weightie, honilyke,The descrip∣tion of it. and fresh. In so much that many tymes it commeth in sixtie dayes after it is gathered, and beeing freshe, it is of a gra∣tious and good tast, and not of so horrible smell, as that of Leuant is, and so it doeth his woorke farre better, & with more facilitie. This Canafistola, and the woorke thereof is of greate securitie, it purgeth gently, without any alteration.The vertue of the Cana∣fistola. And doeth auoyde principally Choller, and after Fleume, and that which is in the wayes and the Guttes. It doeth temper them much that take it, also it purifieth the blood, it doeth many good woorkes in all kinde of diseases, in espe∣cially in the paines of the Reines, and of vryne, being taken twoo houres before supper. And in reumes it doeth much profite, being taken twoo houres after Supper, and easily it doeth cure the euilles of the breast, which haue bene of long continuance, & griefes of the side, being taken with Syropes for the breast: and being applied outwardly with the Oyle of sweete Almondes, it taketh away the grieuous
diseases of the Lunges, and griefes of the Reynes. It is good in hotte Feuers, and vsing it continually before supper or dinner, it stayeth the ingendring of the stone, it taketh a∣way the drieth. it is moist in the first degree, it declyneth to heate, although it be little, it is dissoluatiue, it clarifieth the blood, and delayeth the sharpnesse therof, and of the red col∣lour. There haue beene in the Indias since it was discoue∣red some thereof so weightie, that one codde waieth fiue shil∣linges, being taken out by the Seene, and foure ounces in weight the whole cane. Of the Purgatiue Nuttes. AT the beginning when they discouered the Indias, they brought from Sancto Domingo,Of the purga¦tiue Nuttes. certaine Nuttes being three cornered, with the which the Indians did purge themselues, and were vnto them a familiar purgation. And afterwardes the Spaniardes, for necessi∣tie did purge themselues with them, with hazarde ynough of some of their liues, for with the vse therof, many thought to lose their liues, for that it is a strong purge. And although that it doeth make a great excesse of stooles, yet doeth it al∣so prouoke vomitte very strongly, and with much vio∣lence, with greate faintnesse and heauinesse. Afterwarde some did rectifie them by costing of them, and then they be not so violent, nor so strong, neyther woorke with so much cause of fayntnesse.What these Nuttes doe purge. They do purge Fleume very strongly, & after colour. It is an excellent Medicine for the Colike, it doeth dissolue windes, and putte in a glister it doeth eua∣cuate reasonably. The maner & colour of them is as of our Nuttes, with a thinne rinde,The dscrip∣tion o he Nes. of the colour of a cleare Baye, they are three cornerd, the carnell within is whyte, and sweete, inso∣much that for their sweetnesse, many haue beene me∣ked
therwith. The Phisitions doe call them commonly Ben,Ben. of which there are twoo sortes, one they call greate, and the other little. The great Ben bee these purgatiue Nuttes, the little Beu bee as great as our Peason, of the which in Italy they make that oyle of sweete smel, which they call Oyle of Ben, with the which they do annoynt their heare, and beards for dilicatenesse. Their complexion is hotte in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the second. Their weight is of halfe a dragme vnto one, but they must bee tosted. Of the purgatiue Pinions. THey doe bring from the newe Spayne certain Pinions or Carnels wherewith the Indians did purge themselues:The descrip∣tion of them. they be like to our Pinions, which do growe out of our trees, being great after the fa∣shiō of the wheate of the Indias, the shale is not so hard as ours is, they are some∣what more blacke, they be round, and within very white, fat∣tie, and sweete in tast. They do purge valiantly Fleame and Colour, and any maner of waterishnes, they are more easie Medicine, then the Nuts be, they do purge by stoole,How they purge. and by vomit, and if they be tosted they doe not purge so much, nor with so much faintnes. They doe purge of their own nature grosse Humors: it is a Purgation much vsed amongest the Indians, being grounde and dissolued with Wyne, ha∣uing first taken preparatiues that do attennuate the humor,How they bee taken. that a man doeth pretende to euacuate, and vsing a conueni∣ent Diet. They take of them fiue or sixe more or lsse, confor∣mably to the obedience of the stomacke, of him that shall take them. Ordinarily they do tost them: for so they be more gentle and lesse furious. It is needefull that hee which doeth take
them, be kept as one being purged. They be geuen in large infirmities, and where there bee grosse humors: they be hot in the thirde degree, and dry in the seconde with some fatnes, which doeth take away some∣what of the drynes. Of the purgatiue Beanes. FRom Cartagena, and numbre de Dios, they bring cer∣taine Beanes lyke to the fashion of ours,Beanes like to ours. sauing that they be somewhat lesse, and of the colour and making of ours, they haue in the middest of the Beane that doth deuide the two halues, one little thinne skinne, lyke to the skinne of an oynion. How they bee tken.They doe take them from theyr shale, and from the in∣ner thinne skinne, and toste them and make them into pou∣der, and take them  Wyne: and beeing made into pou∣der and mingled with Sugar, one sponeful of the pouder is taken, and vppon that a little draught of wyne. They doe purge without molestation Choler and Fleame, and grosse mixt humors. And amongst the Indians they are of great e∣stimation, for the easinesse that they haue in the taking of them. Many Spaniardes doe purge with them with much securitie, and it is a Medicine more easie and gentle than that aforesaide. Historie.I haue seene many that haue come from those partes, purge them therewith, and it succeedeth with them very well, and purgeth without griefe. Note.But they must be aduysed that there be taken from them that little skinne that is in the middest of the twoo halfes of the Beanes. For if they take that, the strength of it is so much greater and vehement of Uomites and stooles, that they put in great hasarde him that shall take them And also they must haue care to coste them, for that it doeth prepare thm, and delayeth much of the sharpenes, and fearsenes,
which is generall in this Medicine, and in all the rest, for that to tost them is the true preparation of them. After the ta∣king of any of the foresaide Medicines the patient must not sleepe at al: it is needful that he keep great watch being pur∣ged, and in all thinges which in a man purged may be con∣uenient. The Beanes be geuen prepared, in Feuers being large and importunate, and in diseases of mixt humours,Their work and effectes. beeyng grosse and in the paynes of the ioynts, & they are an vniuer∣sall Purgation: they be hotte in the second degree, & dry in the first, there bee geuen of them from foure too sixe, tosed more or lesse, as the obedience and sufferance of the bellie is of him that shall take them. Of the milke Pinipinichi. IN all the coast of the firme land they take out a certaine kind of milke, frō little trees.Of the Pin∣pinichi. like to Apple trees, which the Indians cal Pinipinich, of the which cutting one bough, ther commeth forth whereas it is cut, a certayne kind of milke somewhat thicke & clammy, and taking three or foure drops therof, it doth purge valiantly by the stoole principal∣ly Cholerike Humors, and Citrine water, and it doth work with much vehemencie and force. It must be taken in Wyne, or dried into pouder in little quantitie, for that the worke thereof is of most strength.How it is ta∣kn. It hath one property, that in eating or drinking of broth or wine or other thing foorthwith it woorketh no longer, and he that doth take it, hath need to keepe good watch, and good order, It is hot and dry in the third degree. All these Medicines which we haue spoken of, be violent
and of great force, & they haue not beene muche vsed sithence the Mechoacan hath come, for that in it there is founde a woorke more sure,Note. and vnto this not onely we, but all the In∣dians haue runne, as vnto a purge most excellent, of the which we will treate now. Of the Mechoacan. THe Mechoacan is a root, that it may bee about xxx. yeeres that it was discouered,Mechoacan. in the prouince of the new Spain, in the Indias, of the Occean Seas, it is brought from a Country that is beyonde the greate city of Mexico, more then 40. leagues, & is called Mechoacan the which Sir Fernando Curtes did conquere, in the yeere of our Lorde, 1524. This is a countrie of much riches, of Gold and chief∣ly of siluer,The riches and increase. and it is vnderstoode that in all that Countrie is, much siluer. For more then 200. leagues, here those Mynes be so celebrated, and of so great riches, that they bee called the Cacatecas, & euery day they discouer in the lande verie riche mines of siluer, and some of Golde. It is a countrie of good and holesome ayre, and doeth bring foorth health∣full hearbes for to heale many diseases, insomuch that at the time the Indians had the gouernment therof, the inhabiters there rounde about that Prouince, came thither too heale their diseases and infirmities. For the said causes, it is a coū∣trie very fruitfull, and of great abundance of bread, wilde foule, and fruites. It hath many fountaines, and some of sweet waters, which haue much abundance of fish, the Indi∣ans of that countrie are of a tauller grouth,The sation of Mechoa∣can. & of better faces than the Borderers are, and much more healthfull. The Principall place of that Prouince the Indians doe
cal in their language Chincicila, and the Spaniardes do cal it as they cal that Realme Mechoacan, & it is a great towne of Indians, situated neere to a lake, which is of sweete wa∣ter, abounding with very much Fish. The same Lake is in fashion of the making of an horseshoe, and in the midst ther∣of standeth the Towne, the which at this dy hath greate trade of buying and selling, for the great Mynes of Plate that are in all that countrie. As soone as that Prouince was gotten from the Indi∣ans,Historie. there went thither certain Friers of Sainct Frances order, & as in a Countrie so far distaunt from theyr naturall soyle, some of them fell sicke, amongest whom the Warden, who was the chief Fryer of the house was one, with whome Caconcin Casique an Indian Lorde, a man of great power in that Countrie, had very great friendship, who was Lorde of al that Countrie. The father Warden had a long sicknes and was brought in great danger of life: the Casique as hee sawe his disease proceede forwarde, saide that hee woulde bring him an Indian of his, which was a Phisition, with whome he did cure himself, & it might be, that he would giue him remedy of his disease. The which being hearde of the Frier, and seing the little helpe that hee had there, and the want of a Phisition, with other thinges of benefite, he than∣ked him, and desired him, that hee woulde bring him vn∣to him: who beeing come, and seeing his disease, saie to the Casique, that if hee tooke a pouder, that he would giue him of a roote, that it woulde heale him. The which bee∣ing knowen to the Fryer, with the desire that he had of health, he accepted his offer, and tooke the pouder that the Indian Phisition gaue him, the nexte day, in a little wyne: with the which hee did purge so much, and wih∣out paynes, that the same day hee was much lightned, and much more from that tyme forward, in such sort that he was healed of his infirmitie. The rest of the Fryers which were sicke, and some Spaniardes that were sicke also, did fol∣low
the father Wardens cure, & tooke of the selfesame pou∣der once or twise, & as oft as they had neede of it, for to heale them. The vse of the which went so well with them, that all they being healed, the Friers did send relation of this, to the father prouincial to Mexico wher he was, who did cōmu∣nicate it with those of the countrie, geuing to thē of the roote and comforting them that they shoulde take it, because of the good relation, that hee had from those Friers of Mechoa∣can. The which beyng vsed of many, and seeyng the mer∣uellous woorkes that it did, the fame of it was extended all abroad, so that in short time, all the Country was full of the good workes and effectes thereof, vanishing the vse of Rui∣barbe of Barberie, and taking the name thereof calling it Ruibarb of the Indias, as all men doe now commonly call it. And also it is called Mechoacan,Ruibarbe of the Indias. for that it is brought from thence, & gathered in the Prouince called Mchoacan. And not onely in Mexico, and in that Countrie it doth take it as the most excellent purgation, and best of all other, but also in Peru, and in all other partes of the Indias, they vse no o∣ther thing, neyther purge they with any other purge, and they take it with so much trust and easinesse, that when they take it, they thinke to haue certaynly theyr health, & so they carrie it from the newe Spayne, as Merchaundise of very great price. Historie.I is about thirty and foure yeeres past, when I sawe it heere the first tyme, when one Pasquall Catano a Genoues, came from the newe Spayne, who fell sicke at his com∣ming, and as I did cure him, at the time that I woulde purge him, he sayde to me that he brought a Ruibarbe from the newe Spayne, that was a very excellent Medicine, with the which all they of Mexico did purge themselues, saying, that it was called Ruibarbe of Mechoacan, and hee had beene purged many times therewith, and it had succeeded very well with hym, and if he shoulde take any purge, he woulde take that, of the which he had experience.
But I caused him vtterly to forsake the vse of suche like nw Medicines, of the which there was nothing written nor knowne. And did perswade with him to purge with the Me∣dicines that we had heere, of the which there was so greate experience and knowledge, in written Authors. And he did graunt to my woordes, and purged himselfe with a purgai∣on that I gaue him, euē as it was conunient for his disease. By the which although that there did followe vnto him nota∣ble lightnesse, and profite: yet hee was not cleare of the dis∣ease in such sort, but that it was necessary to purge him an o∣ther time. And when we came to the second purgation, hee woulde take none other but his owne Ruibarbe of Mechoa∣can, with the which he did purge so well, that he remayned whole, and without any disease. And although that this ffect did like me well, neuerthelesse I did not remaine satisfied, vntill many other that came at the same time, and fel sicke, did purge with the sayde Mechoacan, and it went verie well with them, because they were accustomed to purge therewith in the newe Spayne: and seeyng the good works and so many thereof. I began to consider of it, and to purge many therewith, geuing credite to the good effectes that it wrought. And so with these that I did make experience of here,The vse in all partes of the Mechoacās. as also with the relation, and great credite of them, that came out of the newe Spayne (insomuch that the vse thereof hath spread abroade, that it is a common thing in all the worlde, and they doe purge therewith not onely in the newe Spaine, and the Prouinces of the Peru, but also in our Spayne, all Italie, Almaine, and Flaunders) I haue sent relation ther∣of, well neere to all Europe, as well in Latine, as in our natiue tongue. The vse thereof is so muche,The grate quantity of Mechoacan that is vsed. that they bring it for chiefe Merchaundise, in great quantitie, and it is solde for greate summes of monie: Insomuch that a seller of Drugges tolde me, besides that which he had sold for the Citie, he had solde
foorth of the citie the last yeere, more than ten kintalles of it, which is a thousand pound weight, so that nowe they aske for Ruibarb of the Indias, for that it is so familiar, that ther is no husband man that doeth not vse it, as a most sure me∣dicine, and of great effects, because for that kinde of pur∣gation, there is no neede of a Phisition, as being that, vnto which all men geue most credite, as a thing determined and approoued for good. I haue talked with many of them that haue come from the newe Spayne, and in especially with them that haue beene in Mechoacan, concerning the fashion of the plant that this roote is of, and what forme and figure it hath, the which they doe bring from the Countrie, within 40. leages of beyonde Mechoacan, from a countrie which is called Co∣lima, and they haue so little care therein, seeyng that their principall intent is vnto theyr interest and gaine, that they know no more thereof, but that the Indians in Mechoacan doe sell it them, the rootes beyng drie and cleane, as hither they doe bring them, and the Spaniardes doe buy them, as a kind of Merchandise, and so send them to Spaine. And surely in this we are woorthy of great reprehension▪ that seeyng that there are in the newe Spayne, so mani Hearbes, and Plantes, and other thinges Medicinable, of so much importaunce, there is not any that writeth of them, nor is it vnderstood, what vertues and formes they haue, for to accord them with ours: so that if men had a desire to search out, and experiment so many kinde of medicines, as the In∣dians doe sell in their Market places and Fayres, it would be a thing of great profite, and vtilitie to see and to knowe their propertie, and to experiment the variable and greate effectes, which the Indians doe publishe, and manifest with great proofe amongest themselues, which they haue of them: wee of our parte without any consideration doe re∣fuse it, and suche as doe knowe their effectes, will not giue
vs relation, nor knowledge what they are, nor write the ef∣ficacie and manner of them. And goyng too searche after the Place of the Roote Mechoacan,Historie of the Plant of Mechoacan. a Passenger that was come from that Pro∣uince, did aduertise me that a Fraunces Frier, that was come from that Countrie, had brought in the shippe where he came, the proper Hearbe of Mechoacan greene, in a great barrell, and with muche care, which hee brought from beyonde Mechoacan, and that hee had it in the Frierie of S. Frances of the City. And hearing thereof I did receyue greate contentment, and so I went foorthwith to the Frie∣rie, and at the doore of Infirmerie, or house for the sicke people of this Frierie, there was a thing like too halfe a Pipe, in the which there was an hearbe very greene, which they saide was the Mechoacan, that the Frier had brought from the new Spayne, not with little labour.The descrip∣tion of the Mechoacan. It is an heath that groweth creeping vp by certaine little Canes, it hath a sadde greene colour, it carrieth certayne leaues, that the greatnesse of them may be of the greatnesse of a good Po∣renge dish, which are in compasse round, with a little point, the leafe hath his little Sienewes, it is small, well neere, without moysture, the stalke is of the colour of a cleere Tawnie. They say that it casteth foorth certayne Clusters with little Grapes, of the greatnesse of a Coriander seede which are the fruite, and doe waxe rype by the Moneth of September: it casteth out many Bowes, which doth stretche a long vppon the Earth, and if you put any thing neere to it, it goeth creeping vpon it. The Roote of the Mechoacan is vnsauerie, and without byting,The manner of the roote. or anie sharpenesse of tast. That which wee doe see at this present of our Mechoacan, is a roote which they bring from the new Spayne, from the Prouince of Mechoacan, made in greate and little peeces, of them cutte in peeces, of them broken with their handes. It is a white Roote, somewhat strong,
and mighty, it appeareth that the peeces be of a great roote, without any heart. The conditions, or elections that it must haue, for to be good and perfect is: that it be freshe, which may be knowne if that it be not worme eaten,The electiōs of the Me∣choacan. nor blacke, and that it be some∣what white: but the very white is not so good, and if it bee somewhat russet, so that it be the vttermost parte of the root, for that the inner parte is somewhat white. In the tasting or chewing of it, it is without sauour, or any manner of by∣ting tast. It importeth to make his worke the better if so be that it be freshe,That it be fresh. for that the fresher it is, the better it is, and the greater the peeces are, the better they are conserued. And it is true, that that which is brought in pouder, is not so good, for that it doeth putrifie, and lose much of the vertue, and ope∣ration. As also we doe see, if we make pouder, and keepe it, it doeth not make so good woorke, as when the roote is ground, and then forthwith taken. The roote beyng old doth turne blacke, and it will be worme eaten with holes, and be∣come very light. It will keepe well rouled in Sere cloth. It is gathered in the moneth of October, and it neuer loseth his leafe. The Complection thereof is hot in the first degree, and drie in the seconde,The comple∣ction thereof. for that it hath subtill partes, with some bynding, whereby it seemeth that his woorke beyng done, it leaueth the interiour Members strengthened, without debilitation and weakenesse, which the other Purgatiue Medicines doe leaue them in: but rather those that doe purge themselues therewith, doe remayne after they be purged, more strong and harde, then before they were purged. It hath no neede of rectification, for that wee doe not see in this roote any notable hurt, onely the Wine is vnto it a corroboration for the woorke, for being taken with Wine, it maketh a better worke, then with any other Licour, for that it doth not cause vomite, and it woorketh the better.
It is giuen at all tymes and in all Ages,Easie to take and easie to work. it doeth his woorke without molestation, and without the accidentes that the other Medicines soluatiue are woont to procure. It is a Medicine easie to bee taken, for that it hath no euil cast. Onely it hath the sauour of that with the which it is ta∣ken, for that it is of it selfe without sauour, and so it is easie for Children, for that they may take it without feeling what it is, it is so lykewyse for persons that cānot take Me∣dicines, for it hath neyther smell nor taste. I haue pur∣ged therewith many Children, and many very olde per∣sons, & haue giuen it to men of more then 80. yeeres of age,It is giuen to children and olde people. and it maketh in them very sure and good woorke with no maner of alteration nor chaunge of body, and without being debilited or weakened. This Roote doeth auoyde cholerike humors, grosse mixt, and also flegmatike Humors, of what kind soeuer they be, and humors putrified and rotten, and of both colors:The woork and effectes be meruel∣lous of this roote. it doeth euacuate the Citrine water, of them that haue the Dropsie, with much easines. The principall respect thereof is to the Liuer, making it cleane, and comforting it, and the Members neere adioyning to it, as the stomacke and the inner partes. It doeth cure all Opilations of the same partes, and all diseases caused of them: As the Dropsie, the Iaundies, and ioyntly with his good woorke it re∣ctifieth the euill complexion of the Liuer, it dssolueth windinesse, and with easinsse it expelleth it, and doeth open all the hardnesse of the Liuer, and of the Lunges, and of the stomacke. It taketh away olde griefes of te head, and mundifieth the brayne and te Sinewes, and empieth out the humors that bee in the head, or pres thereof. In the disease called the Lampaones, which is the Ringes Euill, it maketh a good woorke: in olde grife of the head called the Megrim, and the Falling sicknesse, and in all Distillations, or olde runninges, in paynes of he Ioyntes, both particular and vniuersal, as in the ou Ar∣thetica,
in paynes of the stomacke, emptying the cause, and consuming windines. Also in paynes of the Uryne & Blad∣der,In griefes of Women. in paynes of the stone and Colicke, of what kynde soe∣uer it bee, it maketh a meruellous woorke. It cureth the paynes of women, and especially the Mother, by emptying and taking away the cause, as namely those causes which come of cold humors & windinesse, and in the griefes of the brest, as of an olde cough, & shortnes of breath, for vsing this roote oftentymes it taketh it away, and healeth it. Also in griefes of the Reynes caused of grosse Humors, for it doeth emptie and expell them. In griefes of the Poxe.In griefes of the Poxe it maketh a greate worke. And it seemeth that for these griefes our Lord did ordaine it, emp∣tying the humors of them, which for the moste parte are colde, and especially when they be waxen olde of long tyme, it purgeth them, and doeth expel them without any paynes, by multiplying the taking thereof as many tymes as is necessarie, for that in these infirmities that bee olde, and of long continuance,Note. one euacuation is not sufficient, but it is necessary to haue many euacuations, which may be done without daunger with this Roote: and it is not to bee mar∣uelled at, if that with one eucuation therewith doeth not follow the health that is wished for, but that many tymes it is needful to make often repetition, to the intent to roote vp and expel the euil, and naughtie humors, that are the cause of the saide disease. In agewes.This roote doeth maruellously empty foorth the cause of the lrge Feuers, and importunate, and all Feuers com∣pounded, and chiefly in olde Feuers, as Tertians, Quotidi∣ans, flegmatike, and in sch diseases as commonly come of opilacions, vsing thereof at the tyme that is needefull, for that in the lyke large and importunate diseases, the Phisiti∣on must not bee content with one eucuation,Note. but with ma∣ny, digesting by little and little, and auoyding out by little and little, seeing that the auoyding out is done with such as∣suraunce
by this Medicine so blessed. He that hath neede of it must haue a good hart,Note. and with trust that it will profite him much, which hetherunto wee haue experimented, in so many, that with iust title all credit may be giuen to the good workes therof. We see with how much easines & without any accidēts, it worketh the effects that we haue spoken of. & it is looked for, that euery day will bee discouered greater matters, that may bee added vnto these. The Rule and order that must be kept in the administra∣tion, and geuing of the Pouders,The order that ought to be kept in ta∣kig of it. made of the roote of Me∣choacan, was learned of the Indian Phisition that wee haue spoken of, and since it hath beene vsed in diuers and sundrie fashions. The first thing that is requyred of him that shal take this Pouder is, that he do prepare himself with good diet,It is conueni∣ent that there be a preparatiue for him that shal take it. & good order, keeping himselfe from all thinges that may offende health, and to vse these meates which are most conueniēt for him, & to dispose the humor that principally hee pretendeth to auoyde out, & with some Syrope, that may haue the same respect that the humor is disposed vnto the way to be prepa∣red where he may go out. And for this it is good that he take the counsel of a Phisitiō: & he must vse Glisters, if the Belly be not obedient at the least the day before he shal take it, and if by chaunce he shal neede letting blood he shall doe it with the iudgement and opinion of a Phisition. The body so pre∣pared and ready to be purged, he shal take this roote chosen as we haue said, and it must be grounde,Howe these pouders shall be taken. making Pouder of it, of an indifferent sinenesse, and way of it the quantitie that must bee taken, as wee shall speake of, and put it into whyte Wyne, which is Sacke, as much in quantitie as is needful for to drinke, and it must be tken in the morning. Wyne is the best licour that it can bee taken withall, and so it is vsed generally in the Indias, for the Wyne as wee haue sayde, doeth corroborate and geue strength to these
Pouders, and because there be some that can drink no wine, in such case they may geue it in sodden water, wherein Sy∣namon hath beene boyled, or Anis or Fenell seede, and if the pure wine doe offend them, it may be delayed with any manner of Water, but the quantitie of the Wine that shall be taken, is so little, that it canot offende, nor molest anie person. It may be delaied with Endife, or Langdebeefe wa∣ter, and because this medicine is not geuen in sharpe Agues, but in large and temperate diseases,Otherwise to geue it. it doth heare the Wine better then any other licour. Also they geue these Pouders with Conserua of Uiolets, and with Syrope of Uiolets, and it is a good practise: for with his colde and moysture, it doeth correct the litle heate, and drought that the Patient hath, and let them drinke vpon it Wine watered, or some water as aforesaide. There is made of this Pouder Pilles formed with elec∣tuary of Roses,There are made pils of it. and surely they make a very good worke and purge well. Also they doe put it in paste of Wafer bread, or in Marchpaines, and as it hath no euill sauour, so they doe not feele it.In Wafer bread. It serueth much for children and for them that can∣not take the like thinges. The Pilles that must be made of this pouder must be ve∣ry little▪Note. somewhat greater then Coriander seede, that they may dissolue the rather, and not heat, and so they work more quickly and better. They may be geuen in the morning and at night, these pouders be receiued with most prosperous successe,When they shall be giuē. beeing made vp with Syrope of Roses of nine infusions, mingling the quantity that thereof shal be taken in two ounces of Sy∣rope, and surely this mixture doeth make a meruellous woorke,Wht hu∣mrs the Mchoaca doth auoyde. for that it doth strengthen, and inforce much the worke of the pouders. It auoydeth Cholerike, grosse and fleugmatike humors
and permixt, and the fearcenes of the blood, and so it is a greate Medicine, and of maruellous woorke: It auoydeth also most strongly the Citrine water of them that haue the Dropsie, frequenting it many tymes, giuing betweene one purge and another, that which may corroborate and make strong the Liuer: in Broth it is taken many tymes, and ma∣keth good woorke. This Medicine or purge must bee taken in the morning early, and after it is taken,Whē it should be taken. they may sleepe halfe an houre vppon it, before it doe purge, for that the sleepe doeth slaye the Uomit, and the natural heate shal make a better worke in the Medicine. Hee that shall take these Pouders, if he do feare them, or any other Medicine purgatiue, and if he feare Uomit,Note. may vse this one remedy, of the which I haue large experience, and is, when hee hath taken this purge or any other, let him take the Yolke of an Egge rosted hot, broken betweene his Fingers, and put into a course Linen Cloth, and so rounde let him put it into the Throate Pit, and let him holde it there, vntill that hee doe beginne to purge, for that surely, it will slaye the Uomiting and also the Fumes, that doe ryse of the purge, and this is no small content. After that hee hath somwhat slept, if hee can, at the tyme that it beginneth to woorke, let him not sleepe nor eate, nor drinke any thing, but bee in place where the ayre doe not offende him, nor with much company, for that all the intent shall bee for to purge, staying all thinges that may let the auoy∣ding out. And he shall be aduertised, that one of the greatest excellencies that this purge hath, is, that it is in the handes of the sicke person to auoyde out what quantitie of humour hee will, the which is a thing that they of olde tyme did consider much of. And waying which was surest of pur∣ging or the letting of blood, they doe not aleage any other cause more principall, than that the letting of blood is more sure. Forasmuch as in the letting of blood wee may take
out what quantity of blood we lust, & not in the purge, which once being taken, it is not in the handes of the Phisitiō, nor the sicke person to let it to doe his woorke, which quality is not in this our purge of the roote of Mechoacan, seeing that with taking of a little Broth, or eating any maner of thing, the working of it seaseth, and it worketh no more, and so it cannot exceede nor hurt the patient. Note.Surely it is to be holden of much price, that there is foūde a kinde of purge with so much assurance, and that so mighti∣ly doeth his woorke, and is at the will of him that doth take it. After it hath done what to the patient seemeth good, and sufficient, then with a little Broth which hee eateth, it shall worke and purge no more. After that he hath pur∣ged.After that the sicke person or Phisition perceyueth that it hath made an ende of his working, and hath purged that which is conuenient, then they must giue him somewhat to eate, taking at the beginning of his Dinner a Disheful of Broth, and after a little whyle let him eate of a Hen, and in the rest let him gouerne himself as one that is purged, as wel in his drinke as in his meate, as also in the keeping that hee shall haue of his person. For that day that he doeth take it, let him take heede that hee sleepe not in the day tyme nor drinke till Supper, the which Supper shall bee light and of some good meates. What hee must doe the next day.The next daye let him take a washing Medicine, and some Conserua, and from that tyme forwarde let him keepe good order and good gouernement, in al that is conuenient for him. And if that with once taking of these pouders, the sicke man doe not heale, nor auoyde from him that which is need∣ful for to bee voyded, hee may take it again, as many tymes as the Phisition shall see conuenient, wherein he shall haue care after that the sicke man is purged, to comfort and to al∣ter the principal members. Note.And in this I can holde no precise opinion, for that there
be diuers and variable diseases, and it is needful for them to haue diuers remedies, & my intent is no more then to wryte the vse of the Roote of Mechoacan, as a thing of so greate importaunce, and of a purge and remedy so excellent, as na∣ture hath giuen vnto vs. And if processe of tyme haue taken frō vs the true Myrre,A good di∣gression. and the true Balsamo, and other Medicines that they of old tyme had, of the which in our tyme there is no memorie, and with the tyme are lost: yet tyme it selfe in place of them hath discouered and giuen so many and so sundry thinges as wee haue spoken of, as our Occidental Indias do sende vs. In especially the Mechoacan, a purge most excellent and gentle, which doth his work with such assurance, being white in colour, pleasant in sauour, and in smel easie to take, with∣out any lothsomnes in working, and without that horrible∣nes, that other purges haue, and without those accidents & fayntnes that come at the tyme, that they be taken, & with∣out that disquietnesse which it maketh when it woor∣keth. This Roote hath ouer and aboue that, which is sayde, o∣ther properties, and hidden workes, that wee doe not reach vnto, which with the tyme and vse of them shalbee knowen and discouered euery day. The waight or quantitie that is giuen of the Pouder, made of the Roote of Mechoacan,The quantity that is giuen of it. is conformable to the o∣bedience of the belly, of him that shall take it. Some there be that doe purge with little quantity. I knowe a Gentle∣man of this Realme, that with the waight of halfe a Ryall, which is iii.d. doth purge very wel, and there are other that haue neede of the waight of xii.d. and others of the waight of xviii.d. And in this euery one ought to measure the quāti∣tie, as he hath his belly in obedience, more or lesse. Euen so they ought to limit the quantity conformably to the age of the Patient. For that the Childe hath neede of little, the Boye of more, and the strong man of much more, and the
Leane of lesse, and for this cause the Phisition must mea∣sure the quantitie as hee seeth it conuenient. Because to the Childe he shal giue the waight of iii. d. and to the Boy the waight of vi. d. and to the Man the waight of xii. d. which is commonly so taken, but to the Woman it is not conuenient to giue lesse then the waight of twelue pence, & in this there may be had a consideration, seeing that it is in the hande of the Phisition to take away his worke when hee doth see that it excedeth, it is better to giue a litle too much, considering that with taking of a fewe suppings of broth, if it doe exceede, the excesse may be remedied. This is the summe which I haue vnderstoode vnto this day of the Roote, which they bring from the Prouince of Mechoacan, and when I shall know more of it, I will wryte as the tyme and the vse therof shall giue occasion. Of the quicke Sulphur. WHen I made an end of wryting of these last lynes, Barnadine of Burgus the Po∣ticarie,Quicke Sul∣phur. a man learned and expert in his arte, did shewe mee in his shop a peece of quicke Sulphur brought from our Indias, a thing most excellent as euer I sawe, and in our tyme the lyke hath not beene seene. It was bright lyke Glasse, of the colour of fine gold, taking a little of it, and casting it into the Fyre, it doeth cast from it a very greate smell of Brimstone lyke to greene smoke,As it is. and the peece it selfe (smelling therunto) hath no smell. They brought it from Quito, wt is a place in the prouince of Peru,Brought frō Quito. from a Mine that there was founde in certayne Hlles, nere vnto the Mines of gold. And it is not in vayne that the Alcumistes doe say, that the matter of Gold, is the Quickesiluer,Note. and the Sulphur, that is to say, the Quicke∣siluer
the matter, and the Sulphur the former and maker. And so this which I saw, was like to a peece of golde most fine. They bring from Nicaraga, other Sulphur, but it is rus∣set, like to Ashes, congeled without colour or brightnsse,Euill Sul∣phur. which is found nigh vnto the Uolcan of Nicaraga, the which being cast into the fire doth cast from it the smell of Brim∣stone, but it is a peece of earth, and in nothing is like to that, of the Prouince of Quito, more then in the smell, neyther hath it that colour of Golde, nor that brightnesse that the other hath, which is of Quito. The same beyng applyed in things, that are conuenient for medicine, worketh meruellous effectes:The thinge that i profi∣teth in. chiefly beeyng grounde, and dissolued with wine, and applied in the night to them, that haue their face redde inflamed that bee like to Lepers, vsing it certayne nightes, after they haue beene at the stoole, it taketh the rednesse away, and healeth it mar∣uellously, of the which I haue greate experience. It healeh the Skabbes, beyng dissolued with oyle of Roses. Taking the weight of sixe pence in an Egge, it healeth the Colike. and the Palsey. It is good for the payne of the Stone, and beyng taken, it healeth the Iaunders. It is hotte and drie excessiuely, which appeareth by the friendship, that it hath with the fire,The comple∣ction thereof. for being touched with it, it inflameth, and maketh a flame. It is the principal mat∣ter, of that Diuelishe inuention of Gunpouder, which hath beene the cause of so many euils, and hurtes. ¶ Of the wood Aromatike. ALso the sayde Barnardino de Burgus shewed mee a Wood, which to my seeming, I thought too haue beene the holy wood, that I meane of Saint Iohn d Puerto Rico, the which was of this manner, and
forme. Beeyng in the house of a principal Merchant of this city, making a Medicine in a Chimney, where they did burne of that wood, the smoke that came out of the wood did smell much,The smell of the wood. and gaue a very sweet sauour, of the which he maruelled much, and asked from whence they had cast thither that good smell. They of the house tolde him, that the good smel was of the wood that they did there burne, and it was that which did cast that good smell. He tooke a sticke of the Wood, and from it plucked a slip of the same, which had no smell nor sauour, more than other common wood had, then he tooke a∣way a little of the rinde, and smelled vnto it, and tasted it, and he founde a sweete smell most excellent in it, and a Sa∣uour no more nor lesse then of Maces, or Nutmegges, and much more sharpe, and more sweete, and of a more plea∣sant smell and tast, then any Cinamom that is in the world, and with more liuelinesse, and sharpnesse of tast then the Pe∣per. I tasted it at the taking away of the rinde from the said wood, of the which he had a great peece of timber, and surely there is not any thing of so sweet smell and tast, of any thing which we haue that with so much pleasantnesse of smell, and with such liuelinesse seadeth forth a flauour as this did peni∣trate me, insomuche that tasting a little of it, I carried all that day the sweete smell and sauour in my mouth, beeyng meruellous, as though I had carried there a peece of Nut∣megge. Histori.Of this wood they saide, that a Maister of a Shippe of his, did cut a great quantitie, comming by the Hauana, and in a mountayne, they cut much of it, for the shippes prouisi∣on, and that which did remayne they carried to the Owners howse, & there wast it, as I haue said. Wherby I do cōsider howe many trees and plantes there be in our Indias, that haue great vertues for medicines, that in the fuell of the Chimney they spend wood, of sweet odoriferous sauour, the rynde of the which being made into pouder, there might bee
done very great effects with it, for comforting the heart and the stomake, and principall members, without seeking after the spicerie of Maluca, and the medicines of Arabia, and them of Persia. Seeing that in the fieldes vntilled, and in the Mountaines and Desertes, our Indias do yeeld them vnto vs, the fault is ours that we doe not follow after them, nor seeke to doe the diligence that is conuenient, for to pro∣fite our selues in these meruellous effectes, the which I trust that Time beeing the discouerer of all thinges, and good diligence and experience withall will discouer vnto vs to our greate pro∣fite. ¶ The end of the first parte. God be praysed.
The Seconde Part of this Booke is of the things that are brought from our Occidentall INDIAS, which serue for the vse of Medicine, wherein is treated of the Tabaco, and of the Sassa∣fras, and of the Carlo Sancto, and of many other hearbes and plantes, seedes and licoures, that newly are brought from those partes, of great vertues and meruellous ef∣fectes. Written by Doctor Monardus, Phisition of Seuill.
Catholike Roiall Maiestie. THese daies past I wrote a booke of all thinges which come frō your Occidentall Indias, seruing for the vse of medicine, and surely it hath been taken in that estimati∣on, that the things which in it are intreated of doe de∣serue. And seeing the profite that it hath done, and howe many haue been remedied and healed with those reme∣dies, I did determine to proceede forwardes, & to write of the thinges, which after that the first part was written, haue come from those countries, of the which I haue vn∣derstood, that no lesse vtilitie and profite shal come, then of those which are past, for there shalbe discouered newe thinges & secrets, which will bring admiration, neuer to this day seene nor knowne before. And seeing that these medicinall things which we do treate of, & the Realmes and Countries from whence they come, belong vnto your maiestie, and he also that writeth of them, is your Maiesties subiect: I doe desire your Maiestie, to receiue this trauell into your protection, and that the reward may be such, as for the like workes dedicated to your Maiestie is accusto∣med to be geuen. Your Maiesties Subiect Doctor Monardes▪
¶ Of the Tabaco, and of his great vertues. THIS Hearbe which com∣monly is called Tabaco, is an Hearbe of muche anti∣quitie, and knowen amongst the Indians, and in especi∣ally among them of the new Spayne, and after that those Countries were got∣ten by our Spaniardes, be∣yng taught of the Indians, they did profite themselues with those things, in the wounds which they receiued in their Warres, healing themselues therewith to their great benefite. Within these few yeeres there hath beene brought into Spayne of it, more to adornate Gardens with the faire∣nesse thereof, and too geue a pleasaunt sight, than that it was thought to haue the meruellous medicinable vertues, which it hath, but nowe wee doe vse it more for his vertues, than for his fairenesse. For surely they are such which doe bring admiration. It is growing in many partes of the Indias, but ordi∣narily in moyst and shadowie places,Howe it is sowne and how it grow∣eth. and it is needefull that the grounde whre it is sowen, bee well tilled, and that it be a fruitefull grounde, and at all times it is sowen, in the hot Countries. But in the colde Countries it must bee sowen in the Moneth of Marche, for that it may defende it selfe from the frost.
The proper name of it amongest the Indians is Picielt, for the name of Tabaco is geuen to it by our Spaniardes,The name of it. by reason of an Island that is named Tabaco. It is an hearbe that doth growe and come too bee verie greate: many times to bee greater then a Lemmon tree.The descrip∣tion of it▪ It casteth foorth one steame from the roote which groweth vpright, without declining to any parte, it sendeth foorth many Bowes, straight, that wel neere they bee equall with
and at the tyme as the hearbe is in the Morter a stamping, let there be put to it a fewe droppes of Uineger, that his worke may be made the better, and after the place is rubbed where the paine is, then lay vpon it one leafe or twoo leaues of the Tabaco being hotte, and so let it alone til the next day, and then doe the like againe, or in place of the leaues vse a Linen cloth wette in the hotte Ioyce. Some there bee, that after they haue rubbed it with the stāped leaues, do annoynt it with oyntments, made for the like euils, and vpon it they lay the leaues or the ioyce of the Tabaco. And surely with this cure they haue dissolued great and harde opilations, and very old swellings. In the griefe of the stone, of the Kidneis and Reines,In the griefe of the stone. this hearbe worketh great effectes, by putting the leaues into Ashes, or Embres, hotte, that they may warme wel, and then being layde vpon the griefe, multiply∣ing the vse of it as often as it is needefull. It is necessary in the seethinges that are vsed to bee made for Glisters to put into them with the other things,To put them n Glisters. the Leaues of this hearbe, for that they shal profit much: and likewise for Fomentati∣ons and Plaisters, that they shall make. In griefes of winds.In griefes of windes they worke the like effect, taking away the paines that come of the windinesse, applying the leaues after the same sorte as is aboue saide. The euill of the Mother.In the griefe of women, which is called the euill of the Mother, laying too one leafe of this hearbe Tabaco very hotte, in the manner as it is sayde, it doth manifestly profite and it must bee layde vppon the Nauell. And vnder it some doe vse to put first of al, thinges of good smell vpon the Na∣uel, and then vpon that they lay the leafe. In that which they finde most profit, is to lay the Tacamahaca, or the oyle of li∣quid Amber, and Balsamo, and Caranna, or any of these vnto the Nauel, and to kepe it too it continually, that it may cleaue vnto it, and this worketh manifest profit in griefes of the Mother.
In one thing, the women that dwel in the Indias doe ce∣lebrate this hearbe, that is,For an euill breath. in the euill breathing at ye mouth of children, when they are ouer filled with meate, and also of olde people, anoynting their bellies with lampe oyle, and laying some of those leaues, in ashes hotte to their bellies, & also to theyr shoulders, for it doeth take away ther naugh∣ty breathing, and maketh them goe to the stoole, applying it vnto the fundement at what tyme it is needfull, and if the leaues bee ashed it is the better. Wormes, of all kindes of them, it killeth,For Wormes. and expelleth them maruellously, the seething of the hearbe made into a Syrope delicately, beeing taken in very little quantitie, & the ioyce thereof put on the nauel. It is needful after this be done to giue a Glister, that may auoyde them, and expell them out of the guttes. In griefes of the Iointes comming of a colde cause it maketh a maruellous worke,In euill of the Ioyntes. the Leaues of this Tabaco be∣ing laid hotte vpon the griefe: the lyke doth the Ioyce layde vpon a little cloth hotte, for that it doeth dissolue the humor, & taketh away the paines therof. If it come of a hot cause it doth hurt, sauing when the humor hath bene hot, and the sub∣til part is dissolued, and the grosse remayneth, then it doeth profite as if the cause were colde, and it is to be vnderstood, that the leaues being layde, where as is griefe of the sayde cause, in any part of the body, it profiteth much. In swellings or in cold Impostumes, it doth dissolue and vndoe them, washing them with the hotte Iuyce,In cold sel∣lings. and laying the beaten leaues, after they be stampt, or the leaues beeing whole of the sayde Tabaco, vpon it. In the Toothache when the griefe commeth of a colde cause, or of colde Rumes,For the t∣ache. putting to it a little ball made of the leafe of the Tabaco, washing first the tooth with a small cloth wet in the Iuyce, it taketh away the payne, and stay∣eth it, that the putrifaction goe not forwarde: in hot causes
it doth not profite, and this remedy is so common that it hea∣leth euery one. For Cil∣blaines.This hearbe doth maruellously heale Chilblaines, rub∣bing them with the stamped leaues, and after putting the handes and Feete in hot water, with Salt, and keping them warme: this is done with great experience in many. In Venom & venomous woundes.In Uenom and venomous wounds our Tabaco hath great commendation, which hath beene knowne but a shorte tyme since, for when the wilde people of the Indias, which eate mans fleshe doe shoote their Arrowes, they annointe them with an hearbe or Composition made of many poysons, with the which they shoote at all thinges that they would kill, and this Uenom is so strong, and pernicious, that it killeth with∣out remedie, and they that bee hurte dye with great paynes and accidents, and with madnes, vnlesse that their be found remedie for so great an euill. A fewe yeeres past they laid to their wounds Sublimatum,Sublimatum in venomed woundes. and so were remedied, and surely in those partes they haue suffered much with this vexation of poyson. A little whiles past, certaine wild people going in their Bootes to S. Iohn De puerto Rico, to shoote at Indiās, or Spaniards, if that they might find thē, came to a place and killed certain Indians, & Spaniards, & did hurt many, & as by chaunce there was no Sublimatum at that place to heale them, they remembred to lay vpon the wounds the Ioyce of the Tabaco, & the leaues stamped. And God would, that lay∣ing it vpon the hurtes, the griefs, madnes, & accidents wher∣with they dyed, were mittigated, and in such sort they were deliuered of that euill, that the strength of the Uenom was taken away, and the wounds were healed, of the which there was greate admiration. Which thing being knowen to thē of the Ilande, they vse it also in other hurtes and woundes, which they take when they fight with the wilde people, nowe they stande in no feare of them, by reason they haue
founde so great a remedy, in a case so desperate. This Hearbe hath also vertue against the hearbe called of the Crosseboweshooter,Against the hearbe of the Crossebow∣shooter. which our hunters doe vse to kil the wilde beastes withall, which heathe is Uenom most strong, and doeth kill without remedie, which the Kinges pleasure was to prooue, and commaunded to make experi∣ence thereof, and they wounded a little dogge in the throate, and put foorthwith into the wound the hearbe of the Crosse∣boweshooter, and after a little while, they powred into the selfe same wounde that they had annoynted with the Crosse∣bowe shooters hearbe,Historie. a good quantitie of the Iuyce of Ta∣baco, and layde the stamped leaues vpon it, and they tied vp the dogge, and hee escaped, not without great admiration of al men that sawe him. Of the which, the excellent Phisiti∣on of the Chamber of his maiestie,Doctor Bar∣narde. Doctor Barnarde in the margent of this booke, that sawe it, by the commaun∣dement of his Maiestie, wryteth these wordes: I made this experience by the commaundement of the kinges Maiesty. I wounded the dogge with a knife, & after I put the Crosse∣bowe shooters hearbe into the wounde, and the hearbe was chosen, and the dogge was taken of the hearbe, and the Ta∣baco and his Iuyce being put into the wounde, the dogge e∣scaped and remained whole. In the venomous Carbuncles,In venomous Carbuncles. the Tabaco being applied in maner as is aforesaid doth extinguish the malice of the ve∣nom, & doth that which al the woorkes of Surgery can doe, vntil it be whole.In bitinges of venomous beastes. The same effect it worketh in bytinges of venomous beastes, for it killeth and extinguisheth the malice of the venom and healeth them. In woundes newely hurt, and cuttes, strokes, prickes,In woundes newly hurte. or any other manner of wounde, our Tabaco worketh mar∣uellous effectes, for that it doeth heale them and maketh them soud. The wound must be washed with wine, & pro∣cure to annoynt the sides of it,The manner of healing. taking away that which is superfluous, & then powre into it the Iuyce of this hearbe, &
lay vpon it the stamped leaues, and being well bound it shal cōtinue on vntil the next day that thou shalt returne to dresse it. After the same fashion the patientes shall keepe good or∣der in their meate, vsing the diet necessary, and if it be need∣ful of any euacuation by stoole, the cause being greate, let it be done what shal be conuenient.Note. And with this order they shalbe healed, without any neede of any more Surgerie thē this hearbe only. Here in this Country, & in this City they know not what other to doe, hauing cut or hurt themselues, but to runne to the Tabaco, as to a most readie remedie. It doth maruellous workes, without any need of other Surge∣ry, but this only hearbe. In restrayning the fluxe of blood of the wounds it procureth most maruellous workes, for that ye Iuyce and the Leaues being stamped, are sufficient to re∣straine any fluxe of blood. In olde sores.In olde Sores it is maruellous the woorkes and the ef∣fects that this hearbe doeth, for it healeth them wonderful∣ly, making cleane and mundifying them of all humors that are superfluous, and of the rottennes, that they haue, & brin∣geth vp the flesh, reducing them to perfite health, the which is so common in this Citie, that euery man doeth knowe it▪ and I hauing ministred it to many people as well men as women, in great number, and being grieued of tenne, and of twentie yeeres, haue healed olde rotten sores in legges, and other partes of the body, with this remedy only to the great admiration of all men. The order of the Cure. The order of the Cure that is to bee wrought with this hearbe, is this following. For the olde rotten sores although they bee cankered, let the sicke man bee purged with the counsell of a Phisition, and let him blood if it be needfull, and then take this hearbe and pounde it in a Morter, and wring out the Iuyce, and put it into the Sore, and then af∣ter the maner of a Plaister laie the stamped leaues vpon it, which are the Leaues that the Iuyce is taken out of, and this doe once euery day eating good Meates, and not ex∣ceeding
in any disorder, for otherwyse it will not profite. And doing this, it wil make cleane the euil flesh that is rot∣ten, and superfluous, vntil it come to the whole flesh, and it is not to be maruelled at, if the wounde bee made very greate. For the euil must bee eaten vp, vntil it come to the good, and in the same cure putting in lesse quantitie of iuyce it wil in∣carnate, and reduce it to parfit health, in such sort that it ac∣complisheth al the workes of Surgery, that all the Medi∣cines of the worlde are able to doe, without hauing neede of any other maner of medicine. This woorke doeth cure olde Sores,It cureth best the woundes that be rotten & cankered. with very great ad∣miration: and not onely in men, but in brute beastes also. As at this day in all partes of the Indias, where there are any cattel hauing woundes or gaules, and the countrie beeing hotte and moyst ouer much, doeth soone rotte them, and very quickly they come to bee cankered, and for this cause, much great cattel doe dye: To remedy this and the wormes that doe increase in the sores,Sublimatum doth heale the soares of beastes that bee cankered. they had for remedy to put into the sores, Sublimatum, for that in this remedy they did de more benefite than in any other, that they had vsed. And for that the Sublimatum beares there so high a price, my tymes it was more woorth then the cattel that it hea∣l. For this cause and for hauing founde in the Taba∣co so much vertue too heale newe woundes and rotten, they did accorde and agree together to vse the Tabaco, in the healing of beastes, as they had done in the cure and re∣medy of men, powring the Iuyce of the Tabaco into the woundes, & washing them therwith, & laying vpon them the stamped leaues of the Tabaco, after that the Iuyce is ta∣ken from them. And it is of so greate efficacie and vertue, that it killeth the wormes, and maketh cleane the sore, ea∣ting away the euill fleshe, and ingendering newe vntill it be whole, as in the other thinges which wee haue spoken of. The like it doth in the gaules of the beasts of Cariege, the iuyce being powred in, & the beatē leaues wherout the iuyce
commeth of the Tabaco, as it is sayde: although they be can∣kered, it doeth make them cleane, and incarnate them, and cureth and helpeth them. And so the Indians doe carry it, when they iourney, for this purpose and effect, and it procu∣reth the like profite, that the iuyce doeth. I sawe a man that had certayne olde sores in his nose, wherby he did cast out from him much matter,Historie. which dayly did rotte and canker inwarde, and I caused him to take at his nose the iuyce of this Tabaco, and so he did: and at the se∣conde tyme, hee cast out from him, more then twenty little wormes, and afterwarde a fewe more, vntill that he remay∣ned cleane of them, and vsing it so certayne dayes, hee was healed of the sores, that hee had in the inner part of his nose: and if he had taried any longer, I thinke that there had re∣mayned nothing of his nose, but al had bene eaten away, as it happeneth to many, which we see without them, And bee∣ing wryting of this,Historie. a daughter of a Gentleman of this Ci∣tie, had many yeres a certaine kinde of drieskabbes, or wel neere skuruie in her head. I had her in cure and did vnto her many benefits, vniuersal, and particular: and also Maisters of Surgerie had done their diligence, and al did not profite. And a Gentlewoman, which had the charge of her, as se heard me speake one day much good of the Tabaco, that  did good, and profitable, for so many infirmities, she sent for it, and did rubbe hard the disease that the wench had, & that day shee was very euill, and as though she had bene foolih: and the gentlewoman did not let, in seing her after that sor, to rubbe her harder, and then the wench did not feele so much griefe, but the dry skabbes begn to fall, and the whyte scurffe of her head in such sorte, that it made cleane and healed her head, with dooing so certaine dayes, so that shee was healed of her scuruie disease very well, without knowing what she did. One of the merulles of this hearbe, and that which
bringeth most admiration, is, the maner howe the Pristes of the Indias did vse it, which was in this manner:The man how the Prieste of the Indas do vse th Ta∣baco. when there was emongest the Idians any manner of businsse, of greate importaunce, in the which the chiefe Gentlmen called Casiques, or any of the principall people of the coun∣trie, had necessitie to consult with their Priestes, in any bu∣sinesse of importance: then they went and propounded their matter to their chiefe Priest, foorthwith in their presence, he tooke certayne leaues of the Tabaco, and cast them into the fire, and did receiue the smoke of them at his mouth, and at his nose with a Cane, and in taking of it, hee fell downe vppon the ground, as a Dead man, and remayning so, ac∣cording to the quantitie of the smoke that he had taken, when the hearbe had done his woorke, he did reuiue and awake, and gaue them their answeares, according to the visions, and illusions which hee sawe, whiles hee was rapte in th same manner, and he did interprete to them, as to him see∣med best, or as the Diuell had counselled him, geuing them continually doubtfull answeares, in such sorte, that howsoe∣uer it fell out, they might say that it was the same, which was declared, and the answeare that he made. In like sort the rest of the Indians for their pastime, doe take the smoke of the Tabaco, too make themselues drunke withall, and to see the visions, and thinges that reprsent ¦to them that wherein they doe delight: and other times they take it to knowe their businesse, and successe, because confor∣mable to that, which they haue seene beyng drunke there∣with, euen so they iudge of their businesse. And as the Deuil is a deceauer, & hath the knowledge of the vertue of hearbes, so he did shew the vertue of this Hearb, that by the meanes thereof, they might see their imaginations, and visions, that he hath represented to them, and by that meanes de∣ceiue them. Too haue Hearbes that haue the like vertue,Hearbe which ha is a com∣mon
Iias but is also a common thing in the Orientall Indias. And also in the Portugll Indias, for this effect, they doe sell the Opi in their Shoppes, euen as they sell Conser∣, with the which the Indians vse to ease themselues, of their labour that they take, and to bee merie, and not to feele paynes of any greate labour of the bodie, or minde that may come vnto them, and they call it there amongst themselues Aphi. This Aphion the Turkes doe vse for this effect. The oliers and Captaynes that goe to Warres, when they labour much, after the time that they be lodged, that they may take their rest, they receiue Aphi∣on, and sleepe with it, and remayne lightened of their la∣bour: The most principall people take Bague, and it hath a better cast, and a better smell, for there is put to it muche Amber, and Muske an Cloues, and other spices. And sure∣ly it is a thing of admiration, o see howe these Barbarous people doe take such Medicines, and how many of them doe take them, and that they doe not ki them, but rather they take them for health and remeie, for their necessities. istorie.I sawe an Indian of those partes, that in my presence did aske an Apothecarie for a quart of Opi, and I deman∣ded of him wherefore he woulde haue it, and he tolde me that he took it to put away wearinesse, when he felt himselfe ouer much greeued, and afflicted with labour, and hee tooke the halfe of that which he carried, for the Apothecary gaue him more then a pite for twelue pence, and therewith he slepte so soundly, that when he awoke from sleepe, hee founde him∣selfe very muche eased of his wearinesse, in suche sorte, that hee might continue his labour. I meruelled at it, and it seemed to me a thing of Mockerie, seeyng that fiue or sixe graynes, bee the most that wee can giue to sicke Person, howe strong soeuer hee bee, which beeyng verie well prepared, doeth cause many times Accidentes of Death. And many yeeres after standing in the Shoppe of
an other Apothecary of this Citie, there came an other In∣dian, of the same Orientall Indias, and he asked of the A∣pothecarie, for some Opio called Aphion, the which Apo∣thecarie vnderstoode him not. And I remembring my selfe of the other Indian, caused him to shewe vnto the Indian Opio, and in shewing it to him, he sayd that it was that which he asked for, and he bought a quarter of a Pinte of it, and I asked of the Indian, wherefore hee woulde haue it, and he tolde me the same that the other Indian did, that it was be∣cause he might labour, and ease himselfe of his wearinesse for that hee did beare burdens, and shoulde helpe to discharge a shippe: wherefore he sayde he woulde take the one halfe that he might therewith labour, and the other halfe after he had laboured, that therwith he might take ease, and rest. Then I gaue credite to the first Indian, of that he sayd vnto me, and since I haue beleeued that which I haue seene and read, in those partes to be a thing in common vse, for the like effectes. And truely it is a thing worthy of greate consideration, that fiue graines of Opio doe kill vs, and three∣score doe geue them health and rest. The Indians doe vse the Tabaco, for to suffer drieth, and also to suffer hunger,The Tabaco taketh away drought. and to passe dayes without hauing neede to eate or drinke, when they shall trauell by any desert, or dispeopled countrie, where they shall finde neither water, nor meate. They receiue thereof little balles, which they make of the Tabaco. For they take the leaues of it, and chew them and as they goe chewing of them, they goe mingling with them certayne pouder,Little balles for hunger and drought. made of the shelles of Cockels burned, & they mingle it in the mouth altogether, vntil they make it like dowe, of the which they frame certayne little Balles, little greater then Peason, and lay them to drie in the shadow, and after they keepe them, and vse them in this forme following.The maner how to vse them. When they vse to trauell by the waies, where they finde
no water nor meate, they take a little hall of these, and put it betweene the lower lippe and the teeth, and goe chewing it all the time that they trauell, and that which they chewe, they swallowe downe, and in this sore they iourney, three or foure dayes, without hauing neede of meate, or drinke, for they feele no hunger drieth, nor weakenesse, nor their trauell doth trouble them. I thinke that to iourney after this sort, is he cause they goe chewing continually the little balles: for they bring Fleume into the mouth, and swallowe it into the stomake, the which doeth retayne the naturall heate, which it doth confirme, and so they mainteyn themselues therby, the like whereof wee see to happen in many beastes, for that a great part of the Winter, they be shut vp in their Caues, & hollowe places of the earth, and passe their time there with∣out any meate, for that they haue to cnsume the naturall heate, of the fmes, which they had gotten in the Summer. The Beare being a great and fierce beast, much time in the Winter remayneth in his Caue, and liueth without meate or drinke, with onely chewing his pawes, which perhaps he doeth for the said cause. This is the substance which I haue gathered of this hearbe, so celebrated & called Tabaco, for that surely it is an hearb of great estimation, for the excellent vertues that it hath, as we haue sayde.
Hereafter followeth a further additi∣on of the Hearbe called Tabaco, otherwise called by the Frenchmen Nicotiane. Which hearbe hath done great cures in the Realme of Fraunce and Portugall, as heereafter at large may appeare in thistreatise following. Nicotiane. Chap. 76. NICOTIANE,Nicotiane the chiefest amōg other medicinable hearbes. although it bee not long since it hath beene knowne in France, not∣withstāding deserueth palme and price, and among al other medicinable hearbs, it deser∣ueth to stand in the first rank, by reason of his singular ver∣tues, and as it were almost to bee had in admiration, as hereafter you shall vnderstand. And for that none suche as of auncient time, or of late dayes, haue written the nature of plantes, did neuer make mention thereof, I haue therefore learned the whole historie touching the same, which I lear∣ned of a gentleman my very friend, the first authour, inuenter, and bringer of this hearb into France: wherfore I thought good to publish it in writing for their sakes, that haue so often hearde speaking of this saide hearbe, and yet neyther knew the hearbe nor the effectes thereof. This Hearbe is called Nicotiane,Nicotiane wherefore so named. of the name of him that gaue the firste intelligence thereof vnto this Realme, as many other plantes haue taken their names of certayne Greekes and Romaynes, who hauing beene in straunge Countries, for seruice of their common Weales,The Queen Mothers hearbe. haue brought into their countries many plants, which were before vnknowne. Some haue called this Hearbe the Queenes Hearbe, because it was firste sent vnto her, as heereafter
shalbe declared by the Gentleman, that was the first inuen∣ter of it, and since was by her geuen to diuers for to sowe, whereby it might bee planted in this lande. Others haue na∣med it the great Priors hearbe,The graund Priors hearb. for that he caused it to mul∣tiply in Fraunce, more then any other, for the greate reue∣rence that he bare to his hearbe, for the Diuine effectes ther∣in contayned. Many haue geuen it the nme, Petum, which is indeede the proper name of the Hearbe,Petum. as they which haue traelled that Countrie can tell. Notwithstanding, it is better to name it Ncotiane, by the name of him that sent it into Fraunce first, to the ende that hee may haue the honour thereof, according to his desert, for that hee hath en∣riched our Countrie, with so singular an Hearbe. Thus much for the name, and nowe hearken further for the whole Historie. Maister Iohn Nicot, Counsellr to the King, being Embassadour for his Maiestie in Portugall,Maister Ni∣cot Ambas∣sadour for the king in Portugall. in the yeere of our Lorde. 1559.60.61. went one day to see the Pry∣sons of the King of Portugall: and a Gentleman beeyng the keeper of the sae Prisons presented him with this hearb, as a strange Plant brought from Florida. The same Maister Nicot, hauing caused the said hearb to be set in his Garden, where it grewe and multiplied maruellously, was vppon a time aduertised, by one of his Page, that a young man, of kinne to that Page made a sye of that hearbe brused both the hearbe and the Iuice together vppon an vlcer, which he had vpon his cheeke neere vnto his nose, comming of a Noli me tangere, which began to take roote already at the griffles of the Nose, wherewith hee founde himselfe meruellously eased. Therefore the sayde Maister Nicot caused the sicke young man to bee brought before him, and causing the saide hearb to be continued to the sore eight or ten daies, this saide Noli me tangere,Experience of the Noli me tangere. was vtterly extinguished and healed: and he had sent it, while this cure was a woorking to a cer∣teine Phisition of the king of Portugall one of the greatest fame
to examine the further working and effect of the said Nico∣tiane, and sending for the same young man at the end of ten dayes, the sayde Phisition seeing the visage of the said sicke yong man, certified, that the sayde Noli me tangere was vt∣terly extinguished, as in deede he neuer felt it since. Within a while after, one of the Cokes of the sayde Embassadour hauing almost cutte off his thombe,Experienc for woundes. with a greate chopping knyfe, the Stewrd of the house of the sayde Gentleman ran to the sayde Nicotiane, and dressed him therewith fiue or sixe tymes, and so in the ende thereof hee was healed: from that tyme forward this hearbe began to bee famous throughout Lishebron,Lshebron. where the court of the kyng of Portugall was at that presone, and the vertue of this sayde hearbe was extolled, and the people began to name it the Ambassadours hearbe.The Ambas∣sadours hearbe. Wherefore there came certaine dayes after a Gentleman of the Countrie, Father o one of the Pges of the Ambassadour, who was trou∣bled with an vlcer in his Legge, hauing had the same twoo yeeres, and demaunded of the sayde Ambassadour for his hearbe, and vsing the same in such order as is before written, at the end of tenne or twelue daies hee was healed.Experienc of an olde vlcer. From that tyme forth the fame of that same hearbe increa∣sed in such sort, that many came from al places to haue some of it. Among al others there was a woman that had her face couered with a Ringworme rooted,Experience for the Ring∣wormes. as though she had a Ui∣sour on her face, to whome the saide L. Embassadour caused the hearbe to be giuen, and told how she should vse it, and at the ende of eight or tenne daies, this woman was throughly healed, who came and presented her selfe to the Ambassa∣dour, shewing him of her healing. After there came a Captaine to present his Sonne sick of the kinges euill to the sayde L. Ambassadour,Experience for the king euill. for to send him into France, vnto whome there was a saye made of the sayde hearbe, which in fewe dayes did begin to shewe
great signes of healing, and finally he was altogether hea∣led therby of the kings euill. The Lady of Montigue dead of a No∣li me tangere in her Brst.The L. Ambassadour seeing so great effects proceeding of this hearbe, and hauing heard say that the Lady Monti∣gue that was, dyed at Saint Germans, of an vlcer bread in her brest, that did rne to a Noli me tangere, for the which there could neuer remedy hee fonde: nd lykewyse that the Countesse of Ruffe, had sought for al the famous Phisitions of that Realme, for to heale her face, vnto whom they could giue no remedy,How the Ni∣cotiane was brought into Franc. he thought it good to communicate the same into France, and did sende it to king Frauncis the seconde, and to the Qeene Mothe, and to many other Lords of the Cou  the mne of ministring th same, and howe to apply it vnto the said diseases, uen as he had found it by ex∣perience, and chiefly to the Lorde of Iarnac gouernour of Rogel, with whom th saide Lord Ambassadour had greate amitie for the seruice of the king. The which Lord of Iarnac told one day at the Queens table,Distilled wa∣ter of Nico∣tiane, singu∣lar good for short breath. The figure of Nicotiane. yt he had caused the saie Nicotian to be distilled, and the water to bee drnke, min∣gle with water, of Euphrasio otherwise called eyebright, to one that was short breathe, who was therewith healed. This hearbe hath the stalke greate, bearded and slymie, the leafe large and long bearded slymie, it groweth in branches halfe foote to halfe foote, and is very ful of leaues, and groweth in height foure or fiue foote. In hot countries it is nyne or tenne monethes in the yeere laden, in one selfe tyme, with leaues flowers, & Coddes full of rype graynes, which is when they are waxed blacke, and to be ripe, which is when they are yet greene. It sproutes foorth neere the roote much, and reuyueth by a greate quantitie of buddes, notwithstanding the grain is the least seede in the worlde, & the rootes be like small threeds. Groūd fit for Nicotiane.Nicotiane doth require a fat grounde finely digged, and in colde Countreys very well dounged, that is to say, a
grounde, in the which the doung must be so wil mingled and incorporated, that it be altogether turned into earth, & that there appeare no more doung. It requireth the south Sunne, and to be planted by a wal,The Sunne fit for Nico∣tian. which may defende it against the North winde recouering the heate of the Sunne against it, being a warrant vnto the said hearbe against the tossing vp of the winde, because of the weaknes and highnes thereof. It groweth the better being often watered, and reuiueth it selfe by reason of the water in tyme of droughts.To water Nicotiane. It hateth the cold, therefore to preserue it from dying in the Winter tyme, it must either be kept in Caues made of purpose with∣in the said gardens, or els couered with a double Matte,How to keep Nicotiane in Winter. and a Penthouse of Reede made on the Wall ouer the hearbe, and when the South Sunne shyneth, the dore of the place must bee opened where the hearbe is on the Southside. For to sowe it,The sowing of Nicotian. there must bee made a hole in the ground with your finger, as deepe as your finger can teache, then cast into that hole 40. or 50. graines of the sayde Seede to∣gether stopping againe your hole, for it is so small a Seede, that if there bee put in the hole but three or foure graynes thereof, the earth would choke them, and if the weather bee dry, the place must be watered lightly during the tyme of fiftiene dayes after the sowing thereof: it may also be sowen like vnto Lettis and other such hearbes. And when the hearbe is out of the grounde, for so much as euery Grayne thereof will bring foorth his twigge,To remoue Nicotiane. and that the little threeds of the Roote are the one with∣in the other, you must make with a great knife a greate compasse within the earth rounde about the saide place, and lift vp the earth together with the Seede, and cast it into a payle of water, so that the earth bee separated, & that the little twigges may swimme aboue the water, then shal you take them without breaking, the one after the other,
The Sassafras.
¶ Of the tree which is brought from the Florida, called Sassafras. FRom the Florida which is the firme Land of our Occidental Indias, lying in xxv. degrees,The Histori of the Sassa∣fras. they bring a wood and roote of a tree that groweth in those partes, of great vertues, and greate excellencies, healing therewith grieuous and varia∣ble diseases. It may be three yeres past, that I had knowledge of this Tree, & a French man which had bene in those partes, shewed me a peece of it, and tolde me meruels of the vertues therof, & how many and variable diseases were healed with the water, which was made of it. I gaue at that tyme no credit to him, for that in these things of Plantes, and hearbes, which are brought from other pla∣ces, they say much, and knowe little, vnlesse it bee by a man that hath experience of them, with care and diligence. The tree and the partes thereof lyked mee well, and I iudged that, which nowe I do finde to be true, and haue seene by ex∣perience. He tolde me that the Frenchmen, which had beene in the Florida at that tyme, whē they came into those parts, had beene sicke the most of them, of grieuous and variable diseases, and that the Indians did shewe them this tree, and the manner how they should vse it, and so they did, and were healed of many euilles, which surel bringeth admiration, that one only remedy should worke so variable, and so mer∣uellous effectes. After that the Frenchmen were destroyed,Historie. our Spa∣niardes beganne to waxe sicke, as the Frenchemen had doone, and some which remayned of them, did shewe
it to our Spaniardes, and howe they had cured themselues with the water of this meruellous Tree, and the manner which they obserued in the vsing of it, shewed to them by the Indians, who vsed to cure themselues therewith, when they were sicke of any griefe. Our Spaniards began to cure themselues with the wa∣ter of this Tree, and it wrought in them great effectes, that are almost incredible: for with the naughtie meates & drin∣king of the rawe waters, & sleeping in the dewes, the most parte of them fell into continuall Agues, of the which many of them came into opilations, and from the opilations they began to swell, and when the euil came first, immediatly it began to take away the lust that they had to their meate, and then happened to them other accidents, and diseases, as such like Feuers are accustomed to bring: and hauing there no remedie to bee healed, they did what the Frenchemen had counsailed them, doing that which they had done, which was in this forme. They digged vp the roote of this tree, and tooke a peece thereof, such as it seemed to them best, they cutte it small into very thinne and little peeces, and cast them into water, at discretion, as much as they sawe was needfull, little more or lesse, and they sodde it the tyme that seemed suf∣ficient for to remaine of a good collour, and so they dranke it in the morning fasting, and in the day tyme, and at din∣ner, and supper, without keeping any more waight, or mea∣sure, then I haue sayde, nor more keeping, nor order then this, and by this they were healed of so many griefes, and euil diseases, that to heare of them what they suffred, and how they were healed, it bringeth admiration, & they which were whole, dranke it in place of wine, for it doeth preserue them in health:They which wee whole dranke it. as it appeared very well by them that haue come from thence this yeere, for they came all whole and strong, and with good colours▪ which doeth not happen to them that come from those partes, and from
other conquestes, for they cme sicke and swlne, without collour, and in short space the most of them di. And these Souldiers doe trust so much in this Wood, that I beeyng one day amongest many of them, informing any selfe of th thinges of this Tree, the most parte of them tooke out of their Pockets, a good peece of this Wood, and sayde: Maister, doe you see here the Wood, that euery one of vs doeth bring to heale vs withall, if we fall sicke, as we hau beene there? and they began to prayse it so much, and to con∣firme the maruellous workes of it, with so many examples of them that were there, that surely I gaue great credite vn∣to it, and they caused me to beleeue all that thereof I ha hearde, and gaue mee courage to experiment it, as I haue done, and as wee shall see in the maruelles, which wee shall write of it. And nowe we come to shewe the description, and forme of this Tree. The Tree from whence they cut this Wood,The descrip∣tion of this Tree. which they newly brought from the Florida, called Sassafras, is a Tree that groweth to bee very greate: there be of a middle sort, and lesser sorte. The greater sorte is of the bignesse of a Pine Tree, of a meane height, and well neere to the making of it, for it is straight, & casteth out no more but one branche of Bowes, after the manner of a Palme Tree, onely in the highest part, or sendeth out bowes after the maner of a Pine Tree, made cleane, making of the Bowes which it casteth forth, a forme of roundnes. It hath a grosse rinde of a Tawny colour, & vpon that an other thin rinde, of the colour of ashes, and vpon the inner parte thereof, the Trees and bowes be white, and neere like to Tawny. The tree and bowes are ver light, the rinde beeing tasted, hath an excellent sweete smell, and it is somewhat like to the smell of Fenell, with much sweetenesse of taste, and of pleasaunt smell, insomuche that a little quantity of this Wood being in a chamber, fil∣leth the ayre conteined in it, and the rinde hath some sharp∣nsse
of tst▪ the inner part hath little smell, the higher part that cotyneth the bowes hath leaues, the which be green, after the umer of a Figge tree, with three poyntes, an when they are little, they be like to the leaues of a Peare tree, in onely shewing theyr poyntes. They be of collour a sade Greene, and of a sweete smell, and muche more when they be drie. The Indians vse to lay them beaten or stampe vpon brises, or when any man is beaten with drie blowes, and being dried they are vsed in Medicinable thinges. They lse no their leanes, they are alwayes greene, if any doe dry and fall, there springeth other, it is not knowen that it hath any flowre or fruite. The rootes of this Tree be grosse, or slender, conforma∣bly to the greatenesse of the Tree,The rootes. they bee light, but not so much as the body of the Tree, and the bowes, but for the greatnesse it is notable light. Note.The roote of this Tree is very superficiall, spreading in the vpper face of the soyle or grounde,  so they dygge them vp easily: and this is a common thing in the Tree of the Indias, tha moste of them haue their rootes of small depth, and if they carry any plants from Spayne to plante elsewhere, if they do not set them of smal depth in the ground, they beare no fruite. The best is the roote.The best of all the Tree is the roote, and that woorketh the best effect, the which hath the rinde cleauing very fast to the inner part, and it is of colour Tawnie, and muche more of sweete smell then all the tree, and his Braunches: the rinde tasteth of a more sweete smell, then the tree, and the water being sodden with the roote, is of greater and better effects, then of any other parte of the tree, and it is of a more sweete smell, and therefore the Spaniardes vse it, for that it woorketh better and greater effectes. It is a tree that groweth neere vnto the Sea, and in temperate places, that haue not much drouth, nor moysture. There be
Mountaynes growing full of them, and they caste foorth a most sweet smel, so that at the beginning when they saw thm first, they thought that they had beene trees of Cinamon, and in parte they were not deceiued, for that the rinde of thi tree ath as sweete a smell, as the Cinamon hath, and doth imitate it in colour and sharpnesse of tast, and pleasantnesse of smell, and so the water that is made of it,The Sssa∣fras as good a the Cina∣mon. is of most sweete smell and taste, as the Cinamon is, and procureth the same workes and effects as Cinamon doeth. The tree groweth in some partes of the Florida, and not in others, for that it is in the porte of Saint Elen, and in the Port of Saint Mathew, and not in any other partes: but when the Souldiers did waxe sicke,The cmpl∣ction & tem∣perature of the tree. in places where this tree grew not, either they carried them to bee healed to the sayde places, or they sent them the trees, or their Rootes chiefly, and therewith did heale them. The best of the tre is the roote, & fter them the bowes, and nexte the tree, and the best of all is the rindes. The complection and tempera∣ture of the tree and of his bowes, is hot & drie in the seconde degree, the rinde is somewhat more hot then the rest, for that it entreth into the thirde degree, of heate, and drieth, and this is manifestly seene in the water▪ and so they tha shall neede of it, must procure to haue the rootes or bowes, which haue the rinde, for that which is without it, doth no woorke so good effectes. The name of this Tree, as the Indians terme it, i cal∣led Pauane, and the Frenche Men call it Sassafras.The name. I knowe not wherefore our Spaniardes call it after the same manner, beeyng taughte by the Frenche Men, al∣though that some doe corrupte it, and call it Sassafragia, by the name that we haue from thence, & they of these partes doe call it Sassafras. The vse of the Roote,The vse y seething. or of the Wood of this Tree the which we haue treated of heere, is by the way of see∣thing,
& in this forme the Indians did shew it to the French men, and they vnto vs: and as the Indians haue neither weight nor measure, they haue not kept in those partes any order in the making of the water of this wood, for that they doe no more there than put a peece of the wood, or of the root at their discretion made in peeces, into the water as they doe thinke best. And they seeth it after their maner, without con∣suming more quantitie, then when they see that the seething is sufficient:Variety of seething. so that all they which haue come from those partes, are very variable in their manner of seething, which is no small confusion to them that shall vse it, and likewise to the Phisition that shall minister it. That which I do here∣in. I will write. I looke vpon the complection, and tempe∣rature of the sicke person,How the au∣thour doth order it. that shall take and vse this water, as also the manner and qualitie of the disease, and conforma∣bly I make the water, and geue it to the sicke person, geuing to the Cholerike lesse seething, and lesse quantity of Wood, and to the Flegmatike more seething, and more quanti∣tie of Wood, and to the Sanguine meanably: and so after this sorte too their infirmities, according too the qualities of them, for that if it bee not done according to this order, they cannot choose but make many errours in the vse of this water, and also it is conuenient that for the moe parte they keepe the vse of the diet & gouernment which is necessary for the disease which they pretend to cure. Let none thinke, that to take this water without order & good consideration, as many doeth, there shall followe health: but vnto them ra∣ther taking it without measure & without order, t shall do vn∣to them much hurt: wherby it seemeth to me that when this water shalbe ministred, as well in the diseases that it cureth, as in any other whatsoeuer they be, it is necessary that they goe to some learned Phisition, that may dispose the manner and making of the Water, and the order which they shall obserue in taking of it, for that in the Winter it shoulde bee
taken otherwise than in the Sommer. And otherwise it must be geuen to the leane person, than to the strong, and in an other manner it must bee taken of the Cholerike, than of the fleugmatike, & one order is required in the cold region, & an other order in the hot. Wherby it appeareth, that it is con∣uenient to keep order, measure, & forme in the taking of it, for that there goeth no lesse with it then health & life, cōsidering that we see it haue no price in the world, & not to let it alone to the iudgement of him that knoweth it not. It happened to a gentle woman,Historie. vnto whom for certaine idispositions of the Mother, proceeding of greate colde that she had taken, I coūselled her that she should take this water of the wood of Sassafras. And I gaue her the order that shee should vse, in making and taking of it, which was asmuch as was conuenient for her disease, and seeming for her. But she tooke muche of the wood, more then I willed her, & seething the water more then I commaunded her, she thought that she should heale the sooner. And as shee tooke it certayne dayes with this strength, she was burdened in such sort with a very great Ague, that not onely it stood her vpon to leaue the wa∣ter, but it was needefull to let her blood fiue times, and put her life in aduenture, & so procured infamy to the reme∣die. After she was whole, and had preuayled, she returned & tooke the water with the order that I had first tolde her, and she healed very well of her disease. It is time nowe that wee come to the vertues of this wood so excellent, whereof let vs speak particularly of euery one of them, as we haue knowne, and experimented them. In generall our Spaniardes in those partes of the Flo∣rida, where they haue beene and now are,Te vertues thereof. doe vse this afore∣saide water sodden at their discretion, for all manner of dis∣seases, without making exception of any. An beeyng sicke of any manner of euill which commeth vnto thm, sharpe, or long, hot, or colde, greeuous or otherwise, they ure them all by one maner of fashion, & they heale all with oe maner of
water, without making any difference, and the best is that al be healed therewith, & in this they repose so much trust, that they feare not the euils which are present, nor haue any care of them that be to come, & so they vse it for an vniuersal reme∣die, in all manner of diseases. In one of the thinges that they haue founde moste profite in this water,It healeth opilations. was in Opilations, in the interiour partes, of the which they came to bee swolne, and to bee full of the Dropsie the most parte of them. For of the long and large heates which they had taken, they came well neere ge∣nerally to haue these diseases. And with this water both the swelling and the opilation went away, and therewith they came to be made whole of the Quotidian Agues, which the most parte of them had. For in goyng thither the most parte of them fell sicke, of these long and importunate Fe∣uers, in the which I haue experience by this Water, be∣yng taken as it ought too bee, for it woorketh maruellous effectes, and haue healed many therewith. For the principall effect that it hath,It comfor∣teth the Li∣uer and the stomake, and doth disopi∣late. is to comfort the Liuer, and to dissolue Opilations, and to comfort the stomake, which are the two principall thinges, that are most conuenient for the Phisiti∣on to doe, that the sick may be healed of the like diseases. For in these euils it is not to be feared that the humors be corrup∣ted. And if the principal members be hurt, one of the things that these medicines which are brought from our Indias do principally, when the water of any of them is taken, is to comfort the Liuer, and to amende it, that it may ingen∣der good humors, for if this be not done, the cure is in vaine. And so our Sassafra hath a maruellous propertie, to comfort the Liuer, and to dissolue the Opilations, in such sort that it doth ingender alowable blood. I healed  young man which had an opilation of cer∣tyne Tertians.Hstorie. And thereof he was all swolne, in such sort that he was well neere full of Dropsie And with purging
him many times with Pilles of Ruibarbe, and by taking of Dialaca amongest the said Purgations, and drinking the water of this Sassafras, cōtinually without drinking of any o∣ther thing, he came to be healed very well, and was cleere of his swellings, and opilations. And he did not let to drinke it vntill he remayned perfectly whole. The manner of curing with this water made of the Sas∣safras, for the Tertian Agewes & long Feuers, I will shewe you, and what hath passed in this yeere, that I wrote this. There haue beene many people diseased with the tertiane A∣gewes, so importunately, that no manner of medicine was sufficient to take them away, and to roote them out, insomuch that we let many alone, with onely good order, and good go∣uernment, without helping them any more. They were opila∣ted, and had euill colour of the face, and some of them were swolne. And at that time it was, when the Captayne generall Peter Mellendis came from the Florida,Peter Mel∣lendis. and brought him in common, this wood of the Sassafras, and when euery man did so much prayse it, many of them that had Tertians, tooke water of the Sassafras, keeping the order that the Souldiers gaue them, and surely I saw in that greate maruelles, for that they healed many with the vse thereof. Not onely of the tertians that so much did molest them, but also of the Opila∣tions and euill colour that they had. And seeing this, I cau∣sed other to take it, that without counsel durst not doe it. And it did very wel with them, but it must be wel seene vnto how it shoulde bee geuen, and to whom, that the cause may carrie with it both order and measure. That which ordinarily was done, was to geue one cuppe full of the Water well sodden,How this wa∣ter must be guen. in the morning with Sugar or without it, and after to drinke the water conti∣nually, that which was more simple, then the firste, and as the Phisition shall iudge to be most conuenient for him that is sicke, keeping the conditions in the takyng of
this water that we shall speake of. And surely it is a thing that geueth great contentment to heale onely with the drinking of a water,Digression. it beyng of a sweete smel, and good of sauour which is taken, and drunk without any maner of griefe, and so to doe that woorke which sharpe medicines and sirupes of euill sauour and tast cannot doe. And such as did drinke wine, did water their wine with it, & thy found themselues well with it. In one thing it was seene greately to profite, which is in the vse of this water,To giue appe∣tite to eate. in them that haue lost the lust of their meate, insomuch that it is restored to them, & the lothsomnesse taken from them, by the vse of it, so that many did amende & come to their health quickely. And the vse of this water doth cause lust to meate. The Souldiers doe cōmend it with suche admiration, that some came to leaue it, and not to drinke it, for because that it caused them to haue so great hunger, that they coulde not withstand it. And because there was no suche abundance of meates wherwith they might satisfie their hun∣ger, which the water was cause of, they would not drinke it, as not hauing sufficient for their maintenaunce, for they did all vse it for a drinke in steede of wine, and it was a great re∣medie for them, that by it they became whole, as appeareth by them which came from those partes whereas they doe vse it. In the Hauana there is a Phisition, whom they take for a Man of good vnderstanding in these causes,How a Phisi∣tion of the Hauana doth vse it. who did cure many of them which came in the Fleete from the newe Spayne sicke, with onely the vse of this water, without ge∣uing or making for them any other Medicine. And it did very well with them, for that many were healed there∣with, and he gaue them to drinke as much as they would, all the day, and at Dinner and Supper, and in the morning he gaue a Cuppe full warmed, to them that coulde not goe to stoole with a little Sugar not very white, and it wrought very well with them, for their going to stoole. And to other
he gaue Medicines of this water only and Hony, & it made a good worke. I cured heere some that were in cure in the Hauana. And being ordered in this maner, they which came not wel healed thence, were heere fully healed. In griefes of the head, and in paines thereof being very olde, which proceed of any cold cause,In the had∣ache. the taking of this wa∣ter hot in the morning wel sodden, and at dinner and supper, and in the day tyme simple with good gouernement as well in the meate that is eaten, as in the rest of all other thinges, and doing this for many dayes, it cureth and healeth them maruellously. It is conuenient for him that shal do this, that he purge himself first, and in the tyme that hee must take it, that he receiue certaine Pilles of Hiera simplex, & he hath no need to keepe himselfe close neither in his chamber, nor in his bedde. He that shal take this, it is ynough that he go wel clothed, and that he keepe himselfe from the colde and ayre, and that he vse to eate good meates. In griefes of the brest caused of colde humors, this wa∣ter doth profite much, and openeth the waies of the brest.In euils of the brest. It consumeth moysture and fleames, it stayeth the fluxe, & the running which cometh from the head to the brest. It must be taken in the morning hot, and drinke continually simple, for besides the ordinary drinking in the morning, it must bee drunke simplie for a long tyme. For these simple waters as they doe their worke by little and little, so it is needful that they be continued for a long season. It is good that there be put some suggar too it, that it may make the better woorke. In griefes of the Stomacke when the cause is colde or windie, after that the vniuersal euacuations bee made,In griees of the Stomake. ta∣king this water in the morning strong, & as it is sid simple, at other tymes, it taketh them away and healeth them, chiefly if there bee any olde griefe, for that I haue giuen it for this effect, to men that many yeeres did suffer most grie∣uous paynes in the stomacke, and with taking the water in
the morning hot for certaine dayes, and continuing with the simple water for a long tyme, and taking once euery weeke pilles of Hiera simplex, many people were healed therof ve∣ry wel. And thus we haue declared howe that the vse of this water restoreth the appetite lost, and giueth lust to meate. In the weakenes of the stomacke, and in the lacke of na∣tural heate,For the weak¦nes of the Stomake of them which do not disgest their meate, and for them which do vo∣mit their meate. In the griefe of the Stone. where that which is eaten is not consumed, it worketh great effectes, and helpeth digestion. It consumeth windes, which are the cause of indigestion, it taketh away a stinking breath, and from them that do vomit their meate, it taketh away that euil custome, so that they eate little, and vse continually to drinke this water without wyne. And a∣boue al other thinges, it maketh a good breath, and a good smel at the mouth. In the disease of the stone of the Ridneis and reines, the vse of this water hot when they haue this griefe, doth great∣ly profit, and much more vsing it continually simple by it self, or with wine, for that it doeth preserue that the paine come not so continually nor so grieuously. And also it maketh him that doeth vse it, to cast out much Sande, where the stones bee ingendred.It causeth to cast out gra∣uel & stones. And also it causeth the stones that are in the reynes to be cast out, and staieth the ingendering of them, for that it consumeth the fleames, of the which they be prin∣cipally ingendered, and the windes that be many tymes the causes of the paines. For whome the vse of this water is not conueni∣ent. Of the wood for the stone.To them which haue the burning of the Urine, & to such as haue great burning at the tyme that they make their wa∣ter, doe feele great heat, vnto such is not conuenient the vse of this water, for bicause it is hot. Al such should vse of that wood, which I haue written of in the first part of this Historie, which is excellent, for such as suffer the lyke burninges and paines. For the stones and sandes, for al such euils comming of heate, the work is mer∣uellous that it doeth, sauing that if there bee any stone in the
Bladder, from which place proceedeth the lyke burning, for in such a case none of these waters doe take effect: but on∣ly the Surgions Raser when the Stone is greate, is that which doeth profite, as I haue seene in many. And whyle it is sayd it is a stone, it is no stone, death hath come vnto them that had it, whome if they had beene opened in time, might haue liued many yeres, as we haue seene in diuers of sixtie yeres and more who haue bin opened, and liued vntill they came to eighty yeres and more. And I aduertise you, that this wood, which I call of the Uryne, and the stone, doeth make the water blewe,The wood of the Vrine wil make the water blewe. for if it doe not make the water blewe, it is not the right wood. And now they bring a wood, which maketh the water yel∣lowe, and this is not it which doeth profite, but that which maketh the water blewe, and this hath the couetousnesse of them caused, that bring it, because they haue seene that it is wel solde in this citie, for the manifest profites that it doeth, in these griefes of the Urine, by tempering the Reines, and the Liuer, and procuring many other benefits, & they bring of all the wood that they finde, and sell it for wood of the stone. The same hath happened in the Mechoacan, which when it came to be worth twentie Ducates the pounde, they laded so much from thence of it, some not being rype, other not being right, that when it is come hither, it woorketh not the effect, that th good and wel seasoned ws wont to doe. Wherefore it is needfull to see to that which is taken, that it bee the same, and that it bee well seasoned.alse Me∣choacan. That which is very whyte, is not such as the yellowe is, in myne opinion, for that which is yellowe, wee see that it mketh the better woorke: it may bee that the ve∣ry whyte is not of it, or hath not the perfection that the good hath. And comming to our water of Sassafras,It prouoeth Vners. it pro∣uoketh Urine, it maketh them to Uryne well, which haue the impediment of it, chiefly if it come by humors of cole
causes. I did knowe a Priest, which came in this flete from the Florida, who being in those parts, did make water very euil, and cast from him stones, some tymes with very much griefe, and some of them did put him in hazard of his life, & when hee was in the Florida, as hee dranke of the water of Sassafras ordinarily, as many other did in the place of wyne: hee auoided many great & smal stones, without any paines, and after that hither vnto hee hath founde himselfe whole, and very well of this euill, by drinking the simple wter of this wood ordinarily, and watering his wye therewith. Many doe drinke of this water for the same purpose, and they cast out much Sande, and doe finde themselues cured therewih. In thē which be lame.In them that bee lame or creeples, and in them that are not able to goe, nor to moue themselues, as for the most part that infirmitie commeth of colde humours: by taking this water hot in the morning, and procuring sweate all that hee can, eating things of diet, and drinking the simple water continually, and vsing it many dayes: wee haue seene many healed. And it is to bee noted, that in taking of this water, there is nothing to bee obserued, as in other waters: but when they shal take it hotte, if any sweate come, to keepe it, and after this they may ryse and goe well clothed: it is not needefull of any thing els, but of this and good order, and to eate good meates, and if they sweate not, it maketh no greate matter, but if they sweate not, they shalbe healed: I knowe a Captaine, one of them which came from the Florida: and hee certified mee that hee was so weake in all his body, that his Soldiours carried him vppon their shoulders, for that in any other manner he coulde not stirre, and hee was in a place where the tree of Sassafras was not, and he sent for it and toke the water, and therewith sweate for certaine dayes, and afterward he tooke it simply, and hee was restored to his perfect health, and I did see him whole, and well.
In the toothache, this wood beeing broken and chewed with the tooth that is grieued,In the tooth∣ach. and leauing that which is chewed in the hole of the tooth, which is grieued, if it haue any hollownesse, and although that it haue none, yet it ta∣keth away the paines meruellously, with experience done vpon many. In the euil of the Poxe,In the euil of the Poxe. it worketh the same effectes that the rest of the waters, of the holy wood, the China, and the Sarcaparillia doeth: taking it as these waters bee taken with sweates, putting vp more or lesse, the decoction of the water, and the quantitie of the wood, as the complexion is, and the disease of him that shall take it. For that in colde humours Flegmatike, it maketh a better woorke, then in them that bee Cholerike: and so in the Poxe that bee of a long tyme, it maketh a better and greater woorke, than in them that be of smal continuance: and more where there bee knobbes, and moisture of matter, & old griefes of the head, with the order as is aforesayd.The simple water. And in these euils the simple water is continually taken for a great tyme, and it worketh greate effectes, chiefly in them that bee leane, which be al∣together weakened & debilited, with the vse of many Medi∣cines. Many which haue the Gout, haue vsed, and doe vse to drinke of the Water of this tree,In thē which haue the gout and the euil o the Ioyntes. some of them taking it hotte, as wee haue sayde, and others simple continually by it self, and watering their wyne therewith. That which I haue seene, is that which in the olde kinde of Goutes, doeth neither good nor euil, and if it doe any good, it is to comfort the stomacke, and to dissolue wininesse, & to giue them some lust to their meate, & the rest of the benefite that it bringeth, is to them that hue bin sicke but short time, if the cause pro∣ceede of cold, vnto whome it procureth notable profite, but if the humour and cause be hot, it doth them no good, but hur∣teh them, inflming and causig them to haue greater paynes.
In one thing I haue seene it in many people to bring no∣table profit, with the continual vse of this water, and it is in them which haue foule diseased handes,For them that haue foule handes. which cannot exer∣cise them, as they were wont to doe. I healed a Gentleman which could not write, that when he went to write, his hande fell downe by little and little, and the penne also, after hee had begon to write not past fiue or sixe letters. And hee toke a Cuppe full of that, which was last sodden in the morning, and after he dranke it, hee continued twoo houres in his bedde, and after he rose and went about his businesse. And he did eate at his dinner good meates, and at his Supper vsed diet, and dranke the simple water of the self same Sassafras, and he was healed very wel: hauing spent a great somme of money on Phisitions and Medicines, which did not profite him any thing, vntil he came to be remedied in the order as is aforesaide. The water ht maketh a man goe to the stoole.Many did certifie mee that, which nowe I finde by ex∣perience, and learned of them that were sicke in the Haua∣na, and could not goe to the stoole, that the Phisition which is there, did cause them to take in the morning fasting a good Cuppe full hotte of the water of the Sassafras, and it did soften the belly, and they went to the stoole very well, which we haue seene heere to bee true by experience. And there was a Soldiour which certifed mee, and prooued it, with others of his companie,For the going to the stoole by indigestiō. that hauing stooles by indis∣gestion and rawnesse of stomacke, for want of heate, it tooke them away, with taking of one good cupfull of this water euery morning fasting, and so with drinking it continually, but that which he dranke euery morning, he dranke it cold, and yt neuerthelesse hee was healed very well of the flixe, which he had many yeeres.I the euil of Wn. The eull o the Mohr & . I griefes of women the water of Sassafras doeth great∣ly profite, and in especially in that which is called the euil of the Mother: and where there is windinesse, it consumeth & disseth it, and also any maner of colde of the bely, and it
dissolueth the swelling of it, curing any manner of disease which proceedeth of the Mother. And this is so experimen∣ted, and so put in vse, that many haue beene healed with this water, that neuer thought to haue recouered health. And in the withhelding the Monethly course that commeth, not to women, this water maketh a meruellous woorke, by prouo∣king and making it come in them that wholie doe lacke it,In stopping the courses of Women. taking one Cuppe ful of this water in the morning: & drin∣king it ordinarily at dinner, and at supper, and in the day tyme being more simple, then that in the morning, vsing good regiment, and dooing other thinges which may helpe the water, that it may bee prouoked. And vnto them also to whome it doeth not come wel, it bringeth manifest profite, taking the water in forme as is aforesaide, keeping them the tyme that they take it, from such thinges as may of∣fende them: and beeing vsed it doeth disopilate, and make a good colour in the face, as it is seene by the experience of them that doe vse it, hauing need of it. Let them beware if they haue much heate, or bee of a hotte complexion,Where as i much heate this water i not conueni∣ent. in such case let them moderate the quantitie of the wood, and the seething of the water, as is conuenient, and this is easie to be done, by seing howe it goeth with them at the beginning, with the vse of it, and according thereunto they may ryse or fal, as it seemeth to be necessarie. Some women doe vse of this water, for to make them with childe,To mae wo∣men with childe. and in some it hath wrought the effect as it is wel knowen. That which I can say, is that a gentlewoman, beeing many yeeres married, without hauing children, tooke this water, for that her husbande vsed it for certayne euilles of Opilations, and of an agewe that helde hm, with certayne sittes of a double tercian which he had, and hee continued with the taking of it in the Morning hotte, and at Dinner simple, and at Supper, and in the day tyme, keeping a good gouernement, whereby it came to passe,
that she was with childe, and brought foorth a sonne. And I vnderstande, that one of the principall vertues that this water hath,Note. is to dryue away the Mother for this effect, for the most parte of women that haue no children, is for the greate colde that is ingendered within the Mother, which doeth hinder the cause of generation, and as the wa∣ter ryseth it consumeth it, comforting the place and dissol∣uing the windes, that are the let of it: I am sure that it will manifestly profite, as we haue seene in them which doe not bring forth childrē, for hauing too much heate and drieth, to whome permit not the vse of this water, for because it will not profite them, and if they do take it and feele hurt thereof, let them not put the fault in the water, but in their complexi∣ons, seing that it is not conuenient for them. This water doeth make fatte.The vse of this water doeth make fatte, and this is cer∣tainly knowen, for we haue seene many leane and sicke, that haue taken it, and haue healed of their euils, and haue reco∣uered much more flesh, & better colour, as those people that come from the Florida, do praise it very much: & they they al say, that the vse of this water doeth make fat, and it happe∣neth so to many, and not onely it healeth them of their disea∣ses, but also maketh thē remaine with a good colour. And so it seemeth by thē that come from that country, for that they come al fatte, and of a good colour, who I beleeue as they wre very sick, so that they were very leane & yellow, when as they were healed of their infirmities which they had, they gathered fleshe, and became of a good colour, ingendering in the Liuer good blood, by the which the members were etter maintayned, than when they were sicke. And surely it i a greate thing that this water shoulde woorke this effect, cosidering that it is hot and rye, if it were not for the cau∣ses that are aboue sayd. And I haue seene many that entered i, to tae the water of the wood, leane, and with an euil colour, to come foorth strong and fatte, and of a good
colour, eating no oter thing then Resnges, Almondes, and Bisket. In pestilent and contagious diseases, which we haue seen▪In Pstiln and corru ayes. in the time of the Pestilence past, there were many that desi∣red to drinke it, to preserue them from that euill. And we did see that none of them which vsed it, were wounded of the disease, that then reigned. Many did vse to carry a peece of ye Roote of the Wood with them to smell to it continually, as to a Pomander. For with the smell so acceptable it did re∣ctifie the infected ayre: I carried with mee a peece a great time, and to my seeming I found great profite in it. For with it & with the chewing of the rind of the Cidron nor of the Lemmon in the morning, and in the day time, to preserue health it hah a great strength and property. And it seemeth to me, that I was deliuered by the helpe of God from the fire, in the which wee that were Phisitions went in, blessed be our Lord GOD that deliuered vs from so great euill, and gaue vs this most excellent tree called Sassafras, which hath so great vertues, and worketh such maruellous effectes as we haue spoken of, and more which Time wil shewe vs, which is the discouerer of all thinges. It shall doe well to shewe the quantitie of the wood, and also the quantitie of wa∣ter, wherein it shall be sodden, & to prescribe a rule in waight and measure, in effectes, and temperatures, for them that are hot, and others that are colde. I will tell you the order that ought to bee kept in ta∣ing the water of this excellent wood,How  wa∣ter ought to be ma in generall. which must bee made conformably to the disease of him that shall take it, and ac∣cordin to the quantitie and compexion of the sicke bodie. For vto the Cholerike Person the water ought to bee ge∣uen lesse sodden, and with lesse quanitie of wood, and to the flegmatike more sodden and with more quantitie, of woode. So the diseases should be considered of. Uto them that are very cold the water ought to be geuen more sodden and with more quantitie of Wood. And vnto them tht
be not so cole, but doe participate of some heate: the water ought to be geuen lesse sodden, & with lesse quantity of wood. The like shall be done in the hot or cold times, & in the age of the person, or the most causes making to this respect and pro∣portion. And for the more light, I will here set downe the ma∣ner how this water ought to be vsed, the which shall serue to shew how that they may rise or fal therein, cōformably to the opinion which shall seeme good to euery one. For in these in∣firmities that be very cold, they must set vp the water in quil∣lates, both in seething and also in quantity of the wood. And in the diseases that are not so colde, or that doe participate of any heate, they must set the water lower, in Quillats, see∣thing it lesse, & putting in lesse wood, the maner and order of the preparing it is this. You shall choose the freshest wood that may be had, and that which hath a rynde.The maner to make it in particular. For that wood which hath not the rinde, is not good, nor taketh effect, you must procure that it be of the roote, for that is the best of the tree for these ef∣fects and cures, and for the diseases which we haue spoken of. And if in case there be no roote, then the bowes are the best that growe in the higher part of the Trees, and in case the bowe lacke, then is the tree good, & if so be that the one and the other haue the rinde of the roote, let there be taken lesse in quantity therof, & more of the bowes, & much more of the tree, which must be double to the quantitie of the roote. Nowe let vs speake of the bowes as of a thing in the middest, be∣tweene the roote and the tree, beeyng that which continu∣ally they doe bring, of the which you shall take halfe an Ounce, and cut it as small as may be. And it must be put into three Pottelles of water in a newe Earthen pot,The order ho to make the strong water. and there lie a steeping two howres: and after it must bee sodden at a fire of Coales, vntill the two partes bee con∣sumed, and te one remyne. And after it is colde, let it be strayned and kepte in a glassed vessell,The imle watr. and vpon those small cuttinges of wood that haue beene already sodden, let there
be poured other three Pottels of water, and let it seeth vntil halfe a Pottell bee consumed, and no more, after that it is colde, let it be strayned and kept in a glassed vessell. Let the first water be taken in the morning fasting, halfe a Pint hot, and then keepe your selfe warme, and procure sweate, then change your selfe into hot clothing, and wipe your selfe from the sweate. And eate of a Hen rosted, & dry fruite, and Con∣serua, and drinke of the second water at Dinner and Sup∣per, and in the day time. And then rise and goe well clothed, and flie from all things which may offend you. And at night make a light Supper, and eate drie fruite and Conserua, but eate no flesh at night, and drinke of the second water. And this you may doe for as many dayes as you finde your selfe greeued: and if you finde your selfe well with the vse of this water taken in this maner, proceed forward vntill you be whole, & if not, then cōtinue in taking of the strong water euery third day, & drink of the simple water cōtinually. After this order it may be geuen in all diseases, that we haue trea∣ted of, and it will profite. But many will not submit them∣selues to this labour, which truely is the best of all others, & that which is most conuenient. They may make he simple water in this forme. Let there be taken halfe an ounce of the wood, little more or lesse, with the conditions aforesaide,The smpe water. and let it be made in∣to small peeces, and seeth it in three Pottels of water, vntill halfe be sodden away, rather more then lesse. And of this water you may drinke continually, at Dinner and at Sup∣per, and in the day time, and surely taken in this order it doeth and hath done mauellous woorkes, and moste greae Cures, in long diseases, and importunate, taking it and eeping a good gouernemnt in yur Meate and other thinges prohibited. And howsoeuer it bee, beyng drunke so simple, it procureth great profite. They that cannot forbeare te drinking of wine, may water their wine therewih,
for it will rather make it of a better tast and sweetnesse, for this water hath a most sweete smell, and tast, and aboue all, it worketh maruellous effectes, as we haue seene and do see in diuers and sundrie diseases, in the which ordinary remedies of Phisicke doe not profit, with the greate examples which we haue hereof. Note.And it is to be considered, that principally it doeth profite in longe and colde diseases, and where there is wyndines, & other euils, that run this course, which shalbe knowne foorth∣with by him that shall haue need of it, & vse it. And one thing is to be vnderstoode, that vsing it in the order as is aforesaid, although that he which taketh it haue no neede thereof, it can doe him no hurte, but rather if it be well considered, it wil ma∣nifestly profite him in the time that he shall take it, yea, al∣though he leaue the taking of it when he seeth that he findeth not the profite which hee desireth, nor that it hath done him any hurt or harme during the time that hee hath ta∣ken it.
CARLO SANCTO ¶ Of the Carlo Sancto, a roote brought from the new Spaine. THey bring from the newe Spayne within this three yeeres a mauellous roote & of great vertues,The roote of Carlo San∣cto. which is called Carlo Sancto, the which a fa∣ther of S. Francis order dis∣coured and published in the prouince of Mechoacan, be∣yng taught by an Indian of that countrie that was verie wise in such thinges, and a man of greate xperience, in the vertues of them. In the firte parte wee haue de∣claed that there bee many Medicinadle Hares, which haue greate secretes, and vertues.Where it groeth▪ This ur Carlo San∣cto groweth in that Prouince, in places which are vrie
tmperate, which e not drie nor ver moyst. The forme and figure thereo is like to our wilde Hop of Spaine,The rme . for it crrieth a Lease as they doe, and it rnnth vp by any oter ting that is neere vnto it, and if it haue nothing to leae vto, then it ceepeth all along vppon the grounde: the co∣lor is a sadde grene, it carieth neither flowe nor frut, the smell that it hath is little,The colr. The sm. and acceptable to some. Out of the Roote srigeth a grosse tree, and it casteth foorth other Rootes of the greatnesse of a finger: it is white in colour,The rote. and hath a Rinde which falleth from the inner parte, the hearte of it is meruellously wrought: for it is com∣pounded of certayne small boordes very thinne,The heart is marueus. and they may be deuided by one and one, the roote hath a pleasant smell, and beeyng chewed, it hath a notable bitternesse, wih some sharpnesse of tast:Te vertue is in the rine of the rote. this roote hath his vertue in the Rinde. In the ships that he now come, there cme the satin: pe of it, and now there is more knowledge of the vertues terof then before there was. Many of them that came in this fleee from the newe Spayne, doe speake much good of this roote. But he that speaketh most of it, is a Gentleman that came from Mechoacan, & brought a good quantity of it with him. That as he reporteth, & also what we haue experimented of it, we wil speake of, and also of the complection and tempe∣raure thereof, which is hot, & drie, in the first part of the se∣cond degree. .The principall effect that this Roote doth profite in, is in mes and runninges of the head, for it causeth them to floe out of the mouth, and ringeth them from the head, y  a little of the Rind of the Roote, a good time, but it  be tken in te moring fasting, & it boydeth out much ,  hmors from ye head, that would go to the stomae,  othe partes, but before this be done, it is conuenient, that  be purged.. hat chew it, wich can easly vomite, doe vomite
with chewing of it, & it causeth them to cast out much Cho∣ler and fleume, and much more it maketh them vomite, if they take the decoction of it, for it maketh the humour to come vp, which is in the stomake with much easinesse. The rooe comforteth the stomake, and also the gummes by chew∣ing of it, and it fortifieth the teeth,It comforteth the teeth, , & keepe them from worme ea∣ting. In diseases of women it prouoketh Purgation. It dissolueth windes and comforteth the stomake, and doeth preserue them from woormes, and that they rotte not, nor corrupt. It maketh a good smell in the mouth, and because it is bitter, it is conuenient after that you haue chewed it, that you wash your mouth with wine, that the bitternesse may be taken away. In the infirmities of women chiefly, where opilations are, and lacke of purgation, the pouder of the rynde of the Roote doeth dissolue them, and taketh them away, and ma∣keth their purgation to come downe well with the vse there∣of. It must be taken with wine, or with water, sodden with Coriander, and Cinamon, which they must drinke, whiles they doe take it: it dissolueth windes, and comforteth the stomake, whiles they vse it, they must annoynt their Bel∣lie with the oyle of Liquide Amber, and Dialtea of equall partes, and first they must bee purged, and take heede that they keepe all good order, and good gouernment. In the euils of the hearte,In the euill of the hearte. chiefly beeyng ioyned with the Mother, the saide pouders and the water sodden with the rynde of the Roote, doe woorke very greate effectes. They must take the pouder in the order as is aforesaide: and the weight of twelue pence of the roote, cut small and sod∣den in one Pottell and a halfe of water, vntill halfe bee sod∣den away: and then they must cast into it the waight of two shillinges of the ryndes of Cidrous beeyng rie, and the weight of twelue pence of Cinamom made in pouder, and geue it certayne seethinges with them, and then strayne it: and they must take euery morning a small vessl of sixe Ounces of this seething with Sugar, because it is some∣what
what bitter, or without it as you please: and it is to be noted, that before you begin to vse it, you must make the vniuersall euacuations, which shall be conuenient. This Gentleman sayeth which brought this Roote, tat it profiteth muche, in the disease of the Poxe,In the euill of e Poxe. taking it in Pouder, or the seething of it: which I haue not ex∣perimented, for that wee haue so many remedies for this euill, that wee haue made no experience thereof: he saith that it is to be taken without keeping, more, then when they be taking the water, or pouder, and that then they keepe good order and good gouernment in their meates, and in all other thinges. In the falling sicknesse, a strong disease, and well neere incurable, they say that it hath a great propertie, and wor∣keth greate effectes:In the falling sickenesse. taking the pouder of the rinde of the roote, with wine or with water, as is most conuenient for him that shall take it. I counselled one heere, who was more then fourtie yeeres of age, and had had it of long time, to take it, and hitherto he hath not felte more then to vomite with the pouder, when he taketh it, and he casteth vp much Choler, and his faintnesse is not so great as it was wont to be. It seemeth to me, that it cannot take it away. For it shoulde worke that effect in them, that doe not passe twenty and fiue yeeres, who vnto that time haue remedy. I will proue it vp∣pon such: it woulde be no little good, that it might worke the effect that is spoken of it. In griefes of the Head, they vse this roote in those partes,In griefes of the head. as a great and sure remedy. I will tell what hath passed. The first time that I sawe this roote, was in the power of one which was sicke, who came from Mexico, and he brought it for a greate thing, saying: that he healed there with and tooke away the paynes of the head, which he had certayne dayes, and he asked me if that he shoulde vse it. I tasted of the roote, and it seemed to me as I haue sayde,
and I counselled him that he shoul vse it, as they had willed him to doe in Mexico, and so he did chewe it in the morning, and it tooke away the paines of the head, which a long tyme had molested him. After this, a passenger tolde mee, which came in the Shippe, where the Gentleman was that brought a quanti∣tie of this roote, and he chewed it wel, & did disfleume there∣with, and immediatly it tooke away the payne, & he shewed me a little that remained therof, which was the same that I sawe, and since that, some haue vsed it, and it hath done very wel with them. In the toothache, they that haue brought it into Spaine do much esteeme of it.In the tooth∣ache. And being in the lodging where this man was which brought the roote, the host of the house cer∣tified me, that hauing the toothache very grieuous, it tooke it away from him with chewing the rinde of the roote, on the same side where the tooth was which grieued him, disfleming therewith as much as he could. And I being one day in the Custome house curing a Genoues which was there, an other of the same Nation complained vnto mee of the toothache, and wee caused to be brought some of the said Roote, and in the presence of as many as were there, hee chewed the rinde of this roote, hauing very greate paynes, and he auoyded much Fleume, and in disfleming it began to take away the paynes, and before he went from thence hee was throughly cured. Certaine dayes past I had a grief in one tooth, so that it pained me all one Night, and parte of one day, and I gathered in a garden which I haue in my house, crtaine leaues of Tabaco, and also the aforesaid roote, and I chewed both together, and disfleumed, and the paines went from me, and returned no more to me, being more then sixe monethes after I was payned therewith. This is the effect, that I haue obtayned of this Carlo Sancto, which being so little tyme knowen, is sufficient. The tyme will discouer the rest, and as wee shal vnderstande more of it, so
so wee wil giue notice thereof. Of Beades, which bee called the Beades of Sainct Elen. The Beads of the rootes of sainct Elen.FRom the Florida they bring certayne rounde Rootes which are called the Beades of Sainct Elen. And they take this name by reason that they grow in a place of that Country that is so called: they are greate large Rootes, deuided into seueral peeces,The forme of them. and cuttinges, euery peece by it selfe, they remaine rounde as Beades, which be∣ing bored in the midst, they make of them Beads for to pray vpon, which the Souldiers do hang about their necks, for a thing of great estimation. They dry them, and they are as hade as a bone, on the outwarde part they are blacke, and within white, and the Rinde is ioyned in such sorte, that the harte and it is made alone, they are wrought after they bee dry, and this Roote beeing tasted, hath a sweete smel, with a good taste. And it seemeth by the taste that it is a kinde of Spyce, for it i lyke to Galanga, they are of the thickenesse of a mans thombe, somwhat lesse, the Plant hath a great stalke: the Bowes doe spread by the grounde,The lant. and cast out the leaues broade and greate, and very greene. It groweth
commonly in moyst places, the complexion thereof is hot in the ende of the second degree, and more drie the in th irt, th verues thereof are these. The Indians vse te hearbe beaten betweene to stnes hen they pretend to wash themselues, ubbing l their body with it: for they say that i kniteth their flh t∣gter, and comforteth them with his good smell. And this they doe for the most part euery day, for the great profit that they fnde in it. In griefes of the Stomacke, the Indians doe vse it,In griefe of the make. by taking the Pouder of it, and our Spaniads also take it, for the same purpose, receiuing it in wine, being grounde smal, of the which I haue seene notable experience in some. In the griefe of the Stone of the Ridneis or Reines, the Pouder of this Roote woorketh a knowen effect.In the rief of the tone in te  or eines. For that some haue taken this roote made into Pouder in wyne, ha∣uing the grief, and it hath taken it away. And I maruell not at al that his manifest quātitie is sufficient, to worke the like effectes. In griefes of the Uryne of them that cannot pisse wel,In griefes of the Vi. by taking the Pouder, it doth profite, and expel it. A thing v∣sed of many that haue come from those partes, for that they haue proued it in the lyke euilles, and here hath bin seene the same experience. And one that had a stone which he coulde not auoyde from him, vsed certaine dayes the pou∣der of this roote, and did easily auoyde the same. A ul∣dier brought Beades at his Necke, made of these rootes, and mt with me one day, and asked mee if I knew thoe Beades, and of what they were made, & he saide it was told him that they wre oote of Gentiana. But I declared vto him, that the des ere made of certayne rootes, that  of aint Elen, & that they were not made of Gentiana▪ ad then he tolde me great vertues of them,  te  vr rare that the vse of thē had wrougt hih I did beleeue: for it seemth well, in the roote that they hae
greate Medicinal vertues, according to their fashion, and sweete smell, and by that which I had experimented of them. ¶ Of the Guacatane. THey haue brought in these Shippes n hearbe from the newe Spayne that the Indians cal Guacatane,The descrip∣tion of the Guacatane. and it is lyke to our wilde tyme, sauing that it hath no smel, it is a litle hearbe, whitish, I know not whether it carry Flower or fruyte, the hearbe I haue without the roote: the name that it hath amongst the Indians, is as aforesaid, and the same name the Spaniardes also haue geuen it. The In∣dians doe vse it for their infirmities whereof we wil speake, and for the same the Spaniards doe vse it likewise there in the Indias, and they also which haue brought it hither, with notable profite. In the disease of the Piles.In griefe of the Pyles they vse it in this manner: they grinde or stampe the hearbe very small, and wash the Piles with wine, in the which there is sodden this hearbe,
and if there bee heate in them, they seeth it in water, & with that hot seething they wash them, and then they dry them softly, and cast the Pouder of this hearbe vpon them, & sure∣ly the effect that it worketh is maruellous. Thus after I saw the good efects therof, I much esteemed the hearbe. Whensoeuer you haue any griefe of colde or of windines in any parte of the body wheresoeuer it bee,In griefes of colde and windines. apply Turpen∣tine vnto all partes, wheresoeuer the griefe is, and cast the pouder of this hearbe being smal ground vppon it, and lay a Linnen cloth vpon that, that it may cleaue fast as a Plai∣ster, in such sorte, that it be not taken away, vntil the griefe bee gone. And of this there is manifest experience, by them of the Indias, and also by vs of Spayne. The pouder of this hearbe cast vpon lit∣tle sores, and especially in the se∣cret places doeth mundifie, and heale them.
Of a certaine kinde of Barley.
THey bring lykewyse from the newe Spaine, a kinde of Barley, which they cal smal Barley: they giue it this name, for the likenesse which it hath vnto our Barley: for it casteth out an eare like vn∣to it, and in the vaynes, the seede is shut, but it is different from it in qualities & vertues: for that this smal Barley, is the strongest poyson,It is most strong and mighty poy∣son. which at this day in hearbe, or plant hath beene seene, inso∣much that it woorketh the same effect, which Sublimatum doeth. And wheresoeuer it is needful to burne, or eate away dead or rotten flesh, putting the pouder of this seed thertoo, it wil doe the like worke that any burning Iron shal doe. It extinguisheth and killeth any canker, howe strong soeuer it bee, it killeth and expelleth Wormes,It killeth th Canker. It killeth wormes. wheresoeuer they bee, it eateth fleshe which is naught and rotten, taking it from the sores, and making them cleane from such euill fleshe. The Indians for that they had no Sublimatum, nor o∣ther remedies which wee haue,It eateth rotten flsh. when they shoulde vse the lyke, they had and haue this seede most strong, and surely so it is, and they doe vse it, as a remedy most strong, and of great efficacie. This pouder must bee layde too, by little and little, more or lesse,Howe it must be ministred. conformably to the greatnesse of the euil, applying things defensiue, which is vsed to be laid too, when as the lyke remedies are vsed. In olde sores and filthy, where it is needfull,In olde filthy sores where it is needful that they bee cleansed. that naughty rotten fleshe bee eaten away, with taking of this Seede, and grinding it, and dissoluing it well with water of Planten, or of Roses, weating in the cleare wa∣ter that shall remayne vppon it, some small clothes, or in place of the smal clothes, lint of fine Linen cloth, weate in the water, it cleanseth the sore, eating the euil fleshe in such sorte: for howe euill, olde, and filthy soeuer that the sore
bee, it leaueth it cleane, and being laide to the flesh, it doeth soder and heale them, and after this is done, you must vse the Medicines which haue vertue to ingender flesh. And the ef∣fect of this seede is no more then to mundifie, & make cleane, and to take away the superfluitie of the wounde. The self same effect that this seede worketh in vs, it wor∣keth in beastes also,In Beastes it woorketh the same effect, and better. which for the most part haue very euill sores, that bee cankered, and full of Wormes, the seede being laide vnto them, if the cause bee so great, that it doth requyre it: or the water of it, as it is sayde, maketh the lyke woorke, as wee haue spoken of, and better, vsing alwayes the defensiues as is conuenient, where such Medicines bee applyed, for that it is a Medicine most strong, and it hath neede of them all. I wil shewe you what happened to me with it. An Indi∣an brought me this seede with many other hearbes,Historie. and go∣ing about to discouer them and being come to this seede, I tooke a graine and put it into my mouth, to proue it. He that brought it, as one which knew it wel, kept back my hand, & would not suffer me to proue it: & for all that I parted with my teeth one graine, which is no greater then one grayne of hempe seede, but some deale lesser, and beareth some likenes of it: at the tyme that it came to the point of the tongue, the seede being parted, made me a blister vpon it, which dured with me certaine dayes: I commended it to the Deuil, and then I beleeued what they had certified me of it. I began to make experience of it, and it wrought more effectually then was spoken of it. It is hot in the fourth degree, and more if there be any more degrees. An hearbe which hea∣leth the euill o the brest. An hearbe which maketh a wo∣man to cast from her a dead childe. Two marul∣lous herbes.Also I haue an Hearbe which being sodde, and the water of it taken hot, healeth the euils of the brest: I know not the name of it, but in the remembrance of them which came, it was written. And an other which enforceth to cast out the dead childe of the belly: of thi the Indians haue great expe∣rience
for this effect, and once in these countries, it hath profited. They brought me two drie hearbes, which I would haue been glad to haue seene greene: the one of these being in the field in all his force, if a man or woman doe put their handes vpon him, forthwith he falleth downe dead vpon the ground. And the other lying abroade vpon the ground, in touching it to gather it, it shutteth it self together as a Cabadge of the Countrie of Murcia, Thinges meruellous, and of much con∣sideration. I haue blacke Eleboro, brought from the Prouince of Mechoacan, like to that of Spayne,Blacke Ele∣boro. and woorking the like effect. Certaine dayes past, a young man which tooke counsell of me, that came from the Prouice of Quito,Historie. and beeyng with me, there came vnto me a neighbour of mine, saying, that his daughter was verie sicke of the Flixe, and I had her in cure, and her disease increased with blood, requesting me that I shoulde goe to visite her. The Indian which was with me, asked me if they were stooles of blood, I said yea: and he sayd vnto me that he woulde geue her a thing, that beyng made into pouder and taken, woulde take them away forthwith, & that in the Prouince of Quito, it had been expe∣rimented many times. The Father of the sicke maiden, went with him to his house, and he gaue him certayne peeces of a fruite, which seemed to be of a greate tree: of the one parte they were very smooth, and of colour yeallowe, and of the other they were very sharpe and very redde, insomuch that they seemed of a purple colour. They were ground smal, and he gaue the pouder to the sicke womā, with the water of the hed of Roses, once that Euening, & an other time in the Morning, and immediatly the Flixe did cease, & from tha time waxed better, whereby she came to be whole. And as for the man I neuer saw him, after he gaue it to her▪
¶To the right Worshipfull, Maister Doctor Monardus, Phisition in Seuill. RIght worshipfull & famous Doctor, it will seeme a newe thing to your worship, that I being not learned, not of your profession, doe write to you in things of your faculty, being a Souldier that haue followed the warres in these Countries al my life: I haue done this, because I am affe∣ctioned to your worship, by reason of a book which you haue cōpiled of the medicines which are in these partes, & of the vertues & benefits, that by thē haue byn recey∣ued, which are so great that I cannot declare thē, as they deserue. And by means of your book we haue order how we should vse the remedies which we haue here, for be∣fore we did vse thē without rule or measure, so that ney∣ther they did work effect, nor with them the people were wel remedied, which now is to the cōtrary, & by meanes of your books, there hath been people remedied, that ne∣uer thought to haue had remedy nor health. It is more then 28. yeeres vnto this day, that I haue gone wādring by al these Indias, where are many things of those, which your worship doth write of in your book, & other things also which haue not byn brought thither, for bicause the Phisitions that come to these parts, are nothing curious. They apply not their eye to the vniuersal wealth, but to their owne particular, for they come onely to enrich thē∣selues, & for the most part they be ignorāt people which passe to those Indias, they doe not esteeme of the good which they might doe. And though that I haue no lear∣ning, I am affectioned to men of learning, & so I am to
your worship, for that I vnderstood of your bookes, and for the same that you haue in these partes, which is great, although I knowe you not, yet I was willing to take these paines, which is a contentment to m▪ You write in your book, geuing knowledge of the Bezaar stone, & set down the signes of the beasts which haue thē: which being cō∣sidered, we haue happened vpon a kind of beasts that liue in the moūtaines of this country, which are much like to sheep or kiddes which your woorship speaketh of, which are in the Indias of Portugal, which breede & haue these stones, of the which there are many in this country, in the mountaines, & colde countries. They are for the moste of a darke red colour, they are fed with healthful herbes, wherof is greate plentie in the mountaines, where these beasts do feed they be very swift, insomuch that they can∣not bee hunted, but with the hande Gun: they haue no hornes, and in that onely they doe differ from them of the East India, for in all the rest they are the same. The 15. day of Iune in this yeere of 1568.How they haue found the Bezaar stones. I & certain gē∣tlemen my freends went to the mountaines, to hūt, & we were a hunting fiue dayes, and we killed some of those beasts, which I haue spoken of. And as we went for this purpose, thinking that they were of the kind, of thē of the East India: we carried your booke with vs, & we opened one of them, the greatest that we hunted, and oldest we colde finde, & we found no stones in his belly, nor in any other part of him, nor any other thing, wherby we bele∣ued that they were not the same kind of beasts with those of the East India. And we asked of certaine Indians that went to serue vs, where these beasts had their stones, & as they are our enimies, & would not that we should knowe their secrets, they answered vs that they knew nothing of these stones, vntil one boy which was amongst them be∣ing an Indian of the age of 12. yeres, seeing, that we were so desirous to know the same, shewed vs the secrete of the
haue byn vsed since that hunting, that I haue spoken of, which were the first that haue bin discouered in the world for the vse to heale diseases: & we do trust that with them wil be done maruellous woorkes, according as they haue begun to do thē. & all this is owing to your worship, seing that by your book we had knowledge to seek them, & to discouer them, & to take them out of these beastes, which had them so hidden within them, that surely ther is much owing to your worship, for discouering vnto vs so great a treasure, as this is, which is the greatest that hath bin foūd in these parts, wherby our nation is much bound to you, & likewise al the world, because al men shal profit by thē, & the rest of the secrets which you haue set down in your book, which bringeth vnto vs great profit. And in recom∣pence of the benefit which I haue receiued, I send here to your woorship a dosen of stones, by the returne of Iohn Anthony Corso, the rich Merchant, which if they come thither, your worship may make experience of them, in many infirmities, for you shal find great effectes in them. By the same returne also your worship may aduise me of them, & any thing that shal please you to commaund me, I wil do it, as one that is most affectioned to you, because you are curious and learned, & for doing so much good to the world, in those thinges which you haue written & published. Heerewithall I send you a small Chest, in the which come certaine Frisoles, which you may command to be sowen in the beginning of Marche, that the colde doe not hurte them, which send foorth a plant like vnto beanes, but somewhat lesse, which haue certaine vaines where the seed is. Halfe a dozen of them eaten with salt, & being of the tast of green beanes, they purge valiantly, & euacuate the water of him which hath the dropsie, with∣out paynes. The selfe same effect it worketh if that they be dry, making thē into pouder, & taking thē with wine & it is needful that meat be made in a redines: for if they work to much, by taking more then they should be, with eating
any thing incontinent, the worke wil cease. Also I sende you an hearbe,An hearbe for the Reumes. which groweth in these plaine countries, clounge to the ground like vnto grasse, which is of great vertues for many infirmities, chiefly for them which are grieued with Reumes and Fleumes in the throate, taking them away easily with great bene∣fite, and in this, & griefes of the head & Reumes chew∣ing it, they do dissleume very much: they call this hearbe after my name, because I vse it for the like euils, for that an Indian did teach it me, which knew much of the ver∣tue of hearbes. Also I send your worship a fruite of a tree which is of great profit,A fruite of a tree of grat vertus. & these trees be not founde in any countrie but in this they are of the greatnesse of an Oke, of those in Spain: it hath many vertues, for the rinde, being made in pouder, and cast into any sore which is needful to bee made cleane, it maketh it cleane, & afterward causeth the flesh to grow, & healeth it. And rubbing the teeth with this pouder, it maketh thē cleane very wel, & being laid vpon the gummes, if the flesh be taken away, it doeth in∣carnate them, & if the teeth be loose, it maketh thē fast. Seething the leaues of this tree well in water, & washing with the water thereof any manner of swelling, which hath any sore, or that is therof cankered, it taketh away the swelling, and impostume. And making some small li∣nen clothes weate in this seething, & laying them warme vpon the medicine, which is laide vpon the sore, or vpon the pouder that is made of the rinde: it maketh the sores to heale more quickly, causing that there come no hu∣mour to them. Out of the saide tree commeth a Rosine, which is of sweete smel, and serueth to perfume in many diseases of the head, & to make plaisters for many eils, and heere I send it to your worship. Of the fruite the In∣dians make a certaine drinke, which is for them very healthul. Your worshippe may commande them to be sowen, for I would be glad that they should grow, for it
will bee a thing of much delight, for the profite that it bringeth in Phisicke, and for the noueltie of the tree, for at al tymes it hath a very good smel. I brought into this country a blacke woman, which I bought in Xerez de la Frontera, and there did appeare vpon her when we came hither certain olde sores in her legs, which were of long continuance, and comming to the Ilande of the Marga∣reta, and beeing very sorowefull for the sores which my blacke woman had, an Indian tolde me that hee woulde heale her, and seeing that she had no other remedy, I de∣liuered her to the custodie of the Indian, that he might heale her for me, and immediatly he toke a fruite, which is common in that country, and al people ingeneral doe eate it, which is of the greatnes of an Orenge, & it hath a stone like vnto a Peach. This stone the Indiā did burne, and made it into pouder, for the stone is hard, & can not be grounde, without burning of it: and he cast the pou∣der of it into the sores, which she had ful of much rotten flesh, and very filthy, which with the pouder were made cleane and very well, and it tooke out al the rotten flesh to the bone, and after it was cleane, with lint and a litle pouder laid too it, they began to be filled with newe flesh, vntil they were ful of flesh, and she was healed very wel. And it is to be considered, that the little kernel of the stone hath so much venom, & malice in it, that if any person or beast doe eate it, hee dieth forthwith without remedie, as though he had eaten any manner of venom corsiue, as Sublimatum, or any other Poyson. In the Towne of Posco where I dwelt certaine yeeres, there was an Indian,A cure with the sweate of blood. which did cure the Indians and the Spaniards of any maner of grief or disease that they had, with anointing their Iointes and the partes which did grieue them, with the iuyce of a certain hearbe, & forth∣with he wrapped thē in many clothes, & they did seate at the ioynts pure blood. And also in the sick part where he did lay the iuyce, and as they went sweating he made
cleane the blood with a Linen cloth, vntil hee perceyued that they had sweat sufficiētly, & with this he healed ma∣ny diseases that were incurable. And I am able to say, that many did thinke that they had waxed yong againe, and were more strong and yong than they were before. Hee fel sicke, & for al that wee could do with giftes and faire words, and fierce words, and threatnings, he woulde ne∣uer tel vs what hearbe it was, nor shewe it to any man in this country. There is found a kind of tree, that is of soft Timbr, the Indians wil make no fire of it, although you kil them. For that they say, if any of them come neere to the fire that is made of this tree, or receiue the smooke of it, he remaineth impotent, for women. And they haue this so certain in persuasion, and it is so verified, that you shal not make them to come neere the fire, that is made of that tree, for any thing in the worlde, for they are so carnal that they wil none of this. They heale in these countries any swellings which are in thee feete or legges, caused of colde humors,Centella, an hearbe good for the swel∣ling of the feete or leg. with an hearbe called Centella, which being stamped and laid to the swelling, there arise certaine Blisters, by the which there commeth forth great quātitie of water & humors, vntil it leaue th Foote, or the legge dry. I haue seene great experience by these euacuations, amongēst the In∣dians, for they vse them much, & I haue seene some Spa∣niards vse it, and were healed of th lyke diseases. In the yere 1568. in the Prouince of Chile, they did cut of frō certain Indians being prisoners, the calues of their legs, to eate them, & they rosted them for that purpose, & that which is of more admiration, they applied vnto the place where they were cut, leaues of certain hearbes, & there came not out a drop of blood, and many did see it. And this was done in the Citie of S. Iames, in the pre∣sence of the Lord Don Garcia de Mendosa, which was a thing that made al men maruell at it.
There are to be found here very few hearbes and trees like vnto those of Spaine, for that the earth doeth not beare them: but in the newe Spaine there are more of them than in any other parte of the Indias. For when it was conquered, they found many trees and hearbes and Plantes like vnto those of Castile, and birdes and beastes likewise. We hae heere snakes which bring admiration to such as see thē, for they be as greate as men, which are for the most parte tame, & do no hurt. Here are Spyders as great as Oranges, & very venomous. It raineth Todes as greate as those of Spaine, which the Indians doe eate rosted, for they are a people which eate al kinde of veno∣mous beastes. There bee so many buytres, which breede in many Ilandes, that are in the sea, neere to the lande, that they eate vp the Cattel, and such numbers of them that it is wonderful, and as the keepers of them be black so they care litle for them. One thing doeth make mee maruel, that the kine which are bread in the moūtaines, being brought to the plaine ground, doe al dye. I sawe a friend of mine that brought 300. Kine to be weayed, & they staid a tyme before they were wayed, and by litle & litle, in one moneth there remained not one, but al died. And that which is more to bee maruelled at, is, that they died al trembling, and consumed. Some there be that do attribute it to the mountaines which is a countrie most cold, and it raineth euery day, and in the plaine countrie where there is no raine, but it is hotte, and as they moue from one extremitie to an other they dye, that trulie is a thing worthy of consideration, to see howe that in the space of eight Leages, little more or lesse, which are of plaine grounde from the coast to the mountaine, by a long vale of more then one thousande Leages, it neuer raineth in them, and in the mountaines it rayneth euery day. Your worship shall vnderstande, that the eight day of
October in this yere, there came hither a Cosin of mine, called Alonso Garcia, a good Souldiour,Against the herbe whic the Indian doe vse. who tellth vs that he hath found an hearbe which is good against the venomous hearbe, which the wild people do ve. Which hearbe doeth kil without remedy, and these valiant peo∣ple of the Indias doe vse it in their warres. And likewyse those that dwl from the Charcas towardes Chile, and liue like vnto wilde people, mainteining themselues on∣ly by hunting, and fleshe of mankinde, who haue killed with their arrowes which are poysoned with these vene∣mous hearbes, an infinite number of Spaniardes▪ which they say bee not good to eate, for that their fleshe is hard, so that when they kil them, they kepe them to wax tender, three daies or foure daies. But with this hearbe that is now found, the hurt shal be much remedied, that they doe make. Howbeit our people doe not much feare them, but only the hearbe which they shoote withal, for that it maketh them to dye by madnesse, without any re∣medy. And now with the recoūtering hearbe which they haue founde, they are al gladned. They say it is an hearbe that carrieth very broade leaues, which are like to the leaues of Planten of Spaine: which being beaten & layd to the wound that is poysoned, kill the venome, and im∣mediatly take away the accidents, which the venome of the hearbe procureth. They take it for a greate matter in that country, that they haue found such a remedy. And you shal vnderstand that the coūter hearbe was found in the same country, where the hearbe of poyson was: & I thinke it be also in other parts, but there where the hurt is done, our Lords wil was to discouer the rmedy. I note vnto your worship these things, to the nde by them yee may consider, howe many more hearbes▪ and plante of greate vertues lyke to those, this our Indias haue, which we haue not yet attained vto, for as the In∣dians are a naughty kinde of pople, and our enemis▪ so
and beeing tasted and vsed betweene the teeth they are pure Earth. The stone hath neither sauour nor tast, rather it doth coole then heate, and they be ordinarily as great as beanes, or bigger. For the most part there are both greate and little of them, and it seemeth wel by them that they haue medici∣nal vertues: many persons bring them, which are now come in this Fleete, who come to mee as though I were the first discouerer of them. They declare maruellous effects of thē, that i seemeth wonderful. I brake one and gaue it made in∣to pouder, to a boye, of whome it was sayde that venom had bene giuen to him. I cannot tel whether any other benefites done vnto him, or that healed him, but hee was well recoue∣red. I wil vse it in other infirmities, and what I find of their operation, and the rest of the medicines, which shalbe new∣ly discouered, I wil shew in the thirde volume, which I wil wryte of this Medicinall historie, wherein shalbee expressed thinges maruellous, and greate secretes of Phisicke, that may giue contentation to al men, and much more to the sick, that shalbe healed with them. Of one thing you must bee ad∣uertised, that which is heere written, part of it we haue lear∣ned of them that haue come from those partes, and brought knowledge of them hither: and parte is attributed to theyr complexion, and qualities, what they may doe: and part wee haue experimented: and in all haue this consideration, that al these things which are brought from our Indias, bee for the most parte hotte, and see that you vse them in this qualitie, in all causes wherein they shal bee need∣ful. And it is needful that there bee some ad∣uertisement giuen heereof, since the vse of the things doeth so import it.
¶ Of the Dragon.
the other the blood of Drago, in bread. The one, and the other, haue vertue to retayne any maner of the fluxe of the bellie,The vertue of the blood of Drago. layde vppon the bellie, or geuen in glisters, or taken by the mouth. Made into pouder, it staieth the running of the head, and to the lower parts applied, in a∣ny maner of fluxe of blood, it doeth retaine and slanch it. It sodereth and gleweth woundes together, which be fresh and new made. It letteth that the teeth fall not out, and it maketh the flesh to grow on the bare gummes. It is a meruellous co∣lour for Painters. And besides this, it hath many other ver∣tues. I do meane to sow some of the seed, to see if it wil grow in these partes.It is tempe∣rte. It is thought that the blood of Drago is tem∣perate, with little heate. There was a gumme geuen vnto me which they bring from the firme lande of the Peru,Gumme to purge them which haue the Goute. wherewith they purge them, which haue the Goute in those partes, they put of it as much as a Nut into distiled water, and let it stande all the night in steepe, and in the morning they strayne and wring it, and take that water, which must be the quantity of two Ounces: and the patient must remayne without meate, till the middest of the day, and therewith they purge the humour, which causeth the Goute. I saw a Gentleman who came in this last Fleete, vse it, which hee brought for remedie of this euill, who was full of the Goute, and with vsing this euacuation, he findeth himselfe well, and the Goute doeth not come to him, as it was woont to doe, for that it came to him very cruelly, and often: and he gaue mee as muche as a small Nutte, and would geue me no more, and I gaue it in the order aforesaide, to one which had the Goute, and hee had three stooles with it. I know not how it will proue, it were needfull to haue more quantitie, for to proceede forewarde, in more experience thereof: but it will bee brought hither by others, as they haue done many other thinges. It hath a god tast in the
taking, for that it hath neither smel nor sauour, it maketh his worke without paynes. It is hot in my opinion, in the first degree. I know not what manner of thing the Tree is, wher∣out they take it, for hee which brought it, knoweth not so much himselfe. Of the Armadilio. THis beasts portraiture I tooke out of an other naturally made, which was in the Counting house of Gonsalo de Molina, a Gentleman of this Citie, in the which there is greate quantitie of Bookes of diuers Authours, and the fashion and fourme of many kindes of Beastes, and Birdes, and other curious thinges, brought from the Orien∣tall Indias, as also from the Occidentall, and from other partes of the worlde. And great variety of coynes and stones of antiquity, and differences of armes, which with greate cu∣riositie, and with a noble minde, he hath caused to be brought thither.
waight then two pound: hollowe in some partes, and very white:For the grief of the stone in the Kidneies. they are al somwhat heauie. Of these stones they haue in the Indias great xperience: geuing them made into pou∣der, vnto those that suffer the griefe of the stone in the Kyd∣neies, and to them that cannot pisse, and to them that cannot cast out the stone of the Reines, and of the Bladder, beeyng of such greatnesse that it may not passe out. This is a thing amongst the Indians very common, and well knowne: and likewise amongest the Spaniardes, which dwell in those partes and they which come hither auerre it plainly, and af∣firme it to be so. I haue tasted it, and it seemeth a thing vnsa∣uorie, but I haue not proued it, nor applied hitherto, in time it shal be done, & we wil geue some reason thereof. They bring also from the newe Kingdome and from the prouince of Cartagena,Turpentine of Cartage∣na. Better then ours. a certayne Turpētine, very cleare, & of sweet smel, much better then that they call de Vetae, which they bring from Venice: it hath all the vertues that the good Turpentine hath, & it worketh the selfesame effectes, & bet∣ter, and with greater efficacie and readinesse. Here hath beene vsed of it in woundes, and it is a thing maruellous to see the good worke which it doeth, especially in wounds of ioyntes and Sinewes,Maruellous for woundes. & of Legges, wherein I haue seene gret works done with it. And it doth mundifie being mingled with other thinges, all kind of olde soares, & it is an excellent thing, washed, & prepared, for the faces of Ladies which haue neede of it. Moreouer they bring from the selfesame parts Caranna, of Cartagena,Caranna of Cartagena. purified so cleare that it is like to Cristal, and surely it is better, & it is applied vnto much better effect then that which hithervnto hath come, and maketh better works, and is of a more sweet smel, and more excellent in operation.
Of the Flower of Mechoacan. MAny persons of them which came now in this last Fleate from the firme land,Mechoacan of the firme Land. brought very good Mechoacan, better then that of the new Spaine, gathered in the Coast of Ni∣caraga, and in Quito: yea, since the Mechoacan was dis∣couered, in the new Spaine, they haue founde the selfsame hearbe and roote in those partes which I doe speake of. And they vse it to purge, and it doth maruellous works, and they vse it in those countries and in al the firme land, as they did vse that which was brought from the newe Spaine, with maruellous successe. From the Cape of Saint Elen,Furious Me∣choacan. which is in the same coast, they bring another kind of Mechoacan, but it is very strong, and beeing taken it causeth great accidentes of vo∣mites and faintnesse, with many stooles, and for this cause they cal it Escamonea, & no man vseth it, bicause it bringeth
by incision, which commeth foorth like to a whyte teare or drop, most cleare, with a maruellous sweete smel, declaring wel the maruellous effectes, and Medicinal vertues that it hath, of the which wee haue treated in the first parte. And that Balsamo which is made by seething, as wee doe there showe, we see the maruellous effectes that it worketh, with so great and maruellous vertues, that it bringeth admirati∣on to the whole worlde, with many other maruels which he∣therunto we haue seene, that be there spoken of. And greater wil these woorkes bee, that shal bee done with the Balsamo which they nowe bring, made by incision: seeing that one drop of this is more woorth then twoo Gallons of the other, as it is manifestly seene by vsing of it. The Balsamo of the Indias which is made by inci∣sion, is better then that which was in Aegipt.And surely that which was in Egypt, and failed so ma∣ny members of yeeres past, I beleeue that it had not more vertues then this. And I am sure that this is of greater ver∣tue and effectes then euer that was of. I haue the fruite of this tree, which is little, according to the greatnesse of the tree, and it is a grayne as great as a white Pease, the taste of it is a little bitter, it is shut into the end of a little od of the length of a finger, beeing narrowe, whyte, and thinne, of the thicknesse of vi. d. It carieth no more but one graine in the ende, which is the fruite that the Indians doe vse, to perfume them withal, in griefes of the head, and in Reumes. Surely the Balsamo is a maruellous thing, and it sheweth well in it selfe what it is,In griefes of the head. according to the workes therof. They bring moreouer from the firme land a Turpētine, or Licor,Turpentine or Ole of Deabeto. which is called Deabeto, and it is gathered from certaine trees of mixture, they be not Pine trees, nor Ci∣pres, for they bee higher then our Pine trees, they are as straight as Cipresses trees. In the highest part of the tree, it bringeth forth certaine bladders of two sortes, the which are great and smal, and being broken, there cometh foorth of them a maruellous licour, which falleth drop after
droppe, and the Indians gather them with great delibera∣tion, and they receiue the same droppes which bee in the bladder into a shel, and alwayes haue shelles lying vnder the bladders, whereou they distill, and it is a thing done with such leasure, that many Indians doe gather very little al the whole day. The Licor serueth for all things that the Balsamo doeth,The vertue therof. it healeth very well woundes, it taketh away colde griefes, and windie. Some do take it for the griefs of the stomacke, caused of colde humors, or for windines, with a little white wyne. And it is to be vnderstood, that the Balsamo which is made by seething, or that which is made by incision,Note. and this or any other manner of Licour of these of the Indias, which is to bee taken by the mouth, ought to bee taken but in little quantitie, which must not bee more then foure or fiue droppes, and it must not be taken in the Palme of the hand as it is sayde, but putting a litle wine or Rose water into a spoone, and pouring vpon that the droppes of Balsamo, & putting the spoone wel into your mouth, and letting the Li∣cor fal in, so that it touch not the tongue. For taken with it, or touching it, the sauour and tast is not remoued away in a long time: & it procureth an euell tast, in such sort, that for this onely cause many doe abhorre it, and wil not take it, and from others it hath taken away the lust of their meate, by re∣ceiuing it and touching it with the tongue.
Of long Peper. Long Peper.ALso they bring from Cartagena, and from the coast of the firme lande, from Nata neere to Veraga, a certain kinde of Peper, which they cal long Peper, which hath a sharper taste, then the Pe∣per which is brought from the Oriental Indias, and biteth more then it, and is of more sweete taste, and of better smell, then that of Asia, or the Peper of the East India: it is a gentle spyce, to dresse meates withall, and for this purpose al the people in that country doe vse it. Historie.A Gentleman gaue me a platter full of it, for he brought a great quantitie of it for the seruice of his Ritchin, because
they vse it in place of blacke Peper, and they take it to be of a better tast, and more healthfull. I haue tasted it, and it by∣teth more then the blacke Peper doeth, and it hath a more sweete taste then it hath. I haue caused it to be put into drest meates, in place of the Oriental Peper, & it giueth a more gentle taste vnto the meates that are drest therewith. It is a fruite that casteth out a high plante, of the great∣nesse of a grosse Packethreed,The descrip∣tion of it. and the lower parte neere to the roote, is as great as a litle sticke, that is very small: and vpon it are ioyned the little graines, very neere together, as though they were wrested one within the other, which cau∣seth the greatnesse whereof wee spake: and beeing ta∣ken away from the litle sticke, the stick remaineth bare and whole: and it is greene being fresh, but the Sunne ripeneth it, and doeth turne it blacke, and so they bring it into these partes. It groweth in the coast of the firme lande in Nata and in Cartagena, and in the newe kingdome: in all these partes they vse it, as I haue saide. It hath the Medicinall vertues, which the Orientall Peper hath that we vse. The complexion thereof is hotte in the third degree. And going to visite a childe, the sonne of this Gentle∣man,Historie. which gaue mee this Peper, being diseased of the fire in the face, I commanded him to bee let blood, and that to his face they should apply some litle cloth with Rose water, and the hearbe Mora: hee saide to me that hee liked the let∣ting of blood well, because the boye was of Sanguine com∣plexion, but as for that which should be laid to his face, hee had wherewith to heale it in short tyme: and he commanded to bee brought foorth, a thing lyke vnto a cake, as great as a meane platter, the outside was blacke, and within yeal∣lowe, and beeing brought wel neere twoo thousand Leages, it was moyst, and hee dissolued a little of it with Rose Water, and layde it to the boyes face. I was desirous to know what it was, & he said, that when the worke was seene what it would do, he would tel me whereof it was compoun∣ded.
The next day I returned to the sicke, and his face was so amended, that I maruelled at it, and immediatly he was washed with Rose water, a little warme, and hee remayned as though he had not had any euil therein at all. The cake was made of certaine Wormes, which the Indians take out of the grounde,Of what it was made. and they make them fatte, giuing them to eate leaues of a certaine kinde of corne, that they haue there called Maiz, and after they are fatte, they put them into a frying panne of earth, and seeth them there∣in, and as they take of the skumme, they strayne it, and seeth it stil, vntil it be thicker then an oyntment, after the fashion and manner as he had it there. They bring also from the Charcas certaine Rootes, that bee like to the Rootes of flower de Luce,Rootes a∣gainst venom & venomous things. sauing that they are smaller and they smell much lyke the leaues of Figge tree: they call these Rootes in the Indias, a re∣medy against the venemous hearbe, for beeing made into pouder, and taken with whyte wyne, it is a thing of great strength, and of the greatest vertue, that is there against venome, of what manner or qualitie soeuer it be, so that it be not corsiue as Sublimatum,Mlke good a∣gainst poyson. or the lyke: and as for that kinde of poyson, with only drinking of much Milke they bee re∣medied. This Roote beeing taken, causeth the venome to bee cast out, which is eaten or drunken, or any manner vene∣mous humour, comming of any euill degree, or cause what∣soeuer, which is as wel done by vomit, as by sweate. If thre bee any small Wormes, or long Wormes in the body, it killeth, and expelleth them: and if you haue any suspicion, that there haue beene giuen you any venomous morsel, whe∣ther it bee venome or witchecraft, it expelleth it: in which there is so much trust in those partes, that they take it for a meruellous remedy, for the thinges afore∣sayde. The roote being tasted, it hath a sweete relishe, with
some sharpnes. It seemeth to be hot in the second degree. From the coast of Nicaraga, and of Nata, they which come in these last ships, from the firme land, bring a certaine kind of purge with them, that surely by the tast is easie to be taken, and it worketh well, and without any payne, & princi∣pally it purgeth Choler. It is the fruite of a tree very great, after the maner of Thornish Chestnuts, which haue within them Chestnuts, sauing that they pricke not, but be playne▪ within those prickles there be some like to Chestnuts, made cleane without shale, well neere square, which deuide them∣slues asunder, by meanes of a little skin, euery one into two partes, and so they are couered with it, and when they be ta∣ken & occupied, that little skin is plucked away, & they are made cleane frō it, for that beyng taken with it, it procureth most dangerous accidentes, and vomites, & much faintnesse and infinite stooles: and without it the Chestnut is a purga∣tion very gentle, and they purge easily, and without paines: if they be tosted, then they will purge lesse: if they be greene they eate them: or being beaten in a Morter, they take them with wine, or with the broth of a henne: if hey bee drie, they make pouder of them, any manner of fashion. They doe their worke well, and with much assurance, keeping the order that ought to be kept, by them which be purged, and the humors beyng prepared, as is conuenient. They are hot in the first degree. ¶ Of the Sarcaparillia of Guaiaquill. IN the first part wee declared, howe that they brought Sarcaparillia from Pe∣ru:Of the Sar∣caparilia of Guaiaquill. which wee vse in some persons, and it worketh greate effectes. And be∣cause there was but little of it and soone done, we returned to that of the Hnduras which is that we haue spen hiherto. And
ning as much as they can drinke at once, or at diuers times, and after they cast themselues into a sweate, and they sweate so much, that it runneth by the Bedde in great quantitie. Af∣ter that, they take cleane cloathes, and eate of a Henne, but they drinke of no other thing but of that iuyce which they tooke out of the rynde of the Sarcaparillia, as well at Din∣ner, as at Supper, and they must eate very little at Supper, & likewise at Dinner. And they must procure to keepe them∣selues from the Ayre and from the colde all that they can, although in that Uillage of Guaiaquill, wherein bee about fiftie houses, or few more, the most of them are Cotages, & of little safegarde, and the Walles be made of Canes, and there be no Chambers on high, but onely belowe: they dwel all in places of little defence. Being in this order and small comforte for lacke of Conserua and drie fruite, which were necessary, yet in eight or nine dayes they are made whole of all the diseases, that are healed with the Sarcapa∣rillia, and of many others which shoulde be very large to speake of. It is sufficient that there goe no Man from thence which returneth not whole, although he had ne∣uer so greeuous a disease, so that they bee not sharpe A∣gewes: For in that case the cure hath no place, or in any other sharpe disease. All other diseases it healeth with maruellous successe, as it is seene by the great number of people which come thither, and goe away whole of the diseases, which they bring thither. But it is needfull that he which doth enter into this cure, bee strong and not weake, for if he be weake, he cannot suffer so great sweate, without great perill of his person. Another way to take it.For these euilles they haue another manner of Wa∣ter, that is, taking foure ounces of Sarcaparillia, rather more then lesse, for that there they vse neyther wayghte nor measure, but doe put all at discretion, and they take away the rynde from the Sarcaparillia, and breake it, without putting it in Water, if it bee greene, and if
if it be drie, then they breake it & put it in water, vntill it bee made soft: this rynd beyng without the heart, they seeth in 4. Pottels of water, little more or lesse, and they seeth it vntill halfe the water be diminished, rather more then lesse: and of that Water they drinke as muche as they can in many times, or at one time, and forthwith they betake themselues to sweat, and although they sweat not so much, as they sweat with the first water, yet they will heale, they moue their clothes, they eate of a Pullet, they keep themselues from the colde and ayre, and at Dinner and Supper, they vse the self same water, for that in one day they consume one seething: this people take it in this manner fifteene or twentie dayes, & in this sort also they are healed of all their euils & diseases, to the great admiration of the people. And for the vse of this Sarcaparillia they do not except any disease, vnles it be feuers or sharpe diseases: these people purge not at the beginning, as we doe heere, nor in the middest, nor in the ende of the cure, for there is no other Phisition nor medicine, but cer∣tayne women which be there, that giue the water: they are women Phisitions, and therefore they take away, and put to as it seemeth good vnto them. That which I doe note in this businesse, is that they seeth the Sarcaparillia without the heart: & that they vse not but of the rynde, which seemeth to be very well done, & verie con∣formable to good Phisicke, for the parts of the roots which bee harde, should be taken away, as things superfluous, and without vertue & profite, which rather do let and disturbe, that it cannot worke that effect which is desired in it, & the vertue is in the rynde: and this is that which we doe commonly vse when we will profite our selues by it. And so from hencefor∣ward,The manner how to mae the water of the rynde of Sarcaparillia when I shall ordaine this water for any that haue need of it, I will vse the rynde onely. And thus I ordayne it at this present. Which is to take foure ounces of Sarcaparillia, and too take away the hearte,
BEing in company with Iohn Gotierres Telo, a gentlemā very excellēt, & Treasurer of ye Con∣tratatiō house, a passenger which came frō the Florida, gaue him a peece of Ambar Grese, very ex∣cellent, saying that he brought it from the Florida. I took it, & brake it, & it was perfect grese, of a very good colour, and in the vttermost part it was blacke, and I asked him that brought it, where he had it: he sayd, that he gathered it in the coast of Florida, and that they haue it commonly of the Indians, that gather it in that Coast, and they take much pleasure in it with great delight, and contentment annoynting their fa∣ces with it, and other partes, for the good smell which it hath. And surely it maketh mee maruell to see, that in our Occidentall Indias, there is so excellent Ambar, and that the time hath discouered it vnto vs, and that there hath come from those partes not onely so greate riches, of Siluer and Golde, Pearles, and other precious stones, but that also nowe they bring vs suche excellent Ambar Grise, a thing so esteemed in the world, & so muche vsed for the health of the body, and so necessary to cure and to heale withall, so many and diuers infirmities, as we will speake of beeing a thing which for the delicacy of mankind, is an ornament, & cōtentment wt very much serueth for vse. I do vnderstand also that other Passengers brought of the like Ambar, and some in much quantitie, of which I was very glad, and the first peece that I saw was very suspicious vnto me, and after that I had seen more,Ambar is not the seede of the Whale, but a Gūme. then I beleeued that there was of it, in those parts, which is found cast vp vnto the coast. Some there bee which thinke that it is the seede of a Whale, as it hath beene an auncient opinion, which is false,
as Simeon Archiatros a Greeke author doeth shew, saying that the Ambar in diuers places doeth spring,Simeon a Greeke au∣tor. they bee his fountaynes from whence it doeth spring, as those of Pitch Licor: the worst is that which these fishes doe taste, and swallowe downe, &c. The same it seemeth Serapio doth vn∣derstande, and besides this Simeon a Greeke, and Actio, I finde no other Greekes that make mention thereof, but it is treated of by the Arabies with as great ignorance and con∣fusion as may bee seene. Whosoeuer by them will verifie what Ambar is, it is to bee determined vppon, that it is a kinde of Pitch, that cometh forth of springs & Fountaines, that are made in the deapth of the Sea, and comming forth to the ayre, the Licor being grosse doth congele, and waxe hard, and is made the Ambar which we see, as many things else which are in the lower part of the Sea, are soft & ten∣der, but being brought out into the aire are made harde. As we see in the Coral, which in the lower partes of the Sea is soft and tender,Coral. and by bringing it into the ayre is turned in∣to a stone: and the Ambar whereof the Beades are made, in the lowe parts of the Sea is whyte, and being come foorth into the aire, turneth hard and stony, and is Pitch,Ambar con∣geled. which co∣meth foorth of a fountaine, which is in the Germaine Sea, wherby the barbarous opinions are confounded, that say the Ambar is the seede of the Whale. And the cause whereof this ignorance came, was this, for that Ambar was founde in the Whales, and other fishes,Ambr foūd in the Whales Mawe. and therefore men said that it grewe of it own nature in their mawes, and as this Pitch riseth vp to the highest partes of the Sea by reason of the lightnes therof, the Whales do deuoure it, thinking that it is a thing to bee eaten, and so men finde it in their Mawes. For if it were seed, it would be found in other parts of their bodies, where it is natural to al beasts. In my tyme was ta∣ken a Whale, in the coast of the Canaria that had more thē one hundred pound waight of Ambar within him, and after
that they killed many, and found none. They that come from the Florida say, that there bee Whales by those coastes,Whales of the Coast of the Ambar. and that they haue killed some of them, and founde neither Ambar nor other thing in theyr Mawes, more then fishes: & also in the yong Whales which are very greate, although they haue killed them, that they found nothing in them, for that the Indians doe fishe for thē. and take them with the greatest cunning that may bee ima∣gined, which is after this maner. One Indian taketh a long cord, and strong, made with certaine ginnes, and shippeth himself in a litle Boate, and maketh towarde the Whale where he seeth him comming with his yong Whales, and goeth to one of them and leapeth vppon him, and casteth his snare vpon his snow. The strong young Whale when hee feeleth this, he goeth downe to the deapth of the Sea & the Indian hampered fast with him, for they are greate swim∣mers, and can abide long in the water: and the yong Whale as hee hath neede to breath, returneth vp to the height of the Sea. And in the tyme that hee cometh vp warde, the Indian carrying with him a sharpe wedge, and putting it through his nose where he breatheth, he striketh the wedge into him with his fist, in such sorte, that the yong Whale cannot cast it from him, and when hee commeth vpp on heigh, the Indian giueth him corde, and taketh his boate, and goeth after the yong Whale, and as he cannot breath, he chketh him easi∣ly, and he commeth to the lande. It is surely a delicate and maruellous hunting, wherein they haue so much cunning, that a great Lizard or Crocodil of xxiiii. foote, the most hor∣rible and cruel beast that is in the Sea, one Indian doeth kil. Some say, that the Ambar is made of certaine fruite growing by the Sea side, where Whales bee, and in the Moneth of April and May, when it is in season, & of sweete smell, the Whales doe eate it, and of that the Ambar is made, as if the fruite so eaten, would be conuerted into an o∣ther
thing then into blood and flesh. There bee many other opinions, concerning this matter what Ambar shoulde bee made of, which are confuted all: and it is to bee vnderstoode, that it is a kinde of Pitche which springeth from Foun∣taines that there are in the deapth of the Sea, in particu∣lar partes of it, as wee see there bee of Petrolio, of Napta of Sulphur, and of many other things, as in our Occidental In∣dias, of diuers other Licors:Which is best Ambar. the best Ambar is that which is most like to a red colour, the whyte is not so good, and the worst of al is the blacke. Ambar hath great vertues, and serueth in the world for many thinges, and so it is a substance of great price:The vertues of the Am∣bar. for that which is good is worth at this day, twyce more thē the most fine Gold. For the contentment of man, and for the delicate∣nesse of the worlde, it serueth for many thinges:The medici∣nal vertues therof. with it they make Beades, and fine perfumes, and odorous smelles, and water of Angels of most sweete smell, in diuers formes and fashions: with it they dresse gloues of diuers sortes, & make Oyles and licors of most sweete and delectable smelles: it serueth for meates & drinkes, in diuers and sundry formes, which to reporte, would be a large processe. In medicinal thinges the vertue thereof is greate, and it profiteth very much in our Medicines, for it entereth into the most principall matters of Phisicke, which are com∣pounded in the Poticaries Shoppes, as well Electuaries, as Confectiōs, pouders, & pilles, Preparatiues, Ointmēts, plaisters, & many other thinges, that receiue great vertues therby: & of the name of it, there is made a confection called Dia-Ambar. The vertues which it hath in particular are great, and of great effects, for that with it are healed diuers and sundry diseases. And this the Arabiens did teach vs: for of the Greekes onely Simeon, and Actio wrote a fewe woordes of it, and also Actuario made the lyke mention of
it: These three authours beeing Greekes, liued after the tyme that the Arabiens did wryte, and they made some re∣corde of the Medicines, and thinges which they wrote of, wherof the ancient wryters made no mention & one of them is Ambar, which the olde Phisitions knewe not before the Arabiens, for they made no mention of it. The vertue therof is to heale, dissolue, & cōfort any maner of way,The comple∣xion thereof. wherin it is applyed: For that the cōplexion thereof is hot and dry, with some fatnes, and it hath vertue to molli∣fie, & make soft, with other vertues that it hath besides. And beeing applied to the Braines, in the manner of an oyntment,It cōforteth the braine & Sinwes. and melting it with the Pestel of a Morter being hot, and mingled with the oyle of the flowers of Orenges, in this sorte it taketh away the griefe of the head, it comfor∣teth the Sinewes, it dissolueth any maner of colde which is in them, with a great prerogatiue and helpe, aswel in it own forme as in making a plaister of Alpta Mscata, which is made of certaine compoundes, that it bee applied continu∣ally to that part. What the smel of the Ambar doth.Smelling vnto it in the peece, or making a Pomander of it, mingled with Muske, and Lign'aloe, it comforteth the braynes, and openeth the vnderstanding: in the one sorte, or the other, beeing applyed vnto it, it maketh a good memorie, and helpeth the vnderstanding that it may bee better and more perfite. And it is conuenient that wee vse it more then women, for the hurte which the good smell doeth vnto them, which bee grieued with the Mo∣ther, for they ought not to vse it, if there be not a descending of the Mother to the lower partes: for in such case it were conuenient to smell much to it, for it causeth the Mother to ryse vp to his place, with the good smell, taking some euil sauour by the inferior partes. And lykewyse by smel∣ling vnto it, it comforteth the harte, and maketh the Spi∣rites valiant and strong: and for this purpose it profiteth, be∣ing carried about one, and smelling to it, in the tyme of the
Pestilence, and in corrupt ayres, to resist the corruption, and malice of them, with the vertue and sweete smel thereof. It is a maruellous thing to vnderstande howe muche the Ambar doeth profite and succour them, which be olde,The Ambar is a great re∣medy for thē that be old. in what maner or sort soeuer they vse it: & although with it excellent smel it comforteth the spirites, and the braynes of the head, yet it maketh thinne also Flegmatike humours, which doe continually abounde. And some say, that the vse of it holdeth back age, and conserueth that it goe not forward, and it is good that such doe vse it in their meates, and in sweete smelles for their apparel and Chambers, and appli∣ed to the braine and harte, and that they holde it to smell in their handes continually: and that it bee put into the wyne, wherewith they shall wash their handes and face: for it is a maruellous thing howe much it comforteth, and giueth strength, wherein I haue seene maruellous effectes, & they which are old and crooked, and doe vse it, shal perceiue what great good it wil doe them. In paines of women, it is a maruellous remedie,In paynes of women. min∣gled with the Lode stone, and Galuano, made in little plai∣sters layd vpon the nauil, to keepe the Mother in his place, and for the rest of the paines of it. Chiefly by smelling to it continually, it profiteth women that the moother may come downe. And if it ryse vp, putting into it a Tente of Cotten woll, dissolued with oyle of Liquid Ambar, it maketh it come downe. And being put into the mouth of the mother in women which doe not bring forth children, for the coldnesse that is in them, it is most excellent. I vse to take this confe∣ction: which is compounded with Ambar twoo partes, and the scraping of Iuory, one part grounde small, halfe a parte of Lignaloe made into pouder, and a little Muske: of the which make Pilles, and they must take three, that may way three pence, from three to three daies: applying moreouer the little plaister, which is spoken of, to the nauill, and
the tent into the mouth of the mother: surely it doeth profite much, the vniuersal euacuations, beeing made, and it must be vsed many dayes. For the euils of the sto∣macke.The Ambar profiteth much in the diseases of the sto∣macke, and for the coldnes of it, if there bee a plaister made thereof, and of Alipta Muscata, and of Storacke, after the maner of a brest plate, and laid to the stomacke: and like∣wise of the self same thing Pilles being made and mingled with wine, of sweete smell, and taken in the morning fa∣sting. For it dissolueth windes, it taketh away any maner of colde which is in the stomacke, it helpeth disgestion, it gi∣ueth appetite, and lust to meate, and this is conuenient for him that is colde of complexion, or for that which cau∣seth the hurte of the stomacke, that commeth of colde: and therefore it shoulde bee conuenient for them that be old, and cold of stomacke. It comforteth the harte, and healeth the diseases thereof, principally if they come of windinesse,For the euill of the harte. or of cold humors, being taken by it self, or mingled with Lignaloe & Muske, in maner of pouders, or pilles. For that the Muske, as A∣nerois sayeth, comforteth more then al other sweete smelles that are in the worlde, for that the sweete fauour, and com∣forting smell thereof preuayleth more, then al other smelles. In what maner of way soeuer the Ambar is applyed, by it self, or with other things, in infirmities of the harte, it pro∣fiteth, much applyed thereunto outwardly, and in any maner of sorte taken, it doeth comfort and strengthen, and dissolue any humour that is in the body. I doe cause Ambar to bee ground, which being wel min∣gled with yeallowe wax molted, and made into a thynne cake, and layde to the harte, doeth profite much in the e∣uilles of the harte,Of them that be Melan∣cholike. chiefly if they come first of windinesse, Melancholie, or of any other cause whatsoeuer, so that it be not hotte. The Ambar is very profitable for them that be Melan∣cholike,
for it maketh them very merie, taking awaye the causes of the euill, and dissoluing the windinesse thereof which there are very many grieued with al: and vnto such it is good to bee ministered, and to vse it after the manner of Medicine, mingled as we haue saide, in the morninges: and also to vse it laide vpon the harte, and vpon the braines, and in meates, for surely I haue seene great effectes wrought in them that haue frequented it. Where there is corruption of ayre,It rectifieth the ayre. the Ambar doeth rectifie it by it self, or mingled with things of sweete smel, the place beeing perfumed with it, where men shoulde re∣maine, principally in the tyme of winter, and vnto such as doe suffer colde Rewmes, in cold tymes: chiefly perfuming their kercheifes, wherein they sleepe, with it, or with some mixture thereof, perfuming the Chamber likewise, for it is a maruellous thing to see the good woorke it doeth make. And likewise it doeth good to them, which haue the pal∣sey,For thē that haue the Palsey. For them that haue the falling sicknesse. or weakenesse of Sinewes, perfuming themselues with it, or with the mixture therof. Those that haue the Falling sicknesse, by giuing to them at their noses, when they bee in their traunce or paroxismos, the smoke thereof, it maketh to awake: and wearing it a∣bout them, & smelling to it continually, the traunce doth not come so quickly, nor so strong. And vnto those which suffer the disease of the Palseye, by anoynting their head with it, and all the vpper part of the skull, it bringeth manifest pro∣fite: for that the Ambar is a thing that comforteth the Si∣newes and brayne, more then any thing that wee knowe. One propertie the Ambar hath, that bringeth admiratiō,The Ambar doeth make dronke. and Simeon Secto a Greeke authour doeth reporte, that if any smell to it before hee drinke wyne, it maketh him stand as if he were dronken▪ and if it bee put into the wine, it maketh him dronke indeede, in such sorte that a little
wyne mingled with Ambr, causeth dronkennesse, which I haue seene by experience, in the house of a great Lorde of this Realme, where for delicatenesse, and daintinesse, they had a Slte seller of Ambar, as also Salte to cast into meates: and to a Iester there was Ambar cast into his wyne, and hee was made very drnke with it. Many other things here were to treate of Ambar, but because I would not passe the limites of my purpose, I leaue  wryte of them, and the rther, for that in the thirde parte wee wil declare that which we meane farther to say of them. The ende of the se∣cond parte.
THE THIRD PARTE OF THE ME∣dicinall Historie, which trea∣teth of the thinges that are brought from our Occidentall Indias, seruing for the vse of Me∣dicine. Wherein there is mention made of many things Medicinall, that haue great secrets and vertues: ¶ Nowe newely set foorth by the sayde Doctor Monardes, after that he had made the first and second partes.
¶ Of the Cinamon of our Jndias. IN the yeere of our Lorde 1540. Francis Pissarro proui∣ded to make towarde his bro∣ther Gonsalo Pissarro gouer∣nour of the prouince of Quito, & the Spaniards wēt thither with a good will, & they went also vnto the coūtrie that was called the country of the Cina∣mō, wt is an other prouince be∣yond Quito, and the Cinamon was much spoken of amongst the Spaniardes, for it was vnderstood of the Indians that it was a thing of great riches, Gonsalo Pissarro departed with 200. Spaniards, and it happened to him euil in his iorney,The history of the cōquest of the coun∣trie, where the Cinamon groweth. for it was a sharpe coun∣trie, & without vittaile, & with great trauel they came to that prouince called of the Indians Somaca, where the Cinamon groweth, which is right vnder the Equinoctiall line. The trees which beare it, are of reasonable greate∣nesse, they carrie a Leafe like to Laurel, they be al the yre greene, and they neuer loose the leafe, which is a thing com∣mon to all the trees of the Indias.The descrip∣tion of the trees, and of the fruite. They beare their fruite vnto the likenesse of a little Hatte, that hath his Cup and sides as greate as a peece of eight Rialles of Siluer, which is foure Shillinges, and some greater, it is of the colour of a darke tawnie, as well without as within, it is smooth in the inner parte, and sharpe in the vtter, in the highest part of the Cuppe it hath a stalke, whereby it hangeth in the tree, it is as thicke in the side, as a peece of eight Rialles of Siluer, and the vppermost parte is fuller of bodie, and being tasted, it hath the same pleasauntnesse of tast that the same Cinamon hath, which they bring from the India of Portugall, and in like sorte there rmayneh in the
mouth the same sweete smell, and tast, that the same Cina∣mon of the East India hath, & there remayneth in the mouth the same sweete smell and tast, with some drinesse: the selfe-same it doeth being ground, respiring out from it the same smell, which the most fine Cinamon hath. And in the meates wherin it is put▪ it geueth the same tast & sauour that the Ci∣namon of the East India hath. The trees haue a grosse rynd, but without tast, sauour or smell of the Cinamon. I cannnot tell if the little inner rynd haue any, onely the rynde I haue seen with the fruite, as it is described: they say that the leaues beyng beaten, geue out sme smel of Cinamon, onely the ver∣tue, sweet smel and tast, is in the fruite, which is contrary to he Cinamon, that is brought from the Orientall Indias, for onely the Rynde of the tree is that which hath the sweete sa∣uour and pleasant smell, as we doe all see. And true it is, that some is better and of more sweete smell and tast, than othersome is. For although that they are all one sorte of trees, which bring forth the Cinamon, yet some haue the rinde thinne, and that is the best Cinamon, and others haue it grosse, and this is not so good: and thereof it hath come, that there bee some which doe distinguish the Cinamon into di∣uers kindes. For one sort they call Cassia, and an other Ci∣namon, and an other Cassia liga, and it is all one kinde of tree, that bringeth them foorth: but that the diuersity of the place bringeth forth one more fine than another, and so Cassia and Cinamon are al one,Cassia & Ci∣namō all one. for that they differ not, but onely in the names, for all is Cinamon, thinne, and fine, and whereas you find written Cassia, may be put Cinamon; and where you doe find Cinamon, Cassia. This our fruite that is called Cinamon, profiteth in Medicine for many thinges:Vertues which it hath in medicine. beeyng taken and made into pouder, it comforteth the stomake, and it dissolueth winds, it taketh away the euill smell of the mouth, & it is an impor∣tant remedy for the griefe of the stomake, it is cordiall, it
maketh a good colour in the face, and Cassia in drest meates is vsed euen as Cinamon is, because it woorketh the like ef∣fect, that it doeth: by taking the Pouder of this fruite with wine, or water made for the nonce, it prouoketh the purgatiō of women. It is hot in the thirde degree, and drie in the first, but with notable comforting, by reason of the drie parts that it hath. ¶ Of the Ginger. DOn Francis de Mendosa,Don Francis de Mendosa, Sonne vnto the vice Roy Don Anthony de Mendo∣sa, did sow in the new Spayne Cloaues, Peper, Ginger, and other spices, of those which are brought from the Oriental In∣dias, and that which by him was begun, was lost, by reason of his death, onely the Ginger did remayne, for it grew very well in those partes, and so they bring it greene from the new Spayne, and other partes of our Indias, and some they bring drie, after the ma∣ner of that of the East India. The Ginger is a Plant which carrieth his Leafe like to Lrio, somewhat more narrowe, with the same greenesse:The descrip∣tiō of Ginger. the Roote is as it seemeth, some greater than other, and when it is greene, it burneth not in the mouth, wherefore beeyng made small into peeces, it is put into Sallettes, for because it geueth them both tast and smell. They sow it, of the seede that it bringeth foorth or of the same little Roote, and of the one sorte and of the other it waxeth greate: and after the Roote is growen greate, they take it foorth, and drie it in the shadowe, where no moysture doeth come, for that is it which doeth corrupt him, and for this cause they bring it in drie earth and made in Conserua, although that here it may bee verie well made of that which is drie, burying the Roote at the foote of a place where many
led Emperiall, beyng abroade below and narrow aboue, and by the mouth of them there groweth out certayne Buddes, which are his Leaues, which cause him to shewe verie faire, and these Buddes are sowen, and of them growe the Plantes, which carrie the Pinnas, and one Plant carrieth not more than one Pinna, in the highest part therof: it grow∣eth greene, and as it ripeneth, it turneth yeallowe. They take from it the Rynde, which is verie thinne, for to eate, that which it hath within it is white, and softe, and melteth in the mouth, with a very good tast, and sweete sauour: sa∣uing that it hath many small karnels rounde about it, which it is needefull that you cast from you when you eate them, which are of a Purple colour. The smell thereof is like to a kinde of Quince, and where there is a Pinna rype, he smelleth like to a Quince ouer all the House where he is. The vertues thereof.They take them to bee good for the stomake, and like∣wise for the hearte, and to restore the appetite lost: it is a generall fruite in all partes of the Indias, and much estee∣med. They are to be eaten at the beginning of meate, & they vse to eate them in the hot after Noones: for they say that they do refresh: they are cold in my iudgement: they brought two sorts of them, the one drie, & the other in Conserua. The dry did serue for no other purpose, but to see the figure and the forme of them: in Conserua, they haue a good tast, although somewhat sharpe: they ought to be made in Conserua when they are greene. Of the Guaiauas. The descrip∣tion of the tree which doth carry the Guaia∣as.THey brought mee from the firme Lande the seede of the Fruite which is so muche esteemed by the Indians, as also by the Spaniardes, which they call Guaiauas. The trees which carrie this fruite are of a reasonable greatnesse, they cast out their bowes
dispersed. They carie a leafe like to the manner of Laurell, the flower of it is whyte, according to the fashion of the flower of Orenges, sauing that it is somewhat greater, it is of a sweete smell. This tree yeldeth much fruite, where∣soeuer it be sowen, and doeth multiply and spred so much a∣broade, that they take it to bee euil for the grounde where it groweth, for that in many pastures the people doe loose the feeding of their cattle by reason of them. And they weue themselues one togither with an other like Bryers: the fruite which they carie is like to our Apples, of the great∣nesse of a Pippin, it is greene when it beginneth first to appeare, and as it ripeneth, it turneth yeallowe. In the in∣ner parte it is whyte, and in colour russet, and being cut, hath foure places deuided, where it hath the seede, which is lyke to the seede of Medlers, being very harde, and of colour tawnie, al the stones within haue no karnel, they are without any sauour. And to eate these Apples, they pare them from the Rind, the fruite is holsome, and of good digestion: when they be greene they are giuen to them that haue the Laske, for they restraine and binde much, and when they bee very rype, they make the belly very laxaatiue when they bee of a good seasonable age. They are good rosted for them that be whole, and for the sicke, for beeing so rosted they are more healthful: and better, and of pleasanter taste. And the best of them growe in trees which are tilled. The Indians vse the leaues in seething, with the which washing their feete that are swollen, they cause them to abate, and the inner parts of the body being stopt or opilated, being washt with this seating, doe disopilate. It seemeth to bee a colde fruite, and therefore they giue them rosted to them which haue hot A∣gewes. It is a very com∣mon frute in all the Indias.
Of the Cachos. ALso they did sende mee the Seede of a plante or hearbe,The descrip∣tion of the Cachos. which the Indians doe much esteeme, which they cal Cachos. The Cachos is an hearbe very reddish in colour, it carieth a rounde leafe & thinne, it casteth out a fruite like to a Berengena of Spayne, where the seede doth growe: it is very small, and of a Russet colour, it hath a taste with∣out any sharpnesse, onely in the mountaines of Peru this hearbe is found, The Indians doe much esteeme it, for the medicinal ver∣tues that it hath,The vertues therof. it maketh one to pisse wel where the lack of Uryne is, it doeth expell the Sande and Stones, which growe in the reines. And moreouer they say, that the vse of it doeth breake the stone from the bladder, if the Stones bee soft, that they may bee dissolued, with taking very little quantitie of it, and of this they haue so many examples, that they cause mee to maruell at it, because I thinke that the stone in the bladder cannot bee expelled, but onely to cut it out is the remedie, for that no Phisicke can dissolue him. They say that taking the seede grounde with some water, made for the purpose, causeth it to bee cast out in Clay, and being come foorth it returneth to be congeled, and turneth it self into a stone. Only to a yong man I sawe this happen who had a stone in the bladder,Historie. and I beeing certified of it by the Maister Surgions that had felt him, and of the accidents which hee had, caused him to bee caried at the beginning of the Som∣mer, vnto the Fountaine of the stone, and in twoo monethes after that hee was there, hee came whole from thence, and brought in a paper all the clay which hee had voyded from him at tymes, being of stone dissolued into peeces. We wil sowe the seedes, although very little, onely to see the effect
wrought by them, which as they say is in a cause so greate, and if it doe growe, we wil vse of it. Of the flowres of blood. I Sowed a seede which they brought mee from the Peru,The descrip∣tion of the hearbe, and the flower. more to see the fairenesse thereof, then for any Medicinall vertues that it hath. The hearbe commeth to bee of the height of twoo spannes, litle more or lesse, bowes it casteth out straight with certaine rounde leaues, very greene and thinne, in the hiest of the bowes there groweth a flower being yeallow, very high in colour, and onely it beareth fiue leaues, and in the middest of euery leafe there is figured a droppe of blood, so red and so firmely kindled in colour, that it can not be more. This flower hath at the foote of it a stalke very long, which commeth out a good space from the flower. It is a flower very beautifull, which doeth adornate gardens, & it groweth very wel of the seede, or of the plante, and beeing tasted, it hath the same sauour and taste that the Mastuesso hath: it is notable hotte. A rinde of a tree for the Rewme. AMongst the thinges wt they sent mee frō the Peru, there is a thicke rinde, which seemeth to bee of a great tree, and being tasted, hath a sharpnes of tast with some drynesse: the trees growe at the side of a riuer, where this rinde is taken of, which is twentie and sixe Leagues from Lima, and they are not
founde in other partes of the Indias, but onely there. The tree is after the fashion of an ime, as wel in the greatnes, as in the leafe. The Indians when they feele themselues la∣den with Reumes,The vse thereof. or haue the Cough, or any paynes of the head, they make pouder very small of the rinde of the tree, and take it in at their noses, and it causeth them to purge much at them, and with this they cleare themselues of the e∣uil: which we haue experimented, by taking the pouder in at the nose, and it maketh them to purge notably. It seemeth to be more then hot in the second degree. Of the Pacal. IN the same Riuer there groweth an o∣ther tree,The vse therof. which the Indians call Pacal, which tree is lesser then that wee haue spoken of before: the Indians doe vse it made in Ashes mingled with Soye, it taketh away any maner of sore or skabbe in the head, howe grieuous soeuer it bee, as wel those which growe in the head, as in the bodie: as also it taketh away the markes of the sayde skabbes or sores being neuer so olde. Hether they sent mee a little of the wood, wherewith the Ashes are made, that we might make experience of it. Of the Paico. THey sent mee an hearbe which in the Peru they call Payco: they bee certaine leaues after the manner of the leaues of Planten, of that making and great∣nesse, and as they come dry they are ve∣ry thinne: and being tasted, they haue a notable bityng, so that thereby they seeme to bee very hotte. And being made into pouder and ta∣ken
in wyne, they take away the griefe of the stone in the kidneis, which commeth of windinesse or cold causes:The vertue thereof. and being sodden and made into a plaister, and laide vpon the griefe, they take it away also. An hearbe for the euill of the Reines. LIkewise they sent mee ano∣ther hearbe, which profiteth much in the euill of the reines, when it commeth of a hotte cause.The vertue therof. The Iuyce min∣gled with the oyntment of Roses amongst it, and one of the leaues or more, if it bee needful, laide vpon it, is good for an inflāmation, the iuyce thereof being put, and it profiteth much, for it doth resist the inflammation, and mittigate the payne. The leaues which they sent me, bee lyke to small Lettice, with the same great∣nesse, and being tasted they are of an euill savour: it seemeth to be some hearbe notable cold. ¶ Of a fruite which groweth vnder the ground. THey sent me from the Peru, a fruite very good, that groweth vnder the earth, and very faire to beholde, and of a very good taste in eating. This fruite hath no roote, nor doeth produce any plante,The descrip∣tion of it. nor plante doth produce it, but that it groweth vnder the ground as the Turmas doe grow vnder the earth, which are called the Tur∣mas of the earth. It is of the greatnesse of halfe a finger rounde, and rounde about it is wrought with a very fayre worke, it is of a bay colour: It hath within it a little kernel, which when it is dry, maketh a sounde within, lyke to an
Almonde: the rinde of it is tawny, and somwhat white, par∣ted into twoo partes lyke vnto an Almonde. It is a fruite of goood sauour and taste, and eating of it, it seemeth that you eate Nuttes. Where it groweth.This fruite groweth vnder the earth, in the coast of the Riuer of Maronnon, and it is not in any other part of al the Indias. It is to be eaten greene and dry, and the beste way is to toste it. It is eaten alwaies after meates, as fruite eaten last of all, because it dryeth much the stomacke and leaueth it satisfied, but if you eate much of it, then it brin∣geth heauinesse to the head. It is a fruite in great reputati∣on, as wel amongst the Indians, as the Spaniardes, and with greate reason, for I haue eaten of them, which they haue brought mee, and they haue a good taste. It seemeth to be a temperate fruite. Of the fruite called Leucoma. THey brought mee likewyse a fruite of a tree which the Indians call Leucoma,It is like to Chestnuttes. which is like vnto a Chestnutte of these of ours, as wel in colour as in the great∣nesse, as also in the whytenesse that the Chestnutte hath. It seemeth that within it is another thing. I did not breake it to see what it was, because they brought me but twoo of them, the one I haue sowen, and the other I haue for to sowe at an other tyme. This fruite doeth beare a tree of much greatnesse, for it is of timber strong and harde, it casteth foorth the leaues lyke to Madronno, which is a redde berie, growing in the Mountaines of Spaine. This frute serueth to be eaten, for that they say it is of a good taste, & good for the laske, because it is very dry: they say it is a temperate fruite.
Of the Beades stones to washe withal. THey sent mee a little Cheste made of Corke full of rounde beades stones and blacke, of greate beautie, so that they seeme to be made of the wood Ebano: and they bee a fruite which a small treee beareth,How it is fruite. beeing more crooked then straight, after the manner of bryers: and it carieth a round fruite as great as a Nut, couered with a certaine fleshinesse clong therevnto, which being taken away, there remaineth a round Bead stone, and so rounde that it cannot be rounder, of blacke colour, most harde, that it can not be broken. This fruite serueth in place of Sope, in such sorte, that twoo or three of these with hotte water are of more effect to wash withal, and to make cleane cloathes,Sope. then one pounde of Sope: and so it rayseth the fome, and woorketh al the ef∣fectes that Sope doth, and so they proceed washing by litle and little, vntil onely the Beadstone doe remaine, which is that which this fruite is foūded on, & al are pearced through: and there are made of them Beades to pray vpō, which see∣meth to be made of Ebano. They dure a long tyme, for as they are Beades so hard, that they breake not: this fruite is so bitter, that neither beast nor byrd commeth too it, for the bitternesse thereof. I haue sowen some of the Beades, and they haue growne, and they cast out from them faire leaues very great. I trust that they wil bring forth fruite, for nowe the plants are very litle, but in tyme I hope they wil yeld it. Of the Crabbes of that Country.
A Gentleman which came from the firme lande certified mee, that hauing had cer∣taine continuall Agues in that countrie,Historie. he came to be in a consumption, and was counsailed to goe to certaine Ilandes, which are betweene Puerto Rico and the Margareta, for that there is in them greate quantitie of Crabbes, and they are the best of the worlde, because they are maintained by Pigeons Egges, which goe thither to lay, and of the yong Pigeons that are there, & that he should eate no other thing but these crabbes sodden, and he was healed very wel: and although he had ea∣ten much fleshe of Popingeies for that purpose, they did not him so much good, as the Crabbes did: and in them that are consumed, they haue a great property, as Auenzoar saith, and not only they profit such by manifest qualitie or degree, but also by their particular propertie which they haue, for the same purpose. Of the Cardones. BIcause I shoulde see the straungenesse of this Hearbe which is the Cardones of the greatnes of a torche of eight square, and wreathed like vnto it, they brought them vnto me. It hath a Medicinal ver∣tue,The medici∣nal vertues thereof. that being newly beaten in a Mor∣ter and put into Sores, it healeth and so∣dereth them forthwith. And well neere I my selfe had neede of it, for this purpose, for that one of the thornes that it hath, did pricke me. They are strong as Needles which did hurt mee. It seemeth to be a strange hearbe. Of an hearbe for such as are broken.
THey sent me a little of an hearbe, and by reason it was so drie it came smal broken in peeces, so that the figure of it could not be seene, which they wrote was maruel∣lous for them that are broken, whether they bee children or men that haue that kinde of griefe, and in those partes they haue it for a sure thing, and it is vsed by one Indian, by ap∣plying this hearbe greene, vpon that which is broken, being men or children. And it maketh thervpon a certayne binding very strange, without neede of any maner of Brich, made for the purpose, for they may goe so fast and so swift being bound therwith, as though they had a paire of Briches, as one told me that had byn healed of the like disease, with the hearbe, and with the maner of bynding. I haue vnderstood that if the maner of binding be as good as this man speaketh of, it is sufficient to heale without the hearbe, or any thing els, by reason that I saw a man of Crdona which healed all persons that were broken with onely the bynding that bee made of them, without vsing vnto them any maner of brich. And this is certayne, that there be some here that were healed and cu∣red by him. Of the Veruaine. ALso the same Gentleman wrote vnto me from the Peru, that in the Riuers of the Mountaynes of that Countrie neere vnto them, there groweth a greate quanti∣tie of Veruaine, like vnto that of Spaine, with the which the Indians doe profite themselues in their cures,The vertues thereof. for many in∣firmities, and in especially agaynst all kinde of poyson, and
for such as say that there hath beene geuen them a morsell, or the like thing. I spake heere with a Ladie which came from the Peru, and she certified me that hauing beene many yeeres sicke,Historie. and being in cure with many Phisitions, she went to an In∣dian, that was knowen to bee a man that knewe muche of herbes,Wormes. vnto whom the Indians did put themselues in cure, & hee gaue her to drinke the iuyce clarified of Veruaine, which shee her selfe made, and within a fewe dayes after that shee had taken it, she cast out from her a worme, shee sayd it was a vearie Snake, of more then two spannes long, and verie greate, and his tayle was parted, and after she had cast him out from her, she was well and whole. And shee counselled a Gentleman which was in the Peru, that was continually sicke to take it, and he tooke it in the morning with Sugar, for so she had taken it, because of the bitternesse that it hath, and he cast out a great number of long and small woormes. and one like to a white long girdell, and since that time hee hath very well his health. And this shee counselled other Persons which were sicke, to doe, that had suspicion, too haue woormes, and with the vse of the sayde iuyce they cast from them many, and they were healed. And it was so cer∣tainly, and shee shewed mee a Seruaunt of hers, and it was sayd that according to the greeuousnes of a disease, which hee had, there was geuen vnto him certayne thinges of witchcraft, and with the iuyce of the Veruaine that he tooke, he cast by vomite many thinges out of his stomake, of di∣uers colours, and it was said that it was that wherewith he was bewitched, which being cast foorth, he remayned whole, and of that which toucheth witchcraft I will speake what I haue seene.Witchcraft I sawe a seruant of Iohn de Quinatna Duenas, beeyng Aburgales,A notable historie. who did cast out at his mouth in my presence a greate bundell of eare, of a browne colour, very small, and
hee had in a Paper more then twice as much, which hee had cast vp two houres before, and he remained as though he had cast vp nothing at all, more then the alteration that hee had, to see, that he had cast vp such stuffe. Iohn Langins an Almayne Phisition,Iohn Langi∣us historie. and verie well learned, saith that he sawe a woman that complayned much of payne in her stomake, did cast out many peeces of glasse, and peeces of Earthen Platters, and of fish bones wherwith she remayned whole. An other case like vnto this Beneuenius speaketh of in his book de morbis mirandis, but that which I do most maruel at,Beneuenius historie. was, that a labouring man suffering great paines in his bel∣lie, so that no medicine coulde profite him, did cut his owne throate with a knife, and after that he was dead, they opened him & foūd in his belly great quantity of heare, the like wher∣of he that I haue spokē of did vomit, with many other peeces of yron. These things I do attribute to ye works of the Diuel, for that they cānot be reduced vnto natural causes. The Uer∣uaine is like that of Spaine, & all the yeere it is greene. Of the Mastuerco. I haue an hearbe brought from the Peru, which they call Mastuerco,The vertues. it is a little hearbe, & doth carry certain small leaues that are round, which beeing beaten in a morter, and the iuyce of them put into any maner of wound, doth refresh, comfort and heale, curing it foorthwith, and the vse of it is not more nor lesse then the vse of the Tabaco, in woundes which he freshly made washing them with the iuyce, and lay∣ing the beaten leaues to them, and being tasted it semeth that it is notable hot. Of the small wild Lettice.
LIkewise they brought mee from the same partes an other hearbe, which they call wilde Lettice: the leaues bee like to Let∣tice, the colour is a sadde greene, it hath vertue too take away the Tooth∣ache,It taketh a∣way the toothache. receyuing the seething which is made of the leaues, and holding it in the parte where the griefe is, and putting a little of the iuyce in the tooth, which is greeued, for so it taketh away the paines, & y• leaues which are stāped, after the iuyce is taken out, must be laid vpon it, & being tasted it is most bitter. It seemeth to be hot in more then the first degree. Of the licour which is called Ambia. IN a great Cane they sent me a Licour which springeth out of a fountaine that is neere to the Sea side, it is of the colour of honie, & as thin, the smel is like the Taca∣mabaca, they say and also they write, that it hath great medicinall vertues,The medici∣nall vertues thereof. chiefly in the healing of olde diseases, and those which come of colde causes. It taketh away the paines in any parte of the bodie, proceeding of colde or of windinesse. It ta∣keth away the colde in what part soeuer it be, it doth comfort and dissolue any maner of swelling, and it worketh all the ef∣fectes that the Tacamabaca and the Caranna doe, and so they vse it in those parts, in steede of them: you may not touch nor handle it with your hands, vnlesse you haue them wet, and wheresoeuer it be put, it sticketh fast, that it cannot be taken away, vnlesse it be wasted with long time. They sent me this little for a shew, bicause they doe esteem it greatly, & therfore they sent it as a thing very precious. It seemeth to me hot in the third degree, with notable clammines.
¶ Of the tree that sheweth whether one shall liue or die IN the yere of our Lord, 1562. Whē the Earle of Nieba was in the Peru, he had there a gen∣tlewomā wc was married that serued him, & her husband wax∣ed sicke of a grieuous disease, & an Indian of great reputatiō seeing her to be in much sorow, saide to her, if she would know whether her husbande shoulde liue or die of that disease, he woulde sende her a Bowe of an hearbe, that shee should take in her left hand, and hold it fast, for a good while: and if he should line, then she shoulde shewe much gladnesse, with holding the Bowe in her hande: and if he should die, then she should shew much sadnesse. And the In∣dian sent her the Bow, and she did as he had willed her to do: and the bowe being put into her hand, she tooke so much sad∣nesse and sorrowe, that she threw it away from her, thinking that she should haue died thereof, and so he died within a fewe daies. I was desirous to know if that it were so, and a Gen∣tleman of the Peru that had beene there many yeeres, did certifie me and sayd that it was of truth, that the Indians did this with their sicke people. It hath put me in admiration, and in much consideration. ¶ Of the Granadillia. FRom the firme Lande they brought mee certayne Fruites which are herbes which they call in the hils of the Peru where they grow, Graaillias,The descrip∣tion of he Granadillias▪ and this name the Spaniards did giue them, for the likenes & fashion that they haue to our Granaas, which wee call
they sent me, is of a red colour, somewhat darke, and it hath a good smell. Of the Bezaar stones of the Peru. ALthough in the second parte I treated of the Bezaar stones, that haue been founde in the mountaines of the Peru, for that they haue beene sent me by the first disco∣uerer of them, the best of as many as from those partes haue come, yet I would say in this thirde parte some thing of them, which he sent me for knowledge, saying: that because I wrote of them they had knoledge of them: and the booke which I wrote of them, was the guide to finde and discouer them, as we haue sayd, as he sheweth by his letter, which we haue set in the second parte, Those which hee sent mee too prooue bee verie ex∣cellent in their coullour, making, and greatenesse, whereof I haue broken some, and finde them as excellent as those of the East India: and so they prooue in pouder, or in one little graine as the other doe, and in coullour well neere they are the same. Truth it is, that those which haue this qualitie and goodnesse, and haue all the qualities that the Bezaar stones ought to haue which are fine, shoulde bee those that are taken out of the beastes, that are fedde in the Moun∣taynes, for those which are taken out of them that are bredde in the playne groundes, are not so good, nor haue any Medicinall vertues, because the Beastes ae not mayntayned by those healthfull Hearbes, whereby these stones are ingendered, for as they bee Beastes and chewe tha which they eate of the iuyce, that proceedeth from the herbs, the stones are ingendered. Which thing that Gentle∣man gaue well to vnderstande, who was the first discouerer
of them, who did see where they lay, and were bred within the beast, and with his owne handes made the Anatomy of him,Where thes stones doo growe. and wrot vnto mee that the Bezaar stones are grow∣ing in those beastes, after the manner of a garde made of flesh, of the length of twoo spannes, little more or lesse, and of three fingers breadth, which is ioyned neere vnto the Mawe of the inner parte, and in the garde the stones are set in order one after an other, like vnto button holes, in a coate, in this forme. How ther are set in order. And they open that garde of flesh being closed, and take out the stones, that surely it is a maruellous thing to see, what Nature hath created there, for our health & remedie of our euils And as I haue vnderstoode, that these which are brought from the East India, be founde after the same ma∣ner, so I speake the truthe, for they bring very many which are false, that amongest one hundred there are not to bee founde tenne that are true, and their wryters of the East India doe confesse, that there be made many indeed which are false. The people of the East India take them cut also of a certaine kinde of Goates,They of the Oriental In∣dias. that bee for the most parte redde as ours be: they are the best stones which are takē out of y• cattel, which goe in the Mountaines of Persia: and like∣wise they take them out of other Goates, that goe in the playne Countries of Malaca, and these are not had in such estimation, nor haue the goodnesse nor the vertues that they of Persia haue, because those Goates of Ma∣laca doe serue for cattell to bee eaten, and they be not main∣tained by healthful hearbes of the mountaines, as they that
yet it taketh away the accidentes of it, the faintnesse & sadnesse,In quarterne Agewes. and the griefe of the harte, which in these Feuers are common. Surely they feele with the vse of it notable profite, in al long and importunate diseases I do geue it, & they finde profite in it,In long euils. chiefly those which stand in feare, of any malice of disease, or windinesse, whatsoeuer it bee. For I haue seene, that in this it hath a greate propertie, and of this it commeth, that it is good to cast into pourges, some graines of it, that if the Pourge doe carry venomous qua∣lities, it may rectifie them, and amende them, and if not, it giueth force, and strength to the harte, and they woorke the better. In the oriental Indias they haue a custome to purge themselues twyce euery yere, and especially the noble peo∣ple of estimation, and after they haue purged themselues, they take euery morning fasting foure graines of the Be∣zaar stone,A custome of the Orientall Indians. with Rose water, or with water made for the purpose, and they say that this doeth conserue their youth, and strengthen the members, and preserue them from dis∣eases: and it is a good vse, for it cannot choose, but doe them much good. For Wormes they geue this Stone with most happy successe, and surely I haue giuen it to many people, and especially to Children, and Boyes, that are tormented with this euill, and I haue seene such workes as are not to be beleeued, if they were not seene. I geue it by it selfe, and also mingled with this pouder, in this forme. I doe take hearbe Lumbrigera the wayght of twelue pence,Pouders to be meruelled at for the wormes, and al kindes of them. the seede of Santonico the wayght of sixe pence, the Horne of a Harte burned, and the seede of Verdolagas, and Carlina, of euery one the waight of three pence, and the Bezaar Stone of the Peru, the waight of three pence: of these thinges let there be small Pouder made, and let them bee wel mingled. These Pouders are maruellous and of greate effect, to expell Wormes, and very much experi∣mented in many people, and they haue wrought in this case
greate effectes, and they must be giuen in the morning fa∣sting, as to the Phisition shal seeme good, according to the age of him that shall take them, vsing some Medicine of Milke, and Sugar twoo houres after they bee taken. And vnto children being sicke of it, wee geue this stone mingled with milke; and without it, if they doe sucke, and it doeth a maruellous worke: and to them that be in yeeres, by it selfe, or mingled with other thinges appropriated for the disease. In conclusion, we geue this stone in al long diseases, and im∣portunate, where the ordinary medicines haue not profited, in which it doeth manifest profite, and if it doe no profit, yet it can doe no hurte. Of the Fig trees of the Peru. FIgge trees beeing caried from Spaine to the Peru, haue increased so wel in that Countrie, that there is great plentie of them, where they cary many and very good Figges, of all sortes. And you shal vnderstande, that in that countrie there are certaine kindes of Uermyn, which are called Spyders, and wheresoeuer they bee, they doe spinne, and make Nettes as they of Spaine doe.Spyders. These kinde of Uermyn bee greate, and come to bee as great as Orenges, and they are so ful of poyson that wich one stin∣ging they kill, vnlesse there bee vsed great remedie. And if it bee long tyme without remedie, and that the Poyson goe vp to the hart, there is nothing that can bee done that will benefite, but he must die without remedie: and for this there is founde a remedy in the Figge trees, which is a mar∣uellous thing, that as soone as the Indians or the Spani∣ardes doe feele themselues bitten by this euill Spyder, they goe to the Figge trees, and put vnto it the Milke which commeth foorth of the Leaues of them, two or three times to the place, that is bitten, and this worketh so great effect,
that it remedieth it which is so poysoned, with the venom that the Uermine did cast into the sore, and the accidentes be remitted which they suffer, to wit, great griefs and soun∣dings, remaining only to heale the place bitten, and as it is little, so it healeth forthwith, although they procure to keepe it open a long tyme. And Gods wil is, that at all tymes this remedie shoulde not lacke, for the Figge trees neuer loose their leaues, throughout all the yeere they are alwayes greene. Of the Coca. I Was desirous to see that hearbe so celebrated of the Indiās, so many yeres past, which they call the Coca, wc they sow and till with much care, and diligence, because they vse it for their plea∣sures, which wee wil speake of.The descrip∣tion of the Coca. The Coca is an hearbe of the height of a yerd, little more or lesse, it carieth leaues lyke to Arraihan, somewhat greater, and in that Leafe there is marked an other leafe of the lyke forme, with a line very thinne: they are softe, and of colour a light greene, they carry the seede in clusters, and it commeth to be red when it is rype, as the seed of Arraihan, when it is type. And it is of the same greatnesse, when the hearbe is seasoned, that it is to be gathered, it is knowen in the seede, that it is rype when it is of some rednes lyke to a blackish colour, and the hearbe beeing gathered, is put into Canes and other things, that they may dry, that they may be kepte and caried to other partes. For that they cary them from the high Mountaines, to other places, as marchādise
to be solde, they barter and change them for Mantelles, and Cattel, and Salt, and other things which runne like money amongst vs they plant the seede in Almaciga, and from that they take them vp and set them in other places, into Earth that is wel laboured or tilled, and made conuenient to set them in by their lines and order, as we do set here a Garden of Beanes, or of Peason. The vse of it amongst the Indians is a thing generall, for many things, for when they trauell by the way,The vse of i. for need and for their content when they are in their houses, they vse it in this forme. They take Cokles or Oysters, in their shelles, and burne them and grinde them, and after they are burned they remaine like Lyme, very small grounde: then they take the Leues of the Coca, and chewe them in their Mouthes, and as they chawe it, they mingle with it some of that pouder made of the shelles in such sorte, that they make it lyke to a Paste, taking lesse of the Pouder then of the hearbe, and of this Paste they make certaine small bwles rounde, and lay them to dry, and whē they wil vse them, they take a little Ball in their mouth, and chawe it, rowling it from one place to an other, procuring to conserue it all that they can, and that being done, they take another, and so they goe, vsing it al the time that they haue need, which is when they trauell by the way, and especially if it bee by wayes where is no meate, nor plentie of water. For the vse of these litle Balles taketh the hunger and thirst from them: & they say that they receiue substance thereby, as though they did eate meate. At other times they vse them for their pleasure, although they labour not by the way, and they vse the same Coca alone, chewing it & tossing it in their mouths, from one side to another, vntil there be no vertue remaining in it, and then they take another. When they will make themselues dronke,Note. and bee out of iudgement, they mingle with the Coca the leaues of the
Tabaco, and chewe them all together, and goe as they were out of their wittes, or as if they were dronke, which is a thing that doeth giue them great contentment, to bee in that sort. Surely it is a thing of great consideration, to see howe desirous the Indians are to be depryued of their wittes, and to bee without vnderstanding, seeing that they vse thus the Coca with the Tabaco, and al to this end, that they would be without vnderstanding, and haue their wittes taken from them, as wee sayde in the second parte, when wee treated of the Tabaco. Of the diuers colours of the grounde. A Maruellous thing it is, and well to be considered, the diuers colours of the groundes which are in the fieldes, in the countries of the Peru: for that looking a farre of you shall see many partes of groundes of diuers colours, which seeme to bee clothes of diuers colours layde to dry in the Sunne: for you shall see one parte of the grounde Greene, and an other Blewe, and foorthwith an other yeal∣low, and whyte, and blacke, and red, and so of other colours, all which are Mineries of diuers Earths. Of the blacke I can say that they sent mee a little that there with I might make Inke, which beeing cast into water or wyne there is made there of very good Inke, wherewith one may wryte very wel, but it is somewhat blewe, which maketh it of a better shewe. The red grounde hath beene a thing of great riches, for that which hath beene taken out of it, for it is a Minery most excellent,Quick siluer. of which is made quicke Siluer, and there out is taken such quantitie of it, that there are carried to the newe Spayne, Shippes laden with it, which is a riches
so greate, that it is not knowen vnto the Indians. It serueth them for no other vse then to mingle it with certain gummes, to paint themselues withall, which they vse to doe when they goe to their warres to shewe themselues gallant, and fierce. Euery day they discouer in those countries great Mineries of metals, & such like things, for they haue found out a moun∣taine of Oker, & a myne of Allom, & an other of Brimstone & many other things which they doe daily discouer. Of the Casany. I Haue caused them to bring me from San¦cto Domingo a leafe of that plant wherof they make the Casani, and they brought it me. The Casani is the bread, which the Indians so many multitudes of yeeres haue maintained themselues withall,Casani s bred in the Indias. and doe yet maintaine themselues, & likewise many Spaniardes. It is made of an herbe that the Indians doe call Yuca, which is of fiue or sixe spannes of height,Te descrip∣tin o the hearbe and the fut. it car∣rieth certaine Leaues open, spreade abroade like to the fin∣gers of an hand, and euery one carrieth seuen or eight points, they are alwayes greene, they are set in a ground well tilled, of peeces cut of from the same plant, the fruit is after the ma∣ner of grosse Turnepes, they are of colour Tawnie without, onely in the body, for within they are white, & they par them to vse them: and of this fruite they make Breade in this forme. They make it cleane from the Rynde, and grate it in certayne Graters, which are made of Nedles,How they mae read of the fruite. and being so grated they put it into a sliue of palme, & vpon it they hang thinges of waight, which are great stones, which make the iuyce run out of it, and being well pressed it remaineth as Al∣mondes beaten: thy cast this into a playne frying panne of
Earth, that they haue put to the fire, and there they knede it, and make it like to a little cake of Egges, turning it from one side to an other, and after it is well kneded, it remayneth like a Cake, of the thicknesse of a peece of siluer of foure shil∣linges, or little more, which they lay in the Sunne, that it may drie, and these Cakes they vse for Bread, which are of muche substaunce. These Cakes continue long time without corrupting, and they bring them in the shippes which come from those partes, into Spayne without beyng corrupted, and serue for Bisket too all the peo∣ple. It eateth as a thing sharpe, and so it serueth, and they lay it to soake in water, or in broth, or in Pottage, for after this manner they serue themselues better with it, then to eate it drie. It is needefull to haue a vessel with wa∣ter, for to soake it in. It is a mauellous thing of the iuyce which commeth out of this fruite,Note the maruelles of the iuyce. which is spoken of, that if any Man or beast doe drinke it, or any part of it, incontinently he dieth, as with the most strong venome that is in the worlde: but if this iuyce doe seeth, and bee consumed the one halfe, and so set out too coole, it serueth for very good Uineger, and it is vsed as if it were made of Wine: and if you seeth it vntill it be throughly purged and thicke, it serueth for Honie, and becommeth sweete: you may see how much the seething auayleth in these thinges, seeyng that of mortal ve∣nome, it maketh meate, and healthfull drinke. And I will say an other thing which bringeth admiration: that all this kynde of Corne, which groweth in the firme Lande which is like to that of Sancto Domingo, which they call Cacani, is healthfull, and the Fruite thereof is eaten and the Water that commeth of it is drunke, without ha∣uing any venomous qualitie, and that of Sancto Domingo, howsoeuer it be eaten and the iuyce therof vnles it be sodden, it killeth. And that the disposition of the place is so greate
a cause, that that which is healthfull and allowable suste∣nance in the firme lande, the same is mortal venome in al the Islandes: as Columela writeth of the Peache, that it was venome most mischeeuous,Columla. which in Persia did kil men and being brought into Italy it lost that malice and propertie that it had to kill, and geueth vnto vs health, and a sweete iuyce. Howsoeuer it be, hauing in the Indias so much Mayes, and so common in all partes thereof, I woulde not eate Casani, seeyng that the Mayes are of as good substaunce as our Wheate, and in no parte hath eyther venome,Mais or poyson, but rather is healthful, and maketh a good stomake. There is bread made of it, as of the Casani,Bread of Mai. for they grinde it, and with water they knede it, and in a Frying panne of Earth they bake certayne Cakes, which they make of it, and it must be eaten freshe, assoone as it is made: for beyng dry, it is sharpe and trouble some to swallowe downe, and doeth offende the teeth. The Batatas, which is a common fruite in those Coun∣tries, I take for a vittayle of muche Substaunce,Batatas. and that they are in the middest betweene fleshe and Fruite. Trueth it is, that they be wyndie, but that is taken from them by rosting, chiefly if they bee put into fine Wyne: there is made of them Conferna very excellent, as Mar∣molade, and small Morselles, and they make Potages and Brothes, and Cakes of them very excellent: they are subiect that there be made of them any maner of Conserua, and any maner of meat: ther be so many in Spaine, that they bring from Velez Melaga euery yeere to Seuill, tenne or twelue Caruelles laden with them. They be sowen of the same Plantes that are sette, the smallest of them, or pee∣ces of the greatest in the Earth that is well tilled, and they growe very well, and in eyght Monethes the rootes waxe ve∣ry grosse, so that you may eate of them: They be temperate, and beeyng rosted, or otherwise drest, they soften the Bellie,
and beyng raw, they are not good to bee eaten, because they are wyndie, and hard of disgestion. Of the Canes which are good for the shortnesse of breath. THey bring from the newe Spayne great Canes, of a Cane that are couered within & without with a certain gūmme, & to me it seemeth that it is mingled with the iuyce of Tabaco, & it is heauy. It seemeth that the Cane is annoynted, & as a thing that the clingeth fast, it is clunged wel to the said Cane, and it is of a blacke colour, and being hard it clin∣geth not, they kindle the Cane at that part where the gumme is, and the other parte of it they put in the mouth, and they receiue that smoke, and with it they cast out from them all fleume and rottennesse, that is in the breast: and this they do when they finde themselues greeued with the shortnesse of winde, so that they be all ready to choke. I haue seene it done by a Gentleman, who is much payned with it many times, and receiueth by it great profite: and did it first with the Ta∣bac, taking the smoke of it, and it brought to him the like be∣nefit. And for this cause, I say, that it seemeth, to carry with it the iuyce of the Tabaco, mingled with the one and with the other. It is done with al assurance, for that we do see it experi∣mented with manifest assurance in many. Some beeing sicke of the shortnesse of breath, that come frō the Indias,For faintnesse or shortnesse of breath. with it I haue seene expel, & cast out this rot∣tennes, by taking a little Tabaco green, & chewing the iuyce of it, wt although it be lothsome, it doth them much good to ex∣pell the rottennesse & fleumes, which are retained within the
brestes, so that they be lightened with it notably. It is a mar∣uellous thing, the greate vertues, and sundrie and diuers ef∣fectes that they doe discouer of the Tabaco: for besides that which I haue written of it in the second parte, of the maruel∣lous vertues therof, I determined to make further triall of it, as I haue vnderstood, and seene since that time. ¶ Of the Carlo Sancto. IN the second parte wee entreated of the vertues of a Roote, that then they had brought from the newe Spayne, which they cal Carlo Sancto, & now in these ships they haue brought it, with great venerati∣on and estimation: and the roote is called Indica, and they bring written many ver∣tues of it more then they are woonte too reporte of the Rosemarie. Nowe that which hath beene experimente, and seene since that I wrote of it, I will speake,The vertues thereof. of this Roote, which being made into Pouder, geuen to women that newly brought Children, who for euill keeping haue taken greate colde and be numbe, it profiteth muche to pro∣uoke them to sweate, and maketh them remayne cleere: it profiteth muche geuen with Wine, or water of the floures of Orenges, vnto them that haue a harde labour. There was a Frier which had paynes of the Stomake,Historie. and no tast of his Meate, but had an euill breath, and much windynesse, and all did proceede of colde that hee had ta∣ken, and little natural heate. He sodde of these Rootes in wa∣ter at his discretion, as the water of the Sarcaparillia is sod∣den, and so he dranke it continually, at dinner & supper for a long time, and it did so well with him, that he amended his stomake, and increased the heate of it, whereby hee did digest, and consume his meate very well, and tooke from him his euill breath, and consumed the windes, and in ta∣ken
from twoo to three Ounces of it, it purgeth well and easily, and euen as it is good to take, so it is good to worke, for that I haue purged many people with it, and it maketh a very good woorke, and purgeth without paynes. One thing they doe euill in those partes, which is, that they ne∣uer bring them hither made with good Sugar, if they come so, they woulde be the better, and of better tast. They bee purges for delicate people, they euacuate the same humor that the Canafistola doth. Of the Canes of the small Canafistola there is made an other Conserua verie good, which is an excellent purge,Of the Canes in Conser. and delicate: for they take the small Canes, which are growing of a small time, and seeth them in Sugar, and with the seething and Su∣gar, is taken from them the sharpenesse and the drinesse which they haue, and they are made tender and softe, and of a very good sauour. These beyng taken, make a very good woorke, and purge without griefe or molestati∣on, and without all accidentes and faintnesse that purges are vsed to procure, for that they are full of good tast, at the taking of them, and light of woorking. They are geuen from two Ounces to three, I haue geuen them many times with very good successe, and haue taken them beyng sicke, and they haue wrought verie well with mee. Of these Conseruas they bring hither euery yeere from Sancto Do∣mingo, and Puerto Rico many Barrelles full. The Ca∣nafistola that is perfect and rype, is the moste excellent Medicine for to purge withall, of as many as haue been knowne to this day, and that doeth his woorke best in that which it serueth for, and with most assuraunce, as it is wel knowne not onely to Phisitions, but also to all the world, and doeth his worke without the hurtes and accidents which other Purgatiue Medicines are vsed too doe, and it is a generall Medicine, and amongst them that are called blessed, is the most blessed of all, whose vertues and properties wee doe treate of particularly, in the first part, and that which we
haue spoken heere, hath beene to geue relation of the leaues, and flowers of it, which they haue now brought mee. One thing I would they should be aduertised of,Note. that when we are commanded to geue Canafistola, to lighten and sof∣ten the bellie, and that the common matters may bee voyded downe, is ment that they shoulde take it a smal tyme before meate be eaten, at the most halfe an houre before, for the meate being mingled ioyntly with it, worketh with it, and in this order it maketh a very good woorke, and purgeth ve∣ry wel, & without paines: which is not done with that which is taken any long time before meate, as two or three houres before, as now many doe vse it, for that the meate beeing di∣lated, it maketh an ende of woorking. And as it is a thing without strength and weake, it goeth al into vapours, and so sheadeth it selfe abroade throughout al the body: & if it tarry long, it is conuerted into meate, and substaunce, which I haue seene by experience many yeeres wherein I haue practised, that alwayes as I gaue it halfe an houre before meate at the most, it maketh a good worke, and if it be giuen many houres before meate, it purgeth, and euacuateth little. Concerning mingling of medicines, which doe purge, with the meate, Hipocrates treateth of it in many partes, and Galene in his Commentaries. And trueth it is, that when we wil that the Canafistola should not euacuate, but that the vapours shoulde bee spred abroade by the reines, and all the body, wee geue it many houres before meate, and then not working, it performeth the effect that wee haue spoken of. Of the Balsamo of Tolu. THey newly bring now from the Firme lande, from a Prouince which is betweene Cartagena, & Numbre de Dios, which the Indians call Tolu, a Balsao, or licour, that is the best thing, and of greatest vertues,
of as many thinges as come from these partes. They ga∣ther it from certaine trees,What trees they are whereof it is gathered. which are after the manner of litle Pines, which cast out many bowes to al partes. It car∣rieth the leafe lyke to Algarrona, al the yeere it is greene, they are the best which growe in a softe grounde well tilled. How it is ga∣thered.This Balsmo the Indians doe gather by way of in∣cision, gying certaine cuttes in the rinde of the tree, for it is thinn and soft, and they set vnderneath it, neere vnto the tree, thinges like to dishes made of waxe, which is in that country blacke, which they take out of Hiues, that certaine blacke Bees doe make in the chappinges of the grounde, & I haue seene brought much of this Waxe into Spain,Black waxe. and it was spent in Torches, but it was forbidden that none of it should be spent, for the smoke which it cast from it, had so euil a smel, that it coulde not bee suffered. They did vse this waxe in matters of Medicine, for therof were made Cere∣clthes, which wrought very good effects, in mittigating griefe of any colde cause, it dissolueth any maner of swel∣linges, and woorketh many other good effectes. Of this waxe the Indians doe make vessels lyke to a spoone, and set them close to the tree, that they may receiue the licour that commeth out of it, by the places where the cutting are made, and from thence they receyue it into those ves∣selles: and it is needfull that it be done in tyme of great heate, that the cuttinges may cast out the licour, and in this tyme lykewyse, there soketh out of the ioyntes of the sayde tree some licour, and it is lost because it is so little, and falleth into the grounde: in the night time there commeth forth none. This licour, or Balsamo is very much esteemed amongst the Indians, and is of greate value, and with the notable woorkes which therewith are done, and the Spaniardes haue learned, and by seeing the great woorkes which it ma∣keth,
they haue brought it hether, as a thing of great estima∣tion, and such a thing as they buy there for a great price: and they haue reason so to doe: for one of the best thinges that haue come from those partes, which haue beene brought for Medicine, is this Balsamo, which seemeth to be better then that of the newe Spaine, and in it selfe appeareth to haue more vertues. It is of an Alborne colour, very neere lyke to a thing that is gilt, it is not very thinne, nor very thicke,The colour & maner of it. it clyn∣geth faste wheresoeuer it bee layde, and it hath the taste and sauour sweete, and although it bee taken, it maketh not any horriblenesse, as the other Balsamo doeth: it hath a most excellent smell, lyke to Limons, insomuch that where¦soeuer it bee, the good smell thereof giueth greate content∣ment, and it can not bee hidden,The workes & effectes of this Balsa∣mo. How they cure with it. for a little of it smelleth much: and if you rubbe your hande therewith, there remay∣neth a maruellous smel. The woorkes thereof are excellent and very greate, for that it is licour which is taken out by incision, as they tooke out in olde tyme the Balsamo in E∣gypt: and for al those diseases for which that was good, this of ours is as good. It healeth al fresh woundes, comforting the partes, and ioyning them without making any matter, and without lea∣uing any signe of them. The superfluitie that is in the woūd must be taken away of what sort soeuer it be, & washed with wine, & ioyned wel in the lippes & parts therof, and then the Balsamo laid to it, when the coldnesse is out of it, and forth∣with a double linnen cloth vpon it, wette in the same Balsa∣mo, and so bounde that the lippes goe not a sunder, and kee∣ping diet, and vsing letting of blood if it be needful, and not vnbinding it vntill the fourth day, and they shall finde the wounde comforted, except that there bee any acci∣dent, which causeth it to bee vndone before. And when the cause is such, that it requireth to bee dressed
euery day, by reiterating the wette Linnen cloth in the Bal∣samo, it wil bee healed: for the vertue of this Balsamo is to cause that there bee no matter engendered in the woundes, and especially this Balsamo doeth profite in woundes, where there hath beene cuttinges of bones, taking them out that haue beene diuided one from another, and not tou∣ching the rest, for that the vertue of the Balsamo will caste them out, and hauing so done, wil heale the wounde. One of the thinges wherein this Balsamo worketh greate effectes, is in woundes, and ioyntes, and in cuttinges of Sinewes, & in al prickes: for in all these kindes of woundes it maketh a maruellous woorke, curing and preseruing them from ex∣treame colde, and from running together of Sinewes, that they remayne not lame. The woundes which doe penetrate, are healed with this Balsamo, being mingled with whyte wyne, and spouting it into them, and after three houres ta∣king it out again. This must be done in wounds or prickes, once euery da, that it may goe with a moderate heat. Like∣wyse this Balsamo serueth to be applied, where haue beene giuen dry blowes, or brusinges, and for al workes of Surge∣rie, where is no notable inflammation, which beeing taken away with the Medicines, that are conuenient for it, the Balsamo may then bee vsed. In diseases that belong not to Surge∣ry.In euilles which belong not to Surgerie this Balsamo doth profit much, as in him that hath the shortnes of breath, by taking a fewe droppes in whyte wyne it profiteth him much: it taketh away the grief of the head cōming of a colde cause, and a litle Plaister being laide vpon the griefe, and wette therewith to the Temples of the head, taketh away all runnings by those partes, and in especially the euilles of the eyes, and Reumes that runne into them, beeing layde to the foreparte of the head, and it must be good and hot. It ta∣keth away the paynes of it, and comforteth it, and remedi∣eth the Palsie. Some that haue beene in a Consumption
haue vsed it, taking some droppes in the morning, licking them out of the Palme of the hande, and they haue felt nota∣ble profit. And it maketh cleane the brest very wel, it is good to take some droppes with Aqua vitae, hot, before any maner of colde in a Quarterne Ague, or of a long importunate ter∣tian Ague, annoynting with the same Balsamo, mingled with Oyle of Ruda, the Temples of the head, good and hot before the colde doeth come. If with the Balsamo they an∣noint themselues from the mouth of the stomacke to the Naul, it comforteth the stomacke, it giueth a lust to meate, it helpeth digestion, it dissolueth Windes, it taketh away the paines of the stomacke, and it worketh farre better these effects, if the halfe of the Balsamo be mingled with another halfe of Oyle of Spike Nard compounded or simple, and so it is better applyed. There is great experience of it in the Indias, for Swellinges that are in the maner of Dropsies: and mingling it with oyntment, disopilatiue of equal parts, and annointing the belly therewith, chiefly the parte neere ye Lunges, there are seene wrought therewith great effects: it dissolueth any maner of swelling or hardnes that is in any parte of the body, and being laide vpon any paine that com∣meth of a colde cause, although it be of long continuance, it taketh it away, bringing it to be so smal vntil it fal of it self, the same it doeth wheresoeuer is any winde. And if it bee in the belly, or in any parte of the body, wetting a Linen cloth hot in Aqua vitae of the best, and applying it to the place, where the griefe of the Stone is, and mingled with Oyle made for the purpose, it maketh a great woorke, it taketh a∣way the paynes of the Sinewes, and when they bee shronke together, in a very hot weather, rubbing them with it, it dis∣solueth them. The euil called the Lamparones that are open or shutte, it healeth. Many other effectes this maruellous li∣cour worketh which I haue not knowen, but these which I haue knowen I doe manifest to al the worlde, that they may
take profite by so maruellous a Medicine, which hath so many vertues as you haue hearde, and euery day the tyme wil discouer other greater. The ende of the thirde, and last parte.
The Table of the thinges that these three bookes doe containe. In the first Booke. OF the Anime & Co∣pal. fol. 1. Of the Tacamahaca fol. 2. Of the Caranna. fol. 4. Of the oyle of the Figge tree. fol. 5. Of the Gumme. fol. 6. Of the Liquid Ambar and the oyle thereof. fol. 6. Of the Balsamo. fol. 7. Of Guaiacā & holy wood. 12. Of the China. fol. 13. Of the Sarcaparillia. fol. 15. Of the blood stone, and the stone, for the disease of the stone. fol. 18. Of the woode for the Urine. fol. 19. Of the Peper of the Indias fol. 20. Of the Canafistola. fol. 21. Of the Purgatiue Nuttes. fol. 21. Of the Purgatiue Pinons. fol. 22. Of the Purgatiue Beanes. fol. 22. Of the Milke of Pinipini∣chi. fol. 23. Of the Mechoacan. fol. 23 Of the Quicke Sulphure fol. 30 Of Arromatike wood. 31 In the second Booke. OF the Tabaco. fo. 34 Of the Sassafras. Of the Carlo San∣cto. fol. 57. Of saint Elens Bedes. 59. Of the Guacatane. fol. 60. Of the smal Barlie. fol. 62. The Epistle from the Peru. fol. 64. Of the blood of Drago. 71. Of the Armadilio. fol. 73. Of the flower of Mechoa∣can. fol. 75. Of the Fruite of Balsamo. fol. 76. Of the long Peper. fol. 77. Of the Sarcaparillia of Guaiaquil. fol. 79. Of Ambar grise. fol. 82. In the thirde Booke. OF the Cinamon of our Indias. fol. 88, Of the Ginger. 89.
Of the Ruibarbe of the In∣dias. fol. 89 Of the Pinnas. fol. 90 Of the Guaiauas. fol. 90 Of the Cachos. fol. 91 Of the flowers of blood. 92 Of the Rinde of a tree for Reumes. fol. 92 Of the Pacal. ibid. Of the Paico. ibid. Of an hearbe for the euill of the Raines. ibid. Of the fruite which grow∣eth vnder the ground. 93 Of a fruite called Leucoma. fol. 93 Of the washing Bead stones. fol. 94 Of the Crabbes of that coū∣trie. fol. 94 Of the Cardones fol. 94 Of an hearbe good for them that are broken. fol. 95 Of the Ueruaine fol. ibid. Of the Masluerso. fol. 96 Of the wilde Lettise. fol. 96 Of the licour called Ambia fol. 96 Of a Tree which sheweth whether one shall lyue or die. fol. 97 Of the Granadillia. fol. 97 Of the hearbe of the Sunne fol. 98 Of a Gumme that is taken out frō vnder the ground. fol. 98 Of the Bezaar stones of the Peru. fol. 98 Of the Figge trees of the Peru. fol. 100 Of the Coca. fol. 100 Of the Colours of diuers groundes. fol. 102 Of the Casaui. fol. 103 Of the Canes for shortnesse of breath. fol. 104 Of the Carlo Sancto. 105 Of the Stone for the Mo∣ther. fol. 105 Of Canafistola in Conser∣ua. fol. 160 Of the Balsamo of Colu. fol. 170
A Booke which treateth of two medicines most ex∣cellent agaynst all Venome, which are the Bezaar stone, and the Herbe Escuerconera. Wherein are declared their mar∣uellous effects & great vertues, with the manner how to cure the said ve∣noms, and the order which is to be vsed for to be preserued from them. Where shall be seene greate secretes in medicine and many experiences. Newly compyled by Doctor Monardes of Seuill, 1574. Translated out of Spanish into English, by Iohn Frampton. 1580.
eases of the bodie from the toppe of the head to the soale of the foot may be cured by the same, so as no drugge in the worlde is thought to be comparable to the same. The third book sheweth the mischiefes that growe by drinking of drinkes whot, and what Benefite doeth followe by drinking our drinkes colde, &c. And Sir, finding many thank∣fully to take my sayde former simple trauell too you heretofore dedicated: and your Woorship aboue all desert of my parte too recompence the same, and beyng earnestly and often exhorted, by the lerned Phisitiō Maister Doctor Hector Nones to translate these said 3. Bookes also, the remanent of Monardes works, & to make my Countrymen of England Partakers of the benefit of the same, I tooke it in hand, as inflamed with the great com∣mendations that this Learned Man made of the sayde three Bookes, and especially of the Booke treating of the benefite of yron and steele in phi∣sicke. And hauing now thus finished the whole work, I dedicate the same to your woorship, as to the man to whom I am most bound, and that doeth of many best deserue the same, requesting you too take it in good part & to beare with the base doing of the same. And calling to remembraunce of what moment in somtimes A man of value may be to a common Weale, and howe common in the worlde the practize of poyson is, & what malice raignes now among men, & how needful it is that some kind of persōs should feare & prouide for the worst,
and weying that by our Persian merchants and by other meanes the Bezaar stone this great Iewel is brought into the realme, and may be compassed in this our tyme for a litle money: And withal, wey∣ing that Iron and steele be things tending so much to the cure of al diseases, and bee the natural home commodities of England and such as are commō, and that are both easily and cheaply to bee had by euery poore subiect, I haue the rather for the ready benefit that might ensue, taken the dispatch of the translation in hande with purpose no longer to keepe the same out of print: and so I most hum∣bly take my leaue, from London the xv. of Iune. MDLXXX. Your worships most bownden Iohn Prampton.
bewayle him heereof: in that so little a Hearbe can of∣fende him, and so small a fruite or stone may destroy him. Against al these venomes as well in general as in parti∣cular, the Phisitions as wel Greekes as Arabiens & Lati∣nistes wrote effectual remedies as wel generall as particu∣lar. Amongest the which they put one in practise, that in tymes past was had in greate estimation, and taken for a present remedie, for the greate vertues and meruellous ef∣fectes, which it wrought against all venoms and acci∣dentes thereof, which they called the Bezaar stone. But as tyme is the discouerer of all thinges: so is it the de∣stroyer and consumer of euery thing: for in hauing bene hid so long from vs, wee knewe no more what the Bezaar stone was, then as if it had neuer beene: and the name thereof was so strange and vnknowen vnto vs, euen as the Townes in Scitia. Time it selfe willing to restore againe vnto vs this precious stone hidden from vs so many yeeres; not onely dis∣couered the same vnto vs, but iointly therwith hath descried vnto vs an hearbe, which hath the lyke vertues and effectes against all manner of venom, which hearbe is called Es∣cuerconera, hauing bene discouered but a fewe yeres past to our exceeding great profit and commoditie. The hearbe Escuercone∣ra.And because these twoo thinges, to wit, the Bezaar stone, and the Hearbe Escuerconera, bee so lyke in ope∣ration, and haue so many and the selfe same vertues a∣gainst venom, that I determined to wryte of them both together, and to shewe the proper vertues of these twoo thinges so excellent in medicine: it is needfull first to knowe, and therefore treate of the venomes as a be∣ginning of the woorke; and to declare what Uenom is, and the cause of such as haue taken Uenom, and then the remedies thereof, and howe they may bee preserued from them: and therefore we wil treate first of Uenom, for that it
will serue not a little for the intent of that which we minde to write of the Bezaar stone, and the Hearbe Escuerconera. Uenom is a thing, which beyng taken at the mouth, or applied outwardly, doeth ouercome our bodies, by making them sicke, or by corrupting of them, or by killing them: and this is founde in one of these foure thinges; in plants, in mi∣nerals, in beasts, or in mixtures, the which worketh their ef∣fectes, eyther by manifest qualitie, or by hidden propertie, or both. These venoms partly doe kill vs; partly we vse them for our profite, and bodily health; and partly the people of auncient tune did vse them for a remedie against their great labours. That which doeth offend vs as well in generall, as in particular, Dioscorides in his sixth booke of his history of Plantes doeth treate of very exactly,Dioscorides. putting in generall these remedies, and in particular, that which is conuenient for euery one of them: and the same did other Greekes, La∣tinistes, and Arabians, which are to be seene, who will more particularly know of them. These did write of many Medicines, with the which euery one may preserue themselues from poyson: for the malice of mankinde is very greate, and many haue procured for their interest, and reuenge, not onely with venome to offende and kill the common sorte of people; but also Emperoures, Kinges, great Princes and Lords; the which in how much more high estate they are appoynted and placed, so much the more daunger they are in. And many notable men of the olde Writers fea∣ring this, did compounde many and diuers Medicines, that by meanes of them they might not bee hurte by venom or ve∣nemous thinges that might be geuen them. As for example, the Emperour Marco Antonio did vse suche thinges,The Emperor Marco Antonio. who fearing to be poysoned, tooke euery morning a little Tria∣cle and Methridate. Sometimes his confection Methrida∣tica, other times certayne Leaues of Rue, with Nuttes and Figges: and so they did vse the like medicines because they
and inward and outward burning, that it seemeth to them they are fired. It is also necessary (to know what venome they tooke) for too see the vomite,To knowe what venom it was. and what they doe cast vp withall, to iudge by the colour what Uenome it was: and beeyng knowen by this way, or by Relation, or otherwayes bee∣yng apparaunt, it must bee remedied by his contrary, for to estinguish and kill the malice thereof, as all the aunci∣ent Phisitions haue sufficiently written of, as well in generall agaynst all, as in particular against euery one of them, for that euery one hath his contrary effectes for to re∣medie the malice thereof. The tokens that hee most euill in them that haue taken Uenome,Euill signes. be often soundinges, and to cast vp the white of their eyes, they doe waxe very red, and put out their tongue very great, and blacke, and the pulse fa, colde sweete vni∣uersally throughout all their body, chiefly in the extreeme partes, and in their brestes, and they are desirous to vomit, but cannot, and they haue their vnderstanding troubled: and this is in al kinde of venom being taken, or by bytings of ve∣nomous beastes, in so much that they talke ydlely as though they had the frensie which is a mortal signe. It is needfull, for the better knowledge what Uenom it was,To knowe what venom  was. that it bee seene if there did remayne any thing of that which they had eaten or dronken, and to see what was that which was mingled therewith, iudging it by the colour, the smel and the taste, or geuing it to a Dogge, a Hen, or a Catt, and marke howe it woorketh with them: For if any of them waxe sadde or heauie, it is a token that there is venom; and if they dye, it is a token that the venom was strong. And being knowen to bee venomed the first thing that is to bee procured,The cure. is, that hee which is sicke doe vomit, which is the thing that doeth most profit, bycause there should be no tyme for the venom to enter, by the vaynes, and arteires, for to come to the hart, for if it come thither, it is past all mans
helpe: and therefore it is conuenient that this remedie of Uomite be done with all speede, that it may bee expelled, before it passe from the Stomake. And for to cause Uo∣mite, there must bee procured thinges that in very shorte time will prouoke it, as to put the fingers in hotte water, and the moste common thing is sweete Oyle, drinking muche quantitie thereof in suche sorte, that they fill theyr Bellies therewith, that it may the better bee expelled: the which hauing receyued, they shall with theyr Fin∣gers, or feather prouoke them to vomite, which must be done vntill that you perceyue that all that be expelled, and cast out, which was eaten or drunken, which did hurt. And if the Oyle bee not sufficient too doe this; there may bee mad thinges for to cause Uomite, beginning by the moste Weake, as the seething of Dill, the Seede of Radishe of Camamell and other like thinges that doe pro∣uoke Uomite, adding to the seeting, if it bee needefull, a Dramme of Agarico, the which although it doe pro∣uoke vomite strongly, it hath also the Propertie to breake the strength of the venome. Some for a greate secrete doe geue a Pint of Water of the Flowers of Orenges warme, which although it doeth prouoke Uomite, it hath also a particular vertue too extinguishe, and kill the strength of the Uenome, it muste bee geuen hotte the quantitie of a Pynte. And hereof it commeth that the Water taken out of the Flowers of Orenges which is a kynde of Cydron, hath greate vertue agaynst Ue∣nome, as wee haue written in a little Booke which is printed with others of myne in Latine, that doeth treate of Orenges. It is verie good that with the thing which prouoketh Uomite, there bee mingled thinges that haue vertue agaynst venome, as Triacle, Methridato, and other like thinges, the which heereafter wee will treate of.
mut bee geuen the remedies, that are too bee done for the Cures and Diseases that the venome is cause of; not forgetting the principall cause which is to kill and to de∣stroy the malice, that is the cause thereof with the me∣dicines and Remedies that I will speake of heereaf∣ter. If hee that hath taken venome doe not perceyue nor knowe what manner of venome it was that he tooke, nor the Accidentes thereof doe shewe; It is to be thought that it was of the venomes which doe theyr woorke of theyr owne propertie which is the woorst of all kynde of venomes:Venome of his one propertie. then it is conuenient that there bee had more care procuring vomite, and that it bee effectually done, as it is aforesayde. And if any bee discended ino the Guttes, let him haue a gentle Glister that in all properties hath a knowne vertue agaynst venome, which remedies are called Bezaarticas, the which must bee vsed at all times with his meate, and drinke, pro∣curing the inwarde and outwarde comforting of the prin∣cipall members, and vsing meates of substaunce that may geue great strength, taken out by a small presse and in any other sorte that is needefull, in the which there muste bee put thinges that haue vrtue agaynst all kynde of venome, of the which wee will trate of heereafter. And this muste bee done, not onely in them that bee venomed with vnknowne Uenome which woorketh the malice of it owne propertie, but in suche as haue taken knowne Uenome which woorketh by qualitie: for that the Uenome is a thing that doeth moste of all pull downe and weaken nature, making leane verie quick∣ly, and ouerthrowing the vertue and strength thereof. These medicines which haue this vertue and speciall pro∣pertie against these venomes, are many: some bee sim∣ples
and other compoundes: and bycause there are many of the one and of the other, I will speake of them that are most vsed, and where is seene greater experiēce of thē which are compounded. The principal is the triacle that Andro∣macho wrote of, the which if it bee well made, is the most principal medicine of as many as euer haue beene com∣pounded agaynst al kinde of venom.Triacle. And although it bee of a true composition, yet there lacketh some medicines al∣waies to doe that which is possible; wee doe see that in this case it doeth maruellous effectes, and not onely being taken with some water made for the purpose, but also beeing put into prickes or bytings of venomous beastes, and lykewise in Apostomes ful of poyson which are made in the tyme of the Plague. The Methridate is of very great effect, in this case, and doeth serue sometymes for triacle.Methridat and compoū∣ded medi∣cines. That of Cidrons and Emeraldes doe make a meruellous woorke, in al venome. The earth Sgillata hath a prerogatiue aboue them, especi∣ally in feuers which haue an euil qualitie. The triacle Dia∣thesaron, is for the purpose in colde venoms and in bytinges of venomous beastes, and in especially in the byting of a beast that is made. And so you haue many other compoun∣ded medicines that haue vertue and propertie against ve∣nom: but these which I haue spoken of, are the most princi∣pal, and found most true by experience. The simple medicines bee many, the most principall is the earth Lemnia so celebrated of the olde wryters, in espe∣cially of Galen, who only to see it,Medicine-simples. Lemnia. and to see how the priests did make it, sayld to the Ilande of Lemnos that at this day is called Estalimene, which is the most principal simple me∣dicine that the Greekes knewe. The true Diptamo is another which roweth in the I∣land of Creta, which at this day is called Candia,Diptamo. wherevnto the people of the Isle doe runne, when they feele themselues
in vayne. Lykewyse it is to be giuen to them that are bitten wth venomous beastes, or pricked of them, bycause it may extinguish and kil the malice of the venome: And although that these pouders are of so much vertue as aforesayde, the Bezaar stone is of greater vertue and excellencie, for that in it alone is founde all the vertues and properties that are in all medicines which we haue already spoken of, by his own propertie hidden and by grace from heauen infused into it a∣gainst venomes: which you shall find to bee the best and most present remedy of all others, as wee wil shewe in that which followeth. Of the Bezaar stone. THis Bezaar stone hath many nmes: for the Arabiens do cal it Hagar,The names of the stone. the Persi∣ans Bezaar, the Indians Bezar, the Hebrewes Belzaar, ye Greekes Alexi∣pharmcum, the Latinistes Against ve∣nom, the Spaniardes the stone against venom & sounding. Conrado Gesnero in his booke that he made of beastes,Conrao. speaking of the Goate of the mountayne, sayth that this name Belzaar is an Hebrew name, for that (ben) in Hebrewe is as much to say as Lord, and (za) venom, as if ye would say, Lord of the venomes and by good reason it is so named, seeing that this stone is Lady of the venomes, and doeth extinguish and destroy thē as being Lady, and mistresse ouer them. And of this it com∣meth that al thinges that are against poyson, or venomous thinges are called Bezaarticas, for theyr excellencie. This stone is ingendered in the inner part of a beast, that is commonly called a Goate of the mountaine.Where they are ingen∣dred. The ingen∣dering of stones in beastes is a common thing; and also in man chiefly, there is no part in his body, wherein they bee
not ingendred: and lykewyse in byrdes, and fishes, & rattes of the field. Plinie in his 28. booke the 9. chapter, sayeth that the wilde hartes goe to the hollow places where snakes and ser∣pents are;Plinie. and with their breath doe bring them foorth and eate them. And this is gathered heereby, that they doe it ey∣ther to heale them of some disease; or to wax yong againe, that they may liue many yeeres. The Arabiens doe ampli∣fie this cause and say, that the wild hartes by eating of these serpents, come to ingender the Bezaar stone; and they de∣clare it in this manner. In these East parts are bred certaine beastes, which are called hartes,Historie. which for the great heate of the Sommr goe into the aues and hollowe places, where the adders and snakes and other vermin being of poyson are, which in that country be many, and very venomous, bycause the countrie is so hot; and with their breath they driue them out, and tread vpon them, and kill them, and eate them; and after they are filled with them, they goe as speedily as they can where wa∣ter is, and they plundge themselues therin, in such sorte that they leaue no part of their bodies out, but their snowt, for to fetch their breath: and this they doe, that with the coldnes of the water they may delay the greate heate of the venome, which they haue eaten: and there they remayne without drinking a droppe of water, vntil they haue alayed and coo∣led, that feruent heate, wherein they were by feeding vppon the venomous vermine. And being in the water there doeth ingender in the places were the droppes of water cōmeth foorth of their eyes, a stone, which being come foorth of the water, falleth from them, and it is gathered vp for the vse of medicine. This is tha in effct which the Arabiens doe wryte of the manner howe the Bezaar stone is ingendered. I haue procured and with great diligence sought to find out by such as haue come fro te India of Portingal, and such as haue past beyond the China to knowe the trueth of this
matter: and it is thus. In the greatest India, (where Ptolomeo doth write to bee founde so much goods and so greate riches before the Riuer Ganges in certayne mountaynes which doe ioyn with the Countrie of China,How the Be∣zaar stone is ngendered.) there doe breede certaine beastes lyke to Hartes as well in greatnesse as in swift∣nesse, and are very much lyke vnto hartes, sauing in some respect they doe participate with goates, as well in their hornes which they haue lyke a goate, beeing turned backe∣warde, as in the making of the body: whereby they giue them the name of goates of the mountayne: wherein in my opinion they are deceiued, for they rather ought to bee cal∣led harte goates, in that they haue the partes and likenesses of both, which is of a harte and of a goate. These harte Goates in those partes doe vse themselues lyke to the hartes, that Plinie speaketh of, in these places as is afore∣said, that goe to the dennes of wilde venomous beastes, and with their breathing cause them to come foorth and eate them: and afterwarde doe goe whereas water is, and doe plundge themselues therein, vntill they perceiue that the furie of the venom which they haue eaten bee past, and vn∣till then they dare not drinke a droppe. And beeing come foorth from thnce, they goe into the fieldes, and there they eate many healthfull herbes, of greate vertue, which are a∣gainst venom, which they by their naturall instinct doe know: that there doe aryse as wel of the venom which they haue eatē, as of the herbes which they haue fed on, being in∣gendred by meanes of the naturall heate, and by that ver∣tue which is declared, being infused at the tyme of the ge∣neration in the inner parts of the bowelles, & in other parts of their bodies, certaine stones, of the greatest and of the smallest sort, which is a thing of greate admiration, & of the greatest vertue that to this day is knowen against venom. It is vnderstoode of that venom which is so pernicious and urtful that they did eate; & of those herbes being so health∣ful
that they fed vpon, by a meruellous woorke, the Bezaar stone is ingendered. And as they say which come from those partes, and haue seene this beast from whom they take out these stones,The figure of the beaste. hee is of the greatnesse of a harte and well neere of this making, hee hath onely twoo broade hornes, with the pointes sharpe, turned and falling much backewarde, his hayre is thicke and grosse of a mingled colour, for the most parte, and reddishe, and of other colours: you haue many of them in those mountaines. The Indians doe hurte them and kill them with weapons and with snares and ginnes: and they bee so fearce, that sometymes they kill some of them: they are very swift on foote, and leppe much, they liue in hollowe places of the grounde, they goe in compa∣nies, there bee males and females, their voices are roa∣rings: they take out the stones from the inner parte of their bowelles, and of other hollowe partes of the body, and they vse much diligence in the taking out of them, by rea∣son the Portingales that doe trade thither, giue much for these stones, that they doe so take out, and they carrie them to the China, to sell; and from thence to Maluco, and from Maluco to Calicut, for there is the greatest vt∣terance of them, and they doe esteeme so much of them, that one is woorth there, beeing fine, fiftie crownes, as they are heere. And as I was wryting this treatise I went to see a beast, that shoulde seeme to bee the same,Historie. by reason hee hath all those markes which those of that partes haue, which I sawe in the house of the Archedeacon of Mebla, beeing a woorthie Gentleman, which was sent him from very farre Countries, by the way of Affrica, and is in this forme and fashion: Hee is a Beast of the greatnesse of a wilde harte, hee hath the same hayre, coulour, and horne,His figure. that a harte hath, he hath the face, the head, and the tayle lyke a harte; hee is swift in running, like to a harte, his snowt is
lyke to the hartes, and lykewise his countenance, his body is lyke to a Goate, for hee is lyke to a greate hee Goate; and hath twoo hornes turned backwarde, somwhat falling, with the pointes wrested, that hee seemeth to bee lyke a hee goate, and all the rest lyke to a harte. There is one thing in this beast which is greatly to bee maruelled, for if hee fall from a Towre downe to the grounde, hee lyteth vppon his hornes, and receiueth no hurte thereby, but rather doeth re∣bounde as a ball of winde in the ayre: hee eateth grasse, bread, and all that you geue him, he is of great strength, and is alwayes tyed with a Cheyne, bycause hee breketh and byteth asunder the cordes. I doe looke stil when he will dye, or that they wil kill him, to see if hee haue the Bezaar stone. The forme of the stones.The making and fashion of the stones bee of diuers ma∣ners for that some bee long as the stones of Dates, others bee lyke to Chestnuttes, others lyke to rounde pellottes, of earth, such as are shot in Crossebowes, others lyke to the egges of Pigeons, I haue one lyke to the kidney of a kidd, there are none that bee sharpe pointed. And as these stones bee diuers in their makings so they doe varie in their coulers,His coulour. some haue the collour of a darke baye, others bee of an ashe colour, commonly they bee of a greene colour, and with blacke spottes, such spottes as the Cattes of Algallia haue, of a sad gray colour, all which are finely compounded of certaine thinne skales, or rindes, one vppon an other, lyke to the skales of on Onion, very artificially set, and those rindes are so excellent and so gli∣stering, that it seemeth as though euery one of them were burnished by arte, and so taking away that which is vppermost of all, that which remayneth is much more glistering, and shyning, then that which was ta∣ken away: and heereby they are knowen to bee fine, and true, and onely for this I tooke away from that which I
haue, the vttermost shale, that was vpon him, and that whic remayned was as glistering and more then the rst, these shales are greater or smaller according to the greatnesse of the stone, it is a light stone and easie to bee scraped or cut, lyke to Alabaster, because it is soft: if it bee long in the water, it dissolueth.It is light. It hath no harte nor foundation in the inner parte, wherevppon hee is formed, but rather is some∣what hollowe, and the hollownesse is full of pouder of the same substaunce that the stone is of, which is the best. And this is the best way to knowe whether the stone bee fine and true when it hath that pouder, for they which are false, haue it not, and by these twoo thinges they which are fine and true, may well bee knowne from those which are false and counterfayt.Which are fine. In them that are most tue bee these thinne skales and rindes, glistering and shyning one vpon another; and the inner parte hath that pouder which I haue spoken of: and those which are not true haue neither the one nor the other. For I sawe one that was broken, to see if it were fine and it had shales, and in the inner parte it had a grayne or seede wherby the Indian deceiued many. Guido de Lanazaris, a man naturally borne in this Ci∣tie,Guido de La∣nazaris. which trauelled all the rounde worlde ouer, and was in those partes of the China, sayde vnto mee, that there were Indians that counterfeyted them with a composition that they vse and knowe, but the twoo thinges which is afore∣sayde they coulde neuer bring to passe: to wit, the glistering skales, and the pouder, that is in the inner parte. And hee sayde to mee,In great esti∣mation. that they were there much more esteemed then amongest vs, bycause they bee healed with them of many diseases. Andrew Belunensis oh alledge of Tipthas Arabien,Andrewe Belunensi. in a booke that hee wrote of stones, and sayeth that the Be∣zaar stone is a mineral, and that it is taken out after the same manner as the other particular stones are, of his
minries as the Diamondes, Rubies, Esraldes, and A∣gatas: and it seemeth that Serapio doeth so vnderstande it, when he spake of this stone. He sayde that the Mine∣rall of this stone is in the lande of Syria, and of the In∣dia, and East Countries, in the which they were decei∣ued: for that it is cleerely seene that they are taken out of the sayde Beastes, which the Indians doe take out with greate diligence as wee haue sayde: and there is seene in them the woorke and manifest effect which we will speake of. Serapio doeth shewe, that in his time there were likewise of these counterfayte stones which he sayeth haue not the vertue agaynst Uenome as the true Bezaar hath.Serapio. Of this stone I finde no Greeke Authour which hath writ∣ten of it,The old Wri∣ters wrote of this stone. nor Latinist: onely amongest the Arabiens this matter is treated of, and in some late Writers which wee will speake of heereafter, and for this cause onely the Aun∣cient Writers, beeyng Arabiens that wrote of it, and the late Writers Latinistes and those of our time, amongst the Arabiens, hee that did most largely write of it, was Serapio a learned man, in his medicinall Hystorie in the 306. Chapter where he writeth many thinges of this Be∣zaar stone woorthie too bee knowen,Serapio of his vertue. the which of his owne authoritie he sheweth how great excellencie this stone hath against all kind of Uenome, of what mnner and qualitie soeuer it bee, and agaynst the bytinges of Uenomous beastes, extinguishing and taking away the grounde, and euill qualitie, that the venomes doe infuse into the bodies, deliuering them from death that shall vse it. It is geuen in Pouder, and they say that it doth the same effect by chewing of it,Note. or holding of it in the Mouth: for after it is taken, it doeth prouoke sweate and doeth expell the venome, and maketh the woorke sure, saying that beeyng carried about any person, & that it touch the flesh, and bringing it ouer the left parte, it doeth preserue him that shall so carrie it a∣bout
him that no venome or venomous thing shall offende him: for beyng applyed to the bodie, it resisteth venom that it may not offende him: and them that bee infected there∣with it healeth. And this it doeth not onely to them that haue taken venome, but vnto suche that haue had it put into their Syrope, apparrell, or letter, or other parte that may offende them. The same Serapio sayeth, that this Stone doeth profite muche agaynst bytinges of beastes that are venemous, and in their Prickes takyng the Pouder thereof at the mouth, and prouoking sweate, it expelleth it from the inner partes: it profiteth muche, too cast the pouder of this stone in Prickes, or in woundes made by these venomous beastes, for it destroyeth and ta∣keth away the mallice of the venome, and although that the soares beeyng so made by these beastes doe beginne to cor∣rupt, it cureth and healeth them, and the pouder of this stone beeyng put vppon the venemous beasts doth take away their strength, and if it be put in place where they doe wound any, although they make a sore, yet the malice of the venom doth not take hold. And this is seene by experience in the venomous beastes called Adders and Snakes, for the pouder beeyng put in place where they doe byte, all theyr venemous strength is taken away and nothing doeth remayne but the signe there∣of. Three graynes of this pouder wee with some licour, be∣yng cast vpon snakes and adders they dye foorthwith. Thus muche Serapio sayeth. Rasis Simia of Gallen a man amongest the Arabiens moste learned in the booke which hee wrote called Conti∣nent,Rasis. Simia of G∣len. saieth thus: the Bezaar stone is that which seemeth some what yellowe and soft, without any manner of taste, the which hee sayeth that he hath experimented two times, and hath found in it vertue of great efficacie agaynst Na∣pelo the strongest of all venomes. He sayth also that he hath seene in this stone the most maruellous effectes agaynst all
venome that euer he saw in any Medicine, that was against vnome eyther simple or compounde, or any composition made against venome, as Triacles, or other compositions, for that the Bezaar stone is of more efficacie and vertue then any of them. The same doeth agree with the bookes he made to the King Almasor, saying, The euill Uenoms that doe offende the heart and woorke theyr effect, O how little profite doeth any cure proue in them, if the Bezaar be not taken, for that doeth resist it: and he sayeth, Moreo∣uer I my selfe saw that it did resist the venome called Na∣pelo which is the Uenome that doeth penetrate more then all venoms: thus much of Rasis. An other Moore very learned and a great Astronomer that wrote of stones figured vnder Signes and Planets and the vertues they haue, was called Hamech Benreripho: he in his booke that hee wrote of the vertue of Plantes and of stones and of beastes, that serue for the vse of Medicine, say∣eth the Bezaar stone is agaynst all venome, and it hath be∣sides this particular propertie taken in pouder agaynst the bytinges of Scorpions, and beyng carried about one, and grauen vppon, he is safe against all the bytinges of vene∣mous beastes. An other Moore called Abdala Narache, a learned man in medicine, sayeth, that the Bezaar stone is agaynst all Uenome, he saw it as a precious thing in the hands of the King of Cordoua called Miramamolim vnto whom was geuen strong venome:The king of Cordiua. and hauing geuen vnto him the Bezar stone, by meanes wherof he was deliuered wholly of the venome; foorthwith the King gaue his royall Pallace to him that gaue him the stone, which deliuered him from this imminent death: and surely it was a greate gift of a king, the chiefe Pallace of Cordoua, at this day day beyng a thing so notable and of suche great value: and the stone was much estemed, for that so great a price was ge∣uen for it.Auensoar. Auensoar a Phisition of the Moores, but a natu∣rall
Spaniarde of Penaflore a place lying betweene Cordo∣ua and Seuill, gaue vnto one, who was very much lamen∣ted, by reason he had taken very euill Uenom, of the Beza∣ar stone the waight of 3. graines with the water of Goords, for that it was hot venom, & because it did seeme to be so. For assoone as he had taken it, there did appeare vppon him the Iaundice very yeallow, and he was very well deliuered and saued from it. Aueroiz a Phisition and a Philosopher very excellent, being a Spaniarde, and borne in Cordoua,Aueroi▪ saieth that the Bezaar stone is in great estimation and very profitable a∣gaynst all venomous bytinges, and especially against the bi∣tinges of Scorpions. Haliabas doeth make mention of the Bezaar stone in three places where he treateth of Uenomes,Haliabas. but he passeth it ouer lightly, onely shewing that it is soft, and saith that it must be scoured in water and that the water of it must be ge∣uen to them that are poysoned. Rabbi Moises of Egypt, but borne in Spayne, a most cunning Phisition, who followed Gallen in all his woorkes,Rabbi Mo∣ses. in the booke he made of venomes in the first thing that hee treated of in the thirde Chapter speaking of simple Medi∣cines and the vse of them which are conuenient for the by∣tinges of Uenomous beastes, sayeth the simple Medicines that wee haue amongst vs of most profite and greatest expe∣rience which are of many approoued are the seede of the Cidron &c. And the other is the Emeralde a maruellous medicine agaynt all venome &c. Gallen made mention of the third which is the Bezaar stone that is taken out of a beast, the which stone is like to an akorn, the colour therof is green and doth ingender by little and little making it selfe grosse: & for that they finde in it oe skale vpon another, some doe say that they are ingendred in the corners of the eyes of certaine sheepe that are in the East partes: othere doe say that they are ingendred in the purse of the gall of the sayd sheep which
poysoned, I caused him to take thereof diuers Morninges the waight of three graynes of the same Bezaar stone with the water of Oxetongue, and hee was therewith very wel healed. Many Phisitions of late time and in our dayes haue made mention of this Bezaar stone and doe very much extoll the same in theyr bookes with great Prerogatiues,Phisitions of late time. against all kinde of venome and agaynst many other diseases, which we minde to treate of, to see what we finde written by eue∣ry one of them. Amongest whom Andrewe Mathiolus of Siena, a man very well learned, in the Commentaries which hee wrote most learnedly vppon Dioscorides in the sixth booke,Mathiolus. declaring the Medicines that are agaynst ve∣nome, by speciall propertie, doeth write of the Bezaar stone very geeat vertues, and doeth approoue it to be a me∣dicine and remedie most principall that at this day is kno∣wen in the Worlde agaynst venome, and he doeth referre that, as is sayd, vnto the Authours which wee haue allea∣ged. Andrewe de Laguna borne in Segouia, who amongest the learned was named Galen the Spaniarde for the Com∣mentaries which he made vpon the sixth book of Dioscorides in the Spanish tongue,Andrew de Laguna. where he treateth of venomes, he sheweth how present a remedie the Bezaar stone is agaynst all kinde of venome and agaynst the bytinges of venomous beastes, and agaynst pestilent Agewes of euill qualitie, and also that it is a greate remedie agaynst the falling sickenesse, that it doeth expell the stone of the Raynes, and beeyng geuen with Wyne, it breaketh the stone in the Bladder. There hee noteth howe this Stone is engendred in certayne Goates of the Mountaynes of Per∣sia, and howe the stones that are the best bee bright, and skaley and softe, of the colour of a Fruite of Spaine called Beringena, which is a remedie muche commen∣ded
amongest Princes and great lords for the effects afore¦saide. Valescus de Taranto, a Phisition and borne in Milan,Valescus. the scholler of Tornamira, in the 7. booke of his experi∣ments, praiseth very much this Bezaar stone, to be of great force against venom and other diseases for his effectes, and for the great fame that was of his woorkes, in this tyme a∣gainst al venom. Saint Ardonius of Pesauris Phisition, in a booke which hee made of venomes, exceedingly prayseth the Bezaar stone & preferreth it before all other medicines, as wel simples as compoundes, which haue vertue against venom or byinges of venomous beastes: and sayeth, that hee sawe it and prooued it by great experience. Amato Lucitano, a learned man of our tyme,Amato Lu∣citano. being now resident in Ragosa, in his commentaries which hee wrote vppon Dioscorides in the seconde booke of Ceruige∣nitale, did treate of this Bezaar stone very learnedly, as a man of Portingal, who did much enforme himselfe of those of his nation that came from the East India, and he sayeth that the Bezaar stone is of the making of an acorne, full of spottes, declining to the colour of a sad blewe, compounded with many shales, the which they call Bezaar, as a present remedie against al maner of venom, and they take them out of certaine beastes which are lyke to wilde hartes, that are in the East India, and are called goates of the mountaines: they are founde in their bowelles and inner partes, of the which being giuē 3. graynes with the waters of the flowers of Orenges, it is the present remedy against all Uenom, killing and extinguishing, the venomes, and force thereof, it killeth the wormes giuē with water of Verdolagas, & where the feuer is, and where there is no feuer with whyte wine: he saieth that he hath experience, and hath cured therewith the pluesie being very sore rooted, it is conuenient that it be giuen to them, that haue taken venom, in vomittes, and it wil expel the venom, and being giuen to them that haue vo∣mitted
of beastes speaking of the goate, doeth much commend this Bezaar stone to be against al venō. Other authors there be that make mention of this stone, but they passe it lightly ouer, only praysing it to be good against venom, in generall and in particular, the which at this present I lightly passe ouer, for it is sufficiently spoken of by those before rehear∣sed, wherby it may haue authoritie with al those that therof wil profite themselues. That as I haue seene by experience.That which I haue seene by experience I wil now speake of for the more confirmation of the sayde cause, and of the meruellous vertues which it hath, wherby it may bee vnder∣stoode what is written by these authors aforesayd, with ma∣nifest examples. It is about 14. yeres past that my Lady the Duches of Bjar was aduertised by the Lorde don Iohn Mauriques that in the Court was vsed for such as did sound, a stone that was called the Bezaar, for that my Lady the Duches had a sonne very sicke of the sayde disease, wel neere since the tyme of his byrth, and shee beeing desirous of his health did procure to know what remedy might be had, and seeing the ordinary remedies of Phisicke which they had ministred vnto him beeing many and diuers by the wysest Phisitions of Spayne, and yet not preuailed any thing; and hearing of the greate vertue of this Bezaar stone, they had communication with mee thereof: yet was it to mee some∣what straunge, for that I had no other knowledge thereof then by bookes, and I thought that it had not beene in these partes: then I requested that the stone might be sent for be∣ing desirous to ease this Lorde, for his vertues deserued the same, and his great knowledge in al kinde of learning, and in al things that a noble man might haue knowledge in, as also to see the stone which was a thing of mee much desired. The stone was sent for to Lishebron by meanes of a Ge∣noues, and there was brought twoo of them very fayre wrought in gold, and eche of them as great as a Date stone and somewhat greater, of colour greene and blackishe, lyke
to a Beringena which is a fruit of Spayne, and the stone be∣ing brought, not a little to our contentment, euery one gaue their iudgement, & it was agreed yt at such time as he should sownde, it shoulde presently be giuen him: and the sownding being come in the euening hee toke foorth with the appoin∣ted order, which was brought from the court, that hee should take foorthwith the waight of three graines of the pouder of the stone, and it should bee cast in water of Oxetongue so much as might be sufficient for him, and so it was done. O∣pening his mouth hee swallowed it downe, the which he did with much difficultie; within the space of halfe a quarter of an houre, after hee had taken it, hee recouered as easilie, as though hee had not had it. And seeing the vertue that was in the stone, wee did esteeme it much, and the more for that wee sawe that euery tyme it toke him, he came to himselfe so ea∣sily, and when he toke not the stone, the sounding did continue long, and hee returned from it with greate paynes, and in long tyme it seased not: but when the stone was giuen him he came quickly to himselfe and with greate easinesse, as though he had not had any sownding at all. My Lady the Duches caried the stone in her purse, and had the quantitie that he shoulde take alwayes in a readinesse, bycause when the sownding came to him, it might bee giuen him with more speede, bycause hee shoulde not bee long in payne: so that from the tyme that hee receyued it, his soundings came not to him so continually as they did before. This being per∣ceiued, I saide one day to my Lady, that it was the doctrine of Phisitions, that the medicines which doe not heale dis∣eases, cannot preserue that wee fall not into them, but that it seemed good to mee that wee shoulde giue vnto him euery morning the pouder of the Bezaar stone, that with the conti∣nuall vse thereof, the vapour might bee consumed which did ryse vp to the braynes, so that what seemeth to be venomous and hurtfull, the stone woulde extinguish and kil, and would consume the vapour that riseth vp frō all the body, and from
A Childe did eate a certaine venomous thing, whereby hee was in danger of death, and seing that the common re∣medies did not profit, I caused to bee giuen to the childe the Bezaar stone, and immediatly it was well. And for children that haue wormes, it is lykewyse very good, for that it cau∣seth them to be expelled by dissolution, meruellously taking away the accidents, that are wont to happen to childrē. And this it worketh wheresoeuer you feare any griefe or veno∣mous humour. In the thinges that it hath done most good, hath bene in the pestilence, for that there was in Germany a greate Plague, and vnto all such as had the Bezaar stone giuen them, immediatly was seene the greate effect that it did in them that toke it. And in an Hospital were foure per∣sons infected with this euill, and it was giuen to twoo of them and not to the other, and they that tooke it escaped, and the other twoo dyed. And then it was giuen to many that were infected with this euill, and some of them had twoo sores, and some had three, and yet they escaped and of this were witnesses many people of greate credit that sawe it and other meaner persons, as it is very well knowne to all the Court. For them that are sad and melan∣chlie.This stone doeth profit much to them that be sad and me∣lancholike, the Emperour toke it many tymes for this ef∣fect, and it is taken of many persons that are melancholike: for it taketh it away, and maketh him glad and mery that v∣seth it and to bee of a good disposition. Many I haue seene that haue beene much diseased with fayntnesse, soundinges and melancholie, and taking the waight of three graynes of this stone with the water of Oxtongue they haue bin healed presently. In feuers of an euill qualitie and most pestilent, it is meruellous the good woorke that it doeth: for that it ta∣keth away the malice thereof, extinguishing and killing the euil qualitie of the venom, which is the first and principall thing that the Phisition should doe, for if that this bee not taken away first, the cure is in vaine. Many do vse this stone
holding a peece thereof in theyr mouth in the suspected time of a Pestilence, and whereas venom is feared, or any thing that is venomous, and also it dooth profite much taking it in water to them that are sicke of pestilent Feuers. A Gentleman had all his seruantes sicke of Agewes,Historie. that are commonly called Modorras, and he put into a pot of wa∣ter a Bezaar stone that hee had, of the which he caused the sicke people to drinke, and they all escaped and were deliue∣red from death. And many people for this cause, haue this stone layde in water continually, that they may drinke there∣of being sicke, for it profiteth much to take away the Agewe, and geueth strength to the hart, and not onely this stone doth profite in venomous thinges and venomes, but in other disea∣ses, as it hath byn proued: & being geuen to them that haue the gidines in the head, it doth much profit, and also against opilations. And it happened that a Nunne that had sown∣dinges and greate opilations, by taking the Bezaar stone was healed, and likewise of the opilations: and being long time without her customed termes, they came very well too her and aboundantly. This stone profiteth much to them that haue taken Arsenike or other corsiue venome, for that it dooth kill and consume the force of the venome, and taketh away the accidentes thereof. Milke hath in this a great preroga∣tiue, and doth woorke effectually, by taking much quantitie, and continually vsing the same, for although that it be a mer∣uellous remedie, it must be vsed in corsiue venomes, for that it maketh the venomes to be expelled by vomit, and doth ex∣tinguish the mallice. It is the true Antidote against corsiue venome, and after the vse thereof, the stone may be giuen or the pouder, or any of the sayde medicines, that haue vertue a∣gainst venome. Also this stone doth profit muche against fe∣uers that bringe certaine red spots in the bodie like to Flea-bytinges, that commonly doe appeare in their shoulders, and in their archter parts of the bodie: these doe come in sore Agewes, that doe expell the humours out of the bodie, and
so it is conuenient that it bee so vsed that it may come out well, and this muste bee done by putting bentosites, and other like helpes, that may expell the humour, whereby nature is holpen, forbidding oyntmentes and other things that may disturbe the comming out of these thinges. An other thing which is conuenient, is to geue to the sicke, when these small spottes doe beginne to appeare, those thinges which doe extinguish and kill the venome: of the which we haue treated very largely hauing respect not to let blood, after that they haue appeared, if it come not of too muche replection and fulnesse of blood. One thing I haue founde for these redde Spottes and for Feuers of muche profite and notable experience in many, which is our Bolearmenike prepared in a dishe of earth with Rose wa∣ter geuen in all medicines that are too bee taken, and in the meates that are too bee eaten, and surely in it I haue founde great effect, chiefly in one yeere, wherein reygned many Pestilent Agues, called Moderas, and many were deliuered from them, with the vse of it, for that this our Bolearmenike doth differ little from that of the East partes, and this shall bee where the Bezaar stone is not to bee had, for that it doth exceed all as I saw in a prin∣cipall Gentleman of this citie which had a sore Feuer, with soundinges, Uomites and other Accidentes of an Ague vpon whom did appeare spottes, which before I haue spoken of on his shoulders, and in geuing him the Bezaar stone with a little of the Ucornes horne, foorthwith the Accidentes did cease and began to be bet∣ter, for that it did extinguishe and kill the force of the Agewe, which caused all the hurte. And after this sorte I coulde speake of many heere in Spayne, that for the space of this fourteene yeeres I haue vsed it, and many haue beene deliuered therewith from many disea∣ses
with the vse thereof, that surely it seemeth a thing of woonderfull effectes, that a stone taken out of the bel∣lie of a beaste like to a wilde Harte or Goate in so little quantitie geuen, shoulde woorke so greate effectes as wee haue written of. And for that it is already time to treate of the Herbe Escuerçonera, because wee haue beene long and treating of the Bezaar stone, I will speake what is kno∣wen of it. ¶ Of the herbe Escuerçonera. THe Herbe Escuerçonera the which wee haue promised to treate of, is an herbe knowen, and found within these thirtie yeeres. For time hath discoue∣red it too vs as it hath done many other thinges, as wee see which they bring from the West Indias, and they are so many thinges, as wee see e∣uery day, as were neuer seen by those that were before vs, nor yet by vs, as we haue written o in a Treatise that we made of these things which doe treate of all the things that they bring from our Indias that doeth serue for the vse of me∣dicine. So it is that in the Countrie of Cataluina in the Coun∣tie of Vrgell in a towne called Mmblan,Histori▪ was the place where y• herb Escuerçonera was first discouered & found out, & as al that countrie i molested & toubled of certaine veno∣mous
beastes which are called Escuerços, and likewise of many other and although that they are very Uenomous and full of poyson, there are also many in number, as well in the tilled fieldes as amongest trees, and grasse, and especially in the Corne fieldes, in such sort that they are to them in steede of a Plague, and an vncurable mischiefe, by reason that the peo∣ple cannot labour in their Uines, nor reape their Corne, nor doe their businesse in the fieldes, by meanes that they are so cruelly hurt by them, whose venome and poyson is such, that wheresoeuer they byte, it swelleth foorthwith, with greate paynes, and the swelling riseth vp to the hearte immediatly, and if they be not remedied and suckered foorthwith, they die presently: their Triacle and other benefites which they had, did serue them to little purpose. How this herbe was discouered.And seeyng that in this time this Plague was so without remedie, it fortuned that they brought to that place from A∣frica a young man Captiue, which did heale them that were bitten with these so venemous beastes, with geuing them to eate of a roote, and the iuyce of an herbe that hee knewe which did them so much good, that it healed the bytinges and poyson very easily. For the which there came so many people to the Moore, that they did not onely make him free, but also rich, and the young man in all this tyme with all the promises and giftes that they coulde geue and make vnto him, woulde neuer tell them what roote and herbe it was, wherewith he healed so great a Plague. Two Persons of the Towne beeyng very desirous to knowe the same, by reason it stoode them so muche vp∣pon too knowe what Herbe it was, went after him and dogged him so politikely, that at length they sawe where hee gathered the hearbe and tooke out of the grounde, the rootes thereof. The Moore beeyng gone, they wente too the place where hee gathered it, and they founde the lacke of the grasse that the Moore had gathered, of the
which they tooke out a good quantitie, because there was muche there in that place, and they went therewith too the Towne, and so to the house of the Moore, where they found him taking out the herbe of a Bagge that hee brought it in: and the one herbe and the other beeyng seene, they sawe that it was all one: whereby the Moore coulde not denie but the thing which had beene by himselfe long time hidden, was now discouered, and the herbe that he had gathered and ge∣uen, and that which the other brought were all one. And from that time forwarde all the people began to know it, and such as had neede of it went to geather it, and vsed it for the bytinges of these venemous beastes, as I haue sayde. They call this herbe Escuerçonera because it doeth heale and re∣medy the bytinges of this beast,Why it is cal∣led Escuero∣nera. called Estorçu in the Ca∣talan tongue, and the same roote is like too the sayde beast, and the beast like too the roote in figure. This beast or vermin commonly is a Spanne and a halfe long, hee is small in the tayle, and is greater and greater towardes the heade: his head is greate and square with a great mouth, his tongue blacke and sharpe, his teeth small like to a shee Adder, with the which hee doeth byte, and with his tongue hee doeth pricke like to a Scorpion, his colour is full of blacke spottes, with diuers colours hee goeth e∣uill fauouredly, and is continually among Plantes, and Uines, and byteth other beastes, as hee doeth men, hee goeth continually by the grounde, and therefore all men looke warily too theyr feete, where they are. Hee is a fierce beast and vglie too beholde, and full of mis∣chiefe, his byting is woorser and more dangerous than the byting of a shee Adder of that Countrie. Onely this Herbe is contrary too him which is called of his name Escuerçonera: for if they cast the iuyce vppon him, it maketh him fowle,The vertue of the herbe. and if they put it into his mouth and that hee swallowe it downe, he dyeth. If any man
seede, and the seede beeyng gone, then the Leaues of the Plantes doe fall. The Roote is like too the roote of a Sanahoria fleshie, and waightie, and leaueth with a poynt, and waxeth greater towardes the leaues, it hath a thinne rynde ioyned too the roote, and is of a russet co∣lour, somewhat blackishe, and somewhat sharpe, and be∣yng cut or broken, it doeth cast from it a certayne clammie waterishnesse, like to milke: it is all white within, sweete, and fattie, it groweth for the moste parte in hitlie places, where some moisture is: the complection therof is whot and moyst in the first degree. The Uertues that it hath bee suche as wee haue spo∣ken of, the principall vertue is agaynst the Escorçu a beast so venemous, and doeth so much hurt, that in this surelie it seemeth to bee a thing of great vertue. It is good when the iuyce is taken out of the leaues and clarified, and that the roote also bee taken, which is a thing of greater ver∣tue. And it is to be considered that although you take the iuyce and the roote of this Herbe agaynst the Poyson that proceedeth of this beast which is so pernicious, it is conuenient that great diligence be vsed, as we haue afore∣sayde, for the remedie of them that are venomed: where∣by it woulde doe very well that in the meane time that the iuyce bee a prouiding or the Roote of the sayde Herbe, that foure or fiue fingers breadth aboue the sore it bee bounde fast, that the force of the Uenome doe not passe too the reste of the partes of the body, and this is too bee done in the Legge or arme. And if the byting bee in any suche place where it cannot bee bounde, then there must bee laide too it, plaisters of dry and strong thinges that may dissolue the furie of the venom: and this must be done with speed, before the hurt doe enter the inner partes, for if it once doe come to the harte, the cure will goe
harde: and this must bee vniuersally in al prickinges or by∣tings of venomous beastes. And if the wound bee smal it is needful to open it, with a smal cut or some other way: and if it be newe, let the cuttinges bee smal, and if it bee of a long tyme, then let the incision bee deepe, for that with the much blood that geeth out thereof, there goe out a greate parte of the venom also. And after the cutting let there bee applyed such things as may drawe out strongly the venom, still ad∣ding thereunto that as shal be needful. Some there bee that doe sucke out the venom of the prickes or woundes with their mouth, but it is dangerous to them that so doe, for some haue dyed therof: it is better to rmedie it with ventosities, or to put too it the hinder parte of a Cocke, or a Chicken, or a Pigeon beeing aliue, vppon the pricke, or wunde, the fethers being plucked fom the hindr part therof, and vse it so often as shal bee needful, vntill yu perceiue that they haue taken out the venom that is in the wounde, and euery one of them must be applyed thereto so long tyme vntil that you may perceiue that hee doeth waxe faynt, or vntill he bee readie to dye. Also it is a good remedie to put them that bee a liue opened at the back, and let thm be there as long time as they haue any heate: and beginning to waxe colde, then take them away & put others to, and the venom being taken out by these meanes, let there bee put vpon the woud a me∣dicine that hath vertue to keepe the wounde open. Some do vse in the cuttinges or incisions an actuall thing to burne, called a cauterie, which doth very much good, extinguishing the venom, and comforting the hurte. The same ffect doth the cawterie potentiall in killing the venme, but it is not so good as the actuall, but thereby it doeth cause that the wounde doe not close, which is very necessary for the cure. The iuyce of the herbe Escuerçonera doeth profit very much, being put on venomous ytings or prickings, by it
selfe or mingled with other medicines, that haue vertue to take away the strēgth of the venom, as treacle, methridato & other medicines like to these: and if the Bezaar stone might be had casting the pouder therof vpō the wound, it wil worke a maruellous effect. While they are in this case they must be kept with good order, & good gouernement, in al thinges that are contrary to them, and vsing euacuations, such as is conuenient with wholesome medicines, and there must bee mingled with them medicines that are against venom, and when time serueth vse letting of blood, and in the rest, to goe to the cure of the disease, and vnto euery one of them, as it is conuenient vniuersally, and particularly, hauing alwayes care to giue to them that are sicke, in the morning fasting, the conserua of the roote of the Escuerçonera, and his wa∣ter, or the Bezaar stone, or ye pouder as it is said, or Bolear∣menike prepared, hee must haue care to annoynt the harte with things which are temperate, that may comforte with pouders and cordiall waters, amongest the which let there bee put the herbe Escuerçonera. And besides the vertues that the herbe Escuerçonera hath against the bytinges of these beastes in particular, and for the remedie of all in vni∣uersal, it hath also other particular vertues, the vse whereof hath beene shewed vnto vs, it is very good against sown∣dinges, of the harte, and for them that haue the falling sicknes, and for women whose matrix are suffocated or stop∣ped, by taking the conserua made of the roote, and drinking the iuyce of the hearbe clarified, or the water of it distilled. It doeth profit much when the soundinges are come, but much more before they doe come: when they feele that they begin to sownde, let them take the roote therof with the wa∣ter, and it doeth hinder the comming therof: and if it do come it is much lesse, and it doeth not woorke so vehemently as when it is taken after. Unto them that haue the gidinesse in the head it doeth good, and being continually taken, it ma∣keth the hart merrie: it doeth take away the sadnes which is
the cause therof: the iuyce taken out of the leaues and clari∣fied, and set in Sunne for certaine dayes, taking the cleerest thereof, and put into the eyes doeth clarifie the sight, and ta∣keth away the dimnesse therof, if it be mingled with a litle good hony, it is good for them that feare themselues to bee poysoned. The conserua of the roote beeing taken, and the water in the morning, that day by Gods grace they shal bee safe. The vse and experience of this hearbe hath bin taught without any auctor: for to this day we knowe not with what name the authors doe terme it. Iohn Odoricus Mechiorius an Almayne Phisitiō, doth wryte in an Epistle to Andrew Mathiolo, saying that Pe∣ter Carniser a Catalan Phisition, sent to him the herbe Es∣cuerçonera dry, into Germany: this Phisition did aske of Mathiolo what herbe it was: Mathiolo did not know what hearbe it was, neither did any other, vntil now that it hath bin spoken or written of. Some that are curious wil say that it is the Cōdrillia, a spice of Succory which Dioscorides doth make mention of in the second booke in the 122. chapter: & although that it hath some likenesse therof, it differeth much in the roote: for the Condrillia hath it very wooddie and vn∣profitable and very smal, and in the flowers: but they differ not in their vertues, for both of them are good for the by∣tings of adders. And whatsoeuer that our Escuerçonera is, wee see that his effectes are greate, as well against the by∣tinges of the Escuerços which is so euill a beast and veno∣mous, as for other diseases which we haue spoken of: which seeing that in so fewe yeres there hath bene so much thereof discouered, I do trust yt much more wil be hereafter by wise men, that there may be added to this which I haue discoue∣red and written of it. And seeing that we haue treated briefly and the best that we can of these twoo medicines so precious, to wit, the Be∣zaar stone and the hearbe Escuerçonera, which are twoo
things so precious and of so greate effectes against venom, now haue we to treate of the last parte which wee promised to doe; nd how we ought to keepe and preserue our selues, & not to fal into so greate a danger, as of them is declared, for that it is better to keepe our selues from daunger, thē to fal therein. Heerein the ancient wryters haue bin very circum∣spect. Amongest the rest it hath beene an ancient custome in Princes Courts & other greate estates, to haue their tasters as wel of their meate as of their drinke for the eschewing of poyson, and so by the meanes thereof they assure them∣selues to be out of peril for that matter, the which surely is allowable and a good custome, and necessary for the safegard and health of any Prince or Lorde, for if there be any hurte in the meate or in the drinke, it shal light first vppo thē that doe eate or drinke thereof, and not vpon the Prince or other high estate, in whose life and health greate matters doe de∣pende. Trueth it is that in these dayes it is done more for a cere∣mony and estate, then for health & safety of life, & this order is vsed amongst great estates, more for custome then for any thing else, for this purpose the common people haue it in estimation, so that at this present it is vsed contrary to that end and purpose it was ment, for they vse nowe taking of a little bred and bringing it with the meate and so taste it: that done, they cast it away, and lykewyse they drinke a drop of wyne or water: & if it should be vsed as it ought to bee, they should eate and drinke thereof throughly, for otherwyse the poyson, if there be any, cānot be discerned before it come in to the Princes mouth. Also the lord ought to command that there be prepared for him diuers meates, for that if hee mis∣lyke of one, he may tast of another: for being of diuers sorts he may tast of eache a little, and eating little at once of any that were infected, it would doe lesse hurte then if he shoulde eate of one dish being infected filling himself therwithal, for being either of them infected and eating much therof, it shal
doe the more hurte. And note this wel, that many times a mā is not giuen alwaies to eate of one meate, nor to see it al∣wayes tasted before he eate it, and afterwarde there appea∣reth in it notable hurte, therefore it is good to take your meate with a forke or a spoone, and that they be made as Ie∣rome Montuo a learned man in Phisike had appoynted for king Henry of Fraunce, which was made to knowe if that he had eatē any venom, there must be made a little forke and a spoone of one mixture of gold and siluer, that the olde wryters called Eletrum and it must bee 4. partes golde and one of siluer, they must bee smooth, cleane & well burnished, with the forke or holder let him eate his meate, and with the spoone his broth: for putting them in the meate or in the broth, if that there bee any venom therein, foorthwith the golde will haue an euil colour, appearing tawnie, blewe, or blacke, and loosing the beautie that before it had, the which wil cause them to looke better to the meate, and this is done for trial therof, and to make further experiēce by some beast that may eate thereof, and so to see the effect thereof, for that is the greatest experience: the lyke may bee done with the drinke to make a cuppe therof, or a broade vessel well burni∣shed. For if the wine or water that is put into it, haue any venom, the vessel wil take some colour therof as aforesaide: and if it haue no poyson therein, it will remaine in his owne colour. And surely it is a gallant and a delicate secrete, when you begin to eate any manner of meate, the first morsell that you take let it be wel chewed, and marke wel if it do byte, or haue any euil taste, or if it burne your mouth, or your tōgue, or that your stomacke abhorre it, for in perceiuing or feeling any thing of these signes, cast it forth, and wash your mouth with wyne or water, and leaue that meate, and fal to other: it woulde doe very wel to giue it to some beast to see the effet therof, it is good to haue in the house some beast to whome it might giuen, for to make experience thereof. And the effect so appearing they haue to iudge therof. And this is to be vn∣derstoode
when the venomes come of corsiue thinges, you shal feele a notable sharpenes, and they byte and burne forth∣with: the best is for them that haue suspicion, to eate meate that is rosted or sod, & that they eate neither brothes nor pot∣tages, for in them there may be greater hurte: and if any bee made, let them not bee made with things of smell, as Am∣ber, muske, and sweete spyces, and let them not haue ouer∣much sharpenes, for in broth or pottage, the poyson wil soo∣ner lurke then in rosted or sodden, and vse no meates, which haue much sweetnesse, therein all poyson will lurke the more. Hee that hath any suspition when hee goeth to his meate, let him not bee to greedie to eate foorthwith very ha∣stily, but let him refraine himselfe, and let him eate with lea∣sure, by litle and litle. The lyke he must do, in his drinking, being very thirsty, hee feeleth not what he drinketh: and so many people beeing very dry, haue dronke in lie, lye, and also water of arsenike, not feeling the same vntil they haue hurt their body, and therefore it is conuenient to drinke leysurely by litle, and litle, tasting his drinke as he drinketh: surely if men woulde be ruled by this order, they should easily finde if there were any euil thing in that they eate, and drinke. You haue to consider the colour of your meate, for thereby will somewhat appeare. For it wil looke otherwyse, then it ought to do; see that your vessels wherein you eate or drinke bee cleane, newe, and glistering: and if your abilitie be such, let them bee of siluer, being cleane burnished, for if you haue ve∣nom in the drinke, it is easily espied, and the siluer doth turne blacke or tawney. Not many dayes past a Gentleman of great riches, by drinking in a plaine cuppe of siluer,Historie. perceiued the cup stay∣ned of a sad tawney colour, and did maruel thereat, hee only tasted the wyne, and it made his tongue rough, & his mouth also: hee looked wel on the wyne that was put into the cup, & it had not that quicknes in drinking that it ought to haue had, and hee looked on the water, and in the bottome of the
ewre there were many graines of arsenyke, wt as yet were not dissolued. I was called & I gathered out of the ewre more then xx. smal graines of arsenike. & within certain dayes af∣ter the Gentleman fell sicke, wherby I did conectre that it was not the first tyme that they pretended to poyson him: & since that, he hath bin sicke a long time. And thus much I af∣firme that if the cup had not bin altered of his colour  bin infected, it had not bin perceiued. Therefore it is necessary that the vessels and tinages where wyne & water are kept, be stopt, for feare least any venomous thing fall therein, as spyders, Sallamanquesas and other lyke venomous bests, and therefore it is nought to drinke with vessels or cuppes that haue narrow mouths: for it is best to see what one drin∣keth in a cleere vessel and broade, for it is good for them that do regard their health. It is good to haue a peece of a right Unicornes horne in a smal cheyne of golde, that it may bee swilled continually in the water that shalbee dronke. It would doe well, for not onely it taketh away the suspition of the venom, but doeth put to the drinke a meruellous cordiall vertue. Also you must not stand by the fire that is made with venomous wood, for the smoke doeth poyson, as if you should take poyson, and to set in the chamber coales when they doe begin to kindle, many haue dyed therwith: let your apparell be kept by such as you haue trust in, for in them may bee put things that may do notable hurte, and for al that, as is said, it doeth much profit to haue trustie seruants, and that they bee such whome you may trust, and that they be of a good pa∣rentage, and sticke not to reward them wel. And aboue al o∣ther let the Phisition that hath the charge of your health, bee learned and experimented, discrete and of a good iudgemēt, and that he be riche and of a good kinred, and beeing such a one, he wil not doe any thing that he ought not to doe, seing that in his handes is the life and health of the Mayster and Lorde. FINIS.
THE DIA∣LOGVE OF YRON, WHICH TREATETH OF THE greatnesse thereof, and howe it is the most excellent metall of all others, and the thing most necessary for the ser∣uice of man; and of the greate Medi∣cinall vertues which it hath. An Eccho for the Doctor Monardes Phisi∣tion of Seuill. In Seuill in the House of Alonso Escriuano.
¶ To the most Excellent Lorde, the Duke of Alcala, &c. my Lorde, the Do∣ctor Monardes your Phisition wi∣sheth health, &c. FOrasmuch as the metall cal∣led yron, is of so great impor∣tance in the worlde, and so necessary for the seruice of man, it moued me to make this Dialogue, which doeth treate of the greatnesse and maruellous workes thereof. Which if they be well consi∣dered▪ they will bring admi∣ration vnto all that shall reade them, by reason it is so ne∣cssary for all states, and manners of liuing. It hath also greate and mediinall vertues, and likewise with worthi∣nesse, and greatnesse, it is an Instrument and meane, whereby the most worthy haue gotten great Titles, and fame; as we see many of those which in times past haue attayned vnto, among whom the Predecssors of your excellencie with theyr noble mindes, and strong armes, the Seare in the fist, and the sworde in the hande, by o∣uercomming battels, by getting townes and places, the name and fame of them haue byn immortall to this day. And for to augment and increase this the more, and to geue to your excellencie, and to your chidn and suc∣cessours, geater glory, you tooke to wise the excel∣lent Duches the Ladie Iuna Curtes that at this day doeh beautifi the whole worlde, with er woorthi∣nesse, etimation, qualitie, and gratesse, daughter to that valiaunt and reowmed Prince, Don ernando Curtes, who with his greatnsse and infinite Labours
is a shorter way, and fewe people will be there. It seemeth to mee, that the greate hall of the treasurie house is sutt: t may bee that whiles I go vp to see the sicke person, they will open it. Burgus. Your worship may go in Gods name, I will tarrye here for you, and seeing the great hall is not opened, I will sitt downe vppon the benche, and will see what doeth passe vntill you come. Doctour. Master Burgus, I praye you pardon mee, if I haue tarryed long: for the qualitie of the cause hath cau∣sed mee to tarry. Burgus. Rather I woulde haue beene glad that you had tarryed longer, because I would haue seene more. Doctour. What haue you seene whiles I was absent? Burgus. The great hall being shutt, and the parde full of people, and I looking vppon them earnestly, it seemeth to mee that they are people of estimation, but to my iudgement full of cares: for in them I haue seene so va∣riable and diuerse likenesses of countenance, that I maruel at it. Some of them talking to them selues: others being alone with their heads hanging downe, and with great imagination: Others talking by two and two together: Others in clusters treating of the sales of their merchaun∣dize: Maryners and souldiours carrying for their pay∣mentes: Others carrying away their porcions of siluer, which they had taken out, running with it, as though they had stolen it: Others there were with the Notaries about their suites: Others in the office of the treasourer amongest the Registers. There was also a greate noyse of much people, deliuering and receiuing parcels of siluer, but they were in a great strife therevppon. The Iudges were in counsell, and many people tarrying for them in such sort, that I was in greate admiration: I being there onely to beholde, and all the rest to do their businesse. And it was to mee as one that did beholde them without greefe, as a comedye, with many Pageants.
And that which did make mee maruell more, was to see that none were merrye, nor content: rather they seemed to haue great care and troubles. Doctour. Master Burgus, I am glad you haue seene what doeth passe in that house, with so much attention: for all that which you haue seene, that Gold and siluer is cause thereof, which with so great good will you came to see, and this is it which is the cause of their troubles, and cares, and not onely it bringeth such as you sawe there amazed and astonied, but many others, for they are at this daye the in∣strument of all these things. Some they put downe, others they rayse vp, whereby they haue rule, and dominion in the worlde. These mortall men haue put so much felicitie in them, that they haue and do procure them, by the losse of their lyues, and shedding of their bloud, and after they haue them, they conserue them with much labour, and with grea∣ter care keepe them, and with much misery they spend them, and with great euill fortune they lose them. These are they that take away quietnesse and rest. They take awaye sleape, and many passe the day to keepe them, and to in∣crease their afflictions and cares. In the night also they rest with feare, and care: there are in them so many snares and hazardes, as wee see euery day. Burgus. For all this I woulde see the Golde, the siluer, and the Emeraldes. Doctour. What? master Burgus, haue you neuer seene Golde, siluer, and Emeraldes? Bur∣gus. Yea, I haue seene them, but in little quantitie. Do∣ctour. What do you thinke is there in seeing of little, or much, but to see much earth, or little earth, and moste of all without the profite of man, of as many as nature hath crea∣ted? And if you haue so great desire to see precious metals: I will carrye you to a place where you shall see one metall much more of price, & of greater estimation, then the golde & siluer y• you were so desirous to see, & better, & of more profit
beginning, and original. Trimegisto sayde, that the earth was the mother of the metals,Trimegist. and the heauen the Father. And Plinie saith these wordes.Plinie. The inner parte of the earth is a thing most preci∣ous, for into it, and through it doe goe, and pearce all the in∣fluences of heauen, ingendring therein thinges of greate pryce, as stones and metals: and this is done, as Calci∣donio Platonico doeth say, by reason of the greate heate that is in the inner parte of it. Calisthenes. Calcidon. Calisthenes vnderstood that the forme of metals were all one. Anaxagoras and Hermes. Anaxagoras and Hermes sayde, that the metalls had one forme in the inner parte, and an other in the outwarde parte, one secret, and an other ma∣nifest, after the manner as the lead hath within it gold, and the gold lead, and so of al the rest of the metals. See you my maisters howe many and howe variable opinions there are among wise men. A common opinion.There is another opinion, which is that which is com∣mon, and which for the most certayne we doe followe, which Auicen wrote in his bookes of Metheurous,Auicen. and in the bookes hee made of Alcumisto, which were confirmed by Geber and Raymond Lullio, and Arnolde de Villa no∣ua,Geber. and all the rest that haue treated of these matters, euen vnto our tyme,Raymond. doe say, that the true matter of all metals is ingendred of brimstone,Arnold. and quicksiluer, the brimstone as the father, and the quicksiluer as the mother: and the heat of the brimstone, doeth incorporate, and congele with the quicksiluer, in such sorte that of these twoo thinges are made the metals which are in the bowelles of earth: and of the variation of these twoo beginninges, they come to dif∣fer the one from the other, and of the purenesse of these twoo beginnings, some doe come to be more excellent then other: and for this the golde is more profitable & more fayre then all other metalles, for bycause it is formed of his begin∣ning, cleane, and pure, which was the cause and originall of his perfection.
And there were Philosophers which said that al metals should haue bin gold, if it had not bin for the imperfection of the sulphur, and the quicksiluer. And al other metals besides the golde, they call imperfect mineralles, bycause they had not their purenesse, and concoction, that the gold had, with that maruellous friendshippe, which nature gaue vnto it. And of this it commeth, that the Alcumistes for to make golde, doe pretende to make cleane and purifie these twoo beginninges of the which all the metalles are made, and beeing put into their perfection the golde is made by of them, which is the metall most pure and cleane, of all o∣ther. Thus they de woorke with their distillations and limbecks: and howe harde it is to doe, let them report and speake that haue spent their goods, and also their patrimo∣nies therevppon, and yet in the end haue performed nothing at all. Such as doe wryte against them, making impossible their woorkes and effectes, doe say, that in the bowels of the earth, the metals are not ingendred, nor made of brimstone, and quicksiluer, as they thinke and holde it for certayne, so they cannot make of them by arte, for if it were so, that of brimstone and quicksiluer they were ingendred, there would be some ase of them, in the mynes of golde, and siluer, and of the other metals: for it is seene that there is no signe or vayne of them in any of those mynes, howe deepe so euer they bee: but rather they are mynes of themselues, as wee see, that neyther in them are founde metalles, nor in the mynes of the metals are found sulphur, nor quickesiluer. And if it were so as they say that the metalles doe breede, and are newly ingendred of these twoo beginnings, it must bee of force, that one metall were alreadie made, and the other shoulde goe a making, for that all coulde not bee made alyke: but rather they take out all metalles ready made, and perfectioned, and in the meltinges
the Iron doeth fall downe into the lowest parte, and so is made a great cake, the which being deuided into peeces, they carry them to the forge, where are certeine great ham∣mers or sledges of Iron which the water dryueth, and they beate them, and there they are forged, and doe make these planches that you see there leaning. Trueth it is, that there are mynes where some Iron is more strong then other some, and likewise harder and stronger to labour. The Iron of Almayne is softer and gentler to worke: That of Flaun∣ders is harde and naught:Almayne. and therefore it is that manye things are soone broken that are made of it.Flandrs. In Italy you haue all sortes,Biskey. that of Biskey is the best, by reason it is good to worke, and it is more mightie and strong then all other, and for the goodnesse it hath, it is carryed to all partes. Doctour. Do they bring Steele from Biskey as they do from Italy? Ortun̄o. They do bring a certeine kinde of Iron so harde and strong,Italie. that being wrought, it serueth for Steele, cheefely with a temperature that is giuen to it, that doeth make it very strong, although that it be wrought with great labour. There is great difference betweene this, and he Steele which they bring from Italy, and cheefely from Milan, for this is verye pleasant to worke and softe, and is farre better, and the craftes men that doe worke it, for this cause are desirous of it, and do vse it more then any other. Doctour. Some will say, that the Steele is a myne aone of it selfe distant frō the Ion. Ortun̄o. It is not so, fo all are mynes of Iron, but that some is more strong then other some, and the stronger and harder it is, for the strength and hadnesse thereof wee call it Steele, and there are coun∣tries which haue no other Iron but this which is harde and strong, as all the countrey of Mondragon, where all the mnes that are in it,Mnago. are of this Iron, strong, & harde, where∣by it is called Steele, all that is taken out of them, the dis∣position of the place doeth cause it, but that which they bring
from Italy is of another sorte. In that countrie are diuers mynes of yron, some of soft yron & easie to woorke, and other of hard & strong yron, & not easie to worke. And for to make the steele which they sende vs, they vse it in this sorte: they take of the soft yron, the quantitie they seeme good, and they make it in  aine small thinne planches, then they take marble ground small, and also the rust of the yron grounde smal, and mingling it al togither, they put it into a furnace to mel, prepared for this purpose,The mann how they make Steele in Italie. with much quantitie of kin∣dled coale, they cast al together into it, & geueth it a strong fire, and after they cast to it some of that hard Iron that is so hard, that it cannot bee wrought, and with a strong fire it is al melt, and they make it one peece, of the which they make these barres of steele, that thy bring to these partes, in so great quantitie the which they call stele, by reason it is hard to woorke, and strong, & in Latin it is called Chalibs, by reason of certain smal townes yt were so called, whereas was yron most strong: & harde. The steele serueth for many things, bicause it is of greater might,Steee. and stronger then the yron, and of more actiuitie, and they make strong & fortifie the tooles of yron with it, to endure the longer, and may doe their work more quickly, with more strength & readines, for that it is an yron more pure and cleane, and for this cause it is more dry, and white, and better to be wrought: & this is to conclude that which I haue vnderstoode of the originall of yron, and of steele. D. Maister Ortun̄o, hath sayde very well, and not in short speeche, but wisely, and discretly. Rea∣son would that many people should buy of these 2. metalles. for I haue vnderstood that they serue for many things. Or∣tūno, they which doe buy yron of mee, are many; but they which doe worke it, are many more, for I doe not know any office or science in all this citie whereto yron and steele are not needful, & necessary. D. M. B. & I would be glad yt you would tel vs in what occupations, principally yron is vsed & spent. Ortun̄o. They are so many, that in many dayes they
wil not bee declared, much lesse in the little tyme that wee haue here. D. Let vs be informed as long as time wil per∣mit. Ortun̄o. I wil speake of some thinges which I doe remember. One of the thinges in the which yron is most spent,In what thinges Iron & Steele are spent. as also a greate parte of the steele, is in armour, as wel defensiue, as offensiue, so that there is no  at this day in the world where they are not vsed, and exercised, and in many Countries they are made. Chiefly there is spent much yron in making of handgunnes, the vse whereof is so much in the warres, and warlyke exercises, that the people of greatest fame and actiuitie, are they which shoote in them: as a thing very principal, and most necessary: but surely it was an inuention of the Deuill, for to carrie ma∣ny to hell. And to speake of all kinde of weapons which are made of yron and steele, it wil aske a longer tyme, then we haue. The yron doeth profite for the tilling of the earth, and labouring of the fieldes, and for the benefites of all the woorkes in the Countrie, to sowe, and doe other woorkes, a thing so necessarie and profitable for all people, seeing that the woorkes of the fieldes doeth susteine all manner of estates, in the worlde. The yron serueth to make buil∣dinges, so many sortes, and diuers, that therewith they builde Cities, Townes, Uillages, Forts, Churches, and publike places, the which without yron and steele coulde not be made, as also in the sciences of any manner of handy∣crafts man, in the which there are so many necessary instru∣ments, for to vse, and exercise, that therby you may see howe necessary the yron and steele is, seeing that without thē they cannot be made, nor any thing can bee wrought. And to ex∣presse euery office, and science by it selfe, that by meanes of these twoo metalles are made and exercised, it will neuer bee made an ende of. One thing I wil speake with trueth, that there is nothing in the worlde, bee it by it selfe alone or with the helpe of another thing, that hath not need of yron and steele.
By meanes of these two metals, kinges & princes do get kingdomes, and cities, & by meanes of them they do make subiect their enimies, and do defende their goods and per∣sons. And as Liuio sayth, that with Iron the countrie is defended, and not with golde, and with it kings are made strong and mightie, and are esteemed and had in great reue∣rence. By Iron iustice is kept and maintayned, and by the meanes of it, euill doers are chastened, and the good conser∣ned. This mettall hath so much authoritie in the world, that it conserueth peace and quietnesse in common wealthes, in cities, in feeldes, and in the desertes, in such sort that by i in all places they haue all their assurance, and defence: and so much may be sayde of that which it can doe, and the great aucthority that it hath, and the meane that it is for al things, that my tongue is not able to speake them, nor my memory to expresse them. One thing I will say, that the aunciet Romaines had by it such estimation, that onely the noble people onely might weare a ring, & the same to be of Iron. Of two needles which are made of steele I wil speake, as of the greatest thinges that may be thought:The sowing needle. the one is the Needle with the which they do sowe: howe necessary it is in the world, in cities, in townes, in common wealthes, in particular houses, in the feeld, in the Sea, & in al places, yea and to anye one particular man alone? And let so manye Artes speake thereof, that by meanes of the Needle are v∣sed, and don, and without it, they should not be vsed nor don: and being so many, it will be a thing incomprehensible to speake of them. Let euery man consider thereof, seeing that from the king vnto the sheepeheard, and from the bishop to the sexton, they cannot passe without the vse of it. And if we looke what seruice it doeth to women in their vses and xer∣cises, in their sowings and workes wrought vpon linen cloth and silke, things so politike, and delicate, that with the Needle they do worke: Imitating also, in things which they worke, like vnto the worke of nature, making basts, birds,
plants, leaues, and flowers, which do seeme with the bran∣ches, that they giue of silke in coulours, as if it were the self same that is growing in the feelde. I sawe the picture of the kings maiestie made with a needle so naturally, as if an excellent painter had paynted it. Of all this the needle is the instrument: a thing so small that it is hid among the fingers. The Indians were in great admiration thereof at the beginning, when they were first discouered, when they sawe Spanyards sowe with a Needle, for it seemed to them a thing of wonder, and they gaue for a Needle much golde, and they were askd wherefore they would haue them, see∣ing that they were naked: they aunswered, for the workes that the Spanyardes did with them, they would haue them in their power for a thing of admiration. And with them they tooke out the thornes that can into their feete, better then with any other thing. The other Needle is that which serueth for Nauigati∣on to sayle withall in the Sea,The needle for nauigati∣on. and is one of the greatest things that hath beene discouered in the whole worlde, with∣in this little tyme: and by meanes thereof, there haue beene found newe worldes, great kingdomes, and prouinces, ne∣uer seene nor knowen vnto vs. And if the Needle had not bene found, they had neuer bin discouered. When they wan∣ted it, the nauigation was very little, and short: they fayled onely casting about by the bankes of the Sea coastes: and nowe by the meanes of it, they do ingulfe them selues, and do sayle in such sort, that the shippe called the Uictorie say∣led all the rounde worlde ouer, as the Sunne goeth euerye day, that it is sayde, shee sayled at one time twelue thou∣sande leagues. And that which is more to be maruelled at, that the shippe being in a gulffe of 800. or 1000. leagues, by meanes of the Needle they came to the porte which they pretēded to go vnto, without any other knowledge, more thē by the meanes of the Needle, or as we cal it the compasse,
the which is of steele: and they do rbbe ouer one parte of it with the lode stone, and forthwith by particular vertue which God hath giuen vnto it by that parte which they did rubbe ouer with the lode stone, it looketh towardes the Pole, which is neare to the North, and perpetually it doeth this being in the Sea, or on the land, eyther by the day, or by the night, with the Sunne or without it, alwayes it looketh towardes the North. With the which Needle, and with the carde of Nauigation, wherein is placed a distincion for the know∣ledge of the wyndes, and the description of the portes, they sayle so many milleons of leagues, as at this day wee see: and it is done so easily, that it is very wonderfull.Who frst found thi needle. The inuē∣tion of this maruelous Needle was founde by a Marriner, who was borne in the citie of Melsin Italy. Also the Iron & Steele do serue to make clockes, which is a thing of greate art, & very necessary to liue wt rule & order: for by them shall be knowē the works that are to be made, & the time that shal be spent in them, they serue for all states of people, whereby they may liue wisely & discrtely: & where is no clocke they liue like beasts. they are made at tis day with so much art & curiousnesse, that they make great admiration, they purifie and make cleane these two metals, that they make them as bright as any other: they gyld them, they siluer them, & there is giuen to them other coulor, & are made very fayre, as we see that there are made cheynes f Steele very delicate and fyne: and there are giuen to thm dyuse sapes ad cou∣lours, and are more esemed then those which are made of Golde or Siler. Thse metals ae disilled y t we of Alcumiste: and thre is mae of them Quinta ssncia,Dised. as of Golde and Siler. he Alcumises too saye, tat the metall moe ape fr thir cuses and efctes, is the Iron. The Iron doeth suffer a riuous disease, hich doth consume and make an ende of it, wich is calld
rust,That rust come not. and because it may not come to it, there are many re∣medies, that the things which are made of Iron, and of Steele may be continually cleane: principally, that they bee put into no moyst place, and that they be occupyed and vsed, gilding them or siluering them: in so doing they be kepte cleane from the aforesayde rust, or annoynting them with common oyle, or with the marrowe of a Deare, or with the fatt of birdes, or with white lead and vineger, when they are taken with the rust, for to take it away, they must be fi∣led of,Remedies when the rust hath taken it. and put into vineger, and after into the fire, for with this it is taken away, vnlesse when they be so much eaten, that they are not to be remedyed with these benefites. I doe not speake of the finesse and delicatenesse that there is in sodering of it, and closing of it together, and of the vsing of it in the forge, because I am wery I let it passe, with many other things that I should say thereof, and do conclude, that these two things, Iron and Steele are the moste necessarye things for the seruice of mā, of as many as are in the world. Doctour. I am very glad with that which master Ortun̄o hath spoken: for all is to confirme the excellencies, & great∣nesse which I haue vnderstoode of these two mettales, wher∣by I do take them to be more necessarye then the golde and siluer, if we do consider well of it. The golde doth not serue vs principally for any other thing, but for money, which is to buy any thing therewith, and for the trade of things, the which any other metall might serue, or any other thing. For in the olde tyme as there was no money, they did barter and change one thing for another: and by reason in this barte∣ring and changing there could not be vsed any equalitie and iustification betweene parties; the wise and discreete men of common wealthes did agree together to make a thing, which might serue the lacke that might be of the one partye to the other, that with it the thinges might be made equall, and there might be a iustification of both partes. And for this reason and effect, there was inuented and made the first
mony, which was neither of golde nor siluer, but of yron, and of metall, as wee see in the mony of old tyme. And after that, the Romaynes made it of golde and siluer, for the fayr∣nesse thereof, but it is sufficient that the firste which was made, was of yron and of metall, seeing that the Indians haue it to this day, of fruites of trees, and especially of the Cacao, which is the fruite of a tree, lyke to an Almond, this hath serued, and doeth serue them for money, to buy,Money mad of fruite of Tree. and to sell, and to vse all playnesse, in their buzinesse. And in all Ginea the blacke people called Negros doe vse for money, for the same effect, certayne little snayles, which they finde in the Sea, as also other nations doe vse of thinges lyke to this. B. I haue helde my peace, harkening to your woorshippes, with greate attention, and surely you haue treated in thinges of greate importance, and of greate lear∣ning: and seeing you goe treating so effectually the matter of yron, and so delicately, and with so greate learning, I woulde that Maister Doctor might satisfie vs one thing, that I haue seene decyded of learned men, vppon the com∣plection of yron: for some doe say it is colde, and vppon this I haue had so many alterations, that they haue amased me, and seeing that Mayster Doctor can certifie vs concerning this matter, wee shall take greate pleasure, if that hee will declare it vnto vs. D. I thought to haue made an ende with this saying, and that I had accomplished my promise with Maister Burgus: but nowe hee will dryue mee to a question, the most harde and difficulte that is in al Phisicke, and surely it were neede of more tyme, then that wee haue to determine it. B. Your woorship may not escape by that meanes, for to morrowe you may make an ende of that, which you cannot doe this day. Ortun̄o. I shal receiue great pleasure in it, al∣though it bee not my profession: for beeing a thing touching yron, I shal reioyce therein. D. For to content you, I wil
owne iudgement. And that wee may more apparantly see the same, I will speake of such that holde the one opinion, and also of those that are of the other,That the Y∣ron is cold. Galen. and the parties being heard, wee will iudge that which shall seeme best vnto vs. Let vs speak first of those that affirme Iron to be colde, and let Galen be the first, who doeth saye that all those metals of their nature are drye, and so they haue great vertue, and strength, to drye vp, and that that hath moste vertue & strength to doe this aong all of them, is the Iron, as also with this vertue to drye vp: it hath also vertue to make colde. He doeth com∣pare it to the stone, saying that the substance of the stone is constant, and stedfast, for the colde, and dryeth that it hath: Euen so is the Iron, in such sorte that it hath the nature of the stone, the which is colde and drye. And this which hee sayeth in the nynth of his Methodo,Idem. hee doeth confirme in that of the naturall faculties. The harde bodies do shewe to hae more earthly partes, and as the Iron is most harde, it hath more then all other thinges, whereby it commeth to be colde and drye. Aueroys.Aueroyes doeth confirme the same in the fifth of his C∣liget and sayeth: things which are made harde of heate, with the dominion of earthly partes ought to be colde, and drye,Alberto Maegno. as the Iron is. Alberto Magno in the booke of the Metheuros sayeth: the Iron when it is kindled maketh it selfe very reade, for because in his principall qualitie it hath earthly partes, the same hee doth confirme in the book which he made of metals. Conciliador in the difference 155. sayeth: in the Iron is not founde that vertue which is expressely actiue,Concilia∣dor. Idem. but in the ende it is colde and drye. The same wordes are sayde in the difference 128. Gentill in the same question which he made de Actuatione medicinarum, sayeth, that the Iron is colde and drye.
Herculano in the chapter de Vomitu confirmeth the same. Iacobus de partibus vpon the second of the first,Herculano. Iacobus de partibus. Auicn. sayth that the yron is colde and dry. Wee do see that the waters which haue quenched hot yron or steele, are colde and dry. Auicen in the seconde of the first, sayeth that they doe restrayne the colour, and take away dryeth, and the heat, chiefly in time of very hot weather. And following after this, Menardo saith, that the water which hath cooled hot steele is colde,Menardo, seing that it taketh away the drieth, and doth mittigate the heate, in tyme of hot weather: and the drieth being taken a∣way, causeth that the putrefaction of the feuers do cease, and where they are with stooles, it maketh an excellent woorke. Albucasis in the booke which hee made of cering instru∣mentes sayeth,Albucasis, that those instrumentes wherewith the head shoulde be cered, ought to be of golde, bicause it is most tem∣perate: & that in no manner of wyse they be of yron, bycause the yron is colde of nature. Brasauola in his booke of the Frenche disease sayeth, that the yron is colde and dry,Brasauola. which as he sayeth doth shewe wel in his colour and manner of substance, and in the darke∣nes and waight it hath, for these thinges doe alwaies ap∣peare, and come into earthly substance, as that which is light in to hot, and ayery substance, which is knowen to bee colde and dry for his effectes, seeing that it taketh away, and doeth represse the cholerike stooles, it withholdeth the fluxe, and hot runnings. That which this doeth, alwayes is colde and dry. Sanauarola putteth the degrees of the coldnes, which the yron hath, and sayeth;Sanauarola. that it is colde in the seconde de∣gree, and dry in the third. B. Maister Doctor I pray you to passe forwarde: for vnto mee, that which is spoken, is suf∣ficient, for I haue no doubt therof, but that the yron is colde and dry, and alwayes I haue vnderstood it to be so, and now with the confirmation of such authors, I holde it for more certaine and firme. D. Maister Burgus hath very quickly
and determination of this controuersie. A concorde of the dife∣rence.We haue sayde with the opinion of Auicen, and the rest of the authors, that al metals are made of sulfur and quick∣siluer, the sulfur as the father, and the quicksiluer as the mo∣ther, the one as the maker, and the other as the matter, and being so, the matter whereof the yron is made, is of these twoo things, and of these twoo beginninges, of the most hot sulfur, and of the most colde quicksiluer. The which nature hath placed in the inner partes of the earth, and made them metals, and where there was these twoo beginninges, most pure, it was made golde, and lykewyse of that which was grosse and vnpure, according to the degree and qualitie of euery one, there was ingendred and made the metal, confor∣mably to the purenesse, or grosnesse that it had: and where these metals are more vnpure, more grosse, and more darke, the yron did ingender. The which being of beginnings not pure nor cleane, but grosse and filthy, became to be a metall, more harde then al other metals, so that by meanes of it strength, there might bee some who might make it easie and subiect to bee wrought, as also it might bee a necessary in∣strument that thereof men might profite themselues. And whereas the yron is made and ingendred of these twoo be∣ginnings, which are, sulfur and quicksiluer, the one hot, and the other colde: so it hath the complection, and temperature, and doeth participate of both qualities: therfore it is so dry, and for this cause hard and strong. By meanes of the sulfur it heateth, it consumeth, it dryeth, it openeth, it comforteth, it prouoketh appetite, and maketh the meruellous woorkes that we will speake of heereafter, and al is done by meanes of the heate which it hath. And by meanes of the quicksil∣uer, being grosse and vnpure, and being formed with earth∣ly vertue, wherewith it is mingled, it cooleth, it retayneth, it thickeneth, it congeleth, it withdraweth, and detayneth a∣ny maner of fluxe, or runninges by binding, it taketh away stooles, it cooleth and tempereth the heate, and it doeth ma∣ny
other effects, which are all done by meanes of the coldnes that it hath, in such sorte yt as by the aforesaide is seene, the effects are contrarie which the yron doth: the cause wherof is by reason it is compounded of things that haue contrary qualities, which are rooted in it, and do worke conformably to the subiect where they doe worke. For where it is need to open, it openeth; and where it is neede to shut, it shutteth. Trueth it is, that besides these qualities, the yron hath an o∣ther most principal, which is, that it is most dry, more then all other metals, by meanes whereof it doeth many of these effectes and workes, which wee haue spoken of, and also it hath vertue to heate, to coole, and to dry vp. And of this it commeth, that some doe say it is hot, bycause they see that it maketh workes of heate, and others saie that it is colde, by∣cause they see that it doeth workes to make colde, the reason whereof is, that it is compounded of twoo contrarie begin∣ninges, the one hot, and the other colde, and thereby it see∣meth that they may very wel defend themselues, who sayde that yron is colde, and worketh cold effectes: And lykewyse they that sayde, it was hot, and doth hot effects. Whereby it doth appeare that which the one and the other haue spokē and treated therof, to be true. B. Maister Doctor hath ve∣ry wel ended the controuersie, and contrariety that is in this matter discretly and wisely, wherby wee are satisfied: but there remayneth a doubt, if the quicksiluer bee colde, as he sayeth that some doe say that it is, and to prooue it, they say that it sheweth by his strength, colour, and taste, and the ef∣fectes which it doeth, to make colde, seeing that such as doe vse of it, it maketh impotent, they suffer weakenesse, and trembling of sinewes, and are vtterly voyde of the vse of their members, and many dye all togither of a disease cal∣led Apoplexie, and all this doeth come of cold causes. They which say that the quicksiluer is hot, doe prooue it with his effectes, for anoynting the iointes, and other partes, of the body therwith, it maketh great workes, and effects of heat,
it inflameth their mouth, and throte, their gummes, & rooffe of their mouth, with great heat, and burning: it prouoketh sweat most vehement: we see that therof is made that most strong thing like to fire, that is called Sublimatum, which is most strong fire,Sublimatum. and burneth wheresoeuer it bee put, and all that it taketh, it consumeth, and fiereth. Of it is made that corsiue poyson, called pouder Precipitatos, in such sorte that the cause is doubtful, seeing it hath and doeth the workes so contrary to make colde, and to make hot. D. The same doubt we haue of it, as of the yron, and what is that which Maister Burgus wil now haue? B. Now that you brought vs out of the first doubte, we pray you that you wil bring vs out of the second. D. It semeth vnto me that Maister Burgus doth take the matter so earnestly that I must needs do it, bi∣cause I meane to content him, in al things, & it shal bee done very quickly: the euening commeth vpon vs. The quicksil∣uer is a metal cōpounded of diuers parts, the watery parts that it hath, are mingled with earthy things, which is tha that giueth it substance and strength. It hath also min∣gled with it fulfery parts, which seemeth to be very bright: for in chafing the quicksiluer betweene the hands, there re∣maineth in them the perfit smel of brimstone, & so the quick∣siluer i cmpounded of diuers things. The watery & earthy parts giueth it vertue to make colde: by meanes whereof is done the vertue which we haue spoken of, and by meanes of the sulfure which hath ayery parts, it heateth, penetrateth, openeth and maketh thin, and by them it prouoketh sweat, it causeth to expel by the mouth, and by stooles the humour that doeth abounde, by hearing and doing other effectes of heate. And therfore it is not to be maruelled that the quick∣siluer doth contrary effects, seing it hath diuers operations, which is the selfesame that we haue spoken of the yron, and so the doubt remaineth discouered which was propoūded by M. Burgus. D. I remaine sufficiently satisfied of that which
is saide, but not so satisfied that there doeth not remaine for me to aske of M. Doctor another thing, which is of more weight then all that is saide: which is, to knowe the vertues that the yron and steele haue in the vse of medicine: for their works, and effects, as I haue hard it reported, are many. D. It wilbe a trouble for me to recken, and tel of so ma∣ny ancient authors as also of late written authors, which doe treate of the vertues of yron, and of the steele, by reason they are many, and doe treat of great things. And seing that it shalbe declared, let vs loose no tyme, wherby we may the rather make an ende. By that which is sayde, you haue vn∣derstood howe the yron, and steele, are one kinde of metall, sauing that the steele is more cleane yron, and more fine, & for this cause it is hard and strong. They of old tyme knewe not the steele, but onely treated of the yron, and to it they at∣tributed the medicinal vertues that wee will speake of, and vnder our talke of yron, we wil comprise the steele, seeing that it differeth not from it, in more then in being purer, & cleaner from superfluities: and for this cause the steele doth make cold, and dryeth more then the yron. For where it is needful to heate and to open, the yron hath more force, by∣cause it is not cleane of the sulpherie partes, for there is lost much thereof, when the steele is made in the forme as it is aboue sayde. It is needful before we proceed forwarde,Of the prepa∣ration of Iron and Steele. whereby wee may the better treate of the vertue of yron, that wee vnder∣stand how it ought to be prepared. For if it be not prepared, neither can it be administred, nor yet wil it worke it effet, bycause t is a hard metal and strong. And seeing that wee haue M. Burgus here, who in his arte is one of the excel∣lentest men of al Spain, he may declare vnto vs how it may bee vsed, and prepared, bicause wee may goe forwarde in this matter. B. I haue receiued great pleasure with ht as I haue hearde treated of yron, and of steele, and thought that wee shoulde haue made an ende, and not treated
any longer of them: but seeing that it seemeth good to Mai∣er Doctor, that I shoulde speake of the preparing of these metlles, I will doe it, bycause I woulde say some thing as well for my parte. But if Maister Doctor woulde take paynes, hee might speake thereof, as wel as most men that are in the world, seeing he knoweth it, and that there is no∣thing in medicine hidden vnto him, but seeing that wee haue of him a good Censor, if any thing doe lacke, he may speake and supply it. The metalles if they bee not corrected and prepared euery one,To correct Metalles. as it is conuenient for them, cannot serue in medicine, nor worke the effects and vertues, which they haue in them, bycause they are grosse of substance, and strong. The Alcumistes haue knowen and do knowe much in correcting and preparing of them, seeing that wee see they vse the golde and the siluer, in broths, that they may be droke, and doe reduce them into pouders, as also they do the like with the lead and copper, and of other minerals and meals, which they doe correct and prepare, for to make them into pouders, that they may serue in medicyne. They doe correct and prepare particularly the yron for this effect, but with greate difference, from all other me∣talles, as Bulcasis sheweth very learnedly, being a Phi∣sitin,Bulcasis. and a Moore, who in particular doth shew the man∣ner which ought to bee had, for to prepare the yron, and hee sayeth in this manner, the fyling of the yron which is most pure, must bee taken without other mixture, for if it bee mingled with Copper, or Lead, or Glasse, and if it bee gi∣uen so mingled to any person for to drinke, it wil kill them, you may take the quantity you list, of that which is fyled, being most pure, and let it be wshed, and after it is wel wa∣shed, let it be put into a cleane vessell. And let there bee put to it vineger, and put it vnder some thing, so that it bee well couered, let it so remayne thirty dayes, or at the  seen, and after that tyme take it foorth, and
you shall finde that which is filed of the coullour of Uerde∣grece, the which must be dryd: and after it is drye, it must be grounde, and being well ground you may vse thereof. Some there bee that do washe it with fresh water, or with vineger, and do strayne it through a linnen cloth, and then put it vnder a vessell vntil it waxe rotten, and after they ash it, and keepe it. That which this Moore doeth say, semeth to be of Aueroyes, in the fifth of his gathering,Aueroies. where he set∣teth downe the preparation thereof in this forme: After the Iron is ground very small, let it be put many tymes in to vineger, or into Gotes milke, when it is cruddye. This he would should be the preparation. And Christopher de ho∣nestis,Christpher de honesti. following this in the commentaries which he made vpon Mesue sayeth, Let the fyling of the Steele be put into vinegre many dayes, for in any other wise the vse of it will not profite, although that some do put it into milke of Gotes, and some into oyle of sweete Almondes, and in this sort they take it.Clemen Clementin. The same preparation Clement Clementino doth giue. It seemeth a harde thing to beleeue, that the Iron or Steele is penetrate, and doth waxe soft with any of these things: onely the strong vinegre is that which doth pene∣trate and soften it, whereby it may be well grounde, for to vse of it. And for the more certeintie I will shewe howe I do prepare it.The prep∣ration. I do take of Steele the purest and whitest I can get, as also Iron, and do cause it to be fyled as small as may be, and when it is so fyled I cause it to be washed in wa∣ter many times, vntill the water do come foorth cleare, and then I put it into a cleane glassed vessell, and do cast to it as much strong white vinegre as may be sufficient to wet tho∣rough the sayde fyling, and the vssell being stopped & put ito a close place, I do let it stande xx. dayes, stirryng it well twice euery weeke, and putting to it some vineger if it be needefull: and after the twentie dayes, when it is well ske∣ned, I take it out of that, and put it into some other brode vessell, or vppon a table, that it may dry in the shadowe, and
after it is drie, I doe grynde it in a morter of metall, sifting it twise through a thicke siue of silke, and so beeing made into Pouder, I put it into a fine earthen paynted pot, & then with a Pestle I beate it small agayne, in suche sort that be∣ing taken betweene the fingers, it seemeth not too haue anie maner of substance, neither is it felt between thē. And if it be not done in this sort they are neuer well groune, for it is a thing that they take most care of, so that therby it may worke the effect the better. And beyng made into pouder in this sort, it ought to be kept in a glassed vessel. Some doe wet it with Gumme Dragagaunt and make it in rowles: and it liketh mee very well, because they be the better conserued, and the gumme Dragagant taketh away some parte of their drithe. And seeing that I haue made an ende of the preparing of the steele and Iron, that it doeth the effect when it is needful as though it were the steele it selfe, let Maister Doctor shewe vnto vs the woorkes and vertues that it doeth. D. I doe reioyce very much to heare the good order of the preparati∣on, that Maister Burgus hath geuen and set downe to be vsed with these metals. And seeyng that I am bound to declare the vertues and medicinal works which they haue, I wil speake of it the best that I know, as well that which I haue knowen and read, as that which experience hath taught me, and the vse of so many yeeres,The vertue of Iron and Steele. These two metalles doe serue in me∣dicine two manner of wayes; the one is, that of them may be made instrumentes to worke with, in causes of Surgery, without the which the Surgions cannot worke their works and effectes, nor the Barbours without them cannot do their occupations. To declare what instrumentes those are which serue for the one and for the other occupations, it wil be to te∣dious. The yron and steele doe serue in medicine with great effectes and maruellous workes, by curing and healing di∣uers diseases, and so Plinie in his booke of the naturall histo∣rie, treting of this matter of yron, after he wrote great things of it, as well in that which doeth profite in the seruice of man,
as other curious thinges, hee treateth of he vertes and woorkes which it doeth in medicine, shewing first the quali∣ties of it, saying: The yron hath vertue too drie vp, too re∣tayne, and too holde fast, it is good for suche as doe lacke theyr heare, that it may growe, beeyng prepared and min∣gled with some licour prepared and made for the same pur∣pose, it taketh away the roughnesse of the cheekes, mingled with Uineger: and beyng made in an oyntment with oyle of of Myrtiles, and waxe, it taketh away the blisters of all the vodie: the pouder of it mingled with Uineger, doeth heale the disease called Saint Anthonies fire, as also all maner of skabbes, it healeth the little sores between the nayle and the finger, the pouders therof being applyed thervnto with a lin∣nen cloath. It healeth also the fluxe of women of what sorte soeuer it be, beyng put therevnto with wooll or with otton wool, and also if they be applied therevnto after the mannr of a Tent in the lower partes, the pouder beeyng mingled with mirrhe and put to the sores or wounds newe hurte, doeth soder them and healeth them: and beeyng mingled with Ui∣neger and put vpon the pils, it dissolueth them. It is a great remedy for such as are gowtie, beeyng applyed with thinges made for the purpose vpō the griefe: It stenheth the blood of such as are wounded, which is for the most part made of I∣ron. It is geuen to be drunke to suche as are diseased of the lungs, for it consumeth the disease, and healeth him that is sicke, it stayeth any manner of fluxe & the Piles, & doeth re∣medie the soares of them. It healeth sort cheekes, casting the pouders vpon them it is a great remedy & worthy of estima∣tion. He that doeth cause it to be made & doth put it vpon a Playster called Higre, the which doeth profite to take away and make cleane the soares, and to take away the Fistu∣la and too eate away the Braunches and too cause that the sores bee filled with fleshe: all this is of Plinie in the Chapter of yron. Galen in the Booke of Triacle to Piso,Gale, declareth much the necessitie of yron, for the life of man∣kinde and for the seruice of man, and doeth account it for a
most excellent remedy, for to dry vp the moystures & teares of the eyes. In that of continuall dissolution, he sayeth, that peeces of burning Irō cast into milke, by taking away yt wa∣terishnes which the milke hath, is good for ouer much stoles, and especially for the bloody flix. An in the tenth of the sim∣ple medicines, he commaundeth that milke be giuen, where in peeces of Iron haue beene quenched, and sayth that such kinde of milke doth good vnto them which haue the bloodye flix. And in the like case it is better to vse of Iron, then of stones or pebble stones, by reason the Iron doeth leaue more drithe in the milke.Axander Traliano. Alexander Traliano, adding to this, treatet how milke shoulde be vsed in stooles. He commaū∣deth to seeth milke with a quarter part of water, vntill the one halfe be consumed, and in this sort it may be giuen to them which haue the ague with stooles, and it is better in the place of small pebble stones, wherewith they do com∣maund it to be sodde, that there be cast into it small peeces of burning Iron.Paulo. Paulo, well neare sayeth that which Ga∣len hath sayed, and that the powder of Iron mingled with vinegre profiteth mch to such as haue matter comming forth of their eares, although that it hath beene of a long continu∣ance. And also it is a great remedy for such as haue taken enom, that is called Aconito. And forthwith he treateth of the vertues of the water that haue cooled hot Iron, and sayth, that it doeth good to such as do suffer the payne of the belly, and such as haue any cholerike disease, and such as haue hot stomakes, and such as haue the stopping of the lunges. Dioscorides.Dioscorides in the chapter where hee treateth of the rust of yron, saieth, that the water or the wyne, that hath quen∣ched a peece of burning yron, is good for them that haue the fluxe of the stomake, and the bloody fluxe, it desolueth the hardenesse of the lungs, and serueth in cholerike stooles, and in the loosenesse of the stomake.Actio. Accio, treating of certaine
rowles which are very excellent for the opilations of the inner partes, saieth, that it is a moste conuenient re∣medie for the Lunges, and inner partes of the Bodie, that the water that hath quenched whotte yron bee taken for a long time: but suche as haue a whotte disease, must vse of the water, and such as are colde if they be weake, of wine that hath quenched yron. Oribacio sayeth, that the water which hath quenched whot stile, is an excellent remedie for suche as are sicke of the lunges. Scribonio,Oribacio. an auncient Phisition sayth, that the water which hath quenched whot steele, is a greate remedy for such as are swollen,Scribonio, and for suche as haue sores and griefes of the bladder, chiefly if they vse it continu∣ally. Rasis in his Continent treating of yron saieth, the same as Galen doth. And Paule adding this,Rasis. the yron doth take away the fluxe beyng ouermuche of the menstruous, and con∣ceauing with child, it healeth the little soares that are be∣tweene the finger and the nayle, it taketh away the Pearle in the eye and the hardnesse of the eye lid, it healeth the piles outwardly, it remedieth rotten gummes, it taketh away the Goute from the feete, and from the handes, it maketh heare growe where it lacketh, although there haue none growne a long time. The water that hath quenched yron, is good for the fluxe of the bellie, although that it hath beene of a long continuance, and for stooles of blood which doth auoyd from the bodie, and the meate which is eaten and not consumed, and for stooles of blood: it also dissolueth the hardnesse of the lunges, it remedieth the runninges, and weakenesse of the stomake. And Macerico an auncient Phisition saith, if the pouder of yron be taken with sodden Wine called Cute, it comforteth the weakenesse of the stomake: he taketh for his Authour Mese a Phisition. And Rasis concludeth the same, saying, I say and certifie by great experience, that the yron, doeth profite in the disease of the Piles, and for the fluxe of Urine, and for ouermuche fluxe of the menstrues: this sayeth Rasis.
Scrapio reciteth all that Rasis saith, word for worde: and because I woulde not say it twice together,Scrapio. I let it alone. Auicen followeth Rasis in all that he hath sayd, adding this tha followeth to it:Auicen. The water wherin yron is quenched, ma∣keth strong the inner members by his owne propertie and manifest qualitie: it comforteth the stomake, for the water which doeth quench whot yron, strengtheneth the vertue, and consumeth the superfluities of the stomake, and the superflu∣ous moysture thereof, for those are the things that take a∣way appetite by the loosenesse of the mouth of the stomake, and they are those which extinguish and kill the natural heat: and the yron by reason of the coldnesse and drithe, helpeth the knitting which is made in the mouth of the stomake, wher the appetite is ingendred, it comforteth the Liuer and the rest of the interiour members, it strengtheneth naturall heat, the sinewes and powers of the bodie, and in such sorte it doth geue them strength, and they take such vertue thereby, that they caste from them the opilations: by reason of which causes the Lunges are consumed. It comforteth the vertue of generation, and this it doeth by consuming the moysture which is that which letteth & troubleth naturall heate which is necessary therefore, and if it be not done by his qualitie yet it is done by his accidents.Auicen. All this is spoken by Auicen, in the second of his first, as also he sayeth in the seconde Ca∣non where hee prayseth the yron greately for Ring wormes, and for swellings, and for the Goute, and mingled with Ui∣neger and put into the eares that of long time haue cast out matter, it healeth them, & for the sharpnes of the eye liddes, and to take away a webbe or the whitenesse of the eyes: and hee saieth moreouer that the Wyne which doeth quenche he Iron dooth profite for the Apostumations in the Lunges, and for the loosenesse of the stomake, and for the weakenesse thereof, it taketh away the superfluous Flute of the Mother; it drieth the piles it taketh away olde stooles and the blooddie Flixe, it doeth good to such as theyr
fundament commeth forth, and to such as theyr water doth auoyd from them, not feeling it, it taketh away the ouermuch Fluxe of the menstrues of women, and comforteth lustinesse in man or woman: all this is taken out of Auicen. Aliabas in the fifth of his Theorica sayeth,Aliabas. the water that cooleth the y∣ron, doeth detayne the bellie; it hardeneth and comforteth the Members, if you bathe your selfe with it, it doth good too the Paynes and Apostumations of the Lunges. Albucasis sayeth, that the vse of yron prepared,Albucari. taketh away the naughtie colour of the yellow face, that is of the colour of Saffron, and the vse thereof doeth make fat, and it shoulde be vsed as the sicke man doeth heale, who being well and whole, doeth waxe fat. Well neere all that which I haue sayde, Alzananio and Isack, do say: which I doe leaue to relate,Alzarania▪ Isaac▪ because it is shewed already. B. Haue there been any late writers that haue sayd any thing touching this matter? I thinke there be none that considereth howe that the Auncient Writers haue writ∣ten muche therevppon. D. Yes, many and very learned. B. it woulde doe well that you woulde so muche pleasure vs, as to shewe who they are, and what they say, seeyng you haue begunne, and that they remayne not vnknowen. D. I will shewe you, for some of them with care, and particu∣larly, haue written of yron, and the vse thereof, and of the great vertues which it hath, and the like they say of the steele. A Phisition which was a Cardinall called Vitalis de Furno, treating of yron in a particular Chapter, saith: the filinges of yron haue vertue to drie vp and to make thin,What the late Writers say. Vitalis de Furno. and therefore it openeth and healeth opilations of the lungs: it healeth the bloodie Fluxe, and anie manner of Fluxe of the Bellie taken in meate or drinke. The Iron that is quenched manie tymes in Wyne, is good for the stop∣pinges of the Lunges, and Inner partes, and the milke is good wherein the Steele hath beene quenched.
The yron obeyeth nothing but the Diamont, for it cannot doe more then yron: for it doeth consume it altogeather. There is no mettall, which doeth receiue so much hurt with the rust as the Iron dooth, and much more if it be cankered with the bloode of mankinde, and also after you haue made it cleane againe if you annoint it with the marrow of the deere called the hart, or with Oyle oliue, or with Uineger min∣gled with Alom. This the Cardinall saith. Monten̄ana in his Counsell a hundreth sixtie one doeth put for a great secrete to kill or quenche fiftie times a peece of steele in strong Uineger and in that Uineger beyng made whot,Monten̄na. to wet a course Linnen cloth, and put it vpon the lungs and inner partes that are stopped, many dayes together, Michael Sauanarola in the booke he made of Bathes,Saanarola. doth say, the yron maketh colde and drieth vp, whereby it is byn∣ding, and therefore it doeth deteyne, and the water that kil∣leth or quencheth the yron, hath the sayde vertues, and all the reft that the yron hath, for the water receiueth into it his qua∣tities, and vertues as Galen saith, that the water receiueth the qualities & vertues of the thinges that we put into them,Galen. or sodde in them, and they doe the same woorkes that the said thinges themselues will doe; the water which killeth or quen∣cheth the yron or steele doeth deteyne, it causeth that the fluxe or runninges doe cease, nd being put to the ruptures, it doeth sodder them together, and shutteth them, it consumeth the olde matter of the eyes. The pouder made of yron doeth loose the swollen eye liddes, it taketh away the Rime from the eye, and doeth make fast the gummes that are losse. When there is a tent made and wet in this pouder prepared and put into the mouth of the Mother, it witholdeth anie maner of fluxe of it: and the loke it doeth by putting it into the fluxe of blod: that commeth from the Piles. This Pouder is good agaynst the Uenome called Aczto. The Wine that quencheth yron or the steele,
doeth profit for the hardnesse of the lungs, and the weake sto∣make and laxatiue, & any maner of fluxe, chiefly if it be cho∣lerike, it doeth profit much. Such as haue the dropsie, and the fluxe of the vryne, and such as haue the menstrues, ouer∣much, and such as their water goeth from them without perceiuing thereof, and such as their fundament goeth out: hetherunto Sauanarola hath sayde. Nicholas Florentine, prayseth infinitely steele,Nicolas Florentine. Bartholmew an English man. for opilations of the inner partes of the body, and lykewise the water of the steele. Bartholo∣mew Anglicus, greatly prayseth the vse of yron, & of steele, and saieth, that they are a more excellent medicine, then gold or siluer, for the seruice of a man: for that by them these twoo metalles, that are so greatly esteemed of all men, are kept in safetie, bycause they do defend and sucker them from such as continually doe persecute them. They defende iu∣stice, they conserue the commonwealthes, by them the euill doers are chastened, and the good are conserued and defen∣ded: in all offices of handycraftes they are necessarie: they labour and worke and fieldes with them, whereby wee are maintained, it hath medicinal vertues more then any other metal, for the filing which doeth proceede of it, hath vertue to dry vp, and to make thin. It vndoeth opilations of the lungs, it taketh away any maner of flux of stooles, although they bee of blood: and it profiteth for many other things. Al this the English learned man sayth. William of Saliceto, in the cure of opilations of the lunges,Saliceto. doeth commande to take the pouder of steele, for to loose opilations, and hee ta∣keth it for a great secrete. Platerio in the chapter of yron sayeth, the yron and the scales of it,Platerio. and his rust & the steele euery one of them hath the lyke vertue and propertie, taking twoo partes of a drm of the fyling of yron prepared, as it is conuenient, with hot wyne, it healeth the opilations of the liuer and the lungs, although they be very olde. Mathew Siluatico saith the same,Matthew Siluatico that the rust and the scales of the yron haue the same vertue that the steele hath, either of them
were the lade stone it selfe, and al this it doeth by reason of the greate lykenesse and friendshippe which it hath with the yron, together in one with the hidden propertie which it hath therfore. For this vertue, that it hath to drawe vnto it yron, either it is for the lykenes it hath, or for the propertie, and in this stone ought to bee the one and the other. The dia∣mond is his enemie, insomuch as it is sayde that in his pre∣sence,Galen. it draweth not the yron vnto it. Galen speaketh of greater power that the loade stone hath then the yron, seing that it draweth the yron to him, being of his owne kind, and therfore the ancient wryters do giue it the same vertue, that they giue to the yron, in curing the opilations of the lungs, and other inner partes.Galen. Galen sayth, that the vse therof hea∣leth the dropsie, and doeth euacuate the grosse humors. Se∣rapio saieth,Serapio. that being taken with water and hony, it loo∣seth the belly, chiefly grosse humors: many doe prayse it for the dropsie, with water and hony. I vnderstand that the lo stone ought to be prepared in such sorte that i may bet vsed, as wee haue saide of the preparing of the yron. B. Doth your woorship minister any time the rust of yron prepared' for I haue prepared it by commandement of a Phisition,The rust of the Iron and his vertues. being a stranger, and geue the pouder thereof vnto such as had opilations: and hee saide to mee, that they did better woorke then the pouders of steele D. We haue spoken of Plateario and of Mathew Siluatico,Plateario. howe they say that the rust of the yron,Matthew Siluatico. and the yron it selfe, and the filing of it, and the steele, haue al one maner of vertue, and therfore the rust of the yron prepared wil profit as much for the said purpose, as the rust doth, and I haue vnderstood for to consume and dry vp the moysture of the stomake and the slimy humours therof, it wil make greate effectes, for the rust of the yron and of the steele is the most hot partes, & the dryest parts of them.Galen. And so Galen doeth command it to be prepared with vineger, and that there bee made of it, pouder most small, the which dryeth extreemely, as hee saieth in the nienth of
simples, and in the fifth of his Methodo. Mesue,Mesue. in that of the vlcers of the eares, hee doeth put a confection for them wherein in is conteined the preparing of the rust, and before that hee putteth the same rust prepared in vineger, and made in small pouders, hee maketh of them a liniment for the eares that are troubled with vlcers.Rasis, Rasis in the nienth chapter of those thinges that doe comforte the sto∣make, after hee hath shewed of many compound medicines, saieth, if they doe not profit, let there bee giuen the skales of yron, with wyne, and hee saieth the same in the bookes of the Deuisions, in the chapter of the diseases of the moyst sto∣make: hee commandeth to giue a composition called Trifera Minor, and after that, the rust of yron. And in the same chapter before for the weakenes of the stomake, and the de∣bilitation of the natural heate, hee commandeth that there bee giuen Trifera, and after that the rust of yron: and at the end of the sayde chapter, for such as do eate earth, clay, and coales, hee commandeth them to bee purged with Acibar, and after that they eate Trifera made with the rust of I∣ron. B. You haue spoken very wel, Maister Doctor, but I pray you shew vs how wee shoulde minister the pouders of these things. D. seeing that there with wee shal make an end, I wil shew it in short tyme, considering that the time doeth no longer giue place. The cause and original of the disease being knowen, the sicke person ought to bee let blood, and purged,How these pouders are ministred. if it seeme good to the Phisition to bee so, and if the sicke person hath strength therefore: for there are some so leane, that it is not conuenient to vse of any euacuations in them. This beeing done, they shal take of the pouders that shal seeme most con∣uenient for them, of the three thinges which are spoken of the yron, the steele, or the rust of them, the quantity that shal seeme good to the Phisition, according to the age vertue, & strength. I do giue to them of a meane age a dramme,The quantit and
from thence I ryse or fal, as the age and strength or the con∣tinuance of the disease requyreth, and that it may not be lesse then twoo graynes of waight, nor more then a dram & halfe, I giue it many kinde of wayes, either mingled with suggar of Roses, or with conserua of violettes, or with a syrope of Coriander, or of the roote, or made in pilles, with a syrope made for the purpose, casting them into the mouth, or any maner of these wayes, that they bee taken: there must bee dronke after them a little sacke, that it be not cold, nor very strong. And if the person that taketh it, drinke no wine, then he may drinke water sodden with Cinamon, although the wine be the better,When they should be ta∣ken. it must be taken, fasting in the morning, and immediatly after it be taken, they must goe and exercise their bodies, twoo houres after, if they haue strength there∣fore, and if there bee not strength to doe it, one is sufficient, or the tyme yt they may possibly. The going must bee in such sort that the partie bee not ouerwearied: and if he be, let him sit downe, now and then, and by reason such as do take them haue stoppings or opilations, of any maner of exercise, al∣though it bee little, they are foorthwith wearie, and all the payne is for the first dayes, for afterward they shal goe very wel, and shal not be so much wearied. This exercise is better to bee vsed out of the house, and by the streetes, and in the fieldes, it doeth importe very much by the going whereby these pouders do make their woorke,That which the going doth import. and doe good, that if they bee not well gone with all, they doe not the effect that is desired, and the exercise being made, let him take rest in his house, or in the place where hee commeth vnto, not vnclothing himselfe, but euen so apparelled, let him lye downe vpon his warme bed, and rest himselfe one houre, and let him eate foure houres at the least, after hee hath taken these pouders, or when hee perceyueth his stomake to bee cleere, of them, hee shall eate of a Hen, or of another Byrde without any sauce, with some dry fruite, or some conseruas, and not
to eate any greene thing.The order that he shall haue. Let the drinke be according to the disposition that hee hath, wine watered, if it bee conuenient for him to drinke it, or water sodden with Cinamom: let him refraine to that day from al thinges that may offend him, let him not drinke betweene meales, let him make a light sup∣per, with that as may dry vp moysture. I will not counsell that they take these pouders euery day, but euery third day, and chiefly these first dayes, and especially such which are leane and delicate, for in taking of them euery day, they wil bee much wearied, and one day that they rest betweene, they will be restored, and take strength for the next day. The day that it is not taken, if there doe appeare any feuer, it would doe well that there were taken a good vessel or great cup full of whey, made of goates milke hot, whot with suggar, & if it be not to be had, then take a smal table of rosade of a sweete smel: this day their liuer shall bee anoynted with some oynt∣ment made for the purpose, and their lungs with some thing that may vnstoppe them, and the stomake with some thing that may comfort. This shal bee done in the morning when he is on his bed, and after the oyntmentes are ended a little tyme, one houre or twoo after that they are anoynted, receiue a common medicine with thinges that haue vertue to euacuate, and this medicine shal not lacke, euery day when the pouders are not taken, for it doeth much im∣port, except: if there bee not many stooles: in such sorte it will bee better that it bee a washing medicine. The day which they take not the pouders, they may eate sodde meate with some sauce and greene thinges, and in the one day and the o∣ther drinke little. These pouders are giuen many or fewe dayes accor∣ding to the necessitie of the partie that is sick,The dayes that they shal take them. and as it doth him good for to some 15. dayes are sufficient, and to others 20. and to others 30. some there be which do vomit them vp the first twoo or three dayes, and they cast vp much choler with them, whereby they are notably lightened, and doeth
i this sort they giue contentmēt & gladnes, I know no other medicinall benefite it can do to them. There are many Phisi∣tions which doo cōmande to carrie to the mony house, (which is the house where the money is made) a pot of water corpo∣rall,Note. and spirituall, and after he hath done this, he doeth mo∣derate it in this manner, saying, But such which haue not these eates, and drinketh without them when they are idle, and in pleasure and doe not exercise themselues: these people as they haue not heate to constrayne them to drinke colde, let them not doe it, neither is it conuenient for them to drinke, it, let them content themselues with colde water, as nature hath brought it foorth, without putting it too coole in any other thing, seeyng that they haue not neede of that which is most colde. And foorthwith he sayeth: Although they liue idlely, and doe no exercise, and also without cares if the time were warme, or very whot, they may drinke the wa∣ter colde, I doe meane that in Countries where it is not colde, they may put it too bee made colde, so that it bee not vry colde. The selfesame is confirmed by Galen himselfe in his thirde booke of meates and in the booke of the disease of the raynes, where hee saith, That the vse of colde water cooled with Snowe, vnto suche as are very whot, and such as are fatt, and suche as doe excercise themselues and labour muche, that suche may drinke very colde, chiefly if they be vsed therevnto, for such as are accustomed to drinke it▪ doe suffer and carrie yt better and more without hurte then suche as doe not vse it, for such ought to drinke it with more respect and consideration. And albeit the water hath so greate benefite in it, as wee haue sayde, for the conseruation of health, it hath greater too heale Feuers and other diseases: and therevppon Hipo∣crates and Galen treated very particularly, inespecially Galen in the nienth of his Method, doeth reprehende there Erasistrat,Galen. and suche as doe followe him, which did forbid the vse of colde water, vnto such as were sicke of
the Feuers. And in his first booke of his Methodo, by the like reason doeth reprehende Tesalo. and in the seuenth booke he doeth shewe that hee himselfe hath healed many sicke per∣sons that had the griefe of the stomake, with most cold wa∣ter, and also made cold with Snow. And in the eight, nienth, tenth, and eleuenth of the same Methodo, he healeth the Fe∣uers and other diseases with water that is most colde. And it is an excellent remedy taken with the conditions that is con∣uenient. In the xl. he saith, that the sharpe Feuers are cured with letting blood and colde water, & especially the Feues of blood or that haue much mixture thereof. By that which is said, is seene how conuenient it is, that water be made cold with snowe, where there is not to be founde any so colde as is conuenient for our conseruation & contentment, & for to heale vs of many infirmities. Al the which wee haue treated of in briefe, whereby it may be a beginning of our pretence that shall follow, which is to shew the manner how to make tolde with snow, and because that which shall be made colde is the water, and vnder is also to be vnderstood the wine, & al the rest that shalbe made cold, we will speake of that which shall be treated, vnder the water. The water is cold two maner of waies,Of colde ma∣ter. one naturally as it commeth forth of the springes, and this is as cold as it is con∣uenient, and hath no neede to coole it, if it hath as muche cold∣nesse as will satisfie our necessitie, without hauing neede too seke any thing that may make it colder. There is an other water which is not so colde as is conuenient for vs, as wel for our conseruation & health, as for our satisfaction: and by reason it is not so colde as it ought to be, it is the cause of the hurts it doth, that before we haue spo∣ken of. Some waters are not so colde as they ought to bee by nature, by reason they are in whot countries: Now our intent is to treate of them how they ought to be made colde, because with their heate they hurte vs, and beyng made cold as much as neede requireth, they doe satisfy vs so that wee may drinke
them and vse them without any hurt that they can doe vs: & so we wil shew of al the meanes that we may haue to make cold, which are vsed at this day in all the worlde, and of them wee will choose the best, and most sure, setting downe the in∣conuenience that is in euery one. There are foure maner of waies to make colde, which at this day are vsed in all the worlde:Foure waies to make cold. that is to say, with the aire, in the well, with salt Peter, and with snow: euery one of these is vsed at this day. The first with the ayer in the colde of the night.The first is, to make colde with the ayre, although it bee a common thing, and vsed in all places, yet it hath beene and is most vsed of the Egyptians, by reason they haue neither wels, nor snowe, and that of the salt Peter they neuer knewe. Ga∣len maketh a large relation of the manner howe to make cold with the aire, and saith thus: they of Alexandria and Egypt for to make their water colde,alen. that they may drinke it in time of whot wether, doe warme it first, or doe seeth it, & then they put it into earthen vessels, and set it in the colde aire, or deaw in the night in windowes, or in the gutters of houses, and there they set it all the night, and before the Sunne riseth, they take it away, and washe the saide earthen vesselles in the outside with colde water, and then they roule them with the leaues of a Uine tree, and of lettice, and other fresh herbes and they put them in the grounde in the most colde part of the house, that there the cold may conserue it. This maner of ma∣king colde is vsed at this day in all the worlde, although not with so much curiositie, by reason they seeth not the water and they content themselues with putting it in the cold ayre, and in the dewe, as commonly it is doone. Likewise they doe make colde the water with hanging it in the ayre,To make cold with hanging in the ayre. hauing certaine skinnes full of water in the aire and moouing them continually: the which is vsed in all the Countrey called Estremadura. Others doe make colde by putting the vesselles with water in the drawe, and before the Sunne come forth, they drappe them in cloth or in skinne,
and this the Sheepheardes and other people of the fielde doe. This manner to make colde with the ayre hath many in∣conueniences,The hurte to to coole in the ayre. because the ayre is a subtil element subiect to any maner of alteration and corruption: and therefore it may be infected with some euill qualitie, easily: & being infected, it may infect the water that so is made colde, infusing ther∣into his malice. The which Auicen sheweth very wel in the second of the first saying, The ayre is an euill thing, by reason it is mingled with euill thinges, as Uapors, and smelles,Auicen. and euill smoakes, chiefly that which is put in betweene two walles, and especially that which passeth by places where are rotten Plantes, and naughty Trees, and where dead bodies are, for it altereth at euery one of these thinges, and of them receiueth an euill quality. And for this cause the auncient Phisitions did forbid that in time of the plague the water shoulde not be put into the ayre to bee made colde, be∣cause the corrupt ayres should not infect it. There is like∣wise an other inconuenience, that you cannot euery night set the water too bee made colde in the Ayre, for some nights and the moste parte of them, in the Summer time are so whot, that not onely the ayre doeth not make colde, but the water that is set in the ayre, is whotter then it was be∣fore, and if it bee made any whit colde, it dureth no longer then the Morning, when it is not needefull, and likewise in the time betweene Winter and Sommer, or in the Winter when the ayre woulde make colde, then the rayne, the tempestes and cloudes and other alterations will not suf∣fer the ayre to doe it. All these thinges experience doeth shewe at this day. There is an other manner of way how to make cold with the ayre, which is the most wholesome, and more without hurt than any of all the other: wherein there is no occasion of any euill qualitie. And there are many people of estimation which doe vse this way to make colde that, which they should
drinke, the which they put into vessels of earth, or metall, and do alwayes make winde and ayre to the vessels with a wet lynnen cloth. And it must be so, that it be in the ayre continually without ceasing, as long as you are at meate. And in this sorte it will be made colde to purpose, and the hote ayre that is ioyned to the vessell is taken awaye, and in place of it commeth freshe and colde ayre, euen as it doeth when there is gathered winde to the face, and taking away the hote ayre that is ioyned to it, and with freshe ayre it maketh it colde and refresheth. The other waye to make colde, is in a well, wherein they do put the vessels with water or wine,The seconde manner howe to make colde which is in wels and the hurt that commeth thereof. and there they remayne the moste parte of the daye. This kynde of making colde hath also many inconueniences, as well of the parte of the water, wherewith it is made colde, as of the parte of the place where it is put, cheefely in the welles of the cities and townes, that for the moste parte are fowle and full of filthinesse. The water of these welles is an earthly water, grosse and harde, because it is continually standing in one place, and shut within the bowels of the earth. And as it is a standing water, it must of force he putrified, for that the beames of the Sunne do not pearce it, nor yet the ayre doeth visite it, and therefore continual∣ly it is full of euill vapours, whereof they do easily rott, and they are foule waters full of durte and claye, and of other mischiefes of an euill qualitie. And seeing the water or wine is so put a long tyme in∣to this foule standing water, what can come of it, but that it participateth of the euill qualitie that it hath? And so Galen sayeth,Galen. that the vessell which must be put into the well, ought to bee full: for if it lacke of his fulnesse, then the water of the well doeth penetrate it, or the vapour of it goeth into that which is emptie: and therefore it is con∣uenient
that the vessell bee filled full, and that it bee well stopt, for that which is sayde.In the well the vessell ought to be well stopped. And hee sayeth the con∣trarye, when wee shall make colde in the ayre: for then the vessell shall not bee put full, but some parte thereof re∣mayne emptie: for the colde ayre in the night season ente∣ring into that which is emptie, doeth make the water more colde.and in the ayre vnstop∣ped and not full. To coole in metall, i euill. Ordinarily they are vessels of Copper, or of the lease of Milan, which are put in welles for to make colde. The Copper, if it bee not well tinned within, doeth suffer too enter into that which is to be made colde an, euil qualitie: for with the moysture of the well, there is growen in it im∣mediately, a certeine greenesse that is seene vppon it, af∣ter it hath stoode a fewe dayes, which is a thing verye euill and hurtfull. The leafe of Milan is made of Iron, the which with the moysture of the well is taken forthwith with rust, which is a blacke thing that is seene vppon it after a fewe dayes, which is an euill thing, which doeth infuse an euill qualitie into that which is drunke. And therefore I am of the opi∣nion that that which should be made colde in the water of a well, should bee in a glassed vessell or of siluer,The best ma∣ner how to make colde with the water of a well. although the best waye is to take out water of a well, and put it into a vessel, in the which shoulde bee put that which should bee made colde, mouing the water manye tymes: for by ta∣kyng the water out of the well, it looseth much of his euill vapours, by reason it is visited of the ayre, which as is sayde, doeth shewe the incouenience that there is by ma∣king colde in a well. And besides that, wee see that the water hath euer a taste of earth, or of some euill taste, that is perceyued notably, after it is dronke, besides the euill smell which wee see tha it taketh.
The third manner and fashion to make cold, is with salt∣peter,The thirde way or man∣ner howe to ake cold with saltpe∣ter. the which is an inuention of marchantes, and in espe∣cially of such as goe in the Gallie, by reason that there the ayre doeth not make colde, and especially in the tyme of calmes, and there is neither welles nor snow. Necessity did teach thē this remedie, although it is not good, for the great inconueniences which it hath. It doth coole, as some say, the colde running vnto the inner partes of that which it doeth make colde, for the excessiue heate which the saltpeter hath, the which is done with the strong force of the saltpeter with the water, which the saltpeter beeing entered into the inner partes maketh to bee colde, comming from the heate of the saltpeter working vpon the strong force thereof. Other say, that the water doeth make it selfe grosse with the saltpeter, and being made more thicke and grosse, it hath more colde vertue, the which beeing holpen with the heate of the saltpe∣ter, the cold maketh a greater pearing, through the water, for al thinges that are cold, the more thicke partes that they haue,Galen. the more they coole. And so Galen saith in the bookes of the simple medicines, that nothing cā be very cold, which hath subtil thin partes, by the which howe more thicke the things are the more force they are of. Other there be which say that the saltpeter hath an actual vertue, very colde, and woorking with the water, is made more cold: as is seene by the bryne, that after the salt is very much stirred in the wa∣ter, it is most cold. The selfsame is seene in the water of Al∣lom,The hurt it doeth. and of saltpeter. This maner of making cold doth cause many diseases, it doeth heate the liuer, it causeth continuall heate, and a hot burning, it inflameth the lungs, it taketh a∣way the lust of meate and other euilles, which woulde be te∣dious to treate of. There are other wayes to make cold, which are in riuers, and most colde fountaines,Other waies to make cold. whereof Galen speaketh, of the which it is not needefull to treate of, for whereas are most cold waters, it is not needful to put them to bee made colde,
but to vse of them as they are. Wee haue shewed howe the water that shoulde be made rayne with the coldnesse of the middle region of the ayre,Snowe and rayne water doeth differ in little. did freese, and was made snowe, and therfore is little diffe∣rence from the rayne water, and that which commeth foorth of the snowe, for both of them are ingendred of one manner of matter, sauing that the water which proceedeth of the snowe, is somewhat more grosse, for the compultion it hath, of the coldnes of the ayre, in such sort that it is not so euil, as they say it is. And we see the Scithians doe drinke it continu∣ally, as Hypocrates sayth. We see that of the snowe which doeth melt, are made great and mighty riuers, of the which the people that inhabit neere to them, drinke continually without doing to them any maner of hurt, or benumming of them. And of these are many in Spaine, Almanie, and many more in the west Indias, where most of the riuers are of snowe, which doeth melte from the hilles and mountaynes, and al people in general drinke of them, for there is no other water in al the Countrie. The Romaynes for delight and curiositie, dranke the water that came foorth of the snowe, the which they stray∣ned through stones to make it more thin. Atheneo,Atheneo. doeth rehears certaine verses of Sopita, an ancient Poet, in the which he saith, that in his tyme they dranke snowe, and the water wc came foorth of the snowe. Pericrates, Historiogra∣pher being a Greeke most famous, saith yt in his tyme,Pericrates. they dranke snow, not only in the Cities but in the campes. Eu∣ticles a man very learned,Euticles. in one of his epistels doeth repre∣hende those that were in his tyme, that they did not content themselues to drinke that which was made cold with snow, but that they dranke the snow it selfe. Sciates, maketh men∣tion of the snowe, vsed at tymes conuenient,Sciates. with much care and delite. Xenophon in the thinges of memory which hee wrote,Xenophon. maketh mention of many people that did not onely drinke snowe, but the water therof continually.
The Romanes did vse it much, and so Plinie in the 31. booke of his history saith,Plinie. that Nero was the first that sodde wters, to coole it in Snowe. The which Galen in the se∣uenth of his Methodo doth recite of him, saying, Nero was the first that sodde the waters, and afterwarde cooled them with Snowe: for the water being made colde in this sorte, receiueth more quickly the colde, and more effectually. And it is a water more healthfull, for by the seething of it, is a∣uoyded the earthly partes from the water, and it remayneth more subtile, and more thin, and so it descendeth more spee∣dily from the stomacke. Plinie in his naturall historie, in the nineteenth booke, complayneth of the care that those of his time had,Plinie. in kee∣ping the Snowe of the Winter, for the hote weather in Summer, saying, that they did ouerthrow the mountaines by keeping the snowe from warme weather, making it to peruert the order of nature, that in the monthes which are most whot, in the which there is nothing but heate & drithe, that the curiositie of the people is so much that at that time, there is such aboundance of snowe, as in the monthes in the which there doeth naturally fal vpon the grounde great quā∣tity thereof. This Plinie saieth, for in his tyme and after, it was a common thing to keepe the snow of the winter, for the summer. Heliogabalo Emperour had made a great caue in a litle mountayne,Reliogabalo. from a garden of his owne, where hee gathered in the winter very greate quantitie of snowe, brin∣ging it from the mountaynes that were neerest to Rome, whereof they vsed in tyme of heate, in their bankettes. Chares Militineus, in the history that hee wryteth of King Alexander sayeth,Chares Mili∣tineus. that in the Citie of Petra, a most populous Citie in Asia, there was, ordinarily thirty caues, that in the winter tyme were filled with Snowe, for the whot weather, for the seruice of Alexander, & such as were retayners to him.
At this day it is done, not onely in Asia,Snowe is kept by many peo∣ple. but also in many partes of Africa, and in all Europe, chiefly in all the Countries which are vnder the dominions of the greate Turke, and especially in Constantinople, where the snowe is so much vsed, that all the yeere it is solde in publike market, and they vse of it al the yeere. The selfe same is done at this day in all the states of Almanie and of Flaunders, Hungary, and Bohemia, and other places, where they keepe the Snowe, in houses, and bawes in the Winter, for to make their drinke colde therewith in the summer. They carry from Flaunders to Paris, the water that is frosen, which is more then three score leages di∣stance. Lykewyse in our country of Castile it is kept in houses, and they gather it in the winter: and when winter is past, they conserue it for the whote weather. And there are many Lordes and great men, which haue in the moun∣taynes particular houses, where they commande that it bee put in the winter, for this effect: and many of them doe vse it, and doe make colde therewith as well in the winter, as in the summer, as there are chiefly in Castile in the tyme of winter, waters that are most colde. They which drinke that which is made colde with snowe, saye that it doeth not offende them,The colde which dooth proceede of Snowe, dooth not offend as oher colde dooth. as that which is made cold with the weather, for it is seene that a cuppe of colde water beeing dronke, that commeth foorth of a well, or of a colde fountayne, hurteth such as doe drinke it, and drin∣king that which is made colde with snow, they feele no such hurte. I doe much maruell at one thing,How carles eople are that they haue not had Snowe in S∣uill▪ that this Citie of Siuill beeing one of the most famous of the Worlde, wherein alwayes haue liued many greate personages of very high estate, and many people of greate estimation as well of the naturall people of the Country, as strangers,
that ther hath byn none which haue brought thither snowe in the time of whot weather for to make colde that which they drinke, seeyng that the heate of this countrie from the begin∣ning of Sommer, vntil it be well neere towardes Winter, is so great, that it is not to be suffered, and all the waters are most whot, that they cannot scarcely be drunke. And besides that the moste parte of the people of this Citie are people of much businesse and cares. And seeyng that in a Countrie so whot where businesse and cares doe abounde where the wa∣ter is whot,An exhorta∣tion. and nothing wherewithall to coole it; with iust Title it may be admitted and vsed that it may be cooled with snowe, seeyng that the coldnesse is so sure, as we haue sayd, and it doth make the benefites which Galen and Auicen haue shewed vnto vs. Note.Let euery one looke vppon his disposition that beeing whole, although hee bee not altogether in health, in time of whot wether he may drinke colde more or lesse as it is con∣uenient for him. For the drinking colde doeth temper the Li∣uer, it mitigateth the heate, it geueth appetite to meate, it comforteth the stomake,The good that drinking colde doeth. it geueth strength too all the foure vertues, that may doe theyr woorkes the better, the meate is eaten with appetite, and with gladnesse it taketh away the drithe in the day time, it causeth that the stone doth not in∣gender in the raynes, by keeping temperate the heate of them, it taketh away lothsomnesse, and likewise it doeth ma∣ny other good effectes, that the vse and thereof experience ode shewe vs. And because it is the best manner too make colde with Snowe as we haue sayde,Auicen. let vs awe thereof with graue Authours: and let Auicen bee the first, in the thirde of the first, where he saith, The water that is made cold with snow, vnto such as are of a temperate complection, whereas colde∣nesse hath beene made with Snowe, yea although the snow be fowle and not cleane then it serueth to make colde the wa∣ter without: and that as is good and cleane, is to be put in,
to that which shalbe dronke, as Auicen himselfe sheweth in the second parte of the first booke, the 16. chapter, where hee sayth, the snowe and the frosen water, when it is cleane, and that the Snowe hath not fallen vppon euill plantes, or that it be not mingled with earth, or other superuties, and the frost not made of euill infected waters, but that the water which come foorth of the snow, bee cleere and cleane, and the water that commeth foorth of the frost, be also good and cleane, if any parte of the water of the snowe or of the frost bee put into the water that must bee dronke, or with them the water be made cold without dout it is good: for the waters which come foorth of them, bee not straunge from o∣ther waters. This doth Auicen say, giuing to vnderstande that these waters which doe proceed of snow and of frost being cleane, doe not differ from the goodnesse of other waters: onely the difference is, that the water of the snowe and of the frost are grosser then other waters, by reason that the vapour is con∣geled in the middle region of the ayre, as wee haue decla∣red. Rasis amongest the Arabiens the best learned,Ras▪ in the thirde booke of those which hee wrote to the King Alma∣sor sayeth thus, The water of snowe cooleth the Liuer that is whot, beeing taken after meate, it strengtheneth the sto∣make, it giueth appetite and lust to meate, but that which is dronke may not be much. And immediatly after he sayth, the water which hath not so much coldnesse, that it giueth not contentment to him that drinketh it, filleth the belly, & taketh not away the drithe, it destroyeth the appetite, it ta∣keth away the lust of the meate, it consumeth the body, and concludeth, in saying, that it is not a thing conueni∣ent to bee dronke. I do vnderstand it for the preseruation of the health of man, of the which Rasis,Ide. treating in that booke himselfe in the 4. of Almasor, speaking of the preseruation from the
and there commeth to him hurt and poyson, which destroy∣eth and corrupteth him: beleeue you mee, and suffer not such which are sicke, to spende their mony to cast golde in medi∣cines which they take, nor let them quenche golde that is whot in wyne, nor in water, for of the one and of the other, there remayneth no medicinal vertue, that wil remedy their euilles. Only the golde being made mony, hath greate ver∣tues and properties, for that is it that maketh the hart glad, and taketh away sadnesse and melancholy, and repaireth al the vertues and strength of man, it giueth strength whereas is none, it is an vniuersal remedy of al thinges, vnles it bee of death: for against that, nothing can preuayle. And seeing that night is come, and tyme giueth not vnto vs any longer liberty, and although that it gaue vs; yet age doeth his office, for I feele my selfe weary. God bee with you Maister Ortun̄o, and likewyse to you Maister Burgus, and I goe to take rest. The end of the Dialogue of Yron.
THE BOKE WHICH TREA∣TETH OF THE SNOW, AND OF the properties & vertues therof: And of the maner that should be v∣sed to make the drink cold therwith: & of the other wayes wherewith drinke is to be made colde: Wherof is she∣wed partly, in the latter parte of the seconde Dialogue of yron. With other curiosities which will geue content∣ment by other auncient thinges woorthy too bee knowen, which in this treatise shalbee de∣clared. Written by Doctor Monardes Phisition of Seuill. 1574
To the excellent Lord the Earle of Barajas assistent of the citie of Seuill &c. the Doctor Monardes your Phisition wisheth health. MOst excellent Lorde, the faire & white snow doeth complaine vnto mee, say∣ing: that she being so auncient, and of so many ages, celebrated of so many Princes, Kinges, wise and valiant mn, and beyng had in so greate estimation and price, that with greate care they seeke after her, & with greater care they doe conserue her, for to geue health & contentment to all persons: yet for all this, many people with little consideration, & not kno∣wing what they say, doe persecute her, putting vndecent names to her: and that which doeth most greeue her is, that some Phisitions, either for ignorāce, or for malice, do speak euil of her, not perceiuing what so many lerned mē haue treated & said of the great vtility & profit which she doth to many, as experience doth shew, & all people doe vnderstand, chiefly when they doe drinke their drink most cold with the benefit which doth remaine to them there∣of, they do praise & extol her. Moreouer she saith, that she forceth no persō to vse her: but if any wil vse her, shee can geue such order & maner to make cold the drinke, as is cō¦uenient for al persons, geuing the degrees of coldenesse which euery one would haue, & which doeth best apper∣tayn to them, & this with all assurance with onely leauing or placing the vessel whrein the drinke is ioyned nere to her, the which none of the olde writers nor of the late did speake against, or forbid. And especially let this maner of making cold not be done with stinking water of a well, nor with the most burning Saltpeter, but with pure water beyng cleane and cleare. These cōplaintes & many other the faire lillie white Snow hath vttered vnto me, & in the end she lastly saide to me, that since that I had praysed her so much, and taken in hande to fauour hr, that I should
ly the fire hath no mixture of other Elementes, and amongest these Elements the ayre is very principall, which is deuided into three parts, one is the supreame, and neere to the Rgi∣on of the efire, which is whotte and drie for the felowshippe that it hath therewith, taking muche of his qualitie, which is cleere and pure, from whence doe not proceede anye wyndes, nor cloudes: and this they call the celestiall Re∣gion and the partes more lowe which are neere too the wa∣ter and earth be grea and troubled full of Uapours, pear∣ced and visited with the beames of the Sunne, whereby it commeth too bee whotte and the supreame and middle Region of the ayre doeth come too bee very colde, because it standeth in the middest of the twoo extremities, beeyng so whotte. And in it, is increased the colde as in the mid∣dle parte fleing from the extreme partes of heate, as we haue spoken of before. This middle parte hath partes more or lesse colde, for the parte that is ioyning neere vnto vs is not so cold, as that which is neere to the superiour partes of the fire. And how much more the vapours do rise vp on height, the more they doe congele, and hold fast. In the middle region of the ayre doe ingender the clowdes, the small raynes, the droppes, the frost, the rayne, the Snowe, the Hayle, and other impressions as the Thunder, lightnings and sharpe showers, and comets. The Clowdes be the principal mat∣ter which doe ingender the Rayne, the Snowe, and the Hayle, and the other impressions which wee haue spoken of, that are made of many Uapours which doe rise vp from the lower partes vnto the middle Region of the ayre: and so being ioyned, they make one body, and they waxe thicke with the colde of the saide place: and for this the clowd is like to a mother, and is the common matter of all the im∣pressions that are made in the ayre. And so it is of the snowe as a thing ingendred of it, in the middle Region of the ayre. And the Snowe is no other thing but a Uapour, colde, and
moyst, which came into the middle Region of the ayre, bee∣ing ingendred, in the bodie of the Clowde with a meane coldenesse which is not so strong as that which doeth cause the Hayle, nor so soft as that which doeth cause the water, and in the like Uapour before it be made water, it both, con∣geale and freese, and doeth fall broken in peeces and are white, because there doe rayne in them more colde then in the water. The which Galen doeth shewe vnto vs in the booke of the Philosophicall hystory of Anaximenes the Philoso∣pher. Of the congealed ayre,Galen.Anaxime∣nes. he saieth that the cloudes are made; and of the same, beeyng more thicke, the rayne is in∣gendred, and the same is congealed and frosen, and by the coldenesse of the Ayre it is made Snowe: and beeyng more congealed it is made Hayle. And the same Galen doeth say in his booke de Vtilitate respirationis, the Clowdes congealed are made Snowe: which is the matter that the rayne is made of, the Snowe doeth fall in the highe places, which of their owne nature are colde places, and thereby it is muche conserued, and very seldome it falleth in the Ual∣leyes, and if it doe fall there, it is very smal, & foorthwith it dissolueth. It falleth in the Sea but seldom times by reason of the heat which it hath, & for the winds that are continually in it, for heat & moisture are cōtraries & much more the wind ac∣cōpanied with the sunne. Galen in the nienth of his simples, saieth, that there were Philosophers that saide the snow had hot parts for being takē in the hand,Galen. it heateth & burneth like to fire. And so the saide Galen in the 4. of the sayd Bookes, sayeth as he went vpon snow, his feet did burne: the cause of this is not that the snow is whot, nor that it hath whot parts, but with his cold it doth shut the pores of the handes or feete and causeth that the heate which is in the inner partes haue not wher to come forth: & so being shut in, do cause so great a kindlying, that seemeth to burne: the which we see contrary if the handes doe burne & be put into whot water, as ye pores
drinking of the coldest water they were healed, as Galen sayth in the 7. of his Method,alen. that he sawe in one day, ye in one houre, with a draught of colde water many diseases were healed, and some of these were weake of stomake, not only, with colde water of a fountaine, but with water cooled in snowe,Cornelio Celso. and in Roe it is vsed. And so Cornelio Celso in his first booke, vnto such as were weake of stomake, com∣manded them to drinke, after they had eaten, the coldest wa∣ter they could get, and in cholerike stooles, should be dronke water, that was most cold, and in runnings of whot humors, it shoulde bee vsed, for to stay the fluxe. Auicen in the sayde chapter saith,Auicen. that the cold water doth cōfort all the ertues in his workes that is to say the vertue disgestiue, attractiue, retētiue, and expulsiue. And so he goeth declaring euery one of them, giuing vs to vnderstand how much the colde water doth corroborate and make strong al these vertues, whereby they doe their workes the better.Auicen. And the said Auicen in the second of his first treatie of water, saieth, the colde water is the best of all waters, and it is conuenient for them which are whole, for it giueth lust to meate, & maketh the stomake strong. And a little before hee saieth, that which is not colde doeth corrupt disgestion, and causeth the meate to swim in the stomake, it taketh not away the drithe, it causeth the dropsie, by reason it corrupteth the first disgestin, & consu∣meth the body with his heate. Auicen himselfe confirmeth this in the thirde of the first part,Auicen. saying, the colde water is conuenient for them that haue a temperate complection, for being whot, it causeth the stomake to be sicke. Isaac A∣liabas,Isaak. and Rasis, say the same, that Auicen saith, the which he did let to wryte of,Allabos. bycause hee woulde not bee long in his sayings.Rasit. One thing Auicen would haue in the thirde of the first parte,Auien that hee which shoulde drinke very cold, must first make a good foundation, eating first a good portiō of meate, before he drinke. Also he saith that the cold drinke may not be dronke much at one draught, but by litle and litle, by rea∣son
it doth bring two benefits, which is, that there is taken more taste in that which is drnke,Who drinke colde, let them drike little and lit∣tle. and it doth not kill the natural heat, as it is seene by the pot that boyleth, if you cast into it much water at one tyme, it doeth cease boyling, but if it be cast by litle and litle, it ceaseth not his working. And therfore Auicen himselfe sayeth, when that you will drinke colde, that you drinke with a vessell which hath a straight mouth, that the drinke run not in hastily, the said vessel bee∣ing a limet, or a yewre, with a poynt, surely it is a greate be∣nefit, for them which are affectioned to drinke with the lyke esselles: if they ought first to take out the winde or not, I do remit me to the Doctor Villalabos, who treateth large∣ly of this matter. And by that it is seene howe Auicen woulde that those which woulde drinke very colde,You must ot drike colde at the begin∣ning of meate. they shoulde not drinke foorthwith at the beginning of their meate. For sme there bee, that as soone as they begin to eate, foorthwith they will drinke, that as is very colde, the stomacke beeing empty without meate, which cannot choose but hurte: and so the hurt which doth come to them by this, they doe attribute it, foorthwith to the colde of the drinke, and not to their euil or∣der: the which Auicen sayth, speaking of cold water, that to drinke it without order, is the cause of many diseases, & if it be dronke in order, as wel in time, as in quantity, it profiteth as he hath said. Therfore let euery one loke to that which is conuenient for him, and let him make experience in himself, and if that it be conuenient for him to drinke colde, that hee may beare, it without that it doe offende him that doe it, for therof wil follow the benefites which we haue spoken of, but if he bee sicke, and fall into any disease, whereby hee saith, that the drinking of colde drinke doeth offende him, in such case let him not vse it, for my intent is to shw and per∣swade them that doe drinke colde, that if it doe them no hurt, nor offende them that they drinke it so, ad such as doe vse it of custome and haue experience that it doe
not offende thē, vnto such i they drinke not, that which they drinke cold, the lust of their meate is taken away from thē, for they take no taste in that which they eate, and they eate it with grief, and with an euil wil, for that which they drinke doth not satisfie them, & the whot drinke doth fil the stomake full of windinesse, and cannot make therewith a good dis∣gestion. But what is hee that hath a reasonable health, being in the tyme of great heate,He doth counsell to drinke colde. or in the whot summer, that com∣ming to eate, being weary of exercyse, or of greate labour hauing the tongue dry, the breath shorte, that doeth let to drinke colde, seeing that to doe it, there doe followe the be∣nefites that I haue sayde, and doeth succor his necessity, and remayne content and glad without hauing offended his dis∣position, and health. Unto the which Galen doeth animate and exhorte v, in the booke which hee made of good and e∣uil meates, saying. In the tyme of hot weather, when our bo∣dies are whot and somtymes inflamed, then we must vse of thinges that may refreshe vs: although that they bee euill meates, as Plummes, Apples, Cheries, Melons, Goords, & of other colde fruytes, in these lyke tymes. Galen saith, that wee may vse colde meates, as the feete of a pigge or hogge sodden in vinegre, and crudded milke: and the same meates must be made colde, and likewyse the drinke must bee made colde, as the water, and the wyne watered with colde water, or made cold in snowe, the one and the other must be made colde in the most cold water of a fountaine, and if it be not to be had, let it bee made colde in snow, chiefly the drinke.Galen. And after that Galen hath made a large digression, as it is conuenient so much in the tyme of greate heate to eate and to drinke colde things, hee doeth describe who they are that should drinke colde, and saith in this sorte, those that should drinke cold are such, as haue much buzines, and haue care of many things, as those which are gouerners of cities, and common wealthes, and the ministers which doe helpe
them, and doe participate of such cares and troubles, and those that are much exercised in bodily buzines, in especial∣ly the sowldierlyke exercises, or other great exercises, and they which doe iorney, and inespecially long iorneyes, gi∣uing to vnderstand all corporal exercises. Here I doe see ma∣ny being sicke, and hauing great occasions of sicknes, after that they drinke cold, they are whole: and when they vse it not, they become sicke agayne. And although experience doe shewe it, yet Galen doeth teach it vs, in many places, be∣ing the Prince of Phisicke.Galen. For in the thirde degree of the substance of meates, he saith, that vnto them which are whot of stomake, it is conuenient that their drinke be made colde with snowe: the same he doth confirme in the booke of good and euil meates. And in the 7. of his Methodo, it hath beene seene, as he saith, that diseases haue beene healed,Galen. and the griefes of the stomake with colde water, made colde with snowe, and in the 6. of the Epidimias hee doeth vse much of water, first sodden and after cooled with snow,Galen. and in many partes hee doeth put to coole in snowe the medicines, which he doeth vse of: and the same doe the Arabiens, for that, as it is sayde, it doeth seeme that the snowe was had in reue∣rence, by the ancient wryters, and that they did vse of it in the preseruation of their health, and in the healing of their diseases, for that it was the best maner how to nake it cold, more cleane, and more without scruple. For the cold that pro∣ceedeth of snow, is healthful without receyuing hurt, by that which is cooled with it, nor causeth any alteration bycause it is a very good congeled water, and doeth make cold. Truthe it is, that it is not conuenient to vse of the sayde snowe continually, if it be not in tyme of need,How it ought to be vsed. by the way of medicine: for the vse of the sayde snowe dronke in water or in wyne, or putting the snowe into them, doth ingender many kind of diseases, which if presently they bee not felt, they come to be felt in age: Of the which Galen doeth make
a large relation, in the booke of diseases of the raynes, and in the booke of good and euil meates. And bycause that A∣uicen did expound them, I wil shew what he wryteth, in the third part of the first booke, in the 8. chapter: He which doth drinke snow, and the water that doth proceed out of the same snowe, if hee doe vse it continually there will followe much hurt thereby: it doth offend the sinewes, and it is naught for the brest, and for the inner members, and especially for the breathing: and there is none that doe vse to drinke it, but it wil do them hurte, vnlesse hee be of a sanguine complection which if hee doe not feele hurt presently, hee shall feele it af∣terwarde. Whereby it appeareth howe euill the vse of the sayde snowe is, and the water which doeth come out of it, if it bee not by the way of medicine, onely so it may bee vsed to coole therewith, for in such sorte it doeth not offende, as is sayde. For in this neither the auncient wryters did put any doubt of hurt, nor any scruple, and nowe wee see that it hurteth not, but bringeth health, and benefit, as wee haue sayde. And as Plinie also sayth, of the delight and dayntinesse of the colde,Plnie. without offence of any malice of the Snowe. And Martiall doeth shewe the same,Martial. in the 4. booke, where hee sayth, the snowe must not be dronke, but that licor which is made very colde with it. And this was shewed and taught vnto vs, by the most ingenious drithe. And vnto such as are very colde, it commeth not well to pas, for them to drinke that, which is made cold with snow, or that which is very colde, if hee bee not accustomed there∣too: for by custome, they may vse and drinke it without any offence to them, but it is good that they moderate them∣selues in drinking that which is very colde, and that they conent themselues that it bee made colde, after a meane sorte, although it bee with snowe. Also it is not conuenient for children, nor boyes, that their drinke be made cold, with
snowe, for the weakenes of the sinewes, and interiour parts, and for the tendernesse of their age, and chiefly they may drinke no wyne, but water, for that their age doeth not suf∣fer, that they may drinke it: and drinking water very colde, it doeth them very much hurte. The wyne which is made colde with snowe, doeth not offende so much as the water which is made colde: one of the things which taketh away the fury and strength of the Wyne, is the making of it colde. And so there are three thinges which doe abate the fury of the wyne, that is,Three things which abae the fury of the wyne. to water it a good tyme before you drinke it. Also to cast a peece of bread into it, that it may sucke the vapours, and subtiltie of the wyne. The third is, to put it to coole some reasonable time in water, that is most colde, or in snowe, for the more it is cooled, the more the strength and vapours are repressed, and so it will lesse of∣fend the head, and it will lesse penetrate the ioyntes, which is seene in the sayde wyne, and beeing made colde there is abated much of his strength, in so much that if it bee ve∣ry colde, it seemeth as though that it were water. Some people there are which doe say and publish much euil of the cooling with snowe, without knowing if it be good or euill: and as it is a newe thing, and especially in this Countrie, they feare that there will come hurt to them by the vse of it. And I beeing at the table of a Lorde, there was brought a platter full of Cheries with snowe vppon them, and there was a Gentleman that durst not take any one of them, say∣ing that they would hurt him,History. bycause that they were made colde with Snowe. And as it was a thing vsed a long time, to cast snowe vppon fruite,Snowe vpo fuite. Galen. as Galen doeth say that it was cast vpon the Mulbery, the cause of this is for lacke of the vse thereof, by reason it hath not bene vsed nor seene in these partes, and alwayes they take it for suspicious. And heere are none that doe vse it, but the noble men, and not al, but such as haue beene Courtiers and such
as haue proued the benefit and commodity that doth followe of it: for the rest say, that without know they haue loued, and without it, they wil pas on their tyme. And they do not con∣sider that to liue they may passe with Beefe, and Garlyke, and Leekes, but these kinde of meates doe ingender euil hu∣mours: for it is one thing to eate the partridge, & the veale at his time, and mutton & byrds at another tyme. And there is differīce to eate the flesh with sauce, & the partridge with a Lemon, for the one is to eate without taste rustically, and the other is to eate as men doe, choycely and delicately. And so it is in the drinking of cold, or whot, for of the drinke that is made colde with snow, there foloweth health, taste & con∣tentment: and of the drinke that is whot, commeth euill dis∣eases, distyling, & discontentment. Let vs consider vow the old wryters tooke great felicitie to drinke colde,The old wry∣ters did vse much to coole with snow. and chiefly that which was made cold with snow, and they were people both wyse and discrete, and with much care that preserued their health. For in this and in their estimations, & in their maner of subtile liuing, they did put their whole felicitie▪ & seeing that they with so much care as we haue before decla∣red, did drinke that which they made colde with snowe, in countries that was of lesser heate then this, wherfore shoulde we not inioy this benefit, and contntment, seing that therof cannot followe vnto vs, but greate benefit of health, vsing therof as I haue said? Note.Let euery one looke to that it is conueniēt for his health, age, vse, and custome, and let him haue respect to that which doth agree with him: for the vse wil shew him what hee shall do, seeing that of the hurt or benefit, he may soone perceiue if it ought to be vsed, or no, & he must be aduised that at the be∣inning when he doth vse to drinke cold, that which is made cold with snow, the first daies hee shal feele in the day tyme drithe, but being past 7. or .8. dayes, it is taken away, rather they goe betweene dinner and supper without drith, & with∣out hauing any need to drinke.
They do bring the snow to this countrie, from the moū∣tains wheras is much snow 6. leagues beyond Granado. The snow hath many things to preserue it,Frō whence they bring the snowe. because the way is long and it commeth by a whot country, by reason whereof it doeth muche diminishe, & very little commeth hither of that which they take out there: and therefore it is so deere. It is a maruellous thing that these mountaines of Grana∣do, are alwaies full of snow,Mountaines of Snow. & that in them it is durable and perpetual, and for great heates, and sunne, that shineth vpon them: yet the snow continueth in one state, and we see that it doth not change. In the moūtaines Pirineos, which are filled with snow euery winter, but the sūmer being come, al is mel∣ted, in such sort that there remayneth in them no snowe. The kinges of Granado, being in all theyr royall authoritie did vse in the moneths of great heat and time of summer, to drink these waters which they dranke made cold with snow, as our hystory writer Alonso de Palensio doth referre himselfe too tha hich he wrote of the warres of Granado. Let the snowe be kept in cold and dry places, for the moy∣sture and heate are his contrary,The conser∣uation of the Snowe. & the wind which commeth of the sine, much more, because it is whot & moyst. They doe tread or presse the snowe, when they put it in sellers to keepe, that it may the lōger endure & melt lesse. Charles Militineus doth say that the snow must be kept trodē & couered wt leaues and bowes of an Oke,Charles Mi∣litineus. because in this sort it is most conser∣ued. That which is brought to this citie, they bring it in strawe, for it doeth conserue it more then any other thing, & it doeth melt the lesse: which the glorious S. Augustine doeth shew vs in the first booke of the citie of God, where he saith, who gaue vnto the straw a cold vertue so strong,Saint Augu∣stie. that it kepeth the snow which is most cold and conserueth it? and who gaue it likewise so whot & feruent a vertue, that the green fruit not being rype, as apples and other like,The proper∣ties of straw. it doth rype and season them that they may be eaten? in the which it is seene what diuers vertues the straw hath, seeing that it doeh contrary
effectes which doth conserue the snow,  doeth make ripe the greene fruite, and doth more then the water, which is made colde in the deawe, or in other thing: by putting any vessell with it amongest strawe, it doeth conserue his coldenesse all the day. There were vsed two principal wayes in these times too make colde with snow: the one is, to put the bottelles or the vessels of that as you will make cold, buried in the snow, this is done where there is much snow, & this doth make very cold and quickly: the same is likewise done with the water frosen. There is another way to make cold which is more easie and it is done with little snow, which is to fill a vessell of that which is to be made colde, and put vpon it a little platter of silur or glasse, or of hin Plate called the leafe of Milan & that it may be made so deepe, whereby it may penetrate through that which shalbe made cold, and vppon that deepe vessell let the snow bee put, and from time to time, the water which doeth melt from the snow must be taken away,With a little platter. for if it bee not ta∣ken away, it heateth the snow, and it melteth the more. After this sort it doeth coole much, and maketh it as exceeding cold as you woulde drinke it: and it is a way that euery one may vse more or lesse, as colde as he will, or as hee hath neede of it. The selfesame is done with a long caue made of the leafe of Milan, putting it full of snow, into the thing that you mynde to make colde continuing in it still, and this is to make anie thing colde in an earthen pot or any other great vessell.In a caue. This manner of way is long or it be colde, and it is need∣full that it be put long tyme before you goe too meate, and for all this it will not make it very colde. Others there bee that doe put the snowe in a little basket, layde vpon a little strawe, for this doeth conserue the snowe muche, putting in one goblet with that as you wil drinke, leaning harde too the snow: after this sorte there followeth muche benefite, for it is not needefull to goe taking away the wa∣ter
from the snowe, by reason that it goeth away through the basket. And the other is, that the snowe doeth not melt so muche, let euery man doe as hee hath the quantitie of Snowe to doe it withall, and likewise in the cooling of it, more or lesse as his necessitie and health doeth require, and can beare well the vse thereof: of the which wee haue made a large relation, although that my intente and pur∣pose was for no more than too defende that the best way too make the drinke colde, and more healthfull is to make cold with snowe, and as for the other manner of wayes and vses too make colde, they haue many inconueniences which I haue spoken of, and onely too make colde with Snow, is that which is conuenient, seeyng that the snowe doeth not touche the thing, onely the little platter that is made cold with it, is onely that which doeth make colde. All other wayes which doeth make colde, doeth not come neere to the cooling with snow by a great way, for that is most colde which is cooled with it, and all other wayes doe seeme whotte, beeyng made colde in the deawe, in welles, or with saltpeter, in comparison of that which is made colde with snow. And so it is a greate thing, and too bee muche esteemed that in the tyme of whot weather, when we are made a burning cole, of the extreeme heate of the tyme, when the drithe is so great, that it maketh vs to sounde and our bodies are so burning and sweating, that we haue so easie a remedie with a little Snowe, wee may drinke so colde as is conuenient for vs, and as colde as wee will, with all assuraunce of health geuing vs so muche delighte and contentment, that there is no price to bee esteemed too it, nor vnderstanding that can expounde it, of the which e∣uery one that doth drinke colde with snowe may bee iudge of my Apologie when they do make an end to drinke by meanes of the most colde snowe.
By that which is said, it is seene what a thing snowe is, & how the vse of it was esteemed amongst the people of old time for to make colde therwith, & as the best maner of these which are to make colde withall, and more agreeable to our health and necessitie, is that which is done therewith; & also as the drinking cold doth bring so many benefits and commodities, & the drinking hot so many hurts & discōmodities, seeing that to vse it is to make leane, and debilitate the stomake, it doeth make the meate to swim in it, & it doth corrupt the disgestion, whereby it doth consume and weaken the bodie, it ingendreth winds, it is the cause that the Liuer is debilitated, & weake∣ned, it causeth continuall drithe, it doth not satisfie our neces∣sity, it geueth paine and griefe and other hurts, that he which doeth vse it, shall quickely feele them in himselfe. The which is contrary to them that do drinke colde being cold of his owne nature, or made colde with snow, for that it doth cō∣fort the stomak if it be weake, & strēgtheneth it & doth stay the flixe, & runninges of whot humors to it, & therefore it taketh a way stooles and vomits being cholerike, it doth comfort all the 4. vertues, it taketh away the driche, it geueth lust to eate, it maketh the disgestion better, & you drinke lesse & that with more contentment & gladnes, satisfiing vs more to a little cold drink, then much which is whot. It doth let the ingendring of the stone vnto thē which are whot of cōplection, it maketh tē∣perate the heat of the liner, it taketh away the kindling of the fire of them that are too hot, or inflamed of what cause soeuer it be, it tempereth the excessiue heate of the summer, it preser∣ueth from the plague in the time of it, and being taken vppon meate it strengtheneth natural heat, that it may make better his disgestion & worke, it taketh away the sharp paines which commeth of any hot cause, it taketh away the trembling of the hearte, it maketh glad them that are melancholie, it ta∣keth from wine his furie & vapours, & the fruits put in snowe, & cause, that they doe not corrupt, hee that drinketh cold doth enioy the daintinesse of the colde that it doth make, which is a
thing that cannot be expressed and the vnderstanding of man cannot comprehend it. They which may liberally drinke cold & being made cold with snow, are such as be temperate of cō∣plection & full of flesh, & those which are of a cholerike com∣plection, hot & inffamed, the which are whot of the liuer, and of the stomake, they which are sanguine and doe exercise thē∣selues and labour as men of great buzinesse, they which haue many cares, the gouernours of cities & common welthes: & the ministers of them, which do participate of the like cares and troubles, they which doe exercise themselues in warlike affayres, and other great busines, they which goe much and haue laboured much, they which doe suffer burning Agues, and euils of great heate and inflammations, & aboue al, those which are accustomed to drink it herein, let euery man drink cold, or most colde as he hath necessity, and as it is most con∣uenient for him: & to such as it is not conuenient to drink cold, nor most colde, are they that are very old, and such as doe liue idlely, without exercise, and without care, they which haue rawnesse in their stomakes, they which suffer griefes of cold humors, they which are sicke in the breast, they which haue diseases of the sinewes, they which cannot tast that they eate for humors or colde causes, they which doe suffer muc ventosity, children, and such as are of young age, and others to whom time and vse haue shewed what is conuenient for them. And thus we en our Apologie. Finis.
