18504.5 S4029 34382802 29088
NEWES from diuers countries. AS, From Spaine, Antwerpe, Collin, Venice, Rome, The Turke, and The prince Doria. And how the Arch-duke of Austria is intended to resigne his Cardinall Hat; through his ma∣rying with the King of Spaines daughter. Seene and allowed. Printed at London by Valentine Sims, and are to be sold in Gratious streete. 1597.
❧ Newes from Antwerp, the fifth day of Maie. 1597. THe Cardinall Archduke which is yet at Bruxels, hath (as it is reported) assem∣bled about 5000. men neere Calice and those parts to spoile the country, and it is thought likewise that in the end of this moneth himselfe will take the field with 6000. fighting men to attempt some∣what against the towne of Ostend whe∣ther the states haue sent fiue other ensignes of footemen for the farther strengthning of that garrison. The states had of late intended to surprise Graueling: but the practise being discouered, their men returned without perfour∣ming any thing. The Frenchmen encreasing still in power make towardes A∣miens whereinto there is entred a certaine number of horse and the said Frenchmen inuading the country of Luxembrough, did on a sodaine surprize the towne of Iunix, which after they had sackt they set on fire, and thence marcht towards Lafertei, where not being able to effect their purpose, they roue vp and downe the prouince, doing euery where great hurte. For which cause the Cardinall hath sent thither Colonel Berlotta with other Cap∣taines to withstand the French, who seeke by such attemptes to crosse and hinder his proceedings. We are aduertised here by letters from Holland, of the arri∣uall there of sundry ships laden with diuers merchandizes, and store of ready money, who report that the Englishmen hauing ta∣ken and sakt the Port of Saint Martin, did afterward set it on fire with all the shippes within the harbour. On sunday the bodies of Saint Flauia Domicila and of S. Hereo and Archileo Romanes, were remoued from the Church of S. Adrian to their owne Church, which is the title of Cardinal ronio.
On munday a counsell was called at Montecauallo, wherein the Archmadrite of Messina was bestowed on a Sicilian. The Archbishop of Roan receiued his pall, and Cardinall Farnese propounded a monasterye in the Kingdome of Arragon in Spaine. On Tuseday the Cardinall Marc Antonio Colona departed this life, leauing for heire of all goods, the Lord Martio Colona his nephue. On wendsday towards euening the Cardinall Cesis & Mon∣signor Bonuisi gaue commaundement to the Captaines which were appointed for Hungary, that on munday next they shoulde cause their souldiers to depart; whereupon certaine companies did yesterday set forward, and the said Bonnisi who doth like∣wise to morrow take his iourney, hath already sent his comissary to make prouision for the voyage. The Spanish Agentes heere are aduertised by letters from Praghe, that the Admirall of Arragon hath published in that court by order of the Catholike King, that the Lady Infant of Spaine was maried to the Cardinall Archduke, and that the Emperour will resigne the kingdome of Bohemia vnto him, as also that he shalbe made king of Romanes, which is as much to say as heire and successor in the Empire. Otherwise the Catho∣like Maiesty will not giue him any state lest he should diminish the Crowne of Spaine, vnlesse perhaps he bestow on him the Dutchy of Brittaine hauing recouered it from the French, as a thing belonging to the Lady Infants mother. That the Cardi∣nall shall resigne the Archbishopricke of Toledo to Archduke Maximilian one of the brethren of the Prince of Spaines bride which shalbe. Who (as it is reported) must be conueied to her husband in October next: vpon the publishing whereof the Em∣bassadors of Venice, the great Duke, and Savoy did in their princes names visite and gratulate the catholike kings ambas∣sador. It is likewise reported, that the prince Doria his iorney into Spaine, is to fetch the Kings daughter, and conuey her into I∣taly, whence she shalbe accompanied into Flanders by the count
of Fuentes, who hath order to conduct her to the cardinal Arch∣duke. The other night there were sent from hence two Dispensati∣ons into spaine, the one whereby the kings daughter may take to husband the cardinall, the other that the prince may take to wife her that is betrothed vnto him, who shal this summer be conueied to Barcellona by the prince Doria in his gally royall with other gallies to the number of 30. whither the said prince will come to receiue her. The great duke vnderstanding that the catholike King wan∣ted powder and other munition wherewith to furnish his towns on the sea coast of spaine and Portugall, especially at this time, because he feares they shalbe assaulted by the English fleete, his highnesse did therefore cause a ship to be laden with 20000. bar¦rels of powder and other munition, which he sent into Spaine for a present to the catholike maiestie: but the Florentines say that hee sent the saide munition, to haue therefore so much corne graine. And the Iesuites which are lately come, reporte for a certainetie, that the saide ship is long since arriued at Alli∣cante. They write from Naples, that the viceroy hath built 4. new gallies, wherewith, togither with other shippes he purposeth to imbarke and carry into Spaine the third part of the footmen that were leuied in that kingdome, and there should be leuied another third vnder the conduct of the marques of Treuiso. They write from Florence, that the fort of Casteldit ouer-a∣gainst Marsiglia, holdes for the great Dutchesse in the French kings name, because the said fort was taken by the souldiers of the other fortresse belowe which are kept there at the saide great duchesse cost, by whose order the ambassadour of Tuscane con∣ferring with him of France on tuesday, told him that whatsoeuer was done herein, was for the seruice of the most christian maie∣stie, and by the Duke of Guise his consent, which, perceiuing that the captaine of the said place had inteligence with the prince Doria sent post for him to Marsiglia, that the souldiers might the more easily atchieue their enterprise.
On thurseday the ambassadors of Venice and of the great D. were together with the Catholike Kings Agent by the space of foure houres in a chamber locked vnto them, but it is not known what or whereon they treated. Here are news of the archbishop of Siena his death, who de∣ceased in his owne church, which place (it is thought) shall bee giuen to the cardinall Taruggi. Newes from Antwerp the 14. of Maie. 1597. The Cardinall Archduke doth what hee can to put an armie into the field; but through want of mony his purpose goes slow∣ly forward: neither is it yet knowne what enterprise the Spani∣ards will make, sith the troups which were sent forth, are retur∣ned vnto their garrisons, which moueth some to thinke that they will onely strengthen and furnish the frontier-townes. The forces which his highnesse sent to succour Amiens, haue done nothing, because they were not strong enough to withstand the French, who haue entrenched themselues not farre from the army where they remain, keeping good watch, and the Spanish horsemen in Arras appoynted to succour Amiens, can finde no meanes to enter the towne, sith all the passages are stopt, and the souldiers within the towne reposed small confidence in the Burgesses, who begin to grow weary of perfourming the duetie of souldiers. The French men in the countrie of Luxembrough vnder the D. of Niuers do watch their opportunitie to worke, some spoile (and as the voice goeth) they will lay siege to Harlam, not farre from Bastague, if they be not preuented by colonell Berlotta, whome his highnesse hath sent into those partes, From Rome the 24. of the said moneth. On wednesday towardes night there came a post from the Prince Doria, and departed presently to Naples to sollicite the footmen, and brought word that the said prince did on the twenty
day depart for Spaine, to fetch thence the kings daughter, and to conduct her into Italie: the which princesse (as it is reported) shall be entituled the Queene of Bohemia, for the Emperour and his brethren haue already graunted this title to the cardinal Archduke at the catholike Kings instance, by whose meanes the saide Cardinall shall bee made King of the Romanes, through helpe of his voyce as king of Bohemia: and shal furthermore be confirmed in the gouernement of Flaunders. They write from Naples that the gallies of Sicilie brought eight great canons from Palermo, which (as it is thought) shal be imployed in some attempt. That sixe miles from the hauen a ship laden with corne belonging to the Centurion of Genoa, was cast away, and therewith 100. marriners, 70. souldiers. That the 8000. footemen which were leuied in that kingdome, shall meete neare to the said cittie to be imbarked in twenty gal∣lies; and certaine ships and vessels which were made ready: and that there was order giuen for the leuying of more men in the saide kingdome. They write from Sicilie, that there departed from Palermo foure shippes, laden with biskets, and fiue more ready to depart laden likewise with biskets. On wednesday morning a counsell was called at Monteca∣uallo wherein was propounded by the cardinall of Aquauma the church of Onarem vnder the principalitie of Berna, there was also propounded the bishopricke of Cardoua in Spaine in the behalfe of the bishop of Conia, and this must be propounded in the person of an other Spaniard. The knight Tomaso Tomasi, who was sent ambassador in∣to Spaine by the duke of Parma, is gone (they say) to thanke his maiestie, for hauing giuen him a wife, and in particular, one that is alied to the prince his sonne. On saturday there came a post vnto the Pope, sent to him from the cardinall Taruggi with newes, that hee had laboured and concluded a peace betweene the Dukes of Mantua and Parma: and therefore (say they) that these two princes wil per∣sonally meete each other at Rlegio in Lombardy where the said Cardinall, and the most excellent duke of Ferrara will bee
present: which newes hath caused maruellous great ioy in this court. On Sunday there was an abiuration of twelue men, whome they called heretikes, in S. Mineruaes church, where many car∣dinalles were present: and it is reported, that of these twelue, three shall suffer death, of which one is a Florentine of the stocke of the Duzzi, who because he is constant in his opinion, shall be burned aliue, the other two first putte to death, and then burnt, the rest condemned, some to the gallies, some to prison. By letters from Spaine bearing date the 24. of April, and of the third of this present month, we are aduertized that the agree∣ment of the merchants was accorded on, because the king will giue the saide merchants very good assignements after the rate of ten and an halfe pro cento for the olde parcell, and touching the new, he will pay them the one halfe presently in ready mony, and for the rest will giue very good assignes. It is also reported, that the Englishmen haue wonne the Iland of saint Martha neare the Tercere. It is saide, that the promotions of the Cardinall at the french Kings requests shal not be vntill September or Christmas: and that cardinall Farnese shal be sent ambassador into Flanders to the cardinal Archduke. Monsignor Bonuisi departed for Hungary on Wednesday: so did also yesterday all the companies that were in Rome, by order from the pope. The Celso Celsi, and the captaine Bisa∣sone du Tese shal be made sergeants of one third a peece, besides the companies which they haue already. And of the horse menne which shall be layed in these parts, seignior Flamino Delfino is appointed to haue charge. Newes likewise is brought that Monsignior Fabio Orsino is arriued at Praghe to treate with the Emperour of very great and weightie affaires which are not openly knowen. The cardinall Bandini is departed on his Legacie into Ro∣mania: And the cardinalles of Prinli and Verona are gone for Loretto to imbarke themselues in Ancona for Venice.
It is reported that the Cardinall Dauilla is set in the Congregation of the Councell, and Gueuarra in that of the Bishops. By reason of the Bishop of Cattanaes death, that seate is voide, and rests in the nomination of the Catholike king, yéelding 25. thousand crownes yéerely. From Cullen the 19. of the same moneth. WE are héere aduertised by letters from Bruxels, that the Cardinall Archduke hath renounced his hate in the Cathedrall Church, with the accustomed ceremonies, and that the Catholike King will both cause him to be made King of Bohemia by the Emperor and Princes Elec∣tors, and hath also assigned him a perpetuall reuenew of the Archbishoprick of Toledo. From Antwarpe, the 21. of Maye 1597. THey say that the King of Fraunce, with the Duke of Maine is come to Corbi, hauing 60. peeces of Artillerie, and that his Maiestie hath called backe the Horsemen which were about Amyens, for wante of Corne and other things, yet the footemen are very well intrenched, neither is there any preparation made héere as yet to succour the said Towne. They write from Amsterdam the 17. of this present mo∣neth, that they haue newes, that parte of the said Spanish fléete was arriued in Britaine: That Graue Maurice is de∣parted from the Haghe, with purpose to take the fielde, and that there are sundrie Shippes laden with Corne come in∣to Holland from diuers partes, whereby the price is falne
more then a thirde parte. From Coleine the 26. of the same moneth. THe Spaniards are of late gone towards Berghe in cer∣taine Vessels built on the Rhein, carrying with them great prouision, and much store of powder, but it is not knowne what they purpose to attempt. There are also other Spaniards in the fielde in Gielderland. They write out of Fraunce, that the King hauing mu∣sterd and paide his Armie, made towards Amiens, his for∣ces euery day encreasing: and there was little hope that the Cardinall could succour the said towne, by reason of the great scarcitie of victuals through all Picardie. It was héere reported, that the States Souldiers had woone Venlo in Gelderland, but that at the last they were repulsed and beaten backe by the Townesmen. It is saide for certaine, that the Popes holinesse will by all meanes haue the rents of all the offices for two moneths for the warres of Hungary, for which cause also it is thought that the people shall be charged with a certaine summe of money. They write from Parma of Sinior marco Farnese his ari∣uall, who is looked for héere, being sent by the Generall Al∣dobrandino, to informe the Pope what power the Empe∣rour shall haue for his warre against the Turke: but some suppose that the said Lordes returne is for certaine discon∣tentes. It is héere reported, that Don Iohn de Media is gone to Casteldit with the great Dukes Galleis, and certaine ships laden with Munition, to assure altogether that Fortresse, by building a new Forte in the Island of Cachastrasse, from whence they may batter Casteldit.
On Thursday these companies of Souldiers did all de∣parte on their iourney towardes Hungarie, marching with great spéede, so that there is hope that they wil shortly ariue in those parts. They write from Bologna, that Sinior Marco Pio, and Ot∣tauio Anogodro, came néere to the walles of the saide Cit∣tie, and were discouered by the Courte as banished men: they were pursued, but in vaine, for they saued themselues within the territorie of Ferrara, onely a Gentleman of their company was taken and imprisoned. Sinior Ottauio Massimi, who was kept in prison by the Duke of Segni vpon suspition and iealousie of his Wife, be∣ing set at libertie and on his iourney towardes Rome, had sixe Harquebuzies discharged on him, about thrée miles on this side S Fiora, one of which strooke him into the head, whereof he dyed presently. Newes came on Monday that the Cardinall of Saint Clement, Legate in la Marca d'Ancona, hath taken either aliue or dead, all the Banditi which troubled that prouince. Signor Cümillo Capizucchi wil depart from hence to∣wards Hungarie, and the voice goeth that he shal be made Campe-maister in the Christian Armie. Cardinall Taruggi arriued this euening, being returned from Lombardie, who hath established a firme peace be∣twéene the Dukes of Parma and Mantua, and hath for some respects suspended as yet the enterview of the sayde Princes, but they haue assigned their deputies, and there haue passed letters betwéene them for confirmation there∣of. And it is reported, that amongst other things agréede on, this article is one: that all their former writings tou∣ching this matter shall be burnt. On Thursday morning the aforesaide persons condem∣ued for religion, were first beheaded in the tower of Nona, and afterward burned in Campo de Fiore. The other re∣canted all that they written or spoken against the Pope.
From Venice the 23. of Maye. THey write from Genoa the tenth of this moneth, that two Galleys of Sauoye arriued there to ioyne with the other, for the conueying of the Prince Doria into Spaine, with Sinior Gambacortas footemen, which arriue dayly at the Forde: and the voice goeth, that the sayde Prince will not depart vntill the comming of the Neapolitane footemen for whom he hath sent. They write from Alba-Iulia the 14. of Aprill, that the two Ghraussi which were sent from the great Turke, to the Prince, were dispatched back againe by his Highnesse, who sent with them a Gentleman of his Court, on what affaires it is not knowne. That the Turkes haue built a Bridge on the Riuer of Danuby, wherevpon some great hurte is doubted. There was likewise reporte of a mightie Tur∣kish armie setting forwarde, whereof his Highnesse did speedily aduertise the Emperor, counselling him to prepare for warre with all expedition. They write also from Vienna on the tenth of the same moneth, that there was made prouision for warre, but not so throughly as were requisite. That they fortified certaine Bastions there, the voyce still holding, that the Gardens and houses neere the walles should be throwne downe, and the Trenches enlarged. That 170. footemen of Strigonia being all Wallons and Italians, put to flight 1500. Tur∣kish Horssemen in the Isle of Strigonia, of which number none escaped, the most parte perished in the water, which séemeth miraculous. That the Boores were still executed, and a hundreth more of them brought to Vienna, amongst whom were some of the chiefe. They write from Craconia the third of this present mo∣neth,
that the Palatine of Chionia did still persist in his contumacie, leauing Souldiers, and preparing for warre of his owne authoritie: whereby the King shall be con∣strained to vse force against him, which may bréede some greater matter, but there is hope that the Estates will be mediators betwéene them for the preuenting of farther troubles. And there is no farther talke of his Maiesties iourney into Suetia, since the Palatine of Vilnas answere at the Parliament, to his Commissioners. There are more certaine newes by letters from Con∣stantinople, that Cicala was not called backe vnto Porte. But contrariwise that the great Turke hath appointed him to tarrie still at Argyrore, towardes which place a cer∣taine number of Souldiers was to be sent to renew and strengthen the garrisons of those frontiers. The Persian hauing in vaine demaunded restitution of certaine For∣tresses, according to promisse made in the articles of the peace: and therefore the voyce held, that he purposed to take armes against the said gran Sinior the great Turke, which entended not to make any restitution at all. And that Mahomet Bassa was made Captaine generall of the armie in Hungarie. There are newes from Turin by Letters, of the first of this present moneth, that the Duke of Sauoye made pre∣paration to passe the Mountaines, so soone as Mendoza Captaine of the Horsemen of Millaine should ioyne with him, and hath in the meane time sent a Garrison to Susa San Genis, (which is not taken by Digniere, as it was re∣ported) and to other places. All which, notwithstanding some suppose that there is hope of prolonging the truce, al∣though Dighera be in armes, and hath raised all Daulphine, Prouence, Auuerne, and other countries adiacent, hauing likewise attempted to raise the Switzers. There are farther newes brought from Vienna, that the aforesaid ouerthrow of the Turkes at Srigonia, hath much
encouraged the inhabitants both of the vpper and lower Hungarie, which offer themselues with all readinesse to performe their vttermost against the common enemie. It is yet farther reported, that the Emperour will marche foorth in person, if the Turke come to the siege of Vienna. But others affirme, that there is a treatie of peace, and that the Prince of Transiluania will be a mediator betwéen them, which séemes to many a thing very vnlikely. For so much as is yet knowne, the controuersies be∣tweene the Dukes of Parma and Mantua are very well de∣termined, and through the diligence of Cardinall Taruggi, and the great wisdome of the most excellent Duke of Fer∣rara. They write from Praghe bearing date the tenth of this present moneth, that Sinior Gio: Francisco Aldobrandino, did on the same day depart towardes Vienna with seauen Coaches, and that the Marquisse of Borgari must shortlye follow him. And they had intelligence that the Turke ha∣uing sent 6000. Ianisaries to assure the passages through Transiluania, Moldania, and Valachia: the Transiluanians and Valachians ioyning their forces, had encountered and foilde the first Squadron, in such sorte that fewe escaped, and that they went forwarde to serue the other Squadrons in like manner. As also that the Bulgarians taking armes haue done some spoile vnto the Turkes. There are letters sent from Rome, that the Cardinall Archduke hath renounced his Hatte vnto the Pope, and his Archbishoprick of Toledo to Don Sacio de Valori Tu∣tor to the Prince of Spaine, reseruing to himselfe the pen∣sion of a hundred thousand Crownes, and that his High∣nesse hath in Dowrie the assignements of Portugall, which amounteth to foure hundreth thousand Crownes
with the pretentions of the Infant (daughter to the King of Spaine) his Wife to the Dutchie of Britaine. We are aduertised from Augusta, that there arriued at Olimo sixe thousand footemen, and two thousand horse∣men, all Vallons, which marche into Hungarie. It is also reported that the most excellent Prouiditore Benbo hauing taken certaine of the vscorchi and sent them to Segna, they were presently trussed vs vp: which is an euident signe that the house of Austria is willing to make all the setisfaction he may, to this most excellent state. There came also the Lord Arrideo Borgonia Cup-bea∣rer to the Emperours Eaiestie sent aout the same matter, and being dispatched here he must paffe presently to Vr∣bine, to treat with that Duke, but vppon what affaires, it not as yet well knowne. They report from Millain that the Florentines haue driuen the Frenchmen from Cacastras or castledit. That the truce with Sauoy, was prolonged vntill the fiftéenth of this moneth, and that the saide Duke had sent another Gentleman to the most Christian King, it is not knowne wherefore. That the Knight Landriano was taken at Millan, and sent to Malta, for what cause, it is not knowne. From Venice the thirtith of May. 1597. THey write from Genoa the seuentéenth of this present moneth of the arriual there of Signor Francesco de
Vera a Spaniard, and of the Senator Maionoldi of Mil∣lane, which is now made Regent of that Citie in Spaine, in the place of Brugnolo, who is chosen President of the Counsell of Millane, as also of the arriual of the Comen∣dator Tomaso Tomasi the Duke of Parmas Ambassador, all which purpose to passe into Spain with the Prince Do∣ia, who hath licence from the Senate, and is gone to∣wardes poglio and Loano, whence on munday next hee will depart, there being already twelue Gallies sent to the foorde to take in the footmen. There were newes from Cremoua, that they vnder∣stood by letters from Millane, where there arriued a poste from Lyons, that the Spaniardes haue taken the towne of Masiers in Champaigne. But small credite is giuen to these newes, sith the last letters from Millane doe menci∣no such matter. There came letters from Constantinople bearing date the seuenteenth of the last moneth, that Cicala hauing fi∣nallie cleared himselfe to the Sultane, should returne to Constantinople, and that it was likelie he should bee made chiefe Visir, it being also thought that hee shoulde bee sent Generall into Hungarie, and that then the grand Signor would not goe himselfe. That there is a woonderfull scarcitie, especiallie of beastes. That there are sundrie spéeches and opinions touching the Armie, some supposing that onlie some fewe Gallies shall be sent foorth: But if certaine articles betweene the grande Signor and the King of France were agreed on, that then his Highnesse would send 70. or 80. Gallies to his ayde. That the report of the Catholique Kinges procéedinges
in preiudice of the French kings Maiestie, was much displeasant, and that the great Turke was desirous that the most Christian King should accept the capitulations offered, that he might afterward send foorth a Fleet of 150 Sayles to hurt & spoyle the Catholique King by al meanes possible. That vpon Cycalas comming the great Turke would go to Adrinopoli to encourage his people, being en∣forced to drawe them foorth by wonderful threates, they were so dismayed, fearing some greater losse then they had sustained the yeare before. And that to make them be∣leeue that he means to take the field, the Standerd which is woont to be borne before him was again displayd. That the Mulsti and other Papassi consulting togither, had plain∣lie tolde the grand Signor, that he shoulde not suffer him∣selfe to be ruled by the Sultan which were herewith much offended. It is signified by letters from Vienna, bearing date the 17. of this present moneth, that the Bassa of Bossina with a good number of Souldiours will lay siege to Canisa, ex∣pecting the grande Signors power: and the imperial Cap∣taines haue now thought on sundrie meanes for the rescu∣ing of that place. That the Turkes of Papa. Vesprino. Palotta. S. Martin and other places assemble themselues at Iaurino, scouring the plaines and making no account of our Forces, that on the day aboue written the Generall Al∣dobrandino came to Vienna and was met by Archduke Mathias: that the Marquisse of Borgari and Signor Fer∣ranti di Rossi wil shortlie likewise be there: that the Prince of Transylvanias wife was looked for, as also the Prince of Anholt which (they say) shall be made Archduke Maxi∣milians Lieutenant. That the Transylvanian hath ouer∣thrwn sixteen thousand Turks and Tartars of Valachia and Moldavia. They write from Turin of Mendozzas arriuall which offered great ayde to the Duke of Savoy if the Frenchmen
should stirre. That it was againe reported how the saide Gouernour of Mēz had intelligence with the Cardinall Archduk, the said Gouernor being somewhat suspected by the King. And it was thought that the said Cardinall had resolued on that enterprise, making shew outwardlie as if he purposed to assault some other place. That his High∣nesse of Savoy hath sent away Martinengo with other Cap∣taines and all the footmen, towardes Ciamberi, where the whole Armie should assemble, it being held for certain that the warre shal continue, howsoeuer the truce be prolonged They write from Lyons the 14. of this present moneth that Diguiere and the Gouernor of la Franche Contee did meete together and after conference determined that the said Diguiere should make roads into Savoy and Piemont, the Baron of Luz into la Franch Contee and that Moun∣sieur du Perault should scowre the countrey aboue frō Mon∣tezelo. Although that the forces of Sauoy together, with the aide sent from Millan, did exceed their number. They write from Paris, that the King was still at S. Germans, purpo∣sing immediatlie after he had cleared himselfe, to goe vnto the Camps in Picardie, which consisteth of a thousand foot∣men and 1500. horse besides as manie more which are to come with the King. They write from Marsiglia that those inhabitants were all mooued with the newes of Cachastrasse, and did there∣fore builde a fort ouer against it to beat and reduce it again to their subiection. We are aduertised by letters from the sea that the Clar∣rissimo Pasqualigo, Captaine of the Gulfe hath taken thrée Turkish Foysts and two Brigandines being part of those that spoild the ship Syluestra. The Turkes were all put to the sword: and it is reported that they found aboue seuen thousand Crownes in ready coyne and much of that mar∣chandize which was aboord the saide Ship, which together with the money shal remain to the said Signor Pasqualigo
and two Captaines of two other Gallies, which at that time were with him. They write from Alba Iulia, that the Turkish power doth dayly increase towards Danuby, that they are now allready fiftie thousand strong, and haue built a Bridge, for which cause the Transiluanian made all prouision neces∣sarie, doubting greate inconuenience, if the Turkes should bend their force against him, and his succours be slowe in comming. They write from Milane the 28. of this present moneth, that they haue intelligence from Spaine, how the Catho∣lick King is in perfect health and gone to Escuriall. That the Earle of Fuentes dooth with all dilligence prepare for warre. That the King of Fez is in armes against the Spaniard, and hath layde siege to Centa. That the Duke of Sauoy made prouision to withstande Dighera, who was counselled by Monsieur Iacob late being returned from Pa∣ris, that he should prouide for warre, because the Souldiers of Don Alfonso de Aualos were not yet gone, but would tarrie certaine dayes at the said Dukes request. From Venice the 6. of Iune, 1597. WE were aduertised by the last moneths letters from Constantinople of the Gréeke Patriarchs death, in whose place he of Alexandria a Grecian also shall succéed, with condition that he labour for a peace with the Empe∣rour, the Transiluanian and Michael the Voiuoide of Vallachia. They write from Genou the 24. of the last moneth, how the Galley Royall with others, wente towardes Poggio, there to take in the Prince Doria, who was on the fiftéenth day to depart for Spaine. There came letters from Vienna, bearing date likewise the 24. day, how the Christians going by night to Totta threw down 1 of the gates, and so taking it, slew all the
Turkes within. Wherevpon new prouision was made of men and munition for the kéeping of that place, being a verie fitte passage from Buda to Alba egale. They signifie also how the Siculy offered the Prince of Transilua∣nia, that if he would graunt them their their auncient Li∣bertie, that then they would aide him with fiftéene thou∣sand men, alledging that the cause of their returne to the o∣bedience of that house, whereof the said Princes Wife doth linneally descend, is to eschewe the daungers which are likely to ensue of the wars. They write from Tautinio, that Dighera, besides his greate preparations for warre, hath leuied a new sixe thousand men more in Doulphine, and in Burgoine a farre greater number. For which cause (as they signifie from Millain) the duke of Sauoy hath most earnestly intreated the Cunstable that he should not send away the troupes in∣to Flaunders. It is farther reported that they of Ciambrie did mutiue and refused to haue Souldiers in their houses. They write from Marsiglia, that the Duke of Guise was at high wordes with certaine Lordes of Prouence: Where∣vppon the Parliament of Aix, vndertooke to pacifie and a∣grée them. They write from Cracouia, that there are great forces sent dayly to the frontiers of Hungary, and fifteene thousand horsemen in a readynes to march into Toldania, vppon some new suspicions of the Transiluanian betwene whom and the two breethren Battori: there are some controuer∣sies newly sprong: But Malaspna the Popes Nuncio sought by all meanes to accorde them. The Russian Empe∣ror is yet aliue, contrary to the former reporte, but true it is, that he was euen at the point of death. There was spéech that another Ambassador should be sent vnto him with pre∣sents and offer of ayde against the Turke, who hath of late greatly molested him by stirring vp against him a faction
in the fauour of one who intends to succéede in that king∣dome after the saide Emperors disceasse. There came letters from Paris, bearing date the twelfe of the last moneth, which signifieth that the King did on the same day depart towarde Picardie, Monsieur Tremouille being in the field with 1500. Horse, and 2000. footemen le∣uied out of Poictou. That there doe daily resort vnto his Maiestie great forces from all parts of the kingdom, wher∣by it is thought the number of his armie will amount to thirty thousand fighting men all French, besides the Swit∣zers, English, Scottish, and Dutch, which he will haue in pay: so that the warre will now be greater then euer it was. Corso is gone into Languedock to assault the Spa∣niards from the side of Perpignan. The Marquesse du Pont is at the Courte about his mariage with the Kings sister, which together with a hundreth other chiefe personages should become Catholick. The newes from Sicill is, that in some ports of that I∣land certaine Venecian ships were stayde to be sent into Spaine with men, Biscots and other prouisions, out of which said shippes the great part of the Marriners fled, be∣cause they would not be employed in that voyage. There are farther newes from Vienna, that the surprise of Tatta was atchieued by Signior Polfi, who hauing left there a thousand Souldiers for defence of the said place, went to ioyne himselfe with Nadasdi and other principall Captaines, whose number will be in all eyght thousand footemen, and two thousand horse, all olde Souldiers, with which power and other forces that daily resorte vnto them, the saide Captaines purpose to vndertake some other en∣terprise, before the enemy shall haue assembled his whole armie, which he cannot doo before the 24. of Iuly. That there were sent many spies from Vienna to certaine Vil∣lages, and about a hundreth more of the chiefest of the re∣bellious Bores were put to death.
Besides the two hundreth footemen which were brought hither the other day by Todino, there are come two hun∣dreth more, leuyed by Conte Vgocione Rangone, who are on the Sea side, and must be sent to the Generall Bembo into Dalmatia, vnlesse this most excellent Senate shall otherwise determine. They write from Flaunders, that those of Amiens haue put foorth of the Towne to the number of eyght hundreth women and children, by reason of some wante of victuals, and that they might the better holde out. They reporte yet farther from Vienna, that the Garri∣sons of Comar and Viuar ioyning themselues, made a rode within eyght myles of Buda, and woone a place called Fel∣uar, killing many Turkes, and taking twentie prisoners, which place hauing sacked they set on fire. That Sinior Polfis Lieutenant in Strigonia had sent vnto him a Turke who was taken with letters about him. That at the winning of Tatta they tooke the Begh and other principall Turkes. That they haue intelligence from Transyluania, how that people hath graunted to the Prince foure Florence of euery house. They write from Milane that Don Alfonso de Aualos his troopes began to marche through Flaunders towardes Sauoye, and that the Duke thereof would haue no longer truce with Fraunce vnlesse it were for two or thrée yéeres, but eyther absolute peace or warre, because these short pro∣longings did put his Highnesse to as great charges, as he should be at an action of warre: wherefore he made great preparation, as did also Dighera on the other side. FINIS.
