19201 99855326 20813
AN ACT OR DECREE OF THE COVRT OF PARLIAMENT OF PARIS, made the 26. and executed the 27. of IVNE. 1614. Against a Booke printed at Cologne this present yeere, intituled FRANCISCI SVARES Granatensis è SOCIETATE IESV Doctoris Theo∣logi, Defensio fidei Catholicae & Apostolicae, aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores: containing diuers Prin∣ciples and Propositions repugnant to the soue∣raigne power of Kings, ordayned and esta∣blished by God, the safetie of their Per∣sons, and the peace and tranqui∣litie of their States. Translated out of the French Copie, printed at Paris, by F. MOREL and PETER METTAYER, the Kings Printers and Stationers in Ordinary, with his Maiesties priuiledge, 1614. LONDON: Printed for Iohn Barnes, and are to be sould at his Shop, vnder the signe of the Cardinals-hat without New-gate, 1614.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. THou hast here (gentle Reader) an Edict and Censure, published by the State of France, against the Booke of FRANCIS SVARES, intended for answere to his MAIESTIE; which as it is not the first taste they haue giuen to the world of their mis∣like of sundry Positions maintayned and defended by the Iesuites; so neyther is this the first borne of my Labours, which thy courteous acceptance hath entreated from mee, of exposing to thy view in thy natiue language, sundry nar∣rations and learned Treatises set forth in French. The printed Copie hereof as it came to my hands, I haue subioy∣ned; that thou maist see this Spanish Goliah, or Popish Champion, inuading the King of England, Armado-like, brought to confusion before hee commeth to grapple with his enemie. This is hee who neyther daunted to see LESSIVS beaten, nor BECANVS cast into the fire of Purgatorie, lifteth vp his arme against the Lords An∣noynted. Now to thee, Romish-affected whosoeuer thou art, be∣hold your SVARES, Sidus Hispanicum, imò & Iesui∣ticum;
The Load-starre of Spaine, and glory of his Order, censured, not for his priuate opinion, but for a common tenent of the Iesuites: some there are, who through fauour to the Man and his Order, haue not feared to in∣curre the displeasure of his Maiestie, censure of our State, and danger of the Lawes and Statutes of this Land, in maintaining the doctrine of this Booke: but of the me∣liora spero, I am better conceited: assuring my selfe that seeing these and the like Doctrines finde no better enter∣tainment with these learned French-men (as zealous for the Catholike Faith as thy selfe) neyther the report of their learning, the high commendations of their zeale and gra∣uitie, nor the vsurped title of the Catholike Faith, shall henceforth lull thee asleepe to forget thy duty to thy King and Country; but reddere quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, & quae sunt Dei Deo, teach thee to giue vnto Caesar those things which are Caesars, and vnto God those things which are Gods: and stop thine eares against the Circean Language of this late-sprung-vp Imposters; And in ad∣miration as heretofore some certaine Catholikes haue done, cry out, Good God, that such a Societie of men, after so many scandals and foule deserts of theirs in FRANCE, and else-where, for PRINCE-KILLING SEDITION, &c. can thus be of credit in ENGLAND? A. C. to his dis-Iesuited Kinsman, pag. 72. And so I leaue this and the rest, commended to thy best acceptance. Farewell. Thine I. B.
AN ACT OR DECREE OF THE COVRT OF Parliament of PARIS, made the 26. and executed the 27. of Iune. 1614. THE Court of the great Chamber, Tournelle, and of the Edict assembled, ha∣uing viewed the Booke printed at Cologne this present yeere, entituled, FRANCISCI SVARES Granatensis, è Socie∣tate IESV, Doctoris Theologi, Defensio Fidei Catholicae & Apostolicae, aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores, contayning in the third Booke, Chap∣ter 23. pages 376. 79. 80. 82. Chapter 29.
pages 410. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Chapt. 6. page 834. Chapt. 8. page 484. and in other places, many Propositions con∣trary to the soueraigne power of Kings, or∣dayned and established by GOD, the peace and tranquilitie of their States; and that it is lawfull for their Subiects, and Strangers, to attempt against their Persons. Conclusions of the Kings Attorney Generall. The whole duely considered, THE said Court hath declared, and doth declare, the Propositions and Principles contayned in the said Booke, to be scanda∣lous and sedicious, tending to the subuersion of States, and to induce the Subiects of Kings, and Soueraigne Princes, and others, to at∣tempt against their sacred persons: and the speeches mentioning the Kings Chlowis and Phillip the faire, to be false and slanderous: hath also ordayned, and doth ordaine, that the said Booke of Suares be burned in the Court of the Pallace, by the Executioner of high Iustice.
Furthermore, it hath and doth inhibite and forbid all sellers of Bookes and Printers, to print, sell, or disperse any of the said bookes: as also, all other persons of whatsoeuer cal∣ling or condition, to transcribe, haue, to write out, or to retaine, or to teach in Schooles or else-where; or else to dispute vpon the said Principles or Propositions. It also ordaineth according to the decree of the 8. of Iune 1610. that the Decree of the facultie of Diuinitie, made vpon the fourth of Iune in the same yeere, concerning the renewing of the doctrinall censure of the said facultie, bearing date the yeere 1408. and confirmed by the Councell of Constance, together with this present Act, as also those of the yeeres 1578. and 95. shall yeerely be read the fourth day of Iune, as well in the said facultie, as in the Colledge of the Priests and Schollers of the Colledge of Clermont, and of the foure Orders of begging Fryers. Also, that at the request of the Kings Attur∣ney Generall, Informations shall be taken of the contrauentions against the said Decrees,
and Prohibitions made against writing, ha∣uing or detayning the like Bookes. Giuen in Parliament the twentie sixt day of Iune, 1614. Signed Voisin. FVrthermore, it is decreed that the Fathers, Ignace Armand, Rector in this Citie, Cotton, Fronton, and Sirmund, shall be summoned the first day to this Court, and to them shall be shewed, that contrary to their declaration and the Decree of their Generall of the yeere 1610. the Booke of Suares hath beene printed and brought into this Citie, a Booke impug∣ning the authoritie of the King, and the safe∣tie of his Person and State: and they shall be enioyned to cause their Generall to renew the said Decree; and to publish it, and to bring in an Act thereof within these sixe Moneths, and to prouide that no such damnable and pernitious Propositions be made or published by any of their Companie: as also, they shall be enioyned in their Sermons to exhort the people to the doctrine contrary to the said Propositions; otherwise the Court will pro∣ceede
against the transgressors, as men guil∣tie of Treason and disturbers of the publike quietnes. This aboue-said Decree, and the decreed, were pronounced in the presence of the Fathers Ignace Armand, Charles de la Tour, in the absence of Peter Cotton, Fronton du Duc, and Iames Sirmund. And the Decree was put in execution before the great Stayres of the Pallace, the 27. of June. 1614. FINIS.
