19274 99855120 20593
A true Subiects wish. For the happy successe of our Royall Army pre∣paring to resist the factious Rebellion of those insolent Covenan∣ters (against the sacred Maiesty, of our gracious and loving king Charles) in Scotland. To the tune of, O how now Mars, &c. ever England had occasion, Her ancient honour to defend, let her now make preparation, honourable end: the actious Scot is very hot, ent spléene is néer' forget hath bin about this plot. the colour of religion, ith hypocriticall pretence) e a fraction in that Region, against their native Prince, heaven blesse with nesse, all his enemies represse, st be he that wisheth lesse. gratious Soueraigne very mildely, them what they did desire, ingratefully and vildly, still continued the fire discontent gainst gouernment, England now is fully bent, proud Iocky's bosting to preuent. importeth Englands honour blesse Rebels to oppose, Saint Georges banner, them as our countries foes, and they shall sée, how stoutly we, (for Royall Charles with courage frée) will fight if there occasion be. Vnto the world it is apparent, That they rebell ith' high'st degrée, No true Religion will giue warrant, That any subiect arm'd should be, against his Prince in any sence, what ere he hold for his pretence, Rebellion is a souls offence. Nay more to aggrauate the euill, And make them odious mongst good men, It will appeare, that all their levell, Is change of gouernment, and then, what will insue, amongst the crew, but Iocky with his bonnet blew, both Crown and Scepter would subdue. Why of these men will take compassion, That are disloyall to their king, Among them borne in their owne nation, And one who in each lawfull thing, doth séeke their weale, with perfect Zeale, to any good man I'le appeale, if with king Charles they rightly deale.
The Second part, To the same tune. THe Lord to publish their intentions, Did bring to light a trecherous thing, For they to further their inventions, A Letter wrote to the French King, and in the same, his aide to claime, with subtlety their words they frame, which letter to our Soueraigne came. Then let all loyall subiects iudge it, If we haue not a cause to fight, You who haue mony doe not grudge it, But in your king and countries right, freely disburse. both person purse, and all you may to auoyd the curse, of lasting warre which will be worse. If they are growne so farre audacious, That they durst call in forraine aide, Against a king so milde and gratious, Haue we not cause to be afraid, of life and blood, we then had stood, in danger of such neighbourhood, in time to quell them twill be good. Then noble Country-men be armed, To tame these proud outdaring Scots, That Englands honour be not harmed, Let all according to their lots, couragiously their fortune try, against the vaunting enemy, and come home crownd with victory. The noble Irish good example, Doth give of his fidelity, His purse, and person is so ample. To serve his royall maiesty, and gladly he the man will be, to scourge the Scots disloyalty, if Englands honour would agree. Then we more merely interessed, Ith nture danger that might chance, If that against our soveraigne blessed, Those rebels had got aide from France, should not be slacke, nor ere shrinke backe, or let king Charles assistance lacke, to tame in time this saucy Iacke. We have a Generall so noble, (The great Earle of Northumberland) That twill (I trust) be little trouble, Those factious rebels to withstand▪ his very name séemes to proclaime, and to the world divulge the same, his ancestors there won such fame. The God of host's goe with our army My noble hearts for you ile pray, That neuer any foe may harme ye▪ Nor any stratagem betray your braue designe, may beames divine, upon your ensignes brightly shine, Amen say I, and every friend of mine FINIS. M. P. Printed at London by E. G. and are to be sold at the Horse-shoe in Smithfield.
