2022 99855472 20967
A little Catechisme, that is to say, a short instruction touching christian religion, set forth by Theodorus Beza Minister of the Church of God in Geneua. The first section. Question. 1 WHerefore hath God placed vs in this world? Aunswere. To know and serue him. Q 2. Wil he be knowen and serued according to our vnderstanding and will: or accor∣ding to that, which it hath pleased him∣selfe, to declare and set out vnto vs touching the same? Answere. According to that which he hath declared vnto vs concerning the same. Q 3. Where hath he declared and set out the same vnto vs? A. In that booke which we call the Bible, comprehending, togither with diuers histories, the law and the gospel. Q 4. Who hath made this booke? A. God him selfe, by the ministerye of hys holy Prophets and Apostles. Q. 5. What is the law? A. The doctrine which teacheth vs what we ought to do, as well towards God, as one of vs towards an other. Q. 6. What is the Gospel?
A. That heauenly doctrine which teacheth vs, what we must beleeue to our saluation thorow Iesus Christ only. Q. 7. Doth this word conteine al that which we must beleeue and doe? A. Yea, without hauing any neede to adde or ioyne any thing thereto, or to take anye thing therefrom. Q. 8. Say now the articles of your beleefe. A. I beleue in God, the father almighty. &c The second section. Q. 1. Doth this Doctrine teach vs, that there is but one onely God, or that there are more gods then one? A. It teacheth that there is but one God only, and that we may not haue more. Q. 2. Wherfore say you so? A. Because it must needes be, yt he whiche is God, should be aboue all other thinges, and therfore he may not haue a fellowe or companion ioyned with him. Q. 3. Yet you in naming God haue seemed to rehearse three, that is to say, the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost. A. In deede there are three persons, in one only Godhead: but yet these three persons, are but one, and the selfe same onely God. Q. 4. Meane you that God is diuided into three partes? A. No, for God can not be diuided, but I
say, that euery one of these three persons is one, and the selfe same onely God altogea∣there perfect. Q. 5. How can this be? A. It is a misterie or secreat beyonde al our vnderstanding, and yet notwythstandyng most certayne and sure, for God hath so de∣clared it and set it forth vnto vs, by hys ho∣ly word. Q. 6. Doe you then beleeue in one onelye God, the father the sonne, and the holy ghost. A. Yea: and by Gods goodnes, will. dye in this faith. The third section. Q. 1. How is the sonne of God called? A. IESVS CHRIST. Q. 2. What meane these wordse IESVS CHRIST? A. Iesus is as much to say, as Sauior, and Christe is as muche as annoynted and con∣secrated to be our soueraigne king, hauing power ouer all creatures, our soueraigne or high prophet, who hath fullye declared vnto vs the wyl of God his father, touching our saluation, and our soueraigne or high prieste, which hath fullye appeased an paci∣fied the wrathe of God agaynste vs for our sinnes. Q. 3. What hath hee done and suffered to saue vs?
A. He was conceiued by the holy ghoste, and borne of the virgin Mary, suffered vn∣der Pontius Pilate, &c. Q. 4. Can God suffer or dye? A. No. Q. 5. Is not Iesus Christ true and very God, eternall, with his father and the holy ghost? A, Yea. Q. 6. How then is he sayd to haue dyed? A. Because that being verye God, he was made man also, to the end that in his per∣son our nature mighte beare or suffer the whole punishment due to our sinnes and traunsgressions. Q. 7. Doe you meane that the sonne of God, was changed into man? A. No, because then he should be no more God: and god can not eyther change him selfe or be changed. But being of himselfe verye God, he hath taken our nature vnto himselfe, that so he might be very god and very man. Q. 8. If he had not bin God coulde he haue bin our sauiour? A. No, for it belongeth vnto God onely to pardon and forgiue sins, and to giue eter∣nall life. Q. 9. And if he had not bin man, coulde he haue bin our sauiour? A. If he had not bin man he could not haue
dyed, and therefore we our selues shoulde haue bin subiect vnto death. The fourth section. Q. 1. Shall all the world be saued. A. No, for the greater part of the world re∣fuse their saluation. Q. 2. Who thē are they which shal be saued? A. They that haue faith and beleeue. Q. 3. And what is fayth? A. A certaine perswasion and assurance, which euery true christian man oughte to-haue, that God the father loueth him, for Iesus Christ his sons sake. Q. 4. Wherefore doe you say for Iesus Chri∣stes sake? A. Because that we being altogither cor∣rupted and wholly peruerse in our selues, God could not loue vs, but in respecte of him onely, which is man altogither iuste and perfect, that is to say Iesus Christ his sonne. Q. 5. Commeth this fayth of our selues? A. No, but from the onely grace and good∣nes of God, which doth frely giue it to his elect and chosen ones. Q. 6. And they which haue this fayth, are they saued? A. Yea of necessitie, for god hath giuen his sonne to the ende that euery one which be∣leueth in him, should haue life euerlasting:
and he is not a lyer. The fifth section. Q. 1. But wherby may a man knowe whether he haue fayth or no? A. By good workes. Q. 2. Which be good woorkes, and which be euill? A. Those onely are good which he himselfe hath commanded, and those euill which he hath forbidden. Q. 3. Rehearse nowe the commandements of God. A. Heare Israell &c. The summe wherof is, thou shalt loue the Lord thy God. Q. 4. To knowe Gods commandements, is not onely to know to say them, but men must also vnderstand that which they say: wherfore I demaund of you, what meaneth that which is sayd in the third commaundement, to take the name of God. A. It is to name God, which we muste ne∣uer doe, but vpon iust and good cause, and with feare of his maiesty whom we name. Q. 5. Then it is by stronger and greater rea∣son more forbidden to sweare by God in vain that is to say, to take him for a witnes and iudge, without iust and good cause why. A. It is so in deede, Q. 6. What meaneth it to sanctifie the Sa∣baoth day, or day of rest.
A. It is to dedicate and consecrate it to the glory of God. Q. 7. Ought we not also to dedicate vnto him all the rest of the dayes of our life? A. Yea, but this day is particularlye and cheefely ordayned for this end and purpose. Q. 8. Doe men forbid to trauaile or worke on the Saboth day, as though to labor were a thing euill of it selfe? A. No, but they forbid ordinary and vsuall labor, to doe a worke which is better and more profitable. The sixt section. Q 1. You haue sayde that they only are good workes which God hath commanded. Wher∣fore tell me can we accomplish and fulfyll the commandements of God? A. No, not so muche as begin to doe anye thing, but by a certaine singuler and speci∣all grace of God. Yea there neuer hath bin or shall be a man, excepting Iesus Christe only, which hath perfectly fulfilled y• same. Q. 2. Wherefore say you so? A. Because God will saue vs thorowe his only mercy in Iesus Christ. Q 3. Yet so it is that a good lyfe is the way to saluation. A. It is true that repentaunce and amend∣ment is ioyned with the forgiuenes of our sinnes: but yet it followeth not therevppon,
that we be saued by our workes. Q. 4. And why shall we not be saued by our workes seing that they are good? A. Because they be not good inough for that purpose. Q. 5. Wherefore then are they good? A. To sette forth Gods honor: to winne or else to strengthen our neighbors, and to make vs know and feele in our selues, that we are the children of God. Q. 6. Good workes then make vs not Gods children? A. No, for contrariwise a man must firste be the child of GOD, before he can doe good woorkes: but this is a marke or badge, whereby men may knowe the chil∣dren of God. Q. 7. What then maketh vs the children & sonnes of God? A. The onely grace and mercye of God, by his holy spirite, because he hath elected and chosen vs from before all euerlasting∣nes, according to his good pleasure. The seuenth section. Q. 1. The holy ghost then is hee which ma∣keth vs the children of god: but what instru∣ments or meanes, doth he ordinarily & com∣monly vse to bring vs to that honor and kepe vs in the same? A. The preaching of the word praier, and
the vse of the sacraments. Q. 2. What call you preaching of the word? A. An exposition of the writinges of the Prophets and Apostls, which is don in the Churche, by such as he hath called to that holy ministery: of Whom it is sayd the that receiueth you receiueth me. Q. 3. And how doe you pray? A. Saying. O our father which art in hea∣uen. &c. Q. 4. To whom speake you these wordes? A. To God the Father. Q. 5. How is he your father, seeing that he hath but one onely sonne, that is to say IE∣SVS CHRIST? A. First, because that Iesus Christe hys eternal sonne being made man, is become our brother: secondly, because he loueth me in Iesus Christ his sonne, with a grea∣ter then a fatherly loue and affection. Q. 6. Albeit then that you directe not your speach and wordes eyther to the sonne or to the holy ghoste, yet you doe not exclud or shutte out eyeher the one or the other. A. No, For I can not call him Father, but in the name of his sonne IESVS CHRISTE, nor praye vnto hym
but by the holy ghost. Q. 7. And is it not lawfull for a man to frame or make his prayer to the person of the sonne and of the holy ghost. A. Yea in deede. For seeing that the three persons are one onely, and the selfe same God, inuocation or prayer dooth equallye belong vnto them. And whether I call vp∣on the father in the name of the sonne by the holy ghost, or that I make my prayer vnto the sonne to leade and bring mee to the fa∣ther, or that I pray the holy ghost to teache me the father and the sonne, all commeth to one. The eyght section. Q. 1. And what is a Sacrament? A. It is a thing which God setteth before mens eyes in his church, to signify vnto vs for our saluation, an other thing which men see not. Q. 2. And wherfore hath God ordeined these signes to his promises? A. For to make vs so much the more assu∣red of the certainty of them. Q. 3. How many such signes are there in the christian Church? A. Two, that is to say, Baptisme, and the holy Supper. Q. 4. What see you in Baptisme? A. Water.
Q. 5. What dothe thys water signifye vnto you? A. The bloud of Iesus Christ. Q 6. To what end? A. To make cleane my sins, as the water being occupyed, maketh cleane the filthines of the body. Q 7. Doth this water make cleane and purge sinnes? A. No, but it signifyeth vnto me that which washeth my sinnes, to wit, the bloud of Ie∣sus Christ. Q 8. Meane you that this matter or sub∣stance of the bloud of Iesus Christe washeth our soules? A. No, for our soules can not be clensed wt any matter as our bodyes. But thys bloude maketh me cleane, because ye Iesus Christe hath shed it for satisfaction and full recom∣pence of my sinnes. Q. 9. Is there then anye difference betweene the water of Baptisme, and common water? A. No, as concerning the matter and sub∣stance (for it is alwayes water) but there is very great difference, as concerning the vse: for the common water serueth to wash and make cleane our bodilye filthinesses, and the water vsed in Baptisme, is a sacra¦ment, of the washing of our soules. The ninth section.
Q. 1. What see you in the supper? A. The bread and the wine, which is there giuen and receiued according to the ordi∣naunce and institution of God. Q. 2. What doth this breade and this wine signifie vnto you? A. The bread signifieth to me, the bodye crucified for mee, and the wine signi∣fyeth vnto mee, the bloudde shedde out for me. Q. 3. To what end? A. To testifie vnto me, & to assure me, that euen as this bread & this wine, are ordei∣ned for y• maintenance and nourishment of this life, so our Lorde Iesus Christe hath giuen his body & his bloud for me, and gi∣ueth himselfe to mee, to the ende that from him, as from a fountaine there may flowe vnto me eternal life. Q. 4. Are this bread and wine our spirituall nourishment? A. No, but they signifie vnto vs that from whence verye eternall lyfe it selfe proceedeth, that is to saye, from hym which hath suffered his death and passion to take away the cause of our death, that is to say sins, and to renue vs vnto eternall life, thorow a spiritual liuelines, which re∣steth and remaineih in him. Q. 5. Is there anye difference betweene the
bread and wine vsed in this sacrament, and common bread and wine? A. No, as touching the matter and sub∣staunce (for it is alwayes bread and wine) but there is very great difference, as con∣cerning the vse: for ordinary and common meates are appointed for the vse of thys present life, but this sacrament is ordey∣ned to signify and seale vnto vs our spiri∣tuall and euerlasting nourishment. The tenth section. Q. 1. Wherefore hath the Lorde ordeined & instituted two signes in his holy supper see∣ing that in Baptisme there is but one only? A. To assure vs that he doth not feede vs to the halues, but wholly, being not onelye our meate but also our drinke. Q. 2. Where is Iesus Christ nowe according to his humane nature? A. In heauen, from whence he shall come to iudge the liuing and the dead. Q. 3. By what meanes can you then whiche are on the earth receiue him? A. As I receiue with my hande and my mouth the sacrament, that is to saye, that bread and that wine, for the nourishment of thys bodye, euen so by the vertue, and power of the holye Ghoste, I doe inwardly and in my soule receiue and im∣brace thorowe faythe our Lorde Iesus
Christ, verye God and verye man, that by him I may liue eternally. Q. 4. Doe they which haue no fayth receiue Iesus Christ in the supper? A. No, for Iesus Christe is not receaued but by fayth, yet doe they in deede receiue the sacrament, but to theyr condemnation. Q 5. How so? A. Because that they make no difference betwene common bread and cōmon wine, and that which is the sacrament of the bo∣dy and bloud of Iesus Christe, whom they reiect and throw from them thorowe theyr vnbeliefe. Q 6. Howe must a man prepare himselfe t come worthily to the supper? A. If he haue true repentance of the life yt is passed, confessing their sins before God, and amending them towards God and his brethren, so much as in him lyeth, wt aful deliberation & purpose to be better in time to come, and embracing Iesus Christ by a true fayth in his promises and sacraments for the alone and only sauior, Q. 7. But hath Iesus Christe left it vnto our liberty and choyse▪ whether we will go to the supper, or not goe to it? A. In forbidding men to resort thether vn∣worthily, he commandeth all them whiche haue iudgement and discretion, to prepare
themselues yt they may repaire worthily to it. God giue vs all grace to go to it to his honor and glory, and to our saluation. So be it. A prayer to be sayd of children before they study their lesson. VVherein shall a child addresse his vvay, in guiding him∣selfe according to thy vvord O Lorde Open our eyes and we shal consider the merueilous things of thy lavv. Giue vs vnderstanding, and vve shall keepe thy lavv, yea vve vvil I keepe it vvith our hart. O Lord whych art the fountaine of al wisedom and knowledge, seeing it hath pleased thee to giue vs the meane to bee taught in our young age, to knowe how to guyde our selues holily and honestly, in all the rest of our life hereafter to come, let it please thee also to lighten our vnderstanding (vvhiche of it selfe is blind) that it may comprehend and receiue that doc∣trine and learning, which shall be taught vs, confirme also and strengthen our memory to keepe it vvel: dis∣pose our harts to receiue the same vvillingly, & vvith such desire as is mete, least that thorow our vnthank∣fulnes, the occasion that thou dost offer vnto vs, shuld perish and be lost. To this end powre vpon vs we pray thee thy holy spirit, which is the spirite of all vnder∣standing, truth, iudgement, vvisedome and learning, which may make vs able to profit so wel that the pains vvhich shall be taken in teaching vs be not lost. And to whatsoeuer study, that we apply our selues, graunt that vve may refer it to the true and right end, vvhich ys to knovv thee, in our Lord Iesus Christe, that vvee may haue ful trust of our saluation and eternall lyfe in thy grace, and may serue thee vpryghtlye and purely, accordyng to thy good pleasure, so that al that which we shal learn, may be an instrumēt to helpe vs therto. And seeyng that thou doest promyse to giue wyse∣dome
to the little ones, and such as are humble, and on the otherside to confound the proude in the vanity of their wits and vnderstandinges: & likewise to make thy selfe knovvne vnto them that bee of an vpryghte hart, & on the otherside to make blinde the wicked & vngodly, vve besech thee to fashion and subdue vs to true humility, that thereby vve may be made apte to learne & obedient also, first vnto thee, secondly vnto our superiors which thou hast appoynted to gouerne and teach vs. Moreouer vve hartily prayer thee to dis∣pose and frame our harts, vnfeynedly to seeke thee, for saking all fleshly and euil affections, & that we may novv in such sorte prepare our selues, to serue thee hereafter in that estate & calling, which it shal please thee to ordeine & appoynt for vs, vvhen vve shal come to age. Heare vs O father of al mercy, thorovv our Lord Iesus Christe. So be it. PSALME. 25 The Lord reuealeth his secretes, vnto them which feare him, and maketh them to knowe, hys couenaunte. Imprinted at Lon∣don by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creede Lane, at the signe of the GILDEN TVNN. nere vnto Ludgate. Cum priuilegio. Anno. 1578. HS printer's device of Hugh Singleton
