20397 99850486 15694
THE SCHOOLE of honest and vertuous lyfe: Profitable and necessary for all estates and degrees, to be trayned in: but (cheefely) for the pettie Schollers, the yonger sorte, of both kindes; bee they men or Women. by T. P. Also, a laudable and learned Discourse, of the worthynesse of hono∣rable Wedlocke, written in the be∣halfe of all (aswell) Maydes as Wydowes, (generally) for their singuler instructi∣on, to choose them vertuous and honest Husbandes: But (most specially) sent writtē as a Iewell vnto a worthy Gentlewoman, in the time of her widowhood, to direct & guide her in the new election of her seconde Husband. By her approoued freend and kinseman. I. R. Imprinted at London by Richard Johnes, and are to be solde at his shop ouer against S. Sepul∣chers Church without Newgate. Printed in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth Vide P. 41.
To the worshipfull Maister Richard Euerard: Thomas Pritchard wisheth continuance of health, wealth, and prosperitie. IF benefites bounti∣fullye beestowed, may whet dulled senses, or taste of receaued curte∣sies, spurre the cowarde Knight to hazard him selfe: I haue good cause & occasion to venture the reproch of people, rather than to suffer so lyberall a Micenas to lose deserued fame, or my selfe to bee spotted with ingratitude, the Mother of vices: which the Romanes so spited and enuied at, that they atta∣ched therwith, were as fellones fully exe∣cuted to death. Supposinge therfore, it to bee least approchfull, to set foorth to the gaze of people my ignorance, and to par∣ticipate with the world my silly sentences: than that, my ingratefull acceptions of your liberalitie, should either impaire so
laudable a qualitie, grafted in your mind, or stop the same to my Successors. Wher∣fore, though that your Worships children bee so vertuously trayned vp, that they neede not the instructions of so base a Booke: yet J hope it may reclayme the rude rablement of people, to lead a better & more lawdable lot of life. Whose re∣conciliacion to Vertue, can not bee, with out your condigne praise, that disdayned not to patronise my trauell, tendring the same. Which though grosely fumbled vp, yet your curtesie is such: that you wil con∣sider of my meaninge, and weye good will more than this papers Pamphlet, decla∣ringe the same. Alexander Kinge of Macedonia did not weye the cup of wa∣ter which Synaetes imparted vpon him, but his good wil, so J trust my pretence wil bee accepted more than the thing J greete you with all. And therupon I commit you to Gods good gouernment. Yours to commaund. Tho. Pritchard.
What is an honest lyfe: of what it consistes, and what it profiteth. Chap. 1. AFter that Christe created all thinges, for the behoofe of man: as Brastes, and Birdes: fishe and fleshe, in the precinctes of the wicked worlde: Lastly, our Sauiour made man, gouer∣nour of all: and as a Stewarde, to vse these his creatures, to satisfie nature, not lust: to set forth his glorye, and not to feede his gluttony: to publishe and blaze abroade Christ, his potencie, and not like epicures impiously to abuse the same. The better to busie him in his stewardship, to the intente hée might giue iust ac∣compt therof, to his Creator: hée hath, neede of the habite of honestie, to exile traiterous inuentions, and to bathe him selfe in the Fonte of Vertue, to abandon conspiring affections. And hauing flighted the tumult of vices, hur∣liburly of sinne, and qualitied the flames of the fleshe, to addicte him selfe to lawfull and honest lot of lyfe. Which integritie of liuing, is nothing els but in a trade of loyall lyfe, to passe brutish creatures, and to apply our selues to that, which is to God gladsome, and associate to Vertue. Vertue, is to flée vice, and to kéepe your selues in the bandes and bulwarkes of honesty. Sainct Austine teacheth vertue, to bée the prescribed meane to liue well and godly. Mantuan the Poet, largely deciphereth, what vertue is, vttereth these wordes in her owne person. I vigent vertue, do dash the doome of fierce fortune, the scourge of vices, the banisher of iniquitie, doo dight and trim the mortall, with the fine and fresh hue, of perpetuitie: I lyst and exalte man, made of dust and ashes, to participate ioyes immortall. The Sunne can do nothing with his bright beames, and splendant goulden Banner: the Moone with her light, and christall clearenesse: the Starres with their
twinckling glances, without my presence: If I perishe, mis∣chiefe mounteth, gluttonie gloryeth, vice vaunteth, pryde is pampred, fayth infeebled, religion contempned, and fi∣nally, for demure manners, miraculous murders: for pietie, prauitie: and for heauenly contemplation, inuasion of wic∣kednesse. Plutarch, in his Booke of bringing vp youthe, showeth the effectes thereof, defininge her, vnder the habite and title of Philosophie: sayinge, yt Vertue doth declare what is good and godly, foule and fulsome: how wée should be∣haue our selues towardes our Parentes, our elders, straungers, Officers, & Magistrates, fréends, seruaunts, and all others. As to giue God duetifull reuerence, to Parentes humble obeysance, to Magistrates lawful obe∣dience, to bee modest to inferiors, not puffed with pryde in prosperitie, nor desperate in pouertie, not prone to pleasure, méeke and gentle, still obseruinge the merry meane, adiudged vertue. Lucillius that passing Poet, sayth that it is a vertue, to know the good from the bad: to decline from vicious and vnsatiable affections, and to labour to attayne honour, through newnesse of life, and amendment of manners. The deuision of Vertue. CIcero, that gay Gardener, and cunning Arborer, hath grafted vpon this Trée of Vertue: foure braue bran∣ches: out of which, bud many springing sproutes, very necessary and spectant to perfection, and heale the mise∣rable maymes of mans life. That is, Prudence, Iustice, Temperance, and Fortitude: which foure, as in appella∣tions diuerse, so in proofe and practice dissonant. Yet the true genitors of honest lyfe, and meane methode, of lyuing, which Macrob. witnesseth: in his Booke De som∣nio Scipionis, particularly imparting, to each of them: a seueral goodly guist of action. To Prudence, polliticke conueiance, and duetifull di∣rection
to wil, that is good and godly, sincere and sauery: and to dissanull nought and noysome, and with diuine prouidence, to be prompte and ready, to shunne iminent daungers. To doughty Dame Fortitude, it is as duety addicted, not to feare fainting fittes, not to be dismayde, but with cri∣minous assertions, or fulsome factes, not to bee lulled in the Cradell of Securitie, in pleasaunt prosperitie: nor yoked with misery, to pant in pouertie. This Fortitude is not mans might, or stubberne strength of the armes onely, but it must growe to the habite of vigent Vertue, and bee garded and gouerned, with preceptes of reason, inuironed with the institutions of milde manners, and merry meane, which shall yéelde the possessor magnani∣mitie in countenaunce, constancy in assertions, and co∣uenauntes, bountiful magnificencie, and vaunted valy∣antnesse. To Lady Temperance, is adioyned this sway in mans life, that the possessor may not couet thinges worthy re∣pentance, nor perpetrat the desert of Peccaui: inthraling his affections to the yoake of reason. This loyall Lady, hath to her associate and handmaydes, Modestie, Shame∣fastnesse, Abstinence, Chastitie, Honestie, Moderation, and Sobrietie. To the péereles pearle Iustice, is highted for gallaunt guift, to contribute to euery man his owne: from which bewtified braunch of Vertue, these iolly Gemmes, haue originall: Innocencie, Amitie, Concorde, Pietie, Religion, Affection, and Humanitie. Cicero, the Father of fluent and filed Phrase of speake∣inge, attributeth to this vertue, many pretty profitable properties. First, not to iniury any man, without great adhibited cause and occasion. Secondarily, to vse things common, commonly: not diducting them to priuate profit or pleasure. This accordinge to Tullie, is grounded on Grauitie, founded on Fidelitie, and seasoned with Sobrietie.
Lactantius, in his sixt Booke, alotteth to Iustice, double function: first, to annexe, and to vnite vs to God, through Religion. Secondly with man, through pure passions of pittie and humanitie. The rewarde of Vertue or honest lyfe. IF any dowltish dullarde, bée so blinde and bleared of sight, so incarcered, in the Denne of darkenesse: that hee can not see the bright beames, and royall rewarde of vertuous and honest life: I wish him to know the prince∣ly presence of Vertue, and the honourable harbor of Ho∣nestie, to bathe there tenante in the blisse of felicitie, to aduaunce him by the goulden gay guifte of promotion, in this worlde: And as the péerelesse Poet Virgill sayth, in the world to come, to ascende the starry skie, to haue per∣petuall fruition of ioyes euerlasting. Lactantius to the vertuous, ascribeth this renowmed rewarde, to bée able for to infring and repell, the outra∣gious onset of wofull wrath, to moderate and bow backe with the bit of honesty, the sore assaults of lecherous lust, to dash the diuelish dint of dreadfull desires. Plautus writeth that vertue excelleth all thinges: lyfe, libertie, health, wealth, depende and haue their beeinge therof. Claudianus extollinge vertue: affirmeth, that shée hath no néede of Torches or lightsome Linkes, to bewray her splendant hue in the night, nor store of glistering gould in the day, to clime the stears of preferment: but houering on the stately stages of dignitie and honour: inuiteth her folowers, to taste the blisfull fruite of their toyle and tra∣uell. Will not this hale the Howlets that delight in darkenesse, to the embrasing of vertue, and inspired with her verdure, by litle and litle attaine the perfection ther∣of. Labour for light: damne your darke delightes, and toyle for this treasure.
The hinderance of vertue, and how it is attayned. Chap. 2. THe famous and learned, trowpe of Philosophers, dis∣coursing of fclicitie, composed of multitude of vertues, as of singular simples, haue interdicted the studentes of Dame Vertue, of the contaminatinge contraries, or ex∣treames therof. Among whom, Cicero, a princely piller of Philosophie: commendinge Abstinence, the freendly forderer of vertuous actions, bountifully abandoneth, and carefully condempneth poysoninge pleasures, as baytes of vice, and heaper of harmes, and sayth: the vo∣luptuous man can not atchiue to the tipe of Vertue. Valerius Max. sworne to Abstinence, auoucheth that the Cittie cituated on pleasure, drowned with delight, can not long last nor maintaine her liberties, and fréedomes. Lactantius Chronicled in his fourth Booke, thrée waies to come by Vertue: the first, to abstaine from lewde la∣bours and wicked workes: The second, from wilful wic∣ked wordes, corrupting good manners: The third, from the muse and meditacion of mischéefe. Hee that ascen∣deth the first steppe of these steares, is adiudged iust: the seconde, vertuous: the thirde, sheweth his ascendent to haue the perfect patron of God, his Creator. Horace commending Abstinence, sayth, Vertue to bee nothing but abstaining from vice: therfore, leauing it a Guide to the Goddes vertue, my Penne posteth to Pati∣ence, as an instrument neate and necessary, to accost this habite of Vertue, and honest tried trade of life. As the ruddy Rose odoriferous in swéete smell, is growinge in brierie bushes, harming the hand that catcheth thereat: So is Dame Vertue placed in difficulte Dales, and can not bee obtained without great labours, sweates and ti∣ringe trauels. Which (as Hesiodus witnesseth) as the pearcing prickes of Briers, perswade the lustned eyes to leaue the Rose, for feare of hurt happeninge therby: so continuall contemplation of goodnes, still in conflict with
vice, laborious abstinence, and the wirisomnesse of mind, will insinuat the student, to passe and poste to pleasures: yea, that few or none without curidus caueats of enchan∣ryng enfisements, can persist and perfeuer, to arine in the puissant princely Porte of Vertue, and heauenly ha∣uen of Honestie. In saylyng to this Harbour, the Philo∣sophers spent more Water, than Wine, addicted to due diet, not to delicious delightes. Laertius, in his booke of the liues of Philosophers, re∣porteth, euerie discipline and royall regiment of lawfull life, to want thrée thinges, nature, documents, good prac∣tice: that is to wit, science, and exercise. First to discourse of witte, and wise disposition, Plato proueth, that pregnant wit, is an instrument of Vertue, and that there is no parfect prudent parson, but that ex∣céedyngly excelleth all others. And if you peruse the law∣dable liues of famous Philosophers, euen there shall yée finde, princely prayse highted their personages, and gal∣lantly glorified for pregnancie of wit. Of which Lactan∣tius appoynteth two fréendly functions: the one, to be∣wray falsehood, and couert conueance: the other, to fur∣ther fidelitie and truthe. And by witte, wée must differre from brutish beastlinesse, whose heads heaped with hu∣mours, respect only present pleasures. Tully, toyling to know and finde out the most apparant proofes of Vertue in man, faith, in his Tusculanes questi∣ons, it to bee wit: And if the Selles and Sellers of the remples of the Head, be seasoned with the Odoriferous verdure therof: the pure and perfit patterne of vertue must sprynge therefro. The Philosophers would not almost admit to the Lore of learnyng any, but sutche as by proofe passed, and by tri∣all had the trimme treasure of wit. Quintilian, saith: That if a man lacke this harbin∣ger of Vertue, preceptes and rules of discipline, auayle as mutche, as Tillage, to bare and barren soyle: whose fruite and increase, may not counteruayle the toyle and tranell therein.
Erasmus, whom tracte of time made more suttle sear∣cher of ingenious impes, saith: That the dull witted boye, may by diligence, whet it, to attempte excellente exploytes of Discipline: For it is apparant, that Nature may be repelled (though Horace holde the contrarie.) For Demosthenes, blab and bleat of spéeche, by puttynge of certayne stones into his mouthe, to cure and fill vp the imperfection and mayme of Nature, attayned to the vr∣terance and sugred spéeche of honored Orators, through adhibited déede and diligence. To mitigate and alaye, the rayge of this colde comfort, touchyng the sléepie pated persons: wee reade that Isocrates, had two schollers, E∣phorus, and Theopompius, the one, ingenious and egre to attayne knowledge: the other, néedyng the spurre, to aspier the attempted scope. To conclude, this tracte of witte, and praysed promptnesse of conceiuynge: by soun∣dest sentence, and by opinion of Philosophers, I gather, the soonest ripe, to be sooner rotten: and the hard headded felow, hauing attained the habitte of perfection, and edge of excellencie, to passe him whome firste, I braued with bragges. Erasmus, highly had in honour, for his know∣ledge and iollie iudgement in faculties, by reason of brode blowen blaze of commendation: had a boye of ripe witte, presented by his fréendes, to declayme beefore him. The fréendely furtherers of the buysied boye, ex∣pectynge his iudgement, were answered by him: Timely ripe, timely rotten. But, the ouerthrow of ripe conceauinge, commeth by securitie, and ouer great confidence therein: for trusting to the maturitie of wit, they so longe linger in laysinesse, that either they amit and quenche the qualitie thereof, or with strayning it with extraordinarie meanes, mayme and marre the same. ¶ Of instruction. AS an Horse or Coult, be he neuer so tame and apte of nature, cannot serue yt vse of man without breaking:
So a man, bée hee neuer so ingenious and inritched, by wit and ripe conceauing, without preceptes and institu∣tion can not scale, nor ascend the high and haughtie Hil of Pernassus, to bée acquainted with the Ladies of lear∣ninge, nor climbe the craggie Cliffes and clymates of knowledge: which position, Cicero sincerely fortifieth saying: That instruction doth corroborate and fortifie the gyfte of wit and nature, and for that cause, Gentilis com∣maunded first, Schooles to bée errected in Athence, a Cit∣tie in Greece, that the couente of youth, might bee there instructed. Aristippus a learned Philosopher, compared the vnlear∣ned to a stone: and béeing demaunded by a foolish Father, what learninge auayled his Sonne: hee answered, that a stone had no place in their Theators, or place of prehe∣minence, meaning the vnlearned. The Ethnickes, studious of erudicion and knowledge, kept an instructor in their houses, to trayne vp their youthes in the pleasant pathe of Nurtur and knowledge: which thing, so well lyked the Athenians, that it was, as Law enacted, that the children, which were not traded vp in erudicion, ought not to fauour their Fathers, or ten∣der curtesies to them, inféebled with age. To attaine the treasure of Vertue, and gaine the glad∣fome guift of Discipline, there bee two kindes of instruc∣tions: one mute, the other sowndable: mute, as when wee study our selues, discoursinge without wordes, the carued carracters, and woorkes of others: The other, when the instructor or teacher, with sounding voyce, ope∣neth the misteries and hidden hardnes, of others labors. This last manner of instructing, the learned lore, aboue others commend: Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, and Plato, his Peregrinations, sayling ouer Surge and Sirtes of Seas, to heare Lectures, verifie the same: who were not content to like of their priuate studies. Least I should spend my winde in waste, in discoursinge of in∣struction, and passe the Campe, in which, youthes and o∣thers
ought to bee trained vp: I decipher them as folo∣weth. Pithie Poemes, heroyicall holsome Histories, Prince∣ly Philosophie, sacred and sincere Scripture, the salue of sinfull sores, and pathe to Paradice. The gracious Grecians, thought (only) Poets to be wise, and therfore in honest Poetrie did first season the tender ingenie of Impes, the better to aspire to furder felicitie of Science. And Horace, singularly séene in the art, in his Epistles, exhorteth Children to be first instructed in Poetrie, as an Instrument necessary, to pollice and file away the im∣perfection of lisping nature, and that it soweth and plan∣teth in their heedy heades, the seede of Sapience, wise∣dome, and knowledge. Diodorus sayde, it was a fine and famous thinge, for man by others crymes and faultes, to cure him of that care, and medicine and heale his infirmities, which the reading of Histories, Monumentes, déedes of other men shall guide vs to doo. Baeroaldus sayth, that Histories inflameth a man to ho∣nestie, enamoreth him with vertue, reprooueth the wic∣ked, and exileth vice. To stand vpon choyce of Philosophie, the very Ecimo∣logie of the worlde, which wée interpret and conster, a Louer of knowledge, or imbracer of wisedome, foretel∣leth all Bookes of that noble Science, to bee spectant to surueye the lyfe of man: As the Ethickes of Aristotle, impugning the rebellion of vice, brydling the frensie fits of flaming flesh, with the bit of Nurture and manners, The Pollitickes instructe vs, called to the function of a Magistrate, to minister Iustice, to the exilement of vice, and inhaunsing of Vertue. Lactantius writ a worthy worke of Diuine institutions. Erasmus, of the institutinge of a christian Prince? with infinit others, commodious for the regiment of the lyfe of man.
Lastlye, fitly furnished, and decently decked with institutions of the surueyed Sciences: wee must imploy our selues, to viewe the valleys of sacred Scriptures, which teache vs to know our Sauiour, and him onely to worshippe: which as Lactantius writeth, is the true Philosophie. Pouertie impareth not Vertue. EXperience hauing taught mée, a silly sort of foolish fel∣lowes to withdraw them selues from studie, to heede handy craftes, I thought by excellent examples, and ra∣ted reasons, to heale that passion of infirmitie, and to for∣tifie their faynting fittes, the better to abide the yoake of knowledge. Apuleus sayth in his time, none became famous, but such as were annoyed with nakednesse, and cloyde with carefull dyet, from the houre of birthe: And hee boldely blazeth this commendacion of Pouertie, that in those dayes, it was the builder of Citties, the maintainer of Equitie and Science. Wée reade a worthy example of Cleanthes a Philoso∣pher, who pinched with pouertie in youth: in the night season haled vp water in Buckets, which hée sould in the day to maintaine his studie. If our English Fathers were so inflamed with the loue of Learninge: no doubte our Realme royally ruled, would bée a precious patron to all Europe. Seneca, sayth, Vertue to haue a sting, meaning labour, which plucked awaye by sufficiencie of knowledge, ba∣theth the bier in blisse. Here may rise a question, whither the vnlearned may attaine Vertue or no, the which question is resolued by Tullie in his Orations, who saith that hee had societie with a multitude of men, both godly, honest, and vertu∣ous, yea, altogeather voyde of knowledge: I annexed
this Sentence to my matter, least desperation should bee infixed, & gréeuously ingrafted in the harts of vnlear∣ned dottrels. Of vse and exercise. IF a man bee armed with the fine furniture of boun∣tifull Dame Nature, beautified with the gaye Gownes of Witte, and Disposition: yet if Diligence bee dismiste, and Practice put aside, all is vaine, for the beeinge and continuance of Vertue, is in action and exercise. Cicero, whose doughty diligence, aduaunced to dignitie and high calling among the Romaines: instructeth vs in his Rhetorickes, that preceptes and rules of disciplines anayle nothinge, without daily diligence and paynefull practice therof. Lactantius, in his thirde Booke, writeth that Artes bee learned and layde for, that gotten, agréeable practice and conuersation may arise therof. For Tullie sayth, it is a small praise to know Ver∣tue, and not to doo therafter. Man mindefull of Ver∣tue, and studious thereof, must imitate the busie Bées, who in flagrante Sommer, flee abroade ta∣stinge of diuerse Flowers, and of each pickinge reléefe, store vppe, and heape much Honny: So ought a man exercise him seife daily, vntill he hath gotten the trimme treasure of Vertue and Learninge, and the better to at∣tayne to your purpose: in youthfull yeares, vse foure wayes. The first, in readinge, selecte and picke out of lear∣ned Authors, fine filed Phrases, and least the treasurs house of Man, I meane his memory, bee robbed therof, haue them Chronicled in the skirtes of a Booke. And so of euery Science. Which thinge Plynie practiced, of whom writeth his Vnckle, the second of that name.
The second is, to follow Macrobius Preceptes, teaching vs to vse and exercise the good, and to banish the euill: for what so euer are written. they bee for our learninge: for as the meate lodged in the mouth, or clungde in the sto∣macke, feedeth not the body, nor hath not concoction, for lacke of naturall heate, to disgest the same into good blood and mayntenance of the body. So doth not reading profit, except it be conuerted to the behoofe of the weale publick, neither is the students conscience discharged: For Tullie saith in his Offices, that wee bee borne partly to plea∣sure and profit our fréendes, our Parentes, and most of all, our natiue Countrey. The thirde, is to do some thing (worth the while) euery day, as Appelles the conning Paynter, who though cloyed and ouercharged with a heape of hindraunces, yet daylie drue a line, and paynted some precious protrature, wor∣thy fame. Hesiodus sayth: Many littels makes a mickell. Ney∣ther must wee greedily gapinge, gulpe vp knowledge to bury it in our bellyes, as churles doo their substance and money: but imploy it so, that the Innocente may reape thereby vtilitie and saluation: and wee must make flow speed, accordinge to Augustus Caesars Adaige, least before wee be fully grounded, wee babble to draw others to er∣rors, a cause of sundry sectes in England this daye, more is the pittie. It is far better, by dilligence to reade a litle well, and with addisement, than running (as they say) at randon, voyde of reason, to talke of the Moone shine in the water, supposinge though their heads bee filled with humors of vaine glory, that they perceiue not their doultish delights and vanitie of speeche: that others of sound iudgemente, will not condempne them as vayne glorious bablers. I can compare suche fellowes to a bragginge Paynter, who in the presence of Appelles, cheefe of the Science, brau'd it out with bragges, that sodainly & in the twinck∣linge of an eye, hee had made a fine well proportioned
Image: Appelles knowing his singlenes of skill, answe∣red: Such paultry protratures, thou caust make ynough: than viewing it, sayd: it was doone quicke ynough, if wel ynough. That sage saying of Cato the wise, may abate and qua∣lifie the hot courage of ouer hasty Ministers now a daies: which presse to preache, before they haue the ground of their worke, or know the foundation of true religion, pa∣tronised by our royal and gracious Quéene? How sprang vp sedicious sectes in the Church, but through hastie im∣pudent bablers, presuminge to goe to Pulpit when the Carte cryed for them. The fourth kinde of exercise, Philelphus sayd, Cato the wise sage Senat to haue vsde: which was at night to re∣peat and suruey his trauell that daye, and to require ac∣compt of his owne reading: and it was decréede amonge the Lacedemonians, that the Table couered and meate brought and layde theron, that the Maisters and cheese of euery Cittie, should call the youthes in, and demaund and exigate, what they had profited that day: and hee that had doone nothing, was barde their company, as vnworthy to eate. Apuleius wisheth men, and specially Churche men, and Schollers, with the studentes of Vertue: to imi∣tate the nature of the Shéepe, which at night incarcered with hurdels, and closets, chue the kud: yea all the grasse eaten and geathered that day: which chuynge, yéeldeth a second fruite or milke to the shéepe Maister: so should euery man doo of his reading: for at night they should cal it to minde, to imploy it to the seconde vse or profit, that is, to the common wealth to edifie the vnlearned people, which ignorantly run headlong to vice. What decent behauiour, Vertue, and honestie is to bee obserued in our proper persons, and in euery age. Chap. 3. MAcrobius sayth, that Vertue doth consiste in two things, that is, in honest behauiour and show of him
selfe, and in godly disposition towardes others: for a man must of necessitie be able to gouerne himselfe, before hée be admitted and thought worthy to haue submission of o∣thers. First, we must bridell our owne licentious lewde liuing, and inthrall to the yoke of reason, our furious af∣fections, erre wée bee highted to the dignitie of the facred seate of a magistrate. Herevpon, a wise man, espiynge a wanton witlesse magistrate, spurd a question to Tha∣les Milesius the Philosopher: Who was a kinde kyng and worthie his seate? He answered: He that gouerneth wel him self. That euery one may learne to rule him selfe, I wish these preceptes folowynge to bée obserued, and im∣printed in the plotte of Memorie. First, that a man be addicted to scilence, more than to talke: for taciturnitie argueth wisdome: and bablyng be∣wraieth a foole. Macrobius sayd, a Philosopher to make as greate a signe and shoe of Learnyng by scilence, as by talke. Apuleius doth write, that Pythagoras, a singuler instructer of youth, was wonte, first to season the twat∣lyng tungues of his disciples, with the vertue scilence. Socrates, demaunded, how man might become wise? He adiured the person to obserue two preceptes: the one to huysht rather than to speake: the other, for to learne how to speake. Dame Nature prouident of the vertue scilence, and of the consequent commodities thereof, incarcered our tun∣gues in a Turret, inuironed with sharpe téethe, to re∣uenge, if like witlesse wiues it should miscarie to annoy any man, with staynyng hue or blottes of defame. And wée haue two eares and one tongue, to heare more than wée should vnadnisedly blabbe abroade. The Romaines, embracers of this vertue, had erected in their trim Temples, lofted on Theaters Angerona Goddesse of Scilence, with her lippes seard vp. And the Egiptians so honored Harpocrates, God of taciturnitie, that his princely protrature, was painted in euery house with his singers lockyng his lippes.
Xenocrates, scilent in companie, was asked the cause of his sadnesse & scilence? Hee shapte this answer: That there with hee was neuer annoyed, but inconuenience accident by talke, graueld him daily, and duely. If a man bee spurred to speake: let him haue spéeche of thinges fit for the place, time, and company: Nexte, interrupt none in their talke, nor correct it, least thou be deemed a busie body. An other precept wée haue inioyned vs, to kepe that which is a meane and measurable order in our talke which Terence commendeth in his Comedie, called An∣dria, with these wordes: I thinke a meane to bee com∣modious in mans life, and worthy embracinge: therup∣on the learned sayde, Vertue to be the same, the which Horace doth confesse in his Epistles, saying: Est modus in rebus &c. Englished thus: In things ther is a merry meane, and bounds for to be kept, The which to passe or to impaire, no vertue may bee reapt. WHen the seauen wise Philosophers, imprinted their sapient and politicke Posies vpon the walles of the Senat house, Cleobulus Lyndus, one and chéefe of the number, with his fine fingers writ this sage Sentence: The meane is best in all thinges, as an instruction worthy aduertisement and impression in the memory of man. Another Caueat I will adioyne, that in talking wee doo not carpe nor quip some silly soule, as subiecte to vice or infirmitie, which other of sharper intelligence espie in vs: for Diogenes warned vs to exile our presence, that vice which wee reproue as foule and fulfome in an other. And Cicero sayth, that hee ought to be spotlesse, that with dire defame surueyeth others infirmities: If a man view both endes of the Wallet, he shalbe so ouer charged with the weight of vices packt behinde, that hee will not annoy with nippes, others of honester lyuinge: For it behocueth a man to pull the beame out of his owne eye, ere hee can espye the mote in his Brothers.
As annexed to this cryme, I admonish the gentle Reader that hee be setled in state, not pufte vp with the blissull blast of fawning Fortune, nor dolefully indure distresse, imitating Socrates: who was neuer mooued, to heare of his heauy happes, nor prowde, praysed for excellent ex∣ploytes. Plato was demaunded how a wise man was knowen? He answered: hée that is not angry, beeinge discommen∣ded, nor prowd for adhibited prayse. And why? because that pride and wrath bee the extreames of Vertue, and the faire mannered man, knoweth them not. If a man perpend and consider the euent of pleasure, and sawning blisse of froward Fortune, hee had more neede to follow the deede and dooinge of Hermolaus, who in prosperitie mourned, than others that glow and glory therein: For after faire weather, commeth rayne: and there is no such fulnesse, but after comes as great an ebbe. Fortune is variable, as appeareth by Camenus a ritche man, who so bathed him selfe in blisse, and aboundaunce of wealth, that hee neuer tasted of woe, or mischaunce. Vpon a time for repast, he went to see silly Fishermen castinge their Nettes, and fingering their trash to feede his humors, his Signet fell into the Sea: well sayd hée, now I know that euil Fortune doth raigne: The second day, as they drue their Nettes, they caught a goodly Cod, which for a rare and goodly guift, they imparted vpon the Gentleman: His Cooke gobbetinge the same, in his entrayles founde his Maisters Signet, who with excée∣dinge gladnesse, and chearefull grace, presented it to his Maister: who blinded with the blisse of Fortune, ioyfully receaued it, imparting vpon his Seruaunt a iolly Iuell, named, Nihil, and perswaded him selfe that Fortune so fauoured his Maistership, that hee could not miscarry in any exployte, or attempt, To bee fully resolued of desem∣bling Fortune: hee tooke a corde, I meane a Halter, and in a brauery, assayed how it became a ritch man, or how that gallant cheyne, would fit Fortunes heire or dandled
dottrell: standing vpon a stoole, Fortune burthened and laden with the care of this life, champion like, hee tisped his féete beside: Fortune frowning at his folly, suffered her long lulled lubber, to stranguish and hang to death. Thus ought wee to conceaue no pride in felicitis, nor dispaire in distresse and pouertie: It was wel and wise∣ly sayd of Plautus in Amph. that it séemed good to ye Gods, yt after pleasure, should succéed paine: as after labor, ease. This excellent example, may batter the buildinges of Fortune in our daies, and may disgrace them inhaunsed therby. Wherfore, let euery man labour to liue vertu∣ously, to the example of others: And as coye Curtezans and daintie Dames, haue their glistering Glasses to bee∣holde and correcte their attier, or cumly countenance, so should euery man haue a godly person, for a patterne to liue by, whose steps studied on, shuld guide him to vertue. Of the diuersitie of ages and yeares, and what manners is proper to them. KNowinge by the aduertisment of Terence, and other learned Authors, that change of yeares, requireth dis∣crepancy of manners, and alteration of condicions: I thought it to bee woorth the while, to Chronickle in the skirtes of this base Booke, the seuerall duties of all ages: Findinge in Authors, the yeares of man to bee deuided into sixe seuerall wayes, and manners of lyuing: I will anchore and annexe to them their proper functions. And first, to begin with Infancie, or Babeship, who for weakenesse of nature is not reformable, though sinfull: therfore we wil commit his gouernance, to the discretion of his Mother or Nurce. Next and second, is childehood, hauing the vse of speak∣ing, whose toungs and mindes like a Painters cloth, is fit for to receaue euery hue or colour. Wherfore their sen∣ces are to be seasoned with the verdure of Vertue, euen from their Cradels: for ye new vessel wil tast euer, or long of the first lickor: they must than be taught to prooue and
grow a Christian, as they doo in strength and yeares. Apuleius saydithe childe that prooueth strong in bones, by benefit of bountifull nature, and a Mouster in man∣ners, to be better vnborne, then to haue fruition of life to comaculat, with defame & vnperfect behauiour his pley∣fers & fréends. For one rotten shéepe annoyeth a thousād: In Greece it was vsed, that the Father & Maister, was punished for the childes offence, if fondly they fauoured crime committed, worthy chasticemente, and correction. Diogenes espying a Scholler playing the wanton, with his staffe beate his Maister. If pampering Parents, were at this day so executed, it would fare better with youthes and teachers. They will not follow the right path of education of children, set forth by Philel. who in his Booke of Education of children, in∣structeth foolish Fathers, & mad Mothers, to instruct their children to know God their Creator, to bee obediente to them in word and déede, to be humble to their Superiors, gentle to their equals, milde in manners, not teachinge thē, to bable, to lie, to be slothful, to go slouenly in their a∣parrel, vnwasht or fulsome any way, if vortuously they bée traded vp, béeing tender twigs, & impes, they must of necessitie grow to persection of manners in tract of time. The thirde age, is called of the Latenistes, Iuuentus, of Iuuo, for the childe passinge the time of seauen yeares, is able to ayde his Parentes, accordinge to the english of Iuuo, to ayd: In which, Quintilian writeth, that such as bee vsed in that time and yeares, to curious cates, con∣fectes, sweete meates, will euer looke for the same: and iudgeth that to be the cause of murthers, theftes, and ro∣beries: For youthes so delicately nusted, comminge to mans estate, wil by hooke or by crooke, come by and main∣taine the same: for such as be vsed to delicate diet, except good qualities adorne and boulster it out, their sugred lust will condempne their bodies. Wée reade of one Maxillus a Noble man, whose princely Parents know∣inge their Sonne to be borne to large liuinges, & print∣ly
possessions, deliciously dandled these auster auspring to mans state, without any good gouernance, or instruction: after the decease of his Parentes, rulinge by rigor, his subiectes, hatinge him for extremitie, perpetrated and doone to them, with force bannisht him his Lande: The poore Pilgrim vsed to fine fare, hauing not vnde, as the Latenistes say, fell to robbing, to maintaine daintines of dyet, and taken with the manner, was dampned to die: By this you may sée, that the assertion of learned Quintilian was true: that what so euer they bee vsed vn∣to, such they will still haue. In this age of Iuuentus, the youthes of the Romans, ac∣customed to hange vp vpon the Pinackles of their Tem∣ples, certaine colours, or laces: as Monumentes of pas∣sed age, and in tokens of virilitie taken on them, & were cloathed in faire white gownes, to signifie to the assem∣bled troupe and company, that they would leade a cleaner & sadder life, consonant to their attier & externall habite. This care the auncient Romans toke, to traine vp their children in Vertue, which may bee for the reformation of English Fathers, and fréendly fortherers of youth. As in all ages God is to bee honoured, Parentes obeyed, in∣structors heeded vnto, so I wish it in this, that beeing fa∣thers them selues, they may to Gods glory, & their fame, and ease, prudently trade vp their owne. The fourth is Adolescencie, hauing trod vnder foot .xiiij. yeares, in which wée begin to fantsie & séeke after world∣ly pleasures, as gallaunt Geluings, hounds, to rowse the lodged Bucke, or hunt the Haare and other exercises: in which yeares man may haue great gesse, & coniecture of nature and disposition: This age continueth till, xviij. in which all vices bee grafted and planted: as to haunt harlots, to proue prodigall, prowd, lasciuious: and to end: than be they careles, subiect to sayle with euery blaste: in this they haue most néede of the spurre, to reclaime them from vices: the vigor and feruency of youthfull Adosescencie is sutche, that it so inflameth their buisie
bodies, to lust, after transitorie trash: it so blindeth their bleared eyes, that moylyng and wilfully wallowynge in the lothesome lake of Letcherie, and sinke of sinne, they cannot see, nor discerne the pleasant pathe of righteous and godly conuersation. Euen as the fume of Claret wyne, boylyng through excesse in the stomacke, bleareth the eyes, so doth the hurtfull heate of adolescencie, that they cannot sée to diuerte, from the puddle of perdition. Therefore, it is pertinent to the true touche of maisters, and specially spectant to parents, whom care admonisheth to cure their infirmities: to warne them, if they be flo∣ted with séemelinesse of shape, comelinesse of complexion, proper compaction, and fine framynge of lustie limmes, that they trust not thereto. For Virgill, espyinge the pride of a boy, by meanes of his fayre face, said: My fayre boye, trust not too mutche to bewtie, for it soone fadeth: Bewtie is but a blast, there is no florishyng flower so vi∣gent and fresh of hue, but in space it decayeth. And Dio∣genes sayde: The fayre blacke was better accepted, then the fowle white: Meanyng the blacke man fayre condi∣tioned, and well nurtured, to be better than a bewtifull boy, fowly fedde, voyde of good behauiour. Socrates, a schoolemaster, had a Glasse in his Schoole, and euery day, hee caused his Schoolers to beholde their faces, saiyng to him that was fayre, sée that thy bewtie bée allotted and allied to like conditions. If the face had been hardly fauoured, he wisht him so to behaue himselfe, that the puritie of mild manners, should bewtifie and a∣dorne his euill fauourd visage. Glicon, lustely limmed, pretely proportioned, conceaued sutche pride therein, that he thought nature had forgot to moulde or make the like: forneying (sommond by neces∣sarie businesse) through a craggie and roughe waye, his stately steede fell, and so martird his fine liuely limmes, that the worste in the towne, felt & tasted of more ease than hée. Than did he inueigh against pride, and his folly excéeding therin. By these examples, all may learne, that
nothinge is eternall, but Vertue: Beauty soone blowen away, propernesse of parsonage presently perisheth. Fond Adolescencie, should therfore repose no credit ther∣in. As for ritches and wealth, who would brag of them? which Cicero sayth, be not worthie to bee the handmayde of Vertue. Cresus, Kinge of the Lidianes, was exceedingly ritche, but quickly quailed with pinching pouertie. Thales the Philosopher, was demaunded what was best for younge men to learne? He answered, that which they may bee commended for, and honoured in age: mea∣ninge Vertue and probitie of manners. Plato had this Posie, paynted vpon the Schoole wall: Happy is hee whom others harmes doo make to beware: And all his assembly of Schollers, should reade it duely and daily, to the intente, that they séeing others executed for lyinge, Fornication, Adultery, and other cryminall offences, might in reading the same, reforme themselues. Finding by reading, the Romanes to be studious of Ver∣tue, and carefull of rude Adolescencie, I finde that these youthes of these yeares, should be brought to the Market and there should see the vertuous honoured, and the vici∣ous punished, to encourage them to labour for vertue. The highe renowmed Hercules in his spring of yeares and manly might: beeinge brought to open assembly, to sée the royall rewarde of honest liuers, perswaded him selfe to doo thereafter, as Cicero writeth of him: and in time came so noble, that at this daye hee is not forgotten. Parentes ought to shew vnto their children, the state li∣nesse of their stocke, and how long it was boulstered out with Vertue: and that like wise it must bée vpholden by them: as wée reade of Eneas, in the 12. of the Eneidos, to haue wisht his sonne Ascanius, to learne vertue of him, and fortune of others: And if hée bee base of byrth, yea, the heyre of a Donge Carte, his Parentes may shewe, how many poore Peisantes and children, came by vertue to high honour and dignitie. As Dauid, from a Shepheard
to bee a kynge, with many others. They must follow Vertue, as Horace saith, in his Epittle: I bone quo virtus tua te ducit in pede fausto. Lastly, let prayse for well doing be geuen them. For Cicero saith: The minde of man to be mutche mooued thereby, and desirous thereof. Ouid, in his first booke De tristibus, saith: Prayse to yéeld no smale force, to spurre a man to goodnesse. Quin∣tilian and many others, be of the same opinion: therefore as due, dedicate it to them. As farre as knowledge will geue mee leaue, I will decipher theyr duties, dieted to them by the vertuous forerunners, as foloweth: Cicero ascribeth to them for a dutie, to obey theyr elders: graye heares must bée honoured. Secondlye, to chuse a vertuous Regimente of life, and trimme trade of liuynge: as Hercules did after the Roman fashion. Thirdely, to forget all childishnesse, and vanitie, remembryng his state, and that lewde behaui∣our, doeth not only annoy him, but also his freendes and folowers. The first age is Virilitie, in Latten called vir: to the whiche worde addinge a sillable tus, Vertue is denomi∣nated: as of Vir, Vertue. In this age, Vertue must a∣bounde, for yeres yelde courage: the minde is fit to fur∣ther out Vertue. In this age, man must be fully clothed with the habite of Vertue, as Prudence, Iustice, Tem∣perance, and Fortitude. Prudence, to instructe him to season his speeche there with, to recorde déedes doone: to dispose present affayres, & to suruey prudently all his bu∣sinesse in his vocation, to commendable ende. For it is the parte of an vndeseréete man to say, I had not wist: or to prooue a Troian wise, too late. Terence saith in Adelph. It is a poincte of wisdom, not to looke to present, but to foresee future casualties. Iustice shal schoole him to pacience, concorde, humanitie, & faith∣full dealyng, the grounde of Vertues. Temperance to obserue a meane in all enterprises, so∣brietie,
modestie and chastitie. Fortitude, not of body, but of couragious minde and va∣liaunt stout stomacke, to countenance forth the fury and fiercenes of fawning fortune, with a goodly grace beeing pittifully pinched with pouerty: & especially to kepe vn∣der foote wicked wrath, & odious indignatiō of mad mea∣ning mindes, with rules of reason: Plato adiudged him most valiaunte, that coulde gouerne him selfe spurred to anger. The last Caueat and rule, rated for virilitie, is so to be∣haue him selfe, as he wisheth to bée estéemed of, & accomp∣ted, and to labour to leade his life in loyall league of ho∣nestye, hatinge accesse to the hatefull hue, that dighteth man with dire defame, and spiteful spots of stayned stem of liuing. Olde Age béeing the sixt, and last leaue taking, for the excellent experience and trim tryall had in expired lot of life, must be so furnished with the guiding gouernaunce of Prudence, that they so compasse all and singuler their affaires, in such wise and subtill forte, as younge impes, may be instructed therwith. Cicero reporteth, that olde men in his dayes, were so expert and skilful in the common wealth, that the guided and gouerned the same, without any cause of strife, or oc∣casion of Warre. Romulus, the bountifull builder of Rome, chose an hun∣dreth olde Fathers, whom of Senectus he called Senates, to rule the same: that their christall like lyuinge, might bee an excellent example of prooued probitie to the youth thereof: and they as Princely pictures, and Images of honourable honesty, had highted homage of surueyinge the same. And although they knew this yrkesome age to bee rotten ripe, to season and dounge the ground, yet least the nature of man inthraled to the soueraignties of subtill Sathan, shoulde bee blinded therewith: they had {pro}rotrahed vppon their Iudiciall Seates, this Posie.
Remember man that thou art but dust, & daily drawest on thertoo: Further, there was an olde withered wretch paynted, resemblinge these bendinge backes to imbrace their Mother the ground, ready to the graue, that behol∣dinge it, they might not choose but execute Iustice aright. The view of olde age, kept them backe from pinching the poore, or iniuringe their Neighbours: they followed Horace his good aduice, for deprauinge them selues of worldly blisse, they gyrded them to their Graues, daily expecting the onset of dolefull Death. What decencie is due to God, and honestie towardes all men Chap. 4. THe true tutche of Vertue doth not consist in the knowledge and science therof: but in exhibiting the same, to reclaime the retchlesse, or rather the gracelesse Groomes, that flowrish the Flag of Vices, and sinne: And Cicero sayth, in dooinge there∣after, which maintayneth the stay and state therof: Sée∣inge therefore, that the excellent essence, and beautifull béeing of vigent Vertue, consisteth in action, and daily déede of honesty: I will shew how the actes of man haue their course, or ought to bee directed towardes God and man, and euery sortes of people. Vertuous obeysance towardes God. HOnesty towards God, martired for the wicked trans∣gressions of spightful meaning man, cruelly crucified, rufully racked, lothesomly lashed with stinginge stripes, by lewde forlorne sinners, consisteth in prayer, and pietie towardes his personage, in humble inthralment to his mercy, crauinge at his handes, to washe and mundises with the Well water of meare mercy, our soule soncke by reason of the fraight of sinne, and surge of sorrowes, to the pit of Perdicion, and gapinge gulfe of dread, and dampnation. To request with trickling teares, as Dauid
did, that hee of his benignant beautie, will rid vs of that heauy heritage and duetie due by our rufull race, runned from the stocke of Adam. Lactantius in his thirde Booke, ascribeth vs a seconde duetie, or seruice towardes our Sauiour: That is, to bée feruent in his cause, reuealers of true Religion, and pub¦lishers of practiced pietie: For this onely cause, and ser∣uice to God, were wee borne and created: was learning inuented, and all things fashioned and framed of Christ? In this is wisedome, as Liuie, and Valerius witnesseth: and as Paule teacheth, and all other thinges vayne and transitorious. ¶ Our dutie towardes man. CHriste in his Gospell saith: Loue the Lorde thy God, and thy Neyghbour as thy selfe: By which we learne, that the first duetie is to him wards: The second towards mankinde. Lactantius listning to the wordes of the Gospell, affir∣meth the first function of Iustice, to be due to God, the se∣cond to man: which beeinge so, if a man waxe cruell to his Brother, or tirannously tire him with vexacions, greefes, or other anxieties of minde: let him perswade him selfe, to bee forsaken of God his Sauiour, and to so∣iorne in the daungerous Denne of Dampnation: least wee should be ignoraunt of our duetie, Paule that preci∣ous Pearle of the Church, and posting Preacher of God, sheweth that wée must cloath the naked, harbor the va∣grant, bury the dead, féede the hungrie, visite captiues with comfort, giue drinke to the tirstie: which forrun∣ners of fayth, bringeth blisse to the faithful soule of man. In dooing these thinges, wee should prooue our selues se∣cond Gods, kinde and curteous, amorous fortherers of firme and fast fréendship one to another: abhorring fight∣inge, brawlinge, spite, enuie, mallice, as prouokers of death, and frying in the Fornace of Sathan.
Towardes our natiue Countrey. PHilolius in his fourth Booke affirmeth, that the olde Philosophers did set more by their natiue soyle, than by their Parentes: Therfore Plato sayd, that our Coun∣trey chalengeth part of our life: for we are borne to pro∣site the same, and that fiue wayes. The first in trauelling for the honour and ryal renowne of the same: The instinct and inclination of nature fore∣telleth the same. For if wee come in place where our Countrey is defaced by twatlinge mates, or detected of crime: Nature aduersant to such assertions, wil boyle in man, and the fresh floish of blood, appearinge in mooued moode, will bewray the same, and cause conflictes of par∣ties, as often times it hath beene knowen, the like acci∣dentes to come to passe. Secondly, in instructing the same with politicke coun∣cell, which I take to be addicted, as perticuler function to Preachers, who of nature ought to labour therein, for that their fréendes and Fathers, be inhabitantes therin. Thirdly to profit the same, by worde and deede to deli∣uer it from bondage and captiuitie. Fourthly, to defend the same with maine force, and to repell all violence and iniury offered thertoo. Lastly, to dye for the honour of thy Countrey, as there are many of the Romanes and others Chronicled in Liuie at this day, for the doughty defence, and sacrificed blood, in the behalfe of their natiue Lande, and that caused Horace to say: It is a méete thing tody for our Countrey: Why are valiaunt Captaines honoured? but that they be prompt, to hazard life and limmes, in the defence of their Countrey: as Sir William Drurie, who manfully raui∣shed the long beséeged Castell of Edenborughe of his mai∣denhood, an acte worthy highted honour, and perpetuall praise: Captaine Morgan, Captaine Chester, Captaine Barkley, Captaine Frobusher, with many other worthy English Captaines, and valiaunt Gentlemen that liue in flourishing fame, who so valianntly in forraine Landes, finished their conflictes and bloody broyles, that for seare
of their manhood, from time to time, forraine enemies haue sainted to mollest Englande with warres. Who hath not harde of the hardy enterprise of famous Frobu∣sher, and his fortunate company, who haue by their tra∣uell inritched this Lande, and Countrey. These and many such others, worthy warriours, set more by fame and immortallitie of commendacion, then fumbling feare, and losse of lyfe: By such came the Pro∣nerbe: It is better to dye with honour, than to liue with shame. Such (I say) bee the gay Gardes of Englande, their Countrey, beeing worthy members therof. By the ayde of these, the Churles sweate and frie at the fier, tasting of ease, when they fréese with frost, and chilling colde, in daunger of death. As Tullie sayde, that Rome was happy to haue such a consull as hee was: so maye Englande reioyce to haue procreated such valiaunt Cap∣taynes, to serue so good and gracious a Prince, as cause and occasion, at any time doth require. Dutie due to our Parentes. WEe are not onely admonished by prophane writers, to féede the humors of of our Parentes, but by sa∣cred Scripture and last true Testament of our Sauiour Christ, and ther in not onely in rated Law, set foorth by Moyses, the messenger of Iesus Christ, but in places de∣pending vpon the performable promises of Christ Iesn, and his meare mercy. Wherfore, who voyde of grace, gréeuously graueleth his Parentes, is not dampned to die the second death (onely) by the Law of the Lord: but is indangered of the fruition of his manifolde mercy pro∣mised to the séede of Adam. And as the children be bound to obey, and doo as dutie defineth to them, so Parentes must not will, but such thinges as be honest, vertuous, and lawfull and consonant to the word of God: For wee must leaue father & mother, and cléeue vnto the Lord, we read of many soolish fathers, who béeinge enemies to the Crosse & Gospell of Christ, at the houre of death, mooued vpon their blessinges, that their children should persist therin, a wicked and detestable decree of Parentes.
Parents ought not to commaunde their children, no∣thinge but that, whiche is honest, godly, and fit for their yeres and calling. And in sutche, God commaundeth vs to be seruiceable at their neede, in worde, in deede, to cure their care to lay, to reléeue them pressed with pouertie: and to beehaue our selues to adorne their callynge, and qualities, by our excellencie of liuynge, that their dulled humours, may be indulged by vs, and not impaired: that they may glory in vs, and not lothe vs: that they may ioy in our presence, and not wish our absence, or dissolution of life. Cicero saith, what is pietie and godlinesse, but obe∣dience to our parentes? Philellius writyng of the duties of children towardes their parents, saieth: although we can neuer repaye like curtesies, and bestowe vpon them, matchable benignant benefits: yet children must indeuour as farre as lieth in them, to regratifie them, as in seruyng, folowyng, and ac∣companyng with them, in executing their willes, in pati∣ence and performance: and if they commaunde thinges vnlawfull, vngodly, and vndecent: not to snarre or snap, quippe or carpe them for it: but modestly to perswade them, to the contrarie, with reformable termes, or to let it slippe, it passing with patience. ¶ Of sutche pnnishments as were appointed for vnobedient children. IT will not only decipher the losse of longe life promised by God, in his commaundements, by shamefull death: for disobedience perpatred towards our parents: whiche may sufficiently, reclayme vs therefro: but I will adde how odious a thynge it was adiudged, amonge the Hea∣thens and Insidels, to miscarie towardes them. Orestes Grecus, for killynge of his Mother Clitemnestra, was chaunged into a féende or furious vgly Monster: Nero was for the like déede doyng, counted a terrible Tyrant, worse than bruite beastes: for the Storke beyng a brutish
and sencelesse birde, wil féene her Dam and progenitors, ouer egged and worne with age. Amonge the Romanes, bée that molested his Parentes, or payned them to death, was wretchedly wrapped in a Bulles skinne, associated with a Serpent, and throwen into the deapth of the Sea. Duties towardes their Schoolemaisters. IVuenall a Poet, pregnant of wit, peerelesse for passing pleasanntnesse of Phrase, and Methode of Writinge, sayth in his Satyres, that many honoured their Maisters and teachers, as they did their Parentes: for as proge∣nitors giue by Gods ayde, bodily beeing, so teachers the liuely life of the minde, garnished with the garde and company of vertues, beautified with mildenes of man∣ners, and nurture. And truly if wée had nothingels, but flesh and bones, which wee haue by benefit of Parentes, wee should prooue inferior to sencelesse creatures: for what is it but the sincke of sinne, and open sepulchre and graue of greefes, without instruction and institutions of a Teacher? Wherfore next to Parentes, I finde them to bee reue renced of olde time, though now a dayes pee∣uishly paltred withall. Philelius commendeth obedience, & reuerence towards their Instructors, as a meane to obtaine Learning, and he explaineth it by the example of Troianus, the Emper∣our, who in all poinctes highly honoured his teacher. Plutarch, in so much that beeinge Emperour hee pre∣ferred him before him, in all places. Marcus Antonius, a Romane péere, so honoured his in∣structors, that beeing deade, hee had their Images made of glisteringe Golde, and erected in his Cubickle and Chamber. Cicero, the Father of fine Phrase, and fluent spéeche, maketh mencion in euery of his Bookes, of his Maisters, and furtherers in Learninge. These men knew what learning was, & what benefit
there was by it atchiued: but hammer headed horders of money, set more by a penny, than by the excellency of ly∣berall Artes and Sciences. To cast Pearles amonge Swine is plaine pittie, and not loyall liberalitie: I will compare them to Esopes Cocke, who in the Dounghill found a precious Pearle: hée looked vpon it, saw it cleare and bright, yet knew not the precious vse, and vallure thereof: Oh (sayth hée) I had rather haue one grayne of Barley, or other corne, than a bushell of these bright stones. So it fareth with the Countrey clownes, they had rather saue a penny, then profit their Children in learning: the reason is, because they know not how ex∣cellent it is, and that a man without learninge is an I∣mage of death. Of those which contempned their Maisters and teachers. WIcked Nero, whose diuelish deede to his Mother∣ward, condempneth for a reprobate and abiecte, is noted of all writers of ingratitude towards his Maister: for hee was the death of Seneca his Teacher: that lewds lob and dissolute Tirantt, bad him chuse his death: hee tooke a Pen knife and launced all the vaynes of his body, and so killed him selfe as his name soundeth, for Senecaus is his name, that is slayinge him selfe. Beroaldus in prouerbiall discourse, inueyinge against the tiranny of wicked Nero, sayth: hee is to bee spitted and spited at, that will infame his teacher, or Maister: they fret and fume, chide and chafe, to pleasure and pro∣fite their Schollers, wherfore of right they may require, and of dutie, demaund furtherance at their handes. Duties towardes ourfreendes. EXperience hauing taught mee, that very fréendes al∣lied by nature, & adoption for curteous behaniour, to haue sallen at debate, and with dint of beyslerens blooddy
blowes, to haue cleane battered the Forte of fréend∣shippe and Bulwarkes of professed amitie: I thinke and suppose that fury, to haue yssued of ignorance, and lacke of duetie allotted to the professed vertue, to exile such falshood in fellowship and bloody bickermentes, I wil shew how they harboring in the Hauen of Amitie, may escape the surge and Sirtes of Dissension, and for the maintaynance of the loyall league of true loue, let them obserue sixe principall preceptes. First, doo not exigate or demaund, at thy associate in louing league, any vnhonest exployte, or perpetrate and commit a deede of naughty demeanure, to cracke his cre∣dite, or sommon him shame. Secondly, not like a fléeting Swallow, to accompany thy fréend in prosperitie, and to further a faire face of frendship: and in dule, and dire distresse, to suffer him to cast the cardes of colde comfort alone. In the Sommer a man may haue the chirping chat of the swallow, but in Winter, compared to aduersitie, shee vtterly forsaketh thee: Such bee flatterers, and not fréendes. Thirdely, to will and nill all one thing, one studie, one exercise, for Cicero sayth: diuersitie of things, aske diuer∣sitie of lyuinge. Fourthly, that wee doo not to our freend, but as wee woulde, hée should doo to vs, for true and trusty freends: haue one minde, one harte in two bodies. Fifthly, not to loue or beare a signe and shewe of freendship, in hope of happy rewarde: for wee ought ra∣ther to gine, than to aske. Last of all, fréendly obeysaunce, according to callinge, not as some, which because they thinke a man to bee their freende, will presume to robbe him of his honour, vpon which, spronge vp the Prouerbe: To much fa∣miliaritie, breedeth a contempt: Such be not freendes but robbers of mans honour, and Theeues, hauinge the Cloake of freendshippe on, vnder which, they steale a mannes worshippe or callinge from him.
In the chusing of a fréend in déede, wée must know him to bee of good conuersation and behauiour, than wée must haue an eye to his manners, gestures, and conueyances, and examine them, whither they bée sufferable, and whi∣ther without grudge of conscience, wee may tollerate them: els wee were better neuer to associate our selues to suche a mate, for it will bée an occasion of sedition and anger: It is aduersaunt to the rule of Fréendship, to cor∣rect thy adopted fréends, before a congregacion, or to giue him hase termes inferior to his callinge, which may in∣grasse the like boldenesse in the hearers, to afforde thy fréend the like: and so thou shalt bee a means of lowtish∣nesse to him, whom thou seemest to loue: Finally, I must admonish fréendes not opprobriously to obiect kindenesse, tendered them in their aduersitie, nor hauing imparted vpon them, some good turne to misuse the partye, suppo∣sing him bound to obey, for the receipt therof: which I haue noted in a froward fréend of mine. Such kindenes Cicero repineth against, saying: true fréendship abstay∣neth from cause of dissension. Dutie towardes olde age. THe Romanes schooled in Cicero his trim tracte of due∣ties, made a Law, that whosoeuer passed by the elder sorte of Cittizens, without obeysance of Benet, and bow∣inge of bones, should bee punished by the head: which, as I conster, to bee beheaded, or els to stand a shamefull A∣nathemat yoaked in Pillory, to the vtter cracke of their credite: Age is the crowne of honour, for that it is the Cheste of prudente experience, and supposition of ho∣nestie, els had hee beene cut off before hee had attayned thereto. Ouid sayth, that they are to be borne withal, for the in∣firmitie of age, & aboundance of choller, collected through the want of naturall heate, to disgest humors heaped in their crushed carcasses. And for that the state of the
common Wealth is, and hath euer beene, committed to their discreete rule and gouernance: not only prophane Authors ascribe them duetifull reuerence, but it is spe∣cified in Scriptures, that wée might more reuerently ac∣complish and performe the same. Towardes Matrones and Women. I Am not ignorant, that dowltish dottrels, haue spiteful∣ly sought to spoyle Women of their honour, inferring paltry proffers, to forder their furious frowardnesse, and spite conceaued against them, out of canckered pée∣uishe Poettes: which altogeather voyde of good nature, manifestly shew the mayme of nature, which so gree∣nously graueleth them, that they indeuour to insinuate and flatter mankinde to forsake woman, the only solace, ioye, and Iewell of the world: Amonge whom, Albertus that malicious man, bewrayed their imperfection, more of spite, than of necessitie or thinge spectant to the know∣ledge of man: his beastlinesse shall condempne him a Traitour to Women, and they the trimme treasure of man: foule and fulsome, lewde & lothsome is that beast∣ly birde, which besmerth his owne neast. What worde is so base? what terme so wicked? or name so odious, as may fit this forderer of mischeefe to woman kinde, being his nusted neast, and carefullest kindred. O odious Albert, and you abiecte outcast kistrels, who forgettinge your byrth and beeinge, to haue depended of women, ryotously raue, and desperatly deuise, vndiscret∣ly to discouer their naturall impersections: as though it lay in them to bee rid thereof. Recante yee silly cinicall sectes, your eyes condempne your worke, your toungues at the view of beautifull daintie Diamondes, cry Pecca∣nimus: Your Penne panteth for greefe, to haue inueyed against honest Matrones: yea, as shame of Albertus, his deede weynd him to woe, and misery, so no (doubt) such mischéeuous searchers of maymes towardes their owne
Mothers, shalbe dismisde with the like rewarde. Sainct Peter, a man of milder opiuion, said: A woman to be a crowne of honour to a man: and to be borne with all as the weaker vessell, and should not extende crueltie towardes them, neither in worde, nor déede. For thers is no Tiger so terrible or fierce, no lion so lewde or cruel: no Beare so bare and voyde of gentilenesse, or naturall clemencie, as to payne or pinche, gréeue or molest their pammes, mutche lesse man, indued with reason. I can compare them to no creature, but to vipers which recom∣pence their dammes which bare them, in gnawyng their guttes. Because there be but few that so sclander onslie defame the stately stemne of women, the onely porte of the world, and sure sollace of man: I will bee take mee to scilence. Dutie towards our enemies. IT may séeme straunge to the nature of man, so siercely geuen to reuenge, that any league or loyaltie, or man∣hood should be obserued betwéen furious snes, or enemies Except he hath read it in Historiagraphers, who exhibit∣ted, to the gaze of mens bluddie broyles, and warlike tra∣dicions: in whiche is specified the lawe of armes, how truce is concluded (estsoones) a certeine space: which to violate or defile the corage and valiant stoute stomacke of venterous Captaynes, cannot be brought or perswa∣ded vnto. Cicero affirmeth in his first booke of duties, that faith boluntarie plighted, and aduisedly geuen, to our foes, is to bee obserued, and parte performed, and in very déede, it is a poynt of brutish beastelinesse, for to strike without admonishion or caueate. Terence sayd, the wiseman will demurre of the mat∣ter, before hée fight. But Vertue admonisheth vs, not to fight, but to bée armed with her handemayde, dame Pa∣tience, but if Choller spurre thee to it, I thought good to
shew how infierce dealynge wée must prooue men, and not beastes. Liuie, the Marciasist Poet saith: That wée ought not to fight but for Peace, and quietnesse. And forgeuynge is the noblest reuenge that may bée. Men ought not to iarre or iangle for euerte triffle: for of sufferaunce com∣meth ease. And as the English man sayeth: It is good slepynge in a whole skinne. Dutie due to Straungers, or Traueilers. DOughtie and dutifull Dido, Quéene of Carthage, to the instruction of people, how they should entertaine straungers, and tired trauelers: So feasted Eneas, and his accompanied troupe of trimme Troianes, with dain∣tie diet, and royal hospitalitie, that to this day her boun∣tifulnesse towarde straungers, is fresh and vigent, in me∣mories of men. And Virgill, thought it worthe the while, to Chroni∣cle in his booke so notable a facte, and to waste his winde in deciphyring the manners thereof. The Romans forwarde in good déedes and courteous conueiance, who indeuoured to prooue famous for ex∣ecutynge vertuons actions, gaue and imparted the of∣fice of the Consulshippe vpon Torquinius: and the Pre∣torshippe to Numa Pompeius, béeyng straungers: which argueth greate lenitie and force of Vertue, habitante in them. And Beroaldus, and Liuie affirme: that Iupiter was feared of sutche, as miscaried towarde poore Peregrines and strayinge straungers. And the Gentiles kepte hos∣pitalitie, consecrated to Iupiter, the reuenger of distoyal∣tie offered them. Plautus in his Commedie called Paen. Reproueth one shar{per}ely for deridynge and scornyng of siraungers.
Plato pardoned no fault doone to them: the Scripture say: Hée is accurst that leadeth the blinde, which is a ve∣ry straunger out of his way: but now they haue giuē him Drummes intertainment, soone in at doores, and sorier out: light come, light goe: None is so derided, mocked, and laughed at, as straungers, now in England they bee punisht, whipt, plagued, on euery side: there is no sparks of Roman kindenesse in them, no whit of Dido his boun∣tifulnesse, byding in them: which is an occasion of slaun∣der, to this our natiue Soyle. Duetie towardes our Maysters, whom wee serue bound or free. ALl that goe vnder the name of Seruauntes, must ob∣serue these foure wayes, towardes their Maisters, whom they daily feede vpon, and recreate their bodyes by their prouision, as well in nightfull reste, as daylis dyet. First, it is spectant to the execution of seruile function, to bee prest ready, and willing to finish the rated busines of their Maisters, not as Snayles, slowly settinge it for∣warde, but with couragious dilligence, delightinge therein. Secondly, not glaueringe or flattering their Maisters in their presence, and in their absence fraudilently to deceane them, a thing though it scape the chasticement of man, yet it can not passe the iust reuengement of God, for hee hateth the wicked dissemblinge man, and falshood stinketh in his presence, prouoking his déepe displeasure. The thirde, Plautus teacheth vs, sayinge: a seruaunte must forsake and abolishe from his minde, all priuate gaine, and onely heede his Maisters profit, and deale iust¦ly therin. Fourthly, to bee silent, when they bee mooued, though choller so blindeth them, that they swarue from the truth and not to answere, Quid pro quo, as their equals: and
not to blab abroade their fables, talkes, or suruey in com∣passinge of matters, prouokinge their iust displeasure, or lewdly lust after their Wiues or Seruauntes. The last duety is towardes Magistrates and Officers. MAgistrates and Officers, beeinge the liuely limmes and members of our gracious Quéene, and Godly Gouernesse, are dutifully to bée obeyed: for where there is no order, sayth Oliuerus Carnaruonensis, there is sem∣piternall horror, and pathe to perdition. In what doo wee differ from brutish beastes, but in order and lawfull league of life. Liuie sayth: if the armes, and feete, and other mans members, fal out with ye head, they must all perish: if the Subiectes contempne Magistrates, executioners of the Lawe, both Prince and Subiectes, must taste the gale thereof. God sende the breach of order bée not the ouer∣throw of England, and stubbernesse against our Princes Lawes. Decency deuised to fit all seasons. TO aduaunce honestie, and shewe Dame Vertue to be fully famylied and habitant in vs, wee must haue re∣specte and consideration of time and place: for if our talke be not consonant to them both, it argueth litle lear∣ninge or hoped hap of Vertue: A learned and vertuous man (in deede) needeth no further commendacion, but to presse in place where hee may shew his actions allied to Vertue and knowledge, arguinge probitie of life, and perfect published manners. Macrobius sayth: the due obseruation of time and place, to bee the surest signe of wisedome. And Pyttacus Mitillus, wisheth a man before hée enter∣prise any exployte, to consider and pithily to perpende, to whom hee sueth, what hee sueth for, and when.
As we reade of one Clobulus, who came to Caesar inthral∣led to wrathe, to request admission, to haue dominion in a Promontarie appertaining to his Empire: Caesar fret∣ting at other losses, commaunded him to bee hanged, say∣inge: it is better to hange thee by the necke, than thou shouldest spoyle the Countrey, and spurre many thereto. Thus it falleth out with such, as desire so dasieth, that they can not see, or to obserue time fitting their purpose. Hereupon Terence sayde: I came in season, which is the chéefest thinge of all. Which that it may the better bee heeded of children and others, I will speake somwhat of. How to vse thy selfe at a Banket. AT Banckets or feastes, where multitude of men are resembled, and towled to repast: haue consideration of the Guestes, of their calling, wealth and honestie, and prefer not thy selfe, beefore them: If thou by continu∣ance of auncestrie, Noble or Worshipfull, and others lately loyalled with worship or honour in place: Disdain them not, in possessinge the seate of Soueraignitie, for they exalted by their owne indeuor and vertue, be better than thou descēded of nobilitie, beeing ignoble, degenera∣ting from thy stately stacke. Euery man will take thée as they finde thee: placed to thy contentation, bable not of Scriptures, as meane Ministers will, but follow ra∣ther the example of Socrates, a singuler Philosopher, who requested to speake at a Bancket: hee answered, I am not skilled in things fit for the place and season, adiudge∣inge Philosophie vnworthy to bee vttered amonge Cup Gossips, neither did it become his grauitie, to twatle of vanities or olde Wiues Tales, as some of higher pro∣fession will doo. And if mirthe mooue thee to wade, and passe in pleasure and iest: let it bée so handled, that it re∣downd to no mans discredit or grauell any guest inuited or bidden to the Bancket. For Anagiris saide, that a man is sooner mooned to choller and anger, being occupied
in drinking and feastinge than other wise: which experi∣ence explayneth daily, for drunken frayes bee common. Next, a man must so dyet his stomacke, that it belch not, nor boyle vp, as charged with ouerplus or gluttony, to annoy the hearers squeasie stomackes, nor ply the Pot to often, drinkinge dishonour to him and his: Neither is it méete for thee to common abroad priuate Fables, or tales tolde in thy presence, for therby thou infamest thy selfe, taken of them for a secret well meaning man. Beroaldus saith, that the Gentiles celebratinge feastes, did show the Threshall to the guestes: wishing that what soeuer was doone or sayd there, should go no further. Horace biddinge Torquatus to bancket with him, and his fréendes wished him to bringe such as they might bee merry: for in deede, it is no hartie mirthe, when a man maye not for feare vtter his minde, or least it bee blazde abroad: which deare Reader, if it séeme odious vnto thee follow it the lesse. How to vse thy selfe in sober company. THe whole drift of Arts, and somme of swéete Science is, to know much, and to suruey his trade of lyuing so amonge men, that they may daily associate them selues with him, to reape some benefit of his vertue, for attay∣ning of which lot of loyall life, wee must obserue seauen poynctes. First, to tollerate the fretting fits of men and manners, and to passe them with patience, and not barke at the shakinge of euery réede. Secondly, in boundes of bountie and honest lyfe, to will and nill with them, and to shun that loatheth them: & labour for that, which get∣teth gaine to thée or them. Thirdly, in worde, déede and lyuing, wee resemble the Methode and manner of their lyuinge, for than shalt thou bee partaker of the prayse at∣tributed them. Fourthly, not to take in dudgion any matter, without greate and approoued cause and occa∣sion. Fifthly, in humilitie and submission, to handle and deale with all men, dooinge to others, as thou woul∣dest wishe them to doo towardes thee.
Sixtly, to bee thankeful for curtesies tasted, which shal prouoke thy further gaine, and good will. Lastly, to speake well of all men: These thinges bee the Ladder to climbe into credit with the sobrest sorte of men, which bee not enticed with vanitie, to wish the fel∣lowship of man, but onely with Vertue. Obseruations in mutuall talke or communicacion. TAke héede thou doost not ouerthwart a man in his tale or interrupt him with an other, which argueth im∣perfection and want of manners in thée: Carpe not, nor iyebe not a man tellinge the somme of his meaninge, as thou couldest dash him out of countenaunce: for the grea∣test and gréeuousest théeuery is, to rob a man of his ma∣iestie or countenance. Bée not an oppen accuser of the common people, or coyner of lyes, and flyinge fables, and father them not vpon others, in thy talke had with o∣thers priuatly, for thinking to hurte others, thou hurtest thy selfe. Search not after the secreates of other men: for beeing reuealed vnto thee, they will animate thée, to doo him mischéefe: and in hope of gaine and lewde lucre, or to bring him vnder feete, wil kindle thy wrath against him. And if the partie bee thy better, giue Diu garde, salutation fittinge his callinge, els may bee take it for a mockery: & before a Noble man or Magistrate, so frame the state of thy body, that you stand vpright, not reelinge this way nor that way, not ytching, nor rubbinge, nor fa∣uouringe on legge, more one than another, not bytinge or smacking thy lippes, not scratching thy head, nor pick∣inge thy eares, not lowringe in lookes, nor glauncinge thine eyes too and fro, not sad nor fierce, but meeke and merry, showinge good disposition and nature, to bee ha∣bitant and graciously grafted in thee. In iourneyinge. WHat callinge so euer a man bee, high or low, myrth will become him well, in trauell, so it bee good and
honest: for a merrye wayfaringe mate, is as good as a Weyne or Charret: but take heede your mirth reache not to scorne such as meete with you, or to any man his hurte or daunger: but refresh your selues with Stories and merry tales, inuented to exile the languor of limmes and stifnesse of tyred members. Cato giueth this edicte and commaundement to traue∣lers, to salute gently such as méete you, not iustling them into the mire, or grauelling them with misdemeanure. Of Time. AS all thinges are not fit for euery man, so bee they not decent for all seasons: for iestinge Spirites, bee not accepted amonge mourners or sobbinge Sainctes: neyther is the sad Sot or meagre mooued man, esteemed among such as set Coppe on Hoope: wherfore it is perti∣nent to the polliticke person, to chaunge his coate as the company doo: But the royall rules of famous Philoso∣phy do instructe vs to vse a meane, the Methode & somme of my booke, for in prosperity lofted by fawning Fortune we ought to perpend & consider, that after much drouth & faire weather, foloweth raine with tempestuous change: & eftsoones, the minde is drowned with the enchaunting dalyinge delightes of fawninge Fortune, that the partie can not see time to prayse God. Wherupon was it said: It is easier for a Cammell to goe through the eye of a Nedle, than for a ritche man to goe or ascend to the highe presence of God: And it planteth in the plat of Secrecie, Pompe and Pryde, to disdayne such as bee pressed with pouerty, and gloriously to crow ouer their heades. In aduersitie, a tymorous time, and heauie happes of silly man, wee haue to follow valiaunte Eneas example, who tossed in vnknowen Coastes, in daungers of Sirtes in surging Seas, bitterly bayted by spitefull Fortune, to the great recreation of fayntinge fellowes, sayde: God will ende these sorrowes. So man must hope wel, which
though it bee the Key of Desperation: yet a blisful blast and gladsome gale, will deliuer the hardy harte from gulphe of gaule and sorrow. Surely, patiencie passeth, and is the best Buckler a man can haue. Therfore to ende, take time as time is, countenaunce thy selfe to time: let it bee thy trimme Tayler, to shape thy counte∣naunce in all places. NOw (gentle Reader) I will adde three Poinctes, the conseruatiues of Vertue. Alwayes accept of Vertue, and Honesty. Doo nothing that thou doubtest of. Doo not accompany nor associat thy selfe to the wilful: Which if thou obserue, it wil so (perhappes) lighten thee to the Pathe of Vertue, that not onely here thou shalt bée accepted, but in the presence of GOD, to whom bee all prayse and honour for euer. Amen. FINIS.
A Pithie Epistle and learned dis∣course, of the worthinesse of honourable VVed∣locke, sent written (as a Iuell) vnto a worthie Gentlewoman, in the time of her widowhoode, to direct and guide her in the new election of her seconde husbande, &c. IF God (whiche is the only giuer of all good things, had endewed me with the diuine gift of so greate eloquence, ye I might without any reprehension, com∣pare with that worthie and fa∣mous Grecian Pericles, whose su∣gred vaine of filed eloquence was so excellent: whose pronunciacion and vtterance was so pleasant: whose words and sentences were so ponderous and vehement, that in perswading and disswadynge, hee had so greate and wonderfull grace, that all men ye herde him, gaue their whole consente vnto him: in so mutche, that many learned clarkes of greate renowne, haue re∣ported of him, that he did vse so excellently, and with such wonderful force, to fulminate and thunder out his words and sentences, that for his surpassyng grace and marue∣lous facilitie in perswadynge, no man was euer yet able therein to matche with him: If now my barren skill, were fully comparable with the greate cunning and sur∣passynge knowledge of this worthy Pericles, yet here I fréely confesse, I should appere mutche more barbarous, then the rude and grosse Garamantes, if I should take vp∣pon me, to set forthe the dignitie of honorable wedlocke, and holy Matrimonie, accordynge to the desertes thereof, or go aboute to paint it out with sutch high commendati∣ons, as it hath alwayes béen thought worthy of, euen a∣mongste those that haue moste flowrished with pregnant wittes, and haue excelled withall kinde of knowledge, hothe Diuine and humane.
But though I am not able, according to the worthines therof, to intreat of it, nor to set forth the worthy effectes and fruites of the same, accordinge to my wished desire: yet wil I shew my minde and determinate purpose ther∣of, according to the dutiful honour and reuerence I beare vnto the deserued dignitie of it. Let other prayse Chastitie so mutch as they list, which (they say) filleth Heauen: (I pray God it doo so) yet wil I commende Matrimonie, whiche (I am sure) repleni∣sheth and filleth bothe Heauen and Earthe. Let other set foorthe single life, with so many praises as they can heape and tumble one in an others necke, be∣cause (they say) it is voyde of all careful trouble and dis∣quietnesse: Yet will I for euermore commende the hap∣pie state of honorable wedlocke, which refuseth no kinde of payne and trouble, so that it may brynge any profit at all to the publike weale of Christendome. Let other prayse that kinde of life, whereby mankynde decayeth, and in processe of time shoulde bée vtterly de∣stroyed: Yet will I commend that manner of life, which begetteth and bringeth forthe, excellent Kynges, noble Princes, princely Dukes, puissant Lordes, valiant Kni∣ghtes, worthie Gentlemen, conning Artificers, to main∣taine the common weale, and learned wittes, to gouerne the same. Let others aduance that life, whereby Monarchies, Empyres, and Kyngedomes, are made desolate, barren, and vnfrutefull: Yet will I moste of all prayse that life, whiche maketh Realmes to flowrish with innumerable thousandes of people, wherby the Publique weale is pre∣serued in safe estate. And what thing can there be more necessary then Matrimony, which concerneth the felici∣tie of mans lyfe, the flower of perfite fréendship, the pre∣seruacion of Realmes, the glorye of Princes, and that which is greatest, it causeth immortalitie? Can christian Matrimony bee any otherwise then a thinge of great ex∣cellencie, and incomparable dignitie, séeing it was ordai∣ned,
neither of that auncient Mynos kynge of Crete, nor of Licurgus, the law maker of Lacedemonia: nor yet of Solon the sage & wise Athenian, but of the most highe and immortall God himselfe, and by him alone commended vnto mankinde, in so mutche that men may séeme to bée allured, mooued and stirred vnto this state of liuynge, by a certayne inspiration of the holie ghoste? In Paradise also that Garden of pleasure was it instituted, yea, and that before any sinne rayned in this worlde, to shew that it bringeth vnto man, greate ioye, wealthe, felicitie, and quietnesse: and euer since that time hath it béen had in greate estimation, not only amonge them that professe vnfained faith in the liuyng God, but also amonge so ma∣nie as were led by the only instinct of nature: in so much, that it hath béen alwaies recounted a thinge of mutch ig∣nominie and reproche, to liue without the estate of wed∣locke. It is manifest by the reporte of hystories, of how great estimation holy Wedlocke hath béen, euer since the first beginnyng of the world, among al degrées of persōs. Who will not commende honorable Wedlocke, as a thynge of greate excellencie? Who will not thynke it a state of liuinge worthie high prayse and commendation? Yea, who will not iudge that it ought to bee embraced with méetyng and folded armes, seyng that by it, so many notable treasures do happen vnto vs? Vertue is main∣teyned, Vice is eschewed, howses are replenished, Cities are inhabited, the grounde is tilled, Sciences are practi∣sed, Kyngdomes florishe, Amitie is preserued, the Pub∣like weale is defended, naturall succession is continued, good Artes are taught, honest order is kept, Christendom is enlarged, Goddes word{er}e is promoted, the consience is quieted, lewde life is auoyded, and the glory of God is highly aduaunced and set forthe? And who euer wanted, that liued accordyng to Gods worde in Christian Matri∣monie? God leaueth none succourlesse that put their trust in him. Did not Christe turne the water into sweete Wyne at a certayne Mariage in Cana, to shew that as
many as liue in holy matrimonie accordinge to his word shall neuer wante? The water of the Riuer, shall sooner bee turned into wine, and the stones of the streete into breade, then the faithfull shall lacke or be founde succour∣lesse. Did not God feede the people of Israell with meat from he auen? did he not giue them drinke out of the hard rocke? Did hee not make a Crowe to bring meate to the Prophete Elyas, & so wonderfully fedde him twise a day? Euen so will he do with vs, if we be faithfull, and séeke to liue according to his worde. The blessyng of God maketh men riche (saith Salomon.) The mā that feareth God (saith Dauid) al the time of his life, sheweth mercy vnto the poore, and lendeth vnto them that haue neede, & yet hath he gods plentie and enough for his children that succede him. These goodly properties and fruitfull effectes, these manyfolds commodities and speciall greate benefites, these diuine blessynges & wonderfull graces, besides an iufinite num∣ber more treasures then I am able here to recite, whichs spryng out of holy and christian Matrimonie, me thinks are able and sufficient inough, to encourage and win all kinde of persons, bothe men and women, widowes, and widowars, batchelers, and maydens, willingely to em∣brace and take vpon them the comfortable estate of ho∣norable wedlocke. wherfore (good cosen) hauyng now troubled you thus farre with a rude discourse of wedlocke, whereof I know well you haue had a more certaine and perfit proofe, then I am able by pen to painte foorth, because you haue béen a wedded woman a longe and happie time, & haue enioyed the blessed benifit of so good a husband, as by him I doubt not but you haue had the full experience, aswell of these manifolde felicities and greate commodities by me reci∣ted, as of many other mo surpassyng treasures, whiche happen to faithfull married couples, not able by me to be expressed, by reason I neuer tasted yet the happy blessed∣nesse of honorable wedlocke: I wil now hasten towardes other matter, and cease to procéede any further in the cō∣mendation
of this high degree of holy matrimony: whose worthie excellencie, doth more sufficiently set foorth and commend it self, then my inuencion is able to deuise. And whereas (good cosen) in this mine attempte, I may per∣haps be thought somewhat bold, to trouble you with this longe and tedious treatise in writing, yet if it wil please you to thinke wel of mine enterprise, and peruse it ouer with good aduisement, I trust you shall finde the matter sutche, as all your labour shal not be lost, though the inuē∣cion be founde but simple. It is only good will & christian charitie (my beloued Cosen) ye hath enforced me to frame my pen thus muche to trouble you, wherin I beséeke you to pardon my boldenesse, and to take in good part my sim∣ple entente. The curious cooke doth dight yt rude morsell with some conceit of his cunning, but I haue no other su∣ger or sauce of sauour to grace my simple dish withal, but the neuer vading and euer growyng grayne of good will, which I beséeke you to take in good parte, & to accept this simple inuention, as ye perfit pledge thereof, growyng out of mine owne barren grounde, no far fet thinge, neither déerely bought, and therfore perchance not méete for you, especially if you be very lady fine: it is no greater then came out of mine owne pen, no more precious, then may be kept and caried in a few leaues of paper, of no further forme & fashion, then mine owne hands could frame, of no better inuētion thē mine owne simple wit might deuise: wherfore as you sée, so shal you taste: & as you like ye qua∣lities, so accept my present. I thought it my part (if it wil please you to take it wel) not to spare pen, paper nor pai∣nes in writing vnto you. And though it were more méete for mee, to treate of trifles, then misteries, thinges of smale force, then matters of waight & great importance, yet considering your person, whose case requireth euen in enforced trifles to séeke a grauitie, & beinge lothe that loste labour should runne with loste time (for lost time I accounte loste landes) I beethought my selfe to deuise some matter, that happely mighte quite your laboure in Readyng, and not to bee altogether frutelesse for wit:
so that my wordes might not altogether séeme as wasted winde, but that I might be somewhat better occupied, then as one that did but tell the clockes, and watche the Sunne how he shadoweth the Diall. Consideryng ther∣fore, the state of your life, the case wherin you now stand, that is, towarde the worlde: A woman once a wife, now a wydow: And therfore hauyng of God, leaue and liber∣tie by mariage to become a wife agayne: for when the husbande is deade, the woman may lawfully betake her selfe vnto another, as Sainct Paule reporteth to the Co∣rinthians: This your case I haue so mutch thought vpon, that I may not like a carelesse stranger stande dombe, but as a carefull and faithfull well willer, open my mouthe, and vtter my minde vnto you, not that I meane in hastie sorte to perswade you to Mariage, any otherwise then your owne wisedome with good aduisement shall thinke conuenient, for therin you may best be your owne iudge, for you know best where your shoe wringeth you: neither néede you any Counsaylour to bid you cut where it doth wringe you: But whereas you know it lawfull, if you shal thinke it also expedient, that of a widow you become a wife, then ought you to take good aduisement, how you do bestow your self, least you both marry and marre your self in one daye, and of an happie widow, become an vn∣happie wife. I néede not séeke farre to shew you the daungers ye sutche leapte into, that in this matter rashly leaped before they wisely looked: because the common experience in others, may leade you through the conside∣racion hereof, euen as streight as a line. And therefore I will not counsell you as nedelesse to aduisement, but ra∣ther cōmende you that you haue hitherto stande so staied with sutche aduised deliberacion. Onely this pointe I finde in you, which néedeth a knot, to consider how you might do most aduisedly, what match were moste méete for you to be made, that repentance fo∣low not, to what marke you ought to direct your counsel, aduisement, and deliberation, that the successe might an∣swere
your hope, that is, that it might turne to continu∣all comforte, and to the glorie of God. This verely I wot well, is a case of sutche importance to consider, and hath so many harde knottes to worke on, that it were more fit for gray heares, sage wittes, and déepe Diuines, to take in hande, then for my simplicitie to aduenture. I am (in this case) of like opinion with Mar∣cus Aurelius the Emperour of Rome, who sayd: If all the wise men in the worlde were molten together in a Fornace, they coulde not giue one good counsell to make a Mariage. What counsell then may you looke to haue at my handes: if a wise man, if many wise men, if all the wise, bee not wise inoughe in any pointe well to aduertise you in this behalfe? Wherefore I beséeke you, impute not that for presumption vnto mee, which onely good will doth force mee to aduenture, desiryng you rather to waye the will then the witte, whiche here by mee shalbe shewen. And if I shall ouershoote my selfe by any pointe of foly, (as of likelyhoode I shall) yet let sutche wisedome reste in you, that you make not that open and common, whiche bée∣twixte vs is priuate and priuie. Therefore to enter my purpose, because that of many, yet must but one ioygne with one, and because where one is to be chosen, it is good to sée whiche amongste all, if it might bee: I will bee so bolde, to set before you foure sutche suiters, as may represent vnto you all the rest that may happen hereaf∣ter to come vnto you. Consider all by foure, trie foure, and truste one. There are thrée markes generally, whiche are to bée considered in man, whereat you maye shoote out your game: The inwarde minde of the man, the outewarde personage, and the state wherein he standeth of thinges apperteinyng to the worlde. By this rule I will seuer and single out the sortes of men, that after the diuision, you may with lesse doubte make your choyce. And there∣fore to beginne with the worste: there are men that liue neither well nor welthy, beyng in a desperate state, bothe
towarde God and the world, paste hope, and paste shame? But wée may set these aside out of our number, as wee finde them, so let vs leaue them, for I doubte not, but as they are nought worthie, so you will not haue to doo with them, none of these I thinke will come vnto you in the name of a suiter. The next man is not so well fauoured, nor so wise, as wealthie, not so courteous, as couetous, not so well ma∣nered, as monied, & he hauyng hope through his wealthe, peraduenture will attempte you, for what case is despe∣rate in this worlde, to sutche as Fortune laugheth vpon. This man you may soone espie, where his treasure is, there is his harte, euen sutche kynde of wooynge shall you haue of him, as Sathan vsed to our Sauiour Christ, in the fourth of Mathew: If thou wilt fall downe and worshippe me, I will geue you (saith hée) all these, you shalbe my Mistresse of so many Shéepe, so many Oxen, and thus mutche Money shalbe yours as mine owne, so harpeth he vppon his halfepenie. But let vs set him aside a while, and brynge an other in place, sutche a one that is handsome of personage, a tall Gentleman, a proper man, well borne, graced with some courtely behauiour, well spoken, hauing a pretie naturall witte, adorned and graced with other sutche qualities of the bodie, and yet peraduenture Vertue hath taken litle or no roote in him, he worshippeth God at leysure, and hath some ciuill god∣linesse in him, his religion he vseth as ye market serueth, and thus doth hee recken his game: I sée not (saieth hee to himselfe) why I shoulde despayre, I sée not but I am worthy of as good as she is, I come of as good an house as she, mine auncesters were al gentlemē, and worshipful: I doubt not the misliking of my behauior, for I haue not béen so ill brought vp, but I know how to entertayne a gentlewoman, I shal se well inough that my demeanour be courteous and courtely, as for my personage and coū∣tenance, I force not who behold it: So to himself he saith, when to you he shall commende himself with some more
manerly modesty, as to say, he is not disfigured, nor mai∣med. And what he cannot for shame say of himself, some other freende of his shall set out in playner termes: his fréendes indéede (peraduenture not yours) will so blaze his armes, as though they should sell him vnto you, as if you should take him at their worde, besettinge him with these and sutche like flowers: if you respect the personage of a man, if you refuse him, you shall not be so matched a∣gaine: marke him and view him well, se what deformi∣tie you may finde in him: is there any parte of him out of ioynt, or out of square? Marke what a ioly complexion he hath, sée whether you may espie any warte or blemish in his visage: consider whether he be not a very gentle∣man in his behauiour, forget not his qualities how com∣mendable they are, his actiuitie, his mery conceites, his pretie practises: sée how clenly and trimme hee is in his apparel, how skilful and neate he is aboute his horse, his hawkes, and his houndes: his exercise also that hee vseth is gentlemanlike, abrode he vseth his bowe, within dores he can singe & play on the Lute, & as for learning, though peraduenture he hath litle or none at al, yet will they say he hath inough for a gentleman: and here peraduenture ye wise saying of Salomon, shalbe scarce wisely alleadged in the seuenth chapter of Ecclesiasticus. Be not too wise. If he haue a good wit indéede, then shall there be great com∣passes of comparisons fet: if he be but meane in that re∣specte, then will they say, hee is no foole, no naturall: If he bee peraduenture somewhat stayned in Fame, you shall haue that issue straite stopped with some playster of excuse: if it be not manifest, then will they saye it is false and forged, no man is hable to charge him so, the best are moste subiect to corruption, the sinest clothe may bee soonest stayned, the honestest man may be soonest slaundred: and if it bee not denied, yet it shalbe excused, as the toyes and pranckes that run in common course a∣monge yonge men: then will it bee fayde that a man is not to be reiected, but to be borne withall in sutche cases:
and so, if there appere any good gift, it shalbe set out as it were a sonnyng to beholde: But if there bee any suspi∣cion of vice, or otherwise any wante or defecte, that shall eyther be let slippe with silence, or els the broken peeces shalbe glewed together in some kinde of sorte, that which is vnseemely or vnsightly, shall haue a better coloure set on it with some glosinge tale: the wante of witte shalbe supplied with aboundance of wealthe: euell manners with mutche money. If his life bee suspected, you muste looke in his face, for with some women, the pleasing per∣sonage satisfieth for it selfe, and also for vertue: And good qualities for learnyng in a Gentleman. If the quiuer bee well furnished, if it be well in the Stable, the Mewe and the Kenell, it dothe not mutche force what is in the House, the Chambre, and the Studie. Sutch verely is the Table talke now adayes amonge Gentlemen. Sutche boltes shootes suiters, and suiters fréendes, and with sutche traynes some women are entrapped, with sutche winlesses are some driuen into the nette of mishap: But I trust your eye sight serueth you better, then to be dim∣med with sutch mistes, or dazled with sutch shorte sonne∣shinynges. Now in the degrée of my suiters, the third remaineth, whom if you only iudge by the eye, that discerneth no farther then the face: or if you waye the worthe of your mariage with weightes of siluer, this man perchaunce shall soone be put out of countenance & hope, he shal soone be counteruailed and wayed downe to the grounde, for he may singe saynct Peters songe, Siluer and golde haue I litle or none: Hee cannot number his Landes, his Leases, his Farmes, nor his Tenements: He hath a competente li∣uynge, but not aboundinge, or flowyng with ful streame: He is no Knight, nor Alderman, but a playne Gentlemā: not highly borne, but verie well brought vp: not so wor∣shipfull, as worship worthie: not of greate estimacion, but of singuler honestie: not so longe trayned in ye courte, as conuersant in the schoole: his Landes are not so great,
as his learning: his chest is not so stored with money, as his head and minde possessed & furnished with the trustie treasure of trueth, and the inestimable wealth of wise∣dome: his demaynes with others are not comparable, but his demeanour aboue others commendable: his coun∣tenaunce is not wanton or alluringe, but yet hee hath a manly visage, a face in which appeareth more grace then fauour: more grauitie then beauty: his tongue spéedinge wordes no faster then they may seeme well bestowed, ha∣uing his mouth in his hart, & not his hart in his mouth: hée is not so wel freended of men, as fauoured of GOD: his bodye is not so handsome of makinge, as his soule is well fashioned and framed to Godward: his legge not so cleane, as his life without spot: his hand not so white to sée, as his hart sure to trust: not highe of stature, yet his wit not short: his body not so straight, as his consci∣ence vpright: not so braue in his apparrell, as graue in his behauiour: not curious and neate, but honest and cleanly: not so well faced, as wel lyued: I meane, not so well attyred in the outwarde man, as cloathed in the in∣warde man. These are mee thinkes the degrées of men to bée consi∣dered in our purpose, for I can recken no other markes whereunto Women directe their eyes and thoughtes. But there are some to bee found, I thinke, if wee secke far, in whom Vertue, Fortune, and fauour haue made a Mariage: and such a one, if my prayer might bee heard, you should soone attayne: But such Startes shoote not of∣ten, such Byrdes flie seldome abroad: yet if there happen any such wherupon your consideration shall stande, my counsell is, that you follow the example of the Phisition, who to know the whole estate of a man, openeth and cut∣teth him vp, and deuideth him into partes, and thereby groweth into a greater knowledge: so I wishe you to make an Anatomie of him that you haue in hande, make no confusion of wealth, witte, body, soule, life, and liuing, for so you may soone deceaue your selfe. In one man
therfore, you may consider thrée things, as I sayd before: the inwarde minde, the outwarde person, and the state wherein hee standeth, of thinges appertaininge to the world: of the which thrée, you ought to choose but one, least perhappes you mistake your right marke, and leese your game: least in stéede of a man, you finde but the shadow of a man. Refer your selfe to the patterne of those persons, which I haue rudely described vnto you: compare vnto them, and those betwixt themselues. Wherfore to enter the comparison, if you aske my iudgemente: the Poets to lay the foundation of a farther inuention, fained there were thrée Goddesses in contention for their beautie, who did most excell: Iuno who had the disposition of ho∣nour and dignitie: Pallas at whose pleasure were all the guiftes of wifedome: and Venus the Lady of Loue. To ende this strife, it pleased Iupiter and other Goddes, to refer the iudgement hereof to one Paris a Shapeherde, conuayinge to him a golden Apple, with this inscription or Sentence engraned: Let it bee giuen to the fayrest. The foresayde Goddesses presented themselues beefore this their appoynted Iudge, and offered euery one their reward, to haue sentence on their side: Iuno would make him the highest: Pallas the wisest: and Venus a husband of the fayrest. Venus here preuayled, she was pronounced the fairest. Paris had his reward, that was the beautiful Helena, who (they say) was the cause of the destruction of the Troians. Now if your Mariage stoode vpon the guifte and deliuery of an Apple, I trust you would not play Paris part, that Venus should vanquish you. Wher∣fore, my counsel is, that rather you cncline to Pallas for some reward of wit, then eyther to Iuno for her honour, or Venus for pleasure. And besides these, there is one that by right hath greater interest in the Apple, then any of the other, although shee striue not so much for the mat∣ter, I meane the Lady Vertue. Wherfore, if she come in place, withholde not your hand from her for feare of the other, if shee offer not her selfe at the first, yet be not rash
or hastie, but call vnto God that hee may sende her vnto you, and hee no doubt, as his eares are alwayes open vn∣to the prayers of the faithfull, shall bring her euen home to you: and she, I thinke, is for your purpose: to her (as you ought) deliuer vp your Apple, if you intend to giue it to the fairest, to the best, and to the most worthy. Wher∣fore consider well my last purtrayed person, standinge in the place of my thirde suiter, of whom although I haue not set so faire a colour, yet if he were to be sold, I would holde as dearest: who though hee bee not formed of the fi∣nest fashion, yet is hee made of the finest mettall: whom peraduenture Iuno may iest at, Venus haue litle to vaunt of, and Plutus whom they call the God of ritches passeth not on: yet if Vertue may preuayle with you, as I hope it shall, you shalbe his, and Vertue shalbe yours, yea, Pal∣las also pleadeth on his parte. Wherfore I counsell you, as you would giue the Apple vnto Vertue, so giue your wedding Ringe to be worne of the vertuous. For if it be so, as the Philosopher truely disputeth, that freendship cannot consist but betwixt the good: how slender a Mari∣age will that bee, where Vertue knitteth not the knot? where honesty is not called to counsell? and godlynesse is not bid to the Brydall? The Sonne of Sirache sayth in the sixteenth Chapter: That man is blessed that hath a vertuous Wife, for the number of his yeares shalbe double. I doubt not but you are so vertuously disposed, that you entend to make a happy Husbande: see then that hee doe as much for you, as you for him: wheras you shall make him happy, foresee that hee for want of vertue, turne not the course of your estate: but wheras you shall double his daies, take heede yt hee cut not of yours by the middle. You haue I am sure some good flowers growinge, take héede they be not ouergrowen and choked, with the euill wéeder that hee shall bring into your ground. You are (I doubt not) disposed to godlynesse, match not with the con∣trary disposition: for then shall you bee as the yoake of Oxen that draweth diuerse wayes. Vice & Vertue were
neuer yet fréendes, it caused hatred in Bretheren, as in Cayne and Abell, Esau and Iacob: How can the Lambe and the Woolfe agree togeather? no more can the vngodly with the righteous: hée that toucheth Pitch, shalbe defi∣led therwith. Thinke not then that the vertuous and the vicious may make a good Maryage. Can you set fier and water togeather, but that they shall stir and striue for the mastery, eache to consume the other? Stande therfore, make no haste, for feare of the worst: It is better to loke long, then to leape lightly: rake vp the ashes throughly, and turne them too and fro, that you be sure there remain no sparke of burning vice, or at the least leaue as litle as you may, and swéepe as cleane as you can. And marke well, I wish, what condition S. Paule setteth, when he gi∣ueth you your lycence to marry, in the seuenth Chapter to the Corinthians. The wife (sayth hee) is bound by the Law as long as her Husband lyueth, but if her Husband bee dead, shee is at liberty to marry in the Lorde. Wey well this restraint of your liberty, or rather I may saye the sure stay of your libertie, least by abuse, you turne this libertie into a bondage. For vnlesse you haue God before your eyes, you shall chaunge your libertie into strayte bondage: wheras you soke comfort, you shal finde a curse: wheras you hope for ease and reste, you shall enter into disease and trouble: aboue all therfore, haue a special and a stedfast eye vpon this rule, that you marry in the Lord. God did make the first Mariage that euer was made, and I doubt not but hee made the first that you made: and if hée make the second also, then shall you be sure neuer to repent you of your bargaine. Hée did institute Mariage as a thinge most holy, to his glory, and to the comforte of man: Sée therefore that you in this case bee boyde of all fleshly affection as neare as you may, that you prophane not that which is holy, to your owne discomforte, and the dishonour of God. Christ our Sauiour was presente at a Mariage in Cana, where besides his presence, he honored it with his first miracle: hee turned Water into Wyne.
I pray you make your wedding place as like Cana as you can, let Christe bee present with you: I meane, to guide your spitit with his holy spirite: turne not his miracle, make not, I meane, Water of Wyne, but let that which God hath instituted to your comfort, bee godly handled of you to his glory. Wheras Matrimony is honourable a∣mongst all men, prouide that it turne not to your shame and confusion, as you sée in some. I néede not here (as it were to long) particulerly to giue you preceptes, to re∣hearse the vertues to be embraced, and the vices to be de∣tested in men. But shortly as our Sauiour Christe an∣swered, thou knowest the cōmaundementes, doo this and thou shalt liue: So I, you know the commaundements, méete the length of their féete, by that measure shall you well perceaue, whether his shooe will serue your foote. And one thing more in this behalf I must ad, not of mis∣trust, but to make a double knot of a single, or a treble of a double: for the surer, the better: the warier, the wiser. Bée wise then and beware, that you put not your heade vnder the gyrdle of the vngodly, neither so burthen your selfe, as to beare the yoake with an Infidell. For then it may séeme that you kept not S. Pawles Rule, as to marry in the Lorde, for that is his counsell. And what Maryage may righteousnes make wt vnrighteousnesse? light with darkenesse? Christ with Belyall? the vnfained Children with the faithlesse Infidell? For here besides the danger of discorde, and bodily trouble therof insuing, there is al∣so apparant perrill that may pearce the soule. For so sayth the Lorde to his People Israell, concerninge their ioyning with straunge Nations of forraine fayth and re∣ligion in the seuenth of Deuteronomy. Thou shalt make no couenaunt with them (saith hee) neither shalt thou make Mariages with them, neither giue thy Daughter vnto his Sonne, nor take his Daughter vnto thy Sonne, for they will cause thy sonne to turne away from mee, and to serue other Gods: then will the wrath of the Lorde waxe hotte against thee, and distroy thee sodainly. You are no Isralite, here
might be sayd: how then? yet a Christian I trow, and by faith, the Daughter of Abraham: then this must you rec∣ken to bee written for your learninge. There are no Hethytes, no Amorites, no Cananites to be feared: yet are there many in our daies both faithlesse & godlesse, as the obstinate aduersary of the Gospell of God, and the double dealing, false dissembling Gospeller, in whom there is no lesse daunger of deceit, then is in the heath nish Hethites, and currish Cananites: and although the persons be not one, yet there seemeth to bee litle difference in the cause: for first marke the reason, and then apply it. The Mariage of a Cananite was forbidden the Isralite for feare least hee should bee withdrawen from the true worship of the true God of Israell. And do wee not see in experience, that the wicked wife, corrupteth such men as wee iudge sometime most vpright in life and stedfast in profession of the truth? and how much more daunger is there leaste the vnbeleeuinge and wicked man, alter the good nature of the honest woman, into his owne peruerse nature, séeing that to him she is subiect, as the body to the head? you must of necessitie bee one in fleshe with him whom you shall choose: Foresée therfore by wisedome, that his relygion bee christian and godly with yours: see that you change not your manners with your name, but choose you such a Make, as feareth God, imbraceth and loueth his holy word, and setteth his whole delight in his Lawes and testimonies. Presume not of your selfe here∣in: you are not wiser then Solomon, yet as it appeareth in the nynth Chapter of the first Booke of Kinges: His wise∣dome was so bewitched by the meanes of those forraine wo∣men with whom hee matched in Mariage, that hee became a fond Idolater, and so fell into the handes of God. Of this example, I trust you will take sufficient warning, so that herein I neede not to make many wordes: vnlesse you obiect vnto mée, or some other vnto you, the place of Sainct Pawle in the seauenth Chapter to the Corinthians, where hee sayth: The vnbeleeuing Husband is sanctified by the
Wife, and the vnbeleeuing Wife, is sanctified by the Hus∣band. If wee marke the purpose of Sainct Pawle, the an∣swere shall not be hard: the Verse nexte afore, doth con∣tayne his purpose, which is, that the beleeuinge Woman already marryed to the vnbeleeuinge man, should not vse the infidelity of her Husbande, as an occasion to departe from him, the wordes are these. The Woman which hath an Husbande that beleeueth not, if hee bee content to dwell with her, let her not forsake him: and then hee ioyneth the former sentence, as a rea∣son to confirme this other sentence, so that that place ser∣ueth to this end & purpose, that if you and your husbande were first both of you vnbeleeuers, afterward it pleased God to call you to the knowledge of his truth, your Hus∣band continuing in his infidelitie, or if now being groun∣ded, you should aduenture to marry with an vngodly per∣son, you ought not being married together, to seke a sepa∣ration, because there is hope of sanctification. For as you should do yl to yoake your selfe with an vngodly per∣son, so should you do worse to shake him off, being ioyned vnto you by Maryage, without some iuster cause, because there is hope of sanctification. And although it bee not a sufficiente cause to breake the knot, that by Maryage is knit, yet it is a iust and necessary cause, wherfore to re∣frayne Mariage. For the Maryage of an vngodly person I graunt is a mariage, and not lightly to be dissolued: but yet an vngodly Maryage, and that which lacketh sanctifi∣cation, as may easely be gathered of the wordes of Sainct Pawle, beefore alleadged. Wherfore as I would coun∣sayle you to continue, for the hope of sanctification, if your head were fast in the yoake, that you might winne your husband: so now standing frée, tempt not God I say, presume not, matche not with any that you know to bee out of the household of fayth, for feare of corruption, least you leese your selfe, before you win an other. Thus haue I spoken hytherto for my third wooer, who pleadeth honestie, vertue, and godlynesse, who I doubt
not shall spéede, because that God is on his side. And here if you demaund of mée, whether I would haue you so pre∣cise, as only to regarde the honestie and vertue, without any further respect. Truely, although (peraduenture) I shall séeme to spiritual in this point, yet if you had your eies fully fixed vpō that marke, without wanering other wayes, no doubt but God would prosper you the better, in asmuch as hée shall therby haue tryal, that you depend wholy vpon him and his prouideuce, and then shal you be left in danger of snares. And of this, that it ought to bee so, we may take an example and warning of the manner that God vsed in the first Mariage making, in the second Chapter of Genesis: For while he was prouiding for Adam, the Woman that should be his wyfe and his comfort, he caused an heauy fleepe to fall vpon the Man, and while hee was a sleepe, he toke out that Ryb wherof he framed the Woman. So verely I would thinke that God did most worke with you, if you laide Adam a fléepe, I meane, if you remooued all carnal affections, and worldly respectes which proceed as earthly from Adam, while that this bargaine were a dryuing. This I know is far wide from worldly wise∣dome, but this way you shall goe nearest, to make a Ma∣riage of Paradice, and so shal you séeme most to marry in the Lord. And if you may not abide so straight binding, yet swarue as litle as you may: If this be not your whole building, yet at the least, let it be your chéefe foundation: if this be your ground, haue no doubt but there wil grow and follow other good flowers sufficiently. So then I thinke you shall geather a good somme, if you caste your accountes in this wise: If Vertue come alone, she is not to be refused: if shee come with the company of sutch as the world estemeth, not as a Seruant, but as a Mistresse, which is hard and seldome, she is also to be imbraced. But if you stand on this point, you are in great daūger to slide: for Vertue clothed, is not so sure to trust, as if it be naked and bare. Then a litle vertue excéeding in one, may not be supplied with great store of goods, and haboundance of
ritches in another: for we must in our dooings first séeks the kingdome of Heauen, as for other things, after them seeke the Gentiles: If they bee sought with care, euen when we thinke vs nearest, we are oftentimes farthest off, and shoote to short: If we attaine the thing desired, yet we lacke the fruition, as when we wanted the thing: If wee enioy it, yet the space is shorte: but if they come as vnbidden guestes, then are they most welcome: yea if we seeke thē not, the promise is, they shalbe cast vnto vs: and if they be cast, then come they in their kinde. Now then to speake somewhat of other respectes seuerally, you may remember, the suiter whom I cōmended vnto you, I did so qualifie, that as I would not haue him godlesse, so I wish him not to be witlesse, for that I recken a most honest respecte, so that you discerne the true wisedome from the false, so that the simplicitie of the Dooue, do not ioyne with the wilines of the Serpent: neither shal this hinder my honest and godly Wooer in his suit, but rather further him. For as fooles are fortunate, so the vertuous commonly haue lesse want of wisedome: the feare of the Lorde is wisedome. Christ is the wisedome of God the Father: therfore if you make account of true wisedome, in this behalf you shalbe best sped in the true godly chris∣tian. I néede not make comparison betwéene the godly and the wise, so that you vse your wisedome, to iudge and discerne aright of wisedome, for the right wisedome, the godly righteous hath obtained. Only if the comparison stand betwixte the wise, and the wealthy or hansome, let Salomon bee your Counsailour therin, who sayth in the eyghth Chapter of his Prouerbes. VVisedome is better then precious Stones, and all pleasures are not to be compa∣red vnto her: and in the sixteenth Chapter. It is much bet∣ter to get wisedome then Golde, and to get vnderstandinge, is more to be desired then Siluer. And in yt seauenth Chap∣ter of Ecclesiasticus hée saith: The excellency of the know∣ledge of wisedome, giueth life to the possessers thereof. Now if the righteous and the ritch stand in comparison,
yet I trust my poore spirited suiter shall not be out faced, you sitting as Iudge, & such I trust shalbe your sentence, as was the wise Themistocles answere: For when it was demaunded of him, whether a man should bestowe his Daughter vpon a good poore man, or vpon a ritch man not so honest? his answere was, I had rather like the man that lacketh money, then money that wanteth a man. So litle thought he that ritches and substance did make a matter of Mariage, that it seemed to him, she did not mar∣ry for any regard of the man, that had such respect of rit∣ches: and that shée that married not an honest man, did scarse marrie a man. Some in déede haue their fancy so led, as though money made men: but let this bee your Poesie rather when you make your Mariage: Manners makes Men. Consider the saying of the Prophet Dauid in the .xxxvij. Psalm. A smal thing that the iust man hath is better thē great ritches of the vngodly wicked & mighty. I wish you wealth & ritches, for I know they are the good giftes of God: but I feare least Vertue wilbe ouerwhel∣med, where such floods breake out. Hée that wil tarry for the company of a ritch man to goe to Heauen, it will per∣haps be long ere hée come there, for his way is as straight as the eie of a Néedell, and hée himselfe as huge as a Ca∣mell. Salomon in the twentie & twentie one Chapters of Ecclesiasticus, maketh a maruell of the ritch vpright man. Therfore I wishe you, haue not this minde with you, as to seeke a ritche Mariage, for then you misse of the right marke of Mariage ordained for your comfort, there lyeth not the way leading to rest and quietnesse. For they that wilbe ritch, fal into snares and temptations, & into many foolish & noysome lustes, which drowne men in perdition and destruction. Vse oftentimes rather to repeate this sentence with your self: The desire of money, is the roote of all euill. Take héede that that roote ouergrow not other good flowers: but harken to the sentence yt our Sauiour pronounceth, in the sixt Chapter of Sainct Lukes Gospel. VVoe bee vnto you that are ritche, for you haue receaued
your consolation. These are the boundes that S. Pawle appointeth vs: If we haue (saith hée) foode and rayment, let vs therwith be content. And truely herein consisteth not true ritches, to possesse this earthly treasure, the meat of Mothes, and the bayte of Théeues. But such as my com∣mended suiter possesseth, if you may be partaker thereof, thē may you say: my lot is fallen to me on a faire ground, and that you haue got a goodly possession. Godlinesse (saith the Apostle) is great gaine, if a man be content with that hée hath: euen that is it which my suiter bringeth, godli∣nes with contentacion. Wherfore then should you desire the mariage of the ritch? you sée it bringeth no rest: you sée godlines is the true ritches: and God of his goodnesse hauing already blessed you with sufficient store & greate haboundance, I doubt not but you haue so good a minde with you, that you are rather vertuously desirous, wisely to imploy and bestow your goods and ritches, then gréedily couetous, to hoard them vp, and laye heape vpon heape, with an insatiable desire to increase them. Doo you seke to establish to you and yours an inheritance? harken then what the Prophet Dauid saith in the .xxxvij. Psalme. The euill dooers (saith hée) shalbe cut off, but they that wait vpon the Lord, they shall inherit the Lande. Againe: The meeke men (saith hée) shall inherite and possesse the earth. And againe: The Lord knoweth the dayes of vpright men, and their inheritance shalbe perpetuall. Doo you séeke a continuance and perpetuitie in things? S. Iames sayth: Like as when the Sunne ryseth with heate, the Grasse withe∣reth, his flowerfalleth away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perisheth, euen so shall the ritche man fade away in all his wayes: but the iuste they flourish like the Palme tree, they are like the Bay tree, euen greene and fresh like themselues: the roote of the righteous shall not be mooued. Doo you desire to haue such a heade as may best defende you from iniuries and oppressions? who is of more might then the righteous & godly? Dauid sayth in the .xxxiiij. Psalme. The Angell of the Lorde pitecheth his Tente round about
them that feare him, and deliuereth them in all their necessi∣ties. And againe: The cares of the Lord are open vnto their prayers, and hee will heare their cry, yea, hee keepeth their bones that none of them be broken, he numbreth the haires of their heades that none of them be lost. Doo you feare perrill or penury? of the godly righteous thus saith Da∣uid in the .xxxvij. Psalme. They shall be confounded in the perrilous time, and in the dayes of famine they shal haue ynough. You will peraduenture say, for my selfe I can holde mée well ynough contente, but my Childrens case mooueth mée. Harken then what Dauid speaketh of his experience in the xxxvij Psalme. I haue been younge (saith hée) and am now old, yet saw I neuer the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begginge their bread. Doubtlesse God shall prouide for you and yours sufficiently and haboundantly, if you casts away all such worldly respectes, and much more then o∣therwise. Now I thinke these shall suffise to vnderset and staye you vp that you fall not on this side. The nexte care concerneth my fourth Suiter, that hes take you not with the bayt of beauty, wherby many wise Women and Men haue bin deceaued, and with a shorte pleasure haue purchased long and desperate repentance. This caused Salomon to commit folly, as appeareth in the seconde Chapter of the first Booke of Kinges. This cooled the mighty Sampsons courage, as is manifested by the sixtéenth Chapter of the Booke of Iudges. Did not the beauty of Bethsaba so rauishe the eyes of holy Dauid, that he committed with her most habominable Adultery, and made himselfe gyltie of bloodshed? so it is written in the second Chapter of the second Booke of Samuell. Hee saw a Woman washinge her selfe, and the Woman was very beautifull to looke vpon. &c. You might abuse these ex∣amples to folly, as to saye: These men were notable, for strength, for wisedome, for godlinesse: maruell not then (might you say) though I be ouercome in that case. Not so, good Cosin, but this consider in these examples, that if
such of so excellent graces, haue béen led away with these traynes: you haue hereby a faire warninge, to beware, and to be very circumspecte, in so subtill a pointe, and so daungerous a case: if you giue place to such fancies that they ouercome reason, you may soone slip into those in∣conueniences that you see in the examples of others, you may pluck the house on your owne head, as Sampson did. As you choose your marke, so goeth your game: as you make your foundacion, so will your buildinge bée: if the one be stedfast, the other will not lightly shake: but if the one be not surely grounded, a litle blast marreth mutch worke. Surely the hansome person of man is not of long continuance: besides that it is subiecte to corruption by inuulnerable meanes. Wherfore, if your Mariage hang vpon that knot, a litle force will breake it, a litle labour will vndo it, and of it selfe it wil decay and weare away. If this fancie bee the leader of your loue, you folow a blinde guide, you may soone slide, and wander out of the right waye. Many an vnsauery woode, beareth a faire blossome: and so vnder a faire face, their lyeth hidden many a foule fault, and with a sound looke, oftentimes is couered the holow harte, full of all hatred, whereof you may reade a louely example of Absolon, in the fourséenth Chapter of the seconde Booke of Samuell. I haue read an History of one Paulus Aemilius a Noble man of Rome, matched with a Wife called Papiria, both for byrth and beauty (to iudge) worthy such a Husbande: howbeit hes deuorced her, and when her fréendes infreated for her, demaunding of him what should be the cause that moued him so to doo, for they saw none, séeinge that shée was to beholde, mannerly and moodest, faire and fruitfull. Then hée for answere, thrusteth out his foote, and saith: behold, sée my shoe, is it not faire? is it not new? yet none of you wotteth where it doth wringe mée. Belike there was some secret fault in that Woman not to bee borne with, which was so lothsome vnto the Husband, as her beautie could be pleasaunt, Bée aduised therfore, least you finde
that your handsome husband haue that, which this man found in his faire Wife. If you will not that your shoe wringe you, measure him before you buy, and iudge not of him by the colour: but measure him rather within thē without, least you wring for it afterwarde. The goodly personage without wisedome and vertue, what is it bet∣ter then a paynted man? Plato the wise Philosopher, thus sayd to Alcibiades: Hee that at any time hath loued Alcibiades body, hath not loued Alcibiades himselfe: but he that loueth thee, loueth thy minde and soule. And the wise Tully sayth: Man is as his minde is, and not that forme and figure which may be pointed at with the finger. For man consisteth of two partes: the one is the minde endued with reason, and beareth the Image of God: the other is the body, which wee haue common with brute Beastes. Dauid compareth that man that lacketh vnderstandinge, vnto Horse and Mule: and mée thinkes, I may wel com∣pare such lusty lads, whose commendacion is only in their personage, and lacketh learninge wit and honesty, vnto Platoes man, as Diogenes scoffingly termed. For when that Plato in his Schoole had defined a man in this wise, to be a lyuing and two footed creature, made vpright and without any feathers: Diogenes thinkinge that hee had not well defined or expressed the nature of man, because hee suppressed that which was most propper to man, and did concerne the minde and guift of reason: hee plucked a Capon bare of all his feathers, and turned him into the Schoole, saying: beholde Platoes man. Thus is a man if you consider not his minde, a foole: What is he but an vnfeathered fowle. A man without manners, what is hée better then a Capon without fea∣thers? wherfore if you meete any sutche in your dishe, esteeme him as you list, I haue tolde you the price. Trust not to soone those faire faces, which come like Capons vpon Soppes and Suger. That braue apparrell, what is it else but Peacockes feathers? The good complexion, the strength of the body, the white hande, the cleane leg,
what are they all, but fadinge flatteringe flowers? what but baytes to deceaue the foolish fishe? All these doo serue but to please the eye, & to satisfie the fantacy of the flesh. Consider that which is written in the sirte Chapter of Genesis. The Sonnes of God saw the Daughters of men that they were fayre, and they toke them Wiues of all that they Iyked. Therfore the Lord sayd: my spirit shall not alwaies striue with man. &c. Beholde that fleshly fancy euen of Mariage it selfe, because therby they abused and polluted the holy ordenaunce of God, is expressed there, as one of the causes, that prouoked God, so to powre out the rayne of his wrath, and to destroy all fleshe from the face of the earth. Wherfore in this point I ende with the exhorta∣tion of Sainct Iohn, in the seconde Chapter of his first Epistle. Loue not the worlde, neither the things that are in the world: if any man loue the world, the loue of the Father is not in him: for al that is in the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pryde of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world: and the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but hee that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth for euer. By these you may consider the true and sure way you haue to walke: you haue the by wayes yt may cause you to wander, in some part stopped vp: you may sée, if it please yon, the good, and the bad, although set forth but in a rude glasse. Singe not now Medeas songe, who sayd: I see and allow the better, but yet I follow the worse. Giue not Venus your Apple, but giue the vertuous your wed∣dinge Ringe. And then sée how you haue headed your Arrow: sée the blessed state you stande in: hee is yours, for better, for worser, forritcher, for poorer, in sickenesse & in health: hée shalbe to you an Husbande, to your Chil∣dren a Father, to your fréendes a fauourer, to your ene∣mies a terror: hee shall willingly beare parte of all your blowes and burdens: hee shall double your prosperitie: hee shal mourne whē you wéepe: hée shal laugh when you are glad: his loue is sure sealed, euen ioyned by God him slfe. Hée is not like the ritche, of whom the Sonne of
Sirache sayth in the thirtéenth Chapter. If thou bee for his profit, hee vseth thee, but if thou haue nothing, hee for∣saketh thee. Hée is not like the light louer of Beauty, of whom the wise Plato saith: Hee that loueth thee for thy fauour, when that decayeth hee will giue thee ouer. But hee shall bee one wit you both body and soule, hee shal walke forth with you all your Pilgrimage here on earth, & shall leade you the way to eternall rest.) Hee shal bée blessed in all his affaires, for so saith Dauid in the hundred & four∣téenth Psalme: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, and delighteth in his commaundementes, the generation of him shalbe blessed, ritches and treasures shalbe in his house, and his righteousnesse shal indure. And in the hundred & twentie eyght Psalme hée sayth: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, and walketh in his wayes: when hee eateth the laboures of his handes hee shalbe blessed, and it shalbe wel with him: his Wife shalbe as the flourishinge Vyne on the sides of his house: euen your Husbandes Wife shal bee such a one, if your Husbande bee such a one: This Dauid promiseth, and in the spirit of God prophesieth, and con∣firmeth it againe, saying: Loe, surely thus shal the man be blessed that walketh in the wayes of the Lord, and thus shall the Woman bee blessed that marryeth the man that feareth the Lorde. You wil say, peraduenture, I would thinke my selfe well bestowed vpon such a man: but the crafte is in the catching, the doubt is in the obtayninge. But goe you forwarde in your race of Vertue, and then you shall not goe far before you meete with a méete matche. It is an olde sayinge: The like loueth the like. The Sonne of Sirache sayth in the thirtéenth Chapter. All flesh wil resort to their like, and euery man wil kepe compa∣ny with such as hee is himselfe. A vertuous Woman (saith hée in the sixtéenth Chapter) is a good portion, and a gyfte to be giuen to some iust ioseph, or some true Tobyas. You know that euery good gifte cōmeth from God, as the Fa∣ther and first founder therof: and surely in this case God appeareth more euidente to strike the stroke, & to worke
as it were immediatly within, with his owne hande: So sayth Salomon in the nynetéenth Chapter of his Pro∣uerbes: House and ritches are the inheritance of the Fa∣thers, but a prudent Wife is the speciall guisee of the Lorde. Wherfore, although there bee good tokens and markes wherby to make your choice, as by the fruite to iudge the Trée: for so saith the Booke of Ecclesiasticus in the .xxvij. Chapter: The worde declareth the harte, the talke is the tryall of men: Yet because these are rather probable con∣iectures, then sure demonstracions, for Fame oftentimes lyeth: therefore when you haue caste the whole and the somme, yet God is all in all this matter, and the onely maker of good Mariages. Bee free then from worldly businesse, he cleare from carnall affections, cast your hope vpon God, depend vpon his prouidence, commit the mat∣ter wholy to his handes, resorte and flye to him with oft and earnest prayer: for that when all other wayes bee tryed, is the plainest to seeke, the surest to trust, and the readiest to finde, for such as seeke good Wiues, and good Husbandes. You haue a good example in the .xxiiij. Chap∣ter of Genesis, how Abraham proceeded in the Mariage of his Sonne Isaac: You haue there the praier that the ser∣uaunt of Abraham made, to whom the charge therof was committed, how hée entringe his iourney desired God to prosper him, and to shew mercy vnto his Maister Abra∣ham, and that God according to his faithfull prayer, gaue him a token, wherby hée chose the vertuous Virgin Re∣becca. For her Parentes, when they perceaued that God wrought with man, could not deny their good will vnto Isaac, but answered: This thing is proceeded of the Lorde, we cannot therfore say vntō thee eyther euill or good. You haue also there the exercise of Isaac, how he was occupied in the meane time, while Rebecca was taken out of his Ryb: hée wente out to praye in the Féelde towardes the euening, and Rebecca first found him so occupied. This is all (my good Cosin) that I haue now to be sayd. Giue your selfe ouer wholy vnto God to bee your guide. Let
your eyes be so earnestly bente vpon him, as they were wont to be vpon your Mistreste, whom you haue hereto∣fore serued: Then shall God no doubt giue you as a por∣tion to the rightuous, hée shall so ioyne you, that man may not seperate you: Christ shal bee present with you, as at the Mariage of Cana: hee shall conduct you with his holy spirit: he shall turne your Water into Wine: hee shall make the sower sweete, and prosper all your affaires. In the meane time, while God worketh, bee not you ydle, but practise your selfe in Isaackes exercise, and God shall sende you an Husbande of his kinde, euen a faithfull Sonne of Abraham, a chosen Childe of God. Yea, God shal sende his Aungell to lead that man vnto your house, euen as hee brought Tobyas vnto Sara, at the house of her Father Raguell. And as my poore prayer may helpe, I will become your faythfull Orator, I will beseeke the Lorde God to guide you with his holy spirite, to prouide you an Husband for your comfort, and to graunt you long to liue and loue togeather, to your desired hartes ease, and vnspeakeable quiet. And so I leaue to trouble you, and betake you to God, who I am sure will neuer forget you, if you repose your whole confidence in him. Yours to commaund during lyfe, I. R. This faythfull pledge of true intente, With trustie harte is truely mente. FINIS.
THE GLASSE of godly Loue. Wherin all maried couples may learne their duties, each toward o∣thers, according to the holy Scriptures: Verye necessary for all maryed men and women, that feare the Lorde, & loue his lawes, to haue it in their Bedchambers, daily to looke in: whereby they may know, and do their duties each vnto others, and leade a godly, quiet, and louing life togeathers, to the glory of God, and the good example of their Christian Bretheren. Iames. 1. See that ye be not only hearers of the worde, but also doers, least that therby yee deceaue your selues. Colossians. 3. Aboue all thinges put on Loue, which is the band of perfection.
To all Christian men and wo∣men that are maryed. FOrasmuch, as the Diuel is most ready to make strife where there ought to bee most loue: and hath with heddy wil∣fulnesse, concupiscence, and ignorance, so∣blinded the hartes of those which liue vnder the yoke of Matrimony (that as I may iudge by their fruites) there be very few that leade their lyues therein, accor∣ding to the lawes of Christe. Therfore (my deare & welbeloued Christians, which professe the Gospell) to the intent that you should liue therin, according to your profession and knowledge: I haue here breefely and plaincly set forth what it is, and how you ought to leade your lyues therin, accordinge to the Rules of the holy Scriptures, so that your pure and godly lyfe may bee a good example, and also make such ashamed as would sclaunder the holy Gospell, and professours of the same: yea, and that their wonted worde (which is, marke these new men by their lyuinge) may sound to Gods glory, to the honour of his most holy worde, and praise of al them in Christ, which do professe the same. Farewell in the Lorde.
YOu shall first vnderstande, that Wedlocke is an hie and blessed order or∣dained of God in Paradise, which hath euer bin had in great honor and reuerence, wher∣n, one man and one woman are coupled and knit togea∣ther in one fleshe and body, in the feare and loue of God, by the frée, louing, hartie, and good consent of them both, to the intente that they two may dwel togeather, as one flesh and bodye, of one will and minde, in all godlynesse, most louingly to helpe and comfort one another, to bring forth children, and to instruct them in the lawes of God. Also to auoyde Fornication and all vncleanenesse, and so in all honesty, vertue, and godlynesse, to spend their liues in the equall partakinge of all such thinges as God shall send them, with thankes gyuinge. And because that the Wife is in subiection to her Hus∣band, I will begin with her, & shortly declare what dutie and obedience shée oweth vnto him, by the commaunde∣mentes of the Scriptures. Ephe. 5. The duetie of the Wife, to her Husband. SAynct Pawle sayth: Yee Wiues, submit your selues to your owne Husbandes, as to Lorde: for the Husband is the Wiues head, as Christ is the head of the Congregatiō: Therfore as the Congregation is in subiection vnto Christe, likewise let Wiues be in subiection to their Husbandes in al thinges. So that the wife must bee obediente vnto her husband, as vnto Christ himselfe, whereout it foloweth, that the saide obedience extendeth not vnto any wicked∣nesse, or euill, but vnto that which is good, honest, and cumly. In asmuch as God delighteth onely in goodnes, & forbiddeth the euill euery where: it foloweth also, that the disobedience that a wife showeth to hir Husband, dis∣pleaseth God no lesse, then when he is disobeyed himself. For the wife ought to obey hir husband in all pointes, as
the Congregation to Christe, which loueth Christ onely: and aboue all thinges, shee is glad and willinge to suffer for Christes sake, shee doth all for the loue of him, Christe only is her romfort, ioy, and all togeathers, vpon Christe is hir thought daye and night, shée longeth onely after Christ, for Christes sake (if it may serue to his glory) shée is hartely well contented to die, yee shee giueth ouer her selfe wholly therto, for Christes loue, knowing assuredly that hir soule, hir honour, body, lyfe, and all that she hath is Christes owne. Thus also must euery honest Wife submit hir self, to please hir Husband with all hir power, and giue hir selfe fréely, and willingly, to loue him and o∣bey him, and neuer to forsake him till the houre of death. And farther (sayth S. Peter:) Let the Wiues be in sub∣iecton to their Husbandes, that euen they which beleeue not the worde, may without the worde be wonne by the conuer∣sation of the Wiues, while they beholde your pure conuer∣sation coupled with feare, whose apparrell shall not bee out∣ward with brodred haire, and hanging on of Golde, either in putting on of gorgious apparrell, but let the hid man of the harte bee vncorrupt, with a meeke and quiet spirit, which spirit is before God much set by, for after this manner in the olde time did the holy Women which trusted in God tire themselues, and were obedient to their Husbandes, euen as sara obeyed Abraham: and called him hir Lorde, whose Daughters ye are as long as ye do well. And Paule speaking vnto Tytus (sayth hée:) Let the elder Women be in such apparrell as becommeth holinesle, not beeing false accusers, not giuen to much Wine, but that they teache honest thinges, to make the young Women so∣ber minded, to loue their Husbandes, to loue their Children, to be discrete, chaste, huswifely, good, obedient vnto their Husbandes, that the worde of God be not euill spoken of. VVhat a Wife ought to bee. HEre may you learne, that a Wife ought to be discret, chaste, huswifely, shamefast, good, méeke, pacient, and
sober, not light in countenance, nor garishe in apparrell, with dyed or curled haire, painted nor pasted, but with a cumly grauitie and a sad behauiour of a constant minde, true tongued, and of few wordes, with such obedience in all godlynesse to her Husbande and head, as it beseemes a Christian to haue vnto Christ, and to the intente that the Husband in like case may learne his duetie, let him har∣ken what Sainct Pawle sayth: and take heede that hee turne not his authoritie to tyranny. The dutie of the Husband to his Wyfe. HVsbandes loue your Wiues (sayth hée) as Christ loued the Congregation, and gaue him selfe to sanctifie it. Now must you vnderstande, that the Husbande is the Wiues head, as Christe is the head of the congregation: and Christ showeth to the congregation the same thinge, that ye head showeth to the bodye: for like as the head seeth and heaveth for the whole body, studieth and deuiseth for to preserue it in strength and life: euen so doth Christe defend, teach, and preserue his congregation. For hee is the eye, hart, wisedome, and guide therof: so ought Hus∣bands (then) to loue their wines, & be their heads in like manner to show them like kindenesse, and after the same fashion to guide them and rule them with discretion, for their preseruacion, & not with force or wilfulnesse to in∣treat them. And S. Pawle saith farther: So ought men to loue their wiues, as their owne bodies: he that loueth his wife loueth himself. For no man hath at any time hated his owne flesh, but doth nourish and cherish it, euen as the Lorde doth the Congregation. Therfore, ought euery man most fer∣nently to loue his wife equally wt himselfe in al pointes: for this is the measure of mutuall loue Matrimoniall, that either partie haue nothing so deare that they can not be contented to bestow one vpon another, ye, and if neede should be, they should also not spare their owne liues one for another, no more then christ did for his congregation.
And like as when we repent and beléeue in the promise of God in Christ (though we were neuer so poore sinners) are as ritch as Christ, & al merites ours: so is a Woman (though she were neuer so poore afore she was maried) as ritch as hir husband, for all ye he hath is hirs, ye his owne bodye, and hath power ouer it, as saith Sainct Pawle. And if it so chaunce yt you finde not your wife so perfect in al pointes, as you would or as your selfe, yet must you not dispise hir, nor bee bitteer nor cruell vnto hir for hir faultes, but gently and louingly, seeke to amend and win hir. For like as Christe thought no scorne of his church, dispised hir not, neither forsooke hir for hir vncleanenes and sinnes: so should no christian man spurne at his wife nor set light by hir, because that sometime she falleth, of∣fendeth, or goeth not right, but euen as Christ nourisheth and teacheth his church, so ought euery honest husbande (also) louingly and gently to informe & instruct his wife. For in many things (saith S. Peter) God hath made the men stronger then the women, not to rage vpon them & to be tirantes vnto them, but to helpe them & beare their weakenesse. Bee curteous therfore (saith hée) and win them to Christ, and ouercome them with kindenesse, that of loue they may obey the ordinance that God made bee∣twéene man and Wife. Oh how ashamed be those men to loke vpon this texte, which with violence in their furye will intreate their wiues: no beast so beastly, for in the most cruelst way is not mete, as when the wife is sad and disquieted, then with spiteful wordes and wanton fashions, so prouoking hir to anger. Where it is not the dutie of the husband, but rather ashamed to his owne head: likewise it is wor∣ship for a man to haue the feare of the Lorde before his eyes, that he prouoke not the plague of vengeance. Let vs therfore haue humilitie in our hartes: For as a wise man loketh well to his owne goinges, euen so plea∣sant are the wordes spoken in due season, which moueth the woman in hir wrath vnto patience, whereof Salamon
sayth: Faire wordes are an Hony Combe, a refreshinge of the minde, and a health of the bones. For it is seldome seene yt any beast is found in the cruelst rage, that ye Male doth euer hurte his Female: and how vnnatural a thing is it for a man to hurt his owne flesh and body: Who will violently reuenge himselfe (yea) on his foote if it chaunce to stumble? but wil not rather, if hee haue an yll bodye, cherish it to make it better. The strong (saith S. Pawle) ought to beare the frailenesse of the weake, let one suffer with another: beare ye one an o∣thers burden, and so shall ye fulfill the lawes of Christ, and a∣boue all thinge (sayth S. Peter:) Haue feruent loue amongst you, for loue couereth the multitude of faultes. So that loue in all things and at all times ought to bee the whole doore and only instrument to worke and frame all things betwéene man and wife. VVhat the Husband ought to bee. BY all this may yee geather and learne that the man is the head, gouernour, ruler, & instructer (with gentil wordes and good example) the prouyder, defender, and whole comforte of the woman, and oweth vnto hyr most feruent loue and affection, all gentle behauiour, all fayth∣fulnes and helpe, all comforte and kindenesse, as to him selfe, his owne flesh and body: so that vnder God there is no loue, no affection, no fréendship, no nerenes of kin, to be compared vnto this, nor any one thing vnder the Sun that pleaseth God more thē man and wife that agrée well togeathers, which liue in the feare of God. And how can that bee more liuely expressed, then in that, that Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, and the holy christian Church, and the holy body of them both, are set forth for an exam∣ple or Mirror of the state of Wedlocke, or coniugall loue, a more holy, a more godly and purer example could not be shewed. Vndoubtedly, this doth plainely show, that loue Matrimoniall is most highly accepted afore God, and the
contrary must néedes folow, ye vnquietnes, hatred, strife, brawling, chiding, and frowardnes in Mariage, doth ex∣ceedingly displease God, & is clearely forbidden by Sainct Pawle, where hée sayth: Let all bitternesse, fiercenesse, and wrath, roaringe, and cursed speaking be put away from you: be ye curteous and louinge one to another and merciful, for∣geuing one another, euen as God for Christes sake forgaue you. Surely it is an highe and pure loue, perfecte and constant that God requireth to be betwéene maryed cou∣ples, and therfore ought they by all wayes, meanes, and labour to get, maintaine, and increase this exceding loue, and to eschue, forbeare, and cut of all things, that might occasion any parte of the contrary. What maintaineth loue and quietnesse in Mariage. ANd vndoubtedly, there is nothing that longer main∣taineth concorde and quietnes, nor more increaseth perfecte loue in Maryage, then sweet and faire wordes, gentle and fréendly déedes, and with a louing patience to take all things to the best. Fréely to breake their mindes togeathers, and al things to be kept secret, doth glad and willing to amend that is amisse, and aboue all thinge not once one to heare yl of another, for S. Pawle warneth you that ye giue no place to the backebiters, but take them as yll willers to you both, though that they be neuer so nere fréendes or kin. And God sayth: A man shall forsake Fa∣ther and Mother, and cleaue vnto his Wife, and they two shalbe one flesh, which in like case is mente to the Woman. Therfore ought no creature aliue, to be in such estéema∣tion, credit, fauour, and loue, as each of you with others. Also to bee of a sober and temperate dyet, doth much far∣ther a good agréement, and where the contrary is, there is much vnquietnesse. For Salomon askinge where is woe? where is strife? where is brawling? euen amongst those (saith hée) that bee euer at the Wine, therfore it is most cumly for christians to be temperate in dyet, tempe∣rate
in wordes, temperate in déedes, and temperate in all things, so that at all times ye eschue al excesse and furfet, rage and fury, which makes no difference betwixt man and beast, and all other things which may bréed any part of vnquietnesse. For Salomon sayth: Better is a dry mor∣sell with quietnesse, then a full house, and many fat cattell with strife. Therfore ought yee to exteeme and imbrace this concord and quietnesse, as the maintainer and onely vpholder of the whole felicitie in Mariage, which is en∣gendred of feruent loue, faithfulnesse, and kindenesse, and maintained by the same, wherin ye ought continually to walke in all chastenes and purenes of liuing, which (as∣suredly) shineth, as a most precious thinge in the sight of God, and in the commendacion of the same sayth: The commendacion of Chastitie. SAlomon in the Booke of Wisedome. O faire is a chast generacion with vertue, for it is with good men, where it is present men take example therat, and if it go away, yet they desire it: it is alwayes crowned and holden in honour, and winneth the reward of the vndefiled Battel, but the multitude of vngodly Children are vnprofitable, and the things that are planted in whoredome shall take no déepe roote, nor lay any fast foundacion, though they be gréene in the braunches for a time, yet shall they be sha∣ken with the winde, for they stand not fast, and through the vehemency of the winde they shal bee rooted out, for the vnprofitable braunches shall bee broken, their fruite shalbe vnprofitable & sower to eate, yée meet for nothing, and why? all the children of the wicked must beare re∣corde, of the wickednesse of their Fathers and Mothers, when they be asked, but to the rightuous bee ouer taken with death, yet shall hée be in rest. Here may you sée, how vile filthye and abhominable A∣dultery, Fornication, and Basterdy is, and how high in estemacion a chaste life is amongst all good and godly
folke, and especially in the sight of God, to whom no se∣creat sinne is hid. That maryed folke ought to haue chaste manners, and communication. ANd as a chast louinge life in Mariage is most cōmen∣ded, so ought ye to be of chast manners, to haue chast talke, and to eschue all wanton fashions, vnclenly com∣munication, filthy handling, and all vnséemelynesse, and to be the speakers and very doores of all vertue and god∣linesse, for Sainct Pawle sayth: Be ye folowers of God as deare Children, and walke in loue euen as Christ loued you, and gaue himselfe for vs an offering and a sacrifice of sweete sauour to God, so that fornication and all vncleanenesse or couetousnesse bee not once named amongest you, as becom∣meth Saincts neither filthy nor foolish talke, neither iesting which are not cumly, but rather giuinge of thankes, for this ye know, that whoremongers, eyther vncleane persons, or couetous persons, which is the worshippers of Images shall haue any entrance in the kingdome of God and of Christe. Of temperance in Maryage. ALso there ought to be a temperance betweene man & wife, for God hath ordained mariage for a remedy or medecine to asswage the heate of the burninge flesh, and for procreation, and not beastly for to fulfill the whole lustes of the diuelish minde and wicked flesh, for though ye haue a promise that the acte in mariage is no sinne, if the man receaue his Wife as a guifte giuen to him of God, and the Wife her Husbande in like case, as ye haue a promise that yee sinne not when yee eate and drinke measurably with thankes giuinge, yet if yee take excesse or vse it beastly, vilely, or inordinately, your mistempe∣rance make that yll which is good (beeinge rightly vsed and that which is cleane yee defile through your abusinge
of it: God hath not called you to vncleanenesse, but vnto holynesse sayth S. Pawle:) and farther (sayth hée) It is the will of God euen that you should bee holye, and that euery one of you should know how to keepe his vessell in holynes and honour, and not in the lustes of concupiscence as do the Heathen which know not God. Also Sainct Pawle willeth you that yee withdraw not your selues nor departe not one from another, except it bee with the good consente of bothe, for a time to faste and to pray, which fastinge and prayer, I would to God were more vsed then it is, not as Hipocrites were wont, but as Christians ought, and are commaunded (almost) in euery parte of the Scriptures: for they that in eating and drinkinge fulfill the whole lustes of the fleshe, can not worke after the spirite: and as wée daylie and houre∣ly continually sinne, so ought wee continually to praye and call for grace. And in all the whole Byble, you shal not finde a more godly example of maryage (which I would to God all maryed folkes would reade) then that of Tobiach and Sara, the Daughter of Raguell, which were knit togeather in fastinge and prayer, and oft vsed the same, lyuinge a godly, pure, and cleane lyfe: for the which, they obtayned the blessinge of God, and saw their Chiloerns Children to the fifte generacion. The commendacion of Children. CHildren (vndoubtedly) is the highest guift, and grea∣test treasure of this worlde, and maintenaunce of the same. For Children is the very sure band and last knot of loue Matrimonial, by the which the parents can neuer be clearely seperated a sunder: In asmuch as that which is of them both cannot be deuided, seeing both haue parte in euery one. And children are their Parents chéefe ioy, comfort, and felicitie next vnto God, their stay and staffe & vphelders of their age: and in their children do the Pa∣rents liue (in a manner) after their death. For they dye not all togethers ye leaue collops of their owne flesh aliue
behinde them, and by their children (if they be vertuously and godly brought vp) then is God honoured, & the com∣mon wealth aduaunced, so that the parents and all men fare the better by them. Your children (most assuredly) is the very blessing of god, for the which ye ought to giue him most hartie thankes, and be contented, and with such as hée doth sende you, bee they many or few, Sonnes or Daughters. For if they be many, he wil prouide for them if they be faithful. If they be few, he may send you more, and giue you more ioy of one daughter, thē of ten sonnes: Therfore be content with his will, for hée doth all things for the best, and knoweth what is beste for you, giue him most hartie thankes for such as you haue, and be diligent to sée them vertuously and godly brought vp, and in any case suffer them not to bee ydell. How children ought to bee brought vp. FOr they that wil not worke (saith S. Pawle) let them not eate, therfore put them to learne some honest Science, or Crafte, wherunto of nature they be most apt. For in that shal they most profite, in the which they may get their owne ly∣uinge, and serue the common wealth. And aboue al thing let them first learne to know God & his most holy worde, which is the right pathe and highe way to all vertue and godlinesse, the sure Shielde and stronge Buckler to de∣fende vs from the Diuell and all his cruell and craftie assaultes, giue them daily godly and louinge exhortaci∣ons, suffer no vice to take roote in them, but rebuke them for their yll, and commend them in their well doo∣inge. Prouide honestly afore hand for all necessary thinges, both for them and all your household. For saith S. Pawle to Timothie: If there bee any that prouideth not for his owne, and namely for them of his householde, the same de∣nyeth the fayth, and is worse then an Infidell.
The order of your house. OF the Sparrowes may yee learne the order of your household, for as the Cocke flyeth too and fro, to bring all thinge to the neast, and as the dam kéepeth the neast, hatcheth and bringeth foorth hir yonge, so all prouision and whatsoeuer is to bee doone without the house, belon∣geth to the man, and the woman to take charge within, to sée all things conueniently saued, or spent as it ought, to bring forth and nourish hir children, and to haue al the whole dooing of hir Daughters and women. Also be louing vnto your children, and be not fierce nor cruell vnto them. For S. Pawle saith: Fathers rate not your children, least they be of a desperate minde, but with discrete admonitions, and with your pure and good example of liuinge (which is the cheefest perswasion) lead them to all vertue and godlynesse. If all Parentes would vertuously bringe vp their chil∣dren in the knowledge and feare of God, in the practice & exercise of some honest Science or Craft. Then should we not sée so many ydell as bee, so many Vacabondes, Théeues, and Murderers, so many vicious persons of all degrées, nor such vngodlynes raigne. But then should wée sée euery man honestly get his lyuing, preferring his Neighbours proffite as his owne, then should wée sée all men rightly do their duties, then should loue and charity spring, and all godlynesse raigne, then should the Lawes and Magistrates be willingly obeyed, the commō wealth flourish, and God rightly honoured, for in this point only through the grace of God consistes the amendment of all the whole worlde. Therfore (my deare and welbeloued Christians) séeing that in this blessed state of Matrimony, and godly house∣holde of husband, wife, and children consistes (next vnder God) the chéefest and highest felicitie of this worlde, and maintenance of the same, wherein the common wealth is wholly aduaunced, and God most highly honoured. I
exhort you in the name of Iesus Christ, the Sonne of the liuinge God, that you walke worthely therin, accordinge to the will of Christ, which you professe without faining, and that you eschue all woorkes and déedes of the fleshe, which bee these, saith S. Pawle: Adultery, Fornication, vncleanenesse, wantonnesse, Idolatry, Witchcrafte, hatred, varyance, wrath, strife, sedition, sectes, enuyinge, murther, drunkennesse, gluttony, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I haue tolde you you in times past, that they which commit such thinges shall not inherite the kingdome of God. Therfore follow yee the spirit and workes of the same, which hée (sayth S. Pawle:) Loue, ioy, peace, longe suffering, gentilnesse, goodnesse, faithfulnesse, meeke∣nesse, temperance, and such like. And yet once agayne, I exhort you with the exhortacion of S. Pawle. If there be amongst you any consolation in Christ, if there be any com∣fortable loue, if there be any felowship of the spirit, if there be any compassion of mercy, fulfill you my ioy, that ye draw one way, hauing one loue, beeing of one accorde, and of one minde, that nothing bee done through strife or vaine glory, but that in meekenesse of minde, euery one esteeme other better then them selfe, and so shal you leade a ioyfull quiet, and godly life in this world, and after, through Iesus Christ, come to the life euerlasting, with God the Father, to whom bee all honour and glory. Amen. Rom. 10. If the roote bee whole, the braunches shall bee whole also. FINIS.
