20392 99849311 14451
THE TABLE OF THE LORD: WHEREOF 1. THE VVHOLE SERVICE, IS THE LIVING BREAD. 2. THE GVESTS, ANY MAN. 3. THE MOVTH TO Eate, FAITH ONELY. By GILBERT PRIMEROSE, Doctour of Divinitie, one of his Maiesties Chaplaines in Ordinary, and Pastour of the French Church at London. LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop at the Royall Exchange. 1626.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, Sir IAMES FOVVLERTON, First Gentleman of his MAIESTIES Bed∣chamber, &c. RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SOoner shall the heaven be without stars, the stars without light, the fire without heat, the aire without moi∣sture, the Sea without agitation, a faire med∣dow without grasse,
then the Church with∣out the poisonous tares, and noysome weeds of hellish heresies, which springing vp with the wholesome and soule-feeding wheat the Lord Iesus hath sowed in the heavenly field of his Church, hast to smoo∣ther it, ere it grow to any beautiful and fruit∣full perfection. For1 Cor. 11.19. there must be heresies, that they which are approved may be made manifest. Therefore, as God foretelling thatZach. 1.18.19.20.21. foure hornes should arise to scatter Iudah, Israel, and
Ierusalem, foretold also that he had appointed foure Carpenters to fray them, even so foreseing that by the ever-wat∣ching craft of the ever-waking divell, the vene∣mous seed of deadly er∣rors should grow with the good corne of the Gospell to choake it, he ordained diligent and faithfull1 Cor. 3.9. Labourers to weed and plucke them out by the roote. These Labourers are the Pastours of the Church, who should be, not onely1 Tim. 3 2. . apt to teach
good and sound doc∣trine, but alsoTit. 1.9. . apt to con∣vince the gainesayers. And certainely, if it be the dutie of all Christians, not onelyAthenag. in legat. pro Chri∣stianis. . to speake of the truth, but also to dispute for the truth: How much more should the man of God, the Doctour of the Church beAug. de Doc. Chri. lib. 4. c. 4. Ʋeritatis propugna∣tor & er∣roris ex∣pugnator. defender of the truth, and over-commer of errour: Never was there in the Church greater need of both, then now that the Whoore of Baby∣lon giues to the Kings and great men of the earth, great bowles of
her phyltres to drinke, farre more dangerous then the waters of Ae∣thiopia; Ovid. 15. Meta∣morphos. Quos si quis faucibus hausit, Aut furit, aut patitur mirum gravitate soporem. For assoone as they haue set that golden cup to their heads, they are possessed with a dizzi∣nesse, and, as if they had drunke a worse Nepen∣thé then that whichHomer. Odys. lib. 4. Helena gaue to Telema∣chus, they forget their owne name of Christi∣ans, and never speake
of Iesus Christ, but to seeke vnder a Herodian colour of worshipping him, to kill him againe in his members. Of what pestilent herbes that loue-drinke is made, who knowes not? How all those that call themselues Ca∣tholiques are bewitched with it, who sees not? Where these mishapen and ougly plants, whose bane-giving liquor ba∣nishes the wisest men from their best wits, doe grow, who hath read in the seventeenth
chapter of the Revelation of S. Iohn what is writ∣ten of the woman ar∣rayed in purple & scar∣let, of the golden cup in her hand full of abomi∣nations, and filthinesse of her fornications, of the name written on her forehead in capitall Letters, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MO∣THER OF HAR∣LOTS, AND ABO∣MINATIONS OF THE EARTH, of the blood of the Saints wherewith she is drun∣ken,
of the beast with seaven heads she sits vpon, of many waters she rules over, and will not affirme boldly, that S. Hierome strayed not from the Truth, when he said it isHierony. ad Marcel linam vi∣duam. Rupes Turpeia, the Towne builded on seaven Mountaines, Rome, even that Rome where in Hieromes dayes was the true Church, the Trophies of the Apostles and Martyrs, the true confession of Christ, and was then decaying, then beginning to beRev. 18. the habitation of devils, the hold of every foule Spirit, and
a cage of every vncleane and hatefull bird? There is the devils gar∣den, and his Gardener the man of sinne, the Sonne of perdition, whose e∣missaries runne abroad sowing every where the aconit of his most venemous doctrine, the only Marchandise these Mountebankes of the fourth vow fetch from that dungeon of infer∣nal fiends, which beingRev. 11.8. spiritually Sodom and Egypt, hath nothing but faire shewes of rotten and stinking drugges, like
theIoseph. de bello Iu∣daico. lib. 5 cap. 5. . apples of Sodom, which at the first touching va∣nish away in smoake and ashes, and worse then Egypt, Odyss. lib. 4. Aboūds in evill weeds, & hath few or no good hearbes. Of these loath∣some and infectious hearbs, the best where∣of is but Swines-grasse, at my attendance at Court in Iuly last, I la∣boured to grubbe vp with the hooke-weed of the word of GOD
that poysonous Toad-stoole, called Transubstan∣tiation, the last and the foulest master-piece of work of the divels hus∣bandry, and wherein he delights most, because it is most like vnto himselfe: For by it Ceres & Bacchus are worship∣ped vnder the name of Christ, poore Christi∣ans blind-folded by the Corybantes of Babylon, are holden in hand, that a round and thin crust of the breadth of a shilling is Christs owne selfe, as big, as tall, as perfect a
man as he was on the Crosse, that at the Masse they see him, that at Ea∣ster they eate with the mouths of their bodies his flesh, bones, blood, and whole body, that therefore they must worship that crust with the worship of Latria due to none but God: So he makes them the greatest, or at least as great idolaters as ever were in the world: This seemed so barbarous to the Ambassadours of the Towpinambauts in Frāce not long since, that al∣though
they be the most barbarous people of the world, and eaters of mens flesh, yet to the naturall light that hath remained in their bru∣tish minds, this went beyond all brutishness, that reasonable men should eate that which they worship, or worship that which they eate: And certainely, said they, if Our God were as beneficiall to vs, as your Christ is to you, we would honour him the best we could, but we would not eate him. And one of them made a Proselyte by the Capuchin Friars
of Paris, being asked if he was now a good Christian, Yes, said he, for every day for my breake∣fast I eate one of your Christs. What I then preached in two Sermons, both for the truth, & against this most abominable errour. I haue set down in this little Booke, which I dare to send abroad cloathed with the livery of your ho∣nourable & most wor∣thy Name, that appea∣ring to the common view with such a good∣ly face, it may be well∣comer
to the Readers, and as it shall please God to giue a blessing vnto it, helpe to recall and reclaime those that goe a whooring with the works of their own hands, or at least to di∣rect such of our owne, who desirous to wind the spole-fuls of wri∣thed and intricate con∣troversies, for not ha∣ving their sences exerci∣sed in such a wearisom and painefull labour, cannot finde the right ende of the thread, and being once entred
into the vnknowne crookes of that turning labyrinth, cannot goe thorow them without a more assured and in∣fallible guide, then the thread of Ariadné. Your Honour having as great acquaintance with all kinde of true learning, and namely with true divinitie, as many of the learnedest, I confesse this Booke can haue no such vse to you-ward: Neither was that my intentiō when I honoured it with your worthy Name: My one∣ly
desire being to make it a true and publicke witnesse that since that time you vouchsafed me the honour of your loue, I could consi∣der, considering know, knowing acknowledg, acknowledging reve∣rence your manifold & rare gifts, quite voide of all ostentatiō, which the holy Ghost, as most precious stones, hath set in a heart of true god∣linesse, and which as they haue beene the happy and godly direc∣tours of our then most
hopefull Prince, so are they now the true and faithfull Counsellours of our maiesticall, he∣roicall, and religious King, who so long as his royall eares shall hang at the wise tongs of so moderate & godly Senatours, neither shall the distressed Church want protection, nor his Subiects iustice in him, nor he blesse-brin∣ging prayers and true obedience in them. If any say a greater worke was due to so excellent a personage:
your Honour will an∣swere for me, thatDemost. . not great, but good things are best; that good is this little worke in the matter, that it is handled, al∣though not exquisitly in words, yet soundly. Moreover, I answer for my selfe, that by your meanes I came to the Kings knowledge, and by your recommenda∣tion was named by his Maiesty to be one of his Chaplaines: Therefore to you are due the first fruits of that harvest, which such as they are
I consecrate to your Ho∣nour, and my selfe to the continuance of your fa∣vour, offering my hear∣ty prayers to God for the increasing of his merci∣full & favourable bles∣sings on your graue and old age, on your right re∣ligious and honourable Lady, and all her most no∣ble and godly Family, till they come to their ful measure in Iesus Christ, in whom I remaine for ever, Your Honours most humble and affectionate servant, G. PRIMEROSE.
Of the living Bread which came downe from Heaven. Preached at Whitehall to the KINGS house on the Communion day the 3. of Iuly. 1625. IOHN. VI. 51. I am the living Bread which came downe from Heaven. FIRST CHAPTER. I. The whole Christian Religion may be reduced to two heads: The first, concerning the Saviour: The second, concerning them which are saved. God alone teacheth the one and the other. II. By his Sonne Iesus Christ. III. Who setteth downe these two heads in this Verse. IV. Foure parts of the first part of this Verse. ALL the Christian Religion may be reduced to two heads: The first
is concerning the Saviour of the world: The second is concerning them which are saved. It is written in the third Psalme, thatPsal. 3.8. Salvation is the Lords: Salvation is the Lords gift; Salvation is the Lords worke; Salvation is the Lord himselfe. Who then can more truely, Who can more clearly speake of salvatiō, and of those which are saved, then the Lord who is the salvation of all them which are saved? As we can∣not see the Sunne but by the light of the Sunne; so we cannot know God, nor the salvation which is of GOD, but by the revelatiō of God,Psal. 6.9. in whose light we see light. AndIob. 36.22. who teacheth like him? The sonnes of men may be deceived in that which they
know, by reason of their ig∣norance: or deceiue by that which they teach, and like vnto the wild fire, called by the Latines Ignis fatuus, lead many a man into the quag∣mires, pits, and gulfes of e∣ternall perdition, by reason of their vanitie: ForPsal. 116.11. all men are lyers. But God cannot be deceived in that which he knoweth, because he is All-wise: Nor deceiue in that which he teacheth, because he is All-good. He is alwayes true: True in his knowledge, True in his teaching. He teacheth vs by his Son: His Sonne who isIoh. 1.1. his Word: NotIgnat. epist. ad Magnesi∣an. . a vocall Word formed by the tongue, not a found in the aire, beating the eares: For hee was in the beginning before there was aire or
eares: But a substantiall word, but Gods own mind,Cyril. l. 1. Thesauric. 5 Quia ex ip∣so est filius vocatur: quia vero in ipso, sapientia & verbum. called the Sonne, because he is of the Father: and the Wisedome and Word, because he is in the Fa∣ther: because also God hath from the beginning revealed his Word to the Church by himIoh. 1.18. For no man hath seene God at any time: The onely be∣gotten Sonne, which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared him: He he onelyIoh. 14.16 is the way, the truth, and the life: The way wherein, The truth whereby, The life wher∣vnto we walke. And as Ber∣nard saith;Bernard. de caena domini. serm. 7. Ego sum via sine errore, veri tas fine falsi∣tate, vita si∣ne morte. The way without errour, the truth without false∣hood, the life without death. Even1 Ioh. 5.20. the true God, and eter∣nall life: The true God, and therefore our Saviour: Eter∣nall life, and therefore our
salvation. Wherefore let vs now and for ever listen vnto Christ, who best of all can tell vs who is the Author, who the giver, who the Prince of eternall life: As likewise which be they on whom this most wonderfull gift, this blessed and preci∣ous iewell is vouchsafed: ForIoh. 3.32.33. he that is of the earth, is earth∣ly, and speaketh of the earth: He that commeth from heaven, is aboue all: and what he hath seene and heard, that he testifi∣eth, andIoh. 8.14. his record is true. As in all this Chapter most largely, so in this verse of the Chapter summarily and suc∣cinctly he beareth Record both of the Saviour, and of them which are saved Con∣cerning the Saviour he saith; I am the living bread which
came downe from heaven. Con∣cerning them which are sa∣ved he saith also in the se∣cond part of this Verse, If any man eate of this bread, he shall liue for ever. The one and the other are vttered in Metaphoricall words, or in two similitudes contracted each of them to one word: The sence of the first is that which God said vnto Christ by the Prophet Isaiah,Isa. 49.6. I will giue thee for a light to the Gen∣tiles, that thou mayest be my salvation vnto the end of the world. The sence of the se∣cond is set downe in this same Chapter, vers. 47. where Christ saith; He that beleeveth on me hath euerla∣sting life. The first part of the verse, is the foundation wherevp∣on,
with the assistance of the Spirit of God I am to build this exhortatiō, considering in it, first, the subiect of this enunciation, I am the living bread, and next, the attribute thereof. The subiect is Christ, in the Word. I. The attribute, is the living bread which came downe from heaven. These two are coupled together by the coupling word, Am: But because this division will seeme too scholasticall and harsh to popular & vnlear∣ned eares, we shall follow the words of the Text, and di∣viding them into foure parts consider, 1. To whom Christ doth ascribe this glory to be the living bread: Even to his owne selfe, saying, I am. 2. Why he calleth himselfe bread: for he saith. I am bread.
3. The excellency and vse of this bread, in that he calleth it living, I am, saith he, the li∣ving bread. 4. The spring from whence this excellen∣cy doth flow; in the words following, which came downe from heaven. Let vs then be∣gin, and our beginning andPsal. 115.8. helpe be in the Name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. SECOND CHAPTER. I. Christ sheweth that he alone is the living bread which came downe from heaven. II. In all matters of faith and of manners, arguments taken from the Scriptures negatiuely are necessary. III. An easie way how to an∣swere to the Sophisticall inter∣rogations
of the Iesuits concer∣ning the Scriptures. IV. Angels and Saints are no part of the living bread. Ex∣hortation. WHEN wee speake of titles of digni∣ties, or of any ex∣cellent qualitie, it is necessa∣ry to know before all things the persons which are capa∣ble of them, and to whom they belong. Because all per∣sons are not capable of all titles, and all dignities are not fit for all. For all men are not of one sise: yea as one little diamond is more to be valued then a thousand big stones; So one man is often more to be esteemed then ten thousand others, as Da∣vids Captaines said vnto
him,2 Sam. 18 3. Thou art worth ten thousand of vs. For this cause. lib. 1. Tit. 5. de sta∣tu homirum l. 2. Cum igi∣tur. Instit. lib 1. Tit. 2. de iurenat. Gent. & Ci∣vili. §. vlt. Parum est ius nosse, fi persona, qua∣rum causa constitutum est, ignoran∣tior. in the civill Law the first question is of the sufficiency and abilitie of the persons the next is of their rights, prerogatiues, & other things which they challenge and take vpon them: It is so in Divinitie, and particularly in this part thereof concer∣ning the Saviour of the world. The Iewes desiring that Christ would feed them more delicately then he had done, alleaged vnto him vers. 31. the example of Mo∣ses, saying, that he gaue to their Fathers bread from hea∣ven to eate: Wherevpon ta∣king a new occasiō to speake to them of a more excellent bread, he answered, vers. 32. Verily, verily, I say vnto you,
Moses gaue you not that bread from heaven: But my Father giueth you the true bread from heaven. Moses is excluded as insufficient to giue from heaven the bread of heaven. And the Father alone is a∣dorned with that glory. For who can giue the bread of heaven but the Father of lights which is in heaven? 2. He describeth vnto them the excellency and vertue of that bread, saying, vers. 33. for the bread of God is he which commeth downe from heaven, and giueth life vnto the world. See the excellencie of it. It is come downe from heaven: See the vertue and vse of it, It giueth life vnto the world. 3. He telleth them who is that bread, and claiming that glory to himselfe; pro∣fessed
vers. 35. I am the bread of life. Then the Iewes, for∣getting the miracle of the fiue loaues and of the two fi∣shes, murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came downe from heauen. vers. 41. But he notwithstan∣ding their murmuring gi∣ueth glory to God, and see∣king to overcome their ob∣stinacie and stubbornenesse, affirmeth againe, Verse 48. I am that bread of life, and a∣gaine, Vers. 51. in this Text, I am the liuing bread which came downe from heaven, and so often in the verses follow∣ing. That as Ioseph said, thatGen. 41.32. the dreame was doubled vnto Pharao twise, because the thing was established by God, and God would shortly bring it to passe; so from this frequent repeti∣tion
we may conclude, that Christ indeed is the living bread, that he alone & none other with him, none other besides him is that bread. Yea, although he had said but once, I am the liuing bread, this conclusion would be true. For no such thing is said of any other. Not of Cherubims, of Seraphims, of Thrones, of Dominions, of Principalities, of Powers, of Angels. Not of the Virgin Mary, not of Peter, not of Paul, not of any other Apo∣stle. Not of any Martyr, not of any Saint. As when God said to his people,Psal. 50.7. I am God, euen thy God, the sence is; I am God, and besides me there is no other God: I am thy God, and thou hast no other God but me. So when
Christ saith, I am the living bread,Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 3. cap. 34. Per∣spicuum esse arbitror, non aliumpanem, neque aliud alimentum praeter filium dei rationa∣libus intelle∣ctualibusque substantijs propositam esse: Ipse est Manna verum: Ipse inquam est pa∣nis de caeio qui omni rationali creaturae a Deo Patre prae∣betur. it is manifest, saith Cyrillus, that no other bread, no other food, saue the Sonne of God, is appointed to reasonable and intellectuall creatures: He is the true Manna: He is the bread from heaven, which God the Father giueth to all reaso∣nable creatures. WHAT? Can an argument framed from authoritie ne∣gatiuely be currant & good? From the authoritie of men it cannot, because neither doe they know all things, neither doe they speake al∣wayes according to their knowledge: From the au∣thoritie of God revealed in the Scripture it is good in all
things belonging to saith and manners. Because, as S.August de Doctr. Chri∣stiana. lib. 2. cap. 9. In ijs quae apertèin Scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia quae continēt fidem mores∣que viuendi. Austin saith, in that which is clearly set downe in the Scripture, are to be found all these things which concerne faith and manners. This is manifest by these words of God to his people. Deut. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you obserue to doe it: Thou shalt not adde thereto, nor diminish from it. Whatsoever things God commanded, those Mo∣ses writ in a booke,Deut. 31.24. vntill they were finished: And of that booke Moses said,Deut. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. Cur∣sed is euery one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to doe them. Vpon this ground God condemned whatsoever his people did vndertake be∣sides
his Word in things be∣longing to his service: Dauid having a purpose to build an house to God, Nathan ap∣proved it, but God said vnto him,1. Chron. 17.6. Wheresoeuer I haue wal∣ked with all Israel, spake I a word to any of the Iudges of Is∣rael, saying, Why haue yee not built me an house of Cedars? All things amongst that peo∣ple were1. Cor. 10.11. Heb. 10.1. types and shadowes of good things to come. The Temple was to beIoh. 2.19.21. a type of Christ, asHeb. 9.11 12. the Taber∣nacle was. Who then in the house of God was to be so bold as to establish a figure of the things of God, a type of the Sonne of God, with∣out speciall command and direction from God? When the people did set vp such Will-worship, did
not God hew it downe with this sharpe and heavie Axe,Esa. 1.12. Who hath required this at your hand? When the Iewes through a most fervent zeale vnto God built the high pla∣ces of Tophet, to offer vp their sonnes and their daughters to God in a burnt sacrifice, this was a good reason to God, why such places should be throwne downe, and that vnnaturall devotion aboli∣shed, thatIere. 7.31. he commanded not any such thing, neither came it into his heart. Commanded it not, I say, in the booke of the Law:Hil. in Ps. 132. Quae in libro legis nō continentur, ea nec nosse debemus. For the things which are not contained in the booke of the Law, we should not so much as know them, saith S. Hilarie. For this cause the Apostle after he had declared to the
ChurchAct. 20.27 all the counsel of God, averred thatAct. 26.22 he had taught none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come, and there∣fore condemned allCol. 2.23. Will-worship, though it had a faire shew of wisdome and humility. Thus cōparing Christ with the Angels, he asketh,Heb. 1.5. Vnto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Sonne, This day haue I begotten thee? And againe,13. To which of the Angels said he at any time: Sit on my right hand, vntil I make thine enemies thy footstoole? Reasoning not onely affir∣matiuely for Christ, and pro∣ving that he is the Sonne of God, and sitteth at his right hand, because the Scripture hath said it; but also nega∣tiuely against the Angels, &
proving that no such glory belongeth vnto them, be∣cause the Scripture saith not any such thing of them. This is a perpetuall & most forcible manner of reaso∣ning in all substantial points of Religion. God hath said it in the Scriptures, therfore we must beleeue it: God hath spoken nothing of it: Ther∣fore we should not beleeue it. Athanas. in epist. ad Marcellinum de interpret. Psal. Divina Scriptura est magistra virtutis & verae fidei. The holy Scripture is the mistresse of vertue, and of true faith, which are the substan∣tiall points of our Religion. For circumstances of time, place, and persons, haue all this generall rule:1 Cor. 14.30. Let all things be done decently and in order, the particulars where∣of are committed to the wisdome of the Church.
OBSERVE this well against Papists, who are now taught by Iesuites to aske of you Doe ye not beleeue that Purgatorie is a fable, that the body of Christ is not in the Eucharist, that the Masse is not a propitiatorie sacrifice, that it is not lawfull to pray to the Saints which are in heaven, that the Pope is not the head of the Church, that there are but two Sacramēts? If ye answer that ye beleeue so, they intangle you with new questions, asking where is it written; There is no Pur∣gatorie, The Masse is not a propitiatorie sacrifice, &c? For the obiect of your faith is not the written Word of God: Neither doe ye, or should ye beleeue that wher∣of God hath not spoken.
If then God hath not said that there is no Purgatorie, how can yee say yee beleeue that there is none? So they fetter you with sophisticall interrogations, and make you to confesse against your owne profession, that ye be∣leeue many things which are not written in the holy Scriptures. Therefore ye must answer farre other-wayes, and say, What God hath said in the Scriptures, that I beleeue: What he hath not said, that I beleeue not.Orig in E∣sa cap. 8. ho∣mil. 12. Non est verbum post verbum Mosi, post verbum Pro∣phetarum, multo magis post verbum Iesu Christi, & Apostolo∣rum eius. There is no word to be beleeved after the word of Moses, after the word of the Prophets, much more af∣ter the word of Iesus Christ, and of his Apostles. God hath not said, that there is no Purgatorie, that the Masse is
a propitatorie sacrifice, that the Pope is the head of the Church: Therefore I will not say, I beleeue such things are not: But contrariwise, I doe not beleeue such things are: For where God hath not a mouth to speake, I haue not an eare to heare, nor a heart to beleeue, nor a tongue to confesse: What he hath not said in things belonging to the saluation of my soule, my soule hath nothing to do with it. AS IN this matter which we haue in hand, I beleeue that Iesus Christ is the living bread which came downe from heaven, because the Scrip∣ture saith so: I beleeue not that the Saints are this bread, I beleeue not that they are the least crumme of
it. For where the Scripture is dumbe, who shall accuse me if I be deafe? Where there is no word, can I haue any faith, seeingRom. 10.17. faith is by hea∣ring, and hearing by the Word of God? As S. Iohn the Evangelist said of S. Iohn the Baptist,Ioh. 1.8. He was not that light, but was sent to beare witnesse of that light, and as S. Paul said of David, thatAct. 13.36 in his owne age he served the will of God: So may we say of all the Saints that are now in heaven: They were not that bread, but they did eate of that bread: They were sent to beare witnesse of that bread, but they were no part of that bread. In their age they ser∣ved the counsell of God, be∣leeving, preaching, confes∣sing
that Christ Christ onely is the living bread. If any man ascribe more vnto them then this,Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43. he bringeth strange fire to the Altar of God, which God comman∣ded him not, and the fire of heaven shall devoure him, as it didLeuit. 10.1.2. Nadab and Abihu. And to such a man yee must say with Tertullian,Tertull. de Carne Chri∣sti. cap. 7. Non recipio quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers. I receiue not that which thou bringest of thine owne invention besides the Scripture. Yea as S. Iohn when he was in the world, being asked who he was, confessed, say∣ing,Ioh. 1.20. Ioh. 3.28. I am not the Christ, I am sent before him: So the blessed soules which are now in hea∣ven, if they were asked, Who they are, would answere, We are not the living bread, we are not Saviours: We are
come after the Saviour, and are saved by him: And as S. Iohn to draw away mens eyes from gazing vpon him, pointed out Iesus vnto them, and said,Ioh. 1.29. Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the sin of the world: So they would point at Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father, and say, Behold the living bread, Behold the Saviour of the world: And taking their harpes in their hands, would joyntly fall downe before the Lambe, and sing to his glory the new song, which I exhort you all to sing vnto him in your hearts for con∣clusion of this first part of my Text,Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receiue glory, and ho∣nour, and power:Rev. 5.8.9.10.11. For thou wast slaine, and hast redeemed
vs to God by thy bloud out of e∣very kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and hast made vs vnto our God Kings and Priests. THIRD CHAPTER. I. Bread in the Scripture hath divers significations. II. In all these significations Christ is our bread. III. Similitudes most frequent in the Scripture. IV. Christ did delight in simi∣litudes. V. The occasion which moved him to call himselfe Bread. VI. Exhortation to an earnest desire of this Bread. IT is then Christ Christ a∣lone to whom the Scrip∣ture beareth Record that he is the living bread: We are
now to search in the second part of this Discourse the causes why he called him∣selfe bread: For in all Meta∣phores which are Epitomes and Abridgements of Simi∣litudes, we must not so much regard whence they are ta∣ken, (as those doe which tie their eares to the leaues of the words) as dig with our minds into the root of the reason wherefore they are v∣sed. Bread in the Scripture hath divers literall significations. When David saith, thatPsal. 104.14.15. God bringeth forth bread out of the earth, and wine that maketh glad the heart of man, it is ta∣ken in a vulgar sence, which is common to all languages, & so is it taken in the words of the institutiō of the Lords
Supper. Wherein it is said, thatMat. 26.26. Iesus tooke bread. When2 King. 6.22. Elisha counselled the King of Israel to set bread and wa∣ter before the Armie of the King of Syria, bread is taken for meate without drinke. When Iacob called his bre∣threnGen. 31.54. to eate bread, and they did eat bread, he called them to a feast wherein there was both meate and drinke, and both are signified by the word Bread: When Salomon prayed to GodPro. 30.8. to feed him with bread convenient for him: When he saith, thatPro. 31.14. the ver∣tuous woman, is like the mar∣chants ship, shee bringeth her bread from a farre off: When Christ hath taught vs to pray, Giue vs this day our daily bread, bread signifieth all things needfull for the sustenance
of this our mortall life. THAT which bread in all these literall sences is to our bodies, the same in a spiritu∣all sence is Iesus Christ vnto our soules. The Iewes magni∣fied much the Manna which Moses gaue to their Fathers in the Desert. But although it was bread, it was not drink vnto them, els they had not murmured for want of wa∣ter. But Christ is both meate and drinke.Ioh. 6.35. I am, saith he, the bread of life: He that com∣meth to me shall never hunger. Ye see that he is meate: And he that beleeveth in me shall ne∣ver thirst. Ye see also that he is drinke: He is bread both to be eaten & to be drunke. The inhabitants of the Maldiuian Isles, cracke much of a tree growing every
where amongst them, calledTheuet. Cos∣mograph. 12 booke. chap. 21. Gomarra. 3. booke, chap. 94. Coco, the onely fruit wherof furnishes vnto them bread, wine, oyle, vinegar, sugar, butter, to feed them delici∣ously, physicke to heale their diseases, Hemp to make Ca∣bles and Sayles for Shippes, Lint to make cloths to cover their nakednesse: And the tree it selfe hath all the vses that any other tree can haue for fewell, or for tymber∣worke.Peyrard in his naui∣gations 2. booke. One who did liue many yeares in those Isles, writeth that he saw a Shippe of two hundreth tunnes, whereof all the tymber and nayles were of that tree, all the Cables and Sayles were of the outward skin of the fruit thereof, and the whole load was of the butter, sugar, vinegar, wine, oyle, & other
cōmodities which that fruit doth afford. And indeed it is a most wonderfull tree, but not to be matched withRev. 2.7. the tree of life which is in the mid∣dest of the Paradise of God, with our Lord Iesus Christ, who is all that & more then all that to our soules: He is here in my. Text the whole and intire food of our hun∣gry and dryed vp soules: He is not onelyEsa. 53.5. the Physick. out andEsa. 61.1 Mat. 9.12. the Physition of our sicke and languishing con∣sciences. He isRom. 13.14▪ the garment wherewith our nakednesse is covered, and our persons are graced: He is1. Cor. 31.11. the foun∣dationEph. 2.20. and chiefe corner stone, wherevpon we are built. He isIon. 15.1. the Vine whereof we are the branches:Eph. 4.15. The head wherof we are the members.
Ose. 2.19. Eph. 5.25. The husband who hath be∣trothed vs:Heb. 7.22 The suretie who hath answered for vs:1 Tim. 2.6 The ransom which hath redee∣med vs:Zach. 13.1 The water which cleanseth andIoh. 4.10. refresheth vs:Ioh. 1.9. The true light,Mal. 4.1. the Sunne of righteousnesse, which inligh∣teneth vs, and bringeth vnto vs healing in his wings. He is the Prophet who teacheth sal∣vation: The high Priest which hath mented it: The King fit∣ting at the right  Father, who keepeth it in heaven, and will giue it vnto vs. In materiall things this is one thing, that is another: And ye seeke this thing in one place, that in another. In spirituall things it is not so: We haue all things in Christ, & Christ is all things
vnto vs:Clemens Paedag. lib. 1. cap. 6. Cusan. Exci∣tat. lib. 6. ex∣serm. Respice Domine. Father, mother, pe∣dagogue, health, peace, loue, the daily bread of the reasonable soule, and all in all. In a word, he is salvation it selfe:1 Cor. 1.30. For of God he is made vnto vs wis∣dome, and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redemption. For this cause he is called Bread. HERE some aske why Iesus Christ did vse such Me∣taphoricall words of bread, & of eating, seeing he might haue said in proper & cleare tearmes, thatHeb. 5.9. he is the author of eternall salvation vnto all them that obey him, as the A∣postle calleth him in the E∣pistle to the Hebrewes? I answere first, O man wilt thou teach the Word and Wisdome of God to speake?Exod. 4.11 Who hath made mans mouth?
Or who maketh the dumbe or deafe, the seeing or the blind? Is it not I, saith the Lord? And wilt thou, to render him like for like, make his mouth? Secondly, I say that of all words those are most cleare and easie to be vnderstood, which haue greatest confor∣mitie with our affections & desires. For which cause God framing his stile to our capa∣city, by similitudes of world∣ly things which are most e∣steemed and affected of vs, leadeth vs from the lower parts of the earth far aboue all the visible heavens, from carnall and sensuall imagi∣nations to spirituall and godly meditations, from the vaine cōceit which we haue of our owne worthinesse, to bungring and thirsting after
his righteousnesse? Neither did he fetch such similitudes from a farre off, but e re natâ, as his servants did light on such or such things, he ma∣keth allusion vnto them, and by them instructeth his peo∣ple in the knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdome of Heaven. Because men prise gold aboue all mettall, and value precious stones at an high rate, he saith that heEfa. 54.11 Rev. 21.18. will lay the foundations of his Church with precious stones, make her gates of pearles, her wals of iasper, her streets of pure gold. Because the Iewes were much given to bodily exer∣cise, and to renting their clothes in the dayes of their fasting, he speaketh vnto them of a spirituall fasting▪ which he callethEsa. 58.6. the loosing
of the bands of wickednesse, &c. andIoel. 2.11 the renting their hearts. Because also they were ever bragging that they were Iewes, and had the Circumci∣sion, the Apostle teacheth them that the true IewRom. 2.28.29. whose praise is not of men, but of God, is one inwardly, that the true Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, that all true ChristiansPhil. 3.3. are the Cir∣cumcision. CHRIST, by whose Spi∣rit the Prophets and Apo∣stles spake, did delight in such similitudes: He exhor∣teth those which are addic∣ted to gathering of perisha∣ble and momentarie trea∣sures,Mat. 6.22. to lay vp for themselues treasures in heaven. To them w.ch told him when he was preaching, thatMat. 10.47.50. his mother
and brethren desired to speake with him, he answered, who∣soever shall doe the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother: When the wo∣man of Samaria which was drawing water had said vnto him,Ioh. 4.9.10.14. How is it, that thou be∣ing a Iew askest drinke of me which am a woman of Samaria? He tooke occasion of her speech to call his doctrine, his grace, his owne selfe, the living water, whereof whosoe∣ver drinketh shall never thirst: and by such speeches he brought her to the spiritu∣all drinking of the water of grace, whereof the well∣spring is in heaven. When his Disciples prayed him to take some meate, he refused saying,Ioh. 4.34 My meate is to doe the
will of him that seni me, and to finish his worke. In the last day of the feast of Tabernacles, seeing the people very busie about drawing of water, and powring of it out before the Lord, as if that had beene the principall part of Gods seruice, he stood, and cryed,Ioh 7.37.38.39. If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drinke: He that be∣leeveth in me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water: This spake he of the Spirit which they that beleeue in him should receiue. AFTER the same manner, perceiving that those fiue thousand men which he had miraculously fed and filled with fiue loaues and two small fishes, were come to make him a King, not for a∣ny
true loue vnto him, but onely because they had bin fed by him, and had concei∣ved a new hope, that follow∣ing such a wonderfull King, meate should never be wan∣ting to their bellies, yea that he would make bread to raine downe vpon them, as Moses did vpon their fathers in the Wildernesse, he by di∣version speaketh to them of a farre more excellent bread, which he would giue them; even of the true bread which came downe from heaven, and endureth vnto everla∣sting life, & exhorteth them to labour for it: Shewing in all the Chapter, and particu∣larly in this verse, that he is that bread, and that the one∣ly meane to labour for it, is to beleeue in him.
If he had clothed them miraculously, as miraculous∣ly he had fed them, and if they had followed him ther∣vpon to make him King, he would vndoubtedly advised them to labour for the rai∣ments which wax never old, and said that he is that rai∣ment. As indeed the holy Apostle will haue vs to be∣leeue that Christ is our gar∣ment, when he saith, thatGal. 3.27 as many as haue beene baptized into Christ, haue put on Christ, and exhorteth vsRō. 13▪ 14 to put on the Lord Iesus Christ. Which no man that is not witlesse or besides himselfe, will take literally, neither also any of the other similitudes where∣of there is great plentie in the Scripture, and I haue re∣lated some few. Let then Pa∣pists
tell vs, Why the words of this Chapter should be taken in a literall sence, which they shall never be a∣ble to doe. BVT to leaue Papists, let vs, who are to communicate this morning to the blessed seales of this doctrine, weigh in our minds how Christ per allegoriam necessariorum pabu∣lorum, by the allegory of ne∣cessary food, asTertull. de Resurrect. Carnis. cap. 37. Tertullian speaketh, withdraweth the thoughts of his followers from the outward to the in∣ward man, from the flesh to the Spirit, from the food of the body to the food of the soule,Aug. in Ioh. tract. 25. Ille post miraculi Sacramentum, & sermonem infert, vt si fieripotest qui pa∣sti sunt pascantur, & quorum satiauit panibus ventres, sa∣tiet & sermonibus mentes; sed si capiunt: Et si non capi∣unt, sumatur quod non capiunt, ne fragmenta percant. that, if it be possible, those which are fed may be fed
againe, and as he had filled their bellies with bread, he may also fill their minds with his spee∣ches: But if they take them: And if they take them not, as indeed they tooke them not, i.e. they vnderstood them not, let vs take them, least the fragments perish, as we are exhorted by S. Austin. Let vs, I say, now, even now ponder with our selues that although we doe eate and drinke to maintaine this mortall and ever-dying life, and that this is the end of meate and drinke; yet the preserving of this life should not be our principall care. Doe ye not all know,1. Cor. 6.13. that meates are for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it, and them? And therefore ye should all sigh
and groane for a better life, not of the body, but of the soule, not of this world, but of the world to come. Wher∣fore listen, I pray you, to the Sonne of God, who assureth you both by his word which now I preach vnto you, and by his Sacrament which af∣ter this Sermon shall be gi∣ven vnto you, that he is the blessed bread of that blessed life, for you, and vnto you. Come then, come to the Table of the Lord, thanking him that he vouchsafeth to be your bread, and crying vnto him with a more reli∣gious and holy desire then the Iewes did,Ioh. 6.34. Lord, ever∣more giue vs this bread.
FOVRTH CHAPTER. I. The excellency of this bread, shewed by the Greek word , which signifieth both living and quickening. II. And therefore is well tran∣slated both wayes. III. Christ as he is Mediator is living in himselfe, & quick∣ning vnto vs. IV. This bread is wonderfull aboue all other bread. V. Exhortation to labour for this bread. THis, desire will in∣crease, and like a wo∣man with childe, we will more and more long af∣ter this bread, if we know more clearely and fully the excellent vertue and vse of it, set down in the word living.
For Christ saith, I am the li∣ving bread, according to our translation: Or according to the Latin translation ofEgo sum panis vivi∣ficus. Be∣za, andIe suis le pain vivi∣fiant. the French transla∣tion, I am the quickning bread.Cotton an plagiaire de Geneue. The Iesuites of France barke most spightfully against this last translation, saying that the Greeke word  in all Greeke Authors signifieth li∣uing, and is never taken from quickening. But as we say in a common Proverbe, The dog that barkes much, bites but lit∣tle. For to discover to you their impudency, both in affir∣ming too boldly that which they know not, and in deny∣ing shamelesly that which they know. I. The Greeke word hath both significati∣ons in the Septuagint Inter∣preters,
whose words the E∣vangelists and Apostles fol∣low, when ye reade in the booke of the Psalmes;Psal. 41.2. . The Lord will keepe him aliue;Psal. 119.50. . Thy word hath quickned me;Ver. 40.48 quic∣ken me after thy loving kind∣nesse; quicken me in thy righte∣ousnesse;Psal. 134.11. . quicken me, O Lord for thy Names sake; and other such like places, the Greeke word is the same which is in this Text. 2. The words preceeding and following doe shew that living signifieth quickening. In the 33. verse he saith, The bread of God is he which com∣meth downe from heaven, and giveth life vnto the world. In the 35 verse he saith, I am the bread of life: He is so called, saithTolet. 161. Dicitur panis vitae quia a∣lio viuere facit. Tolet, because he maketh others to liue. The words fol∣lowing,
He that commeth to me shall never hunger, and he that beleeveth in me shall neuer thirst, are an evident proofe that it is so. In my Text he saith, I am the living bread which came down from heauen, and addeth in the second part of the verse, If any man eate of this bread he shall liue for ever, calling this bread, Living, because it maketh them that eate it liue for ever. In the 57. verse, He saith in the same sence, He that eateth me, even he shall liue by me. 3. Many Roman Doctors, Thomas Aquinas, and Ferus, two learned Monkes; Iansse∣nius, Emmanuel Sa, Maldonat, Tolet, Iesuits, writ vpon this Text, thatVivus pro vivificans. Living is put for Quickening.
4. But the Iesuites now a∣dayes feare leaft Christ be called quickning in this verse, because they expound it, and all the verses following of the bodily presence of CHRIST in the Eucharist, wherein they confesse that he is not quickning, seeing in the Sacrament not onely many wicked men, but also rats, mice, wormes, dogs, as∣ses, toads often eate him, and are not quickened by him. Which saying is a most hor∣rible blasphemy. .WHAT then? Doe I con∣demne our own translation? God forbid: The Greeke word signifieth living: And is not Christ living? If he were not living how could he giue life?Cusan Ex∣cit. lib. 5. ex Serm. Nou in solo pane vi∣vit bomo. Panis qui nō vivit, non vivificat. For the bread which liveth not, cannot giue
life. Therefore our transla∣tion is good, and on it▪ de∣pendeth the truen of the French translation, as the ef∣fect on the cause. And as the first excludeth not the last, o the  the first, is the cause is included in the effect, and the word Li∣ving, signifieth both, and must signifie both, that the words of our.1. 1 dol Sariour may be found true. For what comfort should it be vnto vs, that Christ liveth in vs, if he did not quicken vs? And this is the drift of this whole Chapter to shew, that he li∣veth in all them that eate him, and giveth eternall life to all those in whom he li∣veth, least we should thinke him to be like vntoIudg. 14.8 the swarme of Bees, which did
liue and make honey in the carkasse of the Lyon which Spson had killed, but did not giue life to the Lyon. War doe we fight for a word, when no Christian dare deny, but that Christ is both living and quickning? It is safer for vs to consider how Christ is living, & where∣fore he is so called. If ye con∣sider him as he isIoh. 1.1.4. the Word which was in the beginning, i.e. as he is true God coessen∣tiall and coeternall to his Fa∣ther, in him was life: He was living formally. For in God to liue and to be, are one thing. But in this sence we are all strangers from God. For what communion can car∣kasses dead in sin, as we are all by nature, haue with God who liveth for ever & ever?
Therefore he speaketh of himselfe as heIoh. 6.27.5. is the Sonne of man, that is to say, the Me∣diator between God & man, (for so is the Mediator cal∣led byDan. 7.13 Daniel) or as1. Tim. 3.16. God made manifest in the flesh. For as he is the Sonne of man, or as he is Mediator between God and man, the Father hath given him to haue life in himselfe, not to keepe it to himselfe, but to communicate it to all the members of his mystical body. This is cleare by his owne words in the fist chap∣ter of this Gospel, where first he sheweth that he giveth life, saying,Ioh. 5.21.25.26. As the Father raiseth vp the dead and quick∣neth them, even so the Sonne quickneth them whom he will. And again, Verily, verily I say vnto you, the houre is comming,
and now is, when the dead shall heare the voice of the Sonne of God, and they that heare it, shall liue. Secondly, he ren∣dreth this reason why he gi∣veth life to the dead, For as the Father hath life in him∣selfe, so hath he given to the Sonne to haue life in himselfe. As the Sunne hath light, the fire heat, a Well-spring water in themselues, not for them∣selues, but for the vse of man and beast: So Christ hath life in himselfe, that he may giue life vnto vs. For this cause he is called liuing, first subiectiuè, because he hath life in himselfe: Se∣condly, effectiuè, because he hath it not for himselfe, but giveth it to all those that haue him, as S. Iohn saith,1 Ioh. 5.12. he that hath the Sonne, hath life.
Even as the scripture callethGen. 26.19. a Well of living water, that which having abundance of water in it selfe, springs, and flowes, and runnes, and im∣parts it selfe vnto all. O MOST wonderfull and powerfull bread! No other bread hath life in it selfe: This hath: No other bread giveth life: This doth. No o∣ther bread is a preservatiue against death: This is: All other breadIoh. 6.27. perisheth: This endureth vnto euer lasting life. Not only it liveth in it selfe, but also it maketh to liue e∣ternally the soules of all those that eate it: and shall at the last day of the world quicken the bodies of all those whose soules it hath quickened in this world, as he saith,Ioh. 6.54. Who so eateth my
flesh, and drinketh my bloud, hath eternall life, and I will raise him vp at the last day. His flesh and his bloud, or rather he himselfe by tea∣ring his flesh and renting it from his soule, He by shed∣ding his bloud in his death is the living bread,Cusan. Ex∣cit lib. 4. ex Sermone. Qui mandu∣cat: Ipse est qui est dator vitae & con∣servator: Quare est panis vitae. giuer and keeper of life, and therefore most worthily called, the bread of life. RIGHT HONORABLE, Reverend, Worshipfull, and beloved Auditours, remem∣ber, I pray you, the exhorta∣tion of our Saviour to the Iewes of Capernaum, andIoh. 6.27. la∣bour not for the meate which perisheth, but for that meate which endureth vnto everla∣sting life. Alas! it is a pitifull spectacle to behold how men labour for the meate
which perisheth,Ps. 127.2. they rise vp early, they sit vp late, they eate the bread of sorrowes:Matth. 15.17. It entreth in at the mouth, it goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught. If men labour exceeding hard for such bread, how should we labour for this living bread? Not to purchase it: for it groweth not in the earth, it is not sold in the Shambles, it is not to be bought in the Shops. But to reach vnto it, where it is: but to receiue it where and when it is offe∣red. It is offered every where, in the towne, in the fields, in our houses, in our closets: But namely in the Church when the Gospell is prea∣ched, and particularly when the blessed Sacrament is gi∣ven, as to you, this day.
The preaching of the Gos∣pell isExod. 25.23. the golden Table wherevpon this shew bread is set: This holy Sacrament is as it wereVe. 29.30. the golden dish, wherein it is offered vnto vs. We know what we must doe to receiue the outward Sa∣crament,Panem do∣mini. the bread of the Lord: If we receiue it from the hand of the Minister: for he is no better thenIoh. 6.32. Moses, who gaue not the true bread from heaven; When we haue received it, we eat it, we let it downe into out stomacks, we disgest it: Nothing is more easie. But  receiuePanem do∣minum. the bread which is the Lord another worke more diffi∣cult is required:Ioh. 6.29. This is the worke of God, that ye beleeue in him whom he hath sent. Your soules must goe vp to hea∣ven.
There the Table is co∣vered: There is the bread which is the Lord set vpon the Table of the Mercie of God: There God the Father giveth it by his eternall will and decree: There the Sonne giveth it by his merite, and consent: There the holy Ghost taketh it, as it were, in his hands, entreth with it into your hearts, and offereth it vnto your famished soules: The Cherubims and Sera∣phims stand by and wonder. Send your faith thither, and there your faith shall receiue it. This is the worke which God commandeth. 1 Ioh. 3.23. This is the worke which God himselfe worketh in you. Eph. 1.3. Phil. 1.29. This is the worke, which if ye want, all your workes are
sinnes. Rom. 14.23. and it is impossible that yee should please God. Heb. 11.6. Which if ye haue, by it Iesus Christ will dwell in you. Eph. 3.17. and liue in you, and quicken you so sensibly, that ye shall say as truely, as S. Paul said,Gal. 2.20 I liue, yet not I, but Christ li∣veth in me. And this life of Christ, or Christ living in you, shall be so powerfull in you, that as1. Kings 19.20. Elijah by the strength of that bread and of that water which the Angel of God prepared for him, went fortie dayes and fortie nights, without hunger, without thirst, without wea∣rinesse, till he came vnto Ho∣reb the Mount of God. So by the vertue of this living bread, which no Angel of God, butLuk 2.31. God himselfe hath
prepared, ye shall walke cou∣ragiously and constantly all the dayes of your life, till ye come to the kingdome of heaven, where ye shallMat. 8.11. sit downe with Abraham, and I∣saac, and Iacob, and there be abundantly satisfied with thesePs. 16.11. pleasures which are at the right hand of God for ever∣more. FIFT CHAPTER. I. Christ came not downe from heaven as man. II. Neither as God by a locall motion. III. Neither as sent and ap∣proved of God. IV. But as God incarnate. V. Three commings of Christ. VI. What should be the order
of our conceptions concerning Christ. WE HAVE, yet the last part of my text to consider, con∣cerning the cause of the ex∣cellency of this bread: For ye may aske how any bread can be so excellent, that it liveth, or so powerfull, that quick∣neth. And certainely no o∣ther bread can: But this can, because, it came downe from heaven: What is the mea∣ning of these words? Valen∣tin said that he brought his body from heaven: But that is false: For the Scripture bea∣reth record thatHeb. 2.16. he tooke on him the seed of Abraham,Rom. 1.3. was made of the seed of David ac∣cording to the flesh, andLuk. 1.27.35. was borne of the Virgin Mary.
IF any say that his divine nature came from heaven by a locall motion. That also is false:Iere. 23.24. Doe I not fill heauen and earth saith the Lord? He is in∣finite, and without going, without comming, without alteration, without generati∣on, without corruptiō, with∣out any motion whatsoever,August ad Volusian. E∣pist. 3. Nouit vbi{que} totus esse, & nullo contine∣ri loco: Nouit venire, nō re∣cedendo vbi erat: Nouit abire, non de∣serendo quo venerat. he filleth the whole world, not as the water, not as the aire, not as the light it selfe, as if with the lesser part of himselfe he did sill the lesser part of the world, and with the greater part of himselfe, the greater part thereof. He can he all eve∣ry where, and contained no where: He can come, and not leaue the place wherein he was: He can goe away, and not leaue the place wherevnto he came.
IF WE say that he came downe from heaven, because he was foreordeined, sent, a∣nointed, approved, confir∣med of God: So were all the Apostles: So are all the true Ministers of God. Yet the Scripture saith not of any of them, that they are come downe from heaven. Christ saith, thatMat. 21.25. the Baptisme of Iohn was from heaven. And S. Iames saith, thatIam. 1.17. every good gift, and every perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth down from the Father of lights. Yet S. Iohn comparing him∣selfe with Christ, saith of himselfe: He that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: But of Christ he saith exclusiuely to all crea∣tures, He that commeth from heaven is aboue all. All Gods
servants are borne on earth, and called from heaven, but they come not downe from heaven: They receiue from heaven, but from heaven they bring not the doctrine which they teach vs. Like∣wise all the gifts of God are created on earth by God who is in heaven. And ther∣fore S. Iames saith, that they come from him: But they are not in heaven, nor else∣where, before God create them on earth. Whereas Christ was in heaven before he came downe from hea∣ven, as he said to his Disci∣ples,Ioh. 6.62 What, and if ye shall see the Sonne of man ascend vp where he was before? And be∣ing on earth he feared not to say to Nicodemus, that e∣ven thenIoh. 3.16. he was in heaven.
Which cannot be said of the gift of God, which when they are come from heaven, and are on the earth, are not in heaven: Yea the Angels themselues when they come from heaven vnto vs, are no more in heaven, till they re∣turne vnto it againe. THIS then is a particular speech, and a phrase of the Scripture appropriated to God, who is said to come downe from heaven, when he maketh himselfe knowne vnto the world by some strange and vnaccustomed worke, asSerm. of the righte∣ous mans e∣vils, and of the Lords deliverāces. Serm. 9. Sect. 3. &. 4. I haue shewed else-where. And therefore when Christ saith that he is come downe from heaven, he will haue vs to vnderstand and beleeue 1. that he is God. 2. that he
hath made himselfe mani∣fest to the world by an extra∣ordinary worke, even the most wonderfull that ever was, or ever shall be in the world. He meaneth his In∣carnation, whereby1 Tim. 3.16. God was made manifest in the flesh, not by conversion of the God∣head into the manhood, or of the manhood into the Godhead, not also by con∣fusion of the two natures in∣to one: But by that most wonderfull vnion, wherebyPaul. Aqui∣leienf. contra Felicem. l. 1. Totus in suo, Totus in no∣stro: Idem in vtroque: Non alter in suo, alter in no∣stro. remaining whole in that which is his, and whole in that which is ours, he is the same in both: Not another in that which is his, and another in that which is ours. AndLeo in Na∣tiuit. domini. serm. 2. De coelesti sede descendens, & a paterna glorianō re∣cedens, &c. so cōming downe from the heavenly seat, and not departing from the glory of his Father, being inuisible in that
which is his, was made visible in that which is ours; the in∣comprehensible was compre∣hended; he that was before all times tooke his being in time, the Lord of all tooke the forme of a servant, God impassible disdained not to be a passible man, and the immortall to be subiect to the Lawes of death. This is his comming downe from heaven.Bernard de Aduentu de∣mini serm. 3. Non venit qui aberat, sed apparuit qui late∣bat; He was not absent from vs before he came: But he was hid till then, and then he appeared. TO MAKE this more cleare, let vs either learne, or remember, that the Scrip∣ture maketh mention of three commings of Christ, the first is past: the second is: the third shall be:Venit. His first
comming was in the infirmity of the flesh, whereinHeb. 9.26. once in the end of the world, he hath appeared to put away sinne. Of this comming Saint Iohn saith, thatIoh 13.3. Iesus knew that he was come from God, and went to God.Bernard de Coenâ domini serm. 2. A de exiuit, non e∣um deserens; Et ad Deum vadit, non nos derelin∣que He came from God, saith Bernard, not leaving him: And he goeth to God, not leaving vs. He came from God, when being the Sonne of God in heaven without a mother, he became the son of a woman on earth with∣out a Father: For his Father knew not a woman: and his mother knew not a man This is a most wonderfull comming. And the end of it was to take away sinne, or as S. Iohn speaketh,1 Ioh 3.8. For this purpose the Sonne of God was manifested, that he might de∣stroy
the workes of the Devill, and so redeeme vs: He went to God when triumphing o∣ver the Divell, he carried his glorified body into heaven, and sate on the right hand of God. When he said to his Disci∣ples,Venit. thatIoh. 16.5. he was to goe his way to him that sent him, sor∣row filled their heart: But he to comfort them said,Ioh. 14.18. I will not leaue you orphanes; I will come to you▪ Speaking of his second comming by the holy Spirit into our hearts: The end of which comming is, to be vnto vsIoh. 16.13. a Doctor to in∣struct vs in his truth:Rom. 8.14 A conductor to lead vs in his wayes:Ioh. 14.16 17. A comforter to a∣bide with vs for ever, and comfort vs in all our trou∣bles.
He spake of his third com∣ming,Venturus est. when he said to his Disciples; I will goe and pre∣pare a place for you, and I will come againe, and receiue you vnto my selfe, that where I am, there ye may be also. The end of this comming shall be to saue and glorifie vs: ForCol. 3.3. when Christ who is our life shall appeare, then shall we also appeare with him in glory. THIS Text is of his first comming, and of the end thereof: He came from hea∣ven, whenMansit quod erat, factus est quod none∣rat, & nunc est vtrum{que}. being still that which he was, he became that which he was not, and now is both: Being God, he became man, and now is both God and man in one person: So ye haue the constitution of his person, necessary to the fulfilling of the worke for
which he came. The end of his comming was to be liuing bread vnto vs, that is, to re∣deeme and saue vs. Ye finde in his person all things re∣quisite to do that for which he came. He came to be bread: Bread he could not be but by his death: die he could not for man, if he had not beene a man. Therefore in that wherein he is equall vnto vs, he is bread.Gerhard. Lutphan. lib. de Reformat. virium ani∣mae. cap. 28. And this must be your first concepti∣on of him, when ye consider those good things which ye receiue by him, and which are all comprehended in this word Bread. The breaking of the bread in the Sacrament sheweth vs, that he was bro∣ken in his death to be our bread: And therefore we must say: He who is our bread, is man.
The second conception must be; that he is also God; for this bread is called liuing, & who is liuing in the sence which I haue explaned, but God? And therefore in that wherein he is equall vnto his Father, he is liuing, as he him∣selfe saith,Ioh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickeneth: The flesh pro∣fiteth nothing. The flesh is his humane nature, wherein by death he is become our bread: The Spirit in his di∣vine nature, which maketh his flesh to liue, and which giveth a quickening vertue to this bread. The third conception must be this: The excellencie & vertue of this bread flow∣eth from the dignitie of his person: And therefore this man & this God are in him
one person: otherwise he could neither be bread to nourish vs, nor liuing to quic∣ken vs. As indeed he saith of himselfe; not as of two, as Nestorius dreamed, but as of one, Ioam the liuing bread, which came downe from hea∣ven: Hence it is that what∣soever God did in Christ, we beleeue that the man did it, because Christ is a man: And whatsoever the man did in Christ, we beleeue that God did it, because Christ is God. Example. When Christ was on earth speaking to Nico∣demus as he was a man, he said that even thenIoh. 3.13. he was in heaven, because in him man is God. Againe, the Apostle saith, thatAct. 20.28 God hath purcha∣sed the Church with his owne blood: because in Christ God
is a man: Christ in the Sacra∣ment leadeth you to this consideration, when he saith, This is MY body, broken for you: This is MY blood shed for you: meaning that it is the body and blood of him who is God, and therefore it is no wonder if the body of God be bread, if the blood of God be drinke: If I say, the death of so wonderfull and so ex∣cellent a person be your life.Luk. 1.37. For with God nothing shall be impossible. SIXT CHAPTER. I. Seeing Christ is God, we must stand in awe of him, and obey him. II. We should be alwayes raui∣shed in admiration with his comming downe from heaven.
III. His most wonderfull hu∣miliation should be vnto vs a patterne of humilitie. IV. In his comming to be our bread, we should acknowledge our owne indignitie. V. And neverthelesse accept with obedience of faith the ho∣nour of his Table. VI. Exhortation, and Conso∣lation. THIS Doctrine is fer∣tile in instructions & comforts, which may be taken some from the person of Christ, some from the end of his cōming vnto vs. When we consider that he which came downe from heaven is the true God, we must withEsa. 6.2. the Seraphims, and with the man of GOD1 Kings. 19.13. Elijah cover our faces; stand
as we do this day, before his Maiestie with feare & trem∣bling; heare his Word with reverence, receiue the Sacra∣ment which he offereth vn∣to vs with humilitie and thankesgiving, and shew a cheerefull and holy readi∣nesse to doe with obedience whatsoever he commandeth vs. WHEN we heare that he who wasHeb. 7.26. higher then the hea∣vens,Eph. 4.9. descended into the lower parts of the earth, & was there crudled like Cheese, clothed with skinne and flesh, fenced with bones & sinewes: When we are taught, that he whoPhil. 2.6.7 being the Son of God, thought it no robbery to be equall with God, & yet notwithstanding made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke vpon him the forme of
a servant, how can we chuse but wonder and be astonied at his humiliation, whereat the Angels themselues are a∣mazed,Ioh. 1.51. euer ascending & des∣cending vpon the sonne of man,1. Pet. 1.12. ever desiring to looke into this mysterie, which passeth all knowledge. Because man in his prideGen. 3.5.22. would needs be like vnto God, God to make amends for that fault, by a most wonderfull humi∣liation would needs be like vnto man, yeaPsal. 22.6. be a worme & no man, the reproach of men, and the despised of the people.Ioh. 13.6.8. Peter was astonied when he saw Christ comming vnto him, with water in a Bason, and kneeling at his feete to wash them; The Creator to wash the feet of his creature, the Lord of his servant, the
master of his disciple, God of man, he that made all things of nothing the feete of a worme which he had made of clay. Haue we not greater matter of astonishmēt, when we heare and see that the same Creator of all things became a creature, he who is the eternall possessor & ow∣ner of heaven & earth, came downe from heaven and was made man on earth, that he might be the bread of man in heaven? O wonderfull loue! O inestimable bounty! O new, O never heard of be∣fore, O peerlesse humilitie! WHAT president, what patterne of humilitie can we find in heaven or in earth so perfect to follow, so worthy to be followed as this is? I cannot teach you any better
preparatiō to come this day to the Table of the LORD, then this is. O man, the Son of God descēded so low that he came down from heaven, and was made the Sonne of man for thee: And wilt thou who art nothing but the fonne of a man, or rather a man of sin, wilt thou heape vp the summe of thy sinnes by taking vnto thy selfe the wings of pride, to say with the King of Assur,Esa. 14.13.14. I will as∣cend into heaven, I will exalt my throne aboue the starres of God, I will be like the most high? Of whom wilt thou learne humilitie, if thou refusest to learne it of the author of hu∣militie? These and many moe may be our meditatiōs when we consider the excel∣lencie of the person which
is come downe from hea∣ven. WHEN we call to minde the end of his comming; When we heare now that he is come from heaven to be our bread, to be the salvati∣on of our soules: When that truth shall be confirmed vn∣to vs in the Sacrament, if we be not more insensible then stones and rocks, we shall all acknowledge our great in∣dignitie, all cry vnto God with David,Psal. 144.3. Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledg of him? Or the sonne of man that thou makest account of him? When King David cal∣led Mephibosheth to eat bread at his table continually, Me∣phibosheth bowed himselfe, and said,2 Sam. 9.7.8. What is thy servant, that thou shouldest looke vpon
a dead dog, such as I am? con∣fessing his owne vnworthi∣nesse, although he was a Kings sonne. How much more should weEph. 2.3. who are by nature the children of wrath, acknowledge our selues to be worse then dead dogs, when the King of Kings not onely calleth vs to eat bread at his table, but also offereth himselfe vnto vs to be our bread? Certainly we shouldOrigin ho∣mil 6. in di∣versos. follow the laudable custom of the auncient Church on the Communion day, and say vnto him, as the Centuri∣on did,Mat. 8.8. Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come vnder my rooffe. Thus farre should goe our humilitie. TRVE humilitie is the mo∣ther of obedience; Behold, saith he, I stand at the doore,
and knocke;Rev. 3.20. If any man heare my voice, and open the doore, I will come to him, & sup with him, and he with me. When he knocketh, shall I refuse to o∣pen vnto him, because I am not worthy that he should come vnto me.Ioh. 1.11. He came to his owne: That was mercie: For they were not worthy that he should come vnto them. And his owne received him not: That was sinne; As he said,Ioh. 15.22. If I had not come, and spoken vnto them, they had not had sinne: but now they haue no cloake for their sinne.Mat. 22.1 The great King made the mariage of his Sonne, and sent his servants to call them that were biddē to the wedding: That was favour: And they would not come: That was in∣gratitude: Therefore he was
wroth against them, and de∣siroyed them: But he gaue good intertainment to the poore, blind, maimed, halt that came. For although they were not worthy to be cal∣led, he was worthy to be o∣beyed. We we are to day those ghefts, too too vnwor∣thy to sit at his Table, and to eat of his Supper. But seeing he saith this day to my sin∣full soule, as he said once to the Publicane and great sin∣ner,Luk. 19.5. Zacheus, To day I must abide at thy house; Ile make hast, as Zacheus did: Ile leape downe from the Sycomore of pride: Ile run home with the seete of faith and of obe∣dience, to prepare the lod∣ging of my soule for the Lord of glory: Ile receiue him ioysully into the house
of mine heart. And he will say to my soule, This day sal∣vation is to come to this house. O eternall wisedome of the Father, thou cryest vnto vs to day,Pro. 9.5. Come, eat of my bread, and drinke of the wine which I haue mingled: O glorious spoufe of the Church, thou vouch safest to be ourCant. 5.1. honey combe and our honey our wine, our milke, and our bread, and thou cryest againe vnto vs, Eate, O friends: drinke abun∣dantly, O beloved: In this bles∣sed Sacrament thou sayest the third time;Mat. 26.26.27. Take, eate, This is my body: drinke ye all of it: This is my bloud. And shall we not obey thee? Shall we not follow the example of Mephibosheth? Shall we not accept with reverence and thankesgiving the honour
of thy Table, and the benefit of thy meat? Papists call not this pride, it is humilitie: call it not presumption: It is o∣bedience. WE WHICH are invited to day to eate of this bread, know that to obey is a most acceptable sacrifice to God, and therefore let vs try our selues, and come and eate. The scripture, as I haue said, maketh mention of three commings of Christ. Of his comming in the flesh, in the Spirit, and in glory. The first was visible in infirmitie, as the Prophet said,Esa. 53.2. When we see him, there is no beautie that we should desire him. The second is invisible, but yet most sensi∣sible in the power of the ho∣ly Spirit, crying in our hartsRom. 8.15 Abba, Father: None seeth
the Spirit in another: But e∣very true Christian feeleth it in himselfe.2 Cor. 13.5. know ye not your owne selues, saith the Apostle, how that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? And he saith, thatRom. 8.9. if any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, because Christ is in vs by his Spirit. The third shall be visible in Maiestie, whenEsa. 52.10 all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord. In the firstIoh. 1.11 he came vnto his owne, and his owne re∣ceived him not: In the second he cōmethVers. 23. to them that loue him, and keepe his words. In the thirdHeb 9.28 he shall appeare vn∣to them that looke for him vnto salvation,Bernard de Adnentu do∣mini serm. 5. In primo Christus fuit redemptio nostra: In vltimo appa∣rebit vita nostra: In isto requies est & conso∣latio nostra. In his first comming he was our redemption: In the second he is our rest and conso∣lation: In the last he shall be our
life. O then, O let vs thanke him for his first comming whereby he hath redeemed vs: Let vs examine our selues, if we loue him and keepe his words, that thereby we may be assured of his second cō∣ming into our hearts by his blessed and holy Spirit to comfort vs. And because he is to come once againe vnto salvation2 Tim. 4.8. vnto all them that loue his appearing,Heb. 9.28. and looke for him, let vs ioyne our selues with the Church and with the Spirit, and cry with heart & mouth,Rev. 22.17.20. Come quickly: Even so, come Lord Iesus. For then if we be found having the oyle of faith and charitie in ourMath. 25.10. Lampes, we shall enter with the bridegroome to the mariage, and know by expe∣rience that which now we
know by faith, thatRev. 19.7. blessed are they which are called vnto the mariage-supper of the Lambe. These are the true say∣ings of God; To whom with the Sonne & the holy Ghost be all prayse, all glory, and all honour both now and evermore. AMEN.
THE SECOND PART. OF THE EATERS, AND OF THE EATING OF THE LIVING BREAD. Preached at Otlans before the KINGS Maiestie the twelfth of Iuly. 1625. IOHN VI. 51. If any man eate of this bread, he shall liue for ever. CHAPTER I. I. Christ nourisheth not till he be eaten. II. Foure parts of this Text, cōcerning the eaters, the bread, the manner, and the fruit of the eating thereof. AS BREAD, or any other food, how necessary, how sweet, how excel∣lent
soever it be, is not vsefull for the preservation of the life of man, till he eate it; E∣ven so Iesus Christ, although he be the living bread which came downe from heaven, as he hath said in the first part of this verse; although he liue a celestiall and divine life, andPsal. 45.2. be fairer then all the children of men, giveth not life vnto the dead, and preserveth not the life which he hath givē, till he be eaten, as he him∣selfe teacheth vs in this se∣cond part of this verse, If any man eate of this bread, he shall liue for ever. WHERE he sheweth. I. What persons may eate of this bread, in these words, any man. 2. Which is the bread wherof they must eat, if they will eate to liue: Cer∣tainly
it must be of this bread which is come downe from heaven. 3. What necessitie there is of this eating, and what is the manner thereof, to be cōsidered in the word, Eate. 4. The fruit which he that eateth of this bread shall reape thereby: he shall liue for ever: The sence of these foure parts ioyned with the foure parts of the words go∣ing before, is as if Christ had said;Tolet. in Loc. Si ergo panis sum, manducāter, pasco: Si vi∣vue sum, vi∣tam praesto: si viuo vitam immortalem & aternam ac coelestem, viuere alios facio simili vita: Et ideo si quis man∣ducat hunc panem, viuet in aternum. If I be bread, I feed him that eateth: If I be living, I giue life: If I liue an immortall, eter∣nall, and celestiall life, I make others to liue the same life: And therefore if any man eate of this bread, he shall liue for ever. As many words, as many mysteries, which are able of themselues to stirre vp your religious attention without
further encouraging there∣vnto from me. CHAPTER. II. I. Christ is bread common to all. II. To Gentiles and to Iewes according to the Prophecies, III. And types of the Law. IV. Fulfilled by the death of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospell. V. Exhortation to thankesgi∣ving for this benefit. TO speake first of the Guests which may come and eat, ye may judge by these words of the Text, If any man, that this bread is not like vntoExod. 12.43. the Passeover, whereof no for∣reiner nor hired servant might eate: Neither is it like vntoExod. 29.33. the Shew bread, where∣of
it was not lawfull for any to eate, but for the Priests.Levit. 8.31.32. Levit. 24.9. Mat. 12.4. As in it there is no leaven of sinne, so is it like vntoExod. 12.19. the vnleavened bread of the Passe∣over, whereof the stranger did cate, as well as he that was borne in the Land. As it came downe from the third heaven, so is it like vnto the Manna which rained from the first heaven, and wasExod. 16.16. Num. 12.4. meat, not onely to the chil∣dren of Israel, but also to the mixed multitude which came out of Egypt with them: For any man may eate of it. FIRST any man without exception of Nation: Se∣condly any man without ex∣ception of any person in any Nation. The Prophets did foretell, The Types did figure, Iesus Christ did affirme it
should be so: The calling of the Gentiles ever since the dayes of the Apostles shew∣eth that it is so.Act. 10.43 All the Pro∣phets, saith Peter, giue witnesse vnto Christ, that through his Name whosoever beleeveth in him shall receiue remission of sinnes. Did not God say to Eue, who is the mother of all living, thatGen. 3.15 her seed should bruise the head of the Serpent? Did not Noah prophecie, thatGen. 9.27. God should enlarge (or perswade) Iaphet, and that he should dwell in the tents of Sem? Did not God promise to Abraham, thatGen. 22.18. in his feed all the▪ Nations of the earth should be blessed? He saith notGal. 3.16. in his seeds, as of many, but as of one; And to thy seed which is Christ. Did not Iacob fore∣tell, thatGen. 49.60. vnto Shilo should
be the gathering of the people? Did not Moses forewarne the Israelites, that becauseDeut. 32.21. they had moved God to iealousie with that which is not God, and provoked him to anger with their vanities, he would moue them to iealousie with those which are not people, and provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation. Was not thatRom. 10.19. Prophecie fulfilled in the Apostles dayes? When the Apostle said to the Iewes at Ierusalem, thatAct. 22.21.22.23. he was to goe vnto the Gentiles, they lift vp their voices, cast off their clo∣thes, threw dust in the aire, and cryd, Away with such a fel∣low from the earth: for it is not fit that he should liue. When the Iewes of Antiochia saw that he preached the Gos∣pell to the Gentiles,Act. 13.45. they
were filled with envie. It was to the Messias that God said by David,Psal. 2.8. Aske of me, and I shall giue thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the vt∣termost parts of the earth for thy possession. It was to him also that he said by Esaiah;Esa. 49.6. It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise vp the tribes of Iacob, and to restore the preserued of Israel: I will also giue thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation, vnto the end of the earth: Which words when the Apostle alledged to the Gentiles of Antiochia;Act. 13.48 they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many as were ordeined to eter∣nall life, beleeued: It was of the Gentiles that God said;Esa. 65.1. I am sought of them that as∣ked
not for me: I am found of them that sought me not: I said vnto a nation that was not cal∣led by my Name, Behold me, Be∣hold me. For so is this passage applyed by theRom. 10.20. Apostle, and must be expounded so. Of them also God said by Hosea,Hos. 2.23. I will haue mercy vpō he that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my peo∣ple, and they shall say, Thou art my God. This passage is so formall and cleare, that by it both S.Rom. 9.26 Paul and S.1 Pet. 2.10. Peter proved the calling of the Gentiles, including them in the new covenant, and not excluding the Iewes,Act. 13.48. who were first called, and whenRom. 11.25. the fulnesse of the Gentiles shall come in, shall be called a∣gaine, and saved with vs, ac∣cording
to the Prophecie;Esa. 57.19. Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is neere, saith the Lord, and I will heale him, that is to say, according to the interpretation of the Apostle, peace to the Gen∣tiles, whichEph. 2.12.17. were strangers from the Couenants of promise, hauing no hope, and being with∣out God in the world, and ther∣fore were farre off: and peace to the Iewes which had the Covenants of promise, and in that respect hadDeut. 4.7. God nigh vnto them. THE one and the other was figured by the burnt of∣ferings,Levit. 11.11. the blood wherof was sprinckled round about vpon the Altar; to teach the peo∣ple, that the bloud of the Messias was to be shed for the elect which dwell every
where vpon the globe of the earth. As when the high Priest didExod. 20.24. Levit. 7.34. Levit. 10.14 waue the waue offe∣ring, and shake it to and fro; andExod. 29.27. heaue vp the heaue offe∣ring, he figured that which Christ said, thatIoh. 12.32 33. if he were lifted vp, he would draw all men vnto him: This he said, signifying what death he should die. WHATSOEVER was pro∣phecied and figured, hath beene punctually fulfilled. Christ commanded his A∣postlesMat. 28.19. to teach all Nations: What he commanded they did: At his deathMat. 27.51. the vaile of the Temple was rent in twaine from the top to the bottome, to signifie that by the power of his deathEph. 2.14. the middle wall of partition betweene vs and the Iewes is broken downe, the en∣mitie
is abolished, and of twain we are made in him one new man. Now theRom. 1.16. Gospell is the power of God to saluation to e∣uery one that beleeueth, to the Iew and to the Greeke. Now, according to the prediction of Christ,Mat. 8.11 many come from the East and West, & sit downe with Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob in the kingdome of hea∣ven, and these many are.Rev. 7.4.9. of all Nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues, as well as of Iewes. NowMath. 15.26.27. the dogs doe no more eate the scraps of the childrens bread, which fall from their Maisters Ta∣ble: But by a most mercifull wonder are of dogs made the children of God, and sit with him at his Table. The Iewes were first called to this glorious feast Vpon their re∣fusall
Luk. 14.21. the poore, the maimed, the halt, the blind are brought in: This was and is to the Iewes a heart-breaking sor∣row: SAct. 10.28 Peter himselfe at the first repined against it:Act. 11..2.18. The rest of the Apostles, & the bre∣thren that were in Iudea con∣tended with Peter about it, and when they were better informed, they spake of it as of a great wonder. S. Paul cal∣leth itRom. 16.25.26. a mysterie which was kept secret since the world be∣gan: for although that now by the Scriptures of the Prophets it is made knowne to all Nati∣ons, yet the manner thereof, thatEph. 3.3.5.6. the Gentiles should be fellow-heires, and of the same body, and partakers of the pro∣mise of God in Christ by the Gospell, not by the Law; by faith, not by Circumcision,
without any observation of Iudaicall feasts,Ambros. ib. fasts, absti∣nences, dayes, and other ele∣ments of the Iewish disci∣pline, was not revealed to a∣ny of the Prophets, was not made knowne in other ages to the sonnes of men, was first re∣uealed vnto the Apostles and Prophets of their time by the Spirit. Now our little chil∣dren see it and know it more clearly then Abraham the Father of the beleevers, then Dauid who spake so much of it, then all the Prophets did. THAT which was to the Iewes a heart-sorrow, to the Prophets a booke sealed, to the Apostles a mysterie, to the first Christians of Iudea a wonder, is to vs our salvati∣on: Shall it not also be our
ioy, and the matter of our thāksgiving?Rom. 9.23.24. God hath made knowne the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he afore had prepared vnto glo∣ry: Even vs whom he hath cal∣led, not of the Iewes onely, but also of the Gentiles. And shall not we hearken to the ex∣hortatiō of the Apostle, andRom. 15.9.11. Psal. 117. glorifie God for his mercy? As it is written, O prayse the Lord, all ye Nations: Praise him all ye people: For his mer∣ciful kindnesse is great toward vs: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. When Christ was borne in Bethle∣hem, which is interpreted the house of bread, to be the living bread to the dead, the An∣gels of heaven who for their owne particular had no in∣terest in his birth, ioyned
themselues in a great host to praise God, saying and sing∣ing,Luk. 2.14. Glory to God in the high∣est, and on earth peace, good will towards men: And shall not we who are these men for whom he is come, we who feede every day on him, sing prayse glory, and honour to God who hath sent him to be our bread, and hath cal∣led vs to eate of this bread? Shall we not say and sing with Dauid,Psa. 18.49. Therefore will I giue thanks vnto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen, and sing prayses vnto thy Name. CHAPTER III. I. All kinde of persons in any Nation may eate of the living bread, according to the Prophe∣cies and types of the Law.
II. And the doctrine of the Gospell. III. Three vses of this doc∣trine. ISRom: 3.29 GOD the God of the Iewes onely? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yea of the Gentiles also, and of any man amongst Iewes and Gentiles without distinction of per∣sons; According to the pro∣phecie of Esaiah,Esa. 60.3. The Gen∣tiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightnesse of thy rising. Not Kings onely, but Kings aswell as men of mea∣ner sort: but men of meane condition, aswell as Kings:Psal. 22.26.29. The meeke shall eate, and be satisfied: All they that be fat vpon earth shall eate and wor∣ship. Vnder the Law there were sacrifices not onely for
but also for poore men. He which had notLevit. 1.3.10.14. a bullocke of the heard to offer, came with a Lambe or a kid of the flocke, and was accepted. AndLevit. 12.6.8. the woman which after her purificatiō was not able to bring a Lambe and a Pi∣geon for her oblation, was quit for two turtles, or two yong pigeons. For Christ is a propitiatorie Sacrifice for rich and poore, men and wo∣men: And as all persons of all qualities, which were bit∣ten with the fierie Serpents in the wildernesse, were hea∣led, when they looked vpon the Serpent of brasse which Moses had set vpon a pole, according to the Word of God,Num. 21.8. Euery one that is bitten, when he looketh vpon it, shall line.Ioh. 3.14 15. Even so, said Christ of
himselfe, must the Sonne of man he lifted vp, that whosoe∣ver beleeveth in him, should not perish, but haue eternall life. THE graces of God be∣longing to this life are diffe∣rently and in severall fashi∣ons distributed vnto men: to some in a lesser, to some in a greater scantling: Some haue one thing, some haue ano∣ther. Great is the glory of the King: That glory doth not belong to any of his Subiects: Some are rich, moe are poore: some learned, moe ignorant: some honourable, a great deale moe are with∣out honour. God will haue it to be so, and it is necessary that it should be so, for the preservation of the societie of mankinde. It is not so in
spirituall graces which be∣long to salvation. For as the Sunne, the Moone, the stars, the fire, the aire, the water, the earth, which are the most vsefull creatures of God, are common to all, yong and old, men and wo∣men, Subiects and Kings, poore and rich, wise and ig∣norant: so Gods saving gra∣ces are enioyed in common of all his elect. For1 Tim. 2.4 God will haue all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, that is, men of all con∣ditions and qualities; Kings, Governours, & men of note, as well as other men. Not rich men only. ForMat. 11.5 the poore haue the Gospell preached to them: Not men by age only: For Christ said,Mat. 19.14. Suffer little children, and forbid them not
to come vnto me: For of such is the kingdome of heaven. Not men only as opposed to wo∣men. For S. Peter saith of women, that1 Pet. 3.7. they are heires together of the grace of life: And of all conditions S. Paul saith,Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. that there is neither Iew nor Greek there is neither Circumcision nor vncircumci∣sion, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, but we are all one in Christ Iesus. All are baptized with one and the same wa∣ter: All heare the same word: All in the Lords Supper are partakers of one bread, and drinke of one cup; and when our night shall come, we shall all receiue one penny of eter∣nall life.Act. 10.34.35. For God is no respec∣ter of persons, but in every Na∣tion, he that feareth him, and
worketh righteousness is accep∣ted with him. WHEREFORE let not the great ones despise the little ones:1. Vse. They haue nothing more: Let not the little ones repine at the ex∣cellency of the great ones: They haue nothing lesse. We are allEph. 2.19 fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God: We are allRom. 8.17 heires of God, and ioynt-heires with Christ. Let vs all rather seeke the conversion of those which as yet come not to one table with vs.2. Vse. ForIam. 5.20. he that conver∣teth a sinner from the errour of his way, shall saue a soule from death, and shall hide a multi∣tude of sinnes. And when God hath opened the eyes of any one, and turned him from
darknesse to light, let vs giue thanks for him,Gal. 1.22.23.24. as the Chur∣ches of Iudea, which were in Christ, glorified God in Paul, when they heard that he prea∣ched the faith, which once he had destroyed. And looking for a blessing vpon our godly endevours & carefull labours that way,3. Vse. let vs in the meane time bow the knees of our hearts, and open our mouthes with thanksgiving to the heaven∣ly Father,Col. 1.12.13. who hath made vs meete to be partakers of the in∣heritāce of the Saints in light, hath delivered vs from the power of darkenesse, hath tran∣slated vs into the kingdome of his deare Sonne, & there hath covered the Table vnto vs, that there we may eate per∣petually of this bread.
CHAPTER IV. I. Christ is the bread whereof we must eate. II. As he is God and man in one person. III. In this sence S. Cyrillus saith that we are vnited with Christ corporally and spiritual∣ly. IV. Our vnion with him be∣ginneth by his manhood. WHAT this bread is, Christ hath shew∣ed in the first part of this Verse, saying, I am the liuing bread which came down from heaven, wherevnto he addeth in this second part of the Verse, If any man eate of this bread, speaking still of himselfe. And therforeEras. in Loc. Hunc lo∣cum veteres interpretan∣tur de doctri∣na coelesti. this bread is not this doctrine, as E∣rasmus
saith, although he al∣ledge the authoritie of the Fathers: Why Christ is cal∣led bread, Why living, how it is said that he came downe from heauen, I declared in the exposition of these words; yet not so fully, but that I left a gleaning for this place. SEING Christ speaketh of the eating of this bread, we must exactly distinguish be∣tweene the obiect of our ea∣ting, and the action whereby we eate. For nature it selfe teacheth vs that bread is one thing, and to eate is another: Bread is a bodily substance out of vs. To eate is an action of ours, whereby bread is ap∣plyed vnto vs, and changed into our substance. There∣fore we must first know what, and next how we must eate.
That which we must care, is this bread: It is Christ as he is God and man: Not as he is God onely: For so he is not bread: But is so farre from vs, that we cannot come neere him. Not also as he is man onely: For so he is not living. Saith he not, that it isIoh. 6.63. the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profiteth nothing? It is his Godhead, called the Spirit, which quickneth his man∣hood, and maketh it quick∣ning vnto vs. ForHeb. 9.14. through the eternall Spirit, he offered himselfe without spot to God: And1 Pet. 3.18. being put to death in the flesh, he was quickened by the Spirit, and so was enabled to quicken vs.Similitude As wood in it selfe is not able to warme vs: But if fire come vnto it, it re∣ceiveth heat in it selfe, and
by that heat warmeth all those that come neere vnto it. Even so the manhood of Christ hath no quickning life of its owne selfe, but by the vertue of the Godhead vnited vnto it, it is able to quicken all the men of the world, if they did come neere vnto it. THIS was the meaning of S. Cyrillus, when disputing against Nestorius who divi∣ded Christ, he said yt we are vnited vnto ChristCyrill. ad∣vers Nestor. lib. 4. c. 5. , divinely and hu∣manely:Idem in Ioh lib. 11. cap. 27. , corporally and spiritual∣ly, that is to say, according to his own interpretatiō which Papists haue omitted in their translations, , intirely.: And corporally as he is MAN:
. Spiritually also as he is GOD. This is worthy to be obser∣ved against Papists, which will haue the words corporal∣ly and Spiritually to be ex∣poūded of the manner of our vnion with Christ: whereas S. Cyrillus expoundeth them of the obiect of this vnion, which is the body and the Spi∣rit; the manhood and the God∣head of Christ, for he is one with vs in both natures. E∣ven as the same author saith, thatIdem adv. Nestor lib. 4. cap. 6. , we are sanctified and revived spiritually and corpo∣rally, that is to say, not onely in our spirits, but also in our bodies, because, saith he,1 Cor. 15 53. this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortall
must put on immortalitie.Ex Theo∣doreto dia∣logo. 2. So S. Ignace saith, that Christ is ioyned to the Father, , carually and spiritually, i.e. both in his humane and divine nature, and not partly by a carnall, partly by a divine manner: For the manner of the vnion of Christ with the Father, is wholly divine: And so also the manner of our vnion with him is altogether di∣vine, and spirituall. Dare Pa∣pists say that we are ioyned with Christ naturally, al∣though Cyrillus saith that our vnion with himCyril. in Io∣han. lib. 11. cap. 26. is natu∣rall? Yet he speaketh so, be∣cause our nature is ioyned with his natures; as he proo∣veth, because1 Cor. 10.27. the Church is Christs body, and we are mem∣bers of Christ in particular.
So then in regard of the ob∣iects which are vnited, this vnion is naturall, reall, sub∣stantiall, corporall, spirituall, because his whole person is ioyned with ours: And ther∣fore I say that we must eate Christ, not onely as bread, but also as living. And if as man he is bread, and as God is li∣ving, we must eate him in both natures together: For in both natures he is our Mediatour, and the bread whereby we liue. YET in this eating wee must obserue an order. LikeGen. 28.11. Iacobs ladder, by his manheed he toucheth the earth: By his God head he toucheth heavē: And by both vnited toge∣ther he ioyneth the earth with heaven, reconcileth man with God, obtaineth to
vs the service of the Angels of God, whichIoh. 1.51 ascend and descend vpō him, and by him vpon vs: But in such sort that by him as he is man, they al∣cend from vs, and goto him as he is God: and from him as he is God, descend vnto vs by him as he is man. In the same order doe we cate him, and abide in him, and he in vs.Aug. in Ioh. trac. 42. Ad∣nentus eius humanitas e∣ius: Mansio eius diuinit as eius. Diuini∣tas eius quo imus: Hu∣manitas eius qua imus: Nisi nobis fieret qua iremus, nun∣quam ad il∣lum manentē peruenire∣mus. He commeth vnto vs, saith S. Austin, by his humanitie: He abideth with vs by his di∣vinitie. His divinitie is that wherevnto we goe: His huma∣nitie is that whereby we goe. If he were not vnto vs the way whereby we may goe, we should never come vnto him, in that wherein he abideth with vs. But because I haue spoken of this bread largely inough vp∣on the first part of the Verse,
I leaue it, to come to the third part of my division, which is, OF THE EATING of the living Bread, and of the manner thereof. CHAPTER V. I. To eate Christ, is to be vni∣ted vnto him. II. Necessitie of our vnion with Christ. III. Expressed in the Scrip∣ture by many similitudes, and in the sixt of S. Iohn by the si∣militude of Eating. IV. All Papists hold that Christ is eaten in the Sacra∣ment with the mouth of the body. V. The liter all sence is not al∣wayes to be followed.
VI. When it is lawfull, when not to aske How. VII. Papists agree not among themselues concerning divers circumstances of the bodily ea∣ting. TO EATE, is to chew and worke the meate with our teeth, if it be solide and strong; to sup and swallow it downe, if it be li∣quid, to receiue it into our stomackes, to disgest it there till it be turned into blood, and changed into the sub∣stance of all the parts of our bodies, that thereby this our mortall life may be maintai∣ned, which otherwise should decay and perish. Even so, saith Christ,Ioh. 6.53.54. Except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, ye haue no
life in you: And of those that eate him he saith; Who so ea∣teth my stesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternall life, and I will raise him vp at the last day. Whereby it is easie to be vnderstood, that this eating and drinking is a certaine action, whereby Christ is v∣nited vnto vs so neere, that we sucke life out of him, yea that he himselfe beōmethCol. 3 4. our life, as the Apostle cal∣leth him.Aug. Con∣fess l. 7. c. 10. Nec tu me in te mutabis, sicut cibum carnis tuae, sed tu muta∣beris in me. It is true that the bread of the earth when we eate it, cannot feed vs, till it be changed into our bodies, because we are more excel∣lent then it is: But the bread which came downe from heaven, is more excellent then we are, and therefore that we may be fed by it, we are changed into it, & made
members of his bodie, of his flesh, and of his bones. Even as the fire turneth into fire all things that feed on it. THIS leadeth vs by the hand to the consideration of the necessitie of the eating of this bread, that is to say, of our vnion and communion with Christ. Our felicitie is to be ioyned with GOD,Psal. 36.9 with whom is the fountaine of life. ButEsa. 59.2. sinne separateth be∣tweene vs and our God. For1 Ioh. 1.1.5. he is light, and in him there is no darknesse at all:Eph. 5.8. we are darkenesse, and in vs by na∣ture there is no light at all2 Cor. 6.15. What communion hath light with darknesse? O Lord, thou hast made vs for thine owne selfe, that sticking fast vnto thee, we may be blessed by thee: But loe by our sinne we
Eph. 2.11.12.13. are far off, andPsal 73.27.28. loe, they that are far from thee, shall perish. But it is good for vs to draw neere vnto thee, neither is our heart at rest till it returne vn∣to thee. Tell vs then, ô Lord, how shall we be againe ioy∣ned with thee? The Sonne, the Word, the Wisedome of God answereth,Ioh 14.6. No man cō∣meth vnto the Father, but by me. And S. Paul telleth vs why, and how, saying,Eph. 2.13 Now in Christ Iesus, ye who some∣times were farre off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Aske ye why? Because by the blood of his sacrifice, he hath satisfied the iustice of God, asswaged the burning fire of his indignation, and made attonement for vs, asHeb. 7 22. Sure∣tie andHeb. 9.15. Mediatour of the new Testament. Aske ye how? Be∣cause
we are in him. He is ourExod. 28.11.12.30. high Priest, who beareth vs vpon his shoulders, and vpon his heart before the Lord,1 Ioh. 5.11.12. who hath given to vs eternall life, and this life is in his Sonne: He that hath the Sonne, hath life: and he that hath not the Sonne, hath not life. For asMath 13.44. he who found a treasure hid in a field, could not claime any right vnto it, till he bought the field: So cannot we challengeCol. 2.3. the treasures of wisdome & know∣ledge, and of thatIoh. 1.16. fulnesse of graces which is in Christ, till he himselfe be ours: and so ours, that we be in him, and one with him by a most reall vnion of his person with our persons. EVEN asRom. 6.5. the graffe is one tree with the stocke wherein
it is graffed;Ioh. 15.1. the vine and the branches are one plants,1 Cor. 12.12. the head and the members are one body,Eph. 5.31.32. the husband and the wife are one flesh,Eph 2.20.21. the foun∣dation and the stones builded vpon it, are one Temple; and to come to the similitude of my Text, the bread which was no part of vs, because it is without vs, when it is ea∣ten becōmeth a part of our flesh, and of our bodies. So ye see, not onely by the simi∣litude of eating, but also by all the rest, that our vnion with Christ is so necessary, that as a man cannot liue without meate, nor a house stand without a foundation, no more can we liue, stand, and withstand in the evill day, without our vnion with Christ, according to his own
saying,Ioh. 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same briugeth forth much fruit: for without me (or severed from me) ye can doe nothing. Ye see also that he is vnited with vs in all that is his, i. in both his natures:Eph. 5.30. In his manhood: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: And in his Godhead: For1 Cor. 6.7. he that is ioyned vnto the Lord, is one Spirit. Likewise we are vnited with him in all that is ours, i. not only in our soules, but also in our bodies, as the Apostle saith,1 Cor. 6.15. Know we not that your bodies are the mem∣bers of Christ? IF THIS had beene dili∣gently and religiously ob∣served, there should not be a∣ny controversie betweene
Papists & vs about the man∣ner of the eating of Christ. for if to eate Christ be no o∣ther thing but to vnite Christ vnto our selues; if we know how we are vnited with him, we cannot chuse but know how we eate him. If we be one with him corporally, that is, after an outward and corporall manner, then we care him corporally: But if our vnion with him be spiri∣tuall, doubtlesse the mouth wherwith we eate him, must be a spirituall mouth▪ Papists say that our eating of Christ is both spirituall and corpo∣rall: That out of the Sacra∣ment it is spirituall: And many Papists, asBiel super can. Miss. lect. 8. Gabriell Biel,atan. in 3 part. q 80. art. vlt. Caietan,Cusan epist. 7. ad Bohe∣mos. Cusanus,Ianseni con∣cordant▪ c 59 Ian∣senius,Tapper ex∣plicat▪ art. 15 Lovaniens. Tapper,Hessel. in lib▪ de com∣mun. sub vna∣specie. Hesselius, and others, acknowledge that
Christ in this whole Chap∣ter speaketh of the spirituall eating only.Bellarm. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 5. Bellarmin with the rest of the Societie, and other Popish Doctors grant that wee must take in that sence all the words of Christ from the seven and twentith vnto the one and fiftie verse, which now I expound. But that from henceforth begin∣ning at the one & fiftie verse vnto the end of the Chapter, Christ speaketh of the Eu∣charist: which opinion Cu∣sanus refuteth by these words of Christ, vers. 53. Ex∣ceptye eate the flesh of the Son of man, and drinke his blood, ye haue no life in you, saying thatCusan. epist. 7. ad Bohem. Necesse est quod si de▪ omnibus san∣ctis debet▪ verificari, qui habent vitamillam divinā, quod non imelligi∣tur de visi∣bili seu Sa∣cramentali manducatio∣ne, sed de spi∣rituali. if they must be verified of all the Saints which haue this di∣vine life, they must not be vn¦der stood of the visible or Sacra∣mentall,
but of the spirituall eating. Which is true: Yet all Papists agree that in the Sa∣crament Christ is eaten not onely spiritually by faith, but also corporally by the mouth of the body, in such sort that the true body of Christ en∣tereth into their mouthes, and is received into their sto∣mackes. If ye aske how they can beleeue such a mōstrous Doctrine? They answere, that Christ affirmeth in this Chapter, that we must eate his flesh, & drinke his blood: And that in the Sacrament he hath commaunded vs to eate his body, saying, Take, eate, This is my bidy: To refuse to eate him, were disobedi∣ence: To aske how, is incre∣dulitie, like vnto that of the Iewes of Capernaum,Ioh 6▪52. Rhennsta. who
stroue amongst themselues, say∣ing, HOW can this man giue vs his flesh to eate? This, say they, is the literall sence, and this sence they will follow. BVT first, if the literall sence must be alwayes followed, why beleeue they not, as the Anthropomorphits did, that God hath a body as we haue, seeing God saith that he hath eyes, eares, hands, feete, &c? Why shake they not hands with the Arrians, and deny Christ to be God, because he himselfe said,Ioh. 14.28 My Father is greater then I? Certainely if they had been in Nicodemus his place, they would not haue asked of Christ,Ioh. 3.4. How can a man be borne when he is old? but said vnto him, Lord feeing thou hast said that we must be borne againe, we be∣leeue
that we shall enter the second time into our mo∣thers wombe, and be borne againe. And if they had bin standing by the Samaritane Woman, they would haue naught her to beleeue that Christ is reall and substanti∣all water, because he called himselfe water: May they not also with as good reason expoūd literally, that whichPro. 9.5. the Wisdome in the Proverbs,Cant. 5.1. the Spouse in Salemons Song,Esa. 55.1 God in Esaiah speaketh of the furnishing of their Table with beastes, honey, milke, bread, and wine? And when God saith,Psal. 81.10 Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it,Cant 5.1. eate, drinke abundantly, if we must alwayes cleaue to the leaues of the words, we must pre∣pare our throats & our bel∣lies,
and drinke stoutly till we be drunke. SECONDLY, if those spee∣ches must be taken allegori∣cally of meate and drinke of another kinde then those which are earthly and vsuall amongst vs, it is no offence to aske how we may be made partakers of them. To aske how the things which GOD alone doth may be done, as how he created the world, How the Word was made flesh, &c. is a most horrible sinne:August. ad Volusian. E∣pist. 3. In ta∣libus rebus Iota ratio fa∣ctiest poten∣tia facientia. For in such things all the reason of that which is don, is the power of the doer. And therefore Zacharias sinned, when he asked,Luk. 1.18.20. How shall I knew this? for I am an old man, and my wise well strucken in yeares. But when any thing is to be done by vs, it is not
diffidence, is not curiositie, it is docilitie, it is dutie to aske How we should doe it, that we may doe it well, and according to the will of the commander, so that wee goe to him, and aske coun∣sell at his mouth, how he will haue it to be don. The Iewes of CapernaumCyrill. in Ioh. lib. 3. cap. 30. Et lib. 4. c. 14. through pre∣sumption and arrogancie, as∣kedIoh. 6.52.60.67. how Christ might giue them his flesh to eate, and calling his speech an hard saying, went backe, and walked no more with him, whereasChrysost. in Ioh. hom. 46. they should haue remained with him, and not departed, they should haue asked, and not despaired. O thrice and foure times happie had they been, if they had propounded to Christ an How of docilitie, as Nicodemus did, when having
a good conceit of Christ, e∣steeming him so wise that he said nothing absurdly, and not vnderstāding his words, asked of him,Ioh. 3.4. How they should be vnderstood, & was instructed. How more hap∣pie had they beene, if they had come to Christ with an How of faith, as Maneah did to the Angel, saying,Iudg. 13.12. Now let thy words come to passe: How shall we order the childe, and how shall we do vnto him? And as the Virgin Mary did, when beleeving the words of the Angel Gabriel that she should be the mother of the Sonne of God, & not know∣ing if any action of hers should concurre with the power of God in that work, she asked,Luk. 1.34. How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? So
we beleeue that we must eate Christ: For seeing he hath said it, is there any Christian that dare deny it? This ea∣ting is commanded vnto vs, and to be done by vs. There∣fore to aske how we should doe it, and to be carefull that we sinne not by doing it a∣misse, is docilitie and faith. THIRDLY, Papists them∣selues, when they are hoarse with crying against vs, be∣cause we aske and teach how Christ is eaten, seeke in their owne braines the exposition of this How, and decide the question in words so mon∣strous, that we could not be∣leeue it, if they were not written in their own books. NICOLAS the II. Pope of Rome, and a Councell of an hundred and foureteene Bi∣shops
which he assembled at Rome in the yeare of Christ 1059. constrained Berengari∣us to confesse, thatDecret. 3. parte. de con∣secrat. dist. 2. can. 42. Ego Berengarius. Scilicet panē & vinum, quae in altari ponūtur, post confecratio∣nem, non slū sacramentū, sed etiam ve∣rum corpus & sanguinē domini nostri Iesu. Christi esse, & sen∣sualiter, non solum sacra∣mentum, sed in veritate manibus sa∣cerdotū tra∣ctari, frangi, & fidelium dentibus at∣teri. not onely the Sacramēt, but also the true body of our Lord Iesus Christ, is truly and sensibly handled and broken with the hands of the Priests, and is brayed with the teeth of the faithfull. This ca∣non is against the Scripture, which saith Ioh. 19.36. that a bone of him shall not be broken. And therefore the Romane Doctours, departing from their maxime, That the Pope and the Councels approved by him cannot erre, say that Christ without any such bruising goeth down from the mouth to the stomacke whole and intire, but hid vnder the ac∣cidents of the bread. There is in S. Bernards workes a
Sermon de Coenadomini, of the Lords Supper, but it is none of his: In it the author saith, Speciem panis rodit aliquando sorex paruissimus: Christianus recipit etiam pessimus: virtu∣tem gratiae spiritualis non nisi praedestinatus recipit. A little mouse sometimes gnaweth the spece of bread, & a lewd Chri∣stian receiveth it also: where∣as he onely who is predestinated receiueth the vertue of the spi∣rituall grace. By the speces of bread he vnderstandeth the accidents thereof, such as are the colour, the smell, the sa∣uour, the weight, and such like; but it would be a good peece of learning to tell vs how a mouse can gnaw, and a wicked man eate acci∣dents. THOMAS the Angelicall
Doctor of the Roman Church maintaineth that not onely wicked men, but also fowles,Tho. 3. parte q. 80. art. 3. ad ni. De defecti∣bus occur∣rentib circa Missam. beasts and wormes may eate Christs body in the Sacra∣ment, and in all the Masse-bookes many instructions are given to the Priests what must be don with the mouse which hath eaten Christs body, and with the body of Christ, which the Priest or a sicke man hath vomited. If ye aske how long he continueth there? They an∣swere to that also. The Priest praying in the Masse thatAdhareat visceribus meis. it may sticke fast to his bowels, thinketh that he continueth for ever in his body.Glossa in can. 23 Tri∣bus gradi∣bus, Certum est quod spe¦cies quam ci¦to dentibus teruntur, tam cito in coelum rapitur cor∣pus Christi. The Ca∣nonists say, that as soone as the species (or visible accidents) are bruised with the teeth, his body is rauished into heauen, as
if he were afraid of a snatch by the way.Thom. 3. parte. q. 80. art. 3. con∣clus. Bellarm. de Eucharist. lib. 14. c. 1. Thomas and the most part of the rest say, that he abideth in the stomacke till the species or accidents vnder which his body was hid be consumed, that is, as long time as would be need∣full to the naturall heat to disgest the bread whereof they are the accidents, if it were in the stomacke. This is their explication of the how the body of Christ is ea∣ten in the Sacrament, wher∣in they omit to tell vs how it goeth out againe. But we say that this manner of the ea∣ting of the body of Christ▪ is impossible in it selfe, inde∣cent and iniurious to Christ, and vnprofitable to the ea∣ters.
CHAPTER. VI. Six reasons why it is impossible to eate Christ with the mouth of the body. YE haue sundry wayes  to know that it is im∣possible. 1.Chrysost. 1 Cor. 11. ho∣mil. 27. . S. Chryso∣stome exhorteth vs to eate, to drinke, to put on Christ, Shew∣ing that those three must be done by one and the same action. But by the mouth we cannot put him on: There∣fore by the mouth we can∣not eate and drinke him. Extend this argument to all the rest of the similitudes, whereby our vnion with Christ is expressed. The vni∣on of clothes with the body, and of stones with the foun∣dation is artificiall and out∣ward: The vnion of the head
with the members, of the vine with the branches is na∣turall and inward: The vni∣on of the husband with his wife, is ciuill, and inforceth not any proximitie or tou∣ching of bodies, as the rest doe: For they remaine one flesh, although they be as far separated as the East is from the West. If a bodily manner of coniunction with Christ, cannot be inforced by those similitudes, because it should be at one time outward and inward, naturall, civill, and artificiall, which is impossi∣ble: Let Papists tell why it should be inforced by the si∣militude of eating? If by the similitude of eating, why not also by the rest? Here they are muffled and cannot answer.Cusan epist. 7. ad. Bohe∣mos. Crdere igitur, bapti∣zari, mandu∣care, & bi∣bere, et quic∣quid similiter per Christum dicitur, non habet in spi∣rituali intel∣lectu differē∣tiam, sed v∣nū solum est, quodper om∣nia talia va∣rie exprimū¦tur, scilicet quotquot re∣ceperūt eum, dedit eis po∣testtem fili∣os dei fieri ijs qui credunt in nomine eius. Cusanus one of their owne
confesseth, that all those simi∣litudes, and whatsoever Christ saith after that manner, hath no difference in the spirituall vnderstanding, but it is one thing which by all such things is diversly expressed, to wit, As many as received him, to them gaue the power to become the Sonnes of God, to them that be∣leeue on his Name. SECONDLY, in the Sacra∣ment he giveth himselfe, not as glorified in heaven, but as dead vpon the crosse, as he said,1 Cor. 11.24. This is my body which is broken for you:Mar. 14.24 This is my blood which is shed for many: Doe this in remembrance of me. Which commandement the Apostle explaineth say∣ing,1 Cor. 11 26. For as often as ye eate this bread, and drinke this cup, ye doe shew the Lords death till
he come. He did giue himselfe to the Apostles so, and they received him so. For he was not then glorified. Should we desire to receiue him o∣therwayes then they did? To receiue him so with the mouth of the body it is im∣possible, because he is not now dead, butRom. 6.10 liueth vnto God. This argument prevents all replyes. THIRDLY, if Christ were in the Sacrament, wicked men, yea worms, mice, dogs, asses, and other beasts might eate him. But that is impossi∣ble, saithOrigin, in Math. 15. Verus cibus quem nullus malus potest edere. Origines, because if they did eate him, they should abide in him, as he saith, vers. 56. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him: and abiding in him they
should liue for ever, as he saith in my Text, If any man eate of this bread he shall liue for ever, and so often in the verses preceeding and fol∣lowing: Which movedDe cōsecrat. dist. 2. cā 65 Qui discor∣dat a Christo, nec carnem eius mandu∣cat, nec san∣guinem bibit, etiam si tantae rei Sacramē∣tum ad iudi∣ciū suae prae∣sumptionis quotidiè in∣differenter accipiat. S. Austin to say, that he who is discordant from Christ, eateth not his flesh, and drinketh not his blood, although he receiue daily the Sacrament of so great a thing to the condemnation of his owne presumption. As like∣wise he saith of the Apostles, thatIdem in Io∣han trac. 59. Illi mandu∣cabāt panem dominum: Ille panem domini con∣tra dominū: Illi vitam, ille poenam. they did eate the bread which is the Lord, and of Iu∣das, that he did eate the bread of the Lord against the Lord, They life, he paine. FOVRTHLY, the Lord himselfe seeing that many of his Disciples tooke his words carnally, as if he had spoken of a corporall eating
of his body,Athan. de verb. Christi Qui dixerit verbum con∣tra filiū ho∣minis: Quo∣modo fieri posset vt to∣tus mundus ederet de carne ipsius, quae non suf∣ficeret paucis hominibus: Ideo dominus de carnis suae manducatio∣ne loquens, sui in coelum ascensus me∣minit, vt a corporali eos manducatio∣ne abstrahe∣ret, & vel inde disce∣rent carnem Christi esse cibum coele∣stem, et in a∣limoniā spi∣ritualem da∣re. to draw them a∣way from bodily eating, and to teach them that his flesh is a heavenly meate, and is given to be spirituall food, he maketh mention of his ascension into heaven, saying, vers. 61.62. Doth this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Sonne of man ascend vp wher he was before? arguing, This is a strong rea∣son, thatIbidē trac. 27. Vel tunc videbitis quod non eo modo quo pu∣tatis erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tūc intelligetis quod gratia eius non con∣sumitur morfibus. he giueth not his bo∣dy after the māner which they imagined. z For the heavens must receiue him, vntill the time of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, because there a he appeareth in the presence of God, and b ma∣keth intercession for vs, and cannot come out of that Ho∣ly place, till his intercession be ended, which will not be
till the worlds end. ForHeb. 8.4. if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest. But he is a Priest: and therefore, saith he him∣selfe,Math. 24.23.26. If any man say vnto you, Loe, here is Christ, or there, be∣leeue it not: Behold he is in the desert, goe not forth; behold he is ,Act 3.21.Heb 9.24. in the secret chambers,Ro. 8.34. (as when Papists say he is in the chappell, on the Altar in the box) beleeue it not: Beleeue rather S. Paul who saith, that2 Cor. 5.6.16. whiles we are at home in the body, we are ab∣sent from the Lord, and hence∣forth know him no more after the flesh, and according to his exhortatiō,Col. 3.1 2. seeke those things which are aboue, where Christ sitteth on the right hād of God: set your affection on things a∣boue, not on things on earth.Bernard, de Aduentu do∣mini serm. 1. Incassum la∣boraret erige¦re corda no∣stra, nisi col∣locatū in coe∣lis salutis nostra doce∣ret autorem. In vaine would he labour to
heaue vp our hearts to heaven, if the authour of our salvation were not in heaven. Yea most preposterously should he en∣devour to withdraw our hearts from the earth, if Christ were on earth. ForMath. 6.21. where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. Fiftly, if the eating of Christ with the mouth of the body were possible, his manhood might be separated from his Godhead, his soule from his body, and the life which is in him from his person. Can his Godhead which is infi∣nite be receiued in our bo∣dies? Can his soule which is a spirit enter into our sto∣mackes? Can his quickning life which cannot be with∣out his Godhead, goe where the Godhead will not goe?
Certainly, if it were possible to eate him, the mouth of our body could eat nothing of him but his body: And what is a body without a soule, but a corps? if then ChristRom. 6.9. being raised from dead, he dieth no more, death hath no more dominion over him, it is impietie to thinke, it is blas∣phemie to say that his body may be eaten corporally. AND why, I pray you, doth the Priest when he sheweth the hoste to the people, cry, Sursum corda? Why doth the people answer, Habemus ad dominū, but because they acknowledg that even when the Sacramēt is given, Christ is in heaven, and is not in his body else-where? So all that they prattle of the possibili∣tie and realitie of his bodily
presence in the Eucharist, is like a spiders web, which is swept away with the first blast of the truth. CHAPTER VII. I. The bodily eating is indecent and iniurious to Christ. II. The reply of the Adversa∣ries impertinent. III. The same eating is vn∣profitable to the eaters. CERTAINLY although it were possible, it is vndecent, and iniuri∣ous to Iesus Christ. Are the ac∣cidents of a crust a conveni∣ent garment to cover the Sonne of God? Is it fit that he who vpholdeth all things by the word of his power, should be borne betweene the fingers of a Priest, who is
in perpetuall feare least he fall? Are the stomackes of men, which are puddles of infection, Temples well su∣ting the Lord of glory? The Cherubims and Seraphims, all the Angels of God wor∣ship and serue him in heavē. The divels themselues stoop and bow downe their heads before him from the lower hels, and men which are no better then Grashoppes put him to an open shame, main∣taining, as I haue said, that not onely wicked men, but also fowles, beasts, & wormes may eat him.Thom. 3. q. 80. art. 3. Quidā dixe∣runt quod statim cum Sacramentū tangitur a mure vel ca∣ne, desinit ibi corpus esse Christi, quod etiam dero∣gat veritati Sacramenti. Alexan. Ha∣lens. part. 4. sum. q. 45. in 1. & q. 53. in 2. To let you see how farre the God of this world hath blinded them, they dare say that this blas∣phemous divinitie deroga∣teth nothing from the glory of our Lord Iesus Christ.
WHY?Thom. ibi. Because forsooth he was crucified by sinners without any diminution of his dignitie, yea was byMath. 4.5.8. the di∣vell transported from one place to another. But these things did befall him in the dayes of his flesh: Then he came to be tempted, to be a∣bused and crucified by wic∣ked men: ThenHeb. 4.15. he was in all things tempted like as we are, yet without sinne. But nowEph. 1.20.21. he sitteth at the right hand of his Father in the heauenly pla∣ces, farre aboue all principali∣ties, and power, and might, and dominion. NowHeb. 2.7. he is crowned with glory and honour. NowPhil. 2 9 10. God hath highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is aboue every name, that at the Name of Iesus every knee should bow, of things in heauen,
and things in earth, and things vnder the earth. And shall he now, now be in a worse case then he was in his greatest infirmitie? For then he did not enter into mens bellies, and did not feare the gnaw∣ing of wormes, nor the teeth of mice, nor the intrals of beasts. What? say Papists, is not God every where, and is not defiled? True. But the body of Christ is not. It is a true body: Therefore if it be in the body of a man, or of a beast, it must touch them: And it cannot touch them, but it must be defiled by them. They aske againe, Doth not the light of the Sunne inlighten the whole aire? Is it not spread over the whole earth? Shineth it not
in the most infected places, and is not infected? True al∣so. For the light in the Sunne and in the aire is not a body, it is an accident. But the bo∣dy of Christ is a true body. If the Sunne it selfe were vp∣on a dunghill, it should be soyled, as well as the aire wherein the light is. So the body of Christ if it touch our bodies must necessarily be contaminated: And al∣though it were not, I say that it cannot be lodged in the stincking bellies of men or beasts, but it must be disho∣noured: Wherefore I con∣clude, that this eating of the body of Christ, is not onely impossible, but also inde∣cent & outragious to Christ. WHAT although it were possible? What although
Christ were not dishonoured by it? I aske cui bono? The least of the workes of GOD hath some vse: This which is thought to be one of the most wonderfull, hath none at all. Christ must over-turne the whol order of nature, he must be subiect to the inten∣tion of a Priest, he must be at once in heaven & on earth, he must contract his body to the capacitie of a little round crust, and haue his head in his feete, and all the parts of his body pellemel∣led: He must be kept in a boxe, and often tarry there till he get a white coate. To what purpose so many mon∣strous wonders? To saue men? No, no. Many men since the beginning of the world till Christ haue benne
saved without this eating. Many every day goe to hea∣ven without it. Many wic∣ked men are damned with it. Those who communicate every day, reape no profit by it. For no meate doth good, except it sticke to him that eateth it: Whereas the body of Christ doth not continue in them. But it must scoure to heaven as fast as it came from it, having no longer leaue to stay then till the ac∣cidents be consumed, and giving no oddes in Paradise to them who are every other day so carefull to receiue it. For what end doe wee eate our daily bread? To sustaine our liues. For what end must we eate the bread which came downe from heaven, must Iesus Christ enter into
vs? He himselfe answereth saying,Ioh. 6.57. He that eateth me, e∣ven he shall liue by me, and that for ever, as he saith in my Text. And yet Papists confesse that to haue his bo∣dy in our bodies, bringeth no such advantage to any man. The Virgin Mary had him nine moneths in her wombe, and Elizabeth said vnto her,Luk. 1.45. Blessed is shee that beleeved. And when a wo∣man said vnto Christ,Luk. 11.27.28. Bles∣sed is the womb that bare thee, and the papes which thou hast sucked, he reiected that say∣ing with this answere; Yea blessed are they that heare the Word of God, and keepe it, shew∣ing that it is not the having of his body in our bodies, but the having of him and of his word in our hearts by
faith and obedience that quickeneth and blesseth vs. Which I will proue, decla∣ring first, the true manner how CHRIST giveth this bread, and next how we re∣ceiue it. CHAPTER VIII. I. Wee must learne of Christ how he giveth himselfe, and how we receiue him. II. Christ giveth himselfe vnto vs by his Spirit. III. To be in Christ, and to haue the Spirit of Christ are equivalent in the Scrip∣tures. IV. We haue no reall vnion with Christ in the Sacraments but by the Spirit. V. It is easie to the Spirit to vnite vs vnto Christ.
VI. We must pray for the Spi∣rit. WE shall not goe a∣stray, if in this point, and all o∣thers, we follow the counsell of S.Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 4. c. 13. Quae∣rendum enim ita semper est, vt apud cum habite∣mus, & ad alienas sen∣tentias non defer amur. Cyrillus, and make in∣quirie in such sort, that we dwell with God, and be not ca∣ried about with the opinions of men. Papists beleeue that they must eat Christ, because he hath said it. We beleeue it likewise. But when he telleth vs also, how he giveth him∣selfe, and how we must eate him, they stop their eares, and will not heare: we must not doe so: we must say vnto him as Samuel did to GOD,1 Sam. 3.9. Speake Lord, for thy servant heareth. He of all can best tell how he giveth himselfe, and
how we receiue him. And what he answereth to both questions must be true. TO THE first he answe∣reth in the 63. verse of this Chapter, saying, It is the Spi∣rit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing, the words that I speake vnto you, they are Spirit and they are life, i. they must be vnderstood of the spi∣rit, which isRom. 8.2. the Spirit of life, quickning the flesh of Christ, andAug. in Iohan. tract. 27. Ergospi∣ritus est qui viuificat. Spiritus euim facit viua membra. making all the members of his body to liue by a spiritu∣all vnion with him. He had said before vers. 56. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. And S. Iohn saith, that1 Ioh. 4.13. hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in vs, be∣cause he hath given vs of his Spirit. It is then by the Spi∣rit
that he giveth himselfe vnto vs, and dwelleth in vs. And this giving of himselfe vnto vs by his Spirit is so in∣compatible with his bodily presence, that he averred for a most certaine truth, thatIoh. 16.7. it was expedient that he should goe away; For if I goe not away, said he, the Cemforter will not come vnto you: but if I depart, I will send him vnto you: And what to doe?Ioh. 14.16.17.18. To abide with you for ever. And this abiding of his Spirit with vs, is his abiding with vs, as he saith in the next verse, I will not leaue you com∣fortlesse, I will come to you. THIS IS so true, that in the new Testament to be in Christ, and to haue the Spi∣rit of Christ, are equivalent: The Apostle averreth, that
Rom. 8.9.10. if any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his: Where∣vnto he addeth, If Christ be in you, because Christ is not in vs, but by his Spirit. This v∣nion of Christ with vs exten∣deth it selfe to our bodies.1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not, saith the Apo∣stle, that your bodies are the members of Christ? If ye aske of him How? He answereth,Vers. 17. He that is ioyned vnto the Lord, is one Spirit. i. e. he is made one with the Lord by the holy Spirit, as he shew∣eth when he asketh againe,Vers. 19. What, know you not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye haue of God. WE haue no other kinde of vnion with Christ in the Sacraments. It is written of our Baptisme, that1 Cor. 12.13. by one Spi∣rit
we are all baptized into one body, because it is the Spirit that in our Baptisme incor∣porateth vs in Christ. It is al∣so written of the Lords Sup∣per,1 Cor. 12.13 that we haue bin all made to drinke into one Spirit, be∣cause that in that holy Sa∣crament he giveth his body vnto vs by his Spirit. Al∣though that his body should come downe from heaven, and enter into our bodies, it could not vnite vs vnto him, as I haue said: for the flesh profiteth nothing: But that which is impossible to his flesh, is easie to his Spirit, which if he send from hea∣ven into our hearts, it will vnite vs vnto him more truely and neerely then our soules are vnited to our bo∣dies.
THIS then is the true How Christ giveth himselfe to be eaten,1. Vse. wherevnto we must submit our minds and cogi∣tations, without any further inquirie, following the ex∣ample of the blessed Virgin, who when the Angel had instructed her thatLuk. 1.35.38. the holy Ghost should come vpon her, and make her to conceiue, brought into captivitie all her thoughts to the obedi∣ence of the Word of GOD, and said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it vnto me ac∣cording to thy Word. Behold, I pray you, how the Sunne budgeth not out of his hea∣venly tabernacle, and never∣thelesse darting his beames from heaven to earth, com∣municateth it selfe to all the creatures that are on earth.
And shall we say, thatMal. 4.2. the Sunne of righteousnesse, must leaue his celestiall and glori∣ous palace to make good the word which he hath spoken of our communion with him? O blasphemy? He hath said that by his Spirit he will come vnto vs, and dwell with vs: He will doe it as he hath said it,Luk. 1.37. For with God no word shall be impossi∣ble. WHEREFORE fettering our curiositie with the shac∣kles of the word of God, let vs cry to heaven,Veni crea∣tor Spiritus, Et infunde coelitus. Lucis tuae radium. Come O most holy and blessed Spirit into our hearts, assured that if we pray so earnestly, God will heare vs:Luk. 11.13. For, saith Christ, if ye being evill know how to giue good gifts vnto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father giue the holy Spirit to them that aske him? CHAPTER IX. I. We must learne of Christ himselfe how we eate him. II. Such bread, such eating. III. Such man, such eating. IV. Such sences and instru∣ments to apprehend him, such eating. V. Such end of our eating, such eating. LET Vs in the next place goe againe vn∣to Christ, and aske and learne of him how we must eate this bread, which came downe from heaven. ForAugust. in Ioh tract 27 Patitur enim nos non con∣tradicentes, sed nosse cu∣pientes. he beareth with vs, when we aske of him, not to contra∣dict, but to learne. O ye that
haue an eare to heare, heare.Deut. 29.29. The secret things belong vnto the Lord our God.1 Sam. 6.19. Looke not with the men of Bethshemesh into this Arke of the Lord:Iob. 33.13 He giueth not account of any of his matters.Deut. 29.29. But those things which are revealed, belong vn∣to vs and to our children for e∣ver, that we may doe all the words of this Law. Confor∣mably whervnto an ancient hath said wisely,Ambros. de Vocat Gent. lib. 1. cap. 7. Quae deus occulta esse voluit non sunt scrutanda, quae autē manifesta fecit non sunt neganda: ne in illis illi citè euriosi, istis dam∣nabiliter inueniamur ingrati, that those things which GOD will haue to be hid, must not be searched, and those which he hath made manifest, must not be denyed, least in those we be found vnlawfully curious, and
in this be condemned as vn∣thankfull. Of these things is the manner of the eating of the bread which came down from heaven. FIRST, Such as the bread is, and as it is given to be ea∣ten, so must it be eaten. If it be come downe from hea∣ven, from heaven also must come the mouth that eateth it. If it be given vnto vs by the holy Spirit, the mouth which receiveth it must be a spirituall mouth. If Christ who is this bread, giveth himselfe vnto vs as dead, haue we any mouth that can eate him so, but the mouth of the soule? This is his own doctrine. For after he had said, Take ye, eate ye, This is my body, he shews how we must eate him, saying, doe this in
remembrance of me. These words, saithAugust. de Doct. Christ. lib 3. cap. 15. Figura est ergopracipi∣ens passioni domini esse cōmunican∣dum, & su∣aniter at que vtiliter recō∣dendū in me∣moria, quod pro nobis ca∣ro eius cruci∣fixa & vul∣nerata est. Augustin, are a figure commanding vs to com∣municate to his passion, and to record profitably, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for vs, which we cannot do but by an action of the soule. SECONDLY, Such man, such eating. If he who eateth Christ be nothing but a na∣turall man, let him eate and drinke with his naturall or∣ganes. But if Christ be meate for Christians, if the Christi∣an beEph. 4.24. a new man,1 Cor. 2.1 a spiritu∣all man,Rō. 2.19. Rom. 7.22 an inward man, if all his organes be spirituall and inward, shall we not say tru∣ly with S. Augustin, that he he alone eateth Christ,August. in Ioh. tract. 26 in verba, Vt si quis man∣ducat ex ip∣so non me∣riatur Qui manducat in∣tus, nonforis: qui māducat in corde, non qui pren it dee that eateth inwardly, not outward∣ly; who eateth in his heart, not he that thrufteth his tooth into the Sacrament.
THIRDLY, to apply this to all the sences and parts of the inward man, Christ saith,Math. 5.8. blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righte∣ousnes. Is not he he himselfe,Ier. 23.26. THE LORD OVR RIGH∣TEOVSNES? Such then as is our hungring and thirsting af∣ter him, such is our eating of him: If this hunger be in our stomackes, if this thirst be in our throates, then let vs sa∣tisfie our gnawing stomacks with him, let vs drinke him with our throates: But if this hunger and thirst be proper to the soule, as David saith,Psal. 42 2. As the Hart panteth after the water brookes, so panteth my scale after thee, O God: My soule thirsteth for God, for the living God. What can the ea∣ting of his flesh be, but as S.
Cyprian. de Coena domini Esus igitur carnis huius quaedam aui∣ditas est, & quoddam de∣siderium ma∣nendi in ipso. Cyprian saith, a certaine gree∣dinesse, and eager desire to a∣bide in him? Such as are our eyes wherewith we see him, such is our mouth where∣with we eate him. If we see him with our bodily eyes, with our bodily mouth we must eate him. But he ex∣poundeth our seeing of him, by our beleeving in him, say∣ing,Ioh 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Sonne and be∣leeveth on him, may haue ever∣lasting life. Therefore I say that to beleeue in him, is to eate him. He said to the bel∣ly-god Iewe,Ioh 6.27.28.29. Labour not for the meate which perisheth, but for that which endureth vnto everlasting life. O Lord we aske of thee as the Iewes did, What shall we doe, that we may
worke the workes of God, for such as is our labouring for this meat, such is our eating thereof: And thou answerest O Lord; This is the worke of God, that ye beleeue on him whom he hath sent.August. in Ioh. tract. 25 Hoc est ergo manducare ibum, qui non perit, sed qui permanet in vitam ae∣ternam. Vt quid paras ventrem & dentes? crede & manda∣casti. This then also, saith S. Austin, is to eate the meate which perisheth not, but endureth vnto everlasting life. For what vse makest thou readie thy teeth and thy belly? Beleeue and thou hast eaten him. 4.2 Cor. 5.16. We know him no more after the slesh: ForVers. 6. we are ab∣sent from the Lord. And ne∣verthelesse he saith,Ioh. 6.37. All that the Father giveth me, shall come to me: and him that com∣meth to me, I will in no wise cast out. Such then as are our seete wherewith we goe vnto him, such is our eating of
him. Goe we vnto him with our bodily feete? When he was in the world many did walke with him in their bo∣dies, to whom he said,Ioh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might haue life, shewing that even then when they were present with him in body, they were absent from him; because they beleeved not in him: For2 Cor. 5.7 we walke by faith, not by sight. Therefore the Centurien abiding at home in his body, went a∣broad vnto him with his faith, and said vnto him,Luk. 7.6.7.8.9. Lord, trouble not thy selfe: For I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe: Wherefore neither thought I my selfe worthy to come vnto thee: but say the word, and my seruant shall be healed. And to
that faith which did not re∣gard the bodily presence of the Lord, the Lord gaue this commendation, I haue not found so great faith, no not in Israell. Christ himselfe saith, that to goe thus vnto him, is to eate him.Ioh. 6.35. I am, faith he, the bread of life. He that com∣meth to me shall neuer hunger: and he that beleeveth on me shall neuer thirst. In stead of eating, he putteth comming: in stead of drinking, he put∣teth beleeving: because the eating of him, is to come to him: & the drinking of him, is to beleeue in him. And these two are one.August. de verbis domi∣ni serm. 2. Vbi credis, ibi venis. Where thou beleevest, there thou com∣mest. 5. Such hands to receiue him, such mouth to eate him. The hand wherewith
we receiue him is the hand of faith, as it is written;Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gaue he power to become the Sonnes of God, even to them that beleeue on his Name. This seemeth strange to flesh and blood, which may aske,Aug. in Io∣han trac. 50. Quem tene∣bo? absentem? Quodo anum in coelūmittam, vt ibi seden∣tem teeam? fidem mitte, & tenuisti. Whom shall I hold? Is he not absent? Is he not in heaven? How shall I send my hand into heauen that I may hold him sit∣ting there? S. Austin answe∣reth, Send thy faith, and thou hast taken hold of him. 6. Such as is our palate wherwith we taste him, such is our mouth wherewith we eate him.Psal 34.8. O taste, and see that the Lord is good. How?Iob. 34.3 The eare trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat. So this bread, which is the word of God,Ioh. 1.14 the word which was made
flesh, must be tasted with a spirituall taste, breeding in Ʋs a delight of it; as S. Basill wri∣teth on the 33. Psalme: And as Tertullian saith,Tertull. de Resurrect. carnis c. 37. Proinde in∣causam vitae appetendus sermo, & de∣uor andus au∣ditu, & ru∣minādus in∣tellectu, & side digeren∣dus. We must long after it, devoure it with our eares, ruminate it with our vnderstanding, disgest it with our faith. 7. Christ saith,loh 6.56. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. If then ye can know how he dwelleth in you, and you in him, ye may easily conclude that after the same manner ye eate him. Saith not S. Paul, thatEph. 3.17. he dwelleth in our hearts by faith? And S. Augustin,Aug. in Iohan. tract. 26. Hoc est ergo mandu∣care illam escam, & il∣ham bibere potum, in Christo ma∣nere, & illum manentem in se habere. that to eate him, is to dwell in him, and haue him dwelling in vs? What is that, but to beleeue in him? He that beleeueth in him, saith
the same Doctor, eateth him:Ibid. Qui credit in eum manducat: Inuisibiliter saginatur, quis & in∣uisibiliter renascitur: Infans intus est, Novus intus est: vbi nouellatur, ibi satiatur. He is fed inuisibly, because he is borne againe inuisibly. He is an infant inwardly: He is new inwardly: where he is renued, there he is satisfied. FINALLY, Such as are the benefits and the ends of this eating, such must it be. For the meanes must be corres∣pondent vnto their end. And we may know of what kind the meane is by the end to which it is directed. If the end of our eating be to strengthen our mortall bo∣dies, and to make them lu∣stie, tall, big, let vs open our mouthes, sharpen our teeth, inlarge our bellies: But if this bread be, as S. Bernard saith,Bernard in prologo de Coena dimini. In ea (mensa) inuenies cibū non ventris, sed mentis. food for our soules, not for our bellies; if by it our1 Cor. 15.44. naturall bodies must be made spiritu∣all,
we must needs seeke a mouth in our soules to eate it spiritually. That mouth is faith. CHAPTER X. 1. Three reasons why Christ vsed the metaphores of bread, and of eating. II. Great instructions in both. III. The metaphor of eating teacheth vs what preparation must goe before faith. IV. And what is the nature of faith. IF THIS be so, say the PopishBellarm. de Euchar lib 1 cap. 5. § 8. Quis credar rem facilli∣mam, qualis est credere in Christū, vo∣luisse dominū cum tāto of∣fendiculo dis∣cipulorū, in∣noluere tot abscurissinus metaphoria, cum potuisset vno verbo∣rem totam declarare? Doctours, why did the Lord involue a most cleare and easie thing with so many metaphores, and giue occasion of offence vnto his disciples? For he might haue said in one
word, He that beleeveth on me. I answere. 1. that the Lord spake so vnto them, because he desired to stir vp in them a spirituall desire of a more excellent bread, then that was for which they followed him, as I haue said in the ex∣position of the first part of this Verse. 2. Such metaphores of eating and drinking were not vncouth vnto them; for they are frequent in the old Testament. But they had a loathing of heavenly meats, and therefore they tooke ex∣ceptions against his person when he spake of them, and would not vnderstand him, as it is written,Psal. 36.3. The wicked hath left off to be wise, and to doe good.
3. Metaphores and simi∣litudes are more popular then words which are pro∣per, because that by the like∣nesse of earthly things ap∣prehended by the outward sences, they make heavenly and spiritual things to come into the mind, and thus are most fit for the instruction of those which being more dul haue need of milke, and not of strong meate. II. FOR EXAMPLE, when Christ calleth himselfe the living bread, there is greater instruction and comfort in that similitude, then if he had called himselfe the Sa∣viour of the world: Because the vse of bread is to nourish and to feed, and thereby we learne, that Christ is come downe from heaven to be
the true food and life of our foules. Likewise, when he exhorteth vs to eate of this bread, he giveth vs a more large and full instruction, then we could haue recei∣ved, if he had onely exhor∣ted vs to beleeue in him. Be∣cause this one word of eating teacheth vs, how we must be prepared before we can be∣leeue in Christ, and what is the true action and nature of faith whereby we beleeue in him. III. As FOR the preparation, we know by daily experi∣ence, that he that is to eate must haue an emptie belly, know and feele the need he hath of meate, and hunger and thirst after it.Pro. 27.7. The full soule loatheth an honey-combe, but to the hungry soule every
bitter thing is sweet. Even so before we can beleeue in Christ, we must know and feele out owne indigence, and the need we haue of his grace, that we may be able to say to God,Psal. 84.2. My soule lon∣geth, yea even fainteth for the Courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh cryeth out for the living God. If this preparati∣on be in you, ye haue your comfort in these words of Christ,Math. 5.6. Blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righteousnesse: for they shall be filled. For without it there is no comming vnto Christ, and therefore no comfort from him. Doth he not cry,Ioh. 7.37. If any man thirst, let him come vnto me, and drinke. Can we go vnto him? Can we drinke of the fulnesse of grace
which is in him, till we thirst after him? IV. BEING thus prepared by hunger and thirst, we must take the meate which we long for, worke it with our teeth, receiue it into our sto∣mackes, disgest it there, till it be turned into our blood & flesh, and by a true transsub∣stantiation repaire & restore our decaying bodies. All that is contained in this word of eating, and sheweth vnto vs the nature and true action of faith, which is to apply Christ vnto our soules so neerly, that every one out of the true sence of this hea∣venly gift in his owne heart, saith most truly, as the Spouse doth,Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, and as Thomas did,Ioh. 20.21 My Lord, and my God.
according to the promise of the new Testament,Zach. 13.9 I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God. Such was the faith of S. Paul, when he said,Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ: neverthelesse I liue, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: And the life which I now liue in the flesh, I liue by the faith of the Sonne of God, who loved ME, and gaue him∣selfe for ME. Such is the faith of every true Christian, ac∣cording to this saying of S. Peter,2 Pet. 1.1 ye haue obtained like precious faith with vs. What seeke we by eating of our daily bread? To liue. What seeke we by eating of Iesus Christ? To haue communiō with him, that we may liue by him. The Apostle saith, that we liue by faith: There∣fore,
saith S. Cyprian,Cypr. de Coe∣na domini. Qnod est es∣cacarni, hoc animae est fides. That which food is to the body, the same is faith to the soule. For the same cause S. Augustin expounding the words of my Text, saith, thatAug. in Io∣han. trac. 26 Credere enim ineum, hoc est manduca∣re panem vivum, to beleeue in Christ, is to eate the living bread. This is not their expo∣sition: It is from Christ him∣selfe, as we haue heard. CHAPTER XI. I. To eate Christ by faith, it is no imagination, as Papists say. II. Neither is it an easie thing by nature. III. It goeth beyond the whole reach of nature. IV. Therefore we must aske it of God. V. And although it be weake, be assured that it will eate Christ.
IF THAT be true, say Pa∣pists, if to eate Christ, be no other thing, but to beleeue in him, there is no∣thing more easie then to be saved. What is faith? An ima∣gination in the braine that Christ hath saved vs. How easily may we imagine such a thing, and so be saved by a fancie? 1. Indeed if we did speake of eating of Christ, as they doe, it might be said most truely, that there is nothing more easie. What so easie to any man, as to open the mouth of the body, and to swallow downe that which entereth into it? Is there any Papist that findeth any diffi∣cultie in it? Yea they hold their eating of Christ so easie that they make it common
not onely to bad, as well as to good men, but also to toades, wormes, dogs, asses, mice, and other beasts. 2. When they speake of faith as of an imagination, they teach vs what they iudge, and what they will haue vs to sudge of their faith: They say that they be∣leeue in God. Is their beliefe nothing but an imaginati∣on? They call on God: AndRō. 10.14. how shall they call on him in whom they haue not beleeved?Rō. 14.23 For whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne. What? Will they confesse that their prayers, and in a word, all their most laborious devotion is no∣thing but an imagination? Aske of them how they know that Christs body is in the Sacrament as big and
as tall as it was on the crosse, although such a thing came never in Christs mind, they will answer, that Christ hath said it, and they beleeue it. That beliefe indeed is no∣thing but a most fond ima∣gination: But will they call it so? 3. A great many of their Doctors confesse, that in the first part of this Chapter till the one & fiftie verse, Christ speaketh of the spirituall manducation of his body, and recommendeth it vnto vs, and some of the most lear∣ned amongst them confirme by insoluble arguments, that the whole Chapter is of the same argument. And dare they say that Christ recom∣mended nothing vnto vs but imaginations?
4. Since the beginning of the world there was never a∣ny man saved but by the ea∣ting of Christ. The Apostle writeth of the fathers which were in the desert, that1 Cor. 10 3.4. they did all eate the same spirituall meate, and did all drinke the same spirituall drinke:Aug. de poe∣nit. cap. 1. to. 9. Eundem non inuenio quomodo in∣tellig am, nisi cum quem & nos. The same which we eat & drink, not corporall in the elemēt, but spirituall in the signifi∣cation: For they dranke of that spirituall Rocke that followed them, and that Rocke was Christ. Was that eating and drinking of Christ before he came into the world no∣thing but an imagination? How many milliōs of Chri∣stians die and are saved be∣fore they can eate Christ in the Sacrament? And yet without eating of Christ spi∣ritually
there is no salvation. Are they also saved by ima∣gination? When we shall be calledRev. 19.7. to the marriage-supper of the Lambe, whenMat. 8.11 we shall sit downe with Abraham and Isaac and Iacob in the king∣dome of heaven, when therePsal. 36.8. God shall satisfie vs abun∣dantly with the fatnesse of his house, and shall make vs drinke of the river of his pleasures, shall that eating and that drinking also be nothing but an imagination? As we shall eate him then, so must we eate him now. AND to eate him so now, is not an easie thing, is not an imagination. To see our owne misery and the mercy of God, our naughtinesse and his goodnesse, our emp∣tinesse and his fulnesse, our
folly and his wisedome, our weakenesse and his power, our shame and his glory dis∣played in Iesus Christ, is it an easie thing? Is it an imagina∣tion? To know and to feele how worthy I was of his ha∣tred, and how wonderfull is that loue wherwith he hath loved me in his deare Sonne Iesus Christ, is it an easie thing? is it an imagination? To runne vnto Christ, to im∣brace him, to take hold on him, to lodge him in our hearts, to say vnto him as Ia∣cob did,Gen. 32.26. I will not let thee goe, except thou blesse me: Or ra∣ther with David,Ps. 73.28. It is good for me to draw neere to God, I haue put my trust in the Lord God. And therefore I will ne∣ver let thee goe, that thou mayest blesse me for ever;
To seeke and finde grace, mercie, peace, life, and salva∣tion in him, and therevpon to say,Psal 118.6.14. The Lord is on my side, I will not feare: The Lord is my strength and song, and is be∣come my salvation, is it an ea∣sie thing? Is it an imagina∣tion. SVRELY, the eating of Christ by this kind of faith goeth so farre beyond the power and reach of nature, thatMath. 16.17. flesh and blood doe not re∣veale Christ to be the Sonne of the living God, but the Father which is in heauen, and it is as difficile, yea as impossible to beleeue in Christ, as to re∣solue to be a Martyr for Christ: Therefore the Apo∣stle conioyneth them as two most wonderfull & rare gifts of God, saying,Phil. 1.29. For vnto you
it is given in the behalfe of Christ, not onely to beleeue on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Yea he saith, that God displayeth the sameEph. 1.19.20. might of his power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, to make vs be∣leeue. WHEREFORE let vs all cry to God with David,Psal. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may beholde wondrous things out of thy law. Let vs all pray for our selues: as the blessed Apostle did for the Ephesians, thatEph. 1.17.18. the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Father of glory, may giue vnto vs the spirit of wis∣dome and revelation, in the knowledge of him, the eyes of our vnderstanding being in∣lightened, that we may know what is the hope of his calling,
and what the riches of the glo∣ry of his inheritance in the Saints. AND when we haue recei∣ved this faith from aboue, let vs acknowledg the weak∣nesse of it, & cry to the Lord with teares, as did the Father of the lunatick child,Marke 9.24. Lord, I beleeue, helpe thou mine vn∣beliefe, and with the Apo∣stles,Luk. 17.5. Lord, increase our faith; Yet resting still assured, that as the Pilots trembling Diall in a shippe tossed to and fro with ye waues of the tempe∣stuous Sea, looketh straight to the North Pole, as the shaking hand of a poore man sicke of the Palsey, stretcheth it selfe forth to receiue the rich almes of a bountifull King, and as a dying man will open his wanne and wi∣thered
mouth to let downe the restoratiue, whereby his life is restored; So our trem∣bling, shaking, and weake faith, will in the midde of the most tempestuous and blustery Sea of temptations, fasten her eyes vpon Christ, receiue him, and eate him, that in the middest of death, and in the belly of the graue we may be saved by him. CHAPTER XII. I. The eating of Christ by faith is possible. II. It is not hindred by the di∣stance of time; III. Nor of place. IV. It may be fitted to all the similitudes which expresse our vnion with Christ. V. It is decent.
VI. It is profitable. CHRIST said to the fa∣ther of the Lunarike child,Marke 9.24. If thou canst beleeue, all things are possible to him that beleeveth: Then, say I, to him that beleeveth it is possible to eate Christ by his faith. I say more, that to eate him so is decent and glo∣rious vnto Christ, and most profitable to the eater. If there were any impossi∣bility in this eating, it should come either from the distāce of time, or from the distance of place. We eate him as dead: And wee reckon from his death 1625. yeares, which is a long time. He died in Gol∣gotha, which is far removed from vs, and we must goe to his crosse, & eate him there.
From thence we must goe vp to heaven, where he now is, and feed vpon him there. Between the heavens where he is, and the earth where we are, the distance is almost in∣finite. Behold now how all that, is not any impediment to faith. To BEGIN by the distance of time. Between the promise made to Abraham and Christ there is 1927. yeares, and he had eyes, not in his head, but in his heart to see Christ, as Christ said,Ioh. 8.56. Abraham reioy∣ced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. From the first Passeover which was kept in Egypt till Christ there is 1497. yeares. At that timeHeb. 11.27.28. Moses by faith kept the Passe∣over, for sooke Egypt, and endu∣red as seeing him who is inui∣sible.
At that same time the Fathers in the desert1. Cor. 10 3.4. did eate the same spirituall bread, and drinke the same spirituall drinke, which was Christ. How but by faith? For Christ isRev. 13.8. the Lambe slaine from the foundation of the world in the efficacy of his death towards all the faithfull which were from the beginning. So the Apostle saith, thatGal. 3.1. Christ is euidently set forth before our eyes, and is crucified among vs: Crucified certainely to the eyes of our faith, which see∣eth the things past from the beginning of the world, and all those that are to come till the end of the world. ForHeb. 11.1 faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the euidence of things not seene, it giveth a being in the heart to that
which hath no being in the world, and maketh visible that which is inuisible. AND THEREFORE the distance of place also cannot hinder it. For although we traile these our mortall bo∣dies on the earth, yetPhil. 3.20. our conversation is in heaven, and ourHeb. 6.19.20. hope is an anchor of the soule both sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within the vaile, whither Ie∣sus Christ, as forerunner, is en∣tred for vs. There by faithEph. 2.6. wee sit together with him: There our faith seeth him, eateth him, imbraceth all the promises of God in him. O the most wonderfull effi∣cacy of faith! It seeth all things past and to come: It imbraceth the two ends of the world: It flyeth back∣ward
to Golgotha, and accor∣ding to the saying of Christ,Math. 24.28. Wheresoever the carkasse is, there will the Eagles be gathe∣red together, like a spirituall Eagle it stoopeth vpon him hanging on the Crosse. It fastenth her clawes vpon his wounds, it drinketh the blood streaming out of his side, it feedeth on him with a greedie stomacke, and lea∣veth him never till it be sa∣tisfied, and because it is vn∣satiable, and never hath e∣nough of him, it leaveth him never. Forthwith and at the same instant it flyeth aboue all the visible heavens, it en∣treth boldly into Gods clo∣set, itRev. 3 2. sitteth downe with him in his throne, and raig∣neth with him most glori∣ously in heaven.
THE EATING of Papists cannot be sitted to any of the other similitudes, this can to them all. By what is Christ our head, and we his mem∣bers; He the vine, and we the members? By his Spirit, and by our faith. By what is he the foundation, and we the Temple built on him? By his Spirit, and by our faith? By what doth he giue him∣selfe to be our Garment? By his Spirit? By what doe we put him on? By our faith. By what is he borne in our hearts? By his Spirit. By what are we borne againe, & made new creatures in him? By our faith. By what are we washed in his blood? By his Spirit, and by our faith. By what doth he wed vs to himselfe, that we may be his wife? By
his Spirit. By what doe we espouse him, that he may be our husband? By our faith. By what giveth he himselfe vnto vs to be our meate and drinke? By his Spirit. By what doe we all eate and drinke him? By our faith. So ye see that all the simili∣tudes doe agree, & concurre in the manner of our vnion with Christ. CONSIDER now how de∣cent, yea how glorious this eating of Christ is. Seeing we must eate him, is it not more decent and comely to lodge him in our hearts, which he hath chosen to be his Tem∣ple, saying,Pro. 23.6. My sonne giue me thine heart, then in our bellies, which are puddles of infection, and stincking sinkes? Is it not more glori∣ous
to contemplate him in heaven, sitting at the right hand of his Father, and to feed vpon him there, where we are certaine to find him, then to seeke him in a crust of bread, where he is not to be found? AND IP, we speake of the profit of this eating, is it not more comfortable to feele him living and dwelling in our hearts, and quickening them, then to haue him in our mouths, and to keepe him a short space in our sto∣mackes, who can tell for what vse? He saith of them that eate him, that they shall liue for euer: and it is certaine that he speaketh of earing by faith, because he said in the 47. Verse, Verily, verily, I say vnto you, He that belee∣ueth
in me hath everlasting life. This is the fourth and last head of this Text, the ex∣plication wherof Ile deferre to another occasion. I say onely, that he which eateth Christ liveth already, for he hath everlasting life, and shall liue for ever, otherwayes the life which he liveth could not be called everlasting. He liveth already, for his sinnes are forgiven him, andPsal. 32.1. Rom. 4.6. the blessednesse of man in this life, is principally in the forgiue∣nesse of his sinnes: He liveth already. ForGal. 2.20. Christ liueth in him, and hath made himRom. 6.4.11. a∣liue vnto GOD, that he may walke in newnesse of life. He shal liue for ever, no more on earth, but in heaven, where the spirituall life of his soul which is begun here shall be
perfected, whereAug. in Io∣han. trac. 26 Videbit quod adhuc nō vi∣dendo credi∣dit, Mandu∣cabit quod esurijt: Sati∣abitur eo quod sitit. he shall see, that which now he beleeveth, shall eate that which now he hungreth after; shall be filled with that whereof now he is a thirst, as David said,Psal. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatnesse of thy house: & thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. And in the blessed day of the Resurrection,Phil. 3.21. Christ shall change his vile body, that it may be fashioned like vnto his glorious body. So he liveth, and shall liue a most glorious and blessed life internally in his soule, externally in his body, and eternally in body and soule together in the kingdome of heaven.Aug. in Io∣han. trac. 17 Tunc quod viuet, nō mo∣rietur: Tunc quod sanabi∣tur, nō aegro∣tabit: Tunc quod satiabi∣tur, non esu∣riet, neque sitiot: Tunc quod renou∣bitur, on veterascet▪ Then that which shall liue, shall ne∣ver die: that which shall be healed, shall never be sicke:
that which shall be satisfied, shall never hunger nor thirst: that which shall be renued, shall never waxe old. CHAPTER. XIII. I. As this bread is most won∣derfull, so must we consider the most wonderfull mercy of God in the giving of it. II. Papists eate not of this bread. III. We must value it at the highest rate, and desire no other bread. IV. A prayer to God for this bread. O MOST wonderfull breadAug. to. 10. Homil 32. Vt panem Ange∣lorum man∣ducaret ho∣mo, dominus Angelorum factus est homo. This is the food of the blessed Angels in heaven: This is the food of all true Christi∣ans on earth. l That man might
eate the bread of Angels, the Lord of Angels was made man. Of it they, of it we eate con∣tinually, and, ô wonder,Ibid. Nec deficit vnde pascantur, nec minui∣tur esca ip∣sorum. it is not diminished. By it they, by it we liue for ever. O most wonderfull mercy of God who giveth vs such wonder∣full bread! Sion was in a pit∣tifull estate, when bewailing it she said,Lam. 4.4. The tongue of the suckling childe cleaveth to the roofe of his mouth for thirst: The young children aske bread, and no man breaketh it vnto them. O then how blessed is our estate, whose crying for this bread God hath pre∣vented? yea who hath pre∣pared it for vs before wee were borne, who hath given it vnto vs before we sought it?1 Ioh. 4.10. Herein is loue, not that we loved God, but that he loved vs,
and sent his Sonne to be the pro∣pitiation for our sinnes. It is a too too little & small thing to his bountie, yea it hath beene nothing in his eyes to feed with the bread which commeth out of the earth these our vile and mortall bodies, which although they starue not, yet they must pe∣rish by sicknesse, by age, or by some other mishap. In this he hath displayed all the treasures and riches of grace and mercie, that to his spirituall children he hath given the true, spirituall, and heavenly bread, whereof if any man eate, he shall liue for ever. DEPART from vs Papists, which know not this bread. Your going, your cōming, your trotting, your running
from one Saint to another, from one Angell to another, sheweth that ye are ever hunger-starved, ever dried vp with thirst like a pot∣sheard, and therefore that yee haue never eaten of this bread. For if yee did eate Christ, he would satisfie your hunger, according to his owne saying,Ioh. 6.35. I am the bread of life, he that commeth to me shall never hunger. O then, O abused Christians when will ye turne your faces to him, and goe vnto him? O perishing soules, listen I pray you, to the voyce of him who onely giveth the living bread, and who cryeth vnto you;Esa. 55.1.2. Hoe, every one that thir∣steth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money: Come ye, buy and eate. Yea come, buy
wine and milke without mo∣ney, and without price. Where∣fore doe ye spend money for that which is no bread? and your la∣bour for that which satisfieth not. WHETHER they will heare, or whether they will for∣beare, let vs value this bread at the highest rate, and say vnto our Saviour,Psal. 73.25.26. Whom haue 1 in heaven but thee? and there is none vpon earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart faileth: But GOD is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Those that are sicke refuse to eate bread, and David saith that in his sorrowPsal. 102.1. he did forget to eate his bread. Let vs not re∣fuse to eate this bread, when it is offered vnto vs, and let let vs never forget to eate it
when we haue it. It isAug. to. 10. hom. 32 Hac est salus ne∣stra, medici∣na infirmo∣rum: Cibus Sanorum. Phy∣sick to those which are sicke, meate to those which be whole, strength to those that are weake, comsort to those that are distressed, life to those that die. O EVER-LIVING and most loving GOD, thou hast commanded vsEsa. 58.7. to breake our bread to the hungry: doe vnto vs that which thou cōman∣dest vs to doe vnto others, and breake this thy bread vnto our hungry soules. The Fathers prepare bread for their children: And the chil∣dren looke that their fathers shall giue them the bread which they haue prepared for them.Luk. 11.11. If a Sonne shall aske bread of his Father, will he giue him a stone? Thou art our heavenly Father, and we are
thy children: Thou hast pre∣pared for vs the most excel∣lent bread that ever was: Even thine owne Sonne.Rō. 8.32. Thou hast not spared him, but hast delivered him vp for vs all, that he might be our bread, & wilt thou not giue him vnto vs? In our bodily necessities, we cry vnto thee, Giue vs this day our daily bread, and thou giuest it not onely vnto vs, out even vnto them which know not thee to be the fountaine of all good, and therefore cry not for it vnto thee. O loving Father thou keepest for vs thy children bread more ex∣cellent, more rare, and more precious: Even this living bread, which is indeed our bread, being sent into the world, prepared, and given
for vs, that it may be given vnto vs. This is the daily bread of our soules, which thou givest to thy children by thy holy Spirit O Father we are thy children: There∣fore send thy holy Spirit in∣to our hearts with this our bread, and giue vs this day cur daily bread, that eating it dai∣ly with a true & liuely faith, we may by it liue with thee for ever. To thee who art the giver of this bread, To thy Sonne Iesus who is this bread, To the holy Ghost, who from thee bringeth this bread into our hearts, be all prayse, glory, and ho∣nour, both now and for evermore. AMEN. FINIS.
