26004 99855529 21024
A DEFENCE OF M. PERKINS BOOKE, CALLED A REFORMED CA∣THOLIKE: Against the cauils of a Popish writer, one D. B. P. or W. B. in his defor∣med Reformation. By Antony Wotton. AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the Swan. 1606.
THE PRINCIPAL POINS HANDLED IN THIS BOOKE. 1. Of Antichrist. pag. 41. 2. Of Freewill. pag. 64. 3. Of Originall sinne. pag. 95. 4. Of the certaintie of saluation. pag. 124. 5. Of Iustification. pag. 163. 6. Of inherent iustice. pag. 184. 7. Of iustifying faith; what it is? pag. 195. 8. How faith iustifieth? pag. 206. 9. That faith alone iustifieth. pag. 212. 10. Of good workes, how farre forth they are required to iustification. pag. 239. 11. Whether it be possible for a man that is iustified to fulfill the law of God. pag. 258. 12. Whether good workes be stained with sinne. pag. 265. 13. Whether faith may be without charitie. pag. 277. 14. Whether faith may be without good workes. pag. 285. 15. Of merits. pag. 287. 16. Of satisfaction. pag. 344. 17. Of Traditions. pag. 399. 18. Of vowes. pag. 469. 19. Of the vow of single life. pag. 487. 20. Of wilfull pouerty. pag. 508. 21. Of regular obedience. pag. 522. 22. Of Images. pag. 524.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, ROBERT EARLE OF SALISBVRIE, VICOVNT Cranborne, Baron of Essingdon, Principall Se∣cretarie to his Maiestie, Master of the Court of Wards and Liueries, one of his Highnesse most Honourable Priuie Councell, and Chan∣cellor of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. RIght Honourable, it hath plea∣sed God to vouchsafe your Lordship no small honour in the profession of Christianity, that you haue not onely be∣leeued the truth of the Gos∣pell, but also are made parta∣ker of that glorie of his chil∣dren to suffer for it. To you it is giuen (saith the A∣postle to the Philippians) for Christ, that not onely Phil. 1. 24 you should beleeue in him, but also suffer for his sake. Giuen; as if it were a speciall fauour, which no man attaines to, but they only to whom it is granted by priuiledge from God. To you it is giuen (saith our Matth. 13. . Sauiour) to know the secrets of the kingdome of heauen. And in another place: No man can come vnto me, ex∣cept Iohn 6. 6.
it bee giuen him of my Father. This gift the Lord hath bestowed vpon your Honour, that they which are enemies to him, should be persecutors of you, euen to the death, if it lay in their power, for his quarrell. But the gratious prouidence of God hath manifestly shewed it selfe, in this whole action, on your Lordships behalfe, in that not only you are still preserued, in despight of them, but also that you hold on that noble, and Christian resolution, to pro∣uide for the sasctie of Religion, his Maiesties person, and estate, with the hazard of your owne life, regar∣ding more what your Lordship ought to doe, in du∣tie to God, and your Soueraigne, then what you may suffer by men, for so doing. Now on their part, who can say whether their malice, or their follie is the greater? when I consider the height of their ha∣tred, that reacheth euen to the taking away of life, which is in Gods hands; me thinkes I am not able to looke beyond it. But when I remember their despe∣rate resoluing to commit such a murther, so openly, and their extreame indiscretion, in acquainting your Lordship with their intendment, it seemes to me, that the lightnes of their follie exceeds the waight of their malice. So that they giue all men iust occasion to suspect, that God hath giuen them ouer into a re∣probate sense, as to destroy their soules by intending such a bloody sinne, so to cast away their liues also by attempting it, with so great follie. But leauing them to the mercie and iustice of God, for repentance, or confusion; giue me leaue (Right Honourable) to put your Lordship in minde of that, which I make no doubt, but you know, and thinke on; viz. That
the Lord God (hauing taken your person, estate, and honour into his protection, against these and such like conspiracies) looketh for continuance, and in∣crease of zeale, and care in your Lordship, for the se∣curing, as much as may be in your power, of his holy religion, and his worthie Lieutenant, our gratious Soueraignes person, and dignitie. Now the know∣ledge of danger being a good helpe to the auoyding of it, The Lord himselfe seemes to haue taken halfe the care alreadie, in discouering those, that haue bin, are, and will be the continuall practisers of his Maie∣sties ruine. I were more than conceited, and foolish, if I could but thinke my selfe either able or fit to ad∣uise your Lordship in matters of this nature. Yet let me humbly entreate your Honour, to vouchsafe the reading of that, which, in my poore thoughts, I haue apprehended. That the safetie of Princes dependeth vpon the good pleasure of God, it is out of all que∣stion, especially in their account, who aduisedly, and thankfully remember the late wonderfull, and gra∣tious deliuerance, neuer to be forgotten. Neither can it be doubted, but it is Gods good pleasure to preserue them, as long as they haue care to walke in obedience to him; especially in prouiding for his glorie, by maintaining and aduancing the true reli∣gion of Iesus Christ. So then, the safetie of religion is the securitie of the Prince; and the decay of Gods true seruice, the forerunner of the Kings destruction. As this is true (in generall) concerning all Kings, and Gouernours; so hath it an especiall euidence of truth, in his Maiesties particular. For it is apparant to euery man, that the Papists quarrell to his Maie∣stie
is not for hatred of his person, but of his religion. And therefore so farre foorth will they plot against the former, as they can see likelihood of achieuing the latter. His danger groweth by their hope; and their despaire of bringing in Popish idolatrie, must needs be the securitie of his life and state. Are wee then desirous to rid his Maiestie of this danger, and the whole state of this feare? we see the meanes of accomplishing that desire, to bee no other, than to prouide that true religion may grow and flourish, and Popish idolatrie fade and wither. For neither may wee looke for any blessing from God on the Common-wealth, if he be continually dishonoured amongst vs, by the encrease of Popish heresie; nor reasonably promise our selues any end of treache∣rous and bloodie enterprises, as long as Papists con∣ceiue hope of preuailing for Antichrist, by such at∣tempts. If their number daily encrease, how should their hope lessen? And how is it possible to keepe it from growing, if thousands in this kingdome, remai∣ning in their ignorance, be left as pray to seducing Priests and Iesuits? The conclusion is, that if there be not some religious and wise care taken, as to in∣struct the people in the knowledge of Gods truth, which is the principall: so to ferrit out those lurking Serpents, that breathe Idolatrie and treason into the hearts of his Maiesties people, and to keepe out their like from entring into this Iland, the glorie of God, the safetie of the King, and the prosperitie of this kingdome, are all waining, in the last quarter. For howsoeuer it be very true, that some Popish errors hin∣der not men from remaining good and faithfull subiects;
yet (as his Maiestie most wisely, and truly obserued) None of those, that trulie know and beleeue the whole grounds and conclusions of their Schoole doctrine, can euer prooue either good Christians, or faithfull subiects. For the former, I referre my selfe to most of the points handled in this Treatise ensuing: for the lat∣ter, let the doctrine and practise of the Romish Sy∣nagogue it selfe giue sentence. How can he possibly be a faithfull subiect, that is to be commanded (in the highest bond of conscience) by forreine authori∣tie? Shall we rest vpon the Popes holinesse: as if he forsooth would not enioyne any thing, that should preiudice any Prince in his estate temporall? Let former examples passe; can any true, or iust dealing be hoped for at his hands, whose vassals daily teach subiects, that it is meritorious to murther Princes. Would not the Pope, if hee had misliked that do∣ctrine, haue checkt it long before this time, either in some generall Councill, or by some definitiue sen∣tence of his owne; as your Lordship hath prudent∣ly obserued? And whereas their Arch-priest Black∣well condemnes all attempting of ought against Princes by any priuate authoritie, doth hee not (which is also your Lordships wise obseruation) re∣serue thereby a tacite lawfulnes thereof, in case it be directed by publike warrant? So impossible is it for a Papist (that beleeues the Pope cannot erre, and holds him∣selfe therefore bound in conscience to obey him, in all his commandements) to be a faithfull subiect to any Prince in the world whatsoeuer. But I haue been carried further in this matter, than I purposed; it remaines, that I humbly craue pardon of your Lordship, and com∣mend
there my poore labours to your honourable and gtious acceptance; beseeching God to conti∣nue your life, and to encrease your zeale, care, and wise lo to the glorie of his name, the further ad∣ua of religion, the prosperi of the estate, the sae and honour of his Maiestie, d your owne present and euer∣lasting comfort through Iesus Christ. From my house on the Tower Hill February 18. Anno 16 Lordhips to be commanded in all Crstian dutie. AONY WOTTON.
TO THE READER. WHen I had finished my poore labours in answering, and compared Ma∣ster Perkins Treatise, the Papists accusation, and my defence toge∣ther; I could see no better course for thy vnderstanding of al three, then to set downe all three, euery one in the Authers owne words. Now I came at the last to view them all three together, the great∣nes of the booke driueth me into some feare least that which I intended for thy good in reading of it, should proue an oc∣casion of thy forbearing to read it. Only my hope is, that knowledge of the truth being the end of thy reading, thou wilt not thinke much of a little more paines or cost, which necessity hath laid vpon them, who desire to benefit them∣selues by vnderstanding the difference betwixt the Gospell and Popery. That neither my tediousnesse nor darkenesse might offend or stay thee, I haue laboured for as much plainenes as I could well attaine to, with so much breuitie. The skoffing, reuiling, and slaundering of the Aduersarie, I haue chosen rather to referre to God the reuenger of all such Antichristian dealing, and to thy discreete and Christian consideration, then to answere in the like measure and kind of sinning. But if it please thee in reading of the booke to
compare the testimony he giueth of M. Perkins in his Pre∣face to the Reader, with his carriage toward him in the whole course of his answering, thou shalt easily discerne, that either the one or the other, or both, must needs be without iudgement or conscience. For my course of answering I shall need to say nothing, because I spake sufficiently of it in my answere to the twelue Articles. In this present booke thou mayest know where M. Perkins, the Aduersarie, and my defence beginneth and endeth, as well by the difference of the print, as by the great or capitall letters set in the mar∣gin; W. P. for William Perkins, D. B. P. for the Ad∣uersarie vnknowen, hiding himselfe vnder those three let∣ters, A. W. for Antony Wotton. And this course is obserued throughout the whole booke, saue a few places, where the marginall notes would afford no roome to those letters. I haue further added some short answers in the mar∣gin here and there, which thou maiest perceiue by the mat∣ter and letter. It remaineth that I humbly and earnestlie intreat thee to examine what we haue written without pre∣iudice and partiality, and to acknowledge the truth with liking, where it shall please God to make it euident vnto thee: which he will certainly doe according to his promise, if thou call vpon him in humility and faith, for the assi∣stance of his holy Spirit; To whose gratious direction I com∣mend thee now and euer. Tower hill Febr. 18. 1606. Thine in the Lord Iesus, Antony Wotton.
TO THE MOST PVISSANT, PRVDENT, AND RENOWMED PRINCE, IAMES the first, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, &c. MOst Gratious and dread Soueragne. Al∣beit my slenddr skill cannot affoord any discourse worthie the view of your Ex∣cellencie, neither my deadded, and dai∣ly interrupted, and Not  but perss, that studie  plo Treason persecuted studies, will giue me leaue to accomplish that little, which otherwise I ght vndertake and performe: Yet being nboldeed, both by your high , and gra∣tious fauour, euer shewed vnto all good litterature, especially concerning Diui∣nitie: and also vrged by mine owne bounden dutie, and particular affe∣ction; I presume to present vnto your Highnes this sho ing ea∣tise. For your exceeding clemencie, es, and rare modestie, in the most einent estate of to mightie a Monarch; as it cannot but winne vnto you great loue, in the harts of all considerate Subiects: so on the other side doth it encourage them confidently to open their mindes, and in dutifull manner to vnfold themselves vnto their so louing and astable a Suraine. And whereas  the no vulgar praise of your Maestes pe) you haue made open and often profession of your vigilancie and care, to aduance the diuine honor of our Sa Christ, and his most sacred Religion: Then what faithfull Chan should
slagger, or feare to lay open, and deliuer publikely, that which he assu∣reth himselfe to be ver expedient, necessarie, and a reeable towards the furnishing, and seting forward of so heauenly a worke? Moreouer, if I your Maiesties poore subiect, haue by studie at home, and trauaile abroad, attained vnto any small talent of learning, and knowledge: to whom is the vse and fruite thereof more due, then vnto my so graous, and withall, so learned a Liege? Is it a dutifull manner of vnfolding your selfe, to charge his Maiesties gouernment with persecution, and that of mens studies, with persecuting heauily the sincere profes∣sors of the onely true Catholike faith? with molesting grie∣uously great numbers of most ciuill biects? with ming∣ling his gouernment with bitter stormes of persecution? to threaten him with feare of rebellion or treason? Indeede, I must needes say, you vnfold your selfe perhaps more than you would. For whereas your desire is to lie hid vnder the cloake of commending his Maiestie, for exceeding mildnes, clemencie, affabilitie, &c. before you are aware, the truth of your opinion breakes out, and bewraies it selfe to all the world. Finally, for a proofe of my sinceritie, affection, and dutifull loue to∣wards your Maiestie, this may I iustly say that in time of vncertaine for∣tune (when assured friends are most certainely tried) I both suffered dis∣grace, and hinderance for it, being stiled in Print, A Scotist in faction: therein farther employing my pen in Atvvo-solde discourse (which I hope hath been presented to the view of your Maiestie) the one contai∣ning a defence of your Highnes honour: the other of your title, and in∣terest of the Crowne of England. And if then my zeale and loue of truth, and obligation to your Maiestie, drew me out of the compasse of mine owne profession, to treate of law courses: I trust your benigne Grace will now licence me, out of the same fountaine of ruencie and like zeale vnto Gods tuth, no lesse respecting your Maiesties eternall honour, and heauenly inheritance, something to say in matters of diui∣nitie: hauing been the best part of my studie, for more then thrise seuer, yeares. The late quarrels betwixt the professed, and secret trai∣tors, the Iesuites and Priests, haue made all men of any iudgement, able to discerne, what disgraces and hinde∣rances either part hath by other; when both parts can so easily and suddenly agree with the good liking of your lay-Papists. The best seruice you doe his Maiestie, in this book,
is that you confesse so plainly, that both his honour, and his title to the Crowne of England, were not onely called into question, but iniured, and denied by your Popish saction. And yet this intelligence you giue him, is no newes: for it was discouered before out of a letter of Parsons in the Ie∣suites defence, against the Secular Priests. Whereinto I may conueniently enter with that golden sentence, with which your Maiestie began the Conference, holden in Iay last, be∣tweene certaine of your cts, about some controuesie  Rligion: A Ioue principium: conformable to that in holy writ, I  , ad Apoc. cap. 1. 8. Omega, that is, The begianing, and the end, saith our Lord: And ying it vnto Princes, I may be bolde to say, that nothing is more expedient, and necessarie for Kings: nothing more honourable, and of be assu∣rance for their estate, then that in the very beginning of their agne, they take especiall oder, that the supreane, and most pussat Mnarch of heauen and earth, be purely, and vprightly serued, aswell in their owne exemplar liues, as throughout their Dominions. For of Almighty God his meere bouncde and great grace, they receiue and holde their Da∣dems and cely Seepers: and cannot possesse and enioy them (their mighty Forces, and most prudent Counsailes notwithstanding) one day longer, then during his de will and pleasure. Which that wise King witnesseth, speaking in the person of Gods wisedome, Per me Reges reg∣nant, Pronerb. 4. Dan. 4. By me Kings doe raigne. And Nabuchodonozer sometime King of Babilon, was turned out to grase with beasts, for seuen yeeres, and made to know and confesse, that the highest doth commad ouer the king∣domes of men, and disposeth of them, as pleaseth his duine wisedome. But I neede not stand vpon this poynt, being to well knowne, and duely confessed by your Maese. His Maiestie wisely, and fitly applied the saying of the Poet, to signifie, that whatsoeuer we vndertake, must be be∣gun in the name of God, with desire, and trust of his bles∣sing. But what conformitie hath that of Christ either with Virg Eclog. 3 Theoc it. I∣dyl. 17. . the Poets sentence, or his Maiesties purpose, or your owne application? Our Sauiour truly professes of himselfe, that he is R. . 1. 8. 11. & 2. 8. Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was, and which is to come: the first, and the last: that is eternall. Neither the Poet, nor the King our of the Pt in∣tend to speake any thing of Gods eternitie. Neither can you reasonably apply that speech of our Sauiour, to secure Prin∣ces in their estate, if they begin their gouernment with Pro∣uiding for obedience to God, by true religion. But how
little agreement there is betwixt Christs speech and the Poets, it may easily appeare by this; that if his Maiestie, in stead of Abs loue Principiu, should haue said, I am Alpha and Omega, or Christ is Alpha and Omega, no man could haue vnderstood his meaning by his words. But thence there be in this our most miserable age, great diuersities of Religions, and but one onely, wherewith God is truely serued and pleased, as saith the Apostle. One body, one Spirit, as you are called into one  hope of your vocation, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme: My most humble suite and supplication, to your high Maiestie is, that you to your eternall good, will imbrae, maintaine, and set forth that onely true, Catholike, and Apostolike faith, wherein all your most royall progenitors liued and died or if you cannot be wonne so soone, to alter that Religion in which it hath been your misfortune, to haue been bred and brought vp: That then in the meane season, you will not so heauily persecute, the sincere professors of the other. It is an easie matter to perswade his Maiestie to main∣taine, and set foorth the onely true Catholike and Aposto∣like faith: that is, to doe, that he doth alreadie. But the Ro∣mane religion hath neuer an one of these properties: as it will appeare in the suruay of your reformation. Diuers of his Maiesties progenitors liued and died in the profession of true religion many yeeres before a number of your Popish heresies were hatcht. Neither doth hee now maintainc it, because, by Gods speciall prouidence, he hath been brought vp in it; but for that as it appeares in the •Anno 1580. Iune 20. Confession of Scotland, after long and due examination his Maiestie is thoroughly resolued in the truth by the word and spirit of God. Who would thinke that hee which a little before iustlie commended his Maiestie for exceeding clemencie, mildnes, louingnes and affablenes, should now challenge him for persecuting heauily the sincere professors of the onely true Catholike and Apostolike faith? Very many vrgent, and forible reasons might be produced, in fauour and deece of the Catholike Romane Religion, whereof diuers haue bin in most learned treatises, tendered to your Maiestie already. Where∣fore I will onely touch three: two of them chosen out of the subiect of this booke: The third selected from a sentence of your Maiesties, recor∣ded in the aforesaid Conference.
I doubt not but if those learned treatises, you bragge of, be come to his Maiesties hands, either they haue had, or shal ere long receiue sufficient answere. In the meane while, let vs consider these your reasons. And because that argument is, as most sensible, so best assured, which proceedeth from a principle that is either euident in it selfe or else gran∣ted, and confessed for true: My first proofe shall be grounded vpon that your Maiesties owne resolute, and constant opinion (as it appeareth in the said Conference) to wit: That no Church ought further to separate it Pag. 7. selfe from the Church of Rome, either in doctrine or ceremonie, then she hath departed from her selfe, vvhen she vvas in her flourishing, and best estate. From whence I deduce this reason: The principall Pillers of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing estate, taught in all poynts of Religion, the same Doctrine, that she now holdeth and teacheth; and in expresse tearmes condemneth for error and heresie, most of those Articles, which the Protestants esteeme to be the principall parts of their reformed Gospell: Therefore if your Maiestie will resolutely imbrace, and con∣stantly defend that doctrine, which the Roman Church maintained in her most flourishing estate; you must forsake the Protestant, and take the Catholike into your Princely protection. The most flourishing and best estate of the Church of Rome is that out of question, of the sinceritie whereof wee haue witnes in the Rom. 1. 8. Scripture: from which no Church ought, or may depart: not because they may not dissent from the Church of Rome; but because they must hold the true faith: for which the Apostle commends the Church of Rome, that then was. The antecedent of your reason is false. The Church of Rome, in the Apostles time, did not teach many of those points that the Popish Romish Church now holds; witnes the Epistle to the Romanes, wherein diuers maine matters of her faith are recorded. To demonstrate vnto your Maiestie, that we now hold in all poynts, the very same Doctrine, which the most approoued auncient Doctors, and holy Fathers held and deliuered: Because it is too long for an E∣pistle, I reserue it to the booke it selfe, for the poynts it handleth; and will here briefly note out of it, some such old reprooued errors, that the Protestants doe reuiue, receiue, and auowe, as the very sinnewes of their Gospell. The most approued ancient Doctors & holy fathers, were the Apostles, with whom, how you shew your agreement,
in the points, this booke handles, wee shall see in the parti∣culars: All other writers haue those properties in a farre in∣feriour degree: from among whom, if I would deale strictly with you, I might pick the Fathers of the Greeke Churches, and all those of the Latin that were not members of the Romane, as it was a distinct Church from all other: For so is the Ambros. de sacra lib. 3. c. 1 Prosper de lib. ab. ad Russin. Romane Church conceiued, and spoken of by his Maiestie. But I will not presse you so hard, though I may chance to put you in minde of it now and then. All points that haue been reprooued by some of the an∣cient writers are not errors, and many times the same words haue not the same meaning. Martin Luther the ring-leader of the new pretended reformation, layeth for the ground-worke of his Religion, That man is iustified by By faith only, or by faith a∣one, vvere english, so is not, by only faith. Aug. d  & openbus cap. 4. Cap. 20.  only saith: and in this he is applauded and followed of all Protestants: and yet as testifieth the most sound witnes of antiquitie, S. Austin, that only faith is sufficient to Saluation, was an error sprung vp in the Apostles dayes; against which, the Catholike Epistles of S. Peter, and S. Iames, and S. Iohn, were principally directed. And the author of that error was that infamous Sorcerer Simon Magus; as the blessed Martyr Ireneus hath recorded in his first booke against heresies. For the doctrine of iustification by faith onely, I referre the reader to the article of iustification. That we are vnlike the heretikes, of whom S. Augustine speakes, it may thus ap∣. The faith they so magnified, was a dead faith The Apostle ( De side oper. cap. 1. Non quale   , &c. Austin, in refutation of them) speaks not of euery kind , by which we beleeue in God; but of that wholesome and truly angelicall faith, the workes whereof proceede from loue. And againe: How long therefore will they be deceiued that pro∣mise themselues euerlasting life by a dead faith? Besides, they despised good workes as needles, either before, or after iu∣stification. Hoc Paulum arbitra sunt dicre,  alum, &c. They thought (saith Augustine) that Paul wild vs to doe euill that good might come of it. But it was not the A∣postles meaning (saith he) that by the professing and inioyning of faith, Vt opera iu stitia contem natur. good workes of righteousnes should be despised: But that euery man might know that he may be iustified, iamsi legis opera nō prae∣esterint. though he haue not done the workes of the Law before. For they follow him that is iustified, not goe before him that is to be iustified. Yea
cap. 20 Simon the Sorcerer doubted not, blasphemously to af∣firme, that the commandements of holy life were giuen by the Angels, that made the world, who thereby . brought men into slarie. Of whom  D. B. P.  cap.   Aug. Theodret saith, that because men are sa∣ued by grace and faith, therefore he gaue by all meanes  to commit wickednes. An other principall piller of Fryer Luthers Religion, con niall of free will; wherein he iumpeth with the olde rotten  Manes, of whom the Manid cans were named. Manes so denied free will, that he tooke away all assent of the will, in mens daily sinnes, making the necessitie of sinning naturall, from the creation, as proceeding from the euill god, or beginning, which he blasphemously and ab∣surdly deuised: August. d side contra Manich. cap. 6. 7. & de ha∣res. cap 46. He (saith Augustine) made two diuers be∣ginnings, each contrary to other, and both eternall. And from these two natures and substances of good and euill; so that he ascribed the beginning of sinne, not to the freedome of will, but to the substance of the aduerse faction. Yea so faire proceeded the Manichees, that they affirmed Co.  Maich. lib.  cap. 8. (saith the same Augustine) that euery liuing creature had two soules, A gente l à gente  brarum. one from light, another from darknes. Manes brought in fa∣tall necessitie Histor. lb.  cap. 10. (saith Socrates) and tooke away free will. We contrariwise acknowledge that there is but one God, or au∣thor of all things created, that he made vs in our kinde per∣fectly good. That sinne came in first by freedome of will both in men and Angels, and that, by free will, without any necessitie of constraint, it is daily committed. It appeares further, to our comfort, in that place of Pr al. co Pelag S. Hierome, that the Catholikes, or true Christians in his time, were in like sort charged by the Pelagians, with the Manichees error, in de∣nying free will; because they would not confesse, that a man may be without sinne, if he will: which is one point of difference betwixt vs and the Papists. One Prolus an erronius Origenist taught that sinne was not taken a∣way   in Baptisme, but only couered, as is recorded by that holy man, and auncient Father Eanius. M. Perins (in the name of the Church of England) affirmeth in like manner, that originall sinne remaineth still, and raigneth in the regenerate, albeit it is not imputed vnto them.
Neither Methodius, out of whom Epiphan. tom. 1. lib. 2. haeres. 64. & ibid. Metho∣dius. Epiphanius recites Proclus opinions, in many leaues together word for word; nor Epiphanius himselfe refute that of the remainders of sin, after Baptisme: rather they both confesse, that the . sproutes and branches of concupiscence abide in vs; yea that . sinne dwels in vs, by which the diuell preuailes. The Apostle (saith Methodius) Rom. 7. seemes to make a three-fold law. The first, the law of the minde, according to that good that is ingrafted in vs. The second, by the assault of the diuell, vrging and distracting the minde, by imaginations . full of passion. The third, which . triumphs in the flesh by sinne; which the Apostle calles the law of sinne dwelling in our members. That Hieronym. contra Pelag. lib. 1. in prin∣cip. Hierom is of our opi∣nion in this point, it appeares in his booke against the Pela∣gians. Iouinian was accounted a Monster by S. Augustine, for defending ho∣nest Marriage to be of equall vertue, and merite with chaste Virginitie: and saith further that this heresie was so sottish and fleshly; that it could not deceiue any one learned Priest, but onely some few simple and car∣nall women. Yet this our English champion blusheth not to affirme that marriage is not only equall, but better also in diuers respects than Perkin. pag. 163. Virginitie. S. Austin was neither so ancient, nor so holie, as S. Paul: hauing him on our side, we neede not feare the other. But the report, you make of him, is vntrue. For these are his words in English. August. re∣tract. lib. 2. cap. 22. This heresie preuailed so much in the citie of Rome, that it is said to haue throwne into the estate of mari∣age euen some vowed virgins, of whose chastitie there had been no suspition before. So farre is Augustine from calling them simple, and carnall. Beside he addes (though you will not be knowne of it) that he Frangebat. weakned and ouerthrew the holy single life of holie men, by rehearsing and commending the Fathers, (Abraham, Isaack, Iacob) who were married men. And where∣as he saith, it could not come to the deceiuing of Aliquorum sacerdotum. any Priests, (for learned and any one is your glosse, besides the text) he seemes to attribute it to the short continuance thereof. It was August. de haeres. cap. 82. (saith he) quickly opprest and extinguished, and could not come to the deceiuing of any Priests. The same olde reprobate heretike, barked also against approoued
feasts and fasting dayes, so doe most of our Ministers at this time. Our Ministers doe all generally approoue both of feasts and fasting daies, keeping the former more religiously, than you doe ordinarily the Sabbath. The latter we obserue with reuerence and humilitie, whensoeuer they are appointed. 5. Eliz. cap. 5. Raals Abri∣ment of Ships and Shipping. Fish daies superstitiously abused by you, are ciuilly retained by vs with lesse riot than your selues doe vse. Vigilantius was sharpely reprooued by S. Hierome, in a booke written against him, and hath been euer since vnto this day, esteemed a wicked heretike, for denying prayer to Saints, and honour to be done vnto their Relies: And yet, what poynt of Doctrine is more currant among the Protestants, than this? In censura sua in illum Hieronymili∣brum. Erasmus, not without cause, findes want of modestie in that treatise of Hieroms; he might haue found want of truth too, if Vigilantius held no worse opinion, than those you re∣cite. But of the former, namely praying to Saints, neither the one, nor the other speakes a word. And indeede it was not the manner in those daies to pray to the Martyrs, but to pray Ophr. de ritu sepeliendi mortu. Eusebius hist. lib. 7. cap. 11. at their Tombes: which custome, it should seeme re∣mained till that time, according to the former practise of the Christians, who assembled ordinarily where the Martyrs were , dorters, slee∣ping places. Tertulliano Areae. ad Sc∣pulam. Aug ad q. vul, haeres. 53.  buried, before they were suffered to haue any Chur∣ches. In like sorte, one Aërius to the Arrian heresie, added this of his owne; That we must not pray for the soules of our friends departed; as S. Augu∣stine hath registred. And doe not all Protestants imbrace and earnestly defend the same? This doctrine of prayer for the dead, the deniall whereof is counted an errour in Aërius, hath no foundation in the Scripture, but was built vpon the tradition of the Fathers, as Epiphan. lib. 3. Tom. 1. hae∣res. 75. he, from whom Austin takes the accusation, confes∣seth. A common custome it was of the Arrians, and of other more aun∣cient heretikes, to reiect all Traditions, and to rely onely vpon the writ∣ten D. B. P. Lib. 3. c. 20. Lib. 1. con. Maxi∣minum.  word, as testifieth S. Ireneus and S. Augustine. Doe not ours the same, reiecting all Traditions as Mans Inuention. A perilous error, no doubt, to rest wholy vpon the writ∣ten word: that is, to beleeue none but God, in matters of his owne worship and religion. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 20. Ireneus, in the places al∣leaged,
hath no word of reiecting traditions: rather hee speakes the contrarie of Simon Magu, who reiected the Scripture, to establish his owne deuices. S. Austin findes no fault with Maximinus for resting vpon the Scriptures; nor indeede reasonably could: for it is his own doctrine in that August. cont. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14. conference with the Heretike, and Cont. Dona tist. lib. 2. cap. 6 & de vat. . les. 2. 3. 6. other where. Xeas a Barbaous Persian indeed, yet in shew a counterfeited Christian; is noted for one of the first among Christians, that inueyed against the Images of Saints, and the worship done by true Christians vnto them; as both Nicephorus, and Ced comppen doe recorde. Nceph lib. 10. . The reprobate Iewes indeede before him, and after euen vntill this day, the misran. Turkes (enemies of all Christianitie) doe dwell still in the same err: And yet is not this most vehemently auered by our Protestants, and all aluists; although they cannot denie but that a∣boue 900. yeares agoe, in the second generall Councell holden at Nice, they are by the connt of the best, and most learned of the world, for e∣uer accursed that doe denie reuerence and worshippe, to be giuen vnto the Images of Saints? of this ame, Calli∣stus, and Gre∣gores, both wri∣ters of histo∣ries. Nicephorus (you should haue added Callistus, that the reader might haue knowne whom you meant, and haue quoted Nicephor. Callist. lib. 16. cap. 27. lib. 16. not 10.) who liued not 400. yeeres since, and Cnus pag. 290. Cedrenus, who liued, as it is thought, about the yeere 1058. are neither of antiquitie, nor credit to auow a histo∣rie not recorded by any of their ancients. But how could Xenaias, about the yeere 478. be one of the first, if the Commen∣tar in Dama. Orthod. sid. li. 4. cap. 17. Com∣mentarie vpon Damascen say true: That the worshipping of I∣mages was condemned as superstitious, by some, about the begin∣ning of the Gospell preached? Cedrenus saith be was one of the first; Callistus after him more then 200. yeeres, saith he was the first. The See y an∣svvere in the treatise of ima∣ges tovvard the end.  second Councel of Nice was a conuenticle of Ido∣laters, neither of the best, nor of the most learned; and was presently after condemned by the Councell of Frankfort. I will omitte sundrie other heades of the Protestants Religion, by all approued antiquitie reproued, aad condemned, that I passe not the boundes of an Epistle, and seeme ouer tedious vnto your Maiestie. Espe∣cially considering that these are sufficient, to conuince that those points (wherein the Protestants affirme the present Church of Rome, to haue so farre degenerate from the auncient) are the very essentiall parts of saith, then maintayned by the Romans: And the contrary opinions no∣thing else, but wicked heresies, of old inuented, and obstinately helde a∣gainst
the same Roman See, euen as they are now our time: and of old also condemned by the same Church in her most flourishing and best e∣state. Wherefore your most excellent Maiestie, being resolute in that singular good opinion, (that no Church ought farther to depart from the Church of Rome, then shee is departed from her selfe in her flourishing estate,) must needes recall the Church of England, from such extraua∣gant opinions, to ioyne with the Roman Church in the aforesaid arti∣cles, which shee in her best time helde for parts of pure faith: And in all others also which they cannot directly proue (in a lawfull disputation be∣fore your Maiestie) to haue beene altred by her, particularly naming the point of Doctrine; the author o the chaunge: the time and place, where, and when ht liued: who followed him, who resisted him, and such other like circumstances, which all bee easily shewed in euery such reuolte or innouation: because th vigilant care of the Pastors of Christs flocke, haue bin alwaies so great, as no such things could be vnknowne, let slippe, or vnrecorded. Thus much for my first reason, collected from the vntruth of the Pro∣testants religion. What are nine points to nine skore; that I may speake the least? and yet it is not prooued, that any of these were held by the Romanes, whose faith Rom. 1. 8. S. Paul commends; nor indeed euer can be. It is enough for vs, if we can shew by record of Scripture, that the doctrine the Church of Rome now holds, is not that she maintained in her best estate: which we often haue done, and alwaies will be ready to doe. Is it not a good plea in law, to prooue by ancient euidences and deedes, that the land was mine, vnlesse I can shew when, and how the pos∣session of euery house, Medow, Close, &c. was lost? yet it stands you vpon to proue how you came by it, and by what right you hold it. Which you must doe, when all comes to all, by the Scripture, or else your title will neuer be good. The second shall be grounded vpon the vngodlines of it, where I wil let passe that high point of impiety, that they make God (who is goodnes it selfe) the author of all wicked actions, done in the world: Tvvo mon∣strous vntr  haue shew∣ed else vvhere. And will besides say nothing of that their blasphemie against our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that he ouercome with the paines of his passion vpon the Crosse, did doubt, (if not dispaire) of his owne saluation: being vnwilling to touch any other poynts, then such as are afterwards discussed in this booke. You may well let both these passe: for they are your slan∣ders,
not our opinions, as hath been shewed sufficiently In my an∣svvere to the 12. Articles. part. 2. art. 5. and part. 1. art. 4. The disdaine is at your idola∣grie, not at the. elsewhere. The triumphant Citizens of heauen (who enioy the presence of God, and happiest life that can be imagined) are by Protestants disdain∣fullie termed, Dead men, and esteemed neither to haue credit with God to obtaine any thing, nor any care or compassion on men, among whom they once liued and conuersed so kindly. The Saints departed we loue and honour, but are forced to call them dead men, as De vera re∣lig. cap. 55. Austin doth, by reason of your Idolatrie; with the same disdaine, in our weake measure, with which the Phil. 3. 2. Gal. 5. 2. Apostle disgraced Circumcision. Of their credit with God we doubt not; their care of men we denie not: but See my an∣svvere to 12. Articl. par. 1. art. 4. H. What does your Poe, that may release them all and will not? wee know no calling they haue to become our mediatours, with dishonour to God and Christ. And as for the poore soules departed, who in Purgatorie fire pay deare for their former delightes and pleasures; they depriue them of all humane succour, by teaching the world to beleeue that there is no such matter. See my an∣svvere to 12. Articl. part. 1. art. 4. l. Vtterly vntrue. We depriue them of nothing, that God in the Scripture allowes them. Prooue your Purgatorie thence, and we will confesse our error. Concerning vs Christians yet liuing on earth, there is no lesse im∣pietie in their opinions: For they teach that the best Christian is no better in effect, then a whited Sepulchre, being inwardly full of all wic∣kednes, and mischiefe; and onlie by an outwarde imputation of Christs righteousnes vnto them, are accepted of God for iust. To thinke that there is inherent in the soule of Man, any such grace of God, as doth cleanse it from sinne, and make the man iust in his sight; is with them, to We acknow∣ledge such a grace, though not to iustifica∣tion. raze the foundation of Religion, and to make Christ a Pseudochrist: wherein, I know not whether they be more enuious against the good of Man, then they are iniurious, either to the inestimable value of Christs blood, as though it could not deserue any better estate for his fauou∣rites: or vnto the vertue and efficacie of the holy Ghost; as not being able (by likeliehood) to purge mens soules from sinne, and endue them with such Heauenly qualities. I omitte the disgrace thereby don to the Blessed God-head it selfe, making the Holie of Holies, father willing to couer and cleake our iniquitie, then to cure it. And contrarie to his in∣finite goodnes, to loue them whom hè seeth defiled with all manner of abhominations. We acknowledge euery true Christian to be righteous in the sight of God after iustification, by 1. Cor. 6. 11. inherent, though imperfect, righteousnes; and account none whited sepul∣chers,
but those that bragge or make shee of holines, Matth. 23. 27 be∣ing but hypocrites. We ascribe our iustification wholy and onely to the mercie of God, in Rom. 4. 3, 4▪ . forgiuing our sinnes, for Christs obedience, by accounting . faith to vs for rightcous∣nes. We enuie not the good of man, but preferre Gods truth before mans pride. Our Sauiour Christs sacrifice we meg∣nifie, as infinitly perfect; but wee know the whole et thereof is not perfected at once in vs, though the holie Ghost be of infinit power, which, in respect of vs, is limited by the gratious and wise prouidence of God. We teach that God doth not onely couer our sinnes, by forgiuing them; but cure our corruption, by abolishing it wholy, yet 1. Cor. 13▪ . Rom. 7. 23. 2. Cor. 12. 9. by little and little. His loue depends not vpon our righteous∣nes: for he loued vs, Rom. 5. 8. 1. Ioh 4. 10. when wee were most vnrighteous: but vpon the estate of Gal. 4 6. Rom. 8. 15. being his sonnes, members of his beloued sonne Iesus Christ, and Ephe. 1. 3.  elected to adoption and saluation by him, before the foundation of the world was laid. Vnto these paradoxes, impious against God, and slaunderous to man: If it will please your Maiestie to adde, the prophane carnallity of some other poynts of the Protestant Doctrine; you will (doubtles) in short time loath it. As for example: I hat it is as good and godly, by eating, to And eae of vn. feede the bodie, as to chastize it by fasting. That it is as holy, to fulfill the fleshly desires of it by Mariage, as by Continencie, to mortifie them; yea that it is flat against the word of God to vow Virginitie: And also con∣trarie to his blessed will to bestowe our goods on the poore, and to giue our selues wholy to prayer, and fasting. All which, this Aduocate of the English Congregation teacheth expresse Is this the puritie of the Gospell? Or is it not rather the high way to Pag. 132. 162. 16▪ Epicurisme, and to all worldly vanitie, and iniquitie? To chastice the bodie by fasting wee hold it not only good, but of tentimes 1. Cor. 9. 27. necessary: though we acknowledge neither merit, nor satisfaction in it, which accompanie your popish fasts. Mortification of Rom. 6.  Col. 3. 5. all kindes of lusts, not only that one, we account a necessarie part of sanctification; nei∣ther doe wee allow mariage to fulfill the lust of the flesh, 1. Cor. 7. 2. . but to remedie it: vowing of virginitie we approoue not, because a man cannot be sure that he shall keepe his vow alwaies, though for a time he be able: besides, all lawfull
vowes being things indifferent, 1. Cor 6 12. charitie must giue iudge∣ment of excediencie in making thn. See my an∣svv  the  of V. To make prayer and fasting our whole worke, is to liue in the world without a calling. To giue away our goods to the poore, so to be∣come chargeable to others, is to tempt God, and burthen the Church: to doe it with opinion of merit, is popish pride against Gods glorie. I neede not ioyne hereunto, that they teach it to be impossible to keepe Gods Commaundements; and therefore in vaine to goe about it: And father, that the best worke of the righteous man, is defiled with I deny both your conse∣quences. Borrovved out of the tvvelue Articles, and ansvvered by me heretofore. Rom. 6. sinne. Wherefore, as good for him to leane all vndone, as to doe any. Nay, if this position of theirs were true, it would to low necessarilie, that all men were bound vnder paine of damnation, neuer to doe any good deede, to long as they liue: for that their good deede being stay∣ned with sinne, cannot but deserue the hyre of sinne, which according to the Apostle is: Death euerlasting. If your Maiesties important affaires, would once permit you to consider maturely of these impieties, and ma∣ny other like absurdities, wherewith the Protestant Doctrine is stuffed: I dare be bold to say that you would speedely either commaund them, to reforme themselues, and amend their errors; or fairely giue them their Congie. We say it is See my an∣svvere to 12. Articl. part. 2. art. 3. impossible to keepe Gods commande∣ments perfectly to iustification; but wee denie, that there∣fore it is in vaine to goe about it. Yea we truly affirme, that we are 1. Cor. 15. 58 bound to doe our best endeuour, and shall haue acceptation and reward of our workes from God, though not vpon any desert of ours. o the 12. Art. part. 2. art. 2. That our best workes are tainted with imperfections we professe plainly: That they are therefore to be left vndone, neither we say, nor you can prooue: The imperfection that cleaues to them, is by all good meanes to be auoyded, but the workes to be perfor∣med: for it is not the worke, but the imperfection in it that is forbidden. I will close vp this my second reason, with this Epiphoneme. That it is impossible for a Protestant, firmely cleaning to the grounds of his ovvne Religion, to hope for any saluation. For they doe, and needes must graunt, that no man can be saued without a liuely faith; and also that a liuely faith cannot be without charitie, for otherwise it were dead: Now then to the purpose; No Protestant can haue charitie: for as witnesseth Saint Iohn. This is the charitie of God, that vve keepe his commaundements. But it is impossible (according to the Protestants) to keepe the commande∣ments:  Epist. cap. 5. 3
therfore also impossible to haue charitie; VVhich is the ulnes of Rom 13. the lavve: and consequently impossible to haue a liuely faith, which cannot be without charitie. And so finally through want of that luely feeling faith, whereby they should lay hold on Christs righteousnesse, to hale and apply that vnto themselues, they can haue no hope at all, of a∣ny fauour, and grace at Gods hands: Without which they must needes assure themselues of eternall damnation, in steede of their pretended certain of saluation. True charitie, though not perfect, may be had in this life, and by it the commandements of God may bee, and are kept, though not perfectly: so that a Protestant, firmely cleaning to the grounds of his religion, may yet hope for saluation. To these two arguments, gathered out of the treatise following, I adde a third, collected from these your owne memorable wordes related in the aboue named conference: viz. Are wee now come to that passe, Pag. 69. that we must appeache Constantine of Poperie and superstition? Which argueth that your Maiestie iudgeth them, to haue little regard of either piety or ciuility, that would admit such a thought into their minde, as that the first Christian Emperour (our most renowned countriman) should bee nousled and brought vp in superstition: wherein your Maie∣stie hath great reason, for he was most carefully instructed, and taught the Christian Religion, by such holy Confessors, whose sinceritie in faith had bin tried in the hotte furnace of many strange persecutions: And he farther had the good happe to see, and heare together in the first gene∣rall Councell of Nice, many of the holiest, and best learned Bishops of Christendome. Therefore, is it most vnlikely that so Royall a Person, deuoted to Religion, add hauing so good meanes to attayne to the per∣fect knowledge thereof, as no man could haue better; should neuerthe∣lesse in the purest time of it, be mis-ledde into errour, and superstition. If then, it may be prooued, that this most Christian Emperour (the glitte∣ring ornament of our noble Iland) did beleeue such articles of the pre∣sent Roman Church, as the Protestants teach not to be beleeued: Will not your Maiestie rather ioyne in faith with so peeles a Prince, who by the consent of all antiquitie, was for certaine right well enformed, then with these, whome (doubtles) most men deeme to be pittifullie deceiued' Now that Constantine was of the same opinion, in matter of Religion, with the present Church of Rome, may euidently bee gathered out of this that followeth. He that denies Constantine to haue been a worthie, a sin∣gular instrument of God, for the good of his Church, wrongs the worthie Emperour, and sinnes against God. But the triall of doctrine is to be fetched, not from the opinions
and examples of men, though neuer so holie, but from the Holie of Holies. It may not seeme strange if superstition were crept into the Church before Constantines time, when the 2. Thes. 2. 7. Apostle witnesses, that euen in his daies the mysterie of iniquitie was alreadie begun. First, he was so affectionate vnto the signe of the Crosse, that hee would haue it gloriouslie appeare, both abroade in his business, and at home in his Pallace: and in the middest of the Citie of oe▪ with this Euseb. de vita Constan. lib. 3. cap. 2. Lib. 2. cap. 14: Lib. 4. cap. 26. Posie: In this signe of saluation, I haue deliuered the Cittie. W it also he blessed his visage. With fasting and other corporall affliction, he chastized his body, that he might please God. He with incredible admiration, honored prosessed Virgins, and made lawes in their fauour. He builded many Churches in honour of the Apostles, and Mar∣tyrs. Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 47. & alibi. Chy om. 66. ad pop. Antioth. And as S. Chrysostome recordeth: He that was reuested in purple, went to embrace the Sepulchres of S. Peter, and S Paul, and all Princely state laide aside, stood humbly praying vnto the Saints, that they would bee intercessors for him vnto God. He farther tooke order for the burying of his owne body, in the mid∣dest of the Tombes of the twelue Apostles, that after his death he might be partaker of the prayers, which should be there offered in the honour of the Euseb. in vita Const. lib. 4. c. 60 Ibid. cap 71. Apostles. Neither was he frustrated of his holy desire for as it followeth in the 71. Chapter of the same booke, at his funerals, the people ioyning with the Priests, with many cares, and great sighs, powred out prayers for the good Emperours soule. Againe, at a  feast which he held at the dedication of the Church built by  Ierusalem; some of  cleargie preached and ex∣pounded the holy Scriptures: and othe  me with vnbloudie Sacrifice, and st all conscrlions, appeased the Godhead, and prayed for the Ibidem de via Const. li. 4. ca. 45 hlth of he Prince. Moreover this alous Eperor reprehended Acasius, (a Nouatian hke)  saying, that it was not in the power of Priests, but of Zozom. lib. 1. hist. Eccl. cap. 21 God only to forgiuesinnes. Finally, toward true Bishops, the law full Pastors of Christs Church, he caried such a reuerend  that being in the Councell of Nice, he would not iue dowe, efore they  backed vnto him so to doe. And Socr hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. was so farre  vpon h to  pcame iudge, in causes Ec∣clesiasticall; that hee  thre prof ied, that it did not belong to him to iudge of Bishops  to be iud by them. It was not the , but the thing signified, viz. Christ crucified, to which Constantine shewed his affection, and by
whom he obtained all his victories; . by this God, not by this signe. The chastising of his bodie was not to please God by the worke wrought, but to fit himselfe to prayer, whereby hee might obtaine mercie, Euseb. de vita Constant. li. 2. cap. 14. . saith Eusebius, appeasing God by sup∣plication. To make virginitie a more diuine life than the ma∣ried estate, as ib. 4. cap. 26 Eusibius in that place calles it, is to say Adam liued a more diuine life before God created Eua, than he could doe afterward; and so to make her not an helpe, but an hinderance to him. De aud Constant. . Eusebius speakes not of the A∣postles, but of the Martyrs, to whom the Churches were de∣dicated, but to God onely, and were called the Lords hou∣ses, Dominicae, .  Kyrch, Churches. They were also named , not because they were built in honour of the Martyrs, but because (as I shewed before) the Christians vsed anciently to assemble in the places Euseb. hist. lib. 5. cap. 2. where the Mar∣tyrs had been buried; or because of Christ who was accoun∣ted the prince of Martyrs, in respect of whom the Martyrs refused the name, as belonging properly to him. Therefore Eusebius calles the Church, , though the translator terme it Martyrum domum, in stead of . This testimonie out of Chrysostome may well be suspe∣cted, Plessy de Missa lib. 3. cap. 15. being in the same words in a Sermon falsely attri∣buted to Austin, de Sancto Paulo, and alleaged out of a la∣ter writer one Theodorus Daphnopathus, by Garret a Chanon at the least, we may well remember that caueat of Biblioth. li. 6. Annot. 152. Sixtus Senesis, and take the speech to be hyperbolicall. It Chrysost. ad Pop. Antioch. honul. 66. was the Apostles glorie, that people in such multi∣tudes came to the places of their buriall to pray, though they prayed not to them; nor thought their prayers euer a whit the better, because they were made there. And where there is mention in Eusebius of the peoples praying for the Emperour (with more zeale than knowledge) there is no mention of honouring the Apostles by prayer. He should haue said with . vnbloodie sacrifices; which were not Mastes, but . prayers, and perhaps some offerings
for reliefe of the poore, and maintaining of the Temple. Your author saies that Acasius affirmed this onely of the sinne that is to death. Hereupon the Emperour replied; Set vp a ladder for thy selfe (Acasius) and goe alone into heauen: Quae quidem arbitror im∣peratorem &c. Non quo eum laudaret. which (saith he) I thinke the Emperour said to Acasius, not that he might commend him, but that men might thinke, that they are not free from the staine of sinne. Sozomen, that writes the historie, thinkes the Emperour did not intend to praise Acasius, but to instruct other; you affirme peremptorily that the Emperour reprehended him. Socrat hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. It pleased the gracious Emperour so much to honour those worthie and reuerend Fathers; but it becomes not your Bishops or Popes therefore to exact such behauiour of their Soueraignes; and much lesse to make them As Gregory the 7. sraed the Emperour Henry the 4. his vvie and eldest sonne. Bnno. daunce attendance barefooted, or As Frederick the 1. did to Pope Hadrian the 4. hold their stirrups: as for that profession of the good Emperour, it shewes is zeale, but prooues not that Princes may not iudge Bishops, being their subiects: especially since the reason is strong, for So∣ueraignes principally, for Bishops, but as their deputies. Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. You (saith the Emperour) are appointed gods to vs, and it is not conuenient that man should iudge gods; but he only, of whom the Psalm. 82. 1. Ruffi lib. 1. hist. cap 2. Psalmist saith, God sits in the assemblie of gods. If then this right Puissant Emperor, and most sincere Christian, reue∣renced the Sacrifice of the Masse, and beleeued that there was power in Priests to remitte sinnes, that Saints were to be prayed vnto, and that prayer was to be made for the dead, and such like, as appeareth by the e∣uident testimonie, o most approued Author, that liued with him: hath your Maiestie any cause to doubt, but that in matters of faith, he agreed with the present Romane Church? Wherefore my hope and trust in Al∣mighty God is, that you in your high wisedome, vpon mature and due consideration, how many old condemned errors the Protestants holde; and with alwell weighing that the whole frame of their Doctrine ten∣deth to the disgracing of God, and his Saintes, to the discouragement of men, from well doing, and doth (as it were) loosen the reines vnto all fleshly liberty, will in time make a most Godly resolution, to imitate that famous Emperour Constantine. He contrary to his former education, em∣braced with ah spower that same Romane Religion, which we now pro∣fesse: And (which is worthy to be obserued) he feared nothing the contra∣rie disposition of the multitude, or greater part of his subiects, that were wholy led another way. But following the blessed example of his most
vertuous Mother S. Hela, reposed himselfe in the powerfull assistance of the Almightie, and chas all other Religions into corners, sett ng vp and firmely stabl shing the Roman Thre can be no cause aleadged, why your Maiestie may not doe the like, i t shall please God effectuallie to stirre vp your gratious mie, and  bend your hart to vndertake it: for at that time there was more likelyhoode of resistance, then now: and no much more helpe at hand, if any resistance should be offered. If all you haue said were prooued, as it is not, there are yet many more monstrous abominations in the Romish su∣perstition, at no hand to be approoued or tolerated. Pardon me deere Soueraigne, if before I finish this argument, I seeme ouer-bold here to present vnto your memory, that all your most gracious and Godly Progenitors, and all our holy Predecessors, who now (assu∣redly) stande before the tribunall of God; doe demaund and expect no lesse at your handes. For th y founded not Bishopicks, Deaneres, and other sp rituall inges: thy builded not Colleges, and Schooles, for Protestants or their s Ponder well therfore I beseech your Maiestie, whether they doe not, or may not iustly chalenge of you (to whom the administration of iust belongeth.) to see and prouie: that such Churches, Church-ing, and spirituall rewarde, of learning, as they erected and bequeathed to Roman Fishops, and Priestes, be dispo∣sed of and bestowed according to their erections, and foundations. If it shall please the Protestants to erect any new Churches, o bestow any other reuenues towardes their ministers mayntenance, let them haue them hardly, and enioy them quietly: onlie let hem be content, out of their equitie: to leaue vs that which was prouided for vs and bequeathed vnto vs by our most Religious Auncestors. Colledges, and liuings were giuen, and founded, for the increase of religion and learning; for both which they are still continued. If they, by iniurie of the time, in ignorance mistooke the truth, it is no wrong to keepe their generall purpose, with amendment of their particular error: if there be any merit in these actions, as you teach, they are much beholden to those Princes, who make their deedes truly meritorious by the right vse of them. If all these reasons, and exceeding manie other which might be mu stered, and produced to the same purpose, will not suffice to effect in your Maiestie, a loue and desire, to embrace that auncient Roman f, which all your Renowned Progenitors, so highly reuerenced, loued, and esteemed. Yet let me (prostrate on my knee) most humblie beseech your highnes, in the name of thowsandes: that so farre forth they may preuaile with you, as you will not permitte those rigorous lawes, fra∣med
against recusant Catholikes, to bee put in practize and executed. For how can it seeme comfortable to reason, in your Maiesties deepe wisedome, and iudgement? that your louing Subiects should by com∣pulsion and constrainte, vnder that intollerable penaltie of losse of all their goodes, conforme themselues to such articles of Religion, that by the purest antiquitie were censured to be erronious and execrable? And what misery, and pitty were it, to driue them perforce, either to swallow downe the deadly poyson of their soules, or else to endure besides the disgrace of the state, the losse of their worldly wealth and liberty. Consider, and weigh with your selfe, y most gratious Liege, whether it will not be thought ouer great seuerity, to presse men (euen against humane nature and condition,) with patience to heare their owne profession and beleefe, both vntruely slaundered, and most bitterly reuiled & inueighed against: as in most Ministers sermons it is common∣ly. Yea to giue patient eare to them that blush not publikely, to call our blessed Sauiours body in the holy Sacrament, an abhominable Idole; his glorious and immortall Saintes, senseles dead Men; his Vicar and Vicegerent on earth Antichrist, and euery Catholike an Idolater. With infinit other intollerable reproches; Our constant hope, euen yet, (though against hope) is, that your Maiestie out of your owne sweete na∣turall disposition, and most milde carriage in gouernment hitherto, will not onely moderate, but suspende all such extreamitie: And not suffer it to be extended against them, who in former doubtfull times, were (in manner) the only men, that defended and made manifest to the world, your Title and interest to the Crowne of England; and were no lesse willing to receiue you, when the time came: and as forward to haue as∣sisted you (if need had required) as any sort of Subiects within the land. And neuer since wingly offended your sacred Maiestie in any thing. It may be obiected that they doe not conforme themselues vnto a sta∣tute lawe, made against their Religion: Be it so. Then their Religion toward God, not any contempt of their lawfull Superiour, doth com∣maund them from the conformity, which is pardonable. Considering that they be no inuenters, or followes of nouelties, but onely hold on and perseuer in the aith of their forefathers. And what subiect is there among the most dutifull, that doth not often transgresse and giue of∣fence to one statute law or other: yet for no other law, men are so hardly dealt withall, albeit they violate many of them together. Onely Caholikes are for the traressing of one, hupeled and handled as though they were some haynous rebbels, and trayors: Who (be it spo∣ken without disparagement to others) are (by them that liue neare them) esteemed comonly, the most orderly subiects; as true of their wordes, a und in their deedes, of as great charitie and hospitalitie towardes their neighbours, and compassion of the poore: briefly, of as moderate and cle carriage and behauiour, as mo men in their Countrie: So that to begger and vndoe them (as the execution of that lawe esta∣blished,
must needes doe the poorer sort of them,) would bee little lesse then to vndoe and destroy all good order, and Discipline in the common weale. It is required by God at the Princes hands to see, that all his subiects performe true worship to the true God: how then can his Maiestie suffer thousands (as you say) to defile the land, and dishonour God by such a seruice, as he knowes to be idolatrous? For the punishment, and reason of it, I re∣ferre all men to To an Epistle of a Puritan-Papist. VVhy not Cui bono? Master Powels answere, lately published. Before I make an end, I beseech your Maiestie, that the old worthie saying of Cassian may be diligently examined: Cu boum? For whose commoditie, to what end and purpose must such numbers of most ciuill subiects, be so grieuously molested? What is the cause why your peace∣able and ioyfull gouernment, should be so mingled with such bitter stormes of persecution? Is it to extinguish the Catholike faith? It eth not in mans power to suppresse and destroy that, which the Almightie supporteth and maintaineth. The gates of ll shall not preue against the Catholike Church. And let but those graue and wise counsailers (who Matth. 16. haue managed the state in our late Queenes daies) enforme your Ma∣iestie vvhether all those terrible persecutions that then vvere most ve∣hemently pursued, did any vvhit at all diminish the number of Recu∣sants: or rather did not greatly multiplie and encrease them, from one at the first to an hundred and moe in continuance. But it may be, they entend by those penall lavves, to enrich your Maiestie, and to fill your coffers: Surely the receits vvill fall our much too short, to govv to any such reckoning. And vvhat delight to enich your treasurie, and stuffe your coffers vvith regrets, and outcries of the husband, vvife, children, vvidovves, and poore infants, vvhen as the best and most assured trea∣surie of a King, is (by the prudent esteemed) to consist in the loue, and heartie affection of his people? Or are these penall lavves, and forfei∣tures ordained for revvards vnto such dependents, as for these or the like doe follovv you? But the reuenues, preferments, and offices, be∣longing to your Crovvne of England, are abundantly able to content and revvard them, that shall deserue vvell of the common-vveal, vvith∣out that so heauie agrieance and heart bleeding of others your Ma∣iesties good subiects. And your Maiesties high vvisedome, and long ex∣perience in gouernment, can best remember you, that such men are not so mindfull of benefits receiued, as the daily vvant and miserie, vvill continually renue and reuiue the memorie of the oppressed. And vvhen they shall see no hope of remedie, the state being novv Novv are in your right veine. setled, and a continuall posteritie like to ensue of one nature and con∣dition: God knovveth vvhat that forcible vveapon of necessirie may constraine and driue men vnto a length. Doe you accuse his Maiestie of desiring to extinguish the
Catholike faith? or doe you dallie with him by this que∣stion? To the 12. Art. art. 1. art. 1. D. The gates of hell are set open to all men by your catholike faith: so that the diuell will neuer seeke to pre∣uaile against it. Either the generall opinion of all men, and the bragges of your owne side are very vaine and false, or else for one Papist in her Maiesties daies and gouernment, there are three now at the least, vpon the very hope of tole∣ration. These are matters of estate vndutifully propounding to the Popes vassals occasion of heartburning against their So∣ueraigne, to a worse purpose. Bellarm. de summo pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. 6. 7 It is not lawfull for Christians (saith your Cardinall Bellarmine) to endure a King that is an heretike, if he attempt to draw his subiects to his heresie. If then there be no greater reason of vveight and moment, vvhy such dutifull and vvell deseruing Subiects, should be so grieuously afflicted  Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. 6. 7. VVould you haue greater reason of re∣straint than idolatrie and treason? Matth. 13. A good reason to suffer all kind of here∣tikes. for their conscience: let others conceiue as they shall please, I vvill ne∣uer suffer my selfe to be persvvaded, that your Maiestie vvill euer per∣mit it, before I see it done. If it be further obiected, vvhy should not your Maiestie asvvell punish Catholikes in your Kingdomes, as Catho∣likes doe Protestants in some other Countries: I ansvvere, that in all Countries vvhere multitudes of both sorts are mixed, as it is in Eng∣land: The Protestants are tolerated, as in France, Polonia, Bohemia, the Catholike States of Germanie, and Catounes, according to that of the Gospell: Suffer both the wheate and cokle to grow vntill haruest. In Spaine, and Italie, where sarse any Protestants be, the case is otherwise. But vvhat is that to England? vvhere are very many Catholike Recu∣sants, and Catholikely affected in euery degree, not onely of the Tem∣poraltie, but in the Clergie also, hardly of the highest degrees of honour to be excepted: therefore for their number and qualitie to be tole∣rated. There is great reason to beare with Protestants in any countrie; because there is no apparant shew of Idolatrie in their seruing of God; nor any forraine power, vpon whom they must depend: but Papists are euen outwardly also Ido∣laters, and, vpon paine of damnation, must obey the Popes definitiue sentence (who cannot erre, in seate of iudgment) against all the Princes in Christendome. Lastly, if there were no other cause, but the innumerable benefits which euery degree and order of men throughout England, haue, and do daily receiue from our most Catholike ancestors: as the constituting of so many holesome lawes; founding of so many honourable, and
rich rewards of learning, as Bishopricks, Cathedrall Churches, Deane∣ries, Arch-deaconries, Residencies, Prebends, and Benefices: the ere∣cting, and building of so goodly Schooles, Colledges, and Hospitals, and endowing of them with so ample possessions, which all proceeded out of the bowels of the true wisedome, pietie, and vertue of their Catho∣like Religion: Is not this much more then a sufficient motiue why their heires in faith, should be most benignely, and louingly dealt with? and not for the profession of the same Religion, so seuerely afflicted? Let the Protestants in those countries, where they are most molested, ap∣peare and shew, that their predecessors in beliefe, haue been so benefi∣ciall vnto the publike weale: and I dare vndertake, that for their Ance∣stors sake, they shall finde much more fauour, then we sue for. Where∣fore No doubt but you haue all Princes and estates at com∣maund. they can haue no iust cause, to repine at your Maiesties goodnes, if vpon men of that Religion, which hath been so beneficiall vnto your whole Realme, you take extraordinary compassion. This makes against you, rather than for you. For the strengthening of the Popish Clergie hath alwaies been the weakening of the Prince; and the establishing of the Popes absolutenes, aboue the authoritie of the Magistrate. There∣fore, that the zeale of our ancestors may not become againe dangerous to our state, it is not onely meete, but necessarie also, to keepe out popish persons, and opinions. It lying then in your Maiesties free choise and election, whether you will enlarge and extend your Royall fauour, vnto an infinite number of your most dutifull and affectionate Subiects, who are the most vnwil∣ling in the world to transgresse any one of your lawes, were they not Except the Pope vvill them. thereunto compelled by the law of God: or else vtterly to begger and to vndoe, both them and theirs, for their constant profession of the an∣cient Romane faith. My confidence in the sweete prouidence of the Almightie is, that he will mercifully incline your Royall heart, to chuse rather to pardon, then to punish; because the way of mercie, consorteth better with your kinde and tender nature: it is of better assurance to continue your peaceable and prosperous Raigne: it will purchase mer∣cie at Gods hands, according to his owne promise: Blessed be the merci∣full, Matth. 5. Thine eye shall not pittie him. Deut. 13. 8. 9. for they shall obtaine mercie. I neede not adde what a consolation and comfort it will be to many score thousands of your subiects, and the greatest obligation that can be deuised, to binde them to you and yours for euer. Now what applause, and congratulation from forraine Catholike countries, would follow this your famous fact? Vndoubtedly all the glorious companie of Kings and Queenes (now in heauen) of whom you are lineally descended: and among all the rest, namely, your most sacred and deare Mother, that en∣dured so much for her constancie in the same Catholike faith, cannot but take it most kindly, if for God and their sakes, you take into your
Princely protection their followers in the Romane faith, and de fend them from oppression. Thus most humbly crauing pardon of your Highnes, if I haue in any thing exceeded the limits of my bounden dutie, I beseech your blessed Sauiour to endue you, both with the true knowledge of his diuine veri∣tie, and with the spirit of Fortitude, to embrace and defend it constant∣ly; or at the least, gratiously to tolerate and permit it. Your most excellent Maiesties, most obedient, and loyall subiect, and seruant. W. B. What course will best please God in this difference of profession, not humane policie, but diuine truth must deter∣mine. In which if we sincerely obey God, we shall not need to depend vpon the liking, or misliking, either of forraine countries, or Kings, and Queenes departed; who either are no Saints of God, if they loue popish Idolatrie; or, if they be Saints, loue it not. THE PREFACE TO THE READER. GEntle Reader, I meane not here to entertayne thee with many wordes: the principall cause that moued me to write, was the honour and glorie of God, in defence of his sacred verity, then the imploying of his talent bestowed vpon me: as well to sor∣tifie the weaker sort of Catholikes in their faith, as to call backe and leade other (who wander vp and downe like to lost sheepe, after their owne fancies) into the right way. The like reasons haue drawne me to this suruey of your reformation, with a resolute purpose to acknowledge any truth, that you shall shew me, though it be against the iudg∣ment of all the Churches in Christendome. I tooke in hand particularly the confutation of this booke, not onely for that I vvas thereunto requested, by a friend of good intelligence and iudge∣ment,
who thought it very expedient: but also because perusing of it, I found it penned more Schollerlike, then the Protestants vse to doe ordinariely: For first the pointes in controuersie, are set downe distctly, and for the most part truely. Afterward in confirmation of their opinion, the chiefe arguments are produced from both Scriptures, Fathers, and reason: Which are not vulgar, but called out of their Rabbins, Luther, Peter Matir, Caluin, Kemnitius, and such like, though he name them not. Lastly, he placeth some obiections, made in fauour of the Catholike doctrine, and answereth to them as well as he could. And (which J speake to his commendation) doth per∣forme all this very briefely and clearely. So that (to speake my oion free∣ly) I haue not seene any booke of like quantitie, published by a Protestant, to containe either more matter, or deliuered in better method. And con∣sequently more apt to deceiue the simple: especially considering that he withal counterfeiteth to come as neere vnto the Romane Church, as his tender con∣science will permitte him, whereas indeede he walketh as wide from it, as a∣ny other noueller of this age. If the writings of Protestants haue bin lesse scholerlike, than in the handling of controuersies it were fit they should haue bin; whose fault is it but the Papists, whom they haue bin forced to answere in their owne kinde? It is not vn∣knowne to any of our English Rhemists, or Romanists, that Doctor Fulke, long since, desired to haue the matter brought to an issue, and tried by syllogismes, the very iudgement seate of true reason. If you had knowne Master Perkins life, as well as you see his learning, you would neuer haue accused him of coun∣terfeiting: whereof also me thinkes he may easily be ac∣quited by that cleerenes which you discerne and acknow∣ledge in him. Wherefore I esteemed my spare time best imployed about the discouering of it, being (as it vvere) an abridgement of the principall controuersies of these times, and doe endeuour after the same Scholasticall manner, vvithout all superfluity of vvordes, no lesse to maintaine and defend the Catholike party: then to confute all such reasons, as are by M. Perkins alleadged for the contrarie. Reade this short treatise good Christian diligently, for thou shalt finde in it the marrovv and pith of many large volumes, contracted and drawne into a narrovv revvme. And read it ouer as it becommeth a good Christian, with a desire to finde out, and to follovv the truth, because it concerneth thy eter∣nall saluation: and then iudge vvithout partiality, vvhether Religion hath better groundes in Gods vvord, more euident testimonie from the purest an∣tiquitie, and is more conformable vnto all Godlines, good life, and vpright
dealing, (the infallible markes of the best Religion) and speedely imbrace that. Before I end this short preface, I must intreate thy patience to beare vvith the aultes in Printing, vvhich are too too many, but not so much to be blamed, if it be courteously considered that it vvas Printed farre from the Authour, vvith a Dutch composer, and ouerseene by an vnskilfull Cor∣rector, the greatest of them shall be amended in the end of the booke. I will endeuour the like, or greater shortnes and plain∣nes, if I can; desiring nothing more of the Christian reader, than to remember that hee is to seeke the truth without partialitie: The place to seeke it in is the Scripture: the meanes to find it, the right vse of true reason. He that hunts for it in mens writings, either findes it not at all, or, at the least, hath no certaine knowledge that he hath found it. He that will trust other mens words rather than his owne eyes, deserues in reason to be deceiued. Before the Printing of this part was finished, I heard that M. Perkins was dead. I am sorrie that it commeth forth to late, to doe him anie good. Yet, his worke liuing to poison others, a preseruatiue against it, is neuerthelesse necessarie. It would haue done Master Perkins good to see by expe∣rience, how vaine it is for men to striue against God, for the Pope: but it would haue been little to your aduantage, to haue had such an aduersarie.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR WILLIAM BOWES Knight, &c. Grace and peace. RIght Worshipfull, it is a notable policy of the diuell, which he hath put into the heads of sundry men in this age, to thinke that our religion and the religion of the present Church of Rome are all one for substance: and that they may be reunited as (in their opinion) they were before. Writings to this effect are spread abroad in the French tongue, and respected of English Protestants more then is meete, or ought to be. For let men in shew of moderation, pretend the peace and good e∣state of the Catholike Church as long as they will; this Vnion of the two religions can neuer be made, more then the vnion of light and darkenes. MAISTER PERKINS IN THE Epistle Dedicatorie. It is a policie of the diuell, to thinke that our Religion, and the Religion of the present Church of Rome, are all one in substance, or that they may be reunited. BEfore I am to deliuer my opinion concerning this point, I had neede to be enformed, what this Author meaneth by these words our Reli∣gion:
For there being great diuersities of pretended Religions currant in the world, all contrary to the Church of Rome, how can I certainlie know, whether of them h professeth? Wherefore (good Sir) may it please you to declare, what Religion you vnderstand, when you say our Reli∣gion? Is it that which Martin Luther (a licentious Fryer) first preached in Germany? or rather that, which the martiall Minister Zwinglius, contended with sword and shield, to set vp in Switzerland? or per∣haps that, which John Caluin, by sedition wrought into Geneua, expel∣ling the lawfull Magistrate thence, and by the ayde of Beza (a dissolute turnecoate) spread into many corners of France? Or if by your Religion, you meane only to comprehend the Religion now practised in England. yet are you farther to shewe, whether you vnderstand that established by the State, or the other more refined (as it is thought by many) and em∣braced by them, who are called Puritanes, for of their leauen, sauoureth that position of yours: That the article of Christs descent into bell, crept into the Creede by negligence; and some other such like in this booke. These principall diuisions of the new Gospell (to omit sundrie sub-diui∣sions) being famous, and receiued of diuers in England, according to each mans phantasie, it is meete you expresse, whether of them you speake of, that it may be dulie considered, how the Romane Religion and it agree, and what vnion may be made betweene them. Is this no superfluitie of words? What reasonable man can doubt, that Master Perkins by our religion meanes, as you say afterward, the religion now professed in England? For your word (practised) is too skant for doctrine; some points whereof fall not into practise. If it be contrarie to the Church of Rome, it is easily answered without any such inquirie, that contraries cannot be vnited. If difference in some points make a diuers religion, how many kindes are there amongst you Papists? let the Fran∣ciscans and Dominicans goe, with all the rest of former times; what say you to these maine points, Iustification in Albert. Pig∣hius contro∣uers. 2. Pighius, Predestination in Bellarm de grat & lib. arb. Bellarmine, Free will in Lib. 21. c. 9. Barthol. Ca∣merarius de lib. arb. Bar∣tholomew Camerarius, three pillers of your Church? The difference betwixt 12. Art. part. 1. Art. 1. Protestants and Puritanes (as you call them) is not in any essentiall point of faith, but in matters of outward gouernment and ceremonies. And this shall appeare, if we doe but a little con∣sider, how they of the Romane Church haue rased the foundation. For though in words they honour
Christ, yet in deede they turne him to a Pseudo-Christ, and an Idoll of their owne braine. Now if you meane the hotchpoth and confusion of all these new Religions together, as by the opposition here vnto the Church of Rome, and by the artiles following may be gathered: then I am cleere for you in this, that there can be no more concord betweene these two Re∣ligions, May there be an vnion be∣tvvixt  of the   the Church of ome? then there is betweene light and darknes, faith and insideltie, Christ and Beliall. Notwithstanding I thinke that the reason by you produced to proue the impossibilitie of this vnion, is of no value, to it, that they of the Romane Church aue razed the foundation; for though in vvords they honour Christ, yet indeede they turne him into a Pseudochrist, and an doll of their  braine: A very sufficient cause (no doubt) of eternall breach and diuision, if it could be verisied. But how proue you, that we Romane Catholikes, who beleeue Iesus Christ to be perfect God, and perfect Man, and the onely Redeemer of Mankinde, make him a false Christ, and an Idoll? or before you goe about to proue it, tell me I pray you, how this can well stand with your owne definition of a refor∣med Catholike in your Preface? There you affirme him to be a Catho∣like reformed to your liking, that holdeth the same necessarie heads of Re∣ligion, vvith the Romane Church. Now, can there be any more necessa∣rie head of Religion, than to haue a right faith in Christ? can any o∣ther foundation be laid besides Iesus Christ? If then your reformed Catholike must agree with the Romane Church, in neessarie heads 1 Cor. 3. of Religion, as you hold he must: either the Romane Church th not the foundation, and maketh not Christ a Pseudochrist, as you say here, or else you teach your disiples very pernitiously, to hold the same necessarie heads of Religion with it. It is no confusion to take from seuerall men seuerall opi∣nions, agreeing with the word of God. Luther, hauing been a long time kept in the darknes of Ppcrie, could not by and by discerne the truth in all points. Was not your super∣stition, both for doctrine and ceremonics, patcht vp peece by peece, as it could procure allowance from time to time? Yea was not the truth of Religion made manifest by little and little in the Church, as God gaue learned men occasion of studie, and a blessing in their studie, against the poyson of Heretikes? Such hath been, and such alwaies will be the course of the Gospell: that truth will be more and more knowne, as there is more opposition against it, and as men bestow more paines in reading, praying, and studying. To denie the reason or argument, is to denie the conse∣quence,
not the antecedent: but you grant the consequence, viz. That razing the foundation, and turning Christ into a Pseudochrist, is a sufficient cause of eternall breach: onely you denie the antecedent that the Church of Rome doth so. At the least, as well as you prooue, 12. A. part. 1. Art. 1. that the Church of England holding the same opinions of Christ, haue no faith, no religion, no Church, no Christ, &c. But let vs see how you disprooue the antecedent. If your reformed Catholike (say you) must agree with the Romane Church, in many heads of religion, either the Romane Church razeth not the foundation, or else you teach your disciples very pernitiously to hold the same necessarie heads of religion with it. But he must agree with it in many heads of religion. Therfore either the Romane Church razeth not the foun∣dation, or you teach your disciples very pernitiously to hold the same necessarie heads of religion with it. I denie the consequence of your proposition; because by paring of the errors, which Master Perkins requires, he shall keepe himselfe from razing the foundation, though he hold the same necessary heads: for example he must holde with you, that a true Christiā must haue a right faith in Christ, but he must reiect the faith, you professe, as not right. Again, he must hold, that no other foundation can be laid, but Iesus Christ: not that you lay him aright for the foundation. They call him our Lord, but with this conditi∣on, that the Seruant of Seruants of this Lord may change and adde to his commaundements: hauing so great a power, that he may open and shut heauen to whom he will; and bind the very conscience with his owne lawes, and consequently be partaker of the spirituall kingdome of Christ. But to leaue to you the reconciliation of these places, let vs examine briefly, how you confirme your paradox, That the Church of Rome ma∣keth Christ a false Christ: which you goe about to proue by foure instan∣ces. The first is, because the seruant of his seruants may chaunge and adde to his commandements, hauing so great power that he may open,
and shut heauen to whom he will, and bide the very conscience with his owne lawes, and consequently be partaker o the spirituall kngdome of Christ. Here are diuerse reasons hud vp in one, but all of  mo∣ment: for all these seuerall faculties, which the Pope enioyeth, being receiued by the free gift of Christ, and to be employed in his seruice on∣ly, and to his honour and glorie: are so farre off from making Christ a Pseudochrist that they doe highly recommend his most singular bountie towardes his followers, without any derogation to his owne diuine pre∣rogatiues. he particulars shall be more particularly answered in their places hereafter Now I say in a word, that Christs Vicar cannot change any one of Gods commaundements, nor adde any contrarie vnto them: but may well enact and establish some other conformable vnto them, which doe bind in conscience: for that power is graunted of God to e∣uery soueraigne gouernour, as witnesseth S. Paul saying. Let euery soule Rom. 1. God birds the conscience as sare as the lavv is gron∣dd von his Commaunde∣ments. be subiect to higher povvers. And that (as it is in the fifth verse following) of necessitie, not only for vvrath, but also for conscience sake. So that to at tribute power vnto one that is vnder Christ, to binde our consciences; is not to make Christ a Pseudochrist, but to glorifie him much, acknow∣ledging the power, which it hath pleased him to giue vnto men. In like manner, what an absurde illation is that, from the power to open and shut heauen gates, (which all both Catholikes and Protestants, confesse to haue been giuen to S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles,) to inferre: that Christ is made a Pseudochrist; as who should say, the Master spoi∣led himselfe of his supreame authoritie, by appoynting a stevvard ouer his householde, or a porter at his gates, he must be both Master and Man too, belike. And thus much of the first instance. First, you begge the question, in taking it as granted, that the Popes power is receiued of Christ. Secondly, it doth not follow that Christ is not made a Pseudochrist, if the power be receiued of Christ, to be imployed in his seruice only. For it may be imployed by the Pope to another end, than it is giuen by Christ. As an armie committed to a Generall by his Soueraigne, may bee turned against the Prince, to his ouerthrow. He that can The Poe may dispense against the lav of a∣tue. Glossa. ad caus. 15. q. 6. c. autoiatē. The Pope  peneth against the Apostle. Di. 3 ecr. &  82 pr. &   . 15. . 6 c.  . dispense with Gods commandements, so that either a man shall be freed from doing that which is in∣ioyned: or haue libertie to doe that which is forbidden; can change Gods commandements. But such dispensations haue been giuen by Popes, and may as well be still. In all things inioyned by the commandements of God, the law of the Magistrate bindes men in conscience to obedience
by vertue of the matter commanded. In things indifferent, the conscience is not alwaies charged with sinne, where that which is appointed is not done: but you Papists (.   . . as it ap∣peares by your Catechismes) make the Commandements of the Church equall, or superiour to Gods commande∣ments. The opening and shutting of heauen, by the worke of the Ministerie, th. 16. 19 Ioh. 20. 23. which is the power that was giuen to the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospell, is not to be execu∣ted at their pleasure, but depends vpon the people as much as vpon them, if not more. For whosoeuer will repent and beleeue shall be saued, though all the Popes, Priests, and Ministers that euer were, are, and shall be, would shut him out of heauen. Therefore the Pope hath no authoritie nor power to open the doore to one man more than to another; much lesse to let in, and shut out whom he list. He must open it, if he be a Minister of the Gospell, as much as lies in him, to al; if they wil enter, they may, without any further leaue, or power from him. Againe, they call him a Sauiour, but yet in Vs: in that he giues this grace vnto vs, that by our merits, we may partake in the merits of the Saints. Come we now to the second: it is, that we make Christ an Idoll, for albeit we call him a Sauiour, yet in vs, in that he giues his grace to vs, that by our merits we may be our owne sauiours, &c. I meruaile in whom he should be a sauiour if not in vs: What, is he the Sauiour of Angels or of any other creatures? I hope not, but the mischiefe is, that he giues Js Of and Jn, allone vvith you? But the matter is not. grace to vs, that thereby we may merite and so become our owne Saui∣ours. This is a phrase vnheard of among Catholiks, that any man is his owne Sauiour, neither doth it follow of that position that good workes are meritorious; but well that we applie vnto vs the saluation, which is in Christ Iesus, by good works; as the Protestants auouh they doe by faith onely: In which sence the Apostle S. Paul saith to his deare Disci∣ple Timothie. For this doing thou shalt saue both thyselfe, and them that heare thee. And this doth no more diminish the glorie of our Soueraigne Tim. 4. Sauiour infinit merits, then to say that we are saued by faith only: good works no lesse depending, if not more aduancing Christs merits, then only faith, as shall be proued hereafter more at large in the question of merits. Now that other good mens merits may steede them, who want some of their owne, may be deduced out of an hundred places of the Scriptures, namely out of those where God saith, that for the sake of one
of his true seruants, he will shew mercy vnto thousands, as is expressely said Hovv are there ten then? saith Origen in Ex∣od. Hom. 8. in the end of the first commandement Christ is a sauiour of vs, by 1. Cor. 1. 30. Rom. 3. 25. redeeming vs, not a sauiour in vs, by making vs redeeme our selues. Though the speech be not yours, the matter is: For if Christ be therefore a Sa∣uiour, because by his merits we are saued; looke how much wee merit our saluation, so much wee are sauiours of our selues; yea, how much merit there is in our workes, so much there wanted in Christs satisfaction; or else our saluation is in part twice merited. 1. Tim. 4. 16. The Minister saues, not by meriting, but by preaching the word of saluation; works must needs diminish Christs glorie more than faith, because this saues not by meriting; they doe: the matter cannot be deduced from such places. Exod. 20. 6. The mercie God shewes in that respect, is either for the blessings of this life, or at the most for the outward meanes of saluation. And they acknowledge that he died and suffered for vs, but with this caueat, that the Fault being par∣doned, we must satisfie for the temporall punish∣ment, either in this world, or in Purgatorie. In like manner I answere vnto your third instance, that for Christ to haue taken away by his blessed Passion the eternall paine due vnto our sinnes, and to haue left a temporall to be satisfied by vs, is not to make himselfe a false Christ, but a most louing, kind, and withall a most pru∣dent Redeemer. Wiping away that by himselfe, which passed our forces, and reseruing that to vs, which by the helpe of his grace, we well may and ought to doe: not only because it were vnseemely, that the parts of the body, should be disproportionable to the head: but also because it is reasonable (as the Apostle holdeth,) that we suffer here vvith Christ be∣fore vve raigne vvith him in his Kingdome. Rom. 8. To leaue halfe of our punishment for vs to beare, is to be but halfe a Sauiour, and so a false Christ; there is neither kindnes nor wisedome in it, to leaue either our saluation doubtfull, or punishment for vs perhaps of 1000. yeeres or more in Purgatorie. That as Rom. 8. 29. Christ hath been afflicted, so should we taste of affliction, it is proportionable and reaso∣nable. That wee should bee like him, in making satisfa∣ction for our sinnes, by punishment, is to make vs redee∣mers
with him, though not in the highest degree. In a word, they make him our Mediatour of In∣tercession vnto God: but withall his Mother must be the Queene of Heauen, and by the right of a Mo∣ther commaund him there. Thus, in word they crie Osanna, but indeede they crucifie Christ. In your last instance you say, that we make Christ our mediator of in∣tercession to God, thinking out of your simplicity, that therein we much magnifie him, & sing Osanna vnto him. Whereas we hold it for no small disparagement vnto his diuine dignitie, to make him our Intercessor; that is to pray him to pray for vs, who is of himselfe, right able to helpe Ridiculous: vvho euer ex∣pounded inter∣cession so? vs in all we can demaund; being aswell God, as Man. And albeit one in thought singling out the humanitie of Christ from his diuine nature and person, might make it an intercessor for vs; Yet that being but a Metaphysical conceipt, to separate the nature from the person; since the Arrian heresie (which held Christ to be inferior to his Father) it hath not been practised by Catholikes, who alwaies pray our Sauiour VVas it prac∣tised before by Catholikes? Your conse∣quence is aught. Christ to haue mercy vpon vs, neuer to pray for vs. And consequentlie make him no mediator of intercession, but of redemption. And to come to your grieuous complaint, that vvithall his Mother must be Queene of heauen, and by right of a mother commaund him there: Who can sufficiently meruaile at their vnnaturall grosse pares, who take it for a disgrace to the Sonne, to aduaunce his owne good Mother? or else who well in his wits, considering Christs bountie to strangers and his enemies; will not be perswaded, that on his best beloued mother, he did bestow his most speciall fauours? For hauing taken flesh of her, ha∣uing suckt her breasts, & receiued his nutriture and education of her in his tender yeares, and being aswell followed of her, as of any other: is it possible that he should not be as good to her, as to others; vnto whom he was not at all beholding? Againe the very place of a mother, requiring preheminence, before all seruants and subiects, of what dignitie soeuer: And before sonnes too, if you vvill fol∣lovv nature. doth not the right rule of reason lead vs to thinke, that Christ the foun∣taine of all wisedome, repleshed the B. Virgin Mary his deare Mother with such grace as should make her fit for that place? it lying in his hands, and free choise to doe it. And therefore is she truely tearmed, of holy and learned Antiquity, our Lady and Queene, exalted aboue all quy∣ers of Angels. That which you impute vnto vs farther, that she must in the right of a mother commaund her Sonne, is no doctrine of the Ro∣mane Church, nor said in all her seruice: We say. Shevv thy selfe to be a mother: but it is not added by commaunding thy Sonne: that is your glosse, which is accursed, because it corrupteth the text, for it followeth in that place, Sumat per te preces, &c. Present our prayers to him, that vouchsafed to be borne of thee, for vs. If any priuate person by medita∣tion,
pearcing more profoundly into the mutuall loue and affection, of such a Sonne towards so worthie a Mother; doe deeme her prayers as forcible in kindnes as if they were commaundements, and in that sense call them commaundements, according to the French phrase: Vos pri∣ers This flattering speech vvill not maintaine that Blasphe∣mie. me sont des commandements, that may be done without derogation to Christs supreame dignity, and with high commendation of his ten∣der affection, vnto his reuerent and best beloued mother. We do not pray to Christ to pray for vs, but we account Ioh. 16. 23. his loue to vs, and his graciousnes with God his Father to be such, that whatsoeuer wee aske of God in his name, by To the 12. Art. par. 1. Art. 4. H. our owne prayers, shall certainly be obtained, as well as if all the Saints in heauen should intreate him for vs. And this is to make him our Mediatour of intercession, not sim∣ply as he is mā, but as he is the 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Gal. 3. 20. Aduocate betwixt God and man; in which respect the Rom. 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. Scripture saith, that he makes request to God for vs: whatsoeuer was true and lawfull, before the Arian heresie, is so still. There was as much reason why he should make her head of the Church here on earth, as that she should be Queene of the Church in heauen, or Queene of heauen. But what∣soeuer she may be, once a Mediatrix she may not be, for that is Christs office now in heauen. Those hyperbolicall speeches of the ancients shew their zeale, but maintaine not your error. If those words, Roga patrem, iube natum, iure matris impe∣ra: Command in the right of a mother be not in any part of your Romish seruice; yet these speeches are in one, that is no meane man: Bonauentur. in Psalte beat. Mariae, Psal. 35 Incline the countenance of God toward vs, compell him to haue mercie vpon sinners. And why may she not compell, if (as you terme her) she be Idemin Co∣rona Mariae. §. Imperatur. Empresse and La∣die of the world? If she be Psalt Psal 12. the finder out of grace, if she con∣strained the vncreated word to take flesh of her, because she was a most humble Ladis. But will you haue the very word of com∣manding? Coro Mari. §. Imperatr. O our Empresse and Ladie, most bountifull, by the right of a mother commaund thy most beloued sonne, that he vouchsafe to lift vp our mindes to heauenly desires from the loue of earthly things. What doctrine is this? and for what Churches seruice? was not Bonauenture the author of all
these speeches, In opuse. scrip opuse. a Cardinall of your Romish Church, your Se∣raphicall Doctor, and which is most of all, is he not Canonizatio Bonauenturae in opuse. a Saint canonized by your Pope, that cannot erre? Is not the Vir∣gin Mary in your Horae beat. Maryae ad vsum Sarisbur. Ec∣cles. fol. 42. seruice, called the promise of the Pre∣phets, the Queene of the Patriarkes, the schoolmistris of the E∣uangelists, the teacher of the Apostles, the comforter of the quick and the dead? Who th saios deuoutly this short prayer daily, (saith the Rubrick) shall not depart out of this world, without penance, and ministration of the holy Sacrament. Fol. 46. In another prayer in the same booke, shee is called Magstra E∣uangelistarum veracissima. Doctrix A∣postolorum sapienissima. the most true schoolmistris of the Euangelists, the most wise teacher of the A∣postles. The booke was printed at Paris by Francis Reg∣nault 1526. What profound piercing into such naturall af∣fection can exccuse these speeches? what French phrase can warrant it? But what should we striue about the forciblenes of her prayers, when it is not, nor can be prooued that she prayes at all. Therefore we haue good cause to blesse the name of God, that hath freed vs from the yoke of this Ro∣man bondage, and hath brought vs to the true light and libertie of the Gospell. And it should be a great height of vnthankfulnesse in vs, not to stand ouer a∣gainst the present Church of Rome, but to yeelde ourselues to plots of reconciliation. To this effect and purpose I haue penned this little Treatise, which I present to your worship, desiring it might be some token of a thankfull minde, for vndeserued loue. And I craue withall, not onely your Worshipfull (which is more common) but also your learned pro∣tection; being well assured, that by skill and arte you are able to iustifie whatsoeuer I haue truelie taught. Thus wishing to you and yours the conti∣nuance and the increase of faith and good consci∣ence, I take my leaue. Cambridge, Iune 28. 1597. Your W. in the Lord, VVilliam Perkins.
Wherefore to conclude this Epistle, if there be no waightier cause then this by you here produced, vvhy you and your adherent, doe not reconcile your selues vnto the Church of Rome you may shortly by Gods grace) become nevv men, for vve are so farre off, from making our Sauiour Christ a Pseudochst, or from dravving one iote of excel∣lencie from his soueragne povver, merits, or dignitie: that vve in the very points by you put downe, doe much more magnifie him then you doe, For in maintaining the authority by him imparted vnto his depu∣ties, our spirituall Magistrates, and of their merits and satisfaction: We first say, that these his seruants prer be his hee gifts, of  grace bestovved on vvhom he pleaseth; vvhich is no finall praise of his great liberality: And vvithall affirme, that there is an infinite difference betvveene his ovne povver, merits, and satisfaction, and ours: Where∣in  his soueraigne honour is preserued entire to himselfe, vvithout any comparison. Novv you make Christs authoritie so base, his merits and satisfaction so meane, that if he part any degree of them vnto his ser∣uants, he looseth the honour of all from himselfe. Whereupon it follow eth inuinciblie, if you vnfeignedly seeke Christ Iesus his true honour, and vvill esteeme of his diuine giftes vvorthelie, you must hold out no longer, but vnte your selfe in these necessarie heades of Religion vnto the Catholike Church of Rome, which so highly exalted him, both in his owne excellencie, and in his singular giftes to his subiects. The least of these is cause sufficient to withhold vs from ioyning with the Church of Rome, at least in that point. The Kings authoritie is not abased, because  he cannot communicate any of his royalties to his subiects: That Christ must needes lose by it, I shewed before; for it argues an insufficiencie in his satisfaction. THE AVTHOR TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. BY a Reformed Catholike, I vnderstand any one that holds the same necessarie heades of reli∣gion with the Roman Church: yet so, as he pares off and reiects all errours in doctrine whereby the said religion is corrupted. How this may be done, I haue
begun to make some little declaration in this small Trea∣tise: the intent whereof is to shew how neere we may come to the present church of Rome in sundrie points of religion: and wherein we must for euer dissent. My purpose in penning this small discourse is threefold. The first is, to confute all such Politikes as hold and main∣taine, that our religion, & that of the Roman Church dif∣fer not in substance, and consequently that they may be re∣conciled: yet my meaning is not here to condemne any Pa∣cification that tends to perswade the Roman Church to our religion. The second is, that the Papists which thinke so basely of our religion, may be won to a better liking of it: when they shall see how neere we come vnto them in sundrie points. The third, that the common Protestant might in some part see & conceiue the point of difference betweene vs and the Church of Rome: and know in what manner and how farre forth, we condemne the opinions of the said Church. I craue pardon for the order which I vse, in handling the seuer all points. For I haue set them downe one by one, as they came to minde, not respecting the lawes of Method. If any Papist shall say that I haue not alleadged their opini∣ons aright, I answere, that their bookes be at hand, and I can iustifie what I haue said. Thus crauing thine acceptation for this my paines, and wishing vnto thee the increase of knowledge, and loue of pure and sound religion, I take my leaue and make an ende. AN ANSWERE TO THE Preface. VPON your preface to the Reader I will not stand, because it tou∣cheth no point of controuersie: let it be declared in your next, what
you meane, when you desire your reformed Catholike to hold the same ne∣cessarie I haue shevved you. heades of Religion with the Romane Church: for if the Romane. Church doth erre in the matter of faith, and iustification; in the num∣ber and vertue of the Sacraments; in the bookes and interpretation of the word of God; if she raze the foundation and make Christ a Pseu∣dochrist, and an Idoll; to omitte twenty other erors in substantial points of faith, as in this your small discourse you would perswade: there will remaine verie few necessarie heades of Religion for them to agree in. And be you well assured, that you are so wide from winning Catholikes by this your worke, to a better liking of your Religion: that you haue ta∣ken the high way, to lead them to a farre greater dislike of it; by teach∣ing, that in so many materiall points it differeth so farre from theirs. For all Catholikes hold for most assured, that which the most auncient, lear∣ned and holie Doctor Athanasius in his creede deliuereth in the 2. vers. The name Ca∣tholike, makes not your Reli∣gion Catholike. VVhich Catholike faith vnlesse euery man obserue wholy and inuiolably, (not omitting, or shrinking from any one article of it) vvithout doubt he shall perish euerlastingly. If S. Basil that reuerent and blessed Father of the Church, doth hold it the dutie of euerie good Christian, rather to loose his life, then to condescend to the alteration of any one syllable in matter of faith: you may be sure that we Catholikes cannot but carrie a Theod. 4. hist. cap. 17. verie base conceipt of your doctrine: who goe about vnder the ouer∣worne and thredbare cloake of reformation, to deface and corrupt the purer and greater part of Christian Religion: especially when they shall perceiue the most points of your pretended reformation, to be nothing else but olde rotten condemned heresies, new scoured vp and furbushed, and so in shew made more saleable vnto the vnskilfull, as in this treatise shall be proued in euery Chapter. TO THE REFORMATION OF THE PREFACE. THere are many necessarie heads of saluation, wherein we and you agree. 1. The Trinitie: 2. Redemption by Christ against all Iewes and Heathen: 3. The Godhead of Christ against Arius: 4. The vnitie of his person against Nestorius: 5. The truth of his Manhood (though by con∣sequence you ouerthrow it) against Eutyches: 6. The God∣head of the holy Ghost against Macedonius: and many o∣ther. Which I alleage not, to make any Papist beleeue, that the differences betwixt vs and you are few, or small: but to
shew, that Master Perkins speakes not against reason. We are perswaded, that no man may shrinke from the truth of that which is deliuered in Athanasius Creede; though we dare not peremptorily condemne euery man, that hath not a distinct knowledge and beleefe of euery one of the seue∣rall articles. We are wholy of I asils iudgement, that euery Thet. es. lib.  cap 17. Qu in sa∣s  e ducati, ne vnā quidem ylla∣bam diuino∣ dogma∣ prodi unt. one ought rather to lose his life, than to suffer any one syl∣lable of Gods truth in the Scripture to be betrayed; and therefore wee forbeare to ioyne with the Church of Anti∣christ, which preferres a corrupt translation, before the text it selfe. REVEL. 18. 3. And I heard another voyce from heauen say, Goe out of her my people, that ye be not pertakers of her sinnes, and re∣ceiue not of her plagues. ANSWERE TO THE Prologue. THE learned know it to be a fault, to make that the entrie vnto our discourse, which may as properly fit him, that pleadeth against vs: xordium Commune. but to vse that for our proeme, which in true sence hath nothing for vs, nay rather beareth stronglie for our aduersarie, must needs argue great want of iudgement: Such is the sentence aboue cited out of S. John by M. Perkins: for it being trulie vnderstood, is so farre off from terrifying any one from the Catholike Romane Church, as it doth vehementlie exhort all to fire vnto it, by forsaking their wicked companie that are banded against it. TO THE REFORMATION OF THE PROLOGVE. IF it fall out, as I make no question but it will doe, that the place chosen by Master Perkins, be prooued to belong to
the Church of Rome; where is the fault then? IN the former chapter S. Iohn sets downe a des∣cription  . of the whore of Babylon, and that at large, as he saw her in a vision described vnto him. In the sixteenth verse of the same chapter, he foretels her destruction: and in the three first verses of this 18. chapter, he goeth on to propound the sayd de∣struction, yet more directly and plainely, withall al∣leadging arguments to prooue the same, in all the verses following. Now in this fourth verse is set downe a caueat seruing to forewarne all the people of God, that they may escape the iudgement shall befall the whore: and the wordes containe two parts: a commaundement, and a reason. The com∣maundement: Come out of her my people, that is, from Babylon. The reason taken from the euent, least ye be partakers, &c. Touching the commaunde∣ment, first I will search the right meaning of it, and then set down the vse thereof and doctrine flowing thence. In historie therefore are three Babylons mentioned: one is, Babylon of Assyria standing on the riuer Euphrates, where was the confusion of Languages, and where the Iewes were in captinitie: which Babylon is in Scripture reproched for Idola∣trie and other iniquities. The second Babilon is in Egypt, standing on the riuer Nilus, and is now called Cayr; of that mention is made, 1. Pet. 5. v. 13. (as some thinke) though indeede it is as likely and more com∣monly thought, that there is meant Babylon of Assy∣ria. The third Babylon is mystical, whereof Babylon of Assyria was a tipe and figure; and that is Rome, which is without question here to be vnderstood.
And the whore of Babylon, as by all circumstances may be gathered, is the state or regiment of a people that are the inhabitants of Rome, and appertaine thereto. This may be prooued by the interpretati∣on of the holy Ghost: for in the last verse of the 17. chapter, the woman, that is, the whore of Babylon, is said to be a citie which raigneth ouer the kings of the B. earth: now in the daies when S. Iohn penned this booke of Reuelation, there was no citie in the world that ruled ouer the kings of the earth but Rome; it then being the seate where the Emperour put in e∣xecution his Imperiall authoritie. Againe in the seuenth verse shee is said to sit on a beast hauing seuen C. heads and tenne hornes, which seuen heads bee seuen hils, vers. 9. whereon the woman sitteth, and also they bee seuen kings. Therefore by the whore of Babylon is meant a citie standing on seuen hills. Now it is wel known, not onely to learned men in the Church of God, but euen to the heathen themselues, that Rome alone is the citie built on seuen distinct hills, called Caelius, Auentinus, Exquilinus, Tarpeius or Capito∣linus, Viminalis, Palatinus, Quirinalis. Papists to helpe themselues, doe alleadge that old Rome stood on seuen hills, but now is remooued further to the plaine of Campus Martins. I answer, that howsoeuer the greatest part of the citie in regard of habitation bee not now on seuen hils, yet in regard of regiment and practise of religion it is: for euen to this day vp∣on these hilles are seated certaine Churches and Monasteries and other like places where the Papall Authoritie is put in execution: and thus Rome being put for a state and regiment, euen at this day,
it stands vpon 7. hils. And though it be come to passe that the harlot in regard of her latter dayes euē chan∣ged her seate, yet in respect of her younger times in which she was bred and borne, she sate vpon the 7. hills. Others, because they feare the wounding of their own heads, labour to frame these words to ano∣ther meaning, & say, that by the whore, is meant the company of all wicked men in the world whersoe∣uer, the diuell being the head thereof. But this expo∣sition is flat against the text: for she is opposed to the Chap. 18. . kings of the earth with whom she is said to commit fornication: and in the last verse she is called a citie standing on seuen hils, and raigning ouer the Kings of the earth (as I haue said) and therefore must needs be a state of men in some particular place. For by the purple Harlot in that place is signified (as shall be proued presentlie,) the Romane Empire, as then it was, the slaue of Idols, and with most bloodie slaughter persecuting Christs Saints: Those of the Church of Rome being as nearest vnto it, so most subiect to that sacrile∣gious boucherie. Wherefore that voice which S. Iohn heard say, Goe out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sinnes, &c. can haue none other meaning; then that all they who desire to be Gods people, must separate themselues in faith and manners from them, who hate and per∣secute the Romane Church, as did then, the Heathen Emperours, and now doe all Heretikes: Vnlesse they will be partakers of their sinnes, and consequentlie of their plagues. This shall yet appeare more plaine∣lie in Your friendly offer is suspi∣cious. . Sphoc. in Aia sla∣gel. the examination of this Chapter. Where I will deale friendly with my aduersarie, and aduantage him all tha I can; that all being giuen him, which is any way probable; it may appeare more euidentlie, how little he hath to any purpose out of this place of the Apocalypse, whereof all Protestants vaunt and bragge so much both in their bookes and pul∣pits. Well then I will admitte that in the 17. and 18. Chapters of the Re∣uel by the whoore of Babylon, is vnderstood the Romane state and re∣giment: which in lawfull disputations, they are not able to proue: the most iudicious Doctor S. Augustine, and diuerse others of the auncient Popish you meane. Fathers, with the learned troupe of later Interpreters, expounding it of the whole corps and societie of the wicked: And as for the 7. hlls on the which they lay their foundation, they are not to be taken literallie: The Angell of God in the verie text it selfe interpreting the 7. heads of
the beast, to be aswell 7. Kings, as 7. hilles: But this notwithstanding to helpe you forvvaid, I vvill graunt it you, because some good vvriters haue so taken it. And therefore omitte as imperrinent that vvhich you say in proofe of it. What can you inferre hereupon? Many that the Ro∣mane Church is that vvhoore of Babylon: fayre and soft good Sir, hovv proue you that? thus. The vvhoore of Babylon is a state of the Romane regment, ergo the Romane Church is the vvhoore of Babylon. What some of arguing call you me this? By the like sophistication, you may proue that Roms and Rs vvere the purple Harlot, vvhich to affinne . vvere ridiculous, or vvhich is impious) that the most Christian Empe, . , and codosius, vvere the vvhore of Babilon, be∣cause thes. held also the state of the Romane Empire and regiment, to make short the seeble force of this reason lyeth in this: that they vvho hoeth the state, and gouerne in the same Kingdome, must needs be of like affection in Religion; vvhich if it vvere necessarie, then did Queene Mary of blessed memorie, and her sister Ezabeth    same nundes tovvards the true Catholike ath, because they  in the same chane of estate, and ruled in the same King∣dome. See I pray you vvhat a shamefull cau this is, to rase such  . A simple Logician vvould blush to argue in the par∣s so loose and yet they that take vpon them to controule the learnedst in the vvorld, often fall into such open tallacies. We desire no fauour of you, but that you would acknow∣ledge the truth, when you cannot reasonably gainsay it. What we can prooue you shall see by and by; in the meane while, your reason is naught. For what though S. Austin, and diuers other ancient writers, with the learned troupe of your Popish interpreters doe so expound it; doth it follow thereupon, that in lawfull disputation the contrarie cannot be proued? Could not they erre? May not some other man see that, which they perceiued not? But what if wee shall match you in number and antiquitie of writers for our ex∣position? First Hieron an  Hierome, as you acknowledge afterward, makes for vs, and not for you: so by your confession doth Tertul. con∣tra ludo pag 131. & contra Mar∣ion. lib 3. pag. 204. Tertullian: but what name I seuerall men? The Aetas in A∣poc cap. 17. Greeke Scholiast tels vs, that diuers Interpreters by the harlot vnder∣stood old Rome; and he that so thinks, in his iudgement erres not, though (saith he) it may be vnderstood of new Rome, or the time of Antichrists comming. Yea August de ci∣ lib 18. cap. 2. 2. 27.  lib.  c. 17. Austin himselfe grants, that Rome, in Greeke and Latin writers, is as it were a second Babylon, and he calles it Babylon of the West. More then that,
your Baptista Regnault in  ber, &. Rbea in epistola ad lector. owne writers deny those Ho milies on the Apocalyps to be Autins, and think them rather to be written by Ty conius the Donatist, which Ribera the Iesuite saies Certis argu∣mentis depre∣hendi, eas Ty∣conij esse, non Augustini. he hath found, by certaine arguments and euident reasons. Besides, Babtist. Regnaul. vbi supra. Baptista Regnald affirmes, that the Commentaies of diners of the ancients, Bede, Ambrose, Ausert, Anselme, Prunasius and Austin are mysticall and allegoricall, not historicall; so that wee are not to rest vpon any of them, for the true and proper meaning of the text. It shewes more discretion than plaine dealing, to omit that which you cannot answere; Master Perkins reasons are euident and strong. See Doctor Dovvnam of Antichrist, lib. 1. cap. 2. ss 3. & Master Povvel de Antichristo lib. 1. cap. 11. ss 22. 23. The citie that in S. Iohns daies raigned ouer the Kings of the earth, is the whore of Babylon, Apoc. 17. 18. But Rome that is (Ciuitas, the state of Rome. ciuitas) the state of Rome, and Rome onely, is that citie that raigned ouer the Kings of the earth in S. Iohns daies. Therefore Rome, and Rome onely is the whore of Babylon. 2 The citie that in S. Iohns daies was seated on seuen hilles, is the seate of the whore of Babylon. Apoc. 17. 9. But Rome, that is (Vibs, the tovvn of Rome. vrbs) the towne of Rome (is that on∣ly) is the citie, that in S. Iohns daies was seated on seuen hilles. Therefore Rome (and Rome onely) is the seate of the whore of Babylon. To the proposition of the latter reason you answere, that See Doctor Fulk against Rhem. Testam. Reuel. 17. 9. and Dovvn. of Antc lib. 1. . 2 ss 4. and Rem. Test. Re∣uel. 17. 9. the seuen hilles are not to be taken literally: because the Angell makes the seuen heads aswell seuen Kings, as seuen hilles. But surely that rather makes against you: for as the seuen Kings are literally to be vnderstood, so are the seuen hilles, both being signified by the seuen heads; not that the seuen hils are seuen Kings. For the woman, or Citie, doth not sit vpon the Kings, but rather the Kings vpon her. Besides, it were a strange interpretation, to expound heads by hilles, and hils by Kings; whereas heads doe more resemble Kings, than hilles doe.
And the Papists themselues perceiuing that this shift will not serue their turne, make two Romes, heathenish Rome, and that whereof the Pope is head: now (say they) the whore spoken of, is hea∣thenish Rome, which was ruled by cruell tyrants, as Nero, Domitian, and the rest: and that Rome wher∣of now the Pope is head, is not here meant. Behold a vaine and foolish distinction: for Ecclesiasticall Rome in respect of state, princely dominion, and cruelty in persecuting the Saints of God, is all one with the heathenish Empire: the See of the Bishop being turned into the Emperours court, as all histo∣ries doe manifest. Well, then admitting the purpel harlot to signifie the Roman state, wee doe say that the state of Rome must bee taken as it was then, when these words were spoken of it; that is, Pagan, Idolatrous, and a hot per∣secutor of Christians. Such it had beene a little before vnder that bloo∣die Tyrant Nero, and then was vnder Domitian: which we confirme by the authoritie of them, who expound this passage of the Roman state. The commentary on the Apocalyps, vnder Saint Ambrose name sayth the great where sometime doth signifie Rome, specially vvhich at that time vvhen the Apostle vvrote this, did persecute the Church of God: but other∣vvise, In cap. 178. Jt should be in cap. 17. Libr. 2. contra Iouinian. doth signifie the whole Citie of the Diuell. And Saint Ierome who ap∣plieth the place to Rome affirmeth, that she had before his dayes blotted out that blasphemie vvritten in her forhead, because then the state was Christian, which before had beene Heathen: so that vnto the partie Pagan, and not vnto the Church of God, he ascribeth these works of the wicked Harlot: which also the very text it selfe doth conuince: for it hath That she vvas drunke vvith the blood of the Martrs of Iesus. Now Vers. 6. the Church of Rome hath not then by the confession of all men drawne any blood of Christs Saints, but in testimonie of his trueth, had powred out abundance of her best blood. Wherefore it is most manifest, that the harlot could not signifie the Church of Rome, so pure and free from slaughter: but the Romane Empire, vvhich vvas then full gorged, vvith that most innocent and holy blood. Againe that vvhoore is ex∣pounded, B. To be a Citie vvhich had kingdome, ouer the Kings of the earth. But the Church of Rome, had then no kingdome ouer the earth, or Vers. 18. any temporall dominion at all; but the Romane Emperours had such soueraigne commaundement ouer many Kings▪ vvherefore it must
be vnderstood of them, and not of the Church. Novv to take King∣dome not properly for temporall soueraignty, but for spirituall Iis∣diction, as some shifters doe; is to she vvithout any vvarrant, from the natiue signification of the vvord, vnto phantasticall, and volun∣tarie imagination. And vvhereas M. Perkins saith, that Ecclesiasticall Rome in respect of state, princely dominion, and cruelty against the Saints, is Pag. 5. Spoke of Rome then, as it is now. all one vvith the heathsh Empire; he both seeketh to deceiue, and is greatly deceiued: he vvould deceiue, in that he doth applie vvords spoken of Rome, aboue 1500. yeares agoe, vnto Rome as it is at this day: and yet if that were granted him, he erreth foe in euery one of his particulars. For first, touching prince dominion, the Romane Empire held then, all Italy, all Fraunce, all Spayne, all England, a great part of Germanie, of Asia, and also of Afrike: hauing their Proconsulles, and The Popes Le∣gates haue by one meanes or other equal∣led the Procon∣suls authoritie, and the reue∣nues of the Ro∣mane state. Indeede the church of Rome is no persecu∣ter of heretikes but of true Christians. other principall Officers in all those Countries, drawing an hundred thousand millions in mony, and many other commodities out of them: Wherefore in princely dominion, and magnificall state, it surmounted Ecclesiasticall Rome (which hath not temporall dominion ouer the one halfe of that one kingdome of Italy) more then an hundred degrees. And as for persecution, the Empire slew, and caused to be slaine, more Saints of God in one yeare; then the Church of Rome hath done, of reprobates and obstinate heretikes, in 1600. yeares. Hauing thus proued, that the whoore of Babilon, signifieth the hea∣then state of Rome, and not the Ecclesiasticall: let vs now heare what you say against it. Marry that the distinction of the Empire of Rome, and Church of Rome is foolish, and coyned of late to serue our turne▪ which to be farre otherwise, I proue out of those verie Authors, who doe interpret that harlot to signifie Rome; who are neither foolish, nor of late daies: you haue heard it before out of S. Ambrose commentaries. And farther, we gather it out of S. Hierome, in the Epistle which you Before it was vnder his name; haue you learned since, that it was his in deede? VVhat if there be? cite: for he hauing resembled Rome vnto Babilon, for the multitude of the wicked, which yet remained in it: pointeth out a more pure part, saying; There is in deede the holy Church, there are the triumphant monu∣ments of the Apostles and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ, there is the faith praised by the Apostle, &c. Be not there expressed two distinct parts of Rome? Againe, Tertullian who liued in the second hundred yeare, vnder those persecuting Emperours, saith in one place, that Babilon is a figure of Rome, in respect of her proud Empire and perse∣cution of the Saints. And in an other, that Rome was most happie for her ho∣ly Lib. cont. Iud. De prascpt cap. 16. Church, vnto vvhich the Apostles vvith their blood had poured forth their vvhole doctrine: see a plaine distinction betweene the Heathen Empire and the holie Church of Rome. Which finallie may be gathe∣red out of the expresse word of God. VVhere the Church in Babilon coe∣lect, is distinguished from the rest of that citie, which was Pagan. You say 1. Pet. 5. (but without any authour) that Babilon there doth not signifie Rome, but either a citie in Aegypt, or Assyria: But Eusebins lib. 2. hist. c. 14. and
S. Jerom. de Eccles. script. vers. Marcus, with other Authors more wor∣thie He saith no more but that vvhich is as likely, and more common∣ly Thought. Eusebius onely recites it out of Papias. of credit, doe expound it of Rome. And you your selues take Babi∣lon so. Rome, where you thinke that any hold may be taken against it, as in the 17. of the Reuel. but in S. Peters Epistle they will none of it, because it would proue too plainely, that S. Peter had been at Rome. Master Perkins hauing prooued that by Babylon Rome is signified, proceedes to answere two obiections: First, See Fulke Rhem. Testam. Reuel. 17. and Dovvnam of Antichrist. lib. 1. cap. 2. § 2. that the citie of Rome stands not now vpon seuen hils. But it did in S. Iohns daies, as his reason lies; and at this day popish Churches, or Monasteries, are situated vpon them, vnder the Popes authoritie. Secondly, that by the whore the companie of the wicked vnder their head the diuell is vnderstood. Reuel. 18. 2. & 17. 18. But this the text will not beare; the whore being opposed to the Kings of the earth, and ruling ouer them: vpon this foundation Master Perkins thus builds his reason. Either Rome Heathenish, or Rome Christian, is the whore of Babylon: But Rome Heathenish is not: Therefore Rome Chri∣stian is. This is plainly his reason, and not that which you ga∣ther. The proposition is euident, because the state of Rome was neuer but either Heathenish, or Christian. The assump∣tion Master Perkins proues. But I must be faine to leaue his course, and to follow this reformers steps. The state of Rome must be taken, as it is the See Fulke, Dovvnam, Ab∣bot, Povvel. seate of Antichrist: but it was not the seate of Antichrist in S. Iohns daies; for Antichrist, Bellarm. de Romano pon if. lib. 3. cap. 2 according to your doctrine, is not yet come. Againe, it was no mysterie, for heathenish Rome to be an Idolatrous and bloody persecutor of the Chri∣stians. Thirdly, the state that S. Iohn calles the harlot, con∣tinues till the finall destruction spoken of by him, and S. Paul: but the estate of heathenish Rome was decayed long since. Your proofe is insufficient, for you alleage but two of many, that make Rome Babylon: who, as they de∣serue commendation for discerning so much of the truth, so may they bee excused, if seeing Rome in their time a Christian famous Church, they did not take it to be the seate of Antichrist. But Hierome seemes rather to make against
you, because euen then he calles it Babylon, in respect of Antichrist to come. Your second and third reasons are of no more force. For S. Iohn, as I haue shewed, spake not of Rome as it was then, but as it was to be afterward, and now hath been almost one thousand yeeres euen in temporall authoritie, to which one of the Popes swords belongs. Master Perkins rightly applies to Rome the words, that fifteene hundred yeeres since were spoken of her, as she is now: the Popes Legates were nothing inferiour, either for authoritie, or exactions, to the Romane Proconsuls. But, as it was foretold in a myste∣rie, vnder a colour of spirituall gouernment, ouerruling both in Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill matters: he that remembers the bloodie massacre of so many thousands, in a few daies, not many yeeres agoe in France, shall see that the Church of Rome shed blood enough, at that one time, to make her drunke as long as she shal continue: & yet what a small part was it, of that, which from time to time she hath bezeled in? This section is nothing to purpose. For who denies, that there were as well Christians as Heathen in Rome, in the Emperours daies? The distinction, Master Perkins denies, is, that S. Iohn speakes of Rome, as it was vnder the Emperours, and not of it, as it hath been, and is vnder the Popes; which the authors, you alleage, meddle not with. S. Iohn writ a prophecie, and therefore might well vse al∣legories: besides, he describes his Babylon so plaine, that Rhem. Test. Reuel. 17. Bellarm. de pon. Roma. lib. 3. cap. 5. 13. your selues are forced to confesse, he meanes Rome by it. S. Peter deales as an Apostle, not as a Prophet; and no where giues any inckling, that by Babylon Rome should be meant. Eusebius sets it not downe as his owne opinion, but only re∣cites it out of Papias; from whom also it is apparant that Hrome had it, and in whom (Euseb. hist. lib. 3. cap. 36.  Eusebius saith) there were many fabulous matters. But let the distinction be as they suppose, yet by their leaues, hereby the whore must be vnderstood not onely heathenish Rome, but euen the Papal or
Ecclesiasticall Rome: for the holy Ghost saith plain∣ly Chap. 17. 3. that she hath made all nations drunke with the wine of the wrath of her fornication: yea it is added that she hath committed fornication with the Kings of the earth, wher∣by is signified that she hath indeauoured to intangle all the nations of the earth in her spirituall idolatrie, and to bring the Kings of the earth to her religion. Which thing cannot be vnderstood of the heathe∣nish Rome, for that left all the Kings of the earth to their owne religion and idolatrie: neither did they labour to bring forraine Kings to worshippe their Gods. Againe it is said, that the ten hornes, which be ten Chap. 18. 16. Kings shall hate the whre, and make her deslate and na∣ked, which must not be vnderstood of heathenish Rome, but of Popish Rome: for whereas in former times all the Kings of the earth did submitte them∣selues to the whore, now they haue begun to with∣draw themselues, and make her desolate; as the King of Bohemia, Denmarke, Germanie, England, Scot∣land, and other parts: therefore this distinction is al∣so friuolous. They further alledge that the whore of Babylon is drunke with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, shed not in Rome, but in Ierusalem, where the Lord was crucified: and the two Prophets Chap. 17. 6. being slaine lie there in the streets. But this place is not Reuel. 11. 18. Epist 17. E & P ad Marcell. meant of Hierusalem, as Hierome hath fully taught, but it may well be vnderstood of Rome: Christ was crucified there, either because the authority, where∣by he was crucified was from the Romane Empire, or else because Christ in his members was and is there daily crucified, though locally in his owne person he was crucified at Ierusalem. And thus, not∣withstanding
all which hath bin said, wee must here by the whore vnderstand the state of the Empire of Rome, not so much vnder the heathen Emperors, as vnder the head thereof the Pope. Well, M. Perkins is content in fine, to allowe of that distinction, of Heathenish and Ecclesiasticall Rome, which before he esteemed o foolish: And then will prooue that not the Heathenish, but Ecclesistca  is resembled to the purpell Harlot. See what confidence this man hath Shew vs whee if you can. Cap. 18. 3. in his owne shutle wit, that now will prooue this, and shortly after dis∣proue it: but let vs giue him the hearing. The holy Ghost sayth plaine∣ly, that she hath made all the vvorld drunke vth the vvine of the vvath of her fornication, and yet addeth: that she hath committed fornication vvith the Kings of the earth: But this cannot be vnderstood of heathenish Rome, for that left all the Kingdomes of the earth vnto their owne Reli∣gion and Idolatry: and did not labour to bring them, to worship the Ro∣man Gods. Ergo, it must be vnderstood of Papall Rme. I answere. The Roman Empire being the head and principall promoter of all kinde of Idolatrie, and maintaining, and aduancing them, that most vehemently opposed themselues against the Christian Religion; who with any shew of reason can denie, but they chiefly cōmitted spirituall fornication with the Kings of the earth, if not by persvvading them to forsake their false Gods, vvhich the Pagan Romans vvorship asvvell as they; yet by en∣couraging and commanding them to perseuere in that filthie Idolatrie, and to resist, and oppresse the Christians vvheresoeuer? Neither is that true that the Roman Emperours did not labour to bring other Nations to vvorship nevv Gods, vvhen Nero and Domitian would be worshipped Apol. ad An∣tonin. Euseb. lib. 4. hist cap. 8. It is applied to the Romane Church, vvch novv is a strumpet. Cap. 17. . 1. as Gods, and for feare of Adrian, one Antinous his seruant, was wor∣shipped as a God of all men: as Iustinus Martyr testifieth. These words of the text then, agree very well with the Emperours, who both were I∣dolaters, and the chiefe Patrons of Idolatry: but can in no sort be ap∣plied to the Romane Church, which was thn (as the Protestants can∣not deny) a pure Virgin, and most free from all spirituall fornication. But that it is now become Idolatrous, M. Perkins doth proue by his se∣cond reason, gathered also (I warrant you, right learnedly) out of the text it selfe, where it is said, that the ten Hornes, which signifie ten Kings, shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked: which (as he saith) must be vnderstood of Popish Rome: For whereas in former times, all the Kings of the earth did submitte themselues, to the whore: now they haue begunne to withdraw themselues, and to make her desolate: as the Kings of Bohemia, Denmarke, Germanie, England, Scotland, and other parts. In these his words is committed a most foule fault, by grosse ouer∣sight and ignorance in the very text. What, be England, Scotland, Den∣marke, (as for Bohemia ruled by a Catholike Emperour it must be omit∣ted, as also many states of Germanie,) be these Kingdomes your prin∣cipall
pillers of the new Gospell, comprehended within the number of the ten, mentioned there in S. Iohn, which hate the harlot? Yes marie. Why then they are enemies of Christ, and Satans souldiers; for in the 13. verse it is said of these, that they shall deliuer their power vnto the beast, (which signifieth either the Diuell or Antichrist,) and shall sight Such they were vvhen they gaue their po∣vver to the beast. with the Lambe, and the Lambe shall ouercome them, because he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Is not this doating in an high degree, to in∣fame so notoriouslie them, of whom he would speake most honour? and to make the special Patrons of their new Gospel, the Diuels Captaines, and fiercely to wage battaile against Christ Iesus? See, how heate of wrangling blindeth mens iudgements. But you proceed and say that we further hold, that the blood of the Saints and Martyrs, was not shed in Rome, but in Ierusalem. Here is a confusion of Men, and matters; for Pag. 7. we say that the blood of many Saints, reheaised in the Apoc. was shed in Rome, by the tyrannicall Emperours, but the martyring of those tvvo Cap. 17. principall witnesses, Enoch and Elias, (recorded in the cleauenth of the same) shall be at Ierusalem, aswell, because the text is very plainc for it; specifying that their bodies shall lie in the streetes of that great Ci∣tie, Vers. 8. where their Lord was crucified; as for that the ordinarie interpre∣ters of that place doe so take it. But M Perkins holdeth that the place where Christ was crucified, signifieth here not Ierusalem, but Rome; be∣cause Christ was crucified there in his members: so it might aswell sig∣nifie any other place of persecution as Rome. The reason therefore be∣ing naught worth, befort fiath it with the name of S. Ierome, but citeth in the margent a letter of two vertuous Matrons, Paula and Eustochium. Good Sir, if S. reme had meant that that Epistle should haue had his Epist. 17. Epist. 17. This Epistle is brought by your selfe for Je∣roe▪ ovvne in the treatise of Images. authoritie, he would haue set it out in his owne name, vvhich seeing he thought not expedient, set the authoritie of it aside, and vige his rea∣sons, i you thinke it vvorth your labour, and you shall be ansvvered. In the meane season, (I hope) all sober Christians, vvill take the place vvhere our Sauiour Christ vvas nailed on the Crosse, to signifie rather Ierusalem, then Rome. And consequently, all that you haue alleadged out of Scripture, to proue the vvhore of Babylon to figure the Ecclesi∣asticall state of Rome, not to be vvorth a rush. To make the world drunke with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, is not to inforce men by file and sword, as the Roman Emperors did: but to allure them by poysoned doctrine, and counterfeite holines; which course hath been almost proper to the Church of Rome. The like signification hath the other speech of committing fornication with the Kings of the earth; which argueth a delight, whereby they were drawne, not a violence of inforcement: yea the ido∣latrie the Apostle speakes of, is not the grosse worshipping
of salse gods by profest idolatrie, but, in a mysterie, the false worshipping of the true God. Against his reason you except not, but charge him with doting in a high degree, for making the Kings of England, Scotland &c. Satans souldiers. And such in deed they were, Reuel. 17. 1 when they gaue their power to the beast, and as long as they continued the Popes seruants, but the Apostle shewes, that Reuel. 17. 1. at the last, after their drunkennes and fornication, the Lord hauing discouered their shame vnto them; they should hate the whore &c. which they haue happily done; yea e∣uen Bohemia, though a Popish Emperour, for this present gouerns it, and shall in Gods good time wholy consume her flesh with fire. It is neither diuinity, nor reason to imagine, that Henoch, and Eltas, hauing been taken from the earth by God, to their reward; should come againe into the world, and be slaine by Antichrist. As vntrue is it, that, by that great city Reuel. 14. 8. & 16. 19. & 18. 10. 16. 18 19 21 Ierusalem is meant, for that terme is neuer giuen to it, in all the Reuelation, but to Rome ordinarily, especially Reuel. chap. 17. & 18. chapters 17. 18. yea our Sauiour himselfe was not cru∣cified Leuit. 4. 24. Heb. 13. 11. 12. in Ierusalem, but without it. In the great city, that is in the Romane Empire, he was indeed crucified: yet is he also daily crucified in his members, by the instigation and appointment of the Pope of Rome, by whom all the later persecutions of true Christians haue been raised in seuerall countries; howsoeuer the secular power hath been the in∣strument of his crueltie. M. Perkins brings not onely Hieroms name, but his iudg∣ment, that Epistle being of Erasmus in Carol. oper. eronyn. Ludo ∣ues ad Aug e ciuit. de, . 18 cap 22. Rhem Re∣uel. 17. 5.  his writing, in the name of those two Matrons: yet we stand nor vpon his authoritie, though we might well inough against you, and your ordi∣narie interpreters without name: but vpon the reasons be∣fore deliuered, which proue that the great city is not Ierusa∣lem, but Rome. Which exposition, besides the authoritie of the text, hath the sauour and defence of auncient and
learned men. Bernard saith, They are the ministers of Serm. in Cant. 33. Epist. 1. 25. Christ, but they serue Antichrist. Againe, The beast spoken of in the Apocalyps, to which a mouth is giuen to speake blasphemies, and to make warre with the Saints of God, is now gotten into Peters chaire, as a lyon prepared to his pray. It will be said, that Bernard spake these latter wordes of one that came to the Popedome by intru∣sion or vsurpation. It is true indeed: but wherefore was he an vsurper? He rendreth a reason thereof in the same place: because the Antipope called Inno∣centius was chosen by the kings of Almaine, France, England, Scotland, Spaine, Hierusalem, with con∣sent of the whole Clergie and people in these nati∣ons, and the other was not. And thus Bernard hath giuen his verdict, that not only this vsurper, but all the Popes, for this many yeeres, are the beast in the Apocalyps: because now they are onely chosen by the colledge of Cardinals. To this agreeth the de∣cree of Pope Nicholas the second, ann. 1059. that the C. In nomine, dist. 23. Pope shall afterward be created by the suffrages of the Cardinall Bishops of Rome, with the consent of the rest of the Clergie and people, and the Emperor himselfe: and all Popes are excommunicate and accur∣sed Referente Iuello. 2. Thes. 2. as Antichrists, that enter otherwise, as all now doe. Ioachimus Abbas saith, Antichrist was long since borne in Rome, and shall be yet aduanced higher in the Aposto∣like See. Petrarch saith, Once Rome, now Babylon. And Ireneus booke 5. chap. last, said before all these, that Antichrist should be Lateinus, a Romane. Novv let vs come to the auncient and learned men, vvhom you cite in fauour of your exposition. The first is S. Bernard, vvho saith, that they are the ministers of Christ, but they serue Antichrist. Of vvhom speaketh that good religious Father? forsooth of some officers of the court of Rome. Good, vvho vvere (as he saith) the ministers of Christ, because
they vvere lavvfully called by the Pope to their places, but serued Anti∣christ; for that they behaued themselues corruptly in their callings. And so this maketh more against you, then for you, approouing the lavv∣full officers of Rome, to be Christs Ministers. The second plae is al∣leadged out of him yet more impertinently, your selfe confessing pre∣sently, that those vvords vvere not spoken of the Pope, but of his enemy. The reason yet there set dovvne, pleaseth you exceedingly: vvhich you vouch so clearely that it seemeth to beare flat against you; for you in∣ferre that the Pope, and all others since that time be vsurpers, out of this reason of S. Bnard. Because forsooth, that the Antipope called Inno∣centius, vvas chosen by the King of Almaine, France, England, &c and their vvhole Clergie, and people. For if fnnocentius vvere an Antichrist and vsurper, because he vvas elected by so many Kings and people then belike he that had no such election, but is chosen by the Cardinals of Rome onely is true Pope. This, your vvords declare, but your meaning Or else you vn∣derstand them not. And answered if neede re∣quire. (as I take it) is quite contrary. But of this matter and manner of ele∣ction shall be treated hereafter, if need require; It sufficieth for this pre∣sent, that you finde no reliefe at all in S. Bernard, touching the maine point, that either the Pope, or Church of Rome, is Antichrist. And all the world might meruaile, if out of so sweet a Doctor, and so obedient vnto the Pope, any such poison might be sucked: specially weighing wel, what he hath written vnto one of them, to whom he speaketh thus. Goe to, let vs yet enquire more diligently, who thou art, and what person thou Lib. 2. de Cons. ad Eugen. bearest in the Church of God, during the time. VVho art thou? A great Priest, the highest Bishop: thou art the Prince of Bishops, the heire of the A∣postles, and in dignitie, Aaron, in authoritie, Moses, in povver, Peter, thou art he to vvhom the Keyes were deliuered, to vvhom the sheepe vvere committed: There are indeede also other Porters of Heauen, and Pastors of flockes; but thou art so much the more glorious, as thou hast inherited a more excellent name aboue them: they haue their flockes allotted to them, to each man one: but to thee all were committed, as one flocke, to one man: thou art not onely Pastor of the sheepe, but of all other Pastors, thou alone art the Pastor. And much more to this purpose, which being his cleere opini∣on Are there blind places in your saints artings? of the Pope, how absurd is it, out of certaine blind places and broken sentences of his to gather, that he thought the Pope of Rome to be nei∣ther sheepe, nor Pastor of Christs Church, but very Antichrist himselfe. There is a grosse fault, also in the Canon of Pope Nicolas as he citeth it, that the Pope was to be created by the Cardinals, Bishops of Rome. As though there were some 30. or 40. Bishops at once: but of the matter of election else where. M. Perkins hauing lightly skirmished with a broken sentence or two, out of one Catholike Authour flieth to a late hereke, called Ioachim, and quoteth Iewell for relator of it. A worshipfull testimony of one he∣retike, Or rather you the falsest slan∣derer. and that vpon the report of an other: and he the most lying Au∣thour of these daies. As for the late Poet Petrarke his words might easi∣lie
be answered, but because he quoteth no place, I will not stand to an∣swere it. But to close vp this first combat, a sentence is set downe out of the famous Martyr Ireneus, that Antichrist should be Lateinos, a Roman. Here be as many faults, as words. That learned auncient Doctor discour∣sing of Antichrist his proper name, out of these words of the Reuel, the number of the beast is 666. And obseruing the letters of the Greeke Al∣phabet, Cap. 13. (by which they doe number, as wee doe by ciphers) saith: that among others the word Lateinos, doth containe those letters, which a∣mount iust to the number of 666. and consequently that Antichrists pro∣per name perhaps might be Lateinos, but more likely it is to be Teitan, as he saith there, & lastly that it is most vncertaine what his name shall be. See the place (gentle reader) and learne to beware of such deceitefull merchants, as make no conscience, to corrupt the best Authours: and Whose is the Index Expur∣gatorios? He saith it is very likely. being often warned of it, will neuer learne to amend. Jreneus leaueth it most doubtfull what shall be Antichrists name: And among diuers words esteemeth Lateinos, to be the vnlikeliest. And yet M. Perkins reporteth him to say resolutely that his name shall be Lateinos: and then to make vp the matter turneth Lateinos, a proper name with S. Ireneus; into Ro∣mane, an appellatiue, which noteth onely his country. Fie vpon that cause, which cannot be vpholden and maintained, but by a number of such paltrie shirtes. Thus come we at length to the end of M. Perkins proofes, and reproofes in his prologue, where we finding litle fidelitie in his allegations of the Fathers, badde construction and foule ouersight in the text, of holy Scripture, briefely great malice, but slender force a∣gainst the Church of Rome, we are to returne the words of his theame to all good Christians. Goe out of her my people. Forsake the enemies of the Romane Church. And as our Ancestors did the Pagan Emperours, who drew out her most pure blood, so let vs file in matters of faith, and Religion, from all heretakes that of late also spared not to shedde abun∣dance of the same most innocent blood, vnlesse to your greater con∣demnation, you had leifer be partakers of her sinnes, and receiue of her plagues. Bernar. serm. in Cantic. 33. They were the Ministers of Christ by their profession, as the Pope calls himselfe the seruant of seruants, though both he is, in truth, Antichrist, and they his ministers. M. Perkins reason out of Bernard lyeth thus. He that gets into Peters chaire, without the consent of the Princes, Clergie and people of Christendome, is the beast spoken of in the Apocalypse. But all the Popes, from that schisme hitherto, haue so got∣ten into Peters chaire, viz. with consent of the Car∣dinals onely.
Therefore all the Popes since that schisme are the beast in the Apocalypse. The proposition is Bernards in effect, though notin words; for Indeede Ber∣nard makes them both A∣tichrists. he pronounces the Pope to be the Beast in the Reuela∣tion, because he was not chosen by consent of the Princes, Clergie, and people of Almaine, France, England, &c. And this Master Perkins sets downe very plaine, at these words; And thus Bernard, &c. How wide then are you from his meaning, who make the quite contrarie collection in his name? For if Innocentius (say you) were Antichrist, and an vsurper, because he was chosen by so many Kings, and people; then belike he that had no such election, but is chisen by the Car∣dinals of Rome onely, is true Pope. He concludes out of Ber∣nard, that he was Antichrist, because he was not chosen by the Kings, Clergie, and people, but onely by the Cardinals: you, that he was true Pope, because he was not chosen by the Kings, and but onely by the Cardinals. The reason out of Bernard you answere not, but shift off the matter with alleaging a sentence of his, in commenda∣tion of Pope Eugenius, which is so full of flatterie (that I say not impietie) that it can carrie no credit with any modest Christian. It should seeme you saw so much your selfe, and therefore craftily left out these absurd and vile speeches, viz. Bernard de consider, ad Eugenium li. 2. Prima Ab, gubernatione Noe, patriar∣chau Abra∣ham, ordine Melcc, iudicau Sa∣muel vnctio∣ne Christus. Thou art Abel in primacie, Noah in gouernment, in Patriarkship Abraham, in order Melchisedech, in authoritie of iudging Samuel, in vnction (that is either in annoynting, or in being annoynted) Christ. If this be not a blinde sentence on Bernards part, and a broken sentence on yours, there is nothing but may abide the light, be it neuer so false; and be accounted whole, be it neuer so mangled. It is rather grosse ignorance in you, to finde fault with that you vnderstand not. Master Perkins neither saith, nor meanes, that there were many Bishops of Rome at once, (and yet there haue been three Popes together) but, accor∣ding to the Dist. 23.  in nomine. Canon, cals the Cardinals Bishops of Rome; referring this word (of Rome) not to Bishops simply, but to Cardinall Bishops. Now all Cardinals were Cardinals of
Rome, or of the Romish Church. The Canon indeede puts not in those words of Rome; but the sense is nothing alte∣red by the adding of them. For the cleere vnderstanding of the matter, we are to know, that all Cardinals are either Car∣dinall Bishops, whom the Canon appoints Inprimis Cardinales E∣piscopi dili∣gensime si∣mul de electi∣one tractan∣tes. first to consult about electing of the Pope; or Cardinall Clerkes, that is of some inferiour order of the Clergie, the general name wher∣of is Clerke, whether it be Priesthood, Deaconship, &c: and these Mox clericos Christi Cardi∣nales adhibe∣ant; sicque re∣liquus clerus & populus ad consensum nouae electio∣nis accedant. must in the second place be called to the election. Now let men iudge whether Master Perkins, or you are in fault. This Canon is brought to prooue the former propo∣sition, that he is no lawfull Pope who is chosen only by the Cardinals, and not also by the consent of the rest of the Clergie and people. If you had been as carefull to auoide slandering, as that reuerend and learned writer was to take heede of vntruths, you would neuer haue raised such a suspition of him in this point. For the cleering of him, let his owne desence against Master Hardings reproches speake. For the present, Set out by the vvorthie and learned Sir Henry Sauile. Roger Houeden, Bal. de script. Anglic. cent. 3. cap. 55. who liued in that time, records the historie, and sets Houeden Annal. poster. in Richard. primo. downe Ioachims words to King Richard; That Anti∣christ was alreadie borne in the citie of Rome, and that he should be exalted into the Apostolike seate. But you except against Ioachim as an heretike; so doth not Bellarm. Append. de sumnio pontif. cap. 11. Bellarmine, but onely denies that he writ any such thing. It is true that Concil La∣teran sub In∣nocent. 3. the Coun∣cell of Lateran vnder Pope Innocent the third, condemned a certaine booke that Abbat Ioachim writ against Peter Lom∣bard Bishop of Paris, commonly called the Master of the Sentences, concerning the vnitie or essence of the Trinitie; but it did not reiect him as an heretike: yea the Councell specially addes, that they will not by their sentence any way de∣rogate from the Abbey of Florence, whereof he was the Institutor. orderer, as well because the orders in it were good, as also for that he had submitted all his writings to the Apostolike see. Therefore Coccius in thesauro Ca∣tholico. Iodocus Coccius makes him one of his Latin Doctors, out of whom he confirmes your Popish doctrine. And Trithemius de scriptor. Eccles. Trithe∣mius saith, that he was a man studious and exercised in the
Scriptures, and that he writ many things against the Iewes, and other aduersaries of the Catholike faith. Petrark, one of the lights of his age for learning, wrote about 250. yeeres since, that Petrarc. son. 108. Gia Roma, hor' Babylo∣nia; falla e ria. Rome was become Babylon; and not onely Babylon, but false and wicked Babylon. Further, in the same place he calles her, The fountaine of griefe, the lodge of wrath, the schoole of error, the temple of heresie, a shamelesse strumpet, which hauing been founded in chastitie, humilitie, and pouertie, hath lifted vp her hornes against her founders, the Em∣perours. Sonet. 107. In another place he calles her couetous Babylon, that hath filled vp the measure of Gods wrath, with impious and wicked vices, so that it runnes ouer. Sonet. 92. In a third he termes her impious Babylon, from whom all shame is fled; the lodge of griefe, and mother of errors, in whom there is no goodnes. I set not down all he speakes against her: somewhat I haue touched, that I might see how easily you will answere his words: but I thinke he that hath read Bellarm de Roman. pont. append cap. 20 Bellarmine of this point, may gesse before hand what you can say in the matter. Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 25. Irenaeus, as you truly say, determines not what shall be Antichrists name, and leanes more to  than to : yet neither doth he allow of that, because Habet verisi∣militudinem vt ex multis collgamus, ne forte Teitan vocetur qui venier. a man (as hee saith) may with likelihood gather by many things, that his name perhaps shall not be , and of  he affirmes that it is Valde verisi∣mile est quoni∣am verissi∣num regnum hoc habet vo∣caulum. very likely: and giues his reason of it; because the most true kingdome had that name. Master Perkins expounded it not as a proper name, but as an appellatiue; because neither Reuel. 13. the Euangelist nor Irenaeus doe intend to shew Antichrists proper name; but See Dname of . lb. 1. cap. 8. to make knowne the name of the Beast, which Antichrist should make all take. Now the Beast being the Romane or Latin state, the name also must be su∣table thereunto, as wee see it is: our Papists calling them∣selues Romane; that is Latin Catholikes. I will not fall into exhortation hereupon; only I desire all men, that haue care of their saluation, to consider, without preiudice, whether it be not euident that the state of Rome, whereof the Pope is head, is the whore of Babylon, prophecied of by S. Iohn, Re∣uelat. 17.
Againe, this commandement must not so much be vnderstood of a bodily departure in respect of cohabitation and presence, as of a spirituall separati∣on in respect of faith and religion. And the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that men must depart from the Romish Church in regard of Iudgement and do∣ctrine, in regard of their faith and the worship of God. Thus then we see that the words containe a com∣maundement from God, inioyning his Church and people to make a separation from Babylon. Whence I obserue, That all those who will bee saued, must depart and separate themselues from the faith and religion of this present church of Rome. And whereas they are charged with schisme that separate on this manner; the truth is, they are not schismatiks that doe so, because they haue the commandement of God for their warrant: and that partie is the schismatike in whom the cause of this separation lieth: and that is in the Church of Rome, namely the cup of abomination in the whores hand, which is, their heretical and schismati∣call religion. And because I purpose (God willing) not only to confute what M. Perkins bringeth against the Catholike doctrine, but some what also in euerie Chapter to fortifie and confirme it: I will here deliuer what some of the most auncient, most learned, and most holy Fathers doe teach concerning ioyning with the Church, and Pope of Rome: from whose societie Protestants labour tooth and nayle to withdraw vs. And because of this we must treate more amply in the question of suprema∣cie, I will vse here their authoritie, only whom M. Perkins citeth against vs. S. Bernard is cited already, S. Ireneus Scholler of S. Polycarpe, and he of S. Iohn the Euangelist of the Church of Rome writeth thus. To this Church, by reason of her more mightie principalitie, it is necessary that euery Church, that is the saithfull on all sides, to condescend and agree; in, Lib. 3. cap. 3. and by which, alwaies, the tradition of the Aposiles hath been preserued of them, that be round about her. Saint Jerome writing to Damasus Pope of Rome, saith: I following
none as chiefest, but Christ, doe in participation ioyne with thy blessednesse, that is, with the chayre of Peter, I know the Church to be builded vpon that Rocke. VVhosoeuer doth eate the Paschall Lambe out of this house, is a prophane fellovv, he that is not found vvithin the Arke of Noe, shall when the floudes arise perish: And a litle after, knovv not Vitalis, I refuse Me∣letius, I take no notice of Paulinus: he that gathereth not vvith thee, scat∣tereth; that is, he that is not vvith Christ, is vvith Antichrist. VVell sare a good glosse. Marke and embrace this most learned Doctors iudgement, of ioy∣ning vvith the See of Rome, in all doubtfull questions: he vvould not trust to his ovvne vvit and skill vvhich vvere singular; nor thought it safe to relie vpon his learned and vvise neighbours: he durst not set vp his rest vvith his ovvne Bishop Paulinus, vvho vvas a man of no meane marke but the Patriarke of Antioch: but made his assured stay vpon the See of Rome, as vpon an vnmoueable Rocke, vvith vvhich (saith he) if vve doe not communicate in faith and Sacraments, vve are but profane men, voide of all Religion: In a vvord, vve belong not to Christ, but be of Antichrists traine. See, hovv flat contrarie this most holy ancient Fa∣ther is to M. Perkins. M. Perkins vvould make vs of Antichrists band, Not because you cleaue to Damasus in this poynt. Lib. 3. de Sa∣cra. cap. 1. because vve cleaue vnto the Bishop of Rome. Whereas Saint Hierome holdeth all to appertaine to Antichrist, who be not fast lincked in mat∣ters of Religion, with the Pope and See of Rome. And so to conclude with this point, euerie true Catholike must say with Saint Ambrose: I de∣sire in all things to follovv the Church of Rome. And thus much of his Prologue. It is a weake fortifying of Popish doctrine, to alleage a few sentences written one thousand, or more yeeres since, in approbation of the Church of Rome, as it was then. Ire∣naeus, Hierome, Ambrose, would haue all men ioyne with the Church of Rome, which florished in their daies: therefore no man may separate from it, in these our daies. Who sees not the feeblenes of this consequence? And yet this is all the force that can be in the reason, till they haue prooued, that the Church of Rome either was then, or is not now, the Church of Antichrist. If that principalitie, Irenaeus speaks of, were in the Church of Rome, by any right of authoritie from God; how should the same Irenaeus be excused, who Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. reprooues Victor B. of Rome, for taking vpon him to excommunicate some of the Easterne Churches, about obseruing of Easter? If it be in Nicolas Ga∣las. ad illum Irenaeium. re∣spect of the truth which then florished at Rome, no doubt
all men must cleaue vnto it, as farre as it cleaues to the truth of God. Hieron. ad Damasum. Hierome a Romane, and at that time a yong man, liuing in Syria, being pressed by an Arian Bishop to allow, by sub∣scription that, which might tend to the countenancing of Arianisme, writes to Damasus his owne Bishop, for his ad∣uice in the matter. But that he did, not in respect of his place, as if hee could not erre, because he was Bishop of Rome (for Liberius the very next Bishop before Damasus, by Descriptor. eccles. in For∣tunatiano. Hieroms owne confession, had subscribed to Aria∣nisme) but in regard of his iudgement, which was sound against that heresie: so that whosoeuer, in that question, gathered not with him, scattered, and held with Antichrist against Christ. Those, all things, that Ambros. de sacra. lib. 3. cap. 1. Ambrose speaks of, are, according to the place alleaged by you, to be restrained to the Litur∣gie, and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome. Wherein though Ambrose professe himselfe desirous to follow the Church (note by the way, that the Church of Rome is taken Gabriel Biel in Canon. Missae, lect. 18. de quotidiana praefatione. as a particular Diocesan Church, such as the Church of Millan also was at that time, and not as the vniuersall Ca∣tholike Church) yet he did not so follow it, because reason led him another way: his words are these: In all things I de∣sire to follow the Romane Church: but Et nos homi∣nes ensum habemus. yet we also being men haue vnderstanding: therefore that, which is otherwhere better obserued, we also rightly keepe: We follow the Apostle Peter him∣selfe, we sticke vnto his deuotion, &c. Out of which speech of Ambrose, these points are to be obserued. First, that the vn∣derstanding of Christian men is to direct them, wherein they are to follow the Church of Rome, wherein to leaue it. Secondly, that some other Churches might, and did better obserue diuers things, than the Church of Rome did. Third∣ly, that the Church of Rome did not obserue that, which the Apostle Peter (at least in Ambrose his iudgement) had deuoutly performed. Thus we see what helpe there is in the ancient writers to free the Pope and Church of Rome, that
now are, from being the very Antichrist foretold of in the Reuelation. Now touching the dutie of separation, I meane to speake at large, not standing so much to prooue the same, because it is euident by the text, as to shew the manner and measure of making this separation: and therein I will handle two things. First, how far forth we may ioyne with them in the matter of reli∣gion: secondly, how far forth and wherein we must dissent and depart from them. And for this cause I meane to make choice of certaine points of religion, and to speake of them in as good order as I can, shewing in each of them our consent and difference: and the rather, because some harpe much vpon this string, that a Vnion may be made of our two religi∣ons, and that we differ not in substance, but in points of circumstance. Afterward he taketh vpon him to prescribe and shew vs how far forth we may ioyne with the Church of Rome, by proposing many points in controuersie, betweene vs, and them, and in each shewing in what points we consent togither, and in what we differ. I meane by Gods I hope you vvil note that disor∣der, vvhen you come to it. grace to follow him, step by step, although he hath made many a disor∣derly one, aswell to discouer his deceits and to disproue their errors, as also to establish the Catholike Doctrine, the which I will endeuour to performe (by the helpe of God) with all simplicitie of language, and with as much breuity as such a weightie matter will permitte. Yet (I hope) with that perspicuitie, as the meaner learned may vnderstand it, and with such substance of proofe, both out of the holy Scriptures and auncient Fathers, as the more iudicious (to vvhose profit it is principal∣lie dedicated) may not contemne it. I will labour, as much as I can, both for plainnes and shortnes in all the seuerall points, not doubting, but (by the grace of God) to maintaine Master Perkins reasons and an∣swers against all your cauils. The first point wherewith I meane to begin shall be the point of Freewill; though it be not the prin∣cipall.
I. Our consent. Freewill both by them and vs, is taken for a mixt power in the mind and will of man: whereby discer∣ning what is good and what is euill, hee doth accor∣dingly chuse or refuse the same. That I be not thought captious, but willing to admit any thing that M. Perkins hath said agreeable to the truth, I will let his whole text in  As farre as you think, it makes not against you. You shall finde as much kind∣nes as you offer. You pare off the sense too some∣times. You meane properly. Is this your perspicuitie? places indifferent, passe, paring off only superfluous words, with adding some annotations where it shall be needfull, and rest onely vpon the points in controuersie. First then concerning free-will, wherewith he beginneth, thus he saith: Free vvill both by them and vs, &c. Annot. If we would speake formally, it is not a mixt power in the mind and will, That Master Perkins vvas not ignorant of this, it appeares in his treatise of Gods free grace, and mans free will. pag. 17.  but is a free facultie of the mind and will only, whereby we choose or refuse, supposing in the vnderstanding, a knowledge of the same before. But let this definition passe as more populer. Your correcting of Master Perkins definition passeth my vnderstanding: for if it be a a facultie both of the minde and will, out of doubt it is a mixt facultie. But it is more strange, that you adde only of the minde onely, or of the will onely, are speeches that haue some reason in them; but of the minde and will onely is a phrase implying a contradi∣ction, vnlesse there be some third part of the soule vnknown to ordinarie Philosophers, whereof free will may be suspe∣cted to be a facultie. I. Conclus. Man must bee considered in a foure∣fold estate, as he was created, as he was corrupted, as he is renewed, as he shall be glorified. In the first estate, we ascribe to mans will libertie of nature, in which he could will or nill either good or euill: in the third, liberty of grace, in the last liberty of glory. Annot. Carry this in mind, that here he granteth man in the state of grace to haue free will.  VVhere doth he denie it. W. P. All the doubt is of the second estate: and yet therein also we agree, as the conclusions following will declare. II. Conclus. The matters whereabout freewill is
occupied, are principally the actions of men, which bee of three sorts, naturall humane, spirituall. Na∣turall actions are such as are common to men with beasts, as to eate, drinke, sleepe, heare, see, smell, taste, and to mooue from place to place: in all which we ioyne with the Papists, and hold that man hath free will, and euen since the fall of Adam by a naturall po∣wer of the minde doth freely performe any of these actions or the like. III. Conclus. Humane actions are such as are common to all men good and bad, as to speake and vse reason, the practise of all mechanicall and libe∣rall arts, and the outward performance of ciuill and Ecclesiasticall duties, as to come to the Church, to speake, and preach the word, to reach out the hand to receiue the Sacrament, and to lend the eare to listen outwardly to that which is taught. And hi∣ther we may referre the outward actions of ciuill vertues; as namely, Iustice, temperance, gentle∣nesse, liberalitie. And in these also wee ioyne with the Church of Rome, and say (as experience tea∣cheth) that men haue a naturall freedome of will, to put them or not to put them in execution. Paul saith, Rom. 2. 14. The Gentiles that haue not the lawe, doe the things of the law by nature, that is, by naturall strength: and hee saith of himselfe, that before his conuersion touching the righteousnesse of the law, he was vnblameable. Phil. 3. 6. And for this externall obedience, natural men receiue reward in temporall things. Matth. 6. 5. Ezech. 29. 19. And yet here some caueats must be remembred. I. That in humane actions (he should haue said morall, saith D. B. P.) mans
will is weake and feeble, and his vnderstanding dimme and darke; and thereupon he often failes in them. (This caueat is no caueat of the Protestants, but taken out of S. Thomas of Aquine, saith D. B. P.) And in Summe. 1. 2. q. 109. art. 4. & 8. all such actions with Augustine (you might haue quo∣ted the place, aith D. B. P.) I vnderstand the will of man to be onely wounded or halfe dead. See M. P. of Gods free grace and mans free vvill, pag. 61. Humane is more generall, and more fit; because mo∣rall cannot comprehend the first ranke of actions, in the be∣ginning of the section. Besides, it may be Master Perkins thought it not fit to giue that title to any actions of naturall men, because none of them are performed, according to the Arist. Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 3. & 6. Philosophers definition of morall vertue, by a habit with due obseruation of the circumstances required by him; howsoeuer they are magnified by you Papists. The caueat is not taken out Thomas 1. 2. q. 109. art. 4. & 8. of those places, wherein Thomas shewes no more, but that a man cannot, by his natu∣rall strength, either fulfill the law, or auoide sinne. The place is quoted Edition 1598 in the margin Hypognostic. lib. 3. which you shal finde in tome 7. of Austins works; though indeed the book be thought to be none of Austins. II. That the will of man is vnder the will of God, and therefore to be ordered by it: as Ieremie saith, chap. 10. vers. 23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himselfe, neither is in man to walke or direct his steps. (Who knowes not this? saith D. B. P.) If there be no man that knowes it not, perhaps euery man remembers it not; and it is a caueat necessarie for this que∣stion. The Iere. 10. 23. Prophet in the place brought by Master Perkins so speakes of it to God, as if it were not knowne to all men. O Lord I know that the way of man &c. And to say the truth, how can any man bee said to know it, Boius de consol. phlo∣soph. lib. 5 pro∣ 6. & Tho∣mas bi. that fetches the knowledge, which God hath of things depending on mans will, from the sight of the things from all eternitie, present to him? For the thing must needs be, in the order of nature
at least, before it can be knowne to be. But of this point, when iust occasion shall be offered, about Predestination. IV. Conclus. The third kinde of actions are spiri∣tuall, more neerely concerning the heart and consci∣ence, and these be twofold: they either concerne the kingdome of darknes, or else the kingdome of God. Those that concerne the kingdome of darknesse are sinnes properly: and in these we likewise ioyne with the Papists and teach, that in sinnes or euill actions, man hath freedome of will. Some paraduenture will say, that wee sinne necessarily, because hee that sinneth cannot but sinne: and that free will and ne∣cessitie cannot stand together. Indeed the necessitie of compulsion or coaction, and freewill cannot a∣gree: but there is another kinde of necessitie which may stand with freedome of will: for some things may be done necessarily and also freely. A man that is in close prison, must needs there abide, and cannot possibly get forth and walke where he will: yet can he mooue himselfe freely, and walke within the pri∣son: so likewise, though mans will be chained natu∣rally by the bonds of sinne, and therefore cannot but sinne, and thereupon sinneth necessarily, yet doth it also sinne feely. Annot. The example of a close prisoner is not to the purpose, for it puts necessitie in one thing, and liberty in an other. The solution is, that necessarily, must be taken for certainly, not that a man is at any time VVhat is your certainly but infallibly? compelled to sinne, but his weakenes and the crafte of the Diuell are such, that he is very often ouer reached by the Diuell, and induced to sinne, but with free consent of his owne will. The example is to the purpose: as he that is in prison, if he will walke, must of necessitie walke in the prison, and yet walkes freely there, because he may chuse whether he will walke or no: so he that is chained by sinne, may chuse whe∣ther hee will doe such an action or no: but, if hee doe it, he
shall necessarily sinne in doing of it: and thus, necessitie and libertie are alike, in both parts of the similitude. There is nothing in your solution, that was not in Master Perkins distinction, saue that you haue put it in other words; you say certainly, he infallibly; you say man sinnes with free consent, and is not compelled; he saies he sinnes freely, and not of compulsion. V. Conclus. The second kind of spirituall actions or things, concerne the kingdome of God: as repen∣tance, saith, the conuersion of a sinner, new obedi∣ence, and such like: in which we likewise in part ioyne with the Church of Rome and say, that in the first conuersion of a sinner, mans free will concurs with Gods grace, as a fellow or co-worker in some fort. For in the conuersion of a sinner three things are required: the word, Gods spirit, and mans will: for mans will is not passiue in all and euery respect, but hath an action in the first conuersion and change of the soule. When any man is conuerted, this worke of God is not done by compulsion, but he is conuerted willi gly: and at the very time when he is conuerted, by Gods grace he wills his conuersion. To this end said Augustine, He which made thee with∣out Serm. 15 de verb. Apost. de grat & l. a. bitr. 1. thee, will not saue thee without thee. Againe, that is certaine, that our will is required in this, that we may doe any good thing well: but we haue it not from our owne power but God works to will in vs. For looke at what time God giues grace, at the same time he Posse velle, & a velle recipere. giueth a will to dese and will the same grace: as for ex∣ample, when God works faith, at the same time he works also vpon the will, causing it to desire faith, and willingly to receiue the gift of beleeuing. God makes of the vnwilling will, a willing will: because
no man can receiue grace vtterly against his will, considering will constrained is no will. But here we must remember, that howsoeuer in respect of time, the working of grace by Gods spirit, and the willing of it in men goe together: yet in regard of order, grace is first wrought, and mans will must first of all be acted and moued by grace, and then it also acteth, willeth and moueth it selfe. And this is the last point of consent betweene vs and the Romane Church touching Free will; neither may we proceede fur∣ther with them. Now before I come to the supposed difference, I gather first that he  You gather that vvhich is not scattered by M. P. yeeldeth vnto the principall point in controuersie, that is freedome of will, in ciuill, and morall workes in the state of corruption, and all good workes in the state of grace, for in his first conclusion distinguishing foure estates of man, he affirmeth that in the third, of man renued, or (as we speake iustified) there is liberty of grace, that is, grace enableth mans will to do if it please such spiritual works, as God requireth at his hands. Yet lest he be taken to yeeld in any thing, he doth in shew of words con∣tradict Pag. 16. VVe shall see that vvhen vve come to it. both these points in another place: For in setting downe the dis∣ference of our opinions, hee saith: that mans will in his conuersion is not actiue, but passiue, which is flat opposite vnto that which himselfe said a litle before in his first conclusion; that in the conuersion of a sin∣ner, mans will concurreth not passiuely but is co-worker with Gods grace. The like contradiction may be obserued in the other part of libertie That is iust none at all. in morall actions: for in his third conclusion he deliuereth plainelie man to haue a naturall freedome, euen since the fall of Adam to doe, or not to do the acts of wisedome, Iusce, Temperance, &c and proues out of S. Paul, that the Gentiles so did: Yet in his first reason, he assirmeth as peremptorily out of the 8. of Genisis, that the whole frame of mans Pag. 19. heart is corrupted, and all that he thinketh, deuiseth, or imagineth, is wholy euill, leauing him no natural strength to performe any part of mo∣rall duty. It is neither the principall point in controuersie, nor any controuersie at all, according to Master Perkins, whether man haue freedome of will in morall workes, before grace; and in all good workes after grace. For of the former Ma∣ster Perkins makes no question, but onely Conclus. 3. Caueat. 1. giues a caueat,
of the feeblenes of the will, and dimnes of the vnderstan∣ding, in such matters: with the latter he deales not at all, professedly restraining the question to Conclus. 1. in the end. our dissent about the second estate. Libertie in the state of grace, to will spiri∣tuall good, wee thankfully acknowledge: but neither is it of Rom. 7. 18. so large extent as your exposition makes it; and, Phil. 2. 13. with∣out the speciall worke of Gods spirit, by it selfe it brings no good thing to passe. He doth not say simply, that mans will in his conuersion is not actiue; but that, in it selfe it is not actiue, but passiue: Of which his other speech is not a contradiction, but rather a confirmation; That mans will concurres with Gods grace, as a co-worker, in some sort: and a little after, mans will is not passiue in all and euery respect, but hath an action in the first conuersion of the soule. Now what action it hath, and in what respect it is actiue, and passiue, he shewes presently after: the words are falsely alleadged by you, viz. that it wils well onely, as it moued by grace, being in it selfe neither actiue, nor passiue. This latter contradiction is indeede like the former, that is, no contradiction at all. For hee doth rightly expound Gen. 8. 5. that place of a pronenes to that which is as ill, and to nothing that is fully good: not simply excluding that which is ciuilly good, but that onely which is properly re∣ferred to God himselfe, the soueraigne good: and the o∣ther, in regard of it perfect goodnes. II. The difference, or dissent. The point of difference standeth in the cause of the freedome of mans wil in spiritual matters, which concerne the kingdome of God. The Papists say, mans will concurreth and worketh with Gods grace in the first conuersion of a sinner by it selfe, and by it owne naturall power; and is onely helped by the holy Chost. We say, that mans will worketh with
grace in the first conuersion, yet not of it selfe, but by grace. Or thus; They say will hath a naturall coo∣peration: we denie it, and say it hath cooperation onely by grace, beeing in it selfe not actiue but pas; willing well onely as it is mooued by grace, whereby it must first be acted and mooued, before it can act or will. And that wee may the better con∣ceiue the difference, I will vse this comparison; The Church of Rome sets forth the estate of a sin∣ner by the condition of a prisoner, and so doe wee: marke then the difference. It supposeth the said pri∣soner to lie bound hand and foote with chaines and fetters, and withall to bee sicke and weake, yet not wholy dead, but liuing in part: it supposeth also that beeing in this case, he stirreth not himselfe for any helpe, and yet hath ability and power to stirre. Here∣upon if the keeper come and take away his bolts and fetters, and hold him by the hand, and helpe him vp, hee can and will of himselfe stand and walke and goe out of prison: euen so (say they) is a sinner bound hand and foote with the chaine of his sinnes: and yet he is not dead but sick, like to the wounded man in the way betweene Iericho and Ierusalem. And therefore doth he not wil and affect that which is good: but if the holy Ghost come and doe but vntie his bands, and reach him his hand of grace, then can he stand of himselfe and will his owne sal∣uation, or any thing else that is good. We in like manner graunt, that a prisoner fitly resembleth a na∣turall man, but yet such a prisoner must he be, as is not only sicke & weake but euen starke dead: which cannot stirre though the keeper vntie his bolts and
chaines nor heare though he sound a trumpet in his eare: and if the said keeper would haue him to moue and stirre, he must giue him not onely his hand to helpe him, but euen soule and life also: and such a one is euery man by nature; not onely chained and fettered in his sinnes but starke dead therein: as one that lieth rotting in the graue, not hauing any abili∣ty or power to moue or stirre: and therefore he can∣not so much as desire or doe any thing that is truelie good of himselfe, but God must first come and put a new soule into him, euen the spirit of grace to quic∣ken and reuiue him: and then being thus reuiued, the will beginneth to will good things at the very same time, whē God by his spirit first infuseth grace. And this is the true difference betweene vs and the Church of Rome in this point of free will. See how vncertaine the steppes be of men that walke in darkenes, or that would seeme to communicate with the workes of darknes. For if I  As it is very like you vvill doe for your aduantage. Pag. 16. True: but not of the Popish Church. mistake him not, he agreeth fully in this matter of free will, with the Doctrine of the Catholike Church: For he putting downe the point of difference, saith that it standeth in the cause of the freedome of mans will, in spirituall matters: allowing then freedome of will with vs, in the state of grace, whereof he there treateth; for he seemeth to dissent from vs, only in the cause of that freedome. And as he differeth from Luther, and Caluin, with other sectaries, in graunting this liberty of will: so in the very cause also he accordeth with Catholikes, as appeareth by his owne words. For (saith he) Papists say mans will concurreth with Gods grace by it selfe, and by it owne naturall power: we say that Mans vvill He differs not from Luther and Caluin. worketh with grace; yet not of it selfe, but by grace: either he vnder∣standeth not what Catholikes say, or else accuseth them wrongfully: For we say that Mans will then only concurreth with Gods grace, vvhen it is stirred and holpen first by Gods grace. So that Mans vvill by his ovvne naturall action, doth concurre in euery good worke, otherwise it were no action of Man: But we farther say, that this action proceedeth princi∣pally of grace, whereby the will was made able to produce such actions: for of it selfe it was vtterly vnable to bring forth such spirituall fruit. And th I take to be that, which M. Perkins doth meane by those his words, that the will must be first moued and acted by grace, before it can acte or will. He mistook, thinking that we required some outward helpe on∣ly
to the will, to ioyne with it, or rather, that grace did but a it were vn∣tie the chaynes of sin wherein our will was eted, an ten will could of it selfe turne to God. No vnderstanding how Catholikes take that Luk 10. The hol Ghost intended not to describe the state of man in that pable. parable of the man wounded in the way, betweene Ierusalem and Ieri∣co who was (not as the Papists only say, but as the holy Ghost aith) lete halfe, and not starke dead. Now the exposition of Catholikes is not, that this wounded man, (which signifieth all Mankind) had halfe his spi∣rituall strength left him, but was robbed of all Supernaturall riches, spoi∣led of all his originall Iustice, and wounded in his naturall powers of both vnderstanding and will, and therein left halfe dead, not being a∣ble of his owne strength, either to know all natural truth, or to performe all morall duty. Novv touching supernaturall vvorkes, because he lost all VVhat is be∣cme of your m of coa∣g? Luk. 15. povver to performe them; not being able so much as to prepare him∣selfe conueniently to them; he in a good sense may be likened vnto a dead man, not able to moue one finger that vvay of grace; and so in ho∣ly Scripture the Father said of his prodigall Son, he was dead, and is re∣uiued. Yet as the same sonne liued a naturall life, albeit in a deadly sinne: so mans will after the fall of Adam, continued somewhat free in actions conformable to the nature of man, though vvounded also in them, as M. P. shevves that the vvill is passiue in re∣ceiuing this in∣vvard fortify∣ing. not being able to acte many of them, yet hauing still that naturall facul∣tie of free vvill capable of grace, and also able, being first both outvvard∣ly moued, and fortified invvardly by the vertue of grace, to affect and do any vvorke appertaining to saluation: vvhich is asmuch as M. Perkins affirmeth. You vtterly mistake the matter; he speakes not of will in the state of grace, but in the state of nature, namely in the first conuersion of a sinner; as his plaine words are in this place. The difference stands in the cause of freedome: for it is impossible that a man should beleeue without freedom of will, beleeuing being an action of the will. But the que∣stion is, whether the will work with Gods grace, by it selfe, by it owne naturall power, or haue this operation from grace, being in it selfe not actiue, but passiue. And this is the very opinion of Luther, Caluin, and generally all Prote∣stant Diuines: who in this point thus dissent from you, that they ascribe the very act of the will, in repenting, beleeuing, &c. to the especiall worke of Gods spirit in their hearts, that repent and beleeue: whereas you contrariwise, hauing fur∣nisht man with freedome of will, by nature, or I know not what grace, make his assent (for I must speake of faith as you doe) to proceede, not from the spirit of God, inclining
him certainly to beleeue, but from the good vse of his free will, yeelding of it selfe to the good motion of Gods spirit: yet so as that it might for all the motion and operation of Gods spirit forbeare to assent, if it were not led to it by the goodnes of free will. In a word, you ascribe no more to God, but the power that the will hath to will that which is good: wee acknowledge, that the very act of willing well, both before and after grace, is caused by the spirit of God, to, and in euery good desire that wee bring well to passe. It is more than Master Perkins affirmes, that the will, be∣ing outwardly moued, and inwardly fortified with the ver∣tue of grace, is able to effect, and doe any worke appertai∣ning to saluation. For this vertue is not of such strength, but that it needes the particular assistance of Gods spirit, to incline and frame it to euery good worke of that na∣ture. And this to be the very Doctrine of the Church of Rome, is most ma∣nifestly to be seene in the Councell of Trent, vvhere in the sixt Session  Cap. 1. are first these vvords in effect, concerning the vnablenesse of man to a∣rise from sinne of himselfe. Euery man must acknowledge, and confesse, that by Adams fall we were made so vncleane and sinfull, that neither the Gen∣tiles by the force of nature, nor the Ievves by the letter of Moses lavv, could arise out of that sinfull state. After it shevveth, hovv our deliuerance is vvrought, and hovv freedome of vill is recouered in special, and vvher∣in it consisteth, saying. The beginning of iustification, in persons vsing rea∣son, is taken from the grace of God, preuenting vs through Jesus Christ, that is, from his vocation, vvhereby vvithout any desert of ours vve are called, that vve vvho vvere by our sinnes turned avvay from God, may be prepa∣red by his grace, both raising vs vp, and helping vs to returne to our ovvne Justification, freely yeelding our consent vnto the said grace, and vvorking vvith it. So as God touching the hart of man by the light of the Holy Ghost, neither doth man nothing at all, receiuing that inspiration, vvho might also refuse it: neither yet can he vvithout the grace of God, by his free vvill, moue himselfe to that, vvhich is iust in Gods sight. And that you may be assured, that this Doctrine of the Councell, is no other then that vvhich vvas taught three hundred yeares before, in the very middest of darknes, as heretikes deeme: See vvhat Saint Thomas of Aquine one of her prin∣cipall 1. 2. q. 109. art. 6. pillers hath vvritten of this point in his most learned Summe. Where, vpon these vvords of our Sauiour, No man can come to me, vn∣lesse my Father dravv him. He concludeth it to be manifest, that man Ioh. 6.
cannot so much as prepare himselfe to receiue the light of grace, but by the free and vndeserued helpe of God, moouing him inwarly therevnto. Sell. 6. cap. 5. The Councill of Trent, as closely as it carries matters, could not but bewray it selfe in this point; wherein it leaues to the will of man, inlightened by the holie Ghost, Inspiratio∣nem llam: b∣i cee potest. the act of refusing and receiuing grace. Which must needs be naturall; because there was no former worke of God, whereby this power to receiue grace was bestowed vpon it. And this doth 1. 2. q. 109. art 6. Ad hoc, quod praepar e homo ad susceptionem hs dont, non oportet nere aliquod aliud donum habi∣tuale in ani∣ma. Thomas by you alleaged make more plain, denying that there is any grace in the will of man, as from God, for the preparing of himselfe to receiue habituall grace: because then we should need another grace for the former, and another for that before the former, and so with∣out end. What then doth God in this case? He moues the heart inwardly (saith Thomas) or he breathes into vs a good purpose. A man would thinke that Thomas hereby acknow∣ledged the receite of some speciall grace: but it is not so, he meanes no more but this, that God puts a good motion in∣to vs, for the receiuing of habituall grace; which it is in the power of our will by nature either to receiue, or refuse. So that still, in the matter of iustification, the reason that this man is iustified, that is not, shall be from man, and not from God. Are they not in the middest of darknes that write such things? III. Our reasons. Now for the confirmation of the doctrine we hold, namely, that a man willeth not his owne con∣uersion of himselfe by nature either in whole or in part, but by grace wholy and alone: these reasons may be vsed. The first is taken from the nature and . measure of mans corruption, which may be distin∣guished into two parts. The first is the want of that originall righteousnes, which was in man by crea∣tion: the second is, a pronenes and inclination to
that which is euill, and to nothing that is truly good. This appeareth, The frame of mans heart (saith the Gen. 8. 21. Lord,) is euill euen from his childhood: that is, the dis∣position of the vnderstanding, will, affections, with all that the heart of man deuiseth, frameth, or ima∣gineth, is wholly euill. And Paul saith, The wisdome Rom. 8. 5. of the flesh is enmity against God. Which words are very significant: for the word [] translated wis∣dome, signifieth that the best thoughts, the best de∣sires, affections, and indeauours that be in any natu∣rall man, euen those that come most neare to true holines, are not only contrary to God, but enmitie it selfe. And hence I gather, that the very hart it selfe, that is the will and mind, from whence these desires and thoughts doe come, are also enmity vnto God. For such as the action is, such is the facultie whence it proceedeth: such as the fruit is, such is the tree: such as the braunches are, such are the rootes. By both these places it is euident, that in man there is not only a want, absence, or depriuation of originall righteousnes, but a pronenes also by nature vnto that which is euill: which pronenes includes in it an in∣clination not to some few, but to all and euerie sin: the very sinne against the holy Ghost not excepted. Hence therefore I reason thus. If euery man by nature doth both want originall iustice, and be also prone vnto all euill, then wanteth he na∣turall free will to will that which is truely good: But euery man by nature wants originall iustice, and is also prone vnto all euill. Ergo: Euery man naturallie wants free will to will that which is good.
Reason. II. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man percei∣ueth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolish∣nesse vnto him, neither can know them, because they are spiritually discerned. In these words S. Paul sets downe these points. I. that a naturall man doth not so much as thinke of the things reuealed in the Gospell. II. that a man hearing, and in mind conceiuing them; cannot giue consent vnto them, and by naturall iudgement approue of them: but contrariwise thin∣keth them to be foolishnesse. III. that no man can giue assent to the things of God, vnlesse he be en∣lightened by the spirit of God. And hence I reason thus. If a man by nature doth not know and perceiue the things of God, and when he shall knw them, cannot by nature giue assent vnto them: then hath he no power to will them. But the first is euidently true. Ergo. For first the mind must approue and giue assent, be∣fore the will can choose or will: and when the mind hath not power to conceiue or giue assent, there the will hath no power to will. Reason III. Thirdly the holy Ghost auoucheth, Eph. 2. 2. Coloss. 2. 13. that all men by nature are dead in sinnes & trespasses: not as the Papists say, weak, sicke, or halfe dead. Hence I gather, that man wan∣teth naturall power not to will simplie, but freelie and frankly to wil that which is truely good. A dead man in his graue cannot stirre the least finger, be∣cause he wants the very power of life, sense, and mo∣tion: no more can he that is dead in sinne, will the least good: nay if he could either will or doe any
good, he could not be dead in sinne. And as a dead man in the graue, cannot rise but by the power of God: no more can he that is dead in sinne rise, but by the power of Gods grace alone, without any power of his owne. Reason IV. Fourthly in the conuersion and salua∣tion of a sinner, the scripture ascribeth all to God, and nothing to mans free will. Iohn 3. 3. Except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God. Ephes. 2. 10. We are his workemanship created in Christ Iesus to good works. And chap. 4. vers. 24. The new man is created to the image of God. Now to be borne again, is a worke of no lesse importance then our first crea∣tion: and therefore wholy to be ascribed to God as our creation is. Indeede Paul Phil. 2. 12. 13. biddeth the Philippians worke out their saluation with feare and trembling: not meaning to ascribe vnto them a po∣wer of doing good by themselues. And therefore in the next verse he addeth, It is God that worketh both the will and the deede: directly excluding all naturall free will in things spirituall: and yet withall he ac∣knowledgeth, that mans will hath a worke in doing that which is good, not by nature, but by grace. Be∣cause when God giues man power to will good things, then he can will them: and when he giueth him a power to doe good, then he can doe good, and he doth it. For though there be not in mans conuersion a naturall cooperation of his will with Gods spirit, yet is there a supernaturall cooperation by grace, enabling man when he is to be conuerted, to will his conuersion: according to which S. Paul saith, 1. Cor. 15. 10. I haue laboured in the faith, but least
any man should imagine, that this was done by any naturall power: therefore he addeth, yet not I, that is, not by any thing in me, but Gods grace in mee, in∣abling my will to doe the good I doe. Reason V. The iudgement of the auncient Church. August. de corrept. & grat. c. 12. August. The will of the regenerate is kindled onely by the holy Ghost: that they may therefore bee able because they will thus: and they will thus because God workes in them to will. And, Epist. 105. Wee haue lost our freewill, to loue God by the greatnesse of our sinne. Serm. 2. on the wordes of the Apostle. Man when hee was created, receiued great strength in his free will: but by sin∣ning he lost it. Fulg. lib. Fulgentius, God giueth grace freely to the vnworthy whereby the wicked man beeing iustified is inlightened, with the gift of good will, and with a fa∣cultie of doing good: that by mercy preuenting him he may begin to will well, and by mercie comming af∣ter, he may doe the good he will. Bernard saith, Bernard. de lib. arb. It is who∣ly the grace of God that wee are created, healed, saued. Concil. Arausic. 2. cap. 6. To beleeue and to will is giuen from aboue by infusion, and inspiration of the holy Ghost. More testimonies and reasons might bee al∣leaged to prooue this conclusion, but these shall suf∣fice: now let vs see what reasons are alleaged to the contrarie. And this is all vvhich M. Perkins in his pretended dissent auerreth  A poore shift. here, and goeth about to proue in his fiue reasons follovving: the vvhich I vvill omitte, as being all for vs. And if any man desire to see more to that purpose, let him read the most learned vvorkes of that famous Car∣dinall, and right Reuerend Archbishop Bellarmine. You should, at the least, haue propounded his reasons, that all men might haue seene whether they make for you, or against you: but you tooke a wiser course for your own credit. Yet giue me leaue to shew, that his conclusions are directly against you.
He that hath naturally free will to receiue a good motion inspired by God, hath naturally free will to will that which is good: for to receiue such a motion, is to will that which is good. But euery man, according to 1. 2. q. 109. art. 6. Thomas, and Concil. Tri∣dent. sess. 6. cap. 5. the Coun∣cill of Trent, hath naturally free will, to receiue a good motion inspiried by God: for else he cannot receiue any, or must haue some habituall grace to prepare him for the receiuing of it. Therefore euery man hath naturally free will to will that which is good. This is your conclusion; to which his are contrarie, viz. Euery man naturally wants free will, to will that which is good. Secondly, Man, by nature, hath no power to will the things of God. Thirdly, Men naturally haue no power to will the least good. Fourthly, Man cannot naturally will his owne conuer∣sion. The testimonies alleaged need neither confirmation, nor explication. Bellarmines disputation shall be exami∣ned, if it please God to giue leisure and opportunitie. Novv the very point controuersed, concerning free vvill, M. Perkins hath quite omitted, vvhich consisteth in these tvvo points, expressed in the Councell: First, vvhether vve doe freely assent vnto the said grace, vvhen it is offered vs, that is, vvhether it lie in our povver to refuse it; And secondly, vvhen vve concurre and vvorke vvith it, vvhether vve could if vve listed refuse to vvorke vvith it. In both vvhich points vve hold the affirmatiue part, and most sectaries of this time the negatiue. Of vvhich our Authour is silent: only by the vvay in his fourth reason, toucheth tvvo texts out of S. Paul, vvhich are commonly alleaged a∣gainst free vvill. The fir. I haue (saith he) laboured more abundantly then all they, yet not I, but the grace of God, vvhich is in me, attributing the vvhole vvorke 1. Cor. 15. So doth Ierome reade it. to grace. To vvhich I briefely ansvvere, that they doe corrupt the text, to make it seeme more currant for them: the Greeke hath only He sun emoi, vvhich is, vvith me, not, vvhich is in me, so that the vvord in true construction makes much more for vs, then against vs: Saint Paul af∣firmeth the grace of God, vvhich vvas vvorking vvith him, to haue done these things: And so Saint Augustine vvhom they pretend to follovv most in this matter, expoundeth it. Yet not I, but the grace of God vvith De grat. & lib. arb. cap. 15. me; that is, not I alone, but the grace of God with me. And by this, neither the grace of God alone: neither he alone, but the grace of God vvith him: thus Saint Augustine. The like sentence is in the booke of Wisdome.
Send that (vvisdome) from thy holy heauen, that it may be vvith me, and Cap. 9. labour vvith me. Master Perkins tooke that, as the most principall point, which doth most diminish the glorie of God, the end of all true religion. See 12. Art. part. 2. Art. 4. . Now what opinion is more derogatorie to Gods glorie, than that which giues mans will a power (by nature) to receiue grace ofered, vpon an inward motion of God, without any inclinig of the will by him? And this answers your former quesion; denying that it lies in our owne power to refuse grae, though we freely assent vnto it. There is a necessity of inllibilitie, so that it cannot come to passe, that a man, inclind by Gods spirit, should not re∣ceiue grace; there is notwthstanding a freedome of will, because the will is not compelled to assent. The second question is like the former and answered in like sort, viz. that we might refuse, in reect of the nature of our will, which is not forced to the choise, that in the euent we can∣not refuse, because God frames our will ineuitably to make that choise. You saw it was not for you to deale with Master Perkins reasons, as they were set downe by him, for then it would haue been looked for that yo should haue answered di∣rectly to all the places of Scripure hee brings against the strength of frwill by nature. Therefore you shift off the matter, and outof nine texts alleaged in this question, you chuse onely the. Against which you thinke you are able to say somewh. And what is it you say? That Master Per∣kins attributes he whole to grace; vtterly vntrue. For hee saith plainly, 1. Cor. 15. 10. at there is a supernaturall cooperation of mans will, with Gods srit, by grace, enabling him to will his conuer∣sion. And addes fterwards, Not I, that is, I by any thing in me; but Gods grace e enabling my will to doe that good, I do. Hieron. con∣tra ouin. lib. 2. If that translation rrupt the text, Hierome corrupted it, not we: and to saye truth, it is all one to vs, whether you reade in me, or whme, so you acknowledge the strength, whereby the Apole workes, to be of God, and not of na∣ture. But for the prase, the grace of God, in the Scripture,
signifies either the loue and fauour of God, which is wholy without a man, or some gift of his, which is a qualitie in the soule. Now it is a great deale more likely, that the Apostle speakes of some gift of God within him, whereby hee is made able to labour, than of the fauour of God without him, wherby his labour is blessed. We subscribe to August. de grat. &. lib. arb. cap. 15. S. Au∣stin, That in all our good workes we have a part; or rather, that the worke it selfe is wholieours, though both the grace, whereby we are enabled to do it, and the inclination whereby we are brought to doe i, proceede from the spirit of God. The second text is. It is God that woreth in vs, both to vvill and to ac∣complish. We graunt that it is God, buot he alone without vs, for in  Phil. 2. 13. the next words before, Saint Paul, saith Worke your saluation vvith feare and trembling. So that God worketh pincipally by stirring vs vp by his grace, and also helping forward our wil, to accomplish the worke; but Not onely hel∣ping forward, but also incli∣ning. Of this if occa∣sion be offered in the poynt of Iustification. so sweetly and conormablie to our naure, that his working taketh not away, but helpeth forward our will toconcurre with him. Againe, the whole may be attributed vnto God, considering that the habits of grace infused, be from him as sole efficient cause of them, our actions indued also with grace, being onely disposions and no efficient cause of those habits: but this is an high point of choole Diuinitie, very true, but not easily to be conceiued of the vnleaed. We also grant, as I haue said, that it is God with vs: here∣in wee differ, that you ascribe no more to God in our first conuersion, but a stirring of vs vp, and helpng forward of our will, leauing the euent to our choise, an so vncertaine: we affirme, that God doth so work, that he clines the will, so that the euent shall in fallibly ensue theron. The whole may not be attributed to God, though the habits of grace infused be from him, as a sole efficient case of them. For the question is not how we come by theseabits, but whe∣ther the actions done, when we haue the hbits, be ours or no, speaking of good workes after iustifition. If the que∣stion be of our first conuersion, we say •, t act of beleeuing is ours; but the grace, by which we are eabled to beleeue, is giuen by God; and made effectual;  made to produce this effect of beleeuing, by God also. One other obiection may be collected ou of . Perkins third reason,
against free will, which is touched, as he saith, by the holy Ghost, in these You neede not haue troubled your selfe vvith collecting ob∣iections, there are fiue plaine∣ly st dovvne. Ad Ephes. 2. 2. He is so like a dead man, that he is dead in∣deede spiritu∣ally. words. VVhen vve vvere dead in sinnes. If a man by sinne become like a dead man, he cannot concurre with God, in his rising from sinne. Ansvvere. Sure it is, that he cannot, before God by his grace hath quickned, and as it were reuiued him, to which grace of God, man gi∣ueth his free consent. How can that be, if he were then dead? Marry, you must remember what hath been said before: that albeit man in sinne be dead in the way of grace, yet he liueth naturally, and hath free will in naturall and ciuill actions: which will of his being by grace fortified, and as it were lifted vp vnto a higher degree of perfection, can then concurre and worke with grace to faith, and all good workes necessarie to life e∣uerlasting. As (for example,) a crab-tree ocke hath no ability of it selfe to bring forth apples, and therefore may be tearmed dead in that kind of good fruit. Yet let a siane of apples be gated into it, and it wil be are apples: euen so albeit our sower corrupt naure of it selfe be vnable to fructifie to life euerlasting, yet hauing reiued into it the heauenlie graft of Gods grace, it is inabled to produce he sweete fruit of good workes: to which alludeth Saint Iames. Recee the ingrafted vvord, Cap. 1. vvhich can saue our soules: againe what more dd then the earth? and yet it being tilled and sowed, doth bring forth, a beare goodly corne: now the word and grace of God is compared by ur Sauiour himselfe vnto seede, and our harts vnto the earth that receied it: what meruaile Matth. 13. then if we otherwise dead, yet reuiued by this liuelyeed, do yeeld plen∣tie of pleasing fruit? The question is not, whether God can mae a man able to doe good workes, or no (for of that no mandoubts:) but Ephes. 2. 2. what a man can doe by nature, to his owne coersion. Ma∣ster Perkins saith, he is spiritually dead, and therere can do nothing. You answere, that he can doe something, when God hath quickened him. But what can hee do to the quickening of himselfe? giue his free consent, you say. Then it must needes follow, that he hath power by nae to will his owne conuersion: for as yet hee hath receiued no grace, but onely hath had a good motion made to him, or inspired into him by God: of which by his owne free wil he takes a liking, and so attaines to iustifying grace. Hauing hitherto explicated the state of the question, and solued such  He propounds none for you, and therefore misapplies none. obiections as may be gathered out of Master Perkins against it, before I come to his solution of our arguments, I will set downe some principall places, both out of the Scriptures, and auncient Fathers, in defence of our Doctrine, because he proposeth but few for vs, and misapplieth them too.
God hath appointed to bring them, to chuse and like of saluation  Christ. Vnto these  of the old Testament, (one vnder the law of Nature, and the er vnder Moyses law) let vs couple two more out of the new Testament, The first may be those kind words of our Sauiour vnto the Iewes. Je∣rusalem, Matth. 23. Jerusalem, &c. how often vvould I haue gathered together thy children as the hen doth her chicks vnder her vvings, and thou vvould∣est not: Which doth plainely demonstrate that there was no want, either of Gods helpe inwardly, or of Christs perswasion outwardly, for their conuersion: and that the whole fault lay in their owne refusing, and withstanding Gods grace, as these words of Christ doe plainely witnes, and thou vvouldest not. The last testimony is in the Reuelat, where it is said in the person of God. I stand at the doore and knocke, if any man shall heare my voice and Cap. 3. open the gates, I vvill enter in to him, and vvill suppe vvith him, and he vvith me. Marke well the words: God by his grace, knocks at the dore of our harts, he doth not breake it open, or in any sort force it, but atten∣deth, that by our assenting to his call, we open him the gates, and then, lo he with his heauenly gifts will enter in: otherwise he leaues vs. What can be more euident in confirmation of the freedome of mans will, in working with Gods grace? Matth. 23. 37 We acknowledge that the fault is wholy in euery man, that is not saued: but wee denie, that therefore he hath po∣wer, by nature, to chuse life when it is offered: he failes in∣deede in doing of that which hee might doe, and ought to doe, for his owne furtherance, to this choise; as the Iewes did, in refusing to heare, to meditate, to yeeld to the mi∣racles wrought by our Sauiour Christ, and to beleeue the doctrine; which they could in no reasonable sort gainsay. It was Perk. of Gods free grace. p. 23 Lombard. 1. senten. dist. 45 voluntas signi, not beneplaciti: God offered them the outward meanes of his word, not the inward meanes of his spirit, for their conuersion, which Act. 16. 14. Lydia had. Reuel. 3. 20. To breake open the doore, were to vse compulsion; to Perk. of Gods free grace. p. 79 knock, is to vse the outward meanes of conuerting a man; or if you will, to inspire a good purpose: vpon which if any man open, out of doubt Christ will enter. But this doth no: prooue, that a man vpon this motion, can yeeld by the strength of his owne free will, which is the point in que∣stion. To these expresse places taken out of Gods word, let vs ioyne the te∣stimony
of those most auncient Fathers, against whose workes the Pro∣testants can take no exception. The fi shall be that excellent learned Martyr Iustinus in his Apologie, who vnto the Emperour Aatonine spea∣keth thus. Vnlesse man by free vvill could she from soule dishonest deeds, and follovv those that be faire and good; he vvere vvithout fault, as not be∣ing cause of such things as vvere done But vve Christians teach that man∣kind by free choise, and free vvill, doth both doe vvell, and sinne. To him we will ioyne that hly Bishop and valiant Martyr Jreneus, who of free will writeth thus, not only in vvorkes, but in faith also, our Lib. 4. cap. 72. Lord reserued liberty, and freedome of vvill vnto man: saying, be it done vnto thee, according to thy faith. I will adde to that worthie company, Saint Cyprian: who vpon those words of our Sauiour, vvill you also depart, discourseth thus. Our Lord did Ioan 6. Lib. 1. Epist. 3. not bitterly inigh against them, vvhich forsooke him, but rather vsed these gentle speeches to his Apostles, vvill you also goe your vvay: and vvhy so? Marry obseruing and keeping (as this holy Father declareth) that decree by vvhich man left vnto his liberty, and put vnto his free choise, Appetite, de∣ses, or at the most, procure; not might de∣serue. might de∣serue vnto himselfe, either damnation, or saluation. These three most aun∣cient, and most skilfull in Christian Religion, and so zealous of Christi∣an truth, that they spent their blood in confirmation of it, may suffice to certifie any indifferent reader; what was the iudgement of the auncient and most pure Church, concerning this article of free wl specially when the learnedst of our Aduersaries, confesse all Anquitie, (excepting on∣ly S. Augustine) to haue beleeued and taught free will. Heare the words This is but a popish slaunder to charge him vvith lying. Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 59. They vvere not led to this point by the Apostles, if the spke of spirituall acti∣ons. Sny answere in the Epistle dedatoru.  of one, for all. Mathias Illyricus in his large, long lying historie, hauing rehearsed touching free will, the testimonies of Iustine Ireneus and o∣thers, saith. In like manner lement, Patriarch of Alexandria, doth eue∣ry vvhere teach free vvill, that it may appeare (say these Lutherans) not on∣ly the Doctors of that age to haue been in such darknes, but also that it did much encrease in the ages follovving. See the wilfull blindnes of heresie. Illyricus confessing the best learned in the purest times of the Church, to haue taught free will: yet had rather beleeue them to haue bin blind∣ly led, by the Apostles and then best Schollers, who were their Masters: then to espy and amend his owne eror. These principall pillers of Christs Church were in darknes belike as Protestants must needes say: and that proud Persian and most wicked heretike Manes (of vvhom the Manichees are named) vvho first denied free vvill, began to broach the true light of the nevv Gospell. Iustin Apol. 2. ad Anto∣num. Iustin speakes of naturall actions, not of spirituall: for these were vtterly vnknowne to the Emperour being a hea∣then. He speakes also, perhaps, against the imputation of fatall necessitie, wherewith the Christians were charged in those times. Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 70. Irenaeus giues a man that freedome, which is contrarie
to constraint: God (saith he) made man free, from the begin∣ning, &c. Non Coa∣ctum à deo. not constrained by God. Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3. Cyprian speakes of vsing, or not vsing the outward meanes; such, as following Christ to heare the word of him, whereof Ioh. 6. 66. the Euangelist there entreates. Now that this is in mans power, and that it is a meanes to procure salua∣tion, or damnation, who denies? But Cyprian doth not say, that it is in a mans power by nature, to consent to Gods motion for his conuersion. It cannot reasonably be denied, that, in the point of free will, some of the ancient writers, before Austin, Sixtus Se∣nens lib. 5. in praefat. Tolleus in Ioh. 6. & Rom. 9. Maldonatus in Ioh. 6. Peter. in Rom. 9. Num. 33. spake liker Philosophers, than Diuines; and gaue both occasion to Pelagius of his error, though they fauoured it not, and also aduantage for the confirming of it; as the place of the Centur. 2. cap. 4. col. 59. Centuries alleaged by you plainly prooues. Other of them also spake not so plaine, as it was to be wished they had done: so that Aug. de nat. & grat. cap. 61. & seq. 2. Inst. c. 2. q. 4. It becomes not a diuine to vvrite so skornefully. Not to haue spoken so plain∣ly and vvarily. De spirit. & li. 34. De gra. Chri. 14. Ad Simpl. q. 2. Tract. 2. in Ioh. Ep. 7. Austin hath much adoe to defend them against Pelagius, and in the entrance to his defence is faine to lay this foundation, that he holds himselfe free for yeelding to any writings of men whatsoeuer. Here I vvould make an end of citing Authorities, vvere it not that Caluin saith, that albeit all other auncient vvriters be against him, yet S. Augustine as he vaunteth, is clearely for him in this point, but the poore man is fouly deceiued, asvvell in this, as in most other matters. I vvill briefly proue, and that out of those works which S. Augustine wrote after the Pelagian heresie was a foote; for in his others, Caluin acknowledg∣eth him to haue taught free vvill. Of our freedome in consenting to Gods grace, he thus defineth, to consent to Gods calling, or not to consent, lyeth in a mans ovvne vvill. Againe: VVho doth not see euery man to come, or not to come, by free vvill? but this free vvill may be alone, if he doe not come, but it cannot be but holpen, if he doe come. In another place, that vve vvill (doe vvell) God vvill haue it to be his and ours; his, in calling vs; ours, in follovving him. Yea more: To Christ vvorking in him, a man doth cooperate, that is, vvorketh vvith him, both his ovvne iustification, and life euerlasting: will you heare him speake yet more formally for vs? We haue dealt vvith your brethren and ours, as much as vve could: that they vvould hold out and continue in the sound Catholike faith; the vvhich neither denieth free vvill, to euill or good life, nor doth attribute so much to it, that it is vvorth any thing vvithout grace. So according to this most worthy Fathers iudgement, the sound Catholike faith doth not deny free will, as the old Manichees and our new Gospellers do; nor esteeme
it without grace able to doe any thing toward saluation, as the Pelagi∣ans did. And to conclude, heare S. Augustines answere vnto them, vvho say, that he, when he commendeth grace, denyeth free will. Much lesse Lib. 4. con. ul. c. 8. vvould I say that, vvhich thou lyinglie dost affirme me to say, free vvill to be denied, if grace be commended, or grace to be denied, if free vvill be commended. Caluin doth not without cause affirme, that Austin is for him; not onely in his writings after the Pelagian heresie, but in those before it also; though in the former he Aug. Ret. act. lib. 1. cap. 9. speak not so warily, as in the latter; yet his iudgement was all one. Aug. de spirit. & lit. cap. 34. Austin saith no more, but that assenting, or dissenting, when God calles, is an action of mans will. That the difference betwixt man and man, why one beleeues, and another doth not, proceedes from the diuers worke of Gods spirit, not from the choise of the parties, he speakes most plainly in the same place. Ipsum velle credere deus operatur in homine. God workes in a man the very willing to be∣leeue: and yet more; nay, If any man will draw vs to the sear∣ching of that depth, Cur illi ita suadeatur, vt persuadeatur, illi autem non. why this man is so perswaded, that hee yeelds, he is not, there are onely two things, which I thinke good to answere. Rom. 11. 33. & 9. 14. O the depth of the riches! And is there iniquitie with God? Let him, whom this answere mislikes, seeke for some that are more learned, but let him take heede that he finde not some that are more presumptuous. Imagine then what Austin thinkes of you Papists, who confidently affirme, that the reason of this difference proceedes from the good vse of free will in the beleeuer: not that you are more learned, but that you are more presumptuous. Aug de gra. Christ. cap. 14. If you had added the words that follow immediatly in Austin, you should haue needed no further answere. Free will, if a man come to Christ, cannot be but holpen, Et sic adiu∣tum, &c. and so holpen, that not onely he must know what is to be done, but doe that he knowes: and therefore when God teaches, not by the letter of the law, but by the spirit of grace, he teaches so, that a man doth not onely see by knowledge that which he hath learned, but also desire it by willing, and per∣forme it by doing. And by this diuine manner of teaching, euen the will and worke it selfe, not onely the naturall possibilitie of willing and working is holpen. Si enim so∣l posse no∣strum, &c. For if onely our power were helpt
by this grace, the Lord would thus speake: Euery one that hath heard of the Father, and hath learned, can come to me. But he said not so; but euery one which hath heard of my Father, and learned, doth come to me. To haue power to come, Pelagius Venire posse in natura ponit. ascribes to nature; or, as of late he hath begun to speake, to grace, what grace soeuer he meane; by which (as he saith) our possibilitie is helped: but to come, is in will and worke. It followes not, that he which can come, Etiam veni∣at, nisi id volu∣erit, atque fe∣cerit. comes, vnlesse he will, and doe so; but euery one that hath learned of the Father, not onely can come, but comes. I haue set downe these words of Austin at large, as well that it may appeare with what conscience this man cites the Fathers, as that S. Austins iudgement of this point may be fully knowne to all men. There is great reason that wee should expound Aug. ad Sim∣plicia. q. 2. lib. 1 such short sentences as this, by such large discourses as the for∣mer: but if we knew not that, this place makes nothing a∣gainst vs: for we haue graunted already, that to will is our worke, but wee say further, that Gods calling, as his tea∣ching, in Aug. de grat. Chri. cap. 14. that other place of Austin, works in vs, not only to be able to will, but to will indeede. I Aug. in Ioh. tract. 72. say of this as of the former, that it is not contrarie to our doctrine: for we acknowledge, that in our iustification, and saluation after election, we worke with God; but not, as I haue often answered, by any naturall power of our free will, nor by any choyse of our owne, to which we are not in∣clined and brought by Gods spirit. We say with Aug. Epist. 47 Lib. 4. contra ulian. cap. 8. S. Austin, both in words and meaning, that true religion neither denies free will, either to a good or bad life, nor giues so much to it, that it should be of any force without grace; and we adde, that therefore your reli∣gion is false, because it affirmes, that the will of man can, by nature, assent to a good motion inspired. So to commend free will is indeede to deny grace; but to holde them both, as I haue proued Austin did out of these very places which you alleage for your opinion, and as we doe, going not an haires breadth from him in this question, is to glorifie Gods mercie, and confesse our owne weaknes; which is
the end of his loue to vs, in the whole worke of our salua∣tion. III. Obiections of Papists. Obiect. I. First they alleadge that man by nature may doe that which is good, and therefore will that which is good: for none can doe that which hee neither willeth nor thinketh to doe, but first wee must will and then doe. Now (say they) men can doe good by nature, as giue almes, speake the trueth, doe iustice, and practise other duties of ciuill vertue: and therefore will that which is good. I answer, that a naturall man may doe good workes for the sub∣stance of the outwarde worke: but not in regarde of the goodnesse of the manner: these are two diuers things. A man without supernaturall grace may giue almes, doe iustice, speake the truth, &c. which bee good things considered in themselues as God hath commaunded them; but he cannot doe them well. To thinke good things and to doe good things are naturall workes: but to thinke good things in a good manner, and to doe them well, so as God may accept the action done, are workes of grace. And therefore the good thing done by a naturall man is a sinne, in respect of the doer: because it failes both for his right beginning, which is a pure heart, good conscience, and faith vnfained; as also for his end, which is the glory of God. Novv in fevv vvords I vvill passe ouer the obiections vvhich he fra∣meth  The esse you meddle v them, the  it vvill be for  ceds. in our names. But misapplieth them. First Obiection. That man can doe good by nature, as giue almes, do Iustice, speake the truth, &c. And therefore vvill them vvithout the helpe of grace. This argument we vse to proue liberty of wil in ciuil and morall matters, euen in the corrupted state of man, and it doth demon∣strate it: and M. Perkins in his third conclusion doth He graunts no more there, then he doth here. graunt it. An his
answere here is farre from the purpose, for albeit (saith he) touching the substance of the worke it be good, yet it faileth both in the beginning, because it proceeds not from a pure hart, and a faith vnfeined: and also in the end wich is not the glory of God. Ansvvere. It faileth neither in the one nor other: for that almes may issue out of a true naturall compassion, which is a sufficient good foun∣taine to make a worke morally good: faith and grace do purge the hart, and are necessarie onely for good and meritorious workes: Againe be∣ing done to relieue the poore mans necessity, God his Creator & Ma∣ster, is thereby glorified. And so albeit the man thought not of God in particular: yet God being the finall end of all good, any good action of it selfe, is directed tovvards him, vvhen the man putteth no other contra∣rie end thereunto. Master Perkins, as any man may see, grants a freedome of will in morall actions, but denies those actions to be good, in regard of the goodnes of the manner: and afterward, A man may giue almes, &c. which are good things, conside∣red as they are commanded of God: but hee cannot doe them wel, that is, so as God may accept of the action done. If you will replie vpon M. Perkins, you must proue, that such workes of a naturall man will be accepted of God; but that you cannot do. Prosper. de vocat. genti∣um. lib 2. cap 3 Sine culu ve∣ri Dei etiam quod virtus vi detur esse, pec∣catum est. Aug in sen∣ten. Prosper. cap. 106. Omnis infide∣lium vita, pec∣catum est. For the person must be accepted before the worke; Hebr. 11. 6.  and without faith he cannot be accepted, nor haue faith being a naturall man. The summe of the answere is, if it be not done as the law requires, it is not a good worke: if it be, it is meritorious, and so must be accepted of God. Obiect. II. God hath commaunded all men to beleeue and repent: therefore they haue naturall free will, by vertue whereof (beeing helped by the spirit of God) they can beleeue and repent. Ans. This reason is not good: for by such commaunde∣ments God shewes not what men are able to doe; but what they should doe, and what they cannot doe. Againe, the reason is not well framed, it ought rather to bee thus; because God giues men com∣maundement to repent and beleeue, therefore they haue power to repent and beleeue, either by nature
or by grace, and then we hold with them. For when God in the Gospel commandeth men to repent and to beleeue, at the same time by his grace he inableth them both to will or desire to beleeue and repent, as also actually to repent and beleeue. 2. Obiect. God hath commaunded all to beleeue and repent, there∣fore they haue naturall free will, by vertue whereof being helped by the spirit of God, they can beleeue. The force of the argument consi∣steth in this, that God being a good Lord, will not commaund any man to doe that, which he is no way able to doe. Ans. M. Perkins ansvvereth in effect (for his vvords be obscure) that To him that vvill not vn∣derstand them. God commaundeth that, vvhich we be not able to performe, but that which we should doe: Then I hope he vvill admitte that he vvill enable vs by his grace to doe it, or else hovv should vve doe it? God surely doth not bind vs by commandement to any impossible thing, he is no tyrant, but telleth vs, that his yoke is sweet, and his burthen easie. And S. John vvitnesseth, that his commaundements are not heauy. He vvas farre off Matth. 11. Ioh. 5. from thinking that God vvould tye any man by lavv, to doe that which he was altogether vnable to performe. This in the end M. Perkins him∣selfe approueth. Master Perkins denies the consequence of the enthymem, viz. That therefore men haue free will to beleeue and re∣pent, because God commands them to beleeue and repent; you to helpe the matter, giue a reason of the consequence, God being a good Lord, will not command any man to do that, which he is no way able to do: therefore since God commands men to beleeue and repent, they haue free will to beleeue and repent. Here the consequence is worse than before; for who sees not that there may be other meanes of beleeuing & repenting? namely, inclining the wil by grace. The antecedent also is false: for God being a good Lord, may inioyne his seruant that, which he made him able to performe, Bernard. d grat. & lib. arb. fol. 263. Corruit de posse non pec∣care, in non posse non pec∣care. though by his owne fault he be now vnable. Obiect. III. If man haue no free will to sinne, or not to sinne, then no man is to be punished for his sinnes: because he finneth by a necessitie not to bee auoided. Answere, The reason is not good: for though man cannot but sinne, yet is the fault in
himselfe, and therefore he is to be punished; as a bankrupt is not therefore freed from his debtes, be∣cause he is not able to pay them: but the bils against him stand in force, because the debt comes through his owne default. 3 Obiect. If man haue no free will to sinne, or not to sin, then no man is to be punished for his sinnes, because he sinneth by a necessity, not to be auoided. He answereth, that the reason is not good; for, though man cannot but sinne, yet is the fault in himselfe, and therefore is to be punished. A∣gainst which, I say that this answere supposeth that which is false, to wit, that a man in sinne, cannot choose but sinne: for by the helpe of 1. Per. 3. God, who desireth all sinners conuersion, and thereunto affordeth grace sufficient; a sinner in a moment, may call for grace and repent him: and so choose whether he will sin or no, and consequently hath free vvill to sin or not to sin: And that example of a bankerupt is not to purpose, for he cannot when he will, satisfie his creditours, who content not them∣selues Not to your purpose, but to his very fit. vvith his repentance, vvithout repay of their money, as God doth. Here againe Master Perkins denies the consequence; that therefore a man is not to be punished for sinning, because he hath no free will to sinne, or not to sinne. The reason of his denial is that, which I answered in the second obiection: he may iustly be punished, though he haue not free will not to sinne, because it is by his owne fault that he hath it not. You replie, that the answere supposeth that which is false. The answere doth not suppose it, but, as I haue shew∣ed, plainly denies the consequence. How your conceit, that euery man hath helpe of God, so that he may repent and beleeue when he will, can stand with Austins iudgement before set downe, let euery man, that hath reason, consider. The example of the bankerupt is fully to the purpose; for which Master Perkins brings it, to shew, that a man is not alwaies therfore to be borne with, for not doing that which hee is inioyned, because hee cannot doe it: for when it is through his owne fault that hee cannot, why should hee escape? Now concerning the force of this argument, heare S. Augustines o∣pinion De duab. ani∣mab. contra Manich. in these wordes. Neither are we here to search obscure bookes to
learne, that no man is worthy of dispraise or punishment, which doth not that, vvhich he cannot doe: for (saith he) doe not shepheards vpon the dovvnes, From the doing vvhereof he is forbly restrai∣ned. sing these things? doe not Poets vpon the stages, act them? Doe not the vn∣learned in their assemblies, and the learned in their libraries acknovvledge them? Doe not maisters in the schooles, and Prelats in the pulpits, and fi∣nally all mankind throughout the vvhole vvorld, confesse and teach this? to wit, that no man is to be punished, because he did that, which he could not choose but doe. Should he not then (according to S. Augu∣stines VVho shall iu∣stisie the matter of originall sin, if no man may be punished for that vvhich he could not a∣uoide? censure) be hissed out of all honest company of men, that denieth this so manifest a truth; confessed by all Mankind? How grosse is this heresie, that so hoodeth a man, and hardneth him, that be he learned, yet he blusheth not to deny roundly, that which is so euident in reason, that euen naturall sense, doth teach it vnto shepheards? God of his in∣finite mercie, deliuer vs from this straunge light of the new Gospell. Saint Austin disputing in that booke See my an∣svvere about the Manichees in the Epistle dedicatorie. against the Ma∣nichees, who hold that there were two soules in euery crea∣ture, of two diuers substances; the one good, the other bad, by which they are forced to doe good or euill, as either of them could ouercome other; refutes them by this reason, among other, that if men doe well or ill, by constraint, they were neither to be praised, nor dispraised for it. That he is thus to be vnderstood, not onely the course of his disputa∣tion shewes, but also the definition that he brings of will: Will (saith De duabus animabus contra Manic. cap. 10. Austin) is a motion of the minde (Nullo co∣gente. no man con∣straining it) to Ad aliquid vel non amit∣tendum, vel adipiscendum. the not losing, or to the getting of something. I shewed before that we admit no such necessitie of sinning, but onely affirme, that whatsoeuer a naturall man doth, it is sinfull: so that wee grant him libertie from constraint, for the doing, or not doing this or that action; but denie, that any action he doth is free from sinne, and therefore he sins necessarily in all he doth. The second poynt. Of Originall sinne. The next point to be handled, is concerning Ori∣ginall sinne after baptisme; that is, how farforth it re∣maineth after baptisme. A point to bee well consi∣dered,
because hereupon depend many points of Poperie. I. Our consent. Conclus. I. They say naturall corruption after baptisme is abolished, and so say we: but let vs see how farre it is abolished. In originall sinne are three things; I. the punishment, which is the first and se∣cond death. II. Guiltines, which is the binding vp of the creature vnto punishment. III. the fault or the offending of God, vnder which I comprehend our guiltines in Adams first offence, as also the cor∣ruption of the heart: which is, a naturall inclination and pronenes to any thing that is euill, or against the law of God. For the first wee say, that after baptisme in the regenerate, the punishment of originall sin is taken away; There is no condemnation (saith the A∣postle) to them that be in Christ Iesus. Rom. 8. 1. For the second, that is, guiltines, we further condescend and say; that is also taken away in them that are borne a∣new: for considering there is no condemnation to them, there is nothing to bind them to punishment. Yet this caueat must be remembred, namely, that the guiltines is remoued from the person regenerate, not from the sinne in the person: but of this more afterward. Thirdly, the guilt in Adams first offence is pardoned. And touching the corruption of the heart, I auouch two things. I. That, that very po∣wer or strength whereby it raigneth in man, is taken away in the regenerate. II. That this corruption is abolished (as also the fault of euery actual sinne past) so farre forth as it is the fault and sinne of the man in
whom it is. Indeede it remaines till death, and it is sinne considered in it selfe, so long as it remaines, but it is not imputed vnto the person: and in that re∣spect is as though it were not; it being pardoned. Annotations vpon our Consent. First, we say not, that the punishment of Originall sinne is in it, or a∣ny part of it, but rather a due correction, and as it were an expulsion of it: this is but a peccadillo. VVhat is, but  peccadillo you must needes shevv you are spanish. Neither doe we say, that the punishment of originall sin is in it, or any part of it, but that, in handling that point, it is to be considered; much lesse doe we charge you with say∣ing so. What it is you call a peccadillo, or small sinne, I vn∣derstand not certainly. If you meane that originall sinne is small, and deserues no punishment, but a due correction, either Rom. 5. 12. 1. Cor. 15. 21. the death of all men in Adam is no punishment, or God punisheth without desert. But there lurketh a Serpent in that caueat; that the guiltines of O∣riginall sinne is remoued from the person regenerate, but not from the sinne in the person. The like he saith afterward of the fault, that it is a sinne still in it selfe, remaining in the man till death, but it is not impu∣ted to him, as being pardoned. Here hee quillets of very strange Do∣ctrine: the sinne is pardoned, and yet the guiltines of it, is not taken a∣way. Doth not a pardon take away from the fault pardoned, all bond of punishment due vnto it, and consequently all guiltines belonging to it? Who can deny this, vnlesse he know not, or care not what he say? If then Originall sinne be perdoned, the guiltines of it is also remoued from it selfe. Againe, what Philosophy, or reason, alloweth vs to say, that the offendour being pardoned for his offence, the offence in it self remaineth guilty? as though the offence separated from the person, VVhat vaine iions are these? were a substance, subiect to law, and capable of punishment: can Ori∣ginall sinne in itselfe die the first and second death, or be bound vp to them? What senselesse imaginations be these? The sinne is pardoned, so that the partie shall not be pu∣nisht for it: but it is not so pardoned, that in it self it hath not iust cause of punishment; and this both philosophie and reason allow; all our actuall sinnes are pardoned, as soone as we beleeue in Christ, and yet they are truly sinnes, when∣soeuer afterward they are committed by vs. Againe, how can the fault of Originall sinne remaine in the man re∣newed by Gods grace, although not imputed? can there be two con∣trarios
in one part of the subiect at once? can there be light and dark∣nes There can, though the same ting can not be vertue and vice in the same respect. He is not con∣tent it should be subiect, and therefore he la∣bours to purge and free it. It is taken a∣vvay, that it raignes not: not that it hath no svvay. And there ansvvered. in the vnderstanding, vertue and vice in the wil at the same instant? can the soule be both truly conuerted to God, and as truly auerted from him at one time? is Christ now agreed to dwell with Belial? and the holy Ghost oontent to inhabit a body subiect to sinne? all which must be granted contrary to both, Scripture, and naturall sense, if we admit the ault and deformitie of sinne to remaine in a man renewed, and in∣dued with Gods grace: vnlesse we would very absurdly imagine that the fault and guilt of sinne were not inherent and placed in their proper subiects, but were drawne thence, and penned vp in some other odd corner. Remember also gentle Reader, that here M. Perkins affirmeth the power, whereby the corruption of the hart raigneth in man, is taken a∣way in the regenerate: which is cleane contrary to the first propositi∣on, of his first reason following, as shall be there proued. Not being imputed, hinders not the being of the thing there, but rather proues it: for if it were not there, what fa∣uour were it not to impute it? Who knowes not that con∣traries may bee in one part of the same subiect at once, though not in the same respect? Do 1. Cor. 13. 9. we not, while we are here, know in part, and so remaine ignorant in part? Is not our wil imperfectly reformed? The holy Ghost is not con∣tent that the bodie he doth inhabit should be subiect to sinne, and therefore hee labours continually to free it from that subiection: but he is content to inhabit the man whom he hath begun to reforme, that hee may purge him tho∣roughly. II. The dissent or difference. Thus far wee consent with the Church of Rome: now the difference betweene vs stands not in the a∣bolishment, but in the manner, and the measure of the abolishment of this sinne. Papists teach, that Originall sinne is so farre sorth taken away after baptisme, that it ceaseth to bee a sin properly: and is nothing else but a want, defect, and weakenes, making the heart fitte and readie to
conceiue sinne: much like tinder, which though it be not fire of it selfe, yet is it very apt and fit to con∣ceiue fire. And they of the Church of Rome denie it to be sinne properly, that they might vphold some grosse opinions of theirs, namely, That a man in this life may fulfill the law of God: and doe good workes void of sinne: that hee may stand righteous at the barre of Gods iudgement by them. But wee teach otherwise, that though original sinne be taken away in the regenerate, and that in sundrie respects: yet doth it remaine in them after baptisme, not only as a want and weakenes, but as a sinne, and that pro∣perly: as may by these reasons be prooued. Reason I. Rom. 7. 17. Paul saith directly: It is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me: that is, originall sinne. The Papists answere againe, that it is so called improperly: because it commeth of sinne, and also is an occasion of sinne to be done. I approue this interpretation of S. Paul, as taken out of that aunci∣ent D. B. P. But Saint Paul expounds him∣selfe otherwise. Lib. 1. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 10. Lib  de nup∣t & concup. cap. 23. Is euery one a Papist tat a∣grees vvith you in any one poyn?  and famous Papist Saint Augustine: who saith expresly: Concupi∣scence, (whereof the Apostle speaketh) although it be called sinne, yet is it not so called, because it is sinne, but for that it is made by sinne: a vvri∣ting is called the hand, because it is made by the hand. And in an other place repeating the same, addeth. That it may also be called sinne, for that it is the cause of sinne: as cold is called sloathfull, because it maes a man sloathfull: so that the most profound Doctor Saint Augustine is sti∣led a formall Papist by M. Perkins, shall be well coursed by the plaine circumstances of the place. If S. Austin were a Papist in this point, because of this sentence; questionlesse hee was in the same point a Prote∣stant, because of some other which I will recite. Doest thou not marke (Aug. contra Iulian. Pelag. lib. 6. cap. 5. saith Austin) doest thou not perceiue, that he who doth so vehemently persecute his bodie, if he doth persecute no∣thing that displeaseth God, doth God great wrong, by persecuting his temple Frustra. without cause? Now what, I pray you, displeaseth God, but sinne? But this corruption wee speake of, is also
hated of God, and therefore day by day consumed. As the Physitian (saith Aug. in Ioan. tract. 41. Austin) hates the disease of the sicke man, and labours, by curing it, to driue away the disease, and ease the diseased: so doth God lab our by his grace in vs to consume sinne, and deliuer man. And that it is not onely sinne, as it comes from sinne, and causeth sinne, but also properly as a disobe∣dience, Austin shewes euidently by this similitude: As blindnes of heart (Aug. contra Iulian Pg. lib. 5. cap. 3. saith he) is both a sinne, whereby we beleeue not in God; and a punishment of sinne, whereby the proud heart is worthily punished; and a cause of sinne, when any euill is com∣mitted by the error of the heart: so that concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good spirit lusteth is both sinne, because there is in it disobedience against the gouernment of the minde; and a punishment of sinne, because it is Reddita est meritis inobe dientis. laid by desert vpon the disobedient; and the cause of sinne, by the Defectione conionis. fault of consent, or the Contagione nacen . contagion of birth. Yea Austin doubts not to say (as we doe) that the guilt of concupiscence yet remaining, is pardoned, that it may not be imputed for sinne. In them which are regenerate (saith Aug. vbi su∣pra. Austin) when they receiue for∣giuenes of all sinnes whatsoeuer, it must needes be, that the guilt also of this concupiscence yet remaining is forgiuen, that, as I said, it may not be imputed In peccatum. for sinne. Further it is plaine, that Austin acknowledged it to be sinne, because he Aug. contra Iulian. Pelag. lib. 2. receiues and allowes of Ambrose his opinion, who calles it iniquitie, because it is vniust that the flesh should lust against the spirit. This sinne Ad Rom. 7. Chrysostome and Theophylact vnderstand, to be our lothfull and corrupt will, and a violent inclination to euill. And Lombard. lib. 3. ist. 19. Peter Lombard saith, that we are not altogether redeemed by Christ from the guilt or fault, but so that it reignes not in vs. But by the circumstances of the text, it is sinne properly: for in the words following, S. Paul saith, that this sinne dwelling in him, made him to doe the euill which he hated. And. verse 24. he crieth out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from this body of death?
For saith he, that S. Paul there takes sinne properly, appeares by the words following, That this sinne dvvelling in him, made him to doe the e∣uill vvhich he haa. How proues this, that sinne there must be taken properlie: it rather proues, that it must be taken improperly: for if it He ated it  regenerate; he did it vvilling  s  ate. made him doe the euill, which he hated: then could it not be sin pro∣perly, for sinne is not committed, but by the consent and liking of the vvill: But S. Paul did not like that euill, but hated it, and thereby vvas so farre off from sinning, that he did a most vertuous deed in resisting and ouercomming that euill. As vvitnesseth S. Augustine, saying: Rea∣son sometimes resisteth manfully, and ruleth raging concupiscence; vvhich Lib. . de Gen. cont. Mnic. cap. 14. being done, we sinne not, but for that conflict are to be crowned. This first circumstance then alleadged by M. Perkins, doth rather make against him, than for him. The reason lies thus: Originall sinne dwelling in the A∣postle, made him doe that euill he hates: therefore it is sin properly. You answere, it rather prooues the contrarie; be∣cause y• which the Apostle doth with hatred of it, is not sin: for sinne is not committed, but with liking and consent of the will. I answere, that whatsoeuer a man doth against the law of God, it is sinne, whether he like or mislike it. Second∣ly, that the consent of the will makes it not sinne, but our sinne. Thirdly, the Apostle denies not, that he doth this euil with his will, for else he would not doe it: but affirmes that he doth it against his iudgement, as Arist. Ethi lib. 7. cap. 3. euen naturall men doe, that are ouercome of their affections. Witnes Medea in Metaor. lib. 7.—Video me∣ora proboq deteriora ∣quor.—Ouid: I see what is good, and like it, and doe that is euill. Otherwise such actions of theirs should not be sinne. I denie not that the regenerate haue a greater hatred of the sinnes they fall into, and vpon a better ground; but yet the naturall men also oftentimes doe that, which they mislike in general, though they do it willingly. That this was the A∣postles meaning, he that will reade the Rom. 7. 15. Vers. 23. 25. chapter may easily perceiue: I allow not (saith he) that I doe: that is, I know it to bee euill, and I would faine leaue it vndone: but the strength of my corruption is such, that I am carried away to the doing of it; and so, because I am but in part regenerate, in part I serue God, and in part sinne. As for that you adde out of De Genes. contra Mani. lib. 2 cap. 1 S. Austin, it makes not any whit against vs, who ac∣knowledge
that reason, especially being regenerate, often∣times ouercomes concupiscence & shall haue reward for it. Yet are not Austins words as you report them; but thus: Rea∣son sometimes manfullie Reft, at∣que compet. bridles and restraines concupiscence Etiam com∣. euen when it is stirred: when it so happens we fall not into sin, but Cum aliquā∣ta luctatione, coronaur. with some little wrastling are crowned. But sometimes againe, as Rom. 7. 2. the Apostle plainly confesseth, it is vanquished by sinne, or naturall corruption, and drawne to the com∣mitting of some actuall sinne inward or outward; which being euident, Master Perkins reason is not answered, as the sight of it may prooue. That which dwelling in S. Paul made him doe that he hates, is sinne properly. Indeede why should he hate it if it be not sinne? But originall sinne dwelling in him, made him doe that he hates. Therefore originall sinne is properly sinne. Novv to the second. O wretched man that J am, who shall deliuer mee from this body of death? Here is no mention of sinne: hovv this may be  Sinne is impli∣ed in that body of death. dravvne to his purpose, shall be examined in his argument vvhere he repeateth it: so that there is not one poore circumstance of the text vvhich he can find, to proue S. Paul to take sinne there properly. That originall sinne, called sinne by the Apostle, is sinne  Chemnit. ex∣am. part. 1. de reliq. orig. pecca Whitak. de orig. peccat. lib. 3. cap. 4. properly, our Diuines proue by the description the Apostle makes of it in Rom. 7. 18. Vers. 15. Vers. 23. that chapter: It is not good. It hinders vs from doing good. It drawes vs to the doing of euill. It makes the Apostle crie out, Oh wretched man that I am! To which they adde out of other places, Heb. 12. 1. It is an euill that doth compasse vs about. Gal. 5. 14. Rom 7. 8. It fights against the Commandement, Thou shalt not lust. Col. 3. 5. 9. D. B. P. This conclusion is faultie.  It is an euill to be crucified and mortified. Vpon al these descriptions of it we conclude, that it is truly and properly sinne. Novv I vvill proue by diuers, that he speakes of sinne improperly. First, by the former part of the same sentence: Jt is not I that doe it: l sinne is done and committed properly by the person in vvhom it is: but this vvas not done by S. Paul. Ergo. Let vs now see your proofes to the contrarie: the first whereof you frame thus;
All sinne is done and committed properly by the person in whom it is: But this was not done by S. Paul. Ergo. First, your proposition is false: secondly, your conclu∣sion is either false, or not to the purpose. Your proposition hath two faults: the one, that in stead of saying, All that is sinne properly is done, &c. You say, All that is sinne, is done pro∣perly; applying properly to the committing of sinne, and not to the nature of it. The other fault is, that the matter of your proposition is vntrue. For there is some sinne, namely originall, which is not done by him, in whom it is, but is bred with him. If in your assumption you meane, that the Apostle doth not properly doe the euill which he hates, you are deceiued. For whether it be an inward action of the minde, or an outward of the bodie, it must needes be performed by some nature that hath a true being: but there is no third nature in man, besides the soule and bo∣die, and what is done by either of these, is done by the man, of whom they are parts. If you say, it is done by a vicious qualitie in man, that qualitie hauing subsistence in man, as in the subiect of it, is not properly the doer of the action, but the facultie, by which a man is fitted for the doing of it. To your proofe I answere, that Rom. 7. 1. the Apostle consefleth he did it; I allow not that which I doe. What I hate, that doe I. I doe that which I would not. The euill which I would not, that Vers. 16. Vers. 19. Vers. 25. . doe I. And at last he concludes: I my selfe in my minde serue the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sinne. Where he tea∣cheth vs to expound, his doing, or not doing. I doe not the euill, which I hate, that is, in my minde, or in respect of my re∣generation; I doe, that is, in regard of my corruption. In my minde, I my selfe serue the law of God; in my flesh, I my selfe serue the law of sinne. I doe both my selfe; but the one in my minde regenerate, the other in my flesh vnregenerate. If you will conclude (for that you leaue at large in this reason, it should seeme of purpose, because in the other two you set downe your conclusion expressely) Therefore it is not properly sinne, your conclusion is false: because it con∣taines
more than is in the antecedent. If your meaning be, either that originall corruption is not sinne, or that the euill which S. Paul hates, is not sinne (as one of these two you must needes meane) your conclusion is from the purpose. For the question is not, whether originall sinne be sinne, which both parts grant, but whether it be properly sinne, or no: neither doe you vndertake to prooue, that the euill which the Apostle did, with hatred of it, is not sinne. So that this first proofe of yours is neither for you, nor against vs. Secondly, out of those vvords, I know there is not in me, that is in my flesh, any good: And after. I see an other law in my members, resisting the D. B. P. The flesh and the soule are not contrarie, but the flesh and the spirit.  lavv of my mind. Thus, sinne properly taken is seated in the soule: but that vvas seated in the flesh, ergo it vvas no sinne properly. Sinne properly taken is seated in the soule: But that was not seated in the soule: but in the flesh. Therefore it was no sinne properly. As the image of God, after which wee were created, was though principally, yet not onely in the soule: so the cor∣ruption of nature, wherby that image is defaced, hath place both in soule and bodie, and therefore your proposition is not simply true. But your assumption is simply false. For by saying it was seated in the flesh, you must needs denie that it was seated in the soule, or else your syllogisme will be nothing worth. Now by flesh the Apostle meanes nature vnregenerate, both soule and bodie. Rom. 8. 7. . The wisedome of the flesh is nmitie against God; signifying the very best part of a mans soule. Hence it is that he calles a naturall man, , animalem, and wils vs to Eph. 4. 23. Col. 2. 18. be renewed in the spirit of our mind, affirming that some are puft vp with their fleshly minde: and I pray you consider whence these workes of the flesh arise; Gal. 5. 20. Idolatrie, witchcraft, hatred, debate, heresies, &c. The Apostle (Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. c. 3 saith Austin) ascribes those sinnes to the flesh, which beare principallsway in the diuell, who, it is certaine, hath no flesh: for he saith, enmitie, contention, emulation, enuie, are workes of the flesh, the head and fountaine whereof is pride, which raigneth in the diuell, though he haue no flesh. Yea De amiss. gra. lib. 5. c. 15 Bellarmine himselfe grants, though with much ado, that concupiscence, though
it be (as he saith) principally in the sensuall part, yet hath place also in the minde. The third and last, is taken out of the first words of the next Chap∣ter. There is novv therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ Ie∣sus, that vvalke not according to the flesh, &c. Whence I thus argue: there is no condemnation to them, that haue that sinne dvvelling in them, if they vvalke not according vnto the fleshly desires of it: there∣fore it is no sin properly: For the vvages of sin is death, that is eternall Rom. 6. damnation. If (say you) there be no condemnation to them that haue originall sinne dwelling in them, so they walke not ac∣cording to the fleshly desires of it, then it is not properly sinne. But there is no condemnation to them that haue originall sinne dwelling in them, so they walke not according to the fleshly desires of it. Therefore it is not sin properly. If by these words, there is no condemnation, you meane they shall not be condemned, I denie the consequence of your proposition. For it may be properly sinne, though they in whom it is haue it not imputed to them to condemna∣tion. I denie your assumption, whether you meane they are not condemned, de facto, or they deserue not condemna∣tion, de iure. In the former sense you teach, that all infants which die vnbaptized, are shut out of heauen: and yet none of them walke according to the fleshly desires of originall sinne. In the latter sense we and you are wholy of opinion, that originall sinne is a iust cause of condemnation, euen to infants, who actually sinne not. The Rom. 8. 1. place alleaged by you, serues not to prooue either of your propositions, as you haue set them downe: for the Apostle saith not, that there is no condemnation to them, which walke not according to the flesh∣ly desires of originall sinne; but to them which are in Christ Ie∣sus. I grant that all, but they which are in Christ, doe walke according to such desires; yet it is not all one to say the one and the other. For you seeme to bring that as a reason, why there is no condemnation to them: whereas the A∣postle addes these words to shew, that they which are in
Christ, do not walk after the flesh, but after the spirit; there∣in concluding his former disputation, of Rom. 2. 4. 5. iustification, and Rom. 6. 7. sanctification. Thence I reason thus. That which once was sinne properly, and still remai∣ning in man maketh him to sinne, and intangleth him in the punishment of sinne, and makes him miserable: that is sinne properly. But originall sinne doth all these. Ergo. Novv to Master Perkins Argument in forme as he proposeth it. That vvhich vvas once sinne properly, and still remaining in man, maketh him to sinne, and intangleth him in the punishment of sinne, and makes him mise∣rable, that is sinne properly: But Originall sinne doth all these ergo. The Maor, vvhich (as the learned knovv) should consist of three vvords, containes foure seuerall points, and vvhich is vvorst of all, not Jt may consist of 40. poynts, and yet but three vvords according to Logick.  one of them true. If you meane three words, as Grammar speaks of words, that you say, is false: for any proposition may containe three hundred such words, and yet not offend against Lo∣gike. If you vnderstand three words, as a Logician, there may be fourtie seuerall points in a proposition, and yet but three words, viz. The antecedent part, or subiect: secondly, the consequent part, predicate, or attribute: and thirdly, the bond, by which they are coupled together. So that herein you haue shewed either little skill, or little honestie, to blame him for foure seuerall points, in stead of three words, as if his syllogisme had (as Logicians speake) foure termes, and so were false in the forme of it. The foure seueral points are these. 1. That which was once sinne properly, 2. makes him to sinne, 3. intangles him in the punishment of sinne, 4. makes him miserable: all which make the first word, or antecedent of the proposition: the consequent is, sinne properly; the 3. bond that ties these two together, the verbe, is. Now let both learned and vnlearned iudge, whether the fault be in Master Perkins, or in your ignorance, or cauilling. To the first; that vvhich remaineth in man after Baptisme, common∣ly called Concupiscence, vvas neuer a sinne properly: but only the ma∣teriall part of sinne, the formall and principall part of it, consisting in
the depriuation of Originall iustice, and a voluntary auersion from the lavv of God, the vvhich is cured by the Grace of God, giuen to the bap∣tised, and so that vvhich vvas principall in Originall sinne, doh not re∣maine in the regenerate. It hath alreadie been prooued, that it is sinne properly euen after Baptisme; if you meane that concupiscence, the Rom. 7. 7. Gal. 5. 16. Apostle speakes of, against the commandement. If you do not, what haue we to doe with it in this question? Concu∣piscence, or the facultie of desiring, is no otherwise affected to sinne, than reason is: but the blindnes of the vnderstan∣ding, and the vitiousnes of the will, which the Apostle cals concupiscence, are part of originall sinne. The naturall fa∣culties are not the parts, but rather the seate of it, or the sub∣iect, which in some respect may be said to be the matter. Sure the forme is (as of all sinnes in general) the aberration from, or the contrarines of it to the law of God. The depri∣uation (you should say the absence) of originall iustice, is comprised in the aberration I spake of, and so is that vo∣luntarie auersion from God, and goodnes; besides which, there is also an euill qualitie (I know not how else to call it) whereby we incline to that which is against the law of God. This we call originall sinne, or naturall corruption, because we haue it from Adam, the originall of all mankinde, and that from our first being, together with our nature, and in our nature; though by creation it was not in our nature. This is helped by the power of Gods spirit, through the grace of sanctification, both in the principall point, and in the accessories; yet is not the concupiscence wholy taken away, but being deadly wounded, dies by little and little in the children of God, as they are assured it shall by the out∣ward and inward baptisme, through the power of Christs death and resurrection. Notwithstanding as long as wee liue in this world, it remaines the same thing it was before baptisme, euen sinne properly; but the hurt it hath is vnre∣couerable, and the strength abated. Neither doth that vvhich remaineth, make the person to sin, (vvhich vvas the second point,) vnlesse he vvillingly consent vnto it, as hath bin proued heretofore: it allureth and intiseth him to sin, but hath not po∣vver
to constraine him to it, as Master Perkins also himselfe before con∣fessed. I deny your consequence: it makes him to sinne, though it doe not constraine him, as the spirit of God makes vs be∣leeue, though he inforce vs not to it. Novv to the third, and intangleth him in the punishment of sinne: hovv doth Originall sinne intangle the regenerate in the punishment of sin; if all the guiltines of it be remoued from his person, as you taught be∣fore in our Consent? Mendacem memorem esse oportet: Either confesse that the guilt of Original sinne is not taken avvay from the regenerate, or else you must vnsay this, that it intangleth him in the punishment of sinne. This doubt is alreadie answered, that it intangles him; because it makes him doe that, by which he is guiltie of sin, and deserues punishment, howsoeuer the Lord pardons his sinne in Christ. Novv to the last clause, that the reliques of Originall sinen make a man miserable, a man may be called vvretched and miserable, in that he is in disgrace vvith God, and so subiect to his heauy displeasure: and that which maketh him miserable in this sense, is sin: but S. Paul taketh not the vvord so here, but for an vnhappie man exposed to the danger of sinne, and to all the miseries of this vvorld, from vvhich vve should haue been exempted, had it not been for Originall sinne, after vvhich sort he vseth the same vvord, If in this life only we vvere hoping in Christ, we were more miserable then all men: not that the good Christians were 1. Cor. 15. farthest out of Gods fauour, and more sinfull then other men: but that they had fevvest vvorldly comforts, and the greatest crosses, and thus much in confutation of that formall argument. It is strange, you should so confidently set downe an vn∣truth in writing, whereof you may so easily and certainely be conuinced. The 1. Cor. 15. 19. . Rom. 7. 24. . Apostle doth not vse the same word, but another, that signifies to be pitied, We were of all men most to be pitied. But that the Apostle complaines of miserie in respect of sinne by that word, the vse of it otherwhere may prooue. The Reuel. . 17. holy Ghost saith of the Church of Lao∣dicea, that she was . miserable and wretched (the word  signifying there, either the miserie of sinne, or pitie for that miserie) and beggerly and blinde, and naked; Houle yee rich men (saith Iam. 5. 1. S. Iames) for the . miseries that shall come vpon you. The Apostle speakes not a word of any worldly
miseries (as you expound him) but of the miserie he was in by the law of sinne, which he serued; and surely if in it selfe it be not sinne, why should the Apostle so much complaine of it, since by the trouble it put him to, it did but occasion him to shew his valour (and as you Papists say) was a means to make him deserue a crowne of glorie? Reason II. Infants baptized and regenerate, die the bodily death before they come to the yeeres of dis∣cretion: therfore original sin in them is sin properly: or els they should not die, hauing no cause of death in them: for death is is the wages of sinne, as the A∣postle saith, Rom. 6. 23. & Rom. 5. 12. Death entred in∣to the world by sinne. As for actuall sinne they haue none, if they die presently after they are borne be∣fore they come to any vse either of reason, or af∣fection. Ansvvere. The cause of the death of such Innocents, is either the distemperature of their bodies, or externall violence: and God vvho freely bestowed their liues vpon them, may when it pleaseth him as free∣ly take their liues from them, especially when he meanes to recompence them with the happy exchaunge of life euerlasting. True it is, that if our first parents had not sinned, no man should haue died, but haue bin both long preserued in Paradise, by the fruit of the wood of life, and fi∣nally translated without death into the Kingdome of heauen: and ther∣fore A ridiculous translation. VVood is not vvont to beare fuite. Rom. 5. Rom. 6. is it said most truely o S Paul. Death entred into the vvorld by sin. But the other place, the vvages of sinne is death, is fouly abused, for the Apostle there by death vnderstandeth eternall damnation, as appeareth by the opposition of it to life euerlasting: and by sinne there meaneth not Originall, but Actuall sinne, such as the Romans committed in their infidelity, the wages whereof if they had no repented them, had bn hel fire: now to inferre that Innocents are punished with corporall death, for Originall sinne remaining in them: because that eternall death is the due hire of Actuall sinne, is either to shw great want of iudgement, or else very strangely to peruert the words of holy Scripture. Let this also not be forgotten, that he himselfe acknowledged in our Consent: Euery one bap∣tized is no re∣generae. that the punishment of Originall sin was taken away in Baptisme from the regenerate: how then doth he here say, that he doth die the death for it? Master Perkins reason is thus to be framed:
That, which is the cause of bodilie death to infants Bap∣tised and regenerate, is sinne properly: But Originall sinne is cause of bodily death to infants Bap∣tised and regenerate. Therefore it is sinne properly. The proposition he proues by two Rom. 6. 23. & 5. 12. places of Scripture: the assumption by shewing, that they haue no actuall sinne; and therefore, since death is not, but where sinne is, originall sinne is cause of bodily death to infants, that dye before they come to any vse of reason or affection. First you deny the assumption, viz. that originall sinne is the cause of bo∣dily death to infants. But the reason of your deniall is in∣sufficient. For it doth not follow, that originall sinne is not the cause of death to them, because the meanes of their death is distemperature, or externall violence. For then the death of many reprobate men, were no iudgement of God against sinne: and though God, of his absolute power, may take away any mans life, because he gaue it him: yet it plea∣sed his Maiestie to binde himselfe to a course in the creati∣on, that death should be the consequent of sinne. Gen. 2, 17. The day thou eatest thou shalt dye; so that wheresoeuer we see death, we may conclude there is sinne, either really, as in all A∣dams posteritie, or by imputation, as in Christ. Then you come to the proofe of the proposition, where you graunt the Rom. 5. 12. one place to be rightly alleaged, because death indeede had not found any place of entrie, had it not been for sinne. Rom. 6. 23. The other text you say is folly abused; first, because the Apostle vnderstands by it eternall damna∣tion: he doth so principally; but why may not death be ta∣ken as largely here, as Gen. 2. 17. it is there, from whence all these phrases of Scripture come? But there it signifies both kinds of death. Here S. Paul chiefely puts them in minde of the greater, hauing shewed before, that bodily death came into the world by the meanes of sinne; and although the A∣postle be occasioned to deliuer that speech, by reason of the Romans actuall transgressions; it doth not abate, but shar∣pen the edge of his exhortation, to expound the place of
all sinne whatsoeuer: for if there be no sinne, no not origi∣nall, but shall haue death for wages, certainely these actuall transgressions shall be punisht with it. Master Perkins in In our Con∣sent. the place alleaged speakes of that pu∣nishment, which is condemnation, as the very words follo∣wing declare; in which he prooues, that the punishment is taken away, by that of the Apostle: Rom. 8. 1. There is no condemna∣tion to them, that are in Christ Iesus. It is true, that bodily death also is chaunged from being a punishment; yet the reason of that death is the dwelling of sinne in the regene∣rate, which, by the dissoluing of the bodie through death, must be abolisht. If it had pleased God to haue giuen Ma∣ster Perkins life, that he might haue seene this your excepti∣on, being better acquainted with your sleights, and his owne meaning, he would haue answered you more fully, as in other poynts, so in this also. Reason III. That which lusteth against the spirit, and by lusting tempteth, and in tempting intiseth and draweth the heart to sinne, is for nature sinne it selfe; but concupiscence in the regenerate lusteth a∣gainst the spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and tempteth as I haue said, Iam. 1. 14. God tempteth no man, but euery man is temp∣ted when he is drawne away by his owne concupiscence, and is inticed: then when lust conceiueth, it bringeth forth sinne. And therefore it is sinne properly: such as the fruite is, such is the tree. Ansvvere, The first proposition is not true: for not euery thing that intiseth vs to sinne, is sinne: or else the Apple that allured Eue to sinne, had been by nature sinne: and euery thing in this world one vvay or an other tempteth vs to sinne: according vnto that of S. John. All that is in the vvorld, is the Concupiscence of the flesh, and the Concupiscence of 1. Epist. 2. the eyes, and Pride of life: So that it is very grosse to say, that euery thing vvhich allureth to sinne, is sinne it selfe, and as vvide is it from all morall But not from spirituall. vvisdome to affirme, that the first motions of our passions be sinnes. For euen the very heathen Philosophers could distinguish, betweene sodaine passions of the mind and vices: teaching that passions may be bridled by the vnderstanding, and brought by due ordering of them into the ring of reason, and so made vertues rather then vices. And that same
text vvhich M. Perkins bringeth to persvvade these temptations to be sinnes, proues the quite contrary. God tempteth no man; but euery man is tempted, vvhen he is dravvne avvay by his ovvne concupiscence, and is allured: aftervvard vvhen concupiscence hath conceiued, it bringeth forth Iacob. 1. sinne: Marke the words well. First, Concupiscence tempteth, and allu∣reth by some euill motion, but that is no sinne, vntill afterward it do con∣ceiue, that is, obtaine some liking o our will, in giuing eare to it, and not expelling it so speedely as we ought to doe the suggestion of such an e∣nemie. The first proposition is true, and your answere but a shift; wherein you craftely leaue out the principall poynt, to make a shew of reason. The apple that allured Eue to sinne, did not lust against the spirit, which is the first and chiefe poynt of Master Perkins proposition, whereof you make no mention. Arist. Ethic. lib. 2. cap. 1. Philosophers speake according to their ignorance, graunting to a man seeds and sparkes of vertue by nature, not vnderstanding, that it was sinne to lust, because Rom. 7. 7. the law of God, which forbad it, was vnknowne vnto them. Besides they spake of the passions, as naturall things, and so they are not sinne, but good, as being created by God: but our question is of them, as they are degenerated from their nature, and corrupt; a mere mysterie to naturall men. The which that most deepe Doctor Saint Augustine, sieth out very profoundly in these words. VVhen the Apostle S. Iames saith, euery man  Lib. 6. in Iud. cap. 5. is tempted, being dravvne avvay and allured by his Concupiscence, and af∣tervvard Concupiscence, vvhen it hath conceiued, bringeth forth sin: Tru∣ly in these words, the thing brought forth is distinguished, from that vvhich bringeth it forth. The damme is concupiscence, the fole is sinne. But concu∣piscence doth not bring sinne forth, vnlesse it conceiue, (so then it is not sin of it selfe) and it conceiueth not, vnlesse it dravv vs, that is, vnlesse it ob∣taine the consent of our vvill, to commit euill. The like exposition of the same place, and the difference betweene the pleasure tempting, that runneth before, and the sinne which followeth after, Unlesse vve resist manfully, may be seene in S. Cyrill, so that by the iudgement of the most Lib. 4. in. Io∣han. cap. 51. learned auncient Fathers, the text of S. James cited by M. Perkins, to proue concupiscence to be sinne, disproueth it very soundly: to that reason of his, Such as the fruit is, such is the Tree: I ansvvere, that not concupiscence, but the vvill of man is the Tree: vvhich bringeth forth, either good, or bad fruit, according vnto the disposition of it: concupi∣scence is onely an intiser vnto badde.
Austin and Cyril speake as the Apostle doth of actuall sinne, which is committed by those degrees: and surely if concupiscence be not sinne, without consent, because the Apostle saith it brings forth sinne, when it hath conceiued, by the like reason consent makes not sinne deadly, because th Apostle saith also; that sinne when it is finisht brings forth death. Now we know consent (euen with you) may be deadly sinne, and with vs alwaies is: so concupiscence is of it selfe sinne, though not in that height and kind that outward actuall sinnes are. The first motion to wickednes is sinne, because it is an action against the commaundement, Exod. 20. 17. Rom. 7. 7. Thou shalt not lust, consent increaseth the wickednes of it: The outward act makes vp the sinne which the Apostle and the Austin, Cyril. Fathers here speake of. It should seeme the author of your glosse saw this; who expounds, Brings forth sinne, Glossa ordin. Iacob. 1. 14. Perducit ad actum. Brings it to the acte, or into action. If the Apostle saith (as he doth) That concupiscence brings forth sinne, out of doubt concupiscence is the tree: and as in the tree the naughti∣nes of the sap is blamed for the badnes of the fruite; so is the sinfulnes of the will for the euill actions: though (pro∣perly) neither the sap, but the tree, brings forth the fruite, nor concupiscence, but the will, is the mother of sinne: But that concupiscence is properly sinne, I shewed before. Concupiscence against which the spirit lusteth, is sinne,  August. cont. Iu. lib. 5. cap. 3 because in it there is disobedience against the rule of the minde: and it is the punishment of sinne because it befalles man for the merits of his disobedience: and it is the cause of sinne. But S. Augustine saith, That concupiscence is sinne, because in it there is  Lib. 5. cont. Iulianum c. 3. disobedience against the rule of the mind, &c. I ansvvere, that S. Augu∣stine in more then tvventy places of his vvorkes teacheth expresly, that concupiscence is no sinne, if sinne be taken properly: vvherefore vvhen he once calleth it sinne, he taketh sinne largely as it comprehendeth, not only all sinne, but also all motions and intiements to sinne; in which sense concupiscence may be tearmed sinne: but is so called very sel∣dome of S. Augustine, but more commonly an euill, as in the same wke, is to be seene euidently: where he saith; That grace in Baptisme doth re∣nevve Lib 6. cap. 5. a man perfectly, so farre forth as it appertaineth to the deliuerance
of him from all manner of sinne; but not so as it freeth him from all euill: so that concupiscence remaining after baptisme, is no manner of sinne, in S. Augustines iudgement: but may be called euill, because it prouo∣keth vs to euil. To this place of S. Augustine I will ioyne that other like, Tract. 41. in Iohan. which M. Perkins quoteth in his 4. reason: where he saith, That sinne dwelleth alwaies in our members. The same answere serueth, that sinne there, is taken improperly: as appeareth by that he seates it in our mem∣bers: for according vnto S. Augustine and all the learned, the subiect of sinne being properly taken, is not in any part of the body, but in the will This vvas an∣svvered be∣fore. and soule, and in the same passage he signifieth plainely, that in Bap∣tisme all sinnes and iniquity is taken away, and that there is lefte in the regenerate, only an infirmity or weakenes. Hauing prooued so manifestly in the former sections by Scripture, that originall corruption is properly sinne, wee are desirous so to expound the Fathers, as they may best a∣gree with the truth of Scripture: if you had rather set them against the Scripture, not we, but you, are to be blamed as enemies to them, if any disgrace fall vpon them. Reason V. The iudgement of the ancient Church. August. epist. 29. Charitie in some is more, in some lesse, in some none: the highest degree of all which cannot be increa∣sed, is in none, as long as man liues vpon earth. And as long as it may be increased, That which is lesse thē it should be, is in fault: by which fault it is, that there is no iust man vpon earth that doth good and sinneth not: by which fault none liuing shall be iustified in the sight of God. For which fault, if we say we haue no sinne, there is no truth in vs: for which also though we profit neuer so much, it is ne∣cessarie for vs to say, Forgiue vs our debts, though all our words, deedes, and thoughts bee alreadie forgiuen in bap∣tisme. Ans. That here is neuer a word touching concupiscence, or to proue Originall sinne to remaine after Baptisme, which is in question but on∣ly hat the best men for want of perfect Charity, doe oten sin venially, which we graunt. Indeede, as you pare it, leauing out all these words, By which fault none liuing shall be iustified in the sight of God. For which fault if we say we haue no sin, there is no truth in vs, there
is not much to prooue the poynt; but your &c. hath cut off that which is most materiall, viz. By reason of our defect or failing in charitie, which comes from our naturall corrup∣tion, no man can say he is without sinne, and by reason of which, we must call vpon God for pardon of our sinnes. Indeede Augustine in sundrie places seemes to de∣nie concupiscence to bee sinne after baptisme: but his meaning is, that concupiscence in the regenerate is not the sinne of the person in whom it is. For thus he expounds himselfe, Ad Valer. l. 1 c. 24. This is not to haue sinne, not to be guiltie of sinne. And, Lib. 2. cont. Iul. The law of sinne in baptisme is remitted and not ended. And, Tract. 42. in Iob. Let not sinne raigne: he saith not, let not sinne be, but let it not raigne. For as long as thou liuest, of necessitie sinne will be in thy members: at the least, looke it raigne not in thee, &c. M. Perkins hauing thus strongly (as you see) fortified his position with that one sentence of S. Augustine (which hath also nothing for his pur∣pose) insteed of all antiquitie: confesseth ingenuously, that S. Augustine in sundrie places denieth concupiscence to be sin: but expounds him to meane, that it is not sin in that person, but in it selfe: which is alrea∣dy confuted: for sinne that is an accident, and, so properly inherent in his subiect, cannot be at all, if it be not in some person, and the sinne of And already ansvvered. the same person. Master Perkins, as the places he brings out of Austin, shew, doth not deny it simply to be the sinne of the person, in whom it is, but to be his to condemnation; of it selfe it deserues to be punisht with eternall death, but in him it is not a sinne procuring this punishment. August. ad Valeian. lib. 1. cap. 24. Lib. 3. Instit. cap. 3. num. 10. This is not to haue sinne, not to be guiltie of sinne. But it the Protestant Reader desire to be well assured of Saint Augu∣stines opinion in this point: let him see what their Patriarke Iohn Caluin saith of it: where thus he writeth. Neither is it needfull to labour much in searching out what the olde writers thought of this point, when one Augu∣stine may serue the turne: who with great diligence hath faithfully collected togither all their sentences. Let the readers therefore take out of him, if they desire to haue any certainety of the iudgement of antiquity. Hitherto some∣what honestly: What followeth? Moreouer betweene him and vs, there is this difference: that he truly dares not call the disease of concupiscence a sin, but to expresse it, is content to vse the word of infirmity, then loe doth he say,
that it is made sinne, when the acte of our consent doth ioyne with it. But we hld that very thing to be sinne, wherewith a man is in any sort tickled. Obserue first, good Reader, that S. Augustines opinion with him carri∣eth the credit of all antiquitie: Which is the cause that I cite him more In some que∣stions of which he did collect their opinions; as Caluin ex∣pounds himselfe in the former sentence. often against them. Secondly, that he is tly on our side: teaching con∣cupiscence not to be sinne, vnlesse we doe consent vnto it. Lastly, learne to mislike the blind boldnes of such Masters: who hauing so highly cō∣mended. S. Augustines iudgement in this very matter, and aduised all men to follow it: Doth notwithstanding flie from it himselfe. Presuming that some vvould be so shalovv-vvitted as not to espie him, or else con∣tent to relie more vpon his onely credit, then vpon the authority of all the auncient Fathers. For a tast of whoe consent with S. Augustine in this question, I will here put the sentences of some few, that I need not hereafter returne to rehearse them. Caluin saith not (as you translate him) Betweene him and vs there is this difference; but this Videri potest interesse. may seeme to be the diffe∣rence; because he was loth to speake so plaine, as we now are forced to doe, though in Caluin his opinion, his iudge∣ment was all one with ours. S. Chrysostome saith, Passions be not sinnes of themselues, but the vnbrid∣led excesse of them doth make sinnes: And that J may for example sake  Homil. 11. in epist. ad Rom. touch one of them: concupiscence is not a sinne; but when passing measure it breakes his bounds, then loe it is adultery; not in regard of concupiscence, but in respect of the excessiue and vnlavvfull riot of it. S. Bernard (vvhom M. Perkins often citeth against vs, and therefore may sometimes be alleadged for vs) hath these vvords: Sinne is at the Serm. de sex tribul. doore, but if thou doe not open it, it vvill not enter in: lust tickleth at the heart; but vnlesse thou vvillingly yeeld vnto it, it shall doe thee no hurt: vvithold thy consent, and it preuaileth not. S. Augustine and S. Cyrill, haue been cited already, S. Hierome and S. Gregory shall be hereafter: vvho vvith the confession of Caluin, may serue sufficiently to proue, that approued antiquitie is vvholy for vs. And And ansvve∣red alreadie. if any desire to knovv the founder of our aduersaries Doctrine in this point: let him read the 64. heresie recorded by that auncient and holy Bishop Epiphanius: vvhere he registreth one Proclus an old rotten se∣ctarie to haue taught, that sinnes are not taken avvay in Baptisme, but See my an∣svvere to the Epistle dedica∣torie, and to the Prologue.  are only couered, which is as much to say, as sinne remaineth still in the person regenerate, but is not imputed to him. Which is iust M. Perkins, and our Protestants position. Chrysostome speakes of the affections, as they are natu∣rall; in which respect indeede they are not sinnes, but only as they are disordered against the law of God in their crea∣tion. The concupiscence he names, is not originall sinne,
whereof we dispute, but the naturall desire which Adam had by creation, and which is not in it selfe euill; but, as by our corruption, it inclines now to euill, and hath euill ming∣led with it in the act of desiring. Any man may see, that Bernard intends not to proue, that originall sinne is properly sinne, but that it shall not pre∣uaile to make vs commit grosse sinne outwardly, vnlesse we consent to it: and thereby incourageth Christian men to re∣sist it, affirming that it shal not hurt them to condemnation; in which respect Austin denies it to be sinne. See my an∣svvere to the Epistle dedica∣torie, and my defence of the Prologue. Proclus, howsoeuer deceiued by Origen he erred in the point of the resurrection, yet in this matter taught nothing but that which he sufficiently confirmed by S. Pauls authoritie, of whom he had learned the doctrine: neither doe Epiphanius or Methodius bring any good proofe against his opinion, or for their own, as you write before of Hierome: vrge their reasons, and you shall haue answere. Obiections of Papists. The arguments which the Church of Rome al∣leadgeth to the contrary, are these. Obiect. I. In bap∣tisme men receiue perfect and absolute pardon of sinne; and sinne beeing pardoned is taken quite a∣way: and therefore originall sinne after baptisme ceaseth to be sinne. Answ. Sinne is abolished two waies: first in regard of Quoad im∣putationem. imputation to the person: secondly in regard of Quoad ex∣istentiam. existing and beeing. For this cause, God vouchsafeth to man two blessings in baptisme, Remission of sinne, and Mortification of the same. Remission or pardon abolisheth sinne wholy in respect of any imputation thereof vn∣to man, but not simply in regard of the being thereof. Mortification thereof goeth further, and abolisheth in all the powers of bodie and soule,
the very concupiscence or corruption it selfe, in re∣spect of the being thereof. And because mortificati∣on is not accomplished till death, therefore originall corruption remaineth till death,, though not im∣puted. M. Perkins answereth, that it is abolished in regard of imputation,  And I hope suf∣ficiently de∣fended. A smal summe. Ioh. 13. Neither ours, nor any Apostle a all. Lib. 9. epist. 39 that is, is not imputed to the person, but remaines in him still. This an∣swere is sufficiently (I hope) confuted in the Annotations vpon our con∣sent: In confirmation of our Argument, I will adde some texts of holy Scripture: First, He that is vvashed, needeth not but to vvash his feete, for be is vvholy cleane. Take with this, the exposition of S. Gregory the great, our Apostle; He cannot (saith he) be called vvhaly cleane in vvhom any part or parcell of sins remaineth: But let no man resist the voice of truth, who saith, he that is washed (in Baptisme) is wholy cleane: therefore there is not one dramme of the contagion of sinne left in him, vvhom the cleanser himselfe doth professe to be wholy cleane. Because you content your selfe with your former answer, I will make no further replie, but proceed to examine your reasons. The place you bring is allegoricall, and therefore being not expounded in the Scripture, vnfit to prooue any matter in controuersie. But if wee take it as spoken of baptisme, it makes more against you, than for you: as appeares by this syllogisme. He that hath foule feete, is not wholy cleane: But he that is washed hath foule feete. Therefore he that is washed is not wholy cleane. So that our Sauiours speech must be thus vnderstood: He that is washed, lackes but onely making cleane of his feete, and then he is wholy cleane. This Gregory vvas next neighbour to Boniface the third, the first Pope, in vvhom Antichrist vvas discoue∣ed. Gregories speech (for it is more than I know that he is a Saint, and I am sure hee was none of our Apostle, that neuer bestowed any paines to teach vs) auowes the proposition of my syllogisme, that they which neede to haue their feete washt, are not wholie cleane. Now the assumption our Sauiour makes, affirming that hee which is washt, hath yet neede to haue his feete washt, that he may be wholy cleane: so that your proofes confirme my reason.
The very same doth the most learned Doctor S. Ierome affirme: say∣ing.  Epist. ad O∣ceanum. Psal. 50. How are vve iustified and sanctified, if any inne be let remaining in vs? Againe if holy King Dauid say. Thou shalt vvash me, and J shall be vvhiter then snovv: how can the blacknes of hell still remaine in his soule? There is no such thing in the epistle; and if there were, it could make nothing for your purpose; because Hierome disputes there, not of originall, but of actuall sinne, viz. of that which was thought to be a sinne, but indeede, as hee plainly shewes, was none; the marying of a second wife af∣ter baptisme. Besides, he speakes not of rooting out sinne, but directly, as wee doe; of taking it away by pardoning of it. So also doth Psal. 32. 1. 2. Rom. 4. 6, 7. 8. Dauid, as it is manifest. Neither did hee meane, that God should wash by baptisme, and so clense him from originall sinne, but that he should take away the guilt and staine of the murther and adulterie that hee had committed. Briefly it cannot be but a notorious wrong vnto the precious blood of our Sauiour, to hold that it is not aswell able to purge and purifie vs from sinne, as Adams transgression was of force to infect vs. Yea the A∣postle teacheth vs directly, that we recouer more by Christs grace, then we lost through Adams fault, in these words: But not as the offence, so al∣so Rom. 5. the gift, for if by the offence of one, many died; so much more the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one, man Iesus Christ, hath abounded vpon many. If then we through Christ, receiue more abundance of grace, then we lost by Adam, there is no more sinne left in the newly Baptised man, then was in Adam in the state of innocency, albeit other defects, and infirmities doe remaine in vs, for our greater humiliation, and pro∣bation: yet all filth of sinne is cleane scoured out or our soules, by the pure grace of God powred abundantly into it in Baptisme: and so our first Argument sands insoluble. If we through Christ (say you) receiue more abundance of grace, than we lost by Adam, there is no more sinne left in the newly baptized man, than was in Adam in the estate of innocencie: But we through Christ receiue more abundance of grace, than we lost in Adam: Therefore there is no more sinne left in the newly baptized man, than was in Adam in the state of innocencie. I denie the consequence of your proposition. For though
wee receiue more grace, yet it is not bestowed vpon vs at once, but growes by little and little, receiuing perfection at our death, and not before. Your assumption is true, in re∣spect of the assured continuance of grace, which Adam had not, but the measure is not greater. For Adam was created in true holines and righteousnes, perfect according to his, nature. But the place you alleage, proues not the point. The Rom. 5. 16. Apostle speakes not there of inherent righteousnes, but of grace, that is, the fauour and mercie of God; and of the gift by grace, that is, forgiuenes of sinnes, as I will shew (if it please God) hereafter, vpon another occasion. Obiect. II. Euery sinne is voluntarie: but origi∣nall sinne in no man after baptisme is voluntarie: and therefore no sinne. Answ. The proposition is a politike rule pertaining to the courts of men, and must be vnderstood of such actions as are done of one man to another: and it doth not belong to the court of conscience, which God holdeth and kee∣peth in mens hearts, in which euery want of confor∣mitie to the law is made a sinne. Secondly I answer, that originall sinne was voluntarie in our first parent Adam: for he sinned, and brought this miserie vpon vs willingly; though in vs it be otherwise vpon iust cause. Actuall sinne was first in him, and then origi∣nall corruption; but in vs originall corruption is first, and then actuall sinne. Reply. Full litle knowes this man what belongeth to the Court of conscience: there secret faults in deed be examined, but nothing is ta∣ken for sinne by any one learned in that faculty, which is done without a mans free consent: all of them holding with S. Augustine. That sinne is so voluntary an euill, that it cannot be sinne, which is not voluntary: And Lib. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 17. to say with M. Perkins that any want of conformity to reason in our bo∣dy is sinne, is so absurd: that a man might (if that were true) be damned for a dreame, how well soeuer disposed he went to sleepe: if he chaunce to dreame of vncleannes, whereupon doth ensue any euill motion in his flesh. This paradoxe of sinning without a mans consent is so contra∣rie vnto both, naturall, and supernaturall reason that S. Augustine auer∣reth Lib. de vera Relig. cap. 14.
Neither any of the small number of the learned, nor of the multitude of the vnlearned doe hold, that a man can sinne without his consent. What vnlearned, learned men then are start vp in our miserable age, that make no bones to deny this, and greater matters too? Master Perkins hath truly answered, that although men know no sinne, but that which is voluntarie, because they make all sinne to be in the act: yet in Gods iudgement it is otherwise, who condemnes all for sinne, that is any way a∣gainst his iust and holy law. The place you alleage out of Austin prooues no more, but that those actions that are not voluntarie, are not sinne: which wee easily grant. But A second an∣svvere of Ma∣ster Perkins omitted. Ma∣ster Perkins addes a ond answere, which you craftily, ac∣cording to your custome, omit; because you know not what to say to it. The answere is, that originall sinne may be called voluntarie, because Adams sinne was voluntarie, and so ours in him: as Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. Bellarm. de amiss grat. lib. 4. cap. 10.  Austin truly affirmes. Those dreames that are occasioned by any fault of ours, or by our naturall cor∣ruption, are our sinnes, and to them that are not in Christ, damnable. Obiect. III. Where the forme of any thing is ta∣ken away, there the thing it selfe ceaseth also: but after baptisme in the regenerate, the forme of origi∣nall sinne, that is, the guilt, is quite remoued: and therefore sinne ceaseth to be sinne. Answ. The guilt, or obligation to punishment, is not the forme of originall corruption, but (as we say in schooles) an accident or necessarie companion thereof. The true forme of originall sinne, is a defect and depriuation of that which the law requireth at our hands in our minde, will, affections, and in all the powers both of soule and bodie. But they vrge this reason further, saying, where the guilt and punishment is taken a∣way, there is no fault remaining: but after baptisme the guilt and punishment is remoued: and there∣fore,
though originall corruption remaine, it is not as a fault to make vs guiltie before God, but onely as a weaknes. Answ. Guilt is remoued, and not remo∣ued. It is remooued from the person regenerate, which stands not guiltie for any sinne originall or actuall: but guilt is not remoued from the sinne it selfe; or, as some answere, there be two kindes of guilt, actuall, and potentiall. The actuall guilt is, whereby sin maketh man stand guiltie before God: and that is remoued in the regenerate. But the po∣tentiall guilt, which is an aptnes in sinne, to make a man stand guiltie if he sinne, that is not remooued: and therefore still sinne remaineth sinne. To this or like effect saith August. Contra Iul. lib. 6. c. 6. We say that the guilt of concu∣piscence, not whereby it is guiltie (for that is not a person) but that whereby it made man guiltie from the beginning, is pardoned, and that the thing it selfe is euill, so as the re∣generate desire to be healed of this plague. M. Perkins shifteth in assigning a wrong forme: affirming vs to say that the forme of Originall sinne is the guiltines of it: which we hold to be neither the forme, nor matter of it, but as it were the proper passi∣on following it. Se S. Thomas: who deliuereth for the forme of Ori∣ginall sinne, the priuation of Originall iustice, which iustice made the 1. 2. q. & art. 3 will subiect to God. The deordination then of the will, Mistres and commaunder of all o∣ther points in man, made by the priuation of Originall iustice: is the Originall sinne is in all parts of the inde. forme of Original sinne, and the deordination of all other parts of man, (which by a common name is called concupiscence, as that learned Doctor noteth,) is but the materiall part of that sinne, so that the will of the regenerate being by grace through Christ rectified, and set againe in good order towards the law of God, the forme of originall sinne, which consistd in deordination of it, is taken quite away by Baptisme, and so consequently the sinne it selfe, vvhich cannot be vvithout his proper forme, as the argument doth conuince. The forme of originall sinne (as I shewed before) is not onely the absence of righteousnes, but also an habi∣tuall
inclination to euill; which is not wholy taken away in this life, but onely by degrees diminished, and in death vt∣terly abolished. Obiect. IV. Lastly, for our disgrace they alleage that we in our doctrine teach, that originall sinne af∣ter baptisme is onely clipped or pared, like the haire of a mans head, whose rootes still remaine in the flesh, growing and increasing after they are cut, as before. Answ. Our doctrine is abused: for in the pa∣ring of any thing, as in cutting of the haire, or in lop∣ping a tree, the roote remaines vntouched, and ther∣upon multiplieth as before. But in the mortification of originall sinne after baptisme, wee hold no such paring: but teach, that in the very first instant of the conuersion of a sinner, sinne receiueth his deadlie wound in the roote, neuer afterward to be recoue∣red. Conferre this last answere with his former Doctrine (good Reader) and thou maist learne what credit is to be giuen to such Masters: no more constant then the wind. Here sinne is deadly vvounded in the roote, there it remaineth still vvith all the guiltines of it, although not imputed, there it still maketh the man to sinne, intangleth him in the punishment of sinne, and maketh him miserable: All this he comprehended before in this first reason, and yet blusheth not here to conclude, that he holdeth it as at the first: Neither clipped nor pared, but pulled vp by the rootes: Indeed Wounded in the oot, not plucked vp by the rootes. they doe him a fauour, who say that he holdeth sinne to be clipped, and as it were razed, for albeit haire razed grow out againe, yet is there none for a season: but this Original sinne of his is alwaies in his regenerate, in vigour to corrupt all his workes, and to make them deadly sinnes. But let this suffice for this matter. This is a meere cauill of yours, and no contradiction of Master Perkins; originall sinne hath all these effects, and yet is not wholy rooted vp, as you falsely make him speake, but wounded in the roote so deadly, See 12. Art. part. 1. art. 4.  as that it neither shal, nor can recouer, though it liue and bring forth fruites of sinne, for the time of our continuance in this mortall carcasse.
The third poynt: Certeintie of saluation. I. Our consent. I. Conclus. We hold and beleeue that a man in this life, may be certeine of saluation: and the same thing doth the Church of Rome teach and hold. II. Conclus. We hold and beleeue that a man is to put a certeine affiance in Gods mercy in Christ for the saluation of his soule: and the same thing by common consent holdeth the foresaid Church: this point maketh not the difference betweene vs. III. Conclus. We hold that with assurance of sal∣uation in our harts is ioyned doubting: and there is no man so assured of his saluation, but he at some∣time doubteth thereof, especially in the time of temptation; and in this the Papists agree with vs, and we with them. To this conclusion the Papist ansvvers, Not so Sir. But he shevves not vvhat it is he mislikes in it. IV. Conclus. They goe further and say, that a man may be certeine of the saluation of men, or of the Church by Catholike faith: and so say we. V. Concl. Yea they hold, that a mā by faith may be assured of his own saluation through extraordinary reuelation, as Abraham & others were; and so do we. Here he ads, that, In this sense only the first conclusion is true: viz that there is no assurance but by reuelation. We ansvvere, that this reuelation is common to all true beleeuers in their seuerall proportions. VI. Conclus. They teach that we are to be certeine of our saluation by Bellar. lib. 3. pag. 1. 129. cl. speciall faith in regard of God that promiseth; though in regard of our selues and our indisposition wee cannot: and in the former point they consent with vs.
II. The dissent or difference. The very maine point of difference lies in the manner of assurance. I. Conclus. We hold that a man may be certeine of his saluation in his owne conscience euen in this life, and that by an ordinary and speciall faith. They hold that a man is certeine of his saluation onely by hope: both of vs hold a certeinty, we by faith, they by hope. II. Conclus. Further, we hold and auouch that our certeinty by true faith is vnfallible: they say, their certeinty is only probable. III. Conclus. And further though both of vs say, that we haue confidence in Gods mercy in Christ for our saluation, yet we doe it with some difference. For our confidence commeth from certeine and or∣dinary faith: theirs from hope, ministring (as they Here he addes false: but what he meanes by it he doth not ex∣presse. say) but a coniecturall certeinty. Thus much of the difference: now let vs see the reasons to and fro. III. Obiections of Papists. Obiect. I. Where there is no word there is no faith: for these two are relatiues: but there is no word of God saying, Cornelius beleeue thou, Peter be∣leeue thou, and thou shalt be saued. And therefore there is no such ordinary faith to beleeue a mans owne particular saluation. Ans. The proposition is false vnlesse it be supplied with a clause on this man∣ner. Where there is no word of promise, nor any thing that
doth counteruaile a particular promise, there is no faith. But (say they) there is no such particular word. It is true God doth not speake to men particularly, Be∣leeue thou, and thou shalt be saued. But yet doth he that which is answerable hereunto, in that he giueth a generall promise, with a commandement to apply the same: and hath ordained the holy ministerie of the word to applie the same to the persons of the hearers in his owne name: and that is as much as if the Lord himselfe should speake to men particular∣ly. To speake more plainely: in the Scripture the promises of saluation be indefinitely propounded: it saith not any where, if Ihn will beleeue, he shall be saued; or if Peter will beleeue, he shall be saued, but whosoeuer beleeueth shall be saued. Now then comes the minister of the word, who standing in the roome of God, and in the stead of Christ himselfe, takes the indefinite promises of the Gospel, and laies them to the harts of euery particular man: and this in effect is as much as if Christ himselfe should say, Cornelius beleeue thou, and thou shalt be saued: Pe∣ter beleeue thou, and thou shalt be saued. Here M. Perkins contrary to his custome, giueth the first place to our reasons, which he calleth obiections, and endeuoureth to supplant them: and afterward planteth his owne. About the order I will not contend, seeing he acknowledgeth in the beginning that he obserueth none, but sets downe things as they came into his head. Otherwise he would haue handled Iustification before Saluation. But following his method, let vs come to the matter. Reply. Good Sir, seeing euery man is a lyar, and may both deceiue, The Ministers assurance is but conditio∣nall, as absolu∣tion is, if it be true. So is he as far as he agrees vvith the truth of the Gospell. Luk. 16. 16, and be deceiued, and the Minister telling may erre: how doth either the Minister know, that the man to whom he speaketh is of the number of the elect? or the man be certaine that the Minister mistaketh not, when he assureth him of his saluation? To affirme as you doe, that the Mini∣ster is to be beleeued aswell as if it were Christ himselfe, is plaine blas∣phemie. Equalling a blinde and lying creature, vnto the wisedome and
truth of God. If you could shew out of Gods word, that euery Minister hath such a commission from Christ, then had you answered the argu∣ment directly, which required but one warrant of Gods vvord: but to say that the assurance of an ordinary Ministers vvord counteruailes Gods vvord, I cannot see vvhat it vvanteth of making a pelting Minister Gods mate. On the otherside to auerre that the Minister knowes who is pre∣destinate (as it must be graunted he doth, if you will not haue him to lie when he saith to Peter, thou art one of the elect) i to make him of Gods priuie Councell, without any warrant for it in Gods word: Yea S. Paul not obscurely signifying the contrary in these words. The sure foundation of God standeth hauing this seale: our Lord knoweth vvho be his. And none else, except he reueile it vnto them. You vtterly mistake Master Perkins, who doth not say, that the Minister is to assure any man of his saluation, but to applie the generall promises of Scripture to euery man particularly, vpon condition of beleeuing. The generall is, Whosoeuer beleeues, shall be saued; the Ministers particular application, Cornelius beleeue thou, and thou shalt be saued. This is so plainly set downe by Master Perkins, that I won∣der how you could mistake him; and so certainly groun∣ded vpon the generall, that there can no question be made of it. Neither doth this equall the Minister to Christ, but, as Master Perkins truly saith, is as much in effect, as if Christ himselfe should say, Cornelius beleeue thou, and thou shalt be saued. For if it be true, that whosoeuer beleeues shall be sa∣ued, it is as true that Cornelius shall be saued, if he beleeue. So that your discourse of the Ministers knowledge, and the mans election, is nothing to Master Perkins answere. It is answered, that this applying of the Gospell is vpon condition of mens faith and repentance, and that men are deceiued touching their owne faith and repentance: and therefore faile in applying the word vnto themselues. Answ. Indeed this man∣ner of applying is false in all hypocrites, heretikes, and vnrepentant persons: for they applie vpon car∣nall presumption, and not by faith. Neuerthelesse it is true in all the elect hauing the spirit of grace, and
prayer: for when God in the ministerie of the word being his owne ordinance, saith, Seeke ye my face: the heart of Gods children truly answereth, O Lord I will seeke thy face. And when God shall say, Psalm. 17. 8. Zach. 13. 6. Thou art my people, they shall say againe: The Lord is my God. M. Perkins then flieth from the assurance of the Minister, and leaues him to speake at andon, as the blind man casts his clubbe; and attribu∣teth all this assurance vnto the partie himselfe, who hearing in Gods word, Seeke yee my face, in his hart answereth, Lord I vvill seeke thy face: And then hearing God say, Thou art my people, saith againe, The Lord is my God. And then loe without all doubt he hath assurance of his salua∣tion. Would ye not thinke that this were rather some seely old Womans dreame, then a discourse of a learned Man? How know you honest man, that those words of God spoken by the Prophet 2000. yeares past, to the people of Israell, are directed to you? Mine owne hart, good Sir, tells me so. How dare you build vpon the perswasion of your owne hart any such assurance? When as in holy writ it is recorded. VVicked is the hart of man, and who shall know it? Are you ignorant how Saul before he Ierem. 17. was S. Paul, being an Israelite, to whom those words appertained, per∣swading himselfe to be very assured of his faith, was notwithstanding fouly deceiued, and why may not you farre more vnskilfull then he be in like manner abused? Moreouer suppose that this motion commeth of the holy Ghost, and that he truly saith, The Lord is God, how long know∣eth he that he shall be able to say so truly? When our Sauiour Christ Ie∣sus Matth. 22. assureth vs that many be called, but few of them are chosen to life e∣uerlasting. How knoweth he then assuredly, that he being once called, is of the predestinate? Your question in skorne to the honest man is nothing to Master Perkins answere: he doth not say, that those places of the Prophet belong to euery man; but that all the elect yeeld obedience to God, in the ministerie of the word, be∣leeuing as he commands them, and so, vpon the knowledge of their beleefe, come to the assurance of their saluation. As for the doubt, that a man may be called, and be none of the predestinate, he, that truly beleeues the Scripture, casts it quite away; hauing learned of God that whosoeuer be∣leeues shall be saued: which could not bee true, if it were possible that a man should beleeue, and not be predestinate.
And it is a truth of God, that he which beleeueth knoweth that he beleeueth: and he that truly repen∣teth knoweth that he repenteth: vnlesse it be in the beginning of our conuersion, and in the time of di∣stresse and temptation. Otherwise what thankfulnes can there be for grace receiued? M. Perkins saith, that he who beleeueth, knoweth that he beleeueth Be it so; if he beleeue aright, and meddle no further then with those things, which be comprehended within the bounds of faith But that the certainty of saluation is to be beleeued, is not to be begged, but proued, being the maine question, he saith further that he who truly repenteth, knoweth that he repenteth: he knoweth indeed by many probable con∣iectures, but not by certainly of faith: as wit lh that holy person. If God come to me, (as he dot  all repentant sinne,) I shall not see him, Iob. 9. and if he depart away from me, I shall not vnderstand it: Which is suffi∣cient to make him thankefull, yea i he receiued no grace at all, yet were he much beholding vnto God, who offered him his grace, and would haue freely bestowed it vpon him, if it had not been through his owne default. And thus our first Argument stands in his full strength and ver∣tue, that no man can assure himselfe by faith of his saluation, because there is no word of God that warranteth him so to doe. If 2. Cor. 13. 5. he that beleeues aright know he beleeues, and with∣all is sure, that no Act. 13. 48. Rom. 8. 30. man doth beleeue but he that is prede∣stinate, because that Marc. 16. 16. Ioh. 1. 12. Rom. 8. 15, 16, 17. whosoeuer beleeues shall be saued, and Rom. 8. 30. Ephes. 1. . 4. Rom 9. 11. none shall be saued but they that are predestinate, it is out of doubt that assurance of saluation by faith may and must be had. Now why, or how should it be more impos∣sible to know we repent truly, then that wee beleeue truly; especially since that and this necessarily and certainly goe together? Euery man that hath true faith, and no man but he that hath true faith, doth repent truly. That of Iob. 9. 10. Iob is not spoken of mans repentance, but of his inabilitie to comprehend the workes of God, as the whole discourse shewes; neither are the words, If ye come to me, but (as also Arias Mon∣tanus & Pag∣nin. ibi. Arias Montanus, and Pagnine expound them) Behold he passeth by. Non cog∣noscus il∣lum per opera.  Vatablus vnderstands the place of not knowing God by his workes. Master Perkins asks what thankfulnes there can be for grace receiued, if a man cannot know that
he hath receiued any? As for the coniecture you speake of, it is likelier to breed feare, than thankfulnes, being so vncer∣taine: or at the least thankfulnes by halues, because wee can be but halfe perswaded that we haue receiued grace. Obiect. II. It is no article of the Creede, that a man must beleeue his owne saluation: and therfore no man is bound thereto. Ans. By this argument it appeares plainly, that the very pillars of the Church of Rome doe not vnderstand the Creed: for in that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, eue∣ry article implieth in it this particular faith. And in the first article, I beleeue in God, are three things con∣tained: the first, to beleeue that there is a God: the second, to beleeue the same God is my God: the third, to put my confidence in him for my saluation: and so much containe the other articles, which are concerning God. When Thomas said, Ioh. 20. 20. My God, Christ answered, Thou hast beleeued Thomas. Where we see that to beleeue in God, is to beleeue God to be our God. And Psal. 78. 22. to beleeue in God, and to put trust in him are al one, They beleeued not in God, and trusted not in his helpe. I amit all this, and adde more (that M. Perkins be no lōger ignorant  Catholike knowledge of the creede,) that we must also loue him D. B. P. You may be sure of your loue, if you e sure of your faith. 1. Ioh. 3.  wi a  hart and strength: thus we vnderstand it more fully then he: Yet finde not out that thirteenth article, Thou must beleeue thine ovvne particular saluation. For albeit, I beleeue and trust in God, yet not beng sure of my loue towards him, I am not assured of saluation, for as S. Iohn estifieth. He th th not aideth in death. A man may be bound to beleeue his owne saluation, though it bee not among those twelue Articles of the A∣postles Creed, 12. Art. part. . Art. 4. D. which your selues denie to be the limit of beleefe. Master Perkins knew, as well as you, that by one part of Gods worship the whole was signified; and, for the point in question, denies your assertion, viz. that he cannot
be sure of his loue towards God: For he that can be sure he hath faith, may be as sure he hath loue; because no man is iustified, but he that is also Rom. 8. 9. 10. sanctified. And the articles concerning Remission of sinnes, and Life euerlasting, do include, and we in them acknow∣ledge our speciall faith concerning our owne saluati∣on. For to beleeue this or that, is to beleeue there is such a thing, and that the same thing belongs to me: as when Dauid said, I should haue fainted except I had beleeued to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the liuing. Psal. 27. 13. So I answere to the second article, named by M. Perkins, that is, I be∣leeue that God of his infinite mercy, through the merits of Christs Pas∣sion doth pardon all those, who being hartely sorry for their sinnes, doe humblie confesse them, and fully purpose to lead a new life: that I my selfe am such a one, I doe verily hope, because I haue as farreforth as I O lying Pha∣risie. could, to my knowledge, performed those things, which God requires osme but because I am but a fraile creature, and may perhaps not haue done all that so well as I ought, or am not so well assured of that, which by Gods helpe I haue done, I cannot beleeue it, for in matter of faith (as you shall heare shortly,) there can be no feare or doubt. He that will ground his hope vpon his performance of that which God requires of him, as farre foorth as he can, hath no reason in the world to hope for any pardon. For who is so bewitched with selfe-loue, that hee discernes not how marueilously he hath failed in doing that he might do, both in nature and grace? But a true Christian beleeues that whosoeuer rests vpon God for saluation by Iesus Christ, is by that faith truly iustified, and so much he knowes of him∣selfe, though he be priuie to many imperfections in his own cariage, about the meanes and measure of beleeuing. It is answered, that in those articles we onely pro∣fesse our selues to beleeue remission of sinnes, and life euerlasting, to be vouchsafed to the people and Church of God. Ans. This indeede is the expositi∣on of many, but it stands not with common reason.
For if that be all the faith that is there confessed, the diuell hath as good a faith as we. He knoweth and beleeueth that there is a God: and that this God im∣parteth remission of sinnes, and life euerlasting to his Church. And to the ende that we being Gods chil∣dren, may in faith go beyond all the diuels in hel, we must further beleeue, that remission of sinnes, and life euerlasting belongs vnto vs: and vnlesse we doe particularly applie the said articles vnto our selues, we shall little or nothing differ from the diuell, in making confession of faith. The like answere is giuen to the article of life euerlasting. I beleeue  Matth. 19. that I shal haue life euerlasting, if I fulfill that which our Sauiour taught the young man demaunding what he must doe to haue life euerlasting: to wit, if I keepe all Gods commaundements, but because I am not assu∣red that I shall so doe (yea the Protestants (though falsely) assure vs that no man by any helpe of Gods grace can so doe.) I remaine in feare. But (saith M. Perkins) the Diuell may so beleeue the articles of the creede, Vtterly vntrue: vve say Adam might haue kept thm, and any man may novv by the like measure of grace. vnlesse we doe applie those articles to our selues. First, I say the Diuels, know to be true all that we doe beleeue, and therefore are said by Saint Iames to bleeue, but they want a necessarie condition of faith, that is a godly and deuou submission of their vnderstanding vnto the obedience of faith, and so haue no aith to speake properly. Againe they trust not in God for saluation, no indeuour not any manner of way to obtaine sal∣uation, as Christians do, and so there is great difference betweene their bel in the articles of the creede, and ours. The voice of the Gospell is, that Ma. 16. 16. whosoeuer beleeues shall be saud; That Matth. 9. 17. speech of our Sauiour, is not a direction how to come to life euerlasting by the Gospell. For it con∣taines not sorgiuenes of sins, nor faith in Christ, Matth. 1. 21. Act. 10. 3. the chiefe matter of it, but a leon for that proud Pharisie, that hee might be conuinced by his owne confidence. Which ap∣peares by that Matth. 19. 21 second answere of our Sauiour, wherein he shewes, that the law requires per fit obedience, which he had not attained to. Indeede you Papists, and some, I grant, be∣fore Poperie brake out, dreame of a perfection beyond the law; but we account the law so perfect, that if the mans an∣swere had been true, he might well haue gone away assured
of heauen, though he had giuen neuer a penny more to the poore, but died the richest man in all the world. Our claime to euerlasting life is not by the law, Rom. 10. 5. 6 11. Doe this, but by the Gospell, Beleeue and thou shalt be saued. That which you bring of the diuels beleeuing, doth not any way ouerthrow Master Perkins answere. You propound two differences, that you haue conceiued, betwixt the faith of Christians and Diuels; as if you would thereby refute Master Perkins, who saith not that their faith and ours is all one, but that if no more be required but to beleeue remis∣sion of sinnes, and life euerlasting to be vouchsafed to the people and Church of God, their faith is as good as ours. You replie, that there are two differences; but this doth not weaken Master Perkins consequence: if there be no more required, their faith is as good as ours. You denie the as∣sumption, viz. That the diuels faith is as good as ours, and so dispute for him, against the obiection. M. Perkins in his first exception graunts, That commonly men doe not  Pag. 54. beleeue their saluation, as infallibly as they do the articles of the faith (yet saith he) some speciall men doe. Whereof I inferre by his owne confession, that our particular saluati∣on is not to be beleeued by faith: for whatsoeuer we beleeue by faith, is In it selfe, be∣cause of Gods vvord; to v ac∣cording to the measure of our aith. Js reuelation from God but for ope, and not for assu∣rance.  as infallible as the word of God, which assureth vs of it. Thē if the com∣mon sort of the faithfull doe not beleeue their saluation, to be as infalli∣ble as the articles of our creede, yea as Gods owne word, they are not by faith assured of it. Now that some speciall good men, either by reuela∣tion from God, or by long exercise of a vertuous life, haue a great cer∣tainty of their saluation, we willingly confesse: but that certainty doth rather belong to a well grounded hope then to an ordinary faith. Your answere vpon Master Perkins grant is insufficient; Commonly (saith Master Perkins) men do not beleeue their saluation, as they doe the Articles of faith. Therefore (say you) by his owne confession, our particular saluation is not to be beleeued by faith. I denie the consequence: your conclusion is not rightly inferred: men doe not commonly; therefore they are not bound to doe: or therefore it is not possible they should. Either of both the meanes you name, is sufficient to breed assurance of faith. For the former, who euer durst imagine that reuelation from God breedes not certaintie
of faith? The latter also passeth hope: for a life truly ver∣tuous, argues true sanctification, and that iustification, which is not attained to but by true faith; and whosoeuer beleeues shall be saued. As for falling away from faith, it is impossible: as, if neede be, shall be prooued when occasion is offered. Object. III. We are taught to pray for the pardon of our sinnes day by day, Matth. 6. 12. and all this were needelesse, if wee could be assured of pardon in this life. Ans. The fourth petition must be vnder∣stood not so much of our old debts or sins, as of our present and new sinnes: for as we goe on from day to day, so we adde sinne to sinne: and for the pardon of them we must humble our selues and pray. I an∣swere againe, that wee pray for the pardon of our sinnes, not because wee haue no assurance thereof, but because our assurance is weake and smal: wee grow on from grace to grace in Christ, as children doe to mans estate by little and little. The heart of euery beleeuer is like a vessell with a narrow necke, which being cast into the sea, is not filled at the first; but by reason of the straight passage receiueth water droppe by droppe. God giueth vnto vs in Christ euen a sea of mercie, but the same on our parts is ap∣prehended and receiued onely by little and little, as faith groweth from age to age: and this is the cause why men hauing assurance pray for more. Good Sir, doe you not see how you ouerthrow your selfe? If your as∣surance be but weake and small, it is not the assurance of faith, which is as great, and as strong as the truth of God. We giue God thankes for those giftes, which we haue receiued at his bountifull hands, and desire him to encrease, or continue them if they In such measure assured of. may be lost. But to pray to God to giue vs those things we are assured of by faith, is as fond, and friuolous, as to pray him to make Christ our Lord to be his Sonne, or that there may be life euerlasting to his Saints in heauen, of which they are in full and assured possession. And so these
three Arguments by M. Perkins propounded here for vs, are very sub∣stantiall and sufficient, to assure euery good Christian, that he may well hope for saluation doing his duty, but may not without great presump∣tion, assure him by faith of it. It is necessarie for vs 12. Art. par.  art. 1. daily to craue pardon, although before we were assured of it in some measure: first, because we haue a commandement, which must be simply obeyed: secondly, because we must renew our repentance, as we re∣new our sinnes. Our assurance, though it be weake, is the as∣surance of faith, failing not in truth, for the nature of it, but in quantitie, for the measure: it should be without doubt, but it is not. To these I will adde two or three others, which M. Perkins afterwards D. B. P. And been re∣plied vpon. A disorderly order.  seekes to salue, by his exceptions as he tearmes them. o his first excep∣tion, I haue answered before. The second I will put last for orders sake, and answere to the third. Master Perkins hauing answered the popish obiections propounded by him, proceeds to confirme our doctrine by sixe reasons: whereof the fiue first are drawne from the Scriptures. Against which the Papists except three waies. To those exceptions Master Perkins answeres in their order and place. That order this Papist alters, and to serue his own turne, answers the exceptions, before he propound the rea∣sons, to which they are taken. Afterward he shifts off the rea∣sons as well as he can. The plainest course for me is, to set downe Master Perkins words, and by A. B. C. to referre the reader to the Papists answers, and replies, as they belong to Master Perkins disputation. Our reasons to the contrarie. Reason I. The first reason may bee taken from the nature of faith, on this manner. True faith is both an vnfallible assurance and a particular assurance of the remission of sinnes and of life euerlasting. And therefore by this faith, a man may bee certainely and particularly assured of the remission of sinnes,
and of life euerlasting. And therefore by this faith a man may bee certainly and particularly assured of the remission of sinnes, and life euerlasting. That this reason may bee of force, two things must bee prooued: first, that true faith is a certaine assu∣rance of Gods mercie to that partie in whom it is. Secondly, that faith is a particular assurance thereof. For the first, that faith is a certaine assu∣rance, Christ saith to Peter, Matthew 14. 31. O thou of little faith, wherefore diddest thou doubt? Where he makes an opposition betweene faith and doub∣ting: whereby giuing vs directly to vnderstand, that, To be certaine, and to giue assurance, is of the na∣ture of faith. Rom. 4. 20. 22. Paul saith of Abraham, that he did not doubt of the promise of God through vn∣beleefe: but was strengthened in faith, and gaue glorie to God, beeing fully assured, that hee which had promised was able to doe it: where I obserue first, that doubting is made a fruit of vnbeleefe: and therfore vnfallible certainty and assurance, being contrary to doubting, must needes proceede from true faith: considering that contrary effects come of contrary causes: and contrary causes produce contrarie effects. Secondly I note, that the strength of Abrahams faith did stand in fulnes of assurance: for the text saith, hee was strengthened in the faith, beeing fully assured: and againe, Heb. 11. 1. true sauing faith is said to bee the ground and subsistence of things hoped for: and the euidence or demonstration of things that are not seene: but faith can be no ground or euidence of things, vnles it bee for nature certaintie it selfe: and thus the first point is manifest. The second, that sa∣uing
faith is a particular assurance, is proued by this, that the property of faith is to apprehend and applie the promise, and the thing promised, Christ with his benefits. Ioh. 1. 12. As many, saith Saint Iohn, as receiued him, to them he gaue power to be the sonnes of God, namely to them that beleeue in his name. In these words to be∣leeue in Christ, and to receiue Christ, are put for one and the same thing. Now to receiue Christ, is to ap∣prehend and applie him with all his benefits vnto our selues, as he is offered in the promises of the Gos∣pell. For in the sixt chapter following, first of all he sets forth himselfe not only as a Redeemer general∣lie, but also as the bread of life, and the water of life: secondly, he sets forth his best hearers, as eaters of his bodie, and drinkers of his blood: and thirdly, he intends to prooue this conclusion, that to eate his bodie, and to drinke his blood, and to beleeue in him, are all one. Now then if Christ be as foode, and if to eate and drinke the bodie and blood of Christ, be to beleeue in him, then must there be a proporti∣on betweene eating and beleeuing. Looke then as there can be no eating without taking or receiuing of meate, so no beleeuing in Christ without a spiri∣tuall receiuing and apprehending of him. And as the bodie hath his hand, mouth, and stomacke whereby it taketh, receiueth, and digesteth meate for the nourishment of euery part: so likewise in the soule there is a faith, which is both hand, mouth and stomacke to apprehend, receiue, and applie Christ and all his merits for the nourishment of the soule. And Paul saith yet more plainely, That through aith we receiue the promise of the spirit, Gal. 3. 14.
Now as the propertie of apprehending and ap∣plying of Christ belongeth to faith, so it agreeth not to hope, loue, confidence, or any other gift or grace of God. But first by aith wee must apprehend Christ, and applie him to our selues, before we can haue any hope or confidence in him. And this ap∣plying seemes not to be done by any affection of the will, but by a supernaturall act of the mind, which is to acknowledge, set downe and beleeue that remis∣sion of sinnes, and life euerlasting by the merit of Christ, belong to vs particularly. To this which I haue saide agreeth Augustine, Why preparest thou Tract. 25 in Ioh. teeth and bellie? Beleeue, and thou hast eaten. And, tract 50. How shall I reach my hand into heauen, that I may hold him sitting there? Send vp thy faith, and thou laest holde on him. And Bernard saith, Homil. in Cant. 76. Where he is thou canst not come now: yet goe to follow him and seeke him; beleeue and thou hast found him: for to beleeue is to find. Chrysost. on Mark, homil. 10. Let vs beleeue, and we see Iesus present before vs. Ambr. on Luk. lib. 6. cap. 8. By faith Christ is tou∣ched, by faith Christ is seene. Tertul. de resurrect. car∣nis: He must be chewed by vnderstanding, and be dige∣sted by faith. Reason II. Whatsoeuer the holy Ghost testifieth vnto vs, that we may, yea that we must certainely by B. faith beleeue: but the holy Ghost doth particularly testifie vnto vs our adoption, the remission of our sinnes, and the saluation of our soules; and therefore wee may and must particularly and certainely by faith beleeue the same. The first part of this reason is true, and cannot be denied of any. The second
part is prooued thus: Saint Paul saith, Rom. 8. 15. We haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare: but the spirit of adoption, whereby we crie Abba, father: adding further, that the same spirit beareth witnesse with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Where the A∣postle maketh two witnesses of our adoption: the spirit of God, and our spirits, that is, the conscience sanctified by the holy Ghost. The Papists to elude this reason, alleadge that the spirit of God doth in∣deede witnesse of our adoption, by some comfor∣table feelings of Gods loue and fauour, being such as are weake and oftentimes deceitfull. But by their leaues, the testimonie of the spirit is more then a bare sense or feeling of Gods grace: for it is called the pledge and earnest of Gods spirit in our hearts, 2. Cor. 1. 21. and therefore it is fit to take away all occasion of doubting of our saluation: as in a bar∣gaine, the earnest is giuen betweene the parties, to put all out of question. Bernard saith, That the te∣stimonie of the spirite is a most sure testimonie: Epist. 107. Reason III. That which we must pray for by C. Gods commandement, that we must beleeue: but euery man is to pray for the pardon of his owne sinnes, and for life euerlasting: of this there is no question: therfore he is bound to beleeue the same. The proposition is most of all doubtfull: but it is proued thus. In euery petition there must be two things: a desire of the things we aske, and a particu∣lar faith whereby we beleeue, that the thing we aske shall be giuen vnto vs. So Christ saith, Whatsoeuer ye desire when you pray, beleeue that you shall haue it, and it
shall be giuen vnto you. And S. Iohn further noteth out this particular faith, calling it our assurance that God 1. Iob. 5. 14. will giue vnto vs, whatsoeuer we aske according to his will. And hence it is, that in euery petition there must be two grounds: a commaundement to warrant vs in making a petition, and a promise to assure vs of the accomplishment thereof. And vpon both these, fol∣lowes necessarily an application of the things we aske to our selues. Reason IIII. Whatsoeuer God commandeth in D. the Gospell, that a man must and can performe: but God in the Gospell commandeth vs to beleeue the pardon of our owne sinnes, and life euerlasting: and therefore we must beleeue thus much, and may be assured thereof. This proposition is plaine by the di∣stinction of the commandements of the law, and of the Gospell. The commandements of the law shew vs what we must doe, but minister no power to per∣forme the thing to be done: but the doctrine and commaundements of the Gospell doe otherwise: and therefore they are called spirit and life: God with Ioh. 6. 36. the commaundement giuing grace that the thing prescribed may be done. Now this is a commande∣ment of the Gospell, to beleeue remission of sinnes: for it was the substance of Christs ministery, repent and beleeue the Gospell. And that is not generally to be∣leeue that Christ is a Sauiour, and that the promises made in him are true (for so the diuels beleeue with trembling:) but it is particularly to beleeue that Christ is my Sauiour, and that the promises of salua∣tion in Christ belong in speciall to me, as Saint Iohn saith. This is his commaundement that we beleeue in the
name of Iesus Christ: now to beleeue in Christ is to put confidence in him: which none can doe, vnlesse he be first assured of his loue and fauour. And there∣fore in as much, as we are enioyned to put our confi∣dence in Christ, we are also enioyned to beleeue our reconciliation with him, which stands in the re∣mission of our sins, and our acceptation to life euer∣lasting. Reason V. Whereas the Papists teach, that a man E. may be assured of his saluation by hope: euen hence it followes, that he may be vnfalliblie assured therof. For the property of true and liuely hope is neuer to make a man ashamed. Rom. 5. 5. And true hope fol∣loweth faith and euer presupposeth certeintie of faith; neither can any man truly hope for his salua∣tion vnlesse by faith he be certeinly assured thereof in some measure. Exception I. The Popish Doctors take exception to F. these reasons on this manner. First they say, it cannot be proued y• a man is as certaine of saluation by faith, as he is of the articles of the creed. I answere, First they proue thus much that we ought to be as certine of the one as of the other. For looke what commande∣ment we haue to beleeue the articles of our faith: the like we haue inioning vs to beleeue the pardon of our owne sins, as I haue proued. Secondly, these arguments proue it to be the nature or essential pro∣perty of faith, as certeinly to assure man of his salua∣tion, as it doth assure him of the articles which he beleeueth. And howsoeuer commonly men do not beleeue their saluation as vnfallible, as they do their articles of faith: yet some speciall men doe: hauing
Gods word applied by the spirit as a sure ground of their faith, whereby they beleeue their owne saluati∣on, as they haue it for a ground of the articles of their faith. Thus certeinly was Abrahā assured of his owne saluation: as also the Prophets and Apostles, and the Martyrs of God in all ages: whereupon without doubting they haue bin content to lay downe their liues for the name of Christ: in whom they were as∣sured to receiue eternall happines. And there is no question, but there be many now, that by long and often experience of Gods mercy, and by the inward certificate of the holy Ghost, haue attained to full as∣surance of their saluation. II. Exception. Howsoeuer a man may be assured of his present estate, yet no man is certeine of his per∣seuerance G. vnto the end. Ans. It is otherwise: for in the sixt petition, lead vs not into temptation, we pray that God would not suffer vs to be wholy ouercome of the diuell in any temptation: and to this petition we haue a promise answerable, 1. Cor. 10. That God with temptation will giue an issue: and therefore how∣soeuer the diuell may buffit, molest, and wound the seruants of God, yet shall he neuer be able to ouer∣come them. Againe, hee that is once a member of Christ, can neuer be wholy cut off. And if any by sinne were wholy seuered from Christ for a time, in his recouery he is to be baptized the second time: for baptisme is the sacrament of initiation or ingraf∣ting into Christ. By this reason we should as often be baptized as we fall into any sinne, which is ab∣surd. Againe, Saint Iohn saith, 1. Iohn 2. 19. They went out from vs, but they were not of vs: for if they had been
of vs, they would haue continued with vs. Where he ta∣keth it for graunted, that such as be once in Christ shall neuer whly bee seuered or fall from him. Though our communion with Christ may be lesse∣ned, yet the vnion and the bond of coniunction can neuer be dissolued. III. Exception. They say, we are indeede to be∣leeue H. our saluation on Gods part: but wee must needes doubt in regard of our selues: because the promises of remission of sinnes are giuen vpon con∣dition of mans faith and repentance. Now we can∣not (say they) be assured that we haue true faith and repentance, because we may lie in secret sinnes; and so want that indeed, which we suppose our selues to haue. Answ. I say againe, he that doth truly repent and beleeue, doth by Gods grace know that he doth repent and beleeue: for else Paul would neuer haue said, Prooue your selues whether you be in the faith or not: and the same Apostle saith, 2. Cor. 12. We haue not re∣ceiued the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are giuen of God: which things are not onely life euerlasting, but iu∣stification, sanctification, and such like. And as for secret sinnes they cannot make our repentance void: for he that truly repenteth of his knowne sinnes, re∣penteth also of such as be vnknowne, and receiueth the pardon of them all. God requireth not an ex∣presse or speciall repentance of vnknowne sinnes: but accepts it as sufficient, if we repent of them ge∣nerally: as Dauid saith, Psal. 9. Who knowes the errors of this life? forgiue me my secret sinnes. And whereas they adde that faith and repentance must be suffi∣cient:
I answere that the sufficiencie of our faith and repentance, stands in the trueth and not in the measure or perfection thereof; and the trueth of both where they are, is certainely discerned. Reason VI. The iudgement of the auncient I. Church. De verbis De Serm. 28. August. Of an euill seruant thou art made a good child, therefore presume not of thine owne doing, but of the grace of Christ: it is not arrogancie but faith: to acknowledge what thou hast receiued, is not pride but deuotion. And, Tract. 5. in Epist. Ioh. Let no man aske another man, but re∣turne to his owne heart: if he finde charitie there, he hath securitie for his passage from life to death. Hilar. in Matth. 5. The kingdome of heauen which our Lord pro∣fessed to be in himselfe, his will is that it must be hoped for, without any doubtfulnesse of vncertaintie will at all. Otherwise there is no iustification by faith, if faith it selfe be made doubtfull. Bernard in his epist. 107. Who is the iust man but he that being loued of God, loues him a∣gaine? which comes not to passe but by the spirit reuea∣ling by Faith the eternall purpose of God of his Sal∣uation to come. Which reuelation is nothing else but the infusion of spirituall grace: by which, when the deedes of the flesh are mortified, the man is prepared to the kingdome of heauen—.Together receiuing in one spirit that whereby he may presume that he is loued and also loue againe—. To conclude, the Papists haue no great cause to dissent from vs in this poynt. For they teach and professe, that they doe by a speciall faith beleeue their owne saluation certainely and vnfallibly in re∣spect of God, that promiseth. Now the thing which hindreth them is their owne indisposition and vn∣worthinesse
(as they say) which keepes them from being certaine otherwise then in a likely hope. But this hinderance is easily remoued, if men will iudge indifferently. For first of all, in regard of our selues and our disposition we cannot be certaine at all, but must despaire of saluation euen to the very death. We cannot bee sufficiently disposed so long as wee liue in this world, but must alwaies say with Iacob, I am lesse then all thy mercies, Gen. 32. and with Dauid, Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, O Lord, for none liuing shall bee iustified in thy sight: and with the Centurion, Lord I am not worthie, that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe, Matth. 8. Secondly God in making promise of saluation respects not mens wor∣thines. For he chose vs to life euerlasting when we were not: hee redeemed vs from death being ene∣mies: and intitles vs to the promise of saluation, if we acknowledge our selues to be sinners, Matth. 9. If wee labour and trauaile vnder the burden of them. Matth. 11. If we hunger and thirst after grace. Ioh. 7. 37. And these things we may certenly and sensibly perceiue in our selues: and when we finde them in vs, though our vnworthinesse be exceeding great, it should not hinder our assurance. For God makes manifest his power in our weakenesse, 2. Cor. 12. and he will not breake the bruised reede, nor quench the smoking flaxe. Isai, 42. Thirdly, if a man loue God for his mercies sake, and haue a true hope of saluation by Christ, he is in Christ, and hath fellowship with him: and he that is in Christ, hath all his vnworthines and wants laid on Christ, and they are couered and par∣doned in his death: and in respect of our selues thus
considered, as we are in Christ; wee haue no cause to wauer, but to be certaine of our saluation, and that in regard of our selues. The Catholikes say, we are indeed to beleeue our saluation on Gods part, who is desirous of all mens saluation, very rich in mercy, and able to saue vs, but our feare riseth in regard of our selues, because the promises of remission of sinnes depend vpon our true repentance: Vnlesse you doe Penance, yee shall all perish. And the promises of saluation, are made vpon condition of Luk. 13. keeping Gods commaundements. If thou wilt enter into life keepe the commaundements. Againe, No man shall be crovvned, except he combat Matth 19. 2. Tim. 2. lavvfullie. Novv vve not knovving vvhether vve shall vvell performe these things required by God at our hands, haue iust cause to feare, least God doe not on his part, performe that which he promiseth vpon such conditions. M Perkins answereth, That for faith, and true repentance, euery man that hath them, knoweth well that he hath them. To which I replie, that for F. Iustifying faith is in the vvill, if not vvholy, yet principally. faith being rightly taken, it may be knowne of the party that hath it, be∣cause it is a light of the vnderstanding, and so being like a lampe, may be easily seene: but true repentance requires besides faith, both hope, and charity, which are seated in the darke corners of the will, and cannot by faith be seene in themselues, but are knowne by their effects: which being also vncertaine do make but coniectures and a probable opinion. Your replie is nothing, but a bare deniall of that which Master Perkins answered, whereas you should haue dispro∣ued it. There is no lesse doubt of faith than of repentance, by your owne reason: for that also hath it seate in the will, being a resting, or relying vpon God, for saluation by Christ. The effects both of the one and of the other are as certainly discerned by a Christian, as ordinarie trust in men, and worldly sorrow, by a naturall man. So that place of S. Paul may be omitted where he saith. Proue your selues vvhether you be in saith or no.. Because we accord that it may be  2. Cor. 13. tried by vs, whether we haue faith or no: although I know well, that S. Pauls words carry a farre different sense. But let that passe as imperti∣nent. It is not amisse for you to haue it omitted; because it 2. Cor. 13. 5. makes so plainly against you, the Apostle speaking there of such a faith, as necessarily hath hope and charitie ioyned with it. When you shew another sense, you shall haue ano∣ther answere. To the other. That vve haue receiued the spirit, vvhich is of God, that  1. Cor. 2. 12. vve might knovv the things vvhich are giuen of God. What things these
are which the spirit reuealeth to vs, S. Paul teacheth in the same place, That vvhich the eye hath not seene, nor eare hath heard, &c. God hath pre∣pared for them, that loue him: but to vs, God hath reuealed by his Spirit: All this is true: but who they be that shall attaine to that blessed Ban∣quet by God so prepared. God onely knoweth, and by his spirit reuealeth it to very few. And will you learne out of S. Ierome that auncient Do∣ctor, the cause why? Therefore (saith he) it is put ambiguous and left vn∣certaine, In 3. capu Ioh. that vvhile men are doubtfull of their saluation, they may doe Pe∣nance more manfully, and so may moue God to take compassion on them. An other reason of this vncertaintie, yeeldeth S. Augustine in these De cor. & gra. cap. 13. Lib. 9. moral. cap. 17. words: In this place of temptation, such is our infirmity, that assurednes, might engender pride. To this agreeth S. Gregorie, saying: If vve knovv our selues to haue grace, vve are proud.. So that to strike downe the pride of our harts, and to humble vs, and to make vs trauaile more carefully in the workes of mortification, God doth not ordinarily assure men at the first of their owne saluation: but to cheere vp their harts on the other∣side, doth put them in great hope of it, like to a discreet and good Lord, who will not at the first entrance into his seruice, infeafe his seruant in the fee simpleof those lands, which after vpon his good deserts he mean∣eth to bestow on him. The things 1. Cor. 2. 12. there spoken of, are by the spirit of God made knowne to true Christians, not only that they are pre∣pared for some, but that they themselues haue their part in them. Neither doth S. Hierome say any thing to the con∣trarie; but only shewes, that God doth not giue men know∣ledge how hee will deale with them concerning outward punishment; because he would haue them the more earnest to repent, and crie for mercie. It is saftie he speakes of, such as the Niniuites obtained by prayer and fasting, not euerla∣sting saluation. But let it be vnderstood of euerlasting life: none of these ancient writers say, that either we ought not, or cannot be assured by faith of our saluation; but onely thus much may be concluded out of them, that the measure of our assurance is not perfect, to the end we may be more carefull to pray for pardon, and in lesse danger of being puft vp. This is another kind of Doctrine, then that which M. Perkins in his last supplie deliuereth, to witte: That if vve regard our ovvne indiseositi∣on, vve must dispaire, because vve be not vvorthy of his mercy. Not so good Sir, Because we know that he bestoweth mercy vpon the vnvvor∣thie, at the first iustification of a sinner, but will not admit into the King∣dome of heauen any vnworthy, but giues men grace while they liue to
worke, that they are made worthy of his heauenly Kingdome according to that: They shall vvalke vvith me in vvhites, because they are vvorthy, but of this more fully in the chapter of merits. Apoc. 3. 4. Master Perkins speakes not of vnworthines onely, but of indisposition also; which is a reason to make euery one de∣spaire, in regard of himselfe, though in respect of Gods mercie he may conceiue some hope. For if no man should find fauour, but he that is disposed or fitted for it perfectly, sure wee must needes despaire of attaining to that fitnes; how can we, in respect of that, looke for saluation? the wor∣thines which is in them that shall come to heauen, is both in Christ, by whom they are worthie, as members of his mysticall bodie, and also in themselues, who, departing out of this world, are made perfectly righteous by inherent righteousnes, which before was begun in them. If God bidde vs pray, that we fall not into temptation, and promiseth  G. 1. Cor. 10. an issue forth: then the assurance depends vpon prayer, and not vp∣on our former faith. What then if wee doe not pray so as we should? may not the enemy then, not only wound, but kill vs to? it cannot be de∣nied: and therein, as in diuers other workes of pietie, many haue been too too slacke as the pitifull fall of thousands haue taught vs. Master Perkins doth not say, that prayer doth assure vs of perseuerance; but that wee resting vpon God by faith, and calling on him, are vpheld from falling away; not because our prayer is, for the manner and measure, such as it ought to be (for all should be perfect) but because God-hath pro∣mised to keepe his children, and, that he may fulfill his pro∣mise, stirres them vp to pray, according to his will, though with many imperfections. Oh saith M. Perkins, it cannot be, that he vvhich vvas once a member of Christ, can euer after be vvholy cut off. O shamelesse assertion, and con∣trary  O dle and salse exclamation! to many plaine texts, and examples of holy Scriptures: Doth not our Sauiour say in expresse words, That euery braunch in me not bearing f, he vvill take it avvay? And againe, If any abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as the branch, and shall vvither, and be cast into the fire: which Ioh. 15. doth demonstrate, that some which were members of Christ, be wholie cut off, and that for euer. Are we not by faith made members of Christ by our aduersaries owne confession? and doth not our blessed Sauiour say, expounding the Parable of the sower, That the seed vvhich fell vpon the rocke, doth signifie them, vvho vvith ioy receiue the vvord, and these Ike 8. (saith he) haue no roote, but for a time they beleeue, and in time of tempta∣tion,
reuolt. Doth not S. Paul in expresse tearmes say, That some hauing 1. Tim. 1. 19. faith and good conscience, expelling good conscience, haue made shipvvrack of their faith: of whom were by name, Hymenaeus, and Alexander. The like, That in the last daies, some should reuolt from the faith: Againe, That 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 6. some for couetousnes sake, had erred from the saith. Doe you call that a shamelesse assertion, which is so oft auowed by our Sauiour himselfe? Ioh. 4. 13. 14. He that drinkes of that water that I shall giue him, shall neuer thirst, but it shall be in him a well of water springing vp to euerlasting life. Againe, Ioh. 10. 27. 28 My sheepe heare my voyce, and I know them, and they follow me, and I giue them eternall life; and they shall neuer perish, nei∣ther shall any plucke them out of my hand. And in another place, Ioh. 6. 35. Vers. 40. I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger; and he that beleeues in me, shall neuer thirst. This is the will of him that sent me, that euery one that sees the Sonne, and beleeues in him, should haue euerlasting life, and I will raise him vp at the last day. Now the places you alleage prooue no more, but that, if any man fall away from Christ, he shall perish: and that some may forsake the truth of doctrine, or, hauing had some shew of a iustifying faith for a time, may afterward manifest themselues not to haue beleeued in Christ to iustification. Of the former kinde are those two places of Iohn: of the latter all the rest. And for example amongst other, take Saul the first King of Israell,  There is no such testimonie of him any where. 1. Reg. 19. 1. Reg. 15. & 16 Act. 8. who was at his election (as the holy Ghost witnesseth) so good a man, that there vvas no better then he in Jsraell, and yet became reprobate, as is in the Scripture signified. The like is probable of Salomon, and in the new Testament of Judas the traytour, and Simon Magus whom S. Luke saith, that he also himselfe beleeued, and after became an Arch heretike, and so died: the like almost may be verified of all Arch-heretikes, who before they fell, were of the faithfull. That you say of Saul is vtterly false: for the Scripture neither in that text, nor any where else, speakes so of him. And indeed how could it, Samuel being then aliue, so holie and good a man? But the place you meane is in 1. Sam. 9. 20. the ninth chapter, where Samuel saith to him, whose shall all the best things of Israel be? as your translation reades it. That is (saith Cuius enim optima quae∣que Israel? Lyra ibi. your glosse) the dignitie of the King, who may take the best things of the people subiect to him. . The goodly things,
saith the 70. All that is to be desired, Pagnin. What soeuer is to Expedibile, Pagnin, Vatablns. be desired in Israel (saith Vatablus) and in his marginall note; All the desire of Israel: as if he should say, Thou shalt be King of Israel. And this agrees both with the word, and with the context: Care not for the asses, saith Samuel, for they are found, and besides, whose shall all the wealth of Israel be? Thus haue you graced Saul, and belied the holy Ghost; so haue you disgraced Salomon, whom the holy Ghost hono∣red with speaking by his mouth, and writing by his penne the great mysteries of God. Euery Papist hath not power, like the Pope, to make whom he will a Saint, and whom he list a reprobate. Iudas, Simon, Hymeneus, Alexander, and the rest, beleeued the truth of the Gospell, at least in part, for a time, but neuer any one of these had at any time true iusti∣fying faith, to rest vpon Christ for saluation. But what neede we further proofe of this matter, seeing that this is cosen-german, if not the very same, with one of that infamous heretike Iouinians erronious articles, condemned, and registred by S. Hierome, Heraes. 82. li. 2. cont. Iouin. and S. Augustine, who held, that iust men after Baptisme could not sin, and if they did sinne, they were indeed washed with water, but neuer re∣ceiued the spirit of grace: his ground was, that he which had once re∣ceiued the spirit of grace, could not sinne after, which is iust M. Perkins M. Perkins hath no such proposition. proposition: so that to vphold an errour, he falleth into an old condem∣ned heresie. We denie not that a man may sinne, yea we confesse that the very best men doe sinne: but wee say, the Lord by his spirit keepes them that are iustified, from falling away from Christ, either finally, or totally. Iac. 3. 9. He that is borne of God sin∣neth not, for his seed remaineth in him: neither can he sinne, be∣cause he is borne of God. And which is yet more absurd, in the next confirmation, he letteth slippe at once a brace of other heresies: these be his words. And if by sin one vvere vvhol seuered from Christ for a time, in his recouery he is to be baptised the second time. Where you haue first rebaptizing, which is the And that con∣demned by M. Perkins; so far is he from fa∣uouring it. M. Perkins saith no such thing, you make an absurd col∣lection. Time, say vve. principall error of the Anabaptists, and withall the heresie of the Noua∣tians, who held that if any in persecution denied Christ after baptisme, there was no remedy left in Gods Church, for their recouery: but must be left to God; so saith M. Perkins, for that of rebaptizing he seemes to bring in ex absurdo: so that the common saying is verified in him, (one absurdity being graunted, a thousand follovv after.) But doth he know no
other meanes then Baptisme to recouer one cut off from Christ? hath he forgotten that corrupted sentence of the Prophet, wherwith they be∣gin their common prayer? VVhat houre soeuer a sinner doth repent him of his sinne, &c. With them repentance, and with vs the Sacrament of Penance, serue a man at any time of his life to be reconciled to Christ. 12. Art. part. 2. Art. 4. F. Baptisme being the sacrament of imitating and ingraf∣ting men into Christ, must needes be equally necessarie for all that are out of Christ. As for repentance, vpon which God forgiues a sinner, it is common to the baptized with the vnbaptized: now you hold it needfull at the first (as doubtlesse it is, so that the wilfull neglect of it is damnable, though a man haue repented) why should it be needlesse afterward, when a man is wholy out of Christ, as in the be∣ginning he was? Your superstitious and proud satisfactorie penance, wee reiect as Antichristian, neither allowing any second baptisme, nor excluding them that fall neuer so grieuously, either from heauen, or the Church in this world, if they repent. But we must answere vnto that of S. Iohn. They vvent out from vs, but they vvere not of vs, for if they had bin of vs, they vvould haue continued  1. Ioh. 2. vvith vs. I answere. If they went out from vs, they were before with vs: which confirmeth our assertion, that men may depart from their faith, and Christs profession: but such men were not indeed of the number of the elect, of which S. Iohn was, for then either they would haue con∣tinued with them in the Christian faith, or else by hartie repentance would haue returned vnto it backe againe, which is S. Augustines owne exposition. And these be the Arguments for the Catholikes, vvhich M. De bono perse. c. 8. Perkins through his confused order toucheth here, and there. Who denies they were with the Church? or who can prooue they were of it? you grant as much as we desire, that they were not of the elect: who onely are in case to fall a∣way from Christ; because the rest were neuer in him. Their returning by repentance is not into Christs mysticall body, as if they had been out of it, 12. Art. part. 2. Art. 1. C. but either into the congre∣gation of the faithfull, or, into Gods fauour, in respect of their owne feeling. To which I vvill adde one, taken out of the words of S. Paul. But thou  Rom. 11 20. Phil. 2. 12. by faith dost stand, be not too highly vvise, but feare, if God hath not spared the naturall boughes lest perhaps he vvill not spare thee neither. And a∣gaine. VVorke your saluation, vvith feare and trembling. There be aboue
an hundred such texts in holy vvrite, vvherein the holy Ghost exhorteth vs to stand in feare of our saluation, out of vvhich I thus frame my argu∣ment. No man must stand in feare of that, of vvhich he is by faith assured. But the faithfull must stand in feare of their saluation. Ergo, they bee not assu∣red of it by saith. The Minor or second proposition is plainly proued by these places, ci∣ted before; the Maior is manifest: there is no feare in faith, he that fea∣reth, vvhether the thing be assured or no, cannot giue a certaine assent thereunto: Dubius in side in fidelis est. Put the case in another article, to make it more euident: He that feareth, vvhether there be a God or no, doe vve esteeme that he beleeueth in God? So he that feareth vvhether Iesus Christ be God, is he a Christian? hath he a true faith? You must needs anssvere no. So he that feareth vvhether he shall be saued or no, can haue no faith of his saluation. I may grant your conclusion; the faithfull 12. Art. part. 1. Art. 5. & part. 2. art. 1. are not ordi∣narily assured of their saluation by such a faith as hath no doubting annexed vnto it. Yet is our assertion true, that they are assured of it by such a faith as shall neuer deceiue them. And againe, yet they ought to be assured without doubting. But I will answere to your syllogisme: first by distinguishing on your proposition, no man must, nor indeed can, stand in feare of that of which he is assured by such a measure of faith, as ad∣mits no doubt; but his faith being weake, he may and must: for this feare is an especiall meanes to keepe him from fal∣ling away. In which respect the holy Ghost exhorts to it, by reason our faith is not perfect. Secondly, for your assump∣tion, I say, the faithfull are not simply willed to be afraid that they shall not be saued, but onely are appointed to vse the meanes of securing of themselues by warines: because else it will come to passe, that they shall fall away in their owne sense and feeling. Your example prooues nothing, the measure of faith being so diuers: and further, hee may truly beleeue in God, that in some temptation falles into doubting, for a time, whether there be a God or no: as you must needes know, if you haue any experience of the temp∣tations, which sometimes befall the deare children of God. To these inuincible reasons grounded vpon Gods word, let vs ioyne some plaine testimonies, taken aswell out of the holy Scripture, as out
of the auncient Fathers. First, what can be more manifest to warrant vs, that the faithfull haue not assurance infallible of their saluation, then these words of the Holy Ghost. There be iust (and therefore faithfull) and vvise men, and their vvorkes be in the hand of God, and neuerthelesse a Eccles. 9. man doth not knovv vvhether he be worthy of hatred er loue, but all things are kept vncertaine for the time to come. Where is then the Protestants Are, Pagnine, Vatablus, and Arias Monta∣nus heretikes? Comment. in hunc locum. certainety? And because one heretike cauilleth against the Laten trans∣lation, saying that a word or two of it may be otherwise turned, heare how S. Ierome, who was most cunning in the Hebrew text, doth vnder∣stand it. The sense is, (saith he) J haue sound the vvorkes of iust men, to be in the hand of God, and yet themselues not to knovv, vvhether, they be lo∣ued of God or no. Whether there be cause or no to finde fault with the tran∣slation, let any man iudge, that either vnderstands the He∣brew, Chaldee, and Greeke: or will looke vpon other in∣terpretations of Panin. Vatablus, Arias Mnta∣nus. your owne men. For the sense, our inter∣pretation is confirmed by the course of the text, that a man cannot know by the outward things that befall him here, whether he be loued of God, or hated; because these hap∣pen alike both to the elect, and to the reprobate. Hee that will reade the expositions of learned men, and weigh the likelihood of their reasons, shall see that the place is not cleere enough to prooue a controuersie. An other plaine testimony is taken out of S. Paul, where he sheweth that it is not in vs to iudge of our owne iustice, but we must aue to God the iudgement of it: these be the words. I am not guiltie in consci∣ence of any thing, but I am not iustified herein, but he that iudgeth me is our 1. Cor. Lord, therefore iudge not before the time vntill our Lord doe come, vvho al∣so vvill lighten the hidden things of darknes, and vvill manifest the coun∣sell of the hart, and then the praise shall be to euery man of God. So that be∣fore Gods iudgement by S. Pauls testimony, men may not assure them∣selues of their owne iustice, much lesse of their saluation, how innocent soeuer they find themselues in their owne consciences. See vpon this place S. Ambrose, S. Basill, Thdoret on this place, who all agree, that Serm 5▪ in Psalm. 18. .  moa c. 2.  men may haue secret faults, which God only seeth, and therefore they must liue in feare, and alwaies pray to be deliuered from them. If all you say be granted, it is nothing to vs: for wee doe not fetch our assurance from the perfection of our righte∣ousnes, but from the truth of our faith. Neither denie wee that a man hath many secret slips knowne to God onely; but we say, he may be assured of his saluation, for all these,
vpon which it doth not depend. Wee acknowledge with those worthie men, that we must call vpon God for pardon of our secret sinnes, with feare and humblenes of minde. For the rest let S. Augustines testimony, (whom our aduersaries ac∣knovvledge to be the most diligent and faithfull register of all antiqui∣tie) be sufficient. This most iudicious, and holy Father thus defineth this matter: As long as vve liue here, vve our selues cannot iudge of our selues, I doe not say vvhat vve shall be to morrovv, but vvhat vve are to day. And De verb. Dom. Serm. 35. De ciuit. Dei, lib. 11. c. 12. yet more directly. Albeit holy men are certaine of the revvard of their per∣seuerance, yet of their ovvne perseuerance, they are found vncertaine. For vvhat man can knovv that he shall perseuere, and hold on in the action and encrease of iustice vntill the end, vnlesse by some reuelation he be assured of it from him, vvho of his iust, but secret iudgement doth not enforme all men of this matter, but deceiueth none? So no iust man is assured of his saluation This is not in Austin quoted by you.  by his ordinary faith: by extraordinary reuelation, some man may be assu∣red, the rest are not. Which is iust the Catholike sentence. Austin speakes not Aug. de ver∣bis dom. serm. 35. misquo∣ted for, Aug. homil. 50. ho∣mil. 35. there of the assurance of saluation, but perswades men to giue no credit to flatterers, because we our selues cannot iudge of our selues: and indeede wee are oftentimes faultie in those things, wherein wee suppose we haue done very well. In Aug de ciuit. dei. lib. 11. c. 12 the other place he denies that knowledge which is wholy without doubting, and to which wee grant few or none attaine ordinarily. And because S. Bernard is by our aduersaries, cited for them in this point, take his testimony in as precise tearmes as any Catholike at this time speaketh. Thus he vvriteth. VVho can say, I am one of the elect, I am one of the predestinat to life, I am one of the number of the children? VVho Serm. 1. de Septuag. Eccles. 9. (I say) can thus say, the Scripture crying out against him. A man knovveth not, vvhether he be vvorthy of loue or hatred. Therefore vve haue no cer∣teinty, but the confidence of hope doth comfort vs, that vve be not vexed at all with the perplexitie of this doubt. The vvord of God (according to S. Bernard,) cryeth out against all them, that certeinly assure themselues of their saluation: vvhereon then doe they build their faith that be∣leeue it? Bernard was by profession a member of the Popish Church, and therefore against vs his testimonie is nothing; but against you it is of great weight. For the point in que∣stion, first he is of opinion, Serm. 1. in Sepages. in that place by you quoted, that a Quales su∣mus nosse pos∣sumus, vel ex pate. man may know in what estate he is for the present, at least in part: because God hath giuen certaine manifest
signes and tokens of saluation, Vt indub bile sit. that it cannot be doubted, but that he is in the number of the elect, in whom those signes shall continue. Secondly, the reason why he denies the latter, is, because ye signes he speaks of, being in outward obedience principally, may faile, and so breede some cause of doubting. The Eccles. 9. 1. scripture he alleageth for the ground of his vncertaintie, hath nothing in it to that purpose. If it may be permitted to ioyne moderne opinions vvith auncient, bad men vvith good, I could proue by the testimony of euery principall sect of this time, that all other sectaries vvere deceiued in this their per∣svvasion of their saluation. For both Lutherans, Caluinists, and Ana∣baptists (to omit the rest) doe hold euery one of themselues assured of Lutherans and Caluinists as you tear me them, doe not thinke each o∣ther damned. their saluation, and yet each sect holdeth euery one not of his ovvne band assured of damnation: so that by the sentence of the Lutherans, all Caluinists, and Anabaptists, are miserably deceiued vvhen they as∣sure themselues of their saluation: In like manner if the Anabaptists be true censurers, both Lutherans, and Caluinists and all other, not of their heresie, erre fouly, vvhen they beare themselues in hand that they shall be saued. Certaine it is therefore by the consent of all the vvorld, that very many vvho assure themselues of saluation, are indeed assured of damnation. How doth your conclusion belong to this question? Very many, who to assure themselues of saluation, are assu∣red of damnation; who denies it? But the course you take in comming to it, is out of the way of truth. Let all Ana∣baptists passe, whom Caluin. Bulling. we, not you, haue from time to time confuted; till of late you began to tread vpon them, when we had beaten them downe. Caluinists and Lutherans (as you maliciously call them) agree in this point, for the most part, and neither make any question but the other may be saued, for all their differences in some opinions: but both haue very iust cause to doubt of you, who fight against the maine foundation, as in the next article. With the testimonies of the auncient Doctors for vs, I pray thee gen∣tle  Pag. 57. De verb. Dom. Serm. 28. Reader, conferre those vvhich M. Perkins in his sixt reason allead∣geth against vs. First, S. Augustine in these vvords. Of an euill seruant, thou art made a good child, therefore presume not of thine owne doing, but of the grace of Christ. Jt is not arrogancy, but faith to acknovvledge, vvhat thou hast receiued, it is not pride, but dution. What vvord is here of cer∣teinty of saluation? but that it belongeth to a faithfullman, to confesse himselfe much bound to God, for calling of him to be his. Which euery
Christian must doe, hoping himselfe so to be, and being most certeine, that if he be not in state of grace, it is long of himselfe, and no vvant on Gods part. The second place hath not so much as any shevv of vvords for him, thus he speaketh. Let no man aske another man, but returne to his Tract. 5. in Epist. Iohan. owne hart, and if he find Charity there, he hath security for his passage, from life to death. What need vvas there to seeke charity in his hart, fer secu∣rity of his saluation, if his faith assured him thereof? therefore this text maketh flat against him. There is this for certaintie of saluation, that it is no pre∣sumption or a man to know he hath receiued the grace of Christ; it is not arrogancie, but faith; not pride but deuo∣tion: whereas you say it is presumption, arrogancie, and pride. Can any thing be more contrarie? Not so much as a shew of words: yet is there substance of matter: for if charitie be a securitie for passage from life to death, and if a man may know whether it be in his heart or no, doubtlesse there is assurance of saluation to be had. But you will say, not by faith: else what neede he seeke for charitie? as if it were amisse to haue more proofes than one. He that hath tried the diuels temptations, knowes that all is little enough. But this assurance by charitie is assurance by faith, because it prooues wee haue such a faith, as shall cer∣tainly bring vs to euerlasting life. The next Author he citeth is S. Hilarie in these words. The Kingdome  Sup. 5. cap. Mat. Of yours, not of M. Perkins vvho hath it not. of heauen which our Lord professed to be in himselfe, his vvill is that it be hoped for, vvithout any doubtfulnes of vncertaine vvill (at all, is an addi∣tion) othervvise there is no iustification by faith, if faith it selfe be made doubtfull. First, he saith, but as we say, that the Kingdome of heauen is to be hoped for, without any doubtfulnes; for we professe certainty of hope, and deny only certainty of faith, as M. Perkins confesseth before. And as for faith, we say with him also it is not doubtfull, but very certaine. What maketh this to the purpose, that a man must beleeue his owne sal∣uation when S. Hilary speaketh there of faith of the resurrection of the dead? Hilar. in Math. ca. 5. Spes bonorum aeternorum. Hilary requires such a hope as is grounded vpon faith, and hath the same nature with faith, but that it particularly respects the time to come; whereas faith rests absolutely vpon God for the present also. Neither speakes hee of the resurrection from the dead in particular, but of euery mans trust concerning his own enioying of all heauenlie felicitie.
His last Author is S. Bernard: VVho is the iust man, but he that beg  Ep. 07.  loued of God, loues him againe? vvhich comes not to pass but by the st, reuealing by faith the eternall   saith  Perkns out of Bernard. promise of God, of his saluation to come, vvhich reuelation is nothing else, but the infusion of spirituall grace, by vvhich the deeds of the flesh are mortified, the man is prepared to the King∣dome of heauen, togither receiuing in one spirit, that, whereby he may pre∣sume, that he is loued, and loues againe. Note that he saith the reuelation of the spirit, to be nothing else, but the infasion of spirituall graces, and comfort, whereby a man hath some feeling of Gods goodnesse towards him, by which (as he saith) he may presume, but not beleeue certainely, that he is loued of God. But let S. Bernard in the same place interpret himself, there he speaketh thus, as I cited once before. It is giuen to men to tast before hand, somewhat of the blisse to come, &c. Of the which knowledge of our selues novv in part perceiued, a man doth in the meane season glorie in hope, but not yet in security. His opinion then is expressely, that for all the reuelations of the spirit made by faith vnto vs, we are not assured for certainty of our saluation, but feele great ioy, through the hope we haue hereafter to receiue it. Would Bernard haue a man presume that God loues him, without warrant? or would he haue him not beleeue the te∣stimonie of the spirit, which assures him of that loue by such a pledge? Aug. de verb▪ dom. serm. 28. Austin taught vs before, that it is no arro∣gancie, but faith, to know what we haue receiued: and Bernard teacheth vs now, that the end of receiuing is, that we may pre∣sume we are beloued of God: that is, that wee may know it by faith. He addes further afterward, that this is the holy and se∣cret counsell of God, which the Sonne hath receiued from the Fa∣ther by the holy Ghost, and communicates to those that be his, so that they begin to know as they are knowne, it being granted to them to feele before hand somwhat of their blessednes to come, as it hath been hidden from all eternitie in him that did prede∣stinate, and shall appeare more fully in him, In beatifi∣cante. when he shall make vs blessed. We beleeue with Bernard, that we haue here but a taste of the ioy to come, and that our securitie is not (ordi∣narily) without doubting. So that the certaintie he speakes of, and that we say Christians haue, is all one. This passage of testimonies being dispatched, let vs now come vnto the fiue other reasons which M. Perkins produceth in defence of their opinion. The first reason is this, That in faith there are two things, the one is an A. insallible assurance of those things which vve beleeue: This we grant, and
there hence proue (as you heard before) that there can be no faith of our particular saluation, because we be not so fully assured of that, but that we must stand in feare of losing of it, according to that, Hold that which thou hast, least perhaps another receiue thy crovvne. Apoc. 3. Faith in it selfe is a full assurance, but hath not this full worke in euery one that truly beleeues: and therefore your proofe is insufficient. But the second point of faith, puts all out of question. For (saith M. Perkins) it doth assure vs of remissission of our sinnes, and of life euerlasting in particular. Proue that Sir, and we need no more. It is proued out of S. Iohn. As many as receiued him, he gaue them poeer to be made the sonnes of God, namely, to them that beleeue in his name. This text commeth Ioh. 1 much too short he gaue them power to be the sonnes, that is, gaue them such grace, that they were able, and might if they would, be sonnes of God, but did not assure them of that neither, much lesse that they should so continue vnto their liues end. I omit his vnsauoury discourse of eating, and beleeuing Christ, and applying vnto vs his benefits, (which he might Take your re∣lish, be not meerely natu∣rall. He proues that he brings, by the Scriptures alleaged.  be ashamed to make vnto vs, that admit no part of it to be true.) I con∣fesse that therein faith hath his part, if it be ioyned with charity, and fre∣quentation of the Sacraments. Master Perkins proues that faith is a particular assurance; because it is a particular applying of Christ by euery man to himselfe. That it is so he shewes, in that it is a receiuing of Christ and all his benefits. The place of Ioh. 1. 12. Iohn is brought to proue, that to beleeue in Christ, and to receiue Christ, is all one; to which your answere is altogether impertinent. So also is your exposition false: for the holy Ghost speakes not of a , not . power to be the sonnes of God; but of a priui∣ledge, whereby all true beleeuers are the sonnes of God: Ye are all (saith the Gal. 3. 26. Apostle) the sonnes of God by faith in Christ Iesus. That discourse, so vnsauourie to your corrupt taste, serues to manifest this point, that to receiue, or be∣leeue in Christ, is to applie him particularly, as meate and drinke are applied by eating and drinking. If you could as easily haue disproued, as disliked that discourse, we should haue seene the one, as we haue the other. This is it which S. Paul teacheth, That not by the vvorkes of Moses  Gal. 3. This is your glosse. law, but by faith in Christ Iesus vve receiue the promises of the spirit, and shall haue hereafter the performance, if we obserue those things which Christ hath commaunded vs. But what is this to certeintie of Saluation?
S. Paul speakes of receiuing the spirit by faith, and no where vouchsafes any such priuiledge to workes; which indeed haue not to doe in that matter: Gal. 3. 2. Receiued ye the spi∣rit by the workes of the law, or by the hearing of faith? To those of Augustine and such like authorities, I answere, that we  Tract. 25. in Ioh. find Christ, we hold Christ, we see Christ, by faith, beleeuing him to be the Sonne of God, and redeemer of the world, and Iudge of the quicke and the dead: and we vnderstand, and disgest all the mysteries of this holy word. But where is it once said, in any of these sentences, that we are assured of our saluation? we beleeue all these points and many more: but we shall be neuer the neare our saluation, vnlesse we obserue Gods commandements, The seruant vvhich knovves his Masters will, and doth Luk. 12. Ioh. 15. it not, shall be beaten vvith many stripes. Then you are my friends (saith our Sauiour) when you shall doe the things which I commaund you: which we being vncerteine to performe, assure not our selues of his friendship, Meere Phar∣saisme. but when to our knowledge we goe as neare it as we can, and demaund pardon of our wants, we liue in good hope of it. You seeme to grant as much, concerning these places of Austin, as Master Perkins desires: but that you restraine this beleeuing (against Austins words) to a beleefe of the truth; whereas the vse of eating and drinking Christ, is not onely to establish our iudgement, but also, and that princi∣pally, to confirme the assurance of our saluation by his death and sacrifice. It is a strange kinde of answering, to require the maine conclusion in euery pro syllogisme, and not to vnderstand to what purpose euery seuerall reason is alleaged. The beleeuing of neuer so many points brings neither assurance nor saluation; but the resting vpon Christ for saluation, giues vs assurance that wee are the children of God, and shall continue so, receiuing at the last the inheri∣tance of sonnes, because of our adoption; not the wages of seruants, for our imperfect labour, in which we vse our best endeuour to doe the will of our father, not the taske of our master. I answere first out of the place it selfe, that there followeth a conditi∣on on our parts to be performed, which M. Perkins thought wisdome to  B. conceale. For. S. Paul saith that the Spirit witnesseth with our spirits, that we are the sonnes of God, and coheires with Christ, with this con∣dition, If yet vve suffer vvith him, that vve may be glorified vvith him.
So that the testimonie is not absolute, but conditionall, and then if vve faile in performance of the condition, God stands free of his pro∣mise, and will take his earnest backe againe. And so to haue receiued the earnest of it, will nothing auaile vs, much lesse, assure vs of saluation. S. Paul sets downe no condition at all, in Rom. 8. 15. 16 Vers. 17. the place al∣leaged by Master Perkins; the next verse propounds the course that God hath appointed to bring his children to glorie: which depends not vpon vs, but vpon God him∣selfe, who Rom. 8. 29. makes all his sonnes conformable to their el∣dest brother Christ, according to his predestination, Heb. 12. 6. and chastice all his children, by one kinde of suffering or ano∣ther. This is the direct answere to that place, although the other be very good, that the testimony of the spirit, is but an inward comfort and ioy, which breedeth great hope of saluation, but bringeth not assurance there of. This M. Perkins would refute, by the authority of Saint Bernard, in the place before cited, see the place, and my answere there. The witnes of the spirit, the Apostle speakes of, is, that And my Replie. Epist. 107.  we are the children of God: the comfort and ioy you men∣tion, is an effect arising from that testimonie of his, and our feeling; not the foundation of our assurance. We reioyce, because the spirit beares witnes that wee are the sonnes of God; not contrariwise because we reioyce, therefore wee haue hope that we are Gods children, though this also be a secondarie proofe of our assurance. This Argument is so proper for their purpose, that we returne it vp∣on their owne heads: We must pray for saluation, therefore we are not  C. Not fully assu∣red as vve ought to be. yet assured of it: For who in his wits prayeth God to giue him that, whereof he is assured alreadie? And a godly act of faith it is, in that pray∣er to beleeue that God wil giue that, which he is assured of before hand: such foolish petitions cannot please God, and therefore after their do∣ctrine it is to be denied, that any faithfulman may pray for his saluation, but rather thanke the Lord for it. But to answere directly, he who pray∣eth must beleeue he shall obtaine that which he prayeth for, if he ob∣serue all the due circumstances of praier, which be many, but to this pur∣pose, two are required necessarily: the one that he who prayeth be the true seruant of God, which first excludeth all those that erre in faith, touched in these words. VVhat you of the faithfull shall desire vvhen you pray, shall be giuen you: The other is, when we request matters of such moment, that we perseuere in prayer, and continue our suit day by day, of these suites of eternall saluation, we must take these words of our Sa∣uiour to be spoken. VVe must alvvaies pray, and neuer be vveary. And Lue 18.
to doubt, but vve shall in the end receiue it. But because vve are in Then belike there are de∣grees of assu∣rance. doubt, whether we shall obserue those necessary circumstances of pray∣erer no, therefore we cannot be so well assured to obtaine our suite, although we be on Gods part must assured, that he is most bful, and readier to giue, then vve are to a e. I denie your consequence, and answere to the proofe of it, as before, that 12. Art. part. 2. Art. 1. our faith is not without some doub∣ting, and our feeling not so strong, as it should and may be. If that were the condition, we could neuer looke to ob∣taine any thing of God: for wee are sure that we neuer ob∣serue all the circumstances required; but we are out of all doubt, that God will grant our requests, in his good time, if we make them in Christs name, though we faile in circum∣stances, and pray not euery day as we ought. For the Rom. 8. 26. spi∣rit we haue receiued will rouse vs vp from our deadnes, and teach vs so to pray, that we shall speede, as it may be most for Gods glorie, and our owne saluation. But saith M. Perkins, S. Iohn noteth out this particular faith, calling it, Our assurance, that God will giue vnto vs, whatsoeuer we aske according  1. Ioh. 5. to his vvill. But vvhere find vve that it is Gods vvill, to assure euery man at the first entrance into his seruice, of eternall saluation? is it not suffi∣cient to make him an assured promise of it, vpon his faithfull seruice and good behauiour tovvards him? Where finde you that we hold any such opinion? Nay we teach the contrarie; that this assurance comes not at the first, but by little and little as God sees it requisite, ac∣cording to the triall he hath appointed to make of vs. But because God hath commanded vs to labour for the perfe∣ction of al graces, we are sure this must be intreated for, and haue promise that it shall be granted, as God seeth meete, both for the time and the measure of it. The proposition is true, yet commonly denied by all Protestants, for  D. God commaunds vs to keepe his commaundements, and they hold that to be impossible: but to the assumption: That God commaunds vs to beleeue our saluation, is proued (saith M. Perkins) by these vvords: Re∣pent and beleeue the Gospell: Spectatum admissi, risum teneatis amici: Where is it vvritten in that Gospell, beleeue your ovvne particular sal∣uation? thevv vs once but one cleare text for it, and vve vvill beleeue it. I doe beleeue in Christ, and hope to be saued, through his mercy and
merits, but knovv vvell, that vnlesse I keepe his words, I am by him likened Matth. 7. Matth. 26. Matth. 25. to a foole, that built his house vpon the sanas. He commands me to vvatch and pray, least I fall into temptation: and else vvhere, vvaneth me to prepare oyle to keepe my lampe burning against his comming, or else I am most certaine to be shut out vvith the foolish Virgins. An hundred such admonitions find vve in holy Scriptures, to shake vs out of this se∣curity of our saluation, and to make vs vigilant to preuent all temptati∣ons of the enemie, and dgent to traine our selues in godly exercises of all vertue. Master Perkins hath answered your obiection against his proposition, that it is not a commandement of the Gos∣pell, but of Rom. 10. 5, 6 the law: Doe this, and thou shalt liue. His proofe is easilier laughed at, than answered. To beleeue (saith he) is particularly to acknowledge Christ to be my Sa∣uiour: that is, to put my confidence in him for my saluation: which I cannot doe, vnlesse I be resolued of my reconciliation with him. To this you answere not a word, but barely al∣leage the first proofe, and denie it. All these things, and such like our Sauiour commaunds, and assures me that God will inable me to the performing of them, because I rest vpon him for this grace in Christ. Hope indeed of heauen makes a man most couragiously beare out all  E. stormes of persecution, and not to be ashamed of Christs Crosse, but to professe his faith most boldly before the most bloody tyrants of the world, our harts being by charity fortified and made inuincible. And this is that which the Apostle teacheth in that place: and saith before, that the faithfull glory in the hope of the sonnes of God. And doe not vaunt Vers. 2. themselues of the certainty of their saluation. This certainty of hope, is great in those that haue long liued vertuously, specially when they haue also endured manifold losses, much disgrace, great wrongs and in∣iuries for Christs sake, for he that cannot faile of his word, hath promi∣sed to requite all such with an hundred fold: But what is this to the cer∣tainety of faith, which the Protestants will haue euery man to be endu∣ed with at his first entrance into the seruice of God? When as S. Paul inth, that godly men pa takers of the holy Ghost, yea after they Heb. . They neuer had a iustifying faith. haue tasted the good word of God, and the power of the world to come, that is, haue receiued besides faith, great fauours of Gods spirit, and felt as it were the ioyes of heauen, haue after all this so fallen from God, that there was small hope of their recouery. He that hopes for any thing, and glories in that hope, must needes be ashamed of his follie and presumption, if he faile to obtaine it: but the children of God hope for
euerlasting life, and glorie in this hope of theirs. Now the Rom. 5. 3. 5. Apostle saith they shall not be ashamed of this hope: and therefore it must needes be that they shall haue euerlasting life. This interpretation your owne Gloss. Inter∣lin. glosse auowes; Non facit e∣rubes, quiae impletur. Hope makes not a man blush, because it is fulfilled: and expounding that which followes of the loue of God, it saith, It is cer∣taine it shall be fulfilled, because we haue the spirit to pledge. So doth Lyra ibid. Lyra also interpret that hope: so Theodoret, Chrysostome, Theophylact. Theodoret, so Chrysostome, so Theophylact, &c. And wherein, I pray you, differs this from the assurance of faith, which wee teach, and you condemne? This growes euery day in the hearts of true beleeuers, who neuer fall away, though they are sometimes shaken. Those that the Hebr. 6. 3. 4. Apostle speakes of, neuer had true faith to iustification, as I will prooue otherwhere. The fourth poynt: Touching the iustifica∣tion of a sinner. That we may see how farre we are to agree with them, and where to differ: first I will set downe the doctrine on both parts: and secondly the maine dif∣ferences wherein we are to stand against them euen to death. Our doctrine touching the iustification of a sin∣ner, I propound in foure rules. Rule I. That, iustification is an action of God, whereby he absolueth a sinner and accepteth him to life euerlasting for the righteousnesse and merit of Christ. Rule II. That iustification stands in two things; first in the remission of sinnes by the merit of Christ his death; secondly in the imputation of Christ his righteousnesse; which is another action of God
whereby he accounteth and esteemeth that righte∣ousnesse which is in Christ, as the righteousnesse of that sinner which beleeueth in him. By Christ his righteousnesse we are to vnderstand two things: first his sufferings specially in his death and passion, se∣condly his obedience in fulfilling the law: both which goe together: for Christ in suffering obeyed, and obeying suffered. And the very shedding of his blood to which our saluation is ascribed, must not onely bee considered, as it is passiue, that is, a suffe∣ring, but also as it is actiue, that is, an obedience, in which hee shewed his exceeding loue both to his father and vs, and thus fulfilled the law for vs. This point if some had well thought on, they would not haue placed all iustification in remission of sins as they doe. Rule III. That, iustification is from Gods meere mercie and grace, procured onely by the merit of Christ. Rule IV. That, man is iustified by faith alone: because faith is that alone instrument created in the heart by the holy Ghost, whereby a sinner lieth hold of Christ his righteousnesse, and applieth the same vnto himselfe. There is neither hope, nor loue, nor any other grace of God within man, that can do this but faith alone. The doctrine of the Romane Church touching the iustification of a sinner is on this manner. I. They holde that before iustification there goes a preparation thereunto: which is an action wrought partly by the holy Ghost, and partly by the power of naturall free will, whereby a man
disposeth himselfe to his owne future iustification. In the preparation they consider the ground of iustification, and things proceeding from it. The ground is saith, which they define to bee a generall knowledge, whereby wee vnderstand and beleeue that the doctrine of the word of God is true. Things proceeding from this faith, are these; a sight of our sinnes, a feare of hell, hope of saluation, loue of God, repentance and such like: all which when men haue attained, they are then fully disposed (as they say) to their iustification. This preparation being made, then comes iustifi∣cation itselfe: which is an action of God, whereby he maketh a man righteous. It hath two parts: the first, and the second. The first is, when a sinner of an euill man is made a good man. And to effect this, two things are required: first the pardon of sinne, which is one part of the first iustification: secondlie, the infusion of inward righteousnesse whereby the heart is purged and sanctified: and this habit of righteoutnes stands specially in hope and charitie. After the first iustification, followeth the second; which is, when a man of a good or iust man is made better and more iust: and this say they, may proceed from works of grace; because he which is righteous by the first iustification, can bring forth good works: by the merit whereof, hee is able to make himselfe more iust and righteous: and yet they graunt that the first iustification commeth only of Gods mercie by the merit of Christ. Because M. Perkins sets not downe well the Catholikes opinion, I wil  You should haue shevved helpe him out, both with the preparation and iustification it selfe, and that taken out of the Councell of Trent. Where the very words con∣cerning
preparation are these. Men are prepared and disposed to this iu∣stice, vvherein he failed. Seff. 6. c. 6. vvhen being stirred vp, and helped by Gods grace, they conceiuing faith by hearing, are freely moued to vvard God, beleeuing those things to be true, vvhich God doth reueale and promise, namely, that he of his grace doth iu∣stifie a sinner through the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus. And vvhen knowledging themselues to be sinners, through the feare of Gods iudgments, they turne themselues to consider the mercy of God, are lifted vp into hope, trusting that God vvill be mercifull vnto them for Christs sake: and begin∣ning to loue him as the fountaine of all iustice, are thereby moued vvith ha∣tred and detestation of all sinnes. Finally they determine to receiue baptisme, to begin a nevv life, and to keepe all Christs commaundements. After this disposition, or preparation, followeth Iustification, and for that euery thing is best knowne by the causes of it, all the causes▪ of Iu∣stification are deliuered by the Councell in the next Chapter, vvhich briefly are these. The finall cause of the iustification of a sinner, is the glory of God, the glory of Christ, and maas ovvne iustification: the efficient is God, the meritorious, Christ Jesus Passions, the instrumentall, is the Sacra∣ment of Baptisme, the only formall cause, is inherent iustice, that is, Faith, Hope, and Charitie, vvith the other gifts of the Holy Ghost, povvred into a mans soule, at that instant of iustification. Of the iustification by faith, and the second iustification shall be spoken in their places. So that we agree in this point, that iustification commeth of the free grace of God, through his infinite mercies, and the merits of our Saui∣ours Passion, and that all sinnes, vvhen a man is iustified, be pardoned him. Master Perkins hath truly deliuered the summe of that which you set down, out of the Councill of Trent; and that more plainly for euery mans vnderstanding, than it is in the Councill. I. Our consent and difference. Now let vs come to the points of difference be∣tweene vs and them touching iustification. The first maine difference is in the matter thereof, which shall bee seene by the answere both of Prote∣stant and Papist to this one question: What is the ve∣ry thing, that causeth a man to stand righteous before God, and to be accepted to life euerlasting: wee answer, No∣thing but the righteousnesse of Christ, which con∣sisteth
partly in his sufferings, and partly in his actiue obedience in fulfilling the rigour of the law. And here let vs consider, how neere the Papists come to this answere, and wherein they dissent. Consent I. They graunt, that in iustification sinne is pardoned by the merits of Christ, and that none can be iustified without remission of sinnes: and that is well. II. They graunt, that the righteousnes whereby a man is made righteous before God, commeth from Christ, and from Christ alone. III. The most learned among them say, that Christ his satisfaction, and the merit of his death is imputed to euery sinner that doth heleeue, for Bellarm. de Iustif. lib. 2. c. 7. his satisfaction before God: and hitherto we agree. The very point of difference is this; wee hold that the satisfaction made by Christ in his death, and o∣bedience to the law, is imputed to vs, and becomes our righteousnesse. They say, it is our satisfaction, and not our righteousnes, whereby we stand righte∣ous before God: because it is inherent in the person of Christ as in a subiect. Now the answer of the Pa∣pist to the former question is on this manner; The thing (saith hee) that maketh vs righteous before God, and causeth vs to bee accepted to life euerla∣sting, is remission of sinnes, and the habite of inward righteousnes, or charitie with the fruites thereof. We condesend and graunt that the habite of righte∣ousnesse, which wee call sanctification, is an excel∣lent gift of God, and hath his reward of God: and is the matter of our iustification before men; because it serueth to declare vs to be reconciled to God, and
to bee iustified: yet wee denie it to bee the thing, which maketh vs of sinners to become righteous, or iust before God. The point of difference is this: that the Protestants hold that Christs Passion and obedience imputed vnto vs, becommeth our righteousnes: (for the words of iustice and iustification, they seldome vse,) and not a∣ny righteousnes, vvhich is in our selues. The Cathòlikes affirme, that those vertues povvred into our soules, (speaking of the formall cause of iustifica∣tion) is our iustice, and that through that, a man is iustified in Gods sight, and accepted to life euerlasting. Although as you haue seene before, vve hold that God of his mecre mercy through the merits of Christ Iesus our Sa∣uiour, hath freetie belovved that iustice on vs. The word iustification wee vse continually, the cauill a∣bout our not vsing iustice, but righteousnes, for our aduan∣tage, is sufficiently answered by Fulk against Martins disco∣uerie, chap. 8. Against the Rhem. Luc. 1. 6. Doctor Fulke, against Gre∣gory Martin, and the Rhemists. The true reason why our translators chose rather to say, righteous, and righteousnes, than iust and iustice, was, because the former words are more generall, the latter (for the most part) restrained in common vse to one particular vertue betwixt man and man. We denie not that Christians being iustified, are truly righ∣teous by inherent righteousnes; but that wee are to pleade our owne imperfect righteousnes before God, to our iusti∣fication. Note that M. Perkins comes to short in his second rule, vvhen he at∣tributeth the merits of Christs sufferings to obedience; vvhereas obe∣dience if it had been vvithout charity, vvould haue merited nothing at Gods hands. Master Perkins comes as neere the marke, as you: ac∣knowledging the loue of Christ in his obedience, distinctly both to God and vs. And indeed it were ridiculous to ima∣gine obedience without loue, though the Phil. 2. 8. Apostle men∣tions the one without the other. And this is the first point of our disagreement in the matter of iustification: which must be marked; because if there were no more points of difference betweene vs, this one alone were sufficient to keepe
vs from vniting of our religions: for hereby the Church of Rome doth race the very foundation. And vvhereas M. Perkins doth say, that therein vve raze the founda∣tion, that is as he interpreteth it in his preface, vve make Christ a Pseu∣dochrist, vve auerre, that herein vve doe much more magnifie Christ, then they do, for they take Christs merits to be so meane, that they do Are they meane merits, that appease Gods vvrath, and procure ela∣sting glorie? but euen serue the turne to deface sinne, and make men vvorthie of the ioyes of heauen. Nay it doth not serue the turne, but onely that God doth not impute sinne vnto vs. We contrarivvise, doe so highly esteeme of our Sauiours inestmable merits, that vve hold them vvell able to purchase at Gods hands, a farre inferiour iustice, and such merits as mortall men are capable of, and to them doe giue such force and value, that they make a man iust before God, and vvorthy of the Kingdome of heauen, as shall be proued. This slander was answered before. We acknowledge the power of Christs death, as to iustification, for the forgiuenes of sinnes, so to sanctification for inherent righteousnes; and that such righteousnes, as is sufficient to make vs pure and holie in the sight of God, though we attaine not to the per∣fection of it, as long as we liue in this mortall bodie. Againe, they do great iniurie to Gods goodnes, wisdome, and iustice, in their iustification, for they teach, that inward iustice, or sanctification, is not necessary to iustification; Yea their Ring-leader Luther saith, VVhere? That the iustified can by no sinnes whatsoeuer, (except he refuse to beleeue) lose their saluation. Wherein, first they make their righteous man, Like (as our Sauiour speaketh) to sepulchers vvhited on the out side, with an imputed iustice, but within, full of iniquitie, and disorder. Then the wis∣dome of God must either not discouer this masse of iniquitie, or his goodnes abide it, or his iustice either wipe it away, or punish it: But (say they) he seeth it well enough, but couereth it vvith the mantle of Christs righteousnes. Why? can any thing be hid from his sight? it is madnes to thinke it. We doe God no wrong in maintaining his truth, that sanctification followes iustification, in nature, though in time they come together. Luther saith, as the truth is, that he which beleeues shal be saued; and that faith is not destroyed by any sinne, but infidelitie. A man iustified (as I haue said often) is righteous by inherent righteousnes, and therefore not like a whited sepulchre. Our corruptions and sins God seeth, and mislikes: but hauing punisht them in Christ, he laies them not to our charge.
And why doth he not for Christs sake deface it, and wipe it cleane a∣way, and adorne with his grace that soule, whom he for his sonnes sake  He doth, but not all at once. loueth and make it worthy of his loue and kingdome. What? is it be∣cause Christ hath not deserued it? So to say, were to derogate from the infnite value of his merits. Or is it, for that God cannot make such iustice in a pure man, as may be worthy of his loue and his kingdome? And this were to deny Gods power in a matter that can be done, as we confesse that such vertue was in our first Father Adam, in state of inno∣cency. And M. Perkins seemes to graunt, That man in this life at his last gaspe, may haue such righteousnes. If then we had no other reason for vs, Pag 77. but that our iustification doth more exalt the power, and goodnesse of God, more magnifie the value of Christs merits, and brigeth greater It exalts mans pride aboue Gods mercie. dignity vnto men: our doctrine were much better to be liked, then our aduersaries, who cannot alleadge one expresse sentence, either out of holy Scriptures, or auncient Fathers, teaching the imputation of Christs righteousnes vnto vs, to be our iustification, as shall be seene in the rea∣sons following, and doe much abase both Christs merits, and Gods po∣wer, wisdome, and goodnes. It is enough for vs to know what God doth, without in∣quiring curiously into the reason of it. Yet in this case wee may answere, that God doth not make vs perfectly righ∣teous at once, that wee may continually depend vpon him, and not thinke too highly of our selues, as you, by reason of that conceit, doe, ascribing the best part of your second iu∣stification to your owne merits, proceeding from your will: which grace, as you say, hath wholy freed. But of this also I spake before, and must say more hereafter. Now let vs see by what reasons wee iustifie our doctrine; and secondly answere the contrarie obie∣ctions. Our reasons. Reason I. That very thing which must be our righ∣teousnesse before God, must satisfie the iustice of the law, which saith, Doe these things, and thou shalt line. Now there is nothing can satisfie the iustice of the law, but the righteousnes or obedience of Christ for vs. If any alleage ciuil iustice, it is nothing: for Christ saith, Except your righteousnesse exceede the righteousnes
of the Scribes and Pharises, you cannot enter into the king∣dome of heauen. This reason is not worth a rush, for when he requireth that our iustice  This ansvvere is lesse vvorth. Gal 5. Gal. 5. must satisfie the iustice of the law, I demaund what law he meaneth? If Moses law: of which those words, Doe this and thou shalt liue, are spoken: Then I answere with the Apostle. That you are euacuated, or abolished from Christ, that are iustified in the lavv. That is, he is a Iew and no Chri stian, that wuld haue Christian Iustice answerable to Moses law. If M. Perkins would onely that men iustified, must be able to fulfill Christs law, I then graunt, that they so be, by the helpe of Gods grace, which will neuer faile them, before they faile of their duties. He is neither Christian, nor Iew, but worse than either, that abolisheth the moral law by the Gospel. The Gal. 5. 3. Apostle speakes of ioyning the law with Christ to iustification, not of making Christian iustice answerable to Moses law. But is there any likelihood, that hee which came to bring per∣fect righteousnes, would destroy the law of righteousnes? Are you they that finde fault with vs, because wee say it is impossible for vs to keepe the Commandements so fully, as God requireth? Doth Moses law containe any other, or greater righteousnes, than the perfect loue of God, and of our neighbour? Is it not your common doctrine, that faith makes vs able to keepe the law? Nay, doe you not teach, that our Sauiour hath propounded greater perfection to his followers, than was required by the law of Moses? Beside, is not the law the very law of nature? And can any man bee righteous that keepes not the law of nature? You must prooue that God by Christ hath either abrogated the mo∣rall law, or dispensed with Christians for the breaches of it; not by pardoning of them, as the Apostle teacheth, but by freeing them from obedience to it. If this be false, then who∣soeuer will be iustified by any law, must fulfill Moses law, to which onely the promise is made, Doe this, and thou shalt liue. What? shall we say that workes doe make vs iust? that cannot be: for all mens workes are defectiue in respect of the iustice of the law. Shall we say our
sanctification, whereby we are renewed to the image of God in righteousnes and true holinesse? that also is imperfect and cannot satisfie Gods iustice requi∣red in the law: as Isai hath said of himselfe and the people, All our righteousnesse is as a menstruous cloath. But saith M. Perkins. That iustice of man is vnperfect, and cannot satis∣fie  Isay 64. the iustice vvhich God requires in his lavv, and proues it out of Esay, who saith, All our righteousnesse is as a menstruous, or defiled cloath. I an∣swere that the holy Prophet speaketh those words in the person of the wicked, and therefore are madly applied vnto the righteous. That he speaketh of the wicked, of that nation, and of that time: appeareth plain∣ly by the text it selfe. For he saith before, But loe thou hast been angry, for vve haue offended, and haue been euer in sinne: and after; There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, and standeth vp to take hold by thee. And al∣though the words be generall, and seeme to the vnskilfull to compre∣hend himselfe also, yet that is but the manner of preachers, and special∣ly of such as become Intercessors for others, who vse to speake in the persons of them, for whom they sue: for if he had reckoned himselfe in that number, he had lyed, when he said: There is none that call vpon thy A foule and vnmannerly speech. Luther and Caluin on this place. name, when as he immediatly calleth vpon him in most vehement sort for mercy, all which the best learned among them marking, confesse that this sentence cannot be alleadged against the vertue of good works. Hence, gather how dexterously M. Perkins handleth holy Scrip∣ture. That which the Prophet spake of some euil men, of one place, and at one time: that he applieth vnto all good men, for all times, and all places. It is no proofe that the Prophet speakes not of himselfe, as well as of the people, because Preachers sometimes doe not in the like speeches. For sometimes also they doe. Nei∣ther had the Prophet lied (as you grosly speake) if hee had meant himselfe. For it is not his purpose to denie, that God had been called vpon: but so called vpon as hee ought to haue been. The Prophet speakes of their actions, which had some shew of goodnes, els he would not say our righteous∣nes: besides, he speakes not of that which he presently was to doe, as a Prophet, but of that which (ordinarily) he and other did with the infirmitie of men. Luther & Caluin. in il∣lum locum Esaiae 64. 6. Luther and Caluin are of opinion, that the place doth not properly belong to the proofe of this doctrine; but
they denie not that the Prophet speakes of the faithfull and their works. Yea Caluin plainly affirmes, that he doth speake of them: The faithfull (saith he) goe forward in their com∣plaint. And, The faithfull must confesse their guiltines. So doth Caietan ad 2. Cor. 3. 21. Caietan vnderstand the place, alluding to it, Christ merit is called our righteousnes, because it is true righteousnes, before Gods iudgement seate: to make a difference betwixt it and our righteousnes, which (at Gods iudgement seate) is as the cloutes of a menstruous woman. De verb. E∣saiae ser. 5. Our humble righteousnes, if it be any, is true perhaps (saith Bernard) but not pure; vnlesse perchance we thinke our selues better than our fathers, who no lesse truly than humbly said: All our righteousnes is as the cloutes &c. Therefore Bernard and Caietan expound this place of the righteousnes of iustified men, as Master Perkins doth. To haue a cleare conscience before God, is a prin∣cipall part of inward righteousnesse: and of it Paul in his owne person saith thus, I am priuie to nothing by my selfe, yet am I not iustified thereby, 2. Cor. 4. 4. There∣fore nothing can procure vnto vs an absolution and acceptance to life euerlasting, but Christs imputed righteousnesse. But he will amend it in the next, where he proues out of S. Paul, that a cleare conscience (which is a great part of inherent iustice,) can no∣thing  1. Cor. 4. helpe to our iustification. I am priuie to nothing by my selfe, and yet J am not iustified thereby. Here is a very prety peece of cousinage. What, doth the Apostle say that he was not iustified by his cleere conscience? nothing lesse: but that albit, he saw nothing in himselfe to hinder his iustification yet God who hath sharper eye-sight, might espie some ini∣quitie in him, and therefore durst not the Apostle affirme himselfe to be iustified, as if he should say, if there be no oher fault in me in Gods , then I can find by mine owne insight, I am iustified, because I am  of nothing, and so the place proueth rather the vncertaine knowledge of our iustification, as I haue before shewed. If the Apostle were not iustified by the law who can be? That he was not, himselfe (saith Master Perkins) confesseth, euen then when he was not puie to himselfe of any grosse breach thereof. This is Master Perkins reason: to which
you answere nothing, but frame another argument to your selfe out of the Apostles speech. And this will appeare, if wee doe consider, how wee must come one day before Gods iudgement seat, there to be iudged in the rigour of iustice: for then we must bring some thing that may counter∣uaile the iustice of God: not hauing onely accepta∣tion in mercie, but also approbation in iustice: God being not onely mercifull, but also a iust iudge. But M. Perkins addeth, that we must remember, that we shall come to iudgement, where rigour of iustice shall be shewed. We know it well, but when there is no condemnation to those that by Baptisme be pur∣ged from originall sin, as he confesseth himselfe, the Apostle to teach in Pag. 28. our consents, about originall sinne, what then needeth any iustified man greatly feare, the rigorous sentence of a iust Iudge? And Saint Paul saith himselfe in the person of the iust: That he had ranne a good race, &c. and therefore, there vvas a crowne of iustice laid vp for him, by that iust Iudge, and not only to him, but all them that loue Crists comming. Indeede he that is iustified, needes not feare condemna∣tion: but the question is, whether he can be iustified in Gods iust iudgement, who brings imperfect righteousnes to iusti∣fie himselfe withall: which S. Paul doth not: but being iu∣stified by faith in Christ, lookes for a reward of his holie la∣bours, according to the promise of God. And concerning both, inherent iustice, and the ability of it, to fulfill  Serm. 18. de verb. Apost. the law; And what Iaw, heare this one sentence of S. Augustine. He that beleeueth in him, he hath not that iustice, which is of the lavv, al∣beit the lavv be good, but he shall fulfill the lavv, not by iustice vvhich he hath of himselfe, but vvhich is giuen of God, for charity is the fulfilling of the lavv, and from him is this charity povvred into our barts, not certainlie by our selues, but by the holy Ghost vvhich is giuen vs. There needes Aug. de ver∣bis Apost. ser. 15. no mans authoritie to prooue, that hee which is iustified hath inherent righteousnes. For the A∣postle saith, 1. Cor. 1. 30. & 6. 11. Christ is made sanctification to vs, and that by him we are sanctified: neither doe we denie, that this inhe∣rent righteousnes is such, as might enable vs to keepe the law, and shall, when it is perfect: but to keepe the law, is not onely to haue charitie, or righteousnes, but to vse it as the
law commands. Righteousnes (saith Aug. ser de temp. er. 5. Austin) is nothing els but not to sinne: not to sinne, is to keepe the commandements of the law: that is (as himselfe presently expounds it) to do none of those things that are forbidden, and to doe all those things that are commanded. But the chiefe point is, what law he meanes: out of doubt the law of Moses, which is alwaies meant, when it is put alone without any addition or explication, as it is here. What law vnderstands he, when he saith, that iustice which is of the law? Of the same he saith, he shall fulfill Legem ip∣sam. the law it selfe: besides, what Rom. 13. law doth charitie fulfill? que∣stionlesse the law of Moses: the summe whereof is the loue of God and man. Reason II. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He which knew no sinne was made sinne for vs, that we might be made the righteousnes of God which is in him. Whence I reason thus. As Christ was made sin for vs, so are we made the righ∣teousnesse of God in him: but Christ was made sin, or, a sinner by imputation of our sinnes, he being in himselfe most holy: therefore a sinner is made righ∣teous before God, in that Christs righteousnesse is imputed and applied vnto him. Now if any shall say, that mā is iustified by righteousnes infused: then by like reason, I say Christ was made sinne for vs by infusion of sinne, which to say is blasphemie. I denie both propositions, the former because it hath a comparison in the manner of our iustification, with the sinne which Christ was made for vs: for in the text of the Apostle, there is no signification of a similitude that Christ was so made sinne, as we are made iust. That is then M. Per∣kins vaine glosse, without any liklyhood in the text. The other proposi∣tion is also false, for Christ was not made sinne by imputation, for sin in that place is taken figuratiuely, and signifieth according to the expositi∣on VVhy doe you not bring a bet∣ter vvarrant from the He∣brevv phrases  of auncient Fathers, An host or sacrifice for sinne: Which Christ was truely made: his body being sacrificed on the Crosse for the discharge of sinne, and not by imputation. That there is some comparison of likenes implied by the Apostle, it appeares by Aug. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap 41. Austin: He therefore was made sinne, that we might be made righteousnes; not ours, but Gods;
not in vs, but in him; as he Demonstra∣uit. made shew of sinne, not of his owne, but of ours; not Constitutum. resting in him, but in vs. That interpretation indeed is generally best liked of, be∣cause of the Hebraisme: but yet the place may also be ex∣pounded otherwise, as Lombard. Thomas, Caietan. Ca∣tharin Gloss. Interlin. your owne writers shew: He made him to be counted a sinner, saith Thomas; and Catharin more fully, In illo posuit peccata no∣strum omni∣um.  He laid vpon him the sinnes of vs all, and especially that originall sinne, out of which, as out of a roote, the other spring. And the exposition of this place by S. Hierome is not to be despised. Christ (saith he) beeing offered for our sinnes, tooke the name of sinne that we might bee made the righteousnesse of God in him, Not ours nor in vs. If this righteousnesse of God be neither ours nor in vs, then it can bee no inherent righteousnesse, but must needes be righteousnes imputed. And Chry∣sost. on this place saith, It is called Gods righteousnes, be∣cause it is not of workes, and because it must be without all staine or want: and that cannot bee inherent righte∣ousnes. Anselme saith, He is made sinne as wee are made iustice: not ours, but Gods: not in vs, but in him: as he is made sinne, not his owne, but ours: not in himselfe, but in vs. How these words of the Apostle, Iustice of God, are to be vnderstood, see Saint Augustine. One place I will cite for all. The iustice of God (saith  Tract. 26. in Iohan. Item Epist. 120. ad honorat. cap. 30. Item in Psalm. 30. Con. 1. de spi∣rit. & lib. c. 9. he) through the saith of Christ Jesus, that is by faith wherewith we beleeue in Christ: for as that faith is called Christs, not by vvhich Christ beleeues, so that Iustice is called Gods, not whereby God is iust: both of them, faith and iustice, be ours, but therefore they are tearmed Gods, and Christs, because through their liberality they are giuen to vs. Which interpretation may be confirmed out of that place of S. Chrysostome, which M. Perkins citeth, say∣ing: It is called Gods Iustice, because it is not of works, but of his free gift. So that it is, not that which is in God himselfe, but such as he bestoweth vp∣on vs. And that iustice of it selfe is pure, and wanteth no vertue to work that, for which it is giuen, to wit, to make a man righteous. S. Anselme a A poore shift. VVhat say you to Jerome?  right vertuous and learned Catholike Arch-bishop of ours shall be an∣swered, when the place is quoted. The iustice of God is expounded by the Apostle to be
the forgiuenes of sinnes, especially vpon your interpreta∣tion. For what is it that Christ Rom. 3. 25. 26 procures by his sacrifice but pardon, the wrath of God being appeased? It is indeed cal∣led the righteousnes of God, because it is giuen vs by God, and chiefly because it is appointed and approoued of God. They that make it inherent in vs (as it cannot be prooued by this place that S. Austin doth) stretch it further than the Apostle vseth to doe, and make it comprehend sanctifica∣tion also. It is but a shift to put off Anselm. ad 2. Cor. 5. 21. Aslme, whom you cannot answere: it had been casie for you to conceiue, that he meanes his Commentarie vpon that place. But how chance Hierome is past ouer too? we must haue some other excuse, for the place is quoted. Reason III. Rom. 5. 19. As by one mans disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: marke here is a comparison betweene the first and second Adam. And hence I reason thus. As by the disobedience of the first Adam men were made sinners: so by the obedience of the second Adam, are we made righteous. Now we are not onely made sinners by propagation of naturall corruption, but by imputation. For Adams first sinne was the eating of the forbidden fruite: which verie acte is no personall offence, but is imputed to all his posteritie, in whom we haue all sinned. The In. lbr. 5. cap. 7. Ch . ad Neop. Fathers call this very sinne Adams hand-writing, making vs debters vnto God. And therefore in like manner the obedience of Christ is made the righteousnesse of euery beleeuer, not by infusion but by imputa∣tion. The comparison I allovv, because it is the Apostles, and deny that men are made sinners by imputation of Adams fault. And say that euery one descended of Adam by natural propagation, hath his ovvn peonal iniquity stieking in them, which is commonly called Oginal sin, and an high point of Pelagiamsme is it, to deny it. For albeit vve did not  of
the forbidden fruit in proper person, yet receiue vve the nature of man, polluted vvith that infection really, and not by imputation. And so the comparison serues not at all M. Perkins turne, but beareth very strongly against him, it being thus framed: As by Adams disobedience many vvere made sinners, euen so by Christs obedience many shall be iustified: This is his Maior. Novv to the Minor. But by Adams disobedience they were made sinners, by drawing from him, euery one his owne proper inherent iniquitie, First, by hauing his sinne impu∣ted to them. See hovv they are saine to dis∣grace argu∣ments, that can not ansvvere them. in like manner vve are iustified by Christ, not by imputation of his iustice, but by our inherent iustice, vvhich is povvred into our soules, vvhen ▪ are in Baptisme borne a new in him. See what penury of poore arguments they haue, that to make some shew of store are forced to propound such as make manifestly against them. Your bare deniall is no sufficient answere, especially since greater Clerkes directly affirme the contrarie, viz. that that sin of Adams makes vs debters to God; whereof we are all guiltie, as hauing committed it in his loynes. All men (saith Aug. contra Iulian. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2. Austin) are vnderstood to haue sinned in the first man, because all men were in him when he sinned: yea more then that, he saith, All men committed that sin in him, because all were that one man. As Leui (saith Dominic. Soto ad Rom. cap. 5. Domingo a soto) many yeeres be∣fore he was borne paid tithes in Abraham; in like sort we sinned in the loynes of Adam. We denie not that we receiue from Adam inherent vnrighteousnes by propagation; but af∣firme, that Adams sinne is imputed to vs to our iust con∣demnation. Reason IV. A satisfaction made for the want of that iustice or obedience which the lawe requires at our hands, is accepted of God as the iustice it selfe. But Christ obedience is a satisfaction made for the want of that iustice or obedience which the lawe re∣quires, as the Papists themselues auouch. Therefore this satisfaction is our iustice. And me thinks, the Papists vpon this consideration haue little cause to dissent from vs. For if they make Christs obedi∣ence their satisfaction, why should they not ful∣lie close hands with vs, and make it their iustice also?
For the Maior he citeth Bellarmine. I haue read the Chapter, and find  Lib. 2. de Iusti. cap. 7. no such words: further I say, there is a great difference betweene satis∣faction for mortall sinnes, and iustification: for satisfaction cannot be done by vs; for the guilt of mortall sinne is infinite, being against an in∣finite Maiesty, and so no creature can make full satisfaction for it: wher∣fore the infinit valour of Christs satisfaction is necessarily required, who hauing taken away the guilt of eternall punishment, due to sinners, lea∣ueth vs his grace to satisfie for the temporall paine of it, as shal be in his And answered as largely as shall be need∣full. due place, declared more at large. Againe, a man must needs haue his sinnes pardoned, and grace giuen him, before he can make any kind of due satisfaction, for he must be in the state of grace before he can satisfie, wherefore he must needs flie to the benefit of Christs satisfaction: There is nothing like in iustificati∣on, for first to make a man iust in Gods sight, requires no infinite perfe∣ction but such as a meere man is very well capable of, as all must needes confesse of Adam in the state of Innocency, and of all the blessed soules in heauen who be iust in Gods sight. Neither is it necessary to be infinit, for to be worthy of the ioyes of heauen, which be not infinit as they are The ioyes of heauen are as infinite as the paines of hell.  enioyed of Men or Angels, either who haue all things there in number, weight, and measure. Master Perkins argument is wholy omitted by you; and a consectarie, which he drawes from it, propounded in stead of it. The argument is this: A satisfaction made for the want of that iustice or obe∣dience which the law requires at our hands, is accepted of God as iustice it selfe. But Christs obedience is a satisfaction, made for the want of that iustice, or obedience, which the law requires. Therefore Christs obedience is accepted of God, as the iu∣stice it selfe. Vpon this he concludes yet further. If the Papists make Christs obedience their satisfaction, why should they not make it their iustice? The reason of the proposition is, because God accepts such sa∣tisfaction for iustice. But they make Christs obedience their satisfaction. Therefore why should they not make it their iustice? Your answere must be applied to the consequence of the proposition; the proofe whereof, as I haue shewed, is fetcht
from the former syllogisme; to which you answer nothing at all. But let vs take it as it is; and it is thus much in effect, that you haue neede of Christs satisfaction, but no neede of his iustice. So then belike you will not accept of his righte∣ousnes as yours, because you are loth to be any more be∣holding to him than needs you must. That you need it not, you prooue, because a meere man is capable of sufficient lighteousnes to iustification. But that will not serue the turne, vnlesse also he haue as much as he is capable of: to which estate no man attaines in this life, by your confes∣sion, who admit an increase of iustice euery day. Briefly, it is a most easie thing for one man to pay the debts of an o∣ther but one man cannot bestow his wisedome or iustice on an other, and not credible, that God (whose iudgement is according to truth) will repute a man for iust, who is full of iniquity: no more then a simple man will take a Black moore for white, although he see him cloathed in a white sute of apparell. Secondly, you take it not as yours, because Christ cannot bestow it on you. What? not so much as to haue it impu∣ted to you? why not, as well as Adams sinne is mads ours by imputation? But God (you say) whose iudgement is according to truth, will not repute a man iust, who is full of iniquitie. Indeede God cannot be deceiued, to hold a man not to be wicked that is wicked: but God can iustifie, that is, forgiue and acquite him, though he know him to be wicked; and can take him for righteous in Christ, of whom he is a member, though in himselfe he be not righ∣teous. So may the man, that will not take a blacke Moore for white, accept of him, as if he were white, without any error. Reason V. The consent of the auncient Church. Bernard saith, epist. 190. The iustice of an other is as∣signed vnto man: who wanted his owne, man was indepted and man made paiment. The satisfaction of one is im∣puted to all. And why may not iustice be from an other as
well as guiltinesse is from another. And in Cant. serm. 25. It sufficeth me, for all righteousnesse to haue him alone mercifull to me, against whom I haue sinned. And, Not to sinne is Gods iustice, mans iustice is the mercifullnesse of God. And serm. 61. Shall I sing mine owne righte∣ousnesse, Lord I will remember thy righteousnesse alone: for it is mine also: in that euen thou art made vnto me righ∣teousnesse of God. What, shall I feare least that one bee not sufficient for vs both? it is a short cloke that cannot couer two: it will couer both thee and me largely, beeing both a large and eternall iustice. Master Perkins last reason, is taken from the consent of the auncient  VVhich shewes Austins iudge∣ment. Church, And yet citeth (sauing one two lines) nothing out of any aun∣cient writer, not out of any other, but out of only S. Bernard, who liued 1000. yeares after Christ, so that he signifieth that there is little releefe to be had in Antiquity. What reliefe there is for vs, touching this point, in the Fathers, shall appeare more fully hereafter, if it please God, in another treatise. In the meane while take a taste by these, who acknowledge their righteousnes imperfect, and vn∣able to abide Gods iudgement. This (saith In concio. de humilitate. Basil) is perfect and sound reioycing in God, when a man doth not bragge, no not of his righteousnes, but knowes himselfe vnworthie of true righ∣teousnes, and that he is iustified onely by faith in Christ. And in Basil. in Psalm. 114. another place: Euerlasting rest remaines for them, which in this life haue striuen lawfully, not for the desert of their workes, but by the fauour of the most bountifull God, in whom they haue hoped. Charitie (saith Aug. epist. 2 ad Hietonym. Austin) in some is greater, in some lesse, in other none at all: but so great charitie, as cannot be increased, is in no man so long as he liues here. Now, so long as it may be increased, surely that which is lesse than it should be, is faultie. By reason of which fault, there is not a righteous man vpon earth, that doth good, and sinnes not: by reason of which fault, no man liuing shall be iustified in the sight of God: be∣cause of this fault, if we say we haue no sinne, the truth is not in vs: and for this also how much soeuer we haue done, it is ne∣cessarie
for vs to say, Forgiue vs our debts; though all our words, deedes and thoughts were forgiuen in baptisme. I will not boast (saith De Iacob. & vita beata ca. 6 Ambrose) because I am righteous, but because I am redeemed: I will boast, not because I am voide of sinnes, but be∣cause my sinnes are forgiuen me. Which Caluin declareth more plainely, for he commonly setting light  ib. 3. insti. ca. 11. num. 15 by all other in this question, reiecteth also S. Augustine saying. Yea not the sentence of Augustine himselfe is to be receiued in this matter, vvho at∣tributeth our samctification to grace, wherewith we are regenerate in newnes of life by the spirit. And Kemnitius in the first part of his examination of the Councell of rent, saith: VVe contend not how the Fathers take iu∣stification: and a little after. I am not ignorant that they spake othervvise then we doe of it. Therefore M. Perkins had reason to content himselfe with some few broken sentences of later vvriters. Caluin doth not commonly reiect the Fathers in this point; but both he and Chemnitius alleage diuers things out of them, in this question of iustification. For Chemnit. de iustif. tit. I esti∣monia. Chemni∣tius looke in the place you haue named, in his disputation of iustification. Calu. Instit. lib. 3. c. 11. §. 15 Caluins words will cleere him sufficiently, if they be truly reported. Yea not the sentence of Austin him∣selfe, or at the least not his manner of speech, is Per omnia. in all sorts to be receiued. For although he notably spoyle man of all commen∣dation of righteousnes, and passe ouer all to Gods grace, yet he referres grace to sanctification, whereby we are regenerate into newnes of life, through the spirit. Indeed it is vsuall with Au∣stin, and the Latin Fathers, to speake of Iustificare,  facere. iustification, as the word seemed to leade them; and so to comprise vnder it sanctification also. In which respect Caluin, and Chemnitius say, they are the lesse to be receiued. But as for iustification, they spake ordinarily, as you heard before, when they speak properly, acknowledging euen the charitie of men regene∣rate (as I shewed out of Aug. epist. 29 d Hieron. Austin) by which the law is ful∣filled, to be imperfect, and vnable to iustifie vs in the sight of God. But was S. Bernard trow you in this one point a Protestant? Nothing  Eps. 190. lesse, his words be these. The iustice of another is assigned vnto man, vvho wanted his own: man vvas indebted, and man made payment, &c. But let his owne reason there cited, serue for exposition of his former words, which is this. For vvhy may not iustice be from another, aswell as guiltines is from another? Now guiltines from Adam is not by imputation, but e∣uery
one contracts his owne, by taking flesh from him, euen so iustice  The  is double. from Christ powred into euery man, that is borne againe of water and the holy Ghost. In the second place he saith: That mans iustice is the mercifulnes of God: that is, by Gods free grace and mercy it is bestovved vpon vs. Your answere to the Bern. pi. 19 first place of Bernard was refuted before, when I prooued that Adams sinne was made ours by imputation. How will that agree with the former part of the sentence; Bernard. in Cant. ser. 25. The iustice of God is not to sinne, but the iustice of man is be∣stowed by Gods free mercie? There is a poore difference be∣twixt these two, when as God may bestow such righteous∣nes vpon a man, that he shall be free from sinning. But thus stands the opposition; not to sinne, is Gods righteousnes; not to haue sinne imputed, through Gods mercie, is mans righteousnes. With S. Bernard in the third place, we acknowledge that we haue no iustice of our owne, that is from our selues, but from the goodnesse of God, through the merits of our blessed Sauiours Passion: read his first sermon, vpon these words of the Prophet Jsaie. Vid Dominum, &c. There you shall see him speake plainely of inherent iustice, and how it Ser. 1. super Esaiam. is a distinct thing from the iustice of Christ. How vaine and sleight an answere this is, the very words will shew; Bernard. in Cantic. ser. 61. Thou art made vnto me righteousnes of God: he speakes of such a righteousnes, as is both his and Christs; Shall I feare (saith he) least that one be not sufficient for vs both? It is not a short cloake that cannot couer, it will couer both thee and me largely, being both a large and eternall iustice. In Bernard. ser. 1 super Esai. the place, by you quoted, he speakes not a word of any righteousnes: but in Ser. 5. super Esai. the fifth sermon vpon that text, he compares the righteousnes of men and Angels with Gods; not inherent with imputed. But what if he speake of inhe∣rent righteousnes, as he doth in many places? doe we deny it? or is there, because of that, none imputed? or is that in∣herent righteousnes sufficient to iustifie vs in Gods sight? Let Bernard. ser. 5. de verb. E∣saiae. Bernard speake for himselfe: Our humble righteous∣nes, if there be any, is Recte forsit . true (perhaps) but not pure; vnlesse per∣chance (saith Bernard vpon that very place of Esay) we thinke our selues better than our fathers, who said, no lesse truly than
humbly, All our righteousnes is as the cloutes of a menstruous woman. For how can there be pure righteousnes, whereas yet there cannot be fault wanting? It is no marueile then if you now make light of Bernard, whom otherwise you magnifie. His testimonie must needes bee accounted of, that is so plaine for vs, and against you; whereas he was a member of your owne Church, and erred with you in many points of Anti∣christianisme. August. on Psal. 22. He prayeth for our faults, and hath made our fault: his faults, that he might make his iu∣stice our iustice. Another broken peece of a sentence, there is cited out of S. Augu∣stine.  In Psalm. 22. Tract. 27. in Ioan. Christ made his iustice our iustice. That is, by his iustice, he hath merited iustice for vs, as he expoundeth himselfe. What is this, the iustice of God, and the iustice of man? The iustice of God is here called that, not whereby God is iust, but that which God giueth to man, that man may be iust through God. What a forced interpretation is this? Christ (saith August. in Psalm. 22. Au∣stin) made his iustice our iustice: that is (say you) by his iu∣stice he hath merited iustice for vs. He hath made his ours: that is, he hath by his purchased other for vs. Who can beare such an exposition? Sure the words will not, nor the sense. For how shall we expound the former part of the sentence, which you craftily leaue out? He hath made our sinnes his sinnes. Haue our sinnes merited sinne for him? If this be ab∣surd, as it is, how shall your interpretation be auowed, the latter part depending vpon the former? As for the exposi∣tion you bring out of Aug. tract. 27. in Ioh. another place; where the iustice of God is said to be that which God giueth man; this proues that, which before I deliuered, that the Fathers sometimes make iustification to comprehend sanctification too: but where they speake properly of iustification, there they teach as we doe. Obiections of Papists. Obiections of the Papists proouing inherent righ∣teousnesse to bee the matter of our iustice before
God, are these. Obiect. I. It is absurd, that one man should bee made righteous by the righteousnesse of an other: for it is as much as if one man were made wise by the wisedome of another. Answ. It is true, that no man can bee made righteous by the personall righteousnesse of another, because it per∣taines onely to one man. And because the wisedome that is in one man, is his altogether wholly, it cannot be the wisdom of another: no more then the health and life of one bodie, can bee the health of . But it is otherwise with the righteousnesse of : it is his indeede because it is inherent in him, as in a subiect: it is not his alone, but his and ours together by the tenour of the Couenant of grace. Christ as he is a Mediatour is giuen to euery beleeuer as really and truely, as land is giuen from man to man: and with him are giuen all things that concerne sal∣uation: they being made ours by Gods free gift: among which, is Christ his righteousnesse. By it therefore as being a thing of our owne, wee may bee iustified before God, and accepted to life euer∣lasting. This answere solueth not the difficulty any whit at all, for Christs wisedome, power, and other giftes are not imputed vnto vs, as it is eui∣dent. Why then is his iustice more then the rest? we confesse that in a good sense all Christs gifts are ours, that is, they were all employed to purchase our redemption, and we doe dayly offer them to God that he will for his Sonnes sake more and more, wash vs from our sinnes, and be∣stow his graces more plentifull vpon vs: thus are all Christs riches ours, so long as we keepe our selues members of his mysticall body: but this is nothing to the point which the argument toud, how one man may formally be made iust by the iustice of another, rather then wise, by This formalitie is a bare word.  the wisdome of another. The reason why our Sauiour Christs other gifts are not imputed to vs, is, because we stand not in neede of them, for the fulfilling of the law, to iustification. They also belong
to vs, as members of his mysticall bodie: wee doe not offer them to God, but intreate him for his Sonnes sake (who was so and so qualified, and did such and such things; and, aboue all, who is so beloued) to be mercifull vnto vs, and to accept vs for his children. As for any formall wisedome, or iustice, which should make any reall change in vs, we looke not for it in iustification, but in sanctification; and that is not Christs, but ours personally. Obiect. II. If a sinner bee iustified by Christ his righteousnesse, then euery beleeuer shall be as righ∣teous as Christ: and that can not be. Ans. The pro∣position is false: for Christ his righteousnesse is not applyed to vs according as it is in Christ: neither ac∣cording to the same measure, nor the same manner. For his obedience in fulfilling the lawe, is aboue Adams righteousnesse, yea aboue the righteousnesse of all Angels. For they were all but creatures, and their obedience the obedience of creatures: but Christ his obedience is the obedience or righteous∣nesse of God: so tearmed, Rom. 1. 17. 18. 2. Cor. 5. 21. not onely because God accepted of it, but because it was in that person which is very God. When Christ obeyed, God obeyed: and when he suffered, God suffered: not because the God-head suffered or per∣formed anie obedience, but because the person which according to one nature is God, performed o∣bedience and suffered. And by this means his righ∣teousnesse is of infinite value, price, merit & efficacy. Hence also it commeth to passe, that this obedience of Christ serueth not only for the iustifying of some one person (Namely for himselfe. as Adams did) but of all and euery one of the elect: yea it is sufficient to iustifie many thou∣sand worlds. Now to come to the point, this righte∣ousnesse
ousnesse that is in Christ, in this largenes and mea∣sure; is pertaining to vs in a more narrow skantling: because it is onely receiued by faith As any one sar pa takes in the whole light of the  vvith  of the  r sorth as  said light  it to sinne. so farforth, as it serueth to iustifie any particular beleeuer. But they vrge the reason further, saying; If Christ his righte∣ousnes be the righteousnesse of euery beleeuer, then euery man should be a Sauiour: which is absurd. Answ. I answer as before, and yet more plainely thus: Christ his righteousnesse is imputed to the person of this, or that man, not as it is the price of redemption for all mankind, but as it is the price of redemption for one particular man: as for example, Christ his righteousnes is imputed to Peter, not as it is the price of redemption for all, but as it is the price of re∣demption for Peter. And therefore Christ his righteousnesse, is not applyed to any one sinner in that largenesse and measure, in which it is in the person of Christ: but onely so sarreforth as it serueth to satisfie the lawe for the saide sinner, and to make his person accepted of God as righteous, and no further. That which is applied of Christs iustice, to this, or that man; is either infinite, and then the man is as iust as Christ: for there can be no grea∣ter then infinite in the same kinde. Or it is not infinite, but in a certaine measure as he seemeth to graunt, and then it is no part of Christs innt iustice, for all the parts of an infinit thing, are infinit: according vnto true Philosophy. It remaineth then that a certaine limited portion of in stice is deriued out of Christs infinit iustice, and powred into this, o There is none at all pored in, but impued. that man, as in his owne example, The light of euery starre is receiued from the Sunne beames. Yet is not the light in the starre, the same which is in the Sun, for one accident cannot be in two subiects so far distant, neither is it of like vertue to lighten the skyes, as it is euident: but is a far dm∣mer light, somewhat like vnto that of the Sun from whence it came. E∣uen so in our iustification from the Sonne of iustice Christ Iesus, certaine beames of particular iustice are conueied into this, or that mans soule, whereby it is both lightned by faith, and inflamed by charity: but there is exceeding difference betweene their two iustices, more then there is
betweene the light of the Sunne, and the light of a starre; which S. Au∣gustine in expresse tearmes deliuereth, saying. How much difference there Lib. 12. cont. cap. 5. is betvveene the light that doth lighten, and that vvhich is sightened, that is the sun and the starre light, so much difference is there betvveene the iu∣stice that doth iustifie, and that iustice vvhich is made by that iustificati∣on: to wit, betvveene the iustice of Christ, and that vvhich is in eue good Christian. The iustice of Christs humane nature (for of that now we speake) is not properly infinite, but onely in regard of his person. Therfore, though it were all communicated to some man, yet should it not in him be infinite. You wholy mistake the matter. For Master Perkins doth not meane, that there is any part of Christs righteousnes in∣herently made ours, as the light of the starre, receiued from the Sunne, remaines in it; but brings that similitude only to shew, that the whole is applied to euery one that is iustified, in his seuerall proportion. As for inherent righteousnes, that is rather an effect, than an application of Christs righteous∣nes. It may be also Master Perkins was of opinion, that the starres (as the Moone) haue no light in themselues, but only reflect the light of the Sunne shining on them; and then it is true, that the light which comes from them is the very light of the Sunne, varied according to the nature and posi∣tion of each seuerall starre. Austin speakes of iustification and iustice, as they are largely taken, for sanctification also: neither doth hee compare Christs righteousnes (as hee is man) with ours, but shewes how infinitly Gods wisedome and iustice exceede mans; as hee doth Aug. epist. 85 ad Consenti. elsewhere, by the same similitude. Obiect. III. If we be made righteous by Christ his righteousnesse truly, then Christ is a sinner truly by our sinnes: but Christ is not indeede a sinner by our sinnes. Answ. We may with reuerence to his maie∣stie in good manner say, that Christ was a sinner, and that truely: not by any infusion of sinne into his most holy person, but because our sinnes were laid vpon him.
The third reason for the Catholike party. If men be made truely and really iust by Christs iustice, imputed vnto them, in like manner Christ should be made really vniust, by the iniquitie and sinnes of men impued vnto him. For there is no reason to the contrary, but one may aswell be mande vniust by imputation, as iust; especially considering that euill is made more easilie, and more vvaies then good. M. Per ansvvere is, that vve may say Christ vvas a sinner truely, not because he had sinne in him, but because our sinnes vvere laide on his shoulders. That reason is naught, for he is not truly a sinner, that paies the debt of sinne, vvhich VVhat is it to strke by impu∣tation? an innocent and most iust person may performe: but he that either hath sinne truly in him, or is so by imputation stroken, that the sins are made his ovvne really, and he in all cases to be dealt vvithall, as if he sinned himselfe: as they hold that one iustified by imputation of Christs iustice, is really in Gods sight iust, and is both loued in this life, and shall be re∣vvarded in the next, as if he vvere truly iust indeed: But to auouch our Sauiour Christ to be so a sinner, is to say that he was auerted from God, the slaue of the diuel, & sonne of perdition, which is plaine bahemie. He is truly a debtor that bindes himselfe to pay the debt; by that meanes taking it vpon him, as if hee were hee that principally owes the money. 12. Art. part. 1. Art. 4. It is no blasphemie at all to auow, that our Sauiour Christ, hauing taken our sinnes vpon him, was, in that respect, to God for vs, as euery one of vs is, in himselfe, to God. Doth not the Gal. 3. 14. Apostle say, that Christ hath redeemed vs from the curse of the law, becomming a curse for vs? Thus saith the holie Ghost, hee which knew no sinne was made sinne for vs, and he was counted with sinners, Isa. 53. 13. yet so, as euen then in himselfe he was without blot, yea more holy then all men and Angels. On this manner said Chrysostome 2. Cor. 3. God permitted Christ to be condemned as a sinner. Again, He made the iust one to be a sinner, that he might make sin∣ners iust. That sentence out of the Prophet, He vvas counted vith sinners, is  Isay 53. expounded by the uanglists, that he was so taken indeede, but by a wicked Iudge, and a reprohate people. And theefore if you allow of their sentence, range yourselfe with them, asoneof their number. S.  by him produced, confirmeth the same, saying that God permit∣ted him to be condemned as a sinner not that he was one truly Ch I know is called sinne by S. , but by a figure, ng that he as a
sacrifice for sinne, as hath been before declared. The same blessed Apo∣stle when he speaketh properly, affirmeth in plaine tearmes, that Christ was tempted like vnto vs, in all things excepting sinne. Heb. 4. The wicked Iewes accounted him to be sinfull in him∣selfe; that blasphemie wee disclaime, and hold him to haue been alwaies most pure and holy, saue onely for our sinnes charged vpon him; as the Leuit. 16. 21. sinnes of the people were, in a type, laid on the scape goate. Obiect. IV. If a man be made righteous by impu∣tation, then God iudgeth sinners to bee righteous: but God iudgeth no sinner to bee righteous, for it is abhomination to the Lord. Answ. When God iusti∣fieth a sinner by Christ his righteousnes, at the same time, he ceaseth in regard of guiltinesse to bee a sin∣ner: and to whom God imputeth righteousnesse, them hee sanctifieth at the very same instant by his holy Spirit: giuing also vnto originall corruption his deadly wound. If a man be righteous onely by imputation, he may together be full of ini∣quitie, vvhereupon it must needs follovv, that God doth take for iust and good, him that is both vniust and vvicked: but that is absurd, vvhen Gods iudgement is according to truth. Here M. Perkins yeeldeth, That vvhen God doth impute Christs iustice vnto any man, he doth together sanctifie the partie, giuing originall sinne a deadly vvound. And yet else where he said, Of originall sinne pag. 31. That originall sinne, vvhich remained after iustification in the party, did beare such svvay, that it infected all the vvorkes of the said party, and made him miserable, &c. But it is good hearing of amendment, if he wil abide in it. It is a good shift to multiplie words, when you know not what to say. Master Perkins obiection and answere, are al∣most in as few words as you make the obiection. Is this to pare off superfluitie? Here is nothing altered, that before was deliuered: originall sinne remaines the same it was, and so defiles our actions still, but it hath not the same strength. Obiect. V. That which Adam neuer lost, was ne∣uer giuen by Christ: but he neuer lost imputed righ∣teousnesse:
therefore it was neuer giuen vnto him. Ans. The proposition is not true: for sauing faith, that was neuer lost by Adam, is giuen to vs in Christ: and Adam neuer had this priuiledge, that after the first grace should follow the VVe haue & posse & velle, he had no more but posse  vel∣let, and e vvanted velle quod posset. August. de corrept. & grat. cap. 11. second: and thereup∣on beeing left to himselfe, hee fell from God: and yet this mercie is vouchsafed to all beleeuers, that af∣ter their first conuersion God wil stil confirme them with new grace: and by this meanes, they perseuere vnto the ende. And whereas they say, that Adam had not imputed righteousnesse: I answere, that hee had the same for substance though not for the man∣ner of applying by imputation. The fift reason, is inuerted by M. Perkins, but may be rightly framed thus. Christ restored vs that iustice vvhich vve lost by Adams fall, but by him vve lost inherent iustice, ergo By Christ vve are restored to inherent iustice. The Maior is gathered out of S. Paul, who affirmeth, that we re∣ceiue Rom. 5. Lib. 3. c. 20. lib 6. de Gen. 24. 26. 26. more by Christ, then we lost by Adam: And is Saint Jreneus, and Saint Augustines most expresse doctrine, who say, Hovv are vve saide to be renevved, if vve receiue not againe vvhich the first man lost, &c? Jm∣mortality of body vve receiue not, but vve receiue iustice from the vvhich he sell through sinne. Master Perkins conclusion was to the purpose, though one of the propositions (as he hath prooued, and you grant by not answering) was false. But the reason as you frame it is nothing at all against vs: for we denie not that we receiue inherent iustice by Christ, but that to bee iustified is to bee righteous in Gods fight by inherent righteousnes. Obiect. VI. Iustification is eternall: but the impu∣tation of Christ his righteousnesse is not eternall, for it ceaseth in the ende of this life: therefore it is not that which iustifieth a sinner. Answ. The imputation of Christs righteousnesse is euerlasting: for he that is esteemed righteous in this life by Christ his righte∣ousnes, is accepted as righteous for euer; and the re∣mission
of sinnes granted in this life, is for euer con∣tinued. And though sanctification be perfect in the world to come, yet shall it not iustifie: for wee must conceiue it no otherwise after this life, but as a fruit springing from the imputed righteousnes of Christ, without which it could not be. And a good childe will not cast away the first garment, because his fa∣ther giues a second. And what if inward righteous∣nesse be perfect in the ende of this life, shal we there∣fore make it the matter of our iustification? God for∣bid. For the righteousnesse whereby sinners are iu∣stified, must be had in the time of this life, before the panges of death. The sixt and last reason for Catholikes is, The iustice of the faithfull is eternall, uieth after this life, and is ned in beaen, but Christs im∣puted iustice ceaseth in the end of this life. eigo. M. Perkins answereth. First, that imputed righteousnes continueth with vs for euer, and that in heauen, we all haue no other. Secondly, that perhaps in the end of this life, in ward righteousnes shall be perfect, and then without perhaps it shal be most perfect in heauen. So that one part of this answere, ouerthroweth the other. Wherfore I need not stand vpon it, but will proeed to fortifie our partie, with some authorities, ta∣ken both forth of the holy Scriptures, and auncient Fathers. There are many pitifull shifts in this answere. First Ma∣ster Perkins denies the assumption; which you leaue so ouer∣throwne, and runne to fortifie your owne partie. Secondly, he giueth the reason of his deniall, That acceptation of vs, as righteous, and forgiuenes of sinnes shall be continued in heauen. Thirdly, he saith not that wee shall haue no other righteousnes in heauen, but the quite contrarie, viz. sancti∣fication, which is inherent righteousnes, here imperfect. Fourthly, he puts it not to perhaps, but resolutly affirmes, that sanctification shall be perfect in the end of this life. Fiftly, there is not in his speech so much as a shew of any contradiction; which ariseth wholy from that clause foy∣sted in by you; we shall haue no other. Lastly, as any man may
discerne, you change Master Perkins conclusion, and so his whole reason. The first place I take out of these words of S. Paul, And these things  1. Cor. 6. certes, vvere you, (Dronkers, Couetous, Fornicators. &c.) But you are VVa∣shed, you are Sanctified, you are Iustified in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ and in the spirit of our Lord: Here iustification by the best interpreters S. Chysost. Ambro. & Theophyl.  huncloum.  iudgement is defined, to consist in those actions of washing vs from our sins, and of infusion of Gods holy gifts by the holy Ghost in the name, and the sake of Christ Iesus. First I answere, as before, that the Fathers often take iusti∣fication for sanctification also. Secondly, I say Bellarm de Iustif. lib. 2. c. 3. Bellarmine, out of whom you take this, hath deceiued you. Chrysostad. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Chrysostome doth not make iustification consist in those actions of wash∣ing, &c. his words are these: God hath washed vs; and not that onely, but hath sanctified vs; neither that onely, but hath iusti∣fied vs. Now if washing and sanctifying be iustifying, in Chrysostoms iudgement, how doth he rise from one to ano∣ther, as diuers things? Theophy▪ ibid. Theophylact makes them diuers, at least in nature: God hath clensed you from them (saith Theo∣phylact) yea and sanctified you. How? By iustifying you, faith he, for he hath washed you: then afterward, iustifying he hath sanctified you. Theodor. ibid. Theodoret expounds the place of forgiuenes of sins in baptisme. Your Glossa ordin. ibid. ordinarie glosse applies wash∣ing to baptisme; sanctifying to the holy Ghost giuen vs, that wee may worke well; and iustifying, to our working well. Ambros. ibid. Ambrose saith, that in baptisme he that beleeues is washed, is iustified in the name of the Lord, and is adopted a sonne to God, by the spirit of our God. But neuer a one of these saith, that iustification consists in these actions of washing, and infusion of Gods gifts. The like description of our iustification is in S. Paul. Of his mercie he  Tit. 3. hath saued vs by the lauer of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, vvhom he hath povvred into vs abundantly, through Iesus Christ our Saui∣our, that being iustified by his grace, vve may be heires in hope (and not in certainety of faith) of life euerlasting. Where the Apostle inferring that This is your glosse. being iustified by his grace, declareth that in the words before he had described the same iustification, to consist in our new birth of Bap∣tisme, and the enewing of oursoules, by the infusion of his heauenly giftes, vvhich God of his mercy did bestow vpon vs for his Sonne Chrsts sake.
This is but your glosse. For the grace of God, in that place, signifies the fauour of God: as Rom 3. 24. 1. Cor. 15. 10. Heb. 2. 9. otherwhere the same phrase doth; or the loue of Christ: who (as Lyra ad Tit 3. Lyra there saith) makes vs the adopted sons of God. aietan. ibi. Caietan makes an opposition betwixt Gods grace and our workes, as the Rom. 11. 6. Apostle doth: If it be of grace, it is no more of workes. So doth Chrysost. & Theoph. ad Tit. 3. Chrysostom and Theophylact vnderstand it, of fauour, not of debt: For if he saued vs Per grariam. by fauour, When we were de∣sperate and cast away; much more (saith Theophylact) shall he giue vs those good things to come, now we are iustified, as the Rom. 5. 10. Apostle saith; If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, much more being reconciled, wee shall be saued by his life. Many other places I omit for breuity sake, and will be content to D. B. P. You threaten kindnesse on your aduersa∣ries. De peccat. merit. & re∣miss. cap. 15. Epist 85. Lib. 12. de Trinit. cap. 7. Lib. 6. de Trin.  cite few Fathers, because the best learned of our aduersaries do confesse that they be all against them, as I haue shewed before. First, S. Augustine saith, That this iustice of ours, (which they call righteousnes) is the grace of Christ, regenerating vs by the holy Ghost; And is a beautie of our invvard man. It is the renuing of the reasonable part of our soule. And twenty other such like, whereby he manifestly declareth, our iustice to be inherent, and not the imputed iustice of Christ. Let him suffice for the Latin Fathers. And S. Cyrill for the Greekes, who of our iustification writeth thus. The spirit is a heate, vvho as soone as he hath povvred charity into vs, and hath vvith the fire of it, inflamed our minds, vve haue euen then obtained iustice. In the Aug de pec∣ca. merie. & remss. cap. 15 first place alleaged by you, there is no such mat∣ter: onely Austin proues against the Pelagians, that we are not sinners from Adam, by imitation alone; because then we should also be righteous from Christ by nothing but imitation. In the Aug. epist. 85. ad Comentiu. Epistle to Consentius he speakes not of that righ∣teousnes, whereby wee are iustified, but of that which is in∣herent. What other thing (saith he) is iustice in vs, or any other vertue, by which we liue orderly, and wisely, than the beautie of the inward man? This is true of those graces we receiue by sanctification. August. de Trinit. lib. 12. cap. 7. He doth not say, that the grace by which we are iusti∣fied is the renewing of the reasonable part of our soule, but that the renewing of Gods image in vs, is the renewing of
that part. Now this is done by sanctification, not by iusti∣fication properly taken. I can finde no such thing in that booke of Cyril de Trinit. lib. 6. Cyrill; but if euer he spake so, what is that against vs? who easily grant that we are inherently righteous, as soone as the sanctifying spirit of God hath kindled the fire of loue in our hearts. II. Difference about the manner of Iustification. All, both Papists and Protestants agree, that a sin∣ner is iustified by faith. This agreement is onely in worde, and the difference betweene vs is great in deede. And it may be reduced to these three heads. First, the Papist saying that a man is iustified by faith: vnderstandeth a general or a Catholike faith, where∣by a man beleeueth the articles of religion to bee true. But we hold that the faith which iustifieth, is a particular faith whereby we applie to our selues the promises of righteousnesse and life euerlasting by Christ. And that our opinion is the truth, I haue The Papist asks vvhere: J an∣svvere in hand∣ling the cer∣taintie of sal∣uation. proued before: but I will adde a reason or twaine. Reason I. The faith whereby we liue, is that faith whereby we are iustified: but the faith whereby we liue spiritually, is a particular faith wherby we apply Christ vnto our selues, as Paul saith, Gal. 2. 20. I liue, that is, spiritually, by the faith of the sonne of God: which faith he sheweth to be a particular faith in Christ, in the very wordes following, who hath loued me, and giuen himselfe for me, particularly: and in this manner of beleeuing Paul was and is an example to all that are to be saued. 1. Tim. 1. 16. and Phil. 3. 15. Ans. The aior I admit, and deny the Minor: and say that the proofe is not to purpose. For in the Minor he speaketh of faith, vvhereby vve apply Christs merits vnto ourselues, making them ours, in the proofe S. Paul saith only, that Christ died for him in particular. He makes no mention of his apprehending of Christs iustice, and making of it his owne, which are very distinct things. All Catholikes beleeue with Saint
Paul, that Christ dyed, as for all men in generall: so for euery man in particular, yea and that his loue vvas so exceeding great tovvards man∣kind, that he vvould vvillingly haue bestovved his life, for the redemp∣tion of one only man. But hereupon it doth not follovv, that euery man If God had ap∣pointed him so to doe. may lay hands vpon Christs righteousnes, and apply it to himselfe (or else Tus. Iovves, Heretikes, and euill Catholikes, might make verie bold with him) but must first doe those things vvhich he requires at their hands, to be made partakers of his inestimable merits: as to re∣pent them hartely of their sins, to beleeue and hope in him, to be bap∣tized, and to haue a full purpose to obserue all his commandements. Which M.  also confesseth that allmen haue not only promised, but also oved in Baptisme. Novv because vve are not assured that vve Pag. 152. shall performe all , therefore vve may not so presumptuously apply vnto ourseles, Christs righteousnes, and life euerlasting, although vve beleeue that he died for euery one of vs in particular. That vvhich follovveth in M. Perkins hath no colour of probability: that S. Paul in this manner of beleefe, that is, in applying to himselfe Christs merits: vvas an example to all that are saued. See the places 1. Tim. 1. 16. Phil. 3. 15. The vaine pride of Papists.  good Reader, and learne to bevvare the bold vnskilfulnes of sectaries. For there is not a vvord sounding that vvay, but only hovv he hauing receiued mercy, vvas made an example of patience. Master Perkins prooues his minor thus: The faith, by which Paul liued, was a particular faith, whereby he applied Christ to himselfe. But the faith, by which we liue, is the faith by which Paul liued. Therefore the faith by which we liue, is a particular faith, whereby we applie Christ to our selues. The proposition Master Perkins prooues by the Gal. 2. 20. A∣postles testimonie; where he doth particularly apply Christ to himselfe, as hauing loued him, and died for him. You an∣swere, that S. Paul makes no mention of his apprehending of Christs iustice; no more doth Master Perkins in his pro∣position. But the Apostle mentions such a particular faith, as Master Perkins speakes of, viz. a perswasion that Christs benefits belong to him in particular, and that Christ hath particularly loued him; which is to apprehend Christ. And this is another manner of matter, than to hold that Christ died for euery particular man; which the diuels no doubt doe acknowledge. The assumption is euident of it selfe: for there is no que∣stion,
but that all which are iustified, haue and liue by the same faith. But Master Perkins sets out the matter by two places of scripture: in the former whereof, 1. Tim. 1. 16 the Apostle propounds himselfe to all men, as an example of Gods mercie, that they may assure them selues, that if they will be∣leeue in Christ, as hee did, they should haue forgiuenes of their sinnes, as he had. In Phil. 3. 15. the latter, hauing shewed that he cast off all confidence in his owne righteousnes, and ac∣counted it as dung, resting onely vpon God for his righte∣ousnes, by faith in Iesus Christ; he exhorts all men to fol∣low his example, both in faith and holinesse. Reason 11. That which we are to aske of God in prayer, wee must beleeue it shall be giuen vs, as wee aske it: but in prayer wee are to aske the pardon of our owne sinnes, and the merit of Christs righteous∣nesse for our selues: therefore wee must beleeue the same particularly. The proposition is a rule of Gods word, requiring that in euery petition wee bring a particular faith, whereby wee beleeue, that the thing lawfully asked, shall bee giuen accordingly, Mark. 11. 24. Of the Maior much hath been said before, here I admit it, all due cir∣cumstances  Yea though they be not ob∣serued. of prayer being obserued, and deny that vve must pray, that our Sauiour Christ Iesus merits may be made ours in particular, for that vvere greatly to abase them: but good Christians pray, that through the infinite value of those his merits; our sinnes may be forgiuen, and a iustice proportionable vnto our capacity, may be powred into our souls, vvhereby vve may leade a vertuous life, and make a blessed end. It is no abasing of our Sauiours merits, that is, of his obe∣dience to the morall law, and his suffrings, that they should be communicated to euery member of his mysticall body, for their iustification; as long as the worke of redemption remaines proper to him. The minor is also euident, neither can it be denied: for we are taught by Christ himselfe to pray on this manner, Forgiue vs our debts: and to it we say, Amen,
that is, that our petitions shall without all doubt bee graunted vnto vs. August. serm. de temp. 182. But it is goodly to behold, hovv Master Perkins proueth that vve must pray, that Christs righteousnes may be made our particular iustice, be∣cause saith he, VVe are taught in the Pater noster, to pray in this manner: forgiue vs our debts, and to this vve must say Amen, vvhich is as much to say as our petition is graunted. I thinke the poore mans vvits vvere gone a pilgrimage, vvhen he vvrote thus. Good Sir, cannot our sins or debts be forgiuen, vvithout vve applie Christs righteousnes to vs in particu∣lar? vve say yes. Doe not then so simpl begge that vvhich is in questi∣on, nor take that for giuen, vvhich vvill neuer be graunted. Our sins cannot be forgiuen, without that part of Christs merits be applied to vs, by which sinne is satisfied for. As all men sinned in Adam, so all men satisfie for sin in Christ, namely all men, that by faith are one with Christ. But a vvord vvith you by the vvay. Your righteous man must ouer∣skippe that petition of the Pater noser (sorgiue vs our debts) for he is wel  This hath been alreadie refu∣ted. assured, that his debts be alreadie pardoned. For at the very first instant that he had faith, he had Christs righteousnes applied to him, and ther∣by assurance both of the pardon of sinnes, and of life euerlasting. Wher∣fore he cannot vvithout infidelity, distiust of his former iustification, or pray for remission of his debts: but follovving the famous example of that formall Pharisie, in lievv of demaunding pardon, may vvellay. O Luk. 18. God  giue thee thankes that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, vust, A rdiculous affectation of an obsolte vvord.  aduotres, as also these Papists: Fearing the remission of my sins, or the certainty of my saluation, but am vvel assured therof, and of Christs ovvne righteousnes too, and so forth. How false and idle this obiection is, it hath appeared al∣readie: we haue not assurance either at the first, or at all (or∣dinarily) but with some doubting now and then. And here note, that the Church of Rome in the doctrine of iustification by faith cuts off the princi∣pal partand propertie thereof. For in iustifying faith two things are required: first Knowledge reuealed in the word touching the meanes of saluation: se∣condly, an Applying of things knowne vnto our selues, which some call affiance. Now the first, they acknowledge. So then by M. Perkins ovvne confession, Catholikes haue true know∣ledge of the means of saluation, den h▪ and his fellovves erre miserably.
Papists acknowledge in generall the meanes of salua∣tion, namely the mercie of God in Christ: but they faile much, both in the true vnderstanding of that they hold, and in diuers particulars necessarily belonging to the truth of that doctrine. But the second, which is the very substance and principall part thereof they denie. Catholikes teach men also to haue a firme hope, and a great confi∣dence D. B. P. You confesse as much as you are charged vvith. You make God store of sinnes against the ho∣ly Ghost.  of obtaining saluation, through the mercy of God, and mets of Christs Passion. So they performe their duty towards God, and their neighbour, or else die with true repentance. But for a man at his first conuersion, to asse himselfe by saith of Christs righteousnes, and life euerlasting; without condition of doing those things, he ought to doe, that we Catholikes affirme to be, not any gift of faith, but the haynous crime of presumption, which is a sinne against the Holy Ghost, not par∣donable, neither in this life, nor in the world to come. Neither doe we teach any such assurance, as this man so oft harps vpon: and if wee did, it cannot be a sinne against the holy Ghost, being of ignorance, and not of malice. Reason III. The iudgement of the auncient Church. * August. I demaund now, dost thou beleeue in Christ, O sinner? Thou saist, I beleeue. What beleeuest thou? that all thy sinnes may freely bee pardoned by him. Thou hast that which thou hast beleeued. M. Perkins third reason, is drawne from the consent of the auncient  See S. Tho. 22. q. 21. art. 1. De verbis Do∣mii. serm. 7. Church, of which for fashion sake to make some shew, he often speaketh, but can seldome find any one sentence in them, that fs his purpose, as you may see in this sentence of Saint Augustine, cited by him. Augustine saith. J demaund novv, dost thou beleeue in Christ, O sinner? thou sast J beleeue: vvhat beleeuest thou, that all thy sinnes may freely be pardoned by him? thou hst that vvhich thou beleeuest. See, here is neither applying of Christs righteousnes, vnto vs by faith, nor so much as beleeuing our sinnes to be pardoned through him, but that they may be pardoned by him. So there is not one word for . Perkins. Aug. de ver∣bis Dom. ser. 7 There is this for Master Perkins, though you will not see it, that hee which beleeues in Christ, for the pardon of sins, hath that which he beleeues: that is, vpon this faith is par∣doned. Bernard. The Apostle thinketh that a man is iusti∣fied
freely by faith. If thou beleeuest that thy sinnes cannot bee remitted but by him alone against whom they were committed: but go further and beleeue this too, that by him thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. This is the testimonie which the holy Ghost giueth in the heart: saying, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. But S. Bernard saith plainly: That vve must beleeue that our sinnes are pardoned vs. But he addeth not by the imputed righteousnes of Christ.  No more do we. Againe, he addeth conditions on our part, which M. Perkins crastelie concealeth. For S. Bernard graunteth that we may beleeue our sinnes to bee forgiuen, if the trueth of our conuersion meete with the mercy of God preuenting vs, for in the same place he hath these words: So there∣fore shall his mercy dwell in our earth, that is, the grace of God in our soules, if mercy and truth meete together, if iustice and peace embrace and kisse each other. Which is as S. Bernard there expoundeth it, if we stirred vp by the grace of God, doe truely bewaile our sinnes and confesse them, and afterward follow holinesse of life and peace. All which M. Perkins did wisely cut off, because it dashed cleane the vaine glosse of the for∣mer words. The point in question is not whether wee must beleeue that our sinnes are pardoned, which is all you gather out of that testimonie; but whether the faith which iustifieth be a particular faith, whereby wee applie to our selues the pro∣mises of righteousnes, and life euerlasting by Christ. Master Perkins prooues it to be such a faith by the iudgement of Berna. ser. 1. de Annuntiat. Bernard; in citing wherof, first the Printer did him wrong by leauing out these words, Thou doest well: which are the consequent part of the sentence, and without which there is no sense in it, as any man may see that reades it. This (which is strange in a man so desirous to cauill) you passe ouer, and omitting the principall matter, for which this place of Ber∣nard was alleaged, goe about to answere that which Master Perkins vrgeth not: namely, that we are not iustified by the imputed righteousnes of Christ, neither doth he for that purpose bring this testimonie, but to shew what that faith is by which wee are iustified. Secondly, you accuse Master Perkins for cutting off certaine conditions added, on our part, by Bernard: but where are these conditions added?
The words you alleage, are aboue thirtie lines after those that he cites, and depend not vpon them; but are spoken concerning the certaintie of saluation. So therefore (saith Bernard) doth this glorie, viz. the inward glorie and witnes of our conscience, as in the words immediatly before, dwell here in our earth, if mercie and truth meete together, and righ∣teousnes and peace kisse each other. For it is necessarie that the truth of our conuersion meete with mercie preuenting it. And that afterward we follow holinesse and peace, without which no man shall see God. This, and such like sentences declare, that it is in vaine for a man to promise himselfe iustification without sanctification. But they answere not the former te∣stimonie, which shewes, that iustifying faith is a particular applying of Christ, by beleeuing the forgiuenes of our sinnes. Serm. de Na∣tal. Cyprian. God promiseth thee immortalitie, when thou goest out of this world, and doest thou doubt? This is in∣deede not to know God, and this is for a member of the Church in the house of faith not to haue faith: If we beleeue in Christ, let vs beleeue his words and promises, and wee shall neuer die, and shall come to Christ with ioyfull secu∣ritie, with him to raigne for euer. S. Cyprian encourageth good Christians dying, to haue a full confi∣dence in the promises of Christ, and so doe all Catholikes, and bidde them be secure too on that side, that Christ will neuer faile of his word and promise, but say that the cause of feare lies in our owne infimities: and yet bids them not to doubt, as though they were as likely to be con∣demned as saued, but animats them, and puts them in the good way of hope, by twenty kinds of reasons. But vvhat they be you can sarce tell. Cyprian. ser. de Natal. Cyprian affirmes confidently, that God hath promised euery true Christian immortalitie when he goes out of the world: so that if hee beleeue this promise, and rest vpon God for the performance of it by Christ, he shall certainly be made partaker of it. Your comfort is so cold, that a man were as good be without it, when his hope shall depend especially vpon the good vse of his owne free will, in be∣leeuing and keeping the law of Christ.
M. Perkins hauing thus confirmed his owne party, why doth he not after his manner confute those reasons, which the Catholikes alleadge in fauor of their assertion? Was it because they are not wont to produce any in this matter? Nothing lesse▪ It was then belie, because he knew not how to answere them. I will out of their from take that one prin∣cipall, Belive then he knevve some better then those you bring. of the testimony of holy Scripture, And by that alone ly proue, that the faith required to iustification, is that Catholike faith, whereby we beleeue all that to be true, which by God is reuealed, and not any other particular beleeuing Christs righteousnes to be ours. It should seeme the reason was, that hauing (as he said before) prooued our opinion to be true, he doth but adde a argument or two to his former proofe. For that it was ea∣sie for him to answere those you bring, I hope it shall be manifest to all men: at the least, it had not been hard for him to chuse out some that he could haue answered. How can this be better knowne then if we see, weigh, and consider well, what kinde of faith that was which all they had, who are saide in Scriptures to be iustified by their faith. Your reason is thus to be framed. If the faith of all them, who are said in Scripture to be iu∣stified by faith, was a beleefe of the truth of all that which was reueiled by God, and not any other particular beleeuing Christs righteousnes to be theirs; then iusti∣fying faith is so. But the faith of all them, who are said in Scripture to be iustified by faith, was a beleefe of the truth of all, which by God is reueiled, &c. Therefore a iustifying faith is a beleefe of all that which is reueiled by God, and not any other particular belee∣uing Christs righteousnes to be theirs. First, we must remember that wee speake of that faith by which they were iustified: for else the consequence of the proposition may be doubted of. This being vnderstood, I denie the assumption: and to the proofe of it I answere, first in generall, that your examples are either effects of iustify∣ing faith, or the way and meanes to it, but not the faith it selfe. S. Paul saith of Noe, That he was instituted heire of the iustice, which is, by faith. What faith had he? That by Christs righteousnes he was assu∣red  Heb. 11. 7. of saluation? No such matter, but beleeue that God according to his
word and iustice, would drowne the world, and made an Arke to saue himselfe, and his familie, as God commaunded him. Secondly, I say for the particulars, that this was not the faith by which Heb. 11. 7. Noe was iustified. For it is apparant that he Gen. 6. 8, 9, 13 was iustified, before he beleeued that God would drown the world. Adde hereunto, that this faith of his was also a resting vpon God for safetie, according to his promise. The Apostle in this, and the like, propounds not the meanes of iustification, but some notable effect of faith. Neither doth he declare what this righteousnes of faith was, but saith, that the righteousnes of faith remained (as Lyra ad Heb. 11. Lyra expounds it) in him onely, and his children: in which respect he is called the heire of it. Chrysost. ad Heb. 11. Chrysostome saith, By this he appeared to be iust, because he beleeued God. Abraham the Father of beleeuers, and the Paterne and example of iustice by faith, as the Apostle disputeth to the Romans: What  he  Rom. cap. 4. was iustified by. Let S. Paul declare, who of him and his faith, hath these words. He contrary to hope beleeued in hope, that he might be made the Fa∣ther of manie Nations, according to that which vvas said vnto him. So shall thy seed be as the starres of heauen, and the sands of the sea: and he vvas not vveakened in faith, neither did he consider his ovvne body, novv quite dead, vvhereas he vvas almost an hundred yeares old, not the dead Matrice of Sara, in the promise of God he staggered not by distrust, but vvas strength∣ned in saith, giuing glorie to God, most fully knovving, that vvhasoee he promised, he vvas able also to doe, therfore vvas it reputed to him to iustice. Rather because he trued to God for that blessing vpon himselfe and his wife Sah.  Loe, because he glorified God in beleeuing, that old and barren persons might haue children, if God said the word, and that whatsoeuer God promised, he was able to performe, he was iustified. Od Abraham I answere, as of Noe, that he was iustisied long before God made him that promise, yea Sander. de . before hee came out of the land of Canaan. For Heb 11 8. by faith he obeyed God, when he was called to goe out into a place, which he should afterwards receiue for inheritance. And this faith of his was not a bare beleeuing that which God spake, but a resting vpon him ac∣cordingly: and so was that the Rom 4. 11. 12 Apostle speakes of, where∣by God was especially glorified: for this reposing himselfe vpon God, argued the account he made of the fauour of God to him. Now the beleefe in that promise was not only for the maltiplying of his naturall seede, but for saluation by Christ to his spirituall children, that P should beleeue, as
he had done: and therefore it is called the Gal 3. 8. Gospel that he beleeued. This Rom. 4. 3. faith was counted to him for righteousnes, as euery act is, whereby a man beleeuing in Christ, rests vp∣on the promise of God. But the particular thing that is ac∣cepted to his iustification, is his beleeuing in God for iustifi∣cation by Iesus Christ. I will vse no other proofe but the phrase it selfe, . To beleeue in God, which necessarily im∣plies a relying vpon God, for that wee desire being promi∣sed. The Centurions faith was very pleasing vnto our Sauiour, who said in commendation of it, That he had not found so great faith in Israell? What faith vvas that? Mary, that he could with a word cure his seruant ab∣sent. Say the vvord only (quoth he) and my seruant shall be healed. Matth. 8. • Matth. 8. 9. The Centurions faith was not a iustifying faith, but a meanes to it; begotten in him by the consideration of our Sauiours power in working miracles; though I doubt not but from this beleefe he was raised by God to a true faith for iustification by the Messias. But this in it selfe was no more than Marc. 1. 24. Math. 16. the diuels haue, acknowledging Christs power. S. Peters faith so much magnified by the auncient Fathers, and high∣lie rewarded by our Sauiour, was it any other, Then that our Sauiour was Christ, the Sonne of the liuing God? S. Peters confession Matth. 16. 16 in that place, was no more in words, but of Christs office, Thou art Christ; and his nature, The son of the liuing God. But if he had not also by faith rested on him to iustification, this confession would haue done him but little pleasure: for Luc. 4. 34. Satan himselfe beleeues as much, and is damned. And briefly let S. Iohn that great secretary of the Holy Ghost, tell vs  Ioh. 20. what faith is the finall end of the whole Gospell. These things, (saith he) are vvriten that you may beleeue that Iesus Christ is the Sonne of God, and that beleeuing you may haue life in his name. Doth the preaching of the Gospell aime at nothing else? Then what shall become of holinesse of life, and good workes, made by you the matter of your second iustifica∣tion? This is not the last end of the Gospell, but the first; and by this the other is wrought: we must beleeue that Ie∣sus Christ is the Sonne of God; so that by beleeuing this, we come to him, that is, Ioah. 6. 35. beleeue in him, or rest vpon him
for saluation, and thereby attaine to euerlasting life. With the Euangelist the Apostle S. Paul accordeth very well, saying:  Rom. 10 This is the vvord of faith vvhich vve preach, for if thou confesse with thy mouth our Lord Iesus Christ, and shalt beleeue in thy hart that God raysed him from death thou shall be saued. And in another place. I make knowne 1. Cor. 15. vnto you the Gospell, vvhich I haue preached, and by vvhich you shall be sa∣ued, vnlesse perhaps you haue beleeued in vaine. What was that Gospell? J haue deliuered vnto you that vvhich I haue receiued, that Christ died for our , according to the Scriptures, vvas buried, and rose againe the third day, &c. So by the verdite of S. Paul, the beleefe of the articles of the cred, is that iustifying faith, by which you must be saued. Such is the testimonie of Paul. For it is more than appa∣rant, that a man may beleeue in his heart, that God raised Christ from the death, and yet denie many necessarie heads of religion, and be wholy cast away. But the Apostle in this implies the rest, and namely that Rom. 10. 13.  which followes, belee∣uing in God: that is, if I may so often repeate the same thing, resting vpon him for iustification, by our Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ. The same answere I make to the other place; the point of the resurrection is of necessitie to be beleeued of as many as looke to be saued: but that is not all that is requi∣red. For if it be, neither your preparations to iustification, nor your merits after iustification, are to any purpose. And neither in S. Paul, nor any other place of holy Scriptures is it once taught, that a particular faith whereby we apply Christs righteous∣nes to our selues, and assure our selues of our saluation, is either a iusti∣fying or any Christian mans faith, but the very naturall act, of that ougly Monster presumption: Which being laid as the very corner stone of the You speake like a hired seruant, not like a son.  Protestants irreligion, what morall and modest conuersation, what hu∣mility and deuotion can they build vpon it? All those places that require of vs faith in Christ, teach vs also that a particular faith, whereby we applie Christ to our selues, by trusting to him for iustification, is the only proper iustifying faith; because to it nothing can be added, for the matter of beleeuing. A man may acknowledge that Credere Deum. there is a God, and giue Credere Deo. credit, as to a certaine truth, to all that God reueales, and yet not Credere in Deum. beleeue in God to iustification. But he that performes this latter, must needs also acknow∣ledge the former. This then being the height of faith, is in the Scripture counted a iustifying faith.
The II. difference touching faith in the act of iustification, is this. The Papist saith, we are iustified by faith, because it disposeth a sinner to his iustificati∣on after this manner: By faith (saith he) the mind of man is inlightened in the knowledge of the law and Gospell: knowledge stirres vp a feare of hell, with a consideration of the promise of happinesse, as also the loue and feare of God, and hope of life eternall. Now when the heart is thus prepared, God infuseth the habite of charitie and other vertues, whereby a sinner is iustified before God. We say otherwise, that faith iustifieth because it is a supernaturall Instru∣ment created by God in the heart of man at his con∣uersion, whereby hee apprehendeth and receiueth Christs righteousnesse for his iustification. The second difference in the manner of iustification, is about the for∣mall act of faith, which M. Perkins handleth as it were by the way, cut∣tedly. I will be as short as he, the matter not being great. The Catholiks reach as you haue heard out of the Councell of Trent, in the beginning of this question, that many actes of faith, feare, hope, and charity do goe before our iustification, preparing our soule to receiue into it from God, through Christ that great grace. It is your proud Synagogue that doth magistra∣liter determi∣nare. If the matter be not great, it was but a small fault to be short in it; yea the contrarie had been a fault indeed. It is not handled by the way, but propounded in plaine tearmes, as a second difference betwixt vs and you. M. Perkins Doctor like resolueth otherwise, That faith is an instrument created by God in the hart of man, at his conuersion, vvhereby he apprehen∣deth and receiueth Christs righteousnes, for his iustification. This ioyly description is set downe without any other probation, then his owne authoritie that deliuered it: and so, let it passe as already suf∣ficiently confuted. And if there needed any other disprofe of it, I might gather one more out of his owne explication of it, where he saith that the couenant of grace is communicated vnto vs, by the word of God, and by the Sacraments. For if faith created in our harts, be the only suf∣ficient Tou should adde as super∣naturall instru∣ments. supernaturall instrument, to apprehend that couenant of grace, then there needs no Sacraments for that purpose, and consequentlie I would faine know by the way, how little infants, that cannot for want of
iudgement, and discretion haue any such act of faith, as to lay hold on Christ his iustice, are iustified? Must we without any warrant in Gods word, contrary to all experience, beleeue that they haue this act of faith before they come to any vnderstanding? If it would haue serued your turne to cauil at, you would haue found Master Perkins reason, and not haue iested at his authoritie: I will plainly propound it for all men to iudge of your dealing. That Ioh. 1. 12. & 6. 35. whereby Christ is to be receiued, is an instrument to applie Christ. But faith is that whereby Christ is to be receiued. Therefore faith is an instrument to applie Christ. To this you answere nothing, but frame an argument against the question, as you would haue it thought out of Master Perkins his owne explication of it. Your argu∣ment is: If faith created in our hearts, be the onely sufficient super∣naturall instrument to apprehend the couenant of grace, then there need no Sacraments. You should adde, as supernaturall instruments to that purpose. But there is need of the Sacraments. Therefore faith is not the onely sufficient supernaturall in∣strument to apprehend the couenant of grace. First there is more in your conclusion, than in the que∣stion. The question is, whether faith be a supernaturall in∣strument created to that purpose or no: your conclusion is, that faith is not that onely supernaturall instrument. Se∣condly, I denie the consequence of your proposition: you may as well say (for that Master Perkins sets downe too) that if faith be the onely instrument, then the word is needlesse. The Word and Sacraments applie Christ outwardlie, as meanes on Gods part; faith receiues it in on our part; the holie Ghost inlightening and inclining our hearts there∣unto. Little infants (in my poore opinion) haue no act of faith, but are iustified, without any thing done by them; God for Christs sake (according to his euerlasting election) forgi∣uing
their sinnes, and adopting them for sonnes and heires of glorie. In this their doctrine is a twofold error: I. that they make faith which iustifieth, to go before iustifi∣cation it selfe, both for order of nature, and also for time; whereas by the word of God, at the very in∣stant, when any man beleeueth first, he is then iustifi∣ed, and sanctified. For he that beleeueth, eateth and drinketh the bodie and blood of Christ, and is alrea∣die passed from death to life. Ioh. 6. 54. But to returne vnto the sound doctrine of our Catholike faith, M Per∣kins finds two faults with it, one that we teach faith to goe before iusti∣fication, whereas by the word of God (saith he) at the very instant, when any man beleeueth first, he is then both iustified and sanctified. What word of God so teacheth? Marry this. He that beleeueth, eateth and drin∣keth the body and blood of Christ, and is alreadie passed from death to life. I answere that our Sauiour in that text speaketh not of beleeuing, but of Ioh. 6. 54. eating his bodie in the blessed Sacrament, which who so receiueth wor∣thely, obtaineth therby life euerlasting, as Christ saith expressely in that place. And so this proofe is vaine. If you had meant plainly, you should haue reported Ma∣ster Perkins reproofe of your opinion truly, as he hath deli∣uered it, that you make faith goe before iustification, not onely in order of nature onely, which we grant, but in time also, which we denie. If I should onely say the contrarie, Ioh. 6. 51. 54. that our Sauiour doth not speake there of the Sacraments, I might conclude by as good reason, as you doe; and so this answere is vaine. But I oppose to your authoritie, not mine owne, which is nothing worth, but Gabr. Biel. in Canon. Miss. lect. 84. Nicol. Cusan. epist. 7. ad Bohemos. Caietan. in 3. q. 80. art. vlt. Tapper. in explic. artic. 15. Louan. Hestelius de com. sub vna specie. Iansen concord. Euang. cap. 59. your owne writers; yea Concil. Tid. sess. 21. cap. 1. the Coun∣cill of Trent, which leaues it free to al men to expound that chapter, either of the spirituall eating of Christ by faith on∣ly, or of eating him really in the Sacrament. And this Greg. de valentia de legit. vsu Euchar. cap. 4. pag. 489. li∣bertie is grounded vpon the diuersitie of opinions among the Fathers, concerning the sense of that chapter. This is
sufficient to make Master Perkins reason good, against your deniall. Now will I proue out of the holy Scriptures, that faith goeth before  Rom. 10. iustification, first by that of S. Paul, VVhosoeuer calleth on the name of our Lord, shall be saued, but how shall they call vpon him, in vvhom they doe not beleeue, hovv shall they beleeue vvithout a preacher? &c. Where there is this order set downe to arriue vnto iustification. First, to heare the preacher, then to beleeue, afterwards to call vpon God for mercy, and fi∣nally mercie is graunted and giuen in iustification: so that prayer goeth betweene faith and iustification. Rom. 0 13. 13 Prayer commeth betweene in nature, but not in time: for hee that rests vpon God for saluation in Christ, doth withall call vpon God for pardon of his sinnes: whereupon iustification followes immediatly, though not alwaies in a mans owne feeling. This S. Augustine obserued when he said. Faith is giuen first, by which vve obtaine the rest. And againe: By the lavv is knovvledge of snne, by D. B. P. De praedes. sanct. cap. 7. De spirit. & lit. cap. 30.  faith vve obtaine grace, and by grace our soule is cured. The rest, that Aug. de prae∣dest. cap. 7. Austin speakes of, are graces of sanctifi∣cation, or (as he calles them there) good workes, in which we liue: and these are supplied euery day by God, or at least the increase and vse of these vertues, whereby wee liue godly in the world: such is the cure of ye soule by grace, to the louing of righteousnes, and doing the works of the law. If we list to see the practise of this recorded in holy writ, read the se∣cond of the Acts, and there you shall find, how that the people hauing heard S. Peters Sermon, were stroken to the hearts and beleeued, yet were they not straight way iustified, but asked of the Apostles what they must doe, who willed them to doe penance, and to be baptized, in the name of Iesus, in remission of their sinnes, and then loe, they were iusti∣fied, so that penance and baptisme went betweene their faith, and their iustification. Those men Act. 2. 37, 38. S. Luke there speaks of, were not yet come to a iustifying faith, when they askt the Apostle what they should doe; no nor to the knowledge of the Gospell: but onely to Vers. 23. 36. a sight of their owne sinnes, in consenting to the murthering of Christ. In like manner Queene Candaces Eunuch, hauing heard S. Philip It is kindly to haue as vvell strange vvord as strange do∣ctrines. Act. 8. Act. 9.  an∣nouncing vnto him Christ, beleeued that Iesus Christ was the Sonne of God (no talke in those daies of applying vnto himselfe Christs righte∣ousnes,) yet was he not iustified, before descending out of his chariot he
was baptized. And three daies passed betweene S. Paules conuersion and his iustification, as doth euidently appeare by the history of his con∣uersion. The Act. 8. 35. Eunuch had heard the Gospell expounded out of Esa. 53. 7, 8, 11 Esay, and namely, that men were to be iustified by the ac∣knowledging of Christ: his desire of baptisme was a proofe of his faith, according to that he had learned; and baptisme Rom. 4. 10. 11 the seale of his pardon, or iustification, vpon that his be∣leefe of forgiuenes by Christs sufferings. It appeares by the Act. 9. 9. 18. storie, that there were three daies betwixt the vision and the baptisme of the Apostle; but it is not any way shewed, that hee had iustifying faith the first day, and yet was not iustified till the third day; it is but your conceit, that tie iustification to baptisme. The second is, that faith, being nothing else with them but an illumination of the minde, stirreth vp the will: which being mooued and helped, causeth in the heart many spirituall motions: and thereby disposeth man to his future iustification. But this in∣deede is as much as if wee should say, that dead men onely helped, can prepare themselues to their future resurrection. For we are all by nature dead in sinne, and therefore must not onely bee inlightened in minde, but also renewed in will, before wee can so much as will or desire that which is good. Now we (as I haue said) teach otherwise: that faith iustifieth as it is an instrument to apprehend and applie Christ with his obedience; which is the matter of our iusti∣fication. This is the truth, I prooue it thus. In the Couenant of grace, two things must be considered: the substance thereof, and the condition. The sub∣stance of the couenant is, that righteousnesse and life e∣uerlasting, is giuen to Gods Church and people by Christ. The condition is, that wee for our parts, are by faith
to receiue the foresaid benefits: and this condition is by grace as well as the substance. Now then, that wee may attaine to saluation by Christ, hee must bee giuen vnto vs really, as hee is propounded in the te∣nour of the foresaid Couenant. And for the giuing of Christ, God hath appointed speciall ordinances, as the preaching of the word, and the administration of the sacraments. The word preached is the power of God to saluation to euery one that beleeues: and the end of the Sacraments is to communicate Christ with all his benefits to them that come to bee parta∣kers thereof: as is most plainely to bee seene in the supper of the Lord, in which the giuing of bread and wine to the seuerall communicants, is a pledge and signe of Gods particular giuing of Christs bodie and blood with all his merits, vnto them. And this gi∣uing on Gods part, cannot bee effectuall without receiuing on our parts: and therfore faith must needs bee an instrument or hand to receiue that which God giueth, that wee may finde comfort by this giuing. The second fault he findeth with our faith, is that we take it to be no∣thing else, but an illumination of the mind, stirring vp the will, which being so moued and helped by grace, causeth in the heart many good spirituall motions: But this (sayes M Perkins) is as much to say, that dead men only helped, can prepare themselues to their resurrection. Not so good Sir, but that men spiritually dead being quickned by Gods spirit, may haue many good motions, for as our spirit giueth life vnto our bo∣dies; so the spirit of God by his grace animateth, and giueth life vnto our soules. But of this it hath been once before spoken at large, in the question of free will. Is not the latter your doctrine also, that a man, vpon those good motions inspired, disposeth himselfe to iustification, by the good vse of his free will? let the Concil. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 6. Councill of Trent be iudge, as your selfe alleaged it before.
The III. difference concerning faith is this: the Papist saith, that a man is iustified by faith; yet not by faith alone, but also by other vertues, as hope, loue, the feare of God, &c. The reasons which are brought to maintaine their opinion, are of no mo∣ment. Reason. I. Luke 7. 47. Many sinnes are forgiuen her, Particula non causalis: sed illatiua vel rationalis. because she loued much. Whence they gather that the woman here spoken of, was iustified and had the pardon of sinnes by loue. Ans. In this text, loue is not made an impulsiue cause to mooue God to par∣don her sinnes, but onely a signe to shew and mani∣fest that God had alreadie pardoned them. Like to this, is the place of Iohn, who saith, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. Wee are translated from death to life, because we loue the bre∣thren: where loue is no cause of the change, but a signe and consequent thereof. Obserue first, that Catholikes do not teach that she was pardoned for loue alone, for they vse not (as Protestants do) when they find one cause of iustification, to exclude all, or any of the rest: But considering that in sundrie places of holy write, iustification is ascribed vnto many seue∣rall vertues, affirme that not faith alone, but diuers other diuine quali∣ties concurre vnto iustification, and as mention here made of loue, ex∣cludeth not faith, hope, repentance, and such like: so in other places, where faith is only spoken of, there hope, charity, and the rest, must not also be excluded. This sinner had assured beleefe in Christs power to re∣mit sinnes, and great hope in his mercie that hee would forgiue them, great sorrow and detestation of her sinne also she had, that in such an as∣semblie did so humblie prostrate her selfe at Christs feete, to wash them with her teares, and to wipe them with the haires of her head. And as she had true repentance of her former life, so no doubt but she had also a firme purpose, to lead a new life. So that in her conuersion, all those vertues meete together, which we hold to concurre to iustification, and among the rest, the preheminence worthelie is giuen to loue, as to the principall disposition. Shee loued our Sauiour as the fountaine of all mercies, and goodnes, and therfore accounted her precious oyntments best bestowed on him; yea, and the humblest seruice, and most affectio∣nate she could offer him, to be all too little, and nothing answerable to
the inward burning charitie which she bare him. Which noble affection of hers, towards her diuine Redeemer, no question, was most acceptable vnto him, as by his ovvne vvord is most manifest: for he said, That many sinnes vvere forgiuen her, because she loued much. But M. Perkins saith, that her loue vvas no cause that moued Christ to pardon her, but onely a signe of pardon giuen before: vvhich is so contrary to the text, that a man not past all shame, vvould blush once to affirme it. In stead of answering your long discourse, grounded vp∣on meere coniectures, for the most part, which for the wo∣mans sake I will not examine; let me put you in minde, that if all this you report of her were true, she was iustified before these actions; which could not proceede but from a great measure of grace; especially such an inward burning chari∣tie, as is not easily to be found in many a one that hath been iustified a long time. First Christ saith expresly, that it vvas the cause of the pardon: Because D. B. P. He proueth that many sins vvere forgiuen her, he doth not shevv vvhy they vvere for∣giuen.  she had loued much. Master Perkins hath answered you, that our Sauiour saith not so, and hath prooued his answere by the like place of 1. Ioh. 3. 14. S. Iohn, where . the same word is vsed, and no cause pro∣pounded, but a signe onely. Would you not haue taken a∣way this answer, if you had could? But the text it self cleeres the matter: first by Luc. 7. 41, 42 Vers. 43. Vers. 44. Vers. 47. the parable propounded, with Simons answer, and our Sauiours approbation: then by the applica∣tion of it: lastly, by the general doctrine gathered out of it; to whom a little is forgiuen, he doth loue a little. To this purpose Basil. de bap∣tismo.  Basil saith, That he that owes much, hath much forgiuen him, that he may loue much more. Secondly, that her loue vvent before, is as plainelie declered, both by mention of the time past: Because she hath loued, and by the ∣dence of her fact of vvashing, wiping and anoynting his feete: for h vvhich saith our Sauiour, then already performed: Many si are forgiuen her. So that here can be no impediment of beleeuing the Catholike Do∣ctrine, so clearely deliuered by the holy Ghost, vnlesse one vvill bee so blindly ledde by our nevv Masters, that he vvill beleeue no vvords of Christ, be they neuer so plaine, othervvise then it please the Ministers to expound them. And this much of the first of those reasons which M. Perkins said vvere of no moment. The mention of the time past is too weake a reason, to  Vers. 47. ouerthrow so certaine proofe, out of the whole course of
the text: especially since that notable conclusion is deliue∣red immediatly vpon the former words, in the present time; to whom a little is forgiuen, . he doth loue a little. Neither doth our Sauiour tie the pardon of her sinnes to that pre∣sent time, but then giueth her knowledge of that which was done before, saying first to Simon: Many sinnes are forgiuen her: and then to her selfe, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Reason II. Gal. 5. 6. Neither circumcision, nor vn∣circumcision auaileth any thing, but faith that worketh by loue. Hence they gather, that faith doth iustifie toge∣ther with loue. Ans. The propertie of true faith is, to apprehend and receiue something vnto it selfe: and loue, that goes alwaies with faith, as a fruite and an vnseparable companion thereof, is of an other na∣ture. For it doth not receiue in, but as it were giue out it selfe in all the duties of the first and second ta∣ble towards God and man: and this thing faith by it selfe cannot doe: and therefore Paul saith, that faith worketh by loue. The hand hath a property to reach out it selfe, to lay hold of any thing, and to receiue a gift: but the hand hath no propertie to cut a peece of wood of it selfe without saw or knife, or some like instrument: and yet by helpe of them, it can either deuide or cut. Euen so it is the nature of faith, to goe out of it selfe and to receiue Christ into the heart: as for the duties of the first and second table, faith can∣not of it selfe bring them forth; no more then the hand can deuide or cut: yet ioyne loue to faith, and then can it practise duties commanded concerning God and man. And this I take to be the meaning of this text, which speaketh not of iustification by faith, but onely of the practise of common duties, which faith putteth in execution by the helpe of loue.
Reply. That charity hath the chiefest part, and that faith is rather the instrument and hand maid of charity. My proofe shall be out of the ve∣ry text alleadged, vvhere life and motion is giuen to faith by charity, as the Greeke vvord Euergoumene being passiue, doth plainely shevv, that faith is moued, led, and guided by charity. Gal. 5. 6. . The Greek word is not of the passiue, but of the middle voyce; as it is in many other places of Scriptures: Rom. 7. 5. . The affe∣ctions of the flesh did worke in our members, operabantur, in your own translation. 2 Cor. 4. 12. . Death workes in vs, but life in you operatur: Ephes. 3. 20. . According to the power that worketh in vs operatur: Col. 1. 29. . Accor∣ding to his working, which he worketh in me; quam operatur in me. And in this very place operatur, which cannot be taken passiuely, as euery Grammar scholler knoweth. In the In∣terlinear, faith, which is Effiax. effectuall. Pagnin, Agens. working by loue. Faith (saith Theophyl ad Gal 5. 6. Theophylact on that place) workes by loue; that is (saith he) ought alwaies Viuax & effi∣cax common∣strari. to be shewed to be aliue, and ef∣fectuall by loue to Christ. And a little after, Learne therefore, that faith worketh by charitie, that is (saith he) is shewed to be aliue. Lombard. Thomas. Caietan. Catharin. D. B. P. The place is of vvorkes not of charity.  The best of your owne writers expound it, as we doe. Which S. Iames doth demonstrate most manifest, saying that. Euen as the body is dead without the soule, so is faith vvithout charity: Making charitie to be the life, and as it vvere the soule of faith. Novv no man is ignorant, but it is the soule that vseth the body, as an instrument, euen so then it is charity, that vseth saith as her instrument and inferiour, and not contrarivvise. First the word, Iam. 2. 26. . in that place, doth not signifie the soule, but breath, as Caietan saith. Secondly, the Apostle saith not, without charitie, as you doe, but Sine operibus without workes: which can∣not be taken for the life of faith, but are onely effects of it. Thirdly, for the meaning of the place, let vs here your owne Cardinall Caietan speake. By the name of Spiritus. spirit (saith Ca∣ietan) he vnderstands not the soule, but the breath. And he fit∣ly compareth workes to breath: for as the body of a liuing crea∣ture, Sinon spirat. if it breathe not, is dead: so faith, Sinon parit opus. if it bring foorth no workes, is dead: for breathing is an effect of a liue bodie, and like∣wise working is the proper effect of a liuing faith: whereby it ap∣peareth (saith he) in what sense Iam. 2. 17. 20 the Apostle said aboue, that faith without workes was dead: not because hee thought that works were the forme of faith, but because he thought that works
Concomi∣tantia fidem. accompany faith, as the breath accompanieth the life of the bo∣die. You see both his iudgement and his reason, which is confirmed by that the Iam. 2. 17. Apostle said before: Faith, if it haue not workes, is dead. So that the meaning is, faith without workes, that is, faith that hath not workes, is dead. Which S. Paul confirmeth at large in the vvhole Chapter, prouing charitie to be a more excellent gift then faith, or any other, concluding vvith these vvords. Novv there remaineth faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the greater of these is charitie. Whereupon S. Augustine re∣solueth 1. Cor. 13. thus. Nothing but charity maketh faith it selfe auaileable, for faith (saith he) may be vvithout charity, but it cannot be auailable vvithout it: Lib. de Trinit. cap. 18. So that first you see that charitie is the mouer, and commaunder, and faith, as her instrument, and handmaid. The 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2. Apostle speaketh not of that faith, by which wee beleeue in God to iustification, but of that by which mi∣racles are wrought. Besides it doth not follow, that loue v∣seth faith as an instrument to iustifie vs, because in some re∣spect it is superiour; namely in the present vse, for the good of our brethren: to which the Apostles exhortation tends, as it y appeare by his discourse, both in that chapter, and in the 12. going before, and the 14. that followeth. Austin, bringing the Apostles words, speaketh of the same faith that hee meant: which may be indeed without charitie, and cannot rise to the height of a iustifying faith, but must needs be accompanied by charitie, without which it is dead. Now that in the worke of iustification, it hath the chiefe place, may be thus proued, I demaund whether that worke of iustification by faith  A senselesse question. be done, for the loue of God, and to his honour or no? If not, as it is void of charity; so it is a wicked and sinfull act, no iustification, but in∣fection, our owne interest being the principall end of it: now if it com∣prehend and conclude Gods glory, and seruice in it, that is, if they apply Christs righteousnes to them, to glorifie God thereby, then hath charity the principall part therin: for the directing of all, to the honor and glory of God, is the proper office and action of charity. There is neither reason in your question, nor strength in your argument: the worke of iustification, by faith is Gods action iustifying a sinner, that beleeueth in Iesus Christ. What sense then is there in this question? I demaund whether that work of iustificatiō by faith, be done for the loue of God, and
to his honour, or no. That which followeth, in respect of God, is blasphemous, at least absurd: That the worke of iustifica∣tion is a wicked act. To your reason: It is no wicked act to be∣leeue in God for iustification by Christ, though in the parti∣cular act of beleeuing, we thinke not vpon the glorifying of God, but onely respect our owne saluation. For to beleeue in Christ is no act enioyned by the law of nature, or of Mo∣ses, whereby we should iustifie our selues; but an extraordi∣narie matter appointed by God, who respects nothing in it, on our parts, but that wee beleeue. Not as if we might therefore neglect the glorie of God, but that we may after∣ward giue so much the more glorie to him, the lesse cause there was he should pardon vs, there being such a defect a∣gainst our generall dutie in that act of beleeuing. Further, if it were true that we desired to glorifie God by beleeuing in Christ, and that that desire proceeded from loue; yet had not loue either the principall, or any part in procuring our iustification. Because God doth not iustifie vs, for seeking to glorifie him by beleefe, which is simply a worke of the law, but onely accepteth Ioh. 6. 29. our beleeuing for working; and, as Rom. 4. 5. the Apostle speaketh, counts faith to vs for righteousnes. All this reason that charity both concurreth to iustification, and that D. B. P. Serm. 22. de verbis Apo∣stol.  as principall, S. Augustine confirmeth in these words: The house of God, (that is, a righteous and godly soule,) hath for his foundation faith, hope is the vvalles of it; but charitie is the roofe and perfection of it. Austin speaketh not of iustification onely, but of the whole building of Gods house in the soule of man; which (Aug. de ver∣bis Apostoli Ser. 20. saith he) is built with singing, founded with beleeuing, set vp with hoping, perfected with louing. The end of our election, iustification, and sanctification, is holinesse, with∣out which a man is no true Christian; but iustification is not the building of the soule. Reason. III. Faith is neuer alone, therfore it doth not iustifie alone. Answ. The reason is naught, and they might as well dispute thus. The eie is neuer a∣lone from the heade, and therfore it seeth not alone:
which is absurd. And though in regard of substance the eye be neuer alone, yet in regard of seeing, it is alone: and so though faith subsist not without loue and hope and other graces of God, yet in regard of the act of iustification it is alone without them all. The third of these trifling reasons, is peruersly propounded by D. B. P. You haue suited them with an∣svveres accor∣dingly.  M. Perkins thus. Faith is neuer alone, therefore it dothnot iustifie alone: That this argument is fondly framed, appeareth plainly in that, that Ca∣tholikes doe not deny, but affirme that faith may be without charity, as it is in all sinfull Catholikes. The argument is framed vpon our opinion: who main∣taine, that a iustifying faith is neuer without hope, and chari∣tie. Hence it may seeme to follow, that it doth not iustifie alone: but because you disclaime this reason, I will let it passe. We then forme the reason thus. If faith alone be the whole cause of iustification, then if both, hope and charity were remoued from faith (at least by thought, and in conceipt,) faith would neuerthelesse iustifie. But faith considered without hope, and charity will not iustifie: ergo, it is not the whole cause of iustification. The first proposition cannot be denied of them, who know the nature and propriety of causes, for the entire and totall cause of any thing, being (as the Philosophers say) in act, the effect must needs follow, and very sence teacheth the simple, that if any thing be set to worke, and if it doe not act that, which it is set too, then there wanted some thing requisite. And consequently that vvas not the whole cause of that worke. I denie the consequence of your proposition. For though saith alone be the whole cause of iustification; yet not euery faith, but such an one as is accompanied with hope and cha∣ritie. To your proofe I answere, that such a faith is neither the whole, nor any cause of iustification; and so though that be (as you say) in act, yet no such effect will follow. Now to the second proposition. But their imagined faith cannot applie to themselues, Christs righteousnes vvithout the preseace of hope and chari∣tie.  This assumpti∣on is a great deale scanter then the former And before an∣svvered. For else he might be iustified without any hope of heauen, and with∣out any loue towards God, and estimation of his honor, which are things most absurd in themselues: but yet very well fitting the Protestants iusti∣fication, which is nothing els but the plaine vice of presumption, as hath been before declared: Yet to auoid this inconuenience which is so great,
M. Perkins graunteth that both, hope and charity must needs be pre∣sent at the iustification, but doe nothing in it, but faith doth all, as the head is present to the eie, when it seeth, yet it is the eie alone that seeth. Here is a worthy peece of Philosophie, that the eie alone doth see, wher∣as in truth it is but the instrument of seeing, the soule being the princi∣pall cause of sight, as it is of all other actions, of life, sence, and reason: and it is not to purpose here, where we require the prefence of the whole cause, and not only of th instrumentall cause. To the assumption I answere: Faith, considered without any act of hope or charitie to iustification, doth iustifie: but faith that is without these, doth not iustifie. To your proofe I say further, yt to our iustification God accounteth for righ∣teousnes, neither our hope of heauen, nor our loue towards himselfe, nor our estimation of his honour, but Rom. 4. 3. 5. onely our beleeuing in Iesus Christ. The similitude is true, and fit. True, because the eye doth see, though as an instrument fitted to that office by God: and thus Philosophers, Poets, Orators, and all kinde of people doe speake. He that would be more curious than wise, might finde fault with you also, and say; that the act of seeing also is mans, and the soule the instru∣strument whereby he doth see; as the hand is the instrument with which he reacheth. The fitnes of the similitude appeareth thus; It is man that beleeueth, as it is man that seeth. The generall instru∣ment (as I may speake) for both these actions is the soule, though by diuers faculties; the particular for sight is the eye, for beleeuing, faith, outwardly there is none. The eye seuered from the head seeth not; and yet it is the eye that seeth, and not the head: so saith, that is without hope and charitie, iustifieth not; and yet hope and charitie doth not iustifie. You answere that it is not to purpose; because wee require the presence of the whole cause, and not onely of the instrumentall. But you deceiue your selfe: for the que∣stion is not of the whole cause, or principall efficient, which is God, (for Rom. 8. 33. it is he onely that iustifieth) but of the instru∣ment, if wee may so call it. To speake plainly, the matter is (as I haue often said) what it is that God respects in vs to our iustification. We say it is onely our beleeuing in Christ:
you say it is our beleeuing, louing, and hoping; because we teach, that together with faith, by which (on our part) we are iustified, we receiue hope, charitie, and other graces of san∣ctification, which are all present in the heart, when it belee∣ueth to iustification, but are no way any causes of it. And to returne your similitude vpon yourselfe, as the eie cannot see without the head, because it receiueth influence from it, before it can see, so cannot faith iustifie without charity, because it necessarily recei∣ueth spirit of life from it, before it can do any thing acceptable in Gods sight. I denie your similitude, as faultie in the reddition or lat∣ter part of it. For faith receiueth no influence from any o∣ther vertue, whereby it hath life to worke acceptably in Gods sight: but the acceptablenes of faith proceedes from the meere acceptation of God, Rom. 4. 3. 5. counting it for righteous∣nes. And whereas wee say that such a faith onely iustifieth, as hath hope and loue for companions, it is not our mea∣ning that these make saith acceptable, but that hee which beleeueth, and hath not these vertues, idly presumes of faith, when he hath it not; because the spirit of God, toge∣ther with true faith, powreth these graces also into our soules. But of this whole point of iustification, I shall one day (if it please God) write more distinctly and fully. Reason IV. If faith alone doe iustifie, then wee are saued by faith alone: but we are not saued by faith a∣lone: and therfore not iustified by faith alone. Answ. The proposition is false: for more things are requisit to the maine ende, then to the subordinate meanes. The fourth reason, if faith alone doe iustifie, then faith alone vvill saue, but it will not saue, ergo. M. Perkins first denieth the proposition, and saith, That it may iustifie, and yet not saue: because more is required to saluation, then to iustification. Which is false, for put the case that an Innocent babe dye shortly after his baptisme wherein he was iustified, shall he not be saued for want of any thing? I hope you will say yes: e∣uen so any man that is iustified, if he depart in that state, no man makes doubt of his saluation, therefore this first shift was very friuolous. It had been the part of a scholler to haue refuted his reason, as well as to condemne his answere. But indeede
the reason is sound; that iustification, being but the subor∣dinate meanes to the maine end, saluation, more is required to this, than to that: not that any man can faile of salua∣tion, Rom. 8. 30. which hath attained to iustification, but because God hath appointed to make supplie of other graces, that we may come by degrees to glorification. Your reason is nothing worth. For the comparison of equalitie and like∣nes, is insufficient. For though infants need no more to sal∣uation; yet men of discretion doe. I appeale to your owne doctrine: Doe not you teach, that good workes are neces∣sarie to saluation? and yet you grant, that infants may be saued without them; yea and men of yeres too, if they haue no time to doe them, after their first iustification. Therefore more may bee required to saluation than to iustification, though infants want nothing after they are once iustified: yea infants are iustified without faith, as many as are iusti∣fied. And the assumption is false: for we are saued by faith alone, if wee speake of faith as it is an instru∣ment apprehending Christ for our saluation. Which M. Perkins perceiuing, flies to a second; that for faith alone we shall also be saued, and that good workes shall not be regarded at the day of our iudgement. Then must those words of the holy Ghost M. Perk. hath not a vvord of not regarding vvorkes.  so often repeated in the Scriptures be razed out of the text. God at that time vvill render vnto euery man, according to his workes. But of this more amply in the question of merits. His second answere is, that the assumption is false; vpon this distinction, that by sauing, wee vnderstand being brought into the state of saluation. For that is performed, on our part, by beleeuing onely. Now in this case wee are said to bee saued, because whosoeuer is once iustified by saith, shall certainly haue other things ministred vnto him, by which God hath appointed to bring him to saluation. It is your slander, not Master Perkins error, that good works shall not be regarded at the day of our iudgement. Reason V. We are saued by hope, therefore not by faith alone. Answ. We are saued by hope, not because
it is any cause of our saluation. Pauls meaning is one∣ly this: that wee haue not saluation as yet in posses∣sion, but waite patiently for it, in time to come to be possessed of vs, expecting the time of our ful deliuer∣ance: that is all that can iustly be gathered hence. There be many other vertues, vnto which iustification and saluation are ascribed in Gods word: therefore faith alone sufficeth not. The Antecedent is proued, first offeare it is said. He that is vvithout feare, cannot be iustified. VVe are saued by hope. Vnlesse you doe psnance, you shall Ecclesias. 1. Rom. 8. Luk. 13. 1. Ioan. 3. all in like sort perish. VVe are translated from death to life, (that is iustifi∣ed) because vve loue the brethren. Againe of baptisme. Vnlesse you be borne againe of vvater, and the holy Ghost, you cannot enter into the Kingdome of heauen: Lastly we must haue a resolute purpose to amend our evil liues. For vve are buried together with Christ by baptisme into death, that as Christ is risen againe from the dead, &c. S vve may also vvalke in nevvnes of Rom. 6. life. Master Perkins answered as much as hee propounded: that which you haue brought I will examine, and, I trust, sa∣tisfie. Ecclesiastic. 1. 28. He that is without feare, cannot be iustified. It is a strange course of prouing, to bring that against vs for scrip∣ture, which you know wee denie to be scripture, and that with the consent of the ancient writers, and your owne of late. Interlin. Bibl. Arias Montanus, and they that ioyned with him, haue left all the Apocryphall out of the Interlinear Bible. The Greeke, which is the originall, is farre otherwise, , iracundus. An an∣grie man: and so it is translated in Bibl. Reg. Hispan. the great Bible, set out by Arias Montanus; and before that, by Panin. Pagnin, who also interpreteth it, shall not be iustified, Non poterit censeri iustus. cannot be thought iust, referring it to mans iudgement, rather than to Gods. Vatablus. Vatablus also so translateth it, and addes in the margin, that some copies reade . vniust anger: and for your being iu∣stified, he translateth (as Pagnin doth) cannot be counted iust. Besides I denie the consequence; he that is without feare cannot be iustified: therefore iustification is ascribed in Gods word to some other vertue, and not to faith onely. For though a man that is without feare cannot be iustified, yet he is not iustified in respect of his feare. To omit the absurditie of the translation, Luk. 13. 3. . doe penance,
for repent; who makes any doubt that they shall perish, that repent not? What will you conclude thence? There∣fore repentance iustifieth, and not faith onely? I denie your consequence, see the reason in the former section. The 1. Ioh 3. 14. Apostle makes not the loue of our brethren the cause, but the proofe of our iustification; as it is apparant by his words: We know we are translated from death to life, because we loue the brethren: he that loueth not his brother, a∣bideth in death. We are not translated by reason of our lo∣uing: for indeed we must be translated before we can loue them; but we know by louing them that we are translated. And that is the scope of the Apostle: In this are the children Vers. 10,  of God knowne, and the children of the diuell: whosoeuer doth not righteousnes is not of God, neither he that loueth not his bro∣ther: Let vs not loue in word, nor in tongue, but indeed and in Vers. 18. 19 truth. For thereby wee know that we are of the truth, and shall before him assure our hearts. First, you take that as granted which is full of doubt, that our Sauiour Christ speaketh Ioh. 3. 5. in that place of baptisme. Se∣condly (admitting that) I denie absolute necessitie of bap∣tisme, as well as of the other Sacrament: for which, in your iudgement, those words are as strong, Ioh. 6. 5. Except you eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, ye haue no life in you. Thirdly, I say we are iustified by baptisme, Rom. 4. 10. 1 as Abraham was by Circumcision. Fourthly, I denie the consequence here also: None can enter into heauen, except they be borne againe of water and the holy Ghost. Therefore not onely faith, but also some other vertues are respected by God in our iu∣stification. The end of baptisme is our sanctification, by dying to sinne, and liuing to righteousnes: therefore iustification and saluation are ascribed to other vertues, beside faith. I denie the consequence. For Rom. 6. 4, 5. though we must haue a reso∣lute purpose to amend our liues; yet God doth not iustifie vs, in regard that we haue such a purpose, but only in respect of our beleeuing; neither, to speake truly, doth this pur∣pose goe before iustification, but follow it.
To all these and many such like places of holy Scripture, it pleased M. Perkins to make answere in that one. You are saued by hope: to wit;  Rom. 8. Hee ansvvered all he propoun∣ded. that Paules meaning is only, that we haue not as yet saluation in pos∣session, but must waire patiently for it, vntill the time of our full deliue∣rance, this is all. Now whether that patient expectation, which is not hope, but issueth out of hope, of eternal saluation, or hope it selfe be any cause of saluation, he saith neither yea nor nay, and leaues you to think as it seemeth best vnto your selfe. S. Paul then affirming it to be a cause of saluation, it is best to beleeue him: and so neither to exclude hope or charitie, or any of the foresaid vertues, from the worke of iustification, hauing so good warrant as the word of God, for the confirmation of it. Rom. 8. 24. S. Paul doth not affirme, that it is any cause of saluation, but onely saith (as Master Perkins hath truly answered) that we must come to the possession of saluation, by continuing our hope of it with patience. To which purpose Heb. 10. 36. the A∣postle saith, that we had need of patience, that after wee haue done the will of God, we may receiue the promise. Neither is the question of saluation, but of iustification: so that here the consequence may iustly be denied, we are saued by hope, ther∣fore we are not iustified by faith onely. For more is required to saluation, than to iustification. To these authorities and reasons, taken out of the holy Scriptures, let vs ioyne here some testimonies of the auncient Church, reseruing the rest vnto that place, wherein M. Perkins citeth some for him. The most auncient and most valiant Martyr S. Ignatius, of our iustification wri∣teth thus. The beginning of life is faith, but the end of it is charity, but both Epist. ad Phi∣lip. vnited and ioyned together, doe make the man of God perfect. There is no such word in that Ignatius ad Philip. Epistle to the Philippians; and if there were, the matter were not great. Such an au∣thor, as he sheweth himselfe to be, that writ those epistles in Ignatius name, is an vnfit iudge in controuersies of Diuini∣tie. But for the sentence it selfe, if it bee any where to bee found, it may well be answered, that sanctification is requi∣red to the perfection of a Christian, and not onely iustifica∣tion: and this is all that is here affirmed. What proofe is there in this, that faith onely doth not iustifie? Clement Patriarch of Alexandria saith. Faith goeth before, but feare doth build, and charity bringeth to perfection. D. B. P. Libr. 2. strom. Clemens Stromat. lib. 2. Clement speaketh not either of iustification, or of iusti∣fying faith; but (as the former author) describeth some of
the meanes, and, as it were, the parts of Christian sanctifica∣tion. Saint Iohn Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople hath these words:  Hom. 70. in Math. Least the faithfull should trust that by faith alone they might be saued, he disputeth of the punishment of euill men, and so doth he both exhort the Jn∣fidels to faith, and the faithfull to liue vvell. Chrysost. in Math. hom. 70. Chrysostome speakes of that faith, whereby we giue as∣sent to the truth of the Gospell, not of that whereby we liue in Christ. Neither intreateth he of iustification, but of salua∣tion. Further, hee reiecteth such a faith as hath not good workes: and so doe we. S. Augustine cryeth out as it were to our Protestants, and saith: Heare  Lib. 3. hypo∣gnost. O foolish Heretike, and enemy to the true faith. Good workes, vvhich (that they may be done, are by grace prepared, and not of the merits of free-will) vve condemne not: because by them, or such like, men of God haue been iusti∣fied, are iustified, and shall be iustified. Many doubt, and some, euen of your owne side, denie that booke to be Hypognost. lib. 3. Austins. But for the sentence alleaged by you, it cannot be to the purpose; because our question is now onely of the first iustification, as you speake; to which the workes of grace, that follow afterward, and of which Austin professedly speaketh in that place, cannot belong. Beside, there is no doubt but he speaketh as S. Iames doth, saying, that Iam. 2. 21. Abraham was iustified by workes: that is, ap∣proued and acknowledged for iust, both by God and man: as a man is knowne to be aliue by his breathing. And, Novv let vs see that vvhich is to be shaken out of the harts of the D. B. P. De fide & oper. c. 14.  faithfull: Least by euill securitie they lose their saluation, if they shall thinke faith alone, to be sufficient to obtaine it. The words immediatly following after those you haue set downe, and being a part of the sentence, make it mani∣fest, that Aug. de fide & oper. cap. 14 Austin speakes of a dead faith, which neglecteth good workes. If they shall thinke (saith he) faith alone to be sufficient to obtaine it, but shall neglect to liue well, and hold on the way of God by good workes. This (as hee professeth August. de doctr. Christ. cap. 13. other∣where) he knew to be the course of some, who thought that faith, which (saith he) they faine they haue, should auaile them before God, without good workes; and being deceiued with this kinde of error, commit hainous sinnes without feare, while they
beleeue that God is a reuenger of no sinne, but Persidiae. infidelitie. And these were the Gnostickes, against whom such speeches are intended. Now the doctrine which wee teach on the con∣trarie is, That a sinner is iustified before God by faith: yea, by faith alone. The meaning is, that nothing within man, and nothing that man can doe, either by nature or by grace concurreth to the act of iustistcation be∣fore God, as any cause thereof, either efficient, mate∣riall, formall, or finall, but faith alone. All other gifts and graces, as hope, loue, the feare of God, are neces∣sarie to saluation, as signes thereof, and consequents of faith. Nothing in man concurres as any cause to this worke, but faith alone. And faith itselfe is no principall, but onely an instrumental cause whereby wee receiue, apprehend, and apply Christ and his righteousnesse for our iustification. Now the doctrine which M. Perkins teacheth, is cleane contrary. For (saith he) A sinner is iustified by faith alone, that is, nothing that man can doe by nature or grace, concurreth thereto as any kind of cause, but faith alone. Farther he saith, That faith it selfe is no principall, but rather an instrumentall cause, vvhereby vve apprehend and applie Christ and his righteousnes for our iustification. So that in fine, we haue that faith so much by them magnified, and called the only and whole cause of our iustification, is in the end become no true cause at all, but a bare conditi∣on, It is no vvhere so called by vs. without which we cannot be iustified. The doctrine Master Perkins teacheth, is not contrarie, but the very same. For he holds that no man can be saued, who either neglecteth, or endeuoureth not to bring foorth good workes: though he allow these no place, as causes of a mans iustification. At the last, you vnderstand, that wee make not faith the principall, much lesse the whole cause of our iustification. To speake properly, wee make it no true cause at all; but onely, as you say, a condition, required by God on our part; which hee accepteth in stead of fulfilling the lawe, and
thereupon forgiueth vs our sinnes, for Christs sake. If it be an instrumental cause, let him then declare what is the princi∣pall D. B. P. Conditio sine qua non. Neither of them.  cause, whose instrument faith is; and choose vvhether he had liefer to haue charity, or the soule of man vvithout any helpe of grace. Your disiunction is naught. For neither charitie, nor the soule, are the principall efficients, but man himselfe; not without any helpe of grace, but by such a speciall grace, as certainly produceth that effect in vs, to our iustification. Reason I. Ioh. 3. 14. 15. As Moses lift vp the serpent in the wildernesse, so must the sonne of man be lift vp: that whosoeuer beleeueth in him shall not perish but haue eter∣nall life. In these words Christ makes a comparison on this manner: when any one of the Israelites were stung to death by fierie serpents: his cure was not by any physicke surgery, but only by the casting of his eie vp to the brasen-serpent, which Moses had erected by Gods commandement: euen so in the cure of our soules, when wee are stung to death by sinne, there is nothing required within vs for our re∣couerie, but onely that we cast vp and fixe the eie of our faith on Christ and his righteousnesse. But to come to his reasons. The first is taken out of these vvords. As  Ioh. 3. Moses lift vp the serpent in the desert, so must the Sonne of man be lift vp, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, shall not perish, but haue life euerlasting. True, if he liue accordingly, and as his faith teacheth him: but what is this to iustification by only faith? Mary M. Perkins drawes it in after this fashion. As nothing was required of them who were stung by ser∣pents, but that they should looke vpon the brasen serpent: So nothing is required of a sinner, to deliuer him from sinne, but that he cast his eyes of faith vpon Christs righteousnes, and applie that to himselfe in parti∣cular. But this application of the similitude is only mans foolish inuen∣tion without any ground in the text. Similitudes be not in all points a∣like, neither must be streatched beyond the very point wherein the si∣militude lieth, which in this matter is, that like as the Israelites in the Wildernesse stung with serpents, were cured by looking vpon the bra∣sen serpent: so men infected with sinne, haue no other remedie, then to embrace the faith of Christ Iesus: All this we confesse, but to say that nothing else is necessary, that is quite besides the text, and as easily reie∣cted by vs, as it is by him obtruded without any authority, or probability.
If wee precisely vrge the similitude, the latter part of the reddition is no part of the comparison: for there is nothing in the proposition, to which it answereth. But our Sauiour addes the end of lifting vp himselfe, to stirre vs vp (as it may seeme) to a more thorough consideration of the agreement betwixt health by the Serpent, and saluation by him. And surely it is not without reason to make a likenes in the deli∣uerance, as well as in other points, that all men might vn∣derstand by our Sauiours speech, how they should become partakers of that benefit. Reason II. The exclusiue formes of speech vsed in scripture prooue thus much. We are iustified freely, not of the law, not by the law, without the law, without workes, not of workes, not according to works, not of vs, not by the workes of the law, but by faith. Gal. 2. 16. All boasting ex∣cluded, onely beleeue. Luk. 8. 50. These distinctions, whereby workes and the lawe are excluded in the worke of iustification, doe include thus much: that faith alone doth iustifie. It doth not so: for these exclusiue speeches do not exclude feare, hope and charity, more then they exclude faith it self. Which may be called a worke of the law, as well as any other vertue, being as much required by the law as any other. If they doe not more exclude feare, hope and charitie, than faith, it must be shewed that they are directly, or by ne∣cessarie consequence required, in opposition to the workes of the law. For that is very manifest of faith, in diuers pla∣ces. Rom. 3. 28. By faith without the works of the law. Gal. 2. 16. Not by the works of the law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ. Ephes. 2. 8. By the faith of Christ, and not by the workes of the law. Vers. 9. Through faith, not of workes. But this can neuer be shewed of them. By reason of the opposition, I speake of, faith cannot bee taken for a worke of the law: neither is it any worke, requi∣red by the law, to beleeue in Christ for iustification; because the law saith, Leuit. 18. 5. Rom. 10. 5. Doe this, and thou shalt be saued: namely, as an hired seruant. But the Gospell saith, i Beleeue, and thou
shalt haue thy sinnes forgiuen thee by iustification. Now the law commands no sute for pardon, but calles for either obe∣dience, or damnation. Hope indeede (as I shewed before) differs little from faith, but depends vpon it: feare and loue are proper duties of the law, and so alwaies performed. But S. Paules meaning in those places is, to exclude all such workes, as either Iew or Gentile did, or could bragge of, as done of themselues, and so thought that by them, they deserued to be made Christians. For A n of incation. he truely saith, that all were concluded in sinne, and needed the grace of God, which they were to receiue of his free mercy, through the merits of Christ, and not of any desert of their owne: And that to obtaine this grace through Christ, it was not needfull, nay rather hurtfull to obserue the ceremonies of Moses law, as Circumcision, the obseruation of any of their feasts, or fastes, nor any such like worke of the law, which the lews reputed so necessary. Again, that all morall works of the Gentiles could not deserue this grace, which works not proceeding from charity, were nothing worth in Gods sight. And so all workes, both of Iewe and Gentile, are excluded from being any meritorious cause of iustification, Boasting is not excluded by Popish iustifi∣cation.  and consequently, all their boasting of their owne forces, their first iusti∣fication being freely bestowed vpon them. S. Paul speaketh not of deseruing to be made Christians, but of attaining to saluation: as it is apparant by his dispu∣tation in the Epistle to the Romanes. Rom. 3. 19. By the workes of the law no man liuing shall be iustified. What is iustified? shall be made a Christian, after your interpretation. So afterward, Rom. 3. 28. a man is iustified, that is made a Christian, by faith, and not by the workes of the law. So haue we a new interpretation of iustification by faith. Besides, it would be remembred, that you distinguish betwixt workes of nature, and workes of grace; denying iustification to them, and granting it to these: how will this stand with your answere? Neither doth the Apostle dispute, how they were to at∣taine to the grace of Christ, but how they were to receiue pardon, and acceptation to euerlasting life; which he truly ascribeth, on our part, to beleefe in Christ, by which wee ob∣taine Rom. 3. 28. Gal. 3. 26. both these priuiledges: As for meriting of iustifica∣tion, there is not a letter of it in any place of the new or old Testament. And though there be no meritorious cause of it in workes, before grace; yet boasting by your doctrine, is
not excluded. For may I not iustly boast, that my selfe, be∣ing inlightened by Gods spirit, and hauing a good motion inspired into me, by the power of mine owne free will ac∣cepted of the grace of God offered me, and so am iustified? where my cause of boasting is the greater, because many o∣ther men, who might haue been iustified as well as I, haue not imploied their free will so well as I haue done, and ther∣fore are damned. Yet all this notwithstanding, a certainevertuous disposition is requi∣red in the Iew and Gentile, wherby his soule is prepared to receiue that great grace of iustification: that say we, is faith, feare, hope, loue, and re∣pentance, that (say the Protestants) is faith only. Wherefore say we as the excluding of works, and boasting exclude not faith, no more do they exclude the rest, faith being asvvell our vvorke, and a vvorke of the law as any of the rest, and all the rest being of grace, as well as faith, and as farre from boasting of, as faith it selfe. There is no vertuous disposition required of the one or the other, in respect whereof he shall be iustified. Onely the acknowledgment of sinne, and such like, are vsed as meanes by God, to Act. 2. 28. & 16. 30. bring a sinner to beleeue in Iesus Christ to iu∣stification: yet so, as that neither these dispositions proceed from the free will of man, but from the spirit of God incli∣ning them, that God will iustifie, to these actions, nor any of these, but onely beleeuing is respected of God, on mans part, to his iustification. Now that out of S. Luke, beleeue only, is nothing to the purpose. For he was bidde beleeue the raysing of his daughter to life, and not that Christs righteousnes was his: and faith alone may be a sufficient dispo∣sition to obtaine a miracle, but not to obtaine iustification, of which the question on y is. That place of Luk. 8. 50. Luke sheweth thus much (as also the or∣dinarie course of the old Testament doth) that the thing God regardeth and requireth of man, to the obtaining of any fauour, is resting vpon him for that he stands in neede of. Fasting, praying, and such like exercises, are meanes to make a man discerne truly of his owne vnworthines, and so the rather to trust to Gods mercie and power: but the thing respected by God is, resting on him, and referring himselfe wholy to his will and pleasure.
Consider now good Reader, whether of our interpretations agree better, with the circumstances of the text, and the iudgment of the aun∣cient Fathers. The texts see thou in the Testament. Take for a taste, of the Fathers iudgment, S. Augustines exposition of those places of S. Paul, of one of the chiefest of which, thus he speaketh Men not vnderstanding De gra. & lib. arb. cap. 7. that vvhich the Apostle saith, VVe esteeme a man to be iustified vvithout the law, thought him to say, that faith sufficed a man although he liued euill, and had no good workes: which God forbid, that the vessell of election should thinke. They that so vnderstand the Rom. 2. Apostle, as the Gnostickes did, vtterly mistake him. We are altogether of Hypognost. lib 3. S. Austins opinion that faith cannot iustifie him that liues euilly, and hath no good workes. For (as De side & oper. cap. 14. he truly saith) Though they goe not before iustification, yet they accompanie it: euery iusti∣fied man being also sanctified. Neither is the faith, he spea∣keth of such a faith as we vnderstand, because it workes not by loue: but such, as the diuell hath, who (saith Austin in the same place) hath not the faith, by which the iust man liues, which workes by loue, that God may giue him life euerlasting, ac∣cording to his workes. And againe. Therefore the Apostle saith, that a man is iustified by faith,  De predest. sanct. cap. 7. and not of workes, because faith is first giuen, and by it the rest (which are properly called workes, and in which we liue iustly) are by petition obtai∣ned. In this place, Aug. de side & oper. cap. 14 Austin takes iustification for the whole fitting of a Christian to a holy conuersation; to which, iu∣stification indeede is but a foundation, the building being finished by sanctification. By which it is manifest, that S. Paul excluding the workes of the law,  Not from the conuersation of a Christian, but from his iustifi∣cation. and the workes done by our owne only forces, doth not meane to ex∣clude good workes, which proceed from the helpe of Gods grace. He must of necessitie, according to his course of dispu∣ting, exclude good workes from that iustification hee there speakes of, but not from the life of a Christian man. Reason III. Very reason may teach thus much. W. P. Mans reason is but a blind mystris in matters of faith, and he hat hath no better an instructor in such high misteries, must needs know little. Mans reason is not of it selfe sufficient to determine of truth and falsehood in Diuinitie, but being inlightened by the spirit of God with the knowledge of faith, it may easily
see the diuers vse of that, from other graces and vertues. For no gift in man is apt and fitte as a spirituall hand to receiue and apply Christ and his righteous∣nesse vnto a sinner, but faith. But what if that also faile you in this point? then euery man cannot but see how naked you are of all kind of probabilitie. I say then, that rea∣son  . rather teacheth the contrarie. For in common sense, no man ap∣prehendeth and entreth into the possession of any thing, by beleeuing that he hath it. For if a man should beleeue that he is rich, of honour, wise, or vertuous: Doth he thereby become presently such a one? no∣thing lesse. His faith and perswasion is no fit instrument to applie and draw these things to himselfe, as all the world sees. How then doth rea∣son teach me, that by beleeuing Christs righteousnes to be mine owne, I lay hand on it, and make it mine. Againe Christs righteousnes (accor∣ding to their owne opinion) is not receiued into vs at all, but is ours on∣ly by Gods imputation, what need we then faith, as a spirituall hand to receiue it? If they say (as M. Perkins doth) that faith is as it were a con∣dition required in vs, which when God seeth in vs, he presently impu∣teth Christs righteousnesse to vs, and maketh it ours: then will I be bold to say, that any other vertue is as proper as faith, to haue Christ ap∣plied vnto vs: there being no other aptnesse requisite in the condition it selfe, but only the will and ordinance of God: then euery thing that it shall please him to appoint, is alike apt: and so M. Perkins had small reason to say, that faith was the onely apt instrument to applie to vs Christs righteousnes. Reason, perceiuing that the Scripture, ordinarily, ascri∣beth iustification to beleeuing, and maketh beleeuing in Christ the receiuing of Christ, which is not granted to any other of those vertues; may well conclude, that faith onely is the spirituall hand to take hold of Christ and his righte∣ousnes by, and not feare, loue, hope, or repentance. Indeede loue, hope, the feare of God, and repen∣tance, haue their seuerall vses in men, but none serue for this ende to apprehend Christ and his merits: none of them all haue this receiuing propertie: and therefore there is nothing in man, that iustifieth as a cause but faith alone. Moreouer, true diuine reason teacheth me, that both hope and cha∣ritie,  Hope more par∣ticular then faith is vaine. do much more applie vnto Christians all Christs merits, and make them ours then faith: For what faith assureth me of in generall, that
hope applieth vnto me in particular: by faith I beleeue Christ to be the Sauiour of all mankind: by hope I trust to be made partaker of that sal∣uation in him. None of these hath that aptnes that is in faith. For the o∣ther haue more shew of desert in man, but God purposeth to set out his loue to the soule he saueth. Which can be done by no meanes so well, as when the party to be iustified doth nothing but rest vpon God, to receiue iustification at his mercifull hands. Of the difference betwixt faith and hope, I haue spoken 12. Art. part . Art. 1. otherwhere; now I say only thus much, that to hope with∣out faith is vaine. If I beleeue, I may not hope alone, but be sure I am iustified: if I doe not beleeue, I may be sure of the contrarie. But charitie doth yet giue me a greater confidence of saluation: for by  This is to pleade deet, not mer∣cie. the rule of true charity, as I dedicate and imploy my life, labours, and all that I haue to the seruice of God, so all that God hath is made mine, so farre forth as it can be made mine: according vnto that sacred law of friendship: Amicorum omnia sunt communia. And therefore in true rea∣son, neither by faith, nor any other vertue, we take such hold on Christs merits, nor haue such interest in his inestimable treasures, as by charity. This were the way indeed to make God debtor to man, and man a more speciall cause of his owne iustification, than God: yea to make man (in Ex congro. equitie at the least) deserue his iustification at Gods hands. But what Prince would bee so dealt withall by a traytor, especially if he meant to manifest the riches of his mercie in affoording fauour? Would he, trow you, haue his traiterous subiect plead an interest to his loue, kindnes and bountie, by imploying his life and la∣bours to do him seruice, and so to receiue all benefits from him, Rom. 5. 10. as a friend from a friend, by the law of mutuall good will? who seeth not how directly this runnes against the whole course of the new Testament? Which S. Augustine vnderstood well, when he made it the modell, D. B. P. De nat. & gra. cap. vlt.  and measure of iustification: saying, That Charity beginning, was Justice beginning: Charity encreased, vvas Iustice encreased: great Charity vvas great iustice: and perfect Charity, was perfect iustice. Aug. de na∣tur. & grat. cap. vlt. Austin speakes not of iustification, but of walking cheerefully in obedience to Gods commandements, after
we are iustified: which we cannot doe, vnlesse the loue wee beare to God, make all difficulties that we shall meet with, light and easie to vs. In this respect charitie beginning, is iustice beginning; because he that hath begun to loue, hath also begun to walke in the way of righteousnes, making light of all hindrances, by reason of his loue; and as his loue groweth, so doth his righteousnes in his whole conuersa∣tion. Reason IV. The iudgement of the auncient Church. Ambr. on Rom. 4. They are blessed to whom without any labour or worke done iniquities are re∣mitted and sinne couered: no workes or repentance re∣quired of them, but onely that they beleeue. And cap. 3. Neither working any thing, nor requiting the like, are they iustified, but by faith alone through the gift of God. And 1. Cor. 1. this is appointed of God that whosoeuer beleeueth in Christ, shall be saued without any worke by faith alone, freely receiuing remission of sinnes. To these and such like words, I answere. First, that it is very vncer∣taine, whether these Commentaries be Saint Ambroses. You that could so confidently thrust vpon vs those Com∣mentaries on the Reuelation for Ambroses, which were ne∣uer heard of, till within these last 80. yeres, should not haue made a doubt of these on the Romanes, that haue been re∣ceiued for his so many hundreds of yeeres. But I will not striue about the matter. Once this is out of doubt, that they are very ancient, and generally held to be True for do∣ctrine.  orthodoxall. Secondly, that, that Author excludeth not repentance: but only the workes of Moses law, which the Iewes held to be necessary: as circum∣cision, and such like, see the place, and conferre with it, that which he hath written in the same worke, vpon the fourth to the Hebrews: where he hath these vvords. Faith is a great thing, and vvithout it, it is not pos∣sible to be saued, but faith alone doth not suffice: but it is necessary, that faith worke by charitie, and conuerse worthie of God. Not repentance? he names it expresly. Ambros. ad Rom 4. vers. 7. Nulla ab his requisita poe niteniae opera No workes, or repentance required of them. But he meanes, not workes of the Ceremoniall law onely. He meanes both Ceremoniall and
Morall. Ad vers 2. That law which the Gentiles had by nature; which if a man keepe, he shall liue: Ad vers. 3. Abraham had not whereof to boast, because he was circumcised, or because he abstained from sinne, but because he beleeued: Ad vers. 4. To him that worketh, that is, to him that is subiect to the law of Moses, or of nature: Ad vers. 5. Oboxius pccais. To him that worketh not, that is, to him that is guiltie of sinne, because he doth not that which the law commaunds. Ambros. ad Hebr. cap. 4. In that place vpon the Hebrues, he speaketh not of iustification, as in the other, but of our entring into rest, or heauen; to which no man shall come, that doth not liue holily, beautifying (as he there speaketh) his faith with workes. De verbis Dom. serm. 40 August. There is one propitiation for all sinnes, to beleeue in Christ. Hesyc. on Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 2. Grace which is of mercie is apprehended by faith alone, and not of workes. M. Perkins next authoritie is gathered out of S. Augustine. There is  De verb. Ap. serm. 40. Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 2. one propitiation for all sinners to beleeue in Christ; True, but where is it, that we need nothing else, but to beleeue? 3. Hesychius saith, Grace vvhich is of mercy, is apprehended by faith a∣lone, and not of vvorkes: that is, vve doe not merit by our vvorks done be∣fore grace, any thing at Gods hand, but of his mercie receiue both, faith and iustification. This testimonie of Austin, and the next of Hesychius, are answered by roate, and not by iudgement. For they are both misquoted; which he must needes haue obserued, and then would haue reprooued, if he had lookt for them in the places cited. The former I cannot finde, and therefore let it passe without any answere. If Hesych in Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 14. this interpretation may goe for currant, I know not what may be refused, as counterfeit. Grace, which is of mercy, is apprehended by faith alone, and not of workes: that is (say you) wee doe not merit by our workes, done before grace, any thing at Gods hand; but of his mercie receiue both faith and iustification. Hesychius saith, that grace is appre∣hended by faith alone: you make him say, that we receiue both faith and iustification of Gods mercy: he speaketh of attaining to grace by faith; you expound him of receiuing faith by
Gods mercie. But indeed Hesychius in his owne speech ma∣keth a distinction, affirming of grace, that it is Praebetur. giuen vs (viz. on Gods behalfe) of mercie and compassion, and is receiued on our part by faith alone, and not by workes. Supra Can. ferm. 22. Bernard. Whoseeuer is pricked for his sinnes and thirsteth after righteousnesse, let him beleeue in thee, who iustifieth a sinner, and beeing iustified by Faith alone, hee shall haue peace with God. 4. Bernard hath: VVhosoeuer thirsteth after righteousnes: let him be∣leeue in thee: that being iustified by faith alone, he may haue peace with God.  Sup. Cant. em. 22. Ans. By faith alone, he excludeth all other meanes, that either levv, or gentile required, but not charity: Which his very words include, for how can we abhorre sin, and thirst after iustice, vvithout charitie? and in the same worke he declareth plainely that he comprehendeth al∣waies charitie, vvhen he speakes of a iustifying faith: saying. A right faith doth not make a man righteous, if it vvorke not by Charitie. And a∣gaine: Neither workes vvithout faith, nor faith without vvorkes is suffici∣ent Serm. 24. to make the soule righteous. The chiefe thing the Iewes stood vpon was charitie, which they knew the law especially required, and therefore to leaue that in, was to aduance the righteousnes of the Iewes, at the least in their opinion. We may abhorre sinne for feare of punishment, and thirst for righteoosnes for desire of glo∣rie, without any respect of loue, but to our selues. In Bernard. in Cant. ser. 24. those places you bring, he sheweth what faith hee meaneth, euen as we doe, who say that no faith can iustifie, but that which workes by loue; not in the very act of iustifying, but in the course of our conuersation. Therfore Bernard. in Cant. ser. 24. in the former place, when he hath said, that being iustified by faith alone, we shall haue peace with God, he doth afterward distinguish iustifica∣tion from sanctification. They therefore that being iustified by faith, Desiderant deliberantque ctari. desire, and resolue to follow after holines, &c. And in the latter he saith, that faith without workes is dead; to seuer loue from faith, is to kill it. But none of these things prooue, that Bernard gaue the habit, or the act of loue any place of a cause in our iustification, or any respect with God to our iustification. For then, how could hee haue said, by faith onely?
Chrysost. on Gal. 3. They said, he which resteth on faith alone, is cursed: but Paul sheweth, that hee is blessed which resteth on faith alone. He speakes of the Iewes who held Christians accursed, because resting on the faith in Christ would not obserue withall oses law: the Apostle contrariwise denounceth them accursed, who would ioyne the ceremo∣nies of Moses lavv, vvith Christian religion, and so faith alone, there ex∣cludeth Gal. 5. only the old lavv, not the vvorkes of charity. That Chrysost. ad Gal. 3. Chrysostome speaketh of the Morall law, any man may see, that markes how he vrgeth the Apostles reason, to prooue them accursed, who will ioyne the law with faith to iustification: namely, that they are accursed, because they cannot fulfill euery part of the morall law; for of it is that Deut. 27. 26. sen∣tence vttered. Basil. de Humil. Let man acknowledge himselfe to want true iustice, and that he is iustified onely by faith in Christ. So he mangleth pittifully a sentence of S. Basils, saying: Let man ac∣knowledge  De humil. Hovv I pray you? himselfe to want true iustice, and that he is iustified only by faith in Christ: If a man knovv himselfe iustified by faith in Christ, hovv can he acknovvledge that he vvants true iustice? His vvords truly repeated are these. Let man acknovvledge that he is vnvvorthy of true iustice: and that his iustification comes not of his desert, but of the meere mercy of God through Christ. So that by saith alone S. Basill treating of humilitie, ex∣cludes all merit of our ovvne, but no necessary good disposition, as you may see in his Sermon, de fide, vvhere he proues by many texts of ho∣ly Scripture, that charity is as necessary as faith. That is (saith Basil) perfect, and full reioycing in Gods sight, when a man is not lifted vp, no not for his owne righteousness, but acknowledgeth himselfe indeed to be destitute of true righteous∣nes, and to be iustified onely by faith in Christ. Basil. in As∣cet. de fide. Fides est ae∣sus indubita∣tus ad eaquae atur.  Basil in that place speaketh of faith, as it is an assent to those things that are taught by the grace of God, requiring workes not to iu∣stification, but in our cariage here to saluation. Origen. on. cap. 3. Rom. Wee thinke that a man is iustified by faith without the workes of the law: and he saith that iustification, by faith alone sufficeth, so as a man onely beleeuing may be iustified. And, Therefore it lieth vpon
vs—,to search who was iustified by faith without workes. And for an example, I thinke vpon the theefe who being crucified with Christ cried vnto him, Lord remember me when thou commest into thy kingdome: and there is no o∣ther good worke of his mentioned in the Gospell: but for this alone faith, Iesus saith vnto him, This night thou shalt be with me in paradise. Origen excludeth no good disposition in vs to iustification, but saith, that a man may besaued, vvithout doing ourvvardly any good vvorkes; If he vvant time and place: as the Theefe did, vvho presently vpon his conuersion vvas put to death, vvhich is good Catholike Doctrine: but that you may perceiue hovv necessary the good dispositions before men∣tioned be to iustification, you shall find if you consider wel al circumstan∣ces, not one of them to haue bin wanting in that good Theefes conuersi∣on. First, that he stood in feare of Gods iust iudgment, appeares by these his vvords, to his fellovv, Doest thou not feare God, &c. He had hope to be saued by Christ, out of vvhich he said: O Lord remember me, vvhen thou commest into thy Kingdome: By both vvhich speeches is shevved also his faith both in God, that he is the gouernour and iust iudge of the vvorld, and in Christ, that he vvas the Redeemer of mankind. His repentance and confession of his fault, is laid dovvne in this: And vve trulie suffer vvorthilie: His charity tovvards God and his neighbour, in reprehen∣ding his fellovves blasphemie, in defending Christs innocency: and in the middest of his greatest disgraces, and raging enemies, to confesse him to be King of the vvorld to come: out of all vvhich vve may gather also, that he had a full purpose to amend his life, and to haue taken such order for his recouery, as it should please Christ his Sauiour to appoint. So that he lacked not any one of those dispositions, vvhich the Catho∣like Church requires to iustification. Your discourse of the theeues vertues and good workes, doth not refute the truth of Master Perkins allegation; but, if it doe any thing, condemnes Origens iudgement of him. As for the dispositions you often mention, doubtlesse if O∣rigen had thought that any such had been necessarie, or re∣spected by God, in the iustification of that theefe, he would neuer haue said, that he was iustified without workes, that did so many good workes in so short a time. Novv that, that great Doctor Origen meant not to exclude any of these good qualites out of the companies of faith; is apparant: by that vvhich he hath vvritten on the next Chapter: vvhere he saith. That faith cannot be imputed to iustice, to such as beleeue in Christ, vnlesse they Rom. 4.
doe withall put off the old man, and a little before more plainely saying: I thinke that faith is the first beginning of saluation, hope is proceeding in the building, but the toppe and perfection of the whole worke, is charitie. Neither doe we meane to exclude such qualities. For they come together, but are not of like vse, nor to the same pur∣pose. Both the sentences you alleage out of him wee ap∣prooue; that faith which is without sanctification, cannot in∣stifie; that faith is not all that is required to saluation; but all graces of regeneration are to be laboured for and obtained, before wee can come to heauen. And by this wee may see, that as the Fathers, so Origen also makes a difference betwixt iu∣stification, where faith onely is respected, and saluation, to which all vertues are required. III. Difference. The third difference about iustification is concer∣ning this point, namely how far forth good workes are required thereto. The doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that there be two kinds of iustification: the first and second, as I haue said. The first is, when one of an euill man is made a good man: and in this, workes are wholy ex∣cluded, it being wholy of grace. The second is, when a man of a iust man is made more iust. And this they will haue to proceede from workes of grace: for (say they) as a man when he is once borne can by eating and drinking make himselfe a bigger man, though he could not at the first make himselfe a man: euen so a sinner hauing his first iustification, may after∣ward by grace make himselfe more iust. Therefore they hold these two things: I. That good works are meritorious causes of the second iustification, which they tearme Actuall: II. that good workes are meanes to increase first iustification, which they call Habituall.
Now let vs see how far forth we must ioyne with them in this point. Our consent therefore stands in three conclusions. I. That good workes done by them that are iu∣stified doe please God, and are approoued of him, and therefore haue a reward. II. Good workes are necessarie to saluation two waies: first, not as causes thereof, either conseruant, adiuvant, or procreant: but onely as consequents of faith: in that they are inseparable companions and fruits of that faith, which is indeede necessarie to sal∣uation. Secondly, they are necessarie as markes in a way, and as the way it selfe directing vs vnto eternall life. III. Wee hold and beleeue, that the righteous man, is in some sort iustified by works, for so the ho∣lie Ghost speaketh plainely and truely, Iam. 2. 21. That Abraham was iustified by workes. M. Perkins first graunteth, that good vvorkes doe please God, and haue a temporall revvard.  Temporall is of your foysting in as if we denied good works re∣vvarded in heauen. 2. That they are necessary to saluation, not as the cause thereof, but either as markes in a vvay to direct vs tovvards saluation: or as fruites and signes of righteousnesse, to declare one to be iust before men: all vvhich he shuffleth in, rather to delude our arguments, then for that they esteeme much of good vvorkes, vvhich they hold to be no better then deadly sinnes. This is no good dealing to foyst in temporall; as if you would haue men suspect, that we allow good workes no re∣ward in heauen. It had been enough for you to leaue out his words, as you doe, and thrust in your owne, without adding at your pleasure. But these are popish shifts. Whereof you presently affoord vs another example, by putting in these words; Before men, to make the world beleeue, that we giue no place to good works in the sight of God: whereas Pag. 93. 88. Ma∣ster Perkins professeth, that Abraham was iustified by works euen before God; not onely before men, as you write.
To this you adde in the third place a shamelesse slander, 12. Art. part. 2. art. against your owne knowledge, that we hold good workes to be no better than deadly sinnes: whereas wee teach, that those that are indeed good workes, are able to iustifie a man perfectly in the presence of God, and to deserue euerlasting life. Yea we maintaine, that the imperfect workes of the re∣generate, are brought foorth by the grace of Gods spirit, and, for all their imperfection, are accepted, and shall be re∣warded by God our Father in heauen. Thus farre we ioyne with them: and the very dif∣ference is this. They say, we are iustified by works, as by causes thereof: wee say that wee are iustified by works, as by signes and fruites of our iustification be∣fore God, and no otherwise: and in this sense must the place of S. Iames be vnderstood, that Abraham was iustified, that is, declared and made manifest to bee iust indeede by his obedience, and that euen be∣fore God. Now that our doctrine is the truth, it will appeare by reasons on both parts. The maine difference then betvveene vs, consisteth in this, vvhether good vvorkes be the true cause indeed, of the increase of our righteous∣nes, vvhich vve call the second iustification, or vvhether they be onelie fruits, signes, or markes of it. The maine difference, as Master Perkins propounds it, is, whether we be iustified by works, as by causes meritorious of our iustification; not, whether they bee the true cause of our second iustification; which he denies wholy, as a deuice of yours. And indeede they Sander. de iustif. lib. 6. c. 4. pag. 647. that haue more neerely sifted this branne, haue found that there is but one iustification; because faith and workes make one righteousnes, begun by aith, and increased and perfected by workes. Iustification (saith Andrad Or∣thod. e plic. lib. 6. pag. 462. Andradius the great champion of the Councill of Trent) consists of two parts; forgiuenes of sinnes, and obedience to the law. Stapleton. promptu. Ca∣thol. ad Ioa. 8. 57. Stapleton speakes more plaine: The Catholikes say, that a man is iustified by faith, and workes, as by the formall cause. So that, according to your popish diuinitie, workes
are not onely the meritorious efficient cause of our iustifica∣tion, but the formall cause also; as Stapleton directly af∣firmes. M. Perkins pretends to proue, that they are no cause of the increase of our iustice: and yet frames not one argument directly to that pur∣pose: but repeates those obiections, and proposeth them now at large, which he made before, against the first iustification: the which although impertinent to this place, yet I will solue them first, and then set dovvne our owne. This pretence is none of his; who would neuer denie, that our inherent righteousnes is increased though not me∣ritoriously) by our holy actions, which make vs euery day more and more fit to serue and please God. But Master Per∣kins vnderstanding your opinion, better than your selfe will be knowne to doe, frames his reason against this position; That workes are part of that righteousnes, which we must pleade before God, for the deseruing of euerlasting life: or, that our iu∣stification before God, is partly of workes, and partly of faith: which is the doctrine of your Church, howsoeuer by you it be blanched. Our reasons. I. Rom. 3. 28. We conclude that a man is iustified by faith without the workes of the law. Some answer, that ceremoniall workes bee excluded here: some, that morall workes: some, works going before faith. But let them deuise what they can for themselues: the truth is, that Paul excludeth all workes whatsoeuer, as by the text will appeare. For vers. 24. hee saith, We are iustified freely by his grace: that is, by the meere gift of God: giuing vs to vnderstand, that a sinner in his iustification is meerely passiue, that is, doing no∣thing on his part whereby God should accept him to life euerlasting. Ans. The Apostle there speakes of the iustification of a sinner: for he saith before, that he hath proued both Iew, and Greeke, to be vnder sinne; and that all haue sinned, and need the glory of God: Wherefore
this place appertaines not vnto the second iustification: and excludes only either workes of the law, as not necessarie vnto the first iustification of a sinner: against the Iewes who thought and taught them to be ne∣cessary: of else against the Gentiles any worke of ours, from being any meritorious cause of that first iustification: for vve acknovvledge vee willingly (as you haue heard often before) that euery sinner is iustified freely of the meere grace of God, through the merit of Christ only, and See the point of freevvill. without any merit of the sinner himselfe. Your answere of the second instification is idle, because the distinction, as I haue shewed, is vaine. Master Perkins prooueth, that iustification is wholy of faith, because Rom. 3. 28 the Apostle excludeth workes from it: whereas you teach, that faith and workes together make vp that iustice or righte∣ousnes, whereby a man is iustified before God. And yet is not a sinner (being of yeares of discretion,) meerely pas∣siue in that his iustification, as M Perkins very aburdly saith: for in their owne opinion he must beleeue (which is an action:) and in ours not only beleeue, but also Hope, Loue, and Repeet. Master Perkins makes not a sinner meerely passiue in his iustification, but in receiuing the gift of faith; and in being stirred vp to beleeue. And yet is he not in these neither pas∣siue, as fondly you imagine we say: for he heares, and some∣times meditates, feares, hopes &c. but in this respect he is said to bee passiue, because his yeelding to beleeue, pro∣ceedes not from any strength of his free will, vpon the good motion inspired, but from the spirit of God inclining him ineuitably, to beleeue freely. And vers. 27. he saith, iustification by faith exclu∣deth all boasting, and therefore all kind of workes are thereby excluded: and speciallie such as are most of all the matter of boasting, that is, good works. For if a sinner, after that hee is iustified by the merit of Christ, were iustified more by his owne workes, then might hee haue some matter of boasting in him∣selfe. And this kind of iustification excludeth all boasting in our selues, as well as theirs. For as they must giant, that they may not bragge of their faith, although it be an act of theirs so necessaily required at their iusti∣fication, that without it, they could not be iustified: euen so let them
thinke of the rest of those good preparations, which we hold to be neces∣sarie, that we cannot truely bpast of them, as though they came of our selues, but we confesse all these good inspirations, as all other good, to descend from the bounteous liberality of the ather of lights: and For the yeelding of our consent to them; we can no more vaunt, then of con∣senting vnto aith, all which is no more then if a man be mired in a lake, and vnable of himselfe to get out, would be content that another of his goodnesse should helpe him out of it. From this ariseth the true difference betwixt you and vs, concerning boasting; that we haue nothing left vs to brag of; because not onely the abilitie, but the very act of be∣leeuing is brought to passe by Gods spirit inuitably: but your many actions of fearing, hoping, repenting, louing, beleeuing, are caused by your owne free will, without any certaintie of euent on Gods part, as a cause thereof. Yet obserue by the way: that S. Paul forbiddeth not all glorying or boasting: For he orieth in the hope of glorie of the Sonne of God, and in  Rom. 5. 2. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 12. his tribulations: Againe, He defiueth that vve may glorie in measure, and that he might glory in his power. And that he vvas constrained to glory in his visions and reuolations: So that a good Christian may glory in our Lord, and in his heauenly gifts, so it be in measure, and due season. Acknow∣ledging them from whence they come. But to boast and say that either God needed vs, or that our good parts were cause, that God called vs first to his seruice, is both false, and vtterly vnlawfull. The Apostle excludes no boasting, but in a mans selfe; and all that he must needs shut out, if he will reserue Gods glorie entire to him. For he that may truly say, that he is be∣holding to his own free will for his iustification (as he may, who by the good vse of it, at his choise▪ without being cer∣tainly inclined thereto by the spirit, procured his own iusti∣fication) hath cause to boast of his owne goodnes, not cau∣sed by God, in respect of the act of beleeuing. Now he that boasts of the inheritance of heauen, which God onely hath prouided for him; and fitted him to, boasteth not of him∣selfe, Rom. 5. 23. though in the middest of tribulations he breake out into this boasting. But how proou this, that therefore all boasting is not forbidden in the matter of iustification? To which 2. Cor. 10. 3. the next place alleaged, no way belongs, being spo∣ken by the Apostle of himselfe, in respect of those gifts that God had bestowed vpon him, for the worke of his ministe∣rie.
The 2. Cor. . last being of the same nature, is so farre from pro∣uing the lawfulnes of boasting, that the Vers. 1. 5. 1. Apostle is saine to excuse himselfe for it, as a thing inexpedient. But howsoe∣uer, it can by no meanes prooue, that the Apostle shuts not all boasting out of iustification. And that wee may not doubt of Pauls meaning, consider and read Eph: 2. 8. 9. By grace (saith he) you are saued through faith: and that not of your selues, it is the gift of God: not of works, least any man should boast himselfe. Here Paul excludes al and euery worke, and directly workes of grace themselues; as appeares by the reason following, For wee are his workemanship created in Christ Iesus vnto good works: which God hath ordained that we should walke in them. Now let the Papists tell me, what bee the workes which God hath prepared for men to walke in, and to which they are regenerate, vnlesse they bee the most excel∣lent workes? and let them marke, how Paul excludes them wholy from the worke of iustification and sal∣uation. Ephes. 2. is nothing against our Doctrine of iustification, but too too ignorantly or maliciously cited against it: and note also vvith S. Austin, that faith is there mentioned, to exclude all merits of our workes, which Lib. 83. q. 76. vvent before and might seeme to the simple to haue been some cause vvhy God bestovved his first grace vpon vs: but no vertuous dispositions requisite for the better preparation to the same grace. What ignorance or malice there is in alleaging this text against your doctrine of iustification, it shal appeare by and by: in the meane time, I answere concerning Austin; first, Aug. lib. qq. 83. q. 76. that in the place you name, there is neuer a word of the sentence in question. Secondly, that his scope in that trea∣tise is no more, but to shew that they falsely vnderstood such Rom. 3. 27. 28. places of the Apostle, as speake against iustification by workes, who thinke, that when once they haue beleeued in Christ, they shall be saued by faith, though they liue ne∣uer so wickedly. Thirdly, to refue that lewd conceit, Aust
addes, that the Apostle Ad hoc po∣tius. rather therefore saith, that a man is iustified by faith, without the works of the law; because he would haue no man imagine, that he hath obtained iustification by faith, vpon the merit of his former workes. This we grant to be true; but not all that the Apostle intendeth. For it cannot be doubted, but that he confuteth the opinion of the Iewes and Heathen, concerning iustification; as it is plaine by the Rom. 1. & 2. & 3. three first chapters. Now they did not make account to deserue the grace of iustification at Gods hands, by their holy and vertuous liuing, but to inherit heauen by it. Nei∣ther could they that did beleeue, so much flatter them∣selues, as to dreame, that their good deeds in particular had procured that fauour; when it was easie for them to see, that many thousands both Iewes and Gentiles, as good, or better than 1. Cor. 6. 10. 11. diuers of themselues, for vertuous behauiour, notwithstanding attained not to this iustification. Besides, if we mark the reasons, by which the Rom. 1. & 2. & 3. Apostle beates down their pride, they are such as generally concerne all both Iewes and Gentiles. Adde hereunto, that Austin speakes no further for the vse of good works, but to shew, that they are necessarie for a Christian man, as Vacuam esse sidē, si non be∣ne operetur. without which his faith is voide and idle: and that no man may dreame, that if hee beleeue, it Non ad eum pertineat be∣ne operari. pertaines not to him to worke well: which are the words that immediatly goe before these you bring. And therefore very fondly doth M. Perkins inferre, that in that sen∣tence S. Paul speaketh of vvorkes of grace: because in the text follovv∣ing he mentioned good vvorkes. Whereas the Apostle putteth an eui∣dent distinction betvveene those tvvo kinde of vvorks, signifying the first. To be of ourselues: The second, o proceede from vs as Gods vvork∣mansho, created in Christ Iesus, and the first, he calleth VVorkes simplie: the second, Good vvorkes, prepared of God for vs to walke in after our first iustification. What grosse ignorance then vvas it, to take these tvvo so distinct manner of vvorkes, for the same, and to ground himself so bold∣ly vpon it. Master Perkins saith, that the Apostle barres all workes before and after grace. He prooues it by the very text it self. The reason may be thus more plainly propounded; We are not saued by works (saith Eph. 2. 7. 8. Vers. 9. Vers. 10. the Apostle) that no man may boast. His proofe followeth: For good workes are appointed by God
for vs to walke in, for which purpose he hath made vs anew in Iesus Christ. That this tenth verse is a proofe of the former, the coniunction (for) declares. But how it can serue to that purpose, if the two verses speake of diuers kindes of works, some iustifying, some not iustifying, neither I see, nor (I thinke) you can shew me. What though he call the former workes simply, the latter good workes? are not the former those workes which the law morall and naturall require? and are not they in their nature good workes? But who knoweth not, that by workes, without any addition, workes of grace, after iustification, are signified? let the A∣postle Iam. 2. 14. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22. 24. 25. 26. Iames speake, who intreating of such workes, and naming them almost in euery verse, doth not once call them good workes, but workes simply. II. Gal. 5. 3. If ye be circumcised, ye are bound to the whole law, and ye are abolished from Christ. Here Paul disputeth against such men as would be saued part∣ly by Christ, and partly by the workes of the law: hence I reason thus. If a man will be iustified by works, he is bound to fulfil the whole law, according to the rigour thereof: that is Pauls ground. I now assume: no man can fulfill the law according to the rigour thereof: for the liues and works of most righ∣teous men are imperfect, and stained with sinne: and therefore they are taught euery day, to say on this manner: forgiue vs our debts. Again, our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore our faith, repentance, and sanctification is answerable. And lastly the regene∣rate man is partly flesh, and partly spirit: and there∣fore his best workes are partly from the flesh, and in part onely spirituall. Thus then for any man to be bound to the rigour of the whole law, is as much as if hee were bound to his owne damnation. If he can apply the text prefixed vnto any part of the argument, Erit mihi magnus Appollo: S. Paul onely saith in these vvords: That if you be
circumcised, yee are bound to keepe the vvhole lavv of Moses. M. Perkins, That if a man vvill be iustified by vvorkes, he must fulfill the rigour of the S. Paul knevv no other lavv, hut that of Mo∣ses to iustifica∣tion. lavv: Which are as iust as Germaines lippes, as they say: But M. Perkins sayes that it is S. Paules ground: but he is much deceiued, for the Apo∣stles ground is this. That circumcision is as it vvere a profession of Iu∣daisme, and therefore he that vvould be circumcided, did make him∣selfe subiect vnto the vvhole lavv of the Ievves. Of the possibilities of fulfilling the lavv, because M. Perkins toucheth so often that string, shall be treated in a distinct question, as soone as I haue dispatched this. Master Perkins vnderstood his owne minde in this, and other arguments, better than I can doe, and so could haue affoorded better answers for his defence. Yet thus much I may say, that the text of 1 the Apostle may be applied to the proposition; because they that would be circumcised, Gal. 5. 3. would be iustified by the workes of the law. Whereupon it followeth, that he that will be iustified by workes, is bound to keepe the whole law. For so the Apostle saith of them that will be iustified by circumcision. III. Election to saluation is of grace without workes: therefore the iustification of a sinner is of grace alone without workes. For it is a certaine rule, that the cause of a cause, is the cause of a thing cau∣sed. Now grace without works is the cause of electi∣on, which election is the cause of our iustification: and therefore grace without workes is the cause of our iustification. Ans. That election is of grace vvithout vvorkes, done of our ovvne simple forces, or vvithout the vvorks of Moses lavv: but not vvithout pro∣uision of good vvorkes issuing out of faith, and the helpe of Gods grace, as shall be handled more largely in the question of merits. This answere is not only against the Rom. 9. 10, 11. Apostle Paul, and Aug. Epist. 106. Austins exposition of him, but also contrarie to Lombard. lib. 1. dist. 41. Lom∣bard, Thomas. 1. q 23. art. 5. & in 1 senten. dist. 41. q. 1. art. 3. & qq. disp. q 6. de praed. art. 2. & ad Rom. 9. Thomas,  Bellarm. de gra. & lib. arb. lib. 2. c. 10. 11. & seqq. Bellarmine, and generally the learnedst Papists: as it shall appeare, if this writer giue occasion. IV. A man must first be fully iustified, before he can doe a good worke: for the person must first
please God before his works can please him. But the person of a sinner cannot please God, till he bee per∣fectly iustified: and therefore till he bee iustified, hee cannot doe so much as one good worke. And thus good works cannot be any meritorious causes of iu∣stification, after which they are both for time, and order of nature. In a word, whereas they make two distinct iustifications: wee acknowledge that there be degrees of sanctification, yet so as iustification is onely one, standing in remission of sinnes and Gods acceptation of vs to life euerlasting by Christ; and this iustification hath no degrees but is perfect at the very first. OF THE SECOND IVSTIFICATION. THe fourth argument. A man must be fully iustified, before he can doe a good vvorke: and therefore good vvorkes cannot goe before iustifica∣tion. True, not before the first iustification of a sinner. But good Sir, you He shewed your distinction, he made none. hauing made in the beginning of this last Article a distinction betweene the first and second iustification: And hauing before discussed the first, and the second novv remaining, and expecting you, vvhy did you not say one vvord of it, the matter being ample and vvell vvorthy the handling? He that denieth a second iustification, and hath disproo∣ued it, neede not stand vpon a deuice of yours, how worthy the handling soeuer you thinke it. Albeit you vvill not vvillingly confesse any second iustification as you say: Yet had it been your partat least to haue disproued such arguments as vve bring to proue a second iustification: Ye acknovvledge that there be degrees of sanctification: But these degrees must be made dovvne∣vvard of euill, vvorser and vvorst: for if all our sanctification and best This slaunder hath bin often disproued. Pag. 76. vvorkes be like vnto defiled cloutes, and no better then deadly sinnes as you hold else vvhere, let any vvise man iudge vvhat degrees of goodnesse can be lodged in it. But that you knew none of your side doe vse to reade our bookes, nor dare, without your licence; neither you, nor other of your Popish complices, would for shame write in this sort. You haue been often answered, that wee acknow∣ledge
inherent righteousnesse, and labour for, and (by the grace of God) attaine to the increase of it, in some mea∣sure, from day to day. Againe, how absurd is that position, that there is but one iustificati∣on, D. B. P. Lib. 2. con. so∣uin. Epist. 81. Epist, 57. Hom. 15. in Ezech.  whereby they take fast hold on Christs righteousnes, which can ne∣uer after, be either lost or increased? Why then doe you with your bro∣ther Jounuan, maintaine, that all men are equally righteous? If it so be, let him that desireth to see you wel coursed, read S. Hierome, S. Amorose, S. Augustine, S. Gregorie. We maintaine that all men are equally righteous, in re∣gard of iustification; but vnequally, in respect of sanctifi∣cation. Iouinian is rather one of your brood, who hold, that a man being iustified, is Hieron. con∣tra Iouin.  wholy without sin, euen in Gods iudgement. At least you must needs vphold that a man is as iust and righteous at his first conuersion, as at his death, how godly a life soeuer he lead: a∣gainst vvhich I vvill put dovvne these reasons follovving. First that of the reuelations. Let him that is iust be yet iustified: or as Cap. 22. ccles. 18.  your text hath it. He that is righteous, let him be more righteous. He that is iustified, is as righteous at the first as at the last, in respect of iustification; but not inherent righteousnes or sanctification: of which the places you alleage are meant, and therefore need no further answere. But that you may the rather see our desire to satisfie you, I will speake a little of them. Iustified, in Reuel. 22. 11. that place, signifieth to proceede in doing iustly; as Ribera in A∣poc. 22. 11. Ribera the Iesuite proueth, by the opposi∣tion in the other part of the sentence: Let him that hurteth, hurt still, that is, goe forward in your hurting (saith he) and so, let him that hurteth no bodie, but giueth euery man his due, goe forward in so doing. Let him that doth good (saith Glossa inter∣lin. your glosse) yet Impensiùs inferat. doe good more abundantly. Let him that is righ∣teous (saith Cyprian de bono patient. cap. 13. & testi∣mon. ad Quiri. lib. 3. cap. 23. Cyprian in two places) doe yet more righteous things; and him that is holy, more holy. The Aretas A∣poc. 22. 11. Greeke Scho∣liast reade it thus: Let him that is righteous, . yet worke righ∣teousnes. And so doe the Testam. Graec. Plantin. Greeke Testaments printed by Plantin; and the Interlin. Bib.  Interlinear Bible too; so that there is not so much as the word, iustified, in some of your owne Greeke copies. And that, feare not to be iustified euen vntill death: do conuince, that
there are more iustifications then one, and that a man may increase in iustification, and righteousnes vntill death. Eccl. 18. 22. That of Ecclesiasticus would haue been spared, till you haue proued that booke to be canonicall, which you know we deny, and that, as we are sure, with the consent of the auncient Church: at least you should not haue alleadged it with so grosie an error in the translation. The Greek is . dif∣fer not; The old Latin was in all likelyhood, Ne veteris. Be not forbid∣den, or hindered, as it may appeare by Vatabl  pe. Roer. Steph. Vatablus edition of it, by Robert Stephens; Anuerp. a▪ pud iduam Stelsij anno 1572. that of Antwerpe, and that Biblia cum gloss 1506. with the glosse: where Lyra, ne pro∣hibearis. Lyra expounds it, ne prohibearis. Andad. Or∣thod. explic. lib. 6. pag. 446. Andra∣dius deliuers it thus: Let there be nothing that may hinder thee from praying alwaies, or Prohibeat. may let thee from being iustified, euen vntill death. Some ignorant writer that copied out the booke, finding ne veteris, be not let, and mistaking t, for r, writ, ne Ne vereas. vereris, feare not; barbarously, against true Gram∣mar Latin. But the sense also, not onely the words, is mis∣conceiued. For the meaning is, that we should not put off honestie, or good conuersation to our last end. Ne differas iustum proba∣re te. Vata∣blus. Put not off till death, to prooue thy selfe a righteous man, saith Vatablus a Papist, very skilfull in the tongues, and sometimes Hebrue Reader in Paris, where you haue the very word, which Bellarm. d iusti. lib. 4. cap. 19. Bel∣larmine condemnes in Caluin, ne differas. Which also Pagnin vseth, a notable Linguist and a Papist; Nec tuam probtatem differas. Put not off thy ho∣nestie. Arias Mon∣tanus. ne ex∣pectes. Arias Montanus hath the sense, though not the word, waight not. Stapleton. de iustif. pro∣leg. 2. a lib. 5. Stapleton applieth it to the first iustifi∣cation; Bellarm. de iust. vbi supra. Prob. 4. 2. Cor. 9.  Bellarmine to the second; whose reasons I will an∣swere otherwhere. It is enough for the present, that a second iustification cannot be prooued out of these two places. Which is confirmed, vvhere it is said: that the path of a iust man pro∣ceedeth, as the light doth vntill it be perfect day; Which is by degrees more and more: And S. Paul teacheth the same, vvhere he saith to men that giue almes plentifully. That God vvill maltiplie their seede, and augment the increases of the fruits of their iustice. This Prou. 4. 18. place proueth not, that there is a second iustifica∣tion, but either that the light of the righteous continueth, or at the most, that it increaseth to the end; which we denynot. And this much lesse, where 2. Cor. 9. 10. the Apostle exhorteth the
Corinthians to cheerefulnesse in liberalitie to the poore, as∣suring them, that God will make them more able to bring forth such fruites of righteousnesse, by multiplying their seede and their store. Ye shall giue them bread to eate (saith Caietan. ad 2. Cor. 9 10. Caietan) and Deut. 28. 11. seede, wherewith to sowe againe, and iust or ho∣nest gaine; whereas the gaine that the wicked make, is vniust. Further, S. Iames doth most effectually proue this increase of righte∣ousnes, and the second iustification, in these vvords. Abraham our Fa∣ther was he not iustified by vvorkes, offering Isaac his sonne vpon the Altar? That he speaketh of the second iustification is euident: for Abraham was iustified before Isaac was borne, as it is most manifest by the Scrip∣ture it selfe: and by that heroicall act, of not sparing his onely and en∣tirely Cap. 2. beloued Sonne, Not his iusti∣fication. Genes. 15. Rom. 4. his iustice vvas much augmented. And the A∣postle himselfe seemeth to haue foreseene all our aduersaries cauillati∣on, and to haue so long before preuented them: First, that common shift of theirs (that this worke vvas a signe, or the fiuit only of his faith, and no companion of it, in the matter of iustification) is formally con∣futed: for the holy Ghost speaking distinctly of both, his faith, and work, and ioyning them both in this act of iustification, attributeth the bet∣ter part of it, vnto his vvorke: thus; Seest thou that faith did worke vvith his vvorkes, and by the vvorkes the saith vvas consummate and made per∣fect? Which he doth after fitly declare by a similitude, comparing faith to the body, and good vvorkes to the soule: vvhich giue life and lustre to faith, othervvise faith is of little value and estimation vvith God. Though there is enough said before, for the cleering of Iam. 2. 21. this place; yet perhaps it shal not be amisse to follow him in these seueral poynts. That he speaketh not of the same iu∣stification which Paul doth, it is plaine: but not that he mea∣neth your second iustification, whereby the former is made perfit to deserue euerlasting life. When we say works are no companions of faith in iustification, we do not say, they are not present, but that they do not iustifie: neither speak we of testifying our iustification by workes, as the Apostle here doth, but of that which you call the first iustification; to which questionlesse this fact of Abraham, in your own iudg∣ment, did not appertaine. But he ioyneth faith and workes together. How should they be seuered; when there is no ho∣ly action, performed in any part of our life, but proceedeth from faith, which Suapte natu∣ra. Caietan. ibi. of it owne nature, worketh by loue? now faith is not said to be perfited by workes, as if it did iustifie a
man by them, (for then had it not iustified Abraham, till this great worke was wrought) but because the act is the proose of the perfection of the vertue. Wherupon it follow∣eth in the text, Iam. 2. 23. That by this worke the Scripture was fulfilled, which had testified that Abraham was iustified by faith. For now it manifestly appeared, that the testimony was true; A∣braham making it cleare to all the world, that he had true faith indeed: that is (saith Caieton) such a faith, as Non renu∣entem, sed pa∣atam opera. Caietan. ibi. would not refuse, but was redie to bring forth good workes. And (in his o∣pinion) this is that, which Iames saith, that we are not iustifi∣ed by a barren faith, but by a faith fruitfull in good workes. Which S. Paul also teacheth atlarge, among other speeches inclu∣ding this:  1. Cor. 13. That if he should haue all faith, and vvanted charitie, he vvere nothing: And comparing faith and charity together, defineth expresly, that charitie is the greater vertue: Which charity is the fountaine of all good vvorkes. And so by this preferring these vvorks of charity before faith, he doth stop the other starting hole of the Protestants, that Abra∣ham forsooth vvas iustified before God, by only faith: but vvas decla∣red iust before men by his vvorkes: For if God esteeme more of charity, then of our faith, a man is more iustified before God by charity, then by faith. God esteemeth more of Charity, for the vse of our con∣uersation amongst men, but of faith for our iustification. And indeed it is a greater honor to God, for a man wholy to renounce himselfe, and rest vpon him for iustification, then to loue God, in hope of such a fauour to be receiued vpon our being so prepared. Againe, in the very place where this noble fact is recorded, to shevv how acceptable it was to God himselfe, it is said in the person of God; Now I know that thou louest me: and to conuince all obstinate cauilling, Gen. 22. is it not said that his faith did in this very fact cooperate with his works, and that the worke made his faith perfect? which coniunction of both of them together, doth demonstrate that he speaketh o his iustificati∣on VVe graunt he doth. before God; adding also, That he vvas therefore called the friend of God. Which could not haue been, if thereby he had been only declared iust before men: and thus doth S. Augustine reconcile the two places of the Apostles, S. Paul, and S. Iames, which seeme contrary. S. Paul saying that a man is iustified by faith, vvithout vvorkes and S. Iames, that a man is iustified by vvorks, and not by faith only. That S. Paul speaketh of works vvhich goe before saith, such as vve of our owne forces, vvithout the helpe of grace are able to doe: and such he saith not to deserue our first iustifica∣tion. But S. Iames dispteth of workes, vvhich sollovv faith, and issue out
of our soules, now garnished vvith grace, and such he holdeth vs to be iustifi∣ed by, that is, made more and more iust: See the place. He saith directhe, Lib. 83. quaest. q. 76. Serm. 16. de verb. Apos. that we are iustified, and that this iusuce doth increase, whiles it doth proceed and profit. This labour might haue bin saued. For we grant, that A∣braham by this glorious fact was iustified euen before God, that is, was knowne to be iustified, or to haue true faith; as he Gen. 22. 12. was known to feare God by it, not that God was igno∣rant before, either of his faith, or feare, but because it pleased him, by this deed to take as it were speciall notice of them both, as men doe. That righteousnes is increased by holie actions, I shewed before, and that therefore we are iustified by them, that is, more sanctified. Nothing then is more certaine and cleare, then that our iustification may daily be augmented: and it seemeth to me, that this also be granted in their opinion: for they holding faith to be the only instrument of iu∣stification, cannot deny, but that there are many degrees of faith, it is so plainely taught in the word: O yee of little faith. And then a little after, I haue not found so great faith in Israell: And O Lord increase our saith: Math. 8. Luk. 19. and many such like, where many different degrees of faith are mentio∣ned. How then can the iustification which depends vpon that faith, not be correspondent vnto that diuersity of faith, but all one? Againe, M. Perkins deliuereth plainly, That men at the first, are not so vvell assu∣red Pag. 54. of their saluation, as they are aftervvard; If then in the certainety of their saluation, which is the prime effect of their iustification, they put degrees, they must perforce allow them in the iustification it selfe. Degrees of faith we deny not; but increase of iustificati∣on thereupon, except it be in our feeling. In which respect, it receiueth continuall growth, but in it selfe it cannot, be∣cause God doth Rom. 4. 3. 5. account faith to vs for righteousnes, and forgiue our sinnes, not by halues, but fully vpon the least measure of true beleeuing. Obiections of Papists. Psal. 7. 8. Iudge me according to my righteousnesse. Hence they reason thus; if Dauid bee iudged accor∣ding to his righteousnesse, then may hee be iustified thereby; but Dauid desires to be iudged according
to his righteousnesse: and therefore he was iustified thereby. Answ. There be two kinds of righteousnes, one of the person, the other of the cause or action. The righteousnesse of a mans person, is, whereby it is accepted into the fauour of God into life eternall. The righteousnes of the action or cause is, when the action or cause is iudged of God to be good and iust. Now Dauid in this Psalme, speaketh onely of the righteousnesse of the action, or innocencie of his cause, in that hee was falslie charged to haue sought the kingdome. In like manner it is said of Phineas, Psalm. 166. 31. that his fact in killing Zimri and Cos∣bie, was imputed to him for righteousnesse: not because it was a satisfaction to the lawe, the rigour whereof could not be fulfilled in that one worke, but because God accepted of it as a iust worke, and as a token of his righteousnes and zeale for Gods glorie. Obiect. II. The Scripture saith in sundrie places, that men are blessed which doe good workes. Psal. 119. 1. Blessed is the man that is vpright in heart, and walketh in the law of the Lord. Ans. The man is bles∣sed that endeauoureth to keepe Gods commaunde∣ments. Yet is he not blessed simply, because he doth so; but because he is in Christ, by whom he doth so: and his obedience to the lawe of God is a signe thereof. Obiect. III. When man confesseth his sinnes and humbleth himselfe by prayer and fasting, Gods wrath is pacified and staied: therefore prayer and fasting are causes of iustification before God. Answ. Indeed men that truly humble themselues by prayer and fasting, doe appease the wrath of God: yet not
properly by these actions, but by their faith expres∣sed and testified in them, whereby they apprehend that which appeaseth Gods wrath, euen the merites of Christ in whom the Father is well pleased: and for whose sake alone he is well pleased with vs. Obiect. IV. Sundrie persons in Scriptures are com∣mended for perfection: as Noe, and Abraham, Za∣charie, and Elizabeth: and Christ biddeth vs all bee perfect: and where there is any perfection of works, there also workes may iustifie. Answ. There bee two kinds of perfection: perfection in parts, and perfection in degrees. Perfection in parts is, when beeing regenerate, and hauing the seedes of all ne∣cessarie vertues, we endeauour accordingly to obey God, not in some few, but in all and euery part of the law: as Iosias turned vnto God according to all the law of Moses. Perfection in degree is, when a man keepeth euery commandement of God, and that ac∣cording to the very rigor therof, in ye highest degree. Now then whereas we are commaunded to be per∣fected, and haue examples of the same perfection in Scripture: both commaundements and examples must be vnderstood of perfection in partes, and not of perfection in degrees, which cannot bee attained vnto in this life; though we for our parts, must dailie striue to come as neare vnto it, as possibly we can. Obiect. V. 2. Cor. 4. 17. Our momentarie afflictions worke vnto vs a greater measure of glorie: now if afflicti∣ons worke our saluation, then workes also doe the same. Answ. Afflictions work saluation, not as causes procuring it, but as a meanes directing vs thereto. And thus alwaies must we esteeme of workes, in the
matter of our saluation, as of a certaine way, or a marke therein, directing vs to glorie, not causing and procuring it: as Bernard saith, they are via regni, non Lib. de grat.  lib. arb. causa regnandi: The way to the kingdome, not the cause of raigning there. Obiect. VI. Wee are iustified by the same thing whereby we are iudged: but we are iudged by our good workes: therefore iustified also. Answ. The pro∣position is false: for iudgement is an act of God, de∣claring a man to be iust that is alreadie iust: and iu∣stification is an other act of God, whereby hee ma∣keth him to bee iust, that is by nature vniust. And therefore in equitie the last iudgement is to proceed by workes; because they are the fittest meanes to make triall of euery mans cause, and serue fitly to declare whom God hath iustified in this life. Obiect. VII. Wicked men are condemned for e∣uill workes: therefore righteous men are iustified by good workes. Answ. The reason holdeth not: for there is great difference betweene euill and good workes. An euill worke is perfectly euill, and so de∣serueth damnation: but there is no good worke of any man that is perfectly good: and therefore can∣not iustifie. Obiect. VIII. To beleeue in Christ is a worke, and by it we are iustified: and if one worke doe iusti∣fie, why may we not be iustified by all the workes of the law. Answ. Faith must be considered two waies: first, as a worke, qualitie, or vertue: secondly, as an Instrument, or an hand reaching out it selfe to re∣ceiue Christs merit. And wee are iustified by faith, not as it is a worke, vertue, or qualitie; but as it is an
instrument to receiue and apply that thing whereby wee are iustified. And therefore it is a figuratiue speech to say, We are iustified by faith. Faith conside∣red by it selfe maketh no man righteous; neither doth the action of faith, which is to apprehend, iusti∣fie: but the obiect of faith, which is Christs obedi∣ence apprehended. These are the principall reasons commonly vsed: which as wee see, are of no moment. To conclude therefore, we hold, that workes concurre to iustifica∣tion, and that wee are iustified thereby as by signes and effects, not as causes: for both the beginning, middle, and accomplishment of our iustification is onely in Christ: and hereupon Iohn saith, If any man (beeing alreadie iustified) sinne wee haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christ, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes. And to make our good workes meanes or causes of our iustification, is to make euery man a Sauiour to himselfe. The obiections which M. Perkins makes for vs in this Article: doe belong either to the question of merits, or of the possibility of fulfilling D. B. P. Pag. 200. This is but a dece to sft off the ansve∣ring of them.  the law, or to the perfection of our iustice: and therefore I remitte them to those places: and will handle the two latter points, before I come to that of mrits. You are still the same man; shifting off that to which you haue no answere readie. If you say any thing to these obie∣ctions afterward, I will referre the reader to it by A. B. C. WHETHER IT BE POSSIBLE FOR a man in grace, to fulfill Gods lawe. MAster Perkins argueth, that it is vnpossible. First, for that Paule tooke it for his ground, that the law could not be fulfilled. Admitte it D. B. P. Pag. 95. Gal. 5. These obiecti∣ons he picketh out of other places here and there. Rom 8.  were so. I then would answere, that he meant, that a man helped onely with the knowledge of the law, cannot fulfill the law: but by the ayde of Gods grace, he might be able to doe it. Which I gather out of S. Paule,
where he saith, That, that vvhich was impossible to the lavv, is made by the grace of Christ possible. Your answere is insufficient. For the g Apostle speaketh not of any strength to be had by the knowledge of the law, (which no reasonable man euer lookt for) but denieth abi∣litie to the Galathians, who would haue ioyned faith and works together to iustification. That the Rom. 8. 3 Apostle saith is this; That the law, which promiseth euerlasting life to them that keepe it, could not bestow it vpon vs, because wee were vnable to performe the condition: but God hath prepared that for vs, in sending his Sonne to be a sacrifice for sinne, that we might ob∣taine that, which by the righteousnes of the law was to be had, if we could haue fulfilled it; which notwithstanding they onely at∣taine to that walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit. 2. Obiect. The liues and vvorkes of most righteous men, are imperfect and stained vvith sinne; They are not iustified by their vvorkes.  ergo quid? Of this, there shall be a seuerall Article. All this is but trifling, to set down reasons as you list, and then to answere to them. You are too wise to tie any knots, but those you see how to vntie. The conclusion you seeke for, is, Therefore they cannot be iustified by their workes. 3 Obiect. Our knovvledge is imperfect, and therefore our faith, repen∣tance, and sanctification is answerable. I would to God all our works were answerable to our knowledge, then would they be much more perfect then they are, but this Argument is also impertinent, and doth rather This is such a possibility as neuer had e∣uent. proue it possible to fulfill the law, because it is possible to know all the law: Then if our workes be answerable to our knowledge: we may also fulfill it. It asketh better proofe than your word, that it is possible to know all the law; when Psal. 119. 12. 18. 19. 33. 34. Dauid confesseth himselfe so short of that knowledge. And yet a man may know more than he can doe. Our consequence is good, yours naught. 4 Obiect. A man regenerate, is partly flesh, and partly spirit, and there∣fore  Rom. 8. 13. his best vvorkes, are partly from the flesh. Not so, if we mortifie the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, as the Apostle exhorteth. But these trifling arguments belong rather vnto the next question. If we could mortifie them wholy, to which the Rom. 8. 13. Col. 3. 5. Apostle exhorteth, they should not be at all of the flesh. But since that in this life is impossible, all our workes sauour of the flesh.
I will helpe M. Perkins to some better, that the matter may be more throughly examined. Why goe yee about to put a yoke vpon the Disciples  Rom. 8. 13. neckes, vvhich neither vve, nor our Fathers vvere able to beare? these words were spoken of the law of Moses: therefore we were not able to fulfill it. I answere first, that, that law could not be fulfilled by the onely helpe of the same law, without the further ayde of Gods grace. Secondly, that it was so burdensome and comberous, by reason of the multitude of their Sacrifices, Sacraments, and Ceremonies, that it could hardly be kept with the helpe of ordinary grace: and in that sense, it is said to be such a yoke, as we were not able to beare. Because things very hard to be done, are now and then, called impossible. Let vs see your arguments, in comparison whereof Ma∣ster Perkins are trifles. Belike in your iudgement, a little helpe would haue serued: but it stands you vpon to shew, that wee receiue as much in this life, as is sufficient for that purpose. Of all parts of the law, the sacrifices, Sacraments, and Ceremonies had least need of grace to the keeping of them: and therfore that is not the reason why it was a bur∣then. But this is spoken also of the Morall law; to Gal. 5. 3. the kee∣ping whereof circumcision bindes. By such a distinction a∣ny slight thing may to some man be impossible. Now that Josue, Dauid, Josias, Zachary, Elizabeth, and many others, did fulfill all the law, is recorded in holy Scripture: Wherefore it is most D. B. P. Ios. 11. 3. Reg. 14. Act. 13. 4. Reg. 23. Luke 1.  manifest, that it might be kept. They fulfilled the law (as In his an∣svvere to the 4. Obiection. Master Perkins hath truly an∣swered you) in respect of their sincere endeuour, not in some, but in all knowne points of Gods commandements; yet faild they in some now and then. That commendation of Ios. 11. 15. Iosua, is onely in that point of rooting out the Heathen; wherein he also faulted not a little, Ios. 9. 14. 15. by making peace with the Gibeonits, before he had asked counsell of God. How 2. Sam. 12. 9. & 13. 39. & 24. 10. often and grieuously Dauid sinned, I had rather haue the Scripture speake, than my selfe out of it. 2. Chro. 35. 22. Iosiah is reproo∣ued for fighting against Pharao Necho, and chasticed for it with losse both of victorie and life. Luk. 1. 20. Rom. 7. Zachary is conuicted of sinne, and striken with dumnes, for not beleeuing the An∣gell: and yet in all probabilitie he was as holie as his wife Elizabeth, both truly, but not perfectly righteous. To vvill is in mee, but I finde not hovv to performe: If Saint Paul
could not performe that which he would, how can others? Ans. He speakes there of auoyding all euill motions, and temptati∣ons, which he would willingly haue done, but he could not: Marry he could wel by the assistance of Gods grace, subdue those prouocations to sinne, and make them occasions of vertue: and consequently, keepe all the commandements, not suffering those passions to leade him to the breach of any one of them. Those very motions were no other than sinnes, arising from his naturall corruption, and preuailing with him so farre, Rom. 7. 23. that they ouercame him sometimes, and led him captiue. The like answere we make vnto that obiection, that one of the ten commandements forbids vs to couet our neighbours goods, his wife, or seruants, which as they say is impossible but we hold, that it may be well done, vnderstanding the commaundement rightly, which prohibiteth not to haue euill motions of couetousnes and lecherie: but to yeeld our consent vnto them. Now it is so possible for a man by Gods grace to re∣fraine Libr. 10. conf. cap. 7. his consent from such wicked temptations, that S. Augustine thin∣keth it may be done of a mortified vertuous man, euen when he is a sleepe. And restifieth of himselfe, that waking he performed it. If this be the meaning of it, what is it but a needlesse re∣petition of that which was before forbidden? For who knoweth not, Math. 5. 28. that consent to those sinnes was condem∣ned in the 7. and 8. Commandements? Besides, the Apostle might know by nature, that consent to lust was sinne: but the true meaning of the commandement Rom. 7. 7. he knew not, but by the law; so that withholding consent from these mo∣tions is not enough to free vs from sinning by them: and yet perhaps that would not seeme so easie, if wee did not flatter our selues now and then. The quotation out of Au∣stin is false, and being of no great moment, I passe it ouer. VVe doe all offend in many things. And if vve say vve haue no sinne, we  Iac. 3. 2. 1. Ioan. 1. deceiue our selues. But if we could obserue all the law, we should offend in nothing, nor haue any sinne. ergo. Ans. I graunt that we offend in many things: not because it is not possible to keepe them, but for that we are fraile, and easily ledde by the craft of the Diuell into many offences which we might auoide, if vve were so warie and watchfull as we ought to be: againe, although we can∣not keepe our selues from veniall offences, yet may we fulfill the lavv, which is not transgressed and broken, vnlesse we committe some mortall sinnes. For veniall sinnes, either for the smalnesse of the matter, or want of consideration, are not so opposite to the law, as that they violate the
reason, and purport of it, although they be somewhat disagreeing vvith it. But of this matter more fully in some other place. It is an idle speculation to imagine a Christian, as Tully doth an Orator, and Castiglio a Courtier. And what else is he, whom in this answere you fancie? Such an one since the fall of Adam neuer was, not in this world euer shall be. Doe you not see your selfe what pitifull shifts these be? Veniall sinnes disagree with the law, but they do not violate the purport and reason of it. Are they not against the purenes of Gods image, in which we were created? are they not in a naturall man damnable? Our obedience is to be squared according to the commandement of God: neither haue we any warrant from him to excuse our selues by the con∣ceited reason, and I know not what purport of the law. For my part, though I acknowledge a great difference in de∣grees of sinnes, yet I see little reason why it should not be as mortall a sinne, to be led away by carelesnes to the com∣mitting of those things which we might easily auoide, as af∣ter a long and tedious fight, to be led captiue by the vio∣lence of some mightie temptation. For this striuing argueth a desire to please and serue God: but that needlesse sinning shewes either presumption, or want of ordinarie regard. Lastly, it may be obiected that the way to heauen is straite, and the gate narrow: which is so true, that it seemeth impossible to be kept by flesh and blood: but that which is impossible to men of themselues, is made possible, and easie too, by the grace of God. Not euery thing: for there are many impossible to man, that are neuer made possible and easie by the grace of God. So farre as it pleaseth God to make things possible, so farre they are made possible. But this possibilitie is not commu∣nicated to any, the examples of the most righteous doe make it more than manifest. Which made S. Paul to say, I can doe all things in him, that strengtheneth and comforteth me. Philip. 4. He that confesseth he Rom. 7 19. cannot doe that good he would, sheweth plainly that hilip. 4. 13. God doth not enable him to all things: which in this place are to be restrained according to the text: I can doe all things, that is (saith Lyra ad Phil. 4. 13. your glosse) I
can vse all fortunes and estates well. So doe Theodoret. & Oecumeni∣us ad hunc lo∣cum. Theodoret and Oecumenius take it. So doe Lombard. Thomas Ca∣ietan. Psal. 118. other of your Interpreters re∣straine it; shewing that he meaneth not, he can do all things; but that he could not doe all those things, that is, be content with any estate, were it not for the strength and comfort hee hath from Christ. And the Prophet Dauid, after thou O Lord hadest dilated my hart (and with thy grace let it at liberty) I did runne the waes of thy commaunde∣ments: that is, I did readily, and willingly performe them. Of the louing of God with all our hart, &c. shall be treated in the question of the per∣fection of iustice. The Prophet Dauid ranne indeed, and that an excellent race; but not without stumbling, staying, and turning a little out of the way now and then: as 2. Sam. 24. 1. 2.  You ouervvee∣ned your strength as your answeres shew. Rom. 8. the last action in his health declareth. Hauing now confuted all that is commonly proposed to proue the impossibility of keeping Gods commandements, let vs now see what we can say in proofe of the possibility of it: First, S. Paul is very plaine for it, saying. That which vvas impossible to the lavv, in that it is weakned by the flesh, God sending his Sonne in the similitude of flesh, of sinne, damned sinne in the flesh, that the iustification of the lavv might be fulfilled in vs, vvho vvalke not according to the flesh, but according vnto the spirit. See how formally he teacheth, that Christ dying to redeeme vs from sinne, purchased vs grace to fulfill the law, which before was impossible vnto our weake flesh. I shewed the true meaning of Rom. 8. 3. the place before, that God by his Sonne hath iustified vs, which the law could not doe: because we were vnable to keepe it. Now the end of this iustification is, that wee should walke after the spirit, whereby we fulfill the law; though not perfectly, yet per∣forming the same duties the law requires, but not in the same measure. Againe, how farre S. Iohn was from that opinion, of thinking Gods  Cap. 5. Matth. 11. commandements to be impossible, may appeare by that Epistle: And his commandements be not heauy. Which is takē out of our Sauiours own words. My yoke is sweet, and my burthen is light. The reason of this is, that although to our corrupt frailtie, they be very heauy: Yet when the vertue of charity is powred into our harts by the holy Ghost, then loe, doe we with delight fulfill them. For as the Apostle witnesseth. Charitie is the fulnes of the lavv. And, He that doth loue his neighbour, hath fulfil∣led Rom. 13. Math. 22. the lavv: Which Christ himselfe teacheth, when he affirmeth, That the vvhole lavv, and Prophets depend vpon these tvvo commandements, of
louing God, and our neighbour: Now both according vnto our opinion and the Protestants, a man regenerate and in the state of grace hath in him the vertue of Charitie: we hold it to be the principall part of inhe∣rent iustice: they say that their iustifying faith can neuer be seperated from it: So that a righteous man, being also indued with charity, is able thereby to fulfill the whole law. You haue giuen the true meaning of 1. Ioh. 5. 3. S. Iohn: for there∣fore are Gods Commandements said not to be heauie, be∣cause our loue to God, who hath giuen vs the assurance of his loue to vs in Iesus Christ, maketh vs goe willingly and cheerefully about them; for all those incumbrances wee finde by the world, the flesh and the diuell. And in that respect we are said to fulfill the Rom. 13. 13. law by cha∣ritie; because the obedience we performe (weake and slen∣der though it be) proceedeth from the loue of God, and of our neighbour; which is the very summe of the law, Math. 22. 40. vpon which both the law and the Prophets depend. And all this prooueth not perfect, but onely true obedience; which all that are iustified performe, howsoeuer they faile much (in the particulars) of that measure the law exacteth. Let vs adioyne vnto these Authorities of holy write, the testimony of  Serm in illud, Attende tibi. De nat. & gra. cap. 69. one auncient Father or two, S. Basil affirmeth, That it is impious and vn∣godly, to say that the commandements of the spirit be vnpossible. S. Augustine defineth, That vve must beleeue firmely, that God being iust and good, could not command things that be impossible for vs to fulfill: The reason may be, that it is the part of a tyrant, & no true law-maker, to commaund his subiects to doe that vnder paine of death, which he knowes them no way able to performe: For those were not to be called lawes, (which are to direct men, to that which is iust) but snares to catch the most diligent in, and to binde them vp to most assured per∣dition. The sayings of the Fathers are to be vnderstood (accor∣ding to the Scriptures) of possibilitie to performe true obe∣dience, which without grace no man can doe; not of perfect keeping the law, which yet by our creation wee were suffi∣ciently enabled to performe. So that God not onely may not, but reasonably cannot be suspected of iniustice, if hee require that at our hands, which he made vs able to doe, as with Austin we confesse he did. Basil speaketh not of our abilitie to keepe the Comman∣dements,
but onely sheweth, that the charge of looking to our selues belongeth to the contemplation of the minde, not to the eyes of the bodie: because if it did, it were giuen in vaine; no man being able to see the hinder parts of his bodie, nor his face, nor his inwards. Therefore the holie Ghost, who doth not command things vtterly impossible, will haue this precept of looking to our selues to be vnder∣stood of the searching of our heart, not of the viewing of our bodie. Wherefore it was afterward decreed in an approued Councell of A∣rausican, D. B. P. 2. Can. vlt. The Arausican Councell you should say, or the Councell of Orenge. Math. 19.  as an article of faith in these words. This also vve beleeue accor∣ding to the Catholike faith, that all men baptized by grace there receiued, vvith the helpe and cooperation of Christ, both can, and ought to keepe and fulfill those things, vvhich belong to saluation. The principall whereof are after our Sauiours owne determination to keepe the commandements. If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commandements. He may doe them without doubt, as I haue often said, truly, and acceptably to God; yet not so fully as he ought, because our corruption will not suffer vs to Si fideliter laborare vo∣luerint. labour faith∣fully without intermission or infirmitie; which the Coun∣cill requireth, and you aduisedly leaue out. Math. 19. 17. That speech of our Sauiour, is not the voyce of the Gospell (though that al∣so requires obedience, and allowes a reward for it) but of the law; fit to be vttered to him that came to our Sauiour full fraught with the conceit of his owne righteousnes, not so much with a desire to learne of him (saith Hieron. apud Thomam in Catena. ad Math. 19. Hierome) as to trie his skill. And this our Sauiour spake of the iustifica∣tion, which is of the law without faith. As it appeareth by Beda, Lyra, Glossa Ordi∣naria, Rem∣gius ibi. Beda, Lyra, the ordinarie glosse, and Remigius. THAT GOOD WORKS BE NOT stained with sinne. NOw that iust mens workes be not sinnes: which I proue first, by some workes of that patterne of patience, Iob. Of whom it is written, that notwithstanding all the Diuels power and craft in tempting of him, He continued still a single harted, and an vpright man, departing from euill, Cap. 2. and preseruing his innocency. If he continued an innocent, he sinned not: Againe, if in all these instigations to impatience, he remained patient: these his workes were perfect. For S. Iames saith, Esteeme it my brethren, Cap. 1.
all ioy, vvhen you shall fall into diuers temptations: knovving that the pro∣bation of your faith, vvorketh patience: And let patience haue a perfect vvorke, that you may be perfect and entire, fayling in nothing. This, as the last point, is a matter belike that this man thinkes himselfe well prepared for: and therefore he runnes a course of his own in them, hauing no such occasion giuen him by Master Perkins; yet let vs follow him step by step. By Iobs innocencie continued, nothing else is meant but that he had not (as Satan had affirmed he would) vttered any blasphemie against God. But by this it cannot be prooued, that there was no taint of sinne in his patience. As for his sinceritie and vprightnes, they are vertues that alwaies ac∣companie true Christians, and without which all is hypo∣crisie. That perfection, or perfect worke, is the proouing that his faith is perfect, because it ouercommeth, as your Glossa Or∣din. & Lyra ad lac. 1. glosse expounds it; and he is counted a perfect man, but not sim∣ply without any spot in this patience. 2 King Dauid thus by the inspiration of the holy Ghost speaketh of himselfe: Thou hast (O Lord) prooued my heart, thou hast visited me in  Psal. 16. the night, thou hast tried me in fire, and there vvas no iniquity found in me. It must needs then be granted, that some of his workes at least were free from all sinnes and iniquitie. And that the most of them were such, if you heare the holy Ghost testifying it, I hope you vvill beleeue it: read then, vvhere it is of record, That Dauid did that, vvhich vvas right in the sight of our Lord (and not only in the sight of men) and turned from no∣thing 3. Reg. 15. that he commaunded him, all the daies of his life, except only the mat∣ter of Vrias the Hethite. Dauid, in that place, doth not cleare himselfe of all sinne, but only protesteth his innocency, in respect of any hurt in∣tended by him against Saul, and the rest of his persecutors. Dauid meaneth not (saith Lyra ad Psal. 17. Lyra) to say, that he is free from all sin, but that he had committed no euill against Saul, for which he should persecute him. It was one thing for Dauids workes to be righteous in Gods sight, an other thing for them to be perfect. The for∣mer we graunt, the later you can no way proue. That com∣mendation the 1 Reg. 15. 5. holy Ghost giues to his works, must needs be spoken in comparison (as Lyra ibi. Lyra affirmeth) because it is
certaine, he 2. Sam. 10. 29. wronged Mephthosheth, and 2. Sam. 24. . 2. numbred the people; but these sins were not comparable to that against Vrah, especially for the dishonouring of God by it, in the account of the heathen; This deed (saith 2. Sam. 2. . Nathan) hath cau∣sed the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. 3 The Apostle affirmeth, That some men doe build vpon the only foun∣dation  1. Cor. 3. Christ Iesus, gold, siluer, and pretious stones: that is, being choyce members of Christs Catholike Church, doe many perfect good vvorks, such as being trd in the fornace of Gods iudgement, vvill suffer no losse or detriment, as he there saith expresly: Wherfore they must needs be pure, and free from all drosse of sinne, othervvise hauing been so pro∣ued in fire, it vvould haue been found out. The Apostle doth not say so, but this onely, that if 1. Cor. 3, 1. any man build on this foundation, gold, siluer, precious stones, timber, hay, or stubble, euery mans worke shall be made manifest. But put case he had said so; he speaketh of doctrine, built vpon See 12. Art. par. 1. art. 4. 1. the true foundation, as the whole allegory proues: especial∣ly vers. 10. As a skilfull master builder, I haue laid the founda∣tion, Vers. 10. and an other builds vpon it; now in good works, one man layeth not the foundation, and another buildeth vpon it, but euery man begins and ends his owne worke himselfe. Farther, vers. 9. The Ministers are said to be Gods labourers. Vers. 9. the people (not euery mans worke) Gods husbandrie and Gods building: because he builds them vp by their labour. This place is applied by you Papists to proue Purgatory, euen by Bellarm. d Purgat. Bellarmine himself; but with what successe, let any man iudge, that either reads our answeres to him, or considers the text. 4 Many vvorkes of righteous men please God. Make your bodies a  Rom. 12. 1. Pet. 2. Philip. 4. quicke sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God: the same offering spirituall sa∣crifices acceptable to God: And S. Paul calleth almes bestovved on him in prison, an acceptable sacrifice of svveet sauour, and pleasing God. But no∣thing infected vvith sinne (all vvhich he hateth deadly) can please God and be acceptable in his fight: God of his mercy through Christ doth pardon sinne, or as the Protestants speake, not impure it to the person: but to say that a sinful vvorke is of svveet sauour before him, and a grate∣full sacrifice to him, vvere blasphemie: vvherefore vve must needs con∣fesse, that such vvorks vvich so vvell pleased him, vvere not defiled vvith any kind of sinne.
Your Reason is thus framed. No workes infected with sinne please God. Many workes of righteous men please God. Therefore many workes of righteous men are not infe∣cted with sinne. I graunt your assumption; though the proofe of it, Rom. 12. 1. 2 by the first testimony, is insufficient: for it doth not follow that we can do this or that, because we are exhorted to the doing of it. Your proposition I deny; no sin can please God, nor a∣ny action, as it is sinfull; but God both can, and doth par∣don the faultines of his childrens workes, and accept the worke it selfe in Christ, yea and reward it too with increase of glorie. Finally, many vvorkes in holy vvrite be called good, as, That they may see your good works: to be rich in good vvorks: VVe are created in Christ  Math. 5. 1. Tim. 6. Ephes. 2. Iesus to good vvorkes: but they could not truly be called good vvorkes, if they vvere infected vvith sin. For according to the iudgement of all lear∣ned Diuines, it can be no good vvorke, that fayleth either in substance, or circumstance, that hath any one fault in it: For, Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu. Wherefore vve must either say, that the holy Ghost calleth euill good, vvhich vvere blasphemy, or else acknovv∣ledge, that there be many good vvorkes free from all infection of sinne. No workes infected with sinne can be truly called good. Many workes are called good in Scripture. Therefore many workes are not infected with sinne. Here is the same fault againe. Your assumption is true, but your proofe naught. For the places you alleage, proue no more, but that the works which we should do, are good; not that they are good as we doe them. Your proposition is false, as the other was. For the works enioyned by God are very good, but they haue some allay, and abasement by our doing of them; which argueth not, that they are not truely, but that they are not perfectly good. In lieu of the manifold testimonies of Antiquitie, which doth nothing more then recommend good workes, and paint out the excellency of them: I will set downe one passage of S. Augustine wherein this verie
controuersie is distinctly declared, and determined: thus he beginneth: Lib. 3. cont. duas epist. Pelag. cap. 7. The iustice (through vvhich the iust man liueth by faith) because it is giuen to man by the spirit of grace is true iustice: the vvhich although it be vvor∣thilie called in some men perfect, according to the capacity of this life, yet it is but small in comparison of that greater, vvhich man made equall to An∣gels shall receiue. VVhich (heauenly iustice) he, that had not as yet, saide himselfe to be perfect, in regard of that iustice that vvas in him; and also imperfect, if it be compared to that vvhich he vvanted. But certainely this lesser iustice, or righteousnes, breedeth, and bringeth forth merits, and that greater, is the revvard thereof. VVherefore he that pursueth not this, shall not obtaine that: Hitherto S. Augustine. Note first, that he defineth the iustice which we haue in this life, to be true iustice, which is pure from all iniustice and iniquitie: Then, that it is also perfect, not fayling in any dutie, which we be bound to performe. Lastly, that it bringeth forth good workes, such as merit life euerlasting. True it is also, that this iu∣stice although perfect in it self, so farre as mans capacity in this life doth permit: yet being compared vnto the state of iustice which is in hea∣uen, it may be called imperfect, not that this is not sufficient to defend vs from all formall transgression of Gods law: but because it keepeth not vs sometimes from veniall sinne: and hath not such a high degree of perfection as that hath. You may wel think we make no small account of works, that make them the way to heauen, that require them, as ne∣cessary of euery man that looketh to be saued, that allow them no small reward in heauen; that ground part of our assurance of saluation vpon them. First, giue me leaue to obserue by the way, that the life Aug. cont 2. Epist. Pe∣lag. lib. 3. c. 7. Austin heare speaketh of, is not iustification, but holines of conuersation. Then, to your first note, the righteousnesse, we haue in this life, is true righteousnes, in regard of the au∣thor thereof the spirit of God, who cannot deceiue, nor be deceiued. It is also called perfect, in some men, not (as you say, without Austins authoritie) because it faileth not in any dutie, which we are bound to performe, but in comparison of the imperfection of it in other men, and the vncapablenes that by our corruption, is in euery one of vs. By merits he meaneth good workes; as your selfe also expound them, and as the manner of speech, that the aunci∣ent Church vsed, requireth: the reason whereof is, not be∣cause they deserue euerlasting life (Augustine hath no such
word) but because they shall haue a reward; though not vp∣on desert, but fauour. It cannot be called imperfect, because it doth not keepe vs from sinning; If it be true, that it is sufficient to keepe vs from all formall transgression of Gods law: else we must say, that Adams righteousnes was imperfect; yea, it may well be held; That the Angels now, and we hereafter in hea∣uen, shall be kept from sinning, not by any strength of in∣herent righteousnes, but by the speciall grace of God, con∣tinually vpholding vs. That it may be proper to God, that possiblie he cannot sinne, by reason of goodnesse resting in him (that I may so speake) which cannot be lesse then infi∣nite. And sure it is to me somewhat strange, that this perfe∣ction of righteousnes, should be able to keepe vs free from deadly sinnes (as you call them) and not much more easily preserue vs from veniall. Saint Augustine hath the like discourse, vvhere he saith directly, that it appertaines to the lesser iustice of this life, not to sinne. So that vve  De spirit. & lit. vlt. cap. haue out of this oracle of Antiquitie: that many works of a iust man are without sinne. The other place of Aug. de spi∣rit. & litera cap. vlt. Austin rather maketh against you. For if it belong to this lesse righteousnes not to sin, and (for al that measure of it, we haue) we are not kept from sinning; it may seeme that this righteousnes is not perfect. So haue you nothing out of this register of Antiquity, to proue, that any workes of a iust man are without sinne. To these reasons taken partly out of the Scriptures, and partly out of the record of Antiquitie, let vs ioyne one or tvvo dravvne from the ab∣surdity of our aduersaries doctrine, vvhich teacheth euery good vvorke of the righteous man to be infected vvith mortall sinne: Which being granted, it vvould follovv necessarily, that no good vvorke in the vvorld, vvere to be done vnder paine of damnation: thus: No mortall sinne is to be done vnder paine of damnation: for the vvages of sinne is death: but all Rom. 6. A plaine para∣logisme, the Assumption and conclusion being faulty.  good vvorkes are stained vvith mortall sinne. ergo, no good vvorke is to be done vnder paine of damnation. Your Syllogisme is naught: because it hath foure termes as they are called, your assumption not being taken out of your proposition, nor your conclusion sutable to the pre∣misses: it should be thus framed.
See 12 Art. par. . art. 2 No mortall sin is to be done, vnder paine of damnation: But all good workes are mortall sinnes. Therefore no good workes are to be dono, vnder paine of damnation. Now the syllogisme is true, but the assumption euident∣ly false. You chose craftily, rather no make a false syllogisme, which you thought euery one could not spie, then a false as∣sumption, manifest to the eyes of the simplest: If you should alter the proposition, that would be as apparantly false, as the assumption is: Nothing stained with mortall sin is to be done vnder paine of damnation. It follovveth secondly; that euery man is bound to sinne deadly. For al men are bound to performe the duties of the first & second table: but euery performance of any dutie is necessarily linked vvith some mortall sin: therefore euery man is bound to commit many mortall sinnes: and consequently to be damned. These are holy and comfortable conclusi∣ons, yet inseperable companions, if not svvorne brethren of the Prote∣stants doctrine. Novv let vs heare vvhat Arguments they bring against this Catholike verity. Your other Reason is thus to be framed. He that is bound to performe the duties of the first and se∣cond table, is bound to commit many mortall sinnes. But euery man is bound to performe all such duties: Therefore euery man is bound to commit many mortall sinnes. The proposition is thus proued, according to your colle∣ction. If the performance of such duties be neerely linked with mortall sinne, then he that is bound to performe such du∣ties, is bound to commit many mortall sinnes. But the performance of such duties (as the Protestants say) is neerely linckt with mortall sinne. Therfore he that is bound to performe such duties is bound to commit many mortall sinnes. I deny the consequence of your proposition. This onely followeth vpon the antecedent, that he, which is bound to performe such duties, is bound to performe that, which is neerely linckt with some mortall sinne: And this we grant
to be true; we are bound to the performance of those du∣ties, in the doing whereof, by our corruption, there will be some sinne annexed, which in it owne nature is deadly. First they alleadge these vvords, Enter not O Lord, into iudgment with thy seruant, because no liuing creature shall be iustified in thy sight. If none  Psal. 141. can be iustified before God, it seemes that none of their vvorkes are iust in his sight. Ans. There are tvvo common expositions of this place, among the VVhat if there be a third that maketh for it.  auncient Fathers: both true, but farre from the Protestants purpose. The commonnesse of an exposition is a presumption, but not a proofe of the truth thereof: for all these two, there may be a third of more certainty. The former is S. Augustines, S. Hieromes, S. Gregories in his Com∣mentaries vpon that place: who say, that no creature ordinarily liueth  De perfect. iu∣stitiae. Epist. ad Ce∣siph. without many veniall sinnes, for the which in iustice they may be pu∣nished sharpely, either in this life, or else afterward in Purgatory. Wher∣fore the best men do very prouidently pray vnto God, not to deale with them according vnto their deserts: for if he should so doe, they cannot be iustified and cleared from many veniall faults. And therefore they must all craue pardon for these faults, or else endure Gods iudgements for them, before they can attaine vnto the reward of their good deeds. Aug. de per∣fect. iustitiae. Austin hath not a word, in that place, of any veniall sinne, but deliuereth the latter exposition, of comparison with Gods righteousnes. Iudge me not (saith Austin) accor∣ding to thee, who art without sinne, and that, which shall be in the world to come. That, which he saith shall not be iustified, he re∣ferres to that perfection of righteousnes which is not in this life. Neither saith Hieron. epist. ad Ctesip. Ierome any such thing; but speaketh ab∣solutely of all sinne, as the other places alledged by him to the same purpose, manifestly shew. Gal. 3. 22. God hath shut vp all vn∣der sinne. Rom. 3. 233. All haue sinned; 1. Reg. 8. 46. If they sin against thee; for there is no man that sinneth not, &c. Neither doth Gregor. ad Psalm. 141. Gregory make that interpretation, vnlesse we shall say, that there are no sinnes in the heart but veniall. Many (saith he) though Delinquunt in opere. they sinne not in deed, yet slip now and then by vaine and peruerse thoughts. After he concludes thus: Therefore he shall not be iustified in Gods sight that Corde de∣linquit. sinnes in heart, vpon which God looketh. Where he vseth not the word
l slipping, but sinning, as before of the deed. Therfore this first exposition hath not so much as any one authoritie, truly al∣leaged, to countenance it selfe withall. The second exposition is more ordinarie, with all the best writers vp∣on  Lib. ad C∣sium cap. 10. Lib. 9. moral cap. 1. the Psalmes: as S. Hilary, S. Hierome, S. Arnobius, S , and others: Which is also S. Augustine, S. Gregorie. All these say, that mans iustice, in comparison of the iustice of God, will seeme to be no iustie at all: and so take these words, No creature, neither man nor Angell, shall be iustified in thy sight: that is, if his iustice appeare before thine, and be compared to it. for as the starres be bright in themselues, and sne also goodly in a cleare ight: yet in the presence of the glitt sunne beames, they appeare not at all: euen so mans iustice, although consi∣dered by it selfe, it be great and perfect in his kind, yet set in the sight and presence of Gods iustice, it vanisheth away, and is not to be seene. This exposition is taken out of Job, where he saith: I kno  it is Iob. 9. VVe take them in neither of these senses. euen so, that no man compared to God, shall be iustified. Take the words of the Psalme in whether sense you list (that either we haue many veall faults, for which we cannot be iustified in Gods sight, or else that in the sight of Gods most bright iustice, ours will not appeare at all) and it can∣not be thereof iustly concluded, that euery worke of the righteous man is stained with sin. And consequently, the place is not to purpose. Let vs see the other exposition; and first what Hilar. ad Psa. 141. Hilarie saith for it, who indeede applieth it to a comparison with Gods iustice, but not onely in degree of righteousnes. For he reciteth there diuers passions, of anger, griefe, lust, igno∣rance, &c. which are the cause why we cannot be iustified. Eras in Censur. Erasmus hath brought good reasons to prooue that Commentarie on the Psalmes to be none of Hieromes. I will adde one, which (I thinke) may put the matter out of que∣stion, that Hierome refuteth that interpretation, which this Papist would confirme by that place. They (Hieron. pl∣stola ad Cte∣siph. contra Pelagian. saith Hie∣rome) delude this testimonie (none liuing shall be iustified in thy sight) vnder a shew of godlinesse, by a new kinde of reasoning. For they say that none is perfect in comparison of God; as if the scrip∣ture had said thus. Here is your exposition denied to be the meaning of this scripture. What is then the meaning? When he saith (in thy sight) he will haue this vnderstood (Hieron. vbi supra. saith Hie∣rome) that euen those, which to men seeme holy, Scientiae & notitiae Dei▪ in Gods know∣ledge and approbation are not holy: for man looks vpon the face, but God lookes into the heart. Now if no man be righteous, when
he lookes into and considers the heart, whom the secrets of the heart doe not deceiue, it is manifestly shewed, that the heretikes doe not extoll men on high, but derogate from the power of God. Hierome then is so farre from bringing that interpretation for his owne, that he reiects and refutes it: and, that which is worth the obseruing, euen in Hieron. Epi∣stola ad Cre∣siph. that place which this Papist alleaged for his former exposition. It is no marueile if these men can prooue any thing by the Fathers. Arnobius indeed doth so interpret it. But if wee rest vpon authoritie, his bare exposition is not to ouerweigh Hieroms reason. Besides, he is farre from thinking a man righteous in such perfection, as you dreame of; as it is plaine by his for∣mer words. Who dares say to God (saith Arnobius ad Psal. 141. Arnobius) heare me in thy truth, and in thy righteousnes? for it is true and iust, that he which hath sinned, should be Acerrimè. most sharply punished. Vpon the beginning of the second verse he hath these words: It is thy righteousnes, that being Lord, thou shouldest Contemnas. think skorne to enter into iudgement with thy seruant. Euthym. ad Psal. 141. Euthymius denieth that a man can be iustified, if he be examined according to Gods Summam Iustitiam. perfect iustice. But he addes further: Or if we consider the benefits of God, or his commande∣ments. So that the righteous breake euen the Commande∣ments of God, and are vnrighteous. It is a needlesse matter to heape vp authorities, for the proofe of that whereof there is no question. Who doubts that both men and Angels, in comparison of Gods infinite perfection, are imperfectly righteous? And this is all Aug. contra Priscil. & Ori∣gen. Au∣stin saith. But how can this prooue, that the Psalme is to be vnderstood of mans righteousnes compared with Gods? This is to deceiue your reader with bare names of men, not to perswade him by the consent of the ancient. Neither doe you remember that Aug. ad Psal. 141. Austin, where purposely he expounds that Psalme, giues no such interpretation of it; but makes (in his sight) to be, as it is indeed, in his iudgement. Euery li∣uing man (saith Austin) may perhaps iustifie himselfe Coam se, non coam te. be∣fore himselfe, but not before thee. And afterward: Quantum∣libet ecus. How vp∣right soeuer I seeme to my selfe, thou bringest a rule out of thy
treasurie, thou laiest me to it, and I am found Prauus. euill. So that Austin vnderstands this place wholy as we doe. Greg. Moral. lib 9. cap. 1. Gregory is as truly alleaged as Austin, and as himselfe was before. For he doth not so much as allude to the Psalm: but onely say (according to that text of Iob. 9. . Iob, which he there expounds) that man, compared to God, cannot be counted righteous. That place of Iob hath the doctrine, which you would wring out of the Psalme: but where is the proofe, that be∣cause it is there, therfore also it is here? But let me also shew, that this which you rest vpon, cannot bee the meaning of Psal. 142. 3 the Psalme. Which I take to be plaine; because if we vn∣derstand it so, it is no reason to moue God not to enter into iudgement. For what though no man bee so righteous as God? If he be so rigeteous, as God requires such a creature should be, it can neuer hurt him, though God enter into iudgement with him a thousand times. So the sentence should be vaine, there being no occasion of it. Now the conclusion wee make out of these and such like places, is, that no man should fancie to himselfe a possibilitie of kee∣ping Gods Commandements, when the holiest men that euer were, dare not stand before Gods iudgement seate, to giue account of those things they haue done since they were iustified, and (as the Papists say) receiued this grace. One other ordinary hackney of theirs, is that out of the Prophet. All  A leud meta∣phor. Esay. 64. It was the fault of your bad horsemanship. our righteousnes is as a menstruous or defiled cloath. The which I haue al∣ready ridde to death in the beginning of the question of iustification, whereit was alleadged: The answere is briefly, that the Prophet praying for the sinnes of the people, speaketh in the person of the sinfull. Such as the common sort of them were, who had more sins then good workes, and so their righteousnesse was like vnto a spotted and stained cloath. Now this disproueth not, but that their good workes although but few, yet were free for all sportes of iniquity: it only proueth, that with their few good, they had a great number of euill, which defiled their righte∣ousnes, and made it like a stained cloath. I will let passe your lewd allegorie, and your coleworts twice sod, referring the reader to my former answere. Only this I will adde, that the Prophet may well bee thought to refuse your exposition, because he speakes in the plurall.
Omnes iusti∣tiae nostrae.   All our righteousnesses, or rather, to make English of it, all our good deedes. 3 There is not a man, who doth not sinne: And, blessed is the man, whose sinnes be not imputed to him, And such like. I answere that the best men sinne venially, and are happy when those their sinnes be pardoned: but all this is cleane besides this question, where it is only enquired, vvhe∣ther the good workes that the iust doe, be free from sinne, and not whe∣ther they at other times doe sin, at the least venially. This is all, vvhich M. Perkins here and there obiecteth against this matter. Neither the former nor the latter can reasonably be ap∣plied to veniall sinne; that being . Reg. 8. 46. Salomons in his prayer, at the dedication of the Temple, praying for the people, in re∣gard of such sinnes as should prouoke God to deliuer them into their enemies hands: The other Psal 32. 2. Dauids, after those great sinnes of murther and adulterie. Of that idle distin∣ction of veniall sinne it is needlesse to say any thing, till it be better prooued. But because some others doe alleadge also, some darke places out of the Fathers, I thinke it not amisse, to solue them here together. S. Cyprian saith: That the beeiged mind of man, can hardly resist all as∣saults of the enemie: for when couetousnes is ouerthrowen, vp starts lechery and so forth. Ans. All this is true, that the life of man is a perpetuall warfare: yet man assisted with the grace of God, may performe it most valiantly, and neuer take any mortall wound of the enemies; although through his vvne tie he may be sometimes foyled. S. H.  affirmeth: That then vve are iust vvhen vve confesse our selues to be sinners. . 1. cap. Pelag. Ans. That all iust men confesse themselues to sinne venially: but neither of these places come neare the point in question, that not one good deede of the iust man, is without some spot or staine of sinne. S. Augustine hath these wordes: Most perfect charitie, which cannot be increased, is to be sound in no man in this life: and as long as it may bee Epist. 29. increased, that hich is lesse then it ought to be is faultie, of which fault it proceedeth, that there is no man vvho doth good, and doth not sinne. All this we graunt to be true: that no man hath so perfect charitie in this life, but that sometimes he doth lesse then he ought to doe: and conse∣quently doth notso well, but that now and then he sinneth at the least veniall, and that therefore the said holy Doctor had iust cause to say. Voe be to the laudable life of a man, if it be examined without mercie. All Lib. 9. confess. cap. 3. which notwithstanding iust men may out of that charity, which they haue in this life doe many good workes, which are pure from all sinne as hath beene prooued. They alleadge yet another plase out of S. Augu∣stine.
That belongeth vnto the perfection of a iust man, to know in truth his Lib. 3. con. dua Epist. Pelag. cap. 7. imperfection, and in humility to confesse it. True: that is as he teacheth else where. First, that the perfection of this life is imperfection, being compared with the perfection of the life to come. Againe, that the most perfect in this life, hath many imperfections, both of wit and will, and thereby many light faultes. Novv come vve vnto S. Gregory our blessed Apostle, out of vvhose Neuer called to any Apostle∣ship by Christ. Lib. 9. moral. cap. 1. svveete vvords ill vnderstood, they seeme to haue sucked this their poi∣son. He saith. The holy man Iob, because hee did see all the merit of our vertue to bee vice, if it bee straightly examined of the invvard iudge doth rightly adde, if I vvill contend vvith him, J cannot ansvvere him one for a thousand. I ansvvere that by our vertue in that place is to be vnderstood, that vertue vvhich vve haue of our ovvn strength, vvithout the aide of Gods grace vvhich vve acknovvledge to bee commonly infected vvith some vice: that S. Gregorie so tooke it, appeares by the vvordes, both going before and follovving: before he vvriteth thus. A man not compared to God, receiued iustice: but compared vnto him, he leeseth it. For vvhosoe∣uer compareth himselfe vnto the author of all good, leeseth that good vvhich he had receiued: for be that doth attribute the good vnto himselfe, doth fight against God, vvith his evvne gifts: And after thus. o contend vvith God, is not to giue to God the glorie of his vertue, but to take it to himselfe. And so all the merit of this our vertue, vvhich commeth not of God, but is attbuted vnto our selfe, as proceeding onely from our selues, is the very vice of pride and cannot be preiudiciall vnto true good vvorks, all vvhich vve acknovvlede to proceede principally from the grace of God, dvvelling in vs. He saith  ther vvith S. Augustine that in this life vve cannot attaine vnto  puritie, such as shall be in heauen: read the beging of his first and second booke o Morals, and there you shall find him commending Iob to the skyes, as a good and holy man, by his temptations not soyled, but much anced in vertue. These places, for ought I know, are of your owne deui∣sing, to be thus applied: and there fore I will neuer striue a∣bout them, though when occasion shal serue, it will appeare that your answers to Austins and Gregories testimonies, are but shifts. Novv before I depart from this large question of iustification, I vvill handle yet one other question, vvhich commonly ariseth about it: it is, WHETHER FAITH MAY BE without Charitie. I Prooe that it may so be: first out of these vvordes of our Sauiour, Many shall say vnto me in that day, Lord Lord, haue vve not propcied
in thy name, haue vve not cast out Diuels, haue vve not done many mira∣cles, to vvhom J will confesse, that I neuer knevve you, depart from mee, all Math. 7. yee that vvorke iniquitie. That these men beleeued in Christ, and per∣svvaded themselues assuredly to be of the elect appeareth, by their con∣fident The rich man in hell called Abraham fa∣ther. calling of him, Lord, Lord, and the rest that follovveth: Yet Christ Declareth manifestly that they vvanted charity, in saying that they vvere vvorkers of iniquitie. Your proofe that they had a iustifying faith, is too slen∣der. They called him Lord. What if they had called him Sauiour, must they needs therefore haue had saith? The Luk. 16. 24. rich man in hell calles vpon Abraham by the name of father; shall I conclude as you doe? 2. When the King went to see his guestes. He found there a man not attired in his wedding garment: and therefore commanded him to be cast  Math. 22. into vtter darknes. This man had faith, or else he had not been admit∣ted vnto that table which signifieth the Sacraments: yet wanted chari∣tie, which to be the wedding garment, beside: the euidence of the text is also prooued, where in expresse tearmes, The garments of Christs Spouse is declared to be the righteousnesse and good vvorkes of the Saintes. Apoc. 19. And that with great reason: for as S. Paul teacheth. Faith shall not re∣maine after this life: With what instrument then (trow you) will the 1. Cor. 13. Protestants lay hold on Christs righteousnesse? That charitie is that wedding garment, S. Hierome vpon the same place doth witnesse, saying: That it is the fulfilling of our Lords comman∣dements. And S. Gregore doth in expresse wordes define it. VVhat Hom. 38. in Euang. Can. 22. in Math. Tract. 20. in Math.  (saith he) must vve vnderstand by the vvedding garment, but charitie? So doe S. Hilarie, and Origen: and S. Chrysostome vpon that place. Parables are no further any proofes, than the meaning of them is certainly knowne: but all your expositions of this, are at least vncertaine. The table signifieth the Sacraments. What? Baptisme too, and your other fiue? or how many, and what Sacraments? Besides, your consequence is very feeble. Was no man euer admitted to the Sacraments, that made shew of faith, when indeed he had none? Your Glossa Or∣din. ad Mat. 22 ordinarie glosse expounds it of being in the Church: Chrysost. & Gregor. apud Thomam in atena ad Mat. 22. Chrysostome of the Scriptures; which sit at the table of the Scriptures: Gre∣gory of the Church; He commeth into the mariage (saith Gre∣gorie) but without a wedding garment; that hath faith in the Church, but not charitie. I might in like sort examine the rest of the parable, and finde great diuersities of opinions, as in such cases there must needs be. But to the poynt. First, I say,
many hypocrites are in the Church, that haue not so much as a perswasion of the truth of the Scripture, and so absolute∣ly want their mariage garment. Secondly, I adde, that this man, and many other, might haue a generall beleefe, and yet not rest vpon God for iustification by Christ; without which faith, there is no place for any man in heauen. Third∣ly, let it be granted that charitie is the mariage garment; what get you by it, vnlesse you can prooue, that the faith this man had, was a true iustifying faith? which you can ne∣uer possibly doe. The generall meaning of the parable seemes to be no more but this, that many men thrust into the Church, who, when the day of trial comes, will be found to haue no interest to the kingdome of heauen: which our Sauiours conclusion shewes, Math. 23. 14. Many are called, but few are chosen. I denie not, that sentence shall be giuen according to workes, but that they, which want workes, haue faith. This is the poynt in question, and this can neuer be proo∣ued by this parable. 3. The like argument is made of the foolish Virgins. Who were  Math. 25. part of the Kingdome of God, and therefore had faith, which is the gate and enterance into the seruice of God. Yea in the house of God, they aspired vnto more then ordinary perfection. Hauing professed Virgini∣tie, Popish perfecti∣on. yet either carried away with vaine glorie, as S. Gregorie takes it. Or not giuing themselues to the workes of mercy, spirituall, and corporall, as S. Chrysostome expoundes it: briefely not continuing in their former Or charitie. charitie (for faith once had, cannot after the Protestants doctrine bee lost) were shut out of the Kingdome of heauen, albeit they presumed strongly on the assurance of their saluation, as is apparant: By their confident demaunding to bee let in, for they said, Lord, Lord, open vn∣to vs. The very like indeede, and as vncertaine as the former. Math. 25. 1.  These Virgins were part of Gods kingdome in profession, but not in election, and therefore neuer had iustifying faith. The perfectiō you fancie, might well be attained to without true faith, especially the profession of such perfection, which is all that they had for ought that can be proued by the text. If you vnderstood the Protestants doctrine, as well as you would seeme to doe, you would know that we hold it as vnpossible to lose Charitie, as to lose Faith; affirming that
he which hath not both to the end, neuer had either. Their confident demaunding to be let in, shewes rather their de∣sire, than their hope: and yet how many hope without true faith in Christ? Is it not generally the case of all you Papists? 4. Many of the princes beleeued in Christ, but did not confesse him, for  Ioh. 12. they loued more the glory of men then the glory of God. What can bee more euident, then that these men had faith: when the holy Ghost saith expresly that they beleeued in Christ which is the onely acte of faith? And yet were destitute of charitie, which preferreth the glory and ser∣uice of God, before all things in this world. They might Ioh. 12. 42. 43 rest vpon him as the Messiah, and yet not to iustification: for who knowes not that the Iewes, and e∣specially the princes or chiefe men amongst them, look for the Messiah, as a temporall deliuerer, not as a spirituall Sa∣uiour? Beside, they might haue a true iustifying faith, and loue too, and yet be led away, in this point, by vaine glorie, or feare, as Ioh. 3. 2. & 19. 39. Nicodemus was, who came to Christ by night; and Math. 26. 70. 71. Peter, who denied his Sauiour by swearing and cur∣sing, and yet lost not either his faith or charitie by it, though he sinned grieuously against both faith and charitie, in that fearefull deniall. 5. This place of S. Iames. (What shall it profit my brethren if any man say that he hath faith, but hath not vvorkes: what, shall his faith be able to A. W. Cap. 2. This is your glosse, without truth.  saue?) Supposeth very playnelie, that a man may haue faith without good workes, that is, without charitie, but that it shall auaile him nothing. You suppose that which will neuer be prooued, that the Apostle takes works for charitie. Doe you thinke that they, against whom the Apostle writes, would grant that they were without the loue of God? The Gnosticks were neuer so absurd. But the question was, whether a man that profest Iesus Christ to bee the Sauiour of the world, were not by this saued, how lewdly soeuer he demeaned himselfe? Caluin saith that the Apostle speakes of a shadow of faith, which is a bare knowledge of the articles of our creed, but not of a iustifying faith.  VVithout doubt he vvas very vvell ac∣quainted with it. Without doubt hee was little acquainted with that kinde of faith, by which Protestants be iustified: but he directly speakes of such a faith, as Abraham was iustified by: saying. That that faith did worke vvith his vvorkes, and vvas made perfect by the vvorkes. Was this but a shadow of faith?
Caluin saith truly, that the Apostle speaks of a dead faith, which (we say) can iustifie no man; and of faith in profes∣sion, not in truth. The former is plaine; Iam. 2. 17. Faith if it haue no workes, is dead in it selfe. Vers .  Faith without workes, is dead. The latter appeares thus: Ves. 14. Though a man sa he haue faith. Vers. 18. Shew me thy faith by thy workes. You answere, he was little acquainted with our kinde of faith. When you can prooue he tolde you so, I will beleeue you. But you adde further: That he speakes directly of such a faith as Abraham was iusti∣fied by. True: for of such a faith these men did make profes∣sion. Therefore the Apostle shewes, that this faith of Abra∣ham was a liuing faith, that wrought by charitie, and was acknowledged by God himselfe to be such, in regard of the workes issuing from it; such as theirs is not, if it haue no workes, which are the euidences of a true faith, as Vers. 26. brea∣thing is a certaine proofe of life. But they reply that this faith is likened vnto the faith of the Diuell, & therefore cannot be a iustifying faith: that followeth not; for an excel∣lent good thing, may be like vnto a badde in some things, as diuels in na∣ture are not onely like, but the very same as Angels bee: euen so a full Christian faith may be well likened vnto a diuels faith, when it is naked and voyd of good works in tvvo points: First, in both there is a perfect knovvledge of all things reuealed: Secondly, this knovvledge shall not stead them anie vvhit, but onely serue vnto their greater condemnation, because that knovving the vvill of their master, they did it not. And in this respect S. Iames compareth them together: Now there are many pointes vvherein these faiths doe differ, but this one is principall. That Christians out of a goodly and deuoute affection, doe vvillinglie sub∣mitte their vnderstanding vnto the rules of faith, beleeuing things a∣boue humane reason, yea such as seeme sometimes contrarie to it. But the diuell against his vvill, beleeues all that God hath reuealed: Because by his naturall capacitie he knovves that God can teach, nor testifie a∣ny vntruth. We do not say, that it is likened to the Diuels faith, but that the Apostle shevves them, how insufficiently they rea∣son, from the beleeuing the truth of God, to iustification. For the Diuels (saith he) beleeue also; yea more then beleeue (say I) haue one of your preparatory works, euen feare of damnation. Againe, that faith may bee vvithout charitie is proued out of these
vvords of the same second Chapter. Euer as the body vvithout the spirit is dead, so also faith without vvorkes is dead. Hence thus I argue: albeit the body be dead vvithout the soule: yet is it a true naturall body in it selfe, euen so faith is perfect in the kind of faith although vvithout charitie it auayle not to life euerlasting. I answered you before, out of Cardinall Caietan. ad ac. 2. 26. Caietan, that the Apostle speakes not of the soule, but of . breath; so that the comparison stands thus. As the▪ bodie, that breathes not, is dead: so faith, that brings not forth good works, is dead. Lastly in true reason it is manifest that faith may be vvithout charity, for they haue seuerall seates in the soule, one being in the vvill, and the D. B. P. Faith is in the will. Gods goodnes is the obiect of Faith.  other in the vnderstanding: they haue distinct obiectes, faith respecting the truth of God, and charitie the goodnes of God. Your reason is without truth. They haue diuers seats in the soule, and distinct obiects; therefore the one may be without the other. First, I deny the Antecedent, in respect of the former part thereof. For faith that iustifies is not in the vnderstan∣ding, but in the will: secondly I deny your consequence al∣together; because it proues no more, but only that there is no naturall necessity of their being together, in regard of each other. Our doctrine is, that they are alwaies ioyned, be∣cause the spirit, that giues a man faith to iustification, doth also giue him true inherent righteousnes, together with that faith in Christ. Neither doth faith necessarily suppose charitie, as charitie doth faith, for vve cannot loue him of vvhom vvee neuer heard. Neither yet doth charitie naturally flovv out of faith, but by due consideration of the goodnes of God, and of his benefits & loue towards vs, into which good and deuoute considerations, fevv men doe enter, in comparison of them vvho are led into the broade vvay of iniquity through their inordinate passions. This according to the truth, and yet more different in the Pro∣testants opinion: for faith laies hold on Christs righteousnes, and re∣ceiues that in. But charitie can receiue nothing in, as M. Perkins wit∣nesseth. Pag. 85. But giues it selfe forth in all duties of the first and second table. The like answer I make to the other two points yt follow. Faith doth not (say you) necessarily suppose charity, as charitie doth faith; neither doth charity naturally flow out of faith. What then? therefore is not euery man sanctified, that is iustified, I deny the consequence: he Ioh. 1. 12. Rom. 8. 9. 10. Gal. 4. 6. that beleeues in Christ, hath the spirit of Christ, and where he is, there is sanctification.
That with you adde of the impossiblity of our saluation, if I rightly vnderstand it (which I can hardly do, it is so con∣fused) is not to the purpose, yet we may conclude, out of the former part of the discourse, as before, Faith receiues in, cha∣ritie doth not; therefore they are not alwaies together. The con∣sequence is naught, as if vertues of diuers effects could not be giuen by the spirit, at one time, and alwaies keepe toge∣ther in the soule iustified, and sanctified. Now Sir, if they could not applie vnto themselues Christs righte∣ousnes, without fulfilling all duties of the first and second table: they should neuer applie it to them, for they hould it impossible to fulfill all those duties, so that this necessarie linking of charity with faith: maketh their saluation not only very euill assured, but altogither impossible, for charitie is the fulnes of the law, which they hold impossible, and then if the assurance of their saluation, must needs be ioyned with such an im∣possibilitie, Rom. 12. they may assure themselues, that by that faith, they can ne∣uer come to saluation. I will do the best I can to vnderstand and examine what you say in this discourse, wherein (me thinkes) you would perswade vs, that this linking of faith and charity together, makes our saluation altogether impossible, because it re∣quires of vs the fulfilling of the law, that we may thereby, applie Christs righteousnes to our selues; which we hold to be impossible. Now, vpon this impossibilitie, it should fol∣low, (in your opinion) that we may assure our selues, we can neuer come to saluation by this faith. All the matter lies in this proposition, that the ioyning of these vertues exacts the fulfilling of the law, to applie Christ by, which hath no kind of truth in it: for first, the hauing of charitie doth not bind vs to keepe the law, but enables vs in some measure to that dutie, which we were bound to before. Secondlie, it is not the lincking of these two that doth enable vs, but the hauing of charitie, that is of iustifying grace. Lastlie, though they come and stay together: yet haue they as their seuerall na∣tures, and effects, so their seuerall ends also; faith seruing to obtaine iustification, charity to cause a holy conuersation. If I haue mistaken you, it is against my will; if there be any thing else in it, that may make for you or against vs, let me know it, and I will yeeld to it, or answere it.
Let vs annex vnto these plaine authorities of holy Scripture, one eui∣dent  Jt vvas need∣les to proue that vve deny not. Lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 17. Con. Crescen. lib. 1. cap. 29. testimonie of Antiquitie: That most incorrupti S. Augustine saith flatly, That faith may well be vvithout charitie, but it cannot profile vs vvithout charitie. And, That one God is vvorshipped sometimes out of the Church, but that vnskilfully, yet is it he. Also that one faith is had without charitie, and that also out of the Church, neither therfore is not faith: For there is one God, one Faith, one Baptisme, and one iacu∣late Catholike Church: in which God is not serued only, but in which only, he is truly serued: neither in which alone, faith is kept n which only, faith is kept with charitie. So that faith, and that only true faith, of which the Apostle speaketh, One God, one faith, may be, and is an many without charitie. In Aug. de Tri nit. lib. 15. c. 17. the former place alleaged, Augustine hath no such word; and if he had, the answere is easie, that he speakes not of that faith, wherby we trust in God for iustification, but of that which is onelie an acknowledgement of the truth of Scripture. In Aug. contra Crescen. lib. 1. cap. 29. the later thus he writes. As one God is worshipped igno∣rantly, euen out of the Church, neither therefore is not he; so one faith is had without charity, euen out of the Church, neither therefore is not it. For there is one God, one faith, one Baptisme, one incorrupt Catholike Church, not in which alone God is wor∣shipped, but in which alone one God is Piè. rightly worshipped; nor in which alone one faith is held, but in which alone one faith with charity is held; nor in which alone one Baptisme is had, but in which alone one Baptisme is Salubriter. healthfully had. In which dis∣course any man may see, that Austin speakes of such a faith, as beleeues the truth of Scripture. To which purpose, a little before he shewed, that the Diuels also had the same faith, or at least, beleeued the same things of Christ, that we doe in the Church. And this faith, which is indeed the same, the Apo∣stle speakes of, may be, and is often, without charitie. And yet by your leaue, a man may reasonablie doubt, whether this assent to the Scripture, be wrought by the spirit of God, in euery one that professeth religion, according to the truth of his perswasion; and be not rather in many an opinion re∣ceiued from mē, as for the most part, amongst you Papists; who rest vpon the authoritie of men, vnder the name of the Church, in this very point.
The Protestants bold asseuerations, that they cannot be parted, are great: but their proofes very slender, and scarce worth the disprouing. It becomes a Christian to be bold in matters of faith, especiallie when it is gaine-said. What our proofes are, it shall better be seene hereafter, if it please God. In the meane while, how strong yours are, set euery man iudge with indif∣ferencie. THAT FAITH MAY BE WITHOVT good Workes. THe first, He that hath not care of his ovvne, hath denied his faith: ther∣fore  . Tim. ▪ saith includeth that good vvorke, of prouiding for our owne: Ans. That faith there seemes to signifie, not that faith whereby we be∣leeue all things reuealed, or the Protestants the certainty of their salua∣tion: but for fidelity, and faithfull performance, of that which we haue promised in Baptime, which is to keepe all Gods commandements one of the which, is to prouide for our children, and for them that we haue charge of: so that he who hath no such care ouer his owne charge, hath denied his faith: that is, violated his promise in Baptisme. There is also another ordinary answere supposing faith to be taken there for the Christian beleefe, to wit, that one may deny his faith two waies: either in flat denying any article of faith, or by doing something that is contra∣ry to the doctrine of our faith. Now he that hath no care of his owne, doth not deny any article of his faith, but committeth a fact contrary to the doctrine of his faith: so that not faith, but the doctrine of faith, or our promise in Baptisme, includeth good workes. These reasons are such, as (to my best remembrance) I  punc; neuer read in any Protestant to this purpose, if you haue, you should haue quoted the places. But howsoeuer, (I thinke) neither we, nor you, will be bound to maintaine all the ar∣guments, that haue been brought, in all questions, to proue the doctrines we seuerally hold: If it had bin your purpose, to deale throughly in this point, you might haue found out better reasons then these, though not better for your turne. If you aske where? I will shew you, God willing, in another treatise. For the answering of these arguments, is nothing to Master Perkins reformed Catholike, nor the reason of any moment: but as it may well be suspected, of your owne de∣uising: that you might make babies to dallie with all. 2 There are among you that beleeue not; for he knovv vvho beleeued,  Ioh. 6.
and vvho was to betray him: Opposing treason to faith, as if he had said: faith conteined in it selfe fidelitie. This Argument is farre fetched, and The more vn∣wise you to trou∣ble your reader with it. VVhat could the doctrine of the Sacrament hinder Judas gaine? little worth. For albeit faith hath not fidelitie and loue alwaies necessa∣rily ioyned with it, yet falling from faith, may well draw after it, hatred and treason: yea ordinarily wickednes goeth before falling from faith, and is the cause of it: which was Iudas case, whom our Sauiour there taxed, for he blinded with coueousnesse, did not beleeue Christs Do∣ctrine of the blessed Sacrament, and by incredulity opened the Diuell a high way to his hart, to negotiate treason in it. First, I demaund in what the doctrine of the Sacraments could hinder Iudas from growing rich, yt the fault of his not beleeuing it, should lye vpon his couetousnes? Secondly I wonder how it can be proued, that Iudas did not beleeue it? If you ground your conceipt vpon that of Ioh. 6. 64. Iohn, as it is lik∣ly you do, first proue that our Sauiour spake there of the Sa∣crament. Thirdly, it is not plaine by anie place of Scripture, that Iudas vnbeleefe in that doctrine, opened the way to the Diuell; nay rather the text laies the blame vpon his Ioh. 12. 6. 7. couet∣ousnes, Math. 26. 15. and malice, stirred vp by our Sauiours defect of Mary against him, when she had bestowed such costlie oyntments vpon him, in Bethania. 3 They obiect that. VVho saith bee knovves God, and doth not keepe  1. Ioh. 2. See 12. Art. par. 2. art. 5. his commandements is a lyar. Ans. He is then a lyar in graine who professing the only true know∣ledge of God, yet blusheth not to say, that it is impossible to keepe his commandements: but to the obiection, knowing God in that place, is taken for louing of God, as I knovv ye not: that is, I loue you not. Our Math. 7. & 25. Psal. 1. Ioh. 14. Lord knowes the way of the iust: that is approues it, loues it, so he that knowes God, keepes his commandements, as Christ himselfe testifieth. Jf any loue me, he vvill keepe my vvord. And he that loueth me not, vvill not keepe my vvords. Lastly, they say with S. Paul. That the iust man liueth by faith. But if faith giue life, then it cannot be without charity. Ans. That faith in a iust man is not without hope and charity, by all The question is of workes; your conclusion of charitie. Not iustifying faith.  which conioyned he liueth, and not by faith alone. But faith is in a sin∣full and vniust man, without charitie: who holding fast his former be∣leefe, doth in transgressing Gods commaundements, breake the bands of charitie. And so it remaines most certaine, that faith may be and too too often is without the sacred society of charitie. These obiections were not worth the making; neither will I wast time and paper in examining your answeres to them.
The fifth poynt. Of Merits. By merit, vnderstand any thing, or any worke, whereby Gods fauour and life euerlasting is procu∣red: and that for the dignitie and excellencie of the worke or thing done: or, a good worke done, bin∣ding him that receiueth it to repaie the like. Obserue that three things are necessarie to make a worke meritori∣ous. First, that the worker be the adopted Sonne of God, and in the state of grace. Secondly, that the worke proceed from grace, and be re∣ferred to the honor of God. The third, is the promise of God through Christ, to reward the worke. And because our aduersaries either igno∣rantly VVith a m ter of truth. or of malice do slaunder this our Doctrine, in saying vntruly, that we trust not in Christs merits, nor need not Gods mercy for our saluati∣on, but will purchase it by our owne workes. We charge you, and that trulie without ignorance, or slaunder, and according to your doctrine of merits, that you need neither Christs merits, nor Gods mercie, for so much of your purchase of euerlasting life, as is made by good workes. For if your workes be such, as that Ex rigor iustitiae. in the rigour of iustice, they deserue euerlasting life as wages, what neede they either Christs blood, or Gods mercie to make them meritorious? The Rom. 3. 2, 26. Eph. 1. 7. Heb. 10. 1. 4. 11. 12. vse of Christs blood, is to wash a∣way sinne. Where there is no sin, what should Christs blood doe? Rom. 4. 4. Sess. 6. cap. vl. Now to him that workes, the wages is not counted of fa∣uour, but of debt. I will here set downe what the Councell of Tent doth teach concer∣ning merits. Life euerlasting is to be proposed to them that vvorke vvell, and hope well to the end: both as grace, of mercy promised to the Sonnes of God through Christ Iesus, and as a reward by the promise of the same God to be faithfully rendred vnto their vvorkes and merits, So that we hold eter∣nall life to be both a grace; aswell in respect of Gods gree promise through Christ, as also for that the first grace (out of which they issue) was freely bestowed vpon vs. And that also it is a reward in iustice, due partly by the promise of God, and in part of the dignity of good workes. Vnto the worker, if he perseuere and hold on vnto the end of his life, or by truerepentance lise to the same estate againe. The Councell of Trent hath (as much as well it could) made a shew of some reformation; but indeed retained (for
the most part) the former errours of her Antichristian Church, you also (to mend the matter) according to the po∣licie of the craftie Councell, picke out a sentence and pro∣pound it, as the whole doctrine of the Councell concerning merits. The same afterward you expound; but so as that nei∣the text, nor the glosse are sufficient to make your whole do∣ctrine knowne to vs. For whereas you claime heauen of God, as wages due to the deserts of your workes, here is no mention but only of reward; yet somwhat is slipt from you, whereby the Councels dealing may well grow into suspiti∣on. For whereas that sayes no more but, that it is a reward, by the promise of God to be faithfully rendred to their workes and merits: you tel vs, that it is a reward in iustice, due partly by the promise of God, and in part, for the dignitie of good works. Where I would faine know of you, how you part this debt? what part is due vpon promise, what vpon desert? For it may wel be, though the reward be due vpon promise, now God hath promised that it was simplie due, for the dignitie of the worke, whether God had promised it or no: And then it was a small fauour of God, to make vs a promise of that, to which we had full interest by desert, before this promise, so that he could not in iustice, but pay vs our wages, for our worke, though he had not promised it. And indeed this is the verie maine point of your doctrine of merits, howsoeuer you blaunch it with the name of grace. I proue it first by the Councell it selfe, then by Andradius the expounder of the Councels meaning. Concil. Tri∣dent. Sess. 6. cap. 16. Seeing that Christ Iesus (sayes the Councell,) Iugiter vir∣tutem influat. doth continually infuse vertues into them that are iustified, as the head into the members; which vertue alwaies goes before, accompanieth and followeth their good workes, and without which, they could in no sort be acceptable to God, and meritorious: we must beleeue, that there is nothing else wanting to them that are iustified, why they should not be thought Diuinae leg plene satisfe∣cisse. fulle to haue satisfied the law of God, (as farre as the estate of this life requires) by those workes, In Deo sacta. that are done in God; and to haue truly deserued at their time, euerlasting life, prouided that they depart in the estate of grace.
Andradius, who was present at the Councill, and one that debated matters with other Doctors, though he had no voyce in determining, because he was not a Bishop: yet he could not chuse but perfectly vnderstand the poynts that were agreed vpon: otherwise (we may be sure) he should neuer haue been suffered to vndertake the defence of the Councill, as hee hath been, if not chosen to it. He then thus opens the matter: Andrad. Or∣thod. exp. lib. 6. pag. 517 518. That euerlasting felicitie is no lesse due to the workes of the righteous, than euerlasting torments are to their sinnes that obey not the Gospell, nor know God; that hea∣uenly felicitie, which the Scripture calles the rewards and wages of the righteous, is not so much freely and liberally bestowed vp∣on them by God, as it is due to their workes. Which he proues thus: When Paul (saith Andrad▪ vbi supra. Andradius) would shew, that Abra∣ham was iustified by faith, and not by workes; he doth it especial∣ly by this reason: Rom. 4. 5. To him that worketh, the wages is not coun∣ted of fauour, but of debt: therefore if Abrahams righteousnes were the wages of his workes, it ought to be called debt rather than grace. For the Mercedis ratio cum no∣mine graae ex aduerso pugnat. nature of wages is directly contrary to the name of grace. Vpon this reason he concludes: That euer∣lasting felicitie must not be counted according to grace, but ac∣cording to debt. And a little after: Andrad. pag. 519. Therefore if any wages be due to the worthie actions of the righteous, there is in them Vera & inte∣gra ratio. the true and whole nature of merit. This then is the doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning merits; That the good workes of them that haue the first iustification, do truly and wholy deserue euerlasting felicitie of God, as wages due to them by debt, not by grace. Let no man be deceiued, be∣cause (to colour the matter) they make mention of vertue comming continually from Christ, as from the vine into the branches: for this is nothing else but the increase of grace, whereby Christians are enabled to doe good workes, and added no more worthines to the action, than should be in it if this grace were receiued from Christ all at one instant, as (for the substance of it) it is at the time of our iustifica∣tion. In infants baptized there is a kind of merit, or rather dignity of adop∣ted
Sonnes of God, by his grace powred into their soules in baptisme, whereby they are made heires of the Kingdome of heauen, but all that arriue to the yeares of discretion, must by the good vse of the same grace either meritlife, or for want of such fruit of it, fall into the misera∣ble state of death. Infants baptized, if they belong to Gods election, haue indeed the prerogatiue to be Gods children, and thereby an interest to the kingdome of heauen, as their inheritance. All that come to yeeres of discretion, must bring foorth fruites of faith, and shall haue reward for them in heauen, not vpon merit, because their best workes are defectiue; but only vp∣on Gods gratious promise, and mercifull acceptance in Ie∣sus Christ. Our consent. Touching merits, we consent in two conclusions with them. The first conclusion, that merits are so farre forth necessarie, that without them there can be no saluation. The second, that Christ our Mediatour and Re∣deemer, is the roote and fountaine of all merit. The dissent and difference. The Popish Church placeth merits within man, making two sorts thereof: the merit of the person, and the merit of the worke. The merit of the per∣son, is a dignity in the person, whereby it is worthy of life euerlasting. And this (as they say) is to be found in Infants dying after baptisme, who though they want good workes, yet are they not voide of this kinde of merite, for which they receiue the king∣dome of heauen. The merit of the worke, is a digni∣tie or excellencie in the worke, whereby it is made fitte and inabled to deserue life euerlasting for the doer. And workes (as they teach) are meritorious
two waies: first, by couenant, because God hath made a promise of reward vnto them: secondly, by their owne dignitie; for Christ hath merited that our workes might merit. And this is the substance of their doctrine. From it we dissent in these points. I. Wee renounce all personall merits, that is, all merits within the person of any meere man. II. And we renounce all merit of workes, that is, all merit of any worke done by any meere man whatsoeuer. And the true merit whereby wee looke to attaine the fauour of God, and life euer∣lasting, is to bee found in the person of Christ a∣lone: who is the storehouse of all our merits: whose prerogatiue it is, to bee the person alone in whom God is well pleased. Gods fauour is of infinite digni∣tie, and no creature is able to do a worke which may counteruaile the fauour of God, saue Christ alone: who by reason of the dignitie of his person, being not a meere man but God-man, or Man-God, hee can doe such workes as are of endlesse dignitie euery way answerable to the fauour of God: and therefore sufficient to merit the same for vs. And though a me∣rit or meritorious worke agree onely to the person of Christ, yet is it made ours by imputation. For as his righteousnesse is made ours, so are his merits depen∣ding thereon: but his righteousnesse is made ours by imputation, as I haue shewed. Hence ariseth an other point, namely that as Christs righteousnesse is made ours really by imputation to make vs righte∣ous: so we by the merit of his righteousnesse impu∣ted to vs, doe merit and deserue life euerlasting. And this is our doctrine. In a word, the Papists maintaine
the merits of their owne workes: but we renounce them all, and rest onelie on the merit of Christ. With the former Catholike Doctrine M. Perkins would be thought to agree in two points. First, That merits are necessary to saluation. 2. That Christ is the roote and fountaine of all merit. Master Perkins, in the poynt of our consent with you, meant not merits, as you take them, and as himselfe before had defined them, but onely as good workes, which the an∣cient writers oftentimes call merits: not because they truly and wholy haue the nature of merits, as Andrad. vbi supra. Andradius speaks of them, but for that they are not performed without labour on our part, and shall haue reward on Gods part in heauen. But soone after like vnto a shrewd cowe, ouerthrowes with his heele the good milke he had giuen before. Renouncing all merittes in euery man, sauing only in the person of Christ: whose prerogatiue (saith he) it is, to be the person alone, in whom God is well pleased. This dealing of yours is more common with you than commendable. He that meant plainly, would take things as they lie, as farre as reasonably he may, and not draw mat∣ters out of diuers heads, to confound the readers vnderstan∣ding, and hide the force of his aduersaries disputation. But I must be faine to follow you, though you follow not Master Perkins. Then he addeth, that they good Protestants, by Christs merits really imputed to them, do merit life euerlasting. Euen as by his righteousnes imputed vnto them, they are iustified and made righteous. To which I answere that we most willingly confesse our blessed Saui∣ours merits to be infinite, and of such diuine efficacy that he hath not only merited at his Fathers hands, both pardon for all faults, and grace to doe all good workes: but also that his true seruants works, should be meritorious of life euerlasting. That our workes should bee accepted and rewarded of God, our Sauiour hath merited; but that being imperfect, they should haue the true and whole nature of merit, no in∣finitnes nor diuine efficacie can deserue or procure. For it is a manifest contradiction, that this or that work should haue need of pardon, and yet fully satisfie the law of God; and by that satisfaction deserue euerlasting life, as wages, at Gods hands.
As for the reall imputation of his merit to vs, we esteeme as a fained  It is not really in vs. imagination, composed of contrarieties: For if it be really in vs, why do they call it imputed? and if it be ours only by Gods imputation, then is it not in vs really. You make your selfe more worke than you need. Master Perkins doth not say, it is really in vs, but really imputed to vs; not, as you trifle, by a supposed imputation, but in deed and truth, wee being the members of Christ our head by faith in him. Further to say that he only is the person in whom God is vvell plea∣sed,  Iac. 2. Eccles. 45. Act. 13. Ioh. 16. Rom. 1. Iudicio chari∣tatis, non sidei. is to giue the lie vnto many plaine texts of holy Scriptures. Abraham vvas called the friend of God: therefore God vvas vvell pleased in him. Moses vvas his beloued. Dauid vvas a man according vnto his ovvne hart. God loued Christs Disciples, because they loued him. Briefly all the Christians at Rome, vvere truly called of S. Paul, the beloued of God. And therefore although God be best pleased in our Sauiour, and for his sake is pleased in all others, yet is he not only pleased in him, but in all his faithfull seruants. It is Christs priuiledge to be the person in whom God is fully pleased, as in one who by his excellencie of nature be∣ing God euerlasting, and man absolutely pure, deserues his loue: which all other men attaine to in their measure, not by the merit, but acceptation of their persons. Novv to that vvhich he saith that they haue no other meritte then Christs imputed to them, as they haue no other righteousnesse, but by imputation, I take it to be true: and therefore they do very ingenuously and iustly, renounce all kind of merittes in their stayned and defiled vvorkes. But let them tremble at that vvhich thereupon necessarily fol∣lovveth. It is; that as they haue no righteousnes nor merit of heauen, but only by a supposed imputation, so they must looke for no heauen, By a reall im∣p, not a supposed. but by imputation: for God as a most vpright iudge vvill in the end re∣pay euery man, according to his vvorth: vvherfore not finding any eall vvorthines in Protestants, but only in conceipt: his revvard shall be gi∣uen them ansvverablie, in conceipt only: vvhich is euidently gathered out of S. Augustine, vvhere he saith. That the revvard ca goe before Lib. 1 de mo. Eccles cap. 25. the merit, not be giuen to a man before be be vvorthie of it: for (saith he) vat vvere more iniust then that, and what is more iust then God? Where he concludeth that we must not be so hardly as once to demaund, much Iesse so impudent as to assure ourselues of that crovvne, before vve haue deserued it. Seeing then that the Protestants by this their proctour re∣nounce all such merit and desert, they must needs also renounce their part of heauen, and not presume so much as once to demaund it accor∣ding
vnto S. Augustines sentence: vntill they haue first renounced their erronious opinions. We are really members of Christs mysticall bodie, and so haue an interest in the reall imputation of his merits. Be∣side, wee haue also true, though not perfect righteousnes in∣herent in vs, & good works (in some poore measure) sutable thereunto; See 12. Art. part. 2. art. 7. according to which we certainly looke for our reward of God; not for the worthines of those workes, but for his gratious acceptance of them and vs in Iesus Christ. So that we demaund not our reward before our worke, which Austin (after the phrase of the ancient) calles me∣rits; but denie our worke to bee of such a value, as mans pride would make it. Now to requite your kindnes, I be∣seech you by the mercies of God, and the loue of Iesus Christ, that you doe not lay claime to euerlasting life, as the wages of seruants, least it be denied you, as an inheritance belonging to sonnes. That our doctrine is truth, and theirs falshoode, I will make manifest by sundrie reasons; and then an∣swere their arguments to the contrarie. Our reasons. The first shall be taken from the properties and conditions that must be in a worke meritorious, and they are foure. I. A man must doe it of himselfe, and by himselfe: for if it bee done by an other, the merit doth not properly belong to the doer. II. A man must doe it of his owne free-will and pleasure, not of due debt: for when wee doe that which wee are bound to doe, wee doe no more but our dutie. III. The worke must be done to the profit of an o∣ther, who thereupon must bee bound to repay the like. IV. The reward and the worke must be in pro∣portion equall, for if the reward bee more then the
worke, it is not a reward of desert, but a gift of good will. Hence followes a notable conclusion: That Christs manhood considered apart from his Godhead, can∣not merit at Gods hand: though it be more excellent euery way then all men and Angels. For being thus conside∣red, it doth nothing of it selfe, but by grace receiued from the godhead: though it also bee without mea∣sure. Secondly Christs manhood is a creature, and in that regarde bounde to doe whatsoeuer it doth. Thirdly, Christ as man cannot giue any thing to God, but that which hee receiued from God: there∣fore cannot the manhood properly by it selfe merit, but onely as it is personally vnited vnto the godhead of the Sonne. And if this be so, then much lesse can any meere man, or any angell merit: yea it is a mad∣nes to thinke, that either our actions or persons should be capable of any merit whereby wee might attaine to life eternall. But M. Perkins, vvill neuerthelesse proue, and that by sundry reasons, that their doctrine is the truth it selfe, and ours falshood. First, by a sorry short syllogisme containing more then one vvhole It is said after∣vvard to be na∣kedly proposed. page. It is taken out of the properties of a meritorious vvorke: Which must be (saith he) foure. First, That the worke be done of our selues, with∣out the helpe of another. Secondly, That it be not othervvise due debte. Thirdly, That it be done to the benefit of another. Fourthly, That the worke and revvard be equall in proportion. These proprieties he sets dovvne pi∣thagorically vvithout any proofe. But inferreth thereon, as though he had proued them inuincibly, that Christs man-hood seperated from the God-head cannot merit: because vvhatsoeuer he doth, he doth it by grace receiued, and should be othervvise due. He might in like manner as truly say, that Christs manhood vnited to the Godhead could not merit neither: for he receiued his Godhead from his Father, and vvhat∣soeuer he doth is therefore his Fathers by due debte. And so the good man, if he vvere let alone, vvould disappoint vs vvholy of all merits, as vvell the imputed of Christs, as of all ours done by vertue of his grace. The syllogisme that troubles you so with the length of it, is this:
Euery worke that merits euerlasting life, must be done of and by the worker himselfe, not of debt, to the profit of God, with proportion to the reward. No worke of man can be so done. Therefore no worke of man can merit euerlasting life. Is not this a perilous long syllogisme (trow you) to take vp more than a whole page? If this great scholler, that so often blames Master Perkins ignorance, would (for I wil not doubt but he could) haue distinguished the syllogisme from the explication of the proposition, he would not haue been so much offended with it. Sure there was small cause hee should be, if he say truly afterward, that Master Perkins rea∣son was nakedly proposed; or trie whether himselfe can make it any shorter; or compare it with his owne tedious answer, containing three whole pages in quarto in a smaller letter. But what if there be another syllogisme also implied in this reason? as there is this. If the manhood of Christ, properly by it selfe, could not me∣rit, then can no man merit: But the manhood of Christ, properly by it selfe, could not merit. Therefore no man can. The consequence of the proposition is prooued: because the manhood of Christ is more excellent euery way, than all both men and Angels. The assumption is made manifest; because euery worke of Christs manhood, considered apart from the Godhead, would be defectiue in three points concerning merit. To the two former you answer, that whereas Master Per∣kins saith, Christs manhood could not merit, because he did no∣thing of himselfe, but by grace receiued, and that that he did was due; that he might as truly say, that his manhood could not me∣rit vnited to the Godhead. Your reason is; for that he receiued his Godhead from his Father, and whatsoeuer he doth, is therefore his Fathers by due debt. But your reason is false: for See 12. Art. par. 1. art. 4.  Christ had his Sonship (as I may speake) of his Father (for the pro∣pertie of the Godhead is to be of it selfe) yet there is not a∣ny
thing due from the Sonne to the Father, more than from the Father to the Sonne, if they be of equall nature and dig∣nitie. So that this latter point disproues the former, because it inferres a superioritie of the Father ouer the Sonne, and so an inequalitie: which at no hand may be granted. Wherefore vve must a little ist his foure forged proprieties of merit: and touching the first. I say that one may by the good vse of a thing re∣ceiued by free gift, merit and deserue much euen at his hands that gaue it. For example the Father bestovves a farme vpon his Son freely: Who may by often presenting his Father of the pleasing fruits growing on the same, deserue his further fauour: Yea, he may by the commodities, rea∣ped out of that farme, buy any thing that it shall please his father to set to sale, as vvell as if he had neuer receiued the farme from his fathers gift. Which is so common a case, and so sensible, that euery man of meane vvitte, may casily reach vnto it: euen so by good manuring the gifts vvhich God freely bestovveth vpon vs, vve may both merit the in∣crease of them, and according to his ovvne order and promise, purchase thereby the Kingdome of heauen, vvhich is plainly proued in that para∣ble, Of the talents giuen by a King to his seruants; the vvhich they im∣ploying Matth. 25. vvell, and multiplying, vvere therefore esteemed vvorthie of far greater, and vvithall to be made partakers of their Lords ioyes. M. Perkins then vvas not a little ouerseene, to put for the first proprie∣tie of merit, that it must be done by a man, and of a man himselfe. The first of the foure properties is, that a man must doe it of himselfe, and by himselfe. You answere, that one may me∣rit by the good vse of a thing receiued by free gift. But not if the vse of it also be of him, of whom he should merit. The Sonne that receiues the farme, receiues not withall conti∣nually from his Father the power to vse the farme in that sort, and much lesse the will and the vse it selfe. But a man that hath receiued grace from God, hath continually from him Phil. 2. 13. both to will and to doe, and therefore cannot proper∣ly merit of him. The parable hath not one word of any merit; onely it is said, that the King commended his seruants for imploying their talents well, and gaue them authoritie ouer much, be∣cause they had been faithfull in a little; and further, recei∣ued them into his ioy. But that he dealt thus with them vpon due debt, or that they did truly merit, is your glosse, besides the text.
The second, That a man must doe it of his ovvne free will and pleasure, and not of due debt: carrieth in shevv an opposition. But indeed there is no contradiction in it: for a man may, and euery honest man doth, of his ovvne free vvill and pleasure, pay his due debt: but let vs pardon the Show it first to be a fault. disorder of vvords: his meaning being nothing else, but that the pay∣ment of that vvhich is othervvise due debt, cannot be any meritorious vvorke. Is there not a contradiction in the meaning? your selfe confesse it by and by, where you expound it. Disorder in words is, when they are not set in such order as they should be: here is no such fault. If there bee any, it is that he might haue spoken plainer. But any man know his meaning by his words well enough. To vvhich S. Augustine doth ansvvere in these vvords. O great goodnes of God, to vvhom vvhen vve did ovve seruice by condition of our estate, as  Serm. 3. de verb. Apost. bond men do to their Lord, yet hath he promised againe and againe, the re∣ward of friends. S. Austin answers nothing against vs, or for you. It is free for God to promise a reward, as wee gladly acknowledge he doth, euen to those workes that are due. But an action of dutie cannot be made to put on the true and whole nature of merit, which is the question. In vvhich there is couched a comparison, vvhich being laide in the light, vvill much helpe to the vnderstanding of this matter. He that hath a slaue, or a bond-man, may lavvfully exact of him all kind of seruice, vvithout any vvages: Bread and a vvhippe (saith a Philosopher) serue for a slaue: Novv suppose the Master to be soueraigne gouernour of a state: then if it please him to make his manfree, and vvithall a member of his common vveale, the same man by performing many good offices to the state, may iustly deserue of his Prince as great revvard and promotion, as any other of his subiects: and yet may his Lord and old Master say truly to him, all this that thou hast done, or couldest do, is but due debt vs to me, considering that thou vvast my bond-man. So fareth it vvith vs in respect of God: all that vve can do, is due debt vnto him, because he hath made vs, and endovved vs, vvith all that vve either be, or haue: yet it hath pleased him, as a most kind Lord, to set vs at liberty through Christ, and to make vs Citizens of the Saints, and as capable of his heauenlie riches, as the Angels, if vve vvill do our endeuour to deserue them: and vvhereas he might haue exacted all that euer vve could do, vvithout any kind of recompence: yet he of his inestimable goodnes tovvard vs, doth neither bind vs to do all vve can do, and yet for doing that little vvhich he commandeth, hath by promise bound himselfe to repay vs a large recompence.
The cōparison you shew vs is fained by you, not intended by Austin: and, if it be granted you, makes nothing to the purpose. No more indeede doth the conclusion of your whole discourse; for it saith no more than wee yeeld, that God wil recompence those seruices, which are debt, on our part, and that exceeding bountifully; but not vpon their desert. By which we may well vnderstand those words of our Sauiour: VVhen  Luke 17. you haue done all these things that are commanded you, say that you are vn∣profitable seruants: vve haue done that vve ought to doo. True. By our natiue condition we were bound to performe, not only all these things, that be now commaunded, but whatsoeuer else it should haue pleased God to command: and this we must alwaies confesse, to preserue true humility in vs: yet God hath bettered our estate through Christ, and so ighly aduaunced vs, that we not only be Citizens or Saints, but his sonnes and heires, and thereby in case to deserue of him a heauenlie crowne. It hath no shew of reason in it, that our Sauiour should teach his Apostles, whom hee had truly freed, that they should say, they are vnprofitable seruants, because they doe that which they were once bound to doe, but now are not: as if a man that was once bound to pay double custome, be∣cause he was a stranger, should count himselfe vnprofitable to the King, though being absolutely freed, he pay the same custome still, because once forsooth he was by dutie to pay so much. I would faine know what dutie we were bound to doe in our naturall estate, from which wee are freed in our spirituall: for (to my seeming) our bond is doubled; both in equitie, because we haue receiued so vndeserued kindnes, and in Gods intent, who hath giuen vs his grace that wee might doe him better seruice. And this is S. Ambrose exposition vpon the place. D. B. P. That Ambrose giueth no such exposition, his own words shall testifie: Therefore (saith Ambros. ad Luc. 17. Ambrose) as thou doest not onely not say to thy seruant, sit downe, but requirest further ser∣uice of him: so neither doth God content himselfe with one work or labour of thine; because while we liue we must alwaies work. Therefore acknowledge thy selfe to be a seruant, Plurimis ob∣sequijs defoe∣nerarum. bound to very many seruices; Non te prae∣feras. doe not extoll thy selfe, because thou art called
the sonne of God; his fauour is to be acknowledged, but thy na∣ture not to be vnknowne; neither bragge if thou hast serued well, which thou wert bound to doe. These are his words; out of which no man can wring any such interpretation. We owe seruice though we be sonnes: for it is plaine Ambrose speaks of our seruice after we are regenerate. First, because he saith, we must worke alwaies. Secondly, because he mentions, ha∣uing serued well, which befalles no man in his naturall estate before grace. Saint Chrysostome pondering these words let vs say, taketh it for a hol∣some counsaile for vs to say, that we be vnprofitable seruants, least pride  It is as true as holsome. Matth. 25. 21. destroy our good workes: and then God will say, that we be good and faithfull seruants, as it is recorded. Againe, we may truly say, when we haue done all things commaun∣ded, that we are vnprofitable seruants, as venerable Bede our most lear∣ned countriman interpreteth: Because of all that vve doe, no cammoditie riseth vnto God our Lord in himselfe: vvho is such an infinite ocean of all In Luc. 17. Psalm. 15. goodnesses, that he vvanteth nothing: Whereupon Dauid saith, That thou art my God, because thou standest in need of no good that I can doe. You should haue quoted the place: Chrysost. ad Luc. 17. Chrysostome in his homily vpon that chapter saith no such thing. But whereso∣euer he saith it (if he say it at all) it cannot prooue that we are not bound to doe good seruice in the state of grace; nor that wee can merit at Gods hands; nor that you interpret S. Luke aright: wherefore then is it alleaged? Theophyl. ad Luc. 17. Theophylact, who followes Chrysostome euery where, expounds it of our seruice after grace; and concludes vpon it, that we may not for the doing of any worke, necessarily require reward or honour. For it shall be of the Lords bountie if he bestow any thing vpon vs for it: and woe be to vs if we doe not our dutie. And Cyril apud Thomam in caten. ad Luc. 17. Cyrill is wholy of the same opinion, who also denies that which before you affirmed; that subiects can deserue any thing of their Soueraigne: Consider (saith he) that they which rule a∣mongst vs, doe not thanke any of their subiects, if they doe any of those things that are enioyned them; but oftentimes by their bountie stirring their subiects affections, they breed in them a greater desire to serue; so God requires seruice of vs by right: Now, because he is mercifull and good, he promiseth honours to
them that labour; and the greatnes of his bountie ouerpasseth the paines of his subiects. Your Glossa In∣terlin. ad Luc. 17. glosse saith, that we are ser∣uants, because we are bought with a price; vnprofitable, because God hath no neede of our good workes, or because our present sufferings are not worthie of the glorie that shall be reueiled in vs. Which reasons of our vnprofitablenes, Beda apud Thomam. Thomas also brings out of Bede: so doe your Glossa ordin▪ & Lyra. ordinarie glosse, and Ly∣ra expound it, making vs seruants euen after regeneration; as August. in Psalm. 124. Austin truly saith, that Christ did not make vs free men of seruants, but of euill seruants good seruants. And thus we fall vpon the third property of M. Perkins meritorious worke. Which is, That it be done to the profit of another: and say that al∣beit God in himselfe receiue no profit, by our workes: yet doth he in the administration of his holy common weale the Church, wherein good And bad mens too. 2. Tim. 2. Matth. 5. Ioh. 15. v. 8. mens seruices do much pleasure him. And in this sense is it said of Saint Paul, That by cleansing our selues from vvicked vvorkes, vve shall become vessels sanctified, and profitable vnto our Lord. Againe, God is glorified by our good vvorkes, That seeing your good vvorkes, they may glorifie your Fa∣ther vvhich is in heauen. Finally, God doth reioyce at the recouery of his lost children. Not onely good, but also Ezra 6. 3. & 7. 11. Dan. 3. 29. 30▪ & 6. 26. bad mens seruices may be said to profit God, if euery thing that benefits his Church must be held to be of profit to him. But we neither can pro∣fit nor pleasure him, nor glorifie him truly and properly, but onely in his acceptation. And so whatsoeuer reward shall be giuen for these seruices, it proceedes from Gods gra∣tious bountie, not from our desert. If then good men trauailing painfully in Gods Vine-yard, do yeeld  Luk. 15. him outwardly both honor, ioy, and commoditie: that may suffice to make their worke meritorious. To the conclusion you inferre hereupon; which is the proposition of a syllogisme, to proue the maine point that our works are meritorious: I answere, by denying the con∣sequence thereof, and say, that it doth not follow, that our workes merit euerlasting life, because our trauaile doth yeeld him outwardly honour, ioy, and glorie. The reason of my deniall is this; that a slaue may by his paines and seruice procure all these things to his master, and that out of his loue to him, and yet deserue nothing at his hands.
The assumption that should be added, I denied, and refuted in the former part of my answere. M. Perkins fourth property is, That the vvorke and revvard, be equall in proportion. If you pleaded for nothing but reward, the sute were en∣ded. For we (as I haue said before) grant, yt God will reward the least good worke of any of his children. But the que∣stion is, whether he doe this of his bountie onely, or of ne∣cessitie, being bound to it by the law of iustice. This we de∣nie, you affirme; viz. that the good workes of a man iusti∣fied, doe Vere prome∣eri. truly or of right deserue increase of grace, euer∣lasting life, and Consecutio∣nem. the fruition of it (if he depart in grace) and also increase of glorie: and further, Concil. Trident. sess. 6 can. 32.  you accurse all them to hell that say otherwise. If he vnderstand Arithmeticall proportion, that is, that they be equal in quantitie, to wit, the one to be as great, or of as long continuance as the other: then we deny this kind of equality to be requisite to merit: there is another sort of proportion, called by the Philosopher 5. Ethic. Geometricall: and the equality of that is taken by a reasonable corre∣spondence of the one vnto the other: as when a good office is giuen to a Citizen of desert, it may be, that the honour and commoditie of the office is farre greater, then was the merit of the man: yet he being as well able to discharge it as another, and hauing better deserued it, is hol∣den in true iustice worthie of it. It is no true merit (such as you auow it to be, in Vera & inte∣gra ration meriti. the true and whole nature of merit) vnlesse it be fully answerable in value to the reward. Therefore to speake properly, and truly, the citizen you name doth not simply deserue the of∣fice, but (as your selfe confesse) in comparison of other his fellow subiects. So that though there were more in him than in other, why the Prince should bestow that place vp∣on him; yet it is rather a gift than a debt, else should the King offend against iustice, if he did not giue it him. In like manner in a game where masteries are tried, the prize is giuen vnto him that doth best not because the value of the reward, is iust as much worth, as that act of the man who winneth it: but for that such actiuity is esteemed worthy of such a recompence. Now the crowne of heauenly lorie, is likened by S. Paul, vnto a Garland in a game: where he ath, That vve all runne, but one carrieth avvay the prize. And He that 1. Cor. 9. 2. Tim. 2. striueth for the masterie, is not crovvned, vnlesse he striue lavvfully. It is
also resembled vnto places of honour. I vvill place thee ouer much. And Matth 25. Ioh. 14. Matth. 13. 1. Ioh. 3. I goe to prouide you places. Grace is also in many places of Scripture, compared to seede: For the seede of God tarrieth in him. But a little eede cast into good ground, and well manured, bringeth forth abundance of corne. Briefely, then such e∣quality as there is betweene the well deseruing subiect, and the office, betweene him that striueth lawfully, and the crowne, betweene the seed, and the corne, is between the reward of heauen, and the met of a true seruant of God. If it be nakedly proposed, there vvas small cause to blame the length of i. And thus much of M. Perkins first Argument, more indeed to expl∣cate the nature and condition of merit, then that his reason nakedly proposed, did require it. What shall I need to answer to your similitude of games, since your selfe denie, that it is truly and properly desert? But to make the matter more plaine, let vs a little consider it in this sort; where there is an agreement (as in these games) though there be not properly any merit: yet there may be somewhat that shal come neere to the nature of merit. That there is no merit you yeeld, in granting, that the reward is more in value than the act of him that winneth. Notwith∣standing, if the prize (be it what it will) be propounded to them, that shall not onely passe other men in the race, but also runne home to the goale, in such a space of time, with such, or such a carriage of the bodie, without any kinde of stay or treading a haires breadth out of a path appointed, with other like circumstances: I grant that hee which ob∣serues all these conditions exactly, may bee said, in some good sense, to haue deserued the hire that he laboured for, though it were farre greater than such a race could truly and properly merit. But if this man should faile, in many, or any of these circumstances, though he came neerer the perfor∣mance of the whole than any other man did, might he in iustice claime the prize, as due to him vpon desert? This is our case in the point of merit. There is no man but he failes very much, and often, in his best workes, some lesse, some more; but euery one more or lesse. So that no man had any cause to accuse God of iniustice, though he should denie all men the reward, due to the keepers of his Commande∣ments.
Reason II. Exod. 20. 8. And shew mercie vpon thousands in them that loue me, and keepe my com∣maundements. Hence I reason thus: where reward is giuen vpon mercie, there is no merit; but reward is giuen of mercie to them that fulfill the law: there∣fore no merit. What can we any way deserue, when our full recompence must be of mercie? In that text is nothing, touching the reward of heauen, which is now in question: God doth for his louing seruants sake, shew mercy vnto their children or friends, either in temporall things, or in calling them to repentance, and such like: but doth neuer for one mans sake, bestow the kingdome vpon another, vnlesse the partie himselfe be first made worthy of it. What though he doe not? and yet it must needes be im∣plied in the text, if your interpretation be true. For to whom∣soeuer God giues true repentance, which is neuer without faith, to him he will certainly giue the kingdome of hea∣uen. But the reason is strong, by a comparison from the lesse to the greater. For if these outward fauours, which God be∣stowes vpon them that keepe his Commandements, be of mercie, how should heauen be of debt? And this appeares further by Adam: if hee had stood to this day, he could not by his continuall and perfect obedience, haue procured a further increase of fauour at Gods hand, but should only haue conti∣nued that happy estate in which he was first created. That confirmation of his, that Adam by his continuall and perfect obedience, could not haue procured a further increase of Gods fauour, is both besides the purpose, and most false: for as well he, as euery good man sithence, by good vse of Gods giftes, might day by day, encrease them: And that no man thinke that in Paradise it should haue been o∣therwise. S. Augustine saith expresly, That in the felicity of Paradise, righ∣teousnes preserued, should haue ascended into better. And Adam finally, and In Inchir. Cap. 25. all his posterity (if he had not fallen) should haue been from Paradise translated aliue into the kingdome of heauen: this by the way. It is not beside the purpose; because it prooues the que∣stion thus: If Adams continuall and perfect obedience could not deserue increase of fauour; then our interrupted
and imperfect obedience cannot. But his could not, there∣fore ours cannot. Your answere is little to the purpose. For Master Perkins speakes not of Adams increasing his owne righteousnes, but of procuring, or rather deseruing a more happie estate: whereof the testimonie alleaged out of Austin saith no∣thing. And surely, vnlesse men will needes be wiser in this point than the Scripture can make them, it is not possible for them to know any such thing touching Adam. For the Ge. 2. 17 Scripture only sets down a penalty that should ensue vpon the breach of the commandement that was giuen him, and neither makes mention, nor giues signification of any re∣ward at all; much lesse vpon desert. Reason III. Scripture directly condemneth merit of workes. Rom. 6. 23. The wages of sinne is death: but the gift of God is eternall life through Iesus Christ our Lord. The proportion of the argument required that S. Paul should haue said: The reward of good works is eternall life, if life euerlasting could bee deserued, which cannot: because it is a free gift. True. But wee speake of good workes, and not of bad, which the A∣stle calleth sinne: where were the mans wits? but it followeth there, That eternall life, is the grace or gift of God. Nay, where was your conscience when you cauild so a∣gainst your knowledge? Master Perkins reciteth the former part of that text, to shew what the proportion of the argu∣ment required: namely, that the wages of good workes is euerlasting life, as the wages of sinne is death. And thus, without question, would the Apostle haue spoken, to make his exhortation to holines of life more effectuall, if euerla∣sting life could be deserued. This is to purpose: but answered 1200. yeares past, by that famous Father S. Augustine, in diuers places of his most learned workes. I will note one or two of them. First, thus here ariseth no small doubt, which by Gods helpe I will De gra. & lib. arb. c. 8. now discusse. For if eternall life be rendred vnto good workes, as the ho∣ly Scripture doth most clearely teach (note) how then can it be called grace: when grace is giuen freely, and not repaid for workes: and so
pursuing the points of the difficulty at large, in the end resolueth: that eternall life is most truly rendred vnto good workes, as the due reward of them: but because those good workes could not haue been done, vn∣lesse God had before freely through Christ, bestowed his grace vpon vs, therefore the same eternall life, is also truly called grace: because the first roote of it, was Gods free gift. The very same answere doth he giue, where he hath these words. E∣ternall Epist. 106. life is called grace, not because it is not rendred vnto merits: but for that those merits to which it is rendred, vvere giuen. S. Austin, Aug. de gra. & lib. arb. ca. 8. in the places alleaged by you, neither ex∣pounds that text, nor speakes of any proportion, betwixt the desert of death by sinne, and life by good workes. But, because I am not ignorant, Aug. de gra. & lib. arb. ca. 9. De correp. & grat. cap. 13. that it is his opinion, that euer∣lasting life is due to good workes, if you will giue me leaue, I will salue the matter by fetching this due from the pro∣mise of God, not from the dignitie of the worke, which I thinke to haue been his meaning; because he speakes so of∣ten, and so much, of the imperfection of our workes. If, to countenance your owne error, you will needes haue Austin thought to haue erred (which is not impossible) at the least shew some good reason why Rom. 6. 23. the holie Apostle should forbeare to say, Euerlasting life is the wages of good works, when it would so fitly haue serued his turne for exhorta∣tion, and when the nature of the sentence required it. Chrysost & Theoph ad Rom. 6. 23. Chry∣sostome and Theophylact denie all recompence and reward of labours past, and referre all to grace. He doth not say, that the wages of righteousnes is euerlasting life (saith Catan. ad Rom. 6. Caietan) but the gift of God is euerlasting life; that we may vnderstand, that we attaine to euerlasting life for our end: not by our me∣rits, but of his free gift: wherefore also he addes, In Christ Iesus our Lord; Behold the merit, behold the righteousnes; the reward whereof is euerlasting life, but to vs it is a gift, by Ratione ip∣sius Christi.  reason or in regard of Christ Iesus himselfe. In which place he crosseth M. Perkins proportion most directly, affir∣ming, that S. Paul might haue said truly, eternall life is the pay or wages of good workes: but to hold vs in humilitie patly, and partly to put a difference betweene our saluation, and damnation, chose rather to say, that the gift of God, was life eternall: because of our damnation, we are the whole and only cause, but not of our saluation, but principal∣ly the grace of God, the only fountaine of merit, and all good workes.
The reasons you giue, why the Apostle would not speak, as was fittest for his purpose, are too weake. First you say, he would keepe vs in humilitie; but his principall end was more to be respected, which was the stirring of vs vp to ho∣linesse of conuersation. Beside (if it be as you teach) Chri∣stians are acquainted with this doctrine of meriting euerla∣sting life; and therefore the concealing of it here was to small purpose. I would your Councill of Trent had thought vpon this reason; and then (perhaps) they would not haue valued the good workes of men at so high a rate. The difference, you speake of, was put before in handling the doctrine of iustification. Neither could any Christian be so foolishly proud, as to think he could of himself do good works; how then could he looke for euerlasting life simply by his owne strength? Again, Tit. 3. 5. We are saued not by works of righteous∣nesse which we haue done, but according to his mercie he saued vs. And Ephes. 2. 8. 10. By grace you are saued through faith, and that not of your selues, it is the gift of God: not of workes which God hath prepared that we should walke in them. If any works be crowned, it is certaine that the sufferings of Martyrs shal be rewarded: now of them Paul saith, Rom. 8. 18. The sufferings of this life are not worthie of the glorie to come. Where then is the value and dignitie of other workes? To this purpose Ambrose saith, The iust man though he be tor∣mented in the brasen bull is still iust, because hee iustifieth God, and saith he suffereth lesse then his sinnes deserue. Now to those texts cited before about iustification, VVe are saued  Ad Ephes. 2. Ad Tit. 3. But you neuer proued , and haue been a∣sered. Rom. 8. freely, not of our selues, or by the workes of righteousnes, vvhich vve haue done. I haue often answered that the Apostle speakes of workes done by our owne forces, without the helpe of Gods grace: and therefore they cannot serue against workes done, in, and by grace. Now to that text which he hudleth vp togither with the rest, although is deserued a better place, being one of their principall pillers in this controucrise: It is The suffering of this life, are not vvorthy of the glorie to come. The strength of this obiection, lyeth in a false translation of
these words, Axia pros ten doxan, equall to that glorie, or in the miscon∣struction of them: For we grant (as it hath bin already declared) that our afflictions and sufferings be not of equall in length, or greatnesse, with the glorie of heauen: for our afflictions be but for the short space of this life, and they cannot be so great, as will be the pleasure in heauen, not∣withstanding, we teach, that this shorter, and lesser labour imployed by a righteous man, in the seruice of God, doth merit the other greater, and of longer continuance: and that by the said Apostles plaine words, for (saith he.) That tribulation vvhich in this present life, is but for a moment 2. Cor. 4. and light, doth vvorke aboue measure exceedingly an euerlasting vvaight of glorie in vs. The reason is, that iust mens workes islue out of the foun∣taine of grace, which giueth a heauenly value vnto his workes. Againe, it maketh him a quicke member of Christ, and so receiuing influence from his head, his vvorkes are raised to an higher estimate: it consecra∣teth him also a temple of the holy Ghost, and so maketh him partaker of the heauenly nature as S. Peter speaketh. Which addes a worth of heauen to his workes. 2. Pet 1. Diuine nature. For the translation, we haue the warrant of the Syriak in∣terpretation, which is all one with ours; as Arias Mon∣canus. your own men expound it, and Theophyl. ad Rom. 8. Theophylact in his Commentarie saith not onely that they are not Dignae, pa∣res. equall, but also that they are not worthie. Indeed the Apostles purpose is to compare the suf∣ferings of this life with the glorie of the life to come, and to shew how wonderfully that exceeds these. But yet we may also from thence conclude, that because of this inequalitie, there can be no proper and true merit by these. f1. Cor. 4. As for that you alleage, of their working an euerlasting waight of glo∣rie in vs, it is to be vnderstood, that this is by Gods bountie, not the worthinesse of the person, or matter. Which must needes be apparant to euery man, that considers what infir∣mities accompanie the sufferings of the best of Gods chil∣dren. By being a member of Christ, he doth not receiue abilitie to merit, but priuiledge, to be partaker of his head our Sauiour Christs glorie; neither by being the temple of God are we made able to deserue; nor by 2. Pet. 1. being par∣taker of the diuine nature; which is nothing else, but to haue the spirit of God dwelling in vs, by the graces of righteousnesse and holinesse; which is the image of God, according to which wee were at the first created. For these graces, being not perfect in vs, bring foorth vnper∣fect
fruites, which can neuer merit truly and properly. Neither is that glory in heauen, vvhich any pure creature attaineth D. B. P. VVhere saith be so? According to our vvorks, but not for the va∣lue of them.  vnto of infinite dignity, as Master Perkins fableth; but hath his certaine bounds and measure, according vnto each mans merittes, othervvise it vvould make a man equall to God in glorie: for there can be no greater then infinite; as all learned men do confesle. You should haue shewed, where Master Perkins saith, that the glorie of any creature can be infinite; as well as you re∣prooue him for saying so, and that with such skorne as you doe. Master Perkins knew, as well as you can teach him, that no finite nature is capable of any infinitnes; but yet he truly denies full proportion, betwixt our present sufferings and our glorie to come: which your selfe confesse to bee true. Reason IV. Whosoeuer will merit, must fulfill the wholelaw: but none can keepe the whole lawe: For if we say we haue no sin wee deceiue our selues, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. And he that sinnes against one commandement is guiltie of the whole law. And what can he merit, that is guiltie of the breach of the whole law? I deny the first proposition: for one good worke done with his due  VVhy doe you not shevv what those properties be. Popish learned you meane. Luc. 15. circumstances doth bring forth merit, as by all the properties of merit may be proued at large: and by his owne definition of merit set downe in the beginning. Now if a man afterward fall into deadly sinne, he lee∣seth his former merit: but recouering grace, he riseth to his former me∣rit, as the learned gather out of that saying of our Sauiour, in the person of the good Father. Doe on him (that is on his prodigall sonne returning home) his former garment. His second proposition is also false as J had been if your strongth had been as good as your stomacke. Epist. 29. ad Hieron.  hath bin proued at large in a seuerall question. To that of S. Iames, although it belong not to this matter, I answere that he who offendeth in one, is made guilty of all: that is, he shall be as surely condomned, as if he had broken all; See S. Augustine. You denie the proposition; but if you did remember that the question is of meriting euerlasting life, which re∣quires the keeping of the whole law, you would neuer stick at it, for Iam. 2. 10. no man can be guiltie of the whole law, as euery one is that failes in any one commandement, and yet deserue euerlasting life. The reason of your deniall is not sufficient, for no one worke done with neuer so due
circumstances, can bring forth any merit of euerlasting life, whereof Master Perkins speakes in his definition. Indeede this reason is nothing, but a bare deniall of Master Perkins proofe. That you add of a mans losing, and recouering his merit, is liker a dreame, then a point of diuinitie, as it may well appeare by the poore proofe you bring of it, viz. a speech out of an allegory, and that also falsly translated, his former garment, for that best . or principall garment. Your vulgar Editio Lati∣na vulgar. latine calls it the first garment: Pagnin. Ve∣stem primam, praecipuam. Pagnin that prin∣cipall, your Glossa In∣terlin. interlinear glosse expounds it to signifie the garment of the holie ghost: and the Glossa ordin. ordinarie glosse giues a reason why it is called the first, because it is the garment of innocency, in which the first man was created, which in∣terpretation is taken out of De qq. Euan∣gel. Austin. But to the matter, What reason is there that merit should not be recompen∣ced according to iustice? If a man haue once deserued euer∣lasting life, why should he not haue it? Or if that merit be once lost, how can it be restored againe, but only by Gods acceptation? and then how can it be truly and properly merit? You must not only say, but shew too, that the place of S. Iames belongs not to this matter, els it is an easie matter to answere any authority of scripture. Let vs grant your owne interpretation, that he which breakes one commandement, shall be certainely condemned, how then can he deserue euerlasting life without keeping all the commandements? And what a strange and vnsauorie doctrine is it, that he which hath merited euerlasting life may be damned? But the meaning of the Apostle is that the seuerall commande∣ments are as it were seuerall conditions of a couenant be∣twixt God and man, whereof if any one be broken, the whole bond is forfeited, how exactly soeuer all the rest haue bin performed, what merit then can there be of life, where the partie is liable to damnation? Reason V. We are taught to pray on this manner, Giue vs this day our daily bread. Wherein we acknow∣ledge
euery morsell of bread to be the meere gift of God without desert: and therefore must we much more acknowledge life eternall to be euery way the gift of God. It must needs therefore be a satanicall insolencie for any man to imagine, that hee can by his workes merit eternall life, who cannot merit bread. M. Perkins taketh great delight to argue out of the Lords prayer:  Master Perkins knevv hovv to make better vse of it, then to patter it ouer as you doe. He vnderstood it better then you doe his ar∣gument. VVhat needeth that, if vve de∣serue it? but he handleth the matter so handsomely, that a man may thinke him to be so profoundly learned, that he doth not yet vnderstand the Pater noster: for who taketh our dayly food to be so meerely the gift of God, that we must not either make it ours with our peny, or trauaile? we must not looke to be fed from heauen by miracle, by the meere gift of God: but according vnto S. Paules rule, either labour for our liuing in some approued sort, or not cate. Yet because our trauailes are in vaine, vnlesse God blesse them, we pray to God daily to giue vs our nuriture, either by sending or preseruing the fruits of the earth, or by prospering our la∣bours with good successe: or if they be men who liue of almes, by stir ring vp the charitable to relieue them So we pray, and much more ear∣nestly that God will giue vs eternall life: Yet by such meanes as it hath pleased God to ordaine; one of which and the principall is by the ex∣ercise of good workes, which God hath appointed vs to walke in, to de∣serue it. And it cannot but sauour of a Satanicall spirit, to call it a Sata∣nicall insolencie (as M. Perkins doth) to thinke that eternall life can be If vve vvill beleeue your vvord.  merited: when Saint Augustine and the best spirit of men, since Christs time so thought and taught in most expresse tearmes. You take greater paines to disgrace Master Perkins Ar∣guments, then to disproue or vnderstand them: his reason lyes thus: He that cannot merit bread, cannot merit euerlasting life. But no man can merit bread. Therefore no man can merit euerlasting life. The proposition stands vpon the comparison of inequality, from the lesse to the greater, for it is a lesse matter to de∣serue bread, then to merit euerlasting life. The assumption is proued by that clause of the Lords prayer, wherein we beg our dayly bread, which we might claime of due debt, if we could deserue it. In stead of answering some part of the syllogisme, you
tell vs, that we must not looke to be fed from heauen by miracle without our owne trauell or cost, which is as much to purpose as if you should say, we must eate our bread when we haue it, if we will be fed. It is but a mockery to pray to God for it if we know we haue deserued it, vnlesse perhaps we thinke him so vniust, that it is well if we can get our owne of him by any meanes whatsoeuer. We deny not that we are to vse the meanes both for the one and the other, but that we can deserue ei∣ther by vsing the meanes. Reason VI. Consent of the auncient Church. De interpel∣latione Dauid. 4. vel ps 72. Yet is he one of your Saints. Bernard, Those which we call our merits, are the way to the kingdome, and not the cause of raigning. But let vs heare his last argument, which is (as he speaketh) the con∣sent of the auncient Church: and then beginneth with S. Bernard, who liued 1000. yeares after Christ: He (in I know not what place, the quo∣tation is so doubtfull) saith. Those things vvhich vve call merits, are the vvay to the Kingdome, but not the cause of raigning. You that twight vs so much with ignorance, and brag so much of your owne knowledge especially in the old writers, should haue all these places at your fingers ends, but this answere if it were true must needs be more by gesse then by cunning. Bernard sayes merits are the way, not the cause, if he had meant as you would haue him he should and would haue said, that they were not the whole cause, but the party or ioint cause, but he denyes them altogether the nature of causes by giuing them another place to be the way to heauen. I answere, that merits be not the whole cause, but the promise of God D. B. P. Serm. 68. in Cantic.  through Christ, and the grace of God freely bestowed on vs, out of which our merits proceed. Which is Bernards owne doctrine. What is Bernard ser. 68. in Cantic. Bernards owne doctrine? your whole answer, or only the later part of it? let the reader iudge. These are Bernards words, As it is inough to merit, not to presume of me∣rit, so to want merits is inough to condemnation. If he speake of merits properly taken what presumption is it for a man to demand his right? But because our good works, which he (as other auncient writers) calls merits, are imperfit,
therefore our greatest merit is, to know we merit not: for the later part of his sentence, we graunt, that it is inough to damnation, for a man to be without good works. It fol∣lowes in Bernard: No infants regenerate want merits, but haue Christs, whereof notwithstanding they make themselues vnwor∣thie, if they had opportunitie to add their owne, and neglected it, which is the danger of riper yeares. Infants (sayes Bernard) haue Christs merits, but, if they come to yeares, they must also haue some of their owne. What? merits to deserue heauen? then were Christs insufficient; but they must haue good works, without which they make themselues vnworthie of any benefit by Christ. Is not this whollie our doctrine? let vs heare his conclusion. Haue a care (sayes Bernard) to haue merits, hauing them, know they were giuen thee, hope for the fruite of them by the mercy of God, and thou hast auoided all danger, of pouertie, vnthankefulnes, and presumption. We must haue good workes, else wee are poore; we must know they are not of our selues, else we are vnthankfull; we must looke for reward of mercie, not of debt, else we are presumptuous. So that Bernard requires good workes, not as the cause, but as the way, betwixt Gods promise, and performance of gi∣uing euerlasting life to them that are iustified and sancti∣fied. August. Manual. cap. 22. All my hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my merit—:my merit is the passion of the Lord. I shall not be voide of merits, so long as Gods mercies are not wanting. Secondly, he citeth Saint Augustine. All my hope is in the death of my  Manual. c. 22. Lord: his death is my merit. True in a good sense: that is, by the vertue of his death, and passion, my sinnes are pardoned, and grace is bestowed on me to doe good workes, and so to merit. You leaue out the better halfe of that which was allea∣ged out of Austin; which indeede ouerthrowes your an∣swere, That Christ hath procured pardon and grace for you to merit by: but Austin saith, that the death and passion of the Lord are his merit: that is (by your interpretation) his merit of grace, not of glorie. For that he must merit, by well vsing
the grace which Christ hath deserued for him; to cut off this, Austin addes: Aug. Ma∣nual. cap. 22. I shall not be voide of merits, so long as Gods mercies are not wanting. Haue those works the true and whole nature of merit, which receiue their worth from Gods mercie? If you will answere, that by Gods mercie he meanes not his accepting of the worke, but his supplying vs with grace to worke: I replie, that he may, for all that mercie, want merits: because it depends vpon his own free will, when God hath done his vttermost, whether hee will worke or no. But that which followes in Austin, shewes, that all is in Gods mercie: If (saith he) the mercies of the Lord be many, I am much in merit: the mightier he is to saue, the more am I secure. So that Austin takes all from him∣selfe, and giues it to God. Basil. on Psal. 114. Eternall rest is reserued for them, which haue striuen lawfully in this life: not for the merits of their doings, but vpon the grace of the most bountifull God, in which they trusted. These words are vntruly translated: for first, he maketh with the A∣postle, eternall life to be the prize of that combate, and then addeth that it is not giuen according vnto the debt, and iust rate of the works, but in a fuller measure, according vnto the bounty of so liberall a Lord: Where hence is gathered that common and most true sentence. That God pu∣nisheth men vnder their deserts, but rewardeth them aboue their merits. Wherein lies the error of the translation? You take too much vpon you; as if all the world were bound to allow your word, without any further proofe. But let vs examine the translation. Eternall rest (saith Basil) Manetillos. is reserued for them who in this life haue striuen lawfully; not as Debitum o∣peribus reddi∣m. a debt paid them for their worke, but giuen them vpon the most bountifull grace of God, in whom they haue hoped. He is desirous to picke quar∣rels that findes fault with such translations. What one word hath Master Perkins left out, or misinterpreted, that might be any thing to your aduantage? But the testimonie was too plaine to admit any cauill, else the translation had been good enough. But your proofe is, at least, as bad as your accusation. To
prooue the words are vntruly translated, you tell vs, that Ba∣sil makes eternall life the prize of the combat: what is this to the purpose? where is the fault of the translation? But let vs take your interpretation of his meaning. If the reward be not giuen according to debt, but in a fuller measure, and yet no greater thing giuen than euerlasting life; doubtlesse our workes deserue not truly and wholy the reward of euer∣lasting life, that God bestowes on them of bountie. August. on Psal. 120. He crowneth thee, because he crowneth his owne gifts, not thy merits. S. Augustine was to wise, to let any such foolish sentence passe his penne: What congruity is in this. He crowneth thee, because he crowneth his ovvne gifts, not thy merits. It had been better said: He crowneth thee not, &c. It may be apparant to all men, who consider this mans course, in answering the testimonies of the Fathers, that he doth it by rote, and not by skill, not caring what their mea∣ning was, but gessing what, in his conceit, it might be. If he had lookt for the place, here alleaged, he would certainly haue answered, that Austin hath no such speech vpon that Psalme; and then perhaps he might with more reason haue denied that he hath it at all. The truth is the Printer mispla∣ced the cypher, and of Psalme 102. made 120. But Master Perkins truly alleaged Austins words and sentence, which this bold censurer calles foolish, and confidently affirmes, that Austin would not let any such foolish sentence passe his penne. Let himselfe iudge, whether Austin say so or no. We (saith Aug. in Psal. 102. Austin) that are ouercome in our selues, haue ouer∣come in him; therefore he crownes thee, because Quia dona sua coronat. he crownes his owne gifts, not thy merits. The sense is, that if God should looke to our actions of striuing against sinne, as they are weakly performed by vs, hee would neuer crowne them; but considering that wee striue by his grace, he vouchsafes them a reward, though on our part altogether vndeserued. But he mistooke belike this sentence of Saint Augustine. VVhen God crovvneth thee, he crovvneth his gifts, not thy merits. Which is true, be∣ing taken in that sense, which he himselfe declareth. To such a man so De grat. & hb. arb. cap. 6. thinking (that is, that he hath merits of himselfe, without the grace of
God,) it may be most truly said: God doth crovvne his ovvne gifts, not thy merits. If thy merits be of thy selfe, and not from him: but if we acknow∣ledge our merits to proceed from grace working vvith vs, then may vve as truly say, that eternall life is the crowne and revvard of merits. Austin hath the same sentence, for the substance of it, in Aug in Psal. 98. & epistola 105. & de gra. & lib. arb. ca. 6. many other places, and namely in that you alleage, though not altogether as you alleage it. For, after those words, If thy merits be of thy selfe, it followes in De grat. & lib. arb. cap. 6. Austin, for these, if they be such, are naught; those that are naught, God crownes not; but, if they be good, they be the gifts of God. The rest, and the greater halfe of the sentence is none of Austins, but yours; yet closely conueied by you, as if it were his no lesse than the former. And Psal. 142. Lord thou wilt quicken me in thy iu∣stice, not in mine: not because I haue deserued it, but be∣cause thou hast compassion. His other place on the Psalme, is not to this purpose: but appertaines to the first iustification of a sinner, as the first word, quicken and reuiue  Psal. 142. me sheweth plainely: now we confesse that a sinner is called to repen∣tance and reuiued, not for any desert of his owne, but of Gods meere mercie. It will not serue the turne to say, It is not to this purpose, but speakes of the first iustification of a sinner. For Dauid, who is held to be the penner of it, was truly iustified, before the writing of that Psalme: yea the whole course of the Psalme it selfe manifestly prooues, that it was the prayer of one greatly in Gods fauour, and strongly perswaded of his suc∣cour. But what neede I seeke any proofes? Haue you for∣gotten, that a few lines before you confest as much, when as you would haue shifted off that place, in the second verse of this Psalme, by answering, that the Prophet prayed onely for veniall and light sinnes? How then is the case so sud∣denly altred? Forsooth, because he saith, Thou shalt quicken me. For so indeed he saith, and not, Quicken me, as you write. But this quickning, is not giuing him grace to iustification, but comforting, and relieuing him in the troubles hee speakes of; and (as Lyra ad Psalm. 142. Lyra truly expounds it) deliuering him from the daunger of death, which hung ouer his
head, by reason of his sonne Absoloms vnnaturall re∣bellion. Obiections of Papists. Obiect. I. In sundrie places of Scripture, promise of reward is made to them that beleeue and do good workes: therefore our workes doe merit: for a re∣ward and merit be relatiues. Answ. Reward is two∣fold: of debt, and of mercie. Life euerlasting is not a reward of debt but of mercie, giuen of the good will of God, without anything done of man. Hauing thus at length answered, vnto all that M. Perkins hath allea∣ged against merittes: Let vs see what can be said for them, following as neere as I can M. Perkins order. First, in sundry places of Scripture, promise of reward is made vnto good workes. If thou doe vvell, shalt thou not receiue? To him that doth Genes. 4. Prouer. 11. Eccles. 18 Matth. 5. vvell there is a faithfull revvard. Feare not to be iustified vnto death, be∣cause the revvard of God remaineth for euer; and. VVhen you are reuiled and persecuted for my sake, reioyce, for great is your reward in heauen. And a hundred such like: therefore such workes doe merit heauen, for a re∣ward supposeth that there was a desert of it. M. Perkins answereth first, that the reward is of meere mercie with∣out VVithout any thing deserued by doing. any thing done by men. But this is most apparantly false: for the Scripture expresseth the very workes whereof it is a reward: Againe, a reward in English supposeth a former pleasure, which is rewarded, o∣therwise it were to be called a gift, and not a reward: and much more the Latin, and Greek word, Misthos, Merces, which rather signifie a mans hire and wages, then a gift or reward. M. Perkins saith not, that reward is promised to workes, but to them that beleeue and doe good workes: where, if there be any desert, it is wholy in the person, if not onely. Yea all the places, you needlesly alleage, mention reward to the doer, not to the deed. To the former part of the place out of Ecclesiastic. 18. Ecclesiasticus, I answered before; I adde now concerning the latter, which belongs to this argument, viz. Because the reward of God re∣maines for euer; that it is not in the Greeke copie, Caraffa. Pagnin. Greeke copie, nor in Caraffas Latin, nor in Pagnines. Vatablus Vatablus hath it indeede, but within two hookes, as a sentence suspected. The edi∣tion
of Complutum and Aas Montanus wholy omit it. Complutes. Aas Monta∣nus. There is nothing done by man that can deserue such a re∣ward, though there be something done, for which the doer is rewarded. A reward supposeth some action which is rewarded, but not alwaies vpon desert. It may well be called a reward, be∣cause it is giuen in respect of the worke, howsoeuer not for the worth of it. The Greeke , merces. , and the Latin merces, signifie a reward for somewhat done, either vpon couenant, or otherwise, but prooue not any merit in the worke. Secondly, the kingdome of heauen is properly an inheritance giuen of a father to a child, and there∣fore it is called a reward not properly, but by a figure or by resemblance. For as a workeman hauing en∣ded his labour, receiueth his wages: so after men haue lead their liues and finished their course in kee∣ping faith and good conscience, as dutifull children, God giueth them eternall life. And hereupon it is termed a reward. Wherefore M. Perkins skippes to a second shift: that forsooth eter∣nall life is an inheritance, but not a reward. Reply. We know well that it is an inheritance, because it is only due vnto the adopted Sonnes of God: but that hindereth not it to be a re∣ward, for that it is our heauenly fathers pleasure, that all his Sons com∣ming Jt is due, be∣cause they are Sonnes. to the yeares of discretion, shall by their good carriage either de∣serue it, or else for their bad behauiour be disinherited. An inheritance is not due to the sonne onely, because none, except hee bee a sonne, can haue it, but is his proper right, because he is a sonne. And therfore it is vnreasonable, both in Diuinitie and Law, that the sonne should be bound to purchase that by his labour, to which by a naturall right he hath full interest. This is our case: for though we are not sonnes by nature, but Gal. 4. 5. Rom. 8. 17. by adoption, yet being sonnes and heires, yea ioynt heires with Christ, the naturall sonne, of whose bodie we are members, the very nature of our sonneship, or being sonnes, conueies vnto vs a sufficient and certaine title to the inheritance. It is indeed the pleasure of God our Fa∣ther,
that we should labour to expresse our thankfulnes, by all holy obedience to him, that hath adopted vs for his chil∣dren, and that we, after this labour, should receiue the inhe∣ritance; not deserue that by our labour, to which wee haue alreadie a farre better claime, by being sonnes. Thirdly, if I should graunt that life euerlasting is a deserued reward, it is not for our workes, but for Christs merit imputed to vs, causing vs thereby to merit: and thus the relation stands directly between the Reward and Christs Merit applied vnto vs. M. Perkins hauing so good reason to distrust his two former answeres,  It is not distrust in  ormer ansvvere, but desire to giue satisfaction. flies to a third: and graunteth that eternal life is a reward, yet not of our workes, but of Christs merits imputed vnto vs: This is that Castle wher∣in he holds himselfe safe from all Canon shotte, but he is fouly abused, for this answere is the most extrauagant of all the rest, as being furthest off from the true sense of the Scripture: examine any one of the places, and a babe may discouer the incongruity of it. Namely Christ saith that great is their reward, who are reuiled and persecuted for his sake. Assig∣ning the reward vnto their constant bearing and enduring of tribulati∣on for Gods sake; and not to his owne merits imputed, and if you desire a formall sentence, fitting this purpose take this. Euery man shall receiue 1. Cor. 3. his reward, according vnto his ovvne proper labour: And not according to Christs merits imputed vnto him. So a doer of the vvorke shall be blessed Iacob. 1. in his deed. And not in the imputation of anothers deed. Master Perkins did not, nor needed mistrust either of his former answers; but because he knew that diuers men were moued with diuers reasons, he added this third, to see, if by Gods blessing this might giue satisfaction, where the other were not fully vnderstood. It is not Master Perkins meaning to say, that in these our works there is desert by Christs me∣rit imputed, but that, if the children of God must needes be thought to receiue euerlasting life, as of merit, the merit is  Iudge (indiffe∣rent Reade) vvhat there s in this reason either obscure or hard, that the Past in his anse should vv properly Christs imputed to them. Obiect. II. Christ by his death merited that our workes should merit life euerlasting. Answ. That is false: all we find in Scripture is, that Christ by his merit procured pardon of sinne, imputation of righ∣teousnesse, and life euerlasting: and it is no where
said in the word of God, that Christ did merit, that our workes should merit: it is a dotage of their owne deuising. He died not for our good workes to make them able to satisfie Gods anger: but for our sinnes, that they might be pardoned. Thus much saith the Scripture, and no more. And in that Christ did suf∣ficiently merit life eternall for vs, by his owne death: it is a sufficient proofe that hee neuer intended to giue vs power of meriting the same: vnlesse wee suppose that at some time hee giues more then is needefull. Againe, Christ in the office of mediation as he is a King, Priest, and Prophet, admitteth no de∣putie or fellow. For he is a most perfect Mediatour, doing all thinges by himselfe, without the helpe of any. And the Ministers that dispence the word are not his deputies, but reasonable and voluntarie in∣struments, which he vseth. But if men by workes can merit increase of grace and happinesse for them∣selues, then hath Christ partners in the worke of re∣demption: men doing that by him, which hee doth of himselfe, in procuring their saluation. Nay, if this might stand, that Christ did merit, that our workes should merit, then Christ should merit that our stai∣ned righteousnesse beeing for this cause not capable of merit, should neuerthelesse merit. I call it stained; because we are partly flesh, and partly spirit: and therfore in our selues deseruing the curse of the law, though wee bee regenerate. Againe, for one good worke wee doe, wee haue many euill, the offence whereof defaceth the merit of our best deedes, and makes them too light in the ballance of the law. Insteed of our second reason, blindly proposed by M. Perkins, I vvill
confirme the first with such texts of holy writ, as specifie plainly your good A poore shift. workes to be the cause of eternall life. The second reason is so cleerely set downe, that (me thinkes) you dare not looke vpon it, for feare of hauing your eyes dazled by the brightnes of it. A sillie shift to auoid an argument, which you cannot answere. Come vnto me yee blessed of my Father, possesse a Kingdome prepared for  Matth. 25. you: And why so? For vvhen I vvas hungry, yee gaue me meate. And so foorth: the like is in the same Chapter of the seruants, who imployed well their talents: for their Lord said vnto them. Because you haue been faithfull in fevv things, I vvill place you ouer many. And many such like; Not because your faithful∣nes hath fully deserued it. where good workes done by the parties themselues are expresly saide to be the very cause, why God rewardeth them with the kingdome of hea∣uen: Thorefore he must needs be holden for a very vvrangler, that doth seeke to peruert such euident speeches, and vvould make the simple be∣leeue, that the cause there formally specified, is not to be taken for the cause, but doth only signifie an order of things. The places you bring to prooue that good workes are the cause of eternall life, proue not that the things that were done, did truly and wholy deserue such a reward; which is the question. No more doth August. in Psalm. 49. Austins exposition. Wee are iudged according to our workes: so that if any man should wonder, why these are receiued into heauen, those cast into hell, rather than those into heauen, these into hell; our Sa∣uiour tels them, that hee doth not erre in the difference hee makes, which must be according to workes: These haue done well, and therefore are they that must be saued: Those euill, and therefore are the men that must be condemned. So that his iudgement is right, because it is according to works, though workes bee not the meritorious cause of life trulie and wholie. But if any desire besides the euidence of the text, to see how the aun∣cient Fathers take it. Let him read S. Augustine: Where he thus brief∣ly handleth this text. Come yee blessed of my Father, receiue: VVhat shall In Psal. 49. vve receiue? A Kingdome. For vvhat cause? Because I vvas hungrie, and you gaue me meate, &c. Of the reall imputation of Christs merits, there vvas no tydings in those daies: And that iudicious Doctor, found that good vvorkes vvas the cause of receiuing the kingdome of heauen. In this, and such like sentences of the Fathers we must re∣member that obseruation of Sixtus Se∣nens. biblioth. sanct. lib. 6. annot 152. Sixtus Senensis a learned Papist, and not presse their words to the vttermost. It fol∣lowes
in Austin immediatly, what is so Tam vile. little worth, what so earthly, as to breake bread to the hungry? Tanti valet regnum coelo∣rum. That is the price of the kingdome of heauen. Now will any man be so absurd, as to imagin that Austin thought, that the giuing of a peece of bread to a poore body was in deede the price of heauen, by which it might be truly and wholie bought? If it be of no greater value, it was scarse worth the purchasing with the blood of the Sonne of God. The reuerend Father rhetori∣cally amplifies the point, to inforce his exhortatiō to works of charity, which is also our Sauiours reason in that parable. Now that the reward we receiue is not truly and wholie de∣serued by the works there mentioned, it may appeare, be∣cause Chrysost. & Theophyl. ad illum locum Matth. 25. Chrysostome and Theophylact stand so precisely vpon the manner of speach. He saith not Take it (say they) but possesse it as an inheritance, whereas you say it is both an in∣heritance, and a reward. Besides Opus imper∣fect. in Matth. homil 54. apud Chrysostom. another saith, That God did not make the kingdome of heauen of no greater value then mans righteousnes could deserue: and after, not according to the narrownes of mans righteousnes. And lastly, God (saith he) appointed not the reward of the saincts, according to the reward of men, but according to his owne bountie. Here by the vvay M. Perkins redoubleth that common slaunder of  This is dravvn out of Master Perkins second reason, vvhich you durst not propound. theirs: that vve take avvay a part of Christs mediation. For saith he, if Christs merits vvere sufficient, vvhat need ours? It hath been often told them, but they vvil neuer learne to vnderstand it: I vvil yet once againe repeate it. We hold our Sauiours merits to be of infinite value, and to haue deserued of God all the graces and blessings, vvhich hath or shall be bestovved vpon all men, from the beginning of the vvorld vnto the end of it: yet his diuine vvill and order, is that all men of diseretion, ha∣uing freely receiued grace from him, doe merit that crovvne of glorie, vvhich is prepared for them, not to supply the vvant of his merits, which are inestimable, but being members of his mystical body, he vvould haue vs also like vnto himselfe in this point of meriting: and further desirous to traine vs vp in all good vvorkes, he best knevv, that there could be no And so of re∣deeming our selues by me∣riting. better spurre to pricke our dull nature forvvard, then to ordaine and pro∣pose such heauenly revvards vnto all them, that vvould diligently ende∣uour to deserue them. Master Perkins truly chargeth you to make your selues partners with Christ in the worke of your saluation, for he that is by his owne works a deseruer of euerlasting life, is
(in some part at least) a sauiour of himselfe, so that howso∣euer you magnifie in words the infinitnes of Christs satisfa∣ction and merits, yet in truth you make it either not suffici∣ent, or not effectuall to the sauing of them, who must by their works truly and wholie merit euerlasting life, and re∣ceiue it, not as ioint heirs with Christ by the right of sonnes, but as hirelings for wages due to their works. If you would graunt vs an assured interest to heauen by vertue of our be∣ing sonnes, and claime no more of God, but increase of glo∣rie vpon his promise, according to our works, without plea∣ding desert, you and we should agree in this point; neither should we be driuen either to ouer valew our owne righte∣ousnes, by thinking it deserues heauen, or to despaire alto∣gether of saluation, because we cannot do such works as do truly and fully merit heauen. That God would haue vs like vnto his Sonne in true o∣bedience, and patient suffering, we finde in the Phil. 2. 5. 8.  Rom. 8. 29. scriptures, and beleeue; that we should also be like him in meriting, when you prooue by the same authoritie, we will beleeue. In the meane while giue vs leaue rather to rest vpon Christ only and his merits, the sufficiencie whereof we certainely know, then to trust to our owne deserts, which (when they are at the best) seeme to vs worthie of damnation rather then reward, which notwithstanding we assuredly looke for vpon Gods promise, and acceptation, not vpon our desert or perfection, which comes alwayes short of that which is inioyned vs. But it is Gods purpose to traine vs vp in good works, it is so out of question, Ephes. 2. 10. for we are his workemanship, created in Christ Iesus, vnto good works, which God hath ordained, that we should walke in them. And is there no sufficient meanes (thinke you) to prick vs forward to do good works, vnlesse we may perswade ourselues, we shal merit heauen by them? See the difference betwixt children and seruants. And yet forsooth you would beare the world in hand that you do all of pure loue to God, whereas indeed you would do no∣thing at all, but that your pride is satisfied for the present
by the perswasion of the good vse of your free will, and your hope fed with opinion of euerlasting life to be paid you hereafter, as the deserued hire of your worthie works: we on the other side Rom. 8. 17. being led with the affection of chil∣dren, Rom. 12. 1. pricked on with the feeling of Gods incomprehen∣sible mercie: 1. Cor. 15. 58 incouraged by his gratious promises of ac∣cepting our poore indeuours to do him seruice; Rom. 5. 3. rauisht with the expectatiō of such a reward as is assured vs, though without desert; Psalm. 16. 2. Matth. 25. 37. ashamed in our selues euery day of our vn∣kindnes and vnthankfulnes in doing no more; Psal 130. 3. & 143. 2. Dan. 9. 7. 8. 20. yea con∣demned in our owne hearts for doing our best works so vnperfitly; yet by the blessing of God, and assistance of his spirit, presse forwards to the reward that is prepared for vs, through the way of good works which our father hath set vs in. I haue bin caryed on in this course farther then I pur∣posed. Let euery man that hath a true desire to glorifie God more than himselfe iudge betwixt vs and you, out of the sin∣ceritie of his heart, whether our doctrine or yours be more to Gods glory. The man seemes to be much ignorant in the matter of Christs media∣tion: I vvill therefore helpe him a little. It consisteth in reconciling man to God: vvhich he performed by paying the ransome of our sinnes, in purchasing vs Gods fauour, and in ordaining meanes hovv all mankind might attaine to eternall life, in the tvvo first points, vve do for the most part agree: to vvit, that oursinnes are freely pardoned through Christs passion: and that vve are as freely iustified, and receiued, first into Gods grace and fauour: although vve require other preparation then they doe, yet vve as fully deny any merit of ours to be cause of either, as they doe. Marry about the meanes of attaining to heauen, vve differ altoge∣ther: for they say that God requires no iustice in vs, nor merit at all on our parts, but only the disposition of faith, to lay hold on Christs righ∣teousnes and merittes: but vvesay that Christs righteousnes and merit, are incommunicable vnto any meere creature: but that through his merits, God doth povvre into euery true Christian, a particular iustice, vvhereby he is sanctified, and made able to doe good vvorks, and to me∣rit eternall life. Which ability vve receiuing of Gods free gift, through Christ merits, doth much more magnifie both Gods grace, and Christs merits: for the greater that the gift is, the greater is the glorie of the gi∣uer. And to argue that to be a derogation vnto his mediation and me∣rits, vvhich hee hath appointed to bee the very instrument of applying the vertue of them to vs, is indeed vnder colour of magnifying Christs
merits, to vndermine, and blovv out all the vertue of them. Though you denie all merit in the first iustification, yet you make euery mans free will the cause that hee particu∣larly is iustified, and so make him more beholding to him∣selfe, then to God, because he hath from God, that he may be saued if he wil; from himself, that he wils, and so is saued. It is a greater gift to vouchsafe vs euerlasting life with∣out our desert, then to make vs able to deserue it; and more for Gods glory that we should haue it, of his free gift, then of our deseruing by his gift, since the abilitie only to vse the gift well is from him, but the vsing of it from our owne free will, as before. But saies M. Perkins, vvhat should vve talke of our merittes, vvho for one good vvorke vve doe, commit many bad, vvhich deface our merits, if vve had any. True it is, as it was once before said, that euery mortall sinne, blotteth VVe must not pleade merit, because vve de∣serue damna∣tion.  out all former iustice and merit: but by repentance, both are recouered againe: but must we not speake of any good, because we may happe to doe euill? that is a faire perswasion, and well vvorthy a wise man. Of this iest, whereby merit is made to rise and fall, I spake a little before, and shewed how vniust & impossible it was. You may speake of, and do what good you will, but not pleade desert, because you haue so many sinnes to con∣demne you. Obiect. III. Our workes merit by bargaine or couenant, because God hath promised to rewarde them. Ans. The worde of God sets downe two co∣uenants: on Legall, the other Euangelicall. In the legall couenant life euerlasting is promised to works, for that is the condition of the law; Do these things, and thou shalt liue. But on this manner can no man merit life euerlasting, because none is able to doe all that the law requires; whether we respect the man∣ner, or the measure of obedience. In the Euangeli∣call couenant, the promises that are made, are not made to any worke of vertue in man, but to the wor∣ker:
not for any merit of his owne person or worke, but for the person and merit of Christ. For example, it is a promise of the Gospell, Be faithfull vnto death, and I will giue thee the crowne of life. Reuelat. 2. 10. Here the promise is not made to the vertue of fidelitie, but to the faithfull person; whose fidelitie is but a token that he is in Christ: for the merit of whose obedi∣ence God promiseth the crowne of life. Let vs come to our third Argument. God hath by couenant and pro∣mise, bound himselfe to reward our workes with life euerlasting: There∣fore good workes do in iustice deserue it: for faithfull promise maketh due debt. The couenant is plainly set downe: where God in the person Matth. 20. of an housholder agreeth with his workmen, for a peny a day: that is, to giue them life euerlasting for trauailing in his seruice during their life time, as all auncient interpretours expound it. The antecedent being granted that God hath promist to reward our works, your prouing that might haue bin spared, especiallie being such as it is, fetched from a parable not ex∣pounded any where in the scripture. Yea the Fathers them∣selues haue obserued something in the parable, as that of their murmuring, who had wrought all day, which will not be handsomely expounded, of the reward giuen in heauen, as any man may perceiue by the diuers expositions that are vsed to help the matter, by Chrysost. Gregor. Hie∣ron. Hilar. Glossa ordin. apud Thom. in Caten. ad Matth. 20. Chrysostome, Gregory, Ierome, Hillary, and the author of your ordinarie glosse. Therefore Lyra ad Matth. 20. Lyra doubts not to say plainely, that the literall sense is, that in the beginning of the Church the Iewes that were conuer∣ted murmured, because the Gentiles obtained like fauour to them, which he prooues out of the Act. 11. 2. Acts. And indeed that seemes to haue bin the end of the parable, to shew the Matth. 19. 30 & 20. 1. 16. re∣iection of the Iewes, who were the first, and the receiuing of the Gentiles, who were the last. To which purpose Hieron. ad Matth. 20. Ierome saith, that the Iewes which were the head shall be turned to the taile, and the Gentiles who were the taile shall be chan∣ged to the head. And for the penny, he seemes to expound that of grace, rather then glory. A penny (saith he) hath the figure of the king, thou hast therefore receiued the reward I
promised, that is, my image and likenes, which was also Cyprian. Epist. 66. ad Magnum. §. 10 Heb. 6. 2. Thes. 1. Lib. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 2. Cypri∣ans opinion, as it appeares in his epistle to Magnus. Whereupon S. Paul inferreth, that God should be vniust, if he should forget their workes, who suffered persecution for him: And saith, If it be iust with God, to render tribulation to them that persecute you, and to such as are persecuted, rest with vs: Vpon the same ground S. Hierome saith, Great truly were the iniustice of God, if he did only punish ll works, and vvould not as well receiue good workes. To all thse, and much more such like, M. Perkins answereth, that couenant for workes was in the old Testament, but in the new, the couenant is made with the workman, not with the worke. Reply. All that I cited in this Argument, is out of the new Testament, You meane the booke, not the couerant. Matth. 19. Both these are of the old coue∣nant.  where expresse couenant is made for working, and workes, as you haue heard. And as it was said in the old law, Doe these things and thou shalt liue: so is it said in the new, If thou vvill enter into life, keepe the Com∣maundements: and life eternall, is the hire, and wages, for labouring in Gods vineyard, and not of the imputed iustice, or merits of Christ: Vpon what doth Heb 6. 10. 12 S. Paul inferre that? not vpon that pa∣rable; and much lesse vpon the expositions of it, which then were not hatcht: but vpon the promises of God, made to them which through faith and patience attaine to the inhe∣ritance of those promises. And this is that iustice the 2. Thes. 1. 6. A∣postle speaks of, hauing no ground, but Gods gratious pro∣mise to accept and reward our workes, though their worth deserue no such recompence. Which Chrysost. ad Matth. 20. Chrysostom signifieth in his Commentarie vpon the other place, where he saith, The reward shall be greater than the worke; not onely in conti∣nuance, whereof also he speaketh, but in the measure too. He ioynes them (saith Chrysostome) in respect of their crownes, with those who haue done farre greater things than they. So that euerlasting life is not truly and properly deserued by works, but is giuen by promise to them that doe worke. If you will vrge the point of iustice, I answere, the Apostle speaketh ac∣cording to the common speech of men, who count it a mat∣ter of iniustice, not to doe well to them that doe well; and ill to them that doe ill. And in this generall respect God in∣deede deales iustly, punishing them that haue behaued themselues lewdly and wickedly, and rewarding them that haue liued righteously and vertuously: So that herein stands
his iustice, in giuing euery man according to his own works; without the following of which course, there cannot be (or∣dinarily) any iustice. And therefore Hieron. cont. Iouin. lib. 2. c. 2 Ierome truly saith, that God doth both punish euill workes, and receiue or accept of good workes: but not as if there were an equalitie of merit in ei∣ther sort of workes, to the punishment or reward he giues; onely, as he saith there, because he would haue none that are fallen despaire of Gods mercie, he thus amplifies his regard of them; as though it were an vniust thing for God, as Chryso∣stome speakes, to contemne and forget them that haue ex∣ercised themselues in workes of charitie. You haue brought no place of any expresse couenant, but that which being allegoricall, and (as I said before) not expounded in the Scripture, can hardly affoord any certain proofe: and none at all of the matter, for which you bring it. Whereas if the point were so cleere, as you would make it, being of so great importance, doubtlesse it would haue more direct confirmation in Scripture, than by allegories and exhortations. But it seemes you doe not rightly vnder∣stand Master Perkins distinction; who denies not that a re∣ward is promised for working, and workes, euen in the new couenant, but makes this difference, that by the couenant of the law the wages is due to him that workes, vpon the value of his worke; but by the couenant of the Gospell the re∣ward is giuen, not for the worth of the deede, but because the worke is accepted for the workmans sake, who by faith is the sonne of God. Neither of those speeches are any part of the new coue∣nant, though they be recorded in the new Testament. And the Matth. 19. 17 latter was our Sauiours own speech, to beate down the pride of him that would be iustified by the law: but of this before. The parable is often vrged, but nothing prooued out of it. He that will haue euerlasting life, as hire of his tra∣uaile, proclaimeth himselfe to be a hireling, not a sonne. And therefore Christ saith further, I come quickly, and will giue to euery man according to his workes: marke,
hee saith not to the worke, or for the worke, but to the worker according to his workes. And thus the bond of all other promises of the Gospell, in which God willingly binds himselfe to reward our workes, doe not directly concerne vs, but haue respect to the person, and obedience of Christ, for whose sake a∣lone God binds himselfe as debter vnto vs, and giues the recompence or rewarde, according to the mea∣sure of our faith testified by our workes. And there∣fore it cannot be truely gathered, that workes do me∣rit by any promise or couenant, passed on Gods part to man. But looke about you, and behold the goodly marke which M. Perkins sets vp: Marke saith he, that it is said, God will render vnto euery man according to his workes: not to the worke, or for the worke. O sharpe and ouer fine witte? doth he render according to the workes, and doth he not render for the workes? if the rate of the workes be the measure of the revvard, that for fevver or lesser vvorkes, there is a lesser revvard, and for many and vvorthier, a greater: surely, in my simple vnderstan∣ding, he that giueth according vnto the vvorks, giueth for the vvorks. We denie not that the reward is to and for the worke; but that the value of the worke deserues it: which worth being wanting, the reward is bestowed vpon the partie ac∣cording to his worke; not for the desert of it. In another sense, it is all one to say, according to the worke, or for the worke. As in generall he rewards them that doe well, be∣cause they doe well; and he punisheth them that doe ill, be∣cause they doe ill; and so giues to both according, or for their workes. Some may say, if workes merit not, why are they mentioned in the promises? I answere, not because they merit, but because they are tokens that the do∣er of the worke is in Christ, for whose merit the pro∣mise shall be accomplished. That other addle inuention (that vvorkes are there mentioned, not because they are revvarded, but because they are tokens, that the doer is in Christ, for vvhose obedience God promiseth the crovvne of life) is
not vvorth the confuting, it is so flat contrarie to the text: vvhich ascri∣beth distinctly that revvard vnto the vvorkman for his vvorkes, and not for Christs obedience imputed vnto him. What text meane you? Sure neither of both those, to which Master Perkins answers, hath any such direct ascri∣bing of the reward to the workman for his works. But it is the latter (I thinke) you speake of, which you haue labou∣red to confute: what is there in that, but that Christ wil giue to euery man according to his worke? That is, as Reuel. 22. 11 the verse next before shewes, to punish the vniust and filthie, and to reward the righteous and holie. Obiect. IV. Good works are perfect and without fault, for they are the workes of the holy Ghost, who cannot sinne: therefore they merit. Ans. If workes did proceede onely and immediately from the holy Ghost, there could not be any fault in them: but our works come from the holy Ghost, in and by the will and vnderstanding of man: and by this meanes they are tainted with sinne: as water in the fountaine is both cleare and sweete, yet the streames thereof pas∣sing through the filthie channell, are defiled thereby. Againe, they reason thus: That which we are bound to doe hath no fault in it: but we are bound to doe good workes: therefore they are perfect. Answ. The proposition must be expounded: that which we are bound to doe, in it selfe, according to the intention of the commander, hath no fault: or, that which we are bound to doe according as we are bound to doe it, hath no fault, yet in regard of the intention of the doer, or in regard of our manner of doing, it may bee faultie. M. Perkins fourth obiection for vs, is proposed vnskilfully, yet could D. B. P. VVhat mise∣rable shufling is this? Which confu∣tation hath al∣ready been an∣svvered. VVas there none therefore,  he not ansvvere it, but by relying vpon that vvhich is most vntrue, that forsooth no one action of the best man is vvithout fault: vvhith hath bin alreadie confuted, and might be by instances of Abrahams oblation of his Sonne, S. Iohn Baptists preaching, and reprehending of Herode. Ste∣phens
martyrdome, vvith infinite such like, in vvhich M. Perkins, nor any else vvill be able to shevv in particular, vvhat fault there vvas. Will this shifting neuer be left? What want of skill finde you in propounding the obiection? If you could haue told, we should haue been sure to heare of it. Well, let reaso∣nable men iudge. There lackes only the proposition, which any man may supplie; and the assumption, wherein the doubt lies, is prooued by a further reason. What meanes this, yet? as if he had propounded it vn∣skilfully, that he might answere it the easier. Is not his an∣swere plaine, and direct to the proofe of the assumption, in which the strength of the argument consists? But you say, his answere hath been alreadie confuted. I replie, that the confutation hath been alreadie answered. And to the in∣stances you now bring, I adde further, that howsoeuer wee cannot alleage any particular faults in the worthie actions of some extraordinarie men; yet we intreat you to remem∣ber that they were men, hauing Gal. 5. 17. Rom. 7. 24. the flesh in them lusting a∣gainst the spirit, naturall corruption not wholy abolished, to taint their workes; and Hieron. epist. ad Ctesiph. cont. Pelag. Matth. 6. Luke 12. that God can see an error, or want, where men thinke the thing cannot be bettered. Againe, our Sauiour saith: That if the eye be simple, the vvhole body is lightsome, not hauing any part of darknes in it: and very reason teacheth vs, that a mans action, for substance and all due circumstances, may be perfect. I would faine heare what you would conclude vpon that Matth. 6. 22. Luk. 11. 34. place of the eyes simplenes. If by the eye you vnderstand the heart, and thinke to proue that mens actions are good, because the heart is good, either your consequence of the proposition is naught, if by heart you meane intent, (for a good intent makes not by and by a good worke) or else your assumption will be false, imagining such a measure of purenes in the heart as is not in this life to be found. Your Glossa ordin. ad Matth. 6. Glosse vpon the place referres it to the intention, but ar∣gues not from thence any perfection. If thou do good works with as pure intention as thou are able, they are the works of light, though it seeme not so to the world. And Glossa In∣terlin. ibid. another Glosse saith, that by the intent works are discerned, whether they be
works of light, or of darkenes, not as you say, whether they be perfit, or vnperfit. A third I yea ibid. Glosse restraines it more, say∣ing, it is a metaphoricall speach, as if he should haue said, as thy bodily eye directs thy bodily actions, so the eye of the mind by a right intention directs humane actions In quantum inest ratio bo∣ni moralis. as farre as concernes the nature of morall goodnes. If the intent of the mind be right, the whole heape of thy actions shall be good and belie, so that the worke be lawfull, In genere. for the kind of it. I will adde no more, let all men iudge what truth there is like to be in that doctrine, that can find no better warrant of scripture. It vvas then a very seely shift to say, that neuer any man did any one D. B. P. He doth not say so in his an∣svvere.  action, vvith all his due circumstances. Whose shift is this? sure not Master Perkins in this an∣swere. But why is it a shift? because you say that reason tea∣cheth vs that a mans actions, for substance, and all due cir∣cumstances, may be perfit. I dare not take it for true vpon your word, in morall actions, according to the light of na∣ture: and if it were true in them, I should not be resolued, that therefore it were also true in them, according to the law of God. But insteed of that fourth Argument, I vvill put this: If a greater re∣vvard be due vnto them that do better workes, then a reward is due vn∣them that do good workes, vvhici is euident in reason: But a greatot re∣vvard is prouided for them that doe better. He that considers this reason of yours, would thinke, there was small cause why you should condemne Master Perkins for want of skill in propounding the last argument. for you to mend the matter, first bring vs out a false syllogisme, and then conclude that, which we denie not. your syllogisme is false, because the assumption is not taken out of the propo∣sition, as it should be, but is a new matter, as it were a fourth terme brought in. for your assumption should be, But a greater reward is due: in steed whereof you say, a greater is prouided. Now to be prouided, and to be due, is not all one, because many things are prouided for meere gifts, whch are no way due. your conclusion must be, Therefore a re∣ward is due to them which do good works. who saith otherwise? but this due is of promise, not of desert.
As S. Augustine grounded vpon Gods vvord, proueth in sundry pla∣ces:  Serm. 46. de verbis Dom. 1. Cor. 15. Serm. 95. Lib. de virg. cap. 44. namly, vpon that, For starre dissereth from starre in glory, so shall be the resurrection from the dead; specifying that virginity shall shine after one sort, chastity in vvedlocke after another, and holy vviddovvhood yet after another: all (saith he) shall be there, but they shine diuersly: And of the same vvorke affirmeth, That martyrdome, shall be higher revvarded, then any other vvorke. The like doth he vpon those vvords, One ground shall yeeld thirty fold, another threescore folde, another an hundred folde: Comparing chastity in vvedlocke to the thirtie, in vviddovves to the sixtie, and in virgins to the hundred. But most directly in his sixtie seauen trea∣tise vpon S. Iohns Gospell vpon this verse: Jn my Fathers house are many mansions: vvhere he saith, that albeit some be holier, iuster, and more va∣liant then others, yet there shall be fit roomes for them all, vvhere eue∣ry one is to receiue his place according vnto his merit. That peny spo∣ken Matth. 20. of (by vvhich saith he is signified eternall life) shall be giuen to eue∣ry man equally: because euery one shall liue for euer, and not one lon∣ger then another: but many mansions do signifie the different dignities of merits in the same euerlasting life. And Saint Gregorie in most expresse tearmes, doth teach the same do∣ctrine, Lib. 4. mo. cap. 42. saying: Because in this life there is a difference of vvorkes amongst vs, there shall be in the other life vvithout all doubt a distinction of digni∣ties: that as one here exceedeth another in merit, so there one surpasseth another i revvard. Finally, S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, condemne it De haeres. haer. 82. Lib. 2. cont. Iouin.  as an heresie, to hold that there is not diuersitie of merits in this life, and revvards in the next: Whereon follovveth most manifestly, that there be merits and revvards. Al this labour of heaping vp needlesse testimonies might well haue been spared, especially since they proue not that which you should haue assumed, That greater reward is due; but that which you did assume, That greater reward is proui∣ded. Wherefore letting passe the three former, which are nothing to the purpose; to the Aug. n Ioh. tract. 67. last I answere: that by me∣rits, good works are meant, as by meriting, working, not that which is truly and properly desert. Beside, it is expresly set downe in that testimony out of Gregory, wherein that which is termed worke in the former part of the sentence, in the latter is called merit. The same answere I make to the other two testimonies of Austin and Ierome: granting a diuersitie of reward, according to the diuers dignitie and number of good workes. Obict. V. Christ saith Reuel. 3. 4. that the faith∣full
in the Church of Sardis shall walke with him in white: for they are worthie: therefore beleeuers merit. Answ. Euery beleeuer is worthie to walke with Christ; yet not worthie in himselfe, but in Christ, to whom he is vnited, and made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. And by reason of this coniunction it is, that men are said to be worthie, because they are inriched with Christs merits and righteousnesse. The fift reason is taken out of those texts, vvhich reach that men are vvorthy of eternall life: They shall walke with me in whites, because they D. B. P. Apoc. 3. Sap. 3. 2. Thes. 1. Luk. 20. 35.  be vvorthy. God proued them, and found them vvorthy of himselfe. That you may be esteemed vvorthie of the kingdome of God: Novv if men be vvor∣thy of eternall life, it must needs be graunted that they haue deserued it. I denie the consequence of the proposition. First, because infants (at the least in your doctrine) are worthie of euerla∣sting life; and yet it were hard to say, they haue deserued it. Secondly, in that we are the sonnes of God, we haue a cer∣taine worthinesse of our inheritance: yet haue we not truly and wholy deserued euerlasting life. Thirdly, there is also a worthinesse in Gods acceptation, whereof the Apostle speakes, 2. Thes. 1. 5. That you may be esteemed worthie: and our Sa∣uiour, Luk. 20. 35. They that shall be esteemed worthie. Fourthly, they that are iustified, shall haue a speciall worthinesse in them∣selues, when they come to receiue their inheritance, because they shall be truly and fully sanctified. M. Perkins answereth: that they were indeed worthy, but not for their owne merits, but for Christs imputed vnto them. This is his only re∣fuge,  Not in vvords. yet hath he not, nor cannot shew any one text in Scripture that speaketh so. Master Perkins rightly vnderstanding the question, that it is of such a worthinesse, as truly and fully deserues euerla∣sting life for wages, denies that they of Sardis were in that sort worthie of heauen, by any other thing, than by being members of Christs mysticall bodie, and so partakers of his worthinesse, in their measure. Which Master Perkins proues, though he name not the place, by shewing, that Ephes. 5. 30. we are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, receiuing 1. Cor. 15. 22. as our resurrection, so euerlasting life, by, and with him our head.
But to refell him, turne only to the places, and there you shall finde,  Apoc. 3. that this worthinesse rose of good workes, as Christ saith: I knovv thy vvorkes, and find them not full: yet there be some amongst yo, vvho aue not defiled their garments (but haue their workes full) they shall vvalke vvith me in whites, because they be vvorthy. That this worthinesse is not such, as the Councill of Trent speakes of, that truly and wholy deserues heauen as wages, it may easily appeare; because the Reuel. 3. 4. holie Ghost giues this commendation, rather for refraining from those sinnes, whereof the Sardians generally were guiltie, than for any principall workes of obedience. Now whereas you adde, but haue their workes full, it is without authoritie from the text, though it be in the second verse. Yea the change of the phrase in this verse, may cause vs to think, that by that want in the former verse, some actuall transgressions are signified, by which their garments were defiled, as the holie Ghost here speakes. So that this worthinesse was by Christs ac∣ceptation, and in comparison of the rest of the Sardians. And By susteining persecutions, they vvere made vvorthy of that King∣dome.  2. Thes. 1. And in the words following, the Apostle signifieth, that it is as iust for God to requite good workes with the ioyes of heauen, as he doth punish wicked, with the paines of hell. That which I said of the Sardians is euident (as I shewed before) of the 2. Thes. 1. 5. Vers. 6. Thessalonians, who were esteemed worthie for their workes. Yet not precisely for the value of them, being such as they were bound to doe, and could not with∣out sinne leaue vndone. The iustice of God, which you vrge out of the Apostle, prooues nothing but this, that in iustice the persecutors are to be punished, and the persecuted re∣lieued. But it doth not prooue an equalitie of desert on each side; because to suffer for Christ, if occasion be, is a dutie; and many imperfections ouertake the best in suffering, and ouerthrow all true merit. Obiect. VI. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Euerlasting life is termed a crowne, and a crowne of righteousnes to be giuen of a iust iudge: therfore mā for his part by his works deserues the same. Answ. Euerlasting life is called a crowne onely in resemblance. For as hee which runneth a
race, must continue and runne to the ende, and then be crowned: euen so must we continue to walke in good workes vnto the end, and then receiue eternall life. The sixt reason M. Perkins deliuereth thus: Eternall life is tearmed a crowne, and a crowne of righteousnes to be giuen by a iust iudge:  2. Tim. 4. therfore in this life it must be iustly deserued, otherwise it were not well called a crowne of iustice, nor could be saide to be rendred by a iust iudge. It should seeme you like the deliuering of it well enough, or else it is to be presumed you would haue mended it, or blamed it; whereof you make a shew by your preface to it. The proofe of the consequence, which you adde, will be discust in your answers. M. Perkins answereth, that it is called a crowne by resemblance, be∣cause it is giuen in the end of the life, as the crone is giuen in the end of the race. Master Perkins denies the consequence of the Enthymem, viz. that therefore euerlasting life must be deserued, because it is called a crowne. He addes the reason of his deniall; That it is called a crowne, not because it is deserued, but be∣cause it is giuen as a reward, after we are come to the end of our race; as the 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8 Apostle shewes plainly, I haue fought a good fight, and haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith, hencefoorth is laid vp for me a crowne of righteousnes: he saith not, therefore I haue deserued the crowne. If that were all the cause, and that there were no respect to be had so D. B. P. A grosse com∣parison. VVe graunt the likenes, but deny the equa∣litie.  former deserts, it might then as well be called a halter by resemblance, because that also is giuen in the end of life: and in their opinion, more properly: because all their workes are defiled like a menstruous cloath: and a halter is the end of such wicked workes. But as a halter is due to a theefe, so is a crowne of glory the iust reward of the righteous man. That I may omit your lewd dallying, in saying that euer∣lasting life might, in that respect, as well be called a halter; consider whether your answer be not absurd. For that which is giuen vpon continuance of walking in good workes, as Master Perkins saith the crowne is, cannot in any reason be as well termed a halter, as a crowne: though there be not in the workes, the true and whole nature of merit, to deserue
the crowne. Euerlasting life (saith Glossa Or∣din. ad 2. Tim. 4. 8 & Lom∣bardus ibi. your glosse) is as it were the reward of faith, and God seemes to pay it, Quasi ∣ces. Videtu deus tanquam debitum red∣dere. gloss. as it were debt. And it is called a crowne of righteousnes, not be∣cause it belongs to any man by due and desert; but because God hath bound himselfe by a promise to giue it, in performing whereof he is tearmed iust: and by vertue of this promise it is obtained, and no otherwise. These are the principall obiections, by which we may iudge what the rest are. And thus we see what is the truth, namely, that merit is neces∣sarie to saluation: yet neither merit of mans worke, or person, but the merit of Christ imputed to vs, whereby we being in him doe procure and deserue the fauour of God and life eternall. Secondly he answereth, that it is called a crowne of iustice, because God hath bound himselfe by his promise to giue it: here then at length we haue by his owne confession, that by Gods promise, eternall life is He neuer deni∣ed it. Js euery thing deserued that is due by pro∣mise? Math. 20. Math. 25.  due debt vnto the righteous: but as hauing ouer-shot himselfe, he addes, not for any desert of theirs, but only for the promise sake. But as you haue heard before, out of S. Matthew, that promise was made for vvor∣king the time of our life in his vine yard, and so there was some desert on their part, and the seruants were rewarded, because they imployed their talents well. Needes it any defence to say, it is due debt by promise, but not vpon desert? Who knowes not, that (for the most part) these two are, if not contrary, at the least diuers. There∣fore rather you shoote beyond true reason, than Master Per∣kins ouershot himselfe. That which you repeate out of Saint Matthew, was answered before. And in this very place, S. Paul reckoneth vp his good seruices, for which the iust iudge would render him a crowne of iustice: and therfore the iustice is not only in respect of Gods promise. S. Paul reckons vp his good seruices: and good reason; for the reward is not due to any by promise, but to them that doe good workes. For else what should be rewarded? But why should it be called a crowne of iustice? Because it is gi∣uen to the iust (saith Thomas ad 2. Tim. 4. 7. Thomas) Secundunc opera iusta. according to their iust works.
And in that respect God is called a iust Iudge, in giuing this crowne: because he giues good for good. Yea that very iu∣stice, whereby good is giuen for good, is not without mer∣cie, saith the Glossa. Or∣din. bona pro bonis. glosse, and Lombardus ibi. Lombard. And if you will not beleeue me, prouing that I say out of the very text, rather then M Perkins on his bare word, let S. Augustine be arbitrator betweene vs: who most deepely considereth of euery word in this sen∣tence: Let vs heare (saith he) the Apostle speaking, vvhen he approached neere vnto his passion, J haue (quoth he) fought a good fight, J haue ac∣complished Lib. 50. hom. Hom. 4. my course, J haue kept the faith: concerning the rest, there is laid vp for me a crowne of iustice, vvhich our Lord will render vnto me in that day, a iust iudge: And not only to me, but to them also that loue his com∣ming: He saith that our Lord a iust iudge will render vnto him a Crovvne: he therefore doth owe it, and as a iust iudge will pay it. For the vvorke be∣ing regarded, the revvard cannot be denied. I haue fought a good fight, is a vvorke: I haue accomplished my course, is a vvorke: J haue kept the faith, is a worke. There is laid vp for me a crowne of iustice, this is the reward. So that you see most clearely by this most learned Fathers iudgement, that the reward is due for the worke sake, and not only for the promise of God. This place of Austin is brought as a proofe, that a man hath nothing of himselfe, which hee hath not receiued. Whereas if your doctrine of merit and free will were true, a man, hauing grace from God, whereby hee is enabled to worke, might of his owne free will so vse this grace, that e∣uerlasting life should be due to him, as wages for his work. But if these good workes proceed from grace, not onely in respect of our abilitie to doe them, but of the particular ac∣tions; what true merit can there bee in them? Immediatly after the words you alleage, it followes Aug. lib. 50. Hom. Homil. 14. in Austin: In the reward thou doest nothing, in the work nothing alone. The crowne is from him, the worke from thy selfe; yet not without his helpe. Which helpe we must vnderstand to be more than an abili∣tie to worke; or else, as I said, our free will shall haue the chiefe commendation in all our good workes. But to the testimonie; we graunt that the reward is due to the worke, which is your conclusion out of Austin; but wee denie that it is due vpon desert of the worke. For neither doth the worke, if it were perfectly done, truly and properly deserue the reward, because it is a matter of duty, and but one work,
whereas many thousands are due to make vp true merit by workes; and being imperfect, as all our best workes are, it is so farre from deseruing euerlasting life, that it rather might increase our sinnes, if God should strictly in iustice exa∣mine it. See him vpon that verse of the Psalme. J vvill sing vnto thee O Lord,  Psal. 100. mercy and iudgement. Where he concludes, that God in iudgement will ont of his iustice crowne those good workes, which he of mercy had gi∣uen grace to doe. We doe wholy subscribe to S. Austin, That God cannot but reward our workes, because of his promise, and because they are such, for the substance of them, as he hath enioyned. And so (as I haue said often) in generall iustice, they that doe well must haue well. But we adde hereunto, first, that these works did not by their due worth wring this promise from God, as if he had been vniust, vnlesse he had made it. Which must haue been, if they be truly and wholy such merits, that euerlasting life is necessarily due to them as wages. Secondly, the pro∣mise being made, we say further, that none of our works are so exactly performed, according to the rule of Gods iustice, but that hee might iustly denie vs the reward promised. Thirdly, we affirme, that it is not euerlasting life, or the king∣dome of heauen properly taken, which God hath promised and owes to our workes, but onely the measure of glorie in heauen. The kingdome is due to vs, as an inheritance, by the right of sonnes; the diuers measure of glorie is met out to euery one according to his workes, and for his workes; yet not vpon their desert, but vpon Gods gratious promise, and mercifull acceptance, pardoning our sinnes, and rewarding vs aboue our deserts. And that the reader may vnderstand, that not only S. Augustine doth so confidently teach this doctrine of merits, (which M. Perkins blushed not to tearme the inuention of Satan.) I will fold vp this question vvith some testimonies of the most auncient and best Authours. Saint Ignatius the Apostles auditour saith. Giue me leaue to become the Epist. ad Ro∣man.  foode of beastes, that I may by that meanes merit and vvinne God. For answer to the testimonies of the ancient writers, we must remember, that to merit doth signifie in them to worke, and to obtaine, and that very commonly: and in
like sort, merits are ordinarily taken for good works. Beside, their testimonies for the most part intreat of reward, not of wages; and we deny not, that God will reward euery least good worke of his children. Now to the seuerall allegati∣ons; we may easily obserue, in this Ignatius ad Roman. Ignatius, that oueruehe∣ment desire of martyrdom, that caryed away very many, as it appeares by Gregory Greg. Na∣zian. monod. in obitum Ba∣ilij. Nazianzen, who commends Basils father, because he had no such zeale without knowledge, and condemnes (though not by name) this counterfaite Ignatius, who is so hot vpon martyrdom, that he sayeth, he will prouoke the wild beasts to teare him in peeces, if they (as sometimes it fell out, questionles by Dan. 6. 22. Hebr. 11. 33. Gods great proui∣dence) should refraine to fasten on him. Now if this man should somewhat ouerprize his deserts, I thinke it were no great wonder: but I had rather excuse him, if you wil let me, and say, he meanes by meriting nothing but enioying God, which he was to obtaine after this life, and therefore so much longed for his dissolution. As for the other word winne, it is your addition, to make the allegation the more likely. If you will not allow of this excuse, I say plainely, this mans testimonie is nothing worth, because he was of little iudgement in diuinitie, as it is euident by his whole epistle, and especiallie by this absurd sentence. Whosoeuer (saith he) doth not fast euery Lords day or Sabbath, except Ea∣ster day only, is a murderer of Christ: but he may serue your turne for number, though not for waight. D. B. P. Apolog. 2. ante med. VVorthy of Gods will and counsaile is no English nor sense. Iustine a glorious Martyr of the next age hath these vvords, speaking in the name of all Christians. We thinke that men vvho by vvorkes haue shevved themselues worthy of the vvill, and counsaile of God, shall by their merits liue and raigne vvith him, free from all corruption, and perturba∣tion. Iustin. Apo. log. ad Anton. Iustin neither speakes, nor thinks in that place of the question in hand, but writing to a heathen Emperour, tels him that Christians hold this doctrine, That they which shew themselues . conformable, or fitted to Gods will by their works, , dignatum iri. shall be vouchsafed his company, and raigne with him free from corruption and passion. If you will haue the word tran∣slated thought worthy, it is all one, though the latin be other∣wise,
and the meaning of the other word, as the case in the greeke shewes, and the translation, both being the Datiue, howsoeuer you mistooke the latine, which is not the Abla∣tiue case, as you translate it. Saint Ireneus saith. VVe esteeme that crovvne to be pretious, vvhich i D. B. P. Lib. . con. hae. cap. 2.  gotten by combate and suffering for Gods sake. Irenaeus tes vs, that the Apostle Paul exhorts to striue, or fight, that we may thinke the crowne pretious, for indeede (as he saith . lib. 4. cap. 27. there) we make most account of those things which we hardliest come by, so that the more paines we take in striuing, the more pretious shall wee thinke the crowne to be: this is Irenaeus true meaning, as any man may see that will looke on the place. But what is this to proue, that our works deserue euerlasting life for wages? as for the suffering for Gods sake, it is of your deuising, and adding, not of Irenaeus writing. Saint Basill. All we that vvalke the vvay of the Gospell, as Marchants  Ora. in initi∣um prou. Lib. de Spirit. Sancto c. 24. doe, buy and get the possession of heauenly things, by the vvorkes of the com∣maundements. A man is saued by vvorkes of iustice. We acknowledge a comparison of likenes betwixt Mar∣chants and Christians, but we denie an equalitie of valew in the commodities we are to vtter: which we do the rather, because in those parables, to which Basil. Orat. in initium Prouerb. Basil in this place al∣ludes, Mat. 13. 44. 45. Though the field and the pearle are said to bee bought, yet no man imagins that the price paid for them is of equall worth to the purchase: neither doth it follow, that if (as Basil saith) a man be saued by Per iustiam operum. the righteousnes of works, then his works are of full valew to the saluation he obtaines by them. Saint Cyprian, If the day of our returne shall finde vs vnloaden, svvit,  Serm. de el mo. in fine. and running in the race of workes, our Lord will not faile to reward our me∣rits. He vvill giue for workes, to those that vvinne in peace, a white crowne, and for martyrdome in persecution, he vvill redouble vnto them a purple crovvne. What saith Cyprian ser. de lmos. in fine. Cyprian, but that God, if we perseuere to the end in well doing, will reward our works according to the diuersitie of them, with lesse or more glory? we say as much. But the question is, whether our works fully deserue euer∣lasting life or no.
Saint Hilarie. The kingdome of heauen, is the hier and revvard of them that liue vvell and perfectly. D. B. P. Can. 5. in Mat. Hilar. in Mat. Can. 5. Hilary expounding that exhortation of our Sauiour, Math. 6. 33. seeke ye first the kingdome of God, and his righteousnes, coun∣sailes men to seeke it Vitae nostrae stipendijs. with the labour of their life, and this (saith he) is the reward (for there is but one word merces) of them, that liue well and perfitly: he saith not, that any mans worke is perfit inough truly and wholie to deserue it. Saint Ambrose. Is it not euident that there remaineth after this life, ei∣ther revvard for merits, or punishment? D. B. P. Lib. 1. de offic. cap. 15. Ambros. de Offic. lib. 1. cap. 15. Ambrose speakes not of the valew of good works, but labours to take away that offence that commonly troubles men, when they see that euill men fare better then good in this world: he answers, that in the world to come the case shall be altered, the one shall be rewarded, and the other punished for their works, which he calls merits. Saint Hierome. Novv after Baptisme it appertaineth to our trauailes, according vnto the diuersity of vertue to prepare for vs different rewards. You might as well haue left out Ieromes testimonie, as you do the quoting of it, for it makes nothing for you, nor against vs, that wee are to prepare different rewards for our selues, according to the diuersitie of vertue, what if he had said merit? do we not graunt it? But where is deseruing euer∣lasting life in Ieromes words? Saint Bernard. Prouide that thou haue merits, for the vvant of them is a pernitions pouertie. D. B. P. Serm. 68. in Cant. Penury of works (saith Bernard. ser. 68. in Cantic. Bernard) is dangerous pouerty, who denyes it? it followes, but presumption of spirit is deceitfull riches. who presumes if he do not, that thinks himselfe ab∣solutely worthie of heauen, as wages? Briefly that this was the vniuersall Doctrine of all good Christians, a∣boue a thousand yeares past, is declared in the Councell of Arausicane. Revvard is debt vnto good vvorkes, if they be done, but grace vvhich vvas not debte, goeth before that they may be done. These testimonies of the Can. 18. most auncient, and best learned Christians may suffice, to batter the bra∣sen forehead of them that affirme the Doctrine of merits, to be a Satani∣call inuention, and to settle all them, that haue care of their saluation, in As pride is Sa∣tanicall. the most pure doctrine of the Catholike Church. The Concil. A∣rausic. can. 18. Councell of Orenge saith nothing that was not said before in the testimonies of the Fathers, neither needs
any other answer. The doubt is not, whether reward be due to good works, but by what right it is due, whereof the Councell saith nothing expresly. The doctrine of merits, as it was held and taught by the auncient Christians, before the discouerie of your Romish Antichrist, we acknowledge and embrace, howsoeuer per∣haps some particular men may haue gon a little too farre in their amplifications. But the doctrine that is maintained by your Church, and Councell of Trent, we disclaime, and de∣test, as the principall meanes next to direct Pelagianisme, to puffe vp the pride of mans heart, and to take away true thankfulnes and trust in God, that is to ouerthrow the Go∣spell, the end whereof is beleeuing in Christ to iustification and saluation. For if, as by your doctrine it must needs be, man do at the first, by the good vse of his freewill, receiue grace, and by the same freewill, though in both cases in∣lightened and inspired, merit his saluation truly and wholie as the day labouring man doth his wages, what glory can God haue, or what thanks doth Christ deserue for any par∣ticular mans saluation? he prouided the meanes, you will say that Peter (for example) might be saued, if he would. So did he that Iudas might be. He offered the meanes to Peter, & to Iudas too. How chance Peter receiued this grace and Iudas did not? you answer, because Peter would, and Iudas would not. But how came it to passe that Peter would and Iudas would not? Here is the first difference, was it be∣cause God of his loue to Peter wrought in his heart by his spirit, so that it could not come to passe but he should be∣leeue, and left Iudas to himselfe, who so left would neuer beleeue? so we teach according to the truth of the Gospell. But you perswade your people that it was Peter that made the difference betwixt himselfe and Iudas, not God, who left the matter to the free will of both alike, that either, or nei∣ther of them might be saued, as pleased them. But what? is Peter by this beleeuing in Christ, an heire of heauen? no, only he is now in such an estate, as that he may if he will earne euerlasting life, as the hire and wages of his
works. I appeale now to any Christian soule that hath but the least desire to aduance Gods glory aboue his owne, to giue sentence of this matter out of the truth of his heart: what doth God by the doctrine of popery, but only pro∣uide that men may come to heauen if they will? And how? forsooth vpon our Sauiour Christs deserts, he is content to giue men grace, whereby they may be able to merit their owne saluation. But he will giue this grace to no man, who shall not first vpon good motions inspired, prepare him∣selfe, of his owne free will, by faith, feare, hope, loue, repen∣tance, to the receiuing of it: hauing receiued it, he must now by good works, to which he is enabled, deserue euerlasting life so fully, as that God should be vniust, if he should not giue it him, for the worthines of the worke he hath done. For whereas he made a promise of a reward, it was no more then he was bound to do in true iustice, our works, without his promise, deseruing the reward truly and wholie. This is the doctrine of your Church touching faith, and works, which Master Perkins iustly calls a satanicall inuention, be∣cause it ouerthrowes the glory of Gods mercy, to establish the pride of mans free will. Now whereas we teach, that our works do not by their worth deserue euerlasting life, what hurt is it (if it were false, but only that it were false) to make men thinke themselues wholie bound to God, for their iu∣stification and glorification? for we vrge necessitie of works, and assurance of reward, as well as you, though not to merit euerlasting glory by them. If any man be so thankeles, or so proude, that he will not worke, vnlesse he may merit by working, he neuer felt himselfe to be a sonne, and shall re∣ceiue the wages of seruants, the iust hire of his sinnes, dam∣nation. The sixth poynt. Of Satisfaction. Our consent. Conclus. I. First, we acknowledge and hold Ciuill or Politike satisfaction; that is, a recompence for in∣iuries,
and damages offered any way to our neigh∣bours. This Zacheus practised, when at his conuer∣sion he restored foure-fold things gotten by forged cauillation. Againe, by ciuill satisfaction I vnder∣stand, the imposition of fines, mulcts, and penalties vpon offenders, and the inflicting of death vpon ma∣lefactors. For all these are satisfactions to the lawe, and societies of men when they are wronged. All these we maintain as necessary: for, neither Church, nor common-wealth can well bee without them; considering they are notable meanes to vphold ci∣uill peace: and otherwhiles they are fruits of true faith, as the satisfaction of Zacheus was. This is wittily acknowledged by him, but little exercised among Pro D. B. P. Luk. 10. Are you so p∣y to their a∣counts?  testants, for where the Sacrament of Confession is wanting, there men vse very seldome to recompence so much as onefold, for their extorsion, bribes, vsury, and other craftie ouer-reaching of their neighbours. Whatsoeuer our practice be (and yet if it did not exceed yours, we had good cause to be ashamed of it) the question is now of our doctrine; which Master Perkins hath truly de∣liuered. As for the helpe you would haue imagined to come from Auricular confession, to the exercise of satisfaction; who is so ignorant of your courses in appointing penance, that he knowes not how little you inioyne this satisfaction, and how easily it may be bought out, if it be enioyned, with some contribution to some of your Abbeyes, Frieries, Chur∣ches, Chappels, and such like? But of this kind of Satisfaction, which we commonly call restitution, vve are not here to treate: nor of that publike penance, which for noto∣rious crimes is done openly. There was reason to mention this publike penance: as well that all men might the better vnderstand what is in question, as also because the testimonies, which in this case your men alleage, are wholy, or principally of that kinde of satisfaction.  Then there may be satisf∣ction not vo∣luntary. But of such priuate penance, which is either enioyed by the confes∣sor, or voluntarily vndertaken by the penitent, or else sent by Gods visi∣tation
to purge vs from that temporall paine, which for sinnes past and pardoned, we are to endure, either in this life, or in Purgatorie, if we die before we haue fully satisfied here. Your speech and matter are both very strange: who would speak so? By visitation, that is by punishment, to purge men from paine that should be endured? May a man satisfie a∣gainst his will, or without his knowledge? for both these fall out in Gods visitations, that a man is visited against his will, wholy, if hee could helpe it; and that hee doth not so much as once thinke vpon satisfying for his sinnes by it: yea sometimes, if he should, he should thinke amisse: for all visitations of God are not Ion. 9. 1. 2. Iob. 1. & 2. chastisements for sinne, but spe∣ciall trials and meanes of Gods glorie. Conclus. II. Wee acknowledge Canonicall or Ecclesiasticall satisfaction: and that is, when any ha∣uing giuen offence to the Church of God, or any part thereof, doe make an open publike testimonie of their repentance. Mirian for murmuring against Moses, was stricken with leprosie, and afterward by his prayer shee was clensed, and yet for all that shee must goe seuen daies out of the tent and congrega∣tion, that shee might make a kinde of satisfaction to the people for her trespasse. And in the old testa∣ment, sackcloth and ashes were signes of their satis∣faction. Conclus. III. We hold that no man can be saued, vnlesse he make a perfect satisfaction to the iustice of God for all his sinnes; because God is infinite in iu∣stice, and therefore will either exact an euerlasting punishment, or satisfaction for the same. The dissent and difference. The points of our difference and dissent are these. The Church of Rome teacheth and beleeueth, that
Christ by his death hath made a satisfaction for all the sinnes of men, and for the eternall punishment of them all: yet so, as they themselues must satisfie the iustice of God for the temporall punishment of their offences, either on earth or in purgatorie. Wee teach and beleeue, that Christ by his death and pas∣sion hath made a perfect and all-sufficient satisfacti∣on to the iustice of God for all the sinnes of men, and for the whole punishment thereof both eternall and temporall. Thus wee differ, and herein wee for our parts must for euer stand at difference with them: so as if there were no more points of variance but this one, it should bee sufficient to keepe vs al∣waies from vniting our religions, and cause vs to o∣bey the voyce of Christ, Come out of her my people. For as in the former points, so in this also, the papists erre, not in circumstance, but in the very foundation and life of religion. M. Perkins in his third conclusion, decreeth very solemnely, That no man can be saued, vnlesse bs make a perfect satisfaction, vnto the iustice of God, for all his sinnes. Yet in the explication of the difference betvveene Not by him∣selfe hauing made satisfa∣ction by and in Christ. vs, defineth as peremptonly, that no man is to satisfie, for any one of all his sinnes, or for any temporall paine due to them: Which be flat con∣tradictorie propositions, and therefore the one of them must needs be false. But such odde broken rubbish doth he commonly cast into the ground vvorke of his questions, and therupon raiseth the tottering buil∣ding of his nevv doctrine: and lets not, like a blind man, to make an outcrie, that in this matter the Papists erre in the very foundation and life of religion. Is it contradiction to say, that euery man must make sa∣tisfaction, and that Christ hath made satisfaction? Might you not easily haue vnderstood (if you did not) that the sa∣tisfaction which Christ hath made, is made by euery one that beleeues in him? So then the latter proposition doth not contradict the former, but shew by what meanes that satisfaction is made, which in the former was required. Eue∣rie
man must satisfie, and euery man doth satisfie, by and in Christ, are not contradictorie propositions, as a man with halfe an eye may see. The very foundation and life of religion, is the acknow∣ledging of full redemption by the sacrifice of Iesus Christ. But how can that be acknowledged, where satisfaction re∣maines to be made by (perhaps) many thousand yeeres pu∣nishment? Our reasons. I. A satisfaction that is made imperfect either di∣rectly or by consequent, is indeede no satisfaction at all. But the Papists make Christs satisfaction imper∣fect, in that they doe adde a supply by humane satis∣factions: and thus much a learned schooleman, Biel Super lib. 3. dist. 19. concl. 3 in plaine words confessed: Although (saith he) the pas∣sion of Christ be the principal merit, for which grace is con∣ferred: the opening of the kingdome and glory: yet is it ne∣uer the alone and totall meritorious cause: it is mani∣fest, because alwaies with the merit of Christ, there concur∣reth some worke, as the merit of congruitie or condignity of him that receiueth grace or glorie, if hee bee of yeeres and haue the vse of reason: or of some other for him, if he want reason. For that which admitts a supply by another, is imperfect in it selfe. Therefore humane satisfacti∣ons cannot stand. This is a substantiall argument to raise the cry vpon: vvhich hath both propositions false. The first is childish: for he that satisfieth for halfe his debts, or for any part of them, makes some satisfaction, vvhich satis∣faction is vnperfect, and yet cannot be called no satisfaction at all, as e∣uery child may see. Satisfaction is a full discharge of the debt, so that the bond thereupon is voide: but hee that paies halfe, or three quarters of his debt, if he pay not all in such sort as the bond requireth, hath the bond still against him in ful strength and
vertue: so that, though hee hath paid part of his principall debt, he hath made no satisfaction at all. Learned Papists make answere, that Christs satis∣faction and mans may stand well together. For (say they) Christs satisfaction is sufficient in it selfe to an∣swere the iustice of God for all sin and punishment: but it is not sufficient to this or that man till it be ap∣plied: and it must bee applied by our satisfaction made to God for the temporall punishment of our sinnes. But I say againe, that mans satisfaction can bee no meanes to apply the satisfaction of Christ: and I prooue it thus. The meanes of applying Gods blessings and graces vnto man are twofold: some re∣spect God himselfe, and some respect man. Those which respect God, are such whereby God on his part doth offer and conuey his mercies in Christ vn∣to man: of this sort are the preaching of the worde, baptisme, and the Lords supper, and these are as it were the hand of God whereby he reacheth downe and giueth vnto vs Christ with all his benefites. The other meanes of applying on mans part, are those whereby the saide benefits are receiued. Of this sort there is onely one, namely faith, whereby we be∣leeue that Christ with all his benefits belong vnto vs. And this is the hand of man, whereby he recei∣ueth Christ as he is offered, or exhibited by God in the word and sacraments. As for other meanes be∣side these, in Scripture we finde none. Foolish ther∣fore is the answere of the Papists, that make mens sa∣tisfactions meanes to apply the satisfaction of Christ vnto vs: for by humane satisfactions, Christ is nei∣ther offered on Gods part, nor yet receiued on mans part: let them prooue it if they can.
His second is as vntrue: but mans satisfaction is not to supplie the vvant of Christs satisfaction, but to applie it to vs, as M. Perkins saith, his D. B. P. M hath resi∣ted this pag. 121 Proue there is such a vvill.  faith doth to them, and to fulfill his vvill and ordinance. First, the speech is beyond any ordinarie mans vnder∣standing; to make satisfaction, is to applie another mans satis∣faction to vs. Secondly, to make satisfaction, is to deserue, that because of our satisfaction for the temporall punish∣ment due to our sinnes, Christs satisfaction for the eternall may be auailable to vs. Thirdly, if mans satisfaction be not to supplie the want of Christs satisfaction, either there is no temporall punishment belonging to sinne, or Christ hath made satisfaction for that, as well as for the eternall; and then God cannot require any satisfaction of vs, because he is alreadie satisfied both for the eternall and temporall pu∣nishment. Fourthly, if wee doe nothing by our satisfaction, but applie Christs satisfaction to vs, which is onely for the eternall punishment, the temporall remaines wholy with∣out satisfaction made for it. God doth in baptisme for Christs sake pardon both all sinnes, and ta∣keth fully avvay, all paine due to sinne, so that he vvho dieth in that state, goeth presently to heauen. But if vve doe aftervvard vngratefully for∣sake God, and contrary to our promise transgresse against his commaun∣dements, then loe the order of his diuine iustice requires, that we be not so easily receiued againe into his fauour: But he vpon our repentance pardoning the sinne, and the eternall punishment due vnto it, through Christ, doth exact of euerie man a temporall satisfaction, ansvverable vnto the fault committed: not to supplie Christs satisfaction, which was of infinite value, and might more easily haue taken away this temporall punishment, then it doth the eternall. But, that by the smart and griefe of this punishment, the man may be feared from sinning, and be made more carefull to auoide sinne: and also by this meanes be made mem∣bers conformable to Christ our head, that suffering with him, we may raigne with him. And therefore he hauing satisfied for the eternall pu∣nishment, which we are not able to do, doth lay the temporall paine vp∣on our shoulders, that according vnto the Apostle. Euery man do beare his ovvne burden. Gal. 6. Here is a long discourse to little purpose; neither answe∣ring any part of Master Perkins syllogisme, nor defending any point of your owne answere; but onely affirming that, which before was said, that God exacts a temporall satis∣faction;
and affoording vs some reason to confute your opinion by, in this sort. If Christs satisfaction was sufficient more easily to take away the temporall punishment than the eternall, how will you prooue it did not? It stands you vpon to shew vs good euidence out of the record of Scripture, that God agreed with Christ, not to take the full desert of his sufferings and satisfaction, but to leaue man still indebted to him, though in truth the debt were paid. If no such agreement can be shewed, for my part I see not how God in iustice can aske the same debt twice, being once fully satisfied. That which you adde is wholy our doctrine, viz. that God, by smart and griefe, would feare vs from sinning, and make vs conformable to his Sonne our Sauiour. But you teach, that he punisheth vs, and so takes satisfaction for sins past, as if he were to be reuenged on vs, at least by tempo∣rall punishment, for our sinnes committed. You repeate your conclusion, but with no dependance vpon your former matter, or proofe from that which fol∣lowes: where Gal. 6. 5. the Apostle tels the Galathians, that they may not be alwaies finding fault with other men, and so grow into a conceit of their owne goodnes, but looke to themselues; because euery man must giue an account to God for his owne sinnes, and not for another mans. If you will needs abuse the Apostle, and applie his words to that he thought not on; why doe you not, by the same reason, lay the eternall punishment vpon vs too? for that was our burthen, as well as the temporall. Others, not content with this their former answer say, that our satisfactions doe nothing derogate from the satisfaction of Christ: because our workes haue their dignitie and merit from Christs satisfaction: he meriting that our works should satisfie Gods iu∣stice for temporal punishment. But this is also absurd and false, as the former was. For if Christ did satisfie
that man might satisfie, then Christ doth make eue∣ry beleeuer to be a Christ, a Iesus, a Redeemer, and a priest in the same order with his owne selfe. But to make sinful man his own redeemer, though it be but from temporall punishments, is a doctrine of diuels. For the holy Ghost teacheth that the priesthood of Heb. 7. 24. Christ is incommunicable, & cannot passe from him to another. Now to make satisfaction for sinne or any part of the punishment thereof, is a dutie, or a part of Christ his priesthood, and therefore to make satisfaction is a worke that cannot passe from his per∣son to the person of any man. Nay (saith M. Perkins,) we must then be new Christs, and redeemers, and Priests of the same order with himselfe: Nothing so, but hauing grace from him, we may in vertue therof satisfie, not for the crime it self, or euerlasting punishment, which is lincked with it: because that would require an infinite vertue: But for the temporall paine of it, one indued with grace may satisfie, for the measure of stripes must not exceede the rate of the fault, the punishment then resting vnsatisfied being limited, a creature may pay it. It was not for nothing that you would not set downe Master Perkins words. For you saw well enough, that if you should doe so, your poore blinded Papists would venture to reade them (which now they dare not doe) and so your weaknes in answering might be discouered. Master Perkins hath refuted your answere of applying Christs satisfaction, before it was hatcht: you passe it by as not seene, and pro∣pound his answere to another obiection by halues, leauing the obiection out altogether. I will make the matter as plaine as I can with shortnes. You Papists say, that Christs satisfaction merited, that mans workes should satisfie for temporall punishment: Master Perkins denies it vpon this reason: If Christ did satisfie that man might satisfie, he made euery beleeuer a Christ, a Iesus, a Redeemer, a Priest, in the same order with himselfe:
But he did not make men Christs and Iesuses, Redeemers and Priests, in the same order with himselfe. Therefore he did not satisfie, that man might satisfie. The assumption he prooues; Hebr. 7. 24. because Christs Priest∣hood cannot be communicated to any other; the conse∣quence of the proposition depends vpon this, that satisfa∣ction is a part of Christs Priesthood: you denie the conse∣quence; but neither shew any reason of your deniall, nor answere his proofe: onely you tell vs, that a man is able to beare the temporall punishment, though not the eternall; as though wee denied temporall, because a man cannot beare it. And that the Reader may better perceiue what we meane by the tem∣porall paine: Let him consider that in sinne there are two things, the one is the turning away from God, whom we offend, the other is the turning to the thing, for the loue of which we offend: as for glorie, lust, lucre, or such like the sinner transgresseth: Novv vvhen he is by the grace of God conuerted, his turning avvay from God, both the sin and the eternall paine due vnto it, are freely through Christ pardoned, but for the pleasure vvhich he tooke in the sinne, the man himselfe is to sa∣tisfie: and so according vnto the greatnes of that his pleasure, he is to doe penance. First, your distinction belongs not to all sinnes, and so prooues satisfaction needfull but for some sinnes onely. To what doth a man turne, when (in the error of his iudge∣ment) he denies Christ to bee God, without any respect of glorie, lucre, lust, or such like? Again, may not a man sweare vnaduisedly, and rashly, without this turning, and without any pleasure in that sinne? Yea, may not a man thinke the murthering of his Soueraigne lawfull and meritorious (as many Popish traytors haue done) without this turning to I cannot tell what? Sinne is the transgression of Gods com∣mendements: as for this turning to and from, it is an idle speculation of men, that seeke a knot in a rush: he that doth that which God forbids, whatsoeuer the occasion or end of his doing be, sinnes in so doing. He that makes his money his god, sinnes; not because he loues his money, or turnes to his money, but because hee loues it otherwise than hee should, and so turnes from God to it.
Secondly, what a fond distinction is that, betwixt the sin, and the pleasure in the sinne? Is not that pleasure in the sin, a sinne too, if it be voluntarie? and if it be not voluntarie, but onely be a consequent vpon the sinne, hauing no ground in the will any way, how is it punishable? Againe, if Christ by his satisfaction giue power to man to satisfie, then man doth satisfie by Christ and Christ beside his owne satisfaction vpon the crosse, must daily satisfie in man to the ende of the world: but this cannot be: for Christ vpon the crosse, when death was vpon him, said, It is finished, that is, I haue fully satisfied for all the sins of man∣kinde, both in respect of the fault and punishment. As for Christs buriall & resurrection which follow∣eth his death, they serued not to satisfie but to con∣firme and ratifie the same. But Christ (saith M. Perkins) said. On the Crosse it is finished: VVhere∣fore all satisfaction vvas at Christs death ended: as vvell temporall as eter∣nall. Ans. That those vvords haue a farre different sense: To vvitte, that Christ had then ended his course, and fulfilled all prophecies, and endu∣red all such torments, as pleased God to impose vpon him for the re∣demption of mankind: of satisfaction temporall there is no mention, neither can any thing be dravvne thence against it. There is no mention of any satisfaction at all, and yet you grant, that eternall satisfaction is there signified. You must then shew some good reason, why the one was then finish∣ed, and not the other; which it is vnpossible for you to doe; because you confesse, that both were then performed for all sinnes before Baptisme. Look by what reason you can draw that doctrine from that place, by the same will we conclude the other. If you will say, al was done that belongs to mans redemption: I aske whether Christ haue not also redeemed vs from temporall punishment? You grant, from all that was due to sinne before Baptisme. I demaund further, whe∣ther these punishments were not part of that penaltie, which the breach of Gods law laies vpon vs? if they were, then ei∣ther
we are redeemed from them by Christ, or he hath not made perfect redemption. But questionlesse his redemption is perfect, and these are punishments due to sinne. Therfore he hath freed vs from these also. Againe Paul saith, 2. Cor. 5. 21. Hee that knew no sin was made sinne for vs, that is, the punishment of sinne for vs: but if the Church of Rome say true, that Christ doth daily satisfie, then Paul spake too short, and should haue said further, that Christ was made sinne for vs, and in vs too: and that God was not only in Christ but also in vs reconciling the world to himselfe. But Paul neuer knew this lear∣ning: and therfore let them turne themselues which way they wil, by putting a supplement to Christs satisfaction, they doe indeede annihilate the same. No more can be out of this other. Christ vvas made sinne for vs: That  2. Cor. 5. is, the punishment of sinne, as M. Perkins gloseth it: but the learned say, an hoast or sacrifice for sin. But vve raun that he suffered the punish∣ment For our sinne, and say consequently: that all sin is pardoned free∣ly for his sake, and the paine of hell also, vvhich is punishment of sinne: but not other temporall paines, such as it hath pleased the iustice and You begge, not proue this. vvisdome of God, to reserue vnto euery siner, to beare in his ovvne per∣son. And after this sort, and no other vvas God in Christ, reconciling the vvorld to himselfe. If Christ were a sacrifice for sinne, I say, as before, either he was an vnperfect sacrifice (which to say were blasphemous) or hee wrought our redemption from the whole wrath of God, and so from all punishment ensuing thereupon: vn∣lesse (as I noted before) you can shew any agreement to the contrarie, betwixt God and Christ. And that S. Paul vnderstood vvell. that Christ suffrings did not take  Collos. 1. avvay ours, may be gathered by these his vvords. I reioyce in suffering for you, and doe accomplish those things, that vvant of the passions of Christ, in my flesh for his body, vvhich is the Church. But of this point more, vvhen vve come vnto the Arguments for the Caholike part. Wee doe not say, that Christs sufferings take away ours; for we must still suffer, for diuers reasons aboue recited; but
that his satisfaction leaues vs no place for ours: we suf∣fer, but not to satisfie: neither doth Saint Paul say any such thing. Reason II. In sundrie places of Scripture, especial∣ly in the Epistles of Paul, we are said to be redeemed, iustified, and saued Freely: which word Freely, doth import that we are iustified and saued without any thing done on our part or by our selues in the matter of our saluation: and if this bee so, then can wee doe nothing at all that may satisfie the iustice of God for the least punishment of our sinnes. If wee satisfie in our owne persons we are not saued freely: and if we be saued freely, we make no satisfaction at all. Novv to M. Perkins second reason. In sundrie places (saith he) of Scrip∣ture, we are said to be redeemed, iustified, and saued freely: but this vvord freely importeth that vve are saued vvithout doing any thing our selues in that matter of saluation. Ans. Not so good Sir, for euen in your owne Doctrine, it is necessary that ye beleeue, and bring forth the fruits of repentance, and that now and then, yee make some short prayers, and receiue the communion, and doe many other odde things in that matter of saluation: Wherfore the word freely doth not exclude all our working, and suffering in that All to merit or satisfie by  matter. Master Perkins meanes not to exclude all doing, on our part, but all doing to merit, or satisfaction. As it appeares by the proposition of his syllogisme in the end: If we satis∣fie in our person, we are not saued freely: If we be saued freely, we make no satisfaction at all. Now although all doing be not against free saluation, yet all doing to merit and satisfie is directly against it. Reason III. We pray daily, forgiue vs our sinnes: now to pleade pardon, and to satisfie for our sinnes bee contrarie: and for all things, for which wee can make satisfaction, we neede not craue a pardon: but we are taught in the foresaid petition wholy and on∣ly to vse the plea or pardon for our sinnes, and there∣fore
we acknowledge that we cannot make any satis∣faction at all. If our sinnes be mortall, we craue pardon both of the sinne, and the e∣ternall punishment annexed, and do willingly withall satisfie for the tem∣porall paine: as the man who is conuicted of high treason, and hauing both his life, honor, lands, and goods, pardoned and restored vnto him, doth very ioyfully endure three monethes imprisonment, and any rea∣sonable fine set on his head. In this, as in diuers other arguments, namely the very next before, you onely set downe the first lines, and neuer propound the reason that you may answere to it directly; I must doe it for you. If we can satisfie for sinne, we need not craue pardon for it: But we need craue pardon for it. Therefore we cannot satisfie for it. Your answere cannot well be applied to any part of this syllogisme, but in effect it seemes to be as much, as if you should denie the assumption: not simply, but with this di∣stinction, that we need craue pardon for the eternall punish∣ment, but not for the temporall. Then the meaning of that petitiō in the Lords Prayer is, forgiue vs the eternall punish∣ment due to our sins: which is to aske forgiuenes by halues. Lyra ad Math 6. Lyra saith, We pray that our sinnes may be Totaliter. wholy forgiuen, both in respect of the fault, and of the punishment. And that hee meanes temporall punishment too, it appeareth by his rea∣son; because so long as that remaines, we cannot enter into bles∣sednes. Witnes the poore soules that ie so many yeeres in your Purgatorie. . If our sinnes be veniall: then that prayer is a speciall meane, both to obtaine pardon of the fault, and release of all the paine, as witnesseth S. Augustine: saying. That for the daily, short, and light offences, vvithout In Enchirid cap. 71.  vvhich this life is not ledde, the daily prayer of the faithfull doth satisfie. You seeme also to denie the consequence of the propo∣sition, in your answere about veniall sinnes. For which (you say) we may satisfie by praying for pardon. But this is a mar∣ueilous strange satisfaction, that a man should be said to sa∣tisfie, by desiring to be pardoned. And then wee haue a fur∣ther meaning in the Lords Prayer, that God would accept it
as a satisfaction for our veniall sinnes. Can any reasonable man imagine, that our Sauiour did not teach vs to pray for the full pardon of all punishment due to sinne, and yet neuer gaue notice of any such distinction? But of this more after∣ward. Austin speakes of the different course that is to be held in repenting of our sinnes, that according as they are grea∣ter or lesse, so we should be the more or lesse carefull of ob∣taining pardon. Which for ordinarie sinnes, may be had by ordinarie praying; not as if this made a sufficient amends to God, which satisfaction imports, but because he lookes not for so much sorrow and care for these sinnes, as for those; by which, if we commit them, we shall highly dishonour him, and therefore neede to grieue more, that wee may the more carefully auoide them. If you will draw Austin to the worst, wee may not follow him, against the truth of the Scrip∣ture. And that is not true which M. Perkins addes, that we are taught in that prayer, wholy and only, to vse the plea of Pardon. For in thesame petition, we are taught also to pardon others, euen as we will looke to be pardoned. We are taught onely to pleade pardon; the clause that is added, is not to satisfie God, or deserue forgiuenes, but to perswade God to forgiue vs, as wee pardon other, or (as Luk. 11. 4. Luke expounds it) for euen wee are so kinde, as to forgiue them that offend vs. How then should God not shew his kindnes, when he is intreated? Againe, if there were only a plea of pardon, it would not serue Master Perkins purpose. For who would say, that within the compasse of the Pa∣ter noster, all things necessary to saluation be conteined. If praying for pardon of sinne be a sufficient meanes, for the procuring of it to them that beleeue in Christ, surely there is no satisfaction necessarie. That it is such a meanes, it is plaine; because our Sauiour wils vs not here to vse any o∣ther meanes, and yet assures vs that our requests shall be granted. You answer, that all things necessarie are not con∣tained in the Pater noster. What of that? It will serue our turne, that the Lords Prayer prescribes sufficient meanes for
the obtaining of pardon, and yet meddles not with satisfa∣ction. But what speak you of things necessarie to saluation? The satisfaction in question is of no such nature. For you tell vs, that all feare of eternall punishment is taken away by Christ, and a man may come to heauen, though hee neuer dreame of any temporall satisfaction; the worst is but the enduring of the painted fire of Purgatorie for a certaine time. Besides prayer is one part of satisfaction, as shall be proued hereafter: D. B. P. An easie cause to satisfie.  and so by oft praying for pardon, we may well satisfie for much tempo∣rall punishment. Praying for pardon is a poore satisfaction, else might a felon, or a traytor easily satisfie for his fault, and the punish∣ment, especially for the imprisonment and fine you speake of. But we shall examine this better, when we come to an∣swere your profe of it. Reason IV. The iudgement of the auncient Church. Tertul. de Baptism. Guiltinesse being taken away, the punishment is also taken away. M Perkins fourth Argument is taken out of certaine odde fragments D. B. P. You are glad i patch vp your arguments with such frag∣ments. Tertul. de Baptis. Pag. 28.  of auncient writers. Guiltines being taken avvay, the punishment is also taken avvay. True: he that is guilty of nothing, cannot iustly be punished: for guiltines is a binding vp to punishment (as M. Perkins defineth) then if the band to punishment be cancelled, the party is freed: but all this is nothing to the purpose, for guiltines of temporall punishment doth remaine after the sin and guilt of eternall be released. If by these odde fragments you meane the treatises of the authors whence the testimonies are fetcht, you are glad to patch vp your profes out of these odde fragments. If you meane the sentences alleaged, what bring you of this kind but odde fragments? And what else can be brought, vn∣lesse a man should absurdly write out the whole treatise? Your answere is nothing to Tertullians purpose, who speakes of washing by baptisme, in which both guilt and punishment are wholie taken away. Death (saith Tertul is. cap. 5. Tertul∣lian) is destroyed by washing away of sinnes, but death is the whole punishment of sinne, Gen. 2. 17. The day thou eatest thou shalt
dye, therefore freedome from death, is freedome from the whole punishment. Serm. 37. de verbis Apost. August. Christ by taking vpon him the punishment and not the fault, hath done away both fault and the pu∣nishment. Iust: the eternall punishment which was due to that fault, not the temporall: as S. Augustine himselfe declareth. God of compassion doth  In Enchir. cap. 70. blot out our sinnes committed, if conuenient satisfaction be not on our parts neglected. To what was the temporall punishment due? if to the fault, it is taken away, vnlesse there be some fault, for which Christ hath not satisfied, or that punishment may be due, where there is no fault. Beside the punishment that Austin speakes of, as you would easily haue seene, if you had lookt vpon the place, and not answered by gesse rather then by skill, is our mortalitie, which is no part of the eternall pu∣nishment. He (saith Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 37. Austin in his sermon 37. de verbis Do∣mini, not de verbis Apostoli, where there are in all but 34.) had two good things, righteousnes, and immortalitie; we two naughtie things, sinne, and mortalitie. Sinne (as he shewes af∣terward) was our fault, mortalitie our punishment. This Christ tooke vpon him, that he did not, and by taking the one freed vs from both, namely so, that mortalitie is no lon∣ger a punishment, and we by him shall be come immortall. As for the satisfaction he requires, it is not to procure re∣lease of any punishment belonging to vs, but to shew our repentance, which God will take knowledge of by out∣ward actions, so that when he sees them he may seale vp our forgiuenes by assurance of it. And Tom. 10. hom 5. he saith, when wee are gone out of this world, there will remaine no compunction or sa∣tisfaction. Some new Editions haue foisted in the worde [aliqua] and so haue turned the sense on this manner: There will remaine no compunction or some sa∣tisfaction. But this is flat against Augustines meaning, who saith a little before, that when the way is ended
there is no compounding of our cause with any. To that other sentence out of him: VVhen vve are gone out of this  Tom. 10. Hom. 5. Th▪ thought not so, that ∣sted in ▪ vvorld, there vvill remaine no compunction or satisfaction: It is easie to answere vvithout the helpe of any new edition. For it will be too late then to repent, and so there is no place left to compunction, that is, con∣trition of hart: neither consequently to confession, or satisfaction: as if he had said, before we goe out of this world, there is place for both com∣punction, and satisfaction, and so that place is rather for vs. The satisfaction required by Austin, is nothing else but true repentance, or newnes of life, that we loue God, our neighbours, and our enemies, as it followeth immediatly vpon the words set downe, That we may (saith Aug. lib. hom. 50. homil. 5. Austin) do all these things, that is, haue compunction, and make satis∣faction by the help of God, let vs loue, not our friends only but our enemies also, that that may be fulfilled in vs which is writ∣ten, The whole law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe: now this is a necessarie dutie, and can∣not be properly any satisfaction. But for such satisfaction as we make by repentance there is place in this world. And howsoeuer a man himselfe cannot make satisfaction in his owne person but by suffering after this life, yet by your do∣ctrine he may by other men, and haue full pardon and re∣lease, procured him at the Popes hands, or otherwise by masses and almes paid for, and bestowed after his depar∣ture. And therefore in your learning Austin shewes either his ignorance, or his craft, in telling vs, that we cannot sa∣tisfie hereafter, which is not true, but of satisfying in our owne persons. Chrysost prooem. in Esa. Say not to me, I haue sin∣ned: how shall I be freed from so many sinnes? Thou canst not: but thy God can. Yea, and he will so blot out thy sinnes that there shall remaine no print of them: which thing befalls not the bodie, for when it is healed there remaines a skarre: but God as soone as hee exempts thee from punish∣ment, Luc. 22. Petri negat. he giueth thee iustice. All this is most true, and much against M. Perkins doctrine of the in∣fection of originall sin: but nothing touching satisfaction: for we hold that the soule of a sinner when he commeth to be iustified, is washed
whiter then snow: so that there is no staine or print left in it, of the filth of sinne. It is also freed from all eternall punishment, but not from some temporall. Chrysostom. Prooem, in Esaiam. Chrysostome speakes not of originall sinne, but of dayly actuall transgressions (as his whole discourse shewes) which God by pardoning of them so takes away, as that neither guilt nor shame of them remaines in his sight, yea he makes supply of the contrary vertues. To Master Perkins purpose they are thus to be applied, that Chrysostome requires no∣thing of him that is to be pardoned for his full release, but repentance only, which thing he repeates oftentimes in that proeme before Esay, without any the least inkling of tem∣porall satisfaction, which is almost as needfull as the other if your doctrine be true: for it is in our shallow estimation as fearefull almost to fry (I know not how many thousand yeares) in Purgatory, as to be for euer in hell. Euerlasting∣nes we cannot comprehend, many thousand yeares are as much as we can reach to, therefore since Chrysostome in that one preface so many times promiseth so full pardon, and requires nothing but repentance, it is more then likely he knew not your satisfaction. Ambrose saith, I reade of Peters teares, but I reade not of his satisfaction. Now gentle Reader, prepare thy selfe to behold a proper peece of cou∣senage. Ambrose saith, I read of Peters teares, but I read not of his satis∣faction:  Luk. 22. The colour of the craft, lyeth in the ambiguity of this word Sa∣tisfaction, which is not alwaies taken for the penance done to satisfie for the former fault. But is sometime vsed for the defence, and excuse of the fact: So speaketh S. Paul, Bono animo prome satisfaciam, with good courage I will answere in defence of myselfe, or giue you satisfaction: in Act. 24. 10. like manner Ready alwaies to satisfie euerie one that asketh you a reason of that hope vvhich is in you: In this sense doth S. Ambrose vse the word as 1. Pet. 3. is most plainly to be seene to them that reade the place: and conferre it with the very like of his, I find not (saith he) vvhat Peter said, but I finde that he vvept: I read his teares, but I read not his satisfaction: but that which Lib. 10. in Luc. cannot be defended, may be vvashed avvay. So that nothing is more ma∣nifest, then that satisfaction in this, and the like places, is taken for de∣fence and excuse of his fault, which Peter vsed not, but sought by teares and bitter vveeping, to satisfie in part for it, for this bevvayling of our sinnes, is one speciall kind of satisfaction as Saint Ambrose testifieth,
saying: That hee vvho doth penance, must vvith teares vvash avvay his Lib. 2. de poe∣nit. cap. 5. sinnes. A man may easlyer behold malice in you, that construe euery thing to the worst, then cousenage in the allegation of Ambrose: for if your interpretation of it be neuer so true, it is such as might escape a diligēt reader, and not be seene, yea perhaps if it had not bin so prest by our mē, you would haue read Ambrose ouer a good many times before you had dreampt of that sense. Bellarm. de purgat. lib. cap. 13. Bellarmine (from whom you had this as the rest of your answers for the most part) layes no such matter to Peter Martyrs charge, out of whom he brings this obiection; you see not more then he did, but write with more spleene. If Master Perkins had read, and, at the writing of this sentence remembred Bellarmines answere, either he would not haue alleaged it, or else haue giuen some speciall reason for his allegation. But this (me thinks) may be obserued out of this testimonie, that Ambros. Ser. 46. Ambrose ac∣counted confessing, and crauing of pardon to be the satis∣faction God lookes for, which is alwayes performed by a sinner, before he can haue any true hope that his sinnes are forgiuen. This therefore going before the pardon of the e∣ternall punishment, what other satisfaction shall neede for the temporall? Now that Ambrose in that place vnderstands by satisfaction both confessing his fault to Christ whom he had offended, and intreating for pardon, it appeareth by these speeches, and such like, Ambros. ad Luc. 22. lib. 10 cap. Petrus. Therefore Peter brake out into teares, intreating nothing by voyce. Teares wash sinnes, which it is a shame to confesse. Teares are as it were silent prayers. I finde why Peter hold his peace, least the crauing of pardon so soone might more offend. Teares are part of repentance, when they come from the true griefe of the heart, but not any part of satisfaction for temporall paine, which we should else indure, as that very sentence of Ambrose prooues. Hee (saith Ambrose) that repents, must not only wash away his sinnes with teares, but also couer and hide his former sinnes with better deeds, that sinne be not laid to his charge. Now where sinne is not imputed, there can no punishment be due; and where
such repentance is not, there sinne is imputed euen to eter∣nall damnation. So that the teares Ambrose speaketh of are parts of outward repentance, for pardon of sinne, not satis∣faction for temporall iudgements remaining after pardon. Againe, let vs adore Christ that hee may say vnto vs,  De bono mor. feare not thy sinnes of this world, nor the waues of bodily sufferings: I haue remission of sinnes. The other place cited out of S. Ambrose, de bono mortis, Let vs adore Christ, that e may say vnto vs, feare not thy sinnes, nor the vvaues of vvorldly sufferings, I haue remission of nes: is rather for vs then against vs: for if by adoring and seruing of God, vve may be put out of feare of our sins, and the punishment of them: then doth it follow, that praiers, and such like seruice of Christ, doth acquit vs of sinne, and satisfie for the paine due to them. This adoring of Christ is comming to him, whereupon ensueth escaping of death, as it followeth a few lines after. Whosoeuer (saith Ambros. de bono mortis cap. 12. Ambrose, in our Sauiour Christs person) Ioh. 6. 35. comes to me, (that is, beleeues in me) shall neuer see death. By this adoring we are freed from all sinnes, and all punish∣ment due to them, whereas, if your doctrine of satisfaction should be receiued, for all our comming to Christ by faith and true repentance, we might and ought stand in feare of grieuous punishment for many yeares in Purgatory. Nei∣ther doth it follow, that if by seruing God we may be put out of feare of our sinnes, then such seruice doth satisfie, for by true repentance we may be put out of feare of eternall damnation, and yet no man will say that therefore true re∣pentance doth satisfie for eternall paine. Hierome saith in Psalm. 31. The sinne that is couered is not seene, the sinne that is not seene is not imputed: that which is not imputed, is not punished. To vvit, vvith hellfire: vvhich is the due punishment of such mortall sinne, vvhereof he speaketh: or sinne may bee said to bee couered, when not only the fault is pardoned, but all punishment also due vnto it is ful∣ly paide. If it be Hieronym. in Psalm. 31. not imputed, how can it be punished? for pu∣nishment is laid vpon a man in respect of sinne, which he is charged with; neither can any thing be iustly punished with
any kind of paine eternall, or temporall, but only sinne. Your second answere is wholie for vs: for if sinne be then said to be couered, when the fault and the punishment are forgi∣uen, doubtles he that is iustified, is freed from both: witnes Rom. 4. 6. 7. 8 Paul, and Psal. 32. 1. 2. Lib. 2. de poe∣nit. cap. 5. Dauid, who auouch that iustification couers sinne, and suffers it not to be imputed. So doth S. Ambrose take that vvord couered, saying: The Prophet cal∣leth both them blessed, as well him, vvhose iniquities is forgiuen in Baptisme, as him, vvhose sinnes are couered vvith good vvorkes: For he that doth pe∣nance, must not only vvash avvay his sinnes vvith teares, but also with bet∣ter vvorkes couer his former sinnes, that they be not imputed vnto him. If Lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 5. S. Ambrose take the word couered in that sense (as indeed he and all men else do that speake of couering sin) iustification takes away the fault, and punishment of all sin) so that he which is iustified needs make no farther satis∣faction. Chrysostome on Matth. hom. 44. Among all men, some indure punishment in this life and the life to come: others in this life alone: others alone in the life to come: others neither in this life nor in the life to come. There a∣lone, as Diues, who was not Lord so much as of one drop of water: Here alone, the incestuous man among the Corinthi∣ans. Neither here nor there, as the Apostles and Pro∣phets, as also Iob and therest of this kinde: for they indured no sufferings for punishment, but that they might bee known to be conquerours in the fight. Novv vve must backe againe vnto Chrysostome, belike he had forgot∣ten this, vvhen he cited the other, or else this vvas reserued to strike it deed. Such excellent holy personages sufferings as are mentioned in the Scriptures, vvere not for their sinnes: for they committed but ordinary light offences, for vvhich their ordinary deuotions satisfied abundantly: the great persecutions vvhich they endured vvere first to manifest the vertue and povver of God, that made such fraile creatures so inuincible, then to daunt the aduersaries of his truth, and vvithall, to animate and encourage his follovvers. Finally, that they like conquerours triumphing ouer all the torments of this life, might enter into possession of a greater revvard in the kingdome of heauen. All this is good doctrine, but no∣thing against satisfaction, that their surpassing suffering, vvere not for
their ovvne sins: and thus much in ansvvere vnto M. Perkins Arguments against satisfaction. You that are so desirous to find faults, would not haue let Master Perkins scape without reproofe, if you had lookt this place in Chrysost. in Math. homil. 42. & 44. Chrysostome, and found it to haue bin misquoted, though it was most like to haue bin the Printers fault. In stead of answering to this testimonie, you fall a discoursing of the end of the persecutions of holie men, whereas many of them were not persecuted at all: and Chrysostome speaks generally of sufferings, not of persecutions. But this must be obserued in your discourse, that howsoeuer you mince the matter of their ordinatie light offences, yet they them∣selues had another opinion of their sinnes. If thou Lord (saith Psal. 130. 3. one of them) strictly marke what is done amisse, who shall stand? In Psal. 143. 2. another place one cryes to God not to enter into iudgement with his seruant, because in his sight no man li∣uing shall be iustified. Yea Daniel, that Dan. 10. 19. beloued man, Dan. 9. 7. 8. 11. 20. con∣fesseth his owne, and his peoples sinnes to God, as matters that deserue no small punishment; yea there is almost no mans story set downe any thing at large in the scripture that hath not some speciall sinne obserued and recorded, which notwithstanding, if their sufferings were not punish∣ments, to satisfie, how do you teach, that all sinnes must be satisfied for by vs in part? Obiections of Papists. Obiect. I. Leuit. 4. Moses according to Gods com∣maundement prescribed seuerall sacrifices for seue∣rall persons: and they were meanes of satisfaction for the temporall punishments of their daily sinnes. Answ. Those sacrifices were onely signes and types of Christs satisfaction to be offered to his father in his alone sacrifice vpon the crosse: and whosoeuer offered any sacrifice in the olde testament, did thus and no otherwise esteeme of it, but as a type
and figure of better things. Secondly, the said sacri∣fices were satisfactions to the Church, whereby men did testifie their repentance for their offences, and likewise their desire to bee reconciled to God and men. And such kinde of satisfactions, wee acknow∣ledge. Novv to the reasons vvhich he produceth for it.  Lib. 3. instit. cap. 4. num. 29. And albeit he like an euil master of the campe, range our Arguments out of order, placing that in the sore-front of our side, vvhich Caluin pres∣seth out against vs, yet vvill I admit of it, rather then breake his order. How good a master of a camp soeuer he were, he were of no great discretion, that hauing the marshalling of his ene∣mies battaile in his hands, would not order it most for his owne aduantage. But to Master Perkins it was all one which was first, which last, if you thinke him beholden to you for your kindnes, he hath fully paid you, in bearing with your reciting of this, and diuers other his reasons. 1. Moses according to Gods commandement prescribed seuerall sacrifi∣ces,  Leuit. 4. 5, 6. for the sins of seuerall persons, and ordeined, that they should be of grea∣ter and lesser prices, according vnto the diuersitie of the sinnes. Whence we argue thus: These mens faults vpon their true repentance, ioyned vvith faith and hope in Christ to come vvere pardoned: Therfore their char∣ges in buying of sacrifices to be offered for them, their paines, and pray∣ers in assisting during the time of the sacrifice, being painefull vvorkes done to appease Gods iustice, vvere vvorkes of satisfaction. To let passe your propounding the argument otherwise then Master Perkins doth, I answere to your Enthymem, by denying the consequence. Their sinnes (say you) were pardo∣ned vpon their faith and repentance, therefore their sacrifices, and other painefull works, were works of satisfaction. It followes not, for these very works were part of their repentance, which without them, when they could be done, was insuf∣ficient, and they were as requisite for the pardon of the e∣ternall punishment (I speake as you Papists do) as of the temporall. Master Perkins ansvvereth, many things as men do commonly vvhen  Hovv many Not aboue two. they cannot vvell tell vvhat to say directly to the purpose: First, that those sacrifices, vvere types of Christs suffering on the Crosse: vvhat is this to the purpose?
How many things, trow you, doth Master Perkins answer? But poore two, and those more to the purpose, than you would. The obiection was, That those sacrifices which Moses prescribed seuerall persons, were satisfactions for sinne. This Ma∣ster Perkins denieth directly, saying, that Hebr. 10. 1. they were ap∣pointed to be types of Christs satisfaction; which is most certaine. Do you aske what this is to the purpose? To shew, that there was another end of these sacrifices, than you ima∣gine. But you will say, this doth not disprooue their being for satisfaction. Remember your selfe. Master Perkins an∣swers, and you replie: who must prooue, he or you? He hath giuen you a reason of his deniall, which is as much as in ex∣tremitie can bee looked for of an answerer. Further replie shall haue further answere. Secondly, that those sacrifices were satisfactions to the congregation; and vvhat needed that, vvhen they had offended God only, and not the congregation as in many offences it happeneth. The sacrifices for those sins, by which the congregation had not been offended, were not properly for the satisfa∣ction thereof: but onely thus farre, that the people might perceiue, how carefull each man was to repent euen of his secret sinnes, and to haue them also purged by the blood of the Messiah to come, whereof those sacrifices were types. Againe, if satisfaction must be giuen to the congregation, hovv much more reason is it, that it be made to God? Read those Chapters, and you shall find, that they vvere principally made, to obtaine remission of God: as these vvords also do vvitnesse: And vpon that sacrifice, the sinne shall be Leuit. 4. 20. The sinne as your selfe con∣fessed vvas for∣giuen before.  forgiuen them: So that sacrifices vvere to satisfie God, vvho thereupon forgaue the sinne, and all paine due to it. First, satisfaction was made to God alreadie, by the sacri∣fice of the Messiah to come, in whom they beleeued. Se∣condly, there was danger to the congregation by their sin, which might be an example of sinne to other. Thirdly, the people by these sacrifices was to be taught, that their sinnes prouoked the wrath of God, and were to be purged by the sacrifice of the Messiah. There is nothing in those chapters to prooue, that the end of those sacrifices was the obtaining of Gods mercie, otherwise for temporall punishment, than
for eternall. And I am sure you will not say, they were to sa∣tisfie in that respect, though vpon that sacrifice the sinne should be forgiuen, that is, vpon their faith and repentance; of which those sacrifices were enioyned to be proofes and parts. Obiect. 11. Men, whose sinnes are all pardoned, haue afterward sundrie crosses and afflictions laide vpon them, vnto the ende of their daies: therefore in all likelihoode they make satisfaction to God for temporall punishments. As for example, the Israe∣lites for murmuring against the Lord in the wilder∣nesse were barred all from the lande of promise; and the like befell Moses and Aron for not glorifying God, as they should haue done at the waters of strife. Answ. Man must bee considered in a twofold estate, as he is vnder the law, and as he is vnder grace. In the first estate, all afflictions are curses or legall pu∣nishments, be they little or great: but to them that are in the second estate & beleeue in Christ, though the same afflictions remaine, yet doe they change their habite or condition, and are the actions of a Fa∣ther seruing to be trials, corrections, preuentings, ad∣monitions. 1. Cor. 11. 32. When wee are iudged wee are nurtured of the Lord: and, Heb. 12. 7. If we indure chastisment, God offereth himselfe vnto you as children. And Chrysostome saith, 1. Cor. hom. 28. When wee are corrected of the Lord, it is more for our admonition then damnation: more for a medicine then for a punishment: more for a correction then for a penaltie. And whereas God denied the beleeuing Israelites, with Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot be prooued that it was a punishment or penaltie of the law vpon them. The Scripture saith no more but
that it was an admonition to all men in all ages follo∣wing, to take heede of offences, as Paul writeth, All these things came vnto them for ensamples, and were writ∣ten for our admonition, 1. Corinth. 10. 11. The reason for vs (vvhich indeed is the very ground-vvorke of satis∣faction) may thus be framed: many after pardon obtained of their sins, haue had temporall punishment laide vpon them for the same sins, and that by Gods ovvne order: vvherfore after the forgiuenes of the sinne, and the eternall punishment of it through Christs satisfaction, there re∣maineth some temporall paine to be endured by the party himselfe for VVe deny that any man hath been punished to satisfie for his sin.  the same sinne: vvhich is most properly that vvhich vve call satisfaction. They deny that any man hath been punished temporally for any sinne, vvhich vvas once pardoned. If this groundworke of satisfaction prooue ruinuos, the whole building will quickly fall. But it cannot be sound, be∣cause it is deceitfully laid. If by enduring temporall punish∣ment for sinne, you meane no more but that, by occasion of sinne committed, many men haue had such chastisements, we grant your conclusion. But if you vnderstand by it, as the question is, that they haue borne these punishments to sa∣tisfie some part of Gods wrath, to which our Sauiours sacri∣fice either could not, or vpon composition betwixt his Fa∣ther and him, was not to reach, we denie the antecedent of your Enthymem, and say, that no man, beleeuing in the Messiah, euer suffered any such punishment for sinne. We proue it first by the example of the Israelits, vvhose murmuration against God, vvas at Moses intercession pardoned: yet all the elder sort  Numb. 14. of them, vvho had seene the miracles vvrought in Aegypt for their deli∣uerance, vvere by the sentence of God depriued of the ght of the Land of promise, and punished vvith death in the vvildernesse, for the verie same their murmuration. Was the eternall punishment, due to this their murmu∣ring, pardoned at Moses request? If it were not, your ex∣ample is not to the purpose: for our question is of them onely, who haue that forgiuen. If it were, then al the people had true faith in the Messiah; which is a very bold asser∣tion, without all likelihood of truth. But, no doubt, some of them were indeed true beleeuers. They were, and of them it remaines to be prooued, that their shutting out of Ca∣naan,
was to appease the remaines of Gods wrath against their murmuring. There is no such thing in the text, but Num 14. 22, Ioa 9 1. 2, Num. 14. 23. that God did it to make all the earth see his glorie. Adde hereunto, that this punishment was not occasioned by this sinne onely, but by former murmurings, and those many (perhaps) not at all pardoned, by any such speciall entrea∣tie of Moses. The like iudgement vvas giuen against Moses himselfe and Aaron, for not glorifying Gad at the vvaters of contradiction: both of them had their sinne pardoned, yet vvere they both aftervvard for the same de Numb. 20. Deut. 32.  barred from the entrance into the holy Land. The like answere I make to the example of Moses and Aaron; that is, I denie the antecedent. Num. 20. 11. Moses and Aaron were not punished, that God might be satisfied for the tem∣porall punishment belonging to their sinne, but that they and the people might learne, to put their trust in Gods pro∣mises made to them, and to weight on him with patience. The end of their punishment was not Gods satisfaction, but their reformation, and the peoples. To this M. Perkins ansvvereth, first, that man must be considered in a tvvofold estate, as he is vnder the lavv, and as he is vnder grace: In the former estate, all afflictions vvere curses of the lavv: in the latter, they are turned vnto them that beleeue in Christ, from curses into trials, cor∣rections, For satisfacti∣on vvas made by Christ. preuentions, admonitions, instructions, and into vvhat you vvill else, sauing satisfaction. Novv to the purpose: Whereas God (saith he) denied the beleeuing Israelits, vvith Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot be proued that it vvas a punishment, or penal∣tie of the law laide vpon them: the Scripture hath no more but that it vvas an admonition vnto all ages follovving, to take heed of like offen∣ces, as Paul vvriteth: All thse things came vnto them for examples, and vvere vvritten for our admonition. 1. Cor. 10. Reply. He that will not be ashamed of this audacious assertion, needs not to care what he saith: Hath the Scripture no more of their fact, then that it was an admonition to others? Turne to the originall places, where the whole matter in particular is related: First their murmurati∣on, then Moses intercession for them, and the obtaining of their pardon, and lastlie, after all the rest, Gods sentence of depriuation of them from entring into the land of promise, for that their murmuration: A∣gaine, Numb. 14. Numb. 20. vers. 24. Deut. 32. 51. Aaron shall not enter into the land, because he hath been disobe∣dient to my voyce: and of Moses. Because he hath trespassed against me at the vvaters of strife. So that nothing is more cleare euen by the testimo∣ny of the holy Ghost, then that their daies were shortened, and their
hope of entrance into the land of promise cut off, in punishment of those offences, which were before forgiuen them. And these things be∣ing recorded as S. Paul testifieth, for our admonition and instruction: we are to learne thereby, that God so deaeth daily with all those sinners that he calleth to repentance. Master Perkins denies not that this punishment was laid vpon them for those sinnes, but that the Scripture affoords any proofe to shew, that it was a penaltie of the law, as a Deut. 27. 26. part of the Curse, which appertaines to sinners by the law, Gal. 3. 13. for which Christ hath fully satisfied. The punishments, in themselues, were penalties of the law: but they are notsuch to them, who, by Rom. 3. 25. 26. true faith in Christ, haue all their sinnes fully satisfied for by him. Obiect. III. Dauid was punished after his repen∣tance for his adulterie, for the child died, and he was plagued in his owne kind, in the incest of Absolon: and when hee had numbred the people hee was yet punished in the death of his people, after his owne repentance. Answ. I answere as before that the hand of God was vpon Dauid after his repentance: but yet the iudgements which befell him were not cur∣ses vnto him properly, but corrections for his sinnes, and triall of his faith, and meanes to preuent further sinne, and to renew both his faith and repentance: as also they serued to admonish others in like case; for Dauid was a publike person and his sinnes were of∣fensiue, both within the Church of God and with∣out. What dotage is this to graunt the very same thing, which he would be thought to deny: but yet in other tearmes, that the simple (whom only  What dotage is it for you to take one thing for another? he can beguile) may not perceiue it: If the hand of God were vpon Dauid correcting him for his sinne, and that after his repentance: did not Dauid then suffer temporall punishment for his sinnes before forgi∣uen: Which is most properly to satisfie for them. Dauid was punished, but not to satisfie Gods wrath, re∣maining after the eternall punishment was taken away, by the sactifice of the Messiah, made effectuall to Dauid by his
faith. The reason of his punishment (as 2. Sam. 12. 14. the Scripture ex∣presly saith) was the stopping of the Heathens mouthes, who were likely to blaspheme God, because of Dauids sin; as if God either would not haue seene, or had not cared what manner of man by his speciall prouidence he had pre∣ferred to the kingdome of Israel. Master Perkins truly and constantly denies the same thing still, viz. that Dauids punishment was for satisfaction to God, by bearing part of the curse due to sinners by the law; which onely is to satisfie. The reason of this deniall (that I may answere once againe for all) is, that Gal. 3. 13. Christ hath re∣deemed vs from the curse of the law, being made a curse for vs. Yea ouer and beside this punishment inflicted by God, he of his owne deuotion performed farre greater satisfaction, by putting on sack-cloath lying on the bare ground, by watering his couch with teares, and ma∣king He neuer drea∣med of satisfa∣ction in all this repentance. Psal. 50. ashes his food, and in this most pittifull plight, he made most hum∣ble supplication vnto God, to wash him more and more from his iniqui∣tie: he neuer dreamed that this his satisfaction, should be any derogati∣on vnto the satisfaction of his Lord and Sauiour: but in the Psalme saith. That such an humble and contrite hart, is a sweete sacrifice vnto God. Dauid had not so little feeling either of his Sauiours loue, or his owne sinne, as to thinke that the one had satisfied by halues, or the other by such outward cariage could be sa∣tisfied for. His praying and humbling of himselfe was to another end; 2. Sam. 12. 16. partly to intreate for the childs life, whom he loued most dearely; and partly Psal. 51. 8. See 12. Art. part. 2. art. 1. . to obtaine the recoue∣rie of that ioy and comfort, which he had formerly taken in the sense of Gods loue to him; to which he was not to be restored but vpon earnest repentance at Gods good plea∣sure. We deny not but the punishment of one, is a warning and admoniti∣on vnto another, to take heed of the like: so may not they deny, but that correction is to the party himselfe, as an admonition to beware after∣ward, so a correction and punishment of the fault past. Which S. Au∣gustine vpon this verse of the Psalme. Thou hast loued truth, teacheth Psal. 50. most plainely: saying. Thou hast not left their sins vvhom thou didest par∣don, vnpunished: for thou before diddest so shevv mercy, that thou mightest also preserue truth: thou doest pardon him, that confesseth his fault, thou do∣est pardon him, but so as he do punish himselfe: and by that meanes both mer∣cy and truth are preserued.
That Aug. ad Psa. 50. punishment of a mans self, which Austin speaketh of, is not to make satisfaction, but to shew repentance; as it may well be gathered, because it is ioyned to forgiuenes; which can haue no place where the debt is paid. If I make satisfaction, God forgiues me not: If God forgiue me, what doe I satisfie for? Therefore the griefe and humiliation of a sinner, is not to satisfie God, that he neede not be forgiuen, but to repent that hee may be forgiuen. So farre is Dauid from pleading satisfaction by punishing himselfe, that hee intreates for pardon, vpon confession of his fault. Because (saith Glossa. Or∣din. ad Psal. 50. 6. è Ca∣stiodoo. the Glosse, out of Cassiodorus) he had told the truth by confessing, which God desires more than sacrifice: therefore he intreates for helpe. Obiect. IV. The Prophets of God, when the people are threatned with the plague, famine, sword, captiuitie, &c. exhort them to repent and to humble themselues in sackcloth and ashes: and thereby they turned away the wrath of God that was then comming forth against them. Therefore by temporall humiliation, men may escape the temporall punishments of the Lord. Answ. Fa∣mine, sworde, banishment, the plague, and other iudgements sent on Gods people, were not proper∣ly punishments of sinne, but onely the corrections of a father, whereby hee humbled them that they might repent. Our fourth reason the Prophets of God, when the people were threat∣ned with Famine, the Sword, the Plague, or such lke punishments for their sinnes, did commonly exhort them to works of penance, as fasting, prayer, haire-cloath, and the like to appease Gods wrath, iustly kindled against them: which being performed by them, God was satisfied. So (for example sake) the Niniuits at Ionas preaching, doing penance in sack-cloath and ashes, turned away the sentence of God against them. M. Perkins answereth, that famine, the plague, and such like scour∣ge of God, were not punishments of sins, but corrections of a Father. Reply. This is most flat against a thousand expresse texts of the Scrip∣ture: which declare that for the transgressions of Gods commaunde∣ments,
he hath sent those punishments vpon the people of Israell. And what is the correction of a Father, but the punishing of a shrewde sonne for some fault committed, yet in a milde sort? Or doth the Schoolma∣ster (which is Caluins example) whip the Scholler, or strike him with the fula, but to punish him for some fault? So that great Rabbins seeme not to vnderstand, what they say themselues, when they admit those scour∣ges of God to be the corrections of a Father, but not the punishment for a fault. As though Fathers vsed to correct those sonnes, who neuer of∣fended them: Or Masters to beat such Scholers as commit no faults. It is against neuer a one of those places, if there were ten thousand of them. Sinne was the occasion of those punish∣ments, but they were not properly punishments for sinne to any of the people, who were pardoned by resting vpon Christs satisfaction through faith, and manifested their true repentance by their humiliation. And such is the correction of a father, oftentimes perhaps more seuere, than some pu∣nishment of a Magistrate; yet not for reuenge and satisfacti∣on, but properly for correction and admonition. You much mistake the matter, when you thinke we denie that they are laid vpon vs for sinne, and, because of your owne error, con∣demne our writers of not vnderstanding what they say. Cor∣rection is for the fault, but not to satisfie for it. O thus, they were punishments tending to cor∣rection, not seruing for satisfaction. But saith M. Perkins, these punishments be tending to correction, not seruing for satisfaction: what senselesse ryming is this? By due cor∣rection of the fault, the party is satisfied in iustice: and when he that hath offended, doth abide such punishment as the grieuousnes of his of∣fence did require, there is both due correction of the offendour, and due satisfaction vnto the party offended. A professed scholler might know how to make difference betwixt rymes & figures of Rhetorike. Did you neuer heare of Epistrophe, when the like sound is repeated in the clauses of sentences? It is very like Master Perkins did not regard the figure, but hit vpon it, as it were, by chance. Howsoeuer, it is not a ryme; because the vowels in the syllables, which haue the accent, are diuers. Well, for the matter you answer, That a punishment may be both for satisfaction and correction. What then? Therfore these are so. I denie the consequence;
because (if I may repeate the same answere, as oft as you bring the same obiection) satisfaction is, in this case, made alreadie by Christ for as many as truly beleeue in him. And the punishments of God are turned from them, not because they satisfie the iustice of God in their owne sufferings, but because by faith they lay hold on the satisfaction of the Messias, and testifie the same by their humiliation and repentance. As we first grant that all satisfaction hath his vertue, from the grace of God, dwelling in vs, which is giuen vs for Christs sake: so to say that Christs satisfaction taketh away all other satisfaction, is iust to begge the principall point in question, and therefore an old triuants tricke, to giue that for a finall answere, which was set in the beginning to be debated. The answerer is not said to begge the question, but the replier. For to begge the questiō, is to take that for a proofe which is in question. Now it belongs not to the answerer to proue, but to the replier, whose person in this argument, not Master Perkins, but you sustaine. Looke vpon the forenamed example of the Niniuits, of whom it is not certaine that they had any expresse knowledge of the Messias, and therefore were farre enough off from laying hold on his satisfaction. But most certaine and euident it is in the text, that God vpon the con∣templation of their workes of penance, tooke compassion on them, and was satisfied; as by turning away the threatned subuersion is most ma∣nifest. The example of the Niniuites is from the purpose: for if (as you confesse) they did not lay hold on the Messiahs sa∣tisfaction, how could they, by this repentance of theirs, ap∣plie this satisfaction of his to the purchasing of Gods fa∣uour; which (as you taught vs before) is the vse of your sa∣tisfaction? Secondly, if they had not true saith in the Mes∣siah, Bellarm. de poenit. lib. 2. cap. 12. their eternall punishment was vnsatisfied for; and we speake of that satisfaction which is made for the temporall, after the eternall is discharged. From this, and such like ex∣amples, wee may conclude, that God sometimes for beares to lay outward iudgements vpon sinners, 1. Reg. 21. 29 when, and be∣cause they humble themselues: but that these men made sa∣tisfaction to God, either by applying Christs satisfaction to
themselues, or by redeeming the temporall punishment, remaining after the pardon of the eternall, or by making God amends for their former sinnes, neither can it be proo∣ued, nor (I thinke) you, vpon better aduice, will affirme. Obiect. V. Dan. 4. 24. Daniel giueth this counsell to Nabuchadnezar, redeeme thy sinnes by iustice, and thine iniquities by almes deedes. Behold (say they) almes deedes are made meanes to satisfie for mans ini∣quities. If by such good deeds our sinnes may be redeemed, as Holy writ doth testifie, then it followeth that such workes yeeld a sufficient satisfaction for them, for redemption signifieth a full contentment of the party of∣fended, as well as satisfaction. This example of Nebuchadnezzar is no more to purpose, than that of the Niniuites. For the satisfaction we dispute of, cannot be performed by any, but him that hath his sinnes forgiuen, in respect of the eternall punishment, by the satis∣faction of Christ: such as this King, at the least at this time, of the Prophets counsell was not. Answ. The word which they translate to redeeme, [as the most learned in ye Chaldie tongue with one consent auouch] doth properly signifie to breake off, as if the Prophet should say: O King, thou art a mightie Monarch, and to inlarge thy kingdome thou hast vsed much iniustice and crueltie, therefore now repent of thine iniquitie, and breake off these thy sinnes, testifie thy repentance by doing iustice, and giue almes to the poore whom thou hast oppressed. Therefore here is nothing spoken of satisfaction for sinne, but onely of testification of repentance by the fruites thereof. To Authours in the aire, without any pressing of the propriety of the word no answere can be giuen. Either your knowledge and reading is lesse than you would haue it thought to be, or you knew this answere to
be true; and did but shift it off, that you might not seeme to Dan 4. 24.  Not of  But  be ouercome. The word indeed is hebrew, signifying to rub, and so to breake off by rubbing. It is properly spoken of cattell, which being yoked, rub against a tree, or wall, or some other hard thing, till they haue fretted their yoke in sunder, and so freed themselues. Hence is that speech of Gen. 27. 40.  Isaac to Esau: Thou shalt rub his yoke off thy necke. And from hence it is, that the word signifies to redeeme, or deliuer; yet not by making satisfaction, but by breaking the bonds in sunder. Seruants haue ruled ouer vs, saith the Prophet, and Lament. 5. 8.  there is no man that rids vs out of their hands. So Aaron bids the people to take or breake off their eare-rings, viz. by ope∣ning the ring, by which they were fastned. Agreeably here∣unto Exod. 32. 2. 3.  the Prophet in this place aduiseth the King to breake off his sinnes, which held him captiue, and so to free himself from them. And this is the first sense of the word; as it ap∣peares also in the Hebrew Concordance and Dictionaries. Concor. l. Hae∣braic. Pagnin. Aue∣nar. Beside, the onely way for him to escape the iudgement threatned, which was temporall, was to giue ouer those sins, for which it was denounced: in which sense hee might bee said to redeeme his sinnes, in respect of the punishment to come; that is, to auoide and free himselfe from the euill, which else would fall vpon him. But let vs admit that it be broken off; his sinne not being coetous∣nes, but pride and lacke of acknowledging al Kingdomes to depend vp∣on God as the text it selfe doth specifie. To breake off this sin by almes, and compassion of the poore, is nothing else but by such workes of cha∣ritie, in some sort to satisfie Gods iustice, thereby to moue him to take compassion of him. The chiefe sinne was pride of his owne estate; the next to it, and issuing from it, oppression of many people: of that Dan. 4. 22. 24. the Prophet spake in expounding the vision; here hee deales with him about the other, willing him to practise the contrarie vertues, that hee might so escape the destruction that was threatned: for the Prophet knew, that it was pos∣sible, euen for wicked men, to auoide punishment denoun∣ced, vpon the forsaking of their outward sinnes, whereby they had prouoked the Lord to vse those threatnings.
And that by almesdeeds we are cleansed from our sinnes, our Sauiour Daniell 4. Luc. 11. himselfe doth teach, saying. Giue almes, and behold all things are cleane vnto you. That almes should be of force to clense men from their sinnes, and sinnes of a different nature from the contrarie to almes giuing, is a matter that hath no likelihood of truth in it. And much lesse can it be proued by that place of Luk. 11. 41. S. Luke, where our Sauiour reproouing the hypocrisie of the Phari∣sies in washing so carefully before meats, as if they thought themselues otherwise cleane, when they respected not what wrong they did, and what extortion they vsed, exhorts them rather to purge their hearts of their couetousnes, and to giue to the poore, and then all these outward things, meate, drinke, and such like should bee cleane, and it for them, without such superstitious washing. Obiect. VI. Matth. 3. 2. Doe penance: and bring forth fruits worthy of penance, which (say they) are workes of satisfaction inioyned by the Priest. Our sixt, Bring forth the vvorthy fruits of penance. That is, doe such D. B. P. Math. 3. Luc. 3.  workes, as become them who are penitent. Iohn, seeing the Pharisies come to his baptisme, exhorts them not onely to make shew of repentance, but to bring foorth fruites, . be seeming or worthie of them that repent. The same is otherwise thus exprest, Act. 6. 20. To repent and turne to God, and to doe workes worthie repentance; to Ephes. 4. 1. walke worthie of their calling. But for the interpretation we agree in sense. Which (as S. Chrysostome expoundeth) are: He that hath stolen avvay  Hom. 10. in Math. another mans goods let him now giue of his owne: he that hath committed fornication, let him abstaine from the lavvfull company of his ovvne vvife, and so forth. Recompensing the works of sinne, with the contrary works of vertue: The same exposition giueth Saint Gregorie, and to omit all o∣thers, Hom. 10. in Euang. In Psal 4. venerable Bede interpreteth them thus Mortifie your sinnes by do∣ing the worthie fruits of penance, to wit, by afflicting your selues so much for euery offence, as vvorthy penance doth require, which vvill be a sacrifice of iustice, that is, a most iust sacrifice. So do we acknowledge the exposition which the aun∣cients giue of it, though we thinke the exhortation to be somewhat larger then they seeme in the words alleaged, to make it: for it comprehends all kind of holie conuersation,
not only the change of the grosse outward sinnes, which we doubt not was their meaning also, as it is manifest by Chry∣sostome in Chrysost. ad Math hom. 10 that place you bring, who describes the repen∣tance that he speakes of to be not only a leauing of our for∣mer sinnes, but a fulfilling of good works, which he proues by that place of the Psalme, Psal 37. Eschue euill and do good: and Chrysost. ad Math. hom. 11. expounding those words, bring forth fruits &c. It is not enough saith Iohn to flie from naughtines, vnlesse we betake our selues to the practice of well doing. You see what he saith (quoth Theophylact) that we must not only auoid euill, but also bring forth the fruit of vertue. To which he addes for proofe that place of the Psalme. Yea we refuse not that of Beda ad Psalm. 4. & ad Math. 3. & ad Luc. 3. Bede, for it is indeed a sacrifice fit for vs in iustice to offer, that our re∣pentance be answerable in proportion to our sinnes. But what is all this to prooue, that there remaines tempo all paine to be endured, whereby Gods wrath may be satis∣fied? especially when as Chrysostome saith plainely, that Iohn perswading the people to repentance, did it not that they might be punished, but that being made humble by repenting, and con∣demning themselues, because of their sinnes, they might come to the gift of pardon. Answ. This text is absurd: for the worde , signifieth thus much, change your mindes from sinne to God, and testifie it by good workes, that is, by do∣ing the duties of the morall lawe: which must bee done, not because they are meanes to satisfie Gods iustice for mans fine, but because they are fruites of that faith and repentance which lies in the heart. Reply. His answere is most absurd, for we argue out of these words (VVorthy fruits of penance.) And he answereth to the word going be∣fore, repent: which we vse not against them and for his glose or testify∣ing our repentance, is sufficiently confuted, by the Fathers before al∣leaged. Surely a reasonable man might well thinke that you that hold a necessitie of satisfaction, and bring that text, did ground your argument vpon Iohns charge to do penance. The authors alleaged do not confute that interpretation, by
bringing another, which is not  ty to it, at the least we denie your consequence vpon their words. And S. Iohn expresly maketh them the meanes to esca wrath D. . . of God: saying, that the  was set to the ose of the rie, and vn lesse by worthy fruits of penan they  God, they  e  vp, and cast into hell fire: and  h confute the aying d on Christs satisfaction by faith: saying  wl not helpe you to say th yee are the Sonnes of Abraham, wo was her of all true beleeueis: as much as if he had said, trust not to your faith hand off yee generation of vipers. For notwithstanding yee be the Sonnes of the faithfull, vnlesse yee amend your liues, and for the euill works, which ye haue deno tofore, make recompence, and satisfie the iustice of God with good, y shall be cast into hell fire. Neither doth Iohn speake of any satisfaction for the tem∣porall punishment after the pardon of the eternall, but threatens them with euerlasting damnation, except they bring forth the fruits of repentance, as well as make a pro∣fession of it, by being baptised, so that if satisfaction be re∣quired in those words, dbtles it is that satisfaction which may free them from hell fire: but that (you confesse) is not to be performed by euery man, for himselfe, but by Christ, for all that trust in him. To whom seemes he to confute the very matter of all his preaching? not to Beda vbi su∣pra. Bede, who in the place alleaged by you tels vs, that Iohn exhorts the Pharises to humilitie, who were so proude because they were Abrahams children, that they would not confesse themselues to be sinners: nor to Lyea, at Matt. 3. Lyra, who writes thus, Because the Pharises & Lawyers refused Abrahams faith of Christ, therefore they lost the name of Abrahams sonnes. And certainely it had bin against reason for Iohn to haue dis∣swaded the Saduces and Pharises from trusting in Christ, as well because it was his especiall commission to perswade men by all meanes to beleeue in Christ, as also for that there was not the least cause of suspition, that they would be Math. 11, 28, Ioan. 6. 35 too forward to trust in him, who had so strong a per∣swasion of their owne righteousnes, that they could find no want of his help. Obiect. VII. 2. Cor. 7. 10. Paul setteth downe
sundrie fruites of repentance: whereof the last is re∣uenge, whereby repentant persons punish them∣selues, thereby to satisfie Gods iustice for the tem∣porall punishment of their sinnes. Answ. A repen∣tant sinner must take reuenge of himselfe, and that is onely to vse all meanes which serue to subdue the corruption of his nature, to bridle carnall affections and to mortifie sinne: and these kind of actions are restrainments properly, and not punishments: and are directed against the sinne, and not against the person. The 7. obiection with M. Perkins. Paul setteth dovvne sundry fruits of repentance, vvhereof one is reuenge, vvhereby repentant persons punish  2. Co. 7. 10. themselues to satisfie Gods iustice, for the temporall punishment of their sins. M. Perkins answereth. A repentant sinner must take vengeance of him∣selfe, and that is, to vse all meanes to subdue the corruption of nature, and to bridle carnall affections, which kind of actions are restrainements proper∣ly, but no punishments, directed against the sinne, but not against the person. Reply. I neuer saw any writer so contradict himselfe, and so dull, that he doth not vnderstand his owne words. If this subduing of our corrupt It this he whom you so com∣mended in the beginning? nature, be restrainments only from sinne hereafter, and not also punish∣ments of sin past, how then doth the repentant sinner take vengeance of himselfe, which you affirme that he must doe? Reuenge as euery simple body knoweth, is the requitall of euill past: We grant that all satisfacti∣on is directed against sinne, and not against the person, but for the great good of the man, albeit that for a season it may afflict, both his body and mind too, as S. Paules former Epistle did the Corinthians. If he vnderstood not his owne words, he is like to haue small help of you, who either cannot, or will not conceiue his meaning aright. The reuenge that a sinner must take of himselfe is (saith Master Perkins) to vse all good meanes which serue to subdue his corruption: but this is not properly a punish∣ment of the person, against whom it is not directed, but against the sinne, wherein now lyes the contradiction? for sooth because reuenge is a requitall of euill past, therefore the sinner in his re∣uenge, punisheth himselfe for his sinne. But Master Perkins hath alreadie answered, that the reuenge the Apostle speakes of, is of an other kind, being directed to the reformation of the partie, not
to the punishing of him. It is called reuenge, because the Co∣rinthians vsed the same meanes for the reforming of them∣selues, that men commonly do when they reuenge. If this word reuenge would not beare this interpretation (which you haue not proued nor can prooue) yet were not Master Perkins guiltic of contradiction, or not vnderstanding his owne words, but only of mistaking the sense of the word. But this sorrow being according vnto God, doth much benefit the  The text spea∣keth not of ap∣peasing Gods vvrath. person, as the Apostle declareth. For besides this reuenge taken on him∣selfe to appease Gods wrath, it breedeth (as it is in the text following) in our corrupt nature, that loueth not such chasusement, A feare to re∣turne to sinne, least it be againe punished. For where there is no feare of paines, and much pleasure, thither our corruption will runne headlong. It stirreth vp also in vs, Indignation against sinne, and all the wicked in∣struments of it, A defence and clearing of our selues, with the honester fort, And an emulation, and desire to she as farie from sinne as other our equals, and consequently, A loue of vertue and honest life, which freeth vs from that sorrow and all other troublesome passions, all which are plain∣ly gathered out of the same text of Saint Paul. Let vs put the case to your liking, that this reuenge was a requit all of euill past, will it follow thereupon that therefore they did it to satisfie God for the temporall punishment which otherwise they were to haue indured: I trow not, your Glossa Inter∣lin. ad 2. Cor. 7. 11. glosse reserres it to their care to punish sinne, not to satisfie by punishing, that they might shew they mislikt and hated sinne, because (saith the Glosse) you punish euen your selues when you sinne, since you punish (saith another Lyra ad 2. Cor. 7. Glosse) your owne sinnes, and especially (since you punish) Aliena potis∣simum. other mens. But if it were for satisfaction, a man would punish his owne especiallie, that he might auoid a greater iudgement. Your ordinary Glosse applies that reuenge to the sinne of the in∣cestuous person. You haue shewed (saith the Glossa Or∣din. ad 2. Cor. 7. 11. Glosse) by pu∣nishing him that committed the incest, that Incontami∣natos. you were vndefi∣led: so doth Caretan. ad 2. Cor 7. Caietan also expound it, This (saith he) was the last effect against the incestuous person, for they vsed reuen∣ging iustice in excommunicating him: so Chrysostom. Theophylact. Hieronymab. Chrysostome, You punished them that had sinned against the lawes of God, so Theo∣phylact, so Ierome. Lastly they make three works of satisfaction, prai∣er,
fasting, and almes deedes. For the first it is meere foolishnesse to thinke, that man by praier can satisfie for his sinnes. That praier doth appease Gods iustice, and obtaine pardon, God him∣selfe is witnes, saying. Call vpon me in the day of tribulation, and J will de∣liuer  Psal. 49. thee. Prayer cannot be made without saith in Gods power, and hope in his goodnes, and therfore must needs be pleasing in Gods sight: by prayer we humble our selues before God, and acknowledge his om∣nipotencie, and our infirmity. By prayer we lament with bitter teares our owne ingratitude, folly and wickednes, and bewaile the grie∣uousnes of our sinnes: such prayer made King Dauid (as his Psalmes do testify) water his couch with teares, making them his food day and night: and by them he satisfied for his former offences. So did a farre greater sinner then he, King Manasses: who falling into tribulation, prayed vnto This of satisfy∣ing is quite be∣side the text. a. Paral. 33.  Of prayer, fa∣sting, and alms∣giuing. See 12. Art. par. 2. art. 2. C. the Lord his God, and did great penance before the God of his Fathers, and prayed, and entreated earnestly, and God heard his prayer, and brought him backe againe to Ierusalem into his Kingdome. God pardons sinners that call vpon him for mercie and deli∣uerance, therefore their prayers appease his iustice. There is no shew of truth in this consequence. What though true pray∣er please God? doth it therefore satisfie his iustice? Whom doth it not please, that hee which hath offended, should craue pardon? yet is not this a satisfaction to iustice. Dauid and Manasses lamented their sinnes, and called vpon God for mercie, but what scripture saith, they satisfied for their sinnes by so doing? It were an easy matter to satisfie iustice, if intreating pardon would make satisfaction. It is all one as if they had said, that a begger by asking of almes should deserue his almes: or, that a debter by requesting his creditour to pardon his debt, should thereby pay his debt. A begger doth not deserue his almes; because he makes not this for∣mer kind of prayer, Such as your Aue-maries Hudled vp. but the short fleight one of the Protestants from the lippes outward: The like we say of a debter, whose creditor being a needie man, will not be paid without mony, but God who needs none of our goodnes, highly esteemeth of a humble and contrie hart, grieued much for hauing sinned in the sight of God, and humbly suing vnto him for pardon. To such a one he said. Did I not forgiue thee all thy debt, because thou besough est me. Math. 18. Belike then if a begger do intreat an almes from his heart,
by a set speach, as long as one of your Auemaryes, he de∣serues that he asks. If he deserue it, it is small charitie to giue it, and iniustice not to gide it. What if the creditor be not a needy man, and would be content to be paid his debt by a dayes labour, which, vpon the mans intreatie he releaseth also, doth the detter satisfie by intreating? God forgiues vp∣on intreatie, therefore intreating makes satisfaction. These loose consequences fall asunder of themselues without touching. Secondly, fasting is a thing indifferent, of the same nature with eating and drinking and of it selfe conferreth nothing to the obtainement of the king∣dome of heauen, no more then eating and drinking doth. What an Epicurian, and fleshly Doctrine is this? Why then did the  It is one thing to say fasting pleaseth God, another to say it satisfieth for sinne. Math. 6. Niniuits fast, put on sack cloath, and lie on the ground (all which bodi∣ly afflictions are reduced to fasting) rather then eate, and drinke, and presume of Gods mercie, if the one had bin as acceptable to God as the other? Why is S. Iohn Baptist commended for his rough garments and thinne diet, if cherishing the flesh please God as well, as punishing of it? Christ saith expressely. That if vve fast in secret, his heauenly Father vvill repay vs openly: Will he reward eating, and drinking so liberally? but of falling we shall haue a whole Chapter hereafter. Therefore Briefely I here conclude, that this Doctrine tendeth to the establishment of the Kingdome of Atheists and Epicures, whose sweet speech is. Let vs eate, and let vs drinke, for after death there is no pleasure. True: for such Bel∣ly-gods and th followers. What a bad practise and foolish question are these of yours? Master Perkins saith, that fasting (of it selfe) conferres no more to the obtaining of heauen, then eating doth. You leaue out the principall point in reporting his opinion, and then you aske, why the Niniuits fasted, if eating be as accep∣table to God (you must adde, of it selfe) as fasting? because though of it selfe it pleased not God, yet as part of repen∣tance it doth when it shewes humiliation and sorrow. But they might haue fasted long inough, without being hum∣bled, and haue bin neuer awhit the neerer for it. But let it be granted, that fasting did please God (of it selfe) as prayer doth, will you thereupon conclude that therefore it satis∣fies
Gods iustice? Proue the consequence; Iohn Baptist is described to haue liued vpon such meate as the place where he abode did ordinarily afford, but it is not said that he vsed a thin diet, much lesse is he commended for it, as if the thing (of it selfe) had pleased God. It was fit for him, by the ex∣traordinarie direction of Gods spirit, to follow such an au∣stere course of life, not to satisfie for any punishment, but Luk. 7. 31. 32. 33. to make the Israelites the more carefully attend so extra∣ordinary a mans preaching. The Math. 6. 18. reward that God will giue to them that in priuate repent of their sinnes with fa∣sting, is not because fasting (of it selfe) pleaseth him, but for that such fasting is part of their repentance. Thirdly and lastly almes deedes cannot be works of satisfaction for sinnes. For when wee giue them as we ought, wee doe but our dutie, whereunto wee are bound. And we may as well say, that a man by paying one debt may discharge another: as to say that by doing his dutie he may satisfie Gods iustice for the punishment of his sinnes. These we confesse be fruits of faith, but yet are they no workes of satis∣faction: but the onely and all-sufficient satisfaction made to Gods iustice for our sins, is to bee found in the person of Christ, being procured by the merit of his death, and his obedience. And thus our doctrine touching satisfaction is cleared: and it is to be lear∣ned carefully of our common people, because the opinion of humane satisfaction is naturall, and sticks fast in the heart of naturall men. Hereupon when any haue sinned, and feele touch of conscience any way, their manner is, then to performe some out∣ward humiliation and repentance, thinking thereby to stop the mouth of conscience, and by doing some ceremoniall duties to appease the wrath of God for their sinnes. Yea, many thinke to satisfie Gods iu∣stice
by repeating the Creede, the Lords prayer, and the tenne Commandements, so foolish are they in this kinde. A man might suppose, that this man were pretely well seene in Carolo D. B. P. That is for you trauailers.  Bussone, that thus ruffleth in graue matters with his simple Similes. If the similies were as simple as your answers to them, a man should lose both his time and his labour to reade ei∣ther of them, shew their vnfitnes for the purpose, if you can. That Almesdeeds redeeme our sinnes, purge vs from them, and make  And already ansvvered. Serm. de ope∣re & eleenios. all things clean vnto vs, hath bin already proued out of holy scriptures, I will ioyne thereunto this one testimonie of that worthy Maityr Saint Cyprian. Our frailtie could not tell vvhat to doe, vulesse the goodnes of God, by teaching vs the vvorkes of iustice and mercy, had shevved vs a certaine vvay of preseruing our saluation, which is, that vvith Almesdeeds we might vvash cleane avvay the filth of sins, vvhich vve had contracted after Bap∣tisme. The holie Ghost speaketh in the Scripture, and saith. Sinnes are purged by almesdeeds and saith. Cyprian intending to exhort all men to almes deeds, is somewhat too farre caried with his earnestnes to perswade, especiallie since he ascribes to it the purging of sin, whereas it can reach no farther at the vttermost by your doctrine, then to satisfie for the temporall punishment. His proofe Prou. 15. 27. out of scripture is not there to be found, for though your vulgar translation haue it, yet it is not in the originall, nor in your Interlin. bibl. Arias Mont. Chald. para∣phr. Vatablus. interlinear Bible, nor in Montanus, nor in the Chaldee Paraphrase, nor in Vatablus. The Greek seemes to haue had it added out of the Tobi. 4. 11.  Apocryphall. Now to M. Perkins Simile. We deny that a man is bound to giue all the almes that he can: We are bound to giue that which we may well spare, when there is great want: But almes (which is a part of satisfacti∣on) is not giuen out of our superfluity, but spared from our necessarie vses. And is many times bestowed, when there is no such great need, vp∣on building Schooles, Colledges, Hospitals, and Chappels, And this may VVhom may it serue? No rea∣sonable man. serue to answere M. Perkins Similes against these three workes of satis∣faction: If any man desire to know why wee make speciall reckoning of these three workes, it is principally for two causes: First, we being to sa∣tisfie, must performe it with such things, as be our owne, which be of three sorts, either they belong to our soule, or to our body, or to our ex∣ternall goods; the goods of our mind, we offer to God by prayer, by fa∣sting, and other bodily discipline, we exhibite vnto him, A liuing hoast, holy and pleasing God. By Almesdeeds we make him an agreeable pre∣sent Rom. 12. 1.
of our goods. Secondly, all sinne as S. Iohn teacheth, may be redu∣ced 1. Epist. 2. to three principall heads. The concupiscence of the flesh: that is hea∣cherie, which is cooled by fasting and such like afflicting of the bodie; Concupiscence of the eyes, Couetousnes, which is purged and chased away by almesdeeds: And pride of life, which is suppressed by humble prayer, and often meditation of our owne miseries. When we giue almes, as we ought (saith Master Perkins) we doe but our dutie. You answer, that we are not bound to giue all the almes we can. Is this to gainsay him? We are bound to spare, euen from our necessarie vse, when the necessitie of our brethren requires it. He that hath no more meate than to fill his owne belly, is bound to giue his brother part of it, if he see him readie to starue. As for other giuing, when we cannot spare that wee giue, and there is no necessitie, it is so farre from being a satisfaction for old sins, that it is a com∣mitting of new. But whence comes this distinction? It is not either in Cyprian, or in Toby, or that place thrust into the book of Toby. And out of question it was not Daniels mea∣ning, that King Nebuchadnezzar should giue to the poore, so that he should come into want himselfe by giuing; Nei∣ther (I thinke) can you prooue it was our Sauiours mea∣ning, when he exhorted the Pharisies to almes deedes. But doe you not perceiue that you marre all by this doctrine? Who will giue any thing at his death to your Monasteries, if he may not by giuing make some satisfaction? And what satisfaction▪ can then be made, when a man giues all of su∣perfluitie, as hauing need of nothing? There must be some helpe thought on for this matter, or all will be naught. That which followes, presumes there must be satisfaction made, and shewes why you thinke those the fittest meanes for to satisfie by. But where the foundation is ouerthrowne, what shall wee neede to thrust at the building. Onely I will adde here in the end of this discourse, a few, of many meanes, for the procuring of pardon by satisfaction. Pope Iohn the 22. granted seuen hundred yeeres of pardon to euery one, that should kisse three times the measure of our Ladies foote (as Pardon. 700. yeares. you call her) and should say deuoutly three Auemaries to her blessed honour and worship. The measure is to be had
in Spayne, printed together with the graunt of pardon, I haue caused it to be printed and inserted in this place. Monstra te esse Matrem: sumat per te preces. Qui  nobis N tus tulit  se tuus. Shew thy selfe to be a Mother: let him by thy mediation receiue our prayers. Who f our sak vouchs to be th Sonne.
El Papa Iuan 22. Conce∣dio a quien besare esta medi∣da tres vezos, y rezare tres Aue Marias deuotamente, a su bendito honor y reueren∣cia, gana setecientos an̄os de perdon. Y es libre de muchos peligros. Teniendo la Bula de la santa Cruzada. Im∣pressa con licencia. Diri∣gida a la deuocion del Ca∣uallero de Gracia. Pope Iohn the 22. gran∣ted to euery one, that shal kisse this measure three times, and shall say three Aue-Maries deuoutelie to her honour and wor∣ship, to haue seuen hun∣dred yeeres of pardon; and to be free from many dangers; alwaies proui∣ded that he haue the Bull of the holy Cruzada. Printed by authoritie, di∣rected to the deuotion of the Knight of Grace.
Sixtus the 4. granted to all them that deuoutly say a short Horae Virginis Mariae ad vsum Sarisbu∣riensis Eccle∣siae. Fol. 42. a. Yeares 11000. Fol. 38. b. prayer (beginning Aue Maria mater Dei) before the image of our Ladie, the summe of eleuen hundred yeeres of pardon. He that shall deuoutly say that prayer (Obsecro te Domina) &c. before our Ladie of Pitie, she will shew him her blessed vi∣sage, and warne him the day and houre of his death, and in his last end the Angels of God shall yeeld his soule to heauen, and he shall obtaine fiue hundred yeeres, and so many Lents of pardon, Yeares 500. Lents. 500. granted by fiue Popes. Enough for failing. Sixtus the Pope to euery one (being in the state of grace, which Fol. 45. a. must be obserued) that shall say (in the morning, after three tel∣lings of the Aue-bell) three times the whole salutation of our La∣die, granted for euery time so doing, of the spirituall treasure of holy Church three hundred daies of pardon. Toties quoties. Daies 300. to∣ties quoties. Fol. 50. b. Deliuer 15. souls of Purgatory, Conuert 15. fin∣ners. Confirme 15. righteous. Fol. 54 a. Yeares 32755. These be fistene Oos, which S. Briget was wont to say, &c. who so say these a whele yeere, shall deliuer fifteene soules out of Pur∣g of his next kinred, and conuert other fifteene sinners to goodlife, and other fifteene righteous men of his kinde, shall per∣seuere in good life. To all them, that before this Image of Pitie, deuoutly say fiue Pater nosters, and fiue Aues, and a Credo, pitiously beholding these armes of Christs passion, are granted thirtie two thousand, seuen hundred, fiftie fiue yeeres of pardon. Sixtus the 4. made the fourth and fifth prayers, and hath Caused his pardon to be bulled. Fol. 58. a. Daies 3000. for deadly sinnes. Yeares 10000. done bulled his foresaid pardon. Iohn the 22. hath granted to all, that deuoutly say this prayer, after the eleuation of our Lord Iesus Christ, three thousand daies of pardon for deadly sinnes. Boniface the 6. granted tenne thousand yeeres of pardon, vp∣on the saying of another prayer, betweene the eleuation, and the three Agnus Deis. Sixtus the 4. hath granted to all them that be in the state of Fol. 60. a. Cleane remissi∣on of all their sias perpetually enduring. grace, saying this prayer following, immediatly after the eleua∣tion of the bodie of our Lord, cleane remission of all their sinnes perpetually enduring. And Iohn the 3. hath granted to all them that deuoutly say the same prayer before the Image of our Lord crucified, as many
daies of pardon, as there were wounds in the bodie of our Lord, in of the time of his bitter passion; the which were 5465. Daies 5465. The number vvounds that vvere in our Lords body in the time of his Passion. Fol. 66. a. Yeares 1000000. Fol. 72. a. Who that deuoutly say these prayers, shall obtaine tenne hun∣dred thousand yeeres of pardon for deadly sinnes: granted by Iohn the 22. Who that deuoutly with a contrite heart daily say this Ori∣son; if he be that day in the state of eternall damnation, then this eternall paine shall be changed him into temporall paine of Pur∣gatorie; then, if he haue deserued the paine of Purgatorie, it shall be forgotten and forgiuen, thorough the infinite mercie of God. But, that I may not tire the reader, and make him cast his gorge at such abominations, which are Popish satisfactions for sinnes, I will giue you a view of the number of yeeres for which pardon is graunted in this one booke, viz. Yet Purgato∣rie is to last no longer then the vvorld. 1076832. But now to knit vp this question. Let vs heare briefly what the best learned, and purest antiquity hath taught of this satisfaction done by man, and because M. Perkins began with Tertullian, omitting his aunci∣ents. Let vs first heare what he saith of it in his booke of penance. Hovv Hovv many of his auncients can you alledge foolish is it (saith he) not to fulfill our penance, and yet to expect pardon of our sinnes, this is not to tender the price, and yet to put out a hand for the re∣vvard: for God hath decreed to set the pardon at this price: he proposeth impunity to be redeemed vvith this recompence of penance. This is but a tricke, to make a shew, as if Master Perkins had omitted some ancienter than Tertullian, which else you could haue alleaged. But who is so little acquainted with your courses, that he knowes not we haue here the best you can bring? Tertullian, as the ancient writers generally, speakes of re∣pentance, without which it is vnreasonable and vaine to looke for pardon. Now, whereas they mention, and vrge oftentimes the outward workes, it was, because without them, neither the Church could be satisfied, and men would easily deceiue themselues with an opinion of repentance; or at the most with some slight thinking vpon, and grie∣uing for their sinnes. This appeares in Tertull de poenit. cap. 6. that very place im∣mediatly after: Therefore if they that sell, first trie the coyne
which they are to receiue, that it be not clipt, nor washt, nor coun∣tenfeit, we may well thinke that God will first make triall of the repentance, especially since he is to grant vs so great a reward of eternall life. But let vs deferre the truth of repentance a while. By which words it is plaine, that Tertullian speakes of testi∣fying our repentance to be true, by those outward signes of it, which doe ordinarily accompanie it where it is true. His equall in standing, and better in learning Origen, thus discourseth.  But worse for errors. Hom. 3. in lib. Indic. See our good Lord tempering mercy vvith seuerity, and vveighing the mea∣sure of the punishment in a iust and mercifull balance: he deliuereth not vp a sinner for euer. But looke hovv long time thou knovvest thy selfe to haue offended, so long doe thou humble thy selfe to God, and satisfie him in the confession of penance. That which I answered before of Tertullian, is made good by this place of Origen: that repentance is the satisfaction they required. Looke not (saith Origen. hom. 3. ad Iudic. Origen) immediatly vpon the former words, That Chusarsacon should humble thee, and necessitie driue thee (spight of thy teeth) to repentance: but pre∣uent thou this tormentors hands: because if thou amend and cor∣rect thy selfe, God is pitifull and mercifull, who will temper re∣uenge toward him that hath preuented it by repentance. So that it is not satisfaction, but amendment that God lookes for. That glorious Martyr, and most learned Arch-Bishop S. Cyprian, is vvonderfull vehement against them, that vvould not haue seuere pe∣nance done, by such as fel in persecution, saying. That such indiscreet men, labour tooth and nayle, that satisfaction be not done to God, highly offended against thē. And saith further, That he who withdraweth our brethren from these workes of satisfaction, doth miserably deceiue them, causing them that might doe true penance, and satisfie God their mercifull Father, vvith their prayer and vvorkes, to perish dayly. And to be more and more seduced to their further damnation. The former testimony out of Cyprian. Epist. 10. §. 1. Cyprian is falsely alleaged. The words are these: Our brotherhood is deceiued by certaine amongst you, who while they desired to be plausible, without re∣gard of restoring Salutis. health, doe more hurt them that are fallen. There is no word of satisfaction to God. The case was this, certaine Christians had fallen from the profession of reli∣gion in time of persecution, who were restored to the enioy∣ing of the word and Sacraments, before they had sufficient∣ly
repented, and testified their repentance to the congrega∣tion. By this presumption and rashnes in receiuing these men; the honour of the Martyrs, shame of the Confessors, and the peace of all the people (as Cyprian saith) were disturbed. He therefore writ this epistle, against that bad practise of admitting them that had denied Christ, to the Sacrament, before either the Church were satisfied, or these men had repented toward God, as was meete. Whereby it came to passe, that whereas by being held out, they might haue been brought to true repentance, by this hastie receiuing of them they made light of their grieuous sinnes, and remained in state of damna∣tion. Which is the very thing, that Cyprian affirmes, in the other testimonie, which followes in the same epistle, pre∣sently Cyprian. Fp. 10. §. 2. after the amplifying of the sinne, by certaine places of Scripture. S. Basil saith. Looke to thy selfe, that according to the proportion of thy fault, thou maist hence also borrovv some helpe of recouering thy health. Is it D. B. P. Lib. 1. Epist. Lib. 3. Ep. 14. Orat. in illa verba attende Libi. Idem Am. d virg. lap. cap. 8  a great and grieuous offence? it hath then need of much confession, bitter teares, a sharpe combat of vvatching, and vncessant and continued fasting: if the offence vvere light and more tollerabte, yet let the penance be equall vnto it. Basil. in illa verba attende tibi. Basil saith no more than we grant; That our repentance must be proportionable to our sinne. If you gather from thence that we must satisfie God therby, I deny your consequence. The end is, that wee may become more carefull of sinning, and more truly humbled, to increase our thankfulnes to God, for pardoning vs. S. Gregory Nazianzen saith, It is as great an euill to pardon vvithout some punishment, as to punish vvithout all pittie. For as that doth loose the  Orat. in sanct. lum. Idem de paup. amor. bridle to all licentiousnes, so this doth straine it too much. By compassion on the poore and faith, sinnes are purged, therefore let vs be cleansed by this compassion, let vs scoure out the spots and filth of our soules vvith this egregious herbe, that makes it vvhite, some as vvoole, others as snovv, according to the proportion of euery mans compassion and almes. Nazianzen. ratione 39. in sancta lumina. Nazianzens end of requiring punishment (as himselfe makes it plaine) is the restraining of vs from sinning: but this prooues not, that wee can, or must satisfie for the tem∣porall punishment of our sinnes to God. For this effect may easily be wrought in vs, though wee be not put vp with a
conceit of our abilitie to satisfie. What is it that should en∣courage vs, but hope of immunitie? But neither do we pro∣mise, nor can any man looke for freedome in this case. For though God looke not for any further satisfaction than our Sauiour Christ hath made him, yet he will chastice our sins sharply, for example to other men, and our owne amende∣ment. His other Nazianzen. de pauper. amore. speach is an earnest exhortation to compas∣sion and mercy, and (as Sixtus Senensis hath taught vs) may not be prest to the vttermost. There is no doubt, but God likes of mercy and pitie on the poore very highly, and re∣wards it with increase of grace euen in this life, by which we may be said to finde fauour with God for the auoiding of diuers chastisements, not because of their worth, but for that the Lord by them gratiously takes knowledge that we haue a desire and care to please him. S. Ambrose saith, VVe haue many helpes vvhereby we may redeeme our  De Helia & ie∣iun. sinnes, ast thou mony? Redeeme thy sinne, not that our Lord is to be bought and so, but thou thy selfe art sold by thy sinnes, redeeme thy selfe vvith thy vvorkes, redeeme thee vvith thy mony. Ambros. de Elia & ieiunio, cap. 20. Ambrose hauing taught before, that being redeemed by the blood of Christ, we are not to haue to do with the works of the deuill, and that if we do sinne, he that once hath pardoned vs will not remember the wrongs we haue done him, proceeds to exhort vs to the redeeming or satis∣fying for our sinnes, by all outward meanes of true repen∣tance, and namely by vsing well the goods that God hath bestowed on vs: he that will presse this by the word, may vrge satisfaction for sinne by it, not only for punishment. Redeeme thy sinne. Beside, you told vs before that satisfa∣ction is not made, but by that, which is spared from our ne∣cessarie vses. Ambrose here speakes of abundance. Make (saith he) of the instrument of coetousnes, a help of mercy. And he brings that out of the Prou. 13. 8. D. B. P. Epist. 82.  Prouerbs, though misaplied, A mans riches are his redemption. And, Hovv could vve be saued, vnlesse vve washed away our sinnes by fasting. Ambros. Epist. 82. The other testimonie also speakes of washing away, not
satisfying for the punishment due to it in Purgatory. He that will reade the place, and see the weake proofes that are brought for it, will not greatly rely vpon the authoritie of the writer in that case, yet I had rather expound this and such like passages, of repentance so testified and assured to our selues and God, then of satisfaction. S. Hierom maketh Paula a blessed Matron say, My face is to be dissigu∣red, which against the commandement of God I painted: my body is to be af∣flicted, that hath taken so great pleasure: my often laughter, is to be re∣compenced vvith continuall vveeping: my silkes and soft cloathing, it to be Ad Eustoch. de obitu Pau∣lae.  chaunged into rough haire. The like may be said to that of Hieron. ad Eustoch. de obitu Paulae. Ierome, and this beside, that Paula had now resolued, as it followeth in that place, to giue hir selfe to please Christ, and not the world, which she could not well doe if she continued in the vanities thereof. Read another Epistle of his to the same Eustochium, about the preser∣uing of her virginity, and see what penance himselfe did, being a most vertuous young man. As for the penance (as you call it) that Ierome himselfe did, it was not to satisfie Gods wrath for his sinnes, but to subdue his owne corrupt affections, which makes me the rather so expound the former of Paula. I subdued (saith he Hieron. ad Eustoch. de virginit. in that place) the rebelling flesh, by fasting diuers weekes. And afterward, if they suffer this, (that is as the place shewes, if they be so tempted) who, their body being consumed, are assaul∣ted by thoughts only, what temptations is a virgin subiect to, who liues in the abundance of delights? Yea, Ieromes whole epistle to hir, perswades to the auoyding of courtly temp∣tations, by the forsaking of the place of danger, not to sa∣tisfaction by penance. S. Augustine saith, He that is truly penitent, lookes to nothing else, then that he leaues not vnpunished the sinne vvhich he committed: For by that  Epist. 54. meanes, not sparing our selues, he vvhose high and iust iudgment no contem∣tuous person can escape, doth spare vs. The argument of the Aug. Epist. 54. ad Mace∣don. epistle to Macedonius, is the anow∣ing of the priests praying for them, who hauing sinned, pro∣mise ecclesiasticall penance. The clause you alleage out of it makes nothing against vs, who confesse, that our looking
into our owne faults, and condemning our selues for them, and (if you will) afflicting our minds and bodies to, became we haue offended, is many times an occasion that God withholds his hand from shiking. For his end being our re∣formation, by the sight of our sinne, and his iudgement due vnto it, in the nature of the thing, when this effect is alreadie wrought in vs, to what purpose should God draw his sword to chastice? D. R . Lib.  hom. Ho. 50. cap. 1. And he sheweth how that a penitent sinner doth come to the Priest, and re∣ceiue of him the measure of his satisfaction. The very beginning of the Aug lib. hom. 5. homil. 50. cap. xi. homily sheweth, that it is true repentance Austin there intreates of, because he proues the necessitie and profit of that which he there requires, by those places of scripture which vrge humiliation, and am∣plifies the parable of the Publican, who was iustified in his humilitie, rather then the Pharisie, though he fasted twice a weeke, and gaue tithes of all that he possessed. The end of comming to the priest, Austin makes this, that he may iudge whether the sinne require any publike satisfaction to be made to the Church, or no, that if his sinne (saith Austin) be not only to his great hurt, but also to the offence of other, and it seeme expedient to the priest, for the benefit of the Church, he may not refuse to do penance before many, or euen before the whole multitude, and not by shamefastnes adde pride to the deadly sore. And he saith directly against our Protestants position, That it is not  Cap. 15. sufficient to amend our manners, and to depart from the euill vvhich vve haue committed, vnlesse we do also satisfie God, for those things which vve had done. How is this testimonie of Aug hom. 50 cap. 15. Austin against our position? do we say it is inough to leaue sinne, though we sorrow not for it? nay do we not teach, that no man can leaue that sin, for which he is not truly and hartily grieued, vnlesse per∣chance he change one sinne into another? The satisfaction that God requires is that which Austin there describes out of the Psal. 51. 17. Psalme, The sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, an humble and contrite heart God will not despise. This is all that the Prophet whom he alleageth requires in that place. Au∣stin
addes almes, which we willingly acknowledge as a sa∣crifice greatly pleasing God, and fit to testifie true repen∣tance, that hauing found mercy at Gods hands, we may also shew mercy to other. S. Gregorie saith, That sinnes are not only to be confessed, but to be blot∣ted out with the austerity of penance. D. B. P. Li. 6. in 1. Reg. What saith Gregor. lib. 6. cap. 15. in 1. Reg. In Psal. 1. Gregory more then I haue oft acknowled∣ged? that we may not thinke it sufficient to confesse we haue sinned, but must also bewaile our sinnes committed. I will close vp these testimonies, with this sentence of our learned country-man venerable Bede: Delight (saith he) or desire to sinne, vvhen we doe satisfaction is lightly purged by almesdeeds, and such like: but con∣sent is not rubbed out, vvithout great penance: novv custome of sinning is not taken avvay, but by a iust and heauie satisfaction. You were ashamed to set downe Beades proofe of these three points, least the weakenes of his reasons might lighten the waight of his authoritie. Delight in sinne (saith Beda in Psalm. 1. Bede) is likened to Iairus daughter, who was raised to life by the tou∣ching of her hand, (he forgot that Christ bad her rise) so is that purged by almes, and such like light satisfaction. Consent is signified by the yong man that was carying out to be buried, and is not wiped out but by heauie penance. Will you heare his proofe, for our Lord doth not reach out his hand to him, but saith to him as it were Pulsu & grauitate. with a certaine mouing of him, and gra∣uitie, yong man I say vnto thee arise. By Lazarus, hauing lien foure dayes in the graue, and stincking, both the simple act, and the custome of sinning is signified, which is not taken away and pardoned, but by a right and heauie satisfaction, which is vnder∣stood by the lowdnes of our Lords voyce, and his groning in spirit at the raising of him. As weake as this groundworke is to beare so waightie a building, we will not offer to push at it, if you will giue vs leaue to make that reasonable interpreta∣tion, which I haue prooued to be intended by diuers of Beades auncients, that he meanes only to teach vs, that as sinnes differ in heinousnes, so must our ret entance in waight and measure: if this like you not, whatsoeuer damage this worke of Beade shall haue, the fault shall be yours wholie, and not ours at all.
And if you please in few words, to heare the Protestants works of pe∣nance and satisfaction: Insteed of our fasting, and other corporall cor∣rection: they fall to eating, and that of the best flesh they can get, and take in the Lord, all such bodely pleasure, as the company of a woman will afford. In lieu of giuing almes to the poore, they pill them by fines and vnreasonable rents: and by vsury and crafty bargaines, are not asha∣med to cousen their nearest kinne. Finally, in place of prayer, and wash∣ing away their owne sins by many bitter teares, they sing meerely a Ge∣neua Psalme, and raile, or heare a railing at our imagined sinnes, or pre∣tended errors. And so leaue, and lay all paine and sorrow vpon Christs shoulders, thinking themselues (belike) to be borne to pleasure and pa∣stime, and to make merry in this world. This spitefull and slanderous inuectiue of yours sauouring neither of conscience, nor ciuilitie, whereby you charge your soueraigne, his counsailers, nobles, gentrie, and all, that any where in sinceritie professe the Gospell of Iesus Christ with flat Epicurisme, I wittingly omit, holding it more Christian like to be railed vpon without cause, then to raile vpon desert. We vse our libertie with moderation, how you priests and Iesuits obserue that which feare of damna∣tion, hope of reward, the lawes of your superiors, and your owne vowes bind you to, I had rather euery man should iudge according to his knowledge, then suspect by my re∣porting of that, which would not seeme very vnlikely. The seuenth point. Of Traditions. Traditions are doctrines deliuered from hand to hand, either by word of mouth, or by writing, beside the written word of God. Our consent. Conclus. I. Wee hold that the very worde of God, hath beene deliuered by tradition. For first God re∣uealed his will to Adam by word of mouth: and re∣newed the same vnto the Patriarkes, not by writing, but by speech, by dreames, and other inspirations:
and thus the worde of God went from man to man for the space of two thousand and foure hundred yeeres, vnto the time of Moses who was the first pen∣man of holy scripture, For as touching the prophesie of Enoch, we commonly holde it was not penned by Enoch, but by some Iew vnder his name. And for the space of this time, men worshipped God and helde the articles of their faith by tradition, not from men but immediately from God himselfe. And the histo∣rie of the new testament (as some say) for eightie yeeres, as some others thinke, for the space of twenty yeeres and more, went from hand to hand by traditi∣on, till penned by the Apostles, or being penned by others was approoued by them. Hitherto we agree (but not in this which he interlaceth) that in the state of nature, euery man was instructed of God immediately in both matters of faith and religion: For that God then as euer since vsed the ministerie aswell of good fathers, as godly masters; as Enoch, Noe, Abra∣ham, and such like, to teach their children and seruants the true worship of God, and true faith in him; otherwise, how should the word of God passe by Tradition from Adam to Moses, as M. Perkins affirmeth: If no child learned any such thing of his Father, but was taught immediately from God, but M. Perkins seemeth to regard ltle such petty contradi∣ctions. If you were not more desirous to pick quarrels, then to acknowledge truth, you would neuer faine such contradi∣ctions. Master Perkins sayes no such thing, as you charge him with, but speakes only of the Patriarks, by whose mini∣sterie the rest were taught, as he shewes Idolatrie of the later times. otherwhere, ma∣king it an argument to perswade housholders to the like dutie. Conclus. II. We hold that the Prophets, our Sa∣uiour Christ, and his Apostles, spake and did many things good and true, which were not written in the Scriptures: but either came to vs, or to our ancetours onely by tradition. As 2. Tim. 3. 20. it is said, that
Iannes and Iambres were the Magitians that withstood Moses: now in the books of the olde testament wee shall not finde them once named, and therefore it is like, that the Apostle had their names by tradition, or by some writings then extant among the Iewes. So Hebr. 12. 21. the author of the Epistle recordeth of Moses, that when he saw a terrible sight in Mount Sinai, he said, I tremble and am afraide: which words are not to be found in all the bookes of the old testa∣ment. In the Epistle of Iude mention is made, that the Diuell stroue with Michael the Archangell about the bodie of Moses: which point (as also the former) considering it is not to be found in holy writ, it seemes the Apo∣stle had it by tradition from the Iewes. That the Pro∣phet Esai was killed with a fullers clubbe, is receiued for truth, but yet not recorded in Scripture: and so likewise that the Virgin Mary liued and died a virgin. And in Ecclesiasticall writers many worthy sayings of the Apostles and other holy men are recorded, and receiued of vs for truth, which neuerthelesse are not set downe in the bookes of the olde or new Te∣stament. And many things wee holde for truth not written in the worde, if they bee not against the word. His 2. Conclus. We hold that the Prophets, our Sauiour Christ and his Apostles spake, and did many things good and true, which were not written in the Scriptures, but came to vs by Tradition: but these were not necessary to be beleeued: For one example he puts; that the blessed Virgin Marie liued and died a Virgin: but it is necessary to saluation to beleeue this, for Heluidius is esteemed by S. Augustine an Heretike, for denying it. De haeres. ad Quod. lib. 14. Master Perkins saith nothing of the necessitie of beleeuing. That point of the virgin Maries perpetuall virginitie, we hold to be true, but we dare not lay a burthen vpon any mans conscience where the scripture is silent. S. Austins
iudgement though he were a singular light of the Church, is not of waight inough to determine, without all warrant of scripture, what is heresie, and what is not; especially since In praefat. de haeres: b. himselfe confesseth that it cannot at all, or very hardly be declared Regulari definitione. by a lawfull definition what makes a man an he∣retike. Besides, Austin thus deliuers the matter concerning the Heluidians heresie. The Heluidians (saith he) so gaine said the virginitie of Mary, that they confidentlie affirme, she had other children after Christ by her husband Ioseph. So that it may well be Austin counted them heretikes especially for auouching that peremptorily which they could no way make good by scripture. Conclus. III. We hold that the Church of God hath power to prescribe ordinances, rules, or traditi∣ons, touching time, and place of Gods worship, and touching order and comelines to bee vsed in the same: and in this regard, Paul 1. Cor. 11. 2. commen∣deth the Church of Corinth for keeping his traditi∣ons, and Act. 15. the Counceil at lerusalem decreed that the Churches of the Gentiles should abstaine from blood, and from things strangled. This decree is tearmed a tradition, and it was in force among them so long as the offence of the Iewes remained. And this kinde of traditions whether made by ge∣nerall Councels or particular Synods, we haue care to maintaine and obserue: these caueats being re∣membred: first that they prescribe nothing childish or absurd to be done. See what a erent opinion this man carrieth of the Church of God, gouerned by his holy spirit, that it neuerthelesse may prescribe things both childish and absurd. But I must pardon him, because he speaketh of his owne Synagogue, which is no part of the true Church Hee that obserues what your Romish synagogue hath brought into Gods seruice, and remembers that the Church (that is, men which beare sway in it) may fondly erre, will
acknowledge this caueat most needfull. No stage-play is so full of fooleries as your Masse-game. Secondly that they bee not imposed as any parts of Gods worship. This is contrary to the conclusion, for order and comlinesse to be vsed in Gods worship, which the Church can prescribe, is some part of the worship. Order and comelinesse are no parts of Gods worship, but adiuncts, seruing to the better performance thereof, as the obseruation of due and fit circumstances giue a grace and furtherance to any action whatsoeuer. Thirdly, that they be seuered from superstition or opinion of merit. This is needlesse; for if it be not absurd, which was the first prouiso, it is already seneted from superstition. That is absurd which is contrarie to common reason or sense, but all things superstitious are not so, yea many points of superstition haue so much shew of reason for them, that without Gods commandement to the contrarie, a wise man might thinke them very fit meanes of Gods worship, and meritorious. Such Col. 2. was ye Gentiles worshipping of Angels, supposing they had worshipped none but God: such is your worshipping of Angels, and he saincts and she saincts now adayes; such is your feare of displeasing God, if you eate flesh on saincts eauens, or in Lent, and such like. Lastly that the Church of God be not burdened with the multitude of them. And thus much wee hold touching Traditions. The fourth, touching multitude may passe; these be but meere trifles  And yet after∣ward you bring this very de∣cree to proue that the Apo∣stle Paul allea∣ged Tradition, end rested not on  Scrip∣ture. That is of more importance, that he tearmeth the decree registred, in the 15. of the Actes of the Apostles, a Tradition: whereas before he de∣fined Traditions to be all doctrine deliuered, besides the written word. Now the Actes of the Apostles is a parcell of the written word, as all the world knovves: That then vvhich is of record there, cannot be tear∣med a Tradition. Though the Acts of the Apostles be a part of the written word: yet was not the booke written when that decree was
first obserued; neither doth Master Perkins giue it the name of himselfe, but saith, it is tearmed a tradition. The difference. Papists teach, that beside the written worde, there be certaine vnwritten traditions, which must bee be∣leeued as profitable and necessarie to saluation. And these they say are twofold: Apostolicall, namely such as were deliuered by the Apostles and not writ∣ten; and Ecclesiasticall, which the Church decreeth as occasion is offered. Wee hold that the Scriptures are most perfect, containing in them all doctrines needfull to saluation, whether they concerne faith or manners: and therefore we acknowledge no such traditions beside the written worde, which shall bee necessarie to saluation: so as hee which beleeueth them not, cannot be saued. Before we come to the Protestants reasons against Traditions; ob∣serue that we deuide Traditions into three sorts: The first we rearme Diuine, because they were deliuered by our blessed Sauiour, who is God: Thesecond, Apostolicall, as deliuered by the holy Apostles: The third, Ecclesiasticall, instituted and deliuered by the Gouernors of the Curch, after the Apostles daies. And of these three kinds of Traditions, we make the same account, as of the writings of the same Authors: to wit, we esteeme no lesse of our Sauiours Traditions, than of thefoure Gos∣pels, or any thing immediatly dictated from the holy Ghost. Likewise as O eloquence! So doe we to all knovvne to be the Apostles. much honor and credit doe we giue vnto the Apostles doctrine vnwrit∣ten, as written. For incke and paper brought no new holines, nor gaue any force and vertue vnto either Gods or the Apostles words; but they were of the same value and credit vttered by word of mouth, as if they had been written. Here the question is principally of diuine Traditions, ou confesse afterward that the Gospell comprehendeth the principall points of faith. which we hold to be necessary to saluation, to resolue and determine many matters of greater difficulty. For we deny not but that some such principall points of our Faith, (which the simple are bound to beleeue vnder paine of damnation) may be gathered out of the holy Scrip∣tures: as for example, that God is the Creator of the world, Christ the Redeemer of the world, the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier: and other such like Articles of the Creed.
Diuine traditions are such as were deliuered by our Sa∣uiour (say you) and are diuers from those that the Apostles left. So that the controuersie is (principally) of those mat∣ters that Christ only spake; and neither the Euangelists nor Apostles haue set downe in writing. But (that we may vn∣derstand what wee doe) it is further to be knowne, that the question is not, whether, if there be any such traditions, wee are bound to beleeue them (for that is out of all doubt) but whether there be any such or no; or whether the Scriptures doe not containe sufficient direction, for the determining of al matters of importance to saluation, and for the substance of religion. You, that you may discredit the Scriptures, to aduance traditions, doe not so much as acknowledge that the maine grounds of doctrine are there plainly taught, but mince the matter, with your some such principall points, and may be gathered out of the holy Scripture: whereas not onely those two you name; but, if not all, yet many more are ma∣nifestly therein declared. Our reasons. Testimonie I. Deutr. 4. 2. Thou shalt not adde to the words that I commande thee, nor take anything therefrom: therefore the written worde is sufficient for all do∣ctrines pertaining to saluation. If it bee said that this commandement is spoken as well of the vnwritten as of the written word, I answere: that Moses speaketh of the written word onely: for these very words are a certaine preface which hee set before a long com∣mentarie made of the written lawe, for this ende to make the people more attentiue, and obedient. Let the words be set where you will, they must not be wrested beyond their proper signification. The words cited signifie no more, then that we must not either by addition or subtraction, chaunge or peruert Gods commaundements, whether they be written or vnwritten. To interpret Deut. 4. 2. this place of vnwritten traditions, is to Marc. 7. 5. 13. strengthen the Iewes error, and to voide our Sauiours re∣proofe.
And if there were any such, though the particulars were not to be recorded; yet it is strange, that Moses should not once make mention of them in generall. Thomas 3. q. 60. art. 8. ad primum. Thomas ex∣pounds it of adding to the words of the Scripture. And if it be lawful for all these prohibitions to adde other doctrines, why doth Chrysost. ad Mat. hom. 52. Chrysostome reprooue the Iewish Priests, for ha∣uing added many things to the law, though Moses with threat∣ning charged them they should not? For it is certaine, they ne∣uer added to nor any way corrupted the text. But Chryso∣stome accuseth them of adding, because they deliuered do∣ctrines that were not written in the Scripture: as Math. 15. 9. our Sa∣uiour also saith of them. Cardinall Caietan. ad Deut. 4. 2. Caietan wils vs to ga∣ther from this place, that the law of God is perfect. Now to inferre, that because they are as a preface vnto Moses Lavv, that therefore nothing must be added vnto the same Law, is extreame dotage. What is it to refute that which your aduersarie saith not? Master Perkins proues, that Moses spake of the written law, because he sets it as a preface before his Commentarie vpon the same law. You answere nothing to that, but crie out vp∣on extreame dotage, for inferrring, that because it is a pre∣face to Moses law, therefore nothing must be added to it. Who inferres any such matter, but your selfe? You need not make worke: you haue your hands full. Why then were the bookes of the old Testament, written aftervvard, if God had forbidden any more to be written or taught, besides that one booke of Deuteronomie? Shall we thinke that none of the Prophets that liued and wrote many volumes after this, had read these vvords; or that they either vnderstood them not; or that vnderstanding them vvell, did vvilfully transgresse against them? one of these the Protestants must needs defend, or else for very shame surcease the alleadging of this text for the all sufficiencie of the written vvord. We neither need, nor will defend either of them. But we denie your consequence; if no man might adde any thing A. W to the law of God deliuered by Moses, then the Prophets offended in writing so many volumes. The reason is, that the Prophets writ not as men, but as 2. Pet. the instruments of Gods spirit, inditing and penning by them. God did not tie his owne hands by that commandement, that he might
not from time to time instruct his people, as it should seeme good to his infinite wisedome. To speake yet more plain∣ly; the Prophets and Apostles writings, are nothing els but expositions of that, the summe whereof is deliuered in the fiue bookes of Moses; wherein the whole doctrine of the Law and the Gospell is contained. Testimonie II. Isai. 8. 20. To the law and to the te∣stimonie. If they speake not according to this worde, it is be∣cause there is no light in them. Here the Prophet teach∣eth what must be done in cases of difficultie. Men must not runne to the wizard or southsaier, but to the law and testimonie, and here he commends the written word as sufficient to resolue all doubts and scruples in conscience whatsoeuer. Here the Prophet teacheth (saith M. Perkins vvhat is to be done in cases of difficulty. Men must not runne to the Wizards and Sooth∣sayers, but to the Lavve and to the Testament, commending the vvrit∣ten vvord, as sufficient to resolue all doubts. By the Lavv and testimony in that place; the fiue books of Moses are to be vnderstood. If that written Word be sufficient to resolue all doubts vvhatsoeuer: What need vve then the Prophets? vvhat need vve the Euangelists and the Epistles of the Apostles? What Wizard vvould haue reasoned in such sort? The Scripture is not to resolue all doubts; but all doubts and scruples of conscience whatsoeuer, which you craftily leaue out in propounding our reason. Your consequence is false: If the fiue bookes of Moses be sufficient for the resol∣uing of al doubts; what need any writings of the Prophets, Euangelists or Apostles? Is not the Ciuill and Canon law (in your iudgement) sufficient to resolue all doubts, in cases concerning them? is there therefore no need of any expo∣sition thereof? The rest of the Scripture is a Commentarie vpon those fiue bookes. Besides, is nothing required in the scripture but resoluing of doubts? The historie of the Church is worth the knowing, for our instruction, comfort, exhortation, imitation, and such like. The Prophet vvilleth there, that the Israelites vvho vvanted vvit to discerne vvhether it be better to flie vnto God for counsell, than vnto
Wizards and Sooth-sayers, to see vvhat is vvritten in the Lavv of Moses concerning that point of consulting. Wizards, vvhich is there plainely forbidden in diuers places. Novv out of one particular case, vvhereof there is expresse mention in the vvritten vvord, to conclude that all doubts and scruples vvhatsoeuer are thereby to be decided, is a most vn∣skilfull part, arguing as great vvant of light in him, as vvas in those blind Israelites. The Prophet doth not send them to the Law, and to the testimonie, to see whether it be lawfull to enquire of Sooth∣sayers or no: but tels them, that they must looke into the booke of God, to see whether such iudgements, as the Pro∣phets threatned, should not befall them, if they continued their sinning against God. So that hee wils them, not to hearken what the Southsayers say, of their escaping the iudgements that the Prophets denounced, but to trie whe∣ther their promises of safetie, or the others threatning of de∣struction, were agreeable to the word of God. Though the case be particular (which you put amisse) yet if the triall of the Prophets doctrine be to be made by the scripture, as it is, wherein may we looke to vnwritten traditions? Testimonie III. Iohn, 20. 31. These things were written that ye might beleeue that Iesus is the Christ, and in beleeuing might haue euerlasting life. Here is set downe the full end of the Gospell, and of the whole written word: which is to bring men to faith and conse∣quently to saluation: and therefore the whole scrip∣ture alone is sufficient to this ende without tradi∣tions. 3. Testimony, Ioh. 20. 31. These things vvere vvritten, that yee might beleeue that Iesus is the Christ: and in beleeuing, might haue life euerlasting. Here is set dovvne the full end of the Gospell, that is, to bring men to faith, and consequently to saluation: to vvhich, the vvhole Scripture alone is sufficient vvithout Traditions. Ans Here are more faults than lines. First the text is craftily mangled: Things being put in steed of Miracle. For S. Iohn saith, Many other Mi∣racles Christ did, &c, but these vvere vvritten, &c. Mangling is cutting off some part, not putting one word for another; especially such a word as containes the other.
Things-comprehends both doings and sayings; and to both doth one of your Glosses referre this narration, euen on the former verse, where the word miracle is set downe; He shewes (saith I yea ad Ioa 20. 34. Lyra) the insufficiencie of the Scripture, in respect of Christs excellencie In opere & doctrina. in worke and doctrine. Secondly, S. Iohn saith not that for faith vve shall be saued, but belee∣uing vve should haue saluation in his name, vvhich he clipped off. What saith Master Perkins more, than Glossa Or∣din. ibi. your glosse doth acknowledge? That faith may be anowed, by which life may be had. And Lyra. ibi. another glosse expounds that beleeuing, of faith formed by charitie; which you grant iustifies. It helpes vs nothing at all to leaue out those words in his name, and therefore there was no clipping in it. Thirdly, remember to vvhat faith S. John ascribes the meanes of our saluation, not to that vvhereby vve applie vnto our selues Christs righ∣teousnes, but by vvhich vve beleeue Jesus to be Christ the Messias of the Ievves, and the Sonne of God, vvhich M. Perkins also concealed. The faith, spoken of in this text, is not properly iustify∣ing faith, but that is signified in the latter part of the verse, where it is said, that we haue life in his name, that is, by re∣sting vpon his power to saue vs. The concealing of those words doth more hurt, than helpe vs. If it bee said, that this place must bee vnderstood of Christs miracles onely: I answere, that miracles without the doctrine of Christ and knowledge of his sufferings, can bring no man to life euerlasting, and therefore the place must bee vnderstood of the doctrine of Christ and not of his miracles alone, as Paul teacheth, Gal. 8. 1. If we or an Angell from heauen preach vnto you any thing beside that which wee haue preached, let him bee accursed, And to this effect hee blames them that taught but a diuers doctrine to that which he had taught, 1. Tim. 1. 3. Novv to the present matter, S. Iohn saith, that these miracles recorded in his Gospell, vvere vvritten, that vve might beleeue Iesus to be the Son of God; and beleeuing, haue saluation in his name, &c. Therefore the vvritten vvord containes all doctrine necessary to saluation.
Ans. S. Iohn speaks not a word of doctrine, but of miracles: and therfore to conclude sufficiencie of Doctrine out of him, is not to care vvhat one saith. But M. Perkins foreseeing this, saith, it cannot be vnderstood of miracles only; for miracles vvithout the doctrine of Christ, can bring no man to life euerlasting: True, and therefore that text speaking only of miracles, proueth nothing for the sufficiency of the vvritten Word. Christs miracles vvere sufficient, to proue him to be the Sonne of God, and their Messias: But that proueth not S. Iohns Gospell, to containe all Doctrine needfull to saluation: For many other points of faith must be beleeued also. Master Perkins prooues, that the Euangelist speakes not only of miracles, because he speakes of such a faith as will bring a man to euerlasting life; which the faith that comes by miracles only will not doe. You offer not to answere his reason, which stands still in force against you, but denie the conclusion, that he speakes not onely of miracles. This reason wee haue confirmed, as also the interpretation by that place of Austin; Iohn the Euangelist (saith Tractat. 49. in Ioan. ustin) wit∣nesseth, that our Lord Christ both said and did many things that are not written. But those things were chosen out to be written, which seemed sufficient for the saluation of the beleeuers. And whereas you would restraine the text only to the proofe of Christs being the Messiah, Lyra ibi. Lyra may teach you, that in this Epilogo. conclusion the profit also of the doctrine is declared. And Hugo ibi. Hu∣go Cardinalis saith, that in these words specially the intent of the booke, but generally the end of all the Scripture is declared. Now the end of the Scripture is our saluation. To the same purpose writes Cyrill. in Ioa. lib. 12. cap. 68. Cyrill: All things that our Lord did, are not written, but those that the writers thought to be sufficient for manners and doctrine, that we glistering with true faith, good workes and vertue, might come to the kingdome of heauen. And if it alone be sufficient; vvhat neede vve the other three Gos∣pels, the Actes of the Apostles, or any of their Epistles, or the same S. Johns Reuelations. There are some that thinke (and the opinion is not vn∣likely) that the Euangelist speakes of all the bookes of the new Testament, which hee saw before his writing of this Gospell; vnlesse perhaps the reuelation were penned by
him afterward. But the obiection shewes it selfe to be vaine, by my former answer to the like, about the fiue bookes of Moses. Finally, admit that S. Johns Gospell vvere all-sufficient, yet should not Traditions be excluded; for Christ saith in it in plaine tearmes, Ioh. 16. that he had much more to say vnto his Apostles, but they as then being not able to beare it; he reserueth that to be deliuered vnto them aftervvard; of vvhich high mysteries S. John recordeth not much in his Gospell after Christs resurrection; and so many of them must needs be deliuered by Tradition vnvvritten. First if it be granted that Ioh. 16. 12. our Sauiour had (at that time) some new matter to deliuer, which they had not heard of, what get you by it? It will not follow thereupon, either that all things necessarie to saluation are not contained in the scriptures, or that your traditions are the things that our Sauiour meant, for (as Tract. 96. i Ioan. Austin truly affirmeth) since Christ hath not signified any where in scripture what they were, it is rashnes for any man to presume to say, they were such, or such things. No man (saith your Glossa In∣terlin. ibi. Glosse) may determine what they were. Secondly, there is no shew of consequence in your reasoning, Christ had many things to say not long be∣fore his death: Therefore though the Gospell be all suffici∣ent, yet there are many things not written which were needfull to be beleeued. Because they were afterward to be spoken, therefore were they not written at all by the A∣postles and Euangelists? sure Christ forbad not the writing of them in those words. Thirdly, this is the place which he∣retikes abuse to the countenancing of their traditions, as you do of yours. All foolish heretikes (saith Aug. Tract. 97. in Ioan. Austin) that will haue themselues counted Christians, indeuour to colour their bold fantasticall inuentions with that sentence of the Gospell, I haue yet many things to say to you. Lastly I answere, that those many things of which Christ speakes, were the same that before he had taught them, which they partly vnder∣stood not, and partly remembred not. I prooue it thus: Our Sauiour said before, that he Iohn. 15. 15. had taught them all things which he had heard of his father, and promised to send them the holie ghost, Iohn. 14. 26. that should teach them, and cause them to re∣member
whatsoeuer he had said to them, whereof we haue a worthie example in Ioan. 2. 22. that speech of Christ concerning building the temple againe. This (saith the Gospell) the disciples then vnderstood not, but after his resurrection they came to the true vnderstanding of it. We say not, that our Sa∣uiour deliuered to them euery point of doctrine distinctly, but that he furnished them with so much knowledge, as that they might easily by that light gather and write what∣soeuer was needfull to be beleeued; to the penning where∣of they had the speciall direction of the spirit both for mat∣ter and maner. Iansen. ad Ioan. 16. Iansenius Bishop of Gaunt is wholie of the same opinion, affirming that those many things were not di∣uers from those which he had taught them before, but a more plaine exposition of them: and to that purpose he alleages very fitly that place of the 1. Cor. 3. 1. Apostle, I could not speake to you, as vnto spirituall men, but as it were vnto carnall men, to little ones in Christ. Didymus apud Tho. in caten. ad Ioa. 16. Didymus about the yeare 580. expoun∣ded the place thus, This he saith, that his auditors Omnia ver∣borum conse∣cuti. had not yet conceiued all things which he had told them, that afterward they were to suffer for his name sake. And afterward, as yet also (saith Didymus) being vnder the type of the law, and shadowes, they could not discerne of the truth, the shadow whereof the law caryed. This place of S. Iohn, M. Perkins patcheth vp vvith another of S. Paul If vve or any Angell from heauen preach vnto you any thing besides that Gal. 1. 8. vvhich we haue preached, let him be accursed: And to this effect he blames them that taught but a diuers doctrine, to that vvhich he had taught, 1. Tim. 1. 3. Ans. Now we must looke vnto the Gentlemans fingers: There were three corruptions in the text of S. Iohn: here is one, but it is a foule one. Insteed of preaching vnto them another Gospell, he puts (preach vnto them any other thing:) when there is great difference betweene another You giue more to the Gospell in this place, then before to all the Scrip∣ture. Gospell, and any other thing. The Gospell comprehendeth the princi∣pall points of faith, and the whole worke of Gods building in vs: which S. Paul like a wise Architect 1. Cor. 3. 12. had laide in the Galathians; others his fellow workemen, might build vpon it, gold, siluer, and pretious stones, with great merit to themselues and thanks from S. Paul: Marry if any should digge vp that blessed and only foundation, & would lay a new one, him S. Paul holdeth for accursed. So that, that falsification of the text is in∣tolerable; and yet when all is done, nothing can be wringed out of it, to proue the written word to comprehend all doctrine needfull to saluati∣on:
for S. Paul speaketh there only of his Gospell, that is, of his prea∣ching vnto the Galathians, and not one word of any written Gospell: No more doth he in that place to Timothy: And so it is nothing to pur∣pose. The Greeke is (word forword) if we, or an angell from hea∣uen shall preach vnto you, . beside that which we haue preached, let him be accursed. Your vulgar, Latine all one with it in a maner, Praeterquam quod. praeterquam quod, for . praeter id quod, as it is in the next verse, where the greeke is all one: your Interlin. Bib. praeter quod. interlinear praeter quod, in both verses. You will haue the Apostle meane another gospell, and so will Master Perkins: for by another thing he vnderstands such another thing, as shall be neces∣sarie to saluation, and yet diuers from that, which the A∣postle had deliuered. And what is that else, but another Gospell? You tell vs the gospell comprehends the principall points of faith, whereas before in this point you giue no more to the whole scripture but that some principall points may be ga∣thered out of it: this would haue made a contradiction in Master Perkins. But is there any thing necessarie to saluation, that is not a principall point of faith? Is not that a princi∣pall point, without which a man cannot be saued? But if (as you adde) the gospell comprehend also the whole worke of Gods building in vs, either I conceiue not what you meane by those words, or else he that teacheth any other course of Gods building in vs then the gospell prescribes, preacheth another gospell: which doctrine will go neere to ouerthrow the greatest part of your will worship. You pro∣ceed and say, that the Apostle speakes of such a doctrine as digs vp the foundation. What is the foundation? If it be not digged vp, as long as Christ is held to be the Messiah, and that without him there is no saluation, as you commonly expound the gospell of faith in Christ, questionles the A∣postle speakes not of ouerthrowing the foundation, be∣cause the Galathians, against whom he writes, did not think that any saluation could be had without Christ, but Gal. 5. 1. 2. 3. that the law morall and ceremoniall was to be ioyned with Christ to iustification. If the foundation may be razed,
though those points be not denyed; and if to ioyne the law with Christ, be to lay another foundation, and to preach another gospell, how can your popish synagogue be a true member of Christs Church, in which the foundation is shaken, in coupling the law with Christ, and another Gos∣pell preached, by teaching such points of doctrine for mat∣ter necessarie to saluation, as the Apostles neuer deliuered? Master Perkins therefore vnderstanding by any thing, only things, that make another Gospell, as the question in hand, and 1. Tim. 1. 3. the other place alleaged shew A diuers doctrine, may neither be charged with, nor suspected of false dealing. Bellarm. de verbo Dei non script. lib. 4. cap. 10. Bellarmine a Cardinall, and a man of as great iudgement as you, affirmes, that the Apostle in that place speakes both of the written and vnwritten word, not as you would haue it, only of the gospel preached. And Aug. contr. lit. Petil. lib. 3. cap. 6. Austin applies the text to the scripture of the law and of the gospell; other then that which you haue receiued in the legall and Euangelicall scrip∣tures, that is, in the old and new Testament. Basil. Moral. sum. 72. cap. 1. Basill also saith the like of the same matter, that the hearers must exa∣min those things that are deliuered by their teachers, and re∣ceiue those that are . agreeable to the Scripture, and reiect those . Praeterquam quod. that are diuers, which he prooues by that place to the Ga∣lathians. And whereas Bellarmine would haue their testi∣monies, vnderstood of things contrary only, the very words refute him. But it is apparant, that all that Paul preached is in the scriptures; for out of them doth he still confirme his doctrine. They of Act. 17. 10. 11 Berea found that, which hee taught them, to agree with the scriptures, and Act. 26. 12. himselfe auoucheth before Festus, that he preached nothing but that which Moses and the Prophets had taught. And so both these pla∣ces are to purpose. Testimonie IV. 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. The whole Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God & is profitable to teach, to im∣prooue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, beeing made perfect vnto eue∣rie good worke. In these wordes be contained two ar∣guments,
to prooue the sufficiencie of the Scripture without vnwritten verities. The first: that which is profitable to these foure vses: namely, to teach all necessarie trueth, to confute all errours, to correct faults in manners, and to instruct in righteousnesse, that is, to informe all men in all good duties, that is sufficient to saluation. But scripture serueth for all these vses: and therefore it is sufficient: and vnwrit∣ten traditions are superfluous. In these words are contained (saith M. Perkins) two arguments to proue the sufficiencie of Scripture: The first; that which is profitable to these foure vses, to teach (all necessary truth is not in the text) to con∣fute Neither doth M. Perkins put it in. An interpreta∣tion is not ad∣dition to the text. errors, to correct faults in manners, to instruct (all men in all dutie, is M. Perkins his addition to the text) that is sufficient to saluation: But the Scriptures serue for all these vses, &c. Ans. This text of holy Scripture, is so farre from yeelding our aduer∣saries two Arguments, that it affoordeth not so much as any probable colour of halfe one good argument. In searching out the true sense of holy Scriptures; we must obserue diligently the nature and proper sig∣nification of the words; as M. Perkins also noteth out of S. Augustine, in his sixt obiection of this question; which, if the Protestants did here per∣forme, they would make no such account of this text: for S. Paul saith only, that all Scripture is profitable, not sufficient, to teach, to proue, &c. How are they then carried away with their owne partiall affections, that cannot discerne betweene profitable and sufficient? Good Timber is pro∣fitable to the building of an house, but it is not sufficient, without stones, morter, and a Carpenter. Seed serues well, yea, is also necessary to bring forth corne: but will it suffice of itself, without manuring of the ground, and seasonable weather? And to fit our purpose more properly; good lawes are very profitable: yea, most expedient for the good gouernment of the common-vvealth: But are they sufficient vvithout good customes, good gouernours, and iudges, to see the same law and customes rightly vnderstood and duly executed? Euen so the holy Scriptures (S. Paul af∣firmeth) are very profitable; as contayning very good and necessarie matter, both to teach, reproue, and correct: but he saith not they are sufficient, or that they do containe all doctrine needfull for these foure ends: And therefore, to argue out of S. Paul, that they are sufficient for all those purposes; vvhen he saith only, that they are profitable to them, is plainly not to knovv, or not to care vvhat a man h: And to presse such an impertinent cauil, so often and so vehemently as the Protestants do, is nothing else but to bevvray, (vnto the indifferent reader) either
their extreame ignorance, or most audacious impudency, that thinke they can face out any matter, be it neuer so impertinent. The text was set downe before without any addition, now Master Perkins shewes how he gathers his argument out of the text, without adding to it at all, but interpreting it. Now whereas hee saith all necessarie truth, how much lesse affirmes Lyra ad 2. Tim. 3. Lyra, when he addes, to Veritatem. teach the truth? for if by that word he should meane no more but some truth, it were but a bare exposition, but that he vnderstands by it all truth, I gather out of his other exposition that followes, for which also you blame Master Perkins, to instruct all men in all dutie. The word is in all righteousnes, that is, to Glossa In∣terlin. ibi. make him righteous with legall righteousnes (saith Lyra) which is all Omnis vir∣tus. or euery vertue. That the profitablenes of the Scripture to those purposes argues a sufficiencie, it is the iudgement of the best Inter∣preters: There is no sicknes of the soule (saith De dupl. martyr. cap. 43 Cyprian) for which the Scripture of God affoords not a present remedie. He proues it by the place of Timothy. Hieron. ad 2. Tim. 3. Ierome saith, The Scrip∣ture was giuen to teach vs, that doing all things by the aduice thereof, we might doe iust things iustly. Chrysost. ibi. Chrysostome is yet more plaine: If we be to learne, or to be ignorant of any thing, there we shall learne it: if to conuince falsehood, thence we shall fetch it: if we be to correct or chastice for exhortation, if any comfort be wanting, which must be had, out of the Scripture we shall learne it. And vpon those words, That the man of God may be perfit: Therefore without the Scripture hee cannot bee made perfect. In steed of me (saith Paul) thou hast the Scrip∣tures: if thou desire to learne any thing, thence thou shalt, or there thou maist haue it. The Scripture (saith Theophy∣lact. ibi. Theophylact) is profitable to vs, teaching vs, if any thing be to be learned. For there is nothing that cannot be answered by the holy Scripture. If vaine and false things be to be reprooued, thence also it may be done: if any thing be to be corrected, if any man be to be instru∣cted, that is to be taught to righteousnes, that is, that he he may do that which is righteous, this also is ready for thee in the Scrip∣ture. And afterward he makes the Apostle speake thus to
Timothy: If thou wilt be perfect and holy, &c. let the Scriptures be thy Counsellors in steed of me. And vpon these words, Per∣fect to euery good worke. Not simply (saith Theophylact) Particeps bonorum ope∣rum. part∣ly fitted to good workes, but perfect: not so that he shall be fitted to this and not to that, but to euery good worke. That he may be perfect to euery good worke, saith Lombard. ad 2. Tim. 3. Peter Lombard, expoun∣ding the word instructus, which is in your vulgar transla∣tion. Thomas ibi. Thomas goes further, to euery good worke: Not onely to those workes which are for necessitie of saluation, but to those also that are of supererogation. And a little before: If the ef∣fect of holy Scripture be fourefold, to teach the truth, to conuince falsehood, for speculation; to draw from euill, and bring to good, for practise; the last effect of it is, that it brings men to perfe∣ction. Non enim qualitercun{que} bonum facit, sed perficit. For it doth not make a man good in part, but perfectly. It is proper to the holy Scripture (saith Caietan. ibi. Caietan) to teach the ig∣rant, and that he may be perfect in all things, that belong to the perfecting of a man of God. And afterward: See whether the profit of the holy Scripture teads, to the perfection of the man of God: that is, of him who giues himselfe whly to God; to such a perfection I say, that he may be perfect to the practis of eery good worke. I haue been som what the larger in this, because this Papist chargeth vs so hard, not to know, or not to e what wee say. And yet what say we, that hath not been said before by the ancient writers, and many Papis them∣selues? Now for the further confirmation of this exposition (though against a Papist there needes no further) wee may obserue out of Chrysostome, and Theophylact, that the Apostle Paul, being, as he 2. Tim. 4. 6. saith afterwards, shortly to be offered vp, commends the Scriptures to Timothy for instructers in his steed, to which he may haue recourse, as often as any truth is to be taught, any error to be confuted, any fault to be re∣prooued, or any good dutie to be enioyned. Further, we vn∣derstand by the Apostle himself, that 2. Tim. 3. 15. the Scriptures are able to make him wise to saluation. And thence we conclude, that they containe all things necessarie to saluation. And if any thing els were requisite, it is strange that the Apostle should
not commend the especiall meditation thereof vnto him, since without it he could not be perfect. The second: that which can make the man of God, that is Prophets, and Apostles, and the Mini∣sters of the word, perfect in all the duties of their cal∣lings: that same worde is sufficient to make all o∣ther men perfect in all good works. But Gods word is able to make the man of God perfect. Therefore it is sufficient to prescribe the true and perfect way to eternall life, without the helpe of vnwritten tra∣ditions. The same ansvvere I make vnto M. Perkins his second argument, out of the same place: that the holy Scriptures be profitable to make the man of God absolute, but not sufficient. The same replie make I against this answer, that both the Apostle and the interpreters alleaged proue, that they are so profitable, that they make the man of God sufficient. Be∣sides, any man may obserue, that you answer to neither part of Master Perkins syllogisme, but roue at the imagined ex∣position of the place. I say moreouer; that Master Perkins doth falsely English these words  into the whole Scriptures: when it signifieth all Scripture, that is, euery booke of Scripture: and is there put to verifie, that the old Testament only serues to instruct to saluation: For, in the words next before, S. Paul sheweth, how that Timothy from his infancie, had been trained vp in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures: which, saith he, can instruct thee to saluation: And annexeth, as the confirmation thereof the Text cited: All Scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, &c. Now, in Timothies infancie, no part of the new Testament was written, and therefore, all Scripture which is here put, to proue that Scripture which Timothie in his Infancie knew; cannot but by vnreasonable wre∣sting, signifie more than all the bookes of the old Testament. The words are rightly translated: that  is often taken for , these places manifestly prooue: . Col. 2. 9. In him dwels the whole fulnes of the Godhead: . Act. 20. 27. The whole counsaile of God. Luk. 21. 32. All the people. Ephes. 4. 16. The whole bodie. Rom. 4. 16. The whole seede. 2. Thess. 1. 11. All the
good pleasure. Matth. 3. 5. All Iudea, and all the region therea∣bout. That it must be so taken, in this place Dionys. Car∣thus. ad 2. Tim. 3. Dionysius the Carthusian witnesseth; All, that is Tota Scrip∣tura. the whole Canonicall scrip∣ture. The Scriptures (saith Glossa Or∣din. ibi. your ordinarie Glosse.) And in that sense did the Interpreters expound it. If we take it, as you doe, euery Psalme, euery verse, yea euery word, as being from God by inspiration, must haue all these properties. For whereas you would restraine it to euery booke of scrip∣ture, the words will not beare it, If the old Testament onely without the new had this suf∣ficiencie, can it be insufficient now the new is added? which indeed is rather an explication, than an addition to the for∣mer. It is more than can be prooued, that no part of the new Testament was written in Timothies childhood, he being at this time but a young man, and this being one of the last Epistles, if not the very last, that euer the Apostle wrote a little before his martyrdome. So that there are three foule faults in this the Protestants Achilles: The first, in falsification of the text, that it might seeme to be spoken of the whole, which is spoken of euery part. The second, in applying that which is spoken of the olde Testament, vnto both the olde and new. The third, in making that to bee all-sufficient which S. Paul affirmeth onley to bee profitable. And this is all they can say out of the Scrip∣ture, to proue that the vvritten Word containes all doctrine needfull to saluation. Your first and second faults are none at all: The transla∣tion is true, and the reason good; though you expound the place onely of the old Testament. The third is sufficiently cleere, that the profit the Scripture brings, is the perfecting of the man of God to euery good worke. Whereupon, I make this inuincible argument against them out of  Let vs see your Achilles. this their ovne position. Nothing is necessary to be beleeued, but that which is written in holy Scripture. But in no place of Scripture is it written, that the written word containes all doctrine needfull to saluation, as hath been proued. Therfore, it is not necessary to saluation to beleeue the written word, to containe all doctrine needfull to saluation. Your inuincible reason is like your great Masters inuin∣cible Armada, so strong in your conceit, not in truth. I de∣nie
the assumption of your syllogisme, as it lies; that place of Timothie, if there were no more, prooues the matter suf∣ficiently. But if by written in the Scripture, you meane set downe in plaine words, I denie also the proposition. For many things are contained in the Scripture, that are not expresly deliuered; and that your great champion Bellarm. de verbo Dei scripto. lib. 4. cap. . Bellarmine knew well enough, when he propounded your opinion so crafti∣ly by that word expresse, expresly. And by the same principle, I might reiect all testimony of Antiquitie as needlesse, if the Scriptures be so al-sufficient as they hold. Yet let vs here what testimony M. Perkins brings out of antiquity, in fauour of his cause. Not only you may, but you must also reiect all testimo∣nie of antiquitie, that would bring in any doctrine necessa∣rie to saluation, which cannot be prooued by scripture. In∣deed the writings of the ancients are (as you call them) te∣stimonies, that is, witnesses of the truth deliuered in the scripture, not autenticall records of any other truth. To this purpose they are highly to be esteemed, when they agree with the truth, and to beheld as agreeing, when there is not some good reason to be brought to the contrarie. V. the iudgement of the Church. Turtul. De resur∣rect. carnis. saith, Take from hereticks opinions which they maintaine with the heathen, that they may defend their questions by Scrip∣ture alone, and they cannot stand. Here Scripture alone is opposed (as euery one may see) vnto the wri∣tings of Heathen Authors, and not to the Traditions of the Apostles; and therefore make nothing against them. The Scripture is Tertull. de relurrect. car∣nis, cap. 3. here appealed to, as the onely compe∣tent Iudge in matters of controuersie about religion. For otherwise if Heretikes would flie to reuelations, and there∣by defend their errors, they might be said not to do against this rule of Tertullian. Yea, if traditions were of force to prooue, they might easily answere Tertullian in this case, that it skilled not though they could not maintaine their o∣pinions by Scripture, as long as traditions perhaps might make for them. But Tertullian condemnes their errors, be∣cause
they cannot be auowed by the Scripture, making that the onely triall. Againe, We need no curiositie after Christ Iesus, nor in∣quisition after the Gospell. When we beleeue it, we desire to beleeue nothing beside: for this we first beleeue that there is nothing more which we may beleeue. By the Gospell there, is vnderstood all our Christian doctrine, written and vnwritten; and not only the written word of the foure Euangelists, else we should not beleeue the Actes of the Apostles, or their Epistles, no more than Traditions: which Christian doctrine, written and vnwritten, we only beleeue by diuine faith; to all other Authors, we giuesuch cre∣dit as their writings do deserue. By Tertull. de praeser. aduers. haeret. cap. 8. the Gospell, the doctrine of saluation by Christ is vnderstood, which is no lesse plainly and fully deliuered in the other writings of the new Testament, than in those foure bookes, which we call by that particular name. But that tra∣ditions should be commended vnder the title of the Gos∣pell, it is neither true, nor likely. You must shew some place of this author, or of some other about his time, to giue credit to your interpretation. But it is apparant you answe∣red at aduenture, not knowing where it is to be found in Tertullian. If any man desire to see Tertullians iudgement of Traditions, let him read his book of prescriptions against Heretikes, where he auerreth, that Traditions serue better than the Scriptures themselues, to confute all Heresies: Heretikes alwaies, either not allowing all the bookes of Scrip∣ture, or else peruerting the sense and meaning of the Scriptures. He that hath to doe with such Heretikes, as Tertull. de praeser. aduers. haeret. Tertullians aduersaries then were, and you Papists in part now are, must of necessitie haue recourse to the iudgement of the Church. For what other meanes can be vsed against them, that denie the sufficiencie of the Scripture? Therefore Tertullian and Irenaeus too, who had to deale with the same kinde of men, labours to beate them with their owne weapons, and yet bring not in any new doctrine beside the Scripture, but maintaine the doctrine of the Scripture against them, that condemne the Scripture, by the testimonies of learned men,
custome of the Church, but he saith nothing of giuing like authoritie to the traditions, and written word. Beside, here is no speech of doctrine, but only of obseruing certaine outward ceremonies not necessarie to saluation. Augustine booke 2. cap. 9. de doct. Christ. In those things which are plainely set downe in Scripture, are found all those points which containe faith and manners of liuing well. All things necessary to be beleeued of euery simple Christian, vnder  As if there were not one and the same beleefe for the sauing of lear∣ned, and vn∣learned. paine of damnation, that is, the Articles of our Beleefe, are contained in the Scriptures, but not the resolution of harder matters, much lesse of all difficulties, vvhich the more learned must expresly beleeue, if they vvill be saued, vvhich distinction S. Augustine else-vvhere doth signifie. De peccato∣rum meritis cap. vlt. The question is only of such points as are necessarie to saluation, which are all one to the learned, and vnlearned, vnlesse there be diuers meanes of saluation for them. True it is, that a Minister ought to haue more knowledge then an ordinarie Christian, and that the neglect of laboring for it is damnable to him, as all sinne is damnable; but that which is necessarie to saluation, is equallie necessarie for all men: neither doth Austen allow any such distinction, but refutes it rather Aug. de do∣ctri. Christ. cap. 9. in that verie place: for he saith, that all that feare God do seeke the will of God in the Canonicall scripture; but the words alleaged are most plaine, All those points that containe faith and manners of liuing well, that is hope, and charitie. Now what is necessarie for any man to saluation, that is not com∣prized in one of these? And is gathered out of many other places of his vvorkes, as in that matter of rebaptizing them, vvho became Catholikes after they had bin baptized by Heretikes. He saith, Lib. 5. contr. Donat. cap. 23. The Apostles truly haue commaunded nothing hereof (in their vvritings) but that custome which was laid against S. Cyprian, is to be beleeued to haue flowed from an Apostolicall Tradi∣tion, as there be many things which the vniuersall church holdeth, and ther∣fore are to be beleeued. In that place Austen makes no mention of any such dif∣ference betwixt the learned and vnlearned to saluation, but teacheth directlie contrary to your doctrine in both points. For the hard matters you speake of, thus saith Aug. de pec∣cat. merit. & remiss. lib. 2. cap. 36. Austin,
when we dispute of darke matters, where Scriptura∣rum certis cla∣ris. documen∣tis. the certain and cleere instructions of the holy Scriptures do not help vs, a mans pre∣sumption must restraine it selfe, and not incline to either side. This is Austens iudgement, he leades vs not in these cases to traditions as you do. Now for the other point, he addes presently after that, if the knowledge of hard questions could not be wanted, without losse of saluation, there would be some cleere authoritie of Scripture to instruct vs in them, so far was Austen from seeking to any traditions, as necessarie to sal∣uation. This testimonie is falsely alleaged by you in the later part of it, which is thus in Aug. contr. Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 23. Austin, and therefore are to be belee∣ued to haue bin enioyned by the Apostles. You put the matter indefinitly are to be beleeued, that so they may be thought necessarie to saluation, of which there is not a word in this place of Austen. The same saith he of the custome of the Church in Baptizing Infants. De genes. ad lit. lib. 10. c. 23. And in his Epist. 174. of the vvord , that is not in the holy Scripture, and yet neuerthelesse is defended to be vsed in the assertion of faith. As also (saith he) vve neuer read in those bookes that the Father is vnbegotten, and yet we hold that he is so to be called. * And S. Augustine holds that the ho∣ly Ghost is to be adored, though it be not vvritten in the vvord. Of the custome of baptising infants, Austin saith, that it is not to be despised, nor by any meanes to be thought superflu∣ous, and that it were not at all to be beleeued, vnlesse it were an Apostolicall tradition, where he speakes not of any doctrine necessary to saluation, but of the Churches practise, and that indeede in a case grounded on the Scripture. We speake of doctrine, not of words, as Aug. de Ge∣nes. ad lit. lib. 10. cap. 23. Austin doth in those places. The matter which is signified by those words, that Aug. contra Maximin. lib. 3 cap. 3. Christ is of the same substance with his father, that the father was not begotten, may be proued by the Scripture, and must needs be held: the words are neither in the Scripture, nor bring any danger of saluation, though they be denyed, if the points of doctrine signified by them be beleeued; yet were it a great presumption and follie for any man to re∣fuse such words, as haue bin fitlie applied by the former Churches. The other point of adoring the holy ghost, hath
a strong foundation on those places of Scripture which prooue him to be God, as many do. But what is all this to the purpose for the stablishing of any doctrine necessarie to saluation by tradition? The like of the perpetuall Virginity of our B. Lady, Haeresi 4. out of vvhich and many more such like, vve gather most manifestly that S. Augustine thought many matters of faith, not to be contained in the vvritten vvord, but to be taken out of the Churches treasurie of Traditions. The fourth heresie in Austin is the Basilidians, who held no such opinion of the virgin Mary. Indeed there were o∣ther heretikes, the Aug. de hae∣res. haeres. 6. non. 4 6. in number, who denyed her virgini∣tie after our Sauiours birth, falsely, as we verily perswade our selues; but this is no matter necessarie to saluation, though it be an heresie to hold that as a matter of faith, which hath no warrant from the Scripture, but rather the contrarie. Vincentius Lyrinen. saith, the Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and fully sufficient to it selfe for all things. I thinke that there is no such sentence to be found in him; hesaies by way of obiection: VVhat need we make recourse vnto the authority of the  VVhy did you not looke? Ecclesiasticall vnderstanding, if the Canon of the Scripture be perfect? He affirmeth not that they be fully sufficient to determine all controuersies in religion, but throughout all his booke he proues the cleane contrary, that no heresie can be certainly confuted and suppressed by only Scrip∣tures, without we take with it the sense and interpretation of the Ca∣tholike Church. Vincentius cap. 2. Vincentius saith, that the Canon of the Scripture is Satis, su∣per{que} sufficit. suffi∣cient, and more then sufficient for all things: and in another place, the Canon of the scripture sufficeth it selfe for all things. The Vincentius Lyrin. cap. 41. former place is those very words which you alleage falsely, where Vincentius thus speakes. Here perhaps some man will demaund, what the authoritie of the Ecclesiasti∣call vnderstanding of the Scripture needs, seeing the Canon of the Scripture is perfect, and more then sufficient to it selfe for all things? His answere is, that the interpretation of the Church is requisite, because diuers men expound the Scripture diuersly: but what is this against the sufficiencie of the Scripture, or for the authoritie of traditions, concerning matters not contained in the Scriptures?
Beside these testimonies, other reasons there bee that serue to prooue this point. I. The practise of Christ and his Apostles, who for the confirmation of the doctrine which they taught, vsed alwaies the te∣stimonie of Scripture, neither can it be prooued, that they euer confirmed any doctrine by tradition. Act. 26. 22. I continue vnto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. And by this wee are giuen to vnderstand, that wee must alwaies haue recourse to the written worde, as beeing suffici∣ent to instruct vs in matters of saluation. First, for our Sauiour Christ Iesus, he out of his diuine wisdome deliue∣red his doctrine most commonly in his owne name, (But I say vnto you) And very seldome confirmeth it with any testimony out of the Law. The Euangelists do oftē note how Christ fulfilled the old prophecies; but ne∣uer, or very seldome seeke to confirme his doctrine by test monies; their owne they do sometimes; but to say they neuer wrote any thing out of Tradition, proceeds of most grosse ignorance. Where had S. Mathew the adoring of the Sages? S. Iohn Baptists preaching? briefly, that was done before his owne conuersion, but by Tradition? S. Marke wrote the most part of his Gospel out of Tradition, receiued from S. Peter, as witnesseth Eusebius, Lib. 2. hist. cap. 14. S. Luke testifieth of himself, that he wrote his whole Gospel, Cap. 1. as he had receiued it by Tradition, from them who vvere eye-vvitnesses. What desperate carelesnesse was it then to affirme that the Apostles ne∣uer vsed Tradition, to confirme any doctrine? when some of them built, not only parcels, but their whole Gospels vpon Traditions? Our Sauiour doth ordinarily confirme his doctrine, espe∣cially if there be any question of it, out of the bookes of the old testament: by that Math. 4. 8. he repeld Sathan; by that Math. 12. 3. he con∣futed the Pharises, and defended his disciples eating the eares of corne on the Sabbath; by that he Math. 13. 14. 35. taxeth the Iewes blindnes, and maintaines his owne speaking in parables. By the same Math. 15. 4. he ouerthrowes the Iewes traditions, and re∣bukes their hypocrisie, he Math. 19. refutes their errors about diuor∣ces, but what should I run ouer the particulars? the Gospels are full of such examples. Master Perkins hath neuer a word of the Euangelist, who
did but write the history of our Sauiours doings and say∣ings, and yet euen they (as your selfe confesse) prooue, that he is the Messiah by the Scriptures of the old Testament, applying them to the things he did and suffered. You deuise matters to confute. Master Perkins speaketh of confirming doctrine by traditions, and you answere, that they wrote something out of tradition, that is, they set downe somewhat in writing which themselues had heard of other, and not read in the old Testament. And then you aske, where Math. 2. 1. 2. S. Mathew had the adoring of the Sages? euen there where Moses had the creation of the world, and the whole story of Genesis. From a better ground then tradi∣tion, viz. from the Spirit of God, the author and enditer of the Scripture, from whom also the other Euangelists had the matter and penning of their Gospell, though two of them Marke and Luke first came to the knowledge of those things by the preaching of the Apostles, which had all one authoritie with the word written. This is apparant of Marke by Euseb. hist. lib. 2. cap. 14. Eusebius himselfe, who saith, that the Romans intreated him to set downe in writing those things which the Apostle Peter had taught them by word of mouth, and which he also had heard him deliuer. The like is to be said of S. Luke, who was a companion of the Apostle Paul, and wrote (as the other did) that which he heard of him, and other of the Apostles. But howsoeuer the things deliuered by them came first to their knowledge, it wants not much of blasphemy, to make traditions the foundation of the Gospels written by them. For either the holy Ghost did not inspire them with the matter and manner of their penning, or else, if it be as you would haue it, the holy ghost built vpon tradition, which is but an vncertaine kinde of knowledge depending vpon mens memories, which may often faile them, especially in carrying away speeches of discourse, and disputation. II. If the beleeuing of vnwritten traditions were necessary to saluation, then we must beleeue the wri∣tings
of the auncient Fathers as well as the writings of the Apostles, because Apostolicall traditions are not elsewhere to be found but in their bookes. And wee may not beleeue their sayings as the worde of God, because they often crie beeing subiect to er∣rour: and for this cause their authoritie, when they speake of traditions, may be suspected: and we may not alwaies beleeue them vpon their word. His otherreason is, that if we beleeue vnwritten Traditions were ne∣cessary to saluatiō, then we must aswel beleeue the writings of the anci∣ent Fathers, as the writings of the Apostles: because, Apostolicall Tra∣ditions are not elsewhere to be found, but in their books; but that vvere absurd, for they might erre. Ans. That doth not follovv for three causes: First, Apostolicall Tra∣ditions, are aswell kept in the mind of the learned, as in the auncient Fathers vvritings: and therefore haue more credit then the Fathers vvritings. It may be they were kept in the mind of the learned till they were written, but that afterward, and to this day they are in mens minds otherwise then as they haue learned them by reading, it is not very likely. Beside, how can tradi∣tions be kept without adding and altering, if they haue no better guide then the memories of men? Secondly, they are commonly recorded of more then one of the Fa∣thers, and so haue firmer testimonie than any one of their writings. What is that to Master Perkins reason? vnlesse you will say that we are as well to beleeue the writings of the fa∣thers, where more then one writ the same thing, as we are one of the Apostles or Euangelists alone, which (I perswade my selfe) you will not affirme. Thirdly, if there should be any Apostolicall Tradition, related but of one auncient Father, yet it should be of more credit than any other thing of his ovvne inuention, because that vvas registred by him, as a thing of more estimation. And gaine, some of the rest of those blessed and Godly personages, vvould haue reproued it, as they did all other falshoods, if it had not binsuch indeed as it vvas tearmed: Which vvhen they did not, they gaue a secret approbation of it for such; and so that hath the interpretatiue consent at least of the learned of that age, and the follovving for Apostolicall Tradition.
it so, because they were taught by our Lord: yet Pauls case is proper to himselfe, and altogether extraordinarie. The third particular is somewhat more to purpose; be∣cause 1. Cor. 11. 16. S. Paul hauing prooued by many reasons, that wo∣men might not come into the congregations bareheaded, addes in the conclusion, that it was enough to stop any con∣tentions mans mouth, that the Apostles, and the Churches of God allowed of no such custome. But first, this hate∣scripture Papist must be put in minde, that whereas he calles these wranglers scripturists, as if they had alleaged scripture for their defence, there is no such thing in the text, nor any one obiection so much as signified by the Apostle. Second∣ly, this custome of the Church is not alleaged because (as he seemes to presume, by his conclusion afterward) he wanted other reason to prooue the point. For as Chrysostome and o∣thers haue obserued, he hath in the former part of the chap∣ter, proued it to be against nature, and against scripture too. Thirdly, he reasons not about any matter of doctrine, but about the outward carriage of men and women in the as∣semblie of Gods seruice. Lastly, it doth no way follow, that because the custome of the Church must ouer-way priuate mens fancies in things indifferent, therefore the Scripture containes not all things necessarie to saluation, but must be supplied therein by traditions. Neither doth the Apostles example warrant his conclusion. The Apostle hauing pro∣ued that he exhorts to by reason and Scripture, last of all al∣leages custome, against contentious men, in a thing which they tooke to be indifferent: therefore wee must alleage Scriptures, when they be plaine for vs, and when they are not plaine, tradition, euen in matters of saluation. Who sees not that this followes not vpon that? Obiections for Traditions. First they alleadge, 2. Thess. 2. 15. where the A∣postle bids that Church keepe the ordinances which he taught either them by word or letter. Hence they gather,
that beside the written word, there be vnwritten tra∣ditions, that are indeede necessarie to be kept and o∣beyed. Answ. It is very likely, that this Epistle to the Thessalonians was the first that euer Paul writ to any Church, though in order it haue not the first place; and therefore at the time when this Epistle was pen∣ned, it might well fall out, that some thinges neede∣full to saluation were deliuered by word of mouth, not beeing as yet written by any Apostle. Yet the same things were afterward set downe in writing, either in the second Epistle or in the Epistles of Paul. Obserue first, that insteed of Traditions (according to the Greek and Latin vvord,) they translate . Ordinances; euer flying the vvord Tra∣dition, vvhere any thing is spoken in commendation of them. But if any thing sound against them, then thrust they in the vvord Tradition, al∣though the Greeke vvord beare it not. See for this their corruption, and many other: a learned Treatise, named, The Discouery of false translation, penned by M. Gregorie Martin, a man most singulerly conuersant in the Greeke and Hebrevv tongues. Gregory Martinus cauils were answered long since Fulke against Martins Dis∣cou. cap. 2. by Doctor Fulke, and the answer neuer yet replied to (that euer I heard of) by any Papist. Your old translation hath, in steed of traditions, 1. Cor. 11. 2. precepts, and in the Gospell, euery where, traditions; and yet the former place is to the commenda∣tion of traditions, and all in the Gospell to their dispraise. Vatablus. Vatablus also vseth his libertie in translating this word, sometimes 1. Cor. 11. 2, Col. 2. 8. Marc. 7. 8. 2. Thes. 2. 15. & 3. 6.  Instituta, sometimes Constitutio, sometimes Institutio; the difference in our translation, as farre as I can perceiue, is this, that we call mens precepts, traditions; the Apostles doctrines, ordinances. Secondly, is it not plaine dotage, to auouch that this second Epistle to the Thessalonians, was the first that euer he wrote? Surely, if none of his otherwere written before it, yet his first to the same Church must needs haue been written before it. But let vs giue the man leaue to dreame sometimes. It is easie to see that Master Perkins compares not this epistle with the other to the same Church, but with other
that were written to other Churches, and generally with the bookes of the new Testament; among which, if wee may beleeue Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Euseb. hist. lib. 5. c. 8. Irenaeus, it was the ancientest, except the former, and perhaps the Gospell of S. Matthew: for it was written when Paul taught at Athens, some seuenteene or eighteene yeeres after our Lords Ascension; whereas the Gospell of S. Matthew, as Irenaeus saith, was penned when Paul and Peter preached and founded the Church at Rome, twen∣tie yeeres or more after the Ascension. Neither doth Master Perkins auow this for a truth, but sets it down as ve∣ry likely. To the point of the answere, that all was written after in some other of his Epistles, which before had bin deliuered by word of mouth. How proueth M. Perkins that? the man hath such confidence in his owne word, that he goeth not once about to proue it. Good Sir, hold you not here; that nothing is needfull to be beleeued, which is not written in the word? shew vs then where it is written in the word, that Saint Paul wrote in his later Epistles, that which he taught by word of mouth be∣fore? or else by your owne rule it is not needfull to beleeue it. It is not the answerers dutie, as I haue been faine to put you in minde before, to prooue his deniall, but the repliers to disprooue what he answers. But for your satisfaction, let me tell you, that if these things the Apostle speakes of were matters necessarie to saluation, it is prooued that they were written afterward, or before in some part of the Scripture; because the a2. Tim. 3. 14. Scripture is sufficient to make a man wise to saluation. But yet for a more full satisfaction of the indifferent reader, I will set downe the opinions of some of the auncientest and best Interpreters of this place of the Apostle, that we may see whether they thought that S. Paul committed all to writing, and left nothing by Tradition. All this labour might haue been saued, vnlesse it were to more purpose. For wee say not, that the Apostle wrote all things he spake; but that all things necessarie to saluation, are expresly or by consequence contained in the Scrip∣tures. It is out of doubt, in my poore opinion, that the A∣postle preached many things, which were not written by him in these two Epistles, and those also, matters of mo∣ment, which he wils them to obserue: but the question is,
whether it can be prooued by this text, or any other, that those matters are not any where recorded in the holy Scrip∣tures, and yet are points necessarie to saluation. S. Chrysostome in his most learned and eloquent Comentaries vpon this text, concludeth thus. Hereupon it is manifest that the Apostles deli∣uered not all in their Epistles, but many things also vnvvritten; and those things are aswell to be beleeued, as the vvritten. Oecumenius and Theophy∣lactus vpon that place teach the same. To the testimonie out of Chrysostomes interpretation I  answere, first, that Chrysostome saith not they were matters necessarie to saluation. Secondly, that Chrysost.  Psal. 95. otherwhere he ties vs to the Scriptures, if we will be beleeued in that we deli∣uer. Thirdly, that many things may be, and are in other parts of the Scripture, which are not to bee found in the Epistles. Fourthly, that it doth not follow, the Apostle Paul spake something to the Thessalonians, which he wrote not to them, therefore the Apostles spake some things which they neuer writ. For this place speakes only of S. Pauls do∣ings, not of other Apostles. Yet I make no questiō, but they also did in like sort, but it cannot be certainly concluded from this place. Fiftly, I grant, that all that the Apostles de∣liuered, was to be receiued as true, and fit for the Church in those times to which they were deliuered. The doctrine of the Gospell is perpetuall, matters of circumstance, appoin∣ted by them for the vse of the Churches perpetually, are as well to be obserued, as the doctrine, if there be any such: yea traditions of this nature are equall to things written. But here lies the matter, we say there are no such traditions. And indeed who can thinke that the Apostles would write mat∣ters of small importance, which were also not to continue perpetually, and leaue great and waightie points of faith vnwritten? The like answer I make to Oecumen. & Theophylact. ad 2. Thess. Oecumenius, and Theophylact; whereof the one professedly sets downe Chry∣sostoms opinion; the other, according to his custome, writes him out in this place word for word. S. Basil *De sp cap. 27 speaketh thus, I hold it Apostolicall to perseuer in Traditions not vvritten: for the Apostle ith, I commend you that yee are mindfull of my precepts: and, do hold the Traditions, euen as I deliuered them vnto you:
and then alleageth this text: Hold the Traditions vvhich you haue recei∣ued of me either by VVord or Epistle. Basil, de spi∣rit. sanct. c. 27. Basil saith not, that these traditions were matters ne∣cessarie to saluation. 2. He defines not what these traditions were. 3. The consequence is naught. The Apostle wils the Thessalonians to keepe things deliuered by mouth: there∣fore the Church is alwaies to keepe some things not writ∣ten. There was a necessitie to lay that charge vpon them, for else they had needed to care for no more than was set down in those Epistles. 4. The Papists themselues obserue not all the traditions there mentioned as Apostolical by Basil. 5. His iudgement in this case is not much to be accounted of, who pronounceth, that without those traditions, the Gospellis not a∣uaileable, and yt they are of equall force with the Gospell to pietie. S. Iohn Damascen accordeth with the former saying, Lib. 4. De fide cap. 17. That the Apo∣stles deliuered many things vvithout vvriting. S. Paul doth testifie, vvhen he writeth, Therefore brethren stand and hold the Traditions vvhich haue been taught you either by vvord of mouth or by Epistle. These holy and iu∣dicious expositors of S. Paul, free from all partiality, gather out of this text of his, that many things necessary to be beleeued, euen vntill their daies remained vnvvritten, and were religiously obserued by Tradition; which throweth fiat to the ground M. Perkins his false supposition (fen∣ced with neither reason nor authority) that S Paul put in vvriting after∣vvard all that he had first taught by vvord of mouth. Damascen is neither greatly to be respected, nor saith a∣ny thing, but that which I haue answered alreadie and gran∣ted in part as nothing to the purpose. He might well erre in matter of Tradition, that Damascen. de Orthod. fide lib. 4. c. 18. accounts the Apostles Canons, set out by Clement Bishop of Rome, to be Canonicall scrip∣ture: which opinion the Papists themselues reiect. Master Perkins would gladly haue acknowledged any tradition, that could haue been prooued to be Apostolicall; namely so farre as it was intended by the Apostles. What∣soeuer they taught, that hee would hold to bee the truth of God; if they ordained any thing for those times, he would confesse it to haue been most fit. Did they appoint any cu∣stome to bee perpetuall? M. Perkins would haue embraced it with both his armes, and, if occasion had been offered, haue maintained it with his life. But neither can you shew
any such tradition, nor he is to proue the contrarie. But you are to make good your proposition, that the Apostles left some doctrines, necessarie to be beleeued to saluation, by word of mouth onely, without any ground in Scripture for the particulars either expresly, or by good and necessary consequence. Proue this, and the controuersie is at an end. Moreouer S. Paul immediatly before his death in one of the last of his Epistles, commandeth his deare Disciple Timothie, 2. Tim. 2. To commend vnto the faithfull, that vvhich he heard of him by many vvitnesses; and not that only vvhich he should find vvritten in some of his Epistles, or in the vvritten Gospell. I deny your consequence: Paul wils Timothy to com∣mend to the faithfull those things which he had heard of him, therefore he deliuered some things which are not writ∣ten in any part of the Scripture. I might adde, and those ne∣cessary to saluation, but the other hath worke enough for you. Obiect. II. That Scripture is Scripture, is a point to be beleeued, but that is a tradition vnwritten; and therefore one tradition there is not written, that we are to beleeue. Answ. That the bookes of the olde and new Testament are Scripture, it is to bee gathe∣red and beleeued not vpon bare tradition, but from the very bookes themselues, on this manner. Let a mā that is indued with the spirit of discerning, reade the seuerall bookes, withall let him consider the pro∣fessed authour thereof, which is God himselfe, and the matter therein contained, which is a most diuine and absolute truth full of pietie: the manner and forme of speech, which is full of maiestie in the sim∣plicity of words. The end whereat they wholy aime, which is the honor and glory of God alone, &c. and he shal be resolued that scripture is scripture, euen by the Scripture it selfe. Yea, and by this meanes hee may discerne any part of Scripture, from the wri∣tings
of men whatsoeuer. Thus then Scripture prooues it selfe to be Scripture: and yet wee despise not the vniuersal consent or tradition of the Church in this case: which though it doe not perswade the conscience, yet is it a notable inducement to mooue vs to reuerence, and regard the writings of the Pro∣phets and Apostles. It will be said, where is it writ∣ten that Scripture is Scripture? I answere, not in any one particular place or booke of scripture, but in e∣uerie line and page of the whole Bible to him that can read with the spirit of discerning, and can dis∣cerne the voice of the true Pastour, as the sheepe of Christ can doe. The second Argument for Traditions, is this, to beleeue that there be so many bookes of holy Scripture, and no more: and that those be they vvhich are commonly taken so to be, is very necessary to saluation; novv this is not to be found vvritten in any place of holy Scripture, but is receiued only by Tradition, vvherefore it is necessary to saluation to beleeue some Tradition. You propound not Master Perkins reason, but frame one of your owne. To which I answer, that is called in this que∣stion necessarie to saluation, without the beleefe where of a man cannot be saued; but the knowledge of the number of the bookes of Scripture, and what they be, is not so ne∣cessarie, but that without it a man may attaine to saluation. Yea who doubts that he may be saued which knowes not that there are any bookes of scripture at all, so that by the preaching of the word he beleeues truly in Iesus Christ? And if those two points be absolutely necessarie, what shall we thinke of them that haue doubted of some parts of Scrip∣ture, as the Epistles to the Hebrews, and that of Iames? Da∣mascen added one to the number, your Papists many. M. Perkins ansvvereth that the bookes of the Old and Nevv Testa∣ment, be Scripture, is not beleeued on bare Tradition, but by the bookes themselues on this manner. Let the man vvho is indued vvith the spirit of discerning, reade the bookes and consider first the Author of them, vvho is God; then the matter contained, vvhich is diuine; the manner
of speech, vvhich is full of maiestie in simple vvords: Lastly, the end aymed at, vvhich is Gods honor, and by this meanes he shall discerne a∣ny part of Scripture from the vvritings of men vvhatsoeuer. Reply. A vvise and deepe obseruation I vvarrant you, and vvell vvor∣thie A skornfull re∣proofe and vn∣vvorthy of a Doctors grauity 1. Cor. 12. a graue Author: Let vs examine it briefly; first he vvill haue his man endued vvith the spirit of discerning: Who shall endue him vvith the spirit? M. Perkins seemeth to say, that euery Sheepe of Christ hath his spirit. But S. Paul De doctrin. Christ. cap. 8. 18. de ciuit. Dei 36. lib. 2. cont. ep. Gau∣dent. 23. teacheth plainly the contrary; that some certaine only haue the iudgement to discerne. And touching this matter of dis∣cerning vvhich books are Canonical, vvhich are not: Not the learnedst in the Primitiue Church vvould take vpon him to discerne vvhich they were, three hundred yeares after Christ, was left vndefined by the best learned, whether the Catholike Epistles of S. Iames and Iude: the se∣cond of S. Peter. the second and third of S. Iohn, and his Apocalyps, were Canonicall or no, as is confessed on all parts: hath then euery Christian this spirit of discerning, when the best Christians wanted it? Who more profound, more skilfull to discerne, than that subtile and sharpe Doctor S. Augustine, and yet the Protestants will not allow him the true spirit of discerning which bookes be Canonicall. For he, in diuers places of his workes, De praedest. Sanct. 14.  holdeth the bookes of the Machabees, to be Canonicall Scriptures,; and expresly proueth the booke of Wisdome so to be. * And yet our Protestants will not admit them. See therefore how foolish and vaine his first rule is: Come to the second. Master Perkins denies the assumption of the contract syl∣logisme propounded by himselfe, affirming that the scrip∣ture is to be beleeued to be scripture vpon bare tradition. If you will refute him, you must prooue that assumption, till that be done, his answere must stand for sufficient, how∣soeuer that he addes for the confirmation of it, be true or false. But let vs examin that he brings. First he saith, a man must haue the spirit of discerning, to which you knowing not what to answere, tell vs, that Master Perkins seemes to say, that euery Sheepe of Christ hath his spirit. If he did say so plainely, he saith no more then our Sauiour himselfe doth, and his Apostle Paul. But he doth not once glaunce at that point, in any part of his answere, yet you refute that but slenderly, for the 1. Cor. 12. 2. 3. Apostle speakes of an extraordinarie gift bestowed vpon some men, not denying this generall abilitie which all true Christians haue in some measure; nei∣ther doth the Apostle speake of discerning doctrine, but
spirits, that is (saith your Glossa In∣terlin. ad 1. Cor. 12. glosse, and Lombard. b. Thomas. Caan. Lombard, Thomas, and Caietan) that he may discerne that he heares, with what spirit it is spoken, with a good spirit, or with a bad. By this gift the children of God are enabled, or rather directed by the spirit of God to acknowledge those bookes to be scripture, though they can not determine of euery particular among them. Austins iudgement we reuerence in this, and other mat∣ters, though we cannot alwaies rest vpon it. He calls the bookes Canonicall, not properly, but because they were v∣sed in the Church to be read as the Canonicall were, but he makes them not of equall authoritie with the other, be∣cause they were not then so generally receiued, in which re∣spect he made some doubt of those which were indeede Canonicall. Thus we expound Austin, that he may not be thought to contradict other fathers in this point. His second is, that he who goeth about to discerne whether the booke be Canonicall or no, must consider the Author, who is God. If he must at the first take God to be the Author of the booke, what needs any fur∣ther labour? It must needs be Canonicall that hath God for the Au∣thor. This mans wis were surely from home, when he discoursed thus; and therefore it should be but follie to stand vpon his particularities. Is there no difference trow you betwixt saying God is the professed Author, and God is the Author? Let a man consider God who is professed, to be the author of these bookes, and seeing how the things in them agree to that which is befitting God, according as he hath learned by men, and bin perswaded by the holy ghost, he shall come to acknowledge them indeed to be from God, wherein his glory is principally aymed at, and in the penning whereof his diuine Maiestie cleerely shines. Let this one reason in generall serue to confute him; all this manner put together, serueth only to helpe particular men to discerne vvhich bookes are Canonicall, who may, easily after their dlgent inquirie erre and be deied in this point, because euery man is a lyar. Rom. 3. And if there be  more certaine meanes to assure them of this which is the ground of all their Religion, then euery particular mans discretion and iudge∣ment, then out of doubt their whole Religion is most vnvvisely builded vpon meane mens inuentions and discretion, who also for the most part doe neither vnderstand the language in which they were first penned,
nor the vsuall phrases of Scriptures translated; that I say nothing of the figures, parables, prophecies and controuesies which seeme to be; and many other difficulties, and yet these men need not doubt hauing learned some halfe-dozen-lines of Master Perkins, but that reading any booke, they shall be able presently to discerne whether  be Canonicall or no. A goodly mocketie. If this reason be good, since all men together are liers as well as euery man in particular, and so may be deceiued, though not so easily, we are little the neerer, at the least not sure for any help you can affoord vs. There is yet a better assurance by the See 1. Art. par. 1. Art.  holy ghosts directing the elect in this triall, and teaching and assuring them so farre, as shall serue for their necessarie instruction and saluation. Men were not so taught in the Primitiue Church, but the most skil∣full and wisest in discerning Canonicall bookes, trusted not vnto their ovvne iudgement, but leaned alvvaies vpon Apostolicall Traditions. So did Serapion an auncient holy vvriter (as Euseus reporteth) reiect certaine bookes set out in the Apostles names, because they had not re∣ceiued from their Predecssos any such. The like doth element of Alex∣andria, Cap. 11. Cap. 19. and that famous Origen Lib. 35. ca. 6. of the same booke, who obserue the Eclesiasticall Canon, as he had learned and receiued by Tradition. So doth he deliuer his opinion of the foure Euangelists, and other bookes of Canonicall Scripture, and not relying on his owne wit, which was ex∣cellent, or learning which was singular in all manner of languages and matters: That S. Augustine was of the same mind, may be gathered out of these words of his, * Contra Faustum. Of what booke can there be a∣ny assurance, if the letters, which the Church propagated by the Apo∣stles, and by such excellencie declared throughout all Nations, doth teach and hold to be the Apostles, should be vncertaine, whether they be the Apostles or no? So that he maketh the declaratiō of the Church de∣scended of the Apostles, to be a sure pillar to rest vpon, for the certaine knowledge of Canonical Scripture and other spirits whatsoeuer, if they follow not that rule to be reiected; so far is he off from encourageing e∣uery sheepe of Christs fold, to take that weighty matter vpon himselfe as M. Perkins doth. And what can be more against the most prudent pro∣uidence of the diuine wisdome than to permit euery one to be a iudge of the bookes of Canonicall Scripture. For if all those books, and no others should pase urant for Cacall, (which any Christian taking vpon  lib. . & . . . . Lib 1. cap. . 2. . . . 6. Lib. 32. cap . him the spirit of discerning, would cnsure to be such) then alway with all the Old Testament, because diuers esteemed it to proceed of some euill spirits, as witnesseh Ineus and Eps: Yea, not only all the Old must be abrogated, but all the New also, because it hath many false∣hoods mixed with the truth; as some prefuming greatly of their spirit and skill in dning did teach: so testifieth . Augustine, . Fast.
Some would haue had but one of the foure Gospels, some fiue, some sixe, some seauen; some reiected all S. Pauls Epistles: Many, and those of the faithfull did not admit for Canonicall some of the other Apostles Epi∣stles not the Reuelations. If then the diuine fore-sight of our Sauiour had not preuented this most foule inconueniencie by instituting a more certaine meanes of iscerning and declaring which books were penned by inspiration of the holy Ghost, which not, then by leauing it vnto eue∣ry mans discretion he might be thought to haue had but slender care of our saluation, which euery true Christian hart doth abhorre to thinke: and therfore we must needs admit of this most holy and prouident Tra∣dition of them from hand to hand: as among the Protestants Brentius doth in his Prolegomenis, and also Kemnitius, handling the second kind of Traditions, in his examination of the Councell of Trent; albeit they reiect all other Traditions, besides this one. Neither doth Master Perkins, or any Minister, teach the people now to rely on their owne wit or iudgement, but to vse the meanes prescribed, and by prayer and faith to call and to rest vpon the spirit of God for assurance in this case. The iudgement of the Church wee are so farre from discrediting, that we hold it for a very speciall ground in this matter: condemning them as void of shame and rea∣son, that refuse those bookes vpon their owne iudgement, which haue bin from time to time, euen from the Apostles dayes counted Canonicall. But it is vtterly from the que∣stion in hand to dispute this point, and beside diuers other Whitak. de sriptur. Doctor Whitacker hath handled this matter very suffici∣ently, though euery man cannot reade his disputation, be∣cause it is latine; but for the matter in hand, concerning tra∣ditions, it falls not into this question to be disputed what is scripture, and what is not. For it is presupposed that the Scriptures are the word of God, and thereupon this doubt ariseth, whether the word of God conteine all things neces∣sarie to saluation or no. If that be doubted of, it is idle and absurd to enquire, whether there be, besides that, another word of God diuers from it, though not contrarie, which is not written, but only as men haue now and then set downe some part of it in their writings: so then leauing this point, let vs come to those which follow. Obiect. III. Some bookes of the canon of the
Scripture are lost, as the booke of the warres of God. Num. 21. 14. The booke of the iust. Iosu. 10. 13. the bookes of Chronicles of the Kinges of Israel and Iu∣da. 1. King 14. 19. the bookes of certaine Prophets, Nathan, Gad, Iddo, Ahiah, and Semiah: and therfore the matter of these bookes must come to vs by tradi∣tion. Answ. Though it be graunted that some bookes of Canonicall Scripture bee lost; yet the Scripture still remaines sufficient, because the matter of those bookes (so farforth as it was necessarie to saluation) is contained in these bookes of Scripture that are now extant. The two next arguments for Traditions, be not well propounded by  You should haue sd the faults. M. Perkins. The third is to be framed thus: Either all the bookes of holy Scripture conteine all needfull doctrine to saluation, or some certaine of them without the rest; not some of them without the rest, for then the other should be superfluous, which no man holdeth: therfore all the bookes of holy Scripture put together, do con∣taine all necessary instruction. Now then the argument followeth, but some of those bookes of holy Scripture haue been lot; therefore some points of necessary doctrine contained in them, are not extant in the written Word, and consequently to be learned by Tradition. M. Perkins answereth: First supposing some of the bookes to be lost, that all need∣full doctrine, which was in them, is in some of the others preserued. But This Argument vvas not pro∣posed to him. why did he not solue the Argument proposed? were then those bookes superfluous? Doth the holy Ghost set men to pen needlesse discourses? which this answere supposeth. Because you thinke the reason makes for your aduantage, as you haue framed it your selfe, I will follow your steps, and leaue his argument as you do. That I may answere or∣derly, I deny your assumption: All things necessarie to sal∣uation are conteined in some certaine bookes of the scrip∣ture, so that although the rest were wanting, we should haue sufficient to saluation for the matter. To your reason I say farther, that the consequence is naught, if some certaine are sufficient to saluation, the rest are superfluous: for first it can∣not be superfluous to haue any booke of Gods word kept for the vse of the Church, though the matter of it be in
some other. Secondly, if your consequence be good, it is also superfluous to haue the same psalme or story recorded in two places of the scripture, especially the later. But to say so were to condemne the holy ghost of hauing taken super∣fluous paines to no purpose, which were blasphemie. I prooue it by these particulars; for example Psal. 18. 2. Sam. 22. Psal. 18. is in the booke of Psalmes, and in the second booke of Samuell. The history of Ezechiah 2 Reg 19. & 20. & Esai. 35. & 37. & 38. is 2. Reg. 29. and so forward, and Isai 36. 37. 38. The like I might bring out of the bookes of Kings and Chronicles. Thirdly, though the matter be all fully and perfectly in certaine bookes, yet euery point is not so plaine in one booke as in another, and therefore it is not superfluous to haue all these bookes, though all matter ne∣cessarie to saluation be comprised in some few of them. Fourthly, the purpose of the holy ghost in penning the scrip∣tures, was, not only to teach matters necessarie to saluation, but to set forth the glorie of God in his prouidence, iustice, mercie, wisdome, and such like, to afford vs examples of di∣uers kinds of vertues, to exhort vs to faith, and good works, and (in a word) to prouide for Gods glorie by vs heere, as well as for our glorifying by him in heauen, to which there is no booke, nor sentence of scripture, but serues more or lesse, and therefore no booke of it can be thought super∣sluous, though the necessarie matters belonging to salua∣tion be conteined in certaine of them very sufficiently. Againe, I take it to bee a truth (though some thinke otherwise) that no part of the Canon is lost: for Paul saith, Whatsoeuer things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that wee through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, &c. Rom. 15. 4. where he takes it for granted, that the whole Canon of holie Scripture was then extant. For if he had thought, that some bookes of Scripture had beene lost, hee would haue said; whatsoeuer was written and is now ex∣tant, was written for our learning and comfort. For
bookes that are lost serue neither for learning nor comfort. Againe, to hold that any bookes of Scrip∣ture should be lost, calls into question Gods proui∣dence, and the fidelitie of the Church, who hath the bookes of God in keeping, and is therfore called the pillar and ground of truth. And touching the bookes before mentioned, I answere thus: The booke of the warres of God, Num. 21. 14. might bee some short bill or narration of thinges done among the Israe∣lites, which in the daies of Moses went from hand to hand. For sometime a booke in Scripture, signifieth a roule or Catalogue, as the first chapter of Matthew, which containeth the genealogie of our Sauiour Christ, is called the booke of the generation of Iesus Christ. Againe, the booke of the iust, and the books of Chronicles, which are said to be lost, were but as the Chronicles of England are with vs: euen politicke records of the acts and euents of things, in the king∣dome of Iuda and Israel: out of which the Prophets gathered things necessarie to be knowne, and placed them in holy Scripture. As for the bookes of Iddo, Ahiah, Semiah; Gad, and Nathan, they are contained in the bookes of the Kinges and Chronicles and in the bookes of Samuel, which were not written by him alone, but by sundrie Prophets, 1. Chro. 29. 29. as also was the booke of Iudges. As for the bookes of Salomon which are lost, they did not concerne re∣ligion and matters of saluation, but were concerning matters of Philosophie and such like things. Therefore he giues a second more shamefull, that none be perished, which is most contrarie vnto the plaine Scriptures: 1. Paral. vit. 2. Pa. 9. as S. Iohn Chryso∣stome proueth: Rom. 9. in Math & . 7. in   . where he hath these expresse words: That many of the Propheticall bookes are lost, may be proued out of the historie of Paralpome∣neon (which they translate Chronicles.) Now as for M. Perkins gesses,
that some of them are yet extant, but otherwise called: some were but lit∣tle rolles of paper; some profane and of Philosophie, I hold them not worth the discussing, being not much pertinent, and auowed on his word only, without either any reason or authoritie. Sauing the better iudgement of Chrysostome, and other learned men, I cannot perswade my selfe that any part of the Canonicall scripture is lost, when you haue brought your proofe out of any place of the scripture, I will either answere, or yeeld to it. But it makes nothing to your argu∣ment whether any be lost or no, for (as you see) I deny your assumption and the proofe of it, which ouerthrowes your whole reason. The Iewes and the skilfullest Christians in the Rabbines and antiquities of the Iewes that I know, are of a diuers iudgement from Chrysostome concerning this point. Obiect. IV. Moses in mount Sina, beside the writ∣ten law, receiued from God a more secret doctrine, which he neuer writ, but deliuered by tradition or word of mouth to the Prophets after him: and this the Iewes haue now set downe in their Cabala. Answ. This indeede is the opinion of some of the Iewes, whom in effect and substance sundry Papists follow: but we take it for no better then a Iewish dotage. For if Moses had knowne any secret doctrine beside the written law, he could neuer haue giuen this com∣mandement of the said lawe, Thou shalt not adde any thing thereto. Master Perkins his fourth obiection of the Iewish Cabala, is a meere dreame of his owne: our Argument is this; Moses who was the pen man of the old Law, committed not all to vvriting, but deliuered certaine points needfull to saluation by Tradition, nor any Lavv-maker that e∣uer was in any Country comprehended all in letters, but established ma∣ny things by customes, therefore not likely that our Christian Lavv should be all vvritten. Your argument is in effect all one with his: but let vs take yours. Moses committed all to writing, that was ne∣cessarie to saluation; so doe all wise lawmakers: and if any thing be left vnprouided for, that is of moment, it is because
the lawgiuer perceiued it not, or knew not how to helpe it; which, in Gods lawes, and Moses the holie Ghosts Scribes writing, could be no hinderances. For what is there that God seeth not by his wisedome, or cannot order as he list by his power? That Moses did not pen all, thus vve proue. It vvas as necessarie for vvomen to be deliuered from Originall sinne as men. Circumcision the remedy for men, could not possibly be applied to vvomen, as euery one vvhoknovveth vvhat circumcision is can tell; neither is there any other remedie prouided in the vvritten lavv, to deliuer vvomen from that sin: Therefore some other remedie for them vvas deliuered by Tradition. Circumcision was not prouided for remedie of originall sinne, any more than for actuall; neither did it remedie the one, or the other: nay it was not of Moses appointing, but was long before him. The remedie for all sinne is the sacri∣fice of the Messiah; the meanes to applie it, faith: which Moses taught in diuers places of those fiue bookes. If wo∣men without circumcision cannot be freed from originall sinne, how were Adam and Eue freed, and all that died be∣fore God enioyned it to Abraham? Item, if the Child vvere likly to die, before the eight day, there was re∣medie for them, as the most learned doe hold, yet no vvhere vvritten in the Lavv: Also, many Gentiles, during that state of the old Testament, vvere saued, as Iob, and many such like, according to the opinion of all the auncient Fathers: yet in the Lavv, or any other part of the old Testa∣ment, it is not vvritten, vvhat they had to beleeue, or how they should liue; vvherefore, many things needfull to saluation, vvere then deliue∣red by Tradition. The remedie for infants, aswell before the eight day, as vpon it, and after it, was the mercie of God vpon his coue∣nant. As for the meanes, you would imagine, which were you cannot tell what, and deuised by you cannot tel whom; remember what you answered about the Chaldee word in Daniel, To meanes and authors in the ayre, no thing need be, nor can be answered. To that reason of his; that God in his prouidence should not permit such a losse of any part of the Scripture: I ansvvere, that God permiteth much euill: Againe, no great losse in that, according to our opinion, who hold that Tradition might preserue vvhat was then lost. Although God in his prouidence permits much euill, it
followes not, nor is at al likely, that he would suffer his own holie word, indited by his spirit, to perish. Neither can it helpe the matter, that tradition might preserue the truth, vnlesse God should miraculously hold in men, from ming∣ling their inuentions with his traditions. Experience makes the matter cleere: few things, or none yet remaining, that are indeede of antiquitie, both for the substance and vse of them. But what answere you to Master Perkins other reason out of S. Paul? That was too heauie for your shoulders. Obiect. V. Heb. 5. 12. Gods word is of two sortes, milk, and strong meate. By milke, we must vnderstand the worde of God written, wherein God speakes plainely to the capacitie of the rudest: but strong meate is vnwritten traditions, a doctrine not to bee deliuered vnto all, but to those that grow to perfecti∣on. Answ. We must know, that one and the same word of God is milke and strong meate, in regard of the manner of handling and propounding of it. For being deliuered generally and plainely, to the capa∣citie of the simplest, it is milke; but beeing handled particularly and largely, and so fitted for men of more vnderstanding, it is strong meate. As for ex∣ample: the doctrine of the creation, of mans fall, and redemption by Christ, when it is taught ouerly and plainly, it is milke: but when the depth of the same is throughly opened, it is strong meate. And therefore it is a conceit of mans braine, to imagine that some vn written word is meant by strong meate. Novv insteed of M. Perkins his fift reason for vs of milke and strong meate, vvishing him a Messe of Pappe for his childish proposing of it: I D. B. P. Your vvish is better, then your ansvvere would haue bin.  vvill set dovvne some authorities out of the vvritten Word, in proofe of Traditions. I make no question but Master Perkins had al the reasons he propounds for you in any matter, in some of your owne writers; as perhaps hereafter, vpon better search, at more
leisure, I shall finde and prooue to all the world. To the testimonies I answere in generall, that no argu∣ment can be drawne from any, or all of them, to proue that any doctrine necessarie to saluation is to be learned by tra∣dition, and is not written in the Scripture. Let any man con∣clude the point out of them, and we will yeeld, if wee shew not a reasonable cause to the contrarie. Secondly, I adde futhr, that if it were granted that there were some such tra∣ditis et (as Aun Ioa. tract. 41. Austin saith of the first place) who can say these, or those be they? For the most part of the traditions, that are now thrust vpon the Church, by you Papists, are (in comparison) but new, and very trifles, or meere supersti∣tious. Our Sauiour said, being at the point of his passion That he had manie  Ioh. 16. 12. Act. 10. things to say vnto his Apostles, but they could not as then beare them. Our Sauiour after his resurrection, appeared often vnto his Disciples, spea∣king vvith them of the kingdome of God, of vvhich little is vvritten in any of the Euangelists. I commend you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keepe 1. Cor. 11. the Traditions, euen as I haue deliuered them to you. Now for the particulars, the Ioh 16. 12. first is answered alreadie; the Act. 10. second makes a bad consequence. Christ spake often with his Disciples of the kingdome of God, of which little is written in the Euangelists: therfore there are some points necessarie to saluation, not recorded in Scripture. His talke with them might be for exhortation and consolation espe∣cially. Who can say, whatsoeuer it were, that it is not writ∣ten in the Epistles? By traditions Ambros. ad 2. Thess. . Ambrose vnderstands in the 2. Thessal. no∣thing but the Gospell; in that place 1. Cor. 11. 1. to the Corinthians, the Apostle seemes in all likelihood to speake of ceremo∣nies, or circumstances, in their carriage, about Gods ser∣uice: which neither is matter of saluation, nor to be alwaies alike in all places, and at al times. So doth Ambros. ad 1. Cor. 11. Ambrose vnder∣stand him. O Timothy keepe the depositum, that is, that vvhich I deliuered thee to keepe, Hold fast by the holy Ghost, the good things committed vnto thee to  1 Tim. 6. 2. Tim. 1. , vvhich vvas as S. Chrysostom and Thesphilact expound, the true doctrine of Christ, the true sense of holy Scriptures, the right admini-
words be not set downe in Scripture, yet the matter is: if not expresly, which is not needfull, yet by necessarie conse∣quence: as it may euidently appeare by the Councill and Fathers, wherein and by whom the contrarie to those opi∣nions is condemned and confuted. The first point is im∣plied necessarily in all those places, by which our Sauiour is prooued to be true God, that is, the same God with his Fa∣ther; which you shall finde in Athanas. contr. Ana. & Concil. Ni∣cen. 1. Athanasius writings, and the first Councill of Nice. The second, of the holy Ghosts proceedings from the Sonne, as well as from the Father, is prooued by Thom. cont. gentil. lib. 4. cap. 24 Thomas out of the Scripture, and by other a∣gainst the Greeke Church. The third, beside 1. Io. 5. . that place of Iohn, is necessarily concluded (since there can be but one God) out of the texts, that prooue euery one of them seue∣rally to be God; and by Mah. . 19. that of Matthew. The fourth is prooued out of Scripture, by Concil. Ep 1. the first Councill of Ephe∣sus, against Nestorius; so that for these points we neede no traditions. Obiect. VI. Sundrie places of Scripture be doubt∣full: and euery religion hath his seuerall exposition of them, as the Papists haue theirs, and the Prote∣stants theirs. Now then seeing there can be but one truth, when question is of the interpretation of Scripture, recourse must be had to the tradition of the Church, yt the true sense may be determined, and the question ended. Ans. It is not so: but in doubt∣full places Scripture it selfe is sufficient to declare his owne meaning: first, by the analogie of faith, which is the summe of religion gathered out of the clearest places of Scripture: secondly, by the circumstances of the place, and the nature and signification of the wordes: thirdly, by conference of place with place. By these and like helps contained in Scripture, wee may iudge which is the truest meaning of any place.
Scripture it selfe is the text, and the best glosse. And the Scripture is falsly tearmed the matter of strife, it beeing not so of it selfe, but by the abuse of man. And thus much for our consent concerning Tra∣ditions, wherein we must not be wauering but stead∣fast, because notwithstanding our renouncing of Po∣perie, yet Popish inclinations and dispositions bee rife among vs. Our common people maruelouslie affect humane traditions; yea mans nature is incli∣ned more to bee pleased with them, then with the word of God. The feast of the natiuitie of our Saui∣our Christ, is onely a custome and tradition of the Church, and yet men are commonly more carefull to keepe it then the Lords day, the keeping whereof stands by the morall law. Positiue lawes are not suf∣ficient to restraine vs from buying and selling on the Sabbath; yet within the twelue daies no man keepes market. Againe, see the truth of this in our affecti∣on to the ministerie of the word: let the Preacher al∣leage Peter and Paul the people count it but com∣mon stuffe, such as any man can bring: but let men come and alleadge Ambrose, Austin, and the rest of the fathers; oh, he is the man, hee is alone for them. Againe, let any man bee in danger any way, and straight hee sendeth to the wise man or wizzard: Gods worde is not sufficient to comfort and direct him. All this argues that Poperie denied with the mouth, abides still in the heart: and therefore wee must learne to reuerence the written word, by ascri∣bing vnto it all manner of perfection. The sixt and last reason for Traditions: Sundry places of holy Scrip∣tures  This  all out but in some places: many other are very in and easy. be hard to be vnderstood, others doubtfull whether they must be taken literally or figuratiuely: If then it be put to euery Christian to take his owne exposition, euery seuerall sect, will coyne interpretations in fa∣uour
of their owne opinions: and so shall the word of God, ordained only to teach vs the truth, be abused and made an Instrument to con∣firme all errors. To auoid which inconuenience, considerate men haue recourse vnto the Traditions and auncient Records of the Primitiue Church, Still you begge the question. receiued from the Apostles, and deliuered to the posteritie, as the true copies of Gods word; see the true Exposition and sense of it, and thereby consute and reiect all priuate and new glosses, which a∣gree not with those ancient and holy Commentaries: So that for the vn∣derstanding of both difficult and doubtfull texts of Scripture, Traditions are most necessary. M. Perkins his answere is, that there is no such need of them, but in doubtfull places, the Scripture it selfe is the best glosse: If these be ob∣serued; first the analogie of faith, which is the summe of religion, gathe∣red out of the cleerest places. Secondly, the circumstance of the place, and the nature and signification of the words. Thirdly, the conference of place with place; and concludeth, that the Scripture is falsely tear∣med the matter of strife, it being not so of it selfe, but by the abuse of man. First, this reason can conclude nothing against our opi∣nion: We must haue recourse to traditions, for the expounding of doubtfull places. Therefore the Scripture containes not all do∣ctrine necessarie to saluation. I denie the consequence: This rather prooues the sufficiencie of the Scripture, as being suf∣ficient in it selfe, if it be rightly vnderstood. Secondly, I say there is no such danger as you imagine: For though some may abuse it, to confirme error: yet may their false inter∣pretations be confuted, by diligent examination of the text, without resting vpon the authoritie of mans interpretation: as it appeares manifestly by the courses that the ancient writers tooke, for the confuting of all heresies. And if with∣out this it could not haue been done, what should haue be∣come of the truth, before the writings of men were extant in any number? For it were ridiculous to imagine, that eue∣ry particular text was expounded by the Apostles, and so left by tradition to the Church. Thirdly, who shall deter∣mine when the time, to count ancientnes by, ended? espe∣cially since euery mans writings were new when they were written, and cannot grow in truth, as they doe in age by continuance: we acknowledge them for helpes of inter∣pretation, not for warrants. Reply. To begin with his latter words, because I must stand vpon the
former: Is the Scripture falsely tearmed matter of strife, because it is not so, of his owne nature? why then, is Christ truly called the stone of of∣fence or no, to them that beleeue not? Saint Peter saith, Yes, No saith 1. Pet. 2. M. Perkins because that commeth not of Christ, but of themselues. But good Sir, Christ is truly tearmed a stone of offence, and the Scripture, matter of strife, albeit there be no cause in them of those faults, but be∣cause it so falleth out by the malice of men. The question is not wherefore it is so called, but whether it be so cal∣led or no truly: That which truly is, may be so called truly: But the Scripture truly is matter of great contention, euery obstinate Heretike vnderstanding them according to his owne fantasie, and therefore may truly be so tearmed, although it be not the cause of contention in it self, but written to take away all contention. Master Perkins denies the scripture to be matter of strife, and that it may so bee slandered to the disgrace of it, as some Papists haue most shamelesly spoken of it, to draw people from the reading and louing of it. What blasphe∣mies (almost) haue not your writers vttered against the holy word of God? Albert. Pigh. con  d feeles Pighius calls them dumbe iudges, and in Pigh. Hierar. lib. 3. cap. 3. another place commends the truth and pleasantnes of his speech that compared the scriptures to a nose of waxe. Did not Hosius contt. Bren. lib. 2.  Hosius say of Dauids Psalmes, we write poems euery body learned and vnlearned? But to the capitall matter; these three rules gathered out of S. Au∣gustine, be good directions, wherby sober and sound wits may much pro∣fit in study of diuinitie, if they neglect not other ordinary helpes of good instructors, and learnëd Commentaries: But to affirme that euery Chri∣stian may by these meanes be inabled to iudge which is the true sense of any doubtfull or hard text is extreame rashnes and meere folly. S. Au∣gustine himselfe well conuersant in these rules, indued with a most hap∣pie wit, and yet much bettered with excellent knowledge of all the libe∣rall Sciences; yet he hauing most diligently studied the holy Scriptures, for more then thirtie yeares, with the helpe also of the best Cōmentaries he could get, and counsell of the most exquisit; yet be ingeniously con∣fesseth, That there were more places of Scripture, that after all his studie, he vnderstood not, then vvhich he did vnderstand, And shall euery simple Epist. 119 cap. 21. man furnished only with M. Perkins his three rules of not twise three lines be able to dissolue any difficulty in them whatsoeuer? Why doe the Lutherans (to omit all former Heretikes) vnderstand them in one sort, the Caluinists after another, The Anabaptists a third way, and so of o∣ther sects? And in our owne Country, how commeth it to passe that the Prote∣stants finde one thing in the holy Scriptures, the Puritans almost the
cleane contrarie? Why I say is there so great, bitter, and endlesse conten∣tion among brothers of the same spirit, about the sense and meaning of Gods word: If euery one might, by the aide of those triuiall notes, rea∣dily disclose all difficulties, and assuredly boult out the certaine truth of them; It cannot be but most euident to men of any iudgement, that the Scripture it selfe can neuer end any doubtfull controuersie, vvithout there be admitted some certaine Iudge to declare what is the true mea∣ning of it. And it cannot but redound to the dishonor of our blessed Sa∣uiour to say, that he hath left a matter of such importance at randome, and hath not prouided for his seruants an assured meane to attaine to the true vnderstanding of it. If in matters of Temporall iustice it should be permitted to euerie contentious smatterer in the Law, to expound & conster the grounds of the Law and statutes, as it should seeme fittest in his wisdome, and not be bound to stand to the sentence and declaration of the Iudge, what iniquity should not be Law, or when should there be any end of any hard matter; one Lawyer defending one part, an other the other: One counseller assuring on his certaine knowledge, one par∣tie to haue the right, another, as certainely auerring, not that, but the contrary to be Law, both alledging for their warrant sometexts of Law: What end and pacification of the parties could be deuised, vnlesse the decision of the controuersie be committed vnto the definitiue sentence of some, who should declare whether counsellor had argued iustly and according to the true meaning of the Law? none at all, but bloody de∣bate and perpetuall conflict, each pursuing to get or keepe by force of armes, that which his learned counsell auouched to be his owne. No man saith so, but that by these a man may iudge which is the truest, that is, the likeliest interpretation of a doubtfull place. But I pray you tell me, can you, or any Papist, by the help of tradition added to the other three rules certainely determine, what is the sense of euery hard place of scrip∣ture? If you can, S. Austin by that meanes was likelier to haue it then any of you, as he was neerer the Apostles, from whom those traditions are said to haue come. If you rest vpon the Commentaries of the Auntient, what meanes had they to further them, in vnderstanding the Scripture that we now want? is it not apparant, that we haue all they had, and their paines, and iudgement beside? You aske then, how chance diuers men vnderstand them diuersly? not because they want the tradition you talke of. For who knowes not that the Fathers differ exceedingly one from another in their expositions? And do all the popish
interpretations agree? who, it should seeme by you haue recourse to that maine help of Tradition. He that lookes in∣to your Commentaries, and bookes of controuersies, shall finde very diuers, and sometimes contrarie expositions. Our Sauiour Christ hath prouided sufficientlie for his Church, by deliuering in scripture the grounds of religion so plainely, some here, some there, that any reasonable man may with small labour vnderstand them, from which, they that haue knowledge of the tongues, and arts, especiallie of Logick and Rhetorick, may come to vnderstand the harder places, though perhaps not euery one, yet (at the least) so many, and such, as shall serue to instruct the people of God in the knowledge of his will for the obtaining of euerla∣sting life. To auoid then such garboyles and intestine contention, there vvas neuer yet any Law-maker so simple, but appointed some gouernour and Iudge, who should see the due obseruation of his Lawes, and determine all boubts that might arise about the letter and exposition of the Law, who is therefore called the quicke and liuely law; and shall we Christi∣ans thinke that our diuine Lavv-maker, who in vvisdome, care, and pro∣uidence, surmounted all others, more than the heauens doe the earth, hath left his golden Lawes at randome, to be interpreted as it should seeme best vnto euery one pretending some hidden knovvledge from we knovv not vvhat spirit? no no, It cannot be once imagined vvithout too too great derogation vnto the soueraigne prudence of the Son of God. For the auoiding of outward garboiles by force, or prea∣ching false doctrine, our Sauiour hath appointed princi∣pallie the ciuill magistrate, secondarily the gouernors of the Churches. For the keeping of his children from peri∣shing by error, he hath ordeined, beside the outward helps of Pastors and Doctors, the most certaine direction of his vicegerent the holy spirit, who preserues all that are Christs from falling away from the substance and foundation of truth to damnation. Not that euery man may take vpon him to interpret scripture vpon pretence of I know not what spirit, but that he may assure himselfe of being kept from all error, that may ouerthrow his saluation, by the di∣rection of Gods spirit, vpon whom he calls by prayer, and rests by faith to this purpose as I said before.
sure, and who therefore were appointed to be heard with∣out exception. This befals not any men nowadayes, and therefore none can iustly claime any such credit. The auncients that so wrot in this point of S. Pauls going to see Peter, haue wholie mistaken the Apostle, who denies that of himselfe which they affirme of him. For he saith, Gal. 1. 1. First, that he was not an Apostle of men, nor by man. Se∣condly, that he went vp to Ierusalem, not Gal. 2. 6. 7. to haue confir∣mation of his doctrine from them who were no way supe∣rior to him, but that the Gentiles might know he taught the same things that the other Apostles did. If he had done it for his owne assurance, he Act. 26. 19. had not beleeued the vision, and discredited our Sauiours extraordinarie teaching of him, and had taught for a time such things, as he was not sure to be the truth of God. But if this should be his case, he had sinned grieuously in his former preaching, and he had wholie ouerthrowne the authoritie of his ministrie, which in these two Chapters he labors especially to vphold, auou∣ching, that Gal. 2. 6. 7. 8. 9. he neither learned any doctrine, nor receiued any allowance of his authoritie from Iames, Cephas, and Iohn, which were esteemed to be pillers; yea Gal. 2. 11. he did openly reprooue Peter, if not of error in doctrine, yet of misbeha∣uiour in his conuersation. As for the controuersie of abrogating Moses law, it was a case determined by scripture, and no man might refuse to obey any one of the Apostles charge cōcerning that point. But that the Brethren might haue the better satisfaction, it pleased the holy ghost that the Apostles should in a Coun∣cell decide the question by Act. 15. 6. 23. ioynt consent of themselues, and the brethren there assembled, which any one of them might (of himselfe) haue ended. But because diuers parts of the Church were conuerted by diuers Apostles, and each Church made most account of their owne Apostle, the rea∣diest and safest way was to conclude of the matter by com∣mon consultation: so afterward in all lawfull Councels the written word was held sufficient for the consutation of the heresies that arose from time to time: but for the better
stopping of the heretikes mouths, and satisfying of all men, sometimes the consent of former Diuines, Churches, and Councels was added, in good discretion for mens sake, not for the matter which might be and was abundantlie proo∣ued, or discouered, as occasion serued, by the scriptures. See Cardinall Bellarmine, I vvill only record tvvo noble examples of  Tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 6. Lib. 11. cap. . this recourse vnto Antiquity, for the true sense of Gods vvord, The first, out of the Ecclesiastical History, whereof Saint Gregorie Nazianzen and Saint Basil, tvvo principall lights of the Greeke Church, this is recorded: They were both noble men, brought vp together at Athens: And aftervvard for thirteene yeares space, laying aside all profane bookes, imployed their stu∣die, vvholie in the holy Scriptures. The sense and true meaning vvhereof they sought, not out of their owne iudgement and presumption, (as the Pro∣testants Both are vn∣true. both do, and teach others to do) but out of their Predecessors wri∣tings and authoritie: namely, of such as vvere knovvne to haue receiued the rule of vnderstanding from the Tradition of the Apostles: These be the very words. The examples you bring, are nothing against vs in this question. Nazianzen and Basil sought the true sense of the Scripture, not out of their owne iudgement but out of their pre∣decessors writings and authoritie. What then? Therefore the Scripture containes not all doctrine necessarie to saluation. This consequence hath often been disprooued. Neither is the Antecedent true, if it be generally taken. For their owne writings shew euery where, that they vsed the help of lear∣ning and discourse, to finde out the sense of scripture in ma∣ny places, and set downe that in their Commentaries, which by study they came to vnderstand. If any thing were doubt∣full, we presume they did, See 12. Art. par. 1. Art. 2. E, & Art. 5. per t. as we are sure the Protestants now doe, where they had not apparant reason to the con∣trarie, rest vpon the authoritie of their predecessors, rather than vpon their owne. This reuerence wee giue to the Fa∣thers writings, and reade them with as great dilig, as they that make more bragges of thir knowledge in he. And if that rule (which the storie)  and or you name  R. hist Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 9. not, but it is Austin, speakes of  one of them, which we follw in searching out th  of the Scripture, treate ou to make  to vs, and you shall finde that we will take it  and vse it diligently, if
we cannot shew you certaine reasons to the contrarie. If the rule be, to take for truth whatsoeuer the ancients haue deliuered; how many things, yea contrarie expositions, shal we hold for true? If you say, the rule is to beleeue the an∣cientest; what shall we doe where they say nothing? where their expositions are contraried by those you name, and other about their time? But this can be no rule of vnder∣standing any more of the Scripture, than that which they haue expounded, which is very little: and Origen, one of the ancientest and greatest expositors, is generally condemned for an Heretike, by Epiphanius, Ierome, Austin, and the best writers in Diuinitie. Yea Bellarm. de Purgat lib. 2. cap. 8. c Pra∣to spirituali ci∣tat 27. Synod. Bellarmine sheweth, that Origen was seene in hell with Arius, and Nestorius; and affirmeth that Synod. quin∣ta. cap. 11. the fift Synod cursed him amongst other Heretikes. This rule, if it be a rule, will serue in very few places of the Scripture. The other example shall be the principal pillar of the Laten Church, S. Augustine, who not only exhorteth and aduiseth vs to follow the de∣cree of the auncient Church, if we will not be deceiued with the obscu∣rity of doubtfull questions, but plainly affirmeth, That he vvould not be∣leeue the Gospell, if the authoritie of the Church did not moue him vnto it. Lib. contra Crescon. c. 33. Cont. Epist. fund. cap. 5. Which words, are not to be vnderstood as Caluine would haue them that S. Augustine had not bin at first a Christian, if by the authority of the Church, he had not bin thereunto perswaded: but that when he was a learned and iudicious Doctor, and did write against Heretikes; euen then he would not beleeue these bookes of the Gospel to haue bin pen∣ned by diuine inspiration, and no others, and this to be the true sense of them; vnlesse the Catholike Church (famous then for antiquity, gene∣rality, and consent) did tell him, which and what they were: So farre was he oft from trusting to his owne skill and iudgment in this matter, which notwithstanding was most excellent. This matter is so large, that it re∣quireth a whole question: but being penned vp within the compasse of one obiection, I wil not dwel any longer in it, but here fold vp this whole question of Traditions, in the authorities of the auncient Fathers; out of whom, because I haue in answering M. Perkins and else-where, as oc∣casion serued, cited already many sentences; I will here be briefe. Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 1 cap. 33. Austin wils vs to consult with that Church, which the holy Scripture shewes vs to be the Church, without any am∣biguitie: the ancient Church hee names not, but, by the Church so commended, hee vnderstandeth the vniuersall
Church, as he calles it: that is, he appeales, in the question about Baptisme among the Donatists, to the generall pra∣ctise of the Church, in the seuerall congregations: which no doubt is of great force to perswade any reasonable man in any matter, that cannot be decided by the scripture. For in matters of indifferencie the Churches iudgement is a kinde of law: so that he, which in such things would not be de∣ceiued, cannot doe better than to follow it. There is no word in Aug. contra Epist. funda. cap. 5. that place of Austin, to allow your interpretation of that sentence: but rather the whole course of the speech makes for Caluin. I will propound the mat∣ter, let any indifferent man iudge. Manes or Manicheus in his epistle of the foundation, as he termed it, called himselfe the Apostle of Christ: Austin answeres, that he did not be∣leeue him to be so; and then demaunds of the Manichean, what course hee would take to prooue it to him. Perhaps (saith Austin) you will reade the Gospell to me, and assay to prooue Manicheus person to me out of it. But what if you should light vpon one, that doth not yet beleeue the Gospell? I truly Non cre∣derem. had not beleeued the Gospell, if the authoritie of the Church Commo∣ret. had not moued me: why should I not obey them (saith Austin) when they will me, not to beleeue Manicheus, whom I obeyed, when they willed me to beleeue the Gospell? These are Austins words: to which I will adde those that follow Cap. 14. afterward, that, First wee beleeue that, which as yet we cannot Intueri. discerne: that being made stronger in faith, we may attaine to the vnderstanding of that we doe beleeue, not men now, but God himselfe confirming, and enlightening our minde within. S. Ignatius the Apostles Scholler, doth exhort all Christians, To sticke D. B. P. Euseb. lib. 30, 36.  fast vnto the Traditions of the Apostles, some of which he committed to writing. I shewed before what little credit many of the writings wee haue of Ignatius deserue. Eusebius authoritie is more worth, but hee is Euseb. hist. lib. 30. 36, for lib. 3. cap. 32. neither quoted, nor alleaged truly. The former I take to be the Printers fault, the latter must needes be yours. Ignatius (saith Eusebius) as he past through Asia, vnder guard, in euery Citie where he came, by preaching and ex∣hortation
strengthened the parishes, that they should especially take heed of heresies, then first newly sprung vp; and should cleaue fast to the Traditioni. Tradition of the Apostles, which also, for more sure∣tie, he thought it necessarie for him to write. Now the heresies, which at that time troubled the Church, were those of the Simonians, Menadcians, Ebionites, Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, Saturninians, Basilidians; for the refuting whereof, the scrip∣ture is alsufficient to a reasonable man. Polycarpus, by the authority of the Apostles words, which he had re∣ceiued from their owne mouthes; confirmed the  truth, and ouerthrew the Heretikes. Polycarpus might well refute them by authoritie of the Apostles words, which himselfe had heard, if without the Scripture they would beleeue him, that hee heard them of the Apostles. But Euseb. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. Eusebius reports of him, in Irenaus words, that he recited all things, in that refutation, agreeable to the holy Scriptures. It was much for the perswading of the people, to whom (as Irenaeus saith) he spake those things, that he could truly say, he had heard those things of the A∣postles by word of mouth, which they might finde written in the Scriptures. S. Ireneus, who imprinted in his hart Apostolicall Traditions, recei∣ued from Policarp, saith, If there should be a controuersie about any meane  Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 20. question, ought vve not to runne vnto the most auncient Churches, in the vvhich the Apostles had conuersed, and from them take that which is cleere and perspicuous to define the present question? For vvhat if the Apostles had not vvritten any thing at all, must vve not haue follovved the order of Traditions, vvhich they deliuered to them to vvhom they deliuered the Churches? Iren. Epist. ad Floren. & lib. 3. cap. 4. Irenaeus, in his epistle to Florinus aboue mentioned, saith that he imprinted in his heart the whole carriage, and dis∣course of Polycarpus refuting the Heretikes; but of Aposto∣licall traditions hee speakes neuer a word more, than that Polycarpus had heard those things of the Apostles, which he then deliuered, agreeable to the Scriptures. In any such meane que∣stion, as is not resolued of in Scripture, it was fit to haue re∣course to those Churches, in which the Apostles had liued: yea, if they had written nothing, we must haue repaired to the books of the old Testament, the knowne word of God,
for all matters of substance: in things indifferent, the iudg∣ment of such Churches is of great authoritie. Origen teacheth, that the Church receiued from the Apostles by Tra∣dition, D. B. P. Rom. 6.  to baptize Infants. Origen calles the tradition of the Apostles, their practise of baptizing infants, which hath sufficient ground of scrip∣ture, though not in expresse words; as your Church also holds, and as Origen. in Leuit. hom. 91 & in c. ho∣mil. 14. Origen himselfe acknowledgeth, by shewing the reason that moued the Apostles to baptise them, as hee conceiues; though indeede there is also other better war∣rant for it. Athanasius saith: VVe haue proued this sentence to haue been deliuered D. B. P. Lib. de decret. Niceni conc.  from hand to hand by Fathers to Fathers: but yee, O new Iewes, and sonnes of Caiphas, vvhat Auncestors can yee shevv of your opinion? Where reason failed the Arians on their side, and could not moue them in behalfe of the Church, Athanasius addes this as a further proofe for their confutation; that the do∣ctrine of Christ  being one with his Father, had been held from time to time in the Church: whereas they had no con∣sent of antiquitie for their opinion. Yet had he himselfe prooued the point, by many certaine reasons out of the Scripture, and brought this argument from the authoritie of men, for confutation of their false assertion, that the for∣mer Diuines were not of that iudgement. This Athanasius refuteth by the testimonies of Theognostus, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, whom he calles . eloquent, and one other Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and Origen whom he termes . D. B. P. De Spu. Sanct. 27. Of Nazianzen in the treatise of Images.  painfull. S. Basil hath these words: VVe haue the doctrine that is kept and prea∣ched in the Church; partly vvritten, and part vve haue receiued by Tradi∣tion of the Apostles in mysterie, both vvhich be of the same force to godlines, and no man opposeth against these, vvho hath at the least, but meane experi∣ence of the Lavves of the Church. See Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 1. in Iu∣lian. If you will giue me leaue, I will defend Basils speech by that, which may be gathered out of him, viz. that hee holds them things to be by tradition, which are not exprest in the Scriptures. My ground for this exposition are these words of his: Out of what Scripture haue we (saith Basil. de spi∣rit. sanct. c. 27. Basil) the very
S. Augustine, some thousand two hundred yeares agoe, recordeth the very forme of arguing, which the Protestants vse now-a-daies, in the person of Maximinus an Arrian in his first booke against him in the be∣ginning. Jf thou shalt (saith this Heretike) bring any thing out of the Scrip∣tures vvhich is common to all, vve must needs heare thee, but these vvords vvhich are vvithout the Scriptures are in no sort to be receiued of vs: when as the Lord himselfe hath admonished vs, and said: in vaine do they vvor∣ship me, teaching commaundements and precepts of men. How S. Augustine And before ansvvered. Hom 62. Cantica. opposed against them vnwritten Traditions, hath been afore declared. The like doth S. Bernard asfirme of certaine Heretikes of his time, cal∣led Apostolici. So that most truly it may be concluded, that euen as we Catholikes haue learned of the Apostles and auncient Fathers, our noble progeni∣tors, to stand fast and hold the Traditions which we haue receiued by word of mouth, aswell as that which is written: Euen so the Protestants haue receiued as it were from hand to hand, of their ignoble predeces∣sors, old condemned Heretikes, to reiect all traditions, and to she vnto the only Scriptures. The Heretike Maximinus asked nothing but reason of Austin if he stood vpon the matter, and not vpon the . termes; neither doth Austin find fault with this condition, nor could he in reason, because (as I answered before) him∣selfe appeales to that kind of triall in that very disputation. Neither must I (saith Aug. contra. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14. Austin to Maximinus) alleage the Councell of Nice in preiudice of the matter, nor you the Coun∣cell of Ariminum, neither am I tyed with the authoritie of this Councell, nor you with the authoritie of that; let matter striue with matter,  with cause, reason with reason, by the autho∣ritie of the scriptures which are not proper to you or me, but com∣mon to vs both. But will you heare him speake more like Maximinus? Reade me this (saith Aug. de pa∣stor. cap. 14. Austin) out of a Prophet, reade it out of a Psalme, recite it out of the Lawe, recite it out of the Gospell, recite it out of an Apostle. Thence recite I the Church, disperst ouer the whole world, and our Lord saying, my sheepe heare my voyce. And a little after, away with mens papers, let Sonent vo∣ces diuinae. the voyce of God sound. And August. in Psal. 57. in another place, away with our papers, let Gods bookes come forth: heare Christ, heare the truth speaking. If these speeches be hereticall, we confesse our selues to be Heretikes, but so, that we haue
Austin on our side for an Arch-Heretike. Bernard ser. 66. not 62. in Cantica. Bernard speakes of the Hereticks called Apostolicks, not in his 62. but in his 66. sermon vpon the Canticles, where he saith neuer a word of their reiecting Traditions. No more hath Aug. haeres. 40. Austin, nor Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 1. hae∣res. 61. Epiphanius, where they write of them. And if they did reiect traditions, it was because they would establish their owne hereticall bookes, viz. the Acts of Thomas and Andrew, and the gospell of the Egyptians, which, to say the truth, are to be counted traditions, because they haue no warrant of the scripture, nor are any part of the Canon. It were easie for me to turne your owne sentence against you, and (as all men may see) with good reason, but it shall suffice me that I haue refuted your slaunders and shewes with sound proofe of arguments and authoritie. I consider, loosers must haue leaue to speake. The eighth point. Of Vowes. Our consent. Touching vowes this must bee knowne, that wee do not condemne them altogether, but onely labour to restore the purity of doctrine touching this point: which by the Church of Rome from time to time hath beene corrupted and defaced. We hold there∣fore that a vow is a promise made to God touching some duties to be performed vnto him: and it is two∣fold, generall, or speciall. The generall vow is that which concernes all beleeuers: and it is made in the couenant both of the law, and of the Gospell. I will here onely speake of the vow which is made in the couenant of the Gospell, in which there be two acti∣ons: one of God, the other of man. God in mercy on his part promiseth to men the remission of sinnes and
life euerlasting: and man againe for his part promi∣seth to beleeue in Christ, and to obey God in all his commaundements. All men euer made this vow vn∣to God, as the Iewes in circumcision: which also they renewed so often as they receiued the Passeo∣uer: and in the newe Testament all that are baptized doe the like. And in baptisme this vow is called the stipulation of a good conscience whereby wee pur∣pose to renounce our selues, to beleeue in Christ, and to bring forth the fruites of true repentance: and it ought to be renued so oft as wee are partakers of the supper of the Lord. This vowe is necessarie and must bee kept as a part of the true worship of God; be∣cause it is a promise, wherein wee vowe to performe all duties commaunded of God either in the law or in the Gospell. It may be demaunded, considering wee are bound to obedience, how wee binde our selues in baptisme thereto. Answ. Though we be alreadie bound partly by nature and partly by the written word, yet may wee renew the same bond in a vowe, and he that is bound may further binde him∣selfe, so it be for this end, to helpe his dulnes for want of zeale, and to make himselfe more forward in du∣ties of loue to men and the worship of God: to this end Dauid sware to keepe the law of God. Psal. 119. 116. though he were bound vnto it by nature and by the written law it selfe. The speciall vowe is that, which doth not reach to the person of al beleeuers, but onely concernes some speciall men vpon some speciall occasions. And this kind of vow is twofold. The first, is the vow of a cere∣monial duty in the way of seruice to God: and it was
in practise in the Church of the Iewes vnder the old Testament: examples hereof are two especially, the first was the vowe of the Nazarites, whereto no kind of men were bound by Gods commaundement, but they bound thēselues: God only prescribing the ma∣ner and order of keeping the same with rites pertai∣ning thereto, as abstinence from wine, the not cut∣ting of their haire, and such like. The second exam∣ple is of the Iewes, when of their owne accords, they vowed to giue God house or land, sheepe, or oxen, or any like things for the maintenance of the legall worship: and of this also God prescribeth certaine rules, Leuit. 27. Now these vowes were part of the Iewish pedagogie or ceremoniall law, wherein God trained vp the Iewes in the old testament: and bee∣ing obserued of them they were parts of Gods wor∣ship: but now vnder the Gospell they are not: bee∣ing all abolished with the ceremoniall law, to which Christ put an ende at his death vpon the crosse. It is true Paul made a vowe, and since kept the same, in in the time of the new Testament. Act. 18. yet not as a part of Gods worship: but as a thing indif∣ferent for the time, wherein he only condescended to the weakenes of the Iewes, that by this meanes he might bring them the better vnto Christ. And whereas Christ is called a Nazarite, Matth. 2. 23. we may not thinke he was of that very order, because he did not abstaine from wine: but he was so tearmed because hee was the veritie and accomplishment of this order. For by it was signified that Gods Church was a peculiar people seuered or chosen out of the world: and that Christ in respect of holines was al∣so
separated from all sinners. And the words in Saint Matthew, he shall be called a Nazarite, are borrowed from the booke of Iudges, cap. 13. where they are properly spoken of Sampson, and in type or figure of Christ. For as Sampson saued Israel by his death, so did Christ saue his Church. And as Sampson killed his enemies more by death then by life, so did Christ. It is plaine therefore that this kind of vowe bindeth not vs: for there are no more ceremonies to bee kept vnder the Gospell for partes of Gods wor∣ship, but the outwarde rites of Baptisme and the Lords Supper. Vovves concerning meates, and drinkes, attire, touching, tasting, times, place, daies, were proper to the Iewes. The second kinde of speciall vowe is that where∣by a man promiseth freely to performe some out∣ward and bodily exercise, for some good ende: and this vow also (if it be made accordingly) is lawfull, and belongs both to the Church of the olde and new Testament. In the olde wee haue the example of the Rekabites, Ier. 35. who by the appointment of Ionadab their father abstained from strong drinke, and wine, from planting vineyardes and orchardes: whereby Ionadab intended onely to breake them be∣fore hand, and to acquaint them with their future condition and state, that they should be strangers in a forraine land; that so they might prepare them∣selues to indure hardnes in the time to come. And now in the new testament wee haue warrant in like manner to vowe: as if a man by drinking of wine or strong drinke, finde himselfe prone to drunkennes, he may vowe with himselfe to drinke no more wine
nor strong drinke for so long time, as hee feeles the drinking thereof will stirre vp his infirmitie, and mi∣nister occasion of sinning. Of this kind also are the vowes in which we purpose and promise to God, to keepe set times of fasting, to taske our selues in prayer and reading of holy Scriptures, and to giue set almes for special causes knowne to our selues, and to doe sundrie like duties. And that wee be not de∣ceiued in making such vowes, certaine rules must be remembred: I. that the vowe be agreeable to Gods will and word: for if it be otherwise, the making as al∣so the keeping thereof is sinne. Vowes must not bee the bondes of iniquitie. II. It must so be made, that it may stand with Christian libertie. For wee may not make such things necessary in conscience, which God hath made free. Now Christian liberty allowes vnto vs the free vse of all thinges indifferent, so it be out of the case of offence. Hence it followes that vowes must be made and keept or not keept, so farre∣forth as in conscience they may stand or not stande with our libertie purchased by Christ. III. The vowe must be made with consent of superiors, if we be vnder gouernment. Thus among the Iewes the vowe of a daughter might not stand vnlesse the con∣sent of Parents came thereunto. IV. It must bee in the power and abilitie of the maker thereof, to do or not to doe. A vowe made of a thing impossible, is no vowe. V. It must be agreeable to the calling of him that maketh it: that is, both to his generall calling as he is a Christian, and to that particular calling where∣in he liueth. If it bee against either one or both, it is vnlawfull. VI. It must be made with deliberation.
no better things performed then God by his lawe hath bound vs to, else man could deuise better obedience, or more acceptable seruice to God then he himselfe hath ap∣pointed. If by better good, you meane be a greater mea∣sure of obedience then is commonly performed, I doubt whether any man can do more then the law of God hath required of him, which is the rule of perfect obedience. If you vnderstand the meanes of stirring vp our selues to the doing of our dutie to God, Master Perkins acknowledgeth that, and compriseth it in the later part, though he do not expresse it. Secondly, you say, that it must proceede from our owne free choise and libertie. The promise doubtlesse must haue our owne will for the ground of it, and so much the word imports, but the good must be a dutie commanded, or at the least allowed by warrant out of the word of God in the scriptures, or out of the light of true reason, and the law of nature, or out of Reuelation before the scriptures. The second point of our supposed consent is, that Vowes vvere some part of Gods vvorship in Moses Law, but are not so in the Gospell, which vve also deny, M. Perkins proues his assertion thus. Vovves belonged to the ceremonies of Moses Lavv, but all those Ceremonies are abolished, by Christs Passion. Ans. That Vovves in themselues vvere no part of the Ceremonies of Moses Lavv, but true parts of the vvorship of God in all estates; as vvell in the state of Nature and the Gospell, as in Moses Lavv: but this point M. Perkins handleth againe in the first point of our difference, vvhere it shell be discussed. Thirdly he saith, that speciall Vovves may be made in the Nevv Lavv, to performe some bodily exercise for some good end, as to fast, to taske our selues to prayer, or study of holy Scripture, and such like: but many rules must then be obserued: that vve Vovv an honest thing agreeable to Gods vvord: this vve allow. Master Perkins doth not say as you conceiue, that all vowes belonged to the ceremonie of Moses law, but that the vow of a ceremoniall duty in the way of seruice to God, apperteined thereto, whereof he brings two examples of the Nazarites, and of the people generally at their choyse. Secondly, that it be so made, that it may stand vvith Christian liberty: that is, that it make not such things necessary in conscience, vvhich Christian religion leaues at libertie: This rule of his is flat repugnant to the nature of a Vovv, and contrary to himselfe. For he saith a little be∣fore; that a Christian may Vovv Fasting, Prayer, almsdeeds. I then de∣maund,
hauing Vovved these things; is he not bound to performe them? Yes, or else he breakes his Vovv, vvith vvhich God is highly displeased. An vnfaithful promise displeaseth God. Then is it manifest, that all Vows Deut. 83. Eccles. 50. do abridge vs of our libertie, and make that vnlawfull for vs, vvhich be∣fore our Vovv vvas lavvfull: vvhich is so euiden of it selfe, that I mar∣uaile vvhere the mans vvit and memorie vvas, vvhen he vvrote the con∣trarie. He speaketh agreeably to the truth, without any contra∣rietie to himselfe, for the vow alters not the nature of the thing in it selfe, but only layeth a dutie vpon the vower, which also is so to be performed, as that by the perfor∣mance of it he be not alwayes depriued of his christian li∣bertie, but that vpon occasion, he may do against his vow, without any iust scruple of conscience for so doing, though he haue vowed otherwise in generall. His other rules, that a Vovv be made with good deliberation, and with D. B. P. Do you then al∣lovv all, that is taken out of your Doctors? Quest. 88.  consent of our Superiours; and not only of things possible, but also of the better sort, vve allovv, for they are taken out of our Doctors: See S. Thom. Your cotation is somewhat with the shortest, naming nothing but the Tho. 2a, , q. 88. art. 8. question; so is also the determination of your DD. vpon it; for, although they graunt in generall, that we must haue the consent of our superiors to vowing, Art. 9. yet they exempt vs in this case from subiection, as soone as we are out of our noneage, and that they draw vs out of very quickly, that a maide of 12. or 14. yeeres old may vow herselfe a Nunne, and so a youth at 18. or 20, or perhaps sooner, may vow himselfe a Frier, without any consent of their parents, yea directly contrary to their expresse will and commandement. The dissent or difference. The points of difference betweene vs touching vowes are specially three. I. The Church of Rome teacheth that in the new Testament wee are as much bound to make vowes, as was the Church of the Iewes, and that euen in externall exercises. We say
no: considering the ceremoniall law is now abolish∣ed: and wee haue onely two ceremonies by com∣maundement to bee obserued, Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord. Againe wee are not so much bound to make or keepe vowes as the Iewes were: because they had a commaundement so to doe, and we haue none at all. First, the Church of Rome (saith M. Perkins) teacheth, that in the New Testament, we are as much bound to make Vowes, as was the Church of the Iewes, we say no; Considering that the Ceremoniall Law is now abolished, and we haue only two Ceremonies by commaunde∣ment to be obserued for parts of Gods worship: Baptisme, and the Sup∣per of the Lord. Ans. What, is not your Holy-day seruice (which you call diuine ser∣uice) any part of Gods worship in your owne opinions? Can a publike assemblie instituted to honour God by prayer and thankesgiuing vvith externall ceremony of time, place, apparrell, kneeling, standing and sit∣ting, be no part of Gods worship? In your irreligious Congregations, as∣sembled together against Christ and his Catholike Church, be it so. But admitting as you do, your seruice to be good; it could not truly be deni∣ed to belong vnto the worship of God. Whereunto belongs this idle question? is it a ceremonie thinke you to assemble our selues for the seruice of God? all outward seruice of God is not ceremoniall, though the vse of it be in part to expresse our inward affection. But to the matter of difference, you grow very carelesse in your re∣ports of our doctrine: for we hold that neither in the Old nor New law, any man is bound to Vow, but that it is and euer vvas a counsell, and no commandement, neuerthelesse, a thing of great deuotion & perfection in both states, O strange elo∣quence not to be vnderstood! intrinsecallie belonging and much furthering the true worship of almightie God, vvhich vve proue in this sort. In a Vovv are two things, the one is the good vvhich is Vovved, called the materiall part: as for example, Fasting, &c. The other, the promise it selfe made to God, which is the forme; the materiall parts do belong vnto their se∣uerall vertues: but this promise and performance of it be substantiall parts of Gods vvorship. For by promising of any good thing vnto God, The perfor∣mance is no part of the Vow rither the matter nor the forme of it. vve acknovvledge and professe that God is the soueraigne goodnesse it selfe, and taketh great pleasure in all good purposes and determinati∣ons: therefore, to honor and vvorship him, vve make that good promise. Againe, In performing that good seruice of God, vve testifie, that he is most maiesticall, reuerend, and dreadfull. And consequently, that all
promises made to him, are to be accomplished most diligently, and with∣out delay, wherein vve honor and vvorship him, as contrarivvise they do much dishonor him vvho breake vvith him, as if he were of no better ac∣count then to be so deluded. This thing in it selfe is so certaine and cleere, that he vvho denies it, must needs either be ignorant in the na∣ture of a Vovv, or not knovv wherin the true orship of God consisteth: for according vnto the holy Scripture itself, all good deeds done to the glorie of God, be acts of the true vvorship of God. And S. Anne did wor∣ship Luk. 1. Philip. . Iac. 5. God, by fasting and prayer: And almes bestovved on Gods prisoners, is called a sacrifice pleasing and acceptable vnto God: And it is said, to be a pure religion before God to visite Orphanes and vviddovves: If then all other vertuous duties done to the glory of God, be parts of his true wor∣ship; much more Vovves, vvhich by speciall promise dedicate a good deed to Gods honour: they then being of their ovvne nature, speciall parts of his true vvorshippe of God: it follovveth necessarily that at all times they vvere and may be vsed to the true vvorship of God. If we be bound to vow in neither, as indeed we are not, yet are we as much bound in the one, as in the other, which is all Master Perkins saith. But indeed (as I conceiue) hee meanes, bound to it, as a seruice of God. Wee graunt that you say of a vow, and withall confesse, that it is a meanes of Gods seruice; but not properly a part, otherwise then all obedience, whereby we glorifie God; and all helps, by which we fit our selues to obedience, are parts of his wor∣ship. But those actions onely are held to be properly the parts of his worship, which are performed immediatly for seruice to him, not vsed for the better performance of it. That they were in practise before Moses Law is euident, by that Vovv  Gen. 28. which Iacob made of setting vp a stone, which should be called the house of God, and the paying the tenthes of all his goods. Out of which Vow, we also gather, that God holdeth for agreeable, any kind of good seruice offered vnto him out of our owne deuotion: albeit he hath not com∣maunded it, for no such thing as Iacob there Vowed was commaunded him, but he being well assured that it would be wel taken by God, which was offered of good will to his greater honor, he Vowed it, and is in holy Scripture commended for it. Againe, that when S. Paul seemeth to disallow voluntary worship, he Colos. 2. As most oral of your crm∣nis are.  must be vnderstood to speake either of erroneous, or of friuolous and foolish things, promised to God, which do not properly serue to the set∣ting forth of his honor. Gen. 28. 2. Iacobs action was directed immediatly to Gods seruice, not intended, or vsed as a helpe to further him in the wor∣ship
of God. That which you gather out of his example, is not warrantable by it, vnlesse you restraine those words (good seruice) otherwise, than you Papists commonly doe. For it doth not follow, that because God accepted of t vow, therefore he will like whatsoeuer a man shall promise him, so it be (as he imagines) to the greater honor of God. The former of these two was (in likelihood) inioyned A∣dam by God, and so continued among the true worship∣pers of God: the latter is grounded vpon that principle, that we must glorifie God in our soules, bodies and goods, though the manner be left free to euery mans discretion, according to his abilitie and opportunitie: but no man may conclude hereupon, that God in his solemne worship allowes of whatsoeuer wee out of our deuotion inuent, and appoint to serue him by. That Col. 2. 18. of Paul must needes be vn∣derstood of such things; but such are all that are deuised by man to worship God by, without warrant from the word of God, either generally or particularly, expresly, or by necessarie consequence. For all such seruing of God, is worship, depending wholy vpon the will of man, and so will-worship. The ceremonies of your Romish Church are generally foolish and ridiculous, yea those in your Masse: your Doctrines, besides Scripture, erronious, as I shewed in the last article. But they alleadge to the contrarie the Prophet E∣say, cap. 19. 20. who speaking of the time of the Gos∣pell, saith, the Egyptians shall know the Lord, and shall vowe vnto him and keepe it. I answere two waies: first, that the Prophet in this place expresseth and signifi∣eth the spirituall worship of the new Testament by ceremoniall worship then vsed: as hee doth also in the last chapter where he calleth the ministers of the new Testament Priests and Leuites. Secondly, we graunt, the Church of the new Testament makes vowes vnto God, but they are of morall and euan∣gelicall
duties: which must not be left vndone: and if vowing will indeede further them, it is not to bee neglected. And therefore so oft as wee come to the Lords Table, wee in heart renew the vowe and pro∣mise of obedience. And though vowes be made of thinges and actions indifferent, yet are they not any parts of Gods worship, which is the point to bee prooued. Now that Vowes should be frequented in the se of the pell, be∣sides  Act. 1. Esay. 19. 18. the euidence of S. P, Vo and diuers other   e Pro∣phet Esay did foretell, in thse word:      sacri∣fice and gifts, and they shll Vo Vos  our. To which M. Perkins answereth first, that by such cere as thn was in vse, the Prophet doth expresse the spirituall   the new Testament. This exposition is voluntary and nothing : For what is more vild and absurd, than (o declare that Christians shal make  proper a sore. no Vowes) to say that they shall make Vovves, as though one contrarie vvere fit or vvould serue to expresse the other. This exposition being ve∣ry vnmeete, M. Perkins adioyneth a second, that in the nevv Testament, vve haue Vovves of Morall and Euangelicall duties, but such are not any part of Gods vvorship: o that first you shall haue no Vovves at all: Se∣condly, the vvind being changed, you shall haue them, but as no parts of Gods vvorship, as though Morall and Euangelicall duties vndertaken and performed to Gods greater glory bee not the very synevves and substance of his seruice and vvorship. That Act. 18. 1. S. Pauls vow maketh nothing for you, Master Per∣kins hath shewed. It is marueile you would name the ex∣ample, and not refute his answere. Belike the truth of it was too euident. And yet it had been no hard matter perhaps, to finde as good a shift for that place, as you haue for the o∣ther Esay. 19 2. of Esay. Master Perkins answered to it, that the Pro∣phet signifieth the spirituall worship of the new Testament by the ceremonies of the old, then in vse: and he prooues his interpretation by the Prophet himselfe; who Esay. 66. 21. after∣wards calles the Ministers of the new Testament, Priests, and Leuites, which were offices and names proper to the old. You slip ouer the reason, and ell vs, that it is vile and absurd to say, that Christians shall make vowes, to declare, that they shall make none. But the Prophet meanes to de-
from Senacherib. The generall doctrine ensuing from it is this, that we are to be thankefull to God, when he hath deliue∣rd vs out of any extraordinary danger. Your second reason is of lesse force, for first, by the Kings of the earth, the Lyra ibid. Kings bordering vpon Ierusalem, and those parts, are signified, who should be driuen into a feare of God, that had so destroyed the Assyrians. Secondly, if it be generall, it followes not that therefore the vowes he speaketh of there may be made of any sort of men, but that all men must performe the dutie of thankefulnes vpon like occasions. Thirdly, because the auncient Fathers take it to extend vnto vs Chri∣stians, aswellas vnto the Iowes; let one S. Augustine serue in his Com∣mentarie vpon this Psalme 75. Because vve haue handled those things (saith he) peture thou vvho vvast vvilling before, but novv vvilt not Vovv: but mke vvhat the Psalme said vnto thee: It saith not, Doe not Vovv, but Vovv and pay it: vvilt thou not Vovv? Therefore vvould∣est thou haue Vovved, but not haue fulfilled it ay rather do both: Let the one be of  ovvne promise, the other shall be performed by the helpe of God: He then tooke these words to belong vnto his Auditors vvho were no levves. In the same place, he doth highly commend Christians for Vovving, some Chastitie, some Hospitality some Pouerty. . ibid. Theodoret, auncienter then Austin, and not inferiour to him, in expounding the Scripture, applyes it to bringing of gifts, as also the Psalm. 76.  Psalme it selfe in the later part of the verse, and the 2. . 32. 2 practise of the people at that very time warrant him. So also may Au ust. ad Psalm. 75. Austin himselfe, for all those words, be vnderstood. For what do they import, but an exhortation to thankefulnes, vnder the legall termes of vowing? If Au∣stin, or any man else will ground other doctrine vpon it, he deliuers his owne conceipt, not the Prophets meaning. I thinke there is no man that readeth those Commentaries of Austins vpon the Psalmes, but finds, that he mistakes the sense very commonly, which is to be imputed to his want of knowledge in the tongues, especially in the Hebrew. But because contraries being set together, each doe more liuely ap∣peare in his kind: Let vs vvith this Exposition, compare M. Perkins his Commentary vpon this place: vvho saith, that the Prophet speaketh of Vovves, of Prayer and thankesgiuing: For so (saith M. Perkins:) doth
he expound himselfe, My Vovves are vpon me, J vvill offer prayses vnto Psalm 56. 1. God: Well aymed I vvarrant you; The Psalme fiftie sixt, vvritten first, is the Exposition of the Psalme seuenty fiue, which was conceited and vtte∣red after: Again, in the Psalme seuenty fiue Dauid speaketh to others: in the other he speaketh of himself. Thirdly, the Prophets vvords in Psalme fiftie sixe, confirme rather that vvhich he taught before, that all conside∣rate Vovves are prayses and parts of Gods vvorship, or as the vvords do more literallie ound, because his Vovves, that is, his prayers and desires vvere by God accomplished, therefore he would praise and thanke him. That by vowes in this place prayer is meant, not only the Hebri in∣ep. 70. . Septuaginta, and Ambr. orate. Ambrose witnes, but Esai. 38. 9. 10 Hezekiahs practise confirmes. To deny that thankefulnes is vrged, is not to vnderstand the occasion of the Psalme, and the end of the exhortation, which requireth vowes, be they what they may be, but only in that respect. Master Perkins there∣fore needed not any further proofe, then the text it selfe: but, for the better auowing of his exposition, he brought Psalm. 56. 22 another place of the Psalmes, where vowes do signifie praise or thanksgiuing. Now whereas he saith, that Dauid expounds himselfe, and you refute that by the placing of the Psalmes, your answere is not sufficient. For any man may see, the Psalmes were not set in order, as they were penned in time; and if that 75. Psalme were a prophesie of Senacheribs ouerthrow, as I shewed Theodoret. ad Psalm. 75. Theodoret thinks, it might well be written before Psalme 56. But Master Perkins had no such meaning; onely he expounds the word Vowes, vsed in this place by the certaine sense of it in another, which course is agreeable to the rules of interpreting the scripture. But in the one you say Dauid speaketh of himselfe, in the other he speaketh to other. What then? is it not more then likely that he exhorts others to the duety he practised him∣selfe? If in his owne person he meane by vowes praise, what else should be vnderstood by exhorting other men to vow, especially vpon the like occasion, that is, as you say af∣terward, vpon hauing their prayers & desires accomplished? Your collection, that Dauid should proue, that all consi∣derate vowes are praises, and part of Gods worship, hath no likelyhood of truth in it. For the Prophet declares by that speech, that he had vowed to praise God, as the next verse
before sheweth in part, and the practise of Dauid, and the rest of the godly euery where in scripture confirmeth. And this is a sacrifice of speciall honor to God, as by the Psal. 50. 23. Psalme 50. appeares, by which Lyra ad Esai. 19. Lyra expounds that of Esai, where∣of before. See Hieronym. & Theodor. ad Psalm. 49 & 56. & 65. Ierome on Psalme 49. and 56. and 65. and Theodoret on the same places. II. Point of difference. They also hold that vowes made euen of things not commaunded, as meates, drinkes, attire, &c. are partes of Gods worship, yea that they tend to a state of perfection, in that the keeping of them brings men to an higher estate then the keeping of the law can doe. We flatly say, no: holding that lawfull vowes bee certaine Adminicula cultus diuini. staies and props of Gods worship, and not the worship itselfe. For Paul saith plainely, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Bodilie exercise profiteth little, but godlines is profitable for much. Againe, as Gods kingdome is, so must his worshippe be: and Gods kingdome standeth not in outward things, as in eating, drinking, and such like actions: and therefore his worship standeth not in outwarde thinges. Here M. Perkins setteth vp a rotten prop or two, to vphold his ruinous  1. Tim. 4. building, saying, S. Paul saith plainly, Bodilie exercise profiteth little, t godlines profiteth much. Where are you good Sir? We treat here of Vowes, vvhich are formally actions of the mind: vvhat do you novv about bo∣dilie exercises? Vovves are principall parts of that godlines, vvhich is so profitable. And if by bodily exercise, Fasting, and other corporall paine or labour be vnderstood, then vve say, that such things of themselues vvould profitlittle; but being directed to the chastising of the rebellious flesh, to the end vve may lesse offend, and better serue God, then they may much profit vs. The reason why Master Perkins brings this place, is, be∣cause, as it should seeme, some Papists alleage it, to prooue the lawfulnes of vowing bodily exercises, to honor God by them. You answer, that vowes are actions of the minde. What of that? if the performance of the vowes be of small
profit, doubtlesse the vowing of them is a poore piece of seruice to God. Yet may there be good vse of fasting, and such like, to vs, in that they may be made good meanes to further our seruice to God, though of themselues they be no worship. Bu let vs heere M. Perkins his second reason against such Vovves. Gods kingdome standeth not in outvvard things, and therfore his vvor∣ship standeth not in outvvard things. Ans. Gods kingdome in itselfe standeth not in outvvard things, and as it is in vs also, it doth consist chiefly in inward worship, by faith, hope, charity, and religion, in vvhose kingdome Vovvs hold a honorable ranke: but a great part of this vvorship among vs, depends of outvvard things; for be not the tvvo only parts of Gods vvorship among Protestants (as M. Perknis saith in this question) Baptisme and our Lords Supper, both vvhich partly consist in outvvardly, both speaking and doing. And is not faith (vvhich is the roote of all Christian Religion) gotten by outvvard preaching and hearing? But it vvould vvearie a vvilling man to trayle after all M. Perkins his impertinent errors. The kingdome of God stands not in such outward acti∣ons, as eating, drinking, &c. Master Perkins denyes not, that we are to performe outward worship to God, which con∣sists among vs in prayer, prayse, thanksgeuing, and such like duties, not onely, as you would haue your followers falsely imagine of vs, in administring, and receiuing the sacra∣ments. You that would seeme so vnwilling to traile after Master Perkins errors, are glad to make some of your owne, and father them vpon him, least ofttimes you should haue nothing to say. I haue shewed diuers particulars of this kind in the course of my answere to your cauils against him. III. Point of difference. They maintaine such vowes to be made, as are not agreeable to the rules before named: and herein also wee are to dissent from them. The first and principall is, the vowe of continencie, whereby a man promiseth to God to keepe chastitie alwaies in single life, that is, out of the estate of wedlocke. This kind of vowe is flat against the word of God: and therefore vnlawfull. For Paul saith, 1. Cor. 7. 9. If they cannot conteine let them mar∣ric.
1. Tim. 4. 1. It is a doctrine of deuills to forbid to marrie. Heb. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed vndefiled. This kind of Vovv, is flat against the vvord of God, as hesaith vvhich he proueth first out of S. Paul, If they cannot containe, then let  Mar∣rie: True, if they haue not Vovved Chastitie before, as the common 1. Cor. 7. Christians of Corinth, (to vvhom S. Paul there speaketh) had not. For such, f they cannotliue othervvise chastly, it is better they marry then be burned that is, defiled vvith incontinencie. But to them vvho had Vovved chastitie before, S. Paul vvriteth in another stile, That if they but desire to marrie, they incurre domnation, because they haue made frustrate and broken their former faith and promise made vnto God of their 1. Tim. 5. chastiue: So that this first text is a Furlong vvide at the least from the marke. The text is generall, and implies no such exception. E∣piphanius holds it to be a better course for them that haue vow∣ed, to marry, then to continue in sinne against God. And Aug de bono viduit. ca. 9. 10 Au∣stin saith, that the marriages of such men are not to be con∣demned, as if they were no marriages at all, which opinion that they are no marriages he there refutes. And indeede who can thinke in any reason that it is more displeasing to God for a man to breake the promise he hath made, then by making a shew of keeping it, to liue in vncleannes? It is but one fault to breake a vow, though it be neuer so lawfull, but it is a double fault both to do against the vow, by conti∣nuing subiect to such lusts, and to refuse the remedie that is afforded. In which respect Epiphan. vbi supra. Epiphanius saith, it is better to haue one sinne, then many sinnes. Therefore Cyril. in Leuit. lib 3. Cyrill giueth councell to marry euen after the vow of single life, and to con∣fesse our sinne in so doing, if we cannot liue chastly. Yea 22. q. 4. I malis. the Common law bids a man not to do that which he hath vowed vnaduisedly. It is no doubt a fault not to keepe our vow, but to make such a vow as a man is not sure he shall be able to keepe, is a greater fault. If the case fall out to be so, Hieron. ad .  act.  34. Ierome and q Austen hold it the lesse euill to marry. It cannot be prooued out of the text, that the Apostle speaketh there of any votaries, but only of such widowes as hauing for a time employed themselues in the seruice of
the Church, at the last left both the Church and Christ, and followed Sathan by marrying with Infidels. But take it as you will, we haue already seene the iudgement of the Aun∣tients, who for all their high conceipt of virginitie, allow marriage euen after vowes. The second is much like: It is a doctrine of diuels, to forbid to marie:  1. Tim. 4. VVhat reue∣rence vvhen you thinke it defiles your Priests? Ephes. 5. They are soone of yeeres ripe enough in your account. Lib. 3. contra Faust. manich. cap. 6. truth, if one should hold mariage in it selfe to be wicked, and therefore condemne it in all sorts of persons, as Montanus, and the Manichees did. But we haue a more reuerend opinion of marriage, than the Prote∣stants themselues. For we with the Apostle hold it to be a great Sacra∣m: they, that it is a morail contract only. Notwithstanding, we main∣taine, that such persons, who being of ripe yeeres, haue aduisedly Vowed chastitie, may not marry; not because marriage is not honorable, but for that they haue solemnly promised to God the contrarie which we also hold to be better, thā if he had maried. And so to vse S. Augustines words, H. forbiddeth to marry, vvho sayeth it to be euill, but not be vvho before this good thing, preferreth a better. And a little after, you see (saith he) that there is great difference betweene persvvasion to Virginity, by preserring the greater good before the lesse, and forbidding to marrie, by accusing lying togither for issue. The first is, the doctrine of the Apostles, which we teach, the latter only of diuels. The 1. Tim. 4. 1. Apostle speaketh of all forbidding marriage at the least as an vncleane thing, but so it is forbidden by you, be∣cause it defiles your priests, that they cannot be fit to offer vp ther maker, yea that they cannot pray, as Harding a∣gainst the Apo∣logy in Juel. sol 210. Harding saith. You take marriage for such a Sacrament that it is too base for your holy priesthood. We acknowledge it to be Gen. 1. 18. 19. &c. the ordinance of God, of another manner of bond then a morall contract only. We deny not that single life is in some respects to be preferred before marraige, but that marriage is to be forbidden any sort of men, as if of it selfe it made them lesse holy. The strength of this place lyeth in a double corruption of the text: For this verbe (is) is not in the text, nor cannot by the courle of the Apostles speech, requiring a verbe of the Imperatiue Mood, as both the sent nces before and after do conuince. The sentences before and after prooue no such thing, rather the opposition in the Hebr. 13. 4. later part of the verse shewes that it should be [is] marriage is honorable, but whoremongers and adulterers God will iudge: whereas if it had bin so inten∣ded
as you would haue it, the other part must haue bin, for God will iudge, by way of a reason, as your vulgar translation reades it without ground. If we corrupt the text, by adding the verb is, what do Theodoret. Chrysost. Theophyl. Oecum. Heuten. ad Hebr. 1. Theodoret, Chrysostome, Theophylact, Oecumenins, and Heutenius the Papist that translated him, Hesych. in Leuit. lib. 5. cap. 1. Hesychius, Fulgent. ad Galla. de statu. viduit. cap. 2. Fulgentius, Damasc. Orthod fidei. lib. 4. cap. 26. Damasen, who so expound it. Primas. ad Hebr. 13. Primasius giues the reason why the Apostle speaketh so, because some at that time condemned mariage as vncleane. Againe, if you will haue the Apostle say, that Marriage is honorable a∣mong all men; we must also needs take him to say, that the bedde is al∣so vndefiled among all, which was not true. Also, that their conuersation was without couetousnes, &c. For there is no reason why this word (is) should be ioyned with the one more than with the other. And nothing but passion doth cause them to make the middle sentence an affirma∣tiue, when they turne both the other into exhortations. There is great reason why it should be ioyned with the one, as hath been shewed. With the other, as you ioyne it, it is absurd: but it must thus be ioyned, that, is honorable, be repeated; and the bed vndefiled is honorable. In the sentence following it cannot be vnderstood, with any reason; and therefore the Vulgar La∣tin, sint. vulgar Latin puts in sint, and the Rhemis. English, Let be. . Rhemists English, let be: which in the former verse neither of them doth. You so interpret it. The second corruption is in these words (among all) when they should translate (in all) and the adiectiue being put without a substantiue, must in true construction haue this word (things) ioyned with it, and not (men) wherfore the text being sincerely put into English, it would carrie no colour of their error: For the Apostles saying is: Let marriage be ho∣norable in all things, and the bed vndefiled: Here is no willing of any man to marrie, but only a commandement to them that be married to liue honestly in marriage, to keepe (as he else where saith) their vessels in sanctification, and not in dishonor, and then shall their marriage be ho∣norable in all things, that is, in all points appertaining to Matrimonie: So that now you see that M. Perkins is not able to bring any one place out of Scripture to disproue the Vow of chastitie. The Adiectiue may be as well the Masculine, as the New∣ter; and that which followeth in the other part of the verse, of whoremongers and adulterers, directs vs to expound it of the persons. So doth Theophyl. ibid. Theophyl. vnderstand it. In all (saith Theophylact) is not onely in men of riper age, and not in young
men also, but in all men, or in all meanes and times: not in affli∣ction onely, and in rest otherwise; not honourable and pretious in this part, in that part otherwise; but the whole throughout is ho∣nourable. So that both your cauils at the translation are vaine, and the sense is wholy for vs. The Scripture being so barren for him, he shall be like recompence it with the abundant testimony of antiquitie, in fauour of his cause: but oh vnhappy chance, he hath cleane forgotten in this question the record of the auncient Church: What was there not one Father? who vvith You know what is wont to be said of proe∣red seruice. some one broken fragment of a sentence or other, would releeue you in this your combate against the Vow of Chastitie? I will help you to one, but I feare me, you will scarse thanke me for my paines: It is such a one, as is neither holy nor father, but the auncient Christian Epicure Joui∣nian, who as S. Augustine hath recorded, and Saint Ierom did hold that Haeres. 82. ad Quodvult. Lib. 1. cont. Ioui. Virginity of professed persons, men and women was no better then the continencie of the married. So that many professed Virgins beleeuing him did marrie, yet himselfe did not marrie, as Fryer Luther did; not be cause he thought chastitie should be rewarded in the life to come, with a greater crowne of glory; but because it was fit for the present necessity, to auoid the troubles of marriage; see iust the very opinion of M. Per∣kins and our Protestants. But this heresie saith S. Augustine in the same This vvas an∣svvered in the Epistle. Lib. 2. retract. 22. place, was quicklie suppressed and extinguished; it was not able to de∣ceiue any one of the Priests: And in another place thus he speaketh of Iouinian: Holy Church most faithfully and valiantly resisted this monster: So that no maruaile, if that M. Perkins could find smal reliefe in antiqui∣tie for this his assertion, which the best of them esteemed no better than a monstrous sacrilegious heresie. But the Fathers are not for vs. What then? is nothing true, that cannot be confirmed by their testimonie? Then are there very many vntruths in Poperie. Indeed it is one of the blemishes of the ancient writers, that they were too highly conceited of single life. The vse whereof a kinde of necessitie bred at first, by reason of persecution, experience of constant profession confirmed, and opinion of holinesse thereupon at the last perfected: so that it is not to be lookt for, that antiquitie should affoord vs any testimonie against the practise and iudgement of those daies. And yet it is ap∣parant in those places I alleaged before, and diuers other, that neither the Clergie (as you call it) was bound to make any such vow, and that after it was made, it was held a lesse sinne to breake it, than to continue it in vncleannes: which
tained then to vow; but first to vow, and then to looke for strength from God to fit vs for the keeping of our vow, is against all Diuinitie and reason. And therefore the perswa∣sion to vow, vpon presumption of abilitie to performe that which is vowed, shewes (at the least) zeale without know∣ledge; and can be no matter of commendation to the an∣cient Church, if they simply allowed it. Howsoeuer, they were farre better than you, because they enioyned breach of vow, rather than encrease of sinne. But to the further confirmation of this point, let vs heare what the holy Fathers teach touching the possibilitie of this Vow. You labour to disprooue Master Perkins Antecedent, by the testimonie of the ancient writers. To which I answere in generall, that as wee freely acknowledge their authoritie, where there is nothing but mēs authoritie to be waighed; so we account it lighter than nothing, in all cases contrarie to Scripture: such as we can prooue this to be. Tertullian neere the end, expounding these words: He that can take, let him take, Chuse (saith h) that vvhich is good: if thou say thou canst not, it is  Lib. de monog. Matth. 19. because thou vvilt not, for that thou mightest if thou vvouldest, he doth de∣clare vvho hath left both to thy choise. Tertullia. de Monogam. cap. 14. Tertullians testimonie is not worth the answering. Not only because (as I shewed before out of Hilary) his heresie discredited all his writings, but because this is the booke wherein he chiefly maintaines that his heresie, and blasphe∣mie too; accompting Montanus the holy Ghost, and Com∣forter, whom our Sauiour promised to send. Vpon his au∣thoritie doth Tertullian forbid second marriages as vn∣cleane, and brings Math. 19. 22 this place, you alleage, to that purpose. Such conscience make you of citing authorities against the truth. But I answere Tertullian, that our Sauiour hath left it to no mans choise, but to his that hath receiued the gift. Origen vpon the same place, He that vvill take this vvord that is set dovvne of chastitie, let him pray for it, beleeuing m that said, aske and it  Matth. 19. shall be giuen you, and he shall receiue it; which doth plainely confute M. Perkins. Who saith, that although we aske neuer so much, we cannot obtaine this gift. To Tertullian Origen may well be ioyned, a man condem∣ned of heresie, or rather of many heresies, by Ierome, Austin,
Epiphanius, Theophilus, and a whole Councill. Further, it is strange that he should be reported to haue offered such vio∣lence to his owne bodie, if he thought the gift of continen∣cie so easie to be obtained. More especially I say that Origen. in Matth. 19. Tract. 7. Ori∣gen mistakes the matter. For our Sauiour Christ bids not eue∣ry man pray for it that will haue i, but him to take it that can; implying that euery one cannot. The promise is of things needfull, such is not continencie; nor conuenient for all. With Origen agreeth S. Ierome vpon the same place, who saith, It is giuen vnto them vvho haue requested it; vvho haue desired it, and trauay∣led that they might receiue it. Hieronym. in Math. 19. lib. 3 Ieromes authoritie is in it selfe more worth; in this case not much; because hee goes directly against our Sauiours words, who makes it a gift particular to some, and not once mentions any meanes of comming by it, but bids them take it that can. His reason is the same with Origens, and answe∣red before: yet euen there he wils all men to consider their strength, whether they be able to goe thorough with it, or no. The same Song chanteth Gregory Nazianzen which is of three kinds  Orat. 31. of Eunouchs. Nazianzen. in Matth. 19. orat. 36. Nazianzen goeth somwhat further, making it no more but a matter of a mans owne inclination. When thou hearest (saith he) to whom it is giuen, adde, it is giuen to them Valentibus. that are able, and to them who are so carried by the inclination of their minde. As if our Sauiour had said, Take it who will, not who can; as if nothing wanted but resolution. S. Chrysostome saith, it is possible to all them who make choyse of it: and further addeth, that our Sauiour Christ himselfe doth proue it there after this sort: Thinke vvith thy selfe if thou haddest bin by nature an Eu∣nuch, or by the malice of men made one, vvhat vvouldest thou then haue done, vvhen thou shouldest both haue been depriued of that pleasure, and yet not haue had any recompence for thy paine. Therefore thanke God, because thou shalt haue a great revvard, and a glittering Crovvne, if thou liue so as they must doe vvithout any revvard: yet (saith he) thou maiest do it more easilie, safely, and pleasantly, both, because thou art fortifid vvith hope of recompence, and also comforted vvith a vertuous conscience. Chrysost. in Matth. 19. honul. 63. Chrysostoms Rhetorike is better in this place than his Logicke: Our Sauiour exhorts them, that can, to take it; he
saith not, euery man that will may. Those are they which haue made themselues chast, who hauing the gift of conti∣nencie from God, vse it accordingly, and forbe are marriage, that they may with more cheerefulnes, and lesse incum∣brance, serue God: yet is there no shadow of any proofe in this place, that euery one may vow continencie. We will wrappe vp this point with S. Augustine, who directly confu∣teth M. Perkins by many reasons and exampl Lib. 2. De adaerinis con∣ing. cap. 12. Et de bono vid. ap. 0. And vpon the Psalme, an hundreth thirtie seauen, he yeeldeth ano∣ther reason, why God will more really a them, saying. He that exhor∣teth thee to Vo, will helpe thee to fulfill it. All which heauenly Doctrine, because it is spiritually iudged, (as the Apostle speaketh) the Carnall man cannot vnderstand: And therefore M. Perkins being perswaded that few can liue chastly except they marrie, auoucheth that this Vovv, doth bring forth innumerable abhominations in the World: Not the hundreth part, so many as the fleshly Heretikes imagine, and out of fly∣ing and lying tales report and brute abroad: Nay, I dare affirme, that VVhence came that olde pro∣uerbe: Priests and Doues make foule houses? See the Plough∣mans tale in Chavver.  let the authenticall Records of our Realme be well perused, and you shall find more lewde filthie Lecherie, to haue been practised by Mini∣sters and their Wiues this last age, than was in a thousand yeere before, by all the Catholike Priests and Religious persons of the Land. There is not a word of this place, either Aug. de a∣ulter. coniug. cap. 12. in that twelfth Chapter, or in any part of that booke: how then doth Saint Austin directly confute Master Perkins by many reasons and examples? The question propounded by Pollentius, and there handled by Austin is, whether the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. forbid her to marrie, who is departed from her husband, though not because of fornication. In Aug. de bo∣no viduit. c. 20 the other place Austin shewes no more but this, that it is possible to refraine from fornication and adulterie: which it neuer came into our minde to denie. But this is not enough to chastitie and continencie. If the ancient Fathers hereto fore, and you now, count al them chast, that defile not their bodies with outward vncleannes of that kinde, mon∣strous filthinesse may bee chastitie. But admit (which wee grant may be, and like enough hath been in many carnall men, yea is perhaps at this day in some Turkes and other Heathen) that the outward act should be vtterly for borne; yet may they, that so forbeare, burne in continuall lust, and
liue in the breach of Gods Commandements. What doth this discourse of Austins then concerne that which Master Perkins affirmes, when he is readie to grant as much as Au∣stin saith, and yet holds his former conclusion, that chastitie and continencie are vertues of Gods speciall gift, and not matters to be attained to by euery one that wil vow to con∣tinue vnmarried, in hope to prooue able to keepe his vow? August. in Psalm. 137. This third place is like the first, alleaged by you, with∣out any ground at all. For there is no such speech in that Commentarie, nor any occasion of it in the Psalme. The likeliest place for it, in his exposition of the Psalmes, is vpon the Psalm. 75. 75. Psalme, where hee discourses of the vow of conti∣nencie at large. But there it is not; so that it is not to be ta∣ken for Austins, till you bring better proofe that it is his. If I would answere at aduenture, I could say, that God exhorts none to this vow, but them on whom he hath bestowed the gift, and they haue his helpe to fulfill that they haue vowed. We enuie not this your speciall iudgement, nor respect your slanderous challenge: onely this I answere, that if all the Ministers and their wiues, had been as lewd, as your malice can imagine, they could not haue come neere the thousand part of that filthines, which your Bishops, Priests, Friers and Nunnes committed in this land, by record of po∣pish histories. Yea let iust triall be made, and we will aduen∣ture our liues, that time for time, there haue been, since the renewing of the Gospell, more and more beastly vncleane persons, among your Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monkes, Friers, and Nunnes, in that one Citie of Rome, than among al the Ministers, and their wiues, in this whole realme of England. Yet here marke in what manner we doe it. First of all, though wee mislike the vowe; yet wee like and commend single life. Marriage indeed is better in two respects: first, because God hath ordained it to bee a remedie of continencie to all such persons as cannot containe: secondly, because it is the semina∣rie
both of Church and Common-wealth; and it bringeth forth a seede of God for the inlarging of his kingdome. Yet single life in them that haue the gift of continencie, is in some respects to bee preferred. First, because it brings libertie in persequution. Thus Paul saith, 1. Cor. 7. 26. I suppose it to be good for the pre∣sent necessitie for a man so to bee. Secondly, because it frees men from the common cares, molestations, and distractions that bee in the familie, vers. 2. 28. Such shall haue trouble in the flesh, but I spare you. Third∣ly, because single parties doe commonly with more bodilie ease and libertie worship God: it beeing still presupposed, that they haue the gift of continencie. vers. 34. The vnmarried woman careth for the things of of the Lord, that shee may be holy both in bodie and spirit. Againe, though wee mislike the vowe, yet wee hold and teach, that men or women being assured that they haue the gift of continencie, may con∣stantly resolue and purpose with themselues to liue and lead a single life. 1. Cor. 7. 38. Hee that standeth firme in his owne heart that hee hath no neede, but hath power of his owne will, and hath so decreed in his heart that he will keepe his virginitie, he doth well. And wee imbrace the saying of Theodoret on 1. Tim. cap. 4. for he doth not (saith he) blame single life, or continencie, but he accuseth them that by law enacted compel men to follow these. And men made themselues chast for the kingdome of heauen, Matth. 19. 12. not by vowe, but by a purpose of heart, which is farre lesse then a vow, and may be changed vpon occasion, where as a vow cannot, vnlesse it doe euidently appeare to bee vn∣lawfull.
Thirdly, for such persons as are able to containe, to liue single for the endes before named, indeede we hold it to bee no counsell of perfection; yet doe wee not denie it to bee a counsell of expedience, o outward ease: according to that which Paul saith, vers. 25. I giue mine aduise,—and, 35. I speake this for your commoditie not to intangle you in a snare. Lastly, we thinke that if any hauing the gift of con∣tinencie, doe make a vow to liue single, and yet after∣ward marrie (the said gift remaining) they haue sin∣ned. Yet not because they are married, but because their vowe is broken. And thus said Augustine of widowes that married after their vow. lib. de bono vi∣duit, c. 9. This may serue for a reproofe of all that M. Perkins obiecteth against the Vovv of chastitie: aftervvard, the man vvould somewhat reason the matter by shevving hovv he condemneth not chastitie: yet saith, that Marriage is better than it, in two respects. If Iouinian was reputed by the learnedst and holiest Fathers (a Christian Epicure and a Monster) be∣cause he durst make marriage equall vvith Virginitie: What shall this A good shift, when you know not hovv to an∣svvere. man be who saith it is better? His reasons are so childish, that by the like you may proue, durt to be better then gold: vvherefore I vvill not stand vpon them. He neuerthelesse aftervvard concludeth, that one may purpose con∣stantly vvith himselfe to lead a single life, but so as he may change vpon occasion, and this to be a counsell of expedience, but not of perfection. Lastly, that if any hauing the gift of continencie, do Vovv, and atfer∣vvard marie (the gift remaining) they haue sinned, vvhich is flat against his ovvne second rule, vvhich prohibits vs to leese our libertie, and to make any thing vnlavvfull in conscience, vvhich Christian Religion lea∣ueth at libertie. Novv to supplie M. Perkins his default, vvho vvas accustomed to re∣hearse, although many times vntowardly, yet lightlie alvvaies some rea∣sons for the Catholike partie; vvhich in this question he hath vvholie omitted. He that will but reade what Master Perkins writes, and what you answere, shall see a true image of popish dealing, whereby you slubber ouer the matter, to which you know not what to say. Is it a wrong to single life, or virginitie, to
hold that marriage in some respect is better then it? I will go further then Master Perkins hath done, and not doubt to affirme, that it is simply better then virginitie: my reason is, that it belongs to the perfection of humaine nature, that there should be continuance and multiplying of the kind by propagation: beside, God appointed it as an especiall blessing for Adam, when he was in Gods especiall fauour But if that estate be worse then the single life, in which he liued before, God did not blesse, but punish him rather by that change: therefore marriage simply is better. But that virginitie might haue his due, Master Perkins sets downe presently after, three respects, wherein it is to be preserred before marriage, all which you do not once name. Those Christian Fathers dealt vnchristianly with Ioui∣nian, who ascribed as much to virginitie as our Sauiour Christ, or his Apostles gaue to it in any place of Scripture, according to that conclusion of Theodoret. Decret. diuin. de virginit. Theodoret, who ends his discourse of virginitie with these words, Such things we haue receiued, being appointed and decreed by men endued with the knowledge of heauenly things, which are such, as do not accuse marriage, but exhort vs to a life void of cares. This Iouinian acknowledged, and worthily denied all difference of merit betwixt a married and single life, which no enemy of Ioui∣nian can disproue, no more can you Master Perkins reasons, though you disgrace them all you can. I vvill briefelie proue by an argument or tvvo, that it is both lavvfull and verie commendable for men and vvomen of ripe yeeres, and con∣sideration  VVho denieth this? hauing vvell tried their ovvne aptnesse to Vovv virginitie; if by good inspirations, they be thereunto invvardly called. My first reason is this, that vvhich is more pleasant and gratefull vnto God, may verie vvell be Vovved to him, but Virginitie is more acceptable to God then marriage. The first proposition is manifest, and hath no other exception against it, but that vvhich before is confuted, to vvit, if vve be able to per∣forme it. The second is denied by them, vvhich vve proue in expresse tearmes out of S. Paul. He that ioyneth his Virgin doth vvell, but he that ioyneth her not, doth better: and againe of Widdowes: They shall be more 1. Cor. 7. Esai. 56. happie by S. Pauls iudgement, if they remaine vnmarried: This may be confirmed our of Esay, Where God promiseth the Eunuch that holdeth great∣lie of the thing that pleaseth him, that he vvill giue him in his houshold, and vvithin his vvalles a better heritage and name, than if they had bin called
sonnes and daughters. I vvill (saith God) giue them an euerlasting name. And also, out of the booke of Wisdome, Blessed is the Eunuch which hath Cap. 3. vvrought no vnrighteousnesse, &c. For vnto him shall be giuen the speciall gift of faith, and the most acceptable portion in our Lords Temple: for glori∣ous is the fruit of God: Which is also plainlie taught in the Reuelations, Where it is said, that no man could sing that song but 14400. and the cause Reuelat. 14. is set dovvne, These be they vvhich haue not been defiled vvith vvomen, for they are Virgins. To these latter places, M. Perkins anivvereth page 24. that to the Eunuch is promised a greater revvard; but, not because of his chastity, but because he keepeth the Lords Sabbath and couenant. but this is said vnaduisedly; for to all others that keepe Gods comman∣ments; shall be giuen a heauenly revvard: but vvhy shall they haue a better heritage, and more acceptable portion than others, but because of their speciall prerogatiue of chastity? What needs that be prooued which wee graunt? it is questionles lawfull for such as being free, find themselues fitted by God to single life, to resolue vpon the continu∣ance of it as long as they shall be in that case. But I doubt your reasons are scarce good. The first hath a suspitious as∣sumption, because it implies that single life of it selfe should please God better then marriage, which Theodoret. Decret. diuin. de virginit. & ad 1. Cor. 7. I haue shewed to be false. To your proofe I answere, that the happines the Apostle speakes of is that which Theodoret. vbi supra. Theodoret names, viz. being without care, and hauing more free liberty to serue God, as he prooues out of the Apostle himselfe, who shew∣eth by his whole discourse, that he prefers that single life before the married, only in regard of the present times, and opportunitie of seruing God generally. This 1. Cor. 7. 26. Vers. 28. Vers. 32. 33. (saith he) is good for the present necessitie, vers. 26. such shall haue trouble in the flesh. I would haue you without care. The vnmarried ca∣reth for the things of the Lord. That of Esai. 56. 4. 5. Esay prooues no∣thing to the purpose, for the Prophet speakes not of them that had made any vow of continencie, but of such as were made Eunuches by men against their wils, to whom he makes promise, not for their continencie, which was no way voluntary, but for their keeping of his Sabbaths, and choo∣sing the thing that pleaseth him, and taking hold of his co∣uenant. The Eunuch, and the Gentile (saith Lyra ad Esai. 56. Lyra) comming to faith, shall obtaine as much grace and glory (other things alike
Now these young Widdows, if the Protestants doctrine were true, not hauing the gift of continencie, did very well to marrie, and were in no sort bound to keepe their Vowes, which vvas not in their povver: But the Apostle doth not acquit them of their Vow, but teacheth that they were bound to keepe it; in that he pronounceth damnation to them if they marry. It must be prooued that there was such a vow made to Christ, before it can be truly affirmed that the 1. Tim. 5. 12. Apostle speakes of it in this place. The first faith, or vow of a Chri∣stian to God, is that generall promisse of obedience in Bap∣tisme, or the vndertaking of the profession of Christianitie, as it appeareth by Hieron. in prooem. in epist. ad Tit. Ierome speaking of Marcion and Basili∣des, two infamous hereticks, they are not worthie of credit (saith Ierome) they haue forsaken their first faith. But if you will needs referre this to the matter there particularly in question, the fault is, not leauing to be a widow, but forsa∣king the calling in the Church, which they had of their own will vndertaken. This necessarily ensued vpon their mar∣riage, because only widowes had that office of looking to the poore and diseased. It is farther to be obserued, that the Apostle seemes to lay the fault vpon their wilfull wanton∣nes, and not to graunt that there was any necessitie of vsing marriage for a remedie: when such a case falls out, it is the iudgement of the auntient writers, that it is better to marry, then to continue in vncleanes. Wee must (saith Ad Demetri∣adem virgi∣nem. Ierome) plainely charge vowed virgins, whose behauiour defames, and shames the holy purpose of virgins, and the glory of the heauenly and angelicall family, that either they marry if they cannot con∣teine, or conteine, if they will not marry. They marry not (saith De sancta vir∣ginit cap. 34. Austin) because they cannot without rebuke, yet better were it for them to marry, then to burne. It may happen (saith 2a. 2ae. q 88. art. 10. Tho∣mas) that in some case a vow may be either vtterly ill, or vnpro∣fitable, or an hinderance vnto some other good thing of greater waight. And therefore it must of necessitie be determined, that in such a case a vow ought not to be kept. An adulterers case (saith Lib. 4. epist. 2 Cyprian) is worse then his that hath betrayed the faith. And Ambrose, when he had said that a vowed virgin, if she haue a mind to marry, committeth adultery, and is made the
handmaid of death; yet addes afterwards, that she is twice an adulteresse, which is defiled with secret and priuie filthines, fai∣ning her selfe to be that which indeed she is not. Thirdly, the example of our heauenly Sauiour, who would neuer mar∣rie:  Aug. cap. 44. de virg. Bed. 1. Luc. Cle. Alex. lib 3 strom. lib. 1. cont. louin. In apol. 2. ad Aut. Tertul. ap. 2. cap. 9. and of the blessed Virgin S. Mary, vvho Vovved perpetuall Virgini∣tie. And of the glorious Apostles, as who S. rome vvitnesseth, vvere in part Virgins; and all after their follovving of Christ, abstained from the company of their Wiues. And of the best Christians in the purest anti∣quitie, vvho as Iustinas, one of the auncientest Greeke Authors among Christians: And Tertullian his peere among the Latins, doe testifie, did liue perpetuall Virgins. Out of these examples, vve frame this Argument. Our Captaines and ring-leaders, vvho knew well which vvas the best vvay; and whose examples vve are to follovv as neere as vve can, Vovv∣ing Virginity: vve must needs esteeme that state for more perfect, speci∣allie, vvhen as the single man careth only hovv to please God, that to be holy in bodie and mind (as the Apostle writs) vvhen as the married are choked vvith cares of this vvorld. And vnlesse a man had made a league vvith hell, or vvere as blind as a Beetle, hovv can he euer persvvade him∣selfe, that to vvallovv in fleshly pleasure and satisfying of the beastly ap∣perites, is as gratefull to God, as to conquere and subdue them by Fa∣sting and Prayer. Our captaines and ringleaders say you vowed virginitie, therefore we must needs thinke the state of virginitie more perfect then that of marriage. First I denie your antecedent, neither our Sauiour, nor his mother, nor his Apostles vowed virginitie; prooue it of any of them if you can. Indeede our Sauiour was neuer married, and all men may easily see it was no way fit he should be. His mother was, and therefore questionles neuer made any such vow of single life, though we beleeue that (as it was very fit it should be) she conti∣nued a virgin till her death. That some of the Apostles had wiues, it is apparant by scripture; that they kept them after their office vndertaken, it is more then likely, by 1. Cor. 9. 5. Vxorem saith Vatablus, as indeed the or∣der of the ords requires. the like warrant of scripture, whatsoeuer some haue thought, with∣out any sufficient ground of reason or authoritie to the con∣trarie. Peter and Philip (saith Stromat. lib. 3. pag. 97. Clement of Alexandria) had children; Philip also bestowed his daughters in marriage; and Paul Non veretur suam appella∣re coniugem. is not afraid in a certaine Epistle of his to mention his wife, whom he did not leade about with him, because he Non mano ei opus esset ministerio. had no
neede of any great seruice. Your consequence also is very weake. They were virgins, therefore it was a state of greater perfection. It was more fit for those times, and their occa∣sions; yea we graunt it is a freer kind of life for Gods ser∣uice, and therefore they that can liue so, do well to vse that their libertie: but this prooues not, that single life is simply better then marriage. That which you adde, of wallowing in filthie pleasure, and satisfying of the beastly appetites, bewraies the beastlie opinion you haue of marriage, and shewes, that you would be filthy, though you were married: what you are now as I know not, so I will not iudge. But this I will say, that few or no married men liue so vnchastlie and ab∣hominablie, as See D Dow∣name of Anti∣christ, lib. 1. c. 6 §. 4. 5. 6.  1. Cor. 7. many of your vowed virgins haue done, by record of your owne stories. Finally, if S. Paul giue counsell to the married, to conteine during the time of Prayer, Priests and religious (that must alvvaies be in a readines to minister the Sacraments, and to thinke vpon such things as belong vnto our Lord) are therefore vpon a great consideration bound to per∣petuall chastitie. The Apostle giueth no such counsaile, but forbids the married the restraining of each others companie, except it be for a time, that they may giue themselues to fasting and prayer. The reason is, that at such speciall times, speciall hu∣miliation is requisite, to which the forbearing all kind of lawfull pleasure is a principall furtherance; otherwise, the moderate vse of marriage is no hinderance to any dutie ei∣ther of Christianitie, or the Ministrie, but a speciall meanes to preserue necessarie Chastitie. We vvill close vp this point vvith some sentences taken out of the auncient Fathers, in praise of Virginity, vvhich Master Perkins in all this question vouchsafeth scarce once to name, as though Virgins and Virgi∣nitie vvere no English vvords, or not as plaine as continencie. Wee acknowledge that virginitie, where it is pure, as it ought to be, is worthie of very singular commendation: but it consists not onely in abstaining from the outward act of marriage. Master Perkins did very well approue both of the thing and the word: but because it was not general enough for this question, as not reaching to all that were single, he
rather chose to vse the word continencie, being of larger ex∣tent. S. Cyprian, De habitu Virginum: Intitleth Virgins to be the most no∣ble and glorious person of Christs flocke: and addeth, that they shall re∣ceiue of God the highest revvard and greatest recompence. Saint Chrysostome saith, Virginitie to be the top of perfection, and the Lib. 3. cont. vitup. vit. ne∣ces. highest typ of vertue. And Athanasius, De Virginitate; in the end bursteth out into these vvords: O Virginitie, a treasure that vvasteth not, a garland that wy∣thereth not; the Temple of God, the Palace of the Holy Ghost, a preti∣ous stone, whose price is vnknown to the vulgar, the ioy of the Prophets, the glory of the Apostles, the life of Angels, the Crovvne of Saints. S. Ambrose Lib. 1. de Virginibus paulo post init. Virginity is a princi∣pall vertue, and not therefore commendable that it is found in Martyrs, but because it maketh Martyrs: Who can with humane vvit compre∣hend it vvhich nature doth not hold vvithin her lavves, it hath fetched out of Heauen that it might imitate on Earth: neither vnsitly hath it sought a manner of life in heauen, vvhich hath found a spouse for her in heauen. This surmounting the clouds, the starres and Angels hath found the vvord of God in the bosome of his Father; &c. See vvho list to reade more to this purpose the rest of the Fathers in their vvorkes of Virgini∣tie; of vvhich most of them haue vvritten. And S. Ierome, who is behind none of the rest, in his bookes against Iouinian and Heluidius, all vvhich doe most diligently exhort to Vovv Virginitie; do teach hovv to keepe it, and most vehemently inueigh against all them that do breake it. And if any be so mad as to credit rather our fleshly ministers, than all that ho∣norable and holy senate of the auncient Fathers, he deserueth to liue and die in perpetuall darknesse. In this matter I haue stayed some-vvhat longer, because our carnall He calleth the estate of mari∣age, lshly and beasily libertie.  teachers, vvith the levvde example of their dissolute Disciples, haue cor∣rupted ourage vvith fleshly and beastly libertie: In the other points, I vvil recompence it with breuitie. These hyperbolicall commendations of virginitie shew the opinion of some ancient writers concerning it, but prooue nothing. We disswade no man from continuing a single life, so hee bee able to ouercome that burning, which the Apostle condemnes: yea rather wee exhort them, that haue the gift, to vse it. But we denie, either that all haue it, or that they which haue it doe please God any more by the vse of it, that they that haue it not; but as they employ it to the better, and more free seruing of God.
The second, is the vow of pouertie and Monasti∣call life, in which men bestow all they haue on the poore: and giue themselues wholy and onely to prayer and fasting. This vowe is against the will of God. Act. 20. 35. It is a more blessed thing to giue then to receiue. Pro. 28. 7. Giue me neither riches nor pouerty. Deut. 28. 22. Pouertie is numbred among the curses of the law: none whereof are to be vowed. And it is the rule of the holy Ghost, 2. Thess. 3. 10. He that will not labour, namely, in some speciall and warrantable calling, must not eate. And vers. 12. I exhort that they worke with quietnes and eate their owne bread. Now when as men liue apart from others, giuing them∣selues onely to prayer and fasting, they liue in no cal∣ling. And it is against the generall vowe made in Baptisme, because it freeth men from sundrie duties of the morall law, and changeth the proper ende of mans life. For euery man must haue two callings. The first is a general calling of a Christiā, by vertue of which he performeth worship vnto God, and duties of loue to men. The second is a particular calling, wherein according to his gift, he must doe seruice to men in some function, pertaining either to the Church or Common-wealth, whereof he is a mem∣ber. And the first of these twaine must be performed in the second: and the second in and with the first. The end of mans life is, not onely to serue God by the duties of the first table, but by seruing of man in the duties of the second table to serue God. And therefore the loue of our neighbour is called the ful∣filling of the whole law. Rom. 13. 10. because the law of God is practised not apart; but in and with the loue
of our neighbour. This beeing so, it is manifest that vowed pouertie in Monkish life makes many vnpro∣fitable members both of Church and Common∣wealth. Concerning the Vovv of pouertie and monasticall life, in vvhich, as M. Perkins acknovvledgeth, men bestovv all they haue vpon the poore, and giue themselues to Prayer and Fasting: yet he is not ashamed to a∣uouch that this Vow is against the vvill of God, and assaieth to proue it: Act. cap. 20. vers. 35. It is a more blessed thing to giue, than to receiue. Ans. As the verie proposition (that it is displeasing to God to cut off all cares of the vvorld, and to betake our selues vvholy to his holy ser∣uice and contemplation of heauenly matters) is in it selfe profane and vngodly, so the proofe thereof is deuoid of naturall wit and sense. Marke the Argument: It is against Gods vvill to giue avvay all, because it is more blessed to giue, than to receiue: Why, if it be a more blessed thing to giue, then they please God better that giue. So that this his proofe, improues flatly his ovvne assertion: But the dreamer meanes perhaps, that if you giue all at once, you shall not be able to giue aftervvard, but rather stand in need to receiue. Reply. But no such humane prudence can be dravven out of that sen∣tence, vvhich encourageth rather to giue for the present, then to prouide for hereafter. The true meaning of the place, is to exhort Christians to labour and trauaile, at vacanttimes to get their ovvne liuing, and to prouide some thing also to bestovv vpon them vvho stand in need rathēr then to be idle, and to stand in need of almes, as S. Paul himselfe did: vvhich they did best performe, vvho had sold all they had and distributed it to the poore, as the example of Paul himselfe, and the first Christians doth suf∣ficiently declare, vvho sold all, and laid the price at the Apostles feete. Act. 4. The proposition is true, that it is displeasing to God for a man to seuer himselfe from all cares of the world, to serue him in contemplation, without respect of any dutie to his brethren. For the cares of the world are part of euery mans lot in this life, and the Phil. 1. 23, 24. 25. good of our brethren is to be prefer∣red for a time, before our owne happinesse in heauen: nei∣ther is any seruice of praying and fasting continually, so much to Gods glorie, as a Christian carriage in some lawfull calling. The argument is good: For he that giues away that vpon which he should liue, as your Votaries doe, brings himselfe into a lesse blessed estate, to liue on other mens almes, than
spirit. The like is to be said of hungring and thirsting, being full and satisfied, which followeth in the same place. Thus M. Perkins his texts of Scripture against pouerty failing him, he fetcheth about another vvay, saying, that it is a rule of the holy Ghost: He that vvill not labour (namely, in some speciall and vvarrantable cal∣ling) must not eate. Thes. 2. Ans. I allow both the text and the glosse, and finde nothing there a∣gainst religious persons, whose calling is speciall perfect, and therefore best warrantable; not so (saith he) because they giue themselues to pray∣er and fasting: What a profane stupiditie is this? Is not a life giuen to praier and fasting agreeable to the wil of God, and Laws of his Church? albeit many religious men doe ouer and besides very great seruices to Gods Church, in preaching, teaching, & writing of most learned books. But suppose they did nothing else but fast and pray, did they not verie well deserue their sustenance? yes much better than they which trauaile To fast and pray, is the ge∣nerall dutie of all Christians. all the yeere about the prouiding of it: For in vaine do men labour, if God blesse not their worke, with seasonable weather, which he doth ra∣ther at the prayer and instance of such good innocent soules, that are to be fed with it, than for the Plough-mans owne labours sake. And if by their Fasting, Watching, and such like afflictions of their bodies, they do partly satisfie for our superfluous pampering of the flesh, and teach vs by their good example to bridle and correct it: doe they not deserue at our hands bodily sustenance? And who better performes all duties of the second Table than they, being most obedient to all their Superiours, and not hurting their neighbour in life, persons, or any manner of their goods? And so in their seuerall callings offend no honest men, and doe much good both vnto the Church and common-wealth. It is no lawfull calling, nor agreeable to the will of God, that any man should liue in the Church without any charge, or meanes to profit the Church by. Fasting and praying are both lawfull and acceptable; but they are generall duties of all Christians, and may not therefore be made proper callings of certaine men. For callings differ, as other things, by their speciall forme; but their praying and fasting is di∣uers from the same exercise practised by other Christians, onely in quantitie more or lesse. The seruices these men doe beside, are meerely voluntarie, and not lying vpon them by any dutie of their calling: which is onely I know not what stinted deuotion, after the lawes of each seuerall order of Monkes, Friers, Nunnes, and such like. They no way deserue their sustenance, since they haue
vowed to take no course whereby they may prouide for it. Their prayers do no good, no not so much as to themselues, being made with a proud opinion, to merit, by a conceited perfection. A poore husbandman, that labours all the week for his liuing, and vseth the best meanes he can to grow in knowledge and obedience to God, may looke for a greater blessing from God, vpon his bodily and spirituall labours, by his owne poore prayers, and the supplications of the Congregation in which he liueth, than by all the fasting and praying of the holiest Couent, Abbey, or Nunnerie in the countrie. As for their satisfactions, they are like a broken reede, which will not onely faile him that trusts to it, but hurt him also. I haue shewed, that we neede no other satisfaction, be∣ing deliuered by our Sauiour Christs sufferings: and there are few or none, except perhaps the begging Friers, that had not more neede to satisfie for their owne idlenesse and gluttonie, than ordinarily any other kinde of men whatsoe∣uer; if wee may beleeue either the reports of trauellers, or the records of your owne histories. Can they be said to be obedient to their Superiours, that in the very making of their vow oftentimes, wilfully diso∣bey their fathers and mothers? Or may they be thought to hurt none, who liue idle vpon the sweate of other mens browes? and are onely a charge to the state, whereof they are vnprofitable members? But not to hurt, is a kindnes per∣haps, to be commended in theeues: what due praise it can haue in a state of perfection, for my part I cannot see. Which I speake vpon supposition, that they are not so hurtfull to men and women, as it is commonly thought. And though we mislike this vow also, yet we doe it, holding these conclusions. First, that a man may forsake all his goodes vpon speciall calling, as the A∣postles did, when they were sent to preach the Gos∣pell through the whole world. Secondly, goodes may bee forsaken, yea wife, children, parents, bre∣thren,
and all, in the case of confession, that is, when a man for the religion of Christ is persecuted and con∣strained to forsake all he hath. For then the second table giues place to the duties of the first. Mark. 10. 29. II. That, for the time of persecution, men may withdraw themselues (iust occasion offered) and goe apart to wildernesses or like places, Hebr. 11. 37. yet for the time of peace I see no cause of solitarie life. If it bee alleadged, that men goe apart for contemplati∣on and spirituall exercises, I say againe that Gods grace may as wel be exercised in the familie as in the cloister. The familie is indeede as it were a schoole of God, in which they that haue but a sparke of grace may learne and exercise many vertues, the acknow∣ledgement of God, inuocation, the feare of God, loue, bountifulnes, patience, meekenesse, faithfulnes, &c. Nay here bee more occasions of doing or taking good, then be or can be in a cloister. III. That, wee condemne not the old and ancient Monks, though we like not euery thing in them. For they liued not like idle bellies, but in the sweate of their owne browes, as they ought to Zozom. lib. 1. cap 13. Epiph. bar. 78. August. de Mon. Eccl. li. 2. c. 31. & de ope∣re Monach. cap. 17. doe: and many of them were married: and in their meat, drinke, apparrell, rule, vow, and whole course of life, differed from the Monks of this time, euen as heauen from earth. After all this wast-wind, M. Perkins confesseth, that a man may vpon a speciall calling, sll all his goods, as the Apostles did. What then (good Sir) shal become of your former arguments? May one then Vow a curse of the Law, and leaue off prayer for neither pouertie nor riches, and say that it is not a blesseder thing to giue, then to receiue? All these arguments which were whilom of great force, must now be nothing worth: because it pleaseth M. Perkins, the wind now sits in an other corner, such weather-cockes surely are to be much respected. Master Perkins speakes not a word of selling all a man hath, but of forsaking it, when hee hath some calling from
God, which requireth such a course for the following of it, as will not affoord a man leisure to looke to his worldly af∣faires. But this is no wilfull casting away the care of our e∣state, but preferring the duties especially laid on vs by God, before our owne businesse. Neither is it any vowing of po∣uertie, with a fond conceit of perfection, but a faithfull la∣bouring in our necessarie calling, with neglect of the world, in comparison of our dutie. In such a case a man must relie on Gods prouidence, and vse the best meanes he can to pro∣uide for himselfe, that he may not be chargeable to other, but helpfull rather: not renouncing all propriety in world∣ly things, but carefully sauing, and thriftily spending that, which it pleaseth God to send by any good meanes what∣soeuer. This ouerthrowes no peece of any argument Master Perkins brought before. He faith further; in time of persecution, a man may also leaue all: he should rather haue said, he must leaue all, or else loose all; for the perse∣cutor will not spare him. Lastly, he doth not condemne old auncient Monks, who liued by the sweat of their browes, and were married, many of them, as he saith, but his authors cited, saith not so, neither shall he be able to cite one auncient allowed and approued writer, who saith that the auncient Monkes liued with their wiues, if perhaps they had been married before. But no maruaile if fleshly Ministers thinke it no life without their fleshly mates. As for labouring at vacant times, it was al∣waies, and is to this day in practise among many religions. If other do in good studies, writing or teaching, imploy that time of labour, no doubt but they do farre better. He may and must leaue all, if need be. It was sufficient for Master Perkins purpose, to shew that our goods, in some cases, might bee forsaken, though pouertie might not bee drawne vpon vs, by any proud vow of supposed perfe∣ction. He doth not condemne those Monkes, though he thinks many things they vsed not warrantable. The report was (as Lib. 1. cap. 14. Zozomen saith) that Ammon the Monk of Egypt, by the im∣portunitie of his friends, married a wife, though hee neuer companied with her. Which how he might with good con∣science refuse, being married, let them iudge that reade what the 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4.  Apostle writes of this matter; yet (as they say)
he liued with her eighteene yeeres in that course, before she was brought into the liking of a Monkish life. But belike it was lawfull then for them to marrie, and no man can excuse this Ammon of great sinne, that would aduenture to marrie one, of whose continencie and willingnes to conteine, hee could haue no knowledge before marriage. Other Monkes that were married ere they became Monkes, could not vow without consent of their wiues. If labouring at vacant times be in practise among many religions (as indeed there is a multitude of religions among you Papists) it is but a worke of supererogation aboue their calling; for their profession is idlenesse. But that this will not serue the turne, De oper. monach. c. 17. Austin sheweth directly, enioyning it as a matter of necessitie. In defence of the Catholike party, M. Perkins hath not a word, wher∣fore I will briefly supplie his want and proue it to be very gratefull to God to sell all, and giue it to the poore. I omit the example of our blessed Sauiour, (who would not haue any poore cottage of his own, so much as to rest his head in, but would wholy liue of almes) and come vnto his heauenly doctrine. He teacheth a yong man whom he loued, in flat words, That if he would be perfect, he should Matth. 19. go and sell all he had, and giue it to the poore, and come and follow him, and then should haue a treasure in heauen. These words are so expresse and e∣uident, that there can be but one way to shift from them, which M. Per∣kins fleth vnto pag, 244. to wit, that these words were only meant vnto that young man, and not to be applied vnto any others, no more than those words to Abraham of sacrificing his sonne Isaac. But this seely shift of our poore Protestants is confuted, manifestly in the same Chapter of S. Matthew, where a little after S. Peter saith. Lord, behold we haue left all things, and haue followed thee, what reward shall we therefore haue: We haue done (as S. Ierome expoundeth it, and the very sequele of the text doth plainly require) that which thou commandest in the words before, to that yong man. What answere made our Sauiour? That his comman∣dement was only meant vnto that young man, and that they had done foolishly in so doing? nothing lesse, but promiseth that they shall there∣fore sit with him in twelue seats, iudging the twelue tribes of Israel. And that whosoeuer would forsake Father, Mother, Lands, Goods, &c. for his sake, should receiue an hundreth fold, and possesse life euerlasting. Can any thing be more plaine out of the word of God it selfe, than that, not this or that man, but whosoeuer shall forsake all for Christ, doth verie blessedly? If this be the best supplie that can be made, who can iust∣ly
blame Master Perkins for saying nothing in defence of your Popish partie? For if all you offer to prooue were granted you, all were nothing to the purpose. Say it bee gratefull to God to sell all and giue it to the poore: doth it follow hereupon, that therefore it is lawfull to vow wilfull pouertie, as a state of perfection? I trow not. But that is the question betwixt vs. You might haue done well to omit it indeede, being so little to the matter. For what kinde of conclusion call you this? Our Sauiour would not haue any poore cottage of his owne: Therefore pouertie may be vowed as a state of per∣fection: or therefore it is greater perfection to haue no house, than to haue one. Our Sauiour being to trauell from place to place, both for the preaching of the Gospell, and his owne safetie, thought it not conuenient to haue any cer∣taine dwelling place: yet your Monkes, Friers and Nunnes haue, and those the pleasantest and richest for the soile and ayre, that can be found in the whole countries where they are. But what did our Sauiour sell, that he might thereby fall into wilfull pouertie? His example helps you not: let vs see his doctrine, he tea∣cheth a yong man, you say, whom he loued, that if he would be perfect, he should sell all he had and giue it to the poore, and follow him, and then he should haue treasure in heauen. First for our Sauiours louing him, which yet Matth. 19. 21 Matthew records not, but Marc. 10. 21. Marke, who leaues out that clause of being perfect, it is more then plaine, that this cannot be vnderstood of any speciall loue. For neither did the man beleeue in him, as the Messiah, and he was falsely conceited of his owne righte∣ousnes, than which nothing is a greater hinderance to sal∣uation, and therefore nothing lesse beloued by our Sauiour Christ. This loue therefore signifies not an approbation of his vaine brag, or a desire of making him perfit, but either a pittying of his conceit, or some kind gesture vsed towards him: which later signification especially both the See nius on Marc. 10. 21. Greeke and Syriake words will well admit. Secondly I answere, that our Sauiour doth not intend to shew him how he may
be perfect, but by vrging him to sell that he had, meanes to discouer his want of loue to God, and his neighbour. That he meant not to perswade him to any perfection, it is eui∣dent. First, because no man, without true faith, which this Iusticiary wanted, can come any thing neere to perfection. Secondly, for that a man may 1. Cor. 13, 2. sell all that he hath, &c. and yet not be perfect. For single life, in your account, is a matter of no small perfection. But our Sauiour would make his va∣nitie in the opinion of his owne righteousnes, apparant to him and other, as it fell out indeed. For refusing to obey him in that matter, he bewrayed his couetousnes, which he preferd before following our Sauiour, whom he acknow∣ledged to be a worthie teacher, and before the loue of his brethren. Lastly I say, the chiefe point of perfection here mentioned is not selling of our goods, but following of Christ, which is a dutie Luc. 9. 23. belonging to all Christians, so that without it no man is a Christian. In the following of Christ by the works of charity (saith your Lyra ad Matth. 19. 21. glosse) perfection consists principally in wilfull pouertie, but as in the beginning, by way of renouncing that which hinders, and disposing of vs, because by it the care of temporall things is taken away, which hinders the soule from the loue of God, and the soule is fitted to free contem∣plation of God. To sell all and giue to the poore sufficeth not to per∣fection (saith Libr. 3. ad Matth. 19. Ierome) vnlesse after the despising of riches we follow Christ, that is, leauing euill do good. And after, Many leaue riches, but not follow our Lord. He followes our Lord who doth imitate him, and treads in his steps. And againe after∣ward, Because it sufficeth not to leaue, he addes that which is per∣fect, and haue followed me. So that this is no state of perfe∣ction, but rather a remedie against our being drawen away from following Christ, which was as necessary to saluation both before and vnder the law, as it is now in this light of the Gospell: and if without wilfull pouerty it cannot be done, doubtles neither those worthies of the former ages, Abraham, Moses, Dauid, &c. could follow Christ in duties of charitie, and we not only may, but must sell all we haue, that we may follow him.
It was spoken and intended only to that yong man; nei∣ther doth Peter say that the Apostles had sold all, and giuen it to the poore, which is no where recorded of them in the scriptures, but that they had forsaken all and followed him, that is, had left their ordinarie callings (by which in like∣lyhood they might haue thriuen) to attend vpō our Sauiour, and to be employed in his seruice. And to the following of Christ either only or specially doth that of Ierome belong. Peter speakes confidently (saith Libr. 3. ad Matth. 19. Ierome) we haue left all. And because it is not sufficient only to leaue, he addes that, which is perfect, And haue followed thee, we haue done that Quod iussi∣sti. Mat. 4. 19. 22. thou com∣maundest, that is, we haue giuen ouer the hope of our in∣crease in worldly riches rather then we would not serue thee. But by the way let me put you in mind, if you will needs haue that speech of Ieromes belong to wilful pouerty, you must needs make it a commandement by your owne interpretation. It is not only a counsaile but a commandement, that e∣uery man should forsake his goods rather then his profes∣sion of Christianitie, or any speciall dutie, to which God shall call him. If any man (saith our Luc. 14. 26. Sauiour) come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and bre∣thren, and sisters, and his owne life also, he cannot be my disciple. And if need were, I could cite most of the auncient Fathers, teaching those words of Christ, Goe and sell all, to be an heauenly counsell giuen generally vnto all. S. Antonie tooke them spoken to him, In vita eius a∣pud Athanas. S. Augustine to him: Ad Hilarium. To omit latter religious Epist. 89. men, I will only cite S. Jerom who doth briefely both declare our Catho∣like doctrine, and shewes also who was the Author of the Protestants o∣pinion, saying thus: To that vvhich thou affirmest, that they do better, who Lib. cont. Vigilant. vse their goods, and doe by little and little distribute to the poore, the profits of their possessions, then others vvho selling them, giue all at once, not I, but our Lord shall ansvvere: Jf thou vvilt be perfect, goe and sell all thou hast and giue it to the poore. Christ speaketh to him that vvill be perfect (not to the young man only) vvho vvith the Apostles, forsooke both Father shippe and nettes: That which thou Vigilantius commendest, obtaineth the se∣cond and third degree: so that the first (which is to sell all at once) be pre∣ferred before the second and third: Which is, to giue by little and little, the fruit of our reuenues to the poore. The authoritie of the antient writers is lessened by the
knowledge of the ground they built vpon, which was a misconceit of our Sauiours speech, begun at the first by some man, who did not sufficiently waigh the place, and continued from one to another, without any due exami∣nation, till it had got such strength, that it carried away the best learned, who contemning the world, were easily per∣swaded to thinke themselues to be in an estate of perfection. I might confirme this sormer argument with the example of the sore∣ide best Christians, who hauing possessions and lands, sold all and  Act. . brought the price of them, and laid it at the Apostles feete: and more yet enforce it by the fact of Ananias and Saphira, his wife, who hauing sold all theirs, presented but part of the money vnto the Apostles, and reser∣ued the rest vnto themselues. Belike they were of M. Perkins his minde, that it is better to giue then to receiue, and therefore kept part to that purpose; but they therefore were both punished with present death: Which proueth inuincibly, both how laudable it is to sell all, and how dangerous to halte in such holy workes. But to auoid prolixitie, I do but point at the places: And that Anani∣as; as the est had promised this to God (which is a Vow) it appeareth in the text, where it is said, that he lyed not vnto men, but vnto God, in not perorming his promise. And here we deduce very cleerely, that such a Vow is much pleasing vnto God, thus: That which is commended by our Sauiours owne both example and doctine, and was practised by the Apostles and most holie Christians, that may be Vowed verie laudablie: but to sell all and giue it to the poore is such. The example of those Christians is nothing to the pur∣pose, who vpon speciall occasion made their goods com∣mon to the vse of the whole Church in Ierusalem; yet Act. 2. 4. is it not said of them, that they sold all they had; yea the con∣trary may reasonably be gathered by the facts of Act. 4. 37. Barnabas and Act. 5. 1. Ananias, of whom it is recorded, that they sold each of them a possession that he had, and laid downe the money at the Apostles feete. Now to imagin that they had no other goods and chattels but that land, nor any moueables, is a conceit vnwarrantable by any reason. Ananias and Sapphiras mind was to make a shew of more bountie then they had any will to performe. That they had made any vow, or promise to God of any such sale, cannot be prooued by the text, but rather the contrary, because the
Apostle Peter saith, that it was in his choyce before he sold it, whether he would sell it or no, and that after he had sold it, it was in his owne power, viz. to giue all, or halfe of it as he thought good. The lye he made was to say that he had brought in all the money he sold it for, whereas he kept back part. I haue stood the longer vpon this argument, because you bring no more but this, and thinke this vnanswerable. Therefore also beside your custome you draw it into a Syl∣logisme now at the last. That (say you) which is commaunded by our Sauiours owne example and doctrine, and was practised by the Apostles, and most holy Christians, that may be vowed very laudably: But to sell all, and giue it to the poore is such: Therefore it may be vowed very laudably. I denie your proposition, because some things haue bin commended and practised by our Sauiour, his Apostles, and other holy Christians, of which a man may not make a vow. For example, both he and they haue commended, and indu∣red persecution for the Gospell: yet doth it not follow that therefore a man may wilfully by a vow bring persecution vpon himselfe, as by the vow of pouertie you cast your selues into a state of beggery. Your assumption also is false. Neither our Sauiour, his Apostles, nor other holy Christians (I speake of the ex∣amples you bring out of the Acts) haue practised any such matter, as in my former answers it hath appeared. To which I adde yet further, that they in the Acts so gaue that they did giue, that themselues had their reliefe out of it, if neede required, as well as any other. Of the conclusion I say, that it containes not the whole matter in question betwixt vs, though it be rightly drawne from the premisses. For though we should graunt that vowes of selling all and giuing it to the poore may laudably be made (which is false) yet is it not proued, that a man may vow wilfull pouertie, and refuse to possesse any worldly goods. They in the Acts, if they gaue all away, which is al-
made in our Creation, we remember nothing of it, nor neuer heard speake of it by any good author, not that we make, or renew any Vowes when vve receiue the blessed Sacrament. These be but nouelties of words, and the rauing of some decayed wits. You vtterly mistake Master Perkins, for he makes not comparison betwixt your accompt of baptisme, and ours, but betwixt your estimation of the vow in Baptisme, and these other 3. vowes deuised by your selues. And though with you the couenant in baptisme be no vow, yet with Ad Psalm. 75 S. Austin it is. What must we vow? saith he vpon that place which you alleage to prooue the lawfulnes of vowing. He answers, to beleeue in him, to hope for euerlasting life of him, to liue well, according to a common manner of liuing well. The vow in our creation Master Perkins calls the bond, by which we are tyed to obedience in respect that we hold all we haue of God by creation. As the benefits sealed to vs in Baptisme are renewed in the Lords supper, euery time we receiue it; so by vs in like sort the promise or vow made in baptisme is also to be renewed, which is implied in that name of the sacrament, which signifieth . thanksgiuing. The ninth point. Of Jmages. Our consent. Conclus. I. We acknowledge the ciuill vse of ima∣ges as freely and truely as the church of Rome doth. By ciuill vse I vnderstand, that vse which is made of them in the common societies of men, out of the ap∣pointed places of the solemne worship of God. And this to be lawfull, it appeareth because the artes of painting and grauing are the ordinance of God: and to be skilfull in them is the gift of God, as the exam∣ple of Bozaleel, and Aholiab declare, Exod. 35. 30. This vse of Images may bee in sundrie thinges. I. In the adorning and setting forth of buildings; thus Sa∣lomon
beautified his throne with the image of lions. And the Lord commaunded his temple to bee ador∣ned with the images of palme trees, of pomegra∣nates, of bulles, cherubes, and such like. II. It serues for the distinction of coynes: according to the pra∣ctise of Emperours and princes of all nations. When Christ was asked, Matth. 22. whether it was lawful to giue tribute to Cesar or no? he called for a penny and said, whose Image or superscription is this? they said, Ce∣sars: he then said, giue to Cesar the things that are Ce∣sars: not condemning but approuing the stampe or image vpon his coyne. And though the Iewes were forbidden to make images in way of representati∣on, or worship of the true God: yet the Sycle of the sanctuarie, which they vsed, specially after the time of Moses, was stamped with the image of the Almon tree, and the potte of Manna. III. Images serue to keepe in memorie friendes deceased whom we reue∣rence. And it is like, that hence came one occasion of the images that are now in vse in the Roman church. For in the daies after the Apostles men vsed priuate∣ly to keepe the pictures of their friendes departed: and this practise after crept into the open congrega∣tion: and at last, superstition getting heade, images began to be worshipped. Conclus. II. We hold the historicall vse of images to be good and lawfull: and that is, to represent to the eye the actes of histories, whether they bee hu∣mane, or diuine: and thus we thinke the histories of the Bible may be painted in priuate places. Conclus. III. In one case it is lawfull to make an image to testifie the presence or the effects of the
Maiestie of God, namely when God himselfe giues any speciall commaundement so to doe. In this case Moses made and erected a brasen serpent, to bee a type, signe, or image to represent Christ crucified. Ioh. 3. 14. And the Cherubs ouer the mercie seat serued to represent the Maiestie of God, to whom the Angels are subiect. And in the second comman∣dement it is not simply said, Thou shalt not make a grauen image: but with limitation, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe, that is, on thine owne head, vpon thine owne will and pleasure. Christians (saith M. Perkins in his first conclusion) vsed priuately to keepe the Pictures of their friends departed; which afterward (saith he) by abuse came to be set in Churches and vvorshipped. This by the vvay is a very vvilull peruerting of those vvords (to thy selfe) which cannot signifie, but, to thine ovvne vse, that is, to adore them, as is plainely deelared in the text follovving. It is no small aduantage that you take by reporting Ma∣ster Perkins words as please you. Here (as also otherwhere) you set them downe by halues, as if he certainely affirmed that, which he doth but gather by likelyhood. It is like (saith he) that hence came one occasion of the images that are now in vse in the Romane Church. The most that any indifferent man can make of it, is, but a mistaking of the true sense, vnlesse he be able to prooue that Master Perkins knew the meaning to be otherwise, which is not to be thought of any man vpon a bare pre∣sumption. It may be also he did rather so expound it, be∣cause in Iudg. 2. 19. Psal. 106. 29. 39 diuers places of scripture where the Iewes ido∣latry is reprooued, they are charged to haue followed their owne Adinuentio∣nes.  inuentions, as your Latine translates. IV. The right images of the new Testament, which we hold and acknowledge, are the doctrine and preaching of the Gospell, and all things that by the word of God pertaines thereto. Gal. 3. Who hath
bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth to whom Ie∣sus Christ was before described in your sight and among you crucified. Hence it followes that the preaching of the word is as a most excellent picture in which Christ with his benefits are liuely represented vnto vs. And we dissent not from Origen. contra Ces. lib. 8. who saith, We haue no images framed by any base worke, but by such as are brought forth and framed by the word of God, namely patterns of vertue, and frames resembling Christi∣ans. He meanes that Christians themselues are the images of Christians. These be metaphoricall Pictures, not belonging to this purpose: for it is one thing to describe in vvords, another to expresse in liuely co∣lours, and lineaments. Concil. Con∣stantinop. vni∣uers. 7. Actio∣ne 6. These are the onely pictures that we need, Preaching of the Word, administring of the Sacraments, and considering the liues of the true Saints, as they are recorded in the Scripture, and offer themselues to our knowledge, by good histories and daily sight. These conclusions containe, as M. Perkins affirmeth, the doctrine of the Church of England; vvhich I vvould beleeue, if I did not see the Magistrats publikely to take avvay Pictures from Catholiks, to teare and burne thē, which were kept but in priuate places: yea, their more seruent disciples, cannot abide a Crosse standing by the high way side, or in any, neuer so profane a place, but either they beae and hale them dovvn, or most despitefully deface them: bevvraying indeed vnto all moderate men, their cankered stomaks against him that died on the Crosse: vvho He vvill con∣sound you Ido∣laters. vvill one day (vvon he pleaseth) confound them. But to couer this their malice, they cast ouer it the mantle of zeale, saying that the Papists make them their Gods, and that therefore they are to be abolished. Against which of the former conclusions is the practise of the Magistrate, that you should denie that to be our do∣ctrine, because of this? Not against the first, nor the second. For both we our selues vse them for ornament, and remem∣brance, and all your Papists, you speake of, to religious pur∣poses. Not against the third: For you haue no image that God hath appointed to bee made: much lesse against the fourth, which allowes none of your Images. It would haue
becommed you therefore to forbeare both the accusing of the Magistrate, for doing against our doctrine, and the con∣demning of our doctrine, as being other than it is. For the people, though many amongst them iustly mislike crosses, because they are by you ordinarily abused to Idolatrie; yet I thinke you can bring few examples of any such disorder∣ly course, and I am perswaded none at all, which the Magi∣strate hath not corrected. O men blinded vvith spite against true deuotion. We Catholikes are a thousand times morezealous of the true honor of the liuing God, than D. B. P. These rhetori∣call explanati∣ons proue no∣thing. You dvvell by ill neighbours.  any Protestants euer vvere or vvill be: And that small reuerence vvhich vve yeeld vnto Images, is more different from the honor and obedience due vnto Almighty God, than the cope of heauen is distant from the center of the earth. You zealous of the true honour of the liuing God, whose glorie you turne into the likenes of a mortall man, and of a pigeon? whom you dishonor by stockes and stones? whom you crush vp into a baggage wafer cake? whom you de∣uoure and swallow downe into your bellies, and cast out in∣to a place not fit to be named? There neuer was the like senselesse and barbarous Idolatrie among the Gentiles. If some reuerence you giue be small, some againe is a degree at the least aboue that, as . the very words shew. But tell me, is it small reuerence to giue the same honour to the image, which belongs to the partie whose image it is? Doe you not worship the images of the Trinitie, and of Christ alone, with diuine worship? Are not you they who main∣taine that idolatrous second Councill of Nice, in which Carol. mag. de imag. lib. 3. cap. 17. Constantine Bishop of Constance in Cyprus blasphemously affirmed, that he receiued and embraced honourable, holy and venerable Images, according to that seruice of adoration, which he gaue to the consubstantiall and quickning Trinitie? But of this afterwards. And that these hotter brethren may see vvhat reason M. Perkins had to allovv of the ciuill and historicall vse of Images: I thinke it expedi∣ent to note here, hovv in the purest antiquitie, Images vvere made and respected. That famous Image of our blessed Sauiour, vvhich the vvoman cured of the bloody flxe, set vp in Brasse at Caesarea Philippi. vpon a Piller of Matth. 9.
stone, is not vnknown vnto any that haue read the Ecclesiasticall History of Eusebius, Lib. 7. cap. 14. And how God did approue it by giuing ver∣tue vnto an herbe when it did grow, to touch the hem of that Picture, to cure all manner of diseases. Which Image, Eusebius himselfe did see standing vntill his daies, which was 300 yeeres agoe, as he there testi∣fieth: as also, that he saw diuers others, namely, of Saint Peter and Paul. This goodly statue being most memorable both for antiquitie of it, being made our Sauiour yet liuing, and for the miracles wrought by that herbe, growing at the foot of it, Iulian the Apostata for malice a∣gainst our Sauiour, caused to be broken downe, and set vp his owne Image in the place of it: but his was presently with lightning and thun∣der from heauen consumed into ashes, and our Sauiours, by the Christi∣ans Lib. 5. hist. cap. 20.  carried into their Church, as witnesseth Sozomenus. Eusebius deliuers that storie as a matter of report, not knowledge: They say that her house is yet to be seene, and that admirable monuments of that benefit our Sauiour bestowed vp∣on her, are yet remaining. And it is worth the obseruing, that Eusebius makes a difference betwixt that which he knew by the Gospell, and that which he heard by report. Of her hea∣ling by our Sauiour Christ he speaketh thus: Whom we know by the holy Gospels, that our Sauiour freed from her disease. Of her dwelling at Caesarea Philippi, of her house, and that Image, with the hearbe and vertue of it: Ferunt. They say, of the Image also in particular, they say this statue hath the image of Iesus. Neither doth he affirme, that he saw it himselfe: It re∣mained also (saith Eusebius) vntill our times, as it may be seene of them that goe into that Citie. But I wonder at your confi∣dence, that euer you would adde a word of the Images of Peter and Paul; Eusebius report and iudgement being in that very place against your opinion of Images. Let vs heare himselfe speake: It may not seeme strange (saith Eusebius presently vpon the former words) that such of the Gentiles as were cured by our Sauiour did these things: seeing wee haue seene the Images of his Apostles, viz. of Paul and Peter, and of Christ himselfe kept painted in tables: because the ancients, by an heathenish custome of the Gentiles, were wnt in that man∣ner to honour those whom they counted their preseruers. This woman being a Heathen, and perhaps conuerted, in her ig∣norance did like the rest of the Heathen.
The miracle was receiued, and deliuered by Eusebius on∣ly vpon report; of the continuance whereof, with the Ima∣ges enduring, he saith nothing. But in this case I will onely put you in minde of that, which Gab. Biel in can.  lee. 49. one of your owne school∣men writes concerning such miracles, that they are wrought often times by the operation of Diuels, to deceiue the inordinate worshippers of such Images, God permitting, and the infidelitie of men necessarily requiring it. Such might this be, if there were any such. Sozom. hist. lib. 5. cap. 20. Sozomen notes in his preface to the storie, that this de∣stroying of Iulians image, shewed the power of Christ, and his anger against Iulian: but this prooues not that our Sauiour had any liking of the Image; it was Iulians malice, as your selfe call it, that prouoked our Sauiour, not the respect of the Image. The latter part you report very craftily, as if the Christians had set vp that Image in their Church: but So∣zomen saith not so; onely he telleth vs, that when the Gen∣tiles had dragged it to peeces, the Christians gathered vp the peeces, and laid them vp in their Church; where they were kept till the time of his writing. Another Picture of our Sauiours visage, he himselfe is reported to haue sent vnto Abgarus Prince of Edessa, as witnesseth Metaphrastes In vita Constantini, Damascen, and Euagrius, who doth in the same chap∣ter rehearse a notable miracle, vvrought by the same Image, to deliuer Lib. 10. de imagi. Lib. 4. hist. cap. 28.  the Tovvne from the sacking of the Persians. And in his fift booke and eighteenth chapter, recordeth another miracle done by the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary in a prison at Antioch. The Damasc. or∣thod. fid. lib. 4. cap. 17. chiefe author you alleage for this fable, writ 800. yeeres after Christ, and setteth it downe but . as a report; as you might haue seene, if you had looked in him; which by Damasc. de imagin. lib. 10. the wrong quotation, it should seeme you did not. Lib. 1. c. 13. Eusebius, who writ the Ecclesiasticall historie 400. yeeres before Damascen, and set downe that matter out of the re∣cord of Abgarus owne countrey, hath not one word of any such Image. Yea, in his Citante Gre∣gor. Neocaes. in Concil. Ni∣ce. secundo, a∣ctione 6. epistle to the Empresse Constantine Augusta, who writ to him for an image of Christ, he shew∣eth that her desire is not warrantable, and discourses that matter at large. Lib. 4. c. 26. Euagrius another of your authors, about
sixe hundred yeeres after Christ, telleth such a storie as you mention; not vpō his own, but Procopius credit, who liued in the same age with him, and writ that miracle by the report of I know not A veteribus cōmemorata. what old men. It is enough to discredit it, that Eusebius maketh no mentiō of any such Image, though he writ the historie of that matter betwixt our Sauiour and Abgarus at large; and that, as I said before, out of the re∣cords of Edessa, where Abgarus ruled. If these former au∣thors cannot procure credit to that storie, what should Si∣meon Metaphrastes doe, who Anno 950 Coccius in Thesauro Ca∣tholico. came some hundreds of yeeres after Procopius, and Euagrius? But of this and like miracles, if they were indeed wrought, we heard Biels iudg∣ment before. The third Image representing our blessed Sauiour, is said to haue bin made by Nicodemus his secret Disciple, vvhich aftervvard vvas taken by the Ievves, and in despight of Christ, vvas crucified, and to their confusi∣on, much blood issued out of it. This history is in the orke of S. Athanasius that sound piller of the Church, intituled De passione imaginis, and is either his, or some other very auncient and graue vvriters. For it is related in the seauenth gene∣rall councell. Act. 4. There is no likelihood that Athanasius would record any such storie, his Contr. Gen∣tes seu contra idola. other writings are so directly against all I∣dolatrie. But which of the two copies will ye ascribe to A∣thanasius? For hee that reades them aduisedly, will rather take them for two seuerall mens doings, than thinke either of them to be written by Athanasius. And therefore Praefat. in Athanas. Na∣nius a great Doctor of Louaine, makes no bones to place it amongst those writings, which are none of Athanasiuses: neither indeed was it euer knowne, till that idolatrous se∣cond Councill of Nice, eight hundred yeeres after Christ very neere. Yea the storie it selfe seemes to haue bin yonger, than Athanasius, almost foure hundred yeeres: For In chronic. Anno 775. Sigi∣bort affirmes it happened in the yeere 775: Histor. oni∣bard. legend. cap. 30. D. B. P. Lib. 1. colle∣ctam. Lib. 14. hist. 1. 2  the historie of Lombardie, in the yeere 750. That S. Luke the Euangell drew the Picture of our blessed Ladie, is registred by Theodorus Lector 1000. yeeres ago, and Metaphrasies, In vita Lucae, and Nicephorus. Those fragments of Theodor. in Callecta. Theodorus gathering deserue no
such credit, that a thing done more than fiue hundred yeres before he was borne, and recorded by none of his ancients, that are knowne, should, vpon his bare word, be held for true. But let vs grant as much as you desire, that S. Luke drew the Virgin Maries counterfeit. What of that? will it follow that therefore it is fit or lawfull to make Images, now in this certaine daunger of Idolatrie, when no man knowes any more of the Virgins fauour and feature, than he doth of our great Grandmother Euahs? It should seeme Callistus lib. 2. cap. 24. Nicephorus did not giue any great credit to the storie, though Theodo∣rus had written it long before him. For he brings it in with a suspitious preface: It is said: And I marueile, if you reade it in Nicephorus your selfe, that you adde not the rest of his report, in that place, of the Euangelist Lukes picturing our Sauiour also, and the chiefe of his Apostles. Simeon Meta∣phrastes is too young to witnesse a matter, done so many yeeres before his birth. Tertullian, an author of the second hundreth yeere after Christ, hath  Lib. 2. de pu∣dicitia. left writen, that the Image of Christ in shape of a shepheard carrying a sheep on his shoulders, was ingrauen vpon the holy Chalices vsed in the Church. Tertul. lib. 1. de pudicit. Tertullian hath left this written, that the image of a Shepheard carrying a sheepe, was engrauen vpon the Cups or Chalices: but he neuer giues any signification of the ho∣linesse of those Cups, nor approbation of the picture, further than to make them serue his purpose, to shew, that by the sheep all kind of men are signified, as well Heathen as Chri∣stians. And surely he that reades Tertul. de idololat. his booke of Idolatrie, and considers that hee makes Idols and Images all one for their nature, will not thinke him any fauourer of Images. In the time of S. Chrysostom, they were so common, that they were car∣ried in rings, drawen on cups, painted in Chambers. See Theodoret. Jn histor. relig. in vita Simeonis Stelitae. Aug. lib. 2. de cons. Euang. cap. 10. And the 7. Synod Act. 4. This briefly of Images in generall: Now a word or two of the signe of the Crosse, which our Protestants haue banished from all their follow∣ers: Neuerthelesse it cannot be denied to haue been in most frequent vse among the best Christians of the Primitiue Church. We also, as they had in Chrysostomes time, and in all times
and places, where the Art of grauing and painting was vsed, haue Images in Rings, Cups, Chambers. But what Images, or to what purpose? you neither tell vs what they were, nor quote the place, that wee may looke and examine the mat∣ter. Hist. Theod. in Simeone cap. 26. Theodoret speakes not of Images in Rings, Cups, or Chambers, but onely tels of a report, that the people of Rome did set vp little Images of Simeon in all In Officina, vestibulis, & prticibus. their shop∣doores, and walking places, or galleries. But Artificers are no fit iudges in such controuersies; and yet it is but a report that they did so. Aug. lib. 1. de cens. E∣uang. cap. 10. Austin iesting at them, who say that our Sauiour Christ writ certaine books to his Apostles Peter and Paul; where∣in the art whereby he wrought his miracles was contained: I belecue (saith he) they hit vpon these two Apostles, as the men to whom he writ, because they had seene him and them in many places painted together. But what approbation giues he to the vse of these pictures? So (saith he) they deserue to erre, that seeke Christ and his Apostles, not in the holy books, but vpon pain∣ted walles. As for that Concil. Ni∣cen. 2. idolatrous Synod, it is ridiculous to vrge the authoritie of that against vs, when you know wee wholy disclaime it, and pleade against it from the Concil. Fran∣cofor. Coun∣cill of Franckford, and the book Carolus magnus de imagin. of Charlemaigne the Em∣perour, in both which it was refuted and condemned. If you bring no better proofe for the Crosse in particular, than you haue for mages in generall, I doubt me the Protestants will not repeale the act of banishment made against it, what∣soeuer you talke of the most frequent vse thereof among the best Christians in the Primitiue Church. Tertullian hath these words, At euery going forward and returne, whē  De corona militis. we dresse vs and pull on our shoes, when we wash and sit downe, at the lighting of Candels, and entring into our Chambers, finally, when we set ourselues to any thing, we make the signe of the Crosse on our fore∣heads. The signe of the crosse as it is here spoken of by you, doth not indeed belong to this question, which is of such images as are set vp to be outwardly worshipped, such as this signe of the crosse neuer was among the auncient Christians. But
because, as you say, it is the forme that you worship which is made, though it continue not, and for that your Diuines mainteine the worshipping of it euen outwardly, as I will shew, let it passe in the rancke where you haue set it. Now that the signe of the crosse is so to be worshipped, first Bella m. de imag. lib. 2. cap. 19. Bel∣larmine shews, where he saith, The signe of the crosse which is made vpon the forehead, or in the ayer, is holy, and to be worship∣ped. Costerus in Enchir. de sanct. cruce, cap. 11. Costerus his fellow Iesuit speaketh more plaine, Chri∣stians (saith he) euer since Christes time, haue alwaies worship∣ped with great reuerence both the wood of our Lords crosse it self, and the signe of the crosse, with which they daily fence them∣selues. Suarez in Thom par. 1. disp. 56. sect. 3. Suarez another Iesuit is more plaine then he, The signe of the crosse (saith he) is worthie of reuerence and adora∣tion, for it hath the vse and signification of a Sacrament, And it skils not that it is made in a matter, or by an action that passeth away, because the only difference of the matter when the fashion is all one, hinders not the adoration. Iacob, de Graph. decis. aur. lib. 2. c. 12 sect. 15. Iacobus de Graphijs gi∣ueth also the reason of this, We worship it (saith he) with di∣uine honor, for that it puts vs in mind of our Lords passion; which is performed by the signe of the crosse on the forehead, as well as by a crosse painted on the wall. Lastly, Vasq. de ador. cultu lib. 3. cap. 4. num. 61. pag. 493. Gabriell Vasquez saith, that the crosse of Christ, by what meanes soeuer exprest, is worthie of veneration, as well as the crosse it selfe on which he suffered. That the crosse was in common vse among the auncient Christians, it was neuer denied, yet haue we no record of it in any auncient authenticall writer before Ireneus, as Fulke against Marti. Art. 1. fol. 38. Do∣ctor Fulke hath truly auouched against Martiall. As for the counterfeit writings of Ignat. epist. ad Philip. Ignatius, Martial. epist. ad Burdeg. Martialis of Burdeaul. and Dionys. Ec∣cles. hierar. cap. 2. 4. 5. 6. Dionysius Areopagita, both the stile and the matter refute the titles, and bewray partly ignorance euen in the language, and partly authors of later times. Xystus Be∣tul. ad Lact. lib. 4. cap. 27. Instit. Xystus Betuleius would haue vs beleeue his word, that the ceremony of crossing was vsed euen when the Apostles laid on their hands, but neither doth the scripture affirme any such thing, neither brings he any authoritie or reason to prooue it. But let the author of it be vnknowne as he is, yet if the
occasion and vse of it were certaine and warrantable, there were more reason to finde fault with the leauing of it. But who can resolue vs of this doubt? August. in Psal. 141. & de verb. Do. ser. 18. & de verb. Apost. erm. 8. Austin seemes to be very vncertaine, fetching this custome of crossing from a desire to make profession of Christianitie in the sight of the pagans. Aug. de Ca∣techi. rudib. cap. 0 & in Ioa.  55. ad cap. 1. He seemes otherwhere to attribute it to an imi∣tation of the Iewish Ceremony, in marking the dore posts with the blood of the paschall lambe. What should I speake of the doubt concerning the forme it selfe, which is the thing that you professedly worship? What is that forme? the sauoir or S. Andrews crosse? resembling as some thinke not the crosse of our Sauiour, but the  X  . first letter of his name in Greeke, Euseb. in vit. Constant. lib. 1. cap. 25. which also was set on the top of Constantines standerd. Or is it nothing else but two crosse lines, cutting each other in a right angle, as it is commonly made, which some will haue to be resembled by that standerd of Con∣stantines, the staffe and the baner making such a crosse, Ambros. ser. 56. like to the mast and the sayle yard. It is all one what the forme was if the vse were good and lawfull. But how shall that be auowed when it is not certaine what it was. All which not∣withstanding we are desirous so to interpret the auncients concerning this point, as that we may free them from super∣stition if it be possible. We would gladly therfore expound their speaches of the efficacie and vertue of the crosse, not of the wood nor of the forme, but of the passion and sufferings of our Sauiour Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 17. 18. Gal. 2. 16. & 6. 14. Eph. 2. 6. Phil. 3. 16. Col. 1. 20. in which sense the scripture speakes of it most truly and gloriously. I could to this purpose al∣leage diuers places out of the Fathers, but I must needs con∣fesse that I can bring many other out of their writings which will not beare that exposition. What if I should say that they vsed it only as an outward gesture when they prayed to God for any blessing, and therefore continually signed themselues as Tertul. de coron militis. Tertullian, and August. de ectit. ath. conue & de tempor. ser. 10. Austin shew? I could cite some places, by which this coniecture might be made some∣what likely; yea I could adde hereunto the iudgement of your late Iesuits, who Coster. En∣chir. de cruce. c. 11. pag. 360. acknowledge that vse of the crosse amongst them, and Vasquez de adora. cultu lib. 3. cap. 5. num. 7. p. 500. denie that it puts any vertue into the
thing that is signed. But neither would this content you, and many speeches of the auncients are such as can admit no such interpretation. Wherefore all that I will answere is this, that howsoeuer the vse of crossing (as it was amongst the Fathers within 200. yeares after our Sauiours ascension, and for a long time afterward) cannot be sufficientlie war∣ranted by any ground of scripture: yet the Crosse was neuer made an Idoll, by any outward worship amongst them, as it is altogether with you Papists. Whereupon it followes that the testimonies which you alleage out of the Fathers are falsely applied by you to countenance such Idolatry as they neuer dreamed of. S. Ambrose exhort, vs to begin all our vvorkes vvith the signe of the  Serm. 43. Crosse. To that of Ambrose I answere more particularly, first, that your quotation of his Ambr. ser. 84. 84. Sermon is false, for there is not a word of any such matter in all that Sermon. Secondly, that in Ambr. ser. 43. the place you meane he saith not we must begin all our works with the signe of the crosse, but rather speaketh of prayer, according as before I expounded him. We must (saith Ambrose) when we rise giue thanks to God, and Omne diei opus in signo facere saluato∣ris. 11 S. In loan. do euery worke we take in hand all the day in the signe of our Sauiour, that is, with prayer to Christ. S. Augustine, What is that ensigne of Christ, which all men knovv, but the Crosse of Christ, the vvhich signe, vnlesse it be made on the fore∣heads of the faithfull, yea, on the vvater by vvhich they are regenerate, and on the Oyle and Chrisme, vvherewith they are annoynted, and on the sacrifice vvherevvith they are nourished, not one of them are order∣ly and duly administred. Our Protestants then that haue neither holie Oyle, nor sacrifice to make the Crosse vpon, are in pittifull taking. Such outward things not enioyned by our Sauiour nor his Apostles, follow the custome of particular Churches and times: so that though in Aug. in a. tract. 118. Austins daies the Sacrament was appointed to be so administred, and otherwise the action was not R perfici∣tur. duly and orderly performed; yet we may and do baptise well enough, as long as we keepe the order com∣maunded by our Sauiour, and practised by his Apostles: Baptise (saith Matth. 28. 19 he) in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and
of the holy ghost, which they did as occasion offered it selfe in any common water, without oyle or crosse. But heare also vvhat some of the best Greeke Doctors do say of this D. B. P. And with him is ansvvered. Cah. 4. You   Hm. De Spirit sanct. 27.  same signe of the Crosse. S. Cyrill agreethfully vvith Tertullian, saying: Make this signe of the Crosse both eating and drinking, both sitting and standing, and walking and speaking, in summe, at all times. Saint Basil accounteth this making of the signe of the Crosse among some of the principall Traditions of the Apostles. Basil. de Spi∣rit. sanct. c. 27. Basil liued 300. yeeres after the Apostles, and recites other customes as Apostolicall traditions, which haue nei∣ther any warrant by likelyhood of reason, nor some of them allowance by the practise of your owne Church. Turning to the East when we pray, one of his traditions hath no ground of reason: so the soule be present with God (saith Eucher. in lib. Reg. com∣ment. lib. 2. cap. 58. Eucherius) there is no commaundement for the site of the body. And Socrat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. So∣crates writeth, that the Christians of Antioch turned to the west when they prayed. Another of his traditions is concer∣ning the words of inuocation, when the bread and wine are shewed in the Sacrament, which forme of inuocation your Church doth not obserue at your eleuation, nor in any part of your Masse. Origen yeeldeth one reason why we make this signe, affirming that D. B. P. Hom. 6. in cap. 15. Ex.  feare and trembling doth fall vpon the euill spirits, when they see the signe of the Crosse made with faith. That of Origen hom. 6. in cap. 15. Exod. Origen, as also many other sentences of the Fa∣thers, applied by you Papists to the signe of the crosse, is spoken of our Sauiours death vpon the crosse by a Meto∣nymy of the subiect. What (saith Origen) doe the diuels feare? at what tremble they? without doubt at the crosse of Christ, whereby he triumphed ouer them, whereby they were stript of their principalitie and power. Feare therefore and trembling shall fall vpon thē when they shall see the signe of the crosse In nobis fi∣deliter . fixed in vs by faith, and the greatnes of that arme which our Lord stretched out vpon the crosse as he said, Esay. 65. 2. All the day long haue I stretched out my hands. Therefore they will not feare thee, Nisi videant in to crucem Christi. vn∣lesse they see in thee the crosse of Christ, vnlesse thou also can say, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid I should glorie but in the crosse of my Lord Christ, by which the world is crucified to me, and I to the world. But it
is not the wooden crosse, nor the signe of it that crucifieth the world, but the power of our Sauiours death. S. Gregory Nazianzen reporteth, that the wicked Apostata Iulian, be∣ing frighted with spirits made the signe of the Crosse, which he had re∣nounced, D. B. P. Orat. 1. in lu∣lian.  and yet it deliuered him from them. It is but a report, that Nazianz. in Iulia. orat. 2. quae est 47. Nazianzen makes vpon other mens credit: It is (saith he) reported by many, and Non abhor∣ret ab illius moribus. it is not vnlike his custome. But, which is more to be obserued, it must either come from Iulian himselfe, or the Coniurer who was then alone with him at his Coniurations, or else it must haue been deuised by some man that could not see it. Now iudge you what credit is to be giuen to such report. Yet we denie not but this might be; the Lord, to Iulians further iust condemnation, shewing his mightie power, when hee was called vpon by him, in so great an extremitie. S. Chrysostom most largely discourseth of the glorious vse of the Crosse Ora. quod Christus sit Deus. See the place, among an hundred other com∣mendations of it, he hath these words: That the heads of Kings are not so decked with their Diademes, as with the signe of the Crosse, and con∣cludeth, that all men striue to passe other in taking to them this admira∣ble Crosse, and that no man was ashamed of it, but esteemed themselues more beautified with that, than with many Iewels, borders and chaynes, garnished with Pearle and pretious stones. There is no doubt but a true Christian thinkes himselfe more honoured by the profession of his faith in Christ, than by any, or all the ornaments in the world. While it was needfull to make shew of that profession by such meanes, we condemne not the vse of it. Now that occasion amongst Christians in these parts is ceased, and the thing growne to monstrous superstition, wee make no question, but that if they liued now, and saw the abuse of that custom of theirs, they would both refraine and abolish it, if it lay in them. It is not their vsing of that sigue in such sort, as I haue shewed, but your idolatrous abusing of it, and discrediting of it and them, which we mislike. Neither is it at all against reason, or custom of the Church, that such outward actions, as some speciall occasion bred, should with that occasion die and cease. H quantum mutamur ab ipsis: Alasse, what a pittifull change is this,
that that which was of the best Christians reputed deere and holy, should now be accounted a point of superstition and plaine witchcraft. But what is all this adoe about the Crosse to the credit of Images? seeing (as I noted afore) there is nothing affirmed in the testimonies you bring but that the signe of the crosse was vsed, either to testifie the profession of Christianitie, or as an outward gesture in calling vpon the name of our Sa∣uiour Christ? By all which we learne, that the best Christians both vsed alwaies and highly esteemed of holy Images, euen from our Sauiours owne daies, and God himselfe hath by diuine testimony of miracles recommended them vnto vs, not only for the ciuill and historicall vses of them, but more to honor them whose Pictures they were: for no man in his right wits can deny but that it is and hath alwaies bin reputed, as a great ho∣nor done to the deceased, to erect him an image, to eternise the memo∣rie of his noble acts: as also that it is a great encouragement to all be∣holders of such Pourtraits, to endeuour to intate their glorious exam∣ples: The very sight of the Image of Polemon, a most chast and holy per∣sonage, moued an vnchast woman to change her life, as out of S. Grego∣rie Synod. 7. act. Nazianzen is related. Hauing so great testimony for the auncient vse of Images, and such Jt might be∣come your obe∣dience, to giue him such title as his Maiestie vouchsafeth him.  manifold commodities, by the discreet and holy practise of them, he must needs be furiously transported with blind zeale, that makes warre against Crosses, and burnes holy Pictures; as of late the Superintendent of He∣reford did in the market place openly. Here is not one sufficient testimonie (as I haue shewed) to prooue that euer there were any such Images, as you speake of; then what miracles could be wrought for the counte∣nancing of our Sauiour by them? It is an honour indeed to haue Images erected in memorie of the deceased, but not for him that is God: neither is it a religious honour, but a ciuill; proceeding not from our deuotion, but from our loue, whatsoeuer the ground of our loue be, in respect of them whom we so honour. How slight and vaine a motion to the imitation of any mans vertues the sight of his Image is, let all experience testifie; which indeed can bring no more but the remem∣brance of it at the most. But suppose there were some more force in it, all the helps that can be imagined likely to come by it, will not counteruaile the danger of Idolatrie, and so
the breach of Gods commandement, in erecting them for any vse of Religion; whereupon Idolatrie will most cer∣tainly ensue. That fable of I cannot tell what A man, saith Charlemaigne out of the Coli∣cill. lib. 3. c. 21 pag. 402. woman, moued to some ciuill outward carriage by the beholding of Polemons Image, seemes to haue been deuised out of the Heathen historie of another Polemon, who was brought to the like ciuill vertue by hearing the Philosopher Xenocra∣tes discourse of continencie and temperancie; a farre more likely matter, whether it be true or false. But what haue we to doe with that lying Conuenticle, which tels vs of such a thing out of Athanasius, as was written (if they say true) some foure hundred yeeres before, and neuer heard of vn∣till that time, when there was such speciall need of it? No, no, that dealing of that Councill is too well knowne, to pur∣chase any credit with mē, that will not wilfully be blinded. In the like sort, they deale with Basil, Cyril, Ambrose, Chry∣sostome, Gregorie, and the Apostles themselues, whose de∣crees they fetch out of a counterfeit Synod at Antioch. The difference. Our dissent from them touching images stands in three points. I. The Church of Rome holds it law∣full for them to make images to resemble God, though not in respect of his diuine nature: yet in re∣spect of some properties and actions. Wee on the contrarie hold it vnlawfull for vs to make any image, any way to represent the true God: or, to make an image of any thing in way of religion, to worship God, much lesse the creature thereby. For the se∣cond commandement saith plainely, Exod. 20. 4. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, or the likenesse of any thing in heauen &c. The Papists say the commaundement is meant of the images of false gods. But, will they, nill they, it must be vnderstood
of the images of the true Iehouah; and it forbids vs So saith the Romane Ca∣tech. 2. Com. to resemble God, either in his nature, properties, or works, or to vse any resemblance of him for any sa∣cred vse: as to help the memorie, when we are about to worship God. Thus much the holy Ghost who is the best expoūder of himself, teacheth most plainly, Deut. 4. 15. 16. Thou sawest no image at al (either of false or true god) and therefore thou shalt not make any likenes of anything. And againe, the Prophet Esay, c. 40. 18. reprouing idolaters asketh to whom they will liken God, or, what similitude will they set vp to him. And vers. 21. Know ye nothing? haue ye not heard? hath it not bin told you from the beginning? as if he should say, haue yee forgotten the second commaundement, that God gaue vnto your fathers: And thus he flatly reprooues all them that resemble the true God in images. This passeth all kind of impudencie to quote the Roman Catechisme in defence of that opinion, which it doth of set purpose disproue. It tea∣cheth indeed, that the very nature and substance of God, which is, who∣ly spirituall, cannot be expressed and figured by corporall lineaments and colours, and all edgeth the places produced by M. Perkins to proue that vnlawfull; yet by and by annexeth these words: Let no man there∣fore thinke it to be against religion, and the Law of God, vvhen any person of the most holy Trinities is pourtraied in such sort as they haue appeared, ei∣ther in the Old or Nevv Testament, &c. But let the Pastor teach, that not If you had grace, you vvould not say so. Belike some nature of God not pro .  the nature of God, but certaine properties and actions appertaining to God, are represented in such Pictures. If the man be not past grace he wil surely blush at such a foule error. His textes of Scripture are taken out of the same place of the Catechisme, and do proue only, that Gods proper na∣ture cannot nor may not be resembled in any corporall shape or liknes. If you would haue dealt as kindly with Master Perkins in this quotation, as I haue dealt with you in many, you might haue applied it to the former part, that the commandement is meant of the Images of the true Iehouah: which your Ca∣techisme grants, though onely so farre as concernes the ex∣pressing of his forme by an Image, as your selfe also con∣fesse. And the Concil. Trid. sell. 25. de . Councill of Trent affirmes that to be vn-
being al one in the coueting of wife, and coueting of house, seruant, maide, oxe, asse, and whatsoeuer els, as the Rom. 7. 7. Apostle expresseth it, without mētioning any particular. But the two first differ almost as much as may be. The first forbidding the worship of any other God, but the true: the second pro∣hibiting the worshipping of him by an Image or Idoll. The last reason, which only your Catechisme brings, beside Au∣stins authoritie, and custome of your Church, is insufficient also. For it was very fit that God should adde that reason of promise, and threatning to that, rather than any of the rest, because hee had speciall care of that, and knew that the Iewes, and all men generally, were likely to worship him after their owne deuices, and namely by Images. Beside, is not the reason annexed to the third Commandement as ge∣nerall, that God will not hold him guiltlesse which breakes any of his lawes? why then doe you not make that also a part of the first Commandement? And the distinction they make that an Image is the representation of true things, an Idol of things supposed, is false. But Master Perkins goeth on and saith, that our distinction betweene Image and Idoll (that an Image representeth a thing that is, but Idoll, a thing supposed to be, but is not) is false and against the auncient writers, vvho make it all one: We proue the contrary, First, by the authority of the auncient Doctors, Origen and Theodoret, vvho in expresse vvords deliuer the same difference of Image and Idoll: vvhich is taken out of How. 8. in Exod. Q. 38. in Ex. 1. Cor. 8. S. Paul, laying that an Idoll is nothing in the vvorld: that is, such Idols as the Heathen take for their Gods, are nothing formally, that is, though they be great peeces of wood or stone materially; yet they represent a thing that is not, that is, such a thing to be a God, which is nothing lesse. Let M. Perkins but quote one place in the whole Bible, where they are vsed both for one. I will cite some, where if you vse the one for the other, you must offend all good Christiā eares; As where mā is said to be made after the Image of God, may you say after the Idoll of God? Christ is said to be the I∣mage of his Father; will you call him the Idoll of his Father? Surely he cannot deny, but the seuenth general Councel holden about 900. yeres past and gone, is so farre off from making Image and Idoll al one, that it doth accurse al them, who call the Image of Christ and his Saints, Idols. Master Perkins saith no more, but that it is false, without
adding, that it is against the ancient writers; and yet hee might haue said so well enough, for all Origen and Theodo∣ret. For they two are but a few of many, and by their other writings ouerthrow that distinction betwixt Image and I∣doll. To make the case plaine, we must vnderstand, that they call an Image the resemblance of any thing that hath a be∣ing in nature. For example, if you carue, graue, paint, or cast the forme of a man, horse, tree, plant, fowle, fish, Sun, Moon, Star, or any such like thing, you make an Image: but if you make a monster, as a man halfe flesh, half fish, like our Mair∣maides; or a beast compounded of diuers parts of sundrie creatures; for example, the head of a man, the bodie of a horse, the feete of a lion, &c. or in a word, as the common opinion is of Gryphins, which are said to haue the forepart like an Eagle, and the hinder part like a Lion; that is an Idol: because in truth there is no such creature in the world. By this it is manifest, that no shape of a man, by their doctrine, can be an Idoll. For that shape hath some thing like it in na∣ture. Yet Origen. lib. 1. in cap. 1. ad Rom. Origen doubts not, with the Apostle, to con∣demne them of Idolatrie, who worshipped God in the like∣nes of an Image of a corruptible man, of fowles, foure∣footed beasts, and creeping things. So doth Theodor. de de curan. Graec. affect. ser. 3. de Dijs & Angel. Theodoret, where hee disputes against the Gentiles, out of that same place of the Apostle, reciting his words, who calles those I∣dols of the Gentiles, . likenesses of the image of a corrup∣tible man. Theodoret grounds his interpretation vpon the words of the commandement mistaken, but he meddles not so much as by any signification with that place of the Apostle. In∣deede Origen hath it, but not in your sense, as appeareth by your exposition, which agrees not with Origen nor Theodo∣ret about the difference betwixt an Image and an Idoll. For you comming neerer to the 1. Cor. 8. 5. Apostles meaning, expound that Nothing, to signifie no God, or diuine power, as if the error were in making that a God, which is nothing lesse. But they vpon whom you would build your distinction, make an Idoll such a shape as hath no substance answering to it in
nature. And therefore they denie that the image of a man is an Idoll, though it be worshipped, as I shewed before: you make it an Idoll, be it of what shape it will, if it repre∣sent such a thing to be God, as is nothing lesse. He makes an Idoll (saith Origen) who (according to the Apostle that saith an Idoll is nothing) makes that which is not. Marke you what Origen saith? That which is not; you say, that which is not God. But he proceedes. What is that (saith he) which is not? a shape which the eye hath not seene, but the mind faines to it selfe. For example, if a man be made with a dogs head, &c. And Theodoret propounds for example of an Idoll Sphinx the monster, Hvginus fab. . c. 151. which had a maids face, a birds wing, and a dogs body, and the Tritons or Sea-gods, halfe men, halfe fishes; and the Centaures, halfe men, halfe horses. So that the only authors you can bring of that distinction, make nothing at all for it, as you vnderstand it: yea they make against it, cal∣ling that an Image, which you terme an Idoll, namely the statue of Iupiter, Mars, Venus, and the rest of the heathen Idols, who both had the shapes of men or women, and that such men and women as had a true being in nature, though they were no Gods. Besides, Origen the first founder of that distinction, brings it but doubtfully, with Opinor. I thinke; though Theodoret 150 yeres after came to affirme it without doub∣ting. But what skils it whether there be such a distinction or no betwixt the Greeke words, seeing the Exod 20.  Hebrew, wherein the Commaundement was written will not admit any such difference, and both Origen and Theodoret hold Images forbidden by the Commaundement as well as I∣dols; and your vulgar translation followes not the Greeke, but the Sculple. Hebrew? Yea the Greeke translators . 16 1. Deut. 7. 5. & 1. . & . 15. Iud. 17. 13. 14. & 18. 14. 18. 30. otherwhere and that often for the same Hebrew word, giue the . gene∣rall Greeke word, that expresseth it very fully, and some∣times the very word . Image. But I must handle this point more largely then I thought, because you challenge vs to bring one place in the whole Bible where they are vsed both for one, which I shew thus. The word which in the Commaundement they translate
Idoll, in Isay. 40. . another place they interpret Image. He seekes a cunning workeman to prepare an Image; and in the 19. verse, The workeman melteth an Image. Besides, the word Image is often put for the Idols of the heathen. 2. Reg 1. 1 Then the people of the land destroyed the house of Baall with his Alters and his I∣mages; Ezech 7.   16. 17. & 3. 14. They made Images of their Abhominations. Thou madest thy selfe Images of men. When she saw men painted vpon the wall the Images of the Chaldeans, that is, the Idols o the Chaldeans, attired after the fashion of the people of that countrey. Lastly, that  word which the Chale Paraphrast . vseth in the Commaundement, and so generally, where the word of the Commandement is in the Hebrew, the Greeke doth commonly translate Image, as you may see in the pla∣ces last recited. I thinke it is very hard to find any two words that agree in all significations, both proper and tropicall. Neither do we say that Idoll may be vsed wheresoeuer image may, for custome is the rule of speech. But we denie both that distin∣ction which Origen deuised, and that which you would haue past for currant, as if Idoll did signifie some certaine kind of shape, and not generally any forme, as the word Image doth. Tertullian De Idol. c. 3. saith, that euery forme or representati∣on is to be tearmed an Idol. But Tertullian (saith M. Perkins) affirmeth them to be all one; not so  De Idololar. neither: For he maketh Idolum a diminuture of dos, which signifieth a forme or similitude: So that Jdolon, is but a small similitude or slender Image, not so much for the quantitie, as for that it representeth but darkely. Master Perkins doth not say so of Tertullian, that he af∣firmes them to be all one, but that Tertullian saith Euery forme or representation is to be tearmed an Idoll.  (saith Tertull. de Idolola 3. Tertullian) in Greeke signifies formam, a forme or shape, from thence by deriuation  is framed, and hath in like sort with vs made the word Formulam, therefore Omnis for∣,  formu∣la. euery shape great or little must be called an Idoll. Thence comes Idolatry, which is any seruice about any Idoll. Iudge your selfe now whether Master Perkins did not report Tertullians opinion truly, and
whether you do not wrong him by making him say that he neuer meant. So do you Tertullian himselfe, in giuing a false reason of the word not intended by him. And howsoeuer the word may in deriuation be a diminutiue, yet in vse it is not so, but signifieth any shape great or little, representing a thing perfectly or imperfectly, as the word  doth. And Isidore Etym. lib. 8. saith, that the heathen vsed the names of image and idol indifferently in one and the same signification. Eustathius and excellent Greeke interpreter, vpon the eleauenth book of Homers Odyssea, describeth Idolum to signifie a vaine and vanishing Image, as the shadow of a man, a ghost, or phantastical imagination. And so it cannot be, that al profane Authors vse these two words indifferētly, seeing both in proper signification, and by the declaration of the lear∣ned, there is great difference betweene them. Eustath. in Hormer. Odyss. 11. Eustathius doth not vndertake to deliuer in that place the proper nature of the word, but to shew what Homer there meanes by it, namely, that he vseth it to signifie the ghosts or shapes of men departed, . fashioned of ayre, or . imprinted in the ayre by a certaine shadow or slight re∣semblance, where the . very word comming from image, is put to expresse the likenes. The same word (Idoll) Homer vseth Homer. Ili∣ad. lib. 5. otherwhere to signifie the shape or likenes which Apollo made of Aeneas to saue him from Diomedes. Both these kinds of Idols Virgil (who vnderstood Homer well e∣nough, and knew the nature and vse of Greeke and Latine words) calls Images. For the former, viz. the shapes of the deceased, thus he speakes of Aeneas wife Creusa, Virgil. Aene∣id. lib. 2. Infoelix si∣mulachrum atque ipsius vmbra Creüsae, visa mihi ante ocu∣los, & nota maior image: where hauing termed Creusas ghost first a likenes, and then a shadow, last of all he calls it an Image, and presently after comparing it to the wind, and to a sleepe or a dreame, he giues it the name of Image againe. Ter frustra comprensa manus effugit image, par leuibus ventis volucrique simillima somno. So he speakes of Virgil. Aene∣id. . 3. Anchises ghost, vsing the very same verses, and in the Lib. 4. fourth booke. Turbida tenet i∣mago; so againe of him Tua tristis Imago. And of Adrastus, Lib. 6. Adrasti pallentis Imago; yea the apparitions of the Cen∣taures,
and Sea-Monsters, which by Origens distinction are Idols, Virgil calls Lib. 6.—Tenues sine corpore vitas, and saith that they flye vp and down,—Caua sub imagine formae. The other shapes made of aire, or some such thin stuffe, he describes by the same word Image, as in that fiction of Aeneas shape, made by Iuno to draw Turnus out of the battaile, which he cais Lib. 10—Tenuem sine viribus vmbram, and compareth it to the ghosts of the deceased, and to apparitions in dreames. This he calls an Image, At primas laeta ante acies exultat imago, which Homer would haue termed . Whom would you refute by this? Isidor. Ety∣mol. lib. 8. Isidore is the author, Master Perkins the reporter only. But you strike at aduen∣ture, not respecting where the blow light, but where you meane to hit; yet you should haue said no more then they do, that the heathen vse the names indifferently; not that all prophane authors do so, and you should haue vnderstood them aright too, as I shewed before; not that both words are vsed in all significations, in which either is, but that they are vsed indifferently for any kind of shape, whether it haue something or nothing answering to it in any true naturall being. And. S. Steuen in his apologie, Act. 7. 41. calls the golden calfe an Idol. But S. Stephen cals the golden calfe an Idoll, so it was indeed: What is that to the purpose? Do you aske what it is to the purpose, that Act. 7. 41. S. Stephen cals the golden Calfe an Idoll? it directly ouerthrowes the di∣stinction against which Master Perkins disputes. For a Calfe is a thing that hath a reall being in nature, and is not an ima∣gination of the braine, as Sphinx, and Triton, and such like are, according to the authors you alleage in this case. Hierome In Isai. 37.  saith, that idols are images of dead men. And S. Ierom saith, That Idols are the Images of dead-men (adde) that are taken for Gods: True, many Idols be Images: all such as truly represent any person that was once liuing here; but no Images be Idols, vnlesse it be taken for a God: And so Idols requires besides the Image, that it be made a God, or the Image of a false God. If we adde your glosse, we shall adde nothing in defence
barbarous Nations, Scythians, Numidians, Seres, and Per∣sians; he answers, that they agree indeed in the matter, refu∣sing to build, or vse any Altars and Images, but that the rea∣sons of their opinions are diuers; they following I know not what fansies, the Christians refraining these things, in obedience to Gods Commandements, namely the first and second, which hee there recites. Therefore Origen holds it forbidden in those Commandements to make, or vse any Image in the seruice of God. To this doctrine of Origen the practise of the Primitiue Church is agreeable, that I may please you with more testi∣monies. We are slatly forbidden (saith Clemens A∣lexa in  ad ges. Clement of Alexan∣dria) to vse that deceitfull craft or art. For the Prophet saith, Thou shalt not make the likenes of any thing in heauen, or earth below. And againe, We haue no . materiall image, but such an Image as is perceiued by the vnderstanding: God, who only is the true God, is conceiued by vnderstanding, not by sense. Clemens Stromat. lib. 6. In ano∣ther place: Moses, many ages agoe, made a direct law, that wee should not make any grauen, cast, or painted image; that we might not sed sensible things, but might passe to the consideration of those things which are perceiued by the vnderstanding. And further, Ibid. The daily fight or beholding of an Image, causeth the maiestie of God to become vile and contemptible; and, to wor∣ship, by a materiall thing, that which is conceiued by the vnder∣standing, is to make it vile by sense. God (saith Tertul de Idololatr c. 4. Tertullian) forbids as well the making as the worshipping of an Idoll. And afterward, For this cause, namely to roote out the matter of Idolatrie, the law of God proclaimes, Make no Idoll: and adding, nor likenes of any thing in heauen, in earth, or in the Sea, forbids the seruants of God all ouer the world to vse that Craft. In Tetul, de co∣ron. militis. cap. 20. another place: Iohn saith, Babes keepe your selues from Idols; he saith not now from Idolatrie, as from the seruice of them, but from Idols, that is, from the shape of them. For it is an vnworthie thing, that Vt imago Dei vini, ima∣go idoli & moi fiat. the image of an I∣doll, and dead thing, should bee made the image of the liuing God. That I will not let passe (saith Lilius Gi∣rald. de dijs gentium. Syn∣. . Lilius Giraldus) that we
Christians, as sometimes also the Romanes, had no Images in the Primitiue Church. Optatus an ancient Bishop of Africa, counted it a defi∣ling of the Altar, to haue an Image set vpon it, and Optat. lib. 3. penè in ex∣tremo. saith, that when it was reported, that Paul and Macarius would come and place an Image on the Altar, they that heard it were asto∣nied at it, and accounted it as execrable to partake with it. Images (saith August. in Psal. 113. Austin) are of more force to corrupt the mi∣serable soule, because they haue a mouth, eyes, eares, nosthrils, hands, and feete, than to instruct it, because they speake not, heare not, smell not, handle not, walke not: out of which place of Austin, Cassander. in consul. ad Masimil im∣perat. de imag cap. 21. Cassander concludes, that there was no vse of Ima∣ges in Churches in Austins time. The reason is alike, where∣soeuer they be vsed to religion. Arguments of the Papists. The reasons which they vse to defend their opini∣ons are these. I. In Salomons temple were erected Cherubines, which were images of angels, on the Mercieseat where God was worshipped: and there∣by was resembled the Maiestie of God, therefore it is lawful to make images to resemble God. Answ. They were erected by special commandement from God, who prescribed the verie forme of them, and the place where they must be set: and thereby Moses had a warrant to make them; otherwise hee had sinned: let them shew the like warrant for their images if they can. Secondly the Cherubins were placed in the holie of holies in the most inwarde place of the Temple, and consequently were remoued from the sight of the people, who onely hearde of them: and none but the high Priest saw them, and that but once a yeere. And the Cherubins without the vaile,
though they were to be seen, yet were they not to be worshipped. Exod. 20. 4. Therefore they serue no∣thing at all to iustifie the images of the Church of Rome. Obiect. II. God appeared in the forme of a man to Abraham, Gen. 18. 1. 13. and to Daniel, who sawe the ancient of daies sitting on a throne, Dan. 9. Now as God appeared, so may he be resembled: therefore (say they) it is lawfull to resemble God in the forme of a man, or any like image, in which he shewed him∣selfe to men. Answ. In this reason the proposition is false: for God may appeare in whatsoeuer forme it pleaseth his maiestie; yet doth it not follow; that man should therefore resemble God in those formes; man hauing no libertie to resemble him in any forme at all: vnlesse he bee commaunded so to doe. Againe, when God appeared in the forme of a man, that forme was a signe of Gods presence onely for the time when God appeared, and no longer; as the bread and wine in the sacrament are signes of Christs bodie and blood, not for euer, but for the time of ad∣ministration: for afterward they become againe, as common bread and wine. And when the holy Ghost appeared in the likenesse of a doue, that like∣nesse was a signe of his presence no longer then the holy Ghost so appeared. And therefore hee that would in these formes represent the Trinitie, doth greately dishonour God, and doe that for which hee hath no warrant. Hauing confuted the Protestants arguments against the making of  You ouerweene your selfe. You should shew why. Genes. 18. Images, to represent some property or action of God; I now come vnto the Catholike proofe of them. The first reason set dovvne by M. Perkins I reserue to the next point: the second is; God appeared in the forme of a man to Abraham and to Daniel, VVho savv the auncient of daies sit∣ting
on a throne. Now as God hath appeared, so may he bee purtraied Dan 9. and dravvne: M. Perkins his ansvvere is, not so, vnlesse it be expressel commanded by God. Reply, This first is flat against his ovvne second conclusion, where he holdeth it lawfull to present to the eye in Pictures, any histories of the Bible in priuate plaes, both the foresaid apparitions be in the Old Te∣stament, and therefore may be painted in priuate places, which cannot be truly done without you do represent God in the same liknes, as there he appeared. And what reason leadeth in words to represent those acti∣ons of God, the same serueth to expresse them in liuely colours: Not so saith M. Perkins, because when God appeared in the forme of man, it was a signe of Gods presence, for that time only, and for no longer: be it so, it might notwithstanding be recorded in writing, that the memory of such maiestie ioyned with louing kindnesse might endure longer. And if it pleased God, that this short presence of his should be written to be perpetually remembred, euen so the same might be ingrauen in brasle, to recommend it to vs so much the more effectually: For as the famous Poet doth by the light of nature sing. Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus. Such worthy acts as by the eares are to the mind conueide, Do moue vs lesse then that which is by faithfull eye descride. It is your aduantage that Master Perkins is not aliue to answere you, who was better able to expresse his own mea∣ning, than any otherman can be. But, in my opinion, it was his purpose, in that second conclusion, to graunt the pour∣traying of those histories onely, which had nothing to bee painted that was forbidden, as he alwaies tooke the resem∣bling of God to be. That was generall, as rules of Gram∣mar are; exceptions are not contradictions, but rather parts of those rules. If you speake of that reason, which moued God to in∣spire Moses for the writing of that storie, we grant that hee might to the same end haue also enioyned the painting or engrauing of it. But since it pleased him not so to doe, wee answere, that your argument prooues nothing: There is the same reason (say you) for painting that, and such stories; there∣fore they may as well be painted, as written. The consequence is false: For the one was inspired, as I said, and the other not. Vpon the writing, because it is Gods word, wee may looke for a blessing from him. Not so vpon our owne deuices, ac∣companied
with danger of Idolatrie. For my part (sauing other mens better iudgement) I perswade my selfe, that God, who commanded the Israelites to write the words of the law about their houses, and in other places for instru∣ction and remembrance, would haue enioyned the painting of his especiall miracles and workes in their fauour, if he had not seene it to bee dangerous, in respect of Idolatrie that might ensue. For questionlesse, a picture or an Image is of great force, chiefly if the word be added for exposition of it; as we see in Emblems and Impresas. But this helpe, in the most wise iudgement of God, was not thought so much worth, that for it the danger of Idolatrie, to which all men are so prone by nature, should be aduentured. There∣fore we must not be led in this case by the shew of humane reason, but assure our selues it was not for nothing, that God, when he taught the Iewes by signes and shadowes, appointed not the vse of painting diuine histories, for in∣struction, memorie, or deuotion. Concerning Horat. de arte poetic. ad Pison. Horaces testimonie, if you had seene as farre into the meaning of it, as you imagine he did into the vse of Pictures, you would neuer haue alleaged it to such purpose, as now you doe. For you might easily haue per∣ceiued, that the Poet grounds not his precept vpon any light of nature, but vpon experience of mens affections; and (which is the principall thing) that he speakes not at all of any dumbe pictures, but of the liuely gestures of Players vp∣on the stage. Some things (saith he) are acted on the stage, some are onely reported there, and supposed to be done in some other place. Now betwixt these is this comparison made, that those things doe more affect which we see done, than those that we onely heare reported; what is this to pictures? your Poe∣trie failes you, as well as your Diuinitie. This argument may be confirmed by the Pictures of Angels, of Ver∣tues, and other such like of spirituall or accidentall nature: for if such things as haue no bodily proportion or shape, may notwithstanding be counterfeit and resembled in some qualities, why may not some proper∣tie or action of God be in like manner represented? But some qualities of Angels (say you) which are spirituall
substances, and the qualities of Angels and men, which we call vertues (and which, by your leaue, haue as true a being as other creatures, though they neuer be of themselues, but ad∣ioyned to some spirituall subiect) may be counterfeited and resembled. Therefore why may not some propertie or action of God be in like manner reputed? First, I thinke, you are hardly able to prooue your antecedent, that such things may be resembled in outward formes for Gods seruice. Se∣condly, though that be graunted, yet your consequence is naught. For there is a commaundement of God against the later, as we heard out of Clement, least his Maiesty should by such resemblances grow into contempt; to which I adde, least Idolatry should ensue vpon it. That thou mayest (Reader) vnderstand the better what we meanee obserue that Pictures represent after three sorts. Some expresse to the quicke, the very shape, proportion and colour of the patterne; as the liuely Picture of man, or of any such corporall thing: others represent things as they did appeare and were acted, as if the Painter should ex∣presse the meeting of God with Abraham and his entertainement, he must then resemble God in the same likenes of a man in which he shew∣ed himselfe to Abraham. Thirdly, an Image of a spirituall thing, may be dravvne not to resem∣ble the nature of it, but to lead our vnderstanding by such a similitude, into some better knovvledge of that thing: so are Angels painted like goodly young men vvith vvings, to teach vs that they be of an excel∣lent pure nature, euer flourishing and most ready to dispatch vvith all expedition any imployment to vvhich God sends them; and so may God the Father be pourtraied, as a goodly old graue man, sitting in his throne of maiestie, attended vpon by millions of Angels, (as he is described in Daniel 9.) to instruct vs how he is eternall, insinit, wise, and of most re∣doubtable maiestie: in either of these two latter sorts, we hold that God In the idola∣trous second Councill at Nice.  may be represented, and so in the seauenth generall Councell, the draw∣ing of the holy Ghost, in forme of a Doue, as he appeared. Mat. 3. is ap∣proued. Your discourse of the diuers representations intended by pictures, I passe ouer, as nothing to purpose. For the reason of our denying images, is not only because God can not be resembled, as being a spirit and infinit, but principally, be∣cause he himselfe hath forbidden it, as a certaine occasion of Idolatry. This painting of Angels like faire yong men with wings,
of deniall from the Tabernacle built by Moses, wherein you will not remember that the patterne shewed to Moses, was a direction for Salomon, and a warrant in all things that were agreeable to Moses worke. But Master Perkins might haue had enough to say, though he had answered directly, viz. that Salomon was a Prophet, and had also direction for his buil∣ding from the kingly Prophet Dauid his father. And therfore it doth not follow, that because Salomon made such Cherubins, euery man that builds any Church may set vp the like. Or, to speake indeede directly according to his consequent, it is not lawfull for vs to make images to resemble God, because Salo∣mon adorned the Temple with Cherubins. Moses indeed had an expresse precept for the making of them, as he had for the Curteines and Curteine-rods, and euery particular belong∣ing to the Tabernacle. But Salomon vvithout any speciall commaunde∣ment For it vvas a patterne ap∣pointed by God for his house. out of his high and holy vvisdome, vnderstood that he might most lavvfully and laudably imitate that heauenly patterne of Moses: And as the building vvas farre more sumptuous and stately: so in the number and quantity of Pictures exceeded, which is a sufficient instruction and vvarrant for all men after his daies to make and set Images in the Church. And this finally M. Perkins seemes to graunt, vvhen he saith, that these Cherubs vvithout the veile, were there to be seene, but not to be vvorshipped: so that vve haue gotten one step further; that Images may not only be made, but also set vp in the Churches. Now to your Enthymem. In Salomons temple there were Cherubins within the holy of Holyes, and without vpon the walls and dores. Therefore all holy pictures may be placed in Churches. First concerning your Antecedent, it must be remembred, that those Cherubins were not in the vtter court, where the people vsed to come and pray, but in the holy place where the Altar of Incense stood, and where Luke 1. 9. 10 Leuit. 16. 17. none came but the Priests, and in the holie of holies, into Exod 30. 20 Leuit. 16. 2. Heb. 9. 7. which the high Priest only might enter, and that but once a yeare, where the Ark was. So that these images were remoued out of the peoples sight, and that by Salomons propheticall wisdome. Secondly there was no vse of these images to any purpose of religion, but they serued only for ornament and state, as the other worke of the temple did, except the two Cheru∣bins vpon the mercy seate. Ere I answere to your conse∣quence,
I may not forget to note, that in your cōsequent or conclusion you call Images holy, as if by I know not what holynes, they had some right to be placed in Churches, as also you speake afterward, where should holy pictures of holy men be more properly bestowed then in holy places? Nothing is to be counted holy, but that which either hath a qualitie of holines in it, as all that are sanctified haue, or else is belon∣ging to the seruice of God. And whatsoeuer is of this later kind is rather hallowed then holy, and hath no holines in it, but by being consecrated to such a vse. Neither is this con∣secration, as that of the Ceremoniall lawe was, whereby a thing was made indeed holy ceremonially, as nothing with vs can be, the ceremonies being abrogated. So that such things are no longer nor farther holy, then they are em∣ployed in that seruice; and therefore the water with which we baptise, and the bread and wine with which we cele∣brate the Supper of the Lord, after those actions are past, are no more holy then any other matter, bread, or wine. Images therefore can no way be holy more then any other worke in Churches: therfore setting apart this bare title of holines, I denie the consequence of your Enthymem: Salomon ador∣ned the inner parts of the Temple where the people came not with pictures of Cherubins, Therefore it is lawfull to set vp ima∣ges in Churches where the people ordinarily come. Who seeth not great difference betweene the Antecedent and the Con∣sequent? To omit that which I answered before on Master Perkins behalfe, concerning Salomons warrant for his so do∣ing, his father and himselfe being Prophets. Which is fortified by the testimony of Tertullian, in the place cited before: where he saith, that our Sauiour was Pictured vpon holy Chali∣ces, which were vsed at the Altars: and of Sozomenus, vvho vvitnesseth that our Sauiours Picture vvas taken into the Church. The authoritie of other mens doings is of lesse waight. Tertullian saith, Christ was pictured like a Shepheard vpon the chalices: Nazianzen trimmed vp Images: Basil allowed of the Martyr Barlaams picture in the Churches: Damasus saith Constantine set vp a siluer image of our Sauiour: Chrysostome
and Austin say, that the Crosse was on the holy tables, There∣fore it is lawfull to set vp Images in Churches. Of the Antece∣dent by and by, in the meane while I deny the consequence. They allow of Images, therefore they are lawfull. If your Church thinke it possible for these men to erre, as I am sure it doth, then may it not be takē for lawfull because they approue it. But to the Antecedent, what doth Tertull. de pudicit. lib. 1 Tertullian but tell vs what the Chalice-maker had done in likelyhood, for the setting forth of his worke? both this, and that of Sozom. hist. lib. 5. cap. 20. Sozo∣mens report is answered before: it is not proued there euer was any such Image of our Sauiour. S. Gregorie Nazianzen maketh mention of Images in the Church of D. B. P. Epist. 49. Orat. in Bar∣laam.  Neocaesarea, trimmed vp by himselfe. Saint Basil, pointeth to that holy mans Picture, standing in the Church. Nazianzen. epist. 49. ad Olympium. Nazianzen and Basil. orat. in Barlaam Mar∣tyr. Basil speake not of images to any vse of Religion, whereof only our question is, but either for or∣nament, as the former saith, Nazianzen. omne nostrum in eo exor∣nando studi∣um. All our labour and care in the beautifying of it; or for honor to the martyr, which was ciuill, not religious, and yet scarce iustifiable. Damasus In vita Silu. shevveth hovv Constantine in the Church of S. Iohn Lateran erected a siluer Image vnto our Sauiour. S. Chrysostome  demonst. quod Christ. sit Deus: And S. Augustine Serm. 19. de sanct.  do teach, that the Crosse was on the holy Tables, and vsed at all holy fun∣ctions. This Daus in vita Syluestri. report of Constantines erecting a siluer image, see∣meth to depend vpon the tale of his being baptised at Rome by Syluester, whereas it is apparant by Euseb. le vita Const. lib. 4. cap. 62. Eusebius and Theodoret. hist. Eccles. lib. 1 cap 32. Theo∣doret that he was not baptised till the very end of his life, and in Asia, many hundred miles from that Church of Saint Iohn Lateran in Rome, in Nicomedia, now called by the Turke who possesseth it, Nichor, a towne of Bythinia. Chrysost. in demonst. quòd Christus sit Deus. Chrysostome speaketh of the generall vse of the crosse in all places, not for any holines of the signe, but as a marke of profession. The crosse (saith he) is in the purple robes, in the Crownes; the crosse is at our prayers, the crosse is in our armor, the crosse is vpon the holy table, the crosse is ouer all the world,
yea, the crosse glisters aboue the sunne. If this crosse were an Image, Optat. lib. 3. Optatus (as we heard before) counts the presence of it a defiling of the Altar. That place of Aug. ser. 19. de Sanct. if it be Augustines. Austin intreates of the crosse, both for the signe, and image of it most superstitiously: ascribing strange effects to it, which no moderate or reasonable man can de∣fend, except he will expound it as I shewed before, of an outward ceremonie vsed in prayer, to which purpose wee may applie that speech of his in the end of that discourse, Looke what the presence of Christs body did vpon the earth, that doth the famous memory of the victorious crosse, with a faithfull calling vpon the name of Christ. Otherwise it is wonderfull strange that Austin should so highly esteeme of the crosse, whereas Optatus a worthie Bishop of the same countrey, in Anno 380. the beginning of Austins time accounts so meanely of it. And the reason why Images should principally be set in Churches, is very pregnant. For where should holy Pictures of holy men be more properly bestovved, than in holy places? And the Church being a resem∣blance of heauen (as S. Paul teacheth,) is most conueniently decked vp Hebr. 9. They are repre∣sentations of them, as they were earthly creatures.  vvith Images, the representations of heauenly creatures: that men en∣tring into that holy place, may by the vievv and consideration of such a heauenly shew, retire their minds from worldly busines, and lift them vp vnto the soueraigne Monarch of both heauen and earth. The Hebr. 9. 23. Apostle saith no such thing of any Church now, but affirmes, that the Tabernacle of the Iewes was ceremo∣nially a shadow of heauenly things. And yet it would be remembred, that the Tabernacle and Temple had no Ima∣ges, but in the holie places, where the people came not. We hold it very conuenient to haue our Churches modestly a∣dorned, rather than sumptuously, and with such kinde of or∣naments, as may not carrie away the minde by the outward sense, either to a vaine imagination, or to some superstitious conceit. Now let vs come to those tvvo obiectione of M. Perkins, vvhich see me to be against the erection of Images in Churches. The first is out of the Councell of Eliberis cap. 36. which commandeth, that nothing should be painted on the walles of the Church, that was adored of the people. Ans. That if the Councell speake of the Image of God (in vvhich sense. M. Perkins citeth it, and the word (adored) doth insinuate) then
it may be said, that the Councill inhibiteth that sort of Gods Images, vvhich are made to expresse the diuine nature. If it be extended vnto all sorts of Images: I answere, that they were then forbidden to be drawen vpon the Church vvalles, but not to be set in Tables vpon the Altar, or in any other place. The reason is, because that Councell vvas holden in time of persecution, as appeareth by the twenty fiue Canon of it: and then, if the persecutor had found out the place of their assembly, as they often did: those Pictures must needs either haue been defaced by them∣selues, or left vnto the derision and despight of the Heathens; And Pi∣ctures also painted vpon such poore walles as they had then to their Churches, vvould either by the moysture of the vvalles, or other incom∣moditie, haue bin quickly disfigured: wherefore, to the greater honor of such sacred things, those graue Fathers thought it not meete to haue them dravven vpon the Church vvalles, there being many more meete places for them in the Churches. You Concil. Eli∣ber. cap. 36. come backe now to those two allegations, which should, and might haue been answered as fitly in their due place. Your first answere hath no shew of reason in it. For it is absurd to imagine, that any Christians, to whom onely the Councill speakes, would thinke the diuine nature, which is spirituall and infinite, could be exprest by any picture. But if it be possible for the people to be so blind, yet the Bishops and Ministers, who had the charge of such places, must needs know it to bee vnlawfull, and vnpossible. Besides, if they meant to forbid such Images onely, why doe they not call them Idols after your distinction? why doe not they expresse their meaning more plainly, but speake so dange∣rously, to make all Images thought vnlawfull? As the word (Adored) was (in your opinion) a warrant for Master Perkins to applie that Canon to the Images of God; so by the same reason is the other word (worshipped) which the Councill hath, a sufficient authoritie to stretch the decree to all Images that may bee worshipped. Your coniectures are meere shifts, refuted by the very words of the Councill. It is decreed (saith the Councill) that there may be no Images in the Church: what will become then of your Images vpon Altars, vnlesse you will remoue your Altars out of the Church? That which followeth, doth not respect the walles, more than any other part of the Church; but names them specially, vpon which Images most commonly were
painted. But what a toy is it, that you talke of persecutors finding out the place of their assemblie, when they could hold a Councill, and had Churches to repaire to? Could their Churches be vnknowne? Further, if their care had bin to prouide, that the moysture of the walles might not dis∣figure the Images, they would haue said plainly, We will haue no Images on Church walles, least that which is adored and wor∣shipped, come to some disgrace: and this would also haue in∣cluded the other reason of the persecutors despight. But it is manifest, that the meaning of the decree is this, that they will not suffer any Images in Churches, because that which is worshipped and adored, may not bee resembled by pi∣ctures. The decree indeede speakes onely of the Images of God, to whom only religious adoration and worship is due, and may lawfully be performed. The second obiection is out of a post-script of Epiphanius letter, vnto Iohn Patriarke of Ierusalem, in which is written, as M. Perkins falsely re∣porteth: that it is against the authority of Scripture, to see the Pictures of Christ, or of any Saint to hang in the Church. Ans. It is there only, to see the Picture of a man. Novv that he should It is expr said. meane of Christ or of some Saint is only gathered, yet M. Perkins makes no bones to thrust them both into the Text: euen so do we thinke that some old enemy of Images added that post-script vnto Epiphanius letter. Our reasons are, because it hath no coherence with the former letter or ste. Againe, in the seauenth Councell, when all that could be found out of antiquity, vvas cited against Images: no tidings there of this place, which if it had bin true, might haue bin one of the principall. Thirdlie, in the same Councell, other tvvo places brought, as it were out of Epi∣phanius  6. vvorkes, vvere found to be none of his: And for Images vvas al∣leadged, that Epiphanius ovvne disciples erected an Image to their Ma∣ster, and set it in the Church; vvhich they would neuer haue done, if he had taught them to be against the Scripture so to doe. Master Perkins doth not vndertake to report Epiphanius words, but his matter, which hee performes truly. I found (saith Epiphan.  ad an.  osol. Epiphanius, speaking of a Church at Anablatha, in his trauell to Bethel) in the Church doore a vaile hanging, stai∣ned and painted, and hauing the Image as it were of Christ, or some Saint: for I remember not well whose image it was. When I saw this, that against the authoritie of the Scripture, the image of a man hung in the Church of Christ, I rent it. These are Epi∣phanius
words; whereout I obserue, first, that it is against the authoritie of the Scripture, and therfore against Gods Com∣mandement, that the image of a man should hang in Christs Church. But the Images of al your Saints are such, & those of the Trinitie too, except that Doue for the holie Ghost. Se∣condly, I adde, that it is rightly gathered by necessarie con∣sequence (which is as good euery whit, as plaine words) that it is against Scripture to haue the picture of Christ, or any Saint in the Church. For he saith expresly, that the Image he saw, was the image of Christ, or some Saint; and that it was vn∣lawfull to haue any Image of a man there. There is no reason to call it a post-script; vnlesse euerie last point of any letter not depending vpon the former, be a post-script. Hieronym. n illa epist. Hierome, that translated the Epistle out of Greeke into Latin, found no such diuersitie of stile in it; nei∣ther indeed is it to be found: and this latter part is brought in according to the course of writing in the former. Epipha∣nius cleeres himselfe to Iohn Bishop of Ierusalem, for hauing ordered a Deacon in his Diocesse, he begins his excuse thus: I haue heard &c. In the latter part he defends himselfe con∣cerning the renting of the vaile, and begins that also in the like sort, I haue heard. This was written, and translated three hundred yeeres before that Idolatrous Councill, though perhaps they thought it no wisedome to take knowledge of it. The other places, brought in that Councill, were for Images, and so allowed of by that Councill, and haue since been discerned to be counterfeit; as that is of his Disciples, no thankes to that counterfeit Synod: which dealeth in the same sort also with Basil (you afterward alleage the place for Images) with Cyrill, Ambrose, Athanasius, Chrysostome, Gregorie, and the Apostles themselues, as I shewed before. M. Perkins obserues a special reason in Epiphanius other counterfeit testimony: That Images must not be suffered in the common house, be∣cause vve must carry God in our minds. To vvhich vve ansvvere, that Images must be suffred in all places, that vve may the better carry-God in our harts, being by the sight of them, both often put in mind of him, and much moued to honor and loue him. In steed of answering the other testimonie out of Epi∣phanius,
you go about vnder hand to strike at him thorough Master Perkins sides; but there is no great force in your blow. For (as I said erewhile) there is more daunger of I∣dolatrie in the suffering of Images, especially in any place where God is to bee worshipped, than hope of instruction or deuotion by the sight of them. And (as Epiphan. cont. Encratit. citat. in Con∣cil. Constan∣tinop. 7. Epiphanius saith in this place) It is not meete that a Christian should be exerci∣sed by the eyes, but by the meditation of the minde: For such sight (as Clemens Strom. lib. 6. Clement taught vs before) abaseth the Maiestie of God, and begets in vs erroneous opinions. Obiect. III. Man is the image of God, but it is lawfull to paint a man, and therefore to make the i∣mage of God. Ans. A very cauill: for first a man cannot be painted, as he is the image of God, which stands in the spiritual gifts of righteousnesse and true holinesse. Againe, the image of a man may be pain∣ted for ciuill or historicall vse, but to paint any man for this ende to represent God, or in the way of reli∣gion, that wee may the better remember and wor∣ship God, it is vnlawfull. Other reasons which they vse, are of small moment, and therefore I omit them. Differ. II. They teach and maintaine, that ima∣ges of God and of Saints my be worshipped with re∣ligious worship, specially the crucifixe. For Summ. part. 3. quaest. 25. art. 3. Tho∣mas of Watering saith, Seeing the crosse doth represent Christ, who died vpon a crosse, and is to bee worshipped with diuine honour: it followeth that the crosse is to be wor∣shipped so too. We on the contrary, hold they may not. Our principall ground is the second commaunde∣ment, which containeth two partes: the first, forbid∣deth the making of Images to resemble the true God, the second forbids the worshipping of them,
or God in them, in these wordes, Thou shalt not bow downe to them. Now, there can be no worship done to any thing lesse then the bending of the knee. Novv I come vnto a third point, which M. Perkins maketh the second of our difference: That Images may be not only made and set in Churches, but also vvorshipped. M. Perkins holds the contrarie: and his principall ground is the se∣cond commandement; vvhich containes, saith he, tvvo parts. The first, forbids the making of Images to resemble God; the second, the vvor∣shipping of them or God in them, in these vvords: Thou shalt not bovv dovvne to them. Ans. If it be only forbidden to make the Image of God, and to adore it: then the making and worshipping of the Image of Christ, or of any other creature, is not there prohibited: And so this second commande∣ment more than thrise alleadged, vvill not serue the turne against any o∣ther Image but God only. And in plaine reason, according also to Master Perkins his ovvne confession, the Commandements of the first Table, touch only our duty tovvards God, that vve giue him all his due honor, and do not giue any part therof vnto any thing else whatsoeuer: Wher∣fore diuine and godly worship is only there spoken of, and not such wor∣ship as we giue vnto any creature, or to the picture of it: and consequent∣ly, there is nothing there against the vvorshipping of our holy Images. It is not onely forbidden to make the Image of God, and to worship it, but (as Master Perkins said before) to make an Image of any thing in the way of Religion, to worship God, much more to worship the creature thereby. There∣fore the Assumption, that should be added to that proposi∣tion of yours, if it be only forbidden, &c. namely; but it is only forbidden to make the image of God, and to adore it, is false, and so the second Commandement is against all Images for Gods seruice. The Commandements of the first table touch onely our dutie to God. True; and it is an especial part of our dutie to him, that we giue no religious honour to any thing whatso∣euer, but to him onely. For as Religion is a dutie of the crea∣ture to the Creator, and not any bond betwixt creature and creature: so is religious honour due onely to him, to whom religion is appropriated. Therefore the Heathen were neuer so sottish, as to worship any man or thing with religious worship, whereto they did not first ascribe some kinde of
diuinitie, according to which they proportioned their wor∣ship thereto. Obserue that there is a soueraigne vvorshippe due to God, as to the Creator and gouernour of all the vvorld, and to giue this to any crea∣ture, is Idolatrie. Another honor by infinit degrees inferiour, yet abso∣lute in itself, is ascribed vnto Angels, and men as creatures endued with reason, and made after the likenesse of God; and to exhibitth is to whom it is due, is ciuilitie and not Idolatrie. This honor may be diuided into two parts, because these creatures are like to God, asvvell in their natu∣rall povvers and qualities, as in their supernaturall: And that honour vvhich is giuen to man or Angell (in respect of any naturall quality, may be called morall or ciuil; But that vvhich is attributed vnto them, in re∣gard of their supernaturall gifts may vvell be called religious and spiri∣tuall, because it is due vnto them only for their spirituall and religious qualities. There is a third kind of worship, yet meaner then the other; which is a kind of dependant and respectiue worship; as vvhen a seruant is ho∣noured or cherished, not for his ovvne, but for his masters sake. And this is that worship which vve allovv vnto Images, vvhich for the Saints sake whom it doth represent, vve do either reuerently regard, or take off our hat, or bovv our knee vnto it. This third kind of worship, being all we al∣low He is altoge∣ther an idola∣ter that so wor∣shippeth any Image. vnto Pictures, were he not that vnderstands it, more than half fran∣ticke, that should thinke it a great disparagement vnto the incompre∣hensible vvorship of God, that to one of his seruants Pictures, I should yeeld some such pettie reuerence; or that God should forbid this in the fore-front of his ten Commaundements? nothing lesse. This discourse, to colour your Idolattie by a distinction of worship, hath more craft than truth. For first, if you meane plainly, why doe you not tell vs what that soueraigne wor∣ship is, which you acknowledge due to the Creator onely, that we may consider whether you giue it to any creature or no? Secondly, what is the meaning of those words, that the honor ascribed to men and Angels, is absolute in it selfe, and to what purpose is it here alleaged? Thirdly, the chiefe rea∣son of worshipping God, is our dependance vpon him, as . d . lib. 1. the Heathen acknowledge, and experience shewes, in that ciuill worship we giue to Princes & Magistrates. And how∣soeuer Epicurus denying the prouidence of God, and his gouerning of the world, thought to auoide some blame in allowing worship to the Gods, as you do, in regard of their excellent and blessed nature; yet neither was that accoun∣ted
sufficient by the statesmen or learned, and in truth it procures generally rather a reuerend opinion, than any true worship. Lastly, I pray you remember, that the worship, which afterward you diuide into ciuill and religious, is here in the generall nature made ciuill, yea euen that to Angels. That which the creatures lacke in waight, it seemes you will make vp by number. They may not haue (say you) the so∣ueraigne worship due to God. But to make thē amends, you al∣low them two kinds of worship: ciuill, in regard of their na∣turall resemblance of God, and religious, in respect of their super∣naturall likenesse to him. Whereas God, hauing nothing in him supernaturall, must haue but one of the two only, and that as it may seeme by proportioning the worship to crea∣tures, not Ciuil, but Religious. For why should God haue re∣ligious honor for those properties, aboue all degrees, and creatures for the same, haue but ciuill in their degrees? since in your iudgment they are capable of that honor also, which is religious? Besides, is this difference of honor in respect of the gifts, or of the manner of giuing? if the latter, it is God, who must then haue this diuers worship, according to his diuers manner of working, and not man in whom he workes. So shall ciuill honor belong to God for the natural gifts he bestoweth vpon men. If you regard the excellencie of the gifts, why shuld they not be accounted of proportio∣nably in the Image, which is man, as they are in the substāce and patterne, which is God? But in him those properties, the resemblance wherof you call naturall in man, are of as great excellencie as the other, which in man you tearme superna∣turall; yea, which is more; though in God, his nature and his properties be all one, yet in man the naturall qualities are the more principall, & the other as it were but adiuncts therunto. The natural parts of the soule, that I may so speak, are the vnderstanding and the wil; all gifts and graces what∣soeuer, are but qualities belonging to these two, which are the verie substance of the soule. Further, there is no reason why any religious worship should be performed to man, by reason of these qualities, because none was due to him
before his fall, when he had these: else should Adam haue bin worshipped by Eue, with religious worship, and she by him; For each of them had the Image of God, according to the nature of such creatures, entire and perfect; and if we be∣leeue your Popish doctrine, they had those qualities by an especiall grace of God aboue nature. Moreouer what rea∣son can you giue, why Angels shuld not performe religious worship to the Saints departed, and both they and the same Saints to those men liuing here on the earth, who haue re∣ceiued those supernatural qualities from God, for which re∣ligious worship is due to them, on whom they are bestow∣ed? Therfore this distinction of religious and ciuill worship, is a meere deuise, without any ground of true reason; and all religious worship is due to God, ciuill worshippe only be∣longs to men. That respectiue worship is no other but ciuill; as it may easily appeare, because it may be, and must be giuen euen to profane and reprobat men, if any such be imployed by God in gouernment ouer vs. For howsoeuer the outward manner of the honor we giue to Princes, and Magistrates, depends vpon the Lawes and Customes of the Countries, wherin we liue; yet the duty of honoring them, lies vpon vs in consci∣ence to be performed, because they are Gods Lieutenants and Stewards. This worship if you accounted it ciuill, you might giue to whom you thought good, and should not be condemned of vs for Idolatry, but for follie, though you gaue it to Ima∣ges. Yet such follie, as the Gentiles are not guiltie of, who neuer vsed such reuerence to the statues of any famous men, but where first they had an opinion of some diuine nature. I maruell how you could perswade your selfe to write so vntruly, that the honor you giue to Images, is meaner then the former; and that you would craftilie deceiue the igno∣rant, as if taking off your hat, and bowing your knee were al the honor you giue them. Why did you not then refute Tho∣mas, whom M. Perkins brings in speaking thus. Thom. 3. q. 25. art. 3. Seeing the Crosse doth represent Christ, who died vpon the Crosse, and is to
be worshipped with diuine honor; it followeth that the Crosse is to be worshipped so too. Did you neuer read that of Bellarmine, let this (saith he) Bell   mp. . . . . be one preposition, that the Images of Christ and the Saints are to be worshipped not only by accident and vn∣properly (this is your dependent and respectiue worshippe which you say is all you allow vnto Images) but also proper∣ly, so that the Ao. worship rest in the Image, not only as Vt eem ge exm∣ps. it is in∣steed of the party; whose Image it is? Will you heare a third speake yet more plainly? It is the constant opinion of Diuines (saith Azorius Inst. lib. 9. cap 6. Azorius) that the Image is to be worshipped with the same worship and honor, with which he is worshipped whose Image it is. Belike you are no diuine, or else you would acknowledge another manner of worship due to Images. Let vs heare another Iesuite. The old Schoole-men (saith Gabr. Vasq. de ador. lib. 2. disp. 8. cap. 3. & cap. 8. Vasquez) absolutly affirme that the Images of Christ are to be worshipped with diuine worship. Now for the particular wor∣ship, Concil. Trid. elf. 25. de ve∣nerat. the Councell of Trent, as craftie and warie as it was, saith more then you do, that you fall downe before Images, and kisse them. But who knoweth not, that you performe all out∣ward worship to them; you perfume them with incense, though they cannot smell; you set vp lights before them, though they can∣not see. (and yet it is hard to say whether you or they be the blinder.) You kisse them, you kneele downe to them, you lye pro∣strate on the ground before them, you pray, sing, and say your spe∣ciall seruices before them; How could you do more outward worship to our Sauiour Iesus Christ, then you doe to these babies, and puppets? Was it not more then need thinke you, that the Lord of heauen and earth, should in the very heate of his iealousie, make a law against such abhominations? we may well see it was not for nothing, that hee threatens so long a conti∣nuance of his heauie wrath vpon the breakers of the second Commaundement. Againe, the brasen serpent was a type or image of Christ crucified, Ioh. 3. 14. appointed by God him∣selfe:
yet when the people burned incense to it, 2. King. 18. 4. Hezekias brake it in pieces, and is there∣fore commended. And when the diuell bad our Sa∣uiour Christ, but to bow downe the knee vnto him, and he would giue him the whole world: Christ re∣iects his offer, saying, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue. Matth. 4. 10. A∣gaine, it is lawfull for one man to worship another with ciuill worship, but to worship man with religi∣ous honor is vnlawfull. For all religious worship is prescribed in the first table: and the honour due to man is onely prescribed in the second table and the first commaundement therof, Honor thy father, which honour is therefore ciuill and not religious. Now the meanest man that can bee, is a more excel∣lent image of God then all the images of God or of Saints that are deuised by men. But let vs go on vvith M. Perkins his argument: His second is; the brasen Serpent was an Image of Christ crucified, appointed by God: yet vvhen the children of Israell burned incense vnto it, Ezechias brake it in 4. Reg. 18. peeces. Ans. So when Christians generally giue godly honour to Images, as those Israelits did to the Serpent, let them also be broken by their lavv∣full superiour, if no better remedie may be found: But as that very bra∣sen Serpent duly vvorshipped many hundred yeeres by the same people before they fell to Idolatrie (as witnesseth S. Augustine, vvhere he rec∣koneth the brazen Serpent, among those signes vvhich are vvorthie of religious vvorship) so good Christians, may worship all sorts of holy Pi∣ctures, so they thinke no God to dwell in them, nor put any trust in the Pictures, but vse them only to stirre vp deuotion, to keepe their minds from wandering after their domesticall affaires, and to conserue the me∣mory of Gods happy seruants. By godly honor English men vnderstand, not that which is proper to God, but that which is agreeable to the will of God. If to burne Incense to the brazen Serpent, were to giue it diuine honour, your Images are ordinarily worshipped with diuine honor. Besides Ioh. 3. 14. 1. this brazen Serpent was an
Image of Christ crucified, and therefore by your Diuinitie, might and ought to be worshipped with diuine honour, as Christ himselfe. Yet Hezekiah brake it downe; that is the Magistrate: it is pittie he lacked you to haue aduised him of some better remedie. But Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10 c. 8. Augustine commends him for it, as Religiosa potestate Deo eiens, cum magna pieta tis laude con∣trt. hauing in it done a speciall seruice to God, with great commendation of piety. But what speake I of Augustine? doth not the 2. Reg. 18. 3. 4. holy Ghost reckon it amongst the actions of his vpright walking in the sight of God, according to all that Dauid his Father had done? Doth he not ioyne it with ta∣king away the high places, breaking the Images, and cutting downe the groues, actions precisely commaunded by God himselfe? The brazen Serpent was neuer worshipped by the peo∣ple, but Idolatrously, namely with Incense burned to it. Vnto those daies (saith the 2. Reg. 18. . holy Ghost, speaking of Hezechiahs time) the children of Israel did burne Incense to it; As for Aug. lib. 3. de Trinit. c. 10 Au∣gustine, he giueth no suspition of any such thing. All he saith is this, that such things as God hath appointed to signifie some action of his person, Honorem habere possunt vt religiosa. may haue honor, as things vsed to religi∣on. What honor is this, but a reuerend estimation according to the vse, to which they are applied by the commaunde∣ment of God? which may appeare, because he ioynes with the brazen Serpent, Sicut & literae the writings that God ordeined to the like purpose: viz. the Scriptures, which are inded to be reuerently accounted of, but cannot be worshipped without Idolatrie. The common sort of Papists do put as great trust in their Idols, as euer the Heathen did in theirs. Doe you not teach them to pray to the Crosse, O crux aue spes vnica. All haile our only hope? To en∣treate of the Crosse, that it Auge pijs iu∣stitiam, reis{que} dona veniam. would encrease righteousnes in the godly, and giue pardon to the guilty? Neither may it be shifted off, with saying that this belongeth to Christs Passi∣on, and not to the Crosse. For Thom. 3. q. 5. art. 4. Thomas Aquinas proueth by that Hymne of the Church, that the very Crosse is to be wor∣shipped with diuine worship, and hope of saluation to be placed in it. Thus he reasoneth; we must giue diuine worship to that, in
which we place the hope of our saluation. But we place the hope of our saluation in the Crosse. This Assumption he proueth by the authority of that Hymne: whereupon he infers his con∣clusion. Therefore the Crosse of Christ is to be adored with di∣uine worship: Is not the chiefe vse of your Images, to please God, and to do seruice to them, whose Images they are, by worshipping of them? Did I not shew a little before out of Bellarmine and other, that the Image must haue the honour due to the partie, whose Image it is? yea that fIta vt te∣net ano∣tio in  D. B. P.  the Seas to Rome and Rhemes haue wild wits. O harite Pt! the honour must rest in the Image? Novv to the third argument, vvhich is iolly and vvorthy the vvild-wit of a mad-minister. Christ vvould not so much as bovv his knee vnto the diuell, although he vvould haue giuen him the vvhole vvorld for doing of it. Therfore we must not adore Images; true, if the Image were Master Bezas ensigne, or of their Master the diuell, or any of his hel-hounds. Our Sauiours refusing to bow his knee to the Diuell, is not brought to proue the vnlawfulnes of worshipping Ima∣ges, (and yet some of your saincts are not much better then Thomas Becket) but to shew that bowing the knee is a wor∣ship, how light soeuer you accompt of it, forbidden by God himselfe vnder the name of worship to be giuen to any but himselfe. M. Perkins his fourth reason: A man (saith he) may be vvorshipped vvith ciuill honor; not vvith religious, which is vvholy prescribed in the first Table, and yet the meanest man is a more excellent Image of God, than any painted one. Ans. A man may be worshipped vvith religious honor, in respect of his supernaturall gifts asvvell as vvith ciuill honour of his naturall pro∣perties, as hath bin before declared: and no other religious honor is ei∣ther And before consued. prescribed or proscribed in the first Table, then such only as is pro∣per to God. You should haue answered his proofe as well as you de∣nie his proposition. Master Perkins holds, that all religious worship is proper to God, and therefore conteined in the first Table: you answere, that no religious honor is prescri∣bed, or proscribed (was it you that found fault with Master Perkins ryming?) in the first table, but such only as is pro∣per to God. Your aduersarie graunteth as much, and addes, that all religious honor is proper to him.  Part. 3. qu. 2 . 3. But (saith he) Thomas of VVatering holds, that the Crucifixe is to be
adored vvith the same honor that Christ is. Leauing Thomas of VVate∣ring and of VVapping to them that deserue it: I ansvvere to the place of To Trayterous Jesuits and such other Pa∣pists. S. Thomas of Aquine, that he speaketh (like a most learned Philosopher and diuine) very profoundly; that the Image may be considered in it selfe, and so he saith, it is not to be vvorshipped at all: or as it doth con∣uey our mind vnto that vvhich it doth represent: and so because there is but one and the same motion of our vnderstanding and vvill towards Christ and the Crucifixe: vve doe adore them both at once with the same act of adoration, but in a farre different degree: for Christ vve a∣dore properly as the true God, but the Crucifixe accidentally as a thing ioyned with Christ. Euen as (saith he expounding himselfe) art. 4. when one doth his homage vnto the King, he vvorshippeth vvithall his purple garment, not that any worship is due to the robe, but the whole is giuen vnto the person, which cannot be separated from that which is so close∣ly ioyned to the person: Euen so the diuine person of Christ is properly adored, but improperly all things conceiued together vvith it, are said also by that deep Doctor to be adored. He that hath care of hearing, let him heare: for our purpose it sufficeth to knovv, that he assignes very small vvorship to themselues. Thomas of waterings is the old english name of Thomas de Aquino; the place may so be called, because of some Chap∣pell or religious house built there in honor of him. It was not Master Perkins intent nor his veine to disgrace Thomas by that name, though he do not acknowledge any such sainctship belonging to him. In your answere, first you graunt, that Tho. 3. q. 25. art. 3. Thomas saith, We must worship the crosse of Christ with diuine worship. Therefore you graunt as much as Master Perkins affirmes, and thereby prooue that to be false, which before you deliuered, that the worship you giue to Images, is very small: for you worship some of them by your owne confession, with diuine worship. It appeareth also by this answere, that your Images are not only to stirre vp deuotion &c. but to be worshipt too. Se∣condly I would faine know how this doctrine of Thomas can agree with that of Bellarmine, who will haue the honor to rest in the Image, and not to be only accidentall, and vn∣proper? Thirdly, this distinction doth in no sort satisfie vs, who denie that an Image may be worshipped in any respect whatsoeuer. To the proofe out of Arist. de memor. & re∣minise. Aristotle I answer more particularly, that Thomas presupposeth that which we deny,
that it is lawfull to haue such an Image to such purposes. Besides, if all he say be graunted him, he doth not prooue that it is lawfull to intend worship to the Image, but that the worship performed to the partie whose Image it is, by occasion of the Image, is also giuen to the Image, though to the one principally, to the other but accidentally. Lastly to the similitude I say, it is not true that he which doth his ho∣mage to the king doth worship his purple garment, because it is no part of him; neither should he that had worshipt Christ hanging on the Crosse at the time of his passion, haue worshipped the Crosse together with Christ, no more then he that worships the king being on horseback, worships the horse on which he rides. Indeede he that worships Christ, worships him God and man (though the worship be done to him only in respect of his Godhead) but the reason is, that Chrst is as well man as God. There is no such coniun∣ction betwixt the Image, and the partie whose image it is, and therefore for our purpose it sufficeth to know, that how small honor soeuer he or you assigne to the Images them∣selues, if it be religious it is Idolatrous, if ciuill, ridiculous. But what should I spend time in refuting this distinction of Thomas, when as one of your owne Schoolemen hath done it Anno 1350. long ago: our Countreyman Robert. Ho cot in lib Sa∣pient. lct. 7. Holcot hauing pro∣pounded the question, whether it be lawfull for Christians to adore any Images, and hauing proued it vnlawfull, as by other reasons, so by the second Commaundement, obiects against himselfe out of Thomas in this sort. To this question (saith he) Thomas answereth, That an Image may be conside∣red two waies, either as it is an Image, and so no honor is due vn∣to it, as none is due to wood or stone: otherwise it may be conside∣red, as there is the same motion to the Image, and to that, whose Image it is, and so the same honor is due to the Image, and to him, whose Image it is. But against this answere (saith Holcot) I obiect, first thus, Diuine honor is due to God only, But no Image is God, Therefore such honor is due to no Image. Therefore it implies a contradiction, to say, that diuine honor is due to God only, and yet that it is due to the Image of Christ, and to Christ.
Beside, if the same honour be due to the image of Christ, and to Christ, the same honor is due also to a stone and to Christ, and by consequence, the same honour is due to Christ, and to a creature, which is not to be beleeued. Againe, he that worships any thing with diuine honour, confesseth it to be God. Therefore if any man might lawfully giue diuine honor to the image of Christ, he might lawfully protest, and confesse something that is not God, to be God. Therefore (saith Holcot in his conclusion) It may otherwise be said. That no adoration is due to an Image, and that it is not lawfull to adore any Image. For true adoration is in spirit and deuotion, and in the highest degree of loue; and this we may not direct to any creature. Augustine, and long after him Gregorie, in plaine tearmes denieth Images to be adored. Lastly M. P. ins saith, without quoting any place that Augustine and Gregorie in plainetearmes deny Images to be adored; and so do we too, taking adoring as they do for the vvorship that is proper to God. The places alleaged being vnknowne to you, your an∣swere must needes bee made by gesse; and indeede agrees not with either of them, which Master Perkins quotes: for Edit. 1598. he quotes both particularly, though you denie it. August. de morib. eccles. cap. 35. Au∣stin speakes of the Idols of the Gentiles; and I hope you will not allow them any kinde of worship, not onely not adoration. Master Perkins truly holding all your Images that you worship to be Idols also, condemnes the adoring of them by that place of Austin, though it be intended spe∣cially against the Idols of the Heathen. Gregor. lib. . epist. 9. Gregories testimonie, in the place quoted by Master Perkins, allowes no further vse of any Images, than to bee Lay mens books. They are not set vp in the Churches (saith he) to be adored, but onely to instruct the mindes of the ignorant. If they were set vp to be worshipped with any kinde of wor∣ship, how is this speech of Gregories true? But indeede there was no religious worship but adoration knowne in Grego∣ries time, and that was proper to God, as religion it selfe is. The Papists defend their opinions by these rea∣sons, I. Psalm. 99. 5. Cast downe your selues before his
footestoole. Answ. The wordes are thus to bee read, Bowe at his footestoole: that is, at the Arke and Mercie∣seat, for there hee hath made a promise of his pre∣sence: the words therefore say not, bow to the Arke, but to God at the Arke. The first reason by him proposed is this Psalme 98. Cast dovvne your selues before his sootesoole, vvhich vvas the Arke: novv if the Arke vvere to be vvorshipped, because it represented Gods foot-stoole, much more may the Image be vvorshipped. M. Perkins ansvvereth, that the vvords must be englished thus, Bo at or before the Arke, notto the Arke, but to God before the Arke. Reply. If it were so, yet must they admit that wee must kneele, at or before Images, so we kneele to honour or pray to God: against which, some of their Preachers do crielike mad-men: but the Hebre phrase carryeth, that wee must kneele to the arke, as they who be sklfull in the language do know, and that the arke was worshipped of the Israelites is otherwise very euident: for first none but the high Priest might come into the place where it was: and it was carried before the campewith great solemnitie 1. Reg, 4. Cap. 6. to search out a reasting place for the whole host. And when they were to sight against the Philistins, * they had great confidence in the presence of the arke: and cap. 6,50000. of the Bethsa∣mites were slaine for seeing the arke; and 1. Reg. 2. Oza vvas by God smitten to death for touching the arke. Doth not all this conuince in vvhat reue∣rence the arke vvas had, euen by Gods owne testimonie? Your first reason to prooue the worshipping of Images is this: If the Arke were to be worshipped, because it represented Gods footstoole; much more may the Image be wor∣shipped. But the Arke was therefore to be worshipped: Therefore much more may the Image be worshipped. I denie your whole Antecedent: first the consequence of your proposition: For it doth not follow, that we may worship Images deuised by men to represent God, because we may worship the Arke, where God himselfe promised his presence, and which he did appoint as an assurance of his presence. If you can shew vs the like promise to your Images, you say somewhat; else nothing. Your Assumption also is false; The Arke was not to be worshipped. To your proofe Master Perkins answers truly,
that the Psalme doth not commaund worshipping of the Arke, but worship before the Arke. You replie first, that therefore it is lawfull to kneele before Images. I answere, your consequence is false, because your Images are your owne wicked deuices, and haue no promise of Gods pre∣sence: therefore it is senselesnes to kneele before them, not madnes to crie out against such follie. Your second replie is, that the Hebrew phrase carrieth it, that we must kneele to the Arke, as the skilfull in that lan∣guage know. First remember, that these are Authors in the ayre, as you answered about that place of Daniel. Second∣ly know, that they that are skilfull say otherwise. What say you to the Chaldae. Pa∣raphrast. ad Psal. 99. 5. Chaldee Paraphrast, who expounds it; Worship in the house of his Sanctuarie; and yet he keepes  the propo∣sition that is in the Hebrew. So doth the Latin translation in the same Psalme, where the same proposition is vsed, Vers. 9. Ado∣rate in monte sancto eius. worship in his holy mountaine: the Chaldae. Pa∣raphrast. ad vers. 9. Chaldee hath, in the mountaine of the house of his Sanctuarie: the Graec. 70. . Greeke, not much vnlike, In, or toward his holy hill. The same seemes to haue been Theodor. in Psal. 98. Theodorets iudgement of the place in question: His footstoole was sometimes thought to be the Temple at Ieru∣salem; but now the Churches, which are ouer all the earth, and Sea, wherein wee worship the most holy God. Of the same opi∣nion is Vatablus ad Scabellum. Vatablus: Cast downe your selues before his footstoole, that is (as hee expounds himselfe in his note there) In the Temple, or before the Arke, in which God exhibited his presence. So doth Lyra ad Psal. 99. Lyra interpret it, who was a Iew borne, and a Christian by profession, worship his footstole, that is, before his footstoole. The Glosla ordin. & interlin. ibi. ordinarie, and Interlinear glosses expound it out of Chrysost. de Trinit. Ambros de spirit. sanct. lib. 3. Aug. in Psal. 98. the Fathers, of Christs manhood to be worship∣ped, by reason of the hypostatical vnion of it with the God∣head; what is that to the worshipping of Images? For the further auowing of that translation, we haue also R. Dauid Kimchis ibid. R. Dauid Kimchis authoritie. Lastly, you bring diuers proofes, that the Arke was had in great reuerence; all needlesse: for who denies it? Was there not great reason to esteeme highly of that, whereby
God was extraordinarily present with the Iewes, as with no people, nor in any place of the world beside? What then? was it therefore worshipped by the Priest, when he went in once a yeere where it was? Did the people worship it, when it was carried before them? As 1. Sam. .  for that confidence the Iewes put in it, they got little by it, because they supersti∣tiously abused it, against Gods commandement, putting trust in the presence of it abroad, when it should haue been in the Tabernacle where God had promised his presence with it. Was this worship to the Arke, which the Lord deli∣uered into the hands of the Philistins? 1. Sam. 6. . Neither were those 50070. Bethsamites slaine for not worshipping it, but for presuming to looke into it; and 2. Sam. 6.  Vzzah for touching it, not because he did not worship it. To this may be added the authoritie of S. Ierom, Epist. 17. ap. . vvho doth teach that it vvas the more vvorshipped for the Cherubines and pictures of angels that vvere erected at the endes of it▪ vvhereby he declareth that he thought Images vvorthie of religious vvorship. Of Ieroms 17. Epistle, alleaged by Master Perkins to proue that Rome is Babylon, you answere thus: Good sir, if S. Ie∣rome had meant, that that Epistle should haue had his authori∣tie, he would haue set it out in his owne name: which seeing he thought it not expedient, set the authoritie of it aside, and vrge his reasons, if you thinke it worth your labour, and you shall be answered. These your owne words shall serne in steed of an∣swere. But for the satisfying of all men I will set downe Ie∣romes words, that they may see with what care and truth you cite the testimonies of the ancient writers. The Iewes (saith Ierome) in former times Veneraban∣tur sancta san∣ctorum. worshipped the Holy of Holies, because there were the Cherubins, and the Propitiatorie, and the Arke of the Testament, Manna, Aarons Rod, and the golden Altar. Doth Ierome teach in these words, that the Arke was the more worshipped, for the Cherubins and pictures of An∣gels, that were erected at the end of it? First, he makes no mention of any pictures of Angels, but onely of the Cheru∣bins. Secondly, he speakes not of worshipping the Arke, but the Holy of Holies, because of the things that were in it. Thirdly, he makes the Propitiatorie, Manna, Aarons Rod,
and the golden Altar, causes of that worship, as well as the Cherubins. Lastly, in the words following, he counts the Sepulchre of our Lord Venerabi∣lius. more worthie of worship. But to answere plainly to your false allegation of Ieromes authori∣tie; what an indignitie were it to the Maiestie of God, that the assurance of his presence should be the more worship∣ped, because of the Cherubins and pictures of Angels, that were erected at the ends of it; which also, with the Arke it selfe, were hid from all mens sight, in the Holie of Holies? Ie∣rome meaneth, that those things made the people conceiue more reuerently of that Holie of Holies, and strooke them with a kind of awe. To this vve may ioyne that of S. Paul, Hebr. 11. that Jacob by faith adored the top of his sonne Iosephs rod: so doth the Greeke text of S. Paul say, as Erasmus also translateth it: The Protestants mangle the text pitiful∣ly, to auoyde the place: see the Annotations of Rhemes Testament. Heb. 11. 21. The text in the Greeke is according to your owne edi∣tions, . worship vpon the top of his owne staffe. So doth your Interlin. bibl. ibi. Interlinear read it. So Arias Mon∣tan. ibi. Arias Montanus. Erasmus, Ad. Erasmus notes the error of your old translator in leauing out the prepositi∣on ☐ which hee himselfe interpreteth, ad, as it were to ward the top. The Syriac. inter. Pagnin. ibi. Syriak translateth as we do, vpon the top of his staffe. Vatablus ibi. Pagnine thus, he worshipped leaning vpon his staffe. Ad summum aculi. Va∣tablus keepeth the words of the old translation, but he ex∣poundeth them in this sort, Adored, that is (saith Vatablus) giue thankes: The top of his staffe,  toward the top of his staffe, that is, Innixus ba∣culo suo, prae senecture. Leaning vpon his staffe for age. Theodor. ibi. Theodoret maketh the adoration ciuill, to figure out the kingdome of Israel in the tribe of Ephraim Iacobs younger sonne. Your Glossa inter∣lin. Glosse saith, he worshipped Christ by whom he had domination, and a scepter of authoritie in Aegypt: or the kingdome of Christ, which in that was sigured to be, and to come among the Gentiles. Glossa ordin. An∣other glosse saith directly, he worshipped God, presently vpon his sonne Ioseph swearing. Lyra. ibi. Lyra layeth out the matter more largely, and plainly after this manner: Iacob (saith Lyra) be∣leeued that Christ should be buried, and rise againe in the Land of promise: therefore he made Ioseph sweare, that he would cause his body to be carried thither. After he had sworne, he worship∣ped
God with thankes, turning himselfe towards the beds head, according to the translation of S. Ierome; as it appeareth Genes. 47. The 70. translate as it is in this place, and both are true. For he worshipped towards the beds head, which stood west; toward which part the Iewes doe worship; and because he was old, he had a staffe, vpon the top whereof he leaned, when he gaue thankes to God. Therefore we must not conceiue, that he worshipped the top of the Scepter or staffe, but he worshipped God, leaning vpon the staffe. So doth Theoph ib Theophylact expound it, Leaning and resting vpon his staffe for age. Though he doth also follow the expo∣sition of Chrysost. in Hebr. hom. 26. Chrysostome concerning the kingdome of Israel in the Tribe of Ephraim. The same exposition bringeth Oc∣cumenius the Greeke Scholiast, out of Photius apud Oecumenium Photius, vpon the top of his staffe, that is,  being now old, the same bring Lombard, Thomas. Caietan. ibi. Lom∣bard, Thomas and Caietan. It is strange, that a man professing knowledge, should speak so vntruly. Do we mangle the text pittifully? or rather do not you slaunder vs shamefully? we neither take away, nor alter any word, syllable, letter, or accent in the text: but leauing that whole, onlie adde two words in a different let∣ter, to make the meaning more plaine; and that by Aug qq. in Gen. q 162. Au∣gustines authority, as your Rhem. Test. ad Heb. 11. 2. Rhemists confesse, and as I haue shewed with the allowance of your best Interpreters, for both the words. I will conclude with that of Ierome; in this place (saith Hieron. in quaest. Hebr. in Genes. he) some faine without cause, that Iacob worshipped the top of Iosephs Scepter, because forsooth, honouring his son, he honoured his power. But in the Hebrew, it is farre otherwise. And Israel worshipped (saith the Hebrew) toward his beds head: namely, because after his sonne had sworne to him, being assured of the thing he had requested, he worshipped God, Contra ca∣put. ouer against his beds head. Obiect. II. Exod. 3. 5. God said to Moses, Stand a farre off, and put off thy shooes: for the place is holy. Now if holy places must bee reuerenced, then much more holy images, as the crosse of Christ, and such like. Ans. God commanded the ceremonie of putting
off the shooes, that hee might thereby strike Moses with a religious reuerence, not of the place, but of his owne Maiestie, whose presence made the place holy. Let them shew the like warrant for images. The second reason is taken out of Exodus 3. Where God said to Mo∣ses, Put off thy shoes, for the place where thou standest is holy. Novv if pla∣ces be holy and to be reuerenced by reason of the presence of Angels: vvhy not, asvvll the Image that representeth an Angell or some Saint, vvhich is equall to Angels? Master Perkins his ansvvere rather confir∣meth than solueth this argument: for he saith, that the Ceremonie of putting off his shoes, vvas commaunded to strike Moses vvith a religious reuerence; not of the place but of the person there present, vvhich vvas not God but an Angell, as the text there expresseth. Exod. 3. The place then being holy, required the reuerend respect of putting off his shoes, and that reuerence done to the place; stroke Moses vvith a religious reue∣rence of the Angelspeaking in the person of God: euen so holy pictures being first duely reuerenced, doe strike men vvith a religious regard of the Saint represented. Your second reason is thus framed. If places be holy, and to be reuerenced by reason of the pre∣sence of Angels, why not aswell the Image, that repre∣sents an Angell or some Saint, which is equall to an An∣gell? But places are holy and to be reuerenced by reason of the presence of Angels. Therefore the Image that repre∣sents an Angell or some Saint, equall to an Angell, is ho∣lie and to be reuerenced. I deny your whole Antecedent; and first the consequence of your proposition. Because although we should grant that some place were holy, because of the presence of the An∣gels; yet would it not follow that therfore Images are holy, where there is no presence of an Angell. For all your conse∣crating and coniuring of Images cannot make any Angel, or Saint to afford his presence in them. Your assumption is false. There is no holines in places, because of the presence of Angels; as may appeare by the Scriptures, where their apparitions are described, no action of reuerence at all be∣ing performed to the places of their presence. In particular to your proofe M. Perkins answereth, that this was done, not
because the place where Angels appeare is holy, but vpon an especiall commandement of God, to strike Moses with a reuerence of Gods Maiestie, who was there present. You reply, first that God was not present there, but an Angell; I answere that God was there present, as it is plaine, because the Angell was lehouah. Exod 3. 2. And lehouah saw that he turned to see. And Vers. 7. lehouah said. Yea the whole discourse sheweth, that God himselfe was the Angell, namely the se∣cond person in Trinitie, who is called Malac. 3. 1. the Angell of the Co∣nenant, because he was sent for the saluation of Gods elect. So Act. 7. 31. 33. Stephen though he call him an Angell, calleth him asse the Lord. And indeed who but God could say, I am that I am, Exod. 3. 14. as the Angell there doth? Secondly, you say the Answere rather confirmes than solues the Argument: Because as that astion strucke Moses with a reuerence of the Angell, so holy Pictures duly reuerenced, strike men with a religious regard of the Saint represented. What is this but to beg the question? you take it as graunted, that there may be Images, and that religious reuerence may be giuen to them: but these are the verie doubts, we dispute of. Inded if it were true, that there may be such Images, and that religious honour is to be yeelded to creatures, there were somewhat in your Similitude to the purpose: and yet similitudes doe not proue but illustrate. The sorce of your reason is, that Moses was commanded by god to put off his shoes, that he might be striken thereby with reuerence of God: There∣fore we must worship Images, that we may be striken with reue∣rence of Angels and Saints. The consequence is naught. Gods particular charge to Moses at that time, warranteth not men to enioyne worship to Images, that Angels may be worshipped by them. To this, let vs annexe that dayes be truely called holy and vvorship∣ped, as the first and last daies be truely called holy and vvorshipfull, as the first and last daies of the feast of Easter be. Exod. 12. 1. And the vestments of Priests Exod. 28. 5., because they are dedicated and employed to holy vses: euen so Images vvhich are made in honour of God and his Saints, and erected to mooue and teach vs to embrace heauenly courses. Adde it if you will that dayes appointed by God are cal∣led
holy: for of worshipfull dayes I thinke no man euer heard, though your Latine translation say, Eadem festi∣uitate vene∣rabilis. The seauenth day shall be venerable, with the same festiuitie, that is, shall be kept with like solemnitie to the first. The words in the He∣brew are all one, in the former and later part of the verse, and therefore so should the translation be; Now in the for∣mer your translation is, the first day shall be holy and solemne. The Hebrew as Arias Mon. ad Exod. 12. Montanus translateth it, on the first day (shall be) a conuocation of holines, and on the seauenth day shall be a conuocation of holines; that is (as Vatab. ibi. Vatablus truly expounds the Hebrew phrase) An holy Conuocation. So doth Pagnin. ibi. Pagnine also translate it. But this holines which you rightly expound to be a dedication or employment to Gods ser∣uice, neither doth require, nor will admit any worshipping of the dayes or garments: but Images are not holy, for they are neither commaunded of God, nor allowed. Obiect. III. It is lawfull to kneele downe to a chaire of estate in the absence of the king or Queene: therefore much more to the images of God, and of Saintes in heauen glorified, being absent from vs. Answ. To kneele to the chaire of estate, is no more but a ciuill testimonie, or signe of ciuill reuerence, by which all good subiects when occasion is offered, shew their loyaltie and subiection to their lawfull Prince. And this kneeling being on this manner, and to no other ende, hath sufficient warrant in the word of God. But kneeling to the image of any Saint departed, is religious, and consequently more then ciuill worship, as the Papists themselues con∣fesse. The argument then prooueth nothing, vnlesse they will keepe themselues to one and the same kind of worship. He proposeth our argument to the halfes, or else this answere had been preuented. For thus runneth our reason: As the chaire of estate is to bee worshipped with ciuill reuerence, in respect of the temporall
Prince, whom it representeth: euen so the Images of holy personages that raigne now in heauen, are to bee worshipped with a holy and religi∣ous kinde of curtesie: for as Temporall honour is due vnto a Temporal Prince, so religious and spirituall honour, is due vnto spirituall and most holy personages: And as a good subiect testifyeth his loyaltie and good affection towardes his Prince, by honouring his regall throne: So doth a good Christian giue testimonie of his dutiful, both estimation & deuotion toward those heauenly creatures, by giuing honour vnto their Images. At leastwise, why do not the Protestants exhibit ciuill reuerence aswell vnto the representations of Gods Saintes, as to the shaddowes of the secular maiestie? vnlesse it be because they are fallen out with the Saintes of God, and are become adorers of sinfull men. Master Perkins drew your argument from a comparison of quantitie, as the Logicians call it, from the greater to the lesse; you fetch it from a comparison of qualitie by way of Similitude, which, as I answered before, serues to make a thing more plaine, not to prooue it true, as the other com∣parison doth, if it be rightly made. You report his answere by halues, for he denies the con∣sequence of the argument which he propounded; adding this reason of his deniall, that the ciuill worship hath war∣rant sufficient in the word of God, but your religious wor∣ship hath not: so that either you must make your worship∣ping of Images ciuill, or else your comparison holds not. His answere is sufficient to ouerthrow your reason, as you propound it, for it denies that the things are alike, adding farther against your proofe, that no religious honour is due to any but God only: if you can shew warrant for it in the word, he yeelds. But alas you cannot, your chiefe Champion Thomas of Aquine hauing made an obiection against wor∣shipping of the image of Christ with diuine worship, be∣cause there is no tradition to be found in Scripture for the ado∣ring of Images, is faine for answere to flee to vnwritten tra∣ditions. We must answere (saith Thom. 3. q. 25. Act. 3 ad 4. Thomas) that the Apostles by the familiar instinct of the holy ghost, deliuered certaine things to the Churches to be obserued, which they haue not left in writing, but only in the obseruation of the Church by the suc∣cession of the faithfull. And surely he that will take paines to consider the allegations of the seauenth Council, the sd
at Nice, which was called of purpose to establish the wor∣shipping of Images, shall finde very pittifull proofe out of Scripture. Therefore hauing warrant and charge to per∣forme all ciuill honor to princes, we do accordingly; hauing neither for any deuotion or religious reuerence to Angels or men departed, though Saincts in heauen, we dare not worship their images: which also we know to be particu∣larly forbidden in Scripture. And that is the reason why we giue no reuerence to any idolatrous representations of holy men now in heauen, de∣uised by men to a purpose, that hath no warrant by com∣maundement, or example in scripture. As for ciuill reue∣rence, it is due to them only with whom we haue some dea∣ling in worldly matters, and so cannot belong to any in heauen, and much lesse to their pictures, without any liking of themselues. Differ. III. The Papists also teach, that God may be lawfully worshipped in images, in which he hath appeared vnto men: as the Father, in the image of an old man: the Sonne, in the image of a man crucified: and the holy Ghost in the liknes of a doue, &c. But we hold it vnlawfull to worship God, in, by, or at any image: for this is the thing which (as I haue prooued before) the second commandement for∣biddeth. Master perkins makes a third point of difference, that wee may not worship God in any such Image, in which bee hath appeared vnto men. In this we do not differ, vnlesse he takes it otherwise then he deliuereth it. Those Images wee hold more reuerend than any others, as repre∣sentations neerer approching vnto the diuinitie, yet because they doe not expresse the deitie, God is not directly apprehended not worshipped in them, but onely by collection: as for example. The forme of a raue old man, in Daniel, doth not represent Gods person, but wee gather by that ancient forme Gods eternity, whereby wee ase to a more perfect conceit of God, whom wee adore: now other Images of Christ and his Saintes, doe carry ou mindes directly vpon their proper persons, whom in their Images we adore and worship after their degrees. But wee wor∣ship Images with farre meaner reuerence than any of the Saintes, in
regard onely, that they doe represent such presonages, and do induce vs more to loue and honour them, and do stirre vp our dulnesse more often and ardently to honour God in the Saints, and the Saints in their de∣grees: as also to imitate their holy example as hath bin said more than All religious honour is Gods once, that all may vnderstand how far off we are from giuing Gods ho∣nour vnto either Saint or Image. Do you not differ from Master Perkins in worshipping God in the images in which he hath appeared? First, he saith, that it is vnlawfull to worship God, in, by, or at an I∣mage, those are his words in this very place. Secondly, do you only hold those Images more reuerend then other? Do you not giue them diuine honour, euen the same honor that is due to God himselfe, though accidentally, as you hold against Bellarmine? Is not Thomas his reason for wor∣shipping the Image and Crosse of Christ with diuine ho∣nour, as strong for the image of God the Father, and of God the holy ghost? But what should I goe about to prooue so plaine a matter. I would your being ashamed to defend so grosse Idolatry, would make you forsake it. Do you not graunt that you worship God in these Images, though, as you say here, not directly? How do you then agree with Master Perkins, who deliuers his meaning plainely, that in such images God may not be at all worshipped, no not by them, nor at them? and yet for very shame you would not be thought to speake against so manifest a truth, though without shame you make shew of agreement where there is none, and against all equall dealing accuse Master Perkins of seeming to take the matter otherwise then he deliuers it. By person you meane one property of God common to all three persons, or else the nature of the Godhead. But I pray you tell me, by what warrant of scripture you paint God the Father like this old man in Daniell, if you do it not by the authoritie of this place. If it be the end of this picture to signifie Gods eternitie, surely he that appropriates this image to the Father, makes the Father only eternall. This is that more perfect conceipt of God that you come to by this image, namely, to denie the Eternitie, and so the God∣head of the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Further, giue me
leaue to vnderstand you if I can. What can you possibly know concerning Gods eternitie, by the sight of this graue old man? If you did not beleeue that God is eternall, before you looked vpon that image, it is not possible you should learne it, or giue credit to it, by seeing the picture, especially if it represent not as you speake the person of God. But in∣deede the gazing on such Idols is more likely to draw men into a conceipt, that God growes old, and so his eternitie is wearing away, then to teach them that he neuer had begin∣ning, and neuer shall haue end. You will replie, that Daniell doth so describe him. True, as the scripture euery where doth for our capacitie, applying affections, parts, and acti∣ons of men to God. The Lord, who of his infinite wisdome appointed the penning of these things for our instruction, hath promised a blessing to euery part of his word, that it may be read & heard without danger; but Idols are accur∣sed by him, euen such pictures of old men, because whatso∣euer the pretence of making them be, they fill ignorant people with error and superstition. What Images meane you? sure not all, for you worship the image of the Father, of Christ, of the holy ghost, yea, the Thom. 3. q. 5. art. 4. Bellarm. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 27. wood of the crosse on which he died, and euery part and peece of it, though neuer so little a scrap, with diuine honor. To other Images (as I shewed before, out of your owne wri∣ters) you giue the same honour that you do to the Saincts themselues, because Thomas teacheth you out of Aristotle, that there is but one motion of our vnderstanding and will, towards the Sainct, and the image of the Sainct. And the fact of the Israelites, Exod. 32. in wor∣shipping the golden calfe, is condemned as flat ido∣latrie; albeit they worshipped not the calfe, but God in the calfe: for vers. 5. Aaron saith, To morrow shall be the solemnitie of Iehouah: whereby he doth giue vs to vnderstand, that the calfe was but a signe of ehouah whom they worshipped. Obiect. It seemes the Israe∣lites worshipped the calfe. For Aaron saith, verse 4.
These be thy Gods (O Israel) that brought thee out of E∣gypt. Answ. Aarons meaning is nothing else, but that the golden calfe, was a signe of the presence of the true God. And the name of the thing signified is gi∣uen to the signe, as vpon a stage hee is called a King that represents the King. And Augustine saith, that images are wont to be called by the names of things whereof Ad Simpli.  2. q. 3. they are images, as the counterfeit of Samuel is called Samuel. And wee must not esteeme them all as mad men to think that a calfe made of their earings, being but one or two daies old should bee the God that brought them out of Egypt with a mighty hand ma∣ny daies before. And these are the pointes of difference touching Images, wherein wee must stand at variance for euer with the Church of Rome. For they erre in the foundation of religion, making indeede an Idoll of the true God, and worshipping an other Christ then we doe, vnder new termes, maintayning the idolatry of the heathen. And therefore haue wee departed from them: and so must wee still doe, because they are idolaters: as I haue proued. But this poynt of difference is made to bring in a common arument of theirs, to wit, that the worshipping of the golden Calfe is condemned as flat Idolatrie: Exod. 3. and yet the Israelits worshipped not the Calfe, but God in the Calfe, to which we say, they did not worship the true God in the Calfe, but the God of the Egyptians, which was taken by them to haue the shape of a blacke Calfe, with white spots. See S. Augu∣stine. Lib. 18. de ciui. cap. 5. And therefore making the golden calfe to represent this false god, and attibuting their deliuerance, vnto that supposed god, and not vnto the God of Israel, committed idolatry, which the text prooueth most ma∣nifest, De nat. deo, Vers. 4. these be thy gods that brought thee out of Egypt. M. Perkins answe∣reth, that the meaning is nothing else, but that the golden Calfe was a signe of the presence of the true God: such glosses without any authority of the auncient fathers is idiculous, being against the plaine text: but sayth he, we must not think them so adde, as to take a Calfe made with
their care-rings to be their God, no: but we may well thinke them so vn∣gratefull vnto the true God their deliuerer, that they did ascribe their de∣liurance not to him, but vnto that God, which the Aegyptians serued, whose purtraiture was that Calfe. This point of difference is brought in, not to auow any argument of ours, but to answere a distinction of yours, who being drin to shifts, thinke to help the matter by telling vs that the Iewes worshipped the golden Calfe, and there∣fore were condemned. To which we replie, that the Iewes did worship Iehouah in or by the Calfe, which we prooue by the text it selfe. sExod. 32. 4. These be thy Gods that brought thee out of the lād of Egypt. But it was the true God that brought them out of Egypt, euen tExod. 3. 14. Iehouah. You answere, that they attri∣buted their deliuerance to that false God of the Egyptians. Then did they thinke the Egyptian God to be Iehouah; for to Iehouah do they consecrate the day of dedicating the Calfe. uExod. 32. 5. Tomorrow shall be the holy day to Iehouah. But how ridiculous a conceipt is this, to faine, that the Iewes should imagin that the Egyptians God was their deliuerer, where∣as they knew, that the great wise men of Egypt, the chiefe worshippers of that God, had striuen against Moses, and their deliuerance, by all meanes possible, Exod. 8. 19. till at last they and the power of their God were ouercome? So that in∣deede, it was impossible they should be so sottish as to dreame, that the Egyptian God had deliuered them. And if this had bin their fault, being a thing so monstrous and sens∣les, God would certainely haue charged it vpon them, when he laid out their sinne to Moses. But he rather accuseth them for breaking his commaundement by making a molten Calfe, affirming to it, and proclaiming, Exod. 3. 8. These are thy Gods that brought thee out of Egypt. This is farther confirmed by those two calues, which in imitation of this, 1. Reg. 11. 28 Ieroboam set vp to worship the true God by, and so continued euen by 2. Reg. 10. 16. 29. Iehu, who destroyed the heathen Idols. The text prooues nothing for you, These be thy Gods that brought thee out of Egypt. For the Egyptians had no such Calfe to their God, though the Oxe or Calfe called Apis (as August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 5. Austin aith in the place alleaged) was consecrated to
their chiefe God Serapis. If we brought nothing for our ex∣position but authoritie, you might stop our months with the contrary iudgement of the auncient writers, but against rea∣son authoritie is of small force, and yet you bring none for your selfe, nor answere Master Perkins, shewing that Images are called by the names of the things they re , and so that calfe, made to be a token of Iehouahs presence, that brought them out of Egypt, is said to be the God, that brought them out of the land of Egypt. But now before we end this question, I must let you erstand what worthy men they were that fist began to wage batte  ages: they were the evves in their alm. Ord. 2. tra . a  od . Act. 5. A babaous Persian Xenias, as  N ▪ 16 cap. 27. Then Mamet the great god of the Turkes. Al  15. & 17. vvith such like infidels, oers, and the skumme of the earth. See Cardinall Bellamme de Jmag. lib. 2. cap. 6. If these be the auncientest Authors you can bring, that haue waged against Images, I can goe beyond you many hundred yeeres. What say you to Gen. 35.  Iacob, who made all his houshold giue him their Images, which he buried vnder an Oake, that was by Shechim, about the yeere of the world 2270? The commandement of God giuen on Mount Synah, the preaching of the Prophets, & the zeale of many worthy Kings of Iuda, were long before the Iewes Talmud, Talmud be∣gun to be ga∣thered 300. yeeres after Christ. which was begunne to be gathered, and written more then 300. yeeres after Christ, and was not Finished a∣bout the yeere 506. finished till about the yeere 506. long before which time, as I haue shewed, Origen and Clement did not only speake against the Heathen Idols, but defend the Christians, for refusing to haue any Images, and proue that the vse of them was vnlawfull and vnfit. I In my answere to te Episle Dedicatory. shewed before about this matter of Xenaias, who at soonest was aboue 400. yeeres after Christ, that Images were withstood as vnlawfull, euen in the beginning of preaching the Gospel. This Nicephorus wrot not much more then 300. yeeres since. As for Blasphemous Mahomet, who patched vp his ab∣hominable Alcoran, with peeces of all kinds of professions, though his intent was damnable, and his writing most sot∣tish, yet hath he many things agreeable to the truth, taken
out of the bookes of Moses; and in this point of Images, his acknowledging of the truth, shall make the more to your condemnation. What should we do looking in Bellarmine? if there were any thing for your aduantage, more then that which you haue alleadged, you might and would haue made bould with it, as you do generally in all your answeres. Bellarmine there tels vs a storie of the mislikers of Images, but he nei∣ther begins where e should, and dissents without any suffi∣cient reason, from Alphonsus a Castro, and maketh that sea∣uenth Councell his chiefest bulwarke. I vvill vvith one or tvvo testimonies of the auncientest Father, finish this controuersie I ctant. I car. de pass. Christ. Knele downe and adore the venerable wod of th Crosse. Hrome,  vita Paulae: She adored prostrate before the Crosse, as if shee had see Christ hanging on it. Basil agaist Jlian cited, Act. 2. Synod. 7. I honour the historie of the I∣mages, and doe properly worship them. Finally, in the 7. general Councell holden 900. yeeres past, they are condemned of heresie, that denie the vse and vvorshipping of holy Images. Lactantius, though he were an ancient Christian, was not diuine; and in these verses (if they be his) he sheweth him∣selfe liker a light Poet then a graue writer; whose authority should be taken in so great a matter. Ierom reporteth what Paula did in Ierusalem. For which he that well considereth what it was, may find more cause to commend her zeale, then to like of her actions. She went in∣to the Sepulcher, and kist the stone of his resurrection, which the Angell had remoued from the doore of the Tombe; The place of his bodie, where the Lord had lien, as if she had thirsted for the desired waters, she lickt with her faithfull tongue. who sees not more zeale then knowledge, in this behauiour? Neither P∣ter, nor Iohn, nor any of the Disciples, are reported to haue done any such thing, though they came to the graue by and by after our Sauiours resurrection. Was she more deuout? no, but more ignorant, and passionat. This testimony of Basil is no where to be found, but in this Councell, which was packed for the nonst to confirme Idolatrous Image worshippers. I shewed the like practise of
the Councell before, concerning other writers. Now for a conclusion of this point, I will briefly note the beginning of Images among the Christians, and speake a little of that seauenth Councell so often alleadged against vs. The first vse of any Images, after our Sauiours ascension, was brought in by Simon the Sorcerer, who was also the first, and principall Heretik. Of whom Theodore. haerer. lib.  princip. Theodoret and August. d haeres. cap. 1. Au∣stin write, that he gaue his owne, and his strumpet Selenes Images to his followers, to be worshipped by them. After him, one August. ibid. cap. 7. Marcellina, of the sect (as it is said) of the Car∣pocratians, worshipped the Images of Iesus, Paul, Homer, and Pythagoras. The Gnosticks presently after her, worshipped the Images of Christ, and are condemned for it by Irenae. lib. 1. cap. 23. 24. Irenaeus. They haue painted Images (saith Epipha. lib. . om. 2. haeres. 27. Epiphanius of Carpocrates, and the Gnosticks) which they say are the Images of Iesus, and that they were made vnder Pontius Pilate, while our Sauiour li∣ued: but they keepe these Images secret yet (as he obserueth) they worshipped those Images. Amongst true Christians the beginning of Images may wel be thought to haue bin such, as Euseb. hist. lib. 7. cap. 17. Eusebius guesseth it was, namely an imitation of the Gen∣tiles, who vsed to make and keepe the Images of them, by whom they had receiued any speciall good. Yea the Gentiles, being newly conuerted, could not by and by be weaned from all vse of Images, more then from other superstitions. It was ne∣cessary (saith Tertull. d oro. militis. Tertullian) in former times, to yeeld many things to the Christians, who (for the most part) were conuerted from Paganisme to religion, when they were old, and so could hardlie leaue those things, to which all their life time they had bin accu∣stomed, But as yet they had no Churches, nor vse of Images, in their assemblies. That seemes to haue growen by the Basil. in orat. de Balaam Mayre. painting of the histories of Martyrs in tables, and setting them vp in Churches. Which aduantage the Deuill, that al∣waies watcheth his oportunitie, to bring in Idolatry by lit∣tle and little, greedilie apprehended and followed, and at the last brought to such a height, that the Leo 3. Isau∣cus. Emperour Leo, the third surnamed Isaurius, was faine to call a Concil. Constanti∣nop. anno 729. Councell at Constantinople, about the yeere 729. wherein it was de∣creed, that the Images should be pulled downe. This Grego∣rie
the second Bishop of Rome, who some 13. yeeres before had caused Images to be allowed in a Concil. Ro∣man. sub Cre∣gor. 2. Councell at Rome, tooke very hainously; and so much the rather because the Emperour had required obedience of the Latin Church, to the decrees past in that Councell at Constantinople. But the Bishop was so farre from yeelding obedience, that he tooke this commandement of the Emperour, as an occasion to withdraw his allegeance from his Soueraigne, and seized into his hands all the authoritie, that was yet remaining to the Empire in Italie. This contention, after the death of Leo, grew more hot; in so much that his sonne Constantine Co∣pronymus, to make some good end of the matter, assembled another Concil. Constanti∣nop. sepimum sub Constan∣tino Coprony mo. Councell at Constantinople, about the yeere 755. which he calleth the seauenth general Councel, where there were present 308. Bishops, and wherein Images were again condemned. About some 34. yeeres after, Jrene; widow to the Empe∣rour Leo 4. Irene daughter to a King of the Tartars, and widow to the Emperour Leo the 4. (a Pa∣gan by birth, and little better in religion) during the nonage of her sonne Constantine, called a Councell at Constanti∣nople, wherein a great number of Bishops maintained by the word of God, that Images ought to bee abolished. Which the Empresse perceiuing, found meanes to break vp the Councill; and afterwards appointed another again the next yeere at Concil. se∣nd. Nicen.  rene. Nice in Bythinia: wherein it was decreed, that Images should bee worshipped, and that Councill of Nice should be counted the seuenth generall Councell, and not the other, which had been held before at Constanti∣nople against Images. This is that seauenth Councell which our Papists so magnifie; and it passeth vnder the name of that famous Councell of Nice, wherein Arius was condem∣ned, euery man not knowing, that this was a second Coun∣cell betwixt three and foure hundred yeere after the for∣mer. But that all men may be the better able to iudge of this foresaid Councell, let me propound the speeches of some of the Bishops on the behalfe of Images. Carol. Mag∣nus de imag. lib. 3. cap. 17. I receiue and em∣brace honorablie (saith Constantine Bishop of Constans in Cyprus) holy and reuerend Images, according to the seruice of
adoration, which I performe to the Consubstantiall and life gi∣uing Trinitie: And them that do not so thinke, nor glorifie them, I separate from the Catholike and Apostolicall Church, and lay them vnder the Cursse, and ioyne them with such as haue denied the Incarnation of Christ our God, for our saluation. Ioan. Orien∣tal. legatus in Concil. Ni∣cen. 2. Act. 4. The ho∣ly Father hath said plainly, that the Image of the King is called the King, and yet there are not two Kings: so that it is cleere that he which shall adore the Image, and say it is Christ, sinnes not. The most holy Patriarke, Tharasius i cod. Concil. Act. 3. Tharasius said, let vs obserue that the old Scripture ad signes, and that out of it the new hathta∣ken Cherubins of glorie, shaddowing the propitiatory. The holie Synode answered very well Sir, so is the truth. The most holy Pa∣triarke said; if the old Scripture had Cherubins shadowing the Propitiatorie, we also will haue the Images of Iesus Christ, and of the holy mother of God, and of the Saints shadowing our Al∣tars. Theodosius apud. Carol. Magn. lib. 2. cap. 6. Theodosius Bishop of Ancyra said, whatsoeuer things are written, are written for our learning; therfore the holy Ima∣ges and Pictures grauen, and painted, are painted and set vp for our learning, zeale, and example. Elias apud Carol. vbi su∣pra. Elias the most holy Bi∣shop of Creet, said, According to the most reuerend letters of Adrian, most holy Pope of old Rome, I confesse and hold Ima∣ges to be holy and worthy of worship, neuer laying them away, but adoring them perfectly; them that confesse otherwise, I accursse. The othet most holy Bishops and venerable Monkes cried out; Concil. Ni cen. 2. Act. 3. And we all together receiue, and embrace, and adore Images, with very great honour. Concil. eod. Act. 2. Stauratius Bishop of Chal∣cedon said, I receiue, embrace, and honour Images, as being the pledges of my saluation. Ibid. Peter Bishop of Nichor said, I re∣ceiue venerable Images, and adore them, and will alwaies teach the doctrine, that I may one day giue account to God our Iudge, in the world to come. Act. 4. Iohn the most religious Priest, Lieue-te∣nant of the Apostolike thrones said. Therefore an Image is greater then prayer. And this is come to passe by the prouidence of God, for ignorant mens sakes. Act. 1. The same man counteth the denying of worship to Images, the worst of all heresies, as that which ouerthrowes the gouernment of our Sauiours house. I for∣beare to set downe their reasons which are taken from Tra∣dition, miracles, and some places of Scripture so ridiculously
applied, that it is little better then blasphemie to make the holy Ghost president of so Idolatrous and sottish a Coun∣cell. Bergomen∣sis lib. 10. Cen∣tur. 8. cap. 9. col. 629. Constantine hauing subscribed to this Councell by his mothers perswasion and example in his none-age; after he came to yeeres of discretion, and his owne gouernment, by the aduise of diuers learned men, repealed the decrees of it concerning Images; and ere long after tooke the whole sway of the Empire from his mother (who had vsurped it as protectrix) into his owne hands, which dealing of his did incense the ambitious, and idolatrous woman, Zonar. tom. 3. Paul Dia∣con. lib. 23. Sigebert. An∣no 798. that shee caused certaine traitours, first to plucke out his eyes; and af∣terward to murder him: yea so great was her malice and feare, that shee ceased not, till shee had made his sonnes her grand-childrens, or neuewes eyes to be pulled out also: such an author, and patrones had that Idolatrous and wic∣ked Councell; the chiefe foundation of Popish Images. Such as it was notwithstanding, the decrees of it were sent by Pope Adrian the first to the Emperour Charlemaine, that he might allow of them: But he held another Concil. Francofor. sub Carolo Magn. Councell at Franckfort; wherin it was concluded, that the second Coun∣cell of Nice, whereof we haue spoken, should not be held either for generall, or for the seauenth, or for a thing of any worth. The decrees of that Councell condemning Images, were by this repealed, and a book written by expresse com∣mandement of the Councell of Franckfort, and published in the name of Charlemaine, in which, as the Councell of Constantinople is reproued, for taking away all vse of Ima∣ges, euen for history and memory: so that second Councell of Nice is particularly confuted and condemned. The like entertainment found the decrees of that Councell, amongst our countri-men here in England, as you shall see by the te∣stimony of a Monke, that writ 300. yeeres agoe. The Anno 795. Mathae. Westmonast. same yeere (saith Mathew of Westminster) Charles King of the French-men sent into Britaine Librum Sy∣nodalem. a booke of decrees, wherin ma∣ny things were found contrary to the true faith, and that especi∣ally, that it was determined by the ioynt consent of almost all the Doctors of the East, That Images are to be adored, which the Catholike Church vtterly detests. Against this, Albinus writ
an Epistle wonderfully endited, according to the authority of the holy Scriptures d carried together with that booke of decrees to the King of Frce in the name of the Bishops and Nobles. Yet was not this Councell of Franckfort, nor the Epistle written by Albinus, nor the booke set out in Charlemaines name of sufficient strength to stop the course of Idolatry, so violent it is where it finds any way made for it, where∣upon Claudius Taurinens. Episc. Claudius Bishop of Turin hauing bin brought vp and preferred by Charlemaine, opposed himselfe by writing afresh against it, and (as Ionas Aure∣lianens. Epist. Ionas Bishop of Orleans saith, who writ against him) proceeded farther to cast them out of all the Churches of his dioces. This opinion and fact of his, Io∣nas writ against, yet so, as that he wholy agreed with him about the vnlawfulnes of adoring Images against the se∣cond Councell of Nice. But in the East the quarrels about Images were more hot and dangerous, Synod. Pari∣siens. pag. 8. which mooued the Emperours Michaell and Theophilus, to send their Em∣bassadors into France to the Emperour Lewis Le debon naire. the curteous, sonne of Charlemaine about the yeare 823, to signifie to him, that the superstitious abuse of Images in their dominions, had made them assemble a Councell about the matter, in which it was decreed, that they should not be worshipped with incense, lights, kneeling prayers, songs and seruice before them, all which notwithstanding, that some of their clergy refusing to yeeld obe∣dience, had withdrawne themselues to the Pope of old Rome, com∣plaining to him, and slandering the East Church, that they there∣fore had sent their Ambassadors both to him, and to the Pope, for the clearing of themselues of all such false imputations, and that they might vnderstand what the iudgement of their Churches was in those points. Hereupon Lewis the Emperour called a nationall Councel at Paris the Anno 824. yere following 824. where∣in the conclusion was (as in the Councell of Franckfort) a∣gainst both pulling downe, and worshipping of Images, as appeareth by an Epistle sent from the said Synode to Lewis and Lotharius, by two Bishops, Italitgarius, and Flamarius, and according thereunto answere was returned to the Em∣perours Michaell, and Theophilus. Thus much I thought good to set downe, as briefely as I could, hee that would
reade of these matters more at large, may finde enough to content him in that excellent treatise of the Plessy of the Masse. lib. 2. cap. 2. 3. 4. Lord Plessy against the Masse, in the second booke, the second, third, and fourth Chapters. The iudgement of all these matters I leaue to all men whatsoeuer, that will vouchsafe to waigh things by the Ballance of the Sanctuary, with the hand of true reason. Others, that had rather beleeue what is told them, then try that they beleeue, I commit and commend to the mercy of God. Whom I beseech, according to his good pleasure, to enlighten our hearts, and incline our affe∣ctions euery day more and more, that we may discerne and acknowledge his most holy truth, to his glory, the good of his Church, and our owne euerlasting saluation, through his Sonne Iesus Christ. To whom with the Father, and holy Spi∣rit, one God, immortall, inuisible, and only wise, be all glo∣rie, power, obedience, and thanksgiuing for euer and euer, Amen. FINIS. Errata. Pag. 11. lin. 1. read, in our time p. ead. l. 29. r. yes. p. 17. l. 11. r. were not dedicated p. 36. l. 22. r. out. p. 44. l. 10. in the margin, r. Popes breast p. 45 l. 21. r. and that. p. 57. l. 17. r. &c. p. ead. l. 35. r. them Cardinall p. 68. lin. 18. r. is moued. p. cad l. 22. dele as. p. 87. l. 4. in the margin, r. Appetit. p. 100. l. 10. in the margin, r consentientis. p. 129. l. 34. r. he. p. ead. l. vlt. in margin, r.  p. 132. lin. 34. r. conscience. p. 136. lin. 12. r. thereby. p 144 l. 15. r. vncertaine. p. 148. l. 9. r. since. p. 155. l 23. dele, to. p. 158. l. 5. in the mar∣gin, r. take heed your. p. 159. l. 9. r. his. p. 181. l. 9. r. it is not a short, p. 183. l. 27. I. cannot couer two. p. 208. l. 24. dele, only. p. 250. l. 29. dele, your. p. 252. l. 4. r. he. p. 262. l. 30. r. But that this. p. 296. l. 35, r. for though Christ. p. 353. l. 11. r. temporall satisfaction. p. 359. l. 2. in the marg. r. way. p. 380 l. 27. r sin. p. 390. The measure of our Ladies most holy foote. p ead. l. 3. r. zes. p. 403. l. 22. r. good. p. 405. l. 17. r. three. p. 422. l. 16. r. authoritie. p. 425 l. 18.  . p. 426. l. 30. r. is at those. p. 441. l. 39. r. away. p. 451. l. 28. r. . p. 461. l. 36. r. Russin. p. 464. l. 6. r. Menandrians. p. 466. l. 24 r. Cerdon. p. 476. l. 4. dele be. p. 488. l. 31. r. Canon law. p. 502. l. 33. r. Austin. p. cad. l. 35 r. our opinion. p. 506. l. 21. r. refraining. p. 521. l. 10. r. commen∣ded. p. 527. lin. 7. dele by. p. 548. l 36 r. terret. p. 552. l. 34 read, that the image of the liuing God should be made the image of an idoll. and dead thing. p. 580. l. 14. r. the preposition. lin. 26. the same preposition. p. 592. lin. 30. read, offring to it.
