4593.5 99851111 16368
❧ Hereafter en¦suith a litle treatise very ne∣cessary, & behouefull aswell to pre∣serue the people from e Pestilence as to helpe & recouer heym that be infected with the same, made by a Bysshop, & doctor of Phisick of Den¦marke, & thexperience therof proued by the same Bisshop, ad also of late nctised and proued in mani places within the City of london, & by the same many folke haue been recoue∣red & cure & therfre a boke myche pro for all men, & specially for suche as be farre from Phisi∣cions. 1536
¶ The preface of the Auctor. AT the reuerence of God, and worshipp, of the blessed trinite, and the conseruati∣on of the comen weale of all Christen peo¦ple, aswell for theym that ben hole, as for remedy for theym that be infected and syck. I the Bisshop of arusiens in the Realme of Denmarke, and doc∣tor of Phisyk woll hereafter in this boke wryte some thyng is of that contagious infirmyte & syck¦nes called the Pestilence, whyche dayly infectith, and sone suffth vs to departe oute f this lyfe. ¶ Fyrst, I wolle wryte of the tokens of this in∣firmite. ¶ The seconde, of the causes wherof yt commith. ¶ The thirde, of the remedies for  same. ¶ The fourthe, how to conforte the harte and prin∣cipall membres of the body. ¶ The fyft, of the tye and season when it is ne∣cessary to le
FIrst I sayed I wolde write the tokens of this infirmitie Seuē thingis ought to be noted in the same.The fyrst token The fyrst is when in a sommers day the wecher often tymes chaungith, as in the mornyng the weter aperith to rayne, afterwarde it aperith cloudy, and at the last win∣dy in the southe.The se∣conde tokē The seconde token ys when in somer the dayes apperen all darke, and lyke to rayne, & yet yt raynith not, And yf many dayes so continue, yt is to dreade of greate Pestilence. The thyrde token ys when greate multitude of fles ben vpon the earthe,The thir∣de token. The four token. then it is a signe that the ayer is venemous, & infect The fourthe to∣ken is when the sterres semen often tymes to fal∣le, then it is a token that the ayer is infect wyth habundaunce of venemous vapours.The fyfte token The fyfte token is when a blasing sterre is seen in the element, then it is a signe to be sone after greate Pestilence, or greate slaughter of mē in battayll. The sixte token is when there is greate lygh∣tenyng,The sixte token. and thundre namely oute of the soute. The seuenth token is when greate wyndes passen oute of the southe, they be foule and vnclea¦ne,The se∣uenth to¦ken. therfore when these tokens appere, yt is to dreade of greate Pestilence, on∣les God of his infinite mercy woll remoue yt.
¶ Hereafter foloweth the causes of Pestilence. THe Pestilēce commith of thre thin¦gis, sometyme it commith from ye rotte bynethe. Other whyle from the rotte aboue, so that we maye feele sensibly how the chaunge of the ayer apperith vnto vs, And sometyme it commith of bothe together, aswell from the rotte aboue,by the rot¦te by¦nethe is ment of stinkīg pla¦c{is} on ye ear¦the, as se∣ges deade carryn &c as from ye rotte byneth, As we see a sege or priu next to a chambre or of any other perticuler thinge, whiche corruptith the ay¦er in his substaunce and qualite, whiche is a thin¦ge may happe euery day: And therof commith the ague of Pestilence, And aboute the same many Phisicions be deceyued: not supposing this ague to be a Pestilence, some tyme yt commith of deade careyn, or corruption of standing water in diches or sloughes, & other corrupt places and these thin¦gis sometyme be vniuersall and sometyme perti∣culer from the rotte aboue: it fortunith the causes of the bodies aboue in the ayer by whome the spi∣rite of lyfe is corrupte in a man or in a beaste.by ye rotte aboue is ment stin∣king mys∣tes & other infections of ye ayer. In lykewyse as Auicen saith in his fourthe boke, by the forme of the ayer aboue, the bodies byneth lightly be infecte, for the impressions aboue cor∣ruptith the ayer & so the spiritis of a man been cor∣rupte, This infirmite commith also from the rotte aboue and byneth: when of them pressions aboue, the ayer is corrupte, & of the putrefaction or roten careyn of the vyle places byneth an infirmite is
caused in a man, and suche an infirmite somtyme is an axes, sometyme a postume or aswelling, & that is in many thingis: Also the ayer inspired is venemous, & corrupte hurting the harte, that na∣ture many wayes is greued so that he perceyuith not his harme, for the vryne apperith fayer, & she∣with goode digestion, yet neuertheles the patient is lyke to dye, wherfore many Phisicions seyng ye vryne of theire patientes, they speake superficially and be deceyued: therfore it is nede that euery pa∣cient prouyde to him self a goode and expert Phi∣sicion. These thingis before wryten at the causes of Pestilence, But aboute these thingis, two que¦stions be moued. The fyrst is wherfore one dyeth,The fyrst question. and another dyeth not in a towne where men be daede in one house, and in another there dieth no∣ne.The secō¦de questiō. An answe∣re to the fyrst questi∣on. The seconde question is whether Pestilēce so∣res be contagious, To the fyrste question I saye, it may happe to be of two causes, that is to sey of ye thing yt doith, & of ye thinge yt suffreth An ensample of that thinge that doythe the influence of the bo∣dies aboue beholdith that place or that place more then this place, or this place, and the pacient is more disposed to dye then another. Therfore it is to be noted that bodies be more hote disposed of o∣pen pooris, then bodies infect hauing the poores stopped with many humors, where bodies be of resolution or opening as men that abusen theym self with wemen, or vsen often tymes bathes, or men that be hote, with labour, or greate angre, theyr bodyes be more disposed to this syknes.An answe To the seconde question I say that Pestilence so∣res
be contagious because of infect humerous bo∣dies and the reke or smoke of suche sores is vene∣mous and corruptitch the ayer,Exchewr greate as¦srmbles of people and therfor it is to fiee from suche persones as be infect, In Pestilen∣ce tyme no body shulde stande in greate preace of people or assembles of people, for some man of theym may be infect. Therfore wyse Phisiciens visiting folke that been syck of the Pestilence stā∣de farre from the pacient, holding theire face to∣warde the doore or wyndowe and so shal the ser∣uaunt{is} or ministers of the syk folke stande, Also it is goode to a pacient euery day to chaunge his chā¦bre, and often tymes to haue the wyndowes opē againste the nor the and easte, and to sparre and shitte the wyndowes againste the southe. For the southe wynde hathe two causes of putrifaction. The fyrst is, it makith a man being hole or syck, feble in theire bodies,. The seconde cause is, as yt ys wryten in the thirde of Amphorismis the south wynde greuith the heering,The sou∣the wynde is vnhol∣some. and hurtith the harte because yt openith the poores of man and entreth in to the hert. wherfore it is goode in tyme of Pe∣stilence to an hole man when the wynde is in the southe to be within the house all day, and yf it ne¦dith to go outhe, yet lett a man abyde in hys house vntyll the sonne be vp in the east passinge south warde.
¶ The remedies for the Pestilence. NO we it is to witte by what reme∣dies a man may preserue hymself from Pestilence, fyrst see the wry∣ting of Hieremi the Prophet that a man ought to forsake euyll thin ges, and do goode dedes, and me kely to confesse, his synnes, for it is the hy ghest remedy in tyme of Pestilence penaunce and con∣fession to be prefered all other medecynes.Exchewt the infects place. Neuer∣theles I promitte you verely, yt is a gode remedy to avoyde & chaunge thenfect place: but some may not profitably chaunge theyre places therfore as∣myche as to theym is possible, it is to eschewe e∣uery cause of putrifaccion and stinking, and na∣mely euery flesly lust wyth women shalbe esche∣wed, Also the the sothern wynde whiche is natu∣rally infectyue, therforesperreand closse the wyn¦dowes agaynste the southe as yt is sayed before tyll the fyrst houre after the myddes of the day thē open the wyndowes agaynste the northe. Of the same cause euery foule stynche is to be eschewed, of stable, stinking feldes, wayes, or streates,Avoyde  exchew al foule saui¦ours. and namely of stinckyng deade careyn, and most of styncking waters where in many places water is kept, two dayes, or two nyghtes, orelles there be gutters of water casten vndre the earthe whi¦che causith greate stinke & corrupcion and of this cause some dye in that house where suche thingis happen, & in another house dye none, as it is say∣ed before, lykewyse in that place where the
wortes & cooles putrifyed it makith a noyfull sa∣uour & a stinking,The harte is cōforted by swete sauour. For lyke as by the swete adour of bawme the herte and the spirites haue recreaci∣on, so of euyl sauours they be made feble, wherfor kepe your house that an infect ayer entre not in, for an infect ayer most causith putrifaction in pla¦ces and houses where folke slepe, therfore let your house be cleane and make clere fyre of wodde fla∣myng, let your house he made with fumigacion of herbes which be the leaues of bay tree,Brēne Ie ueper and other swe¦te thingis in your house. Ieneper, vberyorgany, it is in the Poticary shoppes, wor∣me wode, rewe, mugwort, and of the tree of aloes which is best, but it is deare such a fume taken by the mouthe, and eares openith the inwarde par∣tes of the body, Also it is to eschewe all greate re∣plections because full bodies be lightly infect as Auicen sayeth in the fourthe canon.Eate tent peratly. They that chargen theire bodies with replection shortē their lyfe, also comen bathes ar to be eschewed for a lyt∣le ruste corruptith all the body. Therfore the peo∣ple asinyche as is possible is to be eschewed leaste of infecte breathes some man be infect, But whē the multitude of people may not be eschewed thē vse the remedies folowinge,In ye mor¦ning eate. In the morninge when ye ryse wasshe a litle rewe, and one or two fylberd nuttes cleane wyth salte, and eate theym, and yf that cannot be had then eate breade, or a tofte sopped in vynegre namely, in troublous and cloudy wecher, Also in tyme of Pestilence it is bet¦ter to abyde within the house, for it is not holsom to go in the City or Towne,Sprencle your hou∣ Also sprencle youre house specially in somer with vynegre and roses
and with the leaues of vyne tre. Also it is goode to washe often tymes in the day your handes wt water and vynegre, & wype your face wyth your handis and smelle to theim. Also it is goode alway to sauour egre thingis, In the mounte of Pessu∣lane I myght not eschewe the company of people for I went from house to house because of my po∣uertye to cure syck folkes therfore breade or a spō¦ge sopped in vynegre I toke wyth me holding it to my mouthe, and nose because all egre thynges stoppen the wayes of humours and suffreth no ve∣nemous thinges to entre into a manes body, and so I escaped the Pestilēce my felowes supposing that I shulde not lyue, these thyngis I haue pro∣ued by my self ¶ The confortis of the herte, & the principall membres. THe confortes of the harte be these, saffron Lanifex plāteyn with other herbes they opon the in wardespirite,Saffiōcō fortith the harte. & these be goode amonge the comen people, where lyghtly yt hap penyth that one ys infect of another therfore be ware the breathe of another, Also of infect ayer a mans eyen be made dymme yf he beare not these sayed thingis in his hande. Also it is holsome to washe your mouthe, face, eyen, and handes of ten tymes in ye day with rose water medle with vynegre, and yf ye haue no Rose water take vynegre:Kepe your selfe sulible. and so these thinges vsed ye maye surely go amonge the people. Also a naturall lare of the bellye is a greate remedye, ellis prouoke a laxe by
a supposytory craftely vse pipille pestilenciales for they be goode they be in the Potecaries shop∣pies.Kepe good fyere in your hou∣se. Also kepe fyre alway in youre house, for yt settith miche the inpressions of the bodies aboue & clarified the ayer. Also it is profitable aswell for hole and sycke folkes to drinke Traicle, therfore take it two tymes a day, with cleare wyne lymp∣hate or with cleare rose water or with cleare ale. Take a quantite of triacle of a pease and two spo¦nefull of cleate wyne or rose water or ale,drinke tri∣acle. dissolue the triacle in the cup and drinke yt, & dyne not vntyli the myddes of the daye, so that the triacle may haue his operation, then chose a goode dyshe of meate, and drinke cleare wyne, and often tymes drinke in the day, but not myche together for myche habundaunce of drinke putrifyeth the humors. Also beware of hote thinges in meate as peper & garlyke,Beware of peper in meate. though pe{per} pourgeth the brayne from flewme and specially the membres from vis¦cous humours yet yt makith myche heate, & heate fallith into putryfaction, bitternes only ys more to please then hote odour or sauor. Also garlycke though yt pourgith flewme and put oute euyll hu¦mour, and prouoked an appetite to eate and suf∣rith no drye ayer to entre, yet it troublith the eyen and makith ye hedde hote, therfore it is not goode to eate garlyck, the pestilence growith often ty∣m of an hote cause, therfore all meates the ligh∣ter they be of digestion so myche they be the better In the mornynge eate boylled meate,Eate mea¦tes oflight digestion. Forbeare pottage at euen ros¦ted, forbeare brothe and potage withoute they be egre, In the tyme of pestilence eygre and tarte me¦ates
be myche better then other meates. Also for∣beare al fruetes,Forbeare all frutes but yf they be eygre as cheries or pome garnates or a litle of a peare or apple by wey of medecyne, because all frute enducith putri¦faction. Eate conuenient spyces as gynger,Eate gyn¦ger. cina∣mum, comin, macis, and saffron, These be the best sause that may be made for ryche people, for ye poo¦re people take rewe, sage, fylbordnutt{is}, percelly wt vynegre mengled together. These be goode and lettith putrifaction. To be mery in the herte ys a greate remedy for helth of body. Therfore in tyme of pestilence beware ye feare not deathe, but lyue merely and hope to lyue longe. For the letting of bloude. LEtting of bloud ones in the moneth may be made,Lett blou∣de. onles age or other thing forbed yt, as pilgrymes or feoble {per}sones which haue the flixe, suffce to be lett bloude in the vayne called basylica on the ryght or lefte syde before ea∣ting, & after incision of basilica be mery & drinke wyne or ale temperately: slepe not that day when basilica ys cutt, yf ye feele you greued to be infect,Eschewe slepe after ye be in∣fect. then eschewe slepe, and be walking and mouing for by slepe the inwarde heate inducith poyson to the harte, & to other specyall membres that vneth any herbe may take away such poyson which shul¦de not be yf a man wolde be mouinge to and fro. But some wolde aske, wherfore slepe shalbe eschewed. I saye that in Pestylence tyme anon after meate yf a body lyste to slepe thē suche luste shalbe forborne by a space, walking in
the gardeins or feldes, and then make a naturall slepe by the space of an houre, And therfore Auicen wrytith that yf a mā wolde slepe, he must drincke a goode draught of ale or wyne before, because a man being a slepe drawith many humors, and the euyll humors be putt downe by the humors of a goode draught, But some wolde aske, howe may a man feele when he is infecte I say that a man whiche is infect that day eatith not myche meate for he is replenished with euyll humours,Howe a man shall know whē he is ifect & forth with after dyner he hathe luste to slepe, and feelith greate heate vndre colde, Also he hathe greate payne in the forehed, but all these thingis he may put a way by mouing of a space hyder & thider, to ryde or to walke,ryde or walke. he may not for sleuthe of the bo¦dy, and the weight of the same, Also a man that is infecte hathe luste to fleape euery houre of ye day and night for the venim beyng within the body troublythe the spirite of lyfe so that all way he wol¦de rest and slepe. And also of these tokens a man shall knowe and feele himself infect, and yf a bo∣dy wol not beleue this abyde the myddes of the day, and thē he shal feele a swelyng vndre ye arme or aboute the share, or aboute the eares, and ther fore see an hye and a gode medicine, forbeare slea¦pe because of these thingis aforesaid, and it is play¦ne that the spirite of lyfe restith in sleape, and all the body here and there is venimed: Alle these thin¦ges I haue proued by my selfe. These thinges knowen, when a man feelith hymself infect, asso∣ne as he may let hym be letc bloude plentuoussy tyll he swowne, then stoppe the vayne. For a litle
lettyng of bloude mouith or styreth venymtand yf yt be so that a man wol not haue many vaynes cutt together,When ye shall lett vionde. then let him suffce the vayue cutt to renne tyll ye bloud withdrawe, for a lytle bleding mouith strongly the venym, as it is sayed afore. Also a man whether he be infect or not, yf he be lett bloude, let him forbeare sleape all that day tyl mydnight folowing, and alweye lett bloude that vayne, vpon that syde of the body where the swel¦lyng apperith. Therfore yf a swelling appere vndre the right arme lett bloude in the myddes of the same arme in the vayne called mediana, yf yt appere vndre the lyfte arme, let him bloude in the myddes of the same or in the vayne of ye lyuer whi¦che is aboute that lytle fynger, and yf it be aboute the share, lett him bloude aboute the hele vpon the same syde, yf the swelling be in the neck, let hym bloude in the vayne called Cephalica abouthe the thombe in the hande of the same syde or in ye vayn called mediana of the same arme: or in the hande of the same syde aboute the litle fingre. And yf the swelling appere aboute the eare, let hym bloude in the vayne called cephalica of ye same syde, or in the vayne whiche is betwene the longe fyngre & the thombe leaste many venemous vaynes go in to the brayne, or let bloude in the vayne which is aboute the lytle fyngre named by the Phisicions Basilica, and yf a swelling appeare in the shoul∣ders lesse and diminishe yt with ventosite, & fyrst lesse the vayne called mediana, yf the swelling be on the back, lesse yt vpon the vayne called pedica magna, and all these thingis be made yf a man
slepe not before the knowlege of the swellynge. But if ye feele suche swellyng after slepe,yf be feele swellynge after slepe then on the contrary parte the lettyng of bloude must be made, As yf the swelling appere in the ryght arme lett him bloude in the lefte arme in Epate, or Ba∣silica, or mediana, and a swellyng appere vndre the lyfte arme, lett hym bloude in the ryght arme lyke as yt ys sayed of ye lyfte arme: and so of other places of the body, lett bloude in the contrary par¦te of suche swellyng, and yf the lettyng of bloude be veray lytle, and feble, then lett the pacient slea¦pe after myddes of ye day, & alway in ye myddes of ye day he must be in continual mouinge, ryding or going moderatly, and afterwarde yf the swelling growe, let hym not be aferde of deathe because su∣che a swelling puttith oute all cuyll, and makith a man veray hole, and that the swellyng may the soner be made rype, take this medicine as folo∣with, Brose the leaues of an eldre tree, and putt therto grounde mustard,a plaster for ye sort. and make a plaster ther∣of and put yt vpon the swellyng, some surgeons woll put triacle vpon the swelling, but do not so for triacle puttith oute venym, therfor drincke tria¦cle for that puttith oute the same, Also there is ano¦ther medicyne, Take sengrene hylworth other wy¦se called wylde tyme, maudelyn, grasse planteyn & a lytle Rye floure, and breake all these together til ye see water come oute therof, medle that water wt womans mylke, and gyue yt to ye paciēt fasting be for sleape, & yt wol worke ye better for to remoue ye swelling, Also for the swelling when it apperith. Take filbert nuttes, fygges, and rewe, and bruse
theym together, and lay is vpon the swellynge. These remedies be sufficient to eschewe this greate sycknes wyth the helpe of all∣myghty God, to whome be euerlasting laude, and praising, worlde withoten ende. AMEN. ¶ Laude, and praise be to almyghty God, and gentle reader pray for the maker of this boke. ¶ Imprinted att London by Thomas Gybson, in the moneth of Septembre, in the yere of oure Lorde God A thousande fyue hundreth thirty & sixe And in the .xxviii. yere, of the Reigne of our most gracious soueraigne lorde Henry the eyghte by the grace of God of Englonde and of Fraunce kinge, defender of the faithe and lorde of Irelonde & in ear∣the (next vndre Christe) supreme hedd of the Chirche of Englond. ¶ God saue the kinge.
blazon or coat of arms
