4833 S107625 99843323 8046
A DEFENCE OF CATHOLIKES PERSECVTED IN ENGLAND, Inuincibly prouing their holy Religion to be that which is the only true Religion of Christ; and that they in professing it, are become most faithfull, dutifull, and loyall Subiects, to God, their King and Country. And therefore are rather to be honoured and respected, then persecuted or molested. Composed by an ould studien in Diuinitie. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a theefe, or a railer, or a coueter of other mens things, But if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorifie God in this name. 1. Pet. 4. Printed at Doway by GERARD PINCHON, at the signe of Coleyn, 1610.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOKE. Chapter I.   BY way of a Preface to the persecuted Catholikes, and by them to their Persecutours: of the Innocencie, perfection, and ho∣nour of them and their spirituall Pa∣stours, renowned Priests. pag. 1.
Chap. II.   That the Religion of our English Catho∣likes, as well from the Saxons as Bri∣tans, is the same with their first A∣postles, and deduced from them; and first of the Saxons conuerted by Saint Augustine, and his Roman Mission▪ pag. 15. Chap. III.   The like proued, of all other person and parts of England, as also the Br¦tans, that their Religion was t same with the Apostles, and th which our now Perseuted Cat¦likes Profsse and maintaine. pag. 30.
Chap. IIII.   The Religion of the Apostles, of our pri∣matiue Christian Britans, of the first Christia Sxons, and of our now persecuted Catholikes, poue to be one and the same in eury Article, against Protestants an eeutours. pag. 50. Chap. V.   That the Consecration, Iurisdiction, and mission of our Cathoie Bishop (tea∣ching the same Apostolicall Doctri∣ne in all thing with the Catholike Church) is most lawfull, oli, orderlie, and honourable, in that his sacred cal∣ling is most worthie, and necessrie, and therfore he vnworthily Persecu∣ted. pag. 69.
Chap. VI.   That our English Priests who teach all things with the Apostolicall Religion are truely consecrated, worthie men, and are to be honoured, and not perse∣cuted. pag. 102. Chap. VII.   That thē Catholikes of England taught and directed by such guides in Reli∣gion as our Priests be, are not to be persecuted but protected, defended and imployed, as true and faithfull sub∣iects in all things. pag. 146. Chap. VIII.   That euerie Article of Catholike Reli∣gion
is more agreable with the best temporall gouernmēt, then those of the Protestants; and that a Catholike kee∣ping his Religion, as he is bound to God, so he cannot be vndutifull to his temporall Prince and Countrie. pag. 157. Chap. IX.   That true and obedient Catholikes, be the truest and most obedient subiects. pag. 170.
APPROBATIO. Viso tstmoio, ciusdam vir¦docti mihi{que} de fide & docrnâ pro¦bè coii, quo testatur ūc libru cui Tulus est; A Defnce of Cathe¦likes perseut in England, nihil con¦tinere fidei vel bonis moibus ad¦uesm, quin poius ulta quae a Catholicorum Agoru conso¦lationem cian; inum cens quem & ego  eo appro¦re atm . artj, A¦no 1630. GEOGIVS COVNRIVS S▪ Theol. Doct & Regius,  Pfssor, Co¦legae  potus,  Cacelaius, & lib¦um Cenor.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. By way of a Preface to the persecuted Catholikes, and by them to their Per∣secutours: of the Innocencie, perfection, and honour of them and their spirituall Pastours, re∣nowned Priests. 1. RENOWNED Catholikes of Engand, mo renoned Ca∣tokes  perseued or your  eligi, giue leaue to one, yor old, humble nd vnworthie seruat n Chist, Associate, nd Partaker now with you, and you renow∣ed Predecessours, a long time fō his youth o old age in prisn, pecution, , nd tribulatiō for the most holy Caolike aith, and Religion, to remember hi loue nd duie to you: as also the bounen dutie nd office of vs all (as true seruants) to our
Master Christ in so noble, and iust a cause with the honour, reward, and recompence, which is his ordinarie paie to all his faithfull seruants in such his affaires, farre more emi∣nent and excellent th any Potentate, Prince, or Persecutour on earth can either take away or giue vnto vs; or any of them, or we in this world inioy. 2. Let me beginne with you as Saint Cy∣prian that glorious Byshop and Martyr did, with the constant Martyrs and Confessours of his Countrie and time. Quibus ego vos laudi∣bus praedicm fortissimi Martyres? &c. O most va∣liant Cyprian. pisl. ad  & Confsor.  pist. 6. Martyrs with what praises may I blase you forth? with what cris of voce may I adorne the fortitude of you heart, and perseuerance of faith? you haue endured euen to the consumation of glorie in your examinatiōs, most hard torments. You haue not giuen place to pu∣nishments: but they haue rather yealded to you. Crownes haue ministred an end to those griefes, to which tor∣ments gaue no nd. And presently after he ad∣deth. The multitude of those which were present, hath seene the heauenlie fight of God, the spirituall ware of Christ, his seuants to haue stoode with a free voice, an vncorrupted minde, a diuine force, naked truely of wordlie weapons, but armed with the shield of faith. 3. Let me speake vnto you, and of you, es∣pecially chiefe Prelate and Pastours, Priests, and persecuted Clergie of England, and of your late Predecessours on earth, and now happie in heauen, as Saint Iohn Chrisostome
thus performed to the two most glorious A∣postles Saint Peter and Saint Paule. Quasnam Chrysst. se. de SS. Apo∣stolis Petr. & aul. p. Meta∣phrst & in Breuia∣die 6. Iulij. vobis referemus gatias, qui tantum pro nobis labora∣tis? memenitu Petre & obstupesco: recordor tui Paule, & excedens mente lachrymis opprimor. &c. What hankes shall we giue vnto you, who haue laboured so much for vs? ô Peter I remember thee and am astoni∣ed. O Paule I call the to mind: and with excesse tere∣f ame oppressed with teares For what shall I speake, or what shall I vtter, when I behold you afflictions: I annot tell. How many prisons haue you sanctified? what chaines haue you adorned? what orments haue ou sustained? what curses or reproaches haue you suf∣ered? how haue you borne Christ? how with your prea∣hing haue you ioyed Churches? blessed are the instru∣ents of your tongue: your members are sprinckled with lood for the Church. You haue imitated and followed Christ in all things. 4. I doe not, I dare not, compare my selfe o those great lightes Bishops, and Rulers in he Church of Christ or such as be vnder our upreame Paour, of that highest Order, to home I owe all dutie and respect. yet as an ld student in holy eing, hauing read uch, and written not a little for the defence f you, and the cause of God, without any ust controll, (neuer adhearing vnto, or rea∣hing suspected or vnsoūd doctrine of sweare∣ing, churchinge, chpge, sword▪ ing, r such like stuffe,) may now more bouldy rite, and wish I had S. Cyprian his learned eale, and S. Chrysostome his golden mouth,
or pen to laye downe the worth and due o you all most renowned Teachers, Learnes, and Sufferers in this cause, the cause of Christ▪ For although the most reuernd Father in God Richard Bishop of Chalcedon, and the holy, learned, reuered Priests of England ar not in person those greatest, or others, a¦mong the Apostles; yet they all, both ou Bishop and Priests in their Episcopall an Priestlie Order (Preaching and teaching a they did, and deriuing Succession, both i doctrine and dignitie fm them, if we ma beleeue the Apostles, and Apostolike me Clem. Ro∣m. Cost. Apost. l 2.  5. and witnesses) doe supplie ther pace, and a so to be obeyed. Presbyteri, si assiduè in studio de¦cend: verbum Dei laborauerint, Apostolorum locu tenent. Sacerdoes sunt omnes Domini Apostoli, q nque agros, neque domos haeteaitant hic, sed sempe Altar & Deo seruiunt: If Priests will continually la¦bour in the studie of teaching the word of God, the sall inioye the plae of the Apostles. Priests are all t Apostles of our Lord, who inheriteth here neith feils nor houses, but alwyes they serue God and th neighbour. Eis qui in Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obedi rinaeus l. 4. c. 20. 43. oportet, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, q cum Episcpatus successione Charisma certum secundu platum paris acceperunt: Those Priests which a in the Church ought to be obeyed, who haue their Su¦cession from the Apostles, and with the Succession Iust, Di 5.  Ti∣. Bishoprikes haue receaued the certaine gift accordi to the will of the Father. Neque vero à quoquam De hostias accipit; nisi à suis Sacerdotibus: Neither indee
oth God Accept of Sacrifices of any,  of his Priests. here we see the honour which ought to e done to our preaching, and Sacrificing ishop and Priests. . And the holy Scrturs pronounce and clare them wor  1. . 5. nour. Qui  habeantur maximè  & do∣â: The Priests tat  wll, let them be esteemed rhie of duble honour: specially they that labour in  word and dotrine. nd I may auerre that ho∣ conuersatiō wh you with so many dif∣ulties possesse▪ n forsaking all to follow rist, to teach, preach, and doe other esslie functions, to be the Apostolicall life d calling. Our Protestant persecutours al∣which doe acknowledge you for true and full Priests, and doe attribute so much to aching, and most highly de commend r holy Apostolicke predecessours, Priests  Monckes (who liued as you doe in the e of the Britons, before all of the Reli∣us Protest. Thtor of great Brit. God Win. Conues. f Brit. Orders that came hither in the Saxōs e) should not otherwise vse you then h honour and respect: especially when al∣es, euen from the begining of Christia∣e here they finde it so. . In the very first age, yea in the A∣les time they auoch that S. Ioseph and Associates our first Religious, disconti∣d their Monasticall life to preach the h. Abbot Fecknam did alleage out of S.
Gildas in the fist Parliament of Queene Eli∣zabeth, that Pope Elutherius, in his time sent from their Monasticall life such hither to preach. S. German and S. Lupus Religious of Lycinum Monasterie were sent hither in∣to Britonie by S. Celestin, before they wer Bishops, to the same end and purpose. Whe our renowned English Apostle S. Gregori tooke religious Monckes, S. Augustine an others out of his owne Monastarie, to sen them hither to preach to the vnbeleeuin Saxons, and hey terrified with the labou and perils of such an Apostolicall life, des¦red rather to returne to their quiet Monast¦call conuersation, he vrged them, and se them forward: because this Apostolicall li was most perfect, and had greatest reward  heauen. Omniinstantia, omnique seruore quae i Gregorius Epist. ad Monachos in Angl. destinnd. Bed hior ccle. l. 1. c. 23. choastis, Deo authore peragite: sciences quod labor magnum maior retribution i gloria sequitur▪ With fore and seruour finish that you haue by the mo of God begun, assuring your selues, that after your gr labour eternall reward shall followe. And the Ber¦dictine Monckes in their Trithemius, a others doe glorie much, (and not witho cause) of the many Bishops, Archbisho Cardinals, and Popes of their Order by t title of Apostolicall Mission. Our Bene¦ctines also of the English Congregation, snites, Dominicans, Franciscans, and Car¦lites with dispention from his Holines, h left the rigour of their Rule and Order,
better to applie themselues here in our coun∣trie for the conuerting of soule, as in a voca∣tion of greater merite and higher perfection; preferring the Apostolicall preaching life in his time and place, before the exact and pro∣essed obseruation of their owne particular Orders, thereby to notifie vnto vs and all, hat this Apostolicall priestlie life (euer from he beginning of Christianitie here or in the orld) was the most perfect and most excel∣nt calling and profession, pleasing to God, rofitable to his Church, and honourable in he professours therof. 7. All our old holy Bishops, Colledges, Monasteries, Seminaries, or Schooles of lear∣ed Christians, such as by our Protestants onfession were here extant in euery age, uouis saeculo extiterunt: (and longe before Matth. Parker, Antiquit. Britun. Ion. Iosi∣lin. hist. Eccles. ma∣nuscript. Gregorie was Pope, or that he did or could nd any Monckes, of what Order soeuer in∣ Englād, or any part of Britonie) sent most oly and learned priests, by allowance of the e Apostolike to preach in France, Ger∣anie, Denmarke, Friseland, Bauaria, Nor∣ay, Ireland, Greenland, and into other rts of the world diuers times, and in great mber, as it shall be hereafter more largly clared. Knowing both by holy Scriptures d the testimonie of Christ himselfe, that is Apostolicall condition, a signed by him his dearest Apostles, first taught and pra∣ised in himselfe, not onely to forsake all
externall wordlie thinges, as Religious men doe, or be bound to doe, but or a man to denie himselfe, the sauing of his health, li∣bertie and life, daily exposing them to losse, and oftē loosing them for the loue of Christ, (truely following him in sauing many soules that were in danger otherwise eternally to perish) is the most absolutly perfect calling, and profession in the Church of God. 8. Monasticall life by abnegation is a State of perfection, and a safe way to saue the pro∣fessers soule; but to saue both his owne and many others by a more perfect abnegation, must needs be the greatest perfection▪ and fol∣lowing of Christ. Si quis vult post me venire, ab∣neget Luc. . semetisum, & tollat crucem suam quoidiè & sequatur me: If any man will come after me, let hi denie himselfe, and take vp his crosse dayly and fol∣low me. And our Sauiour when he demande▪ of Saint Peter his greatest and most louin Apostle. Diligis me plus his? Loues hou me more th Iohn. 21. these? Saint Peter answered. Yea Lord. The our Sauiour repied twice, Pasce agnos meo Feede my lambes. And at S. Peters third answe to the same demand, he added, psce oues me feede my sheepe. And to his Apostles he said Bonus Pastor animam suam dat pro ouibus suis: à go Iohn. 10. Pastor giueth his life for his sheepe. And Maiore hac dilectionem nemo habet, quam vt anima Iohn. 15. suam ponat quis pro amicis suis: Greater loue th this no man ath, that a man yeald his life for h friends.
9. This Pastorall office and dignitie was euer accompted so perfect and excellent, that in all times, euen out of danger, it was estee∣med among the best Religious, a perfection and honour, for any with them to be prefer∣red to Episcopall, or such pastorall charge of soules. Therefore the highest Consistorie, to wit the Court of Rome, hath most iustly and publickly declared the renowned Priests of England to be Ordinis Apostolici: Of the (most perfect and excellent) Apostolicke order: And as theire Order is the same with the Apostles, so they doe deduce their neuer yet interrup∣ted Frane, Godw. Pref. to the Catal. of Bish. conuers. of Brit. pa. 6. succsion therein, euen from the high∣est and chiefest Apostle Saint Peter himselfe: from whom so to deriue it, (to speake in pu∣blicke Protestant words.) VVe should accompt it a great glorie to our Nation, to deriue the pedegree of our spirituall linage, frō so noble and excellent a father as S. Peter. For both Greeke, Latine, Aunciēt, Later, Catholike an Protestant writers as∣sure Sim. Me∣taphr. in SS. Petr. & Paul. Antiquit-Graec. ib & apud Sur∣in Sanct. Petr. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Camden in Brit. Nicphor. apud . vs, that S. Peter came hither into Brito∣nie. Simon Petrus qui fundamenum esse Ecclesae de∣sinitus est tanquam pobaissimus discipulus, &c. Si∣mon Peter, who like a most approued disciple was de∣clared to be the fundation, of the Church, as more po∣werfull then all the rest, was commanded to illuminate the obscurer parts of the world in the west, and he could entirely fulfull the command. He came into Britonie, in which place after he had staid long, drawne many people to the faith, erected Churches, and ordained Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in the twelfth yeare of
the Emperour Nero he returned to Rome againe. The best Protestant Antiquaries doe hold this for so vnquestionable a truth in Histories, that they crie out against any that should doubt thereof. Quid ni crederemus? why should Cambdn supra. we not beleeu? 10. Some saie that Saint Philip the Apo∣stle (and others would haue it, the great A∣postle Saint Peter) sent S. Ioseph and his Re∣ligious companie of Glastenburie hither. But S. Peter, being alredy proued, to be here before their comming, and after it, might well allowe, and approue of their comming, and being here: but I see not how he did send them hither. And as our best Antiquities de∣liuer, they all died without leauing any Suc∣cessours here, vntill Pope Elutherius and King Lucius time. But for our Succession of our holy Catholike Clergie Priests, it was neuer yet interrupted, but continued from S. Peter here vnto this day (notwithstanding any howsoeuer outragious tempest of Perse∣cution, of whatsoeuer enimies of Christian truth, Infidels or Heretikes,) in great num∣ber, and constancie by all writers, none de∣nying or making doubt thereof. And our Protestat Antiquaries themselues doe gene∣rally confesse, and particularly recompt ma∣ny Bishops, Priests and other Clergie men to haue continued here in euery age both in the Britons and Saxons time without any inter∣ruption at all. To tantaque Presbyterorum, Mo∣nachorum,
Praesulum, Episcoporum, Ecclesiarum, Cae∣nbiorum, Math. Parker. Antiquit. Brit. pag. 7. 8. Iohn. Gos hist. c∣cles. Iohn. Bal∣l. de scrip. Centur. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Godwin. Catal. of Bish. in all Sees. Sediumque vetusta nomina quae quouis sae∣culo extiterūt: So many old names of Priests, Monckes, Prelats, Bishops, Churches, Monasteries, Episcopall Sees which in euery age were extant: And vnder the Saxons and English, both of Bishops and Priests, with their Succession of Bishops, vn∣till the first Parliament of Queene Eliza∣beth. 11. Neither doe our Protestants, as latly in publicke Parliament, make their Religi, to which they would violently enforce you any older then that dare, almost 80. years old: neither can they (except leaping backward ouer Queene Maries Raigne, they would patch 4. yeares of yoūge King Edwards yoū∣ger Religion vnto it) shewe any Edict, De∣cree, Statute Parliament, or any publicke proposall or command euen by temporall power for any Religion, vse or profession therein, to which they would pull, and driue you but frō such younge times and Tutors in Religion. That which is true Religion must haue so many hundreds of yeares in age more as then were, and now are from Christ and his Apostles daies: and other Apostles and Proposers then King Edward, and Queene Elizabeth who persecuted, and in what they could did suppresse the true, old, Catho∣like, Apostolike, and Christian Religion, But in so doing, and in whatsoeuer they did or could doe, they onely could inuent, o
giue allowance vnto a newe, but not a true Religion. Therefore if this onely and no∣thing else were to be saied vnto you, or for you in this cause, you are secure, you suffer for Iustice you are blessed here, and by that title shall (so perseuerin) be eternally hap∣pie in heauen: Bishops, Priests, Monckes, Religious and lay Catholikes not so perse∣cuted may perish, but perseuering constantly in persecution for Christ's cause they can∣not perish: Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur prop∣ter Matth. 5. Iustitiam: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for Iustice: As the cause, confirmd by Christ himselfe, confirmeth: Quoniam ipsorum est reg∣num coelorum: Because theirs is the Kingdome of hea∣uen. This quoniam: because. Is more particular vnto you: for it is almost proper vnto our Priests and their Predecessours in this holie warre▪ which Christ saied to his Apostles, Vos estimonum perhibeitis, quia ab initio mecum Iohn. 15. estis: You sall giue testimonie, because you are with me from the begining. It is theirs and their chil∣drens in Christ, Vos autem estis qui permansistis mecum in tentationibus mes. You are they that haue Luck 22. remained with me in my temptations. It is true of them and all such Catholikes of whom Saint Paul saied to the Romans. Fides vestra annun∣tiatur  Rom. 1. in vniuerso mundo: Your faith is renowned in the whole world. This of your faith and con∣stancie therin, and of your obedience and suf∣frings. Vestra obedienti in omnem locum diuulgata est: Your obedience is published into euery place. d Rom. 16.
12. If Christ will confesse all before his father, which is in heauen, who doe confesse him before men on eath, this confession of you that haue beene so long Spectaculum: Aspe∣ctacle, 1. Corint. 4. to Angels, and men will be great: if euery one that is persecuted for Iustice, shall haue his reward in heauen, what will their honour be, which haue suffered so much, and so long time for that cause? Your Protestant Aduer∣saries and Persecutours themselues taking the altitude of your miseries and suffrings for this greatest iustice, haue found their eleua∣tion to be raised to the hight of all former Persecutours; who were Pagans, professed enimies to Christ, and all Christians. They which professe Christ, and Christianitie may not be such. Great was the persecution of Nero, and yet Britonie felt it not, but was then a Refuge, Ayle, and as a Sanctuarie, to receiue and defend the persecuted Bitter was Dioclesiaus Persecutiō here in Britonie, but as our Gildas telleth vs it was but Nunnis: of nine yeares onely; at which time the Scots, cts, Saxons, Gormundians, Aricans, and Dnes ll Pagans persecuted the Christis here. But neuer any bearing the name of Christ before hese dayes persecuted the Catholike Chri∣tians of this Kingdome. All those Pagans ersecuted Christians as enimies to their old Gods, and Religion, and for not ioyning ith them in Idolatrie, deeming Christian eligion newe and erroneous. Our Protestāt
Persecutours persecute vs for defending the old Religion of Christ, which cannot be vn∣true, and for not imbracing their newe, which in the Schoole of Christ cannot be true. 13. All the Pagans that euer persecuted here, distroied not o many Churches and Chappels, as King Henrie the eight and his daughter Elizabeth, nor tooke from the Church the halfe of that which they did. Halse such a Fine and Ransome as the Catho∣likes paid to them, aboue the third part of England in Religious Church-lands, (posses∣sed by the Clergie here Sixhundred yeares since) besides other for fitures, would haue stopped the Pagans Persecution. The Saxons greatest Persecution next to Dioclesians, soone slacked and relēted: no soon r had the Saxons driuē Theonus and Thadiocus Arch∣bishops of Lōdon and Yorke with other Bis∣hops, Priests and Religious from heir Sees, and Residences, in the yeare of Christ 586. But King Ethelbert of Kent ruling vnto Hú∣ber, by meanes of his blessed Christiā Queen Bertha, and her holy Bishop S. Lethard, gau ease and peace to Christians here before S. Augustines and his Associates comming hi∣ther, and they were receiued by Ethelber (not yet a Christian) with honours, and no indignities. All they were strangers and for∣rainers to the persecuted. Our Persecutour be of the same Nation, blood, and kinred
and stiled Christians with them, whom thus they persecute for Christs true Religion. If King S. Ethelbert, Queene S. Bertha, and Bishop S. Lethard were now liuing, Catho∣likes would not be persecuted. THE II. CHAPTER. That the Religion of our English Catho∣likes, as well from the Saxons as Bri∣tons, is the same with their first Apo∣stles and deduced from them; and first of the Saxons conuerted by S. Augu∣stine, and his Roman Mission. NOw because our Protestants and Per∣secutours before haue deliuered it; For greate glorie to our Nation, to deriue our spirituall degree from so noble a Father as S. Peter. We will riue and deduce from him, a continuall d neuer interrupted Succession, both of iscopall and Priestlie function, and do∣ine also, in euery point now questioned by r Persecutours, frō that so noble a Father,  these Protestant times; And to begge more ce and fauour from these our enimies in s cause, they themselues shall briefly make s deduction.
. And first concerning Bishops, and Mas∣sing Priests sent hither, or consecrated here by S. Peter's, or his Roman Successours Iu∣diction (such as they now so greuiously d ) hey confesse publickly that they had o , but so consecrated, as the Ro∣man Church did from the begining (and stil doth consecrate) vnill their ne booke o pretended Consecration, ma by King Edward th Sth ( child) hi thoritie brought in thei ; ad they ack∣nowledge  con¦secrae ▪ Pries▪  and doe , stifie  Engl. Pro∣te. in Ro∣gers: Booke of articles. Annal. Burton. an. 140. Caiu ∣tiq.  Annl.  n Mans . 1. 6. Harrison. descript. of Brit. wa or Archbishop  moreouer that this our  was seld by this greaest Aost in he  yare of Nero; and 67.  . Peter returned againe to  duers of thse our Bishops and  Nation, as S. Manuetus, S. , S. Ma¦cellus or Marcellinus, the renoned Priests and Preachers of Cambridge, n, and afte the yeare 140. S. Marcellus being, and liuin Bishop after King Lucius and Britonie wa conuerted, when three Archbisbops, an ventie eight Bishops were here placed, an all Ecclesiasticall thinges established an confirmed by Papall power in this King¦dome. . To make this Succession without a question, they deliuer vnto vs the names, a
me Episcopall Acts, of our Archbishops Hollinh. Hist. of England. Stows Hist. Godwin. conuers. of Britan. Cata. of Bishops, in London, Yorke, and S. Dauids. f Londō, Yorke, and Caerlegion. In London e chiefe Metropolitan See S. Theanus, S. luanus, Cadar, Obinus, Conanus, Palla∣us, Stephanus, I'tutus, Theodwynus, or edwynus, Thedredus, Hillarius, Guiteli∣s, Restitutus, Fastidius, Vodinus, Theo∣s. Others adde S. Augulus, Ternokinus. d Gormcelinus. They confesse that Theo∣s the last Archbishop of London with full risdiction continued in his Archiepiscopall e, notwithstanding the Pagon Saxons inua∣n and persecutiō, vntill the yeare of Christ . which was but 10. yeares before S. Augu∣ coming hither. So they testifie of Tha∣us Matth. West. an. 586. Archbishop of Yorke, the same yee auing his See, and with the Archbishop of  and many of their Clergie flying into al and Cornewall to the Christian Bis∣ps, Priests, and people there. They re∣pt in th Archbop See of Yorke, Theo∣sius, Sampso, Taurinus, eruans, Sampson, , and the enamed Thadiocu▪  egion they  downe Tremonus, S. ▪ S Daid, iud, Conanc, Theliaus, Ebdus (wholi∣d in S. Augustins time) and after him im∣ediatly succeeding in Archiepiscopall dig∣tie, fourty, or more vntill the time of Ber∣rd, who in the yeare 1115. lost that honour om that See by Papall order, as all Anti∣aries Catholikes, and Protestants agree.
4. These men also deliuer vnto vs a Ca¦talogue of learned holy writers in euery ag and in the age wh S. Augustine came hithe they recount vnto vs, the most noble Sain and Doctours Dubritius, Iltuts, Congellu Dauid, Gildas, Kentigens, Brendant Asaphus, and others, whly nd absolut agreeing with the Church of ome. They  downe our Vniursiies , a among others  from all e¦ror. Our  in the gre ouncels  he same fai with te whole ; they had m entercoure  municaon next to t Popes of  the mo Catholike a renowd  Churc of Christ,  Athana▪ , S. Martine, and ma more, and bth se Tertulan, S. Chry¦stome with , did highly commēd th our  true Religion. 5. An beca some Proestants to mu  libertie cannot well e¦dure  ckes and Religious, s king wa  can o disgrace su (as oher  nowned Clergie) especial the  of S. Benedicts Order, very a¦ci  gland, and doe endeuour all t can  diinish the glorie of the Children so noble a Father (and so doing for disli rather then loue either of them, vs, or o first Christian Saxons) diuers among the doe very forwardly ascribe much to such
hat labour. And some of their prime Anti∣uaries (as some lately haue published) haue et downe vnder their hands, that there were o aunciently, and but Egyptian and Bene∣ictine Monckes in this Kingdome of Brita∣ie, no great glorie, but rather dihonour to his mot noble and aunciēt Nation in Chri∣ian Religion. A Nation that may iustly aime prioritie in that kinde of honour efore Egipt, or any other Countrie in the orld, except they cā proue their Religious ore auncient then S. Ioseph, and his holy mpanie here, in the yeare of Christs Nati∣tie 63. by their owne confession: and what ōckes of Egypt they were that came hither ey should, if they could, haue instanced : To performe which they will haue great fficulie, sith that they themselues confesse at diers denie the Egyptian Rule was e∣r receiued in the West, and consequently re; Minimè credi volunt nonnulli, Mo achorum Iohn. Sel∣den not & spicileg. in Eadmerum pag. 200. Egyptientium Instituta, in Occidnte vnquam esse epta: Some will not haue it beleeued that the In∣ute of the Eyptian Monckes was euer receiued in west. And yet it is certaine by their owne otestant writers, that many Monckes and nasterie▪ were here in Britanie, or in En∣nd. Quouis saculo: In euery age. And before yp had any Monasteries or Monkes▪ 6. We can, and doe recount vnto them nckes from Greece and Syria, who came o Britanie, though longe after our first
Conuersion, and Religious were eted here. So from the most amous Monasterie of Ly∣rinum Veremun. Hist. St. Hector. Boeth. Hist. Scot. l. 6. Rphael olenshed ist. of Scots. our Greeke Mōckes S. Regulus Alba∣tus and his holy companie, who brought the Relickes of Saint Andrewe the Aposte into Scotland, and were so nobly entertained by King Heirgstus, leauing Successous ther (who after were vnited to our old Briis Monckes) are amou to posteritie. S. Palla∣dius who was sent Apostle hither by S. Cae∣lestin the Pope, (as our Protestants write was also a Grecian, Palla lius Graecus; And firs Ioan. Bal. l. de cript. rit. en∣tu. 1. Nicolaus Hrlemn Paio Graeco. a disciple to S. Iohn Patriarch of Herusale that liued a Religious life in Syria especiall about Mount Carmelus, Ioannis Hierosolymoru Patriarcha 44. dum adhu Eremi cultor solita Syriae loca, Carmelum praecipuè incoleret, Nicolao Ha¦lemio teste, Discipulu fuit: As witnesseth Nicola Halem, he was te Disciple of Iohn the 44. Patriarc of Hierusalem, whilst he was as yet a louer of the He¦mitge, and inhabited the desert places of Syria, b especially the Mount Carmelus This may gi antiquitie ere to our learned Carmelits, t¦king their name thence, and as they saie com¦ming from Syria. S. Germanus and S. Lup¦sent Britan. . Antiq. in mu∣scipt. hither Apostles, by the same holy Pop were first Monckes of Lyrinū Monasterie, a brought that Church seruice hither: And  Patrike borre in this our Iland, liui sometimes with our Glastenburie Moncke and Scholler to S. Gman, was in the sa anner sent into Ireland. These were t
Rulers and Directours vnto all our British, Scotish, and Irish Monckes, so much renow∣ed through the whole world. 7. Both English, and Scotih Antiqui∣ies Vremund. & Hect. Boeth. supra. Man. An∣tiq. in vi∣ta S. Bi∣rini. Capg in eodem. witnesse, that soone after S. Augustine of ippo his death, and long before any Monckes of S. Benedicts Order came hither, he Augustine Monckes (Canon-Regulars) ere seated and setled here, who were most oly and learned men; Non tam eruitionis, am proatissimarum viriutum, veaeque pieati∣l insignes: Not so much famous f learning, a for proued vertues, and zeale o deuotion. S Dauid, aint Brendanus, Saint Columbanu, Con∣ellus, and others here wrote Rules of Monckes. 8. To exemplifie but in the worthinesse of Sigibert.  vir. Illustr. in S. Cs∣o Caesar. Arlatēsis, Homilia 25. ad Mo∣nachos. Tom. 2. B∣liot. Patrum. e Lyrian Monckes, who ioyned with ours  Britonie, as S. Caesarius Archbishop of rles neare adioyning thereto, and before bbot there testifieth, that Ab Oriene vsque ad ccidentem, & ab omnibus paene locis in quibus Chri∣iana Religio olitur, religiosssima vestra conuersatio  Christi gloriaem praedicaur: From the East to the st, in all places almost, where Chstian Reigion is aintained, thre to Christ his glorie, your most Chri∣ian conuersation was preached. And  & sae sula Lyrinensis, quae cum pruula & plana esse vi∣atur▪ innumerabiles tamen mones ad aelum misisse gnosciur. Haec est quae eximios nuri Monchos, & astanssimos, per ones Proucia erogat Saer∣es: The blessed and hapie and of rinum, though
it seeme to be little and plain, yet it is knowne to hau sent vnto heauen innumerable mountains. This is se which bring th vp most famous Monckes and through all Prouinces sendeth forth most excellen Priests. 9. This testimonie of such a witnesse, being giuen a little before S. Gregories tim who was so learned a Moncke, and Father to many such in Rome, argueth that his Mōkes and the Monckes of Lyrinum, could no be stranger o eah other. S. Gregorie also commanding his Monckes he sent into En¦glād to goe to the Archbishop of re, Suc¦cessour to S. Cesarius so neare Lyrnum  his assistance; and they bringing from thenc into England Assistants and Interpreter n S. Augustine being consecrated after Bisho of Englād by Eheus Archbishop of Arles▪ according to S. Gregories directions, confir¦meth the same: the accesse of such hither, thei preaching and directions here, and our firs English Moncke: after S. Augustine com¦ming hither, so honouring the Monckes an Monasterie of Lyrinum that they traelle ouer all England and France with them; an Saint Benedict Biscope who was brought  with our British Monckes when none other were here being professed in yrinum Mon¦sterie, showeth how little dffeence there wa betweene the old Monckes of Britanie, th Monckes of Lyrinum, and Saint Augustin and his fellow Monckes sent hither b
ly Saint Gregorie the Pope. 10. By all accompts it is most certaine in storie that S. Benedict Biscope was pro∣led in Lyrinum, went to Rome, returned o the North part of England, where he as Abbot diuers yeares before S. Benedict  Rule, was first giuen, or receiued in these rtes, and was also Abbot at Canterburie bey, and gaue place to S. Adrian, who was t hither by the Pope with Saint Theodore chbishop there, before S. Wilfride the first er of S. Benedict's Rule in the North, was le Archbishop of Yorke to giue it, or gaue e foresaid Rule to the Monckes; as the onckes themselues confesse. And that he  not deliuer Saint Benedicts Rule to the onckes in the North, neither was it in his wer so to doe, vntill he was Bishop there, ich was not vntill the yeare of Christ 670. there about by all Authours, which was ge after S. Benedict Biscops being Abbot th in Northumberland and Canterburie. d whereas some Monckes now would haue Aigulphus a Benedictine Moncke, first to ie persuaded the Monckes of Lyrinum to Mah. VVestm. rn. Floent. VVigorn. chron. Sigbert, & a. eiue S. Benedict's Rule, this cannot be, for Aigulphus was a Moncke of Floriacū Mo∣sterie, which was not builded many yeares er this time: and so it is not certaine, but th the Monckes of Canterburie, and those Northumberland vnder this holy Abbot Benedict Biscope hitherto were Lyrinian,
and not Benedictine Monckes: and yet as be∣fore, they were of the most Religious an learned Monckes, and Apostolike men in th Christian world, as the rest of our Britis Mockes (euen by Protestants confession  also were. 11. nd this is the glorie of this our E∣glish Nation to haue had generally both i Kent, where S. Augustine was, and in all oth pars cnuerted to Christ, such renowne Fathers and Protogenitours in him: For suc were the Monckes of S. Gregories Monast¦rie Io. Diacn. in vita S. Gregorij l. 2. c. 11. in Rome, from which S. Augustine ar his fellowes, learned and holy Disciples  the most learned and holy Pope S. Gregori were sent (as our Protestants them selues ac¦nowledge) that euer was. And so learne were the Monckes of this his Monasterie aboue other Italian Monckes in that tim that besides the Apostolike men about 4 in number, which S. Gregorie sent into E¦gland, he made Maximianus his Abbot the Bishop of Siracusas; Marimanus a Monc thereof, Archbishop of Rauennas; and Pr¦bus another of his Monckes of his Monast¦rie Mari. Sput. l. 2. atate 6. in S. Benedicto. Trithe∣mius l. de script. Ec∣cles. in S. Benedicto. he sent to Hierusalem, to build a Mon¦steie there▪ we haue also warrant from  Church of God, so witnessing in S. Greg¦ries publike office that S. Augustine, and  Monckes he sent into Brianie, (about 40. number) were learned and holy men, Missi Britanniam Doctis & Sanctis viris Augustino,
lijs Monachis: Sending into Britanie learned and holy men Augustine, and other Monckes. 12. But whether S. Augustine, and those who came into England with him to con∣uert it as they most happily did) were in∣deede Monckes of S. Benedicts Order, I will not heare dispute (leauing it perchance to some other worke in hand) it being all one o this my purpose whether S. Augustine nd his companie were Benedicton or other Monckes: I onely intending now to shew that from our first Conuersion in S. Peters time vnto these times, there was a continuall suc∣cession of Priests and of the same Religon, for which now in Englād we are so persecu∣ed: And that S. Augustine and his companie were most hoy and learned men Docti and Breuiar. Roman∣die 12. Martij in festo S. Gregor. Bed. Hist. Eccles. Angl. l. 2. Matth. VVes. in Chron. Forent. VVigr. Chroni. Gliel. Malmes∣bur. d∣gst Reg. Angl. ancti viri, that they taught our Predeces∣ours the same faith we now professe, and that hey conuerted to the faith of Christ Ethel∣ert King of Kent, and his Kingdome of Kēt, nd Sebert or Sigebert King of the East Saxons with his Kingdome, and preached in many other places o England, conuerting in hem many to Christian Religion. I saie with hem and the whole Christian world then, Asia, Africke, and Europe, agreeing with S. Gregorie (who sent hither these so holy and earned men, and therefore is rightly by Saint Beade instiled Apostle of England) in Reli∣gion, vsing his masse, and honouring him for a Sainct, (as our Protestants confesse) that
their doctrine, and Religion was true: and for this part of the world, Italie frō whence they came, France through which they came, England or Britanie whether they came, Ireland, Scotland, and Germanie where some of our Britans and English then were, acknowledging S. Augustines Religion to be true, so prooue vnto vs. So S. Augustine prooued it both by humaine and diuine te∣stimonie. So his Opposits and our persecu∣ting Protestants confesse. To vse their words. The Britans confessed indeede that to be the way of Protestāt. in Stowes st. righteousnesse, which Augustine had preached and sbewed vnto them. 13. And he is a simple witted man, if he can vnderstand but the Latine tongue, that doth not most clearely see, and confesse the same, if he will but reade the publicke Church ser∣uice, Masse and the others, which our Pro∣testants confesse S. Gregorie perused, and pu∣blished, (the Latine and Greeke Church vsing his Masse translated into Greke, as they doe S. Basiles, and S. Chrysostomes) as also his holy learned workes, which he,  Doctour of the Church (and as our Prote∣stants stile him) The most holy and learned Pop that euer was, did publish, and are now extant. Thus he and his Lgates snt hither into En∣gland, generally taught the same Doctrine, in all points, which we Catholikes now pro∣fesse (euen those for which we are so pitti∣fully persecuted) Roman Supremacie, Sa∣ifice
of Mae, Sacrificing Priesthood, such piscopall Roman Ordination, and what∣euer elsse now controuersed by Protestants,  I shall demonstrae against them in euery ticle of their Religion, when I come to the onuersion o te other Parts of England,  those which were of our old British Or∣er and Reigon. And yet our English Pro∣stants publickly, generally, and with such thoritie protest, and testifie, that in the first 0. yeares of Christ, (within which S. Gre∣rie and his Legates liued and aught) the hurch of Rome was pure and free from er∣r. And if she had or should haue erred in is publicke doctrinall practises, and orders ncerning the whole Church, the whole hurch (which these men denie) should also ue erred▪ For they constantly thus ack∣wledge that this most holy and learned pe so published and proposed them. Gre∣ius Io. Bal. d Roman. Ponifice. Art l. 2. in Gregor. Magno. Robert. arnes. . de vit. ontif. Rom. in od. Magde∣bur. his, Ecclesiasc, in Greg. Magnu omnium Pontificum Rmanorum do∣inâ & viâ praestantissimus. Scholas Cantoum in∣uit, & Ambrosi more eclesiastias cantiones, qua aecè dicimus Antiphonas, composuit. Officiarium clesiae fecit, Antiphonarium nocturnum & diurnum pouit. Sacrorum normas digessit, Missarum ritus planauit, & eius Canonem consarinauit. Gregorie  great the most worthies of all the Bishops of Rome  doctrine and life, instituted Schooles of singer, and er Ambrose his manner, composed Ecclesiasticall ges which in Greeke we call Antiphones. He made e office of the Church, be ordered, the nightlie and
daylie Antiphonarie, he digested the Rites of t Church, he polished the Ceremonies of the Masse, a the Canon thereof he gathered together. 14. It will be very hard for the quicke sighted Persecuting Protestant, to finde a one of their Articles of Religion which w not condemned, and of Catholikes not p¦blickly approued, and practised in t Church of Christ, in and by those so gen¦rally receiued and professed Ritualls an Doctrinalls of Religion. And therefo those pure Protestans, which call Cath¦likes vsually, in respect of their Doctrin Papists; and their holy Religion Papistri Papisme, Romanisme or the like, confes plainly, that Saint Augustine from Sai Gregorie bought hither Masses, Altars, Ves¦ments, Chalices, Relickes, Massing Priests, prayer Saincts, for the Deade, and to be briefe Rom¦nisme, Papistrie, all which they terme no Io. Bal. l. de Scripto Brit. cen tur. c. 2. de Act. Poa∣tif. Rom. in Gregor. Franc. Godwin. conuers. of Britan. Dl. Powel in Giral. Cambr. in our Catholikes Superstition. And n only Saint Augustine thus taught and deli¦red▪ but Qne Btha the French Ladi and her Bisho  Lethardus did t same, and King Ehelbert with his Cou∣trie wa conuerted to that Religion. Conu¦sus xoris Berthae ersuasione thelbertus Rex R¦manismum cum a liuns suprstitionibus suscep King thelbert being conuerted by the pesuasion hi wife, he imbraced Romanisme with all it's Sup¦stition.
15. So we haue not only S. Augustine our postle with his Assistants, but S. Gregorie, e Church of Rome, Italie and all Subiects that See Apostolike, our King, Queene d all here agreeing then with vs in this Ro∣anisme, Papisme, and Papistie, for which e are now persecuted. And this our Con∣rsion S. Asaph; in vit. S Kētegerni, Cpgrau. in eod. D. Bal. l. de Scrip∣tor. centur. 1. in Ken∣igern. to the tru Apostolike Religion of hrist, which is the same, Catholikes now osesse (as both Catholikes and Protestants knowledge) was miraculously prooued ad retold by the words of God his propheti∣ll holy Bishop S. Keegerne long before in e declination of the Britans, that God ould giue Britanie ouer to Forraine Na∣ns, which knewe not God, and Chri∣nae legis Religio vsque ad praefinitum tempus sipabur. Sed in pristinum staum, unò me∣em miserante Deo in fine reprabitur: the Re∣gion of the Christian Lawe vnto a determinate  me shall be dissipated; but in the n by God his mercie it shall be restored to it's former, ye tter state.
THE III. CHAPTER. The like proued, of all other persons a parts of England, as also the Br¦cans, that their Religion was th same with the Apostles, and th which our now Persecuted Cath¦likes Professe and maintaine. 1. NOw let vs come to the Conuersio of the other parts of England, n conuerted by S. Augustine, or his Missio from Rome, but by others, our old Britis or Scotish Bishops and Priests in some part before, (by many writers,) and in the far greatest, aer. And because amongst other the Religious of our old British Order ha influēce therein,  I lately spake of Mōck sent into England by Saint Gregorie, and  their labours and Religion here, I will ne ioyne these vnto them. Their Antiquitie  haue deliuered before, from S. Ioseph of A¦ramathia, which buried Christ, arriuin here, in the yeare of his Natiuitie 63. 2. To take better knowledge of their hea¦uenly life, and conuersation on earth, I wi set downe their Rule as (with some alteratiō
s is vsuall in such holy Orders), it was ap∣roued and deliuered to our Monckes by S. auid Metropolitane Archbishop in Brita∣ie, that most learned Religious holy Pre∣te The Rule of our old British Monckes Manu∣scipt. an∣tiq. in vit S. Dauidis. Io. Cap∣gra. C∣tal. in d. liuing vntill with in 50. yeares of S. Au∣ustines comming hither. Dauid constructo in alle Rosinta Monasterio, talem caenobialis praepositi gorem decreuit: vt Monachorum quisque quotidiano sudās operi manuum labore suam in commune trans∣eret vitam, dicens: Qui enim non laborat, ait A∣stolus, non manducet; nesciens enim quod secura quies, itiorum fomes & mater esset. Monachorum hume∣s duris fatigationibus subiugauit: nam qui sub otij iete tempora mentesque submittunt, instabilem spiri∣m, libidinisque stimulos sine quiete parturiunt. Pos∣siones enim Iniquorum respuebant, dona reprobabāt, uitias detestabantur, boum nulla ad arandum cura isque sibi & fratribus diuitiae, quisque & bos. Nul∣n praeter necessarium inter eos habebatur colloquium, d quisque aut orando, aut Deo placia cogitando, in∣nctum opus peragebat, Peracto autem Rrali opere,  Monasterij Claustra reuertentes, aut legendo, aut ibendo, aut orando totam ad vesperum peragebāt em. In vespere verò audito Nolae pulsu, dimissis x operibus, Ecclesiam petebant, & visis in caelo llis ad mensam conuenientes citra saturitatem come∣bant: nimia enim satietas, quamuis solius panis, uriam generat. Pane autem & oleribus sale conditis sti; sitim lacte aquâ mixto restringebant. Peractâ nâ quasi per tres horas, vigilijs, orationibus, genu∣ctionibus insistebant. Quamdiu in Ecclesia orationi∣s vacabant, nullus oscitare, nullus sternutationem
facere, vel sal  Hi¦ita gestis sopo  &  expergfali,  Cogitationes  etia vel ad naturae  in∣duebantur.  desiderans , priu decem diebus  nnon & ve  Si auem benè  perstar diem, acceptus priu  con∣structus seruea.  desu¦dans, fractusque muls  frarum merebatur inire  ¦nem cupientibus eorum nih  ¦lu è naragio uadentes recepti era  se extollendi non haberent. S. autem Daui ost ¦tinas frigidam petebae aquam, in qua dius man carnis ardorem domabat. Orphanorum, pilloru Viduaū, Egentium, Peregrinorum multitudinē pas bat. In English epitomated: They ha not Rid or proprietie Receiued nothing of the wi, they l¦ued by their labour. They had not cattell▪ hing b themselues to ill their ground, no speach pt nece¦sarie at their worke, but with praier and medita they performed it They, did not eate till ght,  their diet then was bread, erbs, and al, th drinke water and mie mixed together. After th resection they persistd three howers in watching a praier vppon their knees: then sleeping vntill  croweing f the Cocke, they arose to their praiers vn ay light. Ending their corporall labour, they retu
their Monasteries and spen all the  till the e∣ning, Anna cl. 9.  Gw.  of  in . auid, in  Ni∣  Io. Ba.  n. 1. in Kenti∣gn. grau. n od. God W. catal in S.  Kegr. M▪  antiq. Brit∣ prima  Elesiast Se. either in reading, writin▪  rres appeared, in the  their ll, they went to the Church▪ And  et of bodie. This was part of the  our ritish Moncle approued by th greatest relate here who receiued i all ches scipline by te Roman Authoritie. 3. Their Bisops and  steritie in conuersation. T   S. Dauid,  neu, about  The  others.  i the  (by diuers ) Mon  in his Mo∣ 3000. Discie S. VVandiocus and Googillus about  vnder them. . entigern and S. Asaph had vnder each of em 960. wherof aboue 60. were Aposto∣ke Preachers, and yt to speake euen in our emies words Being  into companies they ended the service of God in the Church in such , day, and night perpetually, seruice was there con∣ued, some while by some, and other hile by others, ording to an order by him (S. Kentegern) esta∣shed and set downe. 4. And although in some parte amongst e Britans (afflicted  Pagans Inoasions, d cohabitation with them) ts great pitie d deuotion was caied, not long before
S. Augustines comming hither from S. Gr∣gorie then Pope: yet many o hese with the holy Disciples, as S. Brendan, Vuandilocu Gomogillus, Kentegernus▪ Asaphus an others still continued in their Apostolike p∣ritie and perfection, together with all o three Archbishps of Britaie, many Bi∣hops, and Priests thereof, in the same fait and Religiō, which they receiued in our fi Conuersiō, some Ceremonies onely (of whic the obseruation of Easter was the greatest questiond with some of them, but no mate∣riall and essntiall points at all. And such w their holinesse euen here in Britanie whe into the Pagans were entered, that to exe¦plifie in one place of Glastenburie, who Churchyard there vpon was called Tumul Sanctorum The Sepulcher of Saints thousands  Saints, Millia, were interred there, before th yeare of Christ 550. The old Antiquities  Glastenburie recompt 104000. Cum centu quauor millibu, and adde that the Church▪yar (it being one of the greatest in compasse and the Altars aboue, on and vnder the are so full of holy Relicks that there was  spae place to be founde: Non in toto illo Coen terio à profundate 16. pedum vsqi ad eius superficie à Sanctorum cinerilus habetur lous vacuu: In  that Churchyard for 16. Foot depe to the superfic or top theof, no place was found voyed of the ashes  Saints. And not onely Churches and Church yards were esteemed thus holy for the Bodie
of so many Saints buried in them, but whole Countries, and Ilands, for, and rom the San∣ctirie of so many miraculous British Saint iuing in thē, tooke and doe keepe still their ames of holy Iles, Lands, and the lik. And o great was the Sanctitie, learned and Apo∣stolike glorie of these our British Bishops, Culdeys, Priests, ād Religious in those times hat we may almost saie of them, as the Scrip∣ure saied of the Apostles In omnem terram exi∣it sonus corum & in sines orbis terrae verba eorum: nto all the earth hath the sound of them gone forth: nd vnto the end of the whole world the worde of hem. They preached in all, or almost all the Manu∣script. antiq S. Asap. & Capgr. in vit. S. Kentegr. Bal. scrip-Brit. tu. . in Kē. Godw. Cata. epis. in Asaph, Kentegr. Saxonic. leges an∣tiq. inter leg. S. Edwardi Regis. Guam∣ard. l d pis An∣glor gib. world, more then we finde deliuered of any Apostolike Clergie men, or any Religious since then. 5. All the world knoweth their preaching nd preuailing in all Britanie, Ireland, and all Ilands; To the Caledonians, Athals, Ho∣ests, Orchadians, Norwegians, Islandians, y Papall authoritie and of Saint Gregorie imself. It is cōtained in our old Saxon pub∣ick lawes many hundred yeares old, that hey preached with like Commission before hat time in Island, Greenland (accompted part of America) Scantia, Norwegia, Sne∣horda Gutlandia or Iutland, Dacia, Seme∣andia, Winlandia, Curlandia, Roe, Femelā∣dia, Wirelandia, Flandria, Cherrela, Lappa Lapland, & omnes terras & Insulas Orientalis O∣eani vsque Russiam, & multas alias Insulas vla
Scantiam vsquedum sub Septentrione: and all other Ilands and Lands to Russia in the East and many other Ilands beyond Scantia in the North. Yf we turne from the East and North to West, euē the West India, or that America, we finde in the old Manuscripe Author (that wrote S. Brendans trauailes and life) Capgraue and others, that many Apostolike Priests, conse∣crated by Saint Patrick that great Aposto∣lik man, went thither, preached, liued, and died there. If we turne South, to make a cir∣cuite we had in Saint Peters time our Saint Mansuetus his Disciple, an Apostolik Prea∣cher in Germanie and Bishop of Trull in Lo∣raine. We had in the same age our blessed Beatus conscrated at Rome by Saint Peter, or presently after, Preacher and Apostle of the Heluetians. We had Saint Lucius, or Lu∣cian by some Conuertor and Apostle of the Bauarians as they acknowledge. VVe had our S. Clumbanus, S. Gallus, S. Kilianus, Totnanus, the both Ewaldi, Furseus, Foil∣lanus, Vltanus, Offa or Offo, VVitbertus or VVictbertus, S. VVillibrodus and his eleuen Associats Schollers to S. Egbert of our old British Apostolick Order, S. VVyrus, Saint Plechelmus, Egelbertus, Saint Dysibodius with many in his companie of his Associats. All these were of our old Apostolicall Priests, and Religious Order here before any other Order came into Britanie: who as Apostolike men with Papall authoritie, preached in
Gallia, Almania, Italia, Franconia, Bauaria, Thuringia, Hasia, Frisia, Dania, and other Countries, diuers of them by Papal power were consecrated Bishops, others Abbots, nd in other degrees, they founded Monaste∣ies ad Religious houses in great nūber, which ould not be of any other Order thē in which heir founders and Rules were trained vp, nd professed in to wit, that our most aun∣ient, holy and learned British Order. 6. This our Protestant Persecutours them∣lues acknowledge; who speakin of Ban∣or, a Monasterie of our British order here nd of S. Columban and Brendan, two Dis∣iples of Cōgellus Abbot thereof they testifie at: S ernardus hunc locum tradit primum exti∣ss. Bernard. in . Io. Bl. Scptor. Brit. cen∣tur  ongllo. Menasteriorum caput, & multa generauisse Mo∣horum nullia Huius Discipuli fuere plures, quo∣m Columbanus Galliam, Germaniam, & aliam; enanus vro Hiberniam & Scotiam Monacho∣m habitaculi implcuit: Saint Bernard relateth this ace to haue bene the head and chiefist of Monasteries, d to haue begotten many thousands of Monckes, ma∣ were his Disciples, of whom Columbanus filled ance, Germanie and Italie; Brendan Ireland and otland with habitations of Monckes. To these I ight adde that renowned Archbishop and postolike Legate Arcbishop of Moguntia int Boniface, and his holy companie, and artyrs with him, who being a child but of ue yeares old was brought vp by our Apo∣olik Priests, ad after entered into the Mona∣steries
of Exancester with vulhardus à Moncke of our old British Order, and after into the Monasterie of Huntscelle vnder Win∣bert Abbot of the same profession, where he liued a long tim: and afterwards going into Germanie being and Abbot there, he spen diuers yeares in preaching, before he wen to Rome, in the time of Pope Gregorie th second, by whom he was ordained Bishop  Archbishop and Legate in the yeare of Chri 719. and lied vntill he was martyred in th yeare 754. the 36. yeare of his being Bisho with 53. others: Cum alijs quinquaginta tribu Matthew of westminster saith, it was in th yeare 753. by which accompt his Abbots i England must needs be professed in the o British Order. 7. Marianus Scotus a Scot by Nation and liuing in a strict discipline, a Moncke  Germanie with in 200. yeares of S. Bonif¦cius his time, though he acknowledgeth hi to be an English man Anglus, yet very oftē  calleth him Sotus a Sot, in no other respe then for his being of the Scotish Order, and i that regard calleth these Monasteries: Monast¦ria Santorum Scotorum, Sancti Galli & Sancti Bon¦facij: Monasteries of the cotish Saints S. Gallus a S. Bonfce. VVhen it is certaine, and he w knew that neither of them was a Scot by N¦tion, but onely in profession. He proue further that euen in his tim, there we Monckes of the Scotish old Order there, wh
ad a peculiar Monasterie in Colen where e Abbot with others were Scots, Helias Sco∣s abbas. Who professed a strict Religion, and n the opinion of men, giuen to more liber∣e.) ouer greae Discipline, Religionem di∣ictam, disciplinamque niam: and God did mi∣culously approue it. This was also the con∣ition of S. Benedict Biscope Master to Saint ede beng a childe; this the condition of  eolfrdus, and Easterwinus whm S. Bo∣face constituted Abbots in his absence in s Monaseries. 8. Waes had seuen Bishops with an rchbishop, others with their Clergie were ed thither out of England, and yet diuers mained still in other parts, with many Chri∣ians, euen Vniuersites, as that of Cambridge ee then as they saie from all errour and ne∣r Manu∣script. an∣tiq. in vit. S. Dauids. Capgrau. in cod. censured by Saint Gregorie as some were. heir difference from the Church of Rome as not in Questions of faith, but others tol∣rable and tollerated, and this had not beene ng for in S. Dauid time a litle before, all greed in all things with Rome. Omnes Britan∣ae Matth. wst. in chronic. an. 794. Stows hi∣stor. in Mercel. Ecclesiae modum & Regulam Romana authoritate ceperunt: All the Churche of Britanie toocke their anner and Rule by Roman authoritie. 9. The greate Kingedome of Northum∣erland bounded with Trent and Scotland, ere thus conuerted. The greatest kingedome f Mercia which then comprehended 23. hyres, in 20. & tribus Prouinijs, quas Angli
Shiras , s conuerted by the old re¦nowned Clergie men, Bishops, Priests an Monckes that were of our old British Orde they in their Auncestors receiuing Con∣uersion from such our Britans, and thēselue also liuing within the limits and boundes o Britanie or England now: for their Iland a Saint Bede and others witnesse belonged to our Countrie: Insula Hydesti, cuius Monasteri ed. Eccl. hist. l. 3. cap. 3. in  penè Septentrionalium Scotorum & omniu Pictorum Monsterijs non paru tempore Arcem tene¦bat, regendisque eorum populis praeerat Quae videl ce Insula ad ius quidem Britanniae pertinet, non mag¦no ab ea seo discreta: Whose Monasterie (in the Ile Hydestine) was n small im the chiefe house of al the Monasteries Allmost of all the Northeren Sco and of the Abbeys of all the Redhankes, and had th soueraintie in ruling of then people. VVhich Ile i very deede, belongeth to the right of Britanie, bein seured from it with a narrw sea. Sebert King o the East Angles was conuerted in Burgundie and brought ouer with him (who was con∣secrated after Bishop of his Countrie) Sain Felix, and he so honoured the Priests of ou old British Order, that Saint Furseus on thereof, comming hither, and with his al∣lowance and donation building a Monasteri of that Order, King Sebert himself entered into Monasticall life, and was professed  Monke therein, Regni negotijs cognato suo Egri commendatis in Monasterio à sancto Furseo sibi con∣structo habitum Monachalem suscepit: Committing th
affaires of his Kingdome to his Kinsman grek, he betoocke himselfe to Monasticall habit in a Monasterie ounded by S. Furseus. 11. Concerning the Kingedome of the East Saxons, igebert their King ioyned herein with the Northumbers and as baptized by Bishop Finan of the Scotish Order ad Bishop of his Countrie. Cd that was of the same order and consecrated by S. Finan, he in all his dominions consecrated Priests, and Dea∣cons in all places of Essex, but especially at thancester and Tilberie: For although King Seber's sonne of Sledda was a Christiā before, et he dying, the Countrie vnder his sonnes erred and Sigbert (deadly enemies to Chri∣tian profession) was till then in Infideli∣ie. 12. To come to the west Saxons, although hey receiued the faith by Saint Birinus sent rom Rome, yet at the Baptisme of their King Kinegillus, S. Oswald King of Northū∣erland was Godfather vnto him, and he arried King Oswald his daughter, and Do∣auerunt ambo Reges, both these Kings gaue him orchester, sixe miles from Oxford, to settle here his Episcopall See. And in the yeare 35. He instituted there, Canonics seulares: secu∣r Canons. VVe reade in the Manuscript of the ntiquities of winchester that he builded gaine the old Monasterie of winchester, ounded in king Lucius time, and did restore nto, or in it, againe holy Monckes, which
were not long (if at all) before Saint Augu∣stines comming, driuen thence: for we are as∣sured that in the time of Constantine, kins∣mā to king Arthur killing the sonne of Mor∣dred Gildus l. de excid. ritan. Matth. estm. Chronic. an. 586. before the Altar of that Monasterie, they were there and without doubt in king Careticus his time in the yeare 6. when and not before Bishops, Priests and Moncks fled into wales. So the Moncks placed there could be no others, but such as had beene Bed. hsto. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 13 Manu∣scrp. an∣tiq.  vit. S. VVilfridi. Capgrau. n catal. in od. driuen from thence before, who still in them∣selues or succession of that order continued in those parts, as in the Scotish and British Order in the Monasteries of Bosenham whee Dicul a Scot was Abbot; in Redford, vnder Abbot Kinebertus; at Malmesburie, vnder Meildulphus a Scotish Moncke, Natione Scoto, eruditione phylosopho, professione Monacho: By nation a Scot, in lerning a Pylosopher, in profession a Moncke. VVho was so famous there, that he gaue the old name Maildulfesburch to that Guliel. Malmesb. Lnthe∣rius Saxoniae Episcop. in chart. . 675. place, where and vnder whom, in the same discpline S. Aldelme after Abbot there was brought vp, A primo aeuo infantiae: from his child∣ood. Bishop Eleutherius in his graunt to that house dated 675. proueth there were many Abbots and Abbies in these places in that time. 13. VVilliam of Malmesburie with the An∣tiquities of Glastburie assureth vs, that in our enowned Abbey of Glastenburie after Saint Augustines comming, and during his
eing here in the yeare 601. we had our old Moncks in quiet, and peace, their Abbot was alled Morgret, the Bishop vnder whom they hen liued, Manuto, Manuto Episcopus, and their King, Rex Domnoniae, whose name by the old∣esse of the Record is not remēbred: Quis ise Rex fuit scedulae veustas negat scire, he was their Beefactour and gaue them, or confirmed to hem Inswitrin, Terram quae appellatur Inswitrin d Ecclesiam veustam concessit, ad petitionem Mor∣ret iusdem loci Abbatis: The land which is called nswitrin he granted to the old Church by the pti∣iō of Morgret Abbot of that place, and their Bishop Manuto wrote and cōfirmed it. Ego Manuto Epis∣opus hanc chartam scripsi: I Bishop Manute wrote ti aper. 14. Besides this Bishop, England had then t Saint Augustines cōming diuers Bishops ere, ordered or sent by the Popes authori∣ie, Saint Asaph in the west, S. Iuo in Hun∣ingtonsyhre, S. Lethard in Kent: and others not vnprobably in other places, besides ou British Bishops in VVales, and those of Scot∣and. And to remember but the names of our first Bishops in England after S. Augustines comming besides Kent and London, where he and his Associats were Bishops, all which vndoubtedly by all writers Catholike and Protestant, old or new, Monasticall or others, either were of our British old Order, or ioyned with them, that were at that time here.
15. VVe haue in the North Saint Aidan Finan, Colman, Tuda, Eata, Cuthbert. Fo Yorke S. Paulinus the first, by Marianus wa ex Francia, and staied but onely 6. yeares: after him S. Cedda, S. Wilfride, Bosa, Sain Iohn called of Beuerlaie brought vp in Sain Hilda her old Monasterie. At winchester w had S. Birinus spoakē of before who restored in that Monasterie our old Mōckes and ioy∣ned with the Northumbers: Agilbertus  Frenchman who preached long in Ireland ioyned lso with the Northumbers: VVin also a Frenchman, and Eleutherius remem∣bred before. In Lihfeild we had Diuma, o Dwyna a Scot hauing all Middle England for his Dioces, so had sixe or seuen of his Succes∣sours, all such vntill the yeare 678. Cellac  Scot, Trumhere, Ianuman, Cedda, win∣fride, Saxulf. I passe ouer all the old Sees i wales knowne and confessed by all to haue had none but such Bishops. 16. Such also was the ordinarie ād vniuersall pietie and sanctitie of our old holy Priest and Preachers of that time, before any later Order was receiued, euen of the laie people conuerted and taught by them, as the learned Saint Bede then liuing much be waileth the great change, and alteration saying: In tan∣tum Beda l. 3. Hist. c∣cles. Angl. cap. 5. aum vita illus (Aidani) à nostri temporis seg∣nitia distbat, vt omnes qui cum eo incedebant, siue aettonsi ue laici meditari debeent, id est, aut legendi Scripturis, aut Psalmis discendis: S. Aidan his lif
as so farre different from the slouthfulnesse of our e, that all those which went with him, wheather onckes, or Laickes were to meditate, that is, they ere to bestowe their time either in reading Scripture,  learning the Psalmes. And in an other place  aieth thus of Bishop Colman (who dispu∣d with Saint VVilfrid) and of his Prede∣ssours: Bed. hist. ecclesiast. l. 3. ca. 26. Quantae autem parsimoniae uiusque conti∣tiae fueri ipse cum praedecessoribus suis, testabatur am ipse locu;, quem regeba: Of how great abstinen∣ and continencie he was with his Predecessours the ce it selfe which he ruled, did witnesse, where, en they went away, very few howses besides the urch remained, and these howses onely without ch ciuill conuersation could not continue. They had onie, nothing but cattell. If they receiued any mo∣ of the riche, presently they gaue it to the poore. All care of those Doctours then was to serue God and not worlde. All their desire was for the soule, and no bellie: wherevpon in that time the habite of Reli∣ was in greate reuerence, so that wheresoeuer  st or Moncke did come, he was, ioyfully receiued ll, as the Seruant of God. And if any trauailing eir iornie did meete him (a Priest) bending selues they reioyced to be signed with his hande, ssed by his mouth. They gaue diligent eare to his rtatiōs. Vpō the sondayes they floced to the Church onasteries to be instructed in the word of God. If Priest chanced to come into a villadge the Inha∣ts presently came together, and desired to receiue ord of life from him. For there was no other cause riests or Ecclesiasticall men to goe to villadges, but
to speake briefely, to uer soules. And they were so  from all infection of couetousnesse, that they would n (except compelled by the riche men of the world) ¦ceiue lands or possessions to build Monasteies. Whi custome was genrally obserued in the Churces of t ingdome of Northumberland, sometime aferward Thus of Saint Aidan their first Apste, an of his Disiples and people by him conue∣ced, and although he kept Easter otherwi then those did which came from Rome, y he was, and worthily beloued of all, euen  the Archbishop of Canterburie Honori for his workes of faith, pietie, and chariti and during his life that difference was patie∣tly endured. And this was not an errour c∣mon to all Scots, but to some of thē, for Ro and others impugned it. And whē it was ro∣ted out, it was not done by Mōckes or othe Bed. l. 3. 4. 5. Guliel. Malmesb. Matth. Westm. Floren. igrn. from Rome, but as Saint ede and othe prooue either by the Poes admonitiō, as  Ireland, by Bishop Agilbertus, and Sai Wilfride in Northumberland, and in oth place, by Saint Egbertus, Adamnanus a others of their old owne Order and prof¦sion. 17. In this I haue the longer insisted,  onely for the glorie and honour of those o Fathers in Christ, (not iustly to be tak from them, to be giuen vnto others, and t it is the honor of our English Priests a Catholiks to be heires, successours, a children to such Antecessours and parent
Religion;) But because it is the most com∣mon Dauid P∣wll.  annoa. in l. 2. ∣raldi Cā∣bren. de . Cambr. Io. Bal. in Act. R∣man. po∣ific. l. 2  Gegor. 1. Francis. Godwin conuers. of Bi. p. 4. Fulk. answ.  cont. Cain. p 4▪ Middlto▪ papist. pag. 202. Foxe A. and Me. pag. 463. edit. an. 1576. Io. Gs. lin. Hor. eclesiast. Matth. parker. Antiqui. Brit. pag. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. receiued, allowed, and approued opi∣nion, and confession of our English Prote∣stants, and those their best learned in their estimatiō (to write in their owne very words.) At the comming of Augustine there florished with he Britans the preaching of the truth, sincere do∣trine, liuelie faith, and the pure worship f God, uch as from the Apostles themselues was by Gods cō∣aundement deliuered to the Churches. The Britans efore Augustines comming continued in the aith of hrist euen from the Apostles time. After the Britans mbraced the saith of Christ they neuer forsooke i, nei∣er when Augustine came into the Iland. So many nd so great a number of the old names of Priests oncks, Abbots, Prelates, Bishops, Churches, Ab∣eyes and Sees, which haue beene in euery age, doth fficiētly prooue, that the ghospell which was preached  Britanie in the first times of the Apostles, was not ely allwaies firmely retained, but in euery age aug∣ented, and dilated, did increased. Many of the Chri∣an Britans fearing the crueltie of Dioclesian, fleed  the Scots, among whome very many renowned for arning and Integritie of life remained still in Sot∣d, and liued a solitarie life in so great opinion of ctitie with all men, that after their deaths thei lls were chaunged into Curches. And therevpon it ained a custome to posterity, that the old Scots cal∣ Churches, Cells. This kind of Moncks men called ldeys worshippers of God. The later Kinde of onckes was in learning and holinesse so farre eriour vnto them, how much in riches, ceremonies,
and other externall manner of Rites they exceeded th Theater of great Britanie l. 6. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scoti∣ear. l. 4. Reg. 35. l. 5. Reg. 49. Reg▪ 65. VVhen Augustine was sent by Gregorie, the Britan were instructed by Moncks which that age had, lear∣ned and Godly. Many scotish Moncks for loue  Godlinesse trauatled into France and Germanie an preached the Christian doctrine about Rhene, an builded Monasteries in many places. For there were y among the Scots many Moncks of the old disciplin And the Germans gaue that memori nto them, th euen to our age of Protestāts, they made Scots Rulers  them. Apud Scotos enim adhuc mults erant Monac vetere Dsciplin nondum extinctâ literis & piet insignes: Man worthy Monks both for the  Discipline not yet extinguished, learning and piei were ye among the Scots. Iohn Capgraue of th Order of Eremites very learned in Protestā apgrau. in vit. S. Brndani. Iudgment liuing vntill the yeare 1464.  witnesse that the auntient Rule of the Mōck written by S. Brendan remained vntill h time: Brendanus scripsit ex ore Angeli sanctam R∣gulam, quae vsque hodie mne: Brendanus wrote fro the mouth of an Angell that holy Rule, which to th day continueth. And no doubt but that his ho∣ly Order, and that of our Carmelites, as als our Carthusians most renowned here, ha discent from thence. 18. Their Religion was by the Protestant the true Apostolike Religion, and yet the agreed in all essentiall things with those th came from Rome, with Saint Augustine wh brought hither the same Religion (as befor is related) which our Catholicks now pro∣esse,
and our Anceours Saxons receiued om them. And the chiefest among them in ll part whatsoeuer, agreed with the Church f Rome, and had their Apostolike power nd allowance thence: So S. Kentegern that S. Asp. in v. S. Kenteger. Capgrau. in od. ent seuen times to Rome and was approued ere, and at his death gaue seuere charge to is Disciples in numbe 95. fimely to ob∣rue and keepe the Dcrees and Ordinances f the holy Roman Church: Conuocatis Disci∣lis fuis de obseruatione sanctae Religionis mutuae cha∣atis, pacis, hospitalatis,  lectionis, ac oratio∣s instantia, hortabaureos. De Sanctorum Patrum ecretis, sanctaeque Romanae Eclsiae instttis fir∣ter custotendis, fortia de it ac dereliquit pracepta: lling togeather his Dsciples he exborted them to e objeruane of holy Religion, mutuall Charitie, ace, hospitalitie, and of exact diligence in reading d prayer. For the constant keeping of the Decrees  the holy Fathers, and the Institutes of the holy Vit. S. Aph. Balntis. in Aspho. Godwin. catal. in Asaph. veremund. hist. Hector Boeth. Scotor. hist l. 9. Holinsh, hist. of cotl. oman Church, he gaue and left forcible precepts. int Asaph Bishop, a Britane Ruler of so any Apostolike men here in Britanie, in all ings agreed with Rome, and had Appro∣tion and power thence. So S. Molochus ost renowned, ioyning in all things with e Roman Legate▪ ain Bonifacius▪ Qiri∣s and those that came with him. Therefore  cannot be questioned, but our Saxon An∣stours then receiud the ame faith and Re∣gion we Catholike, now professe, and so ffer for profession thereof, which will be in
euery particular most manifest, in that whic now shall followe, concerning Articles i Protestant Religion, and euery of them th is against Catholike Religion. THE IIII. CHAPTER. The Religion of the Apostles, of our pr∣matiue Christian Britans, of the fir Christiā Saxons, and of our now pe∣secuted Catholiks, prooued to be o and the same in euery Article, agai Protestants and Persecutours. 1. It is proued before, and confessed  all, both Catholiks and Protestant that the difference betweene Saint Augusti and our Britans, was of thinges Ceremoni and whereas our Protestants finde much fa Girald. Cmbren. descript. Camb cap. 18. Dauid Po∣well. anno∣tt. in eund. at our Ceremonies, which it pleaseth them  teme Popish, Giraldus Cambrensis the le¦ned British Bishop and writer, setteth th downe, which the Britans kept otherw then the Romās, which are more Popish a Papisticall by Protestants Iudgment, t the Romans were. It is strange among  best Authors how the Britans should diffe
l obseruation of Easter, or any thing else om Rome (but by the Iniurie of the trou∣s here by warrs hindering entercourse thi∣er and from thece) for frō the beginning, as eore, and in euery age we had our chiefe ling Bishops, and Priests from thence: in e first, from S. Peter: in the second age, om Saint Eleutherius; in the third, frō Pope ctor; in the fourth, by Saint Ninian, and hers comming, and sent from thence; in the t, from S. Celestine by S. Palladius, Saint ermanus, Lupus, Patrick, Seuerus, and hers, in the sixt, by S. Kentegerne, S. A∣h, S. Iuo, S. Lethard, and others before, Augustine. And to make a briefe mention euery Article in particular, now contro∣sed with these Protestāts, as they are con∣ned in their booke of Articles: These our tient Britans and Scots retaining their  Apostolike doctrine (as these man said) eed in euery Article with the present Ca∣liks, and in them all dissented from Pro∣ants. . They had the Scripturs from the Ro∣ Eleuthe. Pap. epist. ad Lucium Reg. Brit. Gild. l. de excid. & conquest. Britan. Church, those which Catholikes hold  for Scripturs, so Eleutherius himselfe, ildas and others proue. That they did  hold all needfull thinges to be contained criptures, but some by Traditions, their ifold Traditions in many matters of mo∣t by Protestant confession, is a manifest ument, and will appeare in many Arti∣cles
following. And this is euident in the Gild. supr. Hist. Brit. antiq ma∣nuscript. confessed Sacifice of Masse, and sacrifici Priesthood, being to offer Sacrifice for th liuing and dead, as Protestants confesse; an that in all Masses, there is the doctrine a practice of Transsubstantiation, and Re presence, the doctrine and practise of Pu¦gatorie and praier for the dead, of prayi vnto Saincts, and their protection of diue orders ecclesiasticall which Protestants ha not; the doctrine of merits and good dee deniall of Iustification by faith onely▪ a almost all doctrines which Catholikes ho and Protestāts denie to be cōtained in Scr¦tures, or to be professed; which Catholi doctrines against these Protestants in th Articles of Religion, they themselues ac¦nowledge  al l. 2 . Romā. . to be contained in the old Masse the Britans, the Papisticall Masse, Missae P¦sica, as some of them terme it before S. ¦lestins time. 3. And to speake in order of euery pa¦cuar, in their Articles that is now quest¦ned, Antiquit. last. Gulielm. Ml. l. de antiq. coeb. Glast. Io. Cap∣gru. Ca∣talog. in . Iosep. Arimath. omitting the rest. Their Article intitul of the Iustification of man, asscribing Iustificat to faith onely, is vtterly condemned by  Penitentiall an Order, as I haue recited fr the Britans, their so many Monasteries in  ages, by the liues of our first Religious, S Ioseph of Arimathaea and his fellowes liu Eremits all their life, in watchings, fastin and praiers, so performing their deuout
es to God and the blessed virgin, In vigilijs, iunijs & ortionibus vacantes De & Beatae Vir∣ deuota exhibentes obsequia. So did their uc∣essours after them, and all British Religious  other places: So kings and Princes, Bishops d greatest learned men, all which (by our oestans) truely beleiued, and had true ith▪ though they vndertooke such penall ad tisfactorie course of life. And there great arned Doctour, Priest, Historian and Reli∣ous man in that Penitentiall Odr Saint Gild. Pro∣log. in lib.  exci. & cn∣qut. . ildas wrote: Sciebam misericordiam Domini, sed  iudicium timebam Laudaham gratiam▪ sed reddi∣nem vnicuique secundum opera sua verebar: I did owe te mrcie of our Lord, but yet I did eare his dgment, I praysed his grace, but I did dread his re∣ard acording to euery ones worckes▪ which con∣mneth our Protestants pretended assuring stiying faith. 4. Their Article stiled Of workes of supere∣gation, teaching, such works cannot be tauht thout arrogancie, is confuted by those Britans  that is aid, as an arrogant saying, or if e Britans, or any other peop had beene ounde to such workes of Perfection, such haritie, Chastitie, Obedience, voluntarie ouertie, to so many Religious Foundations  they performed and the like; they that e not so must needs be damned, because  grossely they breake God▪ Commaunde∣ent, among which Protestants recount ese, and whatsoeuer man is able to doe
in this life, in this their Article. 5. The Britans did not hold with thes Protestants in their Article intituled of th Church, That the Church of Rome had erred in ma∣ters of faith, otherwise they would not as be∣fore haue so diligently and dutifully fol¦lowed, and obeyed it in all ages: and if th Church of Rome had then erred, the Britan still following the doctrine thereof, ad als erred n such thinges, which our Protestan haue before generally denied: And the ¦preme head of the Protestants Church  England, King Iames in open Parlame K. Iames speache in is 1. Par∣lam. pronounced of the Church of Rome: It w a Rule to all, both in doctrine and Ceremonies▪ wh it was in her florishing and best estate, wch  he acknowledgeth to haue beene  in that time. And being it is proued to be su in such estate, still it must be a Rule, as th it was. 6. Concerning their Article, Of the Auth¦ritie Protestāt. in their Theater of great Brit. l. 6. with others. of generall Councells, our Britans who tr¦uailed so farre vnto such Councells, subscr¦bed vnto them in many Articles contrary  these of Protestants, and euer had them  great reuerence, (as our Protestants co¦fesse) and attributed more to them, then the men doe. 7. Their Article stiled, Of Purgatorie, figh¦teth against the Catholike doctrine of Pu¦gatorie, Pardons, Indulgences, Relicks ¦mages, and Inuocation of Saincts. In a
ich by our Britans they are condemned; d first in Purgatorie, and praying for the dead. Antiquit. Glston. Manuscr. tabul fix. Guli. Malmb. l. de anq. . glst. Cpgr. in S P∣tricio. Chart. Arth. an. 531. apud Caum l. 1. de an∣quit. a∣ab. Aca∣dm. pag. 69. 70. Manuscri. antiq. de primo sta∣tu Lada∣uen. eccl∣siae. he old Antiquities of Glastenburie teach, at Masse and Praiers were there dayly offe∣d for the Christians buried there. Matthew  westminster and others witnesse, that our oto martyr S. Alban praied for the dad, mmending them to God. King Arthur th the cōsent of all the Bishops and Nobles Britanie, and with licence of the Pope, by  Charter of Immunitie to the Schollers of mbridge reserued praier for the soues of  the kings of Britanie his Auncestours, Pro¦edio animarum antecessorum meorum Britanniae um. So did King Mauricus to the old urch of Landaffe in S. Dubritius time to ie for his soule, the soules of all the kings Britanie and all faithfull soules departed,  this dayly was to be done. Oratione quoi∣â & ecclesiastico seruitio pro anima illius, & ani∣us arentum suorum Regum & Prinipum Bri∣iae, & omnium fidelium defunctorum: In dayly er and Church seruice for his soule, and the soules is parents, Kings and Princes of Britanie, and of he faithfull dead. The Britans in London nded a Church to such purpose to con∣ue for euer: In qua pro ipso (Rege) & fideibus Caroe. Naucarb∣nen. ist. de vit S. Gildae man. an∣i. nctis obsequia aeternaliter celebrarentur diuina: In b diuine seruice should be allwase celebrated for  (the King) and the faithfull which are dead. nt Gildas praied dayly for the soule of his other deceased. Orabat pro spiriu fraterno quo∣tidiè.
So too many to be recited. 8. Concerning, Pardons or Indulgences, S. and Antiquit. Glst. Chare. S. Pariti Gulilm. Malmesb. l. Antiq. oenb. Glst. Gapgrau. in S. Pa∣trico. Io. Leland in Artha. Antiqui. Gst. Ta∣bul. Fix. Pope Eleutherius by the mediatio of our A∣postles Saint Damianus and Phaganus graun∣ted, Decē annos Indulgentiae, tenne yeares Indulgēce, for all Pigrim to Glastburie, and 30. yeare Indulgence to Bishops Pilgrims. And Sain Celestine Pope graunted 12. yeares Indulgē to it. And Saint Patricke an hundred dai Indulgence, S. Patricius dedit centum dies Indu∣gentiae. 9. Touching holy Images, from the fir entrance of Christians heere, they were he∣vied with due reuerence Saint Ioseph and h holy compane brought hither, vsed here, an after their deathe left here the Image of t Crosse, and others, Figura nostrae Rdemptio aliasque figuras manifestas And these and suc holy signes ere uch certane signes of Chr∣stians that when Saint Damianus and Ph∣ganus Britan: Antiquus. Manu∣script. An∣tiq & Capgrau. in vit. S. Albn. Iaob. Gē∣nuen. in od. Probus in vit. S. Pa∣tricij. Capgrau. in od. . came hither, they certainely knew  them, that Christians had dwelled here b∣fore. Quibus bene cognouerunt▪ quod Christiani pri∣locum Inhabitauerun. Saint Amphibalus and  Alban vsed the Image off the Crucifixe wi such reuerence, as if Christ crucified h beene present: Quasi pendentem Dominum Ies in Cruce cernerēt. VVhat honour our Emper Constantine the great, Saint Helena and o other Britans then vsed to such signes,  man can be ignorant off: nor of the deuoti of S. Patrick vnto them. He neuer passed
he Crosse but he praied there: and signed himselfe 100. times in the day and night with that holy signe. King Conual euer had it Hector Boet. Scot▪ Histor. l. 9. Holinsh. Hist. Sco Buchan. l. 5. c. 47. Gul. mal. Henr. hun∣ting. Bed. de lo∣cis sanctis. cap. 5. Hect. Boet. l. 10. Hist. Scotor. Holinsh Hist. Scot. pag. 134. c. of lawes. Girald. Cambren. de script. Camb. c. 18. Io. Dama∣scen. Orat. 2. de dor∣mitione Deiparae. Bonifac. Papa E∣pist. Th. Wal-Singham. in Edo∣uardo. 1. orne before him. King Arthur vsed the I∣mage of the blessed Virgin, with great reue∣ence. Our Britans went long Pilgrimages ea euen to Hierusalem there to reuerence he holy Relicks, and the cloath supposed to e made by he blessed Virgin containing he Images of Christ and his 12. Apostles, Saint de and others more auntient so relating. This was here so pubike, that it was thus by awe decreed: Aras empla, Diuorum statuas, O∣atoria, Saclla, Sadotes, omnesque sacrae familiae iros ex animo venerantor: Lett all the Altars, hurche, statues of Saints, Oratories, Chapells Priests, nd all men appertaning to the Church be reuerenced om the heart. 10. Concerning holy Relicks, the learned ritish Bshop saieth of his Coūtrie, old Chri¦ian Britans, that they gaue more reuerence nto such, then any other Nation. Sanctorum eliquijs longè agis quam vlm gentem honorē de∣rre videmu Iosph of rimathae a brought oly Relicks with him her, and vsed them ith reuerence during thir liues, and Saint oseph being presen wit the Apostles at the eath of the blessed Vgin worshipping her cred bodie as Saint Iohn Damascen witnes∣th by so great warrant, vsed and left such▪ euerence here. The holy Relicks of S. Peter,  Saint Bonifacius writeth were occasion or
motiue of the Scots Conuersion. All our Hi∣stories are full, how in all Persecutiōs by Pa∣gans, one of the greatest cares of our Chri∣stian Britans was, to preserue their holy Re∣licks. Churches were founded and dedicated to our Martyrs in all places, and their Re∣licks were there preserued with great vene∣ration. Our greatest Apostolike men, as Saint Germanus, and his holy companie went on Pilgrimage vnto them. No noble person in the world shewed more reuerence vnto such, then our most noble coūtrie wom Empresse and Queene S. Helena, by all Antiquities. Veremund. Hect. Boet. Scot. hist. The reuerence which was giuen to the Re∣licks of Saint Andrew the Apostle in the yeare 360. (which were brought from Patras in Achaia) by King Heigustus, his Nobles, and others, with geneflexions or more, and grea∣test reuerences, doe not giue place to any now vsed by Catholikes. It was a thinge vsuall in those daies for our Christian Britans to goe on Pilgrimage to Rome, and Hierusalem, to render such reuere there. Saint Dauid, S. Paternus, S. Teliaus, and others our most renowned ad learned did so. All places in Bri∣tanie where such Relicks were preserued, as Glastenburie. , London, Caerlegiō, winchester, and others were thus frequented and visited. 11. For Inuocation of Saints it was the Reli∣gion of our Britans, from their first faith in Christ, Saint Ioseph and his companie praie
vnto the blessed Virgin, and by her were cō∣forted, Antiqui glaston. tabulis fix. Gultel. malm. l. Antiquit. Coenb. glaston. Io. Cap∣grau. in Iosepho. with her help in all their needs, Virgi∣is Dei genetricis auxilio in necessitatibus suis refocil∣bantur. Saint Phaganus and Damianus buil∣ed a Chapell by Glastenburie in honour of Saint Michael the Archāgell to be honoured here: Oratorium aedificauerunt in honore S. Mi∣haclis Archangeli, quatenus ibi ab hominibus habe∣ honorem, qui homines in perpetues honores iubente eo est introducturus: They builded an Oratorie in onour of S. Michaell the Archangell, to the end he ight there be honoured by men, who by God his ap∣intment is to lead men vnto perpetuall ho∣ours. So in our first generall Conuersion all Churches were founded, vnto God and his Antiquit▪ Anonym. Britan. Scripror in vit. S. Amphiba∣li. Iacob. Gennuen▪ & Io. Capgrau. in eod. Matth. Westm. an▪ 520. Holinsh. Engl hist pag. 103. Gildas l. de exci. & Conq. Brit. c. 2. aints. Vni Deo eiusque Sanctis. Saint Amphiba∣s that conucrted S. Alban, after his martyr∣ome, goeing himselfe to be martyred prated to him, and his praier was heard, and mi∣culously proued to be holy, good, and aunted. The examples of our Emperour d Empresse Constantine, and Saint Helena e very many and honourable in this kinde ith auntient approued writers. S. German ur Apostle praied to our Saints here, and as∣ribed great effects vnto it. So King Arthur, o speake in Protestants words) He commit∣d himselfe and his whole armie to the Tuition of rist, and his Mother the Virgin. In the publick asse they vsed, there was publicke memorie, d Inuocation of all Saints. And in their pu∣icke Oathes, as S. Gildas witnesseth, they
solemnly called the blessed Virgin, and all Saints to witnesse. So the kings themselues at their Inthroning. 12. Their Article intituled, Of ministring in the Congregation, and whatsoeuer concerning Bishops, Priests, and Clergie men shall be handled hereafter in the particular defence and honour belōging to Bishops and Priests where our Auntient Britans shall with others be made Iudges and Condemners of Prote∣stants, and witnesses for Catholiks in this question; in the meane time I haue said suffi∣ciently before. 13. Their Article superscribed, Of speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue, as the people vn∣derstand not: Which was made against the pub∣like Sacrifice and Seruice of the Church, i the latine tongue is plainely condemned by our Christian Britans their Apostle, Bishop and Priests from the beginning of their Con¦uerssion. For neither aint Ioseph, nor an of his companie, nor Saint Damianus Phaganus, Germanus, Lupus, Seuerus, Pal¦Iadius, our Apostles, or any such other no Britans, did vnderstand the British languag to vse it themselues, or translate the public seruice into it, for the vse of others. Yet al doe and must needs confesse, such public Protestāt: in Franc. Godwin couers of Brit. cap. 3. pag. 36. mē vsed publick Church seruice, which mu needs be that of the latine Church, the lati seruice therof: Our Protestants themselu acknowledge, they were vttery ignorant of t
British language, and that they preached by Interpreters. And as it was proued and iusti∣fied by the renowned Abbot D. Fecknam publickly in the first Parlament of Queene Elizabeth. The auntient Historiographer D. Gildas witnesseth in the Prologue and begnning of his booke of the Britan histories, that Damianus, and Fugatius (Phaganus) sent hither from Pope Elutherius, brought hither th seruice, Church bookes of their Reli∣gion in the latine tongue. And though the Prote∣stants haue suppressed this historie, or Pro∣logue thereof, yet they graunt vnto vs, that Gildas citeth diuers passages of the publick Church Office in latine: So doe our Prote∣stants themselues (as Foxe and others) pro∣uing Foxe Act. and Mon. pag. 1142. Sermo seu homil. An∣tiquit. Sa∣xoni supr. they were in latine, before S. Germanus his comming hither. And when S. Lupus and Saint German who both had beene Mōckes n the learned Monasterie in the Ireland Ly∣ine by Marcells in Fraunce (as an old Bri∣ish antiquitie with others witnesseth,) rought hither, vsed and left here the Church etuice: Vsed by Saint Marke the Euangelist, after y S. Gregorie Nazianzen, S. Basile, S. Anthonie, aulus, Macharius, Malchus Cassianus in the Mona∣erie Lyrinum, and after him, S. Honoratus Abba here, S. Cesaius, S. Poraris Abhot there, by S. upus and Germanus, both in that Monasterie and fter they were made Bihops, and in Britanie where hey preached, and after them S. Wandilous and S. omogillus who had in their Monasterie about 3000. onkes. After Wandilocus sent to preach by Saint
Gomogillus and Saint Columban into the parts of Gal∣lia and the Monasterie Luxouium vsed there the same Ecclesiasticall Office, ad the fame of their olinesse was spred in the whole world, and of their Order many Monasteries both of men and women were founded. Where is euident not onely that the latine Church seruice was vsed by our Britans and Scots, but our Religious, and those of that most learned and noble Monasterie of Lyri∣num, and others both in France and Italie ioyned together in these daies. This British Author liued ād wrote before the Vniō of the Christian Saxons and Britanie here. Neither our learned Coūtriman Alcuinus or Albinus Tutor to Charles the great Emperour, most cōuersant in such Antiquities, nor Amalarius, nor any other Expositour of old Ecclesiasti∣call seruice and Ceremonies doe finde any o∣ther but latine either in Britanie or any place of the latine Church, taking that denomina∣tion chiefely therevpō, as the Greeke Church of their Greek Masse and other publick Of∣fices Ecclesiasticall. S. Bede also maketh this Bed. Hist. ccl. Angl. l. 1. cap. 1. manifest for Britanie, where he saith, all∣though there were diuers Nations, and peoples, English, Britans, Scots, Picts and Latines yet onely the latine tongue was com∣mon to thē all in Scripture businesse▪ Medi∣tatione Scripturarum caeteris omnibus est facta commu∣nis. Protest. in Doue pag. 23. 2. ca. of pier. By the studying of Scripturs is made common t all the rest. And this is so manifestly true, tha our Protestants thus confesse it, both of th
Latine and Greeke Church: Vntill of late throughout the West part of the world publick praiers were in Latine, in the East parte in Greeke. Their Edw. Sād▪ Relation of Relig. c. 53. or 54. (of the Greeke Church) Liurgies be the same, that were in the old time, namely S. Basils, S. Chry¦sostomes, and Sait Gregories translated without any bending of thē to that change of languadge, which their tongue hath suffered. 14. Their Article which reiecteth fiue of he Seuen Sacraments, Confirmation, Pe∣ance, Order, Matrimonie, and Extreme-nction is vtterly reiected by those our Pri∣matiue Christian Britans; And first for Con∣rmation, Girald. Camn. dscript. Cambr. cap. 18 their learned Bishop and Antiqua∣ie defining it, as Catholikes now doe, to be n Vnction by a Bishop with holy Crisme by which race is giuen, doth testifie that from their first onuersion, all Britans desired and sought it ore then any people: Episcopalem confirmatio∣em, & chrismatis quâ gratia spiritus datur Inun∣ionem, Constant▪ Magn. in priuelg. Rom. Ec∣cls. apud Isodor. Iu∣nior. Tom. 1. Concil. Hist. Brit. l. 12. c. 18. Conc. l. Ni∣on. 1. cā. 55. art. 6 Concil. Arelaten can. 8▪ prae alia gente totus populus magnoperè petit: ll the people did more then any other nation greatly sire Eiscopall Confirmation and the annointing of hrisme wherby the holy Ghoste is giuen. Constan∣ne our great Emperour as he himselfe wit∣esseth, receiued this Sacrament of Saint Sil∣ster the Pope and king Cadwallader going  Rome was there confirmed by Pope Ser∣us. Our Britans receiued the first Generall ouncell of Nice, and were present thereat, d consented vnto the great Councell of les, in both which it is sufficiētly acknow∣ledged
for a Sacrame and signe giuing grace▪ Conferēce & Hamp∣ton pag. 10. 11. Commu∣nion Booke tit. confir∣mat. Articl. of Protest. Relig. 25. And our Prtestant publick authoritie more then in one place acknowledge, it was both vsed by the Apostle, their tradition▪ and giuing grace by application of an exer∣nall signe, which in this Article they desine t be a Sacrament. 15. Concerning the Sacrament of H Orders I shall speake more plentifully in th defēce and honour of Episcopall and Piest. Functiō. And it is sufficētly acknowledge when euen Protestants confesse there is n teaching, Preaching, Ministring of Sacramēt giuing and obtaining grace, remission  sinnes, and euerlasting happinesse, no tr Church on earth, no comming to heauen o¦dinarily without them. Therefore of a people who ar Christians, (saie our Briti Antiquaries, Protestants thereto consentin Girald. Gambren. descript. Cambr. cap. 18. Dauid Powll. Hct. oeth. hist, Scotor. l. 10. p. 208. Raphel Holinsh. Histor. of Sot. pag. , 4. or not denying it) our British Christians ga much more honour to such persons fro their first faith. Ecclesiastiis viris lōgè magis qu vllam gntē honorem deserentes: Yelding farre m honour vnto Eclesiasticall men then any other co¦trie. And the old lawes of the Scots made i deadly offence to hurt a Priest by word deede: There were not of our persecuti Protestants opinion: Laedere Christi Sacerd dicto sactouè xitiale sit. Be it a deadly crime to  a Priest of Christ either in word or deede. It is ¦taine in our Antiquities, that the Britans all essentiall things had the same ordinati
ith the Church of Rome, that they had their hiefest consecrating Bishops from thence; nd in some part of Britanie the custome was, Manuser. antiq. & Capgrau. in . Wy∣rone Epis∣copo. hen one was to be chosen Bishop, they sent im to Rome to be consecrated by the Pope here: Moris erat apud Incoas Pastorem à se electum Romam mambas Apostolicis ordinandum dirigere, dinatumque sedem & plebem reuisere: It wa the stome amonge the Inhabitants to sen tir Pastour  them elected to Rome to be ordained by Apostolicall nds, and being ordained to returne to his seate and ocke. 1. For Matrimonie, the Sacramentall bond ere of was with them so strict and indisso∣be, Nennius Manusc. Histor. in Guorth∣gn. Rege. Matth. Westin. an. 450. Matth. Parker. antiquit. Britan. pag. 7. 8. Protest. annot. in Matth. Westin, an. 454. Stows hist. in Vortigern-Holinsh. hist. in eod, that although before Christianitie ere, especially in Scotland and towards that ountrie the wantonnesse had beene excee∣ing, and not to be mentioned: yet after race receiued and giuen by this Sacrament,  was a chaste and holy people, and more rict Lawes and punishmēts for incontinēcie ere here prouided, and duely executed, then se where. The kings thēselues were not spa∣d for offēding therein, but were excōmuni∣ted and deposed, as in the case of king Vor∣gerne who by S. German the Popes Legate, th the aduise of the British Clergie, was communicated, and by the whole kinge∣me after deposed, as British nd Saxon, atholike and Protestant Antiquaries thus liuer vnto vs. And our Protestants most thorised (among them) cōmunion Booke
in the title of Matrimonie; and publicke so¦lemnizing thereof, attribute sufficient vnt it against this Article, to receiue it as a S¦crament. 17. Concerning Extreme Vnction there i yet extant a short written Relation Ab auth¦re antiquissime, by a most auntient Author,  our Protestant Antiquaries acknowledge wherein concerning this Sacrament, S. Iam the Apostle is expounded as Catholiks do and is proued that the Britās so professed a practised it. Whereby we are assured th the old true beleeuing Britans receiued a the seuen Sacraments as Catholiks now do And yet if after so great losse and hauoc made of their Antiquities we had prou they had vsed fower or three, this had co¦demned these Protestants admitting one two, for such. 18. That it was receiued and vsed al with these true Catholike Britans to reeru and some times to receiue also the Blessed S¦crament Gld.  d xcid. & conquest. Britan. Manuscr. Antiqu. & Cgrau. in vit. S.  Con. Tu∣ronen. 2. can. 3. of the ltar in one onely kinde, ād not in b we haue ample testimonie. Saint Gildas vp such vsed reseruation there of vpon their h¦ly Altars, calleth the Altar the Seate of  hauenly sacrifice. Sedes coelestis Sacrificij, Not o∣ly therevpon offered, but as seated, perm¦nent and preserued. An old British Antiqu¦tie deliuereth, it was the vse here for such  were daungerously sicke To receiue Extre vnction, and communicate thus in one kinde. So
is in Ireland. So in little Britanie receiuing Gregor. Turonen. l 1. de gloria mariyr. c. 86. l. 1. de vit. Patr. c 3. Conc. Ni∣can. 1. can. 3. 63. Ara∣hic. Conc. Are¦lan. e faith from hence, and our Britans: and it as so decreed there in the secōd Councell of urs in the yeare 570. Vt Corpus Domini sub cru∣titulo componatur. That the bodie of our Lord should placed vnder the title of the Crosse. Gregorius Tu∣ensis recordeth it to be an old Custome those parts: And more ouer relateth how holy Bishop S. Gallus there did communi∣e many people in one kinde onely. This stome is remembred and approued in the t Nicen Councell which the Britans re∣ied, and that of Arles to which their hbishop of London Restitutus for Brita∣ subscribed. And our Protestants by pu∣k statute and Parliament, haue declared,  in the Primatiue Church, Communion  vsed sometimes in both kindes, and etimes in one onely. Therefore there was expresse commaund of Christ, euen by e men against one kinde: otherwise it ld not haue so beene vsed, nor could king ard the 6. Q. Elizabeth, king Iames and Protest. Parlamēt an. 1. Edw. 6. An. 1. Eliz. An. 1. Iac Parl. 1. Caroli.  Charles so determine and decree it in lick Parlaments. . Their libertine wanton doctrine For iage of Priests is sufficiently confured by Britans before, no example to be giuen ng them of any one such married man, among so many thousands in so many asteries, Colledges, and other places, in  Regiment here, in which not any one
such, as lawfull and allowed Marriage, is  be found. The Nicen Councell here then ¦ceiued, and whereat our king and Empero with others of this Nation were present, do disalowe it. Paphnutius himselfe there call Concil. Nicaen. can. 3. it, the old tradition of the Church, Veter Ecclesiae Traditionem, That Priests might a marrie: Vt quiunque in Sacerdotum Ordinem le Sozm. hist. aeccl. l. 1. cap. vlt. 22. grentur, si coniuges nondum essent, nè ducerent vxo That whosoeuer should be chosen vnto the Orde Priests, if they were not yet married, they should marrie. Which is the case of Protestants, if th Concil. Arelaten. . can. 2. had true Priests. Like hath the Councell Arles to which our Britans subscribed. A¦mi aliquem ad Sacerdotia non posse in vinculo co¦gij constitutum, nisi fuerit promissa conuesio, N which are married can be assumed to Priesthood, lesse they promisse continancie. 20. The rest of their Articles neede  this Examine, little differing from Cat¦likes, or to smale purpose. Therefore the  of Catholieks in England concerning R¦gion being thus holy, and warrantable w God and men, they which be the Teach and Preachers of such sacred rights,  keepers of others to performe them, suc our renowned Bishop and Priests be, sho not be persecuted but honoured, and reue¦ced of all. But because the malice of Perse tours hath procceeded so farre against th which haue so well deserued, and ought be better respected, I must take leaue of th
Enimies to giue our holy Bishop and Priests, me parte of their due and honour belon∣g to their sacred Orders, Functions, and rons. THE V. CHAPTER. at the Consecration, Iurisdiction, and mision of our Catholike Bishop (teaching the same Apostolicall Do∣ctrine in all things with the Catho∣like Church) is most lawfull, holie, orderlie, and honourable, in that his sacred callng is most worthie, and necessarie, and therfore he vnwrthi∣ly Persecuted. SO honourable and eminēt is the name and Office of sacred Bishops, that no ly the holy Apostles in holy Scripturs, Apostolick Fathers are so named, but ist himselfe by the greatest Apostle is sti∣ Bishop of our soules: Episcopus animarum 1. Pet. . arū. And that sacred Order is so necessarie e Church (euery one in particular to rule gouerne it, to confer holy Priesthood,
and other Orders, to minister Sacrament Preach, Preserue, and continue it, and d other their most needfull offices therein) th if we will beleeue the holy Scripturs, the ¦postolick Fathers of the Apostles age,  continuall Tradition and doctrinall pract of the true Catholick Church from the euen by Protestants confessions, and the te¦monies of themselues against themselues (t now persecute an holy and learned Bishop  being a Bishop and receiuing Episco Order and power whence all our Bish hitherto haue, and must deriue it) it is w out question, that as no other degree or ¦nitie whatsoeuer is so eminent in spirit affaires; So none in such matters and nec¦ties is so behofull and needfull: None so m to be honoured, reuerēced and desired,  in the greatest Persecutions. 2. In holy Scripturs the flock of C and gouernment of his Church is commi vnto thē whn it is saied, vnto them: Att Act. 20. vobis & vniuerso gregi in quo vos spiritus sanct suit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei, quam acq sanguine suo. Take heede to your selues, and to the  flocke, wherein the holy ghost hath placed you Bi to rule the Church of God, which he hath pur with his owne bloud. Where it is saied: Fie¦mo, 1. Tim. 3. si quis Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus d¦rat Asatthfull saying. If a man desire a Bishops  he desieth a good worke. Si quis domnisuae prae¦ci, quomode ecclesiae Dei diligentiam habebit? If
w not to rule his owne howse: how shall he haue e of the Church of God? where it is saied: Oportet iscopum sine crimine esse, sicut Dei dispensatorem. Tit. 1. Biohop must be without crime, as the steward of God. here S. Peter saith to such: Pascite qui in vobis  gegem Domini. Feede the flocke of God which is ong you. Neque vt dominantes in Cleris, sd formae 1. Pet. 5. i greg. Neier as ouerruling the Clergie, but exā∣ of the flocke Where S. Paul saieth to S. Titus hop: Huius reigatia reliqui to Cretae, vt ea quae Tit. 1.  corrgas, & constituas per iuitates presbyteros,  & go disposui tibi: For this cause lest I thee in e, that thou shouldest reforme the things that are ting, and shouldest ordaine Priestes by cities, as so appointed thee. Here they be Rulers, Go∣nour, Fathers and so they must needs be oured, reuerenced and obeyed of ther iects and chiden: And as the Scripture h expressely commaund temporall obe∣ce, vnto temporal Rulers: Amone illos Tit. 3. cipibus & Potestatibu subditos esse, dicto obedire: onish them to he subiect to Princes and Potestats, y at a word, So it doth most expresly and tly commaund obedience and subiection ese our spirituall Rulers: Obedite Prae o∣estris, Heb. 13. & subiacte eis, ipsi eim peruigilant, quasi m pro animabus vestris reddiu, Obeye your s, and be subiect to them. For they watch, as  to render account for your soules. Ignatius Successor to S. Peter at An∣h, saith: Quid aliud est Eiscopus, qum is qui Principatu & Potestate superior est? Episcopi sun
Sacerdotes baptizant, sacrificant, eligunt, inanus im∣ponunt. Nemo Episcopo honorabilior in Ecclesia, Sacer∣dotium Deo gerenti pro mundi salute. Pre byteri & Diaconi atque omnis Clerus simul cum populo, & Mili∣tibus atque Principibus sed & Caesares obebiant Episco∣po. Decet obdre Episcopo, & in nullo illi refragari terribile namque est tali contradicere. Episcopo subiect estote velut Domino, ipse enim vigila pro aniab vestris vt qui rationem Deo reddiurus sit. Nec¦itaque est quicquid facitis, Vt sine Episcopo nihil t∣eis. Quemcunque Paterfamilias mitit ad gul erna¦dam familiam unc it a accipere debetis vt illum ips qui metit. Episcopum aspicere oportet, vt ipsum D¦minum. Sine Episcopo nmo quicquam faciat eorun quae ad Eclesim spectant. Honoa Deum. vt omnu authorem, & Dominum Episcopum verò vt Princips Sacerdotū Imaginem De referentē: Dei quidē prop▪ Principaum Christi veò propter Sacerdotium. Ho¦rare oportet & Regem: neque enim Rege quisqu praestantior, aut quisquam similis illi in rebus omnil creatis: neque Episcopo, qui Deo consecratus est, ¦totius mundi salute, quit quam maius in Ecclesia. W else is a Bishop, but he that is Superiour to all prin¦palitie and power Bishops are Priestes, they Baptiz they offr sacrifice, they chose others, they imp hands. None is more honourable then the Bishop the Church excricising Priesthood before Allmight God for the Saluation of the world. Priestes, Deac and all the Clergie together with the people, Souldi and Princes, yea and Kings should obey the Bish and not contradict him in any thing. Be yea sub vnto the Bishop, as vnto our Lord, for he doth w
uer your soules, as who is to render an account to God. Therefore it is necessarie, that whatsoeuer you doe, that you attempt nothing without the Bishop. VVhom so euer the good man of the house doth send to gouerne his familie, you ought so to receiue him, as if it were himselfe who sendeth him You ought to receiue the bishop, as our Lord himselfe. VVithout the Bishop let no man doe any thing which appertainet to the Church. Honour God as the Authour and Lord of all but the Bishop as the Prince of the Priestes, bearing the mage of God: of God indeede, for his principalitie; and of Christ for his Priesthood you ought also to ho∣nour the King▪ for neither any is chiefer then the King, r any licke vnto him in all created things: nor is there any in the Church of God greater then the Bi∣hop, who is conjecrated to God for the health of the whole world. 4. S. Clement Successour to S. Peter at Rome, saieth from S. Peters mouth: Omnes Principes terrae & unctos homines Episcopis obedire▪ & capita sua ubmittere, eorumque adiutores existere praeiiebat Perus Apostolus. Omne qui eis contra∣eniant, ita damnatos & inams, vsque ad satisfa∣ctionem monstrabat: & nisi conuerterentur, à liminibus Ecclesiae alienes esse praecipiebat. O Episcope, (saith he) stude mundicie operum excellere, cognoscn lo∣cum ac dignitatem tuam, tanquam locum Dei obtinens, eò quòd praees omnibus Dominis, Saccrdotibus, Regi∣bus, Principibus, Patrius, Filijs, Magistris atque Sub∣ditis simul omnibu, Iudica ô Episcope cum potestate▪ tanquam Deus. Episcopus est mediaor inter Deum & vos. Is pietatis magister est, is post Deum Pater vester▪
s princeps & dux vester, is Rex vester, & Dynasta, denique is terrenus Deus post Deum, cui à vobis honor debetur. Episcopus Dei dignitate ornatus est, quaenus Clero pre, & omni populo imperat: Peter the Apostle commanded all Princes of the earth, and all men to obeye the Bishops, and to submit their heads vnto them, and to be their helpers. All those which should speake against hem he did declare them so to be infa∣mous an damned, vnill they had made satisfaction. And vnlesse they would be conuerted, he commanded that they shoul not prticipate of the Chuch. O Bis∣hop (saieth he) studie to excell in the puritie of thy workes, considering thy place and dignitie, as posses∣sing God his place, in that thou goest bfore all Lords, Priests, Kings, Princes, Fathers▪ Soones, Maisters, and also all subiects. O Bishop iuge wih all power, as God. The Bishop is mediatour betweene God, and you. He is the maister of pietie, he after God is your Father, he is your Prince and Captaine, he is your King, and Ruler▪ and lastly after God he is your ter∣rene God, wom you ougt to honour and reuerence. The Bishop is adorned with the dignitie of God, as he is chiefe of the Clergie, and ruleth all people 5. The like haue S. Dionysius the Areo∣pagite, S. Anacletus and others, our English Protestant so confessing So they teach with holy Scriptures, there is no other inferior Order of Priesthood, Deacons, or others, to preach or minister any Sacrament, or doe any spirituall thing in the Church, but by consecration from Bishops. Neque laico permi∣uous facere opus aliquod Sacerdotale vt sacrificium,
aut Baptismum, aut impositionem man us, aut benedi∣ctionem siue paruam siue magnam. Nemo enim sibi su∣mit honorem, sed qui vocatur a Domine: huiusmodi namque gratia per impositionem manuum Episcopi da∣tur. Neque Presbyteris potestatem damus ordinandi Diaconos, aut Lectores, aut Ministros, sed Episcopis tantum. Hic enim est Ecclesiasticus ordo. Cum à Deo consequeniam rerum didicerimus, Episcopis quidem assignauimus, & atribuimus, quae ad principatum Sa∣cerdotij pertinnt: Presbyteris vero quae ad Sacerdo∣tium: Deinde Diaconis, quae ad ministrandum vtrius∣que, vt puè & castè fiant, quae ad Religionem perti∣nent. Neque enim sas est Diacono sacrificium offerre, aut baptizare, aut benedictionem, fiue paruam siue magnam facere neque Presbytero ordinationem Cleri∣corūfacere. Ostensum est Anistitum Ordinem perfi∣cientem esse, & perfectionis authorem Non licet sine Episcopo baptize, neque dothen celebrare. Neither doe we permit he Laeie to doe any Priestly functin, as to offer Sacrifice, baptize, impose hands, or to giue any Benediction either litle or great. For no man taketh this honour to himselfe, but e who is called by God▪ Because this grace is giuen by the imposition of the Bis∣hops hands. Neither doe we giue vnto Priestes the power of ordaining Deacons, or Lectours, or Ministers, but onely to Bishops. This is the order of the Church▪ When we did lerne the sequell of things from God, in∣deede what appertained to the principalitie of Piestes we assigned and gaue it to Bishops: and to Priestes what belonged to Priestehoode: afterward to Deacons what appertained to the assistance of both, that these things which concerned Religion might be performed
chastly and cleanely. Neither is it lawfull for a Dea∣con to offer Sacrifice, or to baptize, or to make any Benediction either litle or great, neither for Priestes to ordaine Clergie-men. It is declared the Order of the Bishops is the perfecting Order and authour of perfe∣ction. It is not lawfull without a Bishop to baptize, nor to offer Sacrifice, nor to saie Masse. 6. Wherevppon the English Protestants in their most publicke and authorised pro∣ceedings thus acknowledge: It is euident vnto all men, diligently reading holy Scripturs, and aun∣tient authors, that from the Apostles time, there hath beene these orders of ministers in Christ Church, Bi∣shops, Priests and Deacōs, which offices were euermore had in such reuerent estimation, that no man might presume to execute any of them, except he were first by publike praier and imposition of hands approued and admitted therevnto. And these orders should be conti∣nued, and reuerently vsed, and esteemed in this Church of England. And in this, both their booke intituled: Of Consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests? as their Articles of Religion, and cō∣mon practise doe onely allowe and commit such thinges to them, whome they call and apprehend to be Bishops, saying: Allmightie God giuer of all good things by his holy spirit hath ap∣pointed them in the Church. Episcopall Order is of di∣uine Ordination, and by law diuine. Christ acted it by the hands of the Apostles. It is an ordinance Aposto∣licall. He hath enacted it for succeding posteritie, and so it is a Canon or Constitution of the whole Trinitie. Wherevpon the Protestant Puritās conclude:
If prelacie be de Iure diuino, by the lawe of God, it re∣ceiueth both breath and life from the Religion of Rome: And this they offer Publikly to defend, and the Parlament Protestants so graūte, claiming that Ministrie they haue, by ordination from Rome. Wherevpon these Puritans with ge∣nerall assent haue thus concluded: They cannot see how possibly by the Rules of Diuinitie, the separa∣tion of our Chuches from the Church of Rome, and from the Pope, head thereof, can be iustified. They pro∣test to all the worlde, that the Pope and the Church of Rome, and in thē God, and Christ Iesus himselfe haue had great wronge and Indignitie offered vnto them: and that the Protestant Churches are scismaticall in forsaking the vnitie and communion with them. If the English Protestant opinion he maintained: That Bishops Iurisdiction is de Iure diuino, by the lawe of God, his Magestie and all the Nobilite ought to be Sub∣ect to Excommunication. 7. Which neither king, Nobles, or vnno∣ble, no meanest Protestants of England can oubt, feare, or pretend against the Bishop of Chalcedon, he neither hauing or claiming the easte spirituall power or Iurisdiction ouer ny one great or little, highe or lowest Prote∣stant in Englād. His Episcopall, both Order nd Iurisdiction which (as he construeth) be∣ongeth vnto it, extending onely to Catho∣iks of this kingedome, to keepe them in good order, and loyall dutie both to God and heir king, as good Catholik Bishops doe, nd are bounde to doe. Which must needs be
an helpe, and no hurt or offence to any Com∣mon-wealth, Bishops learned, louing, and knowing their dutie and hauing charge whereof they must render a seuere accompt to God, (attended with watchfull and re∣uengfull eyes vpon them) for loue will not, or feare dare not, concurre vnto, or suffer vnder them disobediēce to heauenly or earth∣ly Prince. They which cannot endure spi∣rituall dutie, are in most daunger of lapse in∣to temporall disobedience, hauing reiected spirituall power, keeping them in awe and dutie to temporall. VVhich perhaps caused Constantine our wise king and Emperour to saie vpon experience as he did of stagge∣rers in Religion and faithfulnesse to God. No doubt but both the Pope of Rome and Rich: of Chalcedon know their offices suf∣ficiently without any admonishments. They are not ignorant who said, and how it con∣cerned them. Non possumus aliquid aduersus veri∣tatem sed pro veritate: VVe cannot any thing against 2. Cor. 13. the truth: but for the truth, and, potestatem quam Dominus dedit mihi in aedificationm, & non destru∣ctionem: The power which our Lord hath giuen me vnto edification, and not vnto destruction. 8. There is great difference in hauing, and exercising power from Rome: The first should not feare them, which would feare without cause of feare: neither secret and pru∣dent exercise in necessitie to redesse or pre∣uent euills. Greater meetings and assemblies
be often made by some in, and of as great daunger, and to lesse purpose, then would serue priuately to examine witnesses, or so to giue a sentence, where the litigants be, and ought to be secret. To doe many vsuall and necessarie act of Religion, be as daungerous, and require as great, and greater assemblies. A publike setled Consistoie, in any place or laces to be set vp, could not but with onde maginations be thought vpon, were the Iudg ad not vbi reclinet caput suum. Probate of pu∣like wills, administrations, Tithes, Con∣racts, Marriages, Diuorces, Alimonie, Bas∣erdie, and publike slanders among Protestāts aue publike Protestant Courts, and all or any mixt with our temporall lawes. Many f the remembred instances, as Tithes, and asterdies, concerning, inheriting lands, and onours determinable onely by our tempo∣all lawes, with others, cannot come to his au∣ence, except such imaginaries could ad ould put Ministers out, and Priests into e Benifices of England. A secret and consio∣able ending of many of these matters amōg atholikes, though iuridically, can be no ore daunger in a Bishop, then in a Regula rieste. If diuersitie of Iudgments should me time happen in the Iudgment of one a shop giuen in priuate, the inconuenience uld be lesse the now it is by the Idgemēts  many Priests, all of them as much differing m the Protestants Censures, and ribunals
as those by a Bishop would be. Yet these few cases would chance but seldome. We see the Queenes Priests of France and Sotland to be permitted by the king and state to deae with English Catholks ome times brnging such caes. So are all Priests of all Orders, (li∣tle pleasing vnto the) necessitated to doe so▪ But seeing there can be no daunger by suc secret procedings, none can take that offic from a learned Bishop and leaue it to euer Priest, learned or not. 9. Such or greater difficulties were fro the Apostles time, and therein, in them an Bishops their Successours among Ethnic and Pagan Princes; yet the holy Scripturs be¦fore, and Apostolike men, haue taught a men obedience vnto Bishops, euen in su daies, and all good Christians did so ob them. Saint Peter in Scripture strangely e communicated Ananias and Saphira; So d S. Paul Hymineus, Alexander, and the ince¦tuous Corinthian; So did the other Apostl among Pagans, exercise spirituall Iurisd¦ction, So did all Bishops among Infidels, v till the Emperours and Princes more differi from Catholiks the Protestants should, we conuerted: yet at that time they exercised sp¦rituall Iurisdictiō, and the Christians obey them. And now at this time and long vnd the Turks, Tartars, Chinenses▪ and other e¦mies to Catholiks, Catholik Bishops doe e¦ercise their Iurisdiction among the Christi
and all obeye t. This is the case of Catholiks vnder their Bishop in Holland, among the Protestant Holanders. And in his Maiesties Dominion in reand, where Bishops are and doe execise teir Iuisdictin, Ca∣tholiks obeying them. And it is Christs ord∣nance that  they should doe. God forbid any bearing the name Catholike in England, (o renowned for holy Conessous of true Religion in this time) should be wanting in uch dutie, or any other. 10. But because our Protestant Persecu∣ours pretend most exception against the Bishop of Chalcedon for driuing Iurisdi∣tion from the ee of Rome, we must needs ith all antiquitie deliuer vnto them, that in uery age from Christ, we here in Britani aue receiued Bishops and Pastours with heir Iurisdiction, from the Se o Rome and hat highest Papall power and authoritie. Ve haue spoakē before how in the fist Age aint Peter the first Pope o Rome consecra∣d Bishops, and Prists, and founded hurches here▪ We ade urther, how our Pro¦stants eue king Iames himselfe and others y his and their greatest authoritie, con∣sse of the Apostolik Church: It is our moter▪ urch. And Adde. Est capu Roma quatenus ab ea ffasum est Euanglium in reliquas tus O  clsias, & in muas Oriens aque in arar eti∣tra Rmanum Impeum Nationes. Rome i the d, as s it the Gospell is diused into the rest of the
Churches of all the west, and into many of the East, as also into Barbarous Nations out of the Romā Empiere. Peter preached in no place, but he there orained Bis∣hops. and teachers, and founded Churches, The Apo∣stle Peter did in euery Prouince appoint one Archbis∣hop, whome all other Bishops of the same Prouince should obey. The Archbishop of Britanie was Aristo∣bulus. S. Clement his Successour Pope, in the later end of this, and in the beginning of the second age writeth of him concerning Brita¦nie Sanctus Clemens. and other Coūtries: Episcopos persingulas Ci¦uitates, quibus ipse non misrat, perdoctos nobis mie¦re praecepit. Quod facere inchoauimus, & Domino ope ferente faecturi sumus: He commaunded vs to send ve learned Bishops vnto all Cities, to which he had n sent any. Which we haue begun to doe, and by G his healpe shall doe. 11. In the second age also, Pope Eleuth¦rius sent hither S. Damianus, and Phagan his legats with others, who consecrated an VVestm. an. 85. seated here three Archbishops, with 28 Bi¦hops. Templa qua in honorem plurimorum Deo fundata fueran, vni Deo, eiusque Sanctis dedica∣runt, diuesisque Ordinatorum coetibus repleueru The Churches which were builded in the honour of ¦ny Gods▪ they dedicated to one God ād his Saints, ād f¦led thē with diuers ssēblies of such as had takē Orde And afterwards they being by King Luci sent to Rome, to haue those things confirm Idem an. 186. by the Pope, which here in Britanie th had done, Quibus peractis, redierunt in Britann praefati Doctores cum alijs quamplurimis, quorum
rina gens Britonum in fide Christi fundata refulsit: VVhich being ended, the foresaied Doctours accom∣nied with many others returned againe into Britanie whose doctrine, in a short time the Britans grouned the faith of Christ, florished. And although in this onuersion of Britanie, that holy Pope sub∣cted the Countrie now called Scotland (not mporally subiect to king Lucius of Britanie Bedalib. 1. hist. Angl. c. .  the Romans) vnto our Archbishop of rke, Susceptamque fidem Britanm vsque in tempora ocletiani Principis inuiolatam integramque quiea in e seruabant: The Britans did with peace keepe the th they ad receiued whole and inuiolate vntill the e of Dioclesianus the Emperour; Yet in the be∣nning Hector. Boeth. lib. 6 Scote. Histor fol. 86. B. of the third age Saint Victor then ing Pope of Rome. Donaldus (king there) ud Victorem Pontificem per Legatos obinuit, vt i doctrinà & Religone insignes in Scotiam ab eo si, se cum liberis & coniuge Christinomen profiten∣ hapismate insignirent. Regis exemplm Scotica bilitas secuta, auersata impietatem, Christique Re∣onem complexa, sacro fonte est abluta: Donaldus n King by Legats abtained from Pope Victor, that hie men both for lerning and Religion might from  be sent into Scotland, who might baptize himselfe,  and Childrne professing the name of Christ. The ish Nobilitie following the Kings example, did cast y impietie, embraced the Christian Religion, and  baptied. And those Scots or Britans were ructed both in learning and Religion Ibidem▪ those Priests, and Preachers which Pope tor sent. Incaepere tum primum sacras colere lite∣ras,
Saerdotius Praeptoribus, ques Victor Pontif Maximus, ad Christi dogma propalandum in ex¦mam miserat Alionem: Then first of all they b¦gun to studie the holy Scripturs vnder the Pri their maisters, which Victor the Pope had s into the farthest Albion to diuulge the doctrine Christ. 12. When the Persecution of Diocesi raged here 9. yeares, many of our Briti Clergie sent frō Rome, wen into those p wee the Scots now be, ā whether the Per¦cutiō did not cum, ād there they ioyned w those of Pope Victors Mission. And in t Persecution among so many Archbishops a Bishops placed here by Papall authoritie,  finde fewe, if any at all then put to death.  suruiuing after, to haue consecrated Prie dedicated Churches, and performed other ¦piscopall duties, and offices, as the Prie and others did theirs also. Bilustro supra  turbinis nedum ad Iegrum expleto, emarces busque nece suorum authorum nesarijs decretis, lae ¦minibus omnes Christs Tyrones quasi post hiemale prolixm noctem▪ temperiem, lcemque serenam  coeestis excipint, renouant Ecclesias ad solum vs destruct, Bsiitas Sanctorum Martyrum fund construunt, perfiunt, ac velu Victricia signa pa propalnt, diesstos celebrant, sacra mundo corde,  que onficiunt, omnes exultant filij gremio ac si M Ecclesiae cnsoi. Mnsit namque haec Christs ca membroū consonantia  donec, Arinorum p¦dia intrauit. Tenue yeares of the foresaid Trouble
ing as yet altogether compleate, and the wicked de∣es decaying in the dth of their authous, all the fol∣ers of Christ, wih iyull lgh as f atr a ng  er night they had receiued light, ā pleasant tpe∣ure of heaune are, they newe the  ich were fallen to the ground, they onded▪ builded  finished Cathedrall Churches of  ∣ly did set forth as it were signes of Victor▪ thy e∣rated feastes thy saied Masses with pure heart and . All ildren in their mother▪  hey were begotten of the mother the Church and v∣ the wickednesse of the Ar red, this swte v∣n of the members of Christ the head▪ reaed. So Gild as, S. Bede and other great witnesses, d ye when Ariansme was diated, at han sius, S. Hlary and other authorities e cleare Britanie as much as any nation rō  at insect: For it reman▪ me and cō∣nt obedience to the Popes  Roe in that werth age both in Princes, Bishops and hers. Great Constantine our Emperour, ng, and borne in Britanie with S. Helen  Mother a Brian, and Emsse hnord e See of Rome in the highst maner. They, d no doubt diues of our British Bishops  the Councel at Ro of 284▪ weste shops, were present, and assened when i  decreed: N  it primm sedem, quo∣m omnes ees a  dsidrant  Neque a Augusto reue  Rgihus, ne{que} à pop  Iudex  . 4. Episop & 4. 5. Presbytrs, & 5. Diaconi
duo sequentes, Augustus Constantinus, & Mater ei Helena: None shall iudge the first See for all Sees do desire that iustice be moderated by the first See, neither by Augustus, neither by the whole Clergie, neither by Kings, nor by the people, the Iudg shall be Iudged. A heare vnto subscribed 2▪ 4. Bishops, 45. Priestes,  Deacons and the two which followeth Constantine  Emperour and Helena his mother. 13. VVe had our Bishops present and sub¦scribing with generall assent of Britanie,  the great Councell of Sardie, assembled o of 37. Prouinces, where the Popes Supream spirituall power in all places is decreed a confirmed in two seuerall Canons: and A¦peales to be made to him as highest Iudg The Pope then did not onely rule the conue¦ted Christians: But also sent Apostolike m Saint Ninian a Britan instructed at Rom with others to conuert the Pagan Picts  this Nation. Audiens Pontifex Romanus quosd in Occiduis Britanni partibus necdum fidem Ch suscepisse, ad Episcopatus gradum Ninianum consec¦uit. Concreditum à Deo alnum per Britannor Scotorum, Australium Pictorum terras, ad seni vsue latissimè profudit. Ordinauit Presbyteros, Ep¦opos consecrauit, & totam terram per certas Pa¦chias diuisit. Pontifex Romanus Ninianum praem¦genti datâ bene lictione Apostolum destinauit: T Pope vnderstanding that some in the westerne parte Britanie had not as yet receiued the saith of Christ, consecratd Ninianus Bishop; which Talent gi vnto him from God, he powred forth largly vntill
wes agd through all Britanie, Scotland, and the Southerne Picts He made Priests, cōsecrated Bishops, and nto certaine Parishes he denide the whole Land, The Bishop of Rome sent Ninianus Apostle to the foresaied people giuing him his benediction. 14. In the fie age Saint Celestine Pope sent S. Paladius to the Irish and Scots, S. Pa∣trick after him to the Irish, S Germanus, Lu∣pus, and Seuerus to the Britans, to roote out Pelagianisme, to quiet and settle the Ec∣clesiasticall state here, which they did, con∣secrating Bishops Prests, and what else ne∣cessary in these Contries. VVhich by their power Legatine they so happily performed, that Protestants themselues (so testifying) among the Scots. alladius in hodres num diem, Scotorum Apostolus appellatur: Palladius vnto this day, is called Apostle of the Scots. Among the Irish Patricius incredibili spiritus feruore Euangeliū Hiber∣nis praedicans, ad sinceram Christi fidem eos, per 60. annos in vineâ Domini laborans conuertit. Profan Deorum destruxit templa, Ecclesias sundauit, verbi ministros ordinauit. Patrike preaching the Gospell to the Irish with incredible feruour of spirit laboring in the viniard of our Lord, for the space of 60. yeares, tenuerted them to the true faith of Christ, the prophaine temples of the Gods  dstroied, he builded Churches, he ordained Ministers of the word. Old Nennius li∣uing soone after saith: Ecclesias fundauit 365. Or∣dinauit Nenniu. Episcopos 365. aut amplius in quibus spiritus Demin eat: Presbyteros autem vsque ad ri milliae ordinauit: He founded 365. Churches, he ordained
65. Bishops or more in which was the Spirit of ou Lord: but Priestes he made 3000. VVhich must needs be done as the Popes Legate, for other Countris also, besides Ireland. S. Germanus with Saint Lups at the first, and second time wth Saint Seuerus reformed all things amōg the Britans, be made Bihops and Priestes, ād among the rest S. Dubritius Ahbishop, ea∣uing him to be the Popes Legate here after their going hence. 15. In the Sixt age Saint Dabritius still li∣ued▪ who resigning his Bhoprike, S. Dauid succeeded him, both as Archbishop and Le∣gate, reforming all things, and Ownes Brian∣niae Eclsia modum & Rgulam Rman uthoritate acceperunt All the hurche of Britani by Roman authoritie receiued both then manner and Rule. The Pope sent Saint Iuo▪ an Archbishop ino Bri∣tanie, or then England, who liued and died here. Saint Kentegern Bishop receiued Power and Approbation from the Pope of Rome, going thiter seuen times. And Sanctus Papa illū virum Dei & Spiritus sanct graiā plenū intelligens, in pus ministerij à Spirita Sancto illi iniuni destina∣uit. The holy Pope vnderstanding him o be a man of God, eplenished with the grace of the holy Ghoste, he sent him into the worke of the ministerie hch was en∣ioyned him by the holy Ghoste. So renowned was this holy Apostolicall Legate here and in all these Westerne parts, that both Catholik and Protestant Antiquaries thus deliuer vnto vs; raediabat ad flumen vsque ordens & ad mare So∣um,
vbi Caledonios, Athalos Horestos, ac vicina∣m Ion. Ba descript. Briten. in ▪ Albaniae regionum Inolas, docendo, monendo, r ando ad veritatis obseruationē nstigauit. Ex ds∣ults suis quosdam ad Orchades Insulas, ad Norwe∣ & Islandiam misit, vt orum instructionius fi∣i quo que lumen recipeent. Nam in Elguensi Collegio centos & sexaginta quinque literatos viros ad id mper paraos habebat, praetr reliquos alijs exercitijs ditos: He preached a farre as to the riuer of Forde,  the Scotish sea, where he stied vp the Caledo∣ns, Athalins, Hoests, and the Inhabitats of  neighboring kngdoms to Abion vnto the obserua∣n of ueh by teaching, admonishing and  ing.  sent some  disciples to the Iles of Ori ades. to  waye, and sland that  instruions they  receiue the light of aith. For in he Colldge gue he ad 365. learned n alwaise readie for  purpose, besides others imploted in other exer∣. Saint Asaph his scholler, a Bishop of tanie (who as Protestants sai from Ro∣n power, Auhitatem & nctnem acceit:  tooke authorit and .) Succeded hm  that great charge and gouernment of at Apostolike Colledge in VVales. This S. ntegern being by all accounts a Bishop 0. yeares and disciple to S. uanus, con∣aed Bishop by S. Paad its who was sen ther from S. Celestine Pope in or about the are 431. must need be liuing with Saint aph at, or a litle before Saint Augustin mning: And as our Protestants sae Sa aph ioyned with Saint Augustine, So Saint
Asaph writer of his maister S. Kentegerns li proueth, that S. Kentegern was at Rome, wh S. Gregorie was Pope, and submitted hi¦selfe to him in all things, and was approue by him also in his Apostolike proceedings. 16. In this time, in the yeare 596. Sai Augustine was sent Legate hither by the sa holy and learned Pope S. Gregorie, who b his supreame Pastorall power gaue him sp¦rituall authoritie ouer all Bishops, and othe here, in these his owne words vnto him: B tanniarum omnes Episcopos tuae Fraternitati commi¦mus, Beda l. 1. Eccles. hist. gentis Angl. c. 27. vt indocti doceantur, infirmi persuasione rebor¦tur, peruersi authoritate corrigantur. We commit  the Bishops of Britanie to your Fraternitie, that the  learned may be taught, the weake by persuasiō streng¦ned, the wicked corrected by authoritie. By this Pap power and authoritie, all things were orde in the Church of Englād in S. Augustins ti and all his Successours by the same aut¦ritie were setled in that Archiepiscopall S which he translated (after 400. yeares) fro London to Cāterburie. All those Bishops v to the first Protestant Bishop, called Math Parker (who was made by Q. Elizabeth b will, and manner) receiued Consecratio Pall, power, and Iurisdiction from the See Rome, and they swore obedience vnto it, their owne Parker, Godwin, Ioceline a others in the liues of them, and those Yorke, together with all Registers, Recor Annals, and Antiquities doe prooue parti¦arly.
In generall for this place it sufficeth in these Protestants publikely approued con∣fessions, to write it in their owne words: Archbishop Parker being the 70. Archbishop after Augustine, yet of all that number, he was the onely man, and the first of all▪ which receiued Consecration, without the Popes Bulls. 17. They assure vs, that vntill the 23. of King Henry the eight (a ssuming supreamacie to himselfe) euery Bishop in England swore uch obedience vnto the Pope. Hoc Iuramentum  singulis Episcopis Papae praestari consueuit. Obediens ro Beato Petro, Sanctaeque Romanae Eclesiae, & Do∣mino meo Domino Papae suisque successoribus. Papatum Romanum, & Rgalia S. Petri adiutor ero ad retinen∣dum & defendendum, saluo meo ordine contra mnem ominem: This Oath was accustomed to be taken by uery Bishop. I will be obdient to S. Peter and to the Lord, my Lord the Pope, and to his Successours: I will e an helpe to hold and defend the Popedome of Rome nd Rt of S. Peter against all men. In the yeare of Christ 1536. and 23. of King Henry S. they are; and the Statuts themselues so prooue: Le∣ges in Parlamento lataesunt, de Rege supremo Ecclesiae Anglicanae Capite declarando, de Clero Anglicano Re∣gifulijiendo. Ne quid deinceps amplius Papae aut Ro∣manae Cuiae quot unque praetextu ex Anglia pendatur. De Episcopis consecrandis, alijsque quae Roma anea ge∣ebantur, intra Regnum persierendis. De Eccleastico∣rum beneficiorum primitijs atque decimis Principi in perpetuum soluendis. His legibus potentia Papalis, quae nongentis amplius annis in Angli durauis entidi.
Lawes were enacted in the Parliament, of declaring the King to be supreame head of the English Church, of subiecting the English Clegie to the King. That no∣thing heareafter vnder what pretence souer in En∣gland shall depend of the Pope or the Court of Rome. Of conscrating Bishops and performing other aair within the kingdome, which before were done at Rome. Of paying prpetually to the Prince the fist fruites of Ecclesiasticall Benefices and Tihes. By these lawes the Papall power, which hath bne in for for these nine hundred yeares, did fall. And this was o strang a thing and wonder in the world to see the supremacie of the Pope of Rome thus taken from him by a temporall Prince, afer so many hundreds of yeares continuance, and a lay man to stile himselfe supreame head of the Church, that his very flatterers them∣selues crye out: Habetur Conilium Londini i quo Eccleia Anglian formam potestas nullis a∣te temporibus visum induit. Henricus enim Rex▪ caput isius Ecclsi constituitur. At London there is holden a Councell in which the English Church hah put on a power, which in no times past was▪ seene. For King Henry is constituted head of that Church. So large testimonie haue we from our greatest Adursaries witnessing that the Catholikes of England giue no other power, or Iurisdiction to te Pope of Rome, then he had euer, without any interuption. And in this we haue he generall assent of all our Kings, Princes, Bishops and others, and all the Christians in the world, from the tim
of Christ, vntill long ater the greater part of King Henrie the eight his reigne: No King against it, but he, (whom the Protestant Sir VValter Ralegh sufficiently discribeth) his young sonne King Edward the sixth of that name▪ ouerruled by Protestant Protectours▪ and Qeene Elizabeth a woman. King Iames wiser then any of them, hath let it thus pu∣blicky in open assembly declared by his Re∣gall sentence: The kings Resolution is, that no Church ought further to seerate heselfe frō the Church of Rome, either in doctrine or Ceremonies, then she hath departed from herselfe. when she was in her flo∣ishing and best estate: Wherfore as he Bishop o Chalcedon and Catholiks o England may not depart from the Church of Rome in this question: So it will be a great wonder if King Charles and his Councell should thus perse∣cute that, which to them and all should be so honourable. They may not persecute him for his Episcopall▪ Order, for that likewise is prooued the most glorious calling in the Church of Christ. All English Parlamenta∣rie Protestants confesse the Bishop of Chal∣chedon, (and all conscrated as he was, by the Roman Order, containing all and more then they vse, and by most true and lawfull Consecratours) to be an vndoubted true and lawfull Bishop. And so it must needs be▪ for whether we will follow the present Roman Order, euer vsed here since Saint Augustins time, before their new deuised forme of so
called Consecration made by King Edward the Sixth a child, and altered by his Sister Elizabeth Queene a woman: or that which the Britans, Scots, and Irish vsed long before: t is out of question by all, that the Bishop of Chalcedon, and euery one such, is a true and most vndoubted lawfull Bishop, hauing by due and true Consecratours whatsoeuer is contained, or prescribed to be done in either of both, which the new Protestant forme, if they had true Consecatours, cometh short, and wanteth euen in things essentiall both by all others, and their owne iudgment and pra∣ctise. 18. The present Roman Order hath more, though Ceremoniall, then that of our Britās, Scots and Irish, therefore I exemplifie onely in this; and the rather to giue Satisfaction to our Protestants, so extolling them for their Apostolik Religion neuer changed or altered as they saie. Before S. Kentegern was conse∣crated Bishop all most 1200. yeares since, this was their old vse, and māner herein, as Saint Asaph his Scholler a Bishop, and others prooue: Mos in Britannia inoleuerat, in Consecra∣tione Pontificum tantummodo capita corum sacri Cbris∣matis infusione perungere, cum inuocatione Sancti Spiritus, & benedictione & manus impositione. It was an auntient custome among the Britans, that in the Consecration of Bishops, they onely annoynted them on their heads with holy Chrisme, inuoca∣tion of the Holy Ghost, Benediction and imposiion of
ands. This was done by consecrating Bis∣ops. And this was, Mos Britonum, Scotorum, &  Hibernia: The Custome of the Britans, Scots and in eland, In those times, when Canons of Coun∣ells were not made of this matter, or not nowne here by reason of great troubles in ese parts, as our Antiquaries write, and yet ey were excused as hauing true and essen∣ally needfull Consecration. Insulam enim quasi ira orbem positi, emergentibus Paganorum infesta∣onibus Canonum erantignari: Ecclesiastica ideo Cen∣ra ipsis condiscendens excusationem illorum admit tit ha arte: Fo the inhabitants of the Iland, being as were placed out of the world, were ignorant of the anons by reason of the Continuall inuasions of the Pa∣ans: and therfore the Ecclesiasticall Censure yelding nto them in this parte, admted their excusation. But ur Protestants cannot be excused, being not gnorant, but Cōtemners of the Canons, and ot this onely, but omitting that which by he custome of the Britans, Scots, and Irish he old Roman Order in that time, (as Al∣uinus, Amalarius and others 800. yeares nce terme it in their dayes,) was vsed then, and is now:) all of them deliuering, that oly vnction by true Bishops, to be necessa∣ie and essentiall, euer naming the man to be onsecrated Bishop, Bishop elect onely, vntill Dienyus Aeop. l. de Ecclsiat. Herar∣chia. hat vnctiō be ended and then Bishop cōsecrated, piscopus consecratus. Our Protestants tēselues ublickly haue written ad warranted that aint Denys the Areopagite: Vnctionem ponit
expressè. Doth expresely put vnction. Anaclet wrote. Bishop are to be made by imposition of han Anacletus Epist. 2. §. . of Bishops, and oly uction by the exampse of the A¦postles, because all sactification consisteth in the ho ghoste, whose muble power is mixed with ho Chrisme and by this Re, slemne ordination is to  celebrated. O Protestants a o confese th the holy Fathers both of the Greeke and L¦tine Church, were thus coecrated. Of Sain Basile Vnion sca adhbta est dinatus: He w ordained by applying holy nnointing. Of S. G¦gorie Nazianzen: Me ontifiem vngis. So of  Iohn Chrysostome and Saint Seuerus. So  Augustine: Viarius Christi Pontifex efficitur, i in capite vngitur, imitādo illū qui caput est toiu Eccl¦siae, per vnctionis grati sit & ipse caput Ecclsiae sibi ¦missae. The Vicare of Christ is made Bishop ād therf he is annointed on the head, in imitatiō of him who the head of the whole Church, and he by the grace the nnointing, is made the head of the Chu committed vnto him. So Saint Gregorie: Qui S. Gregor. mag. in c. 10. l. 1. Regum. culmine ponitur, Sacramenta susipit vnctionis qu ve ò ipsa vnctio Sacramentum est, is qui prmou benè soris vngiur, sntus virtute Saraē robre He that is paed in the top taeth the Sacraments  annointing bcaus the annointing it selfe is a Sacram he that is to be promoted, is to be nnointed well wil  if he would be strnghned within with the etue  the Sacrament. An  this Te, he adiudge the Epicopal cnation of the Britan Scots, ad Iih  be essentially valie. S▪ Saint Bede, Amals, S. Iuo, Stephant
Eduensis, and other auntient writers, and Expositours of holy mysteries. 19. Concerning the Ceremonie of the Booke of Gospels laied vpon the Consecra∣ted, though Alcuinus saieth; Non reperitur in Alcuinus lb. d . c. . uthoritate veteri, neque nouâ, sed neque in Romanâ raditione: It is not found in authoritie either auncient  newe, yea not in the Roman tradition. And Ama∣arius; Neque vetu authoritas intimat, neque Apostolica traditio, neque Canonia authoritas: Neither auncient authoritie, neither Aposteli∣all tradition, nor Canonicall authoritie doth intimate ny such thing. Yet we find this Ceremnie to aue bene obserued in the time of S. Denis for n his booke of the Ecclesiasticall Hierachie e hath these words; Pontifex quidem qui ad perfe∣ionem Dionisiu . virtutem{que} pontifice dignam euiur, vto∣e genu flexo ante altare, supra caput habet libros à to traditos, manumque pontifiis: The Bishop indeede hich is eleuated to worthy perfection and vertue of a ihop, kneling on both knees before the Altar, hath on his head the bookes giuen from God, and the hand  the Bishop. Which Ceremonie is also vsed ily in the Catholike Church as is to be ene in the Rubiks of the Roman Pontifi∣ll, for after the ring is put on the finger of e newe Consecrated Bishop, this direction ntifica∣le oma∣num de Conscra∣tione El∣cti n E∣pisc. giuen; Tum Consecrator accipit librum Euangelio∣ de spatulis Consecrati: Then the Consecratour ta∣h the booke of the Gospells from the shoulders of the nsecrated. But this maketh not much to the rpose, it being onely (as I haue saied) a
Ceremonie, and not essentiall to the Conse¦cration of a Bishop: and that true and vn¦douted Bishops were made before the Gos¦pells were written. Otherwise the whol Church then, euer after, and now, and eue had wanted it, and had no Ecclesiastical Order at all. Which is the lamentable and des¦perate condition of such as persecute a tru Bishop and Priest for their Order and power thereby confessing their want both of tha which is essentiall in this high office, as als consecratours to performe it, consecrat tru Priests, or confer any Ecclesiasticall Orde or degree at all, not the meanest in that kin to any person. 20. All Authors agree, euen Protestants i their Catalogues of British and English Bi¦hops, that we had continuall succession o such here in great numbers, vntill Queen Elizabeth by her supreamacie depriued an deposed them. And to keepe it farre from th me of an Innouation to haue one such Bis¦hop, Successour to so many, if we haue tha libertie in time of Persecution when Bishop are driuen from their Sees, (vsuall in histo¦ries) to remember and honour them in Exi and Persecution, we haue still kept a Succe¦sion of Bishops in, or of this nation: Of tho which were depriued of their Bishop pricke we haue, Richard Pates Bishop of worcheste who subscribed to the Councell of Trent h being there present, by this Title, Richard
Patus wigorniēsis Episcopus. Thomas Goldwell Bishop Godw. Catal. of Bish. in Worcest. in Ric. Pates in S. A∣saph. in Thom. Goldwell▪ of Asaph liued at Rome 20. yeares after that deposing. Thomas watson Bishop of Lincolne was committed to prison in the Ile of Elie and died about the yeare 1584. Thus the Protestants themselues deliuer, and moreouer they deliuer much praise and com∣mendatiōs of thē and all others our renowned Bishops 14. or more in number, who were de∣posed, and persecuted by Queene Elizabeth yea far more and greater, thē they doe of those which were intruded into their places. Before or soone after the death of Bishop Wason of Lincolne, Owen Lew is of this our Nation was consecrated Bishop of Cassan, in whose life∣time our most Illustrious Cardinall, William Allan was honoured with that dignitie, and consecrated Archbishop of Maken, who li∣ued with these honours vntill the 16. day of October in the yeare of Christ 1594. n his time William Gifford was by Pope Clement the eight made Deane: Ecclesiae Diui Petri In∣sulensis: Of Saint Peters Church at Lile. And afterward, he was ordained Archbishop of Rhemes in Champaine in France, where he lately liued. And whilst he liued Arch∣bishop, both VVilliam of Chalcedon, and Richard also, who is now so persecuted, were by highest Papall authoritie cōsecrated ad sent into England. And what man of ordinarie knowledge, Iudgement, or vnderstanding, will aduenture to saie, but all these were re∣nowned men, as also diuerse of our renowned
Priests, most worthie of Episcopall honour ād dignitie in equall times, honourably stiled and registred for all posteritie not onely as great glories of their Coūtrie England, but the whole Church of Christ. Therefore to haue one of such worthie men a Bishop in his natiue Countrie, (bearing for auoyding of∣fence his Title of a place so farre hence) which frō the first Conuersion thereof to Christ had 3. Archbishops ād many Bishops aboue 1400. yeares past, should not in the new English Religion (teaching the Church of God neuer wanted Bishops, and acknowledging both him and all Catholikely consecrated Bishops, and Priests to be true and lawfull Bishops and Priests vndoubtedly by right ordination) be offensiue, but desired, such Order, Function and dignitie being by their publike testimo∣nies most needefull, excellēt and honourable with all true Professours of Christian Reli∣gion. 21. Thus we see a Succession of English Bishops though not all in England but in other Coūtries some of them consecrated and remaining, (a thing not vnusuall in times of Persecution and bannishment of Bishops, as in the great lights (in their time) of Gods Church S. Hilarius S. Athanasius, S. Chrysos∣tome and others lōg time exiled:) yet thereby did not interrupt a continuall Succession in their Sees. What least exception then can be taken against our renowned Bishop of Chal∣cedon?
for Order, and degree so honourable, and eminent, by all testimonies; for his owne worthines, and worthily therefore to be had in high reuerence, euen with his Persecutours; he bringeth able witnesses with him; his knowne loue ād honour to our king, Queene and Coūtrie; his owne holy life, and conuer∣sation; his learned works, and writings; with all at home and abroad he hath euer piously and gratefully conuersed, and with honour defended and iustified himselfe against Male∣olants. Among all English Catholick o Protestants few are to be found which haue more defēded the honour of our Soueraigne, one more acceptable to his Maiesties frieds nd Allyes in marriage, no mā among so ma∣y renowned Priests of England (worthie of reatest honour in equall times) adiudged so t to supply such place by that highest Pa∣or, which hath shewed great care and loue four king, Queene and hoped Posteritie, nd Countrie. And since Persecution and roclamation against him, what could such a an in Persecution doe more, then he hath one, in decreeing, and Ordering that all riests and Catholiks should daily with de∣otion praie for our king, Queene, State and Countrie. And both since the comming in of im, and VVilliam of Chalcedon of happie emorie his Predecessour: as likewise before e Catholiks of England haue bene and now e knowne to be the most loyall, dutifull
and liuing Subiects in our dearest Countrie of England. THE VI. CHAPTER. That our English Priests who teach al things with the Apostolicall Religio are truely cōsecrated, worthie men, an are to be honoured, and not persecuted▪ 1. Hauing redeemed Episcopall Ord and dignitie, conferred by the S of Rome, from all Imputation of wick obloquies, and made it knowne to be so hig and honourable; we might spare all furth labour for exemption and defence of Prie¦lie Function, seeing euery Bishop of nece¦sitie must be a Priest, and whatsoeuer of th calling is noble and glorious in a Bishop must needs be such in Priests; Episcopal h¦nour and consecration addeth an higher a greater worthinesse to him that was befor Priest, but cannot take away or diminish a excellencie or renowne he had before. T Protestants of Scotland doe confesse (whi all knowe) that after Catholike Religiō w ouerthrowne there, they had not any prete¦ded Bishops before King Iames (accordi to his manner of making such) gaue su
Titles to them. And their Knoxe, Buchanan, Forbs, Bale, and others both of England nd Scotland are not ashamed to saie that efore the sending of Saint Palladius thither y Saint Celestine Pope about the yeare 430. lonckes who were onely Priests supplied he place of that dignitie with that People. ut malice to Episcopall worthinesse, and ower, their owne knowne want thereof, or rosse Ignorance in Antiquities, and Eccle∣asticall Veremun  hist. Both. Scotor. histor. in Maximo. Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. Io. Bal. l. de Scripto. rib. centur. 2. in Coil, Sedul Sigeert. &  ibid. affaires, haue blinded them with this arknesse, because long before that time in he daies of Dioclesiā, Scotland had Bishops, nd Saint Amphibolus was Bishop in the Ile f Man. In the time of Maximus Scotland had iuer Bishop bannished by him. And Hilde∣ertus, and Coilus Sedulius Scots by Na∣on and renowned Bishops are honoured in stories before Saint Palladius came thi∣er, as both these Protestants and sarre etter Antiquaries deliuer for vndoubted uthes. 2. But if we should not onely (as we must) teeme Priests inferiours to Bishops, but which we may not nor cannot) eē to them∣lues, and make them but Deacons: yet oth diuine and best human authoritie as∣reth vs, that by that calling they are to be onoured, and not dishonorably persecu∣d. The holy Scripture honoureth thē with  much true consecration as our Protestants estowe vpon their pretended Bishops▪
publike and solemne prayer and imposition of the Apostles, the chiefest Bishops hands▪ Orantes imposuerunt eis manus: Praying they imposed Act. . hands vpon them. And declareth them, Vir boni testimonij plenos spiritu sancto. Men of good te∣stimonie, full of the holy Ghost. The Apostolike Fathers commaund all laie persons, to b subiect vnto, and reuerence them. Saint Igna¦tius . E∣pist. ad Smyrnen∣sis. Epist. ad phesios. saieth▪ Diaconos reuereamini vt ex Dei praecep¦to ministrantes: Honour yea the Deacons as ministrin by the precept of God. And Enitimini charissimi sub¦iecti esse Episcopo, & Presbyteris, & Diaconis. Q enim his obedit, ob die Christo: My dearest doe yo best to be subiect to the Bishop, and Priests, and Dea¦cons, for he that obeyeth these, obeyeth Christ. An other where. Oporter & Diaconis, mysteriorū Chr¦sti pist ad Tallian. ministris per omnia placere. Sunt Ecclesiae Dei adm¦nistratores. Ipsi itaque tales sunt, & vos reueremi illos vt Christum Iesum, cuius vicarij sunt. Qu Diaconi, quam Imitatores angelicarum virtuum, q puum & inulpatum ministerium illi (Episcopo exhibent, vt Sanctus Stephanus Beato Iacobo, & T motheus & Linus Paulo, Anacletus & Clemens P¦tro? Qui igitur his non obedit, sine Deo prorsus, ¦mpurus est, & Christian contemnit, & constitution eius iminuit: And it is expedient to please Deacon the ministers of the mysteries of Christ in all things▪ They are the Administratours of the Church of Go And tey are such, and you should reuerēce thē as Ies Christ whose Vicars they are. What are Deacons, b the followers of Angelicall vertues who presenteth (t e Bishop) a pure and perfect mysterie, as S. Secu
did to Saint Iames, Timothie and Linus to Paule, A∣nacletus and Clement to Peter? whosoeuer therfore obeyeth not these, is altogether without God, and im∣pure, and doth contemne Christ, and doth distroy his Constitution. Saint Polycarp saieth, subiecti esto∣te S. Polica▪ epist. ad Philip. Presbyteris, & Diaconis, sicut Deo, & Cristo: Be yea subiect vnto the Priests and Deacons, as to God and Christ. Our Protestants themselues in their publike booke named The forme and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Dea∣ons. Saie, that from the Apostles time they haue ene in Christs Church, euermore had in reuerent esti∣mation. Therefore if the Deacons and Mini∣sters to Priests in the holy Sacrifice of Masse, their highest dignitie, are thus by all testimo∣nies to be reuerenced, honoured and obeyed: then the sacred Sacrificing Priests to whom they thus minister, and serue, may not be dishonoured, much lesse persecuted with most barbarous and vnchristian contume∣ies, disgraces, and deaths, for that their so e∣minent Order and dignitie. 3. The holy Sripturs testifie that in their Consecration they receiue grace, the holy Ghost, power to bind and loose, to retaine nd forgiue sinnes, to offer Sacrifice to God, nd to doe what Christ himselfe did in that ind. So the holy Fathers expound these Scripturs, and teach from thm: and our most untient renowned British writer thus affir∣meth Gla  xid. & cxq. ▪ Omni sancto Sacerdoti promittitur. Quaecunque oluer is super terram, runt soluta & in oelis: & quae∣cunque
liganeris super terram, erunt ligata & in c. Verò Sacerdoti dicitur: tu s Petrus, & super hane , 16▪ petram aedisicaho Ecclesiam meam: It i promised to euery holy Priest. Whatsoeuer thou hat loose in earth, it shall be loosed also in the heauens: and whatsoeuer thou shalt binde vpon earth, it shall he bound also in the heauens. To a true Priest it is saied, thou art Peter, and vpon this Rocke I will build my Church. The Scripture saith to, and concerning such: pasci∣te qui in vobis est gregem Dei: Feede the flocke of God ,  which is among you. Qui benè praesunt Praesbyteri, dis∣plici honore digni habeantur: maximè qui laborant i vero & doctrinà: The Priests that rule well, let them be esteemed worthie of double honour: especially they that labour in the word and doctrine. The Apostles Successours giue them as much: Presbyteri Saieth Saint Cement si assiduè in studio docendi verbum Dei laborauerint, seponatur dupla etiam Clem. Const. A∣post. lib. 2. c. . perio in gratiam Apostolorum Christi, quorum locum tenent, nquam Consilarij Episcopi & Ecclesiae coron unt enim Cousilia & Senatus Ecclesiae. Si de parenti∣us secundum carnem ait diuina Scriptura: Honor patrem & matrem vt benè tibi sit. E, qui maledici c. 35. patriaut matri, morte mortatur: quanto magis de patri∣bus spiritualibus verbis Dei moneamur, honore & charitate eos prosequi, vt beneficos & ad Deū Legatos. . 3. Quanto anima corpore praestanor est, tanto est Sacer∣tium regno excellentius: Let there be a double porti reserued for the Priests in honour of the Apostles of Christ, which shall haue labored in teaching of the word of God diligently. Whose places they enioye, as Coun∣sellours of the Bishop, and the Crown of the Church.
They are the Councell and Senat of the Church. If the holy Scripture saieth of carnall parents: honour thy father and thy mother, that it may be well with thee. And whosoeuer doth curse his father or his mo∣ther, shall die: how much more shall we be admonished by the words of God, of our Spirituall fathers, to respect hem with honour and charitie, as beneficiall to vs and Legates to God? How much more noble the soule is then the bodie so much more excellent is Priesthood be∣fore a Kingdome. And Saint Ignatius addeth. Ignatius epist. ad Smy, Sacerdotium est, omnium bonorum, quae in hominibus sunt apex; qui aduersus illud furit, non hominem ign∣miniâ afficit, sed Deum & Christum Iesum primegeni∣um, qui naturâ solus est sus Sacerdos Patris▪ Priest∣hood is the rnament of all things, which ae in men whosoeuer doth rage against it, he doth not dishonour a man, but God and Christ Iesus the first begotten, who by nature is the onely hight Priest of his father. The A∣postles Clm. const. l. 2. c. 2. write by S. Clements penne. Si Rege inuadens supplicio dignu iudicatur, quamuis ilius vel micus sit, quanto magis qui Sacerdbus insultat: quanto enim Sacerdotium regno est excellentius, cum regendarum animarum officio praesit, tanto gruio supplicio punitur, qui aduersus id alquid emerè fee∣rit, quàm qui aduersus regnum: If he that setteth on a King is iudged worthy of punishment, although he be his sonne or his friend, how much more should he be blame worthy that insulteth ouer Priests. For by how much more Priesthood excelleth a Kingdome, when i doth by office gouerne soules, by so much more greater pu∣nishment is he to be afflicted, who shall rashly doe any thing against it, th he who hath ended a Kingdome▪
Presbyteri sunt (saith Saint Ignatius) consess  pist. ad llon. quidam & coniunctus Apostolorum chorus, sine h Ecclesia electa non est, nulla sine his Sanctorum congre∣gatio, nulla Sanctorum electio. Quid Sacerdotium aliud est, quàm ater caetus, consiliaij & assessores E∣piscop: Priests are indeede a certaine Assemblie an vnited quie of the Apostles. Without thee the Church  is not chosen, without these ther is no Congregation  Saincts, nor election of saincts. what else is Prieste¦hood, then an holy assemblie, Counsellours and assi¦stant▪ of the Bishop▪ Saint Anacletus Pope liuing in this age and made Priest by Saint Pete Anacletus Ep. 2. saith: Iniuria Sacerdotum pertinet ad Christum, cui vice funguntur: The iniurie done vnto Priests, apper∣taineth to Christ, whose place they supplieth. And a Protestants (Magdeburgen: & Rob. Barn. i Anacleto) saie: Anacletus Christo alienos esse iudica¦bat, qui Sacerdotes in ius vocarent: Christi vel Ecclesi Magdebu. Rob arnos. pecunias auserentes, homicidas iudicari debere censui quia, inquit, priuilegia Ecclesiae & Sacerdotum, Apo∣stoli Saluatoris iuss inuiolata esse debere iusserunt, i Ecclesiasticis negotijs, grauiores causas ad Primate, luiores ad Metropolitanum Episcopum referendas, se∣cularia negotia apud prophanos iudices agenda esse ius∣st. Omnibus oppressis licere appellare Ecclesiastiū forū Anacletus iudged those to be against Crist, who would goe to lawe with Priests; the Robbers of Christ or the Churches monies, he determined they should be condēned or Murdr because, saieth he, the Apostles by the ecept of our Sauiour ōmaunded the priuiledges of the urch and Priests to be kept inuiolated. In Ecclesiasti∣call affaires he willed the greater matters to be referred
the Primate, the lesser vnto the Metropolitan Bis∣p: and worldlie businesses to be ended by prophaine udges, it is lawefull for all those that are oppressed  appeale vnto the Ecclesiasticall Court. 4. S. Martiall liuing in Christs time and sent to France by Saint Clement, hath these S. Mar∣tiall ep. ad Bur▪ ga. ords; Sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis, qui vitam vobis buunt in calice & viuo pane, honorare debetis. Quod di per inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes se nomen s à terra abolere, nos causa salutis nostrae in ar san∣ficata proponimus, scientes hoc slo remedio nobis vi∣ praestandam, & mortem effugandans; Hoc enim ipse minus noster iussit nos agere in sui commemorationē: ought to honour the Priests of Almightie God, who eh you life in the Chaice and in the liuing ead. at which the Iewes by nuy Sacrified, thinking by to abolish his name out of the World, we in be∣ of our owne health do offer vpon the holy Altar, wing tbat by this onely edie lie shall be giuen vs,  death shall not approch neare vs, and this our d commaunded vs to doe in iorie of him. Pro∣ants auouch that in  Age Pope Aex∣er  Alxand. for bad that a Clergie man should be ught to the common Tbnall. Cleū ad ium tribunal pertraere proibuit. These are the imonies of the Apostles, and Apostolike  of the first age whom all must subscribe o, and followe in such things, and all of  except Saint Ignatius, either Popes of me, or directed by them. as Saint Martiall,  so must needes meane and vnderstand ests consecrated by Roman Iurisdicion
power and Order. And Saint Ignatius Su¦cessor to Saint Peter, and inscribing his Epi¦stle to the Romans: Ignatius Ecclesiae sanctificat quae praesidet in loco Regionis Romanorum: Ignatius  the hallowed Church, which doth beare rule in the R¦gion of the Romans. And writing of the highe power thereof could not denie the pri Iurisdiction of that See. And they all direct speake of Massing Priests, and Sacrifice.  Clement setteth downe the whole order  the Masse, and expressely writeth that t Priest in masse offereth Sacrificium munum  incruentum per Christum institutum, mysterium  S. Clem. const. A∣post. l. 8. c. 5. Testamenti. A pure and vnblooddie Sacrifice instit by Christ, the mysterie of the newe Testament. Co¦tinuall Tradition hath preserued vnto vs  Masses of Saint Peter, Saint Iames, Saint M¦thew, Saint Marke and other Apostles, a Dionis. Arop. Ec∣cles. Hir. . 2. 3. Disciples of Christ. Our old British antiq¦ties doe prooue that the old Apostles Ro Masse was in their time vsed in Frāce and  brought ouer hither into Britanie. Saint D¦nis the Areopagite Saint Paules scholler, ¦sent Apostle into these parts by Saint Pete or Saint Clemēts missiō, hath a forme the of setting downe the Alar, oblation, con¦cration, Sacrifice, worship and adoration Christ there present: ô diuinum peniùs sacr mysterium, obducta tibi significantium opeimenta  orum dignanter apriens, nobis palam atque aper¦esce: O altogether diuine and sacred mysterie vo¦safe to disceuer to vs the couerings of thy signifi¦
gnes, and shine on vs openly and clearely: And he sheweth the Sacrifice to be reuerenced, diuin unera reuerenter ostendens. Saint Ignatius spea∣keth S. Ignati epist. ad myrn. Ep. d Ro. plainely of Priests sacrificing. Sacrificium ffrre. Mssam celebrere: To offer Sacrifice, to saie Masse. And he assureth vs the Sacrifice is. Panis lstis, caro Christi Filij Dei: The heauenlie bread, he flesh of Christ the sonne of God. And Theodore∣us, writing against the Ebeonite Heretiks de∣ying Christ to haue a true bodie he saieth hus as Theodoret relateth: Eucharistius & ob∣tiones non admittunt, qud non confiantur Eucha∣stiam Igna▪ ∣pud h∣dor. in ▪ Dialog. 1. sse arnem Saluaetoris nostr Isu Christi, quae o peccatis nostris passa est, quam Pate suâ benignita∣ susitauit. They doe not adt the Eurist and bla∣ons, because they will not confesse the Euchrist to be e flesh o our Sauiour Iesus Christ, which sufferd for r sinnes, whome the fahe thrugh h goodness aised aine. Where we nde  of hrists Incarnation, and uing a true bodi d blood to haue impged this most holy acrifice, and such Sifing Priests: for e words and insituion of Christ, were so aine in ordaining his most sacred obation  his bodie and bood vnder the formes of ead and wine, and a perpetuall Priesthood  performe it, that except by deniall of a true die to Christ, there was no way laed open  impugne it. And therefore that most holy d learned Apostolike man largely there nfuteth those imaginarie Hereticks, pro∣ing Christ had a true bodie to offer, to su∣fer
in, to redeeme the world, and the holy Eu∣charist was the same. 5. S. Martiall hath deliuered this plaine∣ly before, saying that the Priests doe offe vpō the Altar the same bodie of Christ, which the Iewes crucified, And Christ so commaun∣ded. Saint Anacletus was made such a Massin Prieste by S. Peter, and as Protestants con∣fesse he declared how both Priests ād Bishop arnes & Magde∣urgenses i Anacl. were to offer this most blessed Sacrifice: Ana∣cletus sacrificaturus, ministros vestihus sacris indut ce testes & custodes sibi adibere ordinauit. Episcop vero vt plures ministros sibi in sacris faciēdis adiūga Anacletus being to offer Sacrifice appointed that M∣nisters adorned with sacred vestements, as witness and keepers should be admitted vnto him. And that Bishop in offering sacrifices should adde vnto himsel many assistants. And of Saint Alexander Pop liuing and learning his diuinitie in this Apo¦stolike age, they acknowledge▪ In miss, pri dem in lexand. quam patereur: vsque ad haec ver, hoc est corp teum addiit, ad memoriam passioni Christi incula∣dam: In Eucharistiae Sacrificio aquam vino admisce▪ voluit, pccata Sacrificio, de Eucharistia lquens, d¦leri it: ideo passionemin missâ recitandam institu Rationem effectus huius sacrificij, hoc est, quod peccat expet, adicit, dicēs: quia corpore & sanguine Christ in Sacrificijs nihil maius est: In the Masse, the day be¦fore he should suffer: vnto these words, this is my bod he added, to inculat the memorie of Christ his passio In the Sacrifice of the Echast e would haue wat ingled with wine. He sued (speaking of the Ech¦
ist) that sinnes by the Sacrifice were abolished: ther∣ore he instituded the paession to be saied in the Masse. He added further the reason of the effect of this Sacri∣ice, which is, because it wipeth away sinnes, saying▪ ecause in Sacrifices nothing is greater then the bodie nd blood of our Saiour. 6. Concerning this mattr these Prote∣ante conesse of Saint Sixtus hi Successour  the See Apostolike▪ Sacra vas e qi prter id i Six cros ministros attingert, prcepit▪ Corpore xlince no fieri iussit▪ vt, cte, in munione Euchari∣iaete ancretur, ordinait. Missan non nisi in ala lebran esse constitui▪ He commne that  t sacred ministers shuld touch the ho vesslls, he red that the Corporall shoul e ade of line th. He ordained tat, Sāctus, ould   the Communion of the Eucharist. He csitd that asse should no to  celbrated ut on he ar▪ Of helesphorus his Sucessour, they ai▪ es  Ths∣phor. missas celebranda in die atilitio Christi san , alijs dieus ant om deitertiam Mssam cele∣ rhiuit Gloia in exls De▪ i Mssae canē∣m praecepit; He ordained ree Masss to  tlbrae∣ n the daye of Christ his Natuitie h prhbited t in other dayes any shold sai Mass before tre  ke, he cōmaūded, Gloria in excels  to e song in  Masse. Of S▪ Pius Pope thy write aerdti∣ negligenius idm i i▪ Miss sarafacinbus p statu, i quis per imprudenti de sangine Christ ffunde∣ n terram, paenitentiam agere dies 40. si super al∣e, dies re▪ si super linteum substratum calii, ▪  si super alud litum, dies 9. Therms ouat
mplo dedicauit. Multa verae pietatis opera, in agr Christianae Ecclesiae fecisse perhibetur: Martyrij glo∣riam anno Domini 159. in sui sanguinis ffsion tum demum adeptus: He appointed punishmens for ist which should negligently saie Masse; that if any y imprdence should et fall any of the blood of Christ on the ground, he should doe penance for 40. dayes; if on the Altar, . dayes; f on the cloth laed vner the Chalece, wer daies; It on any other cloth, nine dayes; the whote Bathes of Nouatus he consecrated in∣o a Church. It i saied he did many workes of tru ietie in the field of the Christian Church▪ and at las by te shedding of his blood in the yeare of our Lor 159. egained the Crowne of Martyrdme. Therefor we nede not doubt, but all these liued som time in the first hundred of yeares. Saint An¦cetus being immediate Successor to S. Piu as he must eedes be consecrated a Massin sacrifiing Priest, (not others once imagine to be otherwise consecrated, or to giue con¦cration, and confirming and vsing the sa manner and Order, not onely in Orderi Pests, and other inferiour Ecclesistic persons but Bishops▪ Archbishops, and M¦tropolitans, as his Predecessours had dn and so consecrating 17. Priests,) must of n¦cessitie persuere in this doctrine and pr¦ctise: especially when his immediate Su for Saint Soter by all testimonies made D¦crees about all things concerning holy Mass Altars, and other necessaries and that, Sa¦cns habeat secum adiutorem Sacerdotem. vt nu
ost cium potuque siue qudlibet minimum sumptum Missae facere praesumat. vt nullus Presyrerorum Mis∣sarum solemnia celebrare praesumat nisi duobus praesn∣tibu, sibique respondentibus, & ipse tertius aeatur, qui cum ab o dicitur Dominus vobisum, & orte pro e, aptissimè conuenit, vt & ipsius respocatur salu∣tationi: He that sacrifseth hall haue with him a riest for h Coadiutor. That none hould presume to ate Masse after that he ad takē either mete or drinke, r any thing else how litle souer it be. That no Pric hould presume to saie Mass solemely without two ere present to answere him, and him selfe to be coun∣ed for the third person, because when he saieth Domi∣us voiscum: Our Lord e with you, and Ord pro r me: praye yea for me. It is most conen tha swere e made to his salutation▪ 7. Thus Protestants and ors acknow∣edge, and yet do write of them and thei redecessours, that they were holy mn and lartyrs, and that the Church of Rome wa en in puitie of doctrine and Religion, and t the Prists the were Sacrificing Massing riests, the Bishops conscrated no others, e publike Seruice and Sacrifice was Mass▪  such manner as now s vsed. And S. El∣erius which mmedately succeeded, Sa ter sent such Massing Bishops and Priest ther into Britanie, to performe the general onuersion thereof, there being no other to  sēt or imploed in such, or any like affaires  Priestlie office and function, in that holy d vnspotted time of Religiō, by all cōsents.
And the chiefest Protestants, euen Matthew Parker their first new fashioned Archbishop of Canterburie with others both acknow∣ledge that Saint Peter and Saint Iames said Masse, and that the Order of Sacrifice, or Masse, Missa si dictâ, continued from Christs Institu∣tion thereof n the Primatiue Church, aboue two hun∣dreds of yeares vnto Pope epherine his time, and then e alered i to a more excellent matter and forme. A Christi rimo isituto, ducentis amplius annis in pri∣miti Ecclesia durauit: done eam Zpherinus 16. Romanus Pontisx, quorundans suasionibus ad pulchri∣orem materiam formā{que} mutare voluit. This Pope S. Zepherine, was after Pope Eleutherius, and Pope Victor, by whose meanes, and holy sa∣rificing Bishops and Priests sent hither by there authoritie, this Kingdome of Britanie, wholy and generally was conuerted. And these Persecutours of holy Masse and Priest∣hood consesse that the very same Masse and celebration thereof, which Christ instituted and hi hige Priests and Apostles vsed, was still praced without chang, and alteration. And the hang ād mutation then in the e of Saint Zepherine made, was for the more perectiō thereof; For comming to set downe what this changing was, they finde it to be no other, but that he decred Christ blood should not be consecrated in Chalices made of wood, but better matter. Christi sanuin Consecrationē in vitreo Calice non ligneo, vt antea▪ sin debere flatuit: He decreed that the Consecration of the
blood of Christ ought to be done in a Chalice of glasse, not of woode as it was done before. And ater Viba∣n the first of that name immediate ▪except Calixtus) Succesor to the same Saint Z∣pherinus, (by these Protestans them ) thus declared and ordained that  should be of Gold or siluer,  in po¦ter Churches. Nè vasa  au auea, ut argē ea, aut stannea in  gem dixit. We are assured bth by  all and particular Testimonies that  Priests came hither, and that the  Church serice was Mae and o the Laine tongue. So had our old  by Pro∣testants suppressed▪ in the  of his booke, as Abbo  in publi Parliament in the first yeare of Queene Eli∣zabeth. Saint  Protestants so also consessing witensseth that r itans in this their Cōuersion, had  Aars for Masse in their Churches, ad su ests. 8. The Protestanes also propose vnto vs an Author so Reurend and aunt in this our Britanie, that n the yeare of Christ 366. his Homies or Sermons were vsually and publickly reade in th Churches here, where∣n, is most manifestly and particularly pro∣ed, that the publick seruice was the same Masse which is now vsed, the Priests su Priests, and Christ really present, ere, worshiped and praied vnto there, as by the same antiquiie is uident in these words
thereof: In the old lawe faithfull men offered to God diuers Sacrifices, that had foresignification of Christs bodie, which for our sinnes he himselfe to his heauenly Father hath since offered to Sacrifice. Certainely this Housell, which we doe now hallow at Gods Altar, is a remembrance of Christs bodie which he offred for vs, and of his blood which he shed for vs: So e him∣selfe commaunde doe this in my remembrance. Once suffered Christ by himselfe, but yet neuerthelesse, his suffring is dayly renewed at this Supper, through my∣sterie of the holy Housll. In that holy Housell   one thing in it seene, and an other vnderstoode. That which is there seene hath bodilie shape: and that we doe there vndestand hath ghostly might. The House is dealed into sondrie parts, hewed betweene teach, and sent into the bodlie. Howbeit neuerthelesse afte ghostlie might it is all in euery part. Many receiue tha holy bodie, and yet notwithstanding, it is so all in euery part, after ghostlie mysterie. That innocent lambe which the old Israelits did then kill, had signification after ghostlie vnderstanding, of Christs suffering, who vn∣guiltie shed his blood for our redemption. Hereof  Gods seruants at euery Masse, Agnus De qui ollis  mundi, Miserere nobis. Where we finde a mos plaine and generall concordance between the old Primatiue Christian Britans, and th Priests of the Roman Church at this time,  this holy sacrificing Massing Priesthood, and Masse, by this most auntient and venerable authoritie euen as it pleaseth Protestant to publish and translate it. For wereas they  that Aelfricus in the yeare of Christ
translated this Authour out of latine into the Saxon language, it is a thing most certaine and vnquestionable with all men that know antiquities, that these words which I haue cited from these Protestants, be not the Saxō and old English speach in that time. 9. Our old Cildas also (as the Protestants propose and recommēd him vnto vs) teaching (as they also hold) that our Christian Britans neuer changed, or forsoke the Apostolke Christian Religion which they receiued from Rome by Massing Priests, and Prelats their Priests from the beginning saied Mass, and offered sacrifice on holy Altars, and their Altars were the seate of the  sacri∣fice. Sacramundo corde reque consici. Sacrific∣es inter altaria states. Sacrificium erences, ala adsistunt, sacra altaria, Sacresanta  coelstis sedes; And their Priests thn were conse∣crated to such holy function as now they are Benedictione initiantur Sacerdoum man: The ands were consecrated, and they which did daily offer the holy and heauēly sacrifice of Christ blessed bodie and blood at, and vpon the sa∣cred Altars, consecrating it by conserating words Mundo ore conleiunt, must needes haue such Priestlie power, giuen vnto them in their Consecration, not hauing any such before, to consecrate, and offer Christs most Sacred bodie and blood in the holy Masse, as is con∣tained in the most old and auntient orders of Consecration in those times, and these word
of Bishops consecrating Priests, first praying for them that are to be ordered Priests: run atque unmauū mnisterij tu donum custodiant, & Pole Romanum in conse∣cratione Presbyte∣rorum. per obsequium ples tuae, panem & vinum in corpu & sanguinem Filij timmaculatâ bendictione transfor∣ment. That they may obserue the pure and immal guift of thy mysterie, and trough the obedience of thy people, they may transforme bread and wine by the  maculat benediction into the bodie and blood of thy sonne. VVhich prayer being ended, the conse∣crating Bishop this proceedeth: Expletâ aute oratione, accpns oleum sanum, faat crucem su ambas manus eorum, dicens Consecrare & sanctifire digneris Domine man istas per istam vnctionem, & nostram bene∣dictionem, vt quecumque consecrauerint, consecrentur: & qucunque benedixerint, benedicantur & sanctificontur in nomi∣ne Domini Iesu Christi. Hoc acto acci patenam cum obla, & Calicem cum vino, & de , dicens: Accipite potestatem, offerre Sacri∣ficium Deo, Missa{que} celebrare tpro vi∣uis, qu pro deeris in nomine Domini. And the prayer being endea, taking the holy oyle, he shall make a Crosse  both the hāds of the Priests, saying, Thou shalt vouchsafē Lord to conset
and sanctifie these hands by this holy yntement, and our benediion, that whatsoeuer they shall censrat, may be onsecrated: and whatsoeuer they shall lesse, may be blessed, and sanctified in he name of our Lord Isus Christ,  is finished e sall take the patten with the hoste, nd Chale with the wine, and shall giue it  saying. ake yea power, to offer Sacrifice to God, nd saye masse as well for the liuing, a r the dead in the name of our Lord. his is the most auntient Pontificall which tiquitie hath preserued, and delered vnto  vniformely agreeing with the now vsed ntificall in the Roman Church which dif∣eth not from, but ageath with the most ntient Manuscript Copies and Examplare tant in the most renowned Labraries. And erefore our old British Antiquities deliuer Manus antiq. & Cap in . Histor. . Arthur▪dip. ap Cam. & . for a receiued Tradition ād custome here, in other places for the Priests thereof ac∣ding to their Office and Consecration, to er Sacrifice both for the liuing ād the dead, t consuetudo, tam pro vi, qu defunctis ho∣ Do immolare. And this was so generall a ued truth, and custome in the whole ch from the Apostles time, and Tradition.  them▪ that is was, and iustly, adiudged
Heresie (the Protestants thus acknowleging,) ngl. Pro∣test. in Feild. oke of the Church . 3. ca. 25. pag. 8. Ciu . pag . to denie it: Aerius condemned the custome of the Church in naming t dead at the Altar, and ffering the Sacrifice of  or them: and for this his rash and inconsidera oldnesse, and presumption in con∣demning te esall Curch of Crist,  was  o emned So S. Epiphanius, S. Augustine, Iso∣dorus, Damacnus, and others demonstrate▪ 10. And for England where holy Priests an Priestood are so greuously persecuted, w thus sucssuely and without any Interrupti deduce it in a times and changes to the daies. Saint Peter a massing Prieste, Bishop and Apostle preaching, and consecrati Priests, and Bishops here could consecrat a ordaine no others, but such as were to be  his owne Order. So Saint Cement his confe¦sed massing, and Sacriicing Sucessor, dir¦cted to sed such into these parts. Pope Ele¦herius who by his holy Mission of Prie and Bishops hither, conuerted this king¦dome, being also a Massing Priest and Pop could send no other Pests, but such. And  Churches and sacrificing Massing Altars e¦ctd in them all to such vse, and end, con¦sed by all wriers Caholis, and Protesta doe so demonstrate. All agree we ad qi essesse  Relig and agreeme  vntill Docllian his Persecution, whn ¦og others persued, the holy Pr Massin Prists (as Saint Gildas before  proued and others )
Electi Sacerdotes trucidati: and they which esca∣ped, did as often as they could sai Masse, in places whether they fled to escape dager, as in Scotland, whether the Persecution did not come, t not being vnder the Romans. We had many Massing Priests as Saint Amphlabus▪ odocus, Priseus, Calanus, Ferranus, Am∣ianus, Carnous, d others who ed thith ut of our Britanie, now England, and were maintained by king▪ Crathen to ae Masse, ho founded all things, necessarie to such urpose, Churches, Altars, Chal, Pens, adlesticks, and all things else. Se Crathlintus ex, sacram Antistitis adem, munibus ornaui an∣ssinis, Hect. Boeth , 6▪ Sco. Hist. fol. 99. . Calicibs, Patenis, Candelabris, alsque s∣lib ad sacrorum vsum commodis ex argeno aur∣e fabrefactis, Altarique cupro & are clao prouen s ad cax agris in sacrae aedis vicin constitu: But  King Crathline adornd the Sacred house of the Bis∣p with most ample gifts, Chalices, Patens, Cand∣stikes, and such like necessaries made of ler and ld for the vse of the Church, with an Altar also e∣ased in Copper and Brse▪ to doe all which he allotte yearely rents of the fields neare adioyning to that s∣a house. 11. Britanie after this vntill the Pelagian resi was quiet for Religion, and the pe Caelestine, who was so arre a Massing pe and Priest, that although the Masse wa pisticall before (as he Protestants acknow∣lge) yet he added the Introi, Graduall, sponsorie, Tract and Oetorie vnto it,
strictly commaunding, that Priests shoul knowe the Popes ano ad e sent such Ma¦sing Bishops and Pest, with them ino the kingdom  gd Sotland, and   troum , responsorium, ra &  insruit: atque vt  code  Caones scirent, are prcep Cermanm in , Palladium in Scott,  Prium cum quod  in iberniam,  P¦lagianas aerses  Eiscopos misi: Caelestin d ade to the  all asse the Introite, Caus Respnsori, Tra and Offertorie: and be stric cmmaunded that the Priests should knowe the Ca of the Bishops. He sent Bishops ermnus into  Paius into otland and Patricius with one Sege into reland, that they migt extirpate thēce the P¦gia erisse. All m acknowledge that these w Massing Priests and Bishops, and that t conecrated Such in great numbers bot England, Scotland, and Ireland▪ Neus¦uing neare, or in the time of Saint Patri writeth thus of him, Ordinauit Episcopo tre fexagint quinue aut amplius, in quibus spitus   rat, Psbiteros auem vsue ad tra  init: He conseraed more then 365. Bihops, whome wa the spit of our Lord, but Psts ¦cd 000. And of The diuers wet so a as to Ameria, d there eecued their Pri¦e Oder, n oering the sacred bodie a¦blod of Christ at Mse on consecraed  ar in one place of America, were luing  the time of Saint , (
is life and trauailes allmost 1000. yeare ast) 24. Priests which were Saint Patricks isciples, daily hauing Mase amng them, nd others in other paces. Immolant agnua maculaum: & mnes ad communionem venbant entes. Ho sacrum corpus Domn, & Saluatoris s∣ite sanguinem vos in vitam ternam They sacri∣ed the immaulate Lawbe and all came to the Com∣union saying. Tae yea this bodie and blood of our d and Sauiour, which will be to you lse euerla∣g. And to manifest vnto all the vndoubted uth of Saint Bndans trauaies and rela∣n of these things, i is set downe in memo∣ble Antiquities, diuers hndred of eares fore the Spaiards or Porugals enterance to America, that there it was thus Prophe∣ally reuealed vnto him: Post  Anneru cul dlarabitur ist ter vestris Successous,  Christianon superenei  After  yeares this land shall be discouered  your Su∣urs, wh Prstion hall come  the Christians▪ 2. That S. German▪ S. Lupus, S. Seue∣, S. Paladius, and all thse which S. Ce∣ne that Massing Pop snt hither into Br∣ie were Massing Bishops and Priests, as al∣ tht were coscrated by thē, is confes∣ by all. VVe haue the most worthie wi∣e of our old Btish antiquities written ut 1000▪ yeares since, intituled euen by estants glosses, Prima nstituti & varuas siasti seruitij. The first Institution and varetie ch sruce. The Masse and publike offic
which in the time of S. German, S. Lupus, and S. Patricke, was by thē, and others vsed in Britanie, Scotland, and Ireland, was the ame, which was composed by Saint Marke the Euangelist. And thus it continued here so long as the Britans ruled, and after they were expelled by the Saxons, with the which remained in wales ad Cornewall, and the Scots and Irish. All our Archbishops both o London, Yorke, and Carlegion, Theonus▪ Dubritis, Sampson, Dauid, and the res with all Bishops and Priests vnder them wer sacrificing and Massing Priests: Altars fo Masse were in all Churches, and one t th sacrifice of Christs bodie and blood was offe¦red in Masse. All which appeareth in ann histories, and their destructiō by the Paga Saxōs in all Churches doth witnesse it. Eccl & Ecclesiastica omnia ad solū vs destruebā, Sacerd¦es iuxta aiaria trucidabāt. They destroyed euen to  ground the Curces and all Ecclesiasticall tings, te illed the Priests at the Alars. Such were the Pr¦lats, Bishops, Priests, Abbots, and their Se Monasteries▪ and Churches, where Ma was vsed in great number and aboundanc in euery age y the rotestants confession o. Goo∣lin. histor. Eccles. Matth. Parker Antiquis. Britannis. pag. 8. Tot tantqu Presrorum, Mnacorum, Praesulu Episcoporum, Ecclesiarum, Coenobiorum, Sdium vetusta nomina quae quos saculo extiterunt: Se  old names of Priests, Monckes, Prelats, Biso Churches, Monasteric and Episcopall Ses were in ¦uery ge extante▪
13. And among the Saxons, the first Chri∣stian Priests that were permitted here, were Massing Priests; their Sacrifice, was the sacri∣fice of Masse, their Church at Canterburie had Altars, and Saint Lehard the Bishop, (which came hither with the Fenth Catho∣ike Christian Ladie Queene Bertha, married o the Saxon king Ethebert of kent,) and the Priests with him, were all Massing Priests, and aied Masse in that Church allotted to thē to hat end. In antiquissima sancti Paesulis Marin Ecclesiâ sub vrbe sua beato Pontisie Lethard praesi∣ente, frequentabat Regina Missarum & Oraioum acra, cum suorum coitum samili Christian:  the auncient Chuch of Saint Mrtin citu∣d neare vnto the citie, Lethardus the Bishop gouer∣ng it, the Queene wih her Christian samil heard asse frequently. This was diuers yeares before aint Gregri (that most holy and arned ope, Gregoris magnus Romanus omnium ontisi∣m Romanorum doctrin & vitâ prstantissimu: egorie the greate a Roman, the worthiest of ad the oman Bishops in doctrin and life, As Protestants le him) sent Saint Augustine with his holy mpanie hither: and king Ethelbert as these otestants saie by the persuasion of Queene rtha his wise and her Clergie receiued the ole Roman Religion: Conursus vxoris Ber∣ persuasione Ethelberius Rex Romanismum susce∣. And Saint Augustine brought in among her things, Altars, holy vestiments, and ssel, Relicks, bookes of Ceremonies, the
Sacrafice of Masse, and in a Councell assem∣bled, commaunded the Roman customes to be obserued euery where. Introduxit Altaria, vestimenta, Vasa sacra, Reliquias, & Ceremoniarum codices. Prinum corum Studium erat cira Missarum oblationes, Sedes piscopal, ac deimas, & coactà Syno do, mādauit Romanas viq▪ csctuins sruari. And the Masse which S. Augustin brought hither fom . Gegoie was the same which S. Gre∣goe and the Roman Church then vsed, and the present Rman Church and Catholike of England doe vse at this time, and the very same which was in vse before Saint Gregorie▪ He onely add vnto it, as the Protestants themelues confesse ew things not questione by them, as : Lord haue mie pon  to be diuers times ierated which they con¦fesse the Greeke Church dd vse long be∣fore. He added also Disque ostros in uâ pace di∣onas: And dspose our dais in thy peace, And com¦maund, we e deliuered frō euerlasting dam∣natiō, and numbred in the sock of thy elect But the Protestants allow and vse all these, a also (where they sae he hadded) Alleluia som times to be vsed, (it being vsed in Scripture▪ and the saying or singing our Lords praye Pater noster ordained by Christ, and by Prote¦stants confessō vsed in Masse in the Apostle time. S. Aldeme our holy Bishop and Coun¦trie m, who caleth S. Gregorie his Ma writeth that he added in the daily Canon▪ w the solenities of Mase are celebrated in the C¦alogue
of tyr S.  ioyning the  S.  S. Anassi▪ and thers. Q  Agatha & Luia  &  noster Grego n Canone  m∣a celertur opulsse  ∣logo  gaa, Luci▪ VVhich S.  and Pedagoge regorie▪ s  in the dly Canon  them after this mner  Catalogue  Anastsi, Agaa,  Saint Gregorie added no  to the holy Masse. For hereby  the whole Canon was vsd before▪ an  Saint Agata, and Saint Lucia, to the ohr holy women Martyrs, proueth enough,  is Act to be holy by former authotie and xample, those oer holy Martyrs being by he Church of Christ placed and  in he Canon before S. Gregorie hs  and S. gatha and Sin Lucia in the Caders of Protestants  acknowledged and  holy  Saints, and Martyrs. For Sai Gre∣oe to ioyne Saints to Saints in honour, ould e no nsainctlike Act in him. Nither h Priests of Engand doe dserue suh pe∣alies, punishments, and pesuciors▪ as hey nae long suffered and now full oe nde or execising their most honourabl Functi▪ n offering their most diuine Sacri∣ie instituted by Christ, offered by him, his oly Apostles, and in all Ages after, in this so
approued and receiued Order and forme o Masse, vntill it was first here disallowed by king Edward 6 a child, and made so penall by Queenes Elizabeths strang proceedings in such affaires. For king Henry 8. though o∣therwise a most strang Enimie to Christs oly Church, yet concerning Massing Priests an Masse, he ordained by his laste will and Testa∣ment, as is still to be seene (Mass) That they should continue in England to the nd of the worl willing and charging Prince Edward his sonne, a his Executors, all his heires and Successours, th should be kings of this Realme, s they will answear before allmightie God, at the dreadfull daie of Iudgmēt that they and euery of thē drese it performed. Neithe euer was there in England before that yo kings time, or in any other nation (whe Protestant Communion hath in these thei late daies opposed against Catholike Rel¦gion, Priests, and Masse) any other Churc seruice, but Catholike Masse and Sacriie founde, heard off, or remembred in Anti¦quities. 14. Therefore seeing the honour and dig¦nitie of holy Priesthood, in the respect o the most sacred and heauenlie oblation, an Sacrifice, it offereth vnto God omnipotent the highest king, and king of kings, of hea and the vniuersall created, for the liuing an deceased, is most certainely and without a doubt or question, so great and glorious,  dare not least we should be Traitours
God, harken vnto thē, but lament their dole∣full estate, who declare and persecute it, as a traiterous estate to Princes on earth, which hould subiect their wills and lawes to the will and lawe of God, reuerence and honour, and not so vly vse, his dearest seruants: for as Iùstin▪ Dial. cu riphon. Saint Iustine with all others affirme. Neque à quoquam Deus hostiaes accipit, nisi à suis Sacerdotibus: God accepteth Sacrifices of none, except of his Priests. ō potestas (saith Saint Ephrem) inffaeilis, quae Ephrem. de Sacerdot. in nobis dignae est habitare, per impositionem manuū Sacrorū Sacerdotum. ô quam magnam in se continet profunditatem formidabile & admiaile Saecerdotiū? O inessabile power, which vouchsafest to dwell in vs by the imposition of the hands of the holy Priests. O what great profunditie doth the dreadfull an admira∣ble Priesthoode containe. Sacerdotium (saith Saint Chrysost. hom. 5. de verb. Isaiae vid Dom. Engl. Pro∣test. Pref. booke of conscr. & apud Goell. Defens. of Hook. pag. 87. 88. 89. Exam. pag. 15. Deens. upr. pag. 16. 117. 276. Chrysostome) principatus est ipso etiam regno ve∣nerabilius ac maius. Priesthood is a principalitie grea∣ter and worthier then a Kinome it selfe. Protestats before by publike, regall, and all power they contend to haue declared that these, Priests were euer in Christes Church, and were euer∣more had in reuerent estimation. To which they adde of Priesthood with like allowance: It is a power, which no Prince or Potentate, King or Cesar on earth can giue. By blessing visible elements, it maketh them inuisible grace. It hath to dispose of that esh, which was giuen for the life of the world, and that blood, which was powred out to redeeme fes. To these Persons God imparteth power ouer his mysti¦call bodie, which is the societie of soules, and ouer that
naturall, which is himselfe, a worke, which antiqui∣tie calleth the making of Christs bodie. 15. And this wil be sufficient, to excuse sacred Sacrificing Priests pesecuted for iu∣stice, and lae the guilt and offence vpon their vniust Accusers and Persecutours. For besides this most honourable sacrificing office, and ministring to the sicke (in daunger to die) the Sacrament of Extme vnction, deliuered in holy Scripture, and euer vsed n the Church of Christ, and Protestants neuer question it, a a matter of State, there is nothing in Priest∣ly Oder, but these men in some sense or o∣ther would haue vsed by ther Ministers▪ who vse preaching, baptizing, marriage euen of themselues, forgiuing of sinnes in personall absolution▪ euen without any penance at all, ther by them enioyed, or their Conitents performed or vsed▪ VVhich power they  and  and se∣crating , rists ād Deaons i . Priest. laime a giun vnto them by their Protestat Bishops in their admiance to their ministrie in these his words: Receiue the holy Ghost, whose snnes thou dost forgiue, they are forgiuen; and whose sinn thou dost retaie they are retained. Take thou autoritie to preach, the word of God, and to ministe the oly Sacraments in this Congregation▪ where thou halt be so appointed. And they a confidenly ve it with this further publike warrant and di∣retion Proe. comun  T∣tul. visit. of the sicke. in their Communion booke in this manner▪ The sick person shall make a speciall Con∣ssion, if he feele his conscience troubled with any weightie matter, after which Confession the
Priest shall absolue him after tis sorte. Our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath lef power in is Church to al solue all s¦ners, which truely repnt and beleeue i him, of his great mercie forgiue thee thine offences: and by his authoritie committed to me, I absole thee from all thy snnes in the name of the Father, and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost. Amn, All this is, or should be vsed by Protestant Ministers, by their most publike, Regal. Parlamētall, and whatoeuer authoitie their Religion is set out, and supported by So not onely permitting, tollerating, and allowing, but directing, and commaundng to be done and practised, much more then any Priest presumeth or Pope licencet, o euer licen∣ced to be vsed or attempted, yea more the any Papall power can so warrant▪ no penance enioyned, how many or greuous soeuer the sinnes committed and confessed be: no satisfa∣ction or restntion once thought vpon, how great and manifold soeuer the offences Iniu∣ries, damages, and wrongs were. Felonyes Rebellions, Treasons and all things else how vile soeuer they be are quitted and freed both by ministeriall and legall allonance, and are so iudged and ended, as if they had beene not the least punishable offence.
16. We must free Catholike Priests, and all others of their Religion from such presump∣tion, practise, consenting vnto, or approuing sinne. No absolution without penance and sa∣tisfaction with vs. And yet we with the Church of Christ and holy Fathers saie of holy Priesthood euen in this respect: Nè mihi Chrysost. Hom. 5. de verb. Isaiae vidi Do∣minum. Ephrom. l. de Sacr∣dorio. Gregor. Nyssn. o∣rat. de Baptism. orat. n os ui alios acerb. i∣dicant. Gild. l. de Exci. Bri∣an. Isichius in Leui. l. 6. . 12. Victor Vt∣con. de persec. Vandlia . narres purpuram neque Diadema, neque vestes aureas, vmbrae sunt isthac omnia, vernisque floulis leuiora. Nè inquam, mihi narres ista, sed si vis videre discri∣men quantum absit Rex à Sacerdote, expende modum potestatis vtrique traditae, videbis Sacerdotem multo sublimius Rege sedentem Regiue thrnus rerum terre∣narum administrationem sortitus est, nec vltra potesta∣tem hanc praeterea quicquam habet authoritatis: verùm Sacerdoti thronus in coelis collocatus est, & de coelestibu negoijs pronūtiandi habet authoritatem. Quis haec d? ipse coelorum Rex: Quaecunque ligaueritis super terram, runt ligata & in coelis: & quaeunque solueritis super terram, erunt selta & in coelis. Deu ipsum Regule ca∣put Sacerdotis manibus subiecit, nos erudiens, quod hic Princeps est illo maior; speake not to me of the purple or Diadem, and glden robes, all these are but sha∣dowes, and more vaine then spring fowers. Speake not to me of these things, bu if thou wil see the power giuen to them boh, thou shall see the Priest sitting much higher in igitie the the King. The throne of a King is chosen for the administration of earthlie things: nei∣ther hath he any other authoritie besides this: but to a Prieste a throne is placed in heauen▪ and he hath au∣thoritie to iudge of heauenly businesse. who saieth this? The King of heauen himselfe. Whatsoeuer yee shall
nd vpon earth shall be bound also in the heauens▪ and hatsoeuer yee shall loose on earth, shal be loosed in e heauens. God hath subiected to the hands of the riests the Regall head, theahing vs, that this Prince greater thē that. The thron, power, authoritie nd dignitie of Priests is aboue Regall, this leth onely in things temporall, the Priest  heauenly. The king of heauen hath giuen his power to his Priests and hath subiected e Regall head to th hands of the Priests, eclaring vnto vs that this is a greater Prince en he. Neither hath he giuē such power vnto ngels or Archangels as to Prists▪ Saerdotib um est, vt potestatem habant, quam Deus neque Chrysst. lib. 3. de Sacerdo∣tio. ngelis neque Archangels datam esse voluit. Neque im ad illos dictum est: Quaeunque alligaueritis in rrâ. erunt alligata & in coelo. Et quaecunque soluereti  terrâ erunt soluta & in oel: It is giuen to Priests, at they shall haue power, which God would haue uen neither to Angells nor Arhanges. For it is not ed to them: Whatsoeuer you hall bind vpon earth, all be bound also in heauen: and whatsoeuer you shall ose on earth, shall be loosed in heauen. The power f binding which is in Princes, is onely ouer odies, that of Priests ouer soules, and exten∣eth to heauen Habent & terrestres Principes vin∣li potestatem verum corprum solum: Id autem quod Chryso. ibide. o Sacordotum vinculum ipsam eiam animam con∣ngitatque ad coelos vsque peruadit. Terreane Princes lso haue the power of fetters, but of the bodie onely: ut that which I saie, the bonds of Priests toucheth the ule it selfe, and passeth vnto the heauens. This is
the doctrine deliuered by Christ, so expn∣ded both by the Grke and ine Church, in Britani and all places with all persons, all good Emperours▪ Kinges, and Prince of England▪ and which the whole Chri∣stian worlde hae euer profssed and de∣clared. 17. And the world will witnesse euery where against persecuting England that the Cathlik Piest, and Clergie thereof, be as lened ly, religious, and as sa fm ex∣ception, and eue haue bene since they were persecuted mber for number, as any ∣gi all Chstian reowned Naions▪ And of all Engh people they hae most oo∣red, n east  offended their Pinces, or  Ccrie. Most of them be, and  of noble or : famili, and al bred  and discended, that thy hae  at home and abroad without  or hue▪ They  left , places i  and  Engld, , and all, They  Bshoprcks,  or  but leaue  to thr  any  Tribes, or  From their Ad∣uersaies. The Catholike of nglan  these o  more the Pro∣testants doe  or many ▪ Presenta∣tions and  which beoged  their, o ll into the lapse for the Protestant
Bishops to bestowe as thy will. Ou Catho∣lik Priests haue no wiues or children to trouble the Cōmon ealth withll Parihe nd paces of birth be not postered or char∣ged with any uh nr Schoerships or Fel∣owships in Vnuersitie, which are not or∣ained for Minister children▪ Tenans are ot put out of their liuings, nor the Church Riches and liuings horded vp beggars made ut not releeued, for any  of Priests r Priests fauourers. All that be of their ac∣uintance in Religion are instructed in dutie o God and Prince, and be most true and utifull Subiect to heir king n all occasiōs, hse cānot be the  of a bad Religion. 18. Their Religion vnder preene where∣f they are presecuted, they haue ofē in pub∣shed bookes proued in euery point and rticle to be onely true, and now doe cō it t to pese which will so demonstrate,  euery Article of th Pseutours Re∣ion, euen by the Apostle, and Apo∣olike men, and Fathers of that age, in hich they liued, holy Scripturs, and Pro∣stants themselue▪ and they haue often ade most earnest and hūbe petitions (late∣ pblished in print) to the Parlament , publickly euen with vnequall condi∣ons to themselues and their caus dispute d mintain all and euery part of the do∣ine they hold and  against the best arned Protestant Bishops or  their
Persecutours. And yet if mē would or should speake, doe and proceede consequently, (as they which tak pon them to be teachers, in∣structours, and Reformers in Religion of all men in all times, and places, ought, and with∣out vtterly disabling themselues therein are bound,) A Prieste or Bishop that saieth Mase, absolueth penitents, or reconcieth men to the Catholike faith▪ by power autho∣ritie, or Iurisdiction from Rome is no more guiltie, of so ermed treason, by the Parlamēt Protestant Acts and lawes, then all▪ other Ec∣clesiasticall Parlamēt, an. . Elizab. Statute. 2. Parlam. 1. Iacob. Parlam. . Carli. person, dacons or others inferiours, Re∣ligious of what name, title, or degree soeuer, as Sub∣deacōs, Acolythists, Exorcists, or others wan∣ting all such power, as is euident by that o Queene Elizabeth, receiued and prosecute by king Iames ād king Charles. Priests there¦fore are not, or should not be so prosecute for their Priestlie functions. God forbyd any English minded man or louer of Englan should thinke or wish it a thing so penall an capitall for any Inhabitāt of England or En¦glish man to be borne, abid or remaine in hi beloued natiue Countrie of England, thoug he wee a meaner and more vnworthie ma then any meanest Priest of England is. 19. The Protestants thus deriue our Cler¦g Succession. Th first Parlament of Q Cmbd. Annal pag 36. izabeth being ended, the Oath of th Queens supreamacie was proposed to the Ca¦tholike Bishops▪ and Ecclesiasticall Persons
many as refused to sweare, were depriued their benefices, dignities, and Bishopriks▪  Rulers of Churches, 50. Prebendaries, 5. isters of Colledges, 12 Archdeacons, 12. anes and 14. Bishops, all that then emai∣, except one Anthonie Bishop of Landaffe  calamitie of his See, and ome commited prison in the Tower, Fleete, Marshallea,  kings Bench. How reuerend and learned n those of our Clergie then wee, and they ch immediately ioyned with the and cōti∣d a Successiō of renowned Clergie Priests,  memorable bookes and writings of very y of them in defence of Catholike Reli∣n, ther honour therby registred among  must worthie writers and their glorie in whole Church of Christ, are warrant to posteritie. I am an vnworthie witnesse,  many older, and of more frequēt conuersa∣ with Priests then I, can better testifie that hin 25 yeares of the Reigne of Queene E∣beth, when so many from our Seminaries  come hither, that at one time there were  of them Prisoners in the Marshallea, and y of them put to death. There were then y of Queene Maries Priests depriued and secuted by Queene Elizabeth, still liuing,  labouring here in this holy caue, and st of them were very learned, as they were , which were sent from our Seminaries to plie their number and ioyne with them, as ers published bookes, from them, their
petitions and challendges of dsputatiō bo in the Marshal sea and Tower, and their co¦futing and confounding their Protestant a¦uersaries doe sufficiently estifie. 20. W may take some proportion of th labours and worhinesse ere, if we call  minde the sae of such affair in Engand,  the time of Qeene Elizabeh before ay R¦ligious men came ther, the Clege Prie heing here almost alone without other asi¦stance) and compare it with the present c¦dition, when so many Orders of them ¦sides the old Clergie, be and haue bene h diuers yeares, and we shall not finde feaer the auntient Nobilitie, scarcey more of  chiefest gentrie and not many more othe Catholikes now, then in those daies. T which be old may remember it, others  Iudgment in histories and Records may fi it so, the time of Persecution threatning  commaundeth vnto me silence in particul Yet all that are so desirous to examine  . Annl. p. 27. 21. 22. 36. 39. Rows preface hi∣storicall in Quene Elbeth. Stowes . yeare of Q. . comparison, may easily prooue that mo I am not in error, if they will but read  Protestant Historicall relations, Cad Howes, Stowe and others, they will se w Pollicie was vsed to put downe Cathol Religiō, ād by thē it will also appeare how ¦tholike Coūcellours were moued Cathol Iudges, Sherifes, Iustices of peace and oth were displaced, and Protestants put in t places, fiue nowe Protestant Lords made, i
ounties Protestant Bgesses chosen for rlament; Plures è Protestantibu datâ operâ, è nitatibus tum è iuitatib, & Burgis fuisse electos: ny of the Protestants of set purpose were chosen one  Counties as well out of Cities, as Townes. And hough the Caholike Bishops were also cluded from that Parlament, that so Pro∣tant Religion might be the more easily es∣lished by Parlament, yet the Poestant tie exceeded onely in Sixe voices, the Ca∣olikes, who there profsed themselues to uch, and all for the most part of them for ong time remained so. The Queene her∣e openly then in that Parlament protested,  he would neuer vexe or trouble the Roman Ca∣ikes, concerning any difference in Religion. ough we found and felt since how farre he  altered frō this thē her intetion ad deter∣natiō. What I haue saied is found to be true all the opinion of friends and aduersaries. 21. And this sufficiently argueth a true, st lawfull, and neuer defectiue knowne suc∣ion of worthie and learned Priests of the ular Clergie, who defended in all times holy caue of God in this our Countrie,  conserued still the Catholike Religion in hearts of the Nobilitie, gentrie and others ll sots. No Order of the Religious can  so. The Iesuits came first of all the Reli∣us hither, but they were not heare before.  went away againe, not returning of some res. The Dominicās and Franciscans came er before the Benedictins, but neither they
nor any other id, or could make this clai For our secular Priests haue (as is be often declared) continued alwaies their s¦cesion, and in this last persecution she the way, and broaken the ice vnto all  Religious by their Mission of Priests hith from their Colledges beyond the s which I speacke not with any intention dishonour our Reuerend Religious, bu honour the Secular Clergie and to defend Authour of the Protestās Plea and Petition t Parlamēt for Catholikes: Against whom, a cert Benedictine Moncke in his prefatorie Ep to Saint Augustins Meditations, Soliloq and Manuall translated by him into Eng writeth: I here neuer hath beene any Interrup Benedictine Preachers and Teachers in England  to prooue this his assertion, he reciteth ¦ly three such Monkes▪ Abbot Fecknam▪ a Moncke (to vse his word, whole name was ¦rie Stile as I take it.) Who though bli bodie yet cleare sighted in minde in the Ch Westminster publily and outely confuted in an  none Sermon, a precedent railng Sermon  D. Horne by appointment of the Councell s in the eares of the people to disgrace the profes Monckes, and Catholike Religion, and D. S Buckly: and he seemeth to be offendd  the foresaied Author of the Plea, as thoug had done wrong to their Order in supp¦sing D. Abbot Fecknam his nam say e might haue remembred the famous and
Abbot Fecknam. But aas this is farre frō accu∣sing truely that Author, or excusing him∣selfe, or prouing what he said before. For that Author in that very booke maketh twice an honourable memorie of that noble Abbot, in one plce setting downe to his honour the Orat he made in the first Parlament of Q. Elizabeth in defence of Religion. And hat Author of the Plea was so farre and till is, from being otherwise then a lo∣ing friend and no enimy to the Order of aint Benedict, that in the time of Q. Eliza∣eth before any Monckes came hither. He rote in honour thereof in his Apologie for Catholiks to the Councell of Q. Elizabeth Apolog. pst o Q Eli∣zab Coun∣call prius. an. 601. pag 83.  these words, The onely order of Saint Benedict, so nowned in our Nation, hath had abou twenti kings d Emperours, aboue an hundred grt Princes, many opes, sixteene hunded Archbishops, 4000. Bishops, 000. famous men, and 15600. most honourable ca∣nised Saints. Thus farre ranne his penne with eir Moncke and most commender Trithe∣ius. 22. When the first Moncks from Spaine me hither about the death of Q Elizabeth, d had no Faculties, this Author at the re∣iest of one of them his deare frēd, wrote ef∣ctually to the then Archpriest Maister ack well, to giue them ordinarie Faculties, hich he did, and these were the first Facul∣s, that Congregation in my memorie (as e Moncks themselues confessed) had in En∣gland
vntill more ample were afterwards and otherwise procured vnto them. And that Au∣thor hath euer liued ingreat peace, loue, vni∣tie, and concorde with all the worthiest o that, and other Orders of his acquaintance▪ but to that excepting Moncke he as no knowne. And now at this time and  afte both that Author, and I that write as his an their louing friend, will be so farre fro being an enimy vnto the Moncks of Sain Bendicts Order, that except their auntien learned Moncks Historians and such as the accompt most fauouring to their Order i matter of Historie shall offend and be again them, of this time, we will not offend the bringing nothing but from these men the selues and such. But yet that assertion, T there neuer hath beene any Interruption of Benedi Preachers, and teachers in England, cannot be s by Moncks, and this Moncks owne conf¦sion For if it had bene a thing lawfull fo Moncke or any Catholke to goe twise  day to a Protestant Church, where once  goe i dmnable, such a Moncke could not  a tru Preacher and Catholike, otherwise a learned man vnder pretente to cōfute Pro¦stants by word or writing, might goe to the Churches, and deliuer themselues from p¦alties. Further this Moncke as they confe went soone after out of England, and died  of t. Abbot Fecknam by Moncks, and  ded in the yeare 1585. And then by
Monckes and all mens confession, there liued here in England of the old English Monkes onely F. Buckley no great Preacher or learned man So this onely such Moncke could not abe that proposition: There ner hath bene any Interruption of Benedictine Preachers and teae in England. One no Preacher cannot be such, and in the plurall number. 23. And that Author made no more men∣ion in particular of Benedictine Moncks, hen of other Religious Orders, all o them ailing in learned Priests, except of he Cler∣ie to heach and defend true Rigion. He id not meane, there was not any one either earned or vnlearned. If any such thing is here printed, it was the printers and not his oing: neither can any of equal Iudgement inke otherwise, for that authour well kew at Father Sebert Buckley was thē liuin, he eing well and very louingly acquaine with aister Sadler, and maister Mahu Priests hich first ioyned with that F. Buckley, hea∣ng from them the manner thereof. And he ath seene vnder one of their hans, more en euer he wrote or held: That it was oubted whether that father Buckley was a rofessed Moncke or no: and the reasons of ch doubt are thus set downe, written with ne of their hands Quia hoc neque per scripturam, e publicum Instrumentum, neque per testem, quirem sam nouerat probatum vidit: Because he had no ne this prooued by writing, or pulike Instrument,
nor witnesse that knew it. This is more then my friend needeth in this matter, or this case now requireth. And he euer thought he was a Monke. So doe I, and honour the Order of S. Benedict and all other Religious Orders, and loue and honour all my worthie friēds and acquaintance of them, as much as euer I did, which some of them know to be very much, and as they can wish or desire, and euer shall: yet, verita vincit. THE VII. CHAPTER. That the Catholikes of England taugh and directed by such guides in Religio as our Priests be, are not to be perse¦cuted but protected, defended and im∣ployed, as true and faithfull subiect in all things. 1. THe honour, dignitie, glorie, and re∣nowne of consecrated Bishops, an Priests, being thus great, ample, excellēt an necessarie among all true beleuing Christian Instituted and ordained by Christ himselfe ā according to his owne most holy Order, fo all professours of his faith and Religion in a
nd places, vntill this life and world is to end: and that the publik Sacrifice they offer and celebrate, is so holy, and heauenly, the Reli∣gion generally which they professe, preach, and eache vndoubtedly true and that the highest spirituall power by which their Mis∣sion is so certaine, so antiently honourable, and honoured, and without manifest and vn∣excusable offence both to the greatest autho∣ritie on earth, or in heauen so to be receiued, and reuereuced of all▪ twyce happie, blessed and honourable is then your state, cause and condition, Most Noble, and Renow∣ned Confessours of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, and other Catholike laie∣tie, of England, in chosing in such times, such guides of your soules, professing such Religion, and, which giueth you a se∣cond, and greater felicitie, to be for such a cause so persecuted in your Natiue Coun∣trie, of your owne Countriemen, kindred and called Christians. 2. To suffer Persecution for Iustice is a blessednesse, and bringeth to eternall blisse; But to endure it in such measure, and manner as you haue done and doe, it will eleuate you o the highest and neuer fading ioyes; your osse may be of temporarie: but your pur∣hase thereby will be of much better and euer uting things. Terreane glorie, flattering and
deceitfull honour, is often valued, bought, and solde, at too deare a rate, but that which Persecution for the cause you suffer in, will for euer endowe you with, will farre exceede the worth of any price you can bestowe to possesse it. Id enim quod in praesenti (saieth . ad Cor. 4. Saint Paule) est momentaneum & leue tribu∣lationis nostrae, supra modum in sublimitate aeter∣num gloriae pondus operatur in nobis, non con∣templantibus nobis quae videntur, sed quae non vi∣dentur. Quae enim videntur, temporalia sunt: quae au∣tem non videntur, aeterna sunt: For that our tribula∣tion which presently is momentarie and light, worketh aboue measure exceedingly an eternall weight of glorie in vs, we not considering the things that are seene, but that are not seene. For things that be seene, are tempo∣rall: but those that be not seene, are eternall. And c. 5. in an other place he addeth: Scimus enim quoniam si terrestris domus nostra huius habita∣tionis dissoluatur, quod aedificationem ex Deo habemus, domum on manufactam aeternam in caelis: For we know that if our earthly house of this habitation be dis∣solued, that we haue a building of God, a house n made with hand, eternall in heauen. Your liues, your lands, your liberties, honours, and what soeuer in things temporall, and to be forsakē, or spoyled and depriued off, deare vnto you, were lent, giuen and but for a time bestowed vpon you, as also his most pretious blood and life was after many other Miseries sustai∣ned for your Ransome, ād Redēption, by him for whose right and cause you stand and pa∣tiently
endure afflictions for the same so often so much, and so long time. Thus he himselfe founde the way and returned to his owne kin∣gedome and glorie immense and eternall, and he said, at his departure hence to his heauenly throane vnto his blessed Apostles, Disciples, to you, and all that shall serue, and suffer for him, to the end of the world. In domo Patris mei Io 1. mansiones multae sunt, vado parare vobis locum. Et  abiero & praeparauero vobis locum: iterum venio & accipiam vos ad meipsum vt vbi sum eg, & vos sitis, Et quo ego vado scitis, & viam sis: In my fathers house there be many mansions: I goe to prepae you a place▪ I come againe and will take you to my slf, that where I am, you also may be. And wither I goe you knowe, and the way you knowe. Euery Mansion in heauen in the howse of God, farre surpasseth all Pallaces and pleasures of this world: and to be with Christ in eternall glorie, infinitely exceedeth all delights and honours here. And the glorie and reward of them that come nearest to Christ in sufferings here, ll be he highest and greatest with him there in loyes for euer. Ecce Tabernaulum Dei cum hominibus, & Apoal. 1. habitabit cum eis, & ipsi populus ius erunt, & ipse Deus cum eis, ert corū Deus. E absterget Deus omnem Lachrymam ab oculis eorum▪ & mrs vltrà non erit neque luctus, neque clamor, neque dolor erit vltrà, quae prima abierunt: Behold the Tabernacle of God with men, and he will dwll with them. And they shall be is people: and he God with them shall be their od. And God shall wipe away all teares from their
eyes: and death shall be no more, nor mourning, nor crying neiter shall there be sorrow any more, which first things are gone. All you shall, or can giue, or raher lend, for such a recompence of sure Inheritance for euer, was giuen you by him, that, for but lending him the same againe for a time, will with so great honour returne you all againe ya an hūdred for one. Omnis qui reli∣querit domū velfraes aut sorores aut Patrem, aut Ma∣trem aut vxoem, aut filios aut agros, propter nomen Matth. 19. meum: cenplum acpit & vitam ernam posside∣bit: Eury one that ha lft house, or bretherne, or sisters, or father, or mother or wife, or childrne or and for my sake: shll eeiue on hundre fold, and shall posses life euerlasting. 3. You that be great and Noble, and Noble Cathokes be not troubled or not enioying such mpoall and fading honours in Court or Countrie which your equals or inferiours enoye, (not being of your Reli∣gion, but rather prsecuting it are exalted) or that you haue lost or let any such, for this holy cause. If there was danger you could not exercise uch without offence to God, or hurting his Sruants; it is your honour, and securitie in conscience to want or loose them▪ Qui amat pericuum in illo peribit. Coringrediens du . 3. as, non habebit success: He that lueth danger, shall peish in it. A eart that goeth two waes, sall not haue Successe, And God hath prouided better Leuenancis, and Offices for you in a bettr kingedome. Iudicabunt Nationes, & domnun∣tur  3.
populis. & regnabit Dominus illorum in perpetuum: They shall iudge Nations, and haue dominion ouer peoples, and their Lord shall reigne for euer. Let it be your comfort, that neuer had the, that if you had enioyed such, you would, as your holy Religion teacheth you, haue performed them to you▪ vttermost power, to the honour of God, our king, and Countrie: as they which had and lately loste them did, euer most faith∣full and dutifull to our king, in his com∣maunds, and as readie as any Protestants, to doe him all seruice and supplies they could by themselues or other meanes they might, or were able to procure, and more then diuers Protestants did well approue, or commend in them for such duties, which all Catholikes without exception generally, and vpon all occasions in their degree most readily, and willingly performed. Let it not be a griefe vnto you, that you are driuen out of Parla∣ments, whose chiefest and onely members you with the Catholike Bishops, and some priui∣ledged Abbots, were with the kings of En∣gland, long before any howse of Common was in power. Your lawfull and iust refusal of an Oathe made, and, as it was expoun∣ded by king Iames, by greatest spirituall po∣wer vnlawfull to be taken, giueth you lawfull excuse from all assent to Acts of persecution, England euer was a noble Nation, your Aun¦cestors and of vs all that be truely English, came by all Antiquities from a most honou∣rable
people and progenitors. Saint Grego∣rie the great so called, and in great parte our Apostle and Father in Christ, compared them not onely for name, but endowments of nature, vnto Angells: and the liues and con∣uersation of many thousands of your holy Auncesters, (when England was holy En∣gland) were Angelicall: and you now with other Catholikes made for profession of your faith, a spectacle to the world Angells, and men, shall 1. Cor. 4. be for your rewarde, thus perseuering, as An∣gells Matt. 22. of God in heauen, sicut Angeli Dei in caelo. Your renowned Priests haue giuen you example in the highest degree of perfection in this kinde and cause in forsaking all at once, and with his Apostles following Christ, with an Ecce reliquimus omnia & secuti sumus te: Behold we haue Matt. 19. lf all things, and haue followed thee; So depriued and persecuted onely in England, because we are Priests and borne in England. Be not a∣fraide to followe such guides, with some ha∣zard, losse, or diminution of your honours, esteeme with carnall mindes, Ritches, and re∣uenewes for the like cause, ād for that you are Catholikes of Englād. For others both Priests and Catholikes not of England, are other∣wise entertained here in England, not onely n times of peace, but in times of open hosti∣litie betweene England and their Countries from whence they are: of such by some, some Ielousie might be made; of English Priests and Catholikes, no possible place is left to
inuent the least suspition. Our Priests haue so long and voluntarily professed pouertie, and liued therein, that no man of vpright Iudg∣ment can thinke they would disorderly or vniustly seeke for Ritches, with hazard of their friends. And if his Maiesty should al∣lowe to laie Catholikes, which receiue no spirituall good from Protestant Ministers, to paie Tithes to others of their Religion, this would not be offesiue to God, nor hinder, but rather further a noble great Nation, hauing now more neede of chaste then married of such sorte. 5. If we had not preferred our loue of En∣gland before all earthly things, no doubt but both the Bishop of Calcedon, and diuers re∣nowned Priests of England might haue founde farre greater amitie, fauour, and wordly preferment in other parts, then they could euer expect or looke for in their owne Countrie. We neuer had hand or singer in these late warrs, and contenuons, or euer aue the least occasion of any daunger, diffi¦cultie, or hazard, our dearest Countrie is sub∣iect or exposed vnto, as diuers publick Pro∣lamations and other Protestant Relation▪ publish. We neuer were of Counsaile, or ac∣quaintance, with any great Councellour, o Courtier dead, or liuing full at this time, o any such, which (as many Protestans or uri∣tans haue thought) did not good offis to this kingedome, We were, and are
to all mē or womē, Courtiers or others, which haue bene suspected to haue furthered the driuing  the French Bishop, Priests, Ladies, and others from the Queene, and placed thē∣selues  riends for them, the beginning of daba ewith France▪ We are as Innocent of the breath with Spaine, either Maiage or peace, o with any other Prince. We haue not disturbed it, at ome or aboad. The rebellion of the Netherlanders▪ Hungarians, Austrians, , Luatians, Sileians, Moranian, French and whatsoeuer Prote∣stants against their Princes were by Prote∣stants, not Catholiks allowing but allwayes condemning them. As in England in all op∣positions of Parlamentarie Protestants a∣gainst our king hindering or witholding du∣ties from him, euen in his times of needs and wants, the Catholiks euer yelded to, and most readily performed all, allthough by Parla∣ment they were charged with double subsi∣dies, without any freedome or release of any penalties for Religion: All Priests of the Clergie, Bishop and others haue vtterly con∣demned the deniers of rendring such duties nto our King, and haue what they could persuaded the Recusants (as the refusing Pro∣testants were therin termed) to performe such onds, true offices, and obligations of louing subiects. An although our Catholikes hau ne sondry waie greuiously persecuted for their Religion: yet ▪as the world knoweth
they haue most dutifully, much aboue others honoured our king, supplied his wants with free, and lardge Donations, and Contribu∣ions, when their persecuting Protestants in great number, and of great quaitie made de∣iall No man except maliciously and chri¦dishly very falsely imagining slaunders, and ntruthes against thē, may surmise that these en can be vnmindefull of the dutie and obe∣ience of true Subiects to their Soueraigne. 6. If there be any either in Court or Countrie bearing the name Catholike, gaining not loong, rather honoured then isgraced, preferred then persecuted) gi∣en to libertie and disorders, (such as this rotestant time can easily bestowe and are) and spirituall discipline may not be llowed to kepe such in dutie, o leaue the ame Catholike, Catholike Relgon doth ot and cannot answeare, or make accomp or such▪ Commonly they be men risen o ell reared vp by fall of Religion, and Reli∣ious howses, which complaine most against Catholikes, who finde proects of seae, a∣ing to loose that, they so easily gt. Bt , there is no danger towards them by English Catholikes, for many or most o hem that be landed mē, haue also such land, They be not Catholikes, (which euer defend ld and vnuersall Right) which ae to be sea∣ed in Innouations: Nouelists and louers of ingularities, are the most dangerous in such
respects. Catholikes of England, of all sub∣iects thereof, euer were and now be most ob∣seruant of, and keeping their Protestant Princes lawes: seldome is, or can a Catholike be charged with the breach of any, excep concerning matters of Religion, where i breaketh the lawe of God and his holy Ca∣tholike Apostolike Church. To keepe th lawe of the king of all kings, and his kinge¦dome, must not be termed or thought a breac and violating of the lawes of any priuat earthly king or kingedome, all which mu subiect themselues to that omnipotent king and his gouernment. And to make all sure  Catholikes defence in this cause, we wi briefely examine all Articles now questione betweene Protestāts of England and thē, an prooue in many of these Artices (as they a enacted by Protestāts) that the Catholike do¦ctrine is farre more agreable and profitab for publike peace, vnitie, obedience, an concord in a good ciuill Monarchicall an Rgall gouernment, then that which Pro¦testants hold, and practise, and would for Catholikes vnto; and not any one Article  Catholike Religion, repugnant vnto, or pre¦udicing the Rule and gouernment of a mo worthie king in a noble Nation.
THE VIII. CHAPTER. That euerie Article of Catholike Reli∣gion is more agreable with the best temporall gouernment, then those of the Protestants; and that a Catho∣like keeping his Religion, as he is boūd to God, so he cannot be vndutifull to his temporall Prince and Coun∣trie. THe first fiue Articles of their Reli∣gion, (they consisting onely of 9. ade by a few Protestants in fwerth, or fth yeare of Queene Elizabeth the old age  this Religion) doe containe nothing con∣ouersed betweene them and vs, but were ade against new Sectaries so soone risen vp mong them. The Sixth and next Article in∣tuled, Of the sufficientie of the holy Scripture for luation, Denieth the vse and necessities of raditions not written in Scripture, and de∣eth many bookes of holy Scripture to be ch, and some of them, as the booke of wise∣ome, and of Iesus the sonne of Sirach, con∣sting most of morall precepts, and cōmand∣ments
(as all men knowe) are most needful in all kingedomes for ciuill regimēt. So tha whatsoeuer of this nature is cōtained in thes two morrall bookes and tenne others whic they likewise reiect, or in holy Apostolik Traditions, are wanting in these men, and th Catholiks embracing both hose bookes an Tradiiōs exceede them in all temporall obe∣dience and dutie in this respect. 2. After this, vntill we come to their nint Article stiled, Of originall or birth siane: they finde no difference in this point. But in thi Article they thus enact: There is no condemna¦tion for them that beleeue, and are baptized: By which allowance and Decree, the way to all disobe¦dience, fellonies, treasons, and sinnes what¦soeuer is set open to all Protestants, whic saie they beleeue, and are baptized, and  no Treason, Rebellion, contempt of gouern¦ment can condemne them. Catholikes be o the contrarie profession. And this Protestan libertie and disbedience is further warrante and allowed in the next Article but one: (th immediate next Article after by their gloss not at all or litle differing rō Catholiks▪) Fo this their eleuēth Article intituled of the Iustifi∣cation of man: Thus declareth: That we are iustifie by faith onely, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort▪ But this is not very whole some comfortable, or secure for any king, king∣dome, common-wealth, that it should giu libertie to all offences, not to be puished b
God at all, nor by Prince if they can secretly be committed and concealed. God forbid any bearing the name of of Catholike should euer hold or followe such doctrine. And these Protestants Religion in the next Article of good workes, giuing litle or no efficacie vnto them, will not hinder them in matter of disobe∣dience, to God or Prince. So doth their 13. Article, wherein they sae, that, workes such as we commonly call among others, obedience to kings and Rulers, good works, Done with∣out the grace of Christ haue the nature of sinne. By which if any man all into drunkennese, cō∣mit Adulterie, Fornication, Perue, or any mortall sinne, which depriueth of grace, he may or rather must make rebellion, commit reason, or whatsoeuer wickednesse he can, otherwise containing and abstaining from such horrible wickednesse, such his refrai∣nings from those Impieties, haue the nature of sinne. 3. The 14. next Article against workes of supererogation, bringeth into like desperate∣esse. Their 15. and 16. Articles haue no peuliar difficultie. Their 17. next Ar∣ticle is intituled of Predestination and Ele∣ction: And it deliuereth plainely that their doctrine and Religion therein euen, a it is receiued among them, is so perilous a thing. That for curious and carnall persons, to haue continually before their eies the sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downesall,
whereby the diuell doth thrust them into desperation, or into rechlesnesse of most vncleane liuing no lesse pe∣villous then desperation. These Articles if w should goe no further, are sufficient to di∣swade any man, desiring to be a true subiect to God and his Prince, from embracing the Religion of Protestāts. But to proceede to the end of them: the 18 next Article, of obtaining eternall Saluation onely by the name of Christ: hath nothing in question. The next 19. And the 20. Articles the first intituled, Of he Church: And the other, Of the authoritie of the Church: Are able to destroe all Obedience, Re∣ligion, and dutie. eyther to God or man▪ for the first defining to those of their Religion, and declaring that, The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faitfull men, in the wich the pure worde of God is preached and the Sacraments be duly ministred according to Christs ordinance, in all those things that of necessitie are requisite to the same. And making the Patriarchall Churches of Ie∣rusalē, Alexandria, Antioche, and Rome the chiefest commaunding Churches, by which all others must be ruled, and gouerned, and yet it is concluded of them all, that they Hau erred in matters of faith. They take all true faith and Religion, (which of all things must be most certaine) out of the world. For no man will or can be of a Religion, which is assu∣redly vntrue, nor worship him for God, which will so decee vs. And to no purpose to finde truthe, but to confirme Infidelitie it is
said in the 20. Article; The Church hath power and authoritie in Controuersies of faith: the Church is a witnesse and keeper of holy writ. For if the highest Iudge, witnesse and keeper of holy writ, and hauing authoritie in Controuersies of faith, being to be obeyed of all, may thus erre, all men should thereby be bound to such error, and eternally to be damned. No man would be a Christian with such condition. No man is likely so to be a true subiect: for the cer∣taintie of Religion, which causeth certaintie of obedience and dutie to Princes, being takē away, the other will faile. 4. This they confirme in their 21. Article, Of the authoritie of generall Councels, making them though they represent the whole and vniuer∣all Church, to haue no more power or cer∣tainetie. And if we should followe the Par∣aments of our Countrie, much vnequall to he whole Churches Iudgment, we should inde that they haue often and most inexcu∣ably erred by their owne Iudgements and confessions. And So the Conclusion may be uch as Athests and prophaine contemners of Religion and all dutie to God, Princes and thers in authoritie, vse ād practise. Their 22. Article intituled, Of Purgatorie, denying the octrine of the Roman Church concerning urgatorie, Pardons, Images, Relicks and nuocation of Saints, must needs occasin ore neglect of good life and dutie, then the Catholike doctrine. For first the deniall of
Purgatorie and punishment for sinne there after death, if it be ioyned with the Prote∣stant doctrine before, of sinnes forgiuen by faith, and ministeriall absolution from all guilt or paine thereby, denying any tēporall paine to be inflicted for, or due for sinne, ouerthroweth all penalties, penance or punishment, any Consistorie, ciuill or Ec∣clesiasticall should inflict for any offence. For where none is due, or to be done, in iustice it may not be inflicted. And this is more thē any Pardons or Indulgēce the Pope himselfe doth giue, or may vse: euery preten∣ded beleeuer or Minister taketh more autho∣ritie vpon him herein. No vse of holy Images or Reliks vsed by Catholikes can be offen∣siue in any Cōmon-wealth, but it rather tea∣cheth honour and dutie, which the Protestant opiniō doth not. He that will haue or vse res∣pect, doe honour or reuerēce to the represen∣ting signe, or part of any▪ will rather doe it to him they represent, then he that denieth it. And for honour to Saints, he that will not honour them in heauē and glorie, will sooner be vnmindefull of their dutie to persons which are to be honoured on earth with ter∣reane honour, then he that honoureth and praieth vnto Saints in glorie. 5. The next Articles 23. and 24. haue litle belonging to this purpose. Their 25. Article of Sacraments, saying they be Cer∣taine sure witnesses, and effectuall signes of grace,
and Gods good will towards vs, by which he dot worke inuisibly in vs. Of seauen Sacraments, they onely retaine two, and the first of thē is Baptisme, which they minister to infants. They leaue here the whole life of man, and all states without grace for their callings: They barre the married, frō the grace of wedlock or matrimonie: Ecclesiasticall persons, from all grace in Orders: all that liue, from the grace of Confirmation; offendors, from grace by penance; Those that are sicke, from the grace of Extreame vnction. And for the Lords sup∣per, as they terme their Communion, holding that it doth condemne and hurt those that be in sinne, and neuer ministring vnto any but such as be of yeares subiect to many sinnes, not taking thē away by any other Sa∣crament or meanes, this cannot giue grace, but rather damnation to the receiuers, being in their owne Iudgment vnworthie Receiuers, and receiuing to their damnation, as they thus declare in their 29. Article. The wicked allthough they doe carnally and visibly presse with their teeth the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but rather to their condemnation, doe eate and drinke the signe or Sa∣crament of so great a thing. When Catholikes doe not communicate but after their sinnes be forgiuen in the Sacrament of Penance, Con∣fession, and absolution of all sinnes. So that by this Article Protestants haue no meanes to take away any, but Originall sinne in Inans,
none, for any actuall sinne, but without all grace are left alone to all vndutifulnesse, dis∣obedience and other sinnes, from which Ca∣tholikes are by grace giuen in Sacraments preserued, and made free, and abled to performe their dutie to God, and their Princes. 6. The 26. Article hath nothing belon∣ging to this question: neither the 27. Article following, of Baptisme, hath any thing needing examine in this matter. Their 28. of the Sup∣per of the Lord, denying Transsubstantiation and the Reall presence of Christ in the Eu∣charist, and consequently the reuerence and honour due therevnto, will not breede more honour to Princes on earth, they not hauing more title thē Christ, and by him, of honour. And they hauing before declared that the Sa∣craments be effectuall signes of grace, and here giuing all prerogatiue to Imagined faith, saying: The meane whereby the bodie of Christ is receiued and eaten in the supper is faith, they attribute nothing to any signe or Sacramen∣tall thing, and that Imaginatiue faith is a false faith. For except as Catholiks hold, Christ be truely present there, by the omni∣potent promise, word and worke of God, it is vnpossible faith should be a meane to re∣ceiue Christs bodie there. True faith is one∣ly of true, and not of false things. And so againe these men leaue to themselues no Sacrament to giue them grace in all their
course of life after Baptisme, when they are infants, and so must needs be disabled to serue God or their Prince as they should, and all men are bound to doe. 7. The 29. Article confirmeth this, as I haue deliuered before. And their 30. Article, of both kindes by their doctrine attributing all to their Imagined confuted false faith, con∣firmeth it also. And their assertion there, That the Cupe by Christs commandment ought to be mini∣stred to all Christian men: Is vntrue by their owne Parlaments, testifying that in the very Pri∣matiue Church, and allwaies it was often mi∣nistred in one kinde onely. Then no com∣mandment of Christ contrary, ca be brought to condemne all Churches, times and places for such practise. 8. Their 31. Article, of the one oblation of Christ finished vpon the crosse, denyng against the whole Church of Christ in all ages and places, and thereby depriuing God of all externall sacrifice, contrary to scrip∣ture and all authoritie, will not by the Rule of proportion giue more, or so much honour vnto earthlie kings then Catoliks doe, gi∣uing this tribute and Sacrifice to the king of heauen, and all that is belonging, or was euer giuen to their terrene Princes. 9. Their 32. Artice, of the Marriage of Priests, hath married this kingedome to many mise∣ries, it did not feele, or know before. The po∣steritie proceeded by such lawe, or allowāce,
hath brought vs to number hundreds of thousands more, then Britanie or England (if it had remained Catholike) should haue euer seene. Many thousands of these are left vnprouided for, and not a few are turned, or wrested out of their possessions to furnish these Ministers children, many of whom also haue fallen to such extreame wants that many of them haue taken desperate courses, which the Catholike practise and Religion would haue preuented. 10. Their 33. Article, Of excommunicate per∣sons, how they are to be auoided: Differeth not frō Cathoikes, but that Protestants commit the businesse of excommunication and absolu∣tion, to such as Catholikes hold, haue no power therein: when both Catholikes and Protestants confesse, that men assigned to such offices by Catholikes haue true, lawfull and vndoubted authoritie. 11. Their 34 Article, Of Traditions of the Church, is wholy Ceremonious by their owne expositiō, and no man cā be so singular in this or any such matter, but to thinke any particu∣lar Church or kingedome, the more it agreeth with the vniuersall, or most florishing Chri∣stian kingedomes to be more honourable and secure thereby, then such as fall into No∣uelties, and singularities. 12. Their 35. Article, of homelies, is nothing to this purpose. And their 36. Article intitu∣led,
Of Consecration of Bihops and Ministers, To whom they commit spirituall Businesse, prea∣ching, ministring Sacraments, and to excom∣municate, absolue, and whatsoeuer in like kinde they take vpon them to practise, is quite ouerthrowne by themselues, before in their 22. Article, where they saie that Order, as they vse it, Is no Sacrament or effectuall signe of grace, and hath no any visible signe, or ceremonie or∣dained of God. Then not receiuing or hauing grace, or such spirituall power, it cannot cō∣ferre ād giue it vnto others, or so exercise it, especially in so many things, as is required, from truely and lawfully consecrated per∣sons, such as they acknowledg the Bishop and Priests of the Roman Church to be. 13. Their 37. Article intituled of the ciuill Ma∣gistrate, doth giue to tēporall Princes suprea∣macie euen in spirituall things, and denieth all Iurisdiction to the Pope of Rome in thi Realme in such affaires. Of this sufficient is said before. And euery equall minded man may easily see, whether the temporall state of England was not more honourable, no∣ble, powerfull and secure when the Popes Iu∣risdiction in spirituall thinges ruled here, then now it is, and euer since it hath beene, and yet the Ritches and wealth which fell to our kings and Princes hands, and commaūde at such chang, were as infinite, and so great, that king Henrie 8 to haue licence or assent to suruy them, to make vse thereby, promi∣sed
(to speake in Protestant witnesses words) He would create an maintaine 40. Earles, 60. Ba∣rons, Edw. howes hi∣storicall pref. in Henr. . three thousand knights, and fourtie thousand souldiers with skilfull Captaines, and competent main∣tenance for tem all for euer, ou of the auntiēt Church reuenewes. Neither should the people be any more charged with loane, Subfidies and Fifteenes. Since wih time there au bene more statuts, lawes, sub∣fidies and Fifteenes, then in fiue hundred yeares before. Thus in the publicke Protestant Historie, in the yeare 1614. dedicated to our king now, the Prince Charles. Since we haue heard and tasted in Englād more matters of this nature. And yet if we should make but Robin-hoods penworthes and estimate of what hath beene taken away from holy constant Catholikes, for prossing their true and Apostolike Re∣lign, in the Reigne o Queene Elizabeth, king Iames and king Charles, euen since he married a Queene, prosessing for herselfe Ca∣tholike Religion, It will amount to more, then would haue deliuered a fare meaner king and kingedome, then ours of England haue been accōpted, from such complaintes of feares, wants, needs, dislikes, and va∣ria terein, if God had well approued of such proceeding, and such means of procee∣ding against his Catholike Seruāts, our kings most faithfull . 14. And the spirituall Supreamacie assu∣med by or Princes king Henry, 8. king Edward, 6 and Queene Elizabeth, confirmed
againe in this Article, had wrought so good effects in so short time, (within 4. yeares of Q. Elizabeths obtaining the Crowne,) that Protestants in such order, or rather disorder and number denied tēporall power in Princes here to put any Rebell, or whatsoeuer most greeuious offender to death, and they wēt fur∣ther affirming that Protestants might not fight in defence of their Countrie, though the Prince commaunded it: wherevpon they were enforced to declare in this Article, in this maner against such Protestant Brethren: The lawes of the Realme may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and greuious offences. Is it law∣full for Christian men, at the commaundment o the Magistrate, to weare Armes, and serue in the warrs. And there were among them teaching and holding communitie of goods, no theft, spoiling, or Roberie to be punished, no iu∣stice or lawe to be executed, or Oath to be taken in Iudgement, all Courts and Consisto∣ries to cease, as is euident by the two last Ar∣ticles 38. and 39. thus following, the former intituled Of Christian mens goods which are not com∣mon: And thus declaring: The Riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right Title and possession of the same, as certaine Anabp∣tists, (Protestants) doe beast. And the last 9 Ar∣ticle intituled, of a Christian mans Oath: And thus enacting and declaring: We Iudge tha Christian Religion doth not prohibit, but that a man may sweare, when the Magistrate requireth, in a cause
of faith and charitie, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching in Iustice, Iudgment, and truth. This suffieny witnesseth wat goodly cō∣mon-wealths-mē their Protestant Religion, eun  Infancie thereof, had brought forth in this kingdome. THE IX. CHAPTER. That true and obedient Catholikes, be the truest and most obedient subiects. 1. And in conclusion to come to the par∣ticulare Sate and Regalitie o our most honoured King Charles, and king Iames before him. There neuer were any Pro∣testants in England in their times, or before, which so truely and ducifully carried them∣selues, towards their Monarchicall true Title, Right, and Gouernment, as generally Ca∣tholik euer haue done, and will, as they are bound by Religion to doe. In the time of young king Edward 6. Cranmar and his Pro∣testant Complices by that young kings will, did their vttermost to extinguish and ouer∣throwe it▪ Queene Mary and her Catholike Regimēt did nothing against it, but reuiued, preserued, and confirmed it. In the Protestāt
reigne of Q. Elizabeth, Statuts were made to auoide or hinder it. It was enacted by Protestant Parlament. Capitall to acknow∣ledge it. Hales an Engish Protestant compa∣nion to the Scotish Knox, wrote a booke expressely against the Title of king Iame No Protestant answeared, confuted or see∣med to disalowe it. Onely Catholiks, Sir Anthonie Browne a Iudge, Doctour Morga Doctour of Diuinitie and Doctour Smith of the Ciuill lawe confuted it The death of that glorious Catholike Queene Marie Grand∣mother to king Charles, and true Heire of England was long sought, and after contri∣ued, concluded, and executed by Queene E∣lizabeth and her Protestants. Many worthie Catholicks here for her cause loste their liues, lands, and what they possessed. And all ge∣rally for suspition of fauouring her and king Iames his Title, and now of king Charles, were much persecuted. Yet no Persecution could euer force vs from that dutie to lawfull Princes and their Temporall Titles, but we euer performed it, though with daunger: as we haue, and doe, our dutie to God and the holy Church. No Catholike Clergie man a any time impugned it. 2. William Bishop of Chaleedon, and Richard now his persecured Successor main∣tained, proued and confirmed it. So haue all Archpriests, Assistants, and all in any autho∣ritie among the Clergie either by opinion,
word or writing. And some of vs that yet liue and write, (I might here catch hold of my owne penne with others) haue as expressely, plainely, and effectualy taught and publi∣shed it, as king Charles can desire. The Pro∣testant writers of their great publike Theater of grea Britanie, haue not giuen so great allowance vnto it. The Lord Verulam in his historie of king Henrie 7. hath not asscribed too much; a good Catholike writer would haue guen more, vnto it. 3. And to pu all out of doubt or question in this businesse because Pets and Catholikes are charged so much, for adhearing to Papall powe: in this they are assuredly knowne to be the truest Subiects to our king. For all Popes actually▪ or virtually, (in neuer appro∣uing or legittimating Queene Elizabeth) haue ratified and confirmed the iust Right of Scotland in ths kingedome and Ireland. And nothing can be saide to be more authentically approud▪ and confirmed by Popes authori∣tie, then Pope Innocentius 8. by his Papall Bull, (as our Protestants confesse, and relate Bulla In∣nocentij S. in ∣trim. Hen∣rici Regi Ang. 7. Ma. Parker. Antiquit. Brit. in . Merit. it) confirmed both the marriadge of king Henry, 7. with Elizabeth daughter and heire to king Edward, 4. and his most lawfull and Iust  to the Crowne of England. By all Titles and Rights, by Right of Inheritance, right of warre, right of marriage, right of E∣lectiō, and right of Parlament by hi Pontisi∣call power. Pa ad confirmandum illud legitimum
diuinitusque conciliatum, ac ad pacem, & tranquillita∣tem Anglorum maximè necessarium Matrimoniu, suis Bullis opus esse putauit, quia quarto cognationis gra∣du coniuncti nuptias contraxerunt. In quibus etiam nè authoritate carere videretur, regnum acquisitum Regē confirmauit, illudque iure hareditario, Iure belli, iure coniugali, Iure eleconis. Iure Senatus seu Parliamenti Anglicani, necnon Iure Pontificio atque suo ad Henri∣tum Regem septimum, eiusque Haredes in perpe spectare debere pronuntiauit: The Pope though i needefull by his Bulls to confirme that godly recon∣ciled Marriage, most nssarie for the peace and tranquillitie of English men, for that they ad married in the sowerth degree. In which also, least it may seeme to want authoritie, e cofirmed the obtained kingdome on the king, and declared it to appertaine perpetually to king Henrie the 7. and his heires by editarie right, by right of warre, by right of Marriage, by righ of election, by right of the Counell o Engli Parla∣ment, by Pontificall, and his owne right. This is so constringent and bindng an obligation of all English Catholikes, (attributing so much to Papall powr and Iuidiction, as Prote∣stants saie we doe, euer to performe all tem∣porall dutie and obedience to our king Charles, the vndoubted true lawfull Here of that so established king Hery to him and his heires for euer) that no Catholike man, al∣lowing of Papall authoritie can euer be iustly suspected of disobediēce or vndutifulnesse to our Soueraigne. And all the Protestants of ngland in their Religion, cannot produce
such a bonde, testimonie, or warrant fo their like fidelitie. 4. Therefore being thus clearely and ma∣nifestly made knowne, and euident, that the Religion of English Catholikes in euery point is most true, and holy, plensing to God, and profitable in temporall Regiment the sacred Orders of our Bishop and Priest so honourable, we hope our king and hi Councell hereafter will rather thinke of de∣fending then offending, protecting then per∣secuting K. Charles Declara∣tion to all Subiects An. 1628. them. And besides that is here saide his owne Regall declaration published with aduise of his Councell, calleth vpon him and them so to doe. For there, with that aduise h thus publikly protesteth, before God and m We all God to record, before whō we stand, that it  and allwayes hath bne our hearts desie, o be foun worthie of that Title, which we accompt the most glo∣rious, in all our Crowne, Defendor of the saith▪ 5. We must mst humbly remember vnto him the saith, whereof he is ilc Defender wherein there is so mch gloe it is tha onely true saith of Caoiks, as is here pro¦ued, and no other: true faith being but one  Ephes 4. Vnus Dominus, vna sides, vnum baptisa. One Lord one faith, one Baptisme. And this faith of Catho∣liks of Engand is the true Catholike, Apo∣stolik faith, and saith of the Church of Rom now, and when that Title, Defendor of  faith was giuen to king Henry the 8. befor
his lapse from the Church of Rome, by the Pope there, for defending that faith against Luther. The Title giuen must be interpreted by the giuer the Pope, not the receiuer, which could not receiue, but what was giuen. And this Title was giuen, receiued, and vsed, many yeares before Queene Elizabeth, or before her Religion, the Religion of English Protestāts now was borne, ād was vsed both by king Hē∣ry 8. and Queene Mary, not of this new Reli∣gion: wherefore we hope our king calling God to Record will rather defend the faith of his Catholikes, and them, then to suffer them to be thus persecuted; and his Councell which counsailed him in that declaration, will so aduise and counsaile him▪ And his Par∣lament, that could not finde their Religion 80. yeares old, will not hinder him in so good a deede, seeing it is certaine by their owne ac∣compt, that the Title, Defendor of the faith, is a∣bout 30. yeares older then their Religion, and so he cannot by that Title defend their faith. A non ens can haue no defence▪ It can neither be defended or offended. FINIS.
FAVLTS ESCAPED AND CORRECTED. Pag. 17. lin. 3. Theanus, for Theonus. l. 15. Tha∣diacus, for, Thadiocus. p. 21. l. 22. paene for, penè. p. 27. l. 28. most worthiest, for, worthiest. p. 39. l. 28. were, for, was. p. 42. l. 18. Phylosopho, for, Philo∣sopho. p. 43. l. 20. Huntingtonsyhre, for, Hun∣tington shyre. p. 47. l. 21. did increased, for and encreased. p. 51. l. 20. these man, for, these men. p. 52. l. 19. Missae Papisticae, for, Missa Papistica. p. 61. l. 19. Ireland, for, Iland. p. 63. l. 6. transla∣ted them, for, translated, p. 69. l. 22. euery one, for, and euery one. p. 71. l. 7. formae, for, forma. p. 80. l. 23. iurisdiction, for, iurisdiction on the Christians. p. 91. l. 18. after, S. Peter, adde, and to the holy Roman Church. p. 100. l. 25. make no Parenthesis. p. 111. l. 8. Omitt, Theodore∣tus. p. 120. l. 26. Omitt, Thou shalt. p. 123. l. 6. Amphilabus, for, Amphibalus. Some other faults of lese moment I haue not put downe here, they being easie for the Reader to cor∣rect in reading.
FAVLTS ESCAPED AND CORRECTED. Pag. 13. lin. 23. at which time, for, after which time. pag. 17. l. 3. Theanus, for Theonus. l. 15. Thadiacus, for, Thadiocus. p. 21. l. 22. paene for, penè. p. 23. l. 24., first to haue perswaded, for, be∣fore, to haue brought. p. 25. l. 5. as they most happely did, for, as soone after it most hap∣pely was. p. 27. l. 28. most worthiest, for, worthiest. p. 39. l. 10. S. Bonifacius, for, S. Benedict Bis∣cop. p. 35. l. 28. were, for, was. p. 42. l. 7. yea. 386, for, yeare 586. p. 42. l. 18. Phylosopho, for, Philosopho. pag. 43. l. 20. Huntingtonsyhre, for, Huntingtonshyre. p. 47. l. 21. did increased, for, and encreased. p. 51. l. 20. these man, for, these men. p. 52. l. 19. Missae Papislicae, for, Missa Papi∣stica. p. 61. l. 19. Ireland, for, Iland. pag. 63. l. 6. translated them, for, translated, pag. 69. l. 22. euery one, for, and euery one. pag. 71. l. 7. formae, for, forma. p. 80. l. 23. iurisdiction, for, iurisdiction on the Christians. p. 91. l. 18. after, S. Peter, adde and to the hoy Roman Church. pag. 100. l. 25. make no Parenthesis. p. 111. l. 8. Omit, Theo∣doretus. p. 120. l. 26. Omit, Thou shalt. p. 123. l. 6. Amphilabus, for, Amphibalus. pag. 125. l. 1. allmost 1000, for, aboue 1000. p. 150. l. 22. let, for, left. pag. 156. l. 18. many, for, euery. Some other faults of lese moment I haue not put downe here, they being easie for the eader to correct in reading.
