5422 99852042 17342
Iohn Hadlands advice: Or a warning for all young men that have meanes, advising them to for∣sake lewd company Cards, Dice, and Queanes, To the tune of the bonny bonny Broome. TO all men now. Ile plainely show, how I have spent my time, For I have wrought my overthrow with drinking Béere and Wine: I had no grace for to foresée my folly, 'till 'twas too late, But still did follow lewd company, I meane each drunken Mate. But now I may with sorrow sadly say, my heart is filled with woes, Had it not beene for the good Ale-tap, I had gone in better clothes. My meanes is spent and all is gone, and friendship now is growne cold, Alas, I'm comfortlesse alone, now I thinke o'th proverb old, Which saies as long as men have means they shall regarded be: But having none they lose their friends, and then comes misery. For now I may, &c. So long as I had money store, I had much pleasure indéed, But now alas I am growne poore, and doe want to serve my néed: But there is none will doe for mée, as I for others have done, For I was alwaies kind and frée, and that is plainely knowne. But now, &c. I have béene drinking oftentimes, amongst the roaring brave Boyes, Of Béere and Ale, and choice of Wines, which I have thought much ioyes. But now I finde it was not good to use such company. For now alas I have understood, it hath caused my misery. And now. &c. I had no power for to give o're, when once I did begin, I my money and run o'th store, to allow that deadly sinne: Alas I did not thinke that I should e're have suffered want, For I did cry hang't let money lie, 'tis vaine to thinke upon't. But now, &c. Whilst I had meanes I stil found friends which made a very faire show, But now I want, their friendship ends, and me they will not know. Which striketh terrour to my poore heart to thinke what I have béene; But now I suffer woe and smart even for my former sinne. And now, &c. My Host and Hostestes where I came, they would bid me welcome still, I was the man that had the fame, to call and bid them ll: If I bid goe then they would runne, to tend on me they were willing: And many a time it was well knowne, for two groates I paid a shilling. But now I may with sorrow sadly say, my heart is filled with woes, Had it, &c.
The second part, To the same tune. THeir words were swéet & I might gréet, my Hostes and her fine Maid, With a kisse or two when as none did sée't, but I have full dearely paid. For they would crave fine knacks to have, and I did give it them still. My meanes maintain'd them fine & brave, their minds I did fulfill. But now I may with sorrow sadly say, my heart is filled with woes: Had it not bin for the good Ale-tap, I had gone in better clothes. Sometimes an ell of Lawne or two, Cambrick or Holland most fine, For a favour on a Lasse I did bestow, to walke with me tot'h Wine, And there I have consum'd my meanes, in a most shamefull sort, Amongst those Caterpiller queanes, which grieves me to report. But, &c. You Gallants all, to you I cry and call, learne by me for to be wise. For I did climbe till I had catcht a fall; and now I cannot rise: Therefore I'm in a wofull estate, as all men plainely may sée: Now I repent but 'tis too late, for there is no remedy. And, &c. Now must I stand with my cap in my hand, and of a clowne favour crave, Whereas formerly I have had command of those were fine and brave: But now brave Gallants me despise, because that I have no meanes, Once more young men learne to be wise, hate Cards, Dice, Whores, and Queanes. For, &c. Iohn Had-land now some doe me call, and that name well I may have: I being poore they will chide and braule, and doe call me rogue and slave: Which is much griefe unto my mind, to thinke they should use me so, They'r harsh to me to whom I was kind, my friend is growne my foe. Therefore, &c. Thus have I told to young and old, that they may warning now take, For hereby me you may well behold, that friends will you forsake: When once that you grow poore and bare, and have no money to pay, Then followes misery griefe and care, and your friends depart away. Therefore I may with sorrow sadly say, my heart is filled with woes: Had it not bin for the good Ale-tap, I had gone in better clothes. R. C. FINIS. Printed at London for Francis Coules.
