6312 S118475 99853682 19076
A PROTESTATION Made and Published by Iohn Davenporte vpon occasion of a pamphlett Intitled A IVST COMPLAINT AGAINST AN VNIVST DOER published by a nameles person. Pro. 26.17. He that passeth by, and medleth with Strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dogge by the eare. Mat. 10.16.17. Be yee wise as Serpents, and harmles as Doues, but beware of Men. flying angel blowing a horn and carrying a quill pen Pranted at ROTTERDAM, by Isaac from Waesbergbe, upon the Steygher, in the Fame. MDCxxxv.
THe third day of this present month of Ian: 1635. New Stile, at noone, the fornamed booke was delivered into my hands, by a Reverent Brother, which when I had received, and read the title page, and considered the drift of the Publisher, I was amased to see my name prefixed and passages, which concerned me, Published, without my knowledge, and usshered with such harsh and unsavoury language, and Scriptures so wrested and missapplyed: nor could I have rest in my Spirit, till I had re∣solved upon this Protestation, which I now publish for the declaration, both of mine innocencie in this matter, and of my hearty dislike of this course. First, therefore, I doe solemniley and sadly protest these three following particulars. 1. That I know not, nor can yet learne, who is the Publisher therof. 2 That he had not my approbation, or consent to this Publishing of it. 3. That I doe account the injury done herein so greate, that I know not how the Publisher of it shall be able to make satisfac∣tion, other wise, then by revoking his books, burning the whole impression, or printing another, that may passe as publickly, as this is like to doe, in acknowledgement of his fault. Secondly, what motive set this Publisher upon this worke I know not nor, can I magine, unles I knew the man. If the arrow against the Seperation Stick still in his side,A Booke be made by Mr. Paget and cause him
thus to kick, and fling, let him know that recrimination is no APOLOGY,A Booke be made by Mr. Paget and books are better answered by arguments, then reproaches, and it is more wisdom to heale a mans selfe, then to wound another, to clense himselfe, then to besme∣are another. If some other, not ingaged in that quarrail, be the doer of it, I wish him to cōsider seriously, whether some by∣respect, or secret distemper have not biassed his spirit a wronge way, or imbittered it too much. Thirdly: seing the Publisher consealeth his name, saying, Published by one that &c. I pray him to informe him selfe of three things. 1. Whether that one be not, in this act, an injurious one? If so; had that evill bene a raigning sinne in him, which, I hope, is but, his infirmitie, it would have bene found no small sinne in the punishment, which he may yet escape by repentance 1. Tim. 1.13.14.16. As for my self; had I bene Silent in this case; every man would have concluded mee guilty: yea, it is already reported that I am the author of it, and so, besides the injury done to my selfe (being represented to the publick view as a cōtentious per∣son, which I naturally abhorr, and by Grace much more) the injury also would have fallen upon so many persons, as, upon this occasion, should have bene scandalised by evill surmises un∣justly received against me, which is Slander in hearte. 2 Whether that one be not, in this acte, one, that soweth discord among Brethren, which is one of the sixe things the Lord hateth and of the seaven that are an abhomination to him. Pro. 6.16.17 18.19. For, if this was not the end, or intent of the publisher (as I will hope, it was not) yet, if God doe not, beyond expectatiō, mercifully prevent it, it may be the end or event of the wor∣ke. But the Lord rebuke Sathan! The beginning of Strife is as the ope∣ning of Waters, sayth Salomon pro. 17.14. If any man should goe a∣bout
to open the sluses, how soone might these NETHERLANDS be drowned, before they could be stopped againe? And, who knoweth not that a little Child may fire an house, which a thou∣sand men cannot quench? Thirdly. Whether that one, be not this acte, a Buisy body? 2. Thes. 3.11. one, that Busieth himselfe in other mens matters. 1. pet. 4.15. For, if the publisher be not a member of that Church; what calling hath he to interpose himselfe thus publickly in matters, which properly and only concerne that Church? If he be a member of that Church; what warrant hath any particular mē∣ber to publish those greivances to the world, which are by them selves referred to theyre Consistory, before matters have bene there discussed, and determined, or, at least, before the issue, and conclusion, which there shall be put to the question, hath bene sufficiently demanded and expected? who ever he be; who called him to intrude himselfe into matters that appertame to me, so farr as to publish a privat wrighting, with my name to it, without my knowledg, and against my mind? I leave the publisher to satisfie him selfe in these particulers, which whilest he endeavoreth to doe, I wil labour to satisfye all men concerning myne innocencie in the first part of the booke, leaving the second part of the booke to the members of that Church, whom it concerneth. First, I confesse, that, about sixe months since, having bene often provoked by injurious reports, about my letter to the Classis, and about my Tenet against promiscuous Baptizing all that are brought (especially in such a place as Amsterdam) and about my desisting, and about passages betweene Mr. Paget, and me, and having bene much sollicited by particular freinds, to give my answers to such objectiōs, as were dayly brought to me, and, being informed that the Duch in that citty, and some of the
members of that Church, and many of our nation, in other parts of these Contries, were by misreports prejudiced against me, and, seing that I purposed shortly to leave these Contries: upon such necessity, and much importunity, I was constrayned to sett downe those particulars in wrighting, that some freind might be able to speake in the cause of the dumb, and to cleare the trueth in my absence. Secondly. I professe, that no man hath the originall Copie, but my selfe, and that, for aught I know, I never gave it to mo∣re then two to peruse, and whether they both transcribed Copi∣es out of it, or no, I know not, but they both returned myne to me againe, which, I have in my keeping, at this instant, and my intent, in communicating it to those two, was only to inable them to give privat satisfaction to those that should require it of them, and so to inable those to satisfye others, in a private way, as may appeare, in that I applyed my selfe, in that wrighting, onely to such things as were then objected, concealing other things which I might have added for my further clearing, vnles more publick provocation should make it necessary to publish all together. Which I have hither to forborne, expecting when God would sweetly order, and dispose the spirits of pastor and people, in that Church, to vnity and concord betweene them selves, in some conclusions, and wayes of advancing theyre mu∣tuall good and comfort agreable to the Gospell, and rule, which Christ hath left for his Churches to walke by, which I have ho∣ped hither to that God would, in time, effect, and doe still hope and pray forit: The grant where of would be to me, matter of vn¦feigned joy and thanksgiving (not with standing al the Injuryes which I have Suffered in that place) whersoever it should ple∣ase God to pich my tent afterwards. Thirdly, From hence it will follow, that I am al to-gether in∣nocent in this Matter, which, as I knew not of it, till it was
brought to me in print, so I vtterly dislike, both for the vnsea¦sonablenes of the worke, and for the vnreasonable, and vnchari∣table bitternes of the Publisher. Lastly, my request therfore is, 1. to M. Paget that he will rest satisfied with my ingenuous profession, and acquitt me (as he aught) of any suspicion of guilt, in this particular. Secondly. To the publisher, that, seing he omitted to cleare my innocency in his first publication of this Phamphlett, he will now do me so much right as to affixe this sheete of paper, in stead of a postscript, to his booke, or disperse it among all per∣sons, to whose hands his booke shall come, or is come. But he will most gratifieme, if he make one good fire of both together Thirdly. To all men, to whose hands the other book shall co∣me, that they will spedily send this after it, or stiche this with it: assuring themselfes, that, if I could have foreseene this injury, I would have prevented it. For, how soever I have written no∣thing in that declaration, but the truth (which I am also ready to confirme, as occasion shall require) yet, I affect not to make that publick which may be ended privaty, much lesse to be the first in a contention, whether publick or private. Now the very God of peace, who also is Love, vnite our hearts to himselfe, and one to and other in that Love, which is out of a Pure hart, and a good Conscience, and faith vnfeined: and in able vs to keepe the vnity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, even for his sa∣ke, who is the prince of peace, and in whom Wee, who sometimes we∣re afarr off, are made night by the blood of Christ, who is our peace! AMEN.
