7695.7 22918504 25889
printer's device of Robert Redman
¶ This is a true copy of the or∣dynaūce made in the tyme of the reygne of kynge Henry the .vi. to be obserued in the kynges Esche∣quier by the officers and clerkes of the same for ta∣kynge of fees of the kynges accomptis in the same court. Tudor coat of arms
¶ In thoffyce of the kynges Remembraunces. ¶ Int{er} Recorda de termino sancti Michaelis. Anno. xxvi. Regis Henrici sexti Rotulo, lvi. ex∣parce Remem̄ regis. FIrste for thentre of a Customers viewe or accomptes in the portes of Bregge∣water / Chichester / Newcastell / Plym∣mouth. Fowy. Pole. & Berwyk iii.s.iiii. d Item for thentre of a customers view{is} or accompt of euery other porte vi.s.viii. d. Item to the Secundary clerke of the sayd euery other porte. xx. d. Item for thentre of processes or plees of accomptaū¦tis conteynynge halfe a rolle. iii.s.iiii. d. Item yf it conteyne an hole rolle. vi.s.viii. d And so after the afferant yf it conteyne more. Item for thentre of lettere patentes Escript{er} con∣fessyd or other recordes conteynyng lesse than half a rolle. ii.s. And yf it conteyne halfe a rolle iii.s.iiii. d And so after the afferant. Item for entre of dayes and contyunaunce of ac∣comptauntis. xx. d. Item for makynge of wryttes of pryuylege ii.s. Item of the collectours and accomptauntis of the xv. peny Nihil Item for thentre of wryttes vnder the greate or pryue Seale dyrect to the treasourer & barons for accomptauntis yf it cōteyne halfe a rolle ii.s. And yf it conteyne halfe a syde of a rolle. xii. d.
And yf it conteyne more than halfe a rolle after the affant the whiche shall remayne to the cler∣kes excepte Mittimus and other wryttes whiche haue ben vsed of olde to be entred amōge recordes Item to the Clerkes for their petycyons yf they cō teyne halfe a skynne of {per}chemyn prystwise. ii.s. Item to the clerkes for thentre of foren accomptes of Scotysshmoney xx.s. Item to the clerkes for thentre of warrantes of attourney. iiii. d. Item to the clerkes for makynge of Sistas in A uxilium constat de Nisi prius and commissions of Nisi prius at the consent of the {per}ty cōteynynge lesse thā halfe a rolle of {per}chmyn prystwise. ii.s. And so after thafferant yf it conteyne more. In the offyce of the Treasourer of remēbraūces. ¶ Fyrst to the mayster for makynge prouyng castynge dischargynge and alouaunce of the viewes of the shyres of Cornewall worcester. Rotlande and westmerlande and eche of them v.s. And cyties and Broughes made Shyres iii.s. iiii.d. And of other double and great shyres. vi.s.viii. d Item to the clerkes labourynge wrytynge & char∣gyng of the sayd viewes ii.s. Except the sayd cyties and broughes made shyres ofeueryche of the whiche the clerkes aboue sayde shall take for the sayd viewes but onely. xx. d Item to the mayster for laboure of redynge endo syngs & tryenge of petitions & fynes for contemptis
yf any be of the sheryffes of London and Mydd. Sutrey / and Sussex / Somers, and Dors. warr̄ / & Leyc̄ / Oxen̄ / and Bark. Bedforde / and Buk. Essex & Herf. Norf and Suff. yorke and Lyncolne of eus ryche of the sheryffes x.s ¶ And of the shyres of Kente / Hampshyre / wyltes. Glouc̄. Not̄ / and Darby Heref. Salop̄ Cumbr̄. Cambrigge / and Huntyndonshyres / deuon̄ / corūbr̄ Staff. Northūbr̄ / worcestr̄ / and Rotlande euerych of the sheryffes vi.s.viii. d. ¶ And of the Sheryffes of westmerlande and of eche other of Citees and broughes made Shyres iii.s.iiii. d. Item to the mayster for thentre of Petycyons of customers eschetours and other forreyn accompta∣untis conteynynge halfe a rolle iii.s.iiii. d And yf it conteyne more or lasse after thafferante. Item to the mayster for thentre of Sheryffes day es esehetours and other accompt auntis except dis∣mes and quinzismes xx. d. Item to the mayster for entre of clayme of fraun∣chyses of yssues fynes and amercyamentes contey∣nynge halfe a rolle iii.s.iiii. d And yf it cōteyne ether more or lasse after thafferāt Item to the mayster for makyuge of wryttes of pry uylege ii.s. Item to the mayster for makynge prouyng and dis¦chargynge of euery viewe of baylyf of fraunchy∣ses. xx. d. Item to the clerkes laborynge wryt tynge and dys∣chargynge of euery suche viewe. xii. d Item to the Collectoures of dismes and quinzis∣mes.
Nichil. Item to the clerkes for makynge of the tenoure of the recorde and wrytte of euery Nisi, prius contey∣nynge lesse than halfe a rolle. ii.s. And for more after thafferant. ¶ Item to the clerkes for the commyssyon of the same. ii.s. Item to the clerkes for thentre of the verdyt of eue¦ry suche Nisi prius retourned. ii.s. ¶ Item to the Clerkes for makynge of sistas in auxilium constatsupersedias of lande and vele∣mam. ii.s. Item to the clerkes for Fieri facias vpon tailles & other wryttes. vi. d. Item to the clerkes for entre of warrantis of attor¦ney and mayuprise iiii. d. ¶ In thoffyce of thengrosser. ¶ Fyrst to the mayster for his fee makyng of Al∣louaunce and dyscharge of the sheryffes of Cor∣newall worcestr̄. Rotelande / and westmende of eche of them. v.s. Item to the mayster for Cites and broughes ma∣de shyres of eche of them iii.s.iiii. d. And of euery double shyre and eche other greate shyre x.s. Item to the clerkes for alouaunce of tayles in the sayd double and grete shyres. ii.s. Item to the clerkes for tottes and {per}celles and dis∣charge and alouaunce of the said double and great shyres. vi.s.viii. d.
Item to the clerkes in the Shyres of Cornewall worcester Rotlande & westmerlande for alouaūce of cayles xx. d Item to the clerkes for tottes and {per}celles dischar¦ge and alouaunces of the same iii.s.iiii. d Item to the clerkes of cities and broughes made shyres for alouaunce of tayles xii. d. Item to the clerkes for tottes & {per}celles discharges and alouanuce of the same ii.s. Item to the mayster for alouaunce and discharges of Baylyffes of fraunchyses. xx. d. Item to the mayster of euery Eschetoure of the Shyres of London. Staff. worcestr̄. Salop̄ / and Herer̄. iii.s.iiii. d Item to the mayster of euery other Eschetoure yf he haue any petycyons. v.s. And yf he haue no petycyon onely iii.s.iiii. d Item of Cyties and Bronghes made Shyres. Nihil Item to the clerkes for alowaūce of tayles of eue¦ry Eschetoure of London. Stafforde. worcestre. Salop̄. Hereforde / and cyties and broughes made Shyres xii. d. Item to the clerkes for symple alowaunces of eue∣ry other eschetoure xx. d Item to the clerkes for alowaunce of tayles of bay¦lyffes of fraūchyses xii. d. Item to the clerkes for discharge of Baylyffes of fraunchyses viii. d. Item to the mayster of euery customer in the porte of Bryggewater Chichester / Newecastell / Plym¦mouthe / fowy / Pole and Barwyk iii.s.iiii. d
Item to the sayd clerkes of the sayd porte for al∣lowaunce of tayles. xii. d. And for discharge of them. xx. d Item to the mayster of euery customer in other portes. vi.s.viii. d. Item to the clerkes in the same other portes for allowaunce of tayles xx. d. And for discharge of them. iii.s.iiii. d. Item fof collectours of quinzismes Nihil. Item tor then grossynge of great accomptes with sette hande that is to saye of the Tresourer of the kynges housholde. xxvi.s.viii. d. Of the kynges warderobe. xxvi.s.viii. d Of the Treasourer of Caless. xxvi.s.viii. d Of the vytayller of Caleis xiii.s.iiii. d Of the clerke of the kynges werkes xiii.s.iiii. d And of the duchy of Cornewal xx.s And these sūmes of the sayd great accomptaūtis to be denyded betwyxte the sayd mayster & the cler¦kes that is to saye two partes to the mayster and the thyrde to the clerkes Item of other small accomptauntis that conteyne halse a rolle of parchemyne of the Pype to the Clerkes that come late in to the sayd offyce except of Sheryffes and benefyces not taxed wherof no thynge shall be taken. ii.s. In thoffyce o Coutrollershyppe. ¶ Fyrste to the mayster for his fee and rewarde o the Sheryffes of Cornewall / worcestre / Rotlāde westmerlande of eche of them iii.s.iiii. d
¶ Item of cities and broughes made sheryffes of eche of them. Nichil. Item to the maister of euery double shyre and eche other great shyre vi.s.viii. d. ¶ In officio clerici plitorum. ¶ In primis pro br̄i originali adsectam alicuius computantis in Sc̄cio predicto prosecut{er} versus a liquam aliam personam. ii.s Item pro br̄i iudiciali. &c vi.s. Item {pro} intratione declarationis superinde fact{er} in Rotulo. ii.s. Item pro intratione de nihil dicitfact̄ super aliquo computante. &c. ii.s Item pro intratione iudicii redditi. &c. ii.s. Item pro breui de constat ad sectam alicuius com¦putantis. ii.s. Item pro cōmissione fact̄ pro aliquo computante quorum nomina iii.s.iiii. d Itē pro irrotulatione eiusdē cōmissionis. xii. d Item {pro} br̄i defieri facias su{per} aliqua assignatione fact̄ {pro} aliquo cōputante vel aliqua alia {per}sona per¦aliā assigna tionē siue cōmissionem. &c. ii.s. Sed sepur fierifac̄ per taliam vi. d. tm̄ Item {pro} br̄i de Scire fac̄ su{per} allocatione habita in codm̄ Sc̄cio. &c. ii.s. Item pro intrations pliti siue respons. pro aliqua computante. &c. ii.s. Item pro intratione fact in rotulo {pro} inuocatione tallie perdite per aliquem cōputantem. ii.s. Item ex amplificatione recordi habiti pro aliquo
computante. &c. vi.s.iiii. d. ¶ Pro auditoribus et licis suis. ¶ Item for makynge & wrytynge of euery viewe of an eschetoure. v.s. ¶ Item for the examinynge makyng & wrytyng of thacomptis of eschetour for euery prest of the assise of the pipe wryten on both sydes. vi.s.viii. d ¶ And if it be lesse thā a prest thā lesse aft̄ thafferāt ¶ Item for the examynynge preuyuge deuydynge castynge & wrytynge of euery accompt of customers in the portes of London of the greate custome Sā¦dewyche / Southr̄-Hulle / Boston and Ippyswyche yf there be shyppynge of wolles and no reteygners nor lycence of euery suche accompte of a yere or more xxvi.s.viii. d. And if it be lesse than a yere after the afferente of xxvi.s.viii. d. by the yere Item yf there be reteygners or lycence for euery suche accompt of a yere or more xl.s And yf it be lesse than a yere after thafferant of xi.s. by the yere Item for euery accompt of the sayd customers in the sayd portes yf there be no shyppynge of wolles for a yere and more xiii.s.iiii. d. And yf it be lesse than a yere after thafferent of .xiii.s.iiii. d. by the yere. Item fo euery accompt of the customers of the Tonnage and pontage of London of pety custo∣me of London and of the customers of Brystol for any suche accompt of a yere & more. xxvi.s.viii. d. And yf it be lesse than a yere after thafferant of
xxvi.s.viii. d. by the yere. Item for euery accompte of the customets in the portes of Pole. Excestr̄. Dertmouth Plymmouth Fowy / yernemouth: Lynne / and Newcastell / for euery suche accompte of a yere or more. xiii.s.iiii. d And yf it be lesse than a yere after the afferant of xiii.s.viii. d. by the yere. Item for euery accompte of the customers in the portes of Chychestet and Bryggewater for a yere or more. x.s. And yf it be lesse than a yere after the afferant of x.s. by the yere. And for euery viewe of customers in the sayd por∣tes of London the grete custome of Sandewyche Southr̄ / Hull / Boston̄: and Ippyswyche yf there be no shyppange of wolles. x.s. Item yf there be no shyppynge of wolles for euery suche viewe vi.s.viii. d Item for euery viewe of customers of Tonnage and pontage and pety custome of London and Brystowe. x.s. Item for euery viewe of customers of the portes of Pole / Excestr̄ / Dermouth / Plymmouth / Fowy yermouth and Lynne vi.s.viii. d Item for euery viewe of customers in portes of Chichester / Newcastell and Bryggewater. v.s Item for thexamynacyon preuynge castynge and makīg of accōpt of the tresourer of houshold. xl.s. Item for the kynges warderobe xxvi.s.viii. d Item for the clerke of the werkes xxvi.s.viii. d Item for the tresourer of Caleis xl.s. Item for the vytayler of Caleis, xxxiii.s.iiii. d
Item for the Duchye of Cornewall. xl.s. Item for thaccomptes of the constable of the Cas∣tell of wyndosor xxvi.s.viii. d Item for the acconptes of the treasourer of Irlan¦de. xx.s. Item for thaccomtes of the constable of the castell of Burdeux. xlvi.s.viii. d Item for the accomptes of the Chamberleyne of Berwyke. xx.s. Item for the accomptes of the chamberlayne of Southwalles. xxvi.s.viii. d. Item for the accomptes of the Chamberlayne of Northwalles. xxvi.s.viii. d Item for the accomptes of the Chamberlayne of Chestre. xxvi.s.viii. d. Item for thaccomptes of the clerke of the Hana∣per. xx.s. Item for that comptes of the Baylyffe of Sande∣wyche x.s. Item for thaccomptes of the mayster of the kyn∣ges hors. xiii.s.iiii. d. Item for euery accompt of euery fermoure of the subsyde of Alyeues Serchours and gawgiers in the portes iii.s.iiii. d. Item for euery foreyn accompte of Sheryffes and vlnage xii. d Item yf it be a Newe seisex. ii.s. Item for euery accompte of prestes or any other foreyne accompte so it conteyne the length of an hole preest within forth. iii.s.iiii. d. And so more or lesse after thafferant. ¶ Item for euery viewe of collectours of benefy¦ces
not taxed xx. d. Item for that compt therof iii.s.iiii. d. ¶ Item for euery accompt of the Resumpty on in the laste Parlyamente graunted yf it were to any extent x.s. Item of Nihil inde venit Nihil Furthermore the sayde audytours shall take no thynge of the collectors of quinzismes for any view or accompte makynge. ¶ In thoffyce of the forū oppofer. ¶ Fyrst of the Sheryffes of London and Mydd Surt̄ / and Sussex / Som̄s. and Dors. wart̄ & Leir̄. Oxen̄ & Berk / Bedd / & Buk / Cant̄ / & Hunt̄ / Essex & Hertford. Nort̄. and Sut̄. Not̄ / and Derby / Kent Hāpshyre / wyltes / Deuoū / Corunbt̄ / Glour̄ / Nor¦thumbt̄ Lyncolne / and yorke of euery Shyryffe of these shyresthe apposer vi.s.viii. d. And his clerkes xl. d. Item for bylles of alouaunce of Iustyces of the peace of euerycheof the sayd sweryffes. iii.s.iiii. d. Item of Baylyffes of fraunchyses for theyr clay∣mes within the sayd shyres aforesayd xx. d. ¶ Item of the Sheryffe of the ryte of Norwyche Cyte of yorke / the cyte of Lyneolne Kynstone vpon Hull Herforde worcestr̄ / Salop̄ / Stafforde / Rot∣lande / Norhūbt̄ / Cumbt̄ / westmer̄ / newcastel / Byr¦stowe / Conentre and Nor̄ / and euerychone of these shyryf / the forū opposer. &c. iii.s.iiii. d. And his clerke xx. d. Item for bylles of alouance of the lustyces of pea
wages ofeueryche of the sayd sheryf. xx. d. Item of Baylyffes of Fraunchyses of these Shyrs for theyr claymes. xii. d. ¶ In thoffyce of chamberlaynes. ¶ Fyrste of euery Sheryffe of the Shyres of Lon and Mydd / Surrey / and Sussex / Somers. and Dors. wart̄ and Leic̄. Oxen̄ and Berk Bedd/ and Buk. Essex. Hertf. Nort. and Suf. yorke. Lyncolū for ioynynge of taylles of eueryche of the sayd she∣ryffes. iii.s.iiii. d. Item for ioynynge of tayles of euery Eschetoure of the sayd shyres excepte Mydd. xx. d. ¶ Item to the Sheryffes of Kent Southr̄ wiltes Glouc̄ Nor̄ / and Derby Heref. Salop̄ / Cant̄ and Hunt and Cumberlande for ioynyng of taylles of eueryche of the sayd sheryffes. ii.s. Item for ioynynge of taylles of euery eschetour in the same shyres except Kent and Cumbr̄. xx. d Item of the sheryffes of Deuon̄. Corūbr̄ staf / Nor humbt̄ worcestr̄ / Rotlande / westmer / and of eche other cite and broughe made shyres for ioynynge of taylles of eche of the sayd sheryffes. xx. d. Item for ioynynge of taylles of euery eschetoure of the sayd shyres except Deuon̄ Corumb. Northū bt̄. Rotlande and westmerl. xii. d Item for euery eschetour of the shyres of Kentand Midd Denon̄ Corumb. Northumbr̄ Rotlande / Cumbr̄. and westmer. for ioyuynge of tayles. ii.s. Item of euery Baylyffe offraunchyses for ioynyng of taylles of the summe of .xx.s. or aboue .xii. d.
Itē of euery Baylyffe of Fraūchyses for ioynynge of tayles byneth. xx.s.iiii. d Item of the customers of euery of the portes of lon¦don / Sandwyche / Southr̄ / Hull / Boston̄ and Ip¦pyswyche for ioynynge of tayles v.s. Item of the customers of the portes of Pole / Ex¦cestr̄ / Dertmouth, Plymmouth / Fowy / yermouth Lynne / and newcastell. iii.s.iiii. Item of the customers of euery of the portes of Chychester and Bryggewater. xx. d. Item of euery Fermour or dettoure not accomp taunte for ioynynge of euery tayle to be allowed to the sayd Fermoure dettoure and not allowed to any Sheryffe or Baylyffe / yf the sayd taylles be byneth. xx.li.iiii. d And yf the sayde tayles be of .xx.li. or more vnder xl. pounde. vi. d. Item yf the sayd taylle be of .xl.li. or aboue. xii. d. Item of euery collecture of dismes graunted by the clergie. xii. d. Item of the collectours of quinzismes Nihil. In thoffyce of the clerke of the xstretis. Extract. Onely his fees and rewardes of the kynge. ¶ Finis.
