A1522 99868226 120566
AN EPHEMERIS for the Year 1652. BEING Leap year, and a Year of Wonders. Prognosticating The Ruine of Monarchy through∣out Europe; and a Change of the Law. Manifested by Rational Predictions: 1. From the Eclipses of the Moon. 2. From that most terrible Eclipse of the Sun. 3. By Monethly Observations, as Seasonable Warnings given to the Kings of Europe, more especially to France and Portugal. By NICH: CULPEPER, Gent. Student Astrol. ACT. 2. 19, 20. And I will shew wonders in the Heaven above, and signs in the Earth beneath, fire, and blood, and vapor of smoak. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, BEFORE that great and notable day of the Lord shall come. London, Printed for T. Vere, and N. Brook, and are to be sold in the Old Bayly, and at the Angel in Cornhil. 1652.
To the Reader. I May say of this my little Book, as So∣crates said by the dyet he had provided for his guests; when one told him, He had not provided half enough, quoth he, If my guests be honest, here's enough for them, for they'l more accept of my good will, then of my food; if they be dishonest, here's too much, for they will never be contented with Reason. And I know as well, good men will pick out what's good in my Book, and make much of that; and only such as are evil pick out my failings to carp at. The World is come to such a pass in this our age, that if a man do foolishly, he's laught at; if wisely, he's ; and that by such brutish creatures, that are so far from being rational, that they know not what Reason is. If God have bestowed a little more knowledg upon a few men, then he hath done upon the World in gene∣ral, the Priests call him a Conjurer and a Witch, and the justice of the Peace, a Figure-flinger, Pray ye tell me, and tell me seriously, did not God make the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars? Did not he set them to RULE the Day and the Night? Did not he ap∣point them for SIGNS and SEASONS? And can that be a Sign which signifies nothing? A man of Davids spirit will meditate on ALL the Works of the
Lord. I pray you, (you that despise Astrology,) wherefore (do you think) did God make the Stars? For Sailors to sail by, you say:  is very well; and is that all? Subtract the biggest of them, and let me see that Sailor that can sail by the smallest of them. The least of Gods Works are very considerable, and worthy of our chiefest regard. David infinitely ad∣mired at them, and declares the doom of, them that despise them, or disregard them either: Psal. 28. 5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, the Lord will destroy them, and not build them up. But to leave such, whose manners shew them to be better fed then taught, and come to the Honest Reader, who desires to be taught. Thou findest many sad Predictions in this Book, which (in all probability) are very speedi∣ly like to be produced into act: Make use of thy time while thou hast it; Make thy peace with God in the first place: Deny thy self of the World; Do not trust in shadows: Labour to spend  time well; (God made time;) Do not thou trifle it out in vanity: It is no Wisdom for any man to spoil that which he can∣not make: God made nothing to throw away, but will have an account of thee bow thou hast spent thy time. If thou findest my Predictions prove true, know there is a God, and that God is just: Those that prove false will witness me to be but a man, I am no more, and am called Spittle-Fields, next door to the Red Lion, August 14, 1651. Nich. Culpeper.
Of Eclipses happening this Year. 1652. FOur Eclipses happen this Year, two of the Moon, and not one fewer of the Sun; three of which, namely, two of the Moon, and one (and that no smal one neither) of the Sun, wil be visible to us if the Aire be clear; however if we see them not we may happen to feel them; of these only I shall treat and let the other pass as though I saw it not. The first Eclipse of the Moon happens upon a terrible windy time if not rainy, viz. upon Monday the 15 of March 37 minutes past 3 of the clock in the morning, at which time is the apparent opposition of the Luminaries, and the very middle of the Eclipse. And here I cannot chuse but take notice by the way of a vulgar speech frequently used by the common people of our times, whose manners shew them to be better fed then taught by far, viz. when the wind blows strongly they say men are a conjuring; the speech if rightly considered by the Word of God is little better then Blasphemy; the Scripture saith, the Lord bringeth the winds out of his trea∣suries, and they say Conjurers bring them, now which of these is the rather to be beleeved, let any moderate soul that hath but any care what shall become of him another day, judge. The second cause, or if you will the provi∣dencial cause of these winds at this time seems to me to be the Sextile of Jupiter and Mercury (both of them being with
fixed stars of a Mercurial nature) at the very time when the Eclipse happens. But to return to the Eclipse, which though it be partile yet above eleven parts of 12 are darkned. The face of Heaven at the midst of it appearing in this form. D.H.M. March 14.15. 37. P.M. 1652. ab ☍ ad □ Iupiter ✶, Iupiter, Mercury. Poli. 51. 34. I shall not be very large upon either of the Lunar Eclip∣ses, because my own opinion is, that although their opera∣tion be great, yet will they at this time shew their operations more in preparation for action, then in action it self. All Authors agree, that many dangers ensue, and those no small ones neither, when  Luminaries are eclipsed in one moneth, as now they are. The Planet here afflicted is the Moon, whose influence is most shewed upon the vulgar.
The House of Heaven is the eight, which signifies Death, Sorrow, Sadness, which (together with loss of inhoritance) is like to be the effects of this Eclipse, and so much the ra∣ther, because Luna is Lady of the sixth. The sign afflicted is , Equinoctial and movable, the effects will succeed the sooner. The places subject to the influence of this Eclipse are, Au∣stria, Alsatia, Lisbone in Portugal, Vienna, Frankford on the Main, England, France, Sweden, Poland, Denmark, Burgundia, Padua, Naples, &c. These, or so many of these as God pleaseth, are like to be afflicted by the effects of this Eclipse; but what the Affliction may probably be, you shall hear more anon. The Rulers of this Eclipse are Venus and Saturn, Venus, because she is Lady of the place wherein the Eclipse falls, as also because she is the strongest Planet at the time, which ought to be heeded in all Astrological Iudgments: Sa∣turn, because he is stationary at the Eclipse, and also angu∣lar, for it were a folly to account him in the sixth: As for Jupiter, who is Lord of the succeeding Angle, though I can give no great reason (but only  his ipse dixit, and such ware will scarce go for current in these searching times) why he should have any dominion at all in the E∣clipse; but put case he have, he is in his fall, and in prison, and therefore able to execute but little. But old and cold Saturn stands stone-still, studying mischief in a quarrelling Angle, inventing which is his best way to mischieve such places as are under ♋, such are Scotland, Holland, Zealand, Amsterdam, York, Algier, Tunis, &c. It is true, Saturn is so weak, that he is not able to fight, but yet he will give per∣nicious counsel: Saturn, as he is Lord of the Ascendant, threatens the Commonalty of this Nation; let them look to it, lest Saturn and pitiful poor Mercury fill their brains full of as idle conceits, as the man had that conceited him∣self to be made of Butter. Jupiter Lord of the tenth House, in the twelth, and in his fall, bids Princes, Priests and Lawyers take heed of a down∣fall; 'Tis never good when the Lord of an Angle is cadent from the Angle: Sol and Mars in the second consume the
estate of the vulgar; and the truth is, 'tis but an untoward Position, if you make the best of it. I shall tell you a little what Authors say; Proclus saith, The Moon eclipsed in ♎  , and loss at Sea, great Inandations or overflowings by Water: Let Holland and Zealand look to their Dams now, and shut the stable door before all their Dams be stolen; It torments the common people with evil counsel, they will be subject to mutinies, and discontentedness, to sicknesses of tough and viscus Flegm, long continuing; Fish will dye, the Ayr will be misty, and mens brains whimsical. I could say more if I durst; however this Eclipse lays the foundation to the Catastrophe, of all the Princes of Europe, the House of  excepted. I confels Authors give a large praise of the effects of an Eclipse when Venus is Lady of it, and what Golden Moun∣tains of Happiness it will produce; viz. That she gives glory, honour, and merry days to men, fruitful and fortunate years, fine gay clothes, good dyet, fortunate marriages, and many pretty well-favored children, encrease of riches, familiarity with Princes, fortune in trade, happy voyages by Sea, and almost as many good things as would fill up this little Book. But it is as yet far enough from my thoughts, that the  of those Lights which the Eternal and only wise God hath made to RULE the Night and Day, should  any good to mankind at all, unless it do good to one by mis∣chiefing another, and so every man that is hanged brings gain to the Hangman: The truth is, it is a forerunner both of Famine and Pestilence; men will be mad to undo them∣selves. And thus much for the first Eclipse. Only take notice, that whosoever had their Ascendant mid-heaven, Sol, Luna, or part of Fortune, in the first face of ♈ or ♎, shall in one measure or another feel the effects of it.
The second Eclipse of the Moon happens at this time, and under this Position of Heaven. D.H.M. Sept. 7.6. 22. P.M. ab ☍ Sol vacuâ. Sol ad □ Jupiter. Poli. 51.34. Look here! Jupiter is Lord of the Eclipse in his fall, and in M. C. he is Lord of the nineth also: What? will the Clergy begin to vapor, and stand upon their pantibles once more before their final end? Can neither the Mercies nor Judgments of God move them to repentance? ' a sad case. But what say Authors to it? They say thus, That if the Light eclipsed be neer the Equator (this is within less then five degrees) it threatens such as make a Trade of Reli∣gion. Hark ye Priests,  ye: I, but what Clergy men are here threatened? There are some honest men of that Calling, ' a hard case else you will say: 'Twere so; therefore I will take the pains to give you such plain de∣scriptions of them from Scriptures, that you may discern
who they are, as plain as you can diseern the nose in a mans face. Zech. 11. . Wo to the Idol shepherd that leaveth the flock, the fivord spall be upon his arm, and upon  right eye. Psal. 31. 18. Let the lying lips be put to silence, that speak proud things presumptuously against the righteous. Isai. 56. 10, 11. Her Watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are dumb Dogs that cannot bark, yea they are greedy Dogs, that can never have enough, they all look to their own way, every one for  gain from his quarter. Jer. 5. 31. The Prophets prophecy falsly, and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and the people love to have it so, and what will the end be? Ezek. 34 2. Wo be to the  that feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed the flock? Psal. 26. 10. In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes. Micah 3. 5. They bite with their teeth, and cry peace, but against him that puts not into their mouths they  war. Micah 3. 7. The Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? Zeph. 3. 4. Her Prophets are light and treachereous persons. 2 Tim. 3. 5. Having a form of godliness, but deny the power of it. Hos. 6. 9. As troops of Robbers wait for a man, so the Priests murder in the way by consent, for they commit lewdness. Hos. 9. 7. The Pro∣phet is a fool, and the spiritual man mad. Such as these are threatned by this Eclipse, and let them take notice what the Spirit of God saith, Mal. 2. 1, 2. O Priests, this Commandment is for you, If you will not hear, if you will not lay it to heart, I will curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them already, because ye have not laid it to heart. And thus I leave you to the Justice of God, who will reward all according to their doings. Proclus saith, The Moon eclipsed in the watry Triplicity signifies death of common people, Wars, death of fishes, and water fowls, theeving both by Sea and Land. Me Bahalah saith, it brings much rain. The Countries and Cities subject to the influence of this Eclipse, are, Portugal, , Egypt, Alexandria, Worms, Ratisbone, Greece, Crect, Rhodes, part of France, Sylisia, Babylon, Corinth, Assyria, Jerusalem, Paris, Hydeleburg, Lyons, together
with other places under the Signs ♍ and ♓, as also all people in whose genesis the Ascend. M. C. Sol, Luna, or part of Fortune was in the last face of ♍ or ♓. If many Planets in a House encrease the signification of a House, then may we expect sickness from this Eclipse, be∣cause so many Planets are in the sixth House. Thus I pass to the Eclipse of the Sun. Of the Eclipse of the Sun. BElla sonat, sonat arma, minas sonat, omnla Martis. All the Evils the Sword, Sedition, Famine, Pestilence can do to Europe, may be expected from the effects of this Eclipse. Oh that the Princes of Europe would once learn to be wise, that they would once learn to know from the Book of the Creatures what the Will of their God is, be∣fore their Houses be left them desolate, before their de∣struction comes as an armed man. The time of the Eclipse and Position of Heaven at the time at London is this. D.H.M. March 29.10. 1. A.M. a Sol ad □ Saturn
Behold the Prince of Planets the Sun cclipsed just upon his Throne, upon the 29 of March this present year 1652.  terrifie your eyes, for if the day be clear you may see the Stars; the body of the Sun will appear of a ruddyish gray colour, very formidable to the ignorant multitude, and God knows what other strange and supernatural sights may be seen at or neer that time, some I am of opinion will, and God shews none in vain. It is a remarkable thing, the two superier Bodies, Saturn and Jupiter, who always use to make three Conjunctions in one and the same Triplicity, should the last time anticipate, and make the third in the watry Triplicity, (having made but two in the ) their last being in the weakest and meanest sign of the Zodiack. This I can neither read, nor beleeve they did since the Creation of the World until these our days; for we are brought forth to live in those days, in which the Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of our God, and of our Lord Christ, blessed be his holy Name for it. How ever by this Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, God manifest∣eth by the Book of the Creatures, as well as by the Book of the Scripture, that be will pull down the lofty, and exalt the humble and meek; and this you may read in them, and the time when, without a pair of Spectacles, if you are but of the number of the men of Issachar, 1 Chron. 12. (or of their Spirit to anoint your spiritual David King,) who had skill in the times to teach Israel what they ought do, which could not be intended concerning the Law of God, because that be∣longed to Levi, and in no wise to Issachar. I tell you, and I tell you but the truth, the year 1655. shall not pass over your heads, but you shall acknowledg one knowing man of  to be of more worth then all Sion Colledg, and King Harry the seventh Chappel to boot. Yea so indulgent is the great God of Heaven and Earth both over proud insulting domineering Priests, and over poor silly men and women whom they lead in ignorance, that he will give them more significations then one or two by the Book of the Creatures, even those great Eclipses of the Sun, this I now handle; and that other, anno 1654. upon
the second of August; then which to our eyes, nor the eyes of our fathers grandfathers great-grandfathers never saw greater, nor more terrible. Johannes Henricus Alstedius in his Book entiruled Speculum Mundi, taking occasion to speak of the last Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, saith, It would bring a new Govern∣ment into the World different from Kingly Government; and indeed many years ago I fixing my mind upon that his speech, set my self to study what reason might be given from the Book of the Creatures for it: And although 'tis probable, that if I had minded other things at that time, when I was minding what should become of the Princes of Europe, it might have been better for me in matters of this World then now it is; yet it repents me not, having now an occasion to declare that to the world which by study I found out then; And that this may be done methodically, be pleased to take notice. 1. The part of Heaven afflicted by this dismal Eclipse, is the tenth House, which signifies Kings, Princes, all Gover∣nors, even from the Emperor to the Constable, Generals of Armies, &c. 2. The Planet afflicted is Sol, whose signification is the very same with the House. 3. The Sign is ♈, a Regal or Kingly Sign, nay the chief Sign of the Zodiack. 4. The Sun is afflicted upon the very degree of his Ex∣altation, and Mars is Lord of the place, as though the Lord had given up the Princes of Europe to the Sword: Beleeve me, nay beleeve that Book of God which only and alone he brought to convince Job, Job 38. Before the effects of this Eclipse be over, the World shall see Princes are but men. All this is too General, to come a little to particulars. That we may know what Kings and Governors are threa∣tened by this Eclipse, which will be so formidable to Europe, and indeed it ayms at no small Fools; It is requisite we consider what Kingdoms and Nations are under ♈. under which Sign are most of the Princes of Europe; and if you
add, as some do, such as are under ♎, ♋ and ♑, and as (pto∣lomy would have it) such as under the fiery Triplicity, ei∣ther few or no Princes in Europe shall scape the fury of Gods Vengeance  by this Eclipse; let them but look upon it, and they shall lee God gives them fair warn∣ing of it. I confess I do not intend to hang my Judgment upon any of those tacks, but considering, 1. The House is Regal. 2. The Sign Regal. 3. The Planet Regal, and eclipsed upon the very degree of his Exaltation. Thence I gather, That all the Princes of Europe are threa∣tened by it, yea all those of the World where it is visible and angular, together with HOGHENS MOGHENS, ILLUSTRISIMO's, and TITTILLADO's: I cannot  a quittus est to our present States, I wish I could; I cannot flatter, neither dare I write what I think; all I de∣sire is, to lead a peaceable and quiet life under them; yet this I say, and this I desire of them, That they would be of the number of the meek of the earth, and seek the Lord, seek Righteousness and Judgment, and IT MAY BE they may be hid in the day of the Lords wrath, for his Iudgment is appear∣ing upon the earth, and who shall stand? They that fear God, need fear nothing else. I will tell our States what true Re∣ligion is, nay one of the Apostles did it before me, I desire but to rub up their memories; Jam. 1. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to KEEP THEM∣SELVES UNSPOTTED FROM THE WORLD; and if they do so, Peace shall be to them, as well as to the Israel of God. I am of belief, that Gods special providence will not in this in the least contradict his general. Gods general pro∣vidence I (as yet) conceive to be that whereby communi∣cating himself to his creatures, he upholds one part of the Creation by another: His special providence I take to be that by which he keeps those in a way of close walking with himself, whom he hath united to himself by the person of
Jesus Christ. I told you this Eclipse foretold to the World the Sword, Sedition, Famine and Pestilence; look you if the Book of the Scripture agree not with the Book of the Creatures:  24 6 7. Ye shall hear of wars, and Rumors of wars, &c. For Nation shall rise up against Nation, and King∣dom against Kingdom, and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers places. I never read yet that God would take away this for the Elects sake; indeed I have read that he will shorten the days for the Elects sake; for Saints must not think to live in an evil World, and not be partakers of the punishments of the World, Mat. 24. 21, 22. In those days shall be great tribulation, such as never was from the beginning of the world until this time, nor never shall be, and except those days should be shortened no flesh should be saved, but for the Elects sake they shall be shortened. But to come a little closer home to the business in hand; I shall first give you the Opinion of Authors concerning the Eclipse; Secondly, my own. proclus. Sol  in the second face of ♈ threatens Sedition amongst Kingdoms and People, a hot dry and pe∣stilential Ayr, Sadness, Imprisonment, and danger of death to Kings, Rulers and Governors, it  and spoils the fruits of the Earth: Thus he. And the Judgment of Messahalah is layd down almost in the very same words; If the Sun be eclipsed in fiery Signs, it signifies the death of Kings, Princes, and Potentates; as also of great men, dryness and barrenness of the earth. The matter is so apparent, we need quote no other Au∣thors. The Lord of the Eclipse is Mars, who, according to Origanus, threatens that the fruits of the Earth shall be consumed by fire, heat, and dryness of Ayr, extorted by violence, or consu∣med by Soldiery; he threatens sickness of heat and dryness, War and Bloodshed, Rapine and Extortion; he sets Europe together by the ears, one Nation against another, divides Kingdoms against themselves; He raiseth Sedition and Tumults, Kings are mad, and Subjects stubborn, violent diseases of Choler, young men perish by the Sword and by
the Pestilence, Cities are consumed by fire, and ruined, Countries are spoyled by Injuries, Murther, Rapine and Theeving, the Ayr is hot, pestilential and mortal. I shall desire the favour to add a word or two of my own, rationally deduced from the Scheam. The Planets afflicting are, 1. Luna, because she darkens Sol. 2. Mars, because Lord of the place eclipsed. 3. Saturn, because in the Ascendant, and in  to the Luminaries. The Moon Lady of the Ascendant, darkening Sol in the Tenth, and in his Exaltation, shews that the glory of Kings shall be darkened by their Subjects, or else by men of low degree and small account in this World. Saturn is Lord of the Eight in the Ascendant, and this threatens a Pestilence, which I fear not only England, but almost all Europe will feel. And when honest Jupiter should help, he hides his head, as though he were ashamed of such actions; Nam mitu in  Jupiter occasu premitur. As for the Clergy, as they stand at state present, they must down; for as the Book of the Creatures shews it here by the Eclipse, so the Book of the Scripture also witnesseth; Joel 2. Acts 2. that when God shews wonders in the Hea∣vens above, and signs in the earth beneath, when he turns the Sun into darkness, and the Moon into blood; then the great and notable day of the Lord is coming, then will God pour out of his own Spirit upon all  your sons and your daughters shall pro∣phecy, your young men shall see visions, &c. Indeed you shall be all taught of God, and by the power of his Spirit. As for such Blasphemous Creatures (for men I cannot call them,) that say they are Christ, and God, and such as say Iesus Christ is again conceived, and they have seen the Wench that hath him in her womb, when Christ shall come in the evidence and demonstration of his Spirit, God knows, and I tremble to think, what shall become of such Impostors. The Law shall quite and clean be changed; when the
PRINCE OF PEACE, the great LAWGIVER, shall come in the Power of his Spirit, and dwell in our hearts, there shall be no more wranglings, no more going to Law; The holy Ghost the Comforter shall lead us into all truth; And whence come wars and dissentions amongst us? Come they not from our lusts, because we are carnal? Fy upon me! I had almost forgot his HOLINESS the POPE; For though his Holiness his House is cadent, i. e. falling, yet no signification of his fall can I draw from this Ecliple; it hastens, and you may see the time when, by that Eclipse 1654. I shall onely give him a touch of it in some of my Monthly Observations. Because I cannot perceive this Eclipse to touch much at the fall of Rome, or her abso∣lute Catastrophe, therefore I cannot conceive the second Coming of Christ (not to Judgement, but to raign by his Spirit in the hearts of his Saints) to be during the effects of this Eclipse; this doth but make way for it. If you would build a House in a wood, you must first cut down the tall trees, and the lower shrubs and bushes; this will be done under the effects of this Eclipse; but Antichrist shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christs coming: Neither shall you see the effects of that Eclipse 1654, passed, before it be accomplished. During the effects of this Eclipse you shall see the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a  thing: The Kings of the earth shall set themselves together, and the Rulers take counsel against the Lord, and against his anointed, &c. Yea, christ shall break them with a rod of iron, and  them in pieces like a potters vessel. During the ef∣fects of that 1654, Christ shall be set upon his holy hill of Sion. As for the time when you may expect the Effects of this Eclipse to operate, I desire the liberty to leave my Authors, and write my own thoughts in it; You shall see the begin∣ings of the Effects and preparations for the rest, (for as such great things as they cannot be done in a corner, so can they as little be done on a sudden;) the beginnings, I say, you shall see in July 1652, at which time Mars cuts the Ascendant of the Eclipse, and the place of Saturn in it.
1653, 1654, and part of 1655, shall finish the Effects of it. Lastly, I desire you to take notice, that I pretend no di∣vine inspiration, nor revelation from Angels for what I write, nor any thing else besides what God teacheth me from the book of the Scripture and the book of the Crea∣tures conjoyned together; The one teacheth me what shall be, the other in some measure tells me the time when it shall be. And I ingenuously protest I had never loved A∣strology so well as now I do, if I had not, upon due search, found the Predictions by the book of the Creatures to jump so exactly with those of the Scripture. I shall now give a few Exhortations, and so conclude. First, to Princes; The Lord saith to you, Psal. 2. 10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trembling: Kiss the Son (that is, be subject to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ) lest he be angry, and perish from the way, &c. The book of the Creatures tells you the same truth. For, The Sun's eclips'd in's Throne, and cries aloud, O Kings, why, being mortal, are ye proud! Your  gone; Democracy takes place: Your Hoasts shall fall by sword before your face. 'Tis not your Kingdoms, nor your high-born blood Can stave Gods vengeance off; Learn to be good, Learnto deny your selves, takeup Christs Cross; So never need you fear your Kingdoms loss. But why do I  precious time in exhorting you, see∣ing the Scriptures tell me, Jer. 51, 57. I will make drunk her Princes and her wise men, her Captains, and her Rulers, and  mighty men, and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not awake: And this (nor I, but) the King whose name is the LORD OF HOASTS hath said. Isai. 5. 12, 13, 14, They regard not THE WORK OF THE LORD,  CONSIDER THE OPERATION OF HIS HANDS; therefore my people are gone into captivity, BE∣CAUSE
THEY HAVE NO KNOWLEDG; their honorable men are famished: Therefore the grave hath opened her mouth without measure, and their glory and their multitude is descended into it. To the Saints thus I say, and not I, but the Lord; Rev 3. 10. Keep close to the word of GODS PATIENCE, and he will keep you in the hour of temptation, which shall come to try all those that dwell upon earth: which time I assure you is coming; nay, it is neer at hand. To England I say, You are that People whom God will make use of as Instruments to act for him many of those great things here declared. I see thy Salvation coming, O Jacob; I see it coming from the ISLANDS OF THE NORTH. Do not seek the World, do not seek your selves; Jer. 45. 4, 5. JEHOVAH hath said thus, What I have planted am I plucking up, and what I have built am I pluck∣ing down; and  thou great things to thy self? seek them not. To the poor dejected Jew, (who though our Ministers dayly pray for, yet they hate them so, they will not, if they can help it, let one tread upon English ground;) O Jew, thou art beloved of God for thy Fathers sake: Remember what one of thy own Rabbies prophecied should come to pass, Anno 1654. Zech. 12. 10 The Lord will pour out up∣on the house of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, his spirit of grace and of supplication, and they shal look up upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn as one mourneth for his onely son, &c. Salvation is of the Jews; and God will speedily make you the glory of all the World. Thus much for Eclipses.
Of the Quarters of the Year. Of the Spring. Sol enters ♈ D.H.M. March 8.8. 58. p.m. a △ Sol vacuâ. □ Saturn and Mars. Poli. 51. 34. IF they that have nothing else to do will be but pleased to sum up the dignities of the Planets, they will find Mars Lord of the year, as well as of the Ascendant, who al∣though he be courting Venus in the sixth House, all that have read Histories, know Julius Cesar could fight  days, as wel as wench a nights. Misty beetle browd  so darkens the
eyes of the Clergy from the nineth House, beholding Mars with a hateful , and that from Cardinal Signs, that the sharpness of a Souldiers sword is like to be more prevalent this year, then the sharpness of the Clergies wit. I shall speak of all the Planets apart; and first deliver the Opinion of Authors; secondly, my own: And I'le begin first with Mars, for he is an angry waspish Creature. Guido  saith, That when Mars is Lord of the Year, and is in ♈, it signi∣fies hot winds, a various change of Ayr, especially in the Eastern parts of the World; The year will be dry, and people troubled with  eyes, and 'tis well if they  so too; He signifies War to those people under that Sign he is in. Look  France; and I pray God England scape. He stirs up Insurrections and Tumults, Pestilences and Earthquakes; He will shew Kings what he is able to do. If his Latitude be Meridional (as now it is,) it is like to be a terrible year for Thunder and Lightening; the truth is, this year will amaze all the World. As for Saturn, (though he be not Lord of the year, yet because he casts a  to Mars,) we must have a few words with him too; He predicteth nothing in the World but Death and Mortality. We'l now leave Guido Bonatus, and come to Noel . Mars Lord of the year, and in a fiery Sign, causeth a most terrible hot and dry year, Hot and Pestilential Winds, Burnings, Lightening, Tempest, Hail; He destroys ships by Sea by violent Winds and Storms of Thunder; Cattel dye for want of water, especially sheep (he being in ♈,) Tertian Agues, Pestilences, and other acute diseases, toge∣ther with sudden deaths (none knows why) are as familiar amongst men, as Atomes in the Sun. We must not always dwell with Durret neither, but see a little what Haly saith also, and they all make but unplea∣sing Musick, because they all harp on the same string. For if Mars be in the sixth House, and in a dry Sign, as here he is, beware Health; the bodies of men will be trou∣bled with hot and dry infirmities, Fevers, and the like. But enough of this, too much, unless  better.
Now give me leave to pass my own Iudgment, ballanced by the prudent advise of my Brother Doctor Reason. Mars is Lord of the Ascendant, that's true; and that Sa∣turn is Lord of the Fourth, is as true as that: Saturn is in the Nineth, and Mars in the Sixth; as though Presbytery, which hath been so long in a Consumption, should now breathe its last. The  of Saturn and Mars corrupts the Ayr, and makes it Pestilential; such an Epidemical Disease will arise a∣mongst the Clergy and Lawyers, that this Nation will stink of them as bad as Aegypt did of the Frogs. The Dragons Tayl is in the Twelfth; Venus is Lady of the Twelfth, and in Conjunction with Mars in the Sixth, Women will be so much given to fall backwards, and men so given to Lechery, that they shall pay for their pleasure with the Pox to them. A viperous Sign ascending, and Mars Lord of it in his own House, and in the Sixth, and in Conjunction with the Lady of the Eight, makes the Vulgar hasten their ends by ill dyet and lewd courses: Quos perdere vult Jupiter de∣mentes facit. I think I have said enough of this Quarter; I am sure I shall have done, after I have taken a little notice, that Mars in the Eclipse of Sol is upon the Cusp of the seventh House in this Quarter, and Venus upon the Cusp of the Eight. Have a care young men, lest you pay for your plea∣sure; sweet meat hath sometimes sowre sawce.
Of the Summer Quarter. Sol enters ♋ D.H.M. June 10. 11. 32. p.m. â vacnâ ad ☍ Mars and Mercury, ☌ Mars and Mercury. I'Le lay my Authors aside for want of Paper, or Time, or something else, best known to my self; and only give my own Iudgment rationally from the Scheam. As the fourth House in the Spring Quarter was the eight House in the Eclipse of Sol; so the Sign ascending at Sol's ingress into ♈ is upon the eight House in this  sti∣val Quarter. If you please to look upon ☽, and do not find her upon the Cusp of the tenth House, I am beside the Cushion. The Governor of Souldiers Mars is angular in, the Fourth; He was in the Sixth in the Spring: What, must the sickness end in the Grave? Besides this, He hath gotten Mercury a subtil Knave with him, and is in ♊, as po∣tent
as subtil. Poor Jupiter is in his fall, and he gives ☽ entertainment, such as he can afford her. The ☽ runs to the  of Mercury and Mars, both which are with the  of Jupiter, Mercury what with his wit, and Mars what with his sword, is like to undo the poor Clergy man; who can help it? The times are coming, when none can be wise but such as are honest. If I can read the truth in the Book of the Creatures, Lon∣don shall find before this Quarter is past, that the Souldiery shall out-wit her Grandees, and some of them are like to smart for it. Do not wonder if you see a change of City Government here, but say I told you of it. Hatred to Flat∣tery, and danger that may ensue the speaking of the truth, stops my Pen; and so I leave this Summer Quarter. The Autumnal Quarter. Sol enters ♎ D.H.M. Septemb. 12. 2. 39. p.m. a△ Sol ad ✶ Saturn. □ Sol, Jupiter.
IF you do but cast your eyes upon the Figure, you shall spy Jupiter just upon the Cusp of the Ascendant, as though he would do much good to the Commonalty this Quar∣ter; But other Planets do not consent, and therefore all parties are not agreed. And if you will beleeve Haly the son of Abenragel, he saith, If Jupiter be in the Ascendant, and weak, as here he is (being in his fall,) Sol aftronts him with , which clips his wings, and makes both Jupiter and jo∣vial men, as Priests, Lawyers, &c. look but frigidly upon the business; I say, if you will beleeve Haly the son of A∣benragel, it signifies diminution of substance. What, must Priests lose their Tythes? Nay then take away their lives and all. Men shall mind themselves, and no bodies good but their own; and so they have done a great while; a man would have thought there could scarce have been ano∣ther degree of Comparison, But God certifies men and women by the Book of the Scripture, as well as by the Book of the Creature, That a little before the end Iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold. But to leave Haly; and come to the Scheam it self. As the Ascendant in the Spring was the eight House in the Summer Quarter, as who should say, We are like to have a sickly Summer; so it happens to be the tenth House in this Quarter. What! would the Commonalty turn Magistrates? fortasse aliquod . Remember the old Pro∣verb (Brother Commoner) Set a Begger on horseback, and he'l ride to the Devil. Wait Gods time, and he will give you your desires, but he'l rectifie them first: The time is at hand, but it is not yet; Amend your lives and Conver∣sations: He that cannot order himself, cannot order a State; and you, as you stand in Statu quo, are as fit to govern, as a Sow is to Fiddle, and would make as good Harmony in a Commonwealth, as the crying of a Hog would amongst a Consort of Musicians. Patience is a good Herb, but I doubt it grows but in few of your Gardens about this time: Regard what I may say, or you may hap to suffer for it. Search all Histories from the Creation of Adam to this present day, and see if you do not find that Rashness always drew De∣struction
after it, as a Needle draws the Thred: Dissention breeds desolation, but I'le tell you a Cure; Harken what God will say, and he will speak  to his people, that they may not return AGAIN to folly. I am necessitated to be brief; six sheets is too little for me now, though one will suffice me when I am dead. Mercury is pretty strong in the ninth House, and is in  to Mars, and Mars is Lord of the year. O Heavens! What have men no more wit yet, then to run after a company of prating Priests and Law∣yers? this is so good and so good; if you have not enough of them, you shall have enough of them before you dye; Neither shall you sleep 500 nights more before you know it; count off the time from Septemb. 12. this year. If many Planets in a House increase the signification of the House, then is this like to be a Mortal Quarter, so many Planets being in the eighth House: And seeing it is like to be no better, so I leave it. The Winter Quarter begins under this face of Heaven. Sol enters ♑ D.H.M Decemb. 10. 14. 2. p.m. a△ Sol ad △ Mercury. Poli. 51. 34.
IN passing Judgment upon this Quarter, I will steer a different course from all the rest; and why do you think I do so? To tell you the truth, even in Astrology, as well as in other Arts, there is more ways to the Wood then one. Mars Lord of the seventh in the Ascendant, and there very unfortunate, though with Spica virginis, (besides, I am mistaken if he be not Lord of the sixth too,) makes the Commonalty beleeve Wonders, sets them a brawling and wrangling; Discords, quarreling and fighting is like to be the middle of such corrupt Principles,  and loss the latter end. Brother Commoner, tell me this, and tell me but the truth, Was Christ the Prince of Peace, or was he the son of Bellona? A word is enough  a wise man. I will now leave Mars, and come to Saturn, which is a chip of the same block, though not made into the same form. He signifies a cold Winter, very full of Snow; He mis∣chieves all the Earth universally, and the fruits thereof. Kings cannot agree with their Subjects, whatsoever the matter is, but lay unjust Taxes and Tributes upon them: I think in my very Conscience they are mad to be undone; If they be, who can help it? I have very little hopes they will regard my words, though I tell them the truth; Nam gins bumana ruit in vetitum nefar. Venus Lady of the As∣cendant is in the second, though weak enough God knows: 'Tis no wonder to me that people should be buying and selling, marrying and giving in marriage, when destruction is coming; the old World minded nothing else above a hundred years before the Flood came. The people at Constantinople were so extreamly covetous, so mindful of private, so unmindful of publique good, that they like Apes were imitating their Masters in their shops, even three days after the Turks were within the walls, and that was the reason that the streets ran down with the blood of them, their wives and children. Get as much worldly goods as you can, I can tell you how much you shall keep, viz. Land enough (fee simple) to lie upon, and no more. The times
are coming when that Prophecy shall be fulfilled in Mal. 3. 18. Ye shall discern between the righteous and the , between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. There is a company of Ranters that deny the Scripture to be a Rule of Direction for our lives; but they must have more Liberty (forsooth) then the Scripture will give them. Well then, if you will not beleeve the Scripture, will you beleeve Diogenes? Quoth he, when he was asked what was the best thing belonging to a mans life, LIBERTY; But that man cannot be at Liberty that is a slave to his vices, neither he that wants many things: (If I had been minded to tell you that I had been an Academick, I would have told you Liberty consists in things HOMOGENEAL, and not in things HETEROGENEAL) Now then, a man that is covetous, or ambitious, or follows his pleasures, needs many things; Ergo far enough from Liberty: Thus Dis∣genes. Ranter, Ranter, Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. And thus I pass to Monethly Observations.
The true length of the Tropical Year. D. H. M. S. 365. 5. 48. 54.     D. M. S.   The Apogaeum of ♄ 27. 37. 25. ♐ Anno. 1652. ♃ 8. 28. 55. ♎ Anno. 1652. ♂ 29. 57. 54. ♌ Anno. 1652. ☉ 6. 36. 24. ♋ Anno. 1652. ♀ 0. 47. 23. ♋ Anno. 1652. ☿ 2. 13. 12. ♐ Anno. 1652. The Ingress of the Sun into the four Cardinal Points.     D. H. M.   ♈ March. 9. 8. 58. p. m. ♋ June. 10. 11. 32. p. m. ♎ Septemb. 12. 2. 39. p. m. ♑ . 10. 14. 2. p. m.
1652 January hath xxxi. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. The fornter year's no sooner wheel'd about, Working divisions in the Rabble rout, But Sol (old Saturns malice to asswage) Will bring the Magistrace upon the Stage To act his part. Misty unwholesom weather Begins the year, with Frost & Snow together. M. A. 1 g 4 56 circumcision. 2 a 4 33   3 b 3 51   4 C 2 53   5 d 1 46 Twelfth day. Cold misty freezing weather. 6 e 0 34   7 f 0 39 First quarter; 4 minutes before 9 at night. 8 g 1 46   9 a 2 48   10 C 3 39   11 b 4 20   12 d 4 46   13 e 4 59   14 f 4 57   15 g 4 44 Full Moon, 8 minutes before 4 in the after∣noon. 16 a 4 17   17 b 3 39   18 C 2 53   19 d 1 58   20 e 0 58   21 f 0 4   22 g 1 7   23 a 2 9 Term begins. Last quarter, 20 minutes past 7 at night. 24 b 3 5   25 C 3 55   26 d 4 33   27 e 4 54   28 f 4 59   29 g 4 44   30 a 4 11 New Moon, 17 minutes past 3 in the after∣noon. 31 b 3 14  
Observations on JANUARY. 'TIs a cold Moneth, and much business must not be expected to be done sitting by the fire. There are very few mutual Aspects of the Planets one with another during this Moneth. A Phrensie possesses the heads of the vulgar, to begin the New year with lyes and wranglings: Women will scold with their hus∣bands; a jealous Devil possesses their brains, and the Quintescence of Non-sence. Some men get their livings by inventing and printing of Lyes: Honest men are abused by Printers or Book-sellers, and that's no news, for I have been served so my self: I only quote it for this intent, That the Vulgar may not take it for Authentick which is cryed about the streets at the beginning of this Moneth. Misty dark cold freezing weather begins the Moneth; and if the Animal spirit be formed by the Rete mirabile, of Vital spirit and Ayr, unpleasing Actions are like to follow so unplea∣sing an Ayr. I'le tell you what Haly saith upon an Opposition of Sol and Saturn; Significat quod Reges adversarios habebunt homines de populo, Re∣ligiosos & fratres, & eos qui legem predicant: In plain English thus, Kings or Magistrates shall be op∣posed by the people, and so shall Clergy men and Lawyers. Sensibus haec imis (res non est parva) repone. If you see wise men blow the fire about this time, 'twill burn at last, although the wood be wet. The truth is, the Year is like to end better then it began: People hope for better times, and so do I.
1652. February hath xxix. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude, Now angry Mars with Saturn doth combine, And court each other with a friendly Trine. Lose this time Scot, and thy afflicted State Shall cry peccavi when it is too late. But ere th'Moneth end, Mars doth with Venus meet, And bids young maids beware the under-sheet. M. A 1 C 2 7   2 d 0 53 Candlemas. 3 e 0 22   4 f 1 35   5 g 2 39   6 a 3 33 First quarter, 28 min. after 9 in the morning. 7 b 4 15   8 C 4 45   9 d 4 58   10 c 4 59   11 f 4 46   12 g 4 21 Term ends. 13 a 3 45   14 b 2 59 Full Moon, 19 min. past 10 in the morning. 15 C 2 6   16 d 1 6   17 c 0 4   18 f 0 59   19 g 1   20 a z 57   21 b 3 47   22 C 4 26 Last quarter, 20 min. after 9 in the morning. 23 d 4 51   24 c 5 0   25 f 4 51 Matthias. 26 g 4 22   27 a 3 35   28 b 2 33 New Moon, half an hour after 12 at night. 29 C 1 20 Shrove-sunday.
Observations on FEBRUARY. MUch Kings Lands are like to be in question be∣tween the beginning and the middle of this Moneth, or else upon sale. A few ragged Scots desire an accommodation with this State; let them first learn to be honest; 'tis possible they may have it a∣bout this time. Scotland, Scotland, though I love thee but a little, yet I love thee better then thou dost thy self: Mice and Rats have possessed thy decayed buildings, and have been no plague at all for want of men to be a plague unto. If thou wilt but at this time consider the things that belong to thy peace, thy poor remnant may be saved: Remember the words of Solomon, Wo be to that Nation whose King is a Child. Women are subject to hard labors in Child-birth this Moneth; let them peruse my Book entituled, A Directory for Midwives, or A Guide for Women. The Moneth ends as full of Whoredoms, as an Egg is full of Meat: He does not know himself, that knows not his wife from another woman. And if the German Emperor chance to change this life for another about the latter end of this Moneth, remember I told you of it.
1652. March hath xxxi. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. The Sun's eclips'd in's throne, the Ld defend us From those sad mischiefs this Eclipse portends us; For suddenly doth Sol with Saturn square, Wishing both Kings and people to beware: Kings had as good be warn'd, for down they must The dealings of the Lord are always just. M. A. 1 d 0 2   2 e 1 13 Shrove Tursday. 3 f 2 23   4 g 3 22   5 a 4 8   6 b 4 39 First quarter, 4 minutes after 11 at night. 7 C 4 56   8 d 5 0   9 e 4 48   10 f 4 25   11 g 3 51 Beware Scotland, thy Counsels shall come to no effect. 12 a 3 6 Look to't Holland, or else all the fat's i'th fire. 13 b 2 9   14 C 1 15 Full Moon Eclipsed, 3 hours after midnight, Windy. 15 d 0 13   16 e 0 51   17 f 1 53   18 g 2 51   19 a 3 41   20 b 4 21   21 C 4 48   22 d 5 0 Last quarter, 6 minutes after 7 at night. 23 e 4 54   24 f 4 31   25 g 3 51 Lady day. 26 a 2 54   27 b 1 45   28 C 0 29   29 d 0 48 New Moon, about 3 of the clock in the morn. 30 e 2 1   31 f 3 5  
Observations on MARCH. IN this Moneth Astrologers begin their Year: They hold the World was created at that time when Sol en∣tred ♈, and my self could almost afford to be of that opinion; If the Year do begin then, it begins but scurvily, and what will the end be? Kings look but poorly upon the bu∣siness; This Year will not please them, and it will do them less good to be angry; for, Impedit ira animum ne possit cernere verum. Kings and Magistrates theeve by Authority, as thinking themselves above the Law; The common people theeve, and make a Law of the Sword. Expect Thunder and Lightening about the 12 day of this Month in the morning. The Month ends with Execution of Justice upon Malefactors, and they no small fools neither. Remember what Daniel told Bel∣shazzar, Dan. 5. Holland, look to thy self; if the beginning of January, and the latter end of March, be not fatal times to thee, I cannot read true English from the Book of the . The Sword of the angry Angel is drawn against thee, and it is not yet put up into its Scabbard: When thou wast few in number, and little in the Land, thou wast hum∣ble, and thy God lookt upon thee, and taught thee, (for he always teaches the humble;) then thou grewest proud, and hast forgotten thy God, and mindest thy self; thy God knows how to bring thee poor again: Thou wast a good Servant, but prov'st an ill Master; 'tis only affliction must do thee good, and thou shalt have it; I tell thee of it before it is quite come upon thee: Remember thy Creator, before the evil days come: Because there is some good things in thee, thy House shall not absolutely be left thee desolate. Dan 4. 26 Thy Kingdom shall be sure to thee, after thou shalt have known that the Heavens do rule: Wherefore let my Counsel be acceptable to you, &c. And thus, though I forgot you in Ianuary, yet I remembred you in March: What remains, but that you remember your selves, and look to the  from whence you are hewn.
1652. April hath xxx. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude Just at beginning, Saturns lowring eye Molests the Earth with a disquiet sky? Besides all this, you shall be sure to find The ayr distemper'd with impetuous wind. Mens brains are addle;  their dispositions To vex our State with violent Petitions. S. A. 1 g 3 56 Cold and windy weather begins the Moneth. 2 a 4 33   3 b 4 54   4 C 5 0   5 d 4 51 First quarter, at a quarter of an hour past 4 in the afternoon. 6 e 4 30 What Cony catehers are here ? 7 f 3 51   8 g 3 15   9 a 2 23   10 b 1 25   11 C 0 24 Palm Sunday. 12 d 0 40   13 e 1 43 Full Moon, 17 minutes after 7 at night. 14 f 2 42   15 g 3 35   16 a 4 17   17 b 4 45   18 C 4 59 Easter, day. 19 d 4 55   20 e 4 35   21 f 3 58 Last quarter, at one of the clock in the morn. 22 g 3 4 Clear weather, but windy. 23 a 2 3 Perilous Counsels are abroad, God knows what the end will be. 24 b 0 50   25 C 0 25 Mark Evangelist. 26 d 1 39   27 e 2 46 New Moon, half an hour past 7 at night. 28 f 3 41   29 g 4 24   30 a 4 50  
Observations on APRIL. IF I had not known that the Devil had been a Lyar from the beginning, and also ruled in the children of disobedience, I should have admired that so many lying Pamphlets should have flown about the streets, like Butterflies in the Sun, this Spring Quarter: But I know it; and Admiration is the daughter of Igno∣rance. What, does the Lawyers go about to contend with the State? or be they Judges? or what be they? Perhaps 'tis Term time. Lawyers, a word or two with you; Have you taken a Lease of your places? Have you built you a Fools Paradise in the Ayr? Do, do, and walk up and down in't when you have done; I shrewdly suspect you will act some∣thing this Moneth, which will occasion your final ruine: 'Tis the absolute property of a Fool to go a∣bout to out-wit a wiser man then himself: Learn to be wise, and know this, that two years shall not pass over your heads before the time comes, that a  de non molestando shall not be procured for you for love nor money: Because a Fieri facias could not make you honest men, a Scire facias shall make you know that you are but men. The latter end of the Term will prove more fortunate to my Bro∣ther Commoner, then the beginning.
1652 May hath xxxi. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. This Moneth was (as our ancient fathers say) Called of old, The merry Moneth of May: Muse not if it prove otherwise; 'tis found Of late, the World is turning upside down. O London, London, Sol is joyn'd with Mars, And in thy Sign; Beware of Civil Jars. S. D. 1 b 5 0 Philip and Jacob. 2 C 4 54   3 d 4 36   4 e 4 5   5 f 3 23 Term begins. First quarter, 45 minutes after 9 morning. 6 g 2 34   7 a 1 38   8 b 0 38   9 C 0 26   10 d 1 29   11 e 2 30 It ne'r goes well when friends fall out. 12 f 3 24   13 g 4 10 Full Moon, near 8 of the clock in the morn. 14 4 41 Harm watch, harm catch. 15 b 4 58   16 C 4 58   17 d 4 39   18 e 4 3   19 f 3 14   20 g 2 12 Last quarter, 19 min. after 7 in the morning. 21 a 1 2   22 b 0 10   23 C 1 23   24 d 2 30   25 e 3 28   26 f 4 14   27 g 4 44 Aseension. New Moon at 8 in the morning. 28 a 4 58 Thunder and Lightening. 29 b 4 57   30 C 4 41   31 d 4 13 ends.
Observations on MAY. HOw many good Aspects happen this Moneth? What felicity do they promise? But, the truth is, One performance is worth ten promises. I could almost afford to be afraid of a sickness before it comes. If London finde a sickly time in May, what will it do in July? London, look to thy self; I ne∣ver knew Mars do thee good when he came into II. There hath been many Mutinies in thee; didst thou ever get any thing by them? Will former examples do thee no good? Hath God preserved thee all this while in these civil Wars for nothing else? Doth not thy Government please thee? Thou thinkest to mend it; Thou shalt mend it, as  mended her self: They were not content with Scipio, but Caesar came and taught them better manners: Suis & ipsa Roma viribus ruit. All the sins of Sodom are in thee (by report,) and he that destroyed Sodom is the same still. Take heed of thy Councels; Aspire not: Get able Physicians (a Pestilence is coming;) Be not overweening of thy own strength: The righteous God direct thee: I am afraid of thee this Moneth, that thou shouldst act something dishonorable to thy self. O Citizens, Citi∣zens, why should you go about to undo your selves? This World will not last always. I beseech you in the word of a friend, and of one that loves your souls, have a care of building upon fond conceits this month. Take notice what I say, or else these warnings of mine may be read in your ears another day, when you would be loath to hear them; and Conscience shall then be Mille Testes.
1652. June hath xxx. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. I'th latter end of May expect much Thunder, With spritely fire, renting the clouds asunder: And for ought I know, June, to make amends, in the same manner t'other ends. The middle's clear, but the Celestial Powers Conclude the Month with thunder, lightning, showres S. D. 1 e 3 33   2 f 2 45   3 g 1 50   4 a 0 50 First quarter half an hour after 3 in the morning. 5 b 0 11   6 C 1 13 Whitsunday. 7 d 2 14   8 e 3 10 Here"s a couple of Theeves met. 9 f 3 57   10 g 4 34   11 a 4 55 Full Moon 10 minutes after 6 at night. 12 b 4 59   13 C 4 44   14 d 4 12   15 22   16 f 2 21   17 g 0 11   18 a 1. 1 begins. Last quarter a little after noon. 19 b 1 12   20 C C 25   21 d 3 19   22 e 4 6   23 f 4 39   24 g 4 57 Midsummer.  sights in the ayr. 25 a 4 59 New Moon 46 minu es after 5 at night. 26 b 4 46 Priests and Lawyers look to your selves; both the Civil  and the Soldiery op∣pose you. 27 C 4 20   28 d 3 42   29 e 2 55   30 f 2 1  
Observations on JUNE. AFter ill beginnings follows as corrupt proceedings; and the beginning of June dances after the pipe of the  end of May. Storms above, and stormy Actions below: and what will the end be? But Sol oppo∣seth Jupiter, and clears the Ayr: There comes a man from the North, and clears our domestical Distempers; He is sent from God to do it. Oftenders are brought  condign punishment (or will be very speedily,) I hope the sign∣posts in London were not made to hang men upon, a Gibbet will serve the turn. Quos perdere vnit Jupiter; dementes . London, London, thou wilt not be ruled; Thou hast known enough of the Sword by what God hath done thereby upon other Towns of this Nation: Hast thou not heard what God did to Germany, and to Ireland? Take notice (about the latter end of this Moneth) what unusual sights thou seest in the Ayr; Doth thy God do any thing in vain? Scholars that will not learn by documents, must be ; and so art thou like to be for ought I know: An Acre of  will scarce cure thee of thy madness. The  hath taken a Lease of this City for five years time, and will  be then gotten out by a Lease of Ejectment. Rome, look to thy self; If thou findest quarrels amongst thy Grandees about this Month, or the next; if such a terrible supernatural sight in the Ayr  thee, such as thy eyes never saw before; if Contentions and domestical Duels be within thee; Ask thy learned Iesuites, and they have wit enough, if they have but honesty enough, to tell thee, That thy fatal and final Catastrophe will come in 1655. Thou art great, ( true;) I could wish thou wast not as proud. Thou art strong, ('tis true,) and so was , yet thou knowest what became of it. Fetch a deep sigh, and say, H eu nihil invitu sas  credere divis.
1652. July hath xxxi. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. This Moneth beginneth pleasantly and fair, But Sol and Saturn soon disturb the Ayr With stormy weather; and perhaps may thunder, Our valiant Soldiers get good store of plun∣der, You shal be sure to have a troubled sky: Do not  the works of God on high. S. D 1 1 2   2 a 0 1   3 b 1 0 First quarter half an hour after 8 at night. 4 C 2 1   5 d 2 56   6 e 3 48   7 f 4 25 Term ends. 8 g 4 51   9 a 5 0   10 b 4 51   11 C 4 22 Full Moon 49 minutes after a in the morn. 12 d 3 37   13 e 2 36   14 f 1 26   15 g 0 10   16 a 1 3   17 b 2 12 Last quarter half an hour past 6 at night. 18 C 3 13   19 d 4 1   20 e 4 35   21 f 4 55   22 g 5 0   23 a 4 44   24 b 4 26   25 C 3 50 James Apostle. New  half an hour after 7 in the morning. 26 d 3 4   27 e 2 11   28 f 1 12   29 g 0 11   30 a 0 M 50   31 b 1 50  
Observations on JULY. HAving considered that the Grave equals all men, I'l now make no difference of persons, but con∣joyn in my judgment the Kings with the Beggars. The Moneth begins with Theeving, and ends in Tempests: Thunder, Lightening, Hail, and Rain possesses the Ele∣ments about the latter end of the Moneth; and if the Elements, then all Elementary bodies: 'Tis pity Bed∣lam is not big enough to hold all the mad folks: In∣deed the World is mad, and therefore 'twill not last long. This Moneth Sol is joyned with Saturn, and Mars gives Mercury another meeting. Men will be subject to coyn false Mony, to Theeving and deceiv∣ing one another, (and that they ever did since I knew them.) Wise men will not be regarded, though they be honest. For, Probitas laudatur & alget. Men will be subject to study the Philosophers stone, and that they are like to have when the Devil's blind. It's a strange thing that men should go about to get their living by lying and deceiving: Pray tell me (Countrymen) is that the way to Heaven, yea or no? Look to't your selves, (and say I told you of it,) for 'tis nothing to me. Nobis parta quies. About the latter end of the Moneth a couple of Knaves will meet; who they are, time will manifest. People will be incited to leave the ways of God, and study Necromancy, and other Diabolical Arts. Cor∣rupt beginnings are baseness in the middle, and bit∣terness in the latter end, and so will they finde them; and let them say, I told them so. The last day of the Month save one produceth Thunder and Light'ning in the : Have a care Rome; beware of fire.
1652. August hath xxxi. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. Now Mars & Saturn meet   , And give Rome warning what death she shal dyon. The Ayr's disturb'd with fatal Coruscations, Troubling the brains of giddy-headed Nati∣ons. Of Italy, and many people more, Rome's deep  engag'd; let her pay al the score. M. D. 1 C 2 46   2 d 3 36 First quarter a little before noon. 3 c 4 16   4 f 4 45   5 g 4 59   6 a 4 56   7 b 4 35 Windy weather. 8 C 3 54   9 d 2 57 Full Moon 3 quarters past 10 in the morning 10 c 1 48   11 f 0 31   12 g 0 46   13 a 1 59   14 b 3 3   15 C 3 56   16 d 4 32 Last quarter half an hour past 2 in the morn. 17 e 4 53   18 f 5 0   19 g 4 51   20 a 4 30   21 b 3 55   22 C 3 12   23 d 2 20 New Moon at almost 11 at night. A windy season. 24 e 1 22 Bartholomew Apostle. 25 f 0 21   26 g 0 41   27 a 1 42   28 b 2 38   29 C 3 28   30 d 4 10   31 e 4 40  
Observations on AUGUST. SCotland, Saturn leaves thee, and I wish from my heart thy dishonesty may do the like. Rome, look to thy self; Do not fall out one with another: Re∣member what came of such a business towards the latter end of Nero's reign. Tell the Jesuites what I say, and they have wit enough to pick English out of it. Do not admire if you see Wars in Bohemia again. The Plague rangeth up and down Italy, and Sicillia is like to suffer. Apulia is troubl'd with worser businesses then the Spider Tarantula, and so is like to be these two years & a half. All the water in Danubius wil not quench the fiery spirits in Vlm. Syracusa in Sicillia, Prague in Bohemia, Rome and Damascus, have a care of fire: Thou remembrest the time, Rome, when Nero set thee on fire; and thou wast built again: but if once God set fire to thee, that will never be quench'd. God will give thee warnings enough of it, (if thou knowest when thou hast enough:) and when thou seest these warnings in the Ayr, remember 1655. The Moneth ends indifferent serenely: We seem pretty quiet in London: I protest, 'tis almost time. I hope thou wilt be wise one of these days, especially when thou canst scarce do otherwise: I'le give thee this Motto to set under thy Red Cross; Never City Withstood her friends more then thou hast doxe. Thou hast a little time now left thee to consider what belongs to thy peace; Make use of it, and make good use of it too: For, Post est occasio calva.
1652. September hath xxx. days. Moneth days. Week days. Moons Latitude. Tis , the last Moneth did serenely end, Neither will this Months Ayr us much . Now for Accommodation if you can, yet I doubt, it's past the Wit of Man. Upon a sudden changes wheel about, The  but taked up, it is not out. M. D. 1 f 4 57 First quarter at one of the clock in the morn. 2 g 4 59   3 a 4 43   4 b 4 10   5 C 3 20   6 d 2 14   7 c 0 54 Full Moon, half an hour after 6 at night. 8 f 0 20   9 g 1 38   10 a 2 47   11 b 3 48   12 C 4 26   13 d 4 51   14 e 5 0 Last quarter 19 minutes after 1 in the aftern. 15 f 4 53   16 g 4 33   17 a 4 0   18 b 3 18   19 C 27   20 d 1 30   21 e 0 29 Matthew. 22 f 0 32 New Moon 47 minut. after 3 in the aftern: A  cloudy Ayr (if not rainy.) 23 g 1 34   24 a 2 31   25 b 3 22   26 C 4 5   27 d 4 37   28 e 4 55   29 f 5 0 Arch. 30 g 4 51 First  6 minutes after noon.
SEPTEMBERS Observations. NO sooner doth this Moneth begin, but ☉ and ♀ are got together; but ♀ hath got 8. degrees of Latitude. 'Tis in ♍, and therefore but a barren busi∣nesse. I could wish People would looke after their healths, I am afraid it is but a sickly time. Are the Jewes marching towerds Jerusalem or no? Let them take sober advice, the time is not yet. The Floren∣tines cannot be quiet; what's the matter with them; are they too rich? If about the latter end of this Moneth the Turkish Emperour, dye, I cannot helpe it; It may be hee hides his Head, and tis onely the Janizaries are tumultuous; if hee can save his Life, let him: I give him faire warning of it.
1652. October hath xxxi Dayes. Moneth Dayes Weeks Dayes. Moons Latitude. The Sun and  with the Virgins Spike, Brings wholsom winds and showers; & this I like: The Sun and Iove in sextile cleare the Ayre, And tell the Husbandman it will be faire: e're the Month end, Sol  with Saturn square Let them to whom t' belongeth have a care. M. A 1 a 4 21   2 b 3 35   3 C 2 36   4 d 1 26   5 e 0 7   6 f 1 10   7 g 2 23 Full Moone, halfe an houre past 3. in the morn. Wind and raine. 8 a 3 26   9 b 4 14   10 C 4 45   11 d 4 59   12 e 4 57   13 f 4 38   14 g 4 7 Last Quarter 43. Min. past 4. in the morning. 15 a 3 24   16 b 2 34   17 C 1 39   18 d 0 39 Luke Evang. 19 e 0 23   20 f 1 25   21 g 2 23   22 a 3 16 New M. 8. min. past 9. in the morn. Faire and clear weather. 23 b 3 59 Tearme begins. 24 C 4 33   25 d 4 54 Bitter cold winds. 26 e 5 0   27 f 4 50   28 g 4 24 Simon and Jude. 29 a 3 43 First Quarter, halfe an houre past 9. at night. 30 b 2 49   31 C 1 43  
OCTOBER, Observations. NOw every one lookes to himselfe; Can Sub∣jects finde no other time to Rebell but when Winter drawes on? A mad World: Subjects would be Kings, and what the Nobles would be, neither themselves nor I know. The Pope hath all Holi∣nesse and no Wit, perhaps neither. Thou wast made Pope but onely for a Cloake for the jesuits villany; Thy condemnation is of thy selfe O Rome. Thou writest thy selfe a Servant of Servants, and now thou art made such a foole indeed. The Plague in∣creaseth in London, and the Colledge in Amen-corner, cannot helpe it. Praevisum nequit arte levare Malum, Honesty is an excellent Herbe in the Garden of the Magistrates, and Humblewort would suit the Commons very well, either of them both being taken in the Morning fasting, you shall be safe from Gods Vengeance that day: London, the latter end of this Moneth will be troublesome: The Heavens give thee warning of it, and so doe I.
1652 November hath xxx Dayes. Moneth Days. Weeks Days. Moons Latitude. The Worlds distracted: Councells, Consultations Do fill the heads of the Europian Nations. Embassadors are rife; O cruell Fate N'ere to take Councell ere it be too late, I feare a great ones Life; and cause I have: But Kings and Beggers levell'd are i'th Grave. M. A 1 d 0 30 All Saints. 2 e 0 46   3 f 2 0   4 g 3 4   5 a 3 53 Powder Treason Full Moon, a little after two in the afternoone. 6 b 4 57 Wind and cold Rain, or Sleet. 7 C 4 57   8 d 4 48   9 e 4 44   10 f 4 14   11 g 3 34   12 a 2 45 Last Quarter: almost at 12 at Night 13 b 1 49   14 C 0 49   15 d 0 11   16 e 1 12   17 f 2 11   18 g 3 5   19 a 3 52   20 b 4 28   21 C 4 51 New Moon, almost at 3 in the Morning, 22 d 5 0   23 e 4 24 f 4 28   25 g 3 49   26 a 2 55   27 b 1 51   28 C 0 41 Terme Ends. 29 d 0 32 Last Quarter, half an hour after 6 in the morning 30 e 1 45 Andrew Apostle.
NOVEMBERS Observations. I Had forgotten the last Moneth that some great person may expect a Catastrophe,  but a change out of one World into another, and that wee were all borne to. What difference is there betweene a Prince and my Selfe when wee are dead; nay when a Prince is but asleepe, what is hee the better for his Kingdome? London, let thy Grandee's take no per-nicious Councell this Moneth, for ' come to no∣thing: doth not hee looke more like a Mad-man then like a Saint, that's catching Butterflies when he should be quenching his House that is on fire? Thou standst humming and hawing, and fending and proving, when thou shouldst be looking after able Physitians to cure thy children of the Pestilence. Tis not a Plaister of Turbulencie, mixed with a little Oyle of Nonsence, and distilled through the Alembick of a Fooles braines that can cure thee at this time: you will not give your Children what they desire, when they are wasp∣ish neither will your God you: Bitter cold weather ends the  Moneth (the time of the yeare considered) and I hope the  man when hee reades it will looke to his Cattell; it may propably be too late when hee feeles it. There's a Lyon will dye neere about this Moneth; you will know what I mean when it comes to passe.
1652 December hath xxxi Dayes. Moneth Days. Weeks Days. Latitude. Moons Good Lord, how truly this Moneth is troubled, With violent actions; How our feares are doubled. It is impossible to live at ease, For those that know not Christ the Prince of peace He doth with inward joy to's Saints appeare, His person's lovely: Thus I end the Year. S. A 1 f 2 47   2 g 3 47   3 a 4 26   4 b 4 53   5 C 5 0 Full Moon, half an houre after two in the morning 6 d 4 50   7 e 4 24   8 f 3 46   9 g 2 56   10 a 2 2   11 b 1 2   12 C 0 4 Last Quarter 46 Minutes after 9 at night. 13 d 1 0   14 e 2 0   15 f 2 54   16 g 3 42   17 a 4 20   18 b 4 47   19 C 4 59   20 d 4 55 New Moon, 20 Minutes after 7 at Night. 21 e 4 35   22 f 3 57   23 g 3 4   24 a 3 2   25 b 50 Christs Nativity. 26 C 0 24 Steven Protomar. 27 d 1 37 Iohn Evang. First Quarter, almost at 3 in the after∣noon. 28 e 2 42 Innocents. 29 f 3 38   30 g 4 24   31 a 4 49  
DECEMBERS Observations. THe Yeare drawes now towards an end, I would willingly have written, so doe our Troubles, but instead of Troubles the Compositor sets Wits Oh! what a Moneth is here com∣ming, How many blessings hath God given this poore Nation, and it made it as mad almost (if not altogether) as those were, That when they came into a fertile Countrey, went to erect a Tower of Babell, I would have said Confusion, (for I thinke the word signifies no other) But God came downe to see the Tower which the children of men were building, and confoun∣ded their Language, and so he will your Actions Nature, and the God of Nature bids you be quiet; if not the one will leave you, and the other destroy you: Ah London, London, hast not thou been Caput horum  malorum? God is mercifull, and that's all the hope I have of thee: Thou mayst be wise, thou art old enough: I tell thee truly, had there not been some honest people in thee whom the Lord regarded as much (and it may be more too) as Elisha the Prophet regarded the face of  King of Iudah: JEHOVAH had rained Fire and Brimstone upon thee from JEHOVAH as hee did upon Sodom. Thou  Astrologers, and yet I pray for thee (though thou never did'st mee good) and I'le tell thee from the Bookē of the Creatures what is like to betide thee about this moneth, or the beginning of the next: Thou wilt be troubled with   Murder, and Theevery, and tis 1000 l. to a penny if it be not acted by such as pretend to Religion: Thy Women will be subject to Seditions, and instead of being House-wives will turne State-rulers. Looke to the Malignants, have a care they get not Armes into their Houses: Or if you please you may iet them alone, they have not Wit euough to use them, and yet perhaps more Wit then Honesty. And when they can doe nothing else, then they  a lying and scribling, and  the Year ends.
January 1652. The place of the Planets and  every day at Noon.   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S A S D S D M D M A   ♑ ♑ ♋ R ♐ ♒ ♒ ♒ ♈ 1 21 5 25 2 25 58 28 12 27 57 1 52 3 8 15 0 2 22 7 10 16 25 53 28 25 28 43 3 7 4 49 14 57 3 23 8 24 38 25 48 23 38 29 30 4 25 6 28 14 53 4 24 9 9 43 25 43 28 52 0 17 5 38 8 4 14 50 5 25 10 24 43 25 38 29 5 1 4 6 54 9 38 14 47 6 26 11 9 18 25 33 29 18 1 51 8 11 11 13 14 44 7 27 13 23 20 25 28 29 31 2 38 9 25 12 44 14 41 8 28 14 6 32 25 23 29 44 3 25 10 40 14 16 14 38 9 29 15 20 0 25 18 29 58 4 12 11 56 15 47 14 34 10 0 16 2 59 25 13 0 10 4 59 13 11 17 11 14 31 11 1 17 15 43 25 8 0 23 5 45 14 26 18 36 14 28 12 2 18 28 1 25 0 36 6 22 15 42 20 0 14 25 13 3 19 9 59 24 58 0 49 7 19 16 57 21 19 14 22 14 4 20 21 49 24 53 1 2 8 5 18 12 22 36 14 18 15 5 23 3 38 24 48 1 16 8 52 19 28 23 50 14 15 16 6 24 5 30 24 43 1 27 9 39 20 43 24 1 14 12 17 7 25 7 19 24 38 1 40 10 25 21 59 26 9 14 9 18 8 26 9 0 14 33 1 52 11 12 23 14 27 13 14 6 19 9 26 20 32 24 28 2 11 59 24 29 28 13 14 3 20 10 26 2 26 24 23 2 17 12 45 25 44 29 8 13 59 21 11 27 14 30 24 18 2 29 13 32 27 0 30 0 13 56 22 12 28 0 24 14 2 41 14 18 28 15 0 48 13 53 23 13 28 9 53 24 9 2 53 15 5 29 28 1 32 13 50 24 14 29 22 58 24 4 3 5 15 51 0 45 2 8 13 47 25 15 30 6 29 24 0 3 17 16 38 2 0 2 37 13 44 26 16 31 20 2 23 55 3 29 17 24 3 15 3 0 13 40 27 17 32 4 26 23 51 3 41 18 10 4 28 3 16 13 37 28 18 33 19 0 23 46 3 53 18 57 5 45 3 26 13 34 29 19 34 3 48 23 42 4 6 19 43 7 0 3 29 13 31 30 20 35 18 37 23 38 4 16 20 29 8 15 3 26 13 28 31 21 36 3 27 23 34 4 28 21 15 9 30 3 16 13 24 Latitude for Dayes 1 0 12 0 15 1 3 1 17 0 31     11 0 13 0 14 0 57 1 30 1 2     21 0 14 0 13 1 50 1 34 0 34    
The Lunar Aspects January 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Pla. mutuall     Orient Orient Occid. Occid. Occid. aspects 1   . 23     11. 42 14. 55   2             ☽ Perig. 3     6. 5 6.       4               5 0. 57 1. 40 7. 11   22. 48   ☉♄9. 57 6   Occid.       4. 43 ☽  10. 17 7 8. 56 3. 45 12. 38 19. 10       8         7. 44 14. 54   9 21. 10 11. 25           10       3. 24 23. 35     11           8. 37   12     12. 58 19. 47       13               14   5. 51           15 3. 52             16         11. 36 21. ☽ Apog. 17     8. 16         18       4. 46       19   6. 24 23. 28         20 15. 47           ☽  21. 33 21   19. 40           22     10. 28   1. 57 7. 5   23 7. 20     10. 34       24   1. 27     15. 3 16. 41   25 17. 23     18. 51     ♀ ☿ 7. 24 26     22. 41     23. 22 ♃  5. 9 27         1. 32     28   7. 21   1. 6       29               30 3. 17         23. 30 ☽ Perig 31     1. 10   10. 2    
Febr. 1652. The place of the Planets and ♌ at Noon.   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S. A S. D M. A M. A S. A   ♒ ♓ ♋ R. ♑ ♓ ♓ ♓ ♈ 1 22 36 18 30 23 30 4 39 22 10 45 59 13 21 2 23 36 3 26 23 26 4 50 22 48 12 0 2 34 13 18 3 24 37 5 23 22 5 1 23 34 13 15 2 1 13 15 4 25 38 2 17 23 18 5 12 24 20 14 30 1 21 13 12 5 26 38 15 59 23 14 5 23 25 6 15 45 0 34 13 9 6 27 39 29 18 23 10 5 34 25 52 16 59 29 42 13 5 7 28 39 12 24 23 7 5 45 26 38 18 14 28 46 13 2 8 29 40 25 3 23 3 5 56 27 24 19 28 27 47 12 59 9 0 40 7 36 23 0 6 6 28 10 20 43 26 46 12 56 10 1 41 19 30 22 57 6 17 28 56 21 57 25 45 12 53 11 2 41 1 21 22 54 6 27 29 42 23 12 24 44 12 50 12 3 42 12 52 22 51 6 37 0 28 24 26 23 43 12 46 13 4 44 24 36 22 48 6 47 1 14 25 41 22 45 12 43 14 5 42 6 27 22 45 6 57 1 59 26 55 21 52 12 40 15 6 42 18 0 22 42 7 7 2 45 28 10 21 4 12 37 16 7 29 51 22 39 7 16 3 30 24 10 22 12 34 17 8 43 11 33 22 37 7 26 4 16 0 19 48 12 30 18 9 43 23 29 22 34 7 35 5 1 53 19 20 12 27 19 10 43 5 42 22 32 7 44 5 47 3 19 0 12 24 20 11 43 18 32 22 30 7 53 6 33 4 21 18 47 12 21 21 12 43 1 55 22 28 8 2 7 15 5 35 18 42 12 18 22 13 43 14 43 22 26 8 11 8 4 6 49 18 44 12 15 23 14 43 28 39 22 24 8 20 8 49 3 18 53 12 11 24 15 43 12 47 22 22 8 29 9 34 9 17 19 9 12 8 25 16 43 27 28 22 20 8 38 10 19 10 31 19 32 12 5 26 17 43 12 27 22 18 8 47 11 4 11 45 20 0 12 2 27 18 43 27 25 22 16 8 59 11 50 12 59 20 34 11 59 28 19 43 11 10 22 15 9 4 12 36 14 12 21 16 11 56 29 20 42 27 2 22 13 9 13 13 20 15 25 22 2 11 52   Latitude 1 0 15 0 12 1 43 1 26 1 28       11 0 16 0 11 1 36 1 16 3       21 0 17 0 11 0 29 1 2 2 22    
The Lunar Aspects Feb. 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Pla. mutuall     Occid. Orient. Occid. Occid. Occid. aspects. 1   7. 29   2. 50     ♄♂18 2     3. 57       ☽16. 0 3 12. 59 8. 45       22. 36   4     5. 30         5 21. 28 13. 36   . 18. 9 0. 7     6           . 0 32   7         12. 5 Orient. ☉☿. 0. 4 8 11. 21   8 20, 15 . 4. 29   6. 14   9             ♄♀. 18 8 10   6. 49   20. 20 7. 12     11               12           20. 10   13 ♉22. 19           ☽ apog. 14     1. 57         15   8. 49     22. 51     16     15. 11 7. 50       17   21. 55       14. 47 ☽. . 0. 26 18               19 . 8. 27   2. 28         20   6. 20       0. 9   21 21. 20     . 10. 27 7. 27     22           6. 32   23     16. 31 . 19. 42 17. 21   ♃♀6. 4 24 . 5. 34 15. 32         ♂♀13. 25       22. 52       26         . 0. 2 12. 29   27     17. 41       ☽ Perig. 28 12. 49 16. 19           29     18. 18        
March 1652. The signe degree and minute the Planets are in   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S. A S. D M. A M. A S D   ♓ ♈ ♋ ♑ ♈ ♈ ♒ ♈ 1 21 42 11 45 22 129 21 14 5 16 39 22 52 11 49 2 22 42 26 0 22 11 9 29 14 50 17 53 22 48 11 46 3 23 41 11 0 22 10 9 37 15 35 19 6 24 49 11 43 4 24 41 24 22 22 9 9 16 20 20 20 25 55 11 40 5 25 40 8 0 22 8 9 51 17 5 21 33 27 4 11 36 6 26 40 21 43 22 8 10 0 17 50 22 46 28 19 11 33 7 27 39 3 40 22 7 10 7 18 35 24 0 29 34 11 30 8 28 39 16 9 22 7 10 14 19 20 25 13 1 54 11 27 9 29 38 28 41 22 7 10 21 20 5 26 26 2 15 11 24 10 0 38 10 21 22 7 10 28 20 50 27 40 3 39 11 21 11 1 37 22 10 22 7 10 35 21 34 28 53 5 7 11 17 12 37 43 22 7 10 41 22 19 0 6 63 36 11 14 13 3 30 15 29 22 7 10 48 23 3 1 19 8 8 11 11 35 27 21 22 8 10 54 23 48 2 32 9 41 11 8 15 5 34 9 18 22 8 11 0 24 3 45 11 17 11 5 16 15 22 9 11 6 25 18 4 12 55 11 2 17 7 33 3 16 22 9 11 12 26 6 10 14 10 58 18 8 32 15 21 22 10 11 17 26 45 7 16 14 10 55 19 9 31 28 10 22 11 11 23 27 30 8 36 17 58 10 20 10 30 11 0 22 12 11 28 28 14 9 48 19 40 10 49 21 11 29 24 31 22 13 11 33 28 58 11 21 26 10 46 12 28 8 0 22 14 11 38 29 42 12 13 23 12 10 42 23 13 27 21 53 22 15 11 43 0 26 13 26 25 0 10 39 14 26 6 2 22 17 11 47 1 10 14 38 26 50 10 36 15 25 21 11 22 18 11 52 1 54 15 50 28 40 10 33 26 16 23 6 19 22 20 11 56 2 38 17 2 0 29 10 30 27 17 22 21 19 22 21 12 0 3 22 18 14 2 19 10 27 28 18 21 6 0 22 23 12 4 4 6 19 26 4 9 10 23 29 19 20 20 23 22 25 12 7 4 50 20 38 6 0 10 20 30 20 18 4 45 22 27 12 5 33 21 50 52 10 17 31 21 17 18 43 22 29 12 14 6 17 23 2 9 43 10 14   1 0 18 0 10 0 22 0 41 2 22     11 0 19 0 10 0 15 0 10 0 27     21 0 19 0 9 0 8 0 21 1 47    
The Lunar Aspects March 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall     Occid. Orient Occid. Occid. Orient Aspects. 1   15. 59   3. 53 8. 39 18. 12 ☽0. 3.☉♄11. 38 2     21. 58         3   19. 46           4 0. 9         3 0   5       18. 25     ♄♀ 11. 13 6 11. 4       4. 12 15. 58   7     12. 21         8   11. 17   6. 16 19. 14     9 4. 11             10               11       0. 17 16. 55   ♂♄ 17. 11 12     15. 7     6. 53 ☽ Apog. 13   13. 48         ♃☿ 19. 57 ☽ Eclipsed 14 15 37             15     3. 30       ☽ 3. 45 16   2. 51   8. 40       17     14. 31   6. 26     18   11. 3       0. 6   19 21. 4             20           17. 26   21       7. 39     ☉♃ 1. 43 ♃♀11. 57 22 7. 6   6. 7   6. 53     23   ♉ 0. 30   14. 55   5. 57   24 13. 55       12. 55     25       18. 47       26     10. 24   20. 3   ☽ Perig. 27   4. 0       19. 53 ☽ 8. 27 Ecli.☉ 28 21. 4   10. 2         29   3. 37           30     12. 39 1. 29     ♄♀ 12. 25 31   6. 10     8. 9    
April 1652. The state of the Planets, and  this. Moneth.   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S. A S. D S. A M. A ♈   ♈ ♊ ♋ ♋ ♉ ♉ ♈ ♈ 1 12 16 2 27 22 31 12 17 6 59 24 14 11 36 10 11 2 23 13 15 44 22 33 12 20 7 43 25 26 13 30 10 8 3 24 12 28 32 35 12 23 3 27 26 38 15 24 10 4 4 25 11 11 27 37 12 1 27 49 17 18 10 1 5 26 10 57 2 40 12 28 9 53 29 2 19 14 9 58 6 27 8 6 32 23 42 12 31 10 36 0 12 21 9 9 55 7 28 6 18 58 22 45 12 33 11 19 1 24 23 3 9 52 8 29 5 0 49 22 48 12 35 12 2 2 35 24 58 9 48 9 0 3 12 30 22 51 12 37 12 45 3 47 26 53 9 45 10 1 2 24 20 22 54 12 30 13 27 4 58 28 48 9 42 11 2 1 6 0 22 57 12 4 14 11 6 9 0 43 9 39 12 2 58 17 59 23 0 12 42 14 54 7 20 2. 38 9 36 13 3 56 0 28 23 3 12 43 15 37 8 31 4 31 9 33 14 4 54 12 47 23 7 12 44 16 20 9 42 6 27 9 29 15 5 52 25 13 23 10 12 44 17 3 10 8 22 9 26 16 6 51 7 49 23 14 12 45 17 46 12 4 10 16 9 23 17 7 48 21 12 23 18 12 45 18 29 13 13 12 8 9 20 18 8 47 4 54 23 22 12 45 19 12 14 24 14 1 9 17 19 9 45 18 48 23 26 12 45 19 55 15 34 15 53 9 14 20 10 43 2 32 23 30 12 44 20 38 16 44 17 46 9 10 21 11 41 16 27 23 34 13 44 21 21 17 54 19 37 9 7 22 12 39 0 43 23 38 12 43 22 4 19 4 21 28 9 4 23 13 37 15 37 23 42 12 42 22 46 20 14 23 18 9 1 24 14 35 0 7 23 46 12 41 23 29 21 24 25 8 8 58 25 15 32 15 20 23 51 12 40 24 11 22 34 26 59 8 54 26 16 30 29 36 23 55 12 39 24 53 23 44 28 45 8 51 27 17 28 13 23 24 0 12 37 25 36 24 53 0 32 8 48 28 18 26 27 5 24 5 12 36 26 18 26 3 17 8 45 29 19 23 31 24 10 12 34 27 0 27 12 4 2 8 42 30 20 21 27 43 24 15 12 32 27 42 28 22 5 45 8 39   1 0 20 0 8 S 0 0 52 1 30     0 21 0 7 6 1 24 0 42     21 0 22 0 6 1 12 1 48 0 25    
The Lunar Aspects April 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan mu. Asp.     Occid. Orient Occid. Occid. Orient.   1           18. 21 ☉♄6. 12 2 13. 53           ♃☿8. 42 3       18. 35       4   21. 35 2. 11     13. 27   5 4 15       10. 50     6       8. 18     ♄☿20. 1 7 22. 6         11. 0   8         3. 59   ♃♂19. 0 9   22. 45 1. 58 2. 23     ☽ Apog. 10               11     13. 3   1. 14   ☽. 8. 5 12   9. 23       Occid. ☉☿8. 44 13 7. 17         9. 19   14   19. 20 0. 0 7. 14       15               16         8. 8     17             ♃☿7. 33 18 5. 55   13. 30     17. 9   19   8. 256   1. 11       20 13. 0             21       6. 53 1. 37 5. 10 ☉♃1. 7 22 20. 34   19. 21       ♂☿14. 47 23   13. 47   12. 49 7. 52 15. 0 ☉♃5. 23 24     19. 47       ☽153.  ♄♂10. 44. 25   14. 18     14. 0     26     23. 26         27 7. 34 19. 10   7. 34       28           10. 35   29               30              
May 1652. The position of the Planet, and  at NOOR.   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   ♉ ♋ ♋ ♑. R ♉ ♊ ♊ ♈   S. A S. D S. A S. A S. A 1 21 19 7 32 24 20 12 30 28 24 29 31 6 27 8 35 2 22 17 18 59 24 25 12 28 29 6 0 40 9 8 8 32 3 23 15 1 16 24 12 25 29 48 1 49 10 46 8 29 4 24 12 3 23 24 35 12 23 0 30 2 58 12 26 8 16 5 25 10 52 59 24 4 12 20 1 4 7 14 1 8 23 6 26 7 8 30 24 45 12 17 1 54 5 16 15 35 8 20 7 27 5 20 38 24 50 12 14 2 36 6 25 17 6 8 16 8 28 2 2 31 24 55 12 10 3 18 7 33 18 34 8 13 9 28 59 14 28 25 0 12 6 4 0 8 4 20 1 8 10 10 29 58 26 32 25 6 12 2 4 9 50 21 24 8 7 11 0 55 8 59 25 11 11 58 5 24 10 58 22 23 8 4 12 1 51 21 52 25 17 11 53 6 5 12 6 24 0 8 0 13 2 49 4 35 25 23 11 49 6 47 13 14 25 14 7 57 14 3 46 19 31 25 28 11 44 7 28 14 22 26 26 7 54 15 4 4 0 58 25 34 11 39 8 10 15 30 27 32 7 51 16 5 41 4 47 25 40 11 34 8 51 16 34 28 36 7 48 17 6 38 29 5 25 46 11 29 9 32 17 45 29 34 7 45 18 7 37 13 34 25 52 11 24 10 13 16 52 0 27 7 41 19 8 34 27 55 25 58 11 19 10 54 19 59 1 14 7 38 20 9 30 11 35 26 4 11 14 11 35 21 6 1 57 7 35 21 10 28 25 67 26 10 11 9 12 16 22 13 2 34 7 32 22 11 25 10 28 26 16 11 4 12 57 23 20 3 3 7 29 23 12 22 25 5 26 22 10 58 13 39 24 26 3 26 7 25 24 13 19 9 17 26 28 10 52 14 19 25 32 3 43 7 22 25 14 17 22 56 26 34 10 46 15 0 26 38 3 3 7 19 26 15 14 5 59 26 40 10 40 15 41 27 44 3 56 7 16 27 16 11 18 59 26 46 10 34 16 22 28 50 3 53 7 13 28 17 9 2 2 26 53 10 28 17 3 29 56 3 41 7 10 29 18 6 14 50 26 59 10 22 17 44 0 1 3 22 7 6 30 19 3 27 14 27 6 10 16 18 25 2 7 2 56 7 3 31 20 0 9 26 27 11 10 10 19 6 3 12 2 23 7 0 Latitude 1   0 22 0 5 0 18 2 9 1 27     11   0 24 0 4 0 24 2 17 1 58     21   0 24 0 2 0 30 2 24 1 31    
The Lunar Aspects. May, 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall     Occid. Orient Occid. Occid. Occid. Aspects 1     11. 22   1. 47     2 9. 3 10. 41   19. 3       3           19. 47   4 21. 45           ☉♄ 9 55 5       10. 3 17. 52     6     8. 53     11. 55 ☽ Apog. 7 16. 8 10. 30           8     21. 13 3. 45 10. 41   ☽ 13. 15 9   20. 36       14. 10   10               11     6. 27   5. 6   ♃ 20. 56 12 819. 57 7. 6           13       3. 51       14           15. 37   15     18. 57         16   18. 9     3. 4     17 11. 25     17. 23       18               19 19. 19   23. 24   5. 54   20         16. 55   ☽ Perig. 21   2. 0       11. 16 ☽19. 37 22 2. 25   0. 51 5. 42 22. 43     23         16. 30   24     5. 1       ♄♀22. 16 25   8. 15     19. 27     26 10. 2     18. 26       27       Orient     ☉♂15. 33 28     15. 33     2. 50   29               30       10. 44     31 21. 18          
Iune 1652. The places of the Planets, and  this   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ R ☊   S. A S. D S. A S. D M D   ♊ ♌ ♋ ♑ R ♊ ♌ ♋ ♈ 1 10 58 21 6 27 19 10 3 19 47 4 18 1 43 6 57 2 21 55 27 26 9 57 20 5 23 0 57 6 54 3 2 52 17 30 17 33 9 50 21 9 6 28 0 6 6 4 23 48 2 27 40 9 4 21 49 7 31 29 8 6 47 5 24 46 10 33 27 47 9 22 30 8 36 28 7 6 44 6 25 42 45 27 54 9 29 23 10 9 41 27 6 6 41 7 26 40 4 58 28 1 9 22 23 50 10 43 26 5 6 38 8 27 38 17 29 28 8 9 24 31 11 46 25 6 6 35 9 28 35 0 30 15 9 25 11 12 48 24 10 6 31 10 29 32 13 29 28 22 9 1 25 51 13 52 23 18 6 28 11 0 29 27 2 28 30 8 54 26 31 14 54 22 30 6 25 12 1 26 10 43 28 37 8 47 27 11 15 56 21 49 6 13 2 23 31 28 44 8 40 27 50 16 58 21 14 6 19 14 3 20 8 58 28 52 8 28 31 18 0 20 46 6 16 15 4 15 43 48 28 59 8 26 29 11 19 1 20 26 6 16 5 13 3 46 29 6 8 18 29 51 20 2 20 14 6 9 17 6 23 24 29 13 8 11 0 31 21 3 20 10 6 6 18 7 8 7 31 29 21 8 4 1 11 22 4 20 12 6 3 19 8 5 21 19 29 28 7 56 1 51 23 4 20 21 6 0 20 9 11 29 35 7 48 2 31 24 4 20 36 5 57 21 9 59 17 9 29 42 7 40 3 11 25 4 20 58 5 53 22 10 56 2 36 29 50 7 33 3 51 26 4 21 28 5 50 23 11 53 15 51 29 57 7 25 4 31 27 4 22 5 5 47 24 12 51 28 31 0 4 7 18 5 11 28 2 22 47 5 44 25 13 10 57 0 12 7 11 5 51 28 59 23 34 5 21 26 14 0 19 7 4 6 31 29 57 24 26 5 37 27 15 42 28 0 27 6 56 7 11 0 53 25 22 5 34 28 16 39 17 32 0 34 6 49 7 51 1 52 26 24 5 31 29 17 36 29 29 0 41 6 42 8 30 2 47 27 29 5 28 30 18 33 3 0 49 6 34 9 10 3 43 28 39 5 25         1 0 25 0 2 0 36 2 18 0 18             11 0 25 0 2 0 41 1 56 2 34             12 0 26 0 2 0 46 1 19 3 19    
The Lunar Aspects. June 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall     Occid. Orient Orient. Occid. Occid Aspects. 1       11. 37   18. 5   2     11. 58       ☽Apog. 3 15. 33     11. 9       4   0. 15     22. 14 ☽. 5     0. 29         6 8. 52 10. 15   15. 37   10. 9 ☉☿16. 51 7     10. 28   11. 56 Orient   8   21. 39         ♂☿8. 33 9               10       22. 46 1. 36 16. 5   11 6. 10   20. 29         12               13   6. 40           14         15. 32 17. 46   15 17 46   23. 27 8. 34     ☽ Perig. 16           18. 33 ♀☿4. 13 17   11. 1   12. 40     ☽22. 36 18 0. 25   0. 55     23. 23 ☉♃20. 6 19   7. 1 Occid. 20. 29 4. 22     20   6. 1         21   21. 4     11. 6     22               23           12. 23   24     16 39 13. 42 0 17     25 5. 46             26           ♃♂16. 3 27               28           18. 6   29     13. 3 17. 50     30 16. 20           ☽ Apog.
motions of the Planets and   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S A S D S A S D M A   ♋ ♍ ♌ ♑ R. ♋ ♍. ♊ ♈ 1 19 30 22 58 0 56 6 27 9 49 4 38 29 53 5 22 2 20 26 5 1 4 6 20 10 29 5 34 1 10 5 18 3 21 23 17 41 1 11 6 13 11 8 6 28 2 29 5 15 4 22 21 0 22 1 19 6 6 11 48 7 22 3 51 5 5 23 18 12 58 1 26 59 12 27 8 15 5 16 5 9 6 24 16 25 31 1 34 52 13 7 9 8 6 43 6 5 7 25 13 8 29 1 41 45 13 46 10 0 8 13 3 5 8 26 10 21 53 1 49 39 14 26 10 52 9 44 4 59 9 27 7 5 44 1 56 5 33 15 5 11 43 11 17 4 56 10 28 5 19 47 2 4 5 26 15 44 12 33 12 53 4 11 29 2 3 58 2 11 5 20 16 23 13 23 14 29 4 50 12 29 59 18 25 2 19 5 14 17 2 14 12 16 6 4 47 13 0 56 3 11 2 26 5 8 17 41 15 0 17 44 4 43 14 1 53 18 16 2 34 5 2 18 20 15 48 19 26 4 40 15 2 51 3 1 2 41 4 56 18 59 16 35 21 8 4 37 16 3 48 18 2 49 4 50 19 38 17 20 22 52 4 34 17 4 45 2 11 2 56 4 20 17 18 5 24 36 4 31 18 5 43 50 3 4 4 39 20 56 18 49 16 21 4 28 19 6 40 0 18 3 12 4 34 21 35 32 28 7 4 24 20 7 37 12 43 3 19 4 29 22 14 20 14 29 55 4 21 21 8 35 25 55 3 27 4 24 22 53 10 55 1 41 4 18 22 9 32 8 18 3 4 19 23 32 21 35 3 30 4 15 23 10 29 20 30 3 42 4 14 24; 11 22 14 19 4 12 24 11 27 2 28 3 50 4 9 24 50 22 52 7 8 4 9 25 12 24 14 28 3 57 4 5 25 29 23 28 8 57 4 5 26 13 26 28 4 5 4 0 26 7 24 3 10 47 4 2 27 14 19 8 18 4 13 3 56 26 46 24 37 12 37 3 59 28 15 17 19 58 4 20 3 52 27 24 25 10 14 28 3 56 29 16 14 30 4 28 3 48 28 3 25 42 16 19 3 53 30 17 12 13 23 4 35 3 44 28 41 26 12 18 9 3 49 31 18 9 25 31 4 43 3 41 29 18 26 40 20 0 3 46   1 0 27 0 1 0 51 0 29 2 2     11 0 28 0 1 0 55 0 44 0 34     21   28 0 2 0 59 2 10 0 50    
The Lunar Aspctes. July 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan mutuall Aspects     Occid. Occid. Orient. Orient. Orient. 1   14. 46       15. 17 ☽23. 27 2     2. 15 10. 45     ♃☿.18. 0 3 8. 33             4   1. 50 12. 53   16. 41 11. 49   5 23. 35     1. 25       6   13. 13           7         2. 49     8     23. 31         9       16 36 11. 41 10. 25 ♀☿13. 0 10 14. 49 10. 47           11               12             ♂☿22. 15 13     3. 35 23. 31 19. 41   ☽ Perig. 14 23. 24 Orient       1. 31 ☉♄19. 13 15   0. 0 2. 51       ☽2. 28 16       2. 25   9. 12   17 6. 27 1. 12 6. 1         18       11. 19 7. 20 23. 37   19 16. 17 8. 57           20         18. 17     21     18. 3         22             ♄☿0. 45 23       9. 46 4. 54     24 19. 30 2. 47       11. 2   25               26     14 50         27             ☽ Apog. 28       15. 17 11. 19 Occid. ☉☿ 29   4. 51 2. 33       ☽3. 38 30 7. 12         17   31   18. 11 16. 7 3. 38      
August 1652. A joynt view of the places of the Planet; and ☊   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S. A M. D S. A M. D S. A   ♌ ♏ ♌ ♑ R. ♋ ♍ ♌ ♈ 1 19 7 7 50 4 51 3 37 29 58 7 21 51 3 43 2 20 5 20 38 4 59 3 34 37 27 32 23 42 3 40 3 21 2 3 34 5 6 3 31 1 15 27 56 25 33 3 37 4 22 0 16 57 5 14 3 28 28 18 27 3 34 5 22 58 29 59 5 21 3 25 28 38 29 15 3 30 6 23 55 13 48 5 29 3 23 3 11 28 56 1 6 3 27 7 24 53 28 15 5 36 3 20 3 49 29 2 57 3 24 8 25 51 12 49 5 43 3 18 4 28 29 29 4 48 3 21 9 26 49 27 29 5 51 3 16 5 6 29 41 6 38 3 18 10 27 47 12 13 5 58 3 14 5 45 29 51 8 28 3 15 11 28 44 27 20 6 5 3 13 0 23 29 59 10 18 3 11 12 29 42 12 16 6 13 3 11 7 2 0 5 12 6 3 8 13 0 40 27 29 6 20 3 10 7 40 0 9 13 52 3 14 1 48 11 38 6 27 9 8 19 0 11 15 39 3 15 2 36 25 37 6 35 3 8 8 57 0 10 17 25 2 59 16 3 34 9 1 6 42 3 7 9 36 0 6 19 12 2 55 17 4 32 22 18 6 49 3 6 10 14 29 52 20 56 2 18 5 30 5 17 6 57 3 6 10 52 0 0 22 32 2 49 19 6 28 17 55 7 3 3 5 11 31 29 42 24 25 2 46 20 7 27 0 29 7 10 3 5 12 9 29 30 26 7 2 43 21 8 25 11 58 7 3 5 12 47 29 16 27 48 2 40 22 9 23 23 40 7 24 3 5 23 25 28 59 29 28 2 36 23 10 21 5 25 7 31 3 5 14 3 28 39 1 6 2 33 24 11 19 16 59 7 38 3 6 14 41 28 17 2 43 2 30 25 12 18 28 51 7 41 3 7 15 19 21 53 4 19 27 26 13 16 10 38 7 52 3 8 25 57 27 27 5 53 2 24 27 14 14 22 16 7 59 3 9 16 34 26 59 7 25 2 21 28 15 13 3 57 8 6 3 11 17 13 26 29 8 56 2 17 29 16 11 16 6 8 21 3 12 17 51 25 57 10 24 1 14 30 17 10 28 39 8 19 3 14 18 28 25 24 11 50 2 11 31 18 8 11 50 8 25 3 16 19 6 24 49 13 14 2 8 Latitude 1 0 29 0 3 1 3 4 2 1     11 0 30 0 5 1 6 6 5 1 27     21 0 31 0 8 1 9 7 52 0 39    
The Lunar Aspects. August 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall     Orient Occid. Orient. Occid. Occid. Aspects. 1 23. 52             2       21. 3 14. 38 6. 38   3   4. 25           4 11. 51       21. 21     5     ♂ 5. 48     0. 0   6               7   ♉ 12. 6   ♉ 9. 53 2. 31   ♃ ☿ 4. 47 8 22. 42             9     8. 52     16. 55   10             9 53. ☽ Per 11   13. 38 9. 26 14. 22 4. 21   8. 47 12               13 6. 25 15. 12 10. 15 18. 24       14           8. 51   15 14. 33 20. 17     9. 10   . ☉ ♃ 12 16       2. 15   21. 4   17     9. 51   13. 55     18 6. 29             19           17. 14   20   14. 24     0. 40     21       1. 45     ♀ ☿. 17. 3 22     19. 20         23 10. 52               24         21.   ♃ ♀ 5.  ☽ Apo 25   18. 4 8. 27     11. 36 ☽  7. 7 26       11. 5       27     21. 6       ♄ ☿ 9. 20 28 22. 8. 0           29       3. 13 17. 11     30   17. 48           31 13. 1     14. 27 22 47 3. 16  
☊   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S A M D S D M D M D   ♍ ♐ ♌ ♑ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♈ 1 19 7 8 31 3 18 19 43 24 13 14 36 2 5 20 5 8 4 8 38 3 28 21 23 37 15 1 3 21 4 21 59 8 44 3 23 20 59 23 0 17 12 1 58 22 2 8 24 8 51 3 26 21 36 22 24 18 4 1 5 23 1 21 14 8 57 3 29 22 14 21 45 19 52 6 24 6 14 9 3 3 32 51 21 7 20 37 24 58 21 0 9 10 3 35 23 29 20 30 21 46 8 25 57 5 54 9 16 3 39 6 19 54 22 35 9 26 20 9 22 3 42 24 19 19 23 29 39 10 27 5 5 32 9 28 3 46 25 21 18 45 24 19 11 28 5 20 6 9 34 3 50 25 59 18 13 25 33 12 29 5 4 0 9 40 3 54 26 36 17 42 25 44 1 13 0 ♒ 51 17 42 9 46 3 58 27 14 17 13 26 19 1 14 1 50 0 9 52 3 27 51 16 47 26 48 1 23 15 2 49 14 2 9 58 4 7 28 29 16 27 10 1 16 3 48 26 29 10 3 4 12 29 6 15 56 27 26 1 17 17 4 47 9 10 9 4 17 29 44 15 35 27 36 1 18 5 46 21 7 10 15 4 22 0 15 15 27 39 1 11 19 6 45 56 10 20 4 28 0 58 14 58 27 35 1 7 20 7 4 14 10 4 33 1 36 14 43 2 25 1 21 8 26 7 10 30 4 39 2 13 14 31 27 8 1 9 58 10 35 4 45 2 50 14 21 26 45 0 23 10 19 49 10 40 4 51 3 27 14 13 26 15 0 24 11 42 1 36 10 45 4 57 4 14 8 25 38 0 5 25 12 42 13 27 10 50 5 3 4 41 14 6 24 56 0 49 13 40 25 28 10 55 5 10 5 18 14 6 24 14 0 46 27 14 40 ♐ 53 11 0 5 16 5 14 9 23 23 0 43 15 40 45 11 5 5 23 6 14 14 22 31 0 40 29 16 3 56 11 10 5 30 7 9 14 22 21 37 0 37 30 17 7 20 11 15 5 37 7 46 14 32 20 42 0 Latitude for Dayes 1 0 32 0 9 1 12 8 51 0 33     11 0 34 0 11 1 15 8 10 2 2     21 0 35 0 12 1 18 6 29 2 56    
The Lunar Aspects. September, 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall Aspects.     Orient Occid. Orient. Occid. Occid. 1     15. 7         2 22 28         14. 46   3         1. 51     4   3. 50       21. 45 ☉ ♀ 4. 44 5     20 22 1. 31 Orient.     6         822. 53     7 6. 22   20. 5     ☽  17. 3 ☽ Perig. 8   5. 1           9     20. 23 6. 1 4. 31 10   6. 18     20. 30     11 15. 46     10. 18       12   10. 24     22. 44     13       17. 56   15. 57   14 1. 19   5. 33         15         4 36     16 16. 13         1. 39 ☉ ♃ 10. 10 17   1. 39           18       19. 34   14. 27 1 19     4. 32         20         0. 23   ☽  10. 25. ☽ Apog. 21     17. 16       22 3 47 5. 17       ☉ ♄ 22. 23 ☉ . 23           14. 50   24   18. 31 8. 36 5. 7       25         0. 37   ♃ ♂ 17 27 26       20. 18       27 12. 22 4. 36     11. 38     28           2. 5   29     3. 8 5. 27 18. 30     30 0. 6         5. 32  
October 1652. The position of the Planets and ☊ this Moneth.   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S A M D S A M A M A   ♎ ♒ ♌ ♑ ♍ ♍ ♎ R ♈ 1 18 0 56 11 20 5 44 8 23 14 14 49 0 31 2 19 38 15 3 11 24 5 52 9 0 14 58 18 57 0 28 3 20 38 29 46 11 28 5 59 9 37 15 14 18 8 0 25 4 21 38 14 44 11 32 6 7 10 14 15 32 17 22 0 22 5 22 38 29 55 11 36 6 15 10 51 15 52 16 41 0 19 6 23 37 14 30 11 40 6 23 11 28 16 14 16 6 0 15 7 24 37 29 50 11 44 6 31 12 5 16 38 15 37 0 12 8 25 37 13 51 11 48 6 39 12 41 17 4 15 14 0 9 9 26 37 26 24 11 52 6 48 13 18 17 31 14 57 0 6 10 27 37 10 22 11 56 6 56 13 55 18 0 14 47 0 3 11 28 37 25 51 11 59 7 5 14 31 18 30 14 44 0 0 12 29 37 9 4 12 3 7 14 15 8 19 1 14 47 29 56 13 0 37 21 59 12 7 7 23 15 44 19 34 14 57 29 53 14 1 37 4 43 12 10 7 3 16 21 20 8 15 13 29 50 15 2 37 17 30 12 14 7 41 16 57 20 42 15 36 29 47 16 3 37 29 51 12 17 7 50 17 34 21 20 16 5 29 44 17 4 37 11 51 12 20 8 0 18 10 21 58 16 40 29 41 18 5 37 23 31 12 23 8 10 18 47 22 38 17 20 29 37 19 6 38 5 7 12 26 8 19 19 24 23 18 6 29 34 20 7 38 16 53 12 29 8 29 20 0 24 2 18 55 29 31 21 8 38 28 52 12 32 8 39 20 37 24 46 19 48 29 28 22 9 38 10 55 12 35 8 49 21 13 25 31 20 46 29 25 23 10 39 22 59 12 8 59 21 49 26 17 21 47 29 22 24 11 39 5 0 12 40 9 9 22 25 27 4 22 52 29 18 25 12 40 17 28 12 43 9 20 23 1 27 52 23 58 29 15 26 13 40 0 29 12 45 9 30 23 37 28 40 25 11 29 12 57 14 41 13 48 12 47 9 41 24 13 29 29 26 25 29 9 28 15 41 27 24 12 49 9 52 24 49 0 19 27 42 29 6 29 16 42 10 58 12 51 10 3 25 25 1 10 29 2 29 2 17 42 14 50 12 53 10 14 26 1 2 1 0 24 28 59 31 18 43 8 58 12 54 10 25 26 37 2 52 1 49 28 56   1 0 36 0 13 1 20 4 18 2 2     11 0 38 0 14 1 22 2 17 0 9     21 0 39 0 14 1 24 0 26 1 52    
The Lunar Aspctes. October 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan mutuall     Orient. Occid. Orient. Orient. Occid. Aspctes 1   17. 37       Orient. ☉ ☿ 14. 28 2 7. 45         5. 47   3     8. 47 16. 1       4         1. 1     5   19. 42 11. 18       ☽ . 2. 36 6 815. 29         2. 4 ☽ per. 7   18. 41 11. 40 21 27     ♃ ☿4. 47 8         4. 58     9   22. 18           10       2. 5 10. 12 3. 17   11 3. 53   20. 25         12       10. 31 18. 1 10. 37   13 16 43             14   13. 55           15           20. 53   16 9. 55   17. 46         17       2. 4 22. 0     18             ☽  14. 1 19   16. 10 6. 28       ☽ Apog. 20           4. 20   21 21. 8   20. 23       ☉ ♃0. 1 22   3. 11   21. 22       23         6. 47     24   13 23           25       10. 26 20. 20 11. 29 ☉ ♄ 1. 7 26     16 16         27 0. 11     18. 12       28         4. 32 0. 25   29 9. 39 3. 3           30           9. 32   31 16. 37   1. 39        
Novemb. 1652. The places of the Planets and ☊ at Noon.   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S A M D S A S A S A   ♏ ♓ ♌ ♑ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♓ 1 19 43 23 56 12 56 10 36 27 13 3 44 3 16 28 53 2 20 44 9 3 12 57 10 47 27 49 4 37 4 45 28 50 3 21 45 24 0 12 58 10 58 28 25 5 31 6 16 28 47 4 22 45 8 34 12 59 11 10 29 1 6 25 7 48 28 43 5 13 46 22 42 13 0 11 21 29 7 20 9 20 28 40 6 24 47 6 41 13 1 11 33 0 1 8 15 10 53 28 37 7 25 47 20 31 13 2 11 45 0 47 9 12 12 30 18 34 8 26 48 4 4 13 3 11 57 1 23 10 10 14 8 28 31 9 27 49 17 9 13 4 12 9 1 58 11 8 15 46 28 27 10 28 50 29 52 13 4 12 21 2 33 12 6 17 26 28 24 11 29 51 12 19 13 5 12 37 3 9 13 5 19 6 28 21 12 0 52 24 49 13 5 12 45 3 45 14 20 48 28 18 13 1 53 7 17 13 5 12 57 4 20 15 3 22 29 28 15 14 2 54 19 44 13 5 13 9 4 56 16 3 24 13 28 12 15 3 54 1 39 13 5 13 21 5 3 17 3 25 54 28 16 13 37 13 5 13 33 6 7 18 4 27 38 28 5 17 5 56 25 34 13 4 13 46 6 42 19 4 29 23 28 2 18 6 57 7 34 13 4 13 59 7 18 20 6 1 7 27 59 19 7 58 19 49 13 3 14 12 7 52 21 9 2 53 27 56 20 8 59 2 14 13 3 14 25 8 28 22 1 4 40 27 53 21 10 0 14 50 13 2 14 38 9 3 23 14 6 28 27 49 22 11 2 47 30 13 1 14 51 9 38 24 17 8 13 27 46 23 12 3 10 25 13 0 15 4 10 13 25 20 10 1 27 43 24 13 4 23 53 12 59 15 18 10 48 26 24 11 48 27 40 25 14 5 7 45 12 58 15 30 11 23 27 28 13 36 27 37 26 15 6 21 59 12 56 15 43 11 57 28 32 15 22 27 33 27 16 7 6 19 12 55 15 56 12 32 29 37 17 10 27 30 28 17 8 19 57 12 53 16 9 13 6 0 42 18 59 27 27 29 18 10 4 0 12 51 16 23 13 40 1 48 20 44 7 24 30 19 11 18 40 12 49 16 36 14 15 2 54 22 31 27 21   1 0 41 0 15 1 26 0 36 2 2     11 0 42 0 16 1 27 1 44 1 19     21 0 44 0 16 1 29 2 19 0 19    
The Lunar Aspects. November, 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall     Orient Occid. Orient Orient Orient Aspects. 1       5. 17 16. 25   ☽  8. 34 2   7. 38 2. 43       ☽ Perig. 3           22. 26   4   7. 38 4. 23         5 2. 9     13. 0       6   10. 31     2. 36   ♃ ☿ 11. 3 7           ♄ ♀ 7. 48 8       12. 5 17. 44   9 19. 52             10       3. 38 23. 40   ♃ ♀ 7. 42 11   1. 25       15. 5 ♄ ♀ 0. 0 12 11. 50             13     11. 39         14           11. 14 ☽  18. 19 15 4. 27     8. 13     ☽ Apog. 16   1. 0 0. 0   ♂ 9. 49   17               18   10. 49 14. 19       ☉ ♂ 18 26. 19               20 14. 56   17. 0   5. 29   21         17. 11     22       23. 35       23     ♂ 18. 31       ☉♄21. 53 24         4. 38     25 10. 26 9. 7   5. 15 2 10. 13 ☉♀15. 13 26         11. 55 Occid.   27     17. 6     21. 53 ♄♂15. 3 28 18. 27           ☽12. 28 29   14. 50 20. 7 16. 7     ☽ Perig. 30 1. 27         8. 3  
December 1652. The dayly motions of the Planets and ☊   ☉ ☽ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ ☊   S A M D S A S A M D   ♐ ♉ ♌ ♑ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♓ 1 20 12 3 31 12 47 16 50 14 48 4 0 24 17 27 18 2 21 13 18 7 12 45 17 3 15 23 5 7 26 5 27 14 3 22 14 2 11 12 43 17 17 15 56 6 13 27 50 27 11 4 23 16 15 45 12 41 17 31 16 31 7 20 19 56 27 8 5 24 17 29 6 12 39 17 44 17 5 8 27 1 22 27 5 6 25 10 12 19 12 36 17 58 17 38 9 34 3 7 27 2 7 26 19 24 19 12 34 18 12 18 12 10 41 4 52 26 59 8 27 21 7 58 12 31 18 25 18 47 11 49 6 37 26 55 9 28 22 20 16 12 28 18 39 19 21 12 56 8 18 26 52 10 29 25 2 19 12 25 18 54 19 55 14 4 10 2 26 49 11 0 25 14 16 12 22 19 27 20 29 15 12 11 42 26 46 12 1 26 26 52 12 19 19 21 21 3 16 20 13 25 26 43 13 2 27 9 25 12 16 19 35 24 37 17 29 15 5 26 36 14 3 28 50 12 13 19 49 22 10 18 37 16 43 26 39 15 4 30 3 51 12 10 23 22 44 19 46 18 21 26 33 16 5 31 15 44 12 6 20 16 23 17 20 57 19 59 26 30 17 6 32 28 2 12 3 20 31 23 50 22 4 21 36 26 27 18 7 10 44 11 59 20 45 24 23 23 13 23 11 26 23 19 8 35 23 40 11 55 20 59 24 56 24 22 24 44 26 20 20 9 36 6 50 11 51 21 13 25 29 25 32 26 15 26 17 21 0 37 20 4 11 47 21 17 26 2 26 27 44 26 14 22 11 39 3 39 11 43 21 42 26 34 27 51 29 11 26 11 23 12 40 17 40 11 39 21 56 27 7 29 1 0 35 26 8 24 13 41 2 8 11 35 22 10 27 39 0 11 1 58 26 5 25 14 43 16 58 11 31 22 24 28 11 1 21 3 19 26 1 26 15 44 1 33 11 27 22 39 28 43 2 31 4 39 26 58 27 16 45 15 36 11 23 22 53 29 14 3 41 5 55 25 55 28 17 46 29 32 11 18 23 7 29 47 4 52 7 25 52 29 18 48 40 11 14 23 22 0 19 6 3 8 19 25 49 30 19 49 27 57 11 9 23 36 0 51 7 13 9 26 25 46 31 20 50 12 0 11 5 23 50 1 23 8 25 10 29 25 42   1 0 46 0 16 1 31 2 40 0 49     11 0 47 0 17 1 32 2 48 1 26     21                        
The Lunar Aspects. December, 1652.   ☉ ♄ ♃ ♂ ♀ ☿ The Plan. mutuall     Orient Occid. Orient Occid. Aspects 1   15. 4     0. 44     2     0. 20         3   19. 43           4 14. 37     2. 18       5         17. 50 4. 44   6     10. 37 10. 18     ♃♂ 7               8   7. 52   20. 9 8. 19   ♄♀ 14. 8 9 15. 27             10           15. 49   11     10. 5   0. 0   ☽  0. 0 12 9. 46             13   7. 6 19. 58     12. 36   14       0. 39       15 4. 15 16. 37           16     11. 3   11. 1 11. 49   17               18   1. 48           19       3. 19       20 7. 20             21     2. 3   11. 27 17. 9 ♂ ♀ 21. 45 ♂☿4. 51 22   11. 57           23       15. 8 20. 26     24 19. 46             25     9. 23       ☽15. 18 26   17. 34     2. 39 ☽ Petig. 27 2. 53   12. 34 0. 26       28   19. 47       13. 57   29 10. 38   17. 39         30         18. 46 23. 37   31   0. 39         ♄☿13. 32
Courteous Reader, There are these Books either already extant, or in the birth ready to be brought to light, which I thought good to acquaint thee with as fit for thy Reading. 1. THe new Jerusalem, A Sermon composed  the Society of Astrologers, at their annuall meeting, Aug. 14. 1651. 2. Chyromancy, or Palmestry, or presaging of future event by the lines in the Palm of the Hand, by Capt. George Wharton, an ac∣curate man in Astronomy. 3. Magick and Astrology vindicated, by one H. Warren. 4. An Astrologicall Discourse, proving the influence of the Planets, and fixed Stars, upon Elementary Bodies, and the validity of Astrology justified by that sober and learned Knight Sir Christopher Heidou. 5. A Vindication of Astrology in answer to Doctor Homes, which teacheth by the Booke of the Creatures, what the Wisdom, Power and Excellency of the Creator is. 6. Terasologia, or A Discovery of Gods Wonders manifest∣ed in Former and Moderne Times, by bloody Raine and Waters by, I S. 7. Astrologicall Judgment of Diseases, for the decumbiture of the Sick; Also the manner of finding out the Cause, Change, and end of a Disease, and whether the Sick be likely to live or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected, the signes of Life or Death, by the body of the sick, partly accord∣ing to Hypocrates. All sold by Nath, Brookes, at the Angell in Cornbill.
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Aries. Time from Noon. Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii. ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ H. M. S. Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 0 0 0 0 12 37 28 28 26 42 15 54 4 26 0 3 48 1 13 50 29 20 27 23 16 35 5 13 0 7 20 2 14 59 0 10 28 2 17 15 5 59 0 11 0 3 16 8 1 0 28 42 17 56 6 46 0 14 40 4 17 17 1 49 29 21 18 36 7 32 0 18 20 5 18 25 2 39 0 1 19 16 8 89 0 22 0 6 19 32 3 28 0 40 19 56 9 15 0 25 40 7 20 39 4 16 1 20 20 36 9 52 0 29 22 8 21 45 5 5 2 0 21 17 10 39 0 33 0 9 22 51 5 53 2 30 21 57 11 26 0 36 44 10 23 58 6 41 3 19 22 37 12 13 0 40 24 11 25 3 7 29 3 59 23 17 12 59 0 44 4 12 26 7 8 16 4 38 23 57 13 46 0 47 48 13 27 12 9 5 17 24 39 14 34 0 51 28 14 28 15 9 49 5 57 25 19 15 21 0 55 12 15 29 20 10 35 6 36 26 0 16 9 0 58 52 16 0 22 11 21 7 15 26 40 16 56 1 2 36 17 1 24 12 8 7 55 27 21 17 43 1 6 20 18 2 26 12 54 8 35 28 2 18 31 1 10 4 19 3 28 13 40 9 14 28 43 19 19 1 13 48 20 4 30 14 25 9 5 29 24 20 7 1 17 32 21 5 31 15 10 10 34 0 5 20 55 1 21 16 22 6 30 15 55 11 12 0 46 21 43 1 25 0 23 7 30 16 42 11 52 1 27 22 31 1 28 48 24 8 31 17 26 12 32 2 9 23 19 1 32 36 25 9 32 18 11 13 12 2 51 24 8 1 36 24 26 10 32 18 55 13 52 3 33 24 56 12 27 11 32 19 40 14 32 4 15 25 25 44 28 12 30 20 26 15 24 4 57 26 34 1 47 48 29 13 30 21 10 15 51 5 38 27 23 51 36 30 14 26 21 55 16 31 6 20 28 12
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Taurus. Time from Noon. Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii. ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♍ H. M. S. Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 1 51 36 0 14 26 21 55 16 31 6 20 20 12 1 55 24 1 15 24 22 38 17 11 7 2 29 1 1 59 16 2 16 21 23 24 17 51 7 45 29 51 2 3 4 3 17 18 12 7 18 31 8 27 0 40 2 6 56 4 18 15 24 52 19 12 9 9 1 29 2 10 48 5 19 12 25 36 19 52 9 52 2 19 2 14 40 6 20 9 26 20 20 32 10 35 8 9 2 18 7 21 6 27 5 21 13 11 18 8 59 2 22 8 22 2 27 49 21 54 12 0 4 49 2 26 9 23 0 28 34 22 35 12 43 5 40 2 30 20 10 23 56 29 17 23 16 13 27 6 30 2 34 16 11 24 52 0 2 23 57 14 7 20 2 38 12 12 25 48 0 47 24 38 14 54 8 10 2 42 8 13 26 42 1 31 25 19 15 37 9 1 2 46 4 14 27 38 2 15 26 0 16 21 9 52 2 50 4 15 28 33 3 0 26 42 17 5 10 43 2 54 4 16 29 27 3 45 27 24 17 49 11 34 2 53 4 17 0 23 4 29 28 6 18 33 12 26 3 2 4 18 1 19 5 14 28 47 19 17 13 17 3 6 8 19 2 14 5 59 29 30 20 3 14 8 3 10 12 20 3 9 6 45 0 13 20 48 15 0 3 14 12 21 4 3 7 29 0 55 21 32 15 52 3 18 16 22 4 58 8 13 1 37 22 17 16 44 3 22 20 23 5 52 8 59 2 20 23 2 17 35 3 26 24 24 6 45 9 45 3 2 23 47 18 28 3 30 32 25 7 40 10 30 3 46 24 33 19 20 3 34 40 26 8 35 11 16 4 29 25 19 20 13 3 38 48 27 9 29 12 2 5 12 26 4 21 5 3 42 56 28 10 24 12 48 5 55 26 51 21 58 3 47 4 29 11 18 13 32 6 39 27 37 22 50 3 51 12 30 12 12 14 18 7 22 28 22 23 42
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Gemini. Time from Noon. Dom. x Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♍ ♎ H. M. S. Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 3 51 12 0 12 12 14 18 7 22 28 22 23 42 3 55 24 1 13 6 15 4 8 6 29 9 24 36 3 59 36 2 14 1 15 50 8 50 29 56 25 29 4 3 48 3 14 56 16 36 9 34 0 43 26 22 4 8 0 4 15 51 17 22 10 18 1 30 27 14 4 12 12 5 16 44 18 9 1 3 2 16 28 8 4 16 24 6 17 38 10 56 11 47 3 3 29 1 4 20 36 7 18 32 19 41 12 81 49 29 54 4 24 52 8 19 27 20 27 13 16 4 37 0 46 4 29 8 9 20 20 21 15 14 1 5 24 1 42 4 33 24 10 21 14 22 1 14 46 6 11 1 36 4 37 40 11 22 8 22 47 15 31 6 59 2 31 4 41 56 12 23 2 23 33 16 16 7 46 4 21 4 46 12 13 23 56 24 21 17 1 8 33 5 18 4 50 32 14 24 51 25 9 17 46 9 21 6 13 4 54 52 15 25 46 25 57 18 32 10 9 7 5 4 59 8 16 26 40 26 42 19 17 10 56 8 0 5 3 28 17 27 34 27 30 20 4 11 45 8 53 5 7 48 18 28 28 28 19 20 49 12 32 9 47 5 12 8 19 29 22 29 6 21 5 13 20 10 41 5 16 28 20 0 16 9 54 22 22 14 8 11 36 5 20 48 21 1 11 0 41 23 6 14 56 12 30 5 25 8 22 2 5 1 28 23 51 15 40 13 24 5 29 28 23 2 59 2 16 24 37 16 32 14 18 5 33 48 24 3 53 3 4 25 23 17 19 15 13 5 38 12 25 4 48 3 52 26 9 18 8 16 8 5 42 32 26 5 41 4 41 26 55 18 56 17 2 5 46 52 27 6 37 5 28 27 41 19 44 17 55 5 51 12 28 7 31 6 16 28 27 20 32 18 49 5 55 36 29 8 26 7 4 29 13 21 20 19 4 6 0 0 30 9 21 7 52 30 0 22 9 20 39
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Cancer. Time from . x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii. ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♎ ♏ H. M. S. Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 6 0 0 0 9 21 7 52 0 0 22 29 20 36 6 4 24 1 10 16 8 41 0 47 22 57 21 34 6 8 48 2 11 11 9 30 1 33 23 46 22 29 6 13 8 3 12 10 18 2 19 24 33 23 24 6 17 28 4 12 59 11 5 3 5 25 21 24 18 6 21 48 5 13 52 11 53 3 51 26 8 25 13 6 26 12 6 14 48 12 41 4 37 26 57 26 7 6 30 32 7 15 42 13 29 5 23 27 44 27 1 6 34 8 16 35 14 17 6 9 28 32 27 54 6 39 12 9 17 19 15 4 6 55 29 20 28 49 6 43 52 10 18 23 15 52 7 40 0 0 29 44 6 47 52 11 19 18 16 41 8 26 0 55 0 39 6 52 12 12 20 13 17 28 9 12 1 43 1 33 6 56 32 13 21 7 18 16 9 57 2 30 2 27 7 0 52 14 22 0 19 4 10 43 3 18 3 21 7 8 15 22 54 19 51 11 28 4 5 4 15 7 9 8 16 23 49 20 40 12 14 4 52 5 10 7 13 48 17 24 43 21 27 12 59 5 40 6 4 7 18 4 18 25 36 22 15 13 45 6 26 6 58 7 22 20 19 26 29 23 2 14 30 7 13 7 53 7 26 36 20 27 24 23 50 15 14 8 0 8 47 7 30 52 21 28 68 24 36 15 59 8 46 9 41 7 35 8 22 29 12 25 25 16 44 9 33 10 35 7 39 24 23 0 6 26 11 17 29 10 20 11 29 7 43 36 24 1 0 26 57 18 14 11 5 12 23 7 47 48 25 1 52 27 45 18 52 11 52 13 17 7 52 10 26 2 44 28 31 19 42 12 38 14 11 7 56 12 27 3 38 29 18 20 16 13 24 15 5 8 0 26 28 5 31 0 5 21 10 14 11 15 59 8 4 36 29 5 24 0 52 21 54 14 57 16 54 8 48 30 6 18 1 39 22 38 15 57 17 49
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Leo. Time from Noon Dom. x. Dom. xi. Dom. xii Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii ♍ ♎ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ H. M. S. Grad. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 8 8 48 0 6 18 1 39 22 38 15 43 17 49 8 12 56 1 7 10 2 24 23 22 16 28 18 43 8 17 4 2 8 3 3 11 24 5 17 14 19 37 8 21 17 3 8 55 3 57 24 48 18 0 20 31 8 25 20 4 9 48 4 41 25 32 18 45 21 26 8 29 28 5 10 41 5 28 26 16 19 31 22 21 8 33 36 6 11 33 6 14 26 58 20 16 23 15 8 37 40 7 12 25 6 59 27 41 21 1 24 9 8 41 44 8 13 16 7 44 28 23 21 36 25 3 8 45 48 9 14 9 8 29 29 6 22 31 25 58 8 49 48 10 15 0 9 13 29 42 23 16 26 52 8 53 57 11 15 57 57 0 30 24 1 27 47 8 57 56 12 16 43 10 43 1 13 24 46 28 42 9 1 56 13 17 35 11 28 1 55 25 31 29 9 5 56 14 18 67 12 12 2 36 26 16 0 52 9 9 56 15 19 17 12 57 3 18 27 1 1 28 9 13 56 16 20 9 13 40 4 0 27 46 2 23 9 17 52 17 20 50 14 24 4 41 28 30 3 18 9 21 48 18 21 50 15 7 5 22 29 14 4 14 9 25 44 19 22 40 15 50 6 4 29 59 5 6 9 29 40 20 23 30 16 34 6 45 0 44 6 5 9 33 36 21 24 21 17 17 7 26 1 28 7 1 9 37 32 22 25 11 18 1 8 6 12 7 58 9 41 24 23 26 18 44 8 47 2 56 8 54 9 45 20 24 26 52 19 27 9 28 3 40 9 51 49 12 25 27 41 20 10 10 8 4 24 10 48 9 53 4 26 28 31 20 53 10 48 5 8 11 46 9 56 56 27 29 17 21 36 11 29 5 53 12 43 10 0 44 28 0 10 22 17 12 9 37 13 39 10 4 36 29 0 59 22 59 12 50 7 22 14 37 10 8 24 30 1 48 23 13 30 8 6 5 43
Tabula Domorum Sol in Virgo. Time from Noon. Dom. x Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. . Dom. . ♍ ♎ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ H. M. S. Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 10 8 24 0 1 48 23 41 13 30 8 6 15 34 10 12 12 1 2 37 24 23 14 9 3 51 16 31 10 16 0 2 3 26 25 6 14 49 9 35 17 30 10 19 48 3 4 15 25 46 15 29 10 20 18 29 10 23 36 4 5 4 26 28 16 9 11 19 29 10 27 24 5 5 53 27 11 16 48 11 50 20 29 10 31 12 6 6 41 27 53 17 28 12 35 21 29 10 35 0 7 7 30 28 18 9 13 21 22 30 10 38 44 8 8 29 15 18 48 14 6 23 30 10 42 28 9 9 5 29 57 19 27 14 51 24 30 10 46 12 10 9 53 0 37 20 6 15 36 25 31 10 49 56 11 10 41 1 18 20 48 16 22 26 32 10 53 40 12 11 29 1 59 21 26 17 9 27 35 10 57 24 13 12 17 2 40 22 5 17 54 28 36 11 1 8 14 13 5 3 21 22 45 18 40 29 39 11 4 48 15 13 52 4 1 23 24 19 25 0 41 11 8 32 16 14 39 4 42 24 4 20 12 1 45 11 12 12 17 15 26 5 22 24 43 20 58 2 49 11 15 56 18 16 14 5 3 25 23 21 46 3 53 11 19 36 19 17 1 6 43 26 2 22 32 4 58 11 23 16 20 17 48 7 23 26 41 23 19 6 3 11 27 0 21 18 35 8 4 27 22 24 8 7 10 11 30 40 22 19 22 8 44 28 1 24 56 8 16 11 34 20 23 20 9 9 24 28 40 25 44 9 21 11 38 0 24 20 56 10 5 29 20 26 33 10 28 11 41 40 25 21 42 10 45 29 59 27 22 11 36 11 45 2 26 22 28 11 24 0 39 28 11 12 44 11 49 0 27 23 15 12 5 1 19 29 0 13 52 11 52 40 28 24 1 12 46 2 2 9 491 15 2 11 56 20 29 24 48 13 26 2 39 0 41 16 12 12 0 40 30 25 34 14 6 3 19 1 32 17 22
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Libra. Time from Noon. Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom.. ♎ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ H. M. S Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 12 0 0 0 25 34 14 6 3 19 1 32 17 22 12 3 48 1 26 20 14 46 3 59 2 24 18 23 12 7 20 2 27 6 15 28 4 40 3 15 19 44 12 11 0 3 27 52 16 7 5 20 4 7 20 56 12 14 40 4 28 39 16 47 6 2 5 1 22 8 12 18 20 5 29 26 17 28 6 43 5 55 23 21 12 22 0 6 0 12 18 8 24 6 49 24 36 12 25 40 7 0 59 18 49 8 5 7 44 25 51 12 29 20 8 1 45 19 29 8 46 8 39 27 5 12 33 0 9 2 31 20 10 9 28 9 34 28 20 12 36 44 10 3 19 20 51 10 10 10 32 29 37 12 40 24 11 4 5 21 31 10 52 11 30 0 53 12 44 4 12 4 52 22 12 11 35 12 28 2 11 12 47 48 13 5 38 22 54 12 38 13 27 3 29 12 51 28 14 6 25 23 34 12 59 14 26 4 46 12 55 12 15 7 11 24 16 13 43 25 27 6 6 12 58 52 16 7 57 24 57 14 26 16 28 7 24 13 2 36 17 8 44 25 39 15 10 17 30 8 44 13 6 20 18 9 28 26 20 15 18 32 10 4 13 10 4 19 10 15 27 2 16 39 19 37 11 26 13 13 48 20 11 2 27 44 17 23 20 44 12 49 13 17 32 21 11 50 28 26 18 8 21 50 14 10 13 21 16 22 12 36 29 8 18 54 59 15 32 13 25 0 23 13 23 29 49 19 39 24 6 16 54 13 28 48 24 14 10 0 33 20 26 25 17 18 21 13 32 36 25 14 57 1 16 21 26 28 19 45 13 36 24 26 15 44 1 57 22 1 27 41 21 9 13 40 12 27 16 33 2 43 22 49 57 22 35 13 44 0 28 17 29 3 26 3 37 0 11 24 0 13 47 48 29 18 7 4 26 1 27 25 26 13 51 36 30 18 54 4 51 25 15 2 44 26 51
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Scorpio. Time from Noon. Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. . ♏ ♏ ♐ ♐ ♒ ♓ H. M. S Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 13 51 36 0 18 4 51 25 15 2 43 26 51 13 35 24 1 19 42 5 41 26 5 3 59 28 17 13 59 16 2 20 30 6 19 26 56 5 25 29 44 14 3 4 3 21 18 7 4 27 47 6 49 1 9 14 6 56 4 22 0 7 49 28 39 8 13 2 30 14 10 48 5 22 54 8 34 29 39 9 38 4 0 14 14 40 6 23 43 9 20 0 24 11 6 5 28 14 18 36 7 24 31 10 6 1 11 12 34 6 56 14 22 28 8 25 21 10 52 2 13 14 7 8 24 14 26 26 9 26 9 11 38 3 10 15 40 9 51 14 30 20 10 26 12 25 4 6 17 15 11 19 14 34 16 11 27 47 13 12 5 3 18 52 12 47 14 38 12 12 28 37 13 59 6 1 20 31 14 15 14 42 8 13 29 26 14 47 7 0 22 12 15 41 14 46 4 14 0 12 15 35 0 0 23 53 17 9 14 50 4 15 1 6 16 9 2 25 18 37 14 54 4 16 1 56 17 14 10 6 27 16 20 4 14 58 4 17 2 46 18 3 11 9 19 15 21 30 15 2 4 18 3 36 18 52 12 14 1 6 22 56 15 6 8 19 4 27 19 41 13 21 2 57 24 23 15 10 12 20 5 19 20 23 14 29 4 53 25 49 15 14 21 6 10 21 24 15 37 6 49 27 14 15 18 16 22 7 1 22 14 16 46 8 47 28 39 15 22 20 23 7 53 23 7 17 58 10 42 0 4 15 26 24 24 8 44 24 0 19 11 12 48 1 28 15 30 32 25 9 36 24 54 20 27 14 52 2 52 15 34 40 26 10 29 25 48 21 43 16 58 4 17 15 38 48 27 11 21 26 43 23 3 19 4 5 44 15 42 51 28 12 15 27 38 24 24 21 11 7 3 15 47 4 29 13 15 28 38 25 47 23 18 8 25 15 51 12 30 14 0 29 30 27 10 25 25 9 47
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Sagitary. Time from Noon. Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom ii. Dom. iii. ♐ ♐ ♐ ♑ ♓ ♉ H. M. S gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 15 51 12 0 14 0 29 30 27 10 25 25 9 47 15 55 24 1 14 52 0 28 37 27 36 11 9 15 59 36 2 15 43 1 27 0 6 29 48 12 30 16 3 48 3 16 44 2 26 1 37 2 0 13 51 16 8 0 4 17 38 3 25 3 11 4 11 15 11 16 12 12 5 18 33 4 24 4 38 6 21 16 03 16 16 6 19 28 5 27 6 27 8 31 17 49 16 20 36 7 20 23 6 29 8 8 10 38 19 6 16 24 52 8 21 20 7 32 9 52 12 48 20 24 16 29 9 22 16 8 36 11 40 14 58 21 41 16 33 10 23 15 9 40 13 30 17 6 22 58 16 37 11 24 9 10 45 15 20 19 14 24 14 16 41 56 12 25 5 11 53 17 19 21 24 25 30 16 46 12 13 16 3 13 1 19 18 23 23 26 11 16 50 32 14 27 1 14 11 21 20 25 28 27 59 16 54 52 15 28 0 15 22 23 30 27 30 29 14 16 59 16 28 59 16 32 25 32 29 29 0 26 17 3 28 17 29 57 17 45 27 44 1 27 1 33 17 7 18 0 58 18 57 29 58 3 5 2 50 17 12 4 19 1 57 20 15 2 17 5 21 4 2 17 16 28 20 2 58 21 31 4 38 7 11 5 13 17 20 48 21 3 58 22 50 7 0 9 4 6 23 17 25 8 22 5 0 24 9 9 24 10 55 7 33 17 29 28 23 6 2 25 29 11 53 12 41 8 42 17 33 52 24 7 4 26 50 14 32 14 26 9 51 17 38 12 25 8 8 28 16 16 59 16 11 0 17 42 32 26 9 11 29 43 19 3 17 51 12 8 17 46 52 27 10 14 1 8 22 5 19 30 13 14 17 51 12 28 11 18 2 35 24 39 21 6 14 20 17 55 36 29 12 23 4 6 27 20 22 43 15 26 18 0 0 30 13 28 5 40 30 0 24 19 16 32
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Capricorn. Time from Noon. Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii. ♑ ♑ ♒ ♓ ♉ ♊ H. M. S Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 19 0 0 0 13 28 5 40 30 0 24 19 16 32 18 4 24 1 14 34 7 18 2 37 25 53 17 38 18 8 48 2 15 48 8 54 5 19 27 25 18 42 18 13 8 3 16 45 10 30 7 55 28 53 19 46 18 17 20 4 17 51 12 9 10 29 0 20 20 50 18 21 48 5 19 0 13 44 13 2 1 44 21 53 18 26 12 6 20 10 15 35 15 37 3 9 22 56 18 30 7 21 19 17 20 18 7 4 31 23 58 18 34 52 8 22 28 19 7 20 35 5 52 25 0 18 39 12 9 23 38 20 55 23 0 7 10 26 1 18 43 32 10 24 47 22 25 22 8 29 27 2 18 47 52 11 25 57 24 40 27 43 9 46 28 2 18 52 12 12 27 10 26 37 30 0 11 1 29 2 18 56 13 28 23 28 36 2 16 12 16 0 2 19 0 52 14 29 33 0 33 4 27 13 28 1 2 19 5 8 15 0 47 2 30 6 33 14 38 2 0 19 9 28 16 2 1 4 32 8 39 15 49 2 59 19 12 48 17 17 6 37 10 43 16 59 3 58 19 18 18 4 30 8 41 12 42 18 8 4 55 19 22 20 19 5 46 10 48 14 40 19 14 5 51 19 26 36 20 7 1 12 52 16 31 20 20 6 48 19 30 52 21 8 19 15 0 18 20 21 24 7 44 19 35 22 9 34 17 8 20 5 22 28 8 39 19 39 23 10 53 19 23 21 52 23 32 9 37 19 43 36 24 12 11 21 31 23 33 24 34 10 32 19 47 48 25 13 10 23 45 25 13 25 35 1 27 19 52 0 26 14 47 25 51 26 49 26 35 12 22 19 56 12 27 16 9 28 0 28 22 27 35 13 17 20 0 24 28 17 0 13 29 53 28 34 14 12 20 4 36 29 18 53 2 25 1 23 29 33 15 6 20 8 48 30 20 4 35 2 50 0 30 16 0
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Aquary. Time from Noon Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii. ♒ ♒ ♈ ♊ ♋ ♋ H. M. S Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 20 8 48 0 22 11 4 35 2 50 0 30 16 0 20 12 56 1 21 34 6 44 4 14 1 26 16 53 20 17 4 2 22 54 8 52 5 37 2 22 17 46 20 21 12 3 24 19 10 58 6 58 3 17 18 39 20 25 20 4 25 44 13 2 8 17 4 12 19 31 20 29 18 5 27 9 15 8 9 33 5 6 20 22 20 33 36 6 28 33 17 12 10 49 6 0 21 14 20 37 40 7 29 52 19 14 12 3 6 53 22 7 20 41 44 8 1 21 21 14 13 14 7 46 22 59 20 45 48 9 2 49 23 13 14 24 8 37 23 50 20 49 48 10 4 13 25 8 15 32 9 28 24 41 20 53 52 11 5 37 27 2 16 40 10 19 25 32 20 57 56 12 7 5 57 17 46 11 9 26 23 21 1 56 13 8 30 0 47 18 53 11 59 27 14 21 5 56 14 9 56 2 32 19 56 12 49 28 4 21 9 56 15 11 22 4 21 20 58 13 38 28 54 21 13 56 16 12 53 6 7 22 0 14 26 29 44 21 17 52 17 14 18 7 45 3 0 15 14 0 34 21 21 48 18 15 44 9 30 23 59 16 2 1 22 21 25 44 19 17 11 11 9 24 58 16 49 2 13 21 29 40 20 18 42 12 47 25 55 17 36 3 4 21 33 36 21 20 8 14 21 26 51 18 22 3 51 21 37 32 22 21 34 15 57 27 47 16 9 4 40 21 41 24 23 23 1 17 25 28 41 19 55 5 28 21 45 20 24 24 30 18 56 29 36 20 42 6 17 21 49 12 25 25 57 20 23 0 29 21 26 7 6 21 53 4 26 27 24 21 47 1 22 22 11 7 54 21 56 51 27 28 51 23 12 2 14 22 56 8 43 22 0 44 28 0 17 24 36 3 5 3 40 9 30 22 0 36 29 1 44 26 0 3 56 24 25 10 18 22 8 24 30 3 9 27 17 4 45 25 0 11 6
Tabula Domorum. Sol in Pisces. Time from Noon Dom. x. Dom. xi. Do. xii. Ascend. Dom. ii. Dom. iii. ♓ ♈ ♉ ♋ ♋ ♌ H. M. S Gradus. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. Gr. Mi. 22 8 24 0 3 9 27 17 4 45 25 11 11 6 22 12 12 1 4 35 28 34 5 35 25 52 11 54 22 16 0 2 6 0 29 52 6 23 26 35 12 41 22 19 48 3 7 26 1 6 7 12 27 18 13 28 22 23 36 4 8 51 2 32 8 0 28 2 14 15 22 27 24 5 10 15 3 32 8 48 28 44 15 3 22 51 12 6 11 45 4 43 9 31 29 28 15 50 22 35 0 7 13 2 5 57 10 22 0 11 16 36 22 38 43 8 14 29 7 2 11 7 0 53 17 23 22 42 28 9 15 50 8 10 11 52 1 35 18 10 22 46 12 10 17 12 9 16 12 37 2 17 18 57 22 49 56 11 18 34 10 24 13 23 2 56 19 44 22 53 40 12 19 56 11 27 14 7 3 40 20 31 22 57 25 13 21 16 12 31 14 54 4 21 21 18 23 1 8 14 22 36 13 33 15 37 5 3 22 4 23 4 48 15 23 55 14 34 16 17 5 44 22 50 23 8 32 16 25 15 15 35 17 1 6 26 23 37 23 12 12 17 26 31 16 34 17 44 7 7 24 23 23 15 56 18 27 52 17 33 18 26 7 48 25 9 23 19 36 19 29 7 18 32 19 9 8 29 25 55 23 23 16 20 0 26 19 29 19 52 9 10 26 42 23 27 0 21 1 40 20 26 20 33 9 52 27 29 23 30 42 22 2 55 21 22 21 15 10 32 28 15 23 34 20 23 4 10 22 16 21 56 11 12 29 2 23 38 0 24 5 25 23 11 22 37 11 53 29 48 23 41 40 25 6 38 24 5 23 18 12 33 0 35 23 45 20 26 7 51 24 59 23 59 13 13 1 21 23 49 9 27 9 4 25 54 24 39 13 54 2 7 23 52 40 28 10 16 26 46 25 21 14 34 2 55 23 56 20 29 11 28 27 37 26 2 15 14 3 44 24 0 0 30 12 37 28 28 26 42 15 54 4 26
A Table of the Essentiall Dignities of the Planets according to Ptolomy. Signes. Houses of the Planets. Exaltation. Triple city of the Plan. The Termes of the Planets. The faces of the Planets. Detriment. Fall. Di. Noc. ♈ ♂ D ☉ 19 ☉ ♃ ♃ 6 ♀ 14 ☿ 21 ♂ 26 ♄ 30 ♂ 10 ☉ 20   30 ♀ ♄ ♉ ♀ N ☽ 3 ♀ ☽ ♀ 8 ♀ 12 ♃ 22 ♄ 26 ♂ 30 ☿ 10 ☽ 20 ♄ 30 ♂   ♊ ☿ D ☊ ♄ ♀ ☿ 7 ♃ 74 ♀ 2 ♄ 25 ♂ 30 ♃ 10 ♂ 20 ☉ 30 ♃   ♋ ☽ ND ♃ 15 ♂ ♂ ♂ 6 ♄ 13 ☿ 20 ♀ 27 ♄ 30 ♀ 10 ☿ 20 ☽ 30 ♄ ♂ ♌ ☉ ND     ☉ ♃ ♄ 6 ☿ 13 ♀ 19 ♃ 25 ♂ 30 ♄ 10 ♃ 20 ♂ 30 ♄   ♍ ☿ N ☿ 15 ♀ ☽ ☿ 7 ♀ 13 ♃ 18 ♄ ♂ 30 ☉ 10 ♀ 20 ☿ 30 ♃ ♀ ♎ ♀ D ♄ 21 ♄ ☿ ♄ 6 ♀ 11 ♃ 19 ♀ 24 ♂ 30 ☽ 10 ♄ 20 ♃ 30 ♂ ☉ ♏ ♂ N     ♄ ☿ ♂ 6 ♃ 14 ♀ 21 ☿ 27 ♄ 30 ♂ 10 ☉ 20 ♀ 30 ♀ ☽ ♐ ♃ D ☊ 3 ♂ ♂ ♃ 8 ♀ 44 ☿ 19 ♄ 25 ♂ 30 ☿ 10 ☽ 20 ♄ 30 ☿   ♑ ♄ N ♂ 20 ☉ ♃ ♀ 6 ☿ 12 ♃ 19 ♂ 25 ♄ 30 ♃ 10 ♂ 20 ☉ 30 ☽ ♃ ♒ ♄ D     ♀ ☽ ♄ 6 ♀ 12 ♀ 20 ♃ 25 ♂ 30 ♀ 01 ☿ 20 ☽ 30 ☉   ♓ ♃ N ♀ 27 ♂ ♉ ♀ 8 ♃ 14 ☿ 20 ♂ 26 ♄ 30 ♄ 10 ♃ 20 ♂ 30 ☿ ☿ Whosoever hath occasion for any sort of Mathematicall In∣struments for Sea or Land, may be furnished at the 3. Daggers in Moore-fields neere Bedlam Gate, By Walter Hayes.
EPILOGVS. Of the Faces of the Signes. THat the faces of the signs have significations is aparent, and that none have as yet written of them in English is as true, therefore here having got a little spate paper I shall fill it up with them, . Angelus hath cut convenient Images for them, which although they very fitly expresse their significations, I shall here omit. The first face of Aries is the face of Mars, and signifies boldnesse, fortitude, perferment and immodesty, it is compleat and strong in its properties and vertues. The second face is the face of the Sun, and signifies nobility and Preferment, Rule and Dominion. The third face is the face of Venus, and signifies Women, and their skill in manuall operation and trades belonging to that Sex, curtesies, play, joy and mirth. The first face of Taurus is Mercuries, and is compleat in his nature, is good to plow, sow and build, to frequent the company of Law∣yers, learned and wise Men, to measure and divide Land, to practice Geometry. The second face is belonging to the Moone, and signifies power, nobility and honour, to spoyl towns, and dispeople them, and bring great necessity upon people. The third face is the face of Saturne, and signifies misery, ban∣dage, slavery, necessity, want, and vilenes. The first face of Gemini is Jupiters, and is compleat in its nature, and signifies writing, casting of account, receiving and paying mo∣nies, delivering petitions and exersizing such feats of wit by which little mony is gotten. The second is the face of Mars, and signifies oppression and la∣bour, obtaining things by much study and difficulty, and if it  any at all it is knavish wit. The third is the face of the Sun, and signifies forgetsulnes, dis∣dain, jesting and playing. The first face of Cancer is the face of , compleat in its owne nature, and signifies strength and sensibility, community, subtilty and favour of the men they desire. The second is the face of Mercury, and signifies , jesting and playing with women, riches and fruitfulnesse.
The third face belongs to the Moone, and signifies huating,  of them that fly, and obtaining goods, by fighting, quarrelling and contrarying men in their humors. The first face of Leo belongs to Saturne, and is compleat in form, fignifies cruelty, evill deeds, violence, boldnesse, lust, and many  businosses, which must be born, will he nill he. The second face is the face of Jupiter; and signifies braulings that a man never thought of, misery and necessity, base men get the victory over their betters before they are aware of it, and it gives oc∣casion of fighting and blood-shed. The third is the face of Mars, and signifies love and society, it avoids strife, and men will be loath to part from their own. The first face of the virgin belongs to Sol, and is the faceof plow∣ing and sowing, planting and gathering riches, pleasing the fancy, and cherishing the body The second face of Virgo, is the face of Venus, and signifies getting gain and substance, a greedy desire after wealth, a covetous disposi∣tion, seeking help of other people to advance himselfe. The third is the face of Mercury, and signifies old age and weak∣nesse, sloathfulnes and infirmity, rooting up trees and unpeopling Countries. The first face of Libra belongs to the Moon, and signifies justice, law and truth, it helps the poor and delivers him out of the clutches of the rich, and is compleat both in figure and nature. The second is the face of Saturne, and signifies rest, plentifulnes, quietnes, a good peaceable secure life. The third sace belongs to Jupiter, and signifies lust, sodomy, evill company, singing and jollity. The first face of Scorpio is the face of Mars, and is compleat in figure and nature, it signifies wrangling, sicknes and deceit, sadnes, destruction and way-laying, or private cunny-catching. The second is the face of the Sun, and is a wrangling, quarrelling, scolding, mischief-sowing, seditious, vexatious face. The third belongs to Venus, and signifies violence, drunkennesse, war and fornication. The first face of Sagitarius belongs to Mercury, and gives signifi∣cation of boldnes, liberty and war. The Moon claims the second face which signifies fear and weep∣ing, lamentation, and bodily sorrow.
The third is the face of Saturn, and signifies a man extream, sel∣fish, one that will have his own will though to pull down houses subtile for himselfe, and walks contrary to every body, quick witted to every thing that is bad, but in good things hee moves as though He drew a milstone at his tayle. The first face of Capricorn is the face of Jupiter compleat in figure and nature, and signifyes a joyfull life, wandering and travailing, gain and losse, an intermixed life. The second is the face of Mars, and signifies searching after such things as will never be found out, and studying after such things as will never be attained. The third face belongs to the Sun, and makes a man covetous and desirous of rule, and soveraignty. The first face of Aquary is the face of Venus, and signifies conti∣nuall anxiety after gain, the man is never at rest, but alwayes full of labour and pains-taking; and much adoe he hath to keep buckle and thong together. The second is the face of Mercury, and gives beauty, understand∣ing and modesty, a fine courteous disposition, modest, and not much given to anger, of good condition, compleat in forme, and one that loves liberty. The third face the Moon claims dominion of, and signifies braw∣ling, scolding and quarreling. The first face of Piscos is the face of Saturne, compleat in figure and nature, is of many thoughts & as many journeys, often shifting from place to place, very diligent to get him a name, and an estate. The second is the face of Jupiter, and is of an aspiring braine, a creature that aimes at no small matters. Mars claims the third face in which he delights much in wenches, fornication, whoredome and pleasure. These things I thought good here to set down, because I account them necessary in astrologicall judgments, and also have found them verified in the nativiti s of many people. And for further satisfaction let them see my Booke called, An Astrologicall judgement of Diseases, from the decumbiture of the sick: Also, the manner of finding out the cause, change and end of a Disease, And whether the sick be likely to live or die, and the time when recovery or death is to be expected: to which is added the signes of Life or Death by the body of the sick party, according to the judgement of Hypocrates. FINIS.
