B1617 15747405 104626
WIT WITHOVT MONEY. A COMEDIE, As it hath been Presented with good Ap∣plause at the private house in Drury Lane, by Her Hajesties Servants. Written by Francis Beamount and John Flecher Gent. The second Impression Corrected. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crooke, at the Green Dragon in St. Pauls - Church-Yard, 1661.
The Actors names. VAlentine, a Gallant that will no be perswaded to keep his estate. Francisco, his younger brother. Master Lovegood their Vncle. A Merchant, friend to Master Lovegood. Fountain, Bellamore, Hairbraine, companions of Valentine, and sutors to the Widdow. Lance a Faulkner, and an ancient servant to Valentines Father. Shorthose the Clown, and servant to the Widdow. Roger Ralph, and Humphery, three servants to the Widdow. Three Servants. Musitians. Lady Hartwell a Widdow. Isabel her Sister. Luce a waiting Genlewoman to the Widdow.
VVIT WITHOUT MONEY. Actus 1. Scaena. 1. Enter Vncle and Merchant. Merchant, WHen saw you Valentine? Vncle Not since the Horsrace, he's taken up with those that wooe the Widdow. Mer. How can he live by snatches from such people, he bore a worthy minde. Vncle. Alas, he's sunk, his means are gone, he wants, and which is worse, Takes a delight in doing so. Mer. That's strange. Vnc. Runs Lunaticke, if you but talk of states, he cannot be brouht now he has spent his own, to think theres inheritance, or means, but all a common riches, all men bound to be his Bailiffes: Mer. This is something dangerous. Vnc. No Gent. that has estate to use it in keeping house, or followers, for those wayes he cries against, for eating sins, dull surfets, cramming of serving men, mustering of beggars, main∣tain hospitals for Kites, and curs, grounding their fat faiths up∣on old Countrey proverbs, God bless the founders; these
he would have ventured into more manly uses. Wit and carri∣age, and never thinks of state, or means, the ground works: holding it monstrous, men should feed their bodies, and starve their understandings. Mer. Thats most certain. Vnc. Yes, if he could stay there. Mer. Why let him marry, and that way rise again. Vnc. Its most impossible, he will not look with any hand∣someness upon a woman. Mer. Is he so strange to women. Vnc. I know not what it is, a foolish glory he he has got, I know not where, to balk those benefits, and and yet he will con∣verse and flatter um, make um, or fair, or foul, rugged, or smooth, as his impression serves, for he affirms, they are only lumps, and undigested peeces, lickt over to a form, by our affections, and then they show; The lovers let um pass. Enter Fount. Bella. Hair. Mer. He might be one, he carries as much promise; they are wondrous merry. Vnc. O their hopes are high sir. Fount. Is Valentine come to Town. Bella. Last night I heard, Fou. We miss him mounstrously in our directions, for this Widdow, is as stately, and as crafty, and stands I warrant you. Hair. Let her stand sure, she falls before us else, come lets go seek Valentine. Mer. This Widdow seems a gallant: Vnc. A goodly woman, and to her handsomness she bears her state, reserved, and great Fortune has made her Mistress of a full means, and well she knows to use it. Mer. I would Valentine had her. Vnc. Ther's no hope of that Sir. Mer. A that condition, he had his morgage in again. Vnc. I would he had. Mer. Seek means, and see what Ile do, howevr let the money be paid in, I never sought a Gentlemans undoing, nor cat the bread of other mens vexations, you told me of ano∣ther brother:
Vnc. Yes sir, more miserable then he, for he has eat him, and drunk him up, a handsom Gentleman, and fine Schol∣lar. Enter three tenants. Mer. What are these? Vnc. The tenants, theyle do what they can, Mer. It is well prepared, be earnest honest friends and loud upon him, he is deaf to his own good. Lance. We mean to tell him part of our minds ant pleas you. Mer. Doe, and do it home, and in what my care may help, or my perswasions when we meet next. Vnc. Do but perswade him fairly; and for your money, mine, and these mens thanks too, and what we can be able: Mer. Y'are most honest, you shall find me no less, and so I leave you, prosper your business my friends. Exit. Mer. Vnc. Pray heaven it may sir; Lance. Nay if he will be mad, Ile be mad with him, and tell him that Ile not spare him, his Father kept good meat, good drink, good fellowes, good Hawks, good Hounds, and bid his neighbours welcome; kept him too, and supplied his prodiga∣lity, yet kept his state still, must we turn Tenants now, after we have lived under the race of Gentry, and maintained good yeo∣mantry, to some of the City, to a great shoulder of Mutton, and a Custard, and have our state turned into Cabbidge Gardens, must it be so: Vnc. You must be milder to him. Lance. Thats as he makes his game: Vnc. Intreat him lovingly, and make him feel: Lance. Ile pinch him to the bones else. Valen. Within. And tell the Gentleman, Ile be with him presently, say I want money too, I must not fail boy. Lance. You'l want clothes, I hope. Enter Valentine. Val. Bid the young Courtier repair to me anon, Ile read to him. Vac. He comes, be diligent, but not too rugged, start him, but afright him not. Val. Phew, are you there?
Unc. We come to see you Nephew, be not angry. Val. Why do you dog me tus, with these strange people? why all the world shall never mke me rich more, nor master of these troubles. Tenants. We beseech you for our poor childrens sake. Val. VVho bid you get um: have you not threshing work enough, but children must be bang'd out oth' sheafe too, other men with all their delicates, and healthfull diets, can get but winde eggs: you with a clove of garlick, a piece of cheese, would break a saw; and sowre milk, can mount like Stallions, and I must maintain these tumblers. Lance. You ought to maintain us, we have maintained you, and when you slept provided for you; who bought the silk you wear, I think our labours; reckon, youle finde it so: who found your horses perpetuall pots of ale, maintain'd your Taverns, and who extold you in the half crown boxes, where you might sit and muster all the Beauties, we had no hand in these; no, we are all puppies: Your Tenants base vexations. Val. Very well, sir. Lance. Had you Land, sir, and honest men to serve your pur∣poses, honest and faithfull, and will you run away from um, betray your self, and your poor tribe to misery; morgage all us, like old cloaks; where will you hunt next, you had a thou∣sand acres, fair and open: The Kings Bench is enclosed, there's no good riding, the Counter is full of thorns and brakes, take heed sir, and bogges, you'l quickly finde what broth they're made of. Val. Y'are short and pithy. Lance. They say y'are a fine Gentleman, & excelient judge∣ment; they report you have a wit; keep your self out oth' ram, and take your cloak with you, which by interpretation is your state sir, or I shall think your fame belied you, you have money, and may have means. Val. I prethee leave prating, does my good lye within thy braine to further, or my undoing in thy pity: goe, goe, get you home, there whistle to your horses, and let them edi∣fie; away, sow hempe, to hang your selves withall, what
am I to you or you to me; am I your Landlord, puppies? Vnc. This is uncivil. Val. More unmercifull you: to vex me with these bacon broth and puddings, they are the walking shapes of all my sor∣rowes. 3 Tenants. Your Fathers VVorship would have used us better. Val. My Fathers worship was a fool. Lanc. Hey, hey boyes, old Valentine ifaith, the old boy still. Vnc. Fie Cosen. Val. I meane besotted to his state, he had never left me the misery of so much meanes else, which till I sold, was a meere meagrome to me: If you will talk, turne out these tenants, they are as killing to my nature Uncle, as water to a feaver. Lance. VVe will go, but it is like Rams, to come again the stronger, and you shall keep your state: Val. Thou lyest, I will not. Lance. Sweet sir, thou lyest, thou shalt, and so good mor∣row. Exeunt Tenants. Val. This was my man, and of a noble breeding, now to your businesse Uncle. Unc. To your state then. Val. Tis gone, and I am glad on't, name it no more, tis that I pray against, and Heaven has heard me, I tell you sir, I am more fearful of it, I mean of thinking of more lands, or livings, than sickly men are travelling a Sundayes, for being quell'd with Carriers, out upon't, caveat emptor, let the fool out-sweat it, that thinks he has got a catch on't. Unc. This is madnesse to be a wilfull begger. Val. I am mad then, and so I mean to be, will that content you? How bravely now I live, how jocund, how neare the first inheritance, without feares, how free from title-trou∣bles. Unc. And from means too. Val. Meanes, why all good men's my meanes; my wit's my plow, the Town's my stock, Taverns my standing-house, and all the world knows there's no want; all Gentlemen that
love society, love me; all purses that wit and pleasure opens, are my Tennants; every mans clothes fit me, the next fair lodging, is but my next remove, and when I please to be more eminent, and take the air, a peece, is levied, and a Coach prepared, and I go I care not whether, what need state here. Vnc. But say these means were honest, will they last sir. Val. Far longer then your jerkin, and wear fairer should I take ought of you, tis true, I beg'd now, or which is worse then that, I stole a kindness, and which is worst of all, I lost my way i'nt, your mindes enclosed nothing lies open nobly, your very thoughts are Hindes that work on nothing but dai∣ly sweat, and trouble: were my way so full of dirt as this, tis true I shifted; are my acquaintance Grasiers: but sir, know no man that I am allied too, in my living, but makes it equal, whether his own use, or my necessity pull first, nor is this forc'd, but the meer quality and poysure of goodness, and do you think I venture nothing equal. Vnc. You pose me Cosen. Val. What's my knowledge Vncle, ist not worth money, what's my understanding, travel, reading, wit, all these di∣gested, my daily making men, some to speak, that too much flegme had frozen up, some that spoke too much, to hold their peace, and put their tongues to pensious, some to wear their cloths, and some to keep um, these are nothing Vncle; besides these wayes, to teach the way of nature, a manly love, community to all that are deservers, not examining how much, or what's done for them, tis wicked, and such a one like you, chewes his thoughts doule, making um onely food for his repen∣tance. Enter two servants. 1. Ser. This cloak and hat sir, and my Masters love. Val. Commend's to thy Master, and take that, and leave um at my lodging. 1. I shall do it sir. Val. I do not think of these things: 2. Ser. Please you sir, I have gold here for you. Val. Give it me, drink that and commend me to thy Ma∣ster;
look you Vncle, do I beg these: Vnc. No sure tis your worth sir. Val. Tis like enough, but pray satisfie me, are not these wayes as honest as persecuting the starved inheritance, with musty Corne, the very rats were sain to run away from, or selling rotten wood by the pound, like spices, which Gentlemen do after burn byt'h ounces, do not I know your way of seeding beasts, with graines, and windy stuff, to blow up Butchers, your racking Pastures, that have eaten up as many singing Shep∣herds, and their issues; as Andeluria breeds; these are au∣thentique, I tell you sir, I would not change wayes with you, unless it were to sell your state that hour, and if it were possible to spend it then too, for all your Beans in Rumnillo, now you know me. Vnc. I would you knew your self, but since you are grown such a strange enemy, to all that fits you, give me leave to make your brothers fortune. Val. How? Vnc. From your morgage, which yet you may recover, Ile the means. Val. Pray save your labour sir, my brother and my self, will run one fortune, and I think what I hold a meer vexation, cannot be safe for him, I love him better, he has wit at will, the world has means, he shall live without this trick of state, we are heirs both, and all the World be∣fore us. Vnc. My last offer, and then I am gone. Val. What i'st, and then Ile answer. Vnc. What think you of a Wife yet to restore you, and tell me seriously without these trifles. Val. And you can finde one, that can please my fancy, you shall not find me stubborn. Vnc. Speak your Woman. Val. One without eyes, that is self commendations, for when they finde they are handsome, they are unvvholsome, one without eares, not giving time to flatterers, for she that hears her self commended, wavers, and points men out a way to make um wicked; one without substance of her self,
that woman without the pleasure of her life, thats wanton, though she be young, forgetting it, though fair making her glass the eyes of honest men, not her own admiration, all her ends obe∣dience all her hours new blessings, if there may be such a Woman: Vuc. Yes there may be. Val. And without state too. Vnc. You are disposed to trifle, well, fare you well sir, when you want me next, you'l seek me out a better sence. Val. Fare well Vncle, and as you love your estate, let not me hear ont. Exit. Vnc. It shall not trouble yo, Ile watch him still, And when his friends fall off: then bend his will. Exit. Enter Isabella, and Luce. Luce. I know the cause of all this sadness now, your fister has ingrost all the brave Lovers. Isab. She has wherewithall, much good may't do her, pre∣thee speak softly, we are open to mens ears: Luce. Fear not, we are safe, we may see all that pass, hear all, and make our selves merry with their language, and yet stand undiscovered, be not melancholly, you are as fair as she. Isab. Who I, I thank you, I am as haste ordain'd me, a thing slubberd, my sister is a goodly portly Lady, a woman of a presence, she spread sattens, as the Kings ships do canvas, every where she may spare me her misen, and her bonnets, strike her main Patticoate, and yet outsail me, I am a Carvel to her. Luce. But a tight one: Isab. She is excellent, well built too. Luce. And yet shees old. Isab. Shee never saw above one voyage Luce, and cre∣dit me after another, her Hull will serve again, a right good Merchant: she plaies, and sings too, dances and discourtes, comes very neer Essays, a pretty Poet, begins to piddle with Phylosophie, a subtil Chimicke Wench, and can extract, the Spirit of mens Estates, she has the light before her, and can∣not miss her choice, for me tis reason, I wait my mean fortune.
Luce. You are so bashfull. Isab. It is not at first word up and ride, thou art cosen'd, that would shew mad I faith, besides, we lose the main part of our polliticke government, if we become provokers, then we are fair, and fit for mens imbraces, when like towns, they lie before us ages, yet not carried, hold out their strongest batte∣ries, then compound too without the loss of honour, and march off with our fair wedding: Colours flying, Who are these? Enter Franc. and Lance. Luce. I know not, nor I care not. Isa. Prethee peace then, a well built Gentleman. Luce. But poorly thatcht. Lance. Has he devoured you too? Fran. Has gulp'd me down Lance. Lance. Left you no means to study? Franc. Not a farching: dispatcht my poor annuity I thank him, heres all the hope I have left, one bare ten shillings. Lan. You are fit for great mens services. Fran. I am fit, but who'le take me, thus mens miseries are now accounted stains in their natures, I have travelled, and I have studied long, observed all kingdoms, know all the promises of Art and manners, yet that I am not bold, nor cannot flatter, I shall not thrive, all these are but vain Studies, art thou so rich as to get me a lodging Lance? Lan. Ile sell the titles of my house else, my Horse, my Hawk, nay's death Ile pawn my wife: Oh Mr. Francis, that I should see your Fathers house fall thus. Isab. An honest fellow. Lan. Your Fathers house, that fed me, that bred up all my (name. Isab. A gratefull fellow. Lan. And fall by. Fran. Peace, I know you are angry Lance, but I must not hear with whom, he is my brother, and though you hold him slight, my most dear brother: A gentleman excepting some few rubs, he were too excellent to live here else, fraughted as deep with noble and brave parts, the issues of a noble and manly spirit as any he a live, I must not hear you, though I
am miserable, and ha made me so, yet still he is my brother, still I love him, and to that tye of blood linke my affections. Jsab. A noble nature, dost thou know him Luce? Luce. No Mistress. Isab. Thou shouldest ever know such good men, what a fair body and mind, are married; did he not say he wanted. Luce. What's that to you? Isab. Tis true, but tis great pity. Luce. How she changes, ten thousand more than he, as handsom men too. Isab. Tis like enough; but as I live, this Gentleman among ten thousand thousand, is there no kowing him; why should he want? fellowes of no merit, slight and puft solus, that walk like shadowes, by leaving no print of what they are, or poise, let them complain. Luce. Her colour changes strangly. Isab. This man was made, to mark his wants to waken us, alas poor Gentleman, but will that keep him from cold and hun∣ger, beleeve me he is well bred, and cannot be but of a noble linnage, mark him, mark him well. Luce. 'Is a handsome man. Isab. The sweetness of his suffrance sets him off, O Luce; but whether go I. Luce. You cannot hide it. Isab. I would he had what I can spare. Luce. Tis charitable. Lance Come sir, Ile see you lodg'd, you have tied my tongue fast, Ile steal before you want, tis but a hanging. Isab. That's a good fellow too, an honest fellow, why, this would move a stone, I must needs know; but that some other time. Exit Lance, and Frank. Luce Is the winde there? that makes for me. Isab. Come, I forgot a business.
Actus 2. Scaena 1. Enter Widow and Luce. Wid. MY sister, and a woman of so base a pity, what was the fellow? Luce. Why an ordinary man, Madam. Wid. Poor? Luce. Poor enough, and no man knowes from whence neither. Wid. What could she see? Luce. Onely his misery, for else she might behold a hundred handsomer. Wid. Did she change much? Luce. Extreamly, when he spoke, and then her pity, like an Orator, I fear her love framed such a commendation, and fol∣lowed it so far, as made me wonder. Wid. Is she so hot, or such a want of lovers, that she must doat upon afflictions: why does she not go romage all the pri∣sons, and there bestow her youth, bewray her wantonnesse, and flie her honour, common both to beggery: did she speak to him? Luce. No, he saw us not, but ever since, she hath been mainly troubled. Wid. Was he young? Luce. Yes, young enough. Wid. And looked he like a Gentleman? Luce. Like such a Gentleman, that would pawn ten oaths for twelve pence. Wid. My sister, and sink basely; this must not be, does she use means to know him? Luce. Yes Madam, and has employed a Squire called Shorthose. Wid. O that's a precious Knave, keep all this private, but still be neer her lodging; Luce, what you can gather by any means, let me understand; Ile stop her heat, and turn her charity another way, to blesse her selfe first, be stil close to
her counsels; a begger and a stranger, there's a blessednesse, Ile none of that; I have a toy yet, sister, shall tell you this is foule, and make you finde it, and for your paines take you the last go wne I wore; this makes me mad, but I shall force a re∣medy. Enter Fountaine, Bellamore, Harebraine, Valentine. Fount. Sirra, we have so lookt for thee, and long'd for thee; this widow is the strangest thing, the stateliest, and stands so much upon her excellencies. Bell. She hath put us off, this moneth now, for an answer. Hare. No man must visit her, nor look upon her, no, not say, Good morrow, nor Good even, till thats past. Val. She has found what dough-you are made of, and so kneads you: are you good at nothing, but these after-games? I have told you often enough what things they are, what precious things, these widows — — Hare. If we had um. Val. Why the Devil has not craft enough to wooe um, there be three kinds of fools, mark this note Gentlemen, mark it, and understand it. Fount. Well, go forward. Val. An Innocent, a Knave fool; a Fool politick: the last of which are lovers, widow lovers. Bell. VVill you allow no Fortune? Val. No such blind one. Fount. VVe gave you reasons, why twas needful for us. Val. As you are those fools, I did allow those reasons, but as my Schollars and Companions damn'd um: do you know what it is to wooe a widow? answer me coolely now, and un∣derstandingly. Hare. VVhy to lie with her, and to enjoy her wealth. Val. VVhy there you are fools still, crafty to catch your selves, pure politick fools, I lookt for such an answer; once more hear me, it is to wed a widow, to be doubted mainly, whe∣ther the state you have be yours or no, or those old boots you ride in. Mark me, widowes are long extents in Law upon newes, livings upon their bodies winding-sheets, they that enjoy um, lie but with dead mens monuments, and be get onely
their owne ill Epitaphs: Is not this plain now? Bell. Plain spoken. Val. And plain truth, but if you'le needs do things of dan∣ger, do but loose your selves, not any part concerns your under∣standings, for then you are Meacocks, fools, and miserable, march off amain, within an inch of a Fircug, turn me oth' toe like a VVeather-cock, kill every day a Sergeant for a twelve moneth, rob the Exchequer, and burn all the Rolls, and these will make a shew. Hare. And these are trifles. Val. Considered to a VVidow, empty nothings, for here you venture but your persons, there the varnish of your per∣sons, your discretions; why tis a monstrous thing to marry at all, especially as now tis made, me thinks a man, an under∣standing man, is more wise to me, and of a nobler tie, than all these trinkets, what do we get by women, but our senses, which is the rankest part about us satisfied, and when that's done, what are we? Crest fallen Cowards. VVhat benefit can children be, but charges and disobedience? VVhat's the love they render at one and twenty years? I pray die father: when they are young, they are like bells rung backwards, nothing but noise and giddinesse; and come to years once, there drops a son, byth' sword in his Mistresses quarrell, a great joy to his parents: A daughter ripe too, growes high and lusty in her blood, must have a heating, runs away with a supple ham'd Ser∣vingman: his twenty Nobles spent, takes to a trade, and learns to spin mens hair off; theres another, and most are of this na∣ture, will you marry? Fount. For my part yes, for any doubt I feel yet. Val. And this same VVidow? Fount. If I may, and me thinks, however you are pleased to dispute these dangers, such a warm match, and for you, sir, were not hurtfull. Val. Not half so killing as for you, for me she cannot with all the Art she has, make me more miserable, or much more fortunate, I have no state left, a be∣nefit that none of you can brag of, and there's the Anti∣dote against a VVidow, nothing to lose, but that my soul
inherits, which she can neither law nor claw away to that, but little flesh, it were too much else; and that unwholsom too, it were too rich else; and to all this contempt of what she do's I can laugh at her tears, neglect her angers, hear her without a faith, so pity her as if she were a Traytour, moane her person, but deadly hate her pride; if you could do these, and had but this discretion, and like fortune, it were but an equal venture. Fount. This is malice. Val. When she lies with your land, and nor with you, growes great with joyntures, and is brought to bed with all the state you have, you'le find this certain; but is it come to passe you must marry, is there no buffe will hold you? Bel. Grant it be so. Val. Then chuse the tamer evil, take a maid, a maid not worth a penny; make her yours, knead her, and mould her yours, a maid worth nothing, there's a vertuous spell in that word nothing; a maid makes conscience of half a Crown a week for pies and puppits, a maid will be content with one Coach and two Horses, not falling out because they are not mat∣ches; with one man satisfied, with one rein guided, with one faith, one content, one bed, aged she makes the wise, pre∣serves the same and issue; a widow is a Christmas-box that sweeps all. Fount. Yet all this cannot sink us. Val. You are my friends, and all my loving friends, I spend your money, yet I deserve it too, you are my friends still, I ride your horses, when I want I sell um; I eat your meat, help to wear her linnen, sometimes I make you drunk, and then you seal, for which Ile do you this commodity, be ruled, and let me try her, I will discover her, the truth is, I will never leave to trouble her, till I see through her, then if I find her worthy. Hare. This was our meaning Valentine. Val. 'Tis done then, I must want nothing. Hare. Nothing but the woman. Vnl. No jealousie, for when I marry, the Devil must be wiser than I take him; aud the Flesh foolisher, come let's to
dinner, and when I am well whetted with wine, have at her. Exeunt. Enter Isabella and Luce. Isab. But art thou sure. Luce. No surer then I heard. Hare. That it was that flouting fellowes brother. Luce. Yes, Shorthose told me so. He did searce out the truth. Lece. It seems he did. Har. Prethe Lu call him hether, if he be no worse, I never re∣pent my pity, now sirra, what was he we sent you after, the Gentleman ith black. Enter Shorthose. Shrot. Ith torn black. Isa. Yes, the same fir. Short. What would your Worship with him. Isa. Why, my Worship would know his name, and what he is. Short. 'Is nothing, he is a man, and yet he is no man. Isa. You must needs play the fool: Short. Tis my profession. Isa. How is he a man, and no man. Short. Hees a begger, only the signe of a man, the bush puld down, which showes the house stands emptie. Isa. Whats his calling? Short. They call him begger: Isa. Whats his kindred: Short. Beggers. Isa. His worth. Short. A learned begger, a poor Scholler: Isab. How does he live. Short. Like wormes, he eats old Books. Isa. Is Valentine his brother. Short. His beging brother. Isa. What may his name be? Short. Orson. Isa. Leave your fooling. Short. You had as good say, leave your living.
Isab. Once more tell me his name directly: Short. Ile be hangd first, unless I heard him Christned, but I can tell what foolish people call him. Isa. What? Short Francisco. Isa. Where lies this learning, sir? Short. In Pauls Church yard forsooth. Isa. I mean that Gentleman, fool. Short. O that fool, he lies in loose sheets every where, that's no where. Luce. You have gleand since you came to London, in the Countrey, Shorthose, you were an arrant fool, a dull cold cox∣combe, here every Tavern teaches you, the pint pot has so be∣laboured you with Wit, your brave acquaintance that gives you Ale, so fortified your mazard, that now theres no talking to you. Isa. Is much improved, a fellow, a fine discourser. Short. I hope so, I have not waited at the tail of Wit, so long to be an Asse. Luc. But say now, Shorthose, my Lady should remove into the Countrey. Short. I had as lieve she should remoove to heaven, and as soon I would undertake to follow her. Luce. Where no old Charnico is, nor no Anchoves, nor Master such-a-one, to meet at the Rose, and bring my Lady such-a-ones chief Chambermaid. Isa. No bouncing healths to this brave Lad, dear Shorthose, nor down oth knees to that illustrious Lady. Luce. No fiddles, nor no lusty noise of drawer, carry this pot∣tle to my father, Shorthose. Isa. No playes, nor gally foistes, no strange Embassadors to run and wonder at, till thou beest oyle, and then come home again, and lye both Legend. Luce. Say she should go. Short. If I say, Ile be hangd, or if I thought she would go? Luce. What? Short. I would go with her.
Luce. But Shorthose, where thy heart is: Isab. Do not fright him. Luce. By this hand Mistris tis a noise, a loud one too, and from her own mouth, presently to be gone too, but why, or to what end? Short. May not a man die first, shee'l give him so much time. Isab. Gon ot'h sudden; thou dost but jest, she must not mock the Gentlemen. Luce. Shee has put them off a moneth, thy dare not see her, beleeve me Mistris, what I hear I tell you. Isab. Is this true wench? gone on so short a warning, what trick is this, she never told me of it, it must not be: sirra, attend me presently, you know I have been a carefull friend unto you, attend me in the Hall, and next be faithful, cry not, we shall not go. Short. Her Coach may crack. Enter Vallentine, Francisco, and Lance. Val. Which way to live, how darest thou come to town, to ask such an idle question? Fran. Me thinks tis necessary, unless you could restore that Annuitie you have tipled up in Taverns: Val, Where hast thou been, and how brought up Francisco, that thou talkest thus out of France? thou wert a pretty fellow, and of a hansome knowledge; who has spoyled thee? Lan. He that has spoil'd himself, to make him sport, and by Copie, will spoil all coms neer him, buy but a Glass, if you be yet so wealthy, and look there who? Val. Well said old Copihold. Lan. My hearts good Freehold sir, and so you'l find it, this Getleman's your brother, your hopeful brother, for there is no hope of you, use him thercafter: Val. En'e as well as I use my self, what wouldst thou have Francke. Fran. Can you procure me a hundred pound? Lan. Hark what he saies to you, O try your wits, they say you are excellent at it, for your Land has lain long bed-rid, and unsensible.
Fran. And ile forget all wrongs, you see my state, and to what wretchedness, your will has brought me; but what it may be, by this benefit, if timely done, and like a noble brother, both you and I may feel, and to our comforts: Val. (A hundred pound) dost thou know what thou hast said boy? Fran. I said a hundred pound. Val. Thou hast said more, then any man can justifie beleeve it, procure a hundred pounds. I say to thee, ther's no such sum in nature, forty shillings there may be now ith Mint and that's a treasure, I have seen five pound, but let me tell it, and tis as wonderfull, as Calves with five legges, her's five shil∣lings Francke, the harvest of five weeks, and a good crop too, take it, and pay thy first fruits, Ile come down and eat it out. Fran. Tis patience must meet with you sir, not love. Lanc. Deal roundly, and leave these fiddle faddles: Val. Leave thy prating, thou thinkest thou art a notable wise fellow, thou and thy rotten Sparrow Hawke; two of the re∣verent. Lan. I think you are mad, or if you be not, will be, with the next moon, what would you have him do? Val. How? Lan. To get money first, that's to live, you have shewed him how to want. Val. Slife how do I live, why, what dull fool would ask that question, three hundred three pilds more, I and live brave∣ly, the better half oth town, and live most gloriously, ask them what states they have, or what, annuiries, or when they pray for seasonable harvests, thou hast a handsome wit, stir in∣to the World, Francke, stir, stir, for shame, thou art a pretty Schollar, ask how to live, write, write, write any thing, the Worlds a fine beleeving World, write Newes. Lan. Dragons in Sussex sir, or fiery battels seen in the air at Aspurg. Val. Theres the way Francke, and in the tail of these, fright me the Kingdome with a sharp Prognostication, that shall scowr them, dearth upon dearth, like leven taffaties, pre∣dictions
of Sea-breaches, wars, and want of herrings on our coast, with bloody noses. Lan. Whirl-winds, that shall take off the top of Grantham steeple, and clap it on Poules, and after these, a Lenvoy to the City for their sins. Val. Probatum est, thou canst not want a pension, go switch me up a Covey of young Schollars, there's twenty nobles, and two loads of coals, are not these ready wayes? Cosmography thou art deeply read in, draw me a map from the Mermaid, I mean a midnight map to scape the VVatches, and such long senslesse examinations, and Gentlemen shall feed thee, right good Gentlemen, I cannot stay long. Lan. You have read learnedly, and would you have him fol∣low these megera's, did you begin with ballads? Fran. VVell, I will leave you, I see my wants are grown ridiculous, yours may be so, I will not curse you neither; you may think, when these wanton fits are over, who bred me, and who ruined me, look to your self sir, a providence I wait on. Val. Thou art passionate, hast thou been brought up with girls? Enter Shorthose with a bag. Short. Rest you merry, Gentlemen. Val. Not so merry as you suppose, sir. Short. Pray stay a while, and let me take a view of you, I may put my spoon into the wrong pottage-pot else. Val. VVhy, wilt thou muster us? Short. No, you are not he, you are a thought too handsom. Lan. VVho wouldst thou speak withall, why doest thou peep so? Short. I am looking birds nests, I can find none in your bush beard, I would speak with you, black Gentleman. Fran. VVith me, my friend? Short. Yes sure, and the best friend sir, it seems you spake withall this twelve-moneth, Gentleman, there's money for you. Val. How? Short. There's none for you sir, be not so brief, not a penny,
law how he itches at it, stand oft, you stir my colour. Lan. Take it, tis money. Short. You are too quick too, first be sure you have it, you seem to be a Faulkoner, but a foolish one. Lan. Take it, and say nothing. Short. You are cosen'd too, tis take it, and spend it. Fran. From whom came it, sir? Short. Such another word, and you shall have none on't. Fran. I thank you, sir, I doubly thank you. Short. Well sir, then buy you better clothes, and get your hat drest, and your Laundress to wash your boots white. Fran. Pray stay sir, may you not be mistaken. Short. I think I am, give me the money again, come quick, quick, quick. Fear. I would be loth to render, till I am sure it be so. Short. Hark in your ear, Is not your name Francisco? Fran. Yes. Short. Be quiet then, it may thunder a hundred times, be∣fore such stones fall: do you not need it? Fran. Yes. Short. And tis thought you have it. Fran. I think I have. Short. Then hold it fast, tis not fly-blown, you may pay for the poundage, you forget your self, I have not seen a Gentle∣man so backward, a wanting Gentleman. Fran. Your mercie, sir. Short. Friend, you have mercie, a whole bag full of mercie, be merry with it, and be wise. Fran. I would fain, if it please you, but know. Short. It does not please me, tell over your money, and be not mad, boy. Val. You have no more such bags. Short. More such there are, sir, but few I fear for you, I have cast your water, you have wit, you need no money. Exit. Lan. Be not amazed, sir, tis good gold, good old gold, this is restorative, and in good time, it comes to do you good, keep it and use it, let honest fingers feel it, yours be too quick sir. Fran. He named me, and he gave it me, but from whom.
Lan. Let um send more, and then examine it, this can be but a preface. Fran. Being a stranger, of whom can I deserve this? Lan. Sir, of any man that has but eyes, and manly understan∣ding to find mens wants, good men are bound to do so. Val. Now you see, Franke, there are more wayes than cer∣tainties, now you beleeve: What plow brought you this har∣vest, what sale of timber, coals, or what annuities? These feed no Hinds, nor wait the expectation of quarter dayes, you see it showers into you, you are an asse, he plodding, and lie fooling, about this Blazing Starr, and that bepeep, whyning, and fasting, to finde the naturall reason why a Dog turns twice about be∣foae he lie down, what use of these, or what joy in annuities, where every man's thy study, and thy tennant, I am ashamed on thee: Lan. Yes I have seen this fellow, theres a wealthy Widdow hard by. Val. Yes marry is there. Lan. I think hees her servant, or I am couzned else, I am sure ont. Fran. I am glad ont. Lan. She's a good woman. Fran. I am gladder: Lan. And young enough beleeve. Fran. I am gladder of all sir. Val. Francke, you shall lye with me soon. Fran. I thank my money: Lan. His money shall lie with me, three in a bed sir will be too much this weather. (things — — Val. Meet me at the Mermaid, and thou shalt see what Lan. Trust to your self sir. Exeunt Fran. and Vall. Enter Fount. Bella. and Valentine. Fount. O Vallentine. Val. How now, why do you look so? Bella. The Widdowes going man. Val. Why let her go man. Hare. Shees going out oth Town. Val. The Town's the happier, I would they were all gone. Fount. We cannot come to speak with her.
Val. Not to speak to her. Bel. She will be gone within this hour, either now Val. Fount. Hare. Now, now, now, good Val. Val. I had rather march ith' mouth oth' Cannon, but adiew, if she be above ground, go, away to your prayers, away I say, away, she shall be spoken withall. Exeunt. Enter Shorthose with one boot on, Roger and Humphey. Rog. She will go, Shorthose. Short. Who can help it Roger? Within Raph. Roger, help down with the hangings. Rog. By and by Raph, I am making up oth' trunks here. Raph. Shorthose. Short. VVell. Raph. VVho looks to my Ladies wardrobe? Humphrey. Hum. Here. Raph. Down with the boxes in the gallery, and bring away the Coach cushions. Short. Will it not rain, no conjuring abroad, nor no devi∣ces to stop this journey. Rog. Why go now, why now, why oth sudden, now what preparation, what horses have we ready, what provision laid in it'n Countrey. Hum. Not an egge I hope. Rog. No nor one drop of good drink boyes, ther's the devil. Short. I hartily pray the malt be musty, and then we must come Hum. What sais the Steward? (up again. Rog. Hee's at's wits end, for som four hours since, out of his haste and providence, he mistook the Millars mangie mare, for his own nagge. Short. And she may break his neck, and save the journey, oh London how I love thee. Hum. I have no boots nor none Ile buy (or if I had) refuse me if I would venture my ability, before a Cloak-Bag, men are men Short. For my part, if I be brought, as I know it will be aimed at, to carry any durty dary Cream-pot, or any gentle Lady of the Laundry, Chambring, or wantonness behinde my Gelding, with all her Streamers, Knapsacks, Glasses, Gu∣gawes,
as if I were a running flippery, Ile give um leave to cut my girts, and flay me. Ile not, be troubled with their Disli∣bations, at every half miles end, I understand my self, and am resolved. Hum. To morrow night at Olivers, who shall be there boys, who shall meet the wenches. Rog. The well brew'd stand of Ale, we should have met at. Short. These griefs like to another Tale of Troy, would mol∣lisie the hearts of barbarous people, and Tom Butcher weep, Eneas enters, and now the towns lost. Ral. Why whether run you, my Lady is mad. Short. I would she were in Bedlam. Ral. The carts are come, no hands to help to load um the stuff lies in the hall, the plate: Within Widdow. Why knaves there, where be these idle fel∣lowes Short. Shall I ride with one Boot. Wid. Why where I say: Rnl. Away, away, it must be so. Short. O for a tickling storm, to last but ten dayes. Exeunt. Actus 3. Scaena. 1. Enter Isabella and Luce. Luce. BY my troth Mistris I did it for the best: Isab. It may be so, but Luce, you have a tongue: a dish of meat in your mouth, which if it were minced Luce, would do a great deal better. Luce. I protest Mistress. Isa. It will be your own one time or other: Walter. Walter within: Anon forsooth. Isa. Lay my hat ready, my fan and cloak, you are so full of providence; and Walter, tuck up my little box behind the Coach, and bid my maid make ready, my sweet service to your good La∣dy Mistress; and my dog, good let the Coachman carry him. Luce. But hear me. Isa. I am in love sweet Luce, and you are so skilfull, that I
must needs undo my self; and hear me, let Oliver pack up my Glass discreetly, and see my Cuiles well carried, O sweet Luce, you have a tongue, and open tongues have open you know what, Luce. Luce. Pray you be satisfied. Isab. Yes and contented too, before I leave you: ther's a Roger, which some call a Butcher, I speak of certainties, I do not fish Luce, nay do not stare, I have a tongue can talk too: and a Green Chamber Luce, a back door opens to a long Gallerie; there was a night Luce, do you perceive, do you per∣ceive me yet: O do you blush Luce, a Friday night I saw your Saint Luce: for to: her box of Marmaladde, all's thine sweet Roger, this I heard and kept too. Luce. En'c as you are a woman Mistress. Isab. This I allow as good and Physicall sometime these meetings, and for the cheering of the heart; but Luce, to have your own turn served, and to your friend to be a dogbolt. Luce. I confess it Mistress. Isab. As you have made my sister Jealous of me, and foolish∣ly, and childishly pursued it, I have found out your haunt, and traced your purposes, for which mine honour suffers, your best waies must be applied to bring her back again, and seriously and suddenly, that so I may have a means to clear my self, and she a a fair opinion of me, else you peevish — — Luce. My power and prayers Mistress. Isab. Whats the matter? Enter Shorthose and Widdow. Short. I have been with the Gentleman, he has it, much good may do-him with it. Wid. Come are you ready, you love so to delay time, the day growes on. Isab. I have sent for a few trifles, when those are come; And now I know your reason. Wid. Know your own honour then, about your business, see the Coach ready presently, Ile tell you more then; Exit Luce and Shorthose. And understand it well, you must not think your sister, so
tender eyed as not to see your follies, alas I know your heart, and must imagine, and truly too; tis not your charitie can coin such sums to give away as you have done, in that you have no wisdome Isabel, no nor modesty where nobler uses are at home; I tell you, I am ashamed to finde this in your yeers, far more in your discretion, none to chuse but things for pittie, none to seal your thoughts on, but one of no abiding, of no name; nothing to bring you to but this, cold and hunger: A jolly Joynture sister, you are happy, no mony, no not ten shillings. Isa. You search neerly. Wid. I know it as I know your folly, one that know not where he shall eat his next meal, take his rest, unless it be it'h stocks; what kindred has he, but a more wanting brother, or what vertues. Isab. You have had rare intelligence, I see sister. Wid. Or say the man had vertue, is vertue in this age a full inheritance: what Joynture can he make you, Plutarohs Morals, or so much penny rent in the small Poets, this is not well, tis weak, and I grieve to know it. Isa. And this you quit the town for. VVid. Ist not time? Isa. You are better read in my affairs than I am, thats all I have to answer, Ile go with you, and willingly, and what you think most dangerous, Ile sit laugh at. For sister tis not folly but good discretion governs our main for∣tunes. VVid. I am glad to hear you say so. Isa. I am for you. Enter Shorthose and Humphrey with riding rods. Hum. The Devil cannot stay her shee'l ont, eat an egge now, and then we must away. Short. I am gaul'd already, yet I will pray, may London wayes from henceforth be full of holes, and Coaches crack their wheels, may zealous Smiths so housel all our Hack∣neys, that they may feel compunction in their feet, and tire at Highgate, may it rain above all Almanacks till Carriars sail, and the Kings Fish monger ride like Biko Arion up∣on
a Trout to London. Hum. At S. Albones, let all the Ins be drunk, not an Host sober to bid her worship welcome. Short. Not a Fiddle, but all preach't down with Puritanes; no meat but Legs of Beef. Hnm. No beds but Wool-Packs. Short. And those so crammed with Warrens of starved Fleas that bite like Bandogs; let Mims be angry at their S, Bel-Swagger, and we pass in the heat ont and be beaten, beaten abo∣minably, beaten horse and man, and all my Ladies linnen sprink∣led with suds and dishwater. Short. Not a wheel but out of joynt. Enter Roger laughing. Hum. Why dost thou laugh. Rog. Thers a Gentleman, and the rarest Gentleman, and makes the rarest sport. Short, Where, where? Rog. Within here, has made the gayest sport with Tom the Coachman, so tewed him up with Sack that he lies lashing a But of Malmsie for his Mares. Short. Tis very good. Rog. And talks and laughs, and sings the rarest songs, and Shorthose, he has so mauld the Red Deer pies, made such an alms ith butterie. Short. Better still. Enter Vall. Widdow. Hum. My Lady in a rage with the Gentleman. Short. May he anger her into a feather. Exeunt. Wid. I pray tell me, who sent you hither? for I imagine it is not your condition you look so temperately, and like a Gentleman, to ask me these milde questions. Val. Do you think I use to walk of errands gentle Lady, or deal with women out of dreams from others. Wid. You have not known me sure? Val. Not much. Wid. What reason have you then to be so tender of my cre∣dit, you are no kinsman? Val. If you take it so, the honest office that I came to do you, is not so heavie but I can return it: now I perceive you are too proud, not worth my visit.
Wid. Pray stay, a little proud. Val. Monstrous proud, I grieve to hear a woman of your value, and your abundant parts stung by the people, but now I see tis true, you look upon me as if I were a rude and saucie fellow that borrowed all my breeding from a dunghil, or such a one, as should now fall and worship you in hope of pardon: you are cozen'd Lady, I came to prove opinion a loud liar, to see a woman onely great in goodness, and Mistress of a greater fame then fortune, but== Wid. You are a strange Gentleman, if I were proud now, I should be monstrous angry, which I am not, and shew the effects of pride; I should despise you, but you are welcome sir: To think well of our selves, if we deserve it, it is a luster in us, and every good we have, strives to shew gracious, what use is it else, old age like Seer-trees, is seldome seen affected, stirs sometimes at rehearsal of such acts as his daring youth endea∣deavour'd. Val. This is well, and now you speak to the purpose, you please me, but to be place proud: Wid. If it be our own, why are we sit here with distinction else, degrees, and orders given us? In you men, tis held a cool∣nesse, if you lose your right affronts and losse of honor: streets, and walls, and upper ends of tables, had they tongues could tell what blood has followed, and what fewd about your ranks; are we so much below you, that till you have us, are the tops of na∣ture, to be accounted drones without a difference? you will make us beasts indeed. Val. Nay worse than this too, proud of your cloathes, they swear a Mercers Lucifer, a tumour tackt together by a Taylour, nay yet worse, proud of red and white, a varnish that butter∣milk can better. Wid. Lord, how little will vex these poor blind people, if my cloathes be sometimes gay and glorious, does it follow, my minde must be my Mercers too, or say my beauty please some weak eyes, must it please them to think that blowes me up, that every hour blowes off: this is an Infants an∣ger. Val. Thus they say too, what though you have a Coach
lined through with velvet, and four fair Flanders mares, why should the streets be troubled continually with you, till Carmen curse you, can there be ought in this but pride of shew Lady, and pride of bum-beating, till the learned Lawyers with their fit bags, are thrust against the bulks till all their causes crack? why should this Lady, and t'other Lady, and the third sweet Lady, and Madam at Mile-end, be daily visited, and your poo∣rer neighbours, with course napses neglected, fashions conferr'd about, pouncings, and paintings, and young mens bodies read on like Anatomies. Wid. You are verie credulous, and somewhat desperate, to deliver this sir, to her you know not, but you shall confesse me, and find I will not start; in us all meetings lie open to these lewd reports, and our thoughts at Church, our verie meditati∣ons some will swear, which all should fear to judge, at least un∣charitably, are mingled with your memories, cannot sleep; but this sweet Gentleman swims in our fancies, that scarlet man of war, and that smooth Senior; not dresse our heads without new ambushes, how to surprize that greatnesse, or that glorie; our verie smiles are subject to constructions; nay sir, its come to this, we cannot pish, but tis a favour for some fool or other: should we examine you thus, wert not possible to take you with∣out Prospectives. Wid. It may be, but these excuse not. Wid. Nor yours force no truth sir, what deadly tongues you have, and to those tongues what hearts, and what inventions? Ah my conscience, and 'twere not for sharp justice, you would venture to aim at your own mothers, and account it glorie to say you had done so; all you think are counsells, and cannot erre, 'tis we still that shew double, giddy, or gorg'd with pas∣sion; we that build Babels for mens conclusions, we that scat∣ter, as day does his warm light; our killing curses over Gods creatures, next to the Devils malice: lets intreat your good words. Val. Well, this woman has a brave soul. Wid. Are not we gaily blest then, and much beholding to you for your substance; you may do what you list, we what beseems us, and narrowly do that too, and precisely, our
names are served in else at Ordinaries, and beleht abroad in Taverns. Val. O most brave Wench, and able to redeem an age o women. VVid. You are no Whoremasters, alas no Gentlemen, it were an impudencie to think you vicious; you are so holy, handsome Ladies fright you, you are the cool things of the time, the temperance, meer emblemes of the Law, and vales of Vertue, you are not daily mending like Dutch watches, and plastering like old walls; they are not Gentlemen, that with their secret sinnes increase our Surgeons, and lie in forraine Countries, for new sores; women are all these vices; you are not envious, false, covetous, vain-glorious, irreligious, drun∣ken, revengefull, giddie-eyed, like Parrats, eaters of others honours. Val. You are angrie. VVid. No by my troth, and yet I could say more too, for when men make me angrie, I am miserable. Val. Sure 'tis a man, she could not bear it thus bravely else, it may be I am tedious. Wid. Not at all sir, I am content at this time you should trouble me. Val. You are distrustfull. VVid. Where I find no truth, sir. Val. Come, come, you are full of passion. VVid. Some I have, I were too neer the nature a god else. Val. You are monstrous peevish. VVid. Because they are monstrous foolish, and know not how to use that should trie me. Val. I was never answered thus, was you never drunk Lady? VVid. No sure, not drunk sir; yet I love good wine, as I love health and joy of heart, but temperately, why do you ask that question? Val. For that sin that they most charge you with, is this sins servant, they say you are monstrous. VVid. What sir, what? Val. Most strangely.
Wid. It has a name sure. Val. Infinitely lustfull, without all bounds, they swear you kild your husband. Wid. Let us have it all for Heavens sake, tis good mirth sir. Val. They say you will have four now, and those four stuck in four quarters, like four winds to cool you; will she not cry nor curse? Wid. On with your Story. Val. And that you are forcing out of dispensations with sums of money to that purpose. Wid. Four husbands, should not I be blest sir; for example, Lord, what should I do with them? turn a malt-mill, or tithe them out like Town-buls to my tenants, you come to make me angry, but you cannot. Val. Ile make you merry then, you are a brave woman, and in despite of envie a right one, go thy wayes, truth thou art as good a woman, as any Lord of them all can lay his leg over, I do not often commend your Sex. Wid. It seems so, your commendations are so studied for. Val. I came to see you, and sift you into flour to know your purenesse, and I have found you excellent, I thank you; conti∣nue so, and shew men how to tread, and women how to fol∣low: get an husband, an honest man, you are a good woman, and live hedg'd in from scandall, let him be too, an understand∣ing man, and to that steadfast; tis pitie your fair Figure should miscarry, and then you are fixt, farewell. Wid. Pray stay a little, I love your company now you are so pleasant, and to my disposition set so even. Val. I can no longer. Exit. Wid. As I live a fine fellow, this manly handsome bluntness, shewes him honest; what is he, or from whence? blesse me, four husbands, how prettily he fooled me into vices, to stir my jealousie, and find my nature; a proper Gentleman: I am not well oth' sudden, such a companion I could live and die with, his angers are meer mirth. Enter Isabella. Isa. Come, come, I am ready. Wid. Are you so? Isa. What ails she, the Coach staies, and the people, the
day goes on, I am as ready now as you desire, sister: fie, who stayes now, why do you sit and pout thus. Wid. Prethee be quiet, I am not well. Isab. For Heave'n sake lets not ride staggering in the night, come, pray you take some sweet meats in your pocket, if your stomack — Wid. I have a little business. Isab. To abuse me, you shall not finde new dreams, and new suspitions, to horse withall. Wid. Lord who made you a Commander: hay ho, my heart. Isab. Is the winde come thither, and coward like do you lose your colours to um, are you sick ath Valentine; sweet sister, come lets away, the countrey will so quicken you, and we shall live so swetly: Luce, my Ladies Cloak; nay, you have put me into such a gog of going, I would not stay for all the world; If I live here, you have so knocked this love into my head, that I shall love any body, and I finde my body, I know not how, so apt; pray lets be gonsister, I stand on thornes. Wid. I prethee Isabella, I faith I have some business that con∣cerns me, I will suspect no more, here, wear that for me, and Il'e pay the hundred pound you owe your Taylor. Enter Shorthose I. Roger, Humphrey, Ralph. Isab. I had rather go, but — Wid. Come walk in with me, wee'l go to Cards, unsaddle the Horses. Short. A Jubile, a Jubile, we stay boyes. Eter Vncle, Lan. Foun. Bella. Harebrain following. Vnc. Are they behind us. Lance. Close, close, speak aloud sir. Vnc. I am glad my nephew has so much discretion at length to finde his wants: did she entertain him? Lance. Most bravely, nobly, and gave him such a welcome. Vnc. For his own sake do you think. Lance. Most certain sir, and in his own cause bestir'd him∣self too, and wan such liking from her, she dores on him, has the command of all the house already. Vnc. He deals not well with his friends.
Lance. Let him deal on, and be his own friend, he has most need of her. Vnc. I wonder they would put him. Lan. You are in the right ont, a man that must raise himself, I knew he would cosenum, and glad I am he has: he watched oc∣casion, and found it ith nick. Vnc. He has deceived me. Lan. I told you howsoever he wheel'd about, he would charge home at length, how I could laugh now, to think of these tame fools. Vnc. Twas not well done, because they trusted him, yet. Bel. Harke you Gentlemen. Vnc. We are upon a business, pray excuse us, they have it home. Lanc. Come let it work good on Gentlemen. Exit Vncle, Lance. Font. Tis true, he is a knave, I ever thought it. Hare. And we are fools, tame fools. Bel. Come lets go seek him, he shall be hang'd before he colt us basely. Exit. Entor Isabella, Luce. Isa. Are sure she loves him. Luce. Am I sure I live? And I have clapt on such a commen∣mendation on your revenge. Isa. Faith, he is a pretty Gentleman. Luce. Handsom enough, and that her eye has found out, Isa. He talks the best they say, and yet the maddest. Luce. Has the right way. Isa. How is she? Luce. Bears it well, as if she cared not, but a man may see with half an eye through all her forced behaviours, and finde who is her Vallentine. Isa. Come lets go see her, I long to prosecute. Luce. By no means Mistress, let her take better hold first, Jsab. I could burst now. Exeunt. Enter Valentine, Fountain, Bellamore, Harebrain. Val. Upbraid me with your benefits, you Pilchers, you shotten, sold, slight fellowes, was't not I that undertook you first from emptie barrells, and brought those barking mouthes that gaped like bung-holes to utter sence: where got you understanding? who taught you manners and apt
carriage to ranke your selves? who filled you in fit Taverns, were those born with your worships when yon came hither? what brought you from the Universities of moment matter to al∣low you, besides your small base sentences? Bell. Tis well sir. Val. Long Cloaks with two hand-rapiers, boot-hoses with pen∣ny-poses, and twenty fools opinions, who looked on you but pi∣ping rites that knew you would be prising, & Prentises in Pauls Church-yard, that sented your want of Brittanes Books. Enter Widdow, Luce, Harebrain. Font. This cannot save you. Val. Taunt my integrity you Whelps. Bell. You may talk the stock we gave you out, but see no fur∣ther. Hare. You tempt our patience, we have found you out, and what your trust comes to, yea'r well feathered, thank us, and think now of an honest course, tis time; men now begin to look, and narrowly into your tumbling tricks, they are stale. Wid. Is not that he? Luce Tis he. Wid. Be still and mark him. Val. How miserable will these poor wretches be when I for∣sake um, but things have their necessities, I am sorry, to what a vomit must they turn again, now to their own dear dunghil breeding; never hope after I cast you off, you men of Motley, you most undone things below pitie, any that has a soul and six∣pence dares releeve you, my name shall bar that blessing; ther's your cloake sir keep it close to you, it may yet preserve you a fortnight longer from the fool; your hat, pray be covered, and ther's the Satin that your Worships sent me, will serve you at a Sizes yet. Fount. Nay faith sir, you may ene rub these out now. Val. No such relicke, nor the least rag of such a sordid weak∣ness shall keep me warm, these breeches are mine own, purchased, and paid for, without your compassion, a Christian breeches foun∣ded in Black Friers, and so Ile maintain um. Hare. So they seem sir. Val. Only the thirteen shillings in these breeches, and the odde groat, I take it, shall be yours sir, a marke to know a Knave by, pray preserve it, do not displease more, but
take it presently, now help me off with my boots. Hare. We are no grooms sir. Val. For once you shall be, do it willingly, or by this hand He make you. Bell. To our own sir, we may apply our hands. Val. Theres your hangers, you may deserve a strong pair, and a grdle will hold you without buckles; now I am perfect, and now the proudest of your worships tell me I am beholding to you. Fount. No such matter. Val. And take heed how you pitty me, tis dangerous, exceed∣ing dangerous, to prate of pitty which are the poorer; you are now puppies; I without you, or you without my knowledge be reugues, and so be gone, be rouges and reply not, for if you do — Bell. Only thus much, and then wee'l leave you, the ayr is far sharper than our anger sir, and these you may reserve to rail in warmer. Hare. Pray have a care sir of your health. Exit Lovers. Val. Yes Hog-hounds, more than you can have of your wits; tis cold, and I am very sensible, extreamly cold too, yet I will not off till I have shamed these rascalls; I have indured as ill heats as another, and every way if one could perish my body, you'l bear the blame ont; I am colder here, not a poor penny left. Vncle with a bag. Vnc. Ta's taken rarely, and now hee's flead he will be ruled. Lance. Too him, tew him, abuse him, and nip him close. Vnc. Why how now cozen, sunning your self this weather? Val. As you see sir, in a hot fit, I thank my friends. Vnc. But cozen, where are your clothes man, those are no in∣heritance, your scruple may compound with those I-take it, this is no fashion cosen. Val. Not much followed, I must confess; yet Uncle I deter∣mine to trie what may be done next Tarm. Lanc. How came you thus sir, for you are strangely moved. Val. Rags, toys and trifles, fit only for those fools that first passessed um, and to those Knaves, they are rendred freemen Wicle, ought to appear like innocents, old Adam, a fair Fig∣leaf sufficient. Vnc. Take me with you, were these your friends, that
leat'd you thus. Val. Hang friends, and even recknings that make friends. Unc. I thought till now, there had been no such living, no such purchase, for all the rest is labour, as a list of honourable friends, do not such men as you sir, in lieu of all your under∣standings, travels, and those great gifts of nature; aim at no more than casting off your-coats, I am strangely cosen'd. Lance. Should not the towne shake at the cold you feel now, and all the Gentry suffer interdiction, no more sense spoken, all things Goth and Vandall, till you be summed again, velvets and searlets, anointed with gold lace, and cloth of silver turned in∣to Spanish Cottens for a pennance, wits blasted with your bulls, and Tavernes withered, as though the Term lay at St Albones. Val. Gentlemen, you have spoken long and level, I beseech you take breath a while and hear me; you imagine now, by the twirling of your strings, that I am at the last, as also that my friends are flown like Swallows after Summer. Unc. Yes sir. Val. And that I have no more in this poor pannier, to raise me up again above your rents, Uncle. Unc. All this I do beleeve. Val. You have no mind to better me. Unc. Yes Cosen, and to that end I come, and once more offer you all that my power is master of. Val. A match then, lay me down fifty pounds there. Unc. There it is, sir. Val. And on it write, that you are pleased to give this, as due unto my merit, without caution of land redeeming, redious thanks, or thrift hereafter to be hoped for. Unc. How? Luce layes a suit and letter at the door. Val. Without daring, when you are drunk, to rellish of re∣vilings, to which you are prone in sack, Uncle. Unc. I thank you, sir. Lance. Come, come away, let the young wanton play a while, away I say sir, let him go forward with his naked fashi∣on, he will seek you too morrow; goodly weather, sultrie hot, sultrie, how I sweat. Unc. Farewell, sir.
Unc. Farewell, sir. Exeunt Vncle and Lance. Val. Would I sweat too, I am monstrous vext, and cold too; and these are but thin pumps to walk the streets in; clothes I must get, this fashion will not fadge with me; besides, 'tis an ill winter wear, — What art thou? yes, they are clothes, and rich ones, some fool has left um: and if I should utter — what's this paper here? Let these be onely worn by the most no∣ble and deserving Gentleman Valentine, — dropt out oth' clouds; I think they are full of gold too; well, I'le leave my wonder, and be warm agen, in the next house Ile shift. Exit. Actus 4. Scaena. I. Enter Francisco, Uncle, and Lance. Fran. WHy do you deal thus with him? 'tis unnobly. Unc. Peace Cosen peace, you are too tender of him, he must be dealt thus with, he must be cured thus, the violence of his disease Francisco, must not be jested with, 'tis grown infe∣ctious, and now strong Corrasives must cure him. Lance. Has had a stinger, has eaten off his cloathes, the next his skin comes. Unc. And let it search him to the bones, tis better, twill make him feel it. Lance. Where be his noble friends now? will his fantasti∣call opinions cloath him, or the learned Art of having nothing feed him? Unc. It must needs greedily, for all his friends have flung him off, he is naked, and where to skinne himselfe agen, if I know, or can devise how he should get himself lodging, his spirit must be bowed, and now we have him, have him at that we hoped for. Lanc. Next time we meet him cracking of nuts, with half a cloake about him, for all means are cut off, or borrowing six∣pence, to shew his bounty in the pottage Ordinary? Fran. VVhich way went he? Lance. Pox, why should you ask after him, you have beene trimm'd already, let him take his fortune, he spunne it
out himselfe, sir, there's no pitie. Unc. Besides some good to you now, from this miserie. Fran. I rise upon his ruines, fie, fie, Uncle, fie honest Lance. those Gentlemen were base people, that could so soon take fire to his destruction. Unc. You are a fool, you are a fool, a young man Enter Valentine. Val. Morrow uncle, morrow Franke, sweet Franke, and how, and how dee, think now, how shew matters? morrow Bandog. Unc. How? Fran. Is this man naked, forsaken of his friends? Val. Th'art handsome, Franke, a pretty Gentleman, ifaith thou lookest well, and yet here may be those that look as hand∣some. Lan. Sure he can conjure, and has the Devil for his Tailor. Unc. New and rich, tis most impossible he should recover. Lan. Give him this luck, and fling him into the Sea. Unc. 'Tis not he, imagination cannot work this miracle. Val. Yes, yes, tis he, I will assure you uncle, the very he, the he your wisdom plaid withall, I thank you for't, neighed at his nakednesse, and made his cold and poverty your pastime; you see I live, and the best can do no more uncle, and though I have no state, I keep the streets still, and take my pleasure in the Town, like a poor Gentleman, wear clothes to keep me warm, poor things they serve me, can make a shew too if I list, yes un∣cle, and ring a peal in my pockets, ding dong, uncle, these are mad foolish wayes, but who can help um? Unc. I am amazed. Lan. Ile sell my Copyhold, for since there are such excellent new nothings, why should I labour, is there no Fairy haunts him, no Rat, nor no old woman. Unc. You are Valentine. Val. I think so, I cannot tell, I have been call'd so, and some say Christened, why do you wonder at me, and swell, as if you had met a Sergeant fasting, did you ever know desert want? y'are fools, a little stoop there may be to allay him, he would grow too rank else, a small eclipse to shadow him, but out he must break, glowingly again, and with a great luster, look you uncle, motion and majesty. Unc. I am confounded. Fran. I am of his faith.
Val. Walk by his carelesse kinsman, and turn again and walk, and look thus Uncle, taking some one by the hand, he loves best, leave them to the mercie of the hog-market, come Franke, Fortune is now my friend, let me instruct thee. Fran. Good morrow Uncle, I must needs go with him. Val. Flay me, and turn me out where none inhabits, within two hours, I shall be thus again, now wonder on, and laugh at your own ignorance. Ex. Val. and Franc. Unc. I do beleeve him. Lan. So do I, and heartily upon my conscience burie him stark naked, he would rise again, within two hours im∣broidered: sow mustard-seeds, and they cannot come up so thick as his new sattens do, and clothes of silver, there's no striving. Unc. Let him play a while then, and let's seatch out what hand: == Lan. I there the game lies. Exeunt. Enter Fountaine, Bellamore and Harebraine. Foun. Come, let's speak for our selves, we have lodg'd him sure enough, his nakednesse dare not peep out to crosfe us. Bel. We can have no admittance. Hare. Let's in boldly, and use our best arts, who she dains to favour we are all-content. Foun. Much good may do her with him, no civil wars. Bel. By no means, now do I wonder in what old tod Ivie he lies whistling for means, nor clothes he hath none, nor none will trust him, we have made that side sure, teach him a new wooing. Hare. Say it is his uncles spite. Foun. It is all one Gentleman, 'tas rid us of a fair incum∣brance, and makes us look about to our own fortunes. Who are these? Enter Isabel and Luce. Isa. Not see this man yet, well, I shall be wiser: but Luce, didit ever know a woman melt so? she is finely hurt to hunt. Luce. Peace, the three Suitors. Isa. I could so titter now and laugh, I was lost Luce, and I must love, I know not what; O Cupid, what pretty gins thou hast to halter Woodcocks, and we must into the Countrey in all haste, Luce. Luce. For Heavens sake, Mistris. Isa. Nay, I have done, I must laugh though; but scholler, I shall teach you. Foun. 'Tis her sister.
Bell. Seve you Ladies. Isa. Fair met Gentlemen, you are visiting my sister, I assure my self. Hare. We would fain bless our eyes. Isab. Behold and welcome, you would see her: Foun. Tis our business. Isa. You shall see her, and you shall talk with her. Luce. She will not see um, nor spend a word. Isa. Ile make her frat a thousand, nay now I have found the sab, I will so scratch her. Luc. She cannot endure um. Isab. She loves um but too dearly, come follow me, Ile bring you tot'h party Gentlemen, then make your own conditions. Luce. See is sick you know. Isa. Ile make her well, or kill her, and take no idle answer, you are fools then, nor stand off for her state, sheel scorn you all then, but urge her still, and though she fret, still follow her, a Widdow must be won so. Bel. Shee speaks bravely. Isa. I would fain have a brother in law, I love mens compa∣ny, and if she call for dinner to avoid you, be sure you stay, fol∣low her into her chamber, if she retire to Pray, pray with her, and boldly, like honest lovers. Luce. This will kill her. Foun. You have shewed us one way, do but lead the tother. Isa. I know you stand a thorns, come Ile dispatch you. Luce. If you live after this. Isa. I have lost my aym. Enter Vallentine and Francisco. Fra. Did you not see um since. Val. No hang um, hang um. Fran. Nor will you not be seen by um: Val. Let um alone Francke, Ile mak um their own justice, and a jerker. Fran. Such base discourteous Dog-whelps Val. I shal dog um, and double dog um, ere I have done. Fran. Will you go with me, for I whuld fain finde out this peece of bountie, it was the Widdows man that I am certain of. Val. To what end would you go. Frau. To give thanks. Val. Hang giving thanks, hast not thou part deserves it, it in∣cluds to a further will to be beholding, beggees can do no more at Doore, if you will go, there lies your way.
Fran. I hoyē you wil go. Val. No not in ceremony, and to a woman, with mine own father, were he living Franke; I would tot'h Court with Bears first, if it be that wench, I think it is, for t'others wiser, I would not be so lookt upon, and laught at, so made a ladder for her wit, to climbe upon, for tis the tartest tit in Christendome, I know her well Francke, and have buckled with her, so licke, and reaked, fleard upon, and flouted, and shown to Chambermaids, like a strange beast, she had purchased with her penny. Fran. You are a strange man, but do you think it was a wo∣man. Val. Theres no doubt ont, who can be there to do it else, be∣sides the manner of the circumstances. Fran. Then such courtesies, who ever dos um fit, ing your own wisdome, must be more lookt into, and better answered, then with deserving slights, or what we ought to have conred upon us, men may starve else, means are not gotten now with crying out I am a gallant fellow, a good Souldier, a man of learning, or fit to be employed, immediate blessings, cease like mi∣racles, and we must grow, by second means, I pray go with me, even as you love me sir. Val. I will come to thee, but Francke, I will not stay to hear your fopperies, dispatch those ere I come. Fran. You will not fail me. Val. Some two hours hence expect me. Fran. I thank you, and will look for you. Exeunt Enter Widow, Shorthose, and Roger. Wid. Who let in these puppies, you blinde rascals, you drun∣ken Knaves several. Short. Yes forsooth, Ile let um in presently, — Gentlemen, VVid. Sprecious, you blown Pudding, bawling Rogue. Short. I bawl as loud as I can, would you have me fetch um upon my back. Wid. Get um out rascall, out with um, out, I sweat to have um neer me. Short. I should sweat more to carry um out. Rog. They are Gentlemen Madam: Short. Shall we get um intot'h butterie, and make um drink. Wid. Do any thing, so I be eased.
Enter Isabel, Fount. Balla. Hare. Isab. Now too her sir, fear nothing. Rog. Slip aside bay, I know she loves um, howsoever she car∣ries it, and has invited um, my young Mistress told me so. Short. A way to tables then. Exeunt. Isab. I shall burst with the sport ont. Fount. You are too curious Madam, too full of preparation, we expect it not. Bella. Me thinks the house is handsome, every place decent, what need you be vext? Hare. We are no strangers. Fonnt. What though we come ere you expected us, do not we know your entertainments Madam are free, and full at all times. VVid. You are merry Gentlemen. Bell. We come to be merry Madam, and very merry, men love to laugh heartily, and now and then Lady a little of our old plea. Wid. I am busie, and very busie too, will none deliver me? Hare. There is a time for all, you may be busie, but when your friends come, you have as much power Madam. Wid. This is a tedious torment. Foun. How hansomly this little peece of anger shewes upon her, well Madam well, you know not how to grace your self. Bell. Nay every thing she does breeds a new sweetness. VVid. I must go up, I must go up, I have a business waites up∣on me, some wine for the Gentlemen. Hare. Nay, wee'l go with you, we never saw your cham∣bers yet. Isab. Hold there boyes. VVid. Say I go to my prayers. Foun. Wee'l pray with you, and help your meditations. Wid. This is boystrous, or say I go to sleep, will you go to sleep with me. Bell. So suddenly before meat will be dangerous, we know your dinners ready Lady, you will not sleep. VVid. Give me my Coach, I will take the air, Hare. Wee'l wait on you, and then your meat after a quick∣ned stomacke. Wid. Let it alone, and call my Steward to me, and bid him
bring his reckonings into the Orchard, these unmannerly rude puppies — Exit Widdow. Fonn. Weele walk after you and view the pleasure of the place. Isa. Let her not rest, for if you give her breath, shee'l scorn and flout you, seem how she will, this is the way to win her, be bold and prosper. Bella. Nay if we do not tire her. — Exeunt. Isab. Ile teach you to worm me, good Lady sister, and peep into my privacies to suspect me, Ile torture, you, with that you hate most daintily, and when I have done that, laugh at that you loue most. Enter Luce. Luce. What have you done, she chafes and fumes outragiously, and still they persecute her. Isab. Long may they do so, Ile teach her to declaim against my pities, why is she not gone out ot'h town, but gives ocoasi∣on for men to run mad after her. Luc. I shall be hanged. Isa. This in me had been high treason, three at a time, and private in her Orchard, I hope shee'l cast her reckonings right now. Enter Widdow. Wid. Well, I shall find who brought um. Isa. Ha, ha, ha. VVid. Why do you laugh sister, I fear me tis your trick, twas neatly done of you, and well becomes your pleasure. Isab. What have you done with um. VVid. Lockt umith Orchard, there Ile make um dance and caper too, before they get their liberty, unmannerly rude pup∣pies. Isa. They are somwhat saucy, but yet Ile let um out, and once more sound um, Why were they not beaten out. Wid. I was about it, but because they came as suiters. Isab. Why did you not answer um. VVid. They are so impudent they will receive none: More yet, how came these in. Enter Francisco and Lance. Lan. At the door Madam. Isab. It is that face. Luc. This is the Gentleman. Wid. Shee sent the money too.
Luce. The same. Isa. Ile leave you, they have some businesse. Wid. Nay, you shall stay sister, they are strangers both to me; how her face alters? Isa. I am sorry he comes now. Wid. I am glad he is here now though, who would you speak with, Gentlemen? Lan. You Lady, or your fair sister there, here's a Gentleman that has received a benefit. Wid. From whom, sir? Lan. From one of you, as he supposes Madam, your man de∣livered it. Wid. I pray go forward. Lan. And of so great a goodnesse, that he dares not, without the tender of his thanks and service, passe by the house. Wid. Which is the Gentleman? Lan. This, Madam. Wid. What's your name, sir? Fran. They that know me, call me Francisco Lady, one not so proud to scorn so timely a benefit, nor so wretched to hide a gratitude. Wid. It is well bestowed then. Fran. Your fair self, or your sister as it seems, for what de∣sert I dare not know, unlesse a handsome subject for your chari∣ties, or aptnesse in your noble will to do it, have showred upon my wanrs a timely bounty, which makes me rich in thanks, my best inheritance. Wid. I am sorrie 'twas not mine, this is the Gentlewoman, fie, do not blush, go roundly to the matter, the man is a prettie man. Isa. You have three fine ones. Fran. Then to you, dear Lady. Isa. I pray no more sir, if I may perswade you, your onely aptnesse to do this is recompence, and more than I expected. Fran. But good Lady. Isa. And for me further to be acquainted with it, besides the imputation of vain glory, were greedy thankings of my self, I did it not to be more affected to; I did it, and if it happened where I thought it fitted, I have my end; more to enquire is curious in either of us, more than that suspicious: Fran. But gentle Lady, 'twill be necessary. Isa. About the right way nothing, do not fright it, being
to pious use and tender sighted, with the blown face of Com∣plements, it blasts it, had you not come at all, but thought thanks; it had been too much, 'twas not to see your person. Wid. A brave dissembling rogue, and how she carries it. Isa. Though I beleeve few handsomer; or hear you, though I affect a good tongue well; or trie you, though my years de∣sire a friend, that I relieved you. Wid. A plaguie cunning quean. Isa. For so I carried it, my ends too glorious in mine eyes, and bartered the goodnesse I propounded with opinion. Wid. Fear her not, Sir. Isa. You cannot catch me, sister. Fran. Will you both teach, and tie my tongue up Ladie? Isa. Let it suffice you have it, it was never mine, whilst good men wanted it. Lan. This is a Saint sure. Isa. And if you be not such a one, restore it. Fran. To commend my self, were more officious than you think my thanks are, to doubt I may be worth your gift a trea∣son, both to mine own good and understanding, I know my mind clear, and though modestie tels me, he that intreats, in∣trudes; yet I must think something, and of some season, met with your better taste, this had not been else. Wid. What ward for that, wench? Isa. Alas, it never touched me. Fran. Well, gentle Ladie, yours is the first money I ever took upon a forced ill manners. Isa. The last of me, if ever you use other. Fran. How may I do, and your way to be thought a gratefull taker, Isa. Spend it, and say nothing, your modestie may deserve more. Wid. O sister, will you bar thankfulnesse? Isa. Dogges dance for meat, would you have men do worse, for they can speak, crie out like VVood-mongers, good deeds by the hundreds, I did it that my best friend should not know it, wine and vain glorie does as much as I else, if you will force my merit, against my meaning, use it in well bestowing it, in shewing it came to be a benefit, and was so; and not examining a woman did it, or to what end, in not be∣leeving
sometimes your self, when drink and stirring conversa∣tion may ripen strange perswasions. Fran. Gentle Ladie, I were a base receiver of a courtesie, and you a worse disposer, were my nature unfurnished of these fore-sights, Ladies honours were ever in my thoughts, unspot∣ted crimes, their good deeds holy temples, where the incense burns not, to common eyes your fears are vertuous, and so I shall preserve um. Isa. Keep but this way, and from this place to tell me so, you have paid me; and so I wish you see all fortune. Exit. Wid. Fear not, the woman will be thanked, I do not doubt it, are you so craftie, carrie it so precisely, this is to wake my fears, or to abuse me, I shall look narrowly, despaire not Gentlemen, there is an hour to catch a woman in, if you be wise, so, I must leave you too: Now will I go laugh at my Suitors, Exit. Lan. Sir, what courage? Fran. This woman is a founder, and cites statutes to all her benefits. Lan. I never knew yet, so few years and so cunning, yet beleeve me she has an itch, but how to make her confesse it, for it is a craftie Tit, and playes about you will not bite home, she would fain, but she dares not; carrie your self but so di∣screetly sir, that want or wantonnesse seem not to search you, and you shall see her open. Fran. I do love her, and were I rich, would give two thou∣sand pound to wed her wit but one hour, oh tis a dragon, and such a spritely way of pleasure, ha Lance. Lan. Your ha Lance broken once, you would crie, ho, ho, Lance. Fran. Some leaden landed rogue will have this wench now, when all's done, some such youth will carrie her, and wear her greasie out like stuffe, some Dunce that knowes no more but markets, and admires nothing but a long charge at Sizes: O the fortunes. Enter Isabel and Luce. Lan. Comfort your self. Luce. They are here yet, and a love too, boldly upon't; nay, Mistresse, I still told you, how t'would finde your trust, this
tis to venture your charitie upon a boy. Lan. Now, what's the matter? stand fast, and like your self. Isa. Prethee no more wench. Luce. What was his want to you. Isa. Tis true. Luce. Or misery, or say he had been ith' Cage, was there no mercie to look abroad but yours? Isa. I am paid for fooling. Luce. Must every slight companion that can purchase a shew of poverty and beggerly planet fall under your compassion. Lance. Here's a new matter. Luce. Nay, you are served but too well, here he staies yet, yet as I live. Fran. How her face alters on me? Luce. Out of a confidence I hope. Isa. I am glad on't. Fran. How do you gentle Lady? Isa. Much ashamed sir, but first stand further off me, y'are infectious to find such vanitie, nay almost impudence, where I beleeve a worth: is this your thanks, the gratitude you were so mad to make me, your trim counsell Gentlemen? Lanc. What, Lady? Isa. Take your device agen, it will not serve sir, the wo∣man will not bite, you are finely cosened, drop it no more for shame. Luce. Do you think you are here sir amongst your wast∣coateers, your base wenches that scratch at such occasions; you are deluded: This is a Gentlewoman of a noble house, born to a better fame than you can build her, and eyes above your pitch. Fran. I do acknowledge — Isa. Then I beseech you sir, what could 'see, speak boldly, and speak truly, shame the Devil, in my behaviour of such easi∣nesse that you durst venture to do this. Fran. You amaze me, this Ring is none of mine, nor did I drop it. Luce. I saw you drop it, sir. Isa. I took it up too, still looking when your modesty should misse it, why, what a childish part was this? Fran. I vow. Isa. Vow me no vowes, he that dares do this, has bred himself to boldnesse, to forswear too; there take your gew∣gaw, you are too much pampered, and I repent my part, as
you grow older grow wiser if you can, and so farewell sir. Exit Isabella and Luce. Lan. Grow wiser if you can, she has put it to you, tis a rich Ring, did you drop it? Fran. Never, nere see it afore Lance. Lan. Thereby hangs a tail then: what slight she makes to catch her self, look up sir, you cannot lose her if you would, how daintily she flies upon the Lure, and cunningly she makes her stops, whistle and shee'l come to you. Fran. I would I were so happy. Lan. Maids are Clocks, the greatest Wheel they show, goes slowest to us, and mak's hang on tedious hopes; the lesser, which alre concealed being often oyl'd with wishes, flee like de∣fires, and never leave that motion, till the tongue strikes; she is flesh, blood and marrow, young as her purpose; and soft as pity; no Monument to worship, but a mould to make men in, a neat one, and I know how ere she appears now, which is neer enough, you are stark blinde if you hit not soon at night; she would venture forty pounds more but to feel a Flea in your shape bite her: drop no more Rings forsooth, this was the pret∣tiest thing to know her heart by. Fran. Thou puts me in much comfort. Lan. Put your self in good comfort, if she do not point you out the way, drop no more rings, shee'l drop her self into you. Fran. I wonder my brother comes not. Lan. Let him alone, and feed your self on your own fortunes; come be frollicke, and lets be monstrous wise and full of councell. drop no more Rings. Exit. Enter Widdow, Fountain, Bellamore, Harebrain. Wid. If you will needs be foolish you must be used so: who sent for you? who entertained you Gentlemen? who bid you welcome hither? you came crowding, and impudently bold; press on my patience, as if I kept a house for all Companions, and of all sorts will 'have your wills, will'vexe me and force my liking from you, I nere owe'd you. Fount. For all this we will dine with you. Bell. And for all this will have a better answer from you. Wid. You shall never, neither have an answer nor dinner,
unless you use me with a more staid respect, and stay your time too. Enter Isabella, Shorthose, Roger, Humpherey, Ralph, with dishes of meat. Isab. Forward with the meat now. Rog. Come Gentlemen march fairly. Short. Roger, you are a weak Servingman, your white broath runs from you; fie, how I sweat under this Pile of Beef; an Elephant can do more! Oh for such a back now, and in these times, what might a man arrive at, Goose, grase you up, and Woodcock march behinde thee, I am almost foundred. VVid. Who bid you bring the meat yet? away you knaves, I will not dine these two houres, how am I vext and chafed; go carry it back and tell the Cook, hee's an arrant Rascall, to send before I called. Short. Faces about Gentlemen, beat a mournfull march then, and give some supporters, I or else perish — Exeunt Servants. Isab. It does me much good to see her chafe thus. Hare. We can stay Madam, and will stay and dwell here, tis good Ayre. Foun. I know you have beds enough, and meat you never want. Wid. You want a little. Bell. We dare to pretend no, Since you are churlish, wee'l give you Physick, you must purge this anger, it burns you and decavs you. VVid. If I had you out once, I would be at charge of a percul∣lis for you. Enter Vallantine. Val. Good morrow noble Lady. VVid. Good morrow sir, how sweetly now he looks, and how full manly, what slaves was these to use him so. Val. I come to look a young man I call brother. VVid. Such a one was here sir, as I remember your own bro∣ther, but gone almost an hour agoe. Val. Good e'n then. VVid. You must not so soon sir, here be some Gentlemen, it may be you are acquainted with um. Hare. Will nothing make him miserable? Foun. How glorious!
Bell. It is the very he, does it rain fortunes, or has he a fami∣liar. Hare. How doggedly he looks too. Foun. I am beyond my faith, pray lets be going. Val. Where are these Gentlemen? Wid. Here. Val. Yes I know um, and will be more familiar. Bell. Morrow Maddam. Wid. Nay stay and dine. Val. You shall stay till I talk with you, and not dine neither, but fastingly my fury, you thinke you have undone me, think so still, and swallow that beleef, till you be company for Court∣hand Clarkes, and starved Atturnies, till you break in at playes like Prentises for three a groat, and crack Nuts with the Schol∣lars in peny Rooms agen, and fight for Apples, till you return to what I found you, people betrai'd into the hands of Fencers, Challengers, Tooth-drawers Bills, and tedious Proclamations in Meal-markets, with throngings to see Cutpurses: stir not, but hear, and mark, Ile cut your throats else, till Water works, and rumours of New Rivers rld you again and run you into que∣stions who built Thames, till you run mad for Lotte∣eries, and stand there with your tables to glean the golden Sen∣tences, and cite um secretly to Servingmen for sound Essayes, till Tavernes allow you but a Towel room to Tipple in Wine, that the Bell hath gone for twice, and Glasses that look like broken promises, tied up with wicker protestations, English Tobacco with half Pipes, nor in half a yeer once burnt, and Bisket that Bawds have rubb'd their gums upon like Coralls to bring the mark again. tell these hour Rascals so, this most fatall hour will come again, think I sit down the looser. Wid. Will you stay Gentlemen, a peece of Beef and a cold Capon, thats all, you know you are welcome. Hum. That was cast to abuse us. Bell. Steal off, the devil is in his anger. Wid. Nay I am sure you will not leave me so discourteously now I have provided for you. Val. What do you here? why do ye vex a woman of her goodness, her state and worth; can you bring a fair certifi∣ficate
that you deserve to be her footmen; husbands, you pupies, husbands for Whores and Bawds, away you wind suckers; do not look big, nor prate, nor stay, nor grumble, and when you are gone, seem to laugh at my fury, and slght this Lady, I shall hear, and knw this: and though I am not bound to fight for women, as far as they are good I dare preserve um: be not too bold, for if you be, Ile swinge you monstrously without all pitty, your ho∣nours now goe, avoid me mainly. Exeunt. Wid. Well sir, you have delivered me, I thank you, and with your nobleness prevented danger, their tongues might utter, weell all go and eat sir. Val. No, no I dare not trust my self with women, go to your meat, eat little, take less ease, and tie your body to a daily labour, you may live honstly, and so I thank you. Exit. Wid. Well go thy wayes, thou art a noble fellow, and some means I must work to have thee know it. Exit. Actus 5. Scaena. 1. Enter Vncle and Merchant. Vnc. MOst certain tis, her hands that hold him up, and her sister relieves Franck. Mer. I am glad to hear it: but wherefore do they not pursue this fortune to some fair end? Vnc. The women are too craftie, Valantine too coy, and Franke too bashfull, had any wise man hold of such a blessing, they would strike it out oth' flint but they would forme it. Enter VViddow and Shorthose. Mer. The Widdow sure, why does she stir so early. Wid. Tis strange, I cannot force him to understand me, and m make a benefit, of what I would bring him, tell my sift r ile use any devocions at home this morning, she may if she please go to Church. Short. Hay ho. VVid. And do you waite upon her with torch sir? Short. Hay ho.
Wid. You lazie Knave. Short. Here is such a tinkle tanklings that we can here lie quiet, and sleep our prayers out, Ralph pray emptie my right shooe that you mide your Chamber-pot, and burn a little Rose∣marie in't, I must wait upon my Ladie. This morning Prayer has brought me into a consumption, I have nothing left but flesh and bones about me. Wid. You drousie slave, nothing but sleep and swilling. Short. Had you been bitten with Bandog fleas, as I have been, and haunted with the night Mare. Wid. With an Ale-pot. Short. You would have little list to morning Prayers, pray take my fellow Ralph, hee has a Psalme booke, I am an ingrum man. Wid. Get you ready quickly, and wen she is ready wait up∣on her handsomely; no more, be gone. Short. If I do snore my part out — Exit Short. Unc. Now to our purposes. Mer. Good morrow, Madam, Wid. Good morrow, Gentlemen. Unc. Good joy and fortune. Wid. These are good things, and worth my thanks, I thank you sir. Mer. Much joy I hope youl'l finde, we came to gratulate your new knit marriage-band. Wid. How? Unc. Hee's a Gentleman, although he be my kinsman, my fair Niece. Wid. Niece, Sir? Unc. Yes Lady, now I may say so, tis no shame to you, I say a Gentleman, and winking at some light fancies, which you most happily may affect him for, as bravely carried, as no∣bly bred and managed. Wid. Whats all this, I understand you not, what Niece, what marriage-knot? Unc. Ile tell plainly, you are my Niece, and Valentine the Gentleman has made you so by marriage. Wid. Marriage?
Vnc. Yes Lady, and twas a noble and vertuous part, to take a falling man to your protection, and bouy him up again to all his glories. Wid. The men are mad. Mer. What though he wanted these outward things, that flie away like shadowes, was not his mind a full one, and a brave one? You have wealth enough to give him glosse and out∣side, and he wit enough to give way to love a Lady. Vnc. I ever thought he would do well. Mer. Nay, I knew how ever he wheel'd about like a loose Cabine, he would charge home at length, like a brave Gentle∣man; Heavens blessing a your heart Lady, we are so bound to honour you, in all your service so devoted to you. Unc. Do not look so strange Widow, it must be known, bet∣ter a generall joy; no stirring here yet, come, come, you can∣not hide um. Wid. Pray be not impudent, these are the finest toyes, belike I am married then. Mer. You are in a miserable estate in the worlds account else, I would not for your wealth it come to doubting. Wid. And I am great with child? Vnc. No, great they say not, but tis a full opinion you are with childe, and great joy among the Gentlemen, your husband hath bestirred himself fairly. Mer. Alas, we know his private hours of entrance, how long, and when he stayed, could name the bed too, where he paid down his first fruits. VVid. I shall beleeve anon. Vnc. And we consider for some private reasons, you would have it private, yet take your own pleasure; and so good mor∣row, my best Niece, my sweetest. VVid. No, no, pray stay. Vnc. I know you would be with him, love him, and love him well. Mer. You'l find him noble, this may beget — Unc. It must needs work upon her. Exit Unc. and Mer. Wid. These are fine bobs ifaith, married, and with childe too, how long has this been, I trow? they seem grave fel∣lowes,
they should not come to flout; married, and bedded, the world takes notice too, where lies this May-game? I could be vext extreamely now, and rail too, but tis to no end, though I itch a little, must I be scratcht I know not how, who waits there? Enter Humphrey, a servant. Hum. Madam. Wid. Make ready my Coach quickly, and wait you onely, and hark you sir, be secret & speedy, inquire out where he lies. Hum. I shall do it, Madam. Exit. Wid. Married, and got with childe in a dream, tis fine ifaith, sure he that did this, would do better waking. Exit. Enter Valentine, Fran. Lance, and a boy with a torch. Val. Hold thy torch handsomely, how dost thou Francke? Peter Bassell, bear up. Fran. You have fried me soundly, Sack do you call this drink? Val. A shrewd dog, Francke, will bite abundantly. Lan. Now could I fight, and fight with thee. Val. With the, thou man of Memphis. Lan. But that thou art mine own naturall master, yet my sack sayes thou art no man, thou art a Pagan, and pawnest thy land, which a noble cause. Val. No arms, nor arms, good Lancelot, dear Lanec, no fighting here, we will have lands boy, livings, and titles, thou shalt be a Vice Roy, hang fighting, hang, 'tis out of fashion. Lan. I would fain labour you into your lands again, go too, it is behoovefull. Fran. Fie Lance, fie. Lan. I must beat some body, and why not my master, before a stranger, charity and beating begins at home. Val. Come, thou shalt beat me. Lan. I will not be compeld, and you were two masters, I scorn the motion. Val. Wilt thou sleep? Lan. I scorn sleep. Val. Wilt thou go cat? Lan. I scorn meat, I come for rompering, I come to wait
upon my charge discreetly; for look you, if you will not take your morgage again, here do I lie Saint George, and so forth. Val. An here do I St. George, bestride the Dragon, thus with my Lance. Lan. I sting, I sting with my tail. Val. Do you so, do you so, Sir, I shall tail you presently. Fran. By no means, do not hurt him. Val. Take this Nelson, and now rise, thou maiden Knight of Malligo, lace on thy helmet of inchanted sack, and charge again. Lan. I play no more, you abuse me, will you go? Fran. Ile bid you good morrow Brother, for sleep I cannot, I have a thousand fancies. Val. Now thou art arrived, go bravely to the matter, and do something of worth Franke. Lan. You shall hear from us. Exit Lance and Franke. Val. This rogue, if he had been sober, sure had beaten me, is the most terrish Knave. Enter Uncle and Merchant: May with a torch. Vnc. 'Tis he. Mer. Good morrow. Val. Why sir, good morrow to you too, and you be so lusty. Unc. You have made your brother a fine man, we met him. Val. I made him a fine Gentleman, he was a foole before, brought up amongst the midst of small Beer Brew-houses, what would you have with me? Mer. I come to tell you, your latest hour is come. Val. Are you my sentence? Mer. The sentence of your state. Val. Let it be hang'd then, and let it be hang'd high enough, I may not see it. Unc. A gracious resolution. Val. What would you have else with me, will you go drink, and let the world slide Uncle? Ha, ha, ha, boyes, drink sack like whey boyes. Mer. Have you no feeling, sir? Val. Come hither Merchant: make me a supper, thou most
reverent Land-catcher, a supper of fortie pounds. Mer. What then, Sir? Val. Then bring thy wife along, and thy fair sisters, thy neighbours and their wives, and all their trinkets, let me have fortie trumpets, and such wine, we'll laugh at all the miseries of morgage, and then in state Ile render thee an answer. Mer. What say you to this? Unc. I dare not say, nor think neither. Mer. Will you redeem your state, speak to the point, Sir? Val. Not, not if it were mine heir in the Turks gallies. Mer. Then I must take an order, Val. Take a thousand, I will not keep it, nor thou shalt not have it, because thou camest ith' nick, thou shalt not have it, go take possession, and be sure you hold it, hold fast with both hands, for there be those hounds uncoupled, will ring you such knell, go down in glorie, and march upon my land, and crie, All's mine; crie as the Devil did, and be the Devil mark what what an eccho follows, build fine March panes, to entertain Sir Silk-worm and his Lady, and pull the Chappell down, and raise a Chamber for Mistresse Silver-pin, to lay her belly in, mark what an Earthquake comes, then foolish Merchant my Tenants are no Subjects, they obey nothing, and they are people too, never Chistened, they know no Law, nor conscience, they'l devour thee: and thou mortall, the stopple, they'l confound thee within three dayes; no bit nor memorie of what thou wert, no not the wart upon thy nose there, shall be ere heard of more, go take possession, and bring thy children down, to rost like Rabbets, they love young toasts and butter, Bow-bell Suc∣kers; as they love mischief, and hate Law, they are Cambals: bring down thy kinred too, that be not fruitfull, there be those Mandrakes that will mollifie um, go take possession, Ile go to my Chamber, afore boy go. Exeunt. Mer. Hee's mad sure. Unc. Hee's half drunk sure, and yet I like this unwilling∣nesse to lose it, this looking back. Mer. Yes, if he did it handsomly, but he's so harsh & strange. Unc. Beleeve it 'tis his drink sir, and I am glad his drink has thrust it out.
Mer. Canibals; if ever I come to view his regiment, if faire termes may be had. Vnc. He tels you true sir, They are a bunch of the most boy∣strous Rascals disorder ever made, let um be mad once, the pow∣er of the whole Countrey cannot cool um, be patient but a while. Mer. As long as you will sir, before I buy a bargain of such Runts, Ile buy a Colledge for Baers, and live among um.. Enter Franscisco, Lance, boy with a Torch. Fran. How dost thou now. Lan. Better then I was, and straighter, but my heads a Hogs-head still, it rowls and tumbles. Fran. Thou wert cruelly paid. Lan. I may live to requite it, put a Snaffle of Sack in my mouth and then ride me very well. Fran. Twas all but sport, Ile tell thee what I mean now, I mean to see this wench. Lan. Where a devil is she, and there were two, 'twere better. Fran. Dost thou hear the bell ring. Lan. Yes, yes. Fran. Then she comes to prayers, early each morning thi∣ther: Now if I could but meet her, for I am of another mettle now. Enter Isabel, and Shorthose with a Torch. Lan. What lights yond. Fran. Ha, tis a light, take her by the hand and court her. Lan. Take her below the girdle, you'l never speed else, it comes on this way still, oh that I had but such an opportunity in a Saw-pit, how it comes on, comes on, tis here. Fran. Tis she, fortune I kiss thy hand — Good morrow Lady. Isa. What voice is that sirra, do you sleep as you go, tis he, I am glad ont, why Shorthose. Short. Yes forsooth, I was dreamt, I was going to Church. Lan. She sees yon as plain as I do. Isa. Hold thy torch up. Short. Heres nothing but a stall, and a Butchers Dog a∣sleep
in't, where did you see the voice. Fran. Shee looks still angry. Lan. To her and meet sir. Isa. Here, here. Fran. Yes Lady, never bless your solf, I am but a man, and like an honest man, now I wil thank you. Isa. What do you mean, who sent for you, who desired you. Short. Shall I put out the Torch forsooth. Isa. Can I not go about my private meditations, Ha, but such companions as you must ruffle me, you had best go with me sir. Fran. Twas my purpose. Isa. Why, what an impudence is this, you had best, being so neer the Church, provide a Priest, and perswade me to marry you. Fran. It was my meaning, and such a husband, so loving, and so carefull, my youth, and all my fortunes shall arrive at — — Harke you. Isa. Tis strange you should be thus unmannerly, turn home again sirra, you had best now force my man to lead your way. Lan. Yes marry shall a, Lady, forward my friend. Isab. This is a pretty Riot, it may grow to a rape. Fran. Do you like that better, I can ravish you an hundred times, and never hurt you. Short. I see nothing I am a sleep still, when you have done tell me, and then Ile wake Mistris. Isab. Are you in earnest Sir, do you long to be hang'd. Fran. Yes by my troth Lady in these fair Tresses. Isa. Shall I call out for help. Fran. No by no means, that were a weak trick Lady, Ile kiss, and stop your mouth. Isa. Youl answer all these. Fran. A thousand kisses more. Isa. I was never abused thus, you had best give out too, that you found me willing, and say I doted on you. Fran. That's known already, and no man living shall now carry you from me.
Isa. This is fine ifaith. Fran. It shall be ten times finer. Isab. Well, seeing you are so valiant, keep your way, I will to Church. Fran. And I will wait upon you. Isab. And it is most likely theres a Priest, if you dare ven∣ter as you profess, I would Wish you look about you, to do these rude tricks, for you know the recompences, and trust not to my mercy. Fram. But I will Lady. Isa. For Ile so handle you. Fran. Thats it I look for. Lan. Afore thou dream. Shor. Have you done. Isa. Go on sir, & follow if you dare. Fran. If I do not hang me. Lan. Tis all thine own boy, an were a million, god a mercy Sacke, when would small Beer have done this. Exeunt. Knocking within. Enter Vallentine. Val. Whose that that knocks and bounces, what a Devil alles you, is hell broke loose, or do you keep an Iron mill. Enter a Servant. Ser. T'is a Gentlewoman sir that must needs speak with you. Val. A Gentlewoman, what Gentlewoman, what have I to do with Gentlewomen? Ser. She will not be answered Sir. Val. Fling up the bed and let her in, Ile try how gentle she is — Exit Servant. This Sack has fild my head so full of bables, I am almost mad; what Gentlewoman should this be, I hope she has brought me no butter prins along with her to lay to my charge, if she have tis all one, Ile for wear it. Enter Widow. VVid. O you'r a noble Gallant, send off your servant pray. Exit Servant. Val. She will not ravish me, by this light she looks as sharp set a Sparrow hawk, what would thou woman. Wid. O you have used me kindly, and like a Gentleman, this is to trust to you.
Val. Trust to me, for what? Wid. Because I said in jest once, you were a handsom man, one I could like well, and fooling, made you beleeve I loved you, and might be brought to marrie. Val. The widow is drunk too. Wid. You out of this, which is a fine discretion, give out the matter's done, you have won and wed me, and that you have put fairly put for an heir too, these are fine rumours to advance my credit; ith' name of mischief what did you mean? Val. That you loved me, and that you might be brought to marrie me; why, what a Devil do you mean, widow? VVid. 'Twas a fine trick too, to tell the world though you had enjoyed your first wish, you wished the wealth you aimed at, that I was poor, which is most true, I am, have fold my lands, because I love not those vexations, yet for mine honours sake, if you must be prabing and for my credits sake in the Town. Val. I tell thee widow, I like thee ten times better, now thou hast no Lands, for now thy hopes and cares, Lye on thy husband, if ere thou marry est more. VVid. Have not you married me, and for this main cause, now as you report it to be your Nurse. Val. My Nurse, why, what am I grown too, give me the Glass, my Nurse. Wid. You nere said truer, I must confess I did a little favour you, and with some labour, might have been perswaded, but when I found I must be hourly troubled, with making broths, and dawbing your dacaies with swadling, and with stiching up your ruines, for the world so reports. Val. Do not provoke me. Wid. And half an eye may see. Val. Do not provoke me, the worlds a lying world, and thou shalt sinde it, have a good heart, and take a strong faith to thee, and mark what followes, my Nurse, yes, you shall rock me: Widdow Ile keep you waking. Wid. You are disposed sir. Val. Yes marry am I Widdow, and you shall fell it, nay and they touch my freehold, I am a Tiger.
Wid. I think so. Val. Come. Wid. Whither? Sings. Val. Any Whither. The fit's upon me now, the fit's upon me now, Come quickly gentle Ladie, the fit's upon me now, The world shall know they are fools, And so shalt thou do too, Let the Cobler meddle with his tools, The fits upon me now Take me quickly, while I am in this vein, away with me, for if I have but two hours to consider, all the widows in the world cannot recover me. Wid. If you will, go with me sir. Val. Yes marrie will I, but 'tis in anger yet, and I will mar∣rie thee, do not crosse me; yes, and I will he with thee, and get a whole bundle of babies, and I will kisse thee, stand still and kisse me handsomely, but do not provoke me, stit neither hand nor foot, for I am dangerous, I drunk sack yesternight, do not allure me: Thou art no widow of this world, come in pi∣tie, and in spite Ile marrie thee, not a word more, and I may be brought to love thee. Exeunt. Enter Merchant and Uncle at severall doors. Mer. Well met agen, and what good newes yet? Unc. Faith nothing. Mer. No fruits of what we sowed? Unc. Nothing J hear of. Mer. No turning in this tide yet? Unc. 'Tis all flood, and till that fall away, there's no expe∣cting. Enter Fran. Isab. Lance. Shorthose, a torch. Mer. s not this his younger brother? Unc. With a Gentlewoman the widows sister, as I live he smiles, he has got good hold, why well said Franks faith, let's stay and mark. Isa. Well, you are the prettiest youth and so you have hand∣led me, think you ha me sure. Fran. As sure as wedlock.
Isa. You had best lie with me too. Fran. Yes indeed will I, and get such black ey'd boyes. Unc. God a mercie, Franke. Isa. This is a merrie world, poor simple Gentlewomen that think no harm, cannot walk about their businesse, but they must be catcht up I know not how. Fran. Ile tell you, and Ile instruct you too, have I caught you, Mistresse. Isa. Well, and it were not for pure pitie, I would give you the slip yet, but being as it is. Fran. It shall be better. Enter Valentine, Widow, and Ralph with a torch. Isa. My sister, as I live, your brother with her, sure I think you are the Kings takers. Unc. Now it works. Val. Nay, you shall know I am a man. Wid. I think so. Val. And such proof you shall have. Wid. I pray speak softly. Val. Ile speak it out Widow, yes and you shall confesse too, I am no Nurse-childe, I went for a man, a good one, if you can beat me out oth' pit. Wid. I did but jest with you. Val. Ile handle you in earnest, and so handle you: Nay, when my credit cals. Wid. Are you mad? Val. I am mad, I am mad. Fran. Good morrow, Sir, I like your preparation. Val. Thou hast been at it, Franke. Fran. Yes faith, 'tis done sir. Val. Along with me then, never hang an arse, widow. Isa. 'Tis to no purpose, sister. Val. Well said Black-brows, advance your torches Gentle∣men. Unc. Yes, yes Sir. Val. And keep your ranks. Mer. Lance, carrie this before him. Unc. Carrie it in state.
Enter Musicians, Fount. Hare. Bell. Val. What are you Musicians, I know your comming, and what are those behinde you, Musi. Gentlemen that sent us to give the Lady, a good mor∣row. Val. O I know them come boy sing the song I taught you, And sing it lustily, come forward Gentlemen, your welcome, Welcom, now we are all friends, go get the Priest ready, And let him not be long, we have much business: Come Francke, rejoyce with me, thou hast got the start boy, But ile so tumble after, come my friends lead, Lead cheerfully, and let your Fiddles ring boyes, My follies and my fancies have an end here, Display the morgage Lance, Merchant ile pay you, And every thing shall be in joynt agen. Vnc. Afore, afore. Val. And now confess, and know, Wit without Money, sometimes gives the blow. Exeunt. FINIS. Plays written by Francis Beamount; and John Flecher, printed in. Quarto. 1 VVit without Money. 2 Night walker: or, the Little thief. 3 Opportunity. 4 Coronation. 5 Scornfull Lady. 6 Elder Brother. 7 Philaster. 8 King and no King. 9 Mounsteur Thomas. 10 Rollo Duke Normandy. 11 Rule a wife and have a wife. 12 Thierry and Theodoret. 13 Woman Hater. 14 Maids Tragedy. 15 Knight ot'h Burning Pestle. 16 Cupids Revenge. 17 Noble Kinsman.
