B2923 R18478 12258141 57612
TENDER Counsel and Advice TO THE Flock of God Every where. By a Lover of Truth and Righteousness William Bingley. Psalms 107. 43. Whoso is Wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord. Psal. 112. 1, 2, 3. Blessed is the Man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his Commandments; his Seed shall be mighty upon Earth: the Generation of the Righteous shall be Blessed. Wealth and Riches shall be in his House; and his Righteousness endureth for ever. Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. London, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, next Door to the Meeting-house in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street, and at the Bible in Leaden-hall-street, near the Market, 1697.
TENDER Counsel and Advice TO THE Flock of God, &c. GOD, who is Rich in Mercy to all that calls upon him in Sincerity, and with a True and Humble Heart seeks him, hath, in his Unspeakable Love, been Pleased toLuke 1. 78, 79. Visit us, who once were under the Regions of the Shadow of Death, with the Light of that Blessed Day which sprung from on High, which is no other but the Light of his Be∣loved Son; whom he Pro∣mised of Old to give, For aIsa. 42. 6. 49. 6. Acts 13. 47. Covenant of the Peo∣ple, for a Light of the Gentiles. This is that Light with
which he hath reached to us, and caused to Shine in our2 Cor. 4. 6. Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ; where∣by we, who were in the times past scat∣tered in the Darkness and Ignorance of our Minds upon the Desolate and Barren Mountains of empty Profession, where we might have remained to this Day; yea, and all our Days, in a Poor Miserable and Wretched State; Desolate of the Knowledge of those things which makes truly Happy, both in this World, and that which is to come; had not Almighty God, in this the Day of his great Love, Stretched out the Arm of his Power to gather us, that we might no longer remain in Sin and Coruption, whichDan. 9. 24. Christ our Lord came to put an End to, and by his PreciousEph. 1. 7. Blood to Redeem us from: And that we, who were Aliens and Fo∣reigners in our Minds from the Com∣mon
Wealth of Israel, might, by the Work of his Eternal Power and Spi∣rit in our Hearts, be made nigh to him; who gave his Life a Ransom for us, whereby we might come to be Heirs of Peace, through the true Knowledge of the Work of Sanctifi∣cation wrought in our Hearts by his Spirit; and then Inhabitants of that City, which the Lord God and the Lamb is theRev. 21. 23. Light and Glory of. Now, Friends, seeing the Lord hath done thus for us, and not for us only, but to all Mankind in general, hath given a Visitation of Love, and brought us to the Knowledge of Christ, who is theJohn 14. 6. Truth, the Way, and the Life; and has openedHeb. 10. 20. a Door for us to return to God again; what remains, but that we, in a Ho∣ly Bowedness, Reverence and Fear towards Almighty God, and Love to Christ that first Loved us, and laid down his Life: Make a right Im∣provement
of all the tender Mercies and Dealings of the Lord, and truly answer the End of the Divine Dis∣coveries and Visitations of the Great Everlasting God to us, by receiving the Blessed Truth, and the Heavenly Discovery thereof, in the Love of it; and joyning to the Appearance of it in our Souls; and so loving the Re∣bukes and Convictions of it, as to for∣sake every thing it Reproves for, and Discovers to be Evil, and wait to feel theJoh. 16. 13. Gui∣dance of it, out of all Untruth, into all Truth. And as it is given to us, to change and renew us in the Spi∣ritEph. 4. 23. of our Minds; So we may truly give up to it, that it may work a thorough and effectual Change in us, Translating us, out of the Kingdom of Darkness into the King∣dom of the Dear Son of God; and to possess that Treasure of Eternal Life, that neither Moth can Eat,Mat. 6. 19. Rust Corrupt, nor
Thieves break through and Steal. Now as that is the good End for which the Great God has bestowed so Great and Glorious a Principle up∣on Man, if we be not thus Changed and made Heirs of Life, the fault is our own; for there is neither want of Good Will in God towards Man, nor want of Power in that Divine Principle, God has been Pleased to bestow upon Man; but it is Mans loving the World, and the Delights of it, and, Samson-like,Judg. 16. 4. harbouring a Dalilah in the Bosom; for although a Pro∣fession of the Truth it self may be made from the Convictions and Dis∣coveries it makes, yet not being Changed and Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, but the Old Nature and Birth remaining Alive in them, not given up to the Judgment and Stroak of Truth in themselves; these are they that, though a Day of Visi∣tation hath reached them, and the Blessed Truth is made known to them,
and the reproofs thereof have followed them, yet they have not truly turned at the Reproofs thereof, and so not received the Truth in the Love of it; but are such as the Holy Apostle, Rom. 1. 18. Describes, Who hold the Truth in Ʋnrighteousness, and the Wrath of God is Revealed from Heaven against such; and he gives the Reason for it in the next Verse, Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God hath shewed it unto them. So that it is not holding barely a Pro∣fession of the Truth that will do us any good, but it is a being Renewed in our Minds; or else, whatever we may Profess, the Wrath of God abides upon us: So that we are not only to Profess the Truth, but to Love it above all things, and to yield Obedience to it; for our Love to Christ Jesus the Truth is manifested by our Obedience and Subjection to him, it being in vain to pretend we Love him, whil'st we are not willing to Bow to him, and to let him have the Government
of our Minds. If you Love me (saith our Lord) keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. And again, He that hath my Com∣mandments, and keepeth them, he it is that Loveth me; and he that Loveth me, shall be Loved of my Father; and I will Love him, and Manifest my self to him, Verse 21. Again Jesus said, If a Man Love me, he will keep my Words (and he adds a Blessed and Comfortable Promise to such that thus Love him) and my Father will Love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him, Verse 23. And seeing none are Lovers of him but these who keep his Commandments, and keep his Words and Sayings, how do's it behove us to come to a strict and thorough search? Are we keeping his Commandments, his Words and Sayings: You know the tendency of all the Words, Sayings and Commandments of our Lord was to bring Man to the Knowledge of his Power, and the Work of it in them, that they might come to be Sanctified by his WordJoh. 17. 17. which is
Truth, and Born againJohn 3. 3, 8. of the Spirit, for with∣out it no Man can enter the Kingdom of God; and also to rectifie Man both in Life and Manners, that as Man was gone away from his Primitive State of Holiness, into the Dark World; he, by observing his Word of Life, and keeping of his Commandments, might come up again in that Bright∣ness and Glory from which he was fallen, to Love and Fear God, who hath given him Life and Being. And where this Love is thus seated in the Heart, and lived in, it will naturally lead to forsake all things that offends him, and hurts and hinders the spread∣ing of the Truth, and the Glory of his Name; For it is not a shew or bare pretence of Loving him that will Intitle us to the Blessed Promise, of He and his Fathers Loving them, and coming to make their Abode with them; For as it is said by the Apostle John, If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John
2. 15. And it is said by our Lord, He that LovethMat. 10. 37. Father, Mother, Wife or Children, &c. better than me, is not worthy of me. Now if we must not Love things that are both good and lawful in themselves, and justifiable for us to have, enjoy and love, in their places, better than the Lord, but he must have the Mind and Affections above and beyond the Love of them, then our Love to these things must be sub∣ordinate to the Love we must have to him; nor must we let our Minds, Love or Affections be at all after un∣lawful things, as theJames 4. 4. Friendship and Favour of this World, for that is at Enmity with God; nor after Covetousness and Pride, the Lust, Pleasure and Wanton∣ness of this World, for they are Evil, and expresly forbidden; and therefore as the Apostle said,Col. 2. 21. Touch not, tast not, handle not; for they Defile, and make unfit to draw nigh to God, or to have fel∣lowship
with him and his Beloved Son, who came to Redeem us from such things. Now they that know the Truth, well know, that the Truth calls out of such things, to abandon, forsake and withstand them, in every of their Appearances, and to War against eve∣ry hurtful Lust that Wars against the Soul; and does not only call for this Resisting of them, but will enable every one that submits to it in them∣selves, to overcome these Snares and Temptations; and so not to be Slaves, and brought into Bondage by Evil, but to be Victors over it. And yet notwithstanding God has given this knowledge and invested man with a Divine Power, if he will yet give way to these things, and gratifie his vain and unbridled Mind, and will harbour them in his Heart, and live in them, though he offends by so do∣ing, and becomes an ill Example to others; such will unavoidably bring themselves under the Character the
Apostle gives of some,2 Tim. 3. 4. Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God, and must Reap the Reward of their so doing; and therefore will not be found worthy of him, who is come out of the Bosom of the Father, to Restore poor lost Man to God again; nor of that Eter∣nal Life and Peace which he brings all those who receive him in that Love in which the Father sent him. And therefore, my Dear Friends, as we Profess the Blessed Truth, let us Love and Live in it, and give up in Obedience to it, that it may Purge1 Cor. 5. 7. out that old Leaven of Sin and Corruption, and may slay and bring under that Evil Nature and Birth which loves, and is ready, to lay hold of Temptation, when presented in our view, by the Adversary of our Souls, and so to Purifie and Mould us a new, that we may be a new Lump, Leavened into the Heavenly Divine Nature, and be∣come New Creatures, Grafted into
Christ Jesus, the True and Heavenly Vine, and becomeRom. 11. 17. Branches in him, and receive Divine and Heavenly Sap and Virtue from him, who is the Holy and Heavenly Root from whom all True Nourishment comes; and being thus Grafted into Christ, and Abiding in him, we shall grow in him, and bring forth Fruits of Righteousness through him, to God's Glory and our Ever∣lasting Joy and Peace; which that all may do, who have been Reached to by the Blessed Truth, are the Hearty Prayers and Supplications of my Soul to the Lord. Therefore let all be Careful, that none, who have in any measure par∣took of the Life and Virtue which is in him, who is the Living Vine, lose the Sweetness thereof, and consequent∣ly its Nature, and so suck Nourish∣ment from another Root, though the Name and Profession may be retain'd; and whil'st Professing to be Branches in Christ the True Vine, are found
to be in the old Root of Bitterness, bringing forth the Fruits of it, which are those of the Flesh, as the Apostle doth fully and plainly describe them: which are, Strife, Emula∣tion,Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Wrath, Conten∣tion, Envying, Drunken∣ness, Whoredom, &c. and they that com∣mit such things cannot Inherit the Kingdom of God; but the Fruits of the Spirit which are brought forth by all that abide in Christ, the True Vine, are Love, Joy, (x) Peace, Long-Suffering, Gen∣tleness,Verses 22, 23, 24. Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is is no Law: for they that are Christ's have Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and the Lusts. So there is no room or indul∣gence to be given to the Fruits of the Flesh, but we are to shew forth, in all things, that we are his Children, and are CrucifiedGal. 6. 14. to the World, and the World to us, that, as the Apostle saith, If we Live in the Spirit (it is not our saying, We
Live in the Spirit, if we do not manifest he Fruits thereof) let us alsoGal. 5. 25, 26. walk in the Spirit; let us not be desirous of vain Glory, Provoking one another, Envying one another; for these are not the Fruits of a Branch in Christ, nor of one that has Crnuified the Flesh, but the contrary, and is the Product of a Corrupt and Dar∣kened Heart that, notwithstanding, may Profess the Truth, and Talk of great things for a Name and Ap∣plause among Men, yet is not subject to the Spirit of Truth, which would Leaven into the Fruits of its own Nature; but this Fleshly, Exalted, Vain Glorious Mind and Spirit that is Puff'd up in the Fleshly Wisdom of this World, is Ambitious, does what it does to be seen of Men, will Fawn and Flatter to gain the Applause of of others, but will Slight, Contemn, Undervalue and Trample upon those that are Sincere; and it seeks its own, but not the things of Christ
Jesus, nor the good of his Flock; is not tender, but is unnatural and cruel, will Sacrifice the good of Souls, and the peace of the Church to gain its own ends; this is that Spirit which the Apostle Warned a∣gainst,1 Cor. 13. and is not to be suffered in God's Camp; and there∣fore Watch against it, and its Abet∣tors, where-ever it appears, and look upon it as a deadly Enemy to God, and True Religion, and dangerous to the Peace of the Church, which ought to be prefer'd above and be∣yond any private Interest whatsoever. So that it is not Specious Pretences, Fair Speeches, Old Experiences, nor Knowledge where that is lost that gave the Experience, and did make known the Mysteries of God, and did make tender, whil'st in Subjection to it, that will or can truly Promote the Glory of God, or the Peace of his Church. For the Holy Apostle was truly Sensible of this, when he said, Though
I speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am be∣come as Sounding Brass or a Tinkling Cymbal; and though I have the Gift of Prophecy,1 Cor. 13. and under∣stand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing: And though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my Body to be Burned, and have not Charity, it pro∣fiteth me nothing: for Charity suffereth long, and is kind; Charity envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, doth not behave it self unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easiy provoked, think∣eth no evil, rejoyceth not in Iniquity, but rejoyceth in the Truth; beareth all things, believeth all things; hopeth all things, endureth all things; Charity never faileth. Now, that these Blessed Fruits and Effects of the Love of God, shed abroad in our Hearts, we may be found in, that they may be as Orna∣ments upon us, and we may Shine
forth in them as Lights upon an Hill, and as Candles in Candlesticks, that others may see our good Works, and may Glorifie our Father which is in Heaven: And Zion may become the Glory of many Nations, and Jerusalem the Praise of the whole Earth; and the Borders of God's Sanctuary enlarged; and the Truth Prosper, and many gathered to it. And as we keep in the Wisdom and Counsel of God, Peace and Unity will be Promoted; Fervent Charity, Brotherly Kindness, and Bearing one with another in a Spirit of Love will increase, and thereby the Sincere In∣couraged, the Feeble Strengthened, the Heady and High-minded Rebu∣ked, the Backslider brought back, the Careless and Negligent awakened and stirred up to Faithfulness and Diligence, that nothing but Love and Truth may have any place amongst us; then shall God have his Honour, and we the Comfort of the Power and Pre∣sence of the Living God amongst us.
And, Friends, you hnow the Lord hath raised us up by his Mighty Pow∣er, and Quickened us, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins, to be a Peo∣ple to him, to answer the End for which we were Created, and also the End for which he hath Redeemed us from that Bondage in which we were held, by the Power of Darkness, and, that is, to Serve and Worship him: Now you know God is a Spi∣rit, and our Lord saith to the Wo∣man of Samaria,John 4. 23. The hour cometh, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, for the Father seeketh such to Worship him. Now as the true Worship stands in Spirit, they that are performers of it, must be in the Spirit; that is, they must be Spiritually-minded, their Hearts and Souls must be turned to this Spirit, waiting to feel the Work of it, both to fit them, by taking away and Purging them from every thing, that makes them unfit for so
great an Exercise as that is, to wash from all Corruptions, and to draw the Mind out of that which would defile it; for whil'st the Heart is defiled, it is not fit for this Worship: As God is Holy, so is his Worship, and it must be peform'd by a Heart and Mind that is made so, or else we shall have such a return as Israel had of Old, by the Prophet,Isa. 1. 12, 13, 15. When ye come to appear before me, who hath re∣quired this at your Hands to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, &c.—And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you; yea, when you make many Prayers I will not hear; your hands are full of Blood. So that it is in vain for People to ap∣proach before the Lord with an Earth∣ly Corrupt Heart and Mind; Man has nothing to do to tread his Courts till a Reformation, in some measure, be wrought, and that they know Re∣pentance, and an earnest Willingness and Desire to have their Hearts Wash∣ed
in theZach. 13. 1. Fountain which God hath opened, which is the Life and Virtue of his Beloved Son. For when the Prophet had in the Chapter before advised, Verse 16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes; cease to do evil, and learn to do well, &c. (then he saith) Come now and let us reason toge∣ther, &c. So that it is evident, People must come rightly prepared, or else they have no right to tread his Courts, nor to offer any thing as a Sacrifice to him. And therefore let every Mind (especially when met together in our Solemn Meetings, for it is not barely coming there, and hearing what may be spoken there, but every one must be) turned in, to the Gift of God's Spirit in your own Hearts, and feel your Minds exercised in it, and you truly subject to the Leadings and Dictates of it, that you may be a Spiritual-minded People, and it is in
this Frame God is Worshipped; for when the Mind is truly subject to the Spirit of Life, it quickens and raises such a Soul into a deep Sense of the Dealings of the Lord, and his Goodness and Mercies, which have been very many, and the many De∣liverances and Preservations God hath wrought for us; and in this sense the Soul truly Bows before him, and Ad∣mires his Goodness, and Adores him for it; and here the Worship of God is perform'd acceptably, and such feel returns of Peace into their Souls, and thereby are opened and enlarged to Praise the Lord, and Speak well of his Name, and these grow asMal. 4. 2. Calves in the Stall, and asIsa. 44. 2. Willows by the Water-Courses; these are like a TreePsal. 1. 3. Planted by the Rivers of Water; they bring forth their Fruits in due Season, their Leaf withereth not, and whatsoever such do Prospereth; for the Lord is the Rock and Defence of such, and will
preserve such from the Storm and Hor∣riblePsal. 11. 6. Tempest, which will come upon the Hy∣pocrite, the Rebellious and the Wick∣ed. And, Dear Friends, seeing God, in his Infinite Love, hath gathered us, and redeemed us out of the World, to be a People to him; let not the World, nor the things in it, entangle us again; nor let not the Enjoyment of any outward Substance, which God has been pleased, as Blessings, to be∣stow upon us, alienate our Minds and Affections from him; for that would be Ingratitude in a high degree, and a Sin which shall not go unpunished. What! shall we forget the Hand that has Fed us, and dealt Bountifully with us? Nay, shall we spurn against him that hath given us Food and Raiment, and by his Providence hath preserved us from the Dangers that have often attended, and given us Health and length of Days, and hath been as an open Fountain to us? God forbid,
that ever we should requite the Lord Evil for his Good: Remember Israel's Sin, and God's Complaint by the Prophet against them for it; he calls Heaven and Earth to witness against them, for they had received Blessings, both from Heaven above, and the Earth beneath; therefore he calls both to witness against them, HearIsa. 1. 2, 3. O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth, for the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up Children and they have Rebelled against me: The Ox knoweth his Owner, and the Ass his Master Cribb, but Israel my Peo∣ple doth not know, my People doth not consider. Oh! That every one may be stirred up to a diligent Search and Examina∣tion of themselves, what is my Heart upon, am I setting my Affections on things that are above or on things that are below? For our Lord exhorted by his Apostle, ThatCol. 3. 2. we should set our Affections on things that are above, for the things
that are below fade away, but the things that are above they are Heavenly, and endure for ever; and these are the things that ought to be the Objects of our Minds; about these we ought to be taken up and employed before, and above, any earthly thing: For Christ Jesus our Lord, whom we ought to hear and obey in all things, requires of us, First seek theMat. 6. 33. Kingdom of Hea∣ven, and the Righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto us. It was his care that we might not be over-thoughtful about things that pe∣rish; for he that knows what is good for us, better than we our selves know, has promised, All these things shall be added unto us; and as we diligently observe his Counsel and Direction, we shall find he will not be wanting to fulfil his Promises; for we certainly know, by good and comfortable Ex∣perience, that they that Love and Fear the Lord shall want no good thing; and therefore how ought we
to abandon the World and Worldly-mindedness, with all the inducements that would draw thereto, to neglect our inward Exercise in the Gift of God towards him, and from being Faithful Stewards of what God, in Mercy, hath bestowed upon us. Therefore let all keep their Minds within the bounds of Truth, and not launch out without the bounds of it, in an eager pursuit after the Riches of the VVorld, and thereby forget that Tender Frame of Spirit, and Breathing, which we ought to be in towards the Lord; for if this Tender Breathing Frame of Spirit be lost, then Coldness will come in, our VVatch will be neglected, the Fear and Awe that ought to be upon our Minds to∣wards God will slide off; and Forget∣fulness of God, and his dealings with us, will, by degrees, come in its place. Seeing therefore, that yet a little while and these outward things will come to an end, and that they may be taken from us, and that we must certainly
be taken from them: O! The Care that ought to be upon our Minds, that we may have Treasure in Heaven, when all these things will come to an end. And although this ought to be the Care of all, yet this is not to encourage any, whose Circumstances in the VVorld calls for Diligence, Care and Industry, to be Slothful in their Busi∣ness, nor to neglect an honest Endea∣vour to provide what is convenient for their Pilgrimage in this VVorld, and also for their Families, if they have any; for when the Apostle Ex∣horts the Believers, To be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, he, at the same time, Exhorts them, not to beRom. 12. 11. slothful in Business; and he himself, as well as Exhorted, shewed us an Example of Industry,Acts 20. 34. For his own hands ministred to his ne∣cessities, and them that were with him: So that where occasion requires Care and Diligence, People are not to throw
them aside, on pretence that we must not let in the Cares of the VVorld, nor busie our selves about the things of it. This Extreme is a Stratagem of the Wicked One, who worketh all the ways he can to Ensnare and Captivate Man: For People may be Industrious and Careful in their Lawful Imploy∣ments, and yet Meditate on Heavenly things, and be a Spiritual-minded Peo∣ple, waiting upon the Lord to enjoy his Living Presence, and feel his Spirit and Power to be with them, whereby they will be Strengthened and Com∣forted, and their States and Conditi∣ons Sanctified to them; and hereby truly learn, in all States, to be Con∣tented; then no Murmuring nor Re∣pining at the Providences of the Al∣mighty, but he over all, who is God of all our Mercies, will be Blessed and Praised, for all his Blessings and Mer∣cies, who alone is worthy for Ever∣more.
And, Friends, this is upon my Spi∣rit, also to entreat of you, That all be careful to keep up your Testimony in every part of it; for certain it is, God hath called us to be Witnesses to him, and for him, in all things that we are concerned in, in this World, and first in our Trade and Dealing among Men, that we be careful to answer that Just and Holy Principle in all, which we Profess, to be given of God to all Men, to lead and guide them; I say, that we answer it in all, by our Justice and Truth in Dealings, doing to all as we would have others toMat. 7. 12. do to us; watching against that Mind and Spirit that will wait for an Opportunity to take advantage, to over-reach or de∣fraud another, though it may be done secretly, and not be discovered by others; yet God, who is Judge of all, sees it, and such knows in themselves they would not be so done by: And take not a liberty to speak of things, by way of commending them, above
what they are in their Nature, to induce the Unskilful Buyer, either to buy, or give more than the thing is really worth; for this is not Plain-dealing, this is not the way to answer the Witness of God in them, nor to spread the Honour and Reputation of Truth. And every one keep your VVords, and perform yourPsal. 15. 4. Contracts, to the utmost of your Power, that none may be injured or wronged, but that Truth may be seen to have the Government of your Minds in all things; for what will our Professing this Blessed and Just Principle, and our Reasoning and Disputing for it, and telling the VVorld what a Heavenly Divine Just Principle it is, and what great things it will work in them that obey it; how it will make them Just and Righteous, and will make People careful what they do, and savory in all their words? I say, what will all this do, and abundance more, and not
shew forth these Blessed Virtues and Effects of it in our Lives? VVhat will all our Professing and Disputing for it do? VVill this be a means to Pro∣mote the Name of the Lord, and Justice and Equity in the Earth? Sure∣ly no: It will rather lay stumbling Blocks in the way of the Enquirer; and therefore let all Self-endedness, and desire after Dishonest Gain, be denied, and laid aside, and those Discounte∣nanced and Rebuked, who have given way to any thing of that Nature, that those things that becomes our Holy Profession may be found amongst us; yea, every particular of us, who Pro∣fesseth this Holy Principle, may shew forth the Virtue of it to all, with whom we have to do, by doing Justly and Equitably in the whole Course of our Lives. And, dear Friends, we ought also to be careful, that as the Truth is a Plain thing, and calls to Plainness, so we keep in the Plainness of it, both in our VVords, Deportments, and
every thing else; and particularly that of the Plain Language, seeing God hasZeph. 3. 9. called us to bear a Testimony therein; have a care that none let it fall, for that is the way to go back, and not forward; I know there are some (and I believe all whoever came rightly to the Truth) came through Hardship and Suffering into this Testimony, and could we have Peace or Ease in our Spirits whil'st we were endeavour∣ing to find out ways to shun the Cross in this particular? Surely no: And God is the same, he changeth not, there is no alteration in him, though Men may change; and there∣fore he calls for the same Testimo∣ny still, though it is unacceptable to the World; for that Nature and Spirit loves Honour and Respect, and it is a Cross to it when it is not given it, and is ready to be dis∣gusted with the Simplicity and Plain∣ness that Truth leads into; and I have seen a Snare hath attended
some, that when they have had to do with the World (yea, some, I doubt not, that have known better, and have in times past stood in a Testimony in this matter) have shun'd the Cross, and caused the Of∣fence thereof to cease, by letting the Language of Truth fall, that they might thereby render themselves the more acceptable to the World; some for the sake of Gain, and to Please those they expected Profit and Ad∣vantage by; and others through a Fearful and Cowardly Spirit have fallen into this Snare, and thereby have lost their Dominion in the Truth, and have let in the Worlds Spirit over them, and instead of Leavening them, with whom they have been concerned, into the Leaven and Sa∣vour of Truth, the Leaven and Spi∣rit of the World hath entered them, and thereby Darkness and Insensibili∣ty hath gained upon them. And this is a way, that old Adversary and Enemy of Man's Peace takes, who
works by degrees to Darken, and make Insensible, those that God had once made Savory; and at last brings to that Miserable State our Lord speaks of, by way of Caution, to his Disciples, Ye are theMat. 5. 13. Luke 14. 34, 35. Salt of the Earth, but if the Salt have lost its Sa∣vour, wherewith shall it be Salted, it is thenceforth good for no∣thing but to be cast out and trodden under foot of Men: For Men, as Men, trample upon such, notwithstanding they may seem to like and encou∣rage a Backslider in the Baulking and Flagging in his Testimony, and there is great reason that such should be slighted and dis-esteemed; for whoever will be False to God, and Treacherous in the Testimony he has given them to bear for his Name and Truth upon the Earth, there is no good ground for any to think that such will be true to Men: But it is Faithfulness, and Steadiness in the Truth, and the Testimony of
it, that gives Favour with God, and ma∣ny times, in the end, Reputation among Men; and therefore let none fell the Truth, or the Testimony of it, in this or any other case, to Purchase the World and the Favour thereof, for it will prove a Miserable Pur∣chase at the last, to sell Heaven for this World, and not gain that nei∣ther. Oh my Friends! Stand Faith∣ful and Valiant for God, and keep up his Testimony, though it be through Hardships and Sufferings, and the Frowns of the World, and your Reward will be Peace and Joy that is full of Glory, and you shall have a Dwelling with the Lamb on Mount ZION that cannot be shaken. And, Friends, beware of a Liber∣ty which Truth allows not of; I know, if there be not a diligent Watch kept, it will be apt to creep in by degrees, and that which could not have been complied with, as knowing it to be Hurtful, will get
hold upon us, and the more it is given way to, the more easie and familiar it will be, till that Holy Awe, which ought to be upon our Minds towards God, and watch over our Words, that they may be few and savory, is lost, and then a Flesh∣ly Liberty will come in like a Flood, and the Enemy will take advantages to Darken the Mind, and Cloud the Judgment, that things which here∣tofore were done contrary to our Judgments, and for which we had some Trouble and Reproof, will be∣come easie; and by indulging the committing of them, and pleading for them, many have run out to the say∣ing, Religion stands not in such things; and at length from the very Appear∣ance of Truth, both in Word and Deportment; and so have been lost and gone again into the World, its Ways, and Fashions, and Customs, to Swim in that Old Currant of Li∣berty and Lust they once were in some measure Redeemed from; of
whom it may be said, as the holy Apostle Peter said,2 Pet. 2 22. Pov. 26. 11. It is happend unto them according to the true Pro∣verb, the Dog is turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire again? This is a growing Evil, and I Pray God, a diligent care may be taken by all to prevent it, both in the particular and in the general. I mean, by particular; Every one to watch against it in them∣selves, and keep in the fear of the Lord, which is aProv. 14. 27. Fountain of Life to depart from these, and all the Snares of Death, and to take heed to the divine Instru∣ction of the Grace of God in their own Hearts, which teacheth to de∣ny all these things; and not only to deny Evil, but toTit. 2. 12. live a Holy, Sober and Godly Life in this present evil World; and consider in seriousness when a temptation presents to the jollity and liberty of this World, either
from an Inclination in our selves, or by others, to draw us into it, will this be pleasiing to God, ought I to take this liberty, will it not gen∣der to bondage, or shall I hereby answer the great love of God to∣wards me, shall I be an Instrument to civilize those, among whom I am, or shall I not rather be an evil Instrument to strengthen them in that liberty which will keep them in bondage to Sin and Satan? I entreat in the Love of God, every one consider these things, and also, that we are not our own, we are bought1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. 1 Pet 1. 19. with a Price, and this Price with which we are bought, is no less than the Precious Blood of the Son of God; and being thus bought, we ought not to live to our selves, or gratify our own Hearts lusts and minds, but to live to him that hath bought us: And, as the Apostle saith, to Glorify God in our Bodies and Spirits which are
the Lord's. And as to the general, we are a Body and Society, whom God in some measure has brought into a good and wholsom discipline, that we watch over one another in Love, not with an evil Eye, nor in Sowerness and Prejudice, and in that go about to reprove, for that will never do good, but in a Holy concern for God, and the good of Souls (first knowing our own con∣sciences clear in God's sight) to Coun∣sel, Admonish, Reprove and Re∣buke, not sparing any things that are reproveable in any, nor over∣looking through Favour or Afecti∣on, for that weakens our discipline, gives advantage to the Enemy of the Blessed Truth, and is hurtful to those, to whom Reproof and Rebuke is due; therefore, that that which is wrong may be kept down, by the authority of the Truth, and we kept in Wisdom and Councel of the Lord, and Holy Zeal for his Name, and Truth, whereby
Truth will grow, our adversary the Devil who lies in wait to beguile and defile, those whom God has Visited and begun his work in, will be disappointed; and with those that are ensnared, we shall labour in a Spirit ofGal. 6. 1. Meek∣ness, and in Bowels of Compassion, to bring them to a sence of their out-goings, and to recover them to the Fold, from whence they have strayed, so will Truth prosper and spread, and its Reputation increase, and many gathered to the Name of the Lord, whereby, the borders of Gods Sanctuary being enlarged, Righteousness will Flourish in the Earth. And Friends, as by the Arm and Power of the Almighty, we were gathered to be a People, and by Vertue of the Life of Jesus Christ our Lord, are united and knit to∣gether, to be a Society and Body, of which the Lord Jesus is the Head; as such a Body, we have affairs to manage and to look after,
for the Glory of the Name of the Lord, and for the preservation of our Peace; this I entreat of all, that all things may be managed in Love and Brotherly kindness, in a Meek and Quiet Spirit, none stri∣ving for Mastery, for there is to be no1 Pet. 5. 3. Lording over one another amongst us, for we are Brethren, having one Lord and Master Christ Jesus. And as there is an abiding here, one Brother or Member cannot say to another, I have no need of thee (if they are really Members) but it is to be observed that none can be Members of this Body, nor have any Service there acceptable to God, but as they are in that life which makes them so, and that Life is Meek, Gentle, not Stuborn, Wilful, Heady and High-minded, for that, where-ever it appears, has another Head than Christ Jesus, viz. He that would lay waste our Society, is their Head, and as it is unnatural for the Mem∣bers
of our outward Bodies to tear, hurt and abuse one another, so much more for the Members in this Spiritual Fellowship and Body, whereof Christ is Head: But on the contrary, Oh the Care, Tenderness and Sympathy that is there, one with and towards another, whether in Suffering or in Joy; and here all being kept in our proper Places and Stations, we shall all be Subject to our Head, and the Life of our Head Christ Jesus will flow through all its Members, and preserve a due Sub∣jection. And, Dear Friends, in all matters that we are Concerned in to Ma∣nage, for the good of this Body, let Strife and Contention be avoided; the way to prevent the occasion whereof is, by every ones keeping close to the Truth, and to seek to promote that only; for where Truth only is Promoted, there is no occasion of Strife; but when Men, through Fa∣vour or Affection, will Espouse that
which is wrong, and by Craft and Parts (not Subject to the Truth) will Uphold and Vindicate it, and force things upon others which they ought not; this lays a Foundation for Strife and Contention; and this may be opposed in a wrong Mind and Spirit; for where the Mans Part gets up to Contend, though against a wrong thing, this never does good; for the more it is given way to, the higher the Flame of Contention will rise; and though this may, and does too often, happen; yet they that (in a Cool and Meek Spirit, and in a Concern for God, without any particular End to them∣selves or others) do oppose what is wrong, are not the Cause of Con∣tention; for there is a Distinction to be made between them that in Meekness Contend against what is wrong, and those that would bring in that which should not be brought in, and thereby cause Contention: For I observe the Apostle adviseth,
to Mark them that Cause Division; so that the Cause is to be watched against, and that being removed the Effects will cease. My Earnest De∣sire is therefore, in the Love of God, That nothing be Encouraged, or taken hold of, that would Cause Strife and Contention; but that we may be all of oneRom. 12. 16. 15. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Mind, and may speak the same thing, by keeping to the Truth, and shutting out all that is contra∣ry to it, so shall we be more and more United in One, and kept in the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of our Peace; and here∣by Satan's designs, and the designs of his Agents will be Disappointed, and the Peace of the Church kept Inviolable, and we shall Shine forth in that Comliness which God ever did, and will, put upon his Chosen Ones; this is the Beautiful Garment that Zion is Cloathed with, and Shines forth in, through all Genera∣tions:
The Psalmist was Affected with it, when he breaks out on this wise, Behold! How Good and how Pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell toge∣ther inPsal. 133. 1, 2, 3. Ʋnity; it is like the Pre∣cious Oyntment upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard (even Aaron's Beard) that went down to the Skirts of his Garments, as the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion; for there the Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life for Evermore. And, Dear Friends, who are Pa∣rents of Children, and Masters and Mistresses of Families, a great Care ought to be upon you, to answer the Truth in all things, and to dwell under the Government of it, that it may Season and make Savory both your Words and Actions, that you may be good Patterns and Ex∣amples in Virtue and Holiness in all things. And take Care to Educate your Children in the Fear of the
Lord, and to Imprint a Remem∣brance of the Lord in their Minds, in the days of their Youth; and to keep them out of the Evil Ways and Bad Words that are in the World, that they may not Learn the Evil Communication that is in the World, which doth Corrupt Good Manners; but bring them up in that Plainness and Moderation which the Truth leads into, and, as much as in you lies, in the Plain Language; having a Care you do not Indulge them, in any thing which you know the Lord in Mer∣cy hath gathered you from: For if, through Affection, not Bounded by Truth, you Indulge your Children, in any thing that is wrong, you will neither be just to your Chil∣dren nor clear in the sight of God; and from such Unwarrantable In∣dulgence we have seen the too often sad Effects which have followed, by the degrees of Liberty, which such Children have taken to please them∣selves,
and to gratifie their Loose Vain Minds (which Youth is too much Inclin'd to) both in the Fashions, Customs and Language of the World; and many from a nearness and affini∣ty with the World, have run from the very Form and Appearance of Truth; which when, too late, their Indulgent Parents have began to see, their endeavours to stop them have proved Ineffectual; whereas, had they, like Boughs of a Tree, been taken whilest Young and Tender, they might have been bended and made pliable; but having had so long a growth in the World's Na∣ture, their Stiffness hath been such, that they would sooner Break than Bend. Oh Friends! Be Careful, and Check every Appearance of the Worlds Nature and Spirit betimes, and endeavour to keep your Chil∣dren in that Awe and Subjection as is due to you, and becomes them; not in a ha rugged fierce Spirit,
for that rather hardens, but in Meek∣ness keep your Dominion over them in the Truth, that so that Yoke they ought to be under in their YouthProv. 22. 6. may be easie to them, when they are Old, and you may have the Comfort and Sweetness of it. Now, where Parents do their Du∣ty, by Good Example, and also does Advise, Admonish, Reprove, Cor∣rect and Restrain (for in many cases there is a Restraining Power, as ap∣pears in the Case of Old Ely;1 Sam. 2. who, although he gave his Children Gentle Reproof, saying, Why do ye such things? Yet he did not Restrain them, nor Ex∣ercise that Power and Authority that was put in his Hand; and it was an Offence to God, and their Wickedness and his Indulgence brought God's Judgments, not only upon himself, but his Posterity also.) I say, where Parents do Discharge themselves, and are Clear in the
sight of God, then if their Children will not be Restrain'd nor Prevail'd with, but will take their Course in those By-paths that lead down to the Chambers of Death; although it is Sorrowful for Parents to see their Children do so, yet they have this Comfort (in their Sorrow) We are Clear of their Blood, and their De∣struction lyes at their own Door: But on the other Hand, when Pa∣rents behold their Children Steering their Course to Destruction, and, upon a search, find they have not done their Duty, but have been Re∣miss, either in not being good Ex∣amples, as they ought to have been, or have not Exercised that Power which God put into their Hands, but have let their Children have their own Ways and Wills, till it was too late to break them thereof: Oh! This brings a twofold Sorrow; our Chil∣dren are like to be ruined, and we are not Clear of their Blood. What Misery have Parents brought upon themselves;
nay, have not whole Families been Ruined hereby, and the Mouths of our Adversaries opened to speak Evil of the Blessed Truth, and stum∣bling Blocks laid in the way of such as have been Enquiring after the Way of Peace and Salvation? There∣fore, Friends, I beseech you in the Love of my Heavenly Father, be Careful, and Watch the Enemy's Wiles in these and all other things, and wait upon God for Wisdom and Counsel, that therein you may be Acted to the Glory of his Name, that God Almighty may fulfil his Promise to you, which he made of Old, when he said, I will give them oneJer. 32. 39. Heart, and one Way, that they may Fear me for ever, for the good of them and their Children: And how Sweet and Com∣fortable is it, to see our Children Walk in the2 John 1. 4. Truth, and to Fear the Lord, and Serve him in their Day, and then the Blessings of God will attend
such, For hisProv. 10. 6. 28. 2. Blessings are with them that Fear him, and will be their Portion and their Lot, he will be their Sun and their Shield; and this will be more than all the Treasures, Riches and Pleasures of this World. And, Friends, let us rather Labour to have our Children Intituled to Trea∣sure in Heaven, than to the Injoy∣ments of this World; and when our Children are grown up, and fit to be Disposed of in Marriage, let not the World, and the things of it be the Chief Object of our Minds, and to make them great therein, but let us rather Eye and Aim at Truth; for it is not outwardLuke 12. 15. Riches and Injoyments that make People Happy in this World, but it is when Peoples Minds are subject to the Truth, and are Sanctified by it, and their Minds and Affections United in it, that brings Felicity and Happiness in a Married State; for it is by the Truth
that outward Injoyments are Blest and Sanctified, and truly made Comfortable to us; what better Portion can any have, than to have the Lord for theirPsal. 16. 9. 6. Porti∣on, and to be the Lot of their Inhe∣ritance? They may then in Truth say, My Lot is fallen in a Good Ground, I have a Pleasant Heritage; and that this may be the chief Aim and Drift of our Minds, both for our selves and our Children, are the Hearty Pray∣ers of my Soul to the Lord. And as there is a Care and Duty that ought to be upon Parents to Educate their Children in the Fear of the Lord, so there is a Duty upon Children to Parents, to have an Awe∣ful Regard to them, and to Love them, and be subject to them; not to be Stubborn, Self-will'd, Heady, High-minded or Perverse, but to be Meek and Gentle, willing to be Ad∣vised, Tender, Condescending and Affectionate; Considering the great Care and Pains Parents have taken
for them many ways, and therefore ought not to be Rewarded with Un∣naturalness, Disobedience and Con∣tempt, but with a Meek Condescending Compliance in all Honest and Lawful things, and this brings Parents and Children to have Comfort one in another, and a Blessing from God up∣on both. And also, as touching Servants, there ought to be a Care upon Ma∣sters and Mistresses so to walk to∣wards their Servants, as that they may answer the Witness of God in them, and yet keep that Authority as in their Places in the Truth, not in a Lordly Spirit, nor a High Severe Cruel Mind, but in the Savouryness of the Truth, not giving way upon Provocations that may be given (tho' it may be a Fault in them that gives them) to fly out into Rage and Pas∣sion, and consequently into Rash and Unsavoury Words, as calling Uncom∣ly and Unproper Names, and Threat∣ning Expressions; for when Passion
exceeds the Bounds of Reason, then the Tongue is at Liberty to express that which is Unsavoury, and after∣wards has cause, many times, to Re∣pent; but where Fults are Com∣mitted, let such Reproof be given in a good Temper of Mind as carries a Convinceing Authority along with it; this is the way to answer the good in them, and keep down that which is contrary in our selves; and as it is just and equal for Masters to expect and require of Servants a diligent Per∣formance of their Service and Work for which they take Wages, so on the other hand, Servants ought not to be Cruelly Used nor Oppressed in their Service; but that Moderati∣on, which Truth leads into, used and lived in on both hands, and then they that are served will have quiet and content in them that Serve, and Ser∣vants will have Comfort in their Ser∣vices, and thereby the Truth and Reputation of it will be Promoted, and Love and Concord Increase.
And Servants ought also to behave themselves in their places, Justly and Faithfully, in a considering Mind, with due Respect to those they serve, in all Quietness and Diligence, not asEph. 6. 6. Col. 3. 22, 23. Eye-Servants, but Conscienciously Perform∣ing their Service, as in the sight of God; and where any are Servants to those that know not the Blessed Truth, you may, by your Savoury Lives and Honest Endea∣vours and Conversations in your places, be Instruments in the Hand of the Lord to reach to the Good in them, and they thereby brought to Love and Embrace the Truth, that so you, in your places, may Shine as Lights upon an Hill; that they, seeing your Conscientiousness and Justice in what you are In∣trusted in, may have cause to Glori∣fie God on your behalfs; and be Careful not to give way to a Fro∣ward and Perverse Mind, nor to give any Just Cause of Provocation, nor
to let in a Spirit of Scorn and Con∣tempt towards those you serve, nor to give way to Whispering nor Tale-bearing, for that many times breeds Disturbances in Families, and many times occasions Differences between Friends; it is of a very ill Tendency, and ought be watch'd against and condemned, that so the Blessed Truth may Flourish, and both Servants and Masters, in their places, may be In∣struments in the Hand of the Lord, by their Just and Good Conversati∣on, for the Inlarging the borders of Truth and Righteousness in the Earth, to God's Glory, and the Mutual Com∣fort one of another. And, Friends, be Careful in all things to preserve Love and Peace and Concord amongst the Flock and Heritage of God, and to shun every thing that would lessen it, or any ways undermine the Foundation of True Society one with another, which is Love and Fervent Charity. Therefore beware of Evil-Speakings
and Surmisings one against another; and also of Whisperings, Backbitings andProv. 18. 8. and 11. 13. and 19. 20. and 16. 28. Tale-bearing, and do not encourage, give ear to, or receive any such things from others, but rather reprove and discourage it, where-ever it appears; nor none Act, as busie Bodies, in other Peoples Mat∣ters, where we are not for Truth and its sake Concerned; for where these things are given way to, they beget Grudgings, Heart-burnings and Jealousies against one another; and this is the way to break Uuity, lay waste Society, and put all things into Confusion; and therefore let us watch against all such things, and Live in Peace and Charity one with another, bearing one with anothr, and so fulfilGal. 6. 2. the Law of Christ, that the World may see we are the Disci∣ples of our Lord, whom we Profess, and that we are Lovers of Him, and his Word, who gave himself a
Ransom for us, and that the Pro∣motion of his Name and Truth is more to us than any Worldly End or Interest whatsoever, that his Glo∣ry may be Exalted over all by us, and through us, in all things; and the Glory of his Name may Shine upon us, and we Beautified there∣with; For he will Beautifie thePsal. 149. 4. Meek with Salva∣tion, and he makes them to Inherit the Earth; for he teacheth the Hum∣ble of his Ways, and the MeekPsal. 25. 9. he guides in Judgment: He is not wanting to them that Fear him, nor his Hand shut up to them that depend upon him; but he is an open Fountain, and as a place ofIsa. 33. 21. Broad Rivers and Streams of Refresh∣ment to those whose Souls thirst after him, and he will fill them with his Goodness, and they shall be () Satisfied, he will breakPsal. 22. 26. Bread to the hungring Soul, and will give Water of Life to the thirsty; his
Name will be a strongProv. 18. 10. Tower for them, where they shall find Safety in the time of Storms. Oh Friends! Feel your Minds thus gathered to the Lord and to his Power and Goodness, that his Arm may be our Strength and Support, whatever may be met with in this World; and that, in that Strength, we receive by a diligent waiting upon him, we may Serve and Glorifie our God in our Day, and Serve one another in Bro∣thely Love, and may be one anothers Joy and Comfort in the Lord; that he who is the Fountain and Well-spring of all our Living Mercies and Comforts, and hath made us what we are in his Beloved Son, may have the Honour and Glory of all, over all, who alone is worthy, for evermore, saith my Soul: Who am a Lover of all Mankind, but more especially of those who Love the Lord Jesus Christ. W. B. THE END.
