B3205 R32568 12725036 66335
THE ART OF HERALDRY, In Two Parts. The Fisrt Concisely Comprehen∣ding all necessary Rules in the said ART, with many useful Examples of Bearing, to facilitate the way of Bla∣zoning any COAT of ARMOR. The Second Part giving a full Account of the Priviledges, Dignities, &c. of the Nobility and Gentry of ENGLAND. TOGETHER, With the Atchievements of each Degree, &c. According to the excellent Method of GƲILLIM'S HERALDRY. The whole Illustrated with Fifty two proper Sculp∣tures, for the better Explanation thereof. LONDON, Printed for Hannah Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate-hill. MDCLXXXV.
TO THE HONOURABLE Sir HENRY GOODRICK Of Ribston Park in York-shire, Knight and Bar onet. Honourable Sir, THIS Treatise of He∣raldry, though small in bulk, yet large in sub∣stance comprehending all the cheif and necessary Rules in the said Art, which (with no small labour and pains) are digested in a methodical method (in way of an Ordinary) in several Shields engraven on Cop∣per Plates; and for the Explana∣tion
thereof the several Coats in each Shield are Blazoned with the names of the Bearers, except to those that are made use of only for Examples; and the number of the Figures refers to the Coat in the Shield, which is reckoned from the first in the Dexter cheif. And un∣der the said Heads, Coats of like Bearings may be comprised, whe∣ther of themselves, or between, or charged upon any of the Honoura∣ble Ordinaries; for it can't be ex∣pected that this small Tract should give Examples of all Bearings this being only designed for a small Pocket Book, and only to give the Rules with Examples of Bearings, to teach the way of Blazoning any Coat Armour.
The second Part is a Treatise of the Nobility and Gentry of Eng∣land as to their Priviledges, Dig∣nities, &c. And for Examples of Bearings I have inserted Atchieve∣ments of each Degree compleat, that is, with all the external orna∣ments as Mantle, Helmet, Crest, Motto, and Supporters, hav∣ing given your Honour's Atchieve∣ment for the Example of a Baro∣net that Bears Supporters a peculi∣ar badge of Honour rarely granted to any under the Degree of a Noble∣man. Sir as on the one hand, I may pre∣sume to say that there hath been no∣thing yet extant of this nature so full in so small a Compass; so on the other it is my ambition to takes this opportu∣nity
to express the great esteem I have for your Honour, as well in respect of the nobleness of your Family which renders you a person interessed in this work, as to testifie my grati∣tude for your favours showred upon me for the promoting some former un∣dertakings, being indeed a great fa∣vourer of all ingenuous Arts, and in particular to HERALDRY the Subject of this Book. Sir your generous Spirit hath ever aimed at a publick Good, many admire you, and most love and honour you. Sir you are generally beloved for your generous and noble Actions, for your generous and noble Inclinations, and for your ge∣nerous and noble Principles so that I cannot but receive Com∣mendations
for selecting you to the Patronage of this Work. Sir, if you pardon this my am∣bition I have my satisfacti∣on, and can be no better con∣tented than in that and in being stiled SIR, Your honours most humble Servant RICHARD BLOME.
The Art of HERALDRY teaching the blazoning of ARMS, is set forth in these Shields. By vvhich Examples any Coat may be Blazoned. BOrdures plain and charged Folio 20 Files and Labells Folio 22 Abatements of Honour Folio 27 Charges on which Re∣wards and Additions of Honour are placed Folio 29 Crosses Folio 36 Cheifs Folio 43 Fesses and Bars Folio 46 Pales, Pallets, &c. Folio 49 Cheverons Folio 51 Bends Folio 53 Saltiers Folio 57 Inescocheons and Orles Folio 60 Piles Folio 62 Partitions Folio 64 Counterchanges Folio 67 Ordinaries joyned to∣gether Folio 70 Civil Artificial things Folio 74, 81, 86 Military things Folio 91, 97, 101 Celestials Folio 106, 113 Vegetables Folio 118 Fruits & Flowers Folio 122 Parts of Mans Body Folio 128 Lions Folio 132 Lions Rampant Folio 139 Lions Passant Folio 144 Parts of Lions Folio 147 Other Beasts in whole and in part Folio 150, 155, 159 Animals Folio 165 Fowl and Birds Folio 173, 181 Fish Folio 189 Monstrous Creatures Folio 195, 199
AN ESSAY TO HERALDRY. CHAP. I. This Chapter treateth of the original & uni∣versality, the sundry Denominations, and the original Discipline of Arms and Ensigns, with their use and necessity: Their Sympathy with the Bearer, and conformity with Names, their Definition, Blazon, Distribution, Accidents and Parts, and lastly their Abatements and Rewards of Honour. THE Dignity and Estimation of Arms cannot but be great, if we alone consider that it delights the Beholders, great∣ly Graces the places where they are ere∣cted,
and gives occasion to the Behol∣ders to make inquiry whose they are, and of what family the bearer is descen∣ded. Before I proceed further, it will not be unnecessary briefly to begin with some Observations suitable to this subject, and first, of those Marks or Ensigns called Arms, in Latin Arma. The word Arma as in Guillims Heral∣dry, is taken for very natural Instru∣ments, and in this sence Doctor Casius doth use the same where he saith, Arma bellius natura dedit, ut Leoni Dentes, ser∣penti aculeum, &c. It is also taken for all manner of Instruments that belong to Mechanical Trades. Instru∣ments Mi∣litary.It is likewise taken for all sorts of War∣like instruments: But the word Arma doth not here signify any of these things, but is taken for Shields, Targets, Millitary Cassocks, Banners, and other Martial In∣struments on which they were Engraven, Embossed or depicted, and these were pe∣culiar only to Martial Men, and profes∣sed Souldiers, which to this day is called Arms, from the Latin word Arma. And Claudius Fauches saith that Armes have
their denomination, because Military Men did bear their several Devices as a∣foresaid upon their Shields. Guillim saith that Arms were called Symbola, which signifies tokens or Marks, which in the time of Hostility or civil Tumults were given to Souldiers by their Captains or Chief Commanders, for distin∣guishing of particular Persons, as well amongst themselves as from their Ene∣mies. These Armorial Notes so much in re∣quest now amongst us, are oft times cal∣led Ensigns, which comprizeth in gene∣ral all Marks and Tokens of Honour due to meritorious Persons, as well in respect of their Government, Learning, wisdom, Magnanimity, &c. as for their Martial Prowes. Amongst these Ensigns are those Marks and Shapes of Animals, that Mar∣tial Men used to adorn their Helmets withal, to the end that they might ap∣pear more eminent in the Field, and be the better taken notice of for their valo∣rous Actions, when they encountred their enemies in Battle, or should draw on their forces to fight. Note the use of these Ensigns was yet further extended then the Adorning of
Shields and Helmets; for Ships were beau∣tifyed with Arms on their Sterns, to di∣stinguish the one from the other, as the Ship where St. Paul went, whose Badg was Castor and Pollux; also the fore-Deck of Europa that was carried away, had the form of a Bull depicted thereon, which gave occasion to the fable, that a Bull had stolen away Europa, nor did the Antients only use it, but it hath been a Custom in all succeeding Ages, even to this day, and from thence doth come the names of Ships. Definition of Arms.Arms then, according to original use, are Tokens or Resemblances signifying some Act or Quality of the Bearer, ei∣ther by some worthy exploit performed in Military Affairs (especially if bestow∣ed by a Noble Prince) or else by their Learning and Wisdom, which they do by spending their Spirits in continual study to make themselves fit for the Patronage and defence of their Coun∣try. Rebusses.Sometimes there are Arms born, which may seem to have been devised (in their first Institution) according to the Sir-Name of the Bearer, as 3 Castles for Castleton; three Gates for Yates; three Coneys for
Conisby and the like, and such Bearings are called Rebusses being very Antient. If there were two dictinct Families of one Sir-Name, yet bearing several Coat Armors, it is not evident that they were both extracted from one Ancestor, for the Coat-Armour is the express sign of Distinction. As suppose there are two Families divers in Name, and issued from seve∣ral. Parents, and both of them do bear one Coat Armour, and the name of one of them is agreeable to the Coat Ar∣mour, and the other dissonant from the same; now the question is, to which doth this Coat belong; in answer it may according to probability be conjectured, to belong to him whose appellation is agreeable therewith, rather than to the other. And it is observable, that two distinct Families ought not, nor are they allowed to bear one and the same Coat-Armour, but amongst the Welsh this Rule is not observed. There is between the Arms and their Bearers a kind of Sympathy,Sympathy of Arms with their Bearers. insomuch as he who dishonourably or unreverent∣ly useth the Arms of any one, seemeth to have offered an affront to the Per∣son
of their Bearer, insomuch that ac∣cording to the opinion of some Authors, their owner may right himself against such an Offender, actione injuriarum. Antient Bearing.As touching the antiquity of Arms, I shall give you a Brief account of some peculiar Bearings. The Romans chose the Eagle the greediest of all Birds: The Phrigians the Sow, a hurtful Beast: The Thrasians Mars: The antient Goths the Bear: The People of Alani, that in∣vaded Spain the Cat, a greedy and craf∣ty Beast: The Old French the Lyon: The Saxons the same; but afterwards the French that inhabited France took the Toad, and the Saxons the Horse a war∣like Beast, and now the French have the Flower de-lis, which they say was sent them by an Angel from Heaven to Clo∣vis, the first Christian King of France: The Flemins did bear the Bull, in token of valiantness and hardiness The En∣sign of the King of Antioch was an Ea∣gle holding a Dragon in his claws: That of Pompey a Lion with a Sword: That of Attilla was a Crowned Gennet, and the Romans themselves that were saved by Geese that watched in the Capitol, could not be moved for so great a Bene∣fit
received, to bear a Goose in their En∣signs. There be of them also that set in their Shields Swords, Daggers, Halberts, Axes, Towers, Castles, Engines, and many other Instruments of Homicide and Destru∣ction: Furthermore the Ensigns of the Persians was a Bow and Quivers, like∣wise amongst the Heathen Gods, Jupi∣ter chose Lightning; Neptune the tripple toothed Mace; Mars the Javeline; Bac∣chus the Spear wrapped in Boughs and Ivy; Saturn the Seth, and every one of these Badges of Arms, according to the nature of his Cruelty, Raving, Violence, Manhood, &c. As the Heralds do ap∣point, are supposed some to be Nobler Bearings then others; for the more cruel and fierce the Beast or Fowl is, the more Noble is that Shield esteemed, and those Targets or Shields that have milder things thereon, as Trees, Flowers, Plants, and the like, also the Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, and other of the Celestial Spheres, or such as be parted only with variety of colours, or charged with any of the Ho∣nourable Ordinaries only, as also by any Artificial things, made by the Invention of Man: These and such like things are
not esteemed so Noble as the former, and are not so Antient Bearings. Thus having briefly shewed the first Original Institution and Use of Arms, I shall proceed to the practick Exercise of these Armorial Tokens, which appertain to the Office of a Herald, and is termed Armory, and may be thus defined; Ar∣mory is an Art rightly prescribing the true knowledg and use of Arms.Definiti∣on of Ar∣mory. The skill of Armory consists in Blazon∣ing and Marshalling. Rules in Blazoning Coats.By Blazoning is understood the dis∣playing or expressing a Coats of Arms in its proper Colours and Metals, for to lay Colour upon Colour, Metal upon Me∣tal is a great fault, and a different form of Blazoning makes the Arms not the same. Rules in Martial∣ling Coats.By Marshalling is understood the joyn∣ing of divers Arms in one Shield, in which you must have a great care, but of this more when I treat of Arms joyned together. You must use no repetition of words, but comprise them in as few as you can. A French Armorist saith, that to Bla∣zon, is to express what the Shapes, Kinds, and Colour of things born in
Arms are, together, with their apt and proper Significations. In the Blazoning of any Coat of Arms, always observe this special Rule, first begin with the Field, and then pro∣ceed to the Blazon of the Charge, and if there be sundry things charged in the Field, whether they be of one or divers kinds, name that first which is most prae∣dominate, and lyeth next the Field, and then that which is most Remote. The Blazon of Arms consists in Acci∣dents and Parts; and such Accidents are Tincture and Differences. Tincture,Tincture. as Guillim notes, is a vari∣able hew of Arms, and is as well common to differences of Arms, as to Arms them∣selves, and the same is distributed into Colours and Furs. ColoursColours. he saith is an external Dye, wherewith any thing is coloured or stained; or else is the gloss of any body beautified with light; and the Colour here mentioned is both General and Spe∣cial; by General is understood the pro∣per and natural colour of each particular thing, whether Natural or Artificial, of what kind soever they are illustrated, or set forth in their external or proper Beauty.
Things that are born in their natural Colours are to be blazoned proper, and not to mention the Colours. Other things there are in Armory which have only names attributed unto them, and no Colour specified in the Blazoning thereof, the name being sufficient to ex∣press the same, although the form is all one and the same, which is in Resem∣blance like a round Ball or Bullet, the names of which are as followeth, with Colours appropriate to them. 1. Besants, whose Colour is Or. 2. Plates, Argent. 3. Hurts, Azure. 4. Torteauxes, Gules. 5. Pellet or Aggresses, Sable. 6. Pomeis, Vert. 7. Golpes, Purpure. 8. Orenges, Tenne. 9. Guzes, Sanguine. In these Nine are comprehended all the Colours usually made use of in Bla∣zonry. Terms for Colours.Coats of Arms are Blazoned by Metals and Colours; when they belong to Gen∣tlemen, under the Degree of Nobiles
Minores, as Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights and Baronets; By Precious-stones, when to those of the Nobility, as Barons Vis∣counts, Earls, Marquisses and Dukes; and by Planets, when to Emperours, Kings, and Soveraign Princes. Mettals and Colours. Precious Stones. Planets. Or Topaz Sol Argent Pearl Luna Gules Ruby Mars Azure Saphir Jupiter Sable Diamond Saturn Vert Emerald Venus Purpure. Amethist Mercury Tenne Jacynthe Dragons Head Sanguine. Sardonix. Dragons Tail.
woodcut blazon or This in Arms is Blazo∣ned Or,Or. and signifies Gold and the black Specks in the Escocheon do ex∣press the Colour. This Metal is said to Inchant the Heart of Fools, and Blind the Eyes of the Wise. Of the excellency of this Metal, Hesiodus thus writes, Aurum est in corporibus, sicut Sol inter stellas; and as this Metal doth exceed all others in Purity, Value and Fineness, so ought the Bearer to endea∣vour to surpass all others in Vertue and Prowes. The Precious Stone is To∣paz,Topaz. which Diascorides saith asswages wrath and ill humors, and this Stone was set in the Breast of Aaron. The Planet to which Gold is resem∣bled is Sol,Sol. of which the Philosophers write, that as the Heart of Man is the Noblest, so is this Planet more worthy then any other, and as it were the com∣fort of them all.
woodcut blazon argent The Colour White is resembled to Light, and is called Argent,Argent. this in Dignity and Worth is next to Or, and without these two Metals no Ar∣mory can be good. It sig∣nifies Hope, Innocency, Continence and Temperance. The Precious Stone is Pearl,Pearl. which Plato saith hath a restora∣tive Vertue, and is food to man, which is verifyed by Josephus, who saith, that when the City of Jerusalem was besieged by Titus Vespasianus, the Jews lived some time only upon Pearls, and Aristotle saith it comforteth the Brain. The Planet is Luna,Luna. which Pliny saith is the Fairness of the Night, the Mother of the Honour, and Lady of the Sea and Times, She is also said to be the changer of the Air and Winds, and as the Scrip∣ture saith, She is the Ripener of, and In∣creaser of Fruits, as appears by the be∣nediction of Joseph, who was blest with the ripe Fruits of the Moon.
woodcut blazon gules The word GulesGules. signi∣fieth Red, the Hatches downwards shews the Co∣lour, which is of that Dignity, that it is used for a Vesture of Majesty and Dignity, and is used by the Judges and Chief Magistrates in their Seats of Judicature. The precious Stone is the Ruby,Ruby. which neither Fire nor Water wasteth or spoyl∣eth. Its Planet is Mars,Mars. which of all others is the most Hot and Fiery, he is said to be the God of Battle. woodcut blazon azure The word AzureAzure. sig∣nifies Blew, and is ex∣pressed by Hatches over∣thwart the Escocheon; It is a Royal Colour repre∣senting the Skie; it sig∣nifies Loyalty, Chastity, and Fidelity. The Precious Stone is Saphir.Saphir. which as Isidore saith, is both Noble and Excellent, being a remedy against Poy∣son, and a Preserver of the Sight. The Planet is Jupiter,Jupiter. which by his goodness, as Martianus saith, abateth the Malice
of Saturn, and augmenteth the goodness of the others. woodcut blazon sable The word SableSable. signi∣fies Black, and is expres∣sed by cross Hatches as in the Escocheon, and al∣though it doth represent Mourning, yet is of a good esteem in Armory. This Colour signifies Prudence, Con∣stancy and Heaviness for the loss of Friends; the Precious Stone is the Dia∣mond,Diamond. which of all other is of the great∣est value, and is of that hardness, that it cutteth all Stones and Metals. The Planet is Saturn, the most malevolent of all others, and under whom are brought forth Grave Councellors, great Builders and good House-keepers. woodcut blazon vert The word VertVert. is Green, and is exprest by stroaks thwart ways, as in the Escocheon: This Colour is most delightful and comfortable to the sight, it signifies Love, Mirth, Peace, and Concord. The Precious Stone
is the Emerald,Emerald. which hath in its self singular Vertues. The Planet is VenusVenus. which is of temperature Gold and Moist, and doth excite to Love. woodcut blazon purpure PurpurePurpure. is a Colour consisting of much Red, and a little Black, it hath its denomination from a Fish called in Latin Pur∣pura. The Precious Stone is the Amethist,Amethist. which for its preciousness was set in the Breast of Aaron. The Planet is Mercury, which is of a goodly Temperature, being of quality good with good, and goeth with evil for Company sake. TennyTenny. or Tauny is a bright colour, and made of Red and Yellow, and is ex∣prest by Hatches like the Purpure; A∣mongst the French this Colour is much in use, but not with us. The Precious Stone is the Jacynthe,Jacynthe. which is said to be of singular Vertue. This Tenny is com∣pared to the Dragons Head,Dragons Head. which al∣though it be not a Planet, yet in some respects hath the Nature of a Planet, and keeps its constant course in the Zo∣diack as they do.
SanguineSanguine. is much like the colour of Murrey, and is made of Lake, with a little Spanish Brown, it is also exprest by Hatches as the Purpure, It is a Co∣lour in use amongst the Knights of the Bath, as also amongst the Sergeants at Law in their Vestures. The Precious Stone to this Colour is the Sardonix, which St. John in the Revelations saith, shall be the sixth Stone in the Heavenly Jerusalem. The Dragons TaylDragons Tayl. is appro∣priate to this Colour, which though no Planet, yet in his Workings and Mo∣vings hath the effects of a Planet through all the Twelve Signs of the Zodiack. Thus having treated of the Metals, and Colours used in Heraldry: I shall proceed next to Furrs, used as well in Doublings of the Mantles pertain∣ing to Coat Armour, as in the Coat it self. Furrs,Furrs. according to Guillim, consists of one Colour alone, or of more then one.
Furs that are Com∣pounded of two Colours only, are sorted either. with Black and are ei∣ther Or Black mixt with White Or as Ermine, and Ermines Black mixt with Yellow as Ermanois and Pean, without Black such are ac∣cording to Leigh. Vairy, Argent and A∣zure. and Verry, Or and Gules, or the like Colours. But for the better explaining them ob∣serve these Examples following. Ermine and Erme∣nois. woodcut blazon ermine and ermenois Ermine, that is the Field is Argent, and the Powdering is Sable. Ermenois, is when the Field is Or, and the Pow∣dering is Sable. Ermines and Pean. woodcut blazon ermines and pean Ermines, that is the Field is Sable, and the Powdering is Argent. Pean is when the Field is Sable, and the Powderings are Or.
woodcut blazon vair Verry or Vairy,Verry or Vairy. which is of two sorts, that is if your Vairy do consist of Argent and Azure, then in Blazoning to say Vairy is sufficient, but if it be compounded of a∣ny other Colours, they say Vairy of such and such a Colour, naming them. woodcut blazon potent-counter-potent This Example is Bla∣zoned Potent-Counter-Po∣tent,Potent-Counter-Potent. or Vairy Copy, and the Colours must be ex∣prest as Azure and Ar∣gent, or the like. In Antient times these Doublings or Furs were used for lineings of Robes, and Mantles of Senators, Con∣suls, Kings and Emperors. Having in Brief given you the Exam∣ples of Furrs, I shall next proceed to Bordures.
Examples of BORDURES. Bordures plain.THE First is Gules, a Bordure Or, al∣though this Bordure is plain, yet in the Blazoning the word plain is to be omitted. 2. Sable, a Bordure EngrailedEngrailed Argent, this is called Engrailed from the Latin word Ingred or, which signifies to go in, or to make entrance, or else from Gradus, which signifies a Step or De∣gree. 3. Argent a Bordure InvectedInvected. Azure This Bordure is quite contrary to the last, for as the other did enter into the Field, so contrariwise this doth, by the inver∣sion of the points, into it self. 4. Gules a Bordure IndentedIndented. Argent. This is so called as being as it were composed of Teeth, and in the fashion of Indentures.
engraving of blazon showing plain and charged bordures folio. 20 Bordures, Plaine and Charged.
5. Azure a Bordure Counter-ComponedCounter-Compo∣ned. Argent and Gules. Note that Counter-Compony doth always consist of two Tracts, and no more, whereas that of Checky doth of three. 6. Vert a Bordure Vairy.Vairy. 7. Or a Bordure CheckyChecky. Argent and Sable. 8. Ermine a Bordure Azure,Bordures charged. charged with eight Plates. Note that a Plate is always to be understood to be Argent, without expressing the Colour. 9. Gules a Bordure Sable, charged with three Bendlets Argent. What a Bend is shall be shewed when I come to speak of Bends. 10. Ermine a Bordure GobonatedGobonat∣ted. Or and Sable. This is so termed as being in small and equal Pieces. 11. Gules a Bordure Argent charged with Verdoy of TrefoilsVerdoy of Trefoiles. slipped proper, that is Vert. 12. Azure a Bordure quarterly com∣posed of Purflew Ermin, and Counter-Compony, Argent and Gules. These Examples may suffice, the more curious may be further satisfied in Guillims Display of Heraldry, in the Chapter of Bordures.
Examples of FILES and LABELS. Files.1. ARGENT a File with one Label Gules. 2. Azure a File of there Lambeaux Ar∣gent. 3. A File of five Points or Lambeaux, Azure. 4. Argent a File of three points in Bend Sable. 5. Three Files Bar ways Gules, the first having 5 Points, the Second 4, and the Last Tripple Pointed. 6. Argent a File issuing out of the Chief, without any Intermission at all Sable.
engraving of blazon showing files and labels folio 22 Files, and Labells.
Differences or Distinctions of Fa∣milies in Coat Armour. The First House. woodcut label of three points The Elder Brother du∣ring the Life of his Father.Label. woodcut upturned crescent The Second Brother.Crescent. woodcut star mullet The Third Brother.Mullet. woodcut martlet facing left The Fourth Brother.Martlet. woodcut ring The Fifth Brother.Annules. woodcut fleur-de-lis The Sixth Biother.Flower∣delis.
By these Differences every Brother or House ought to observe his due diffe∣rence for the avoiding of contention in Coat Armour. 2d. House.The Fst Brother of the Second House beareth a Crescent charged with a Label. The Second Son of the Second House, a Crescent charged with another Crescent. The Third Son of the Second House a Crescent charged with a Mullet. The Fourth Son of the Second House a Cre∣scent charged with a Martlet. The Fifth Son of the Second Houe a Crescent charg∣ed with an Annulet. And the Sixth Son of the Second House, a Crescent charged with a Flower-delis. 3d. House.The Mullet, which is the difference of the third House is thus charged; For the First Son with a Label; For the Se∣cond with a Crescent; For the Third with a Mullet; For the Fourth with a Martlet; For the Fifth with an Annu∣let; And for the Sixth with a Flower∣de lis. 4th. 5th. and 6th. Houses.The Martlet, Annulet and Flower de lis, being the differences of the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Houses are charged for Distinctions, as the Mullet is.
But Daughters are allowed to bear the Arms of their Fathers, without any of these Differences or Distinctions. The PARTS of ARMSParts of Arms. are the Escocheon, and the Ornaments without the Escocheon, as the Mantle, Helmet and Crest. The AccidentsAccidents. in the Escocheon are Points and Abatements. PointsPoints. are certain places in an Esco∣cheon, diversly named, according to their several Positions, whereof some are in the Middle, and some Remote. Those in the Middle are in or near the Center of the Escocheon,Middle Point. and such are the Honour, the Fess and the Nombril Points. The Fess PointFess Point, is in the exact Center of the Escocheon, The Honour PointHonour Point. is next above the same in a direct Line, and the Nombril Point is next underneath the Fess Point. Remote PointsRemote Point. are those that are pla∣ced at a further distance from the Cen∣tre of the Escocheon, and of these some are Superior, and some Inferior. The Superior are those that have their being in the upper part of the Escocheon, and of these there are Middle and Extreams:
The Middle is the precise middle of the Chief, between the two Extreams. The two Superior Extream Points do possess the Corners of the Chief part of the Esco∣cheon, and are called the Dexter and Sinister. The Inferior PointsInferior Points. do possess the Base of the Escocheon, and of these there are also both Middle and Remote. But for the better Explanation there∣of, I have in an Escocheon placed Let∣ters that answers to every one of the said Parts or Points. Parts in the Esco∣cheon. woodcut blazon A. Signifies the Dex∣ter. Chief-Point. B. The Precise Mid∣dle Chief. C. The Sinister Chief. D. The Honour Point. E. The Fess Point. F. The Nombril Point. G. The Dexter Base. H. The Dexter Middle Base. I. The Sinister Base Point. The knowledge of these Points are of great concernment, and ought to be well observed, for oft times they are occupied with sundry things of diffe∣rent kinds in one Escocheon.
engraving of blazon demonstrating abatements of honour folio 27 Abatements of Honour.
Examples of Abatements of HONOUR. AN Abatement is an Accidental Mark annexed to Coat Armour, shew∣ing some dishonourable quality or stain in the Bearer, whereby the Dignity of the Coat Armour is abased, AbatementsAbate∣ments. do consist in Diminution and Reversing. Diminution is a Blemish∣ing of some particular Point of the Esce∣cheon, by reason of some Stain and Co∣lour which they must be always of, as Sanguine and Tenne, and never of Met∣tal, for then they are Additions of Ho∣nour. Now what these Abatements are, followeth. 1. Argent a DelphDelph. Tenne: This A∣batement is due to him that revoketh his challenge. 2. Or, an Escocheon reversedEscoche∣on rever∣sed. Sanguin, Due for deflowring a Maid.
3. The whole Coat ReversedCoat re∣versed. (viz.) Sable a Lyon Rampant, Argent due to a Traytor. 4. Or, a Point DexterPoint Dexter. Tenne, due for too much boasting of his Martial Acts. 5. Argent, a Point in PointPoint in Point. Sanguine, due to a Coward. 6. Or, a Point CampionPoint Campion. Tenne, due to him that kills his Prisoner, after he hath yeilded himself and craveth Quar∣ter. 7. Argent, a GoreGore. Sinister Tenne, due for flying from his Colours. 8. Or, two GussetsGussets. Sanguine, due to him that commits Adultry. 9. Argent, a Plain PointPlain point. Tenne, due to him that tells Lyes to his Prince, or General.
engraving of blazon demonstrating rewards and additions of honour folio 29 Rewards, and Additions of Honour.
Forms of CHARGES: On which Rewards and Additi∣ons of Honour are oft times placed in COAT-ARMOUR. 1. GUles, a CantonCanton. Or. 2. Argent, a quarterQuarter. Azure. 3. Sanguine, a GyronGyron. issuing from the Dexter-chief Argent. 4. Ermine, an EscocheonEscoche∣on. Gules. 5. Argent two FlasquesFlasques. Azure. 6. Sable, a Star of eight Rayse or Points Or, between two FlanchesFlanches. Er∣min, and is the Coat Armour of Sir Henry Hobart of Blinkling in Norfolk, Knight and Baronet. 7. Tenne two VoydersVoyders. Or.
CHAP. II. Treats of the divers kinds of Esco∣cheons, what the Field and Char∣ges are, the Diversity of Char∣ges, and their Common Accidents, with their Properties and Forms: And lastly of the Bearing or Using the Ordinaries in COAT AR∣MOUR; together with divers Notes, Rules and Observations to them belonging. ESchocheonsEscoche∣ons. are either of one Tin∣cture or more then one. Those that are of more then one, some are more predominate, and that is said to be predominate, when some on Metal, Colour or Fur is spread, or is understood to be spread all over the surface of the Escocheon, which is term∣ed the Field or Shield; And in such Esco∣cheons
as have in them more Tinctures then one (as most have) the Field and Charge must be observed.Tincture of the Field. And in the Blazoning, first name the Field, and then the Charge thereon, and if there be several Charges (as oft times there is) then name the first which is nearest the Field. The ChargeThe Charge. is that which possesseth the Field, whether it be Sensitive or Ve∣getable, Natural or Artificial, and is pla∣ced either throughout all the superficies of the Escocheon, or else in some special part of the same. The common AccidentsCommon Accidents. of Charges are Adumbration or Transparency; or they are Transmutation or Counter-changing. The making of ORDINARIESOrdina∣ries. consists of Lines diversly Composed. Lines are the matter whereof these Or∣dinaries are formed, and according to the divers Tracts and Forms of Lines, they receive their divers Shapes and va∣riation of Names. The property of these Lines are their Rightness or Crookedness. A Right Line is carried equally through∣out the Escocheon without rising, or fal∣ling, contrary to which is a crooked Line.
A Crooked Line is either Bunched or Cornered, according to these Exam∣ples. Engrailed. woodcut engrailed line, semicircles with points facing up Invected. woodcut invected line, semicircles with points facing down Waved. woodcut wavy line, sine wave Crenelle or Embattuled. woodcut embattled line, square wave Nebule. woodcut nebuly line, wavy line with exaggerated curvature Indented. woodcut indented line, triangle wave Dancette. woodcut dancetty line, trangle wave Of these and Streight Lines are com∣posed the Honourable Ordinaries; as al∣so Abatements and Rewards of Honour.
The Honourable ORDINARIES. THE Honourable OrdinariesHonoura∣ble Ordi∣naries. are the Cross, Chief, Fess, Barr, Pale, Cheveron, Bend, Saltier and Es∣cocheon, all which shall be treated of in order. The CROSSCross. taketh up the fifth part of the Escocheon, but if charged then the third, and it is born as well En∣grailed, Invected, Wavey, or the like as plain, also 'tis born between a Charge, and charged, as the rest of the Ordina∣ries are. The CHIEFChief. is said to be given to those, that by their high merits have procured them chief places and esteem amongst men. It must contain the third part of the Escocheon in depth, and it is divided into a Fillet,Fillet. which con∣tains the fourth part of the Chief, and standeth in the Chief Point.
The FESSFess. contains in breadth the third part of the Escocheon, and doth occupy the Center of the Shield. This hath fomerly been taken for the Girdle of Honour, as dividing the Shield into two equal parts. The BARBar. differeth from the Fest on∣ly in that it contains, but the fifth part of the Shield, whereas the Fess doth the third. It is divided into the Closet,Closet. which contains the moity of the Barr, and the BaruletBarulet. which is the half of the Closet. The PALE contains the third part of the Eschocheon. It is subdivided into a PalletPallet. which is the half of the Pale,Pale. and is never to be charged with any thing, either Quick or Dead, neither must it be parted; and into an Endorse,Endorse. which is the fourth part of a Pale, and is not used but when the Pale is between two of them. If the Pale be upon any Beast, then you must say, He is Debrused with the Pale, but if the Beast be on the Pale, then say, He is Supported of the Pale. The CHEVERONCheveron Represents the Rafters of a House, and was in Antient time the Head attire of Women Priests. It takes up the fifth part of the Field,
and is subdivided into the Cheveronel,Chevero∣nel. which contains half a Cheveron, and a Couple Close,Couple-close. which is the fourth part of a Cheveron, and is not born but by Pairs, except there be a Cheveron between them. The BENDBend. doth contain the fifth part of the Field in Breadth if uncharged, but if charged, then the third. It is divided into a Bendlet,Bendlet. which is limited to the sixth part of the Shield; Into a Garter, which is the moity of a Bend; Into a Cost,Cost. which is the fourth part of a Bend; and into a RibonR bon. the moity of a Cost. There is also the Bend Sinister,Bend Sini∣ster. which goeth thwart the Escocheon from the Si∣nister Chief, to the Dexter Base, which is quite contrary to the other Bend; and this is subdivided into the Scrape,Scrape. which is half the Bend, and into the BattuneBattune. which is the fourth part of the Bend; And this is the most usual Badg of Illegitimacy; but note that the Bat∣tune doth not extend it self quite thwart the Shield, but wants something at both sides, as by the example will appear. The SALTIERSaltier. Contains the fifth part of the Shield, but if charged then
the third. The Saltier is said to be about the height of a Man, and was formerly used to Scale the Walls of a Town, and was driven full of Pins, which served for Steps. This Ordinary as the rest is born En∣grailed, Wavey, or the like, as also be∣tween Or, charged with a Charge. An InescocheonAn Inesco∣cheon. doth contain the fifth part of the Field, and must be placed in the Fess point: This is also termed an Escocheon of Pretence,Escocheon of Pre∣tence. and is so born by those that match with an Heiress, giv∣ing therein her Coat of Arms. Examples of the several CROSSES Most Usually born in Coat Armour. 1. ARgent a Cross sable born by Sir Richard RaynsfordRaynsford 1. of Dallington
engraving of blazon showing crosses folio 36 Crosses.
in Northampton-shire, Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of his Majesties Court of Kings Bench. Or, a Cross Vert, born by the Name of Hussey.Hussey. Ermine, a Cross Sable, by the name of Archer.Archer. Argent, a Cross Sable between four Pellets, born by Sir Robert ClaytonClayton. of the City of London, Knight, Lord-Mayor thereof, Anno 1680. 2. Sable, a Cross Potence Or, born by the Name of Alleyn.Alleyn. Azure, a Cross Potence Or, by the Name of Branchley.Branchley Gules, a Cross Potence Ermine, by the Name of Norton.Norton. Ermine, a Cross Potence Azure, by the Name of Lemynge.Lemynge. Per Bend, Or and Sable, a Cross Potence counterchanged by the Name of Alman.Almn. 3. Azure, a Cross Potence or Potent Fitche Or, born by Etheldred, King of the West Saxons. 4. Sable, a Cross Patee or Forme Ar∣gent, born by MaplesdenMaplesden Gules, a Cross Patee Argent, by the Name of Cross.Cross.
Argent, a Cross Patee Flowry Sable, by the Name of Swinston.Swinston. Per Pale, Or and Gules, a Cross Patee, Counterchanged by the Name of Copton.Clopton. 5. Or, a Cross Patee Gules, fimbri∣ated Sable, that is edged with another Cross of a different Colour. 6. Or, on a Cheveron Gules, three Crosses Patee or Forme of the Field, born by William Peck of Samford-Hall in Es∣sex, Esquire, Son and Heir of Edward PeckPeck. of the said place, Sergeant at Law deceased. 7. Ruby, a Cheveron between ten Crosses forme Pearl, born by the Right Honourable George Berkeley, Lord Berke∣ley, Mowbray, Segrave and Bruce, Ba∣ron of Berkeley Castle, and Earl of Berke∣ley,Earl of Berkeley. &c. Ruby a Cheveron Ermine between ten Crosses forme, Pearl is born by the Right Honourable Mawrice Brkeley, Baron Berkeley of Rathdown, and Viscount Fitz HardenViscount Fitz Hard∣ing. of Bear haven in Ireland. Also by the Right Honourable John Lord Berkeley,Lord Berkeley. Baron of Straton in Somer∣set-shire, &c.
8. Azure, a Cross Moline Or, born by Sir John MolineuxMolineux. of Tavershal in Not∣tingham-shire, Baronet. Azure, a Cross Moline Argent, by the Name of Trelesk.Trelesk. Gules, a Cross Moline Or, by the Name of Berneston.Berneston Argent, a Cross Moline Gule, by the Name of Vudal.Vudal. 9. Sable, a Cross Couped or Pierced Or, by the Name of Grill.Grill. Note that Piercings are born round, as in this example, as also four square, and Lozenge ways. 10. Ermine, a Cross Patonce Sable, born by Jonathan GoddardGoddard. Doctor in Physick, and Fellow of the Colledge of Physitians. Gules, a Cross Patonce Argent, by the Name of Latimer.Latimer. Argent a Cross Patonce Sable, by the Name of Banester.Banester. Verta Cross Patonce Or, by the Name of Boydel.Boydel. Sable, a Cross Patonce Or, by the Name of Mannock.Mannock. Azure, a Cross Patonce Or, by the Name of Ward.Wa d.
Quarterly Gules and Azure, a Cross Patonce Or, born by Sir Richard WenmanWenman. of Caswel in Oxford-sbire, Baronet. 11. Argent, a Cross Bottony Sable, born by Richard WinwoodWinwood of Ditton Park in Buckingham-shire Esq; Son and Heir of the Right Honourable Sir Ralph Win∣wood Knight, Principal Secretary of State to King James, and Embassador Ledger to the States of the Ʋnited Provinces. 12. Argent, a Cross Flowry Sable, and is the Coat of Sir Godfrey CopleyCopley. of Sproadbrough in York-shire-Baronet. 13. Sable, a Cross Raguled Or, by the Name of Stoway.Stoway. Argent, a Cross Raguled Sable, by the Name of Wroth.Wroth. 14. Argent, a Cross Wavey voided Sa∣ble, by the Name of Duckenfield.Ducken∣field. 15. Azure, a Cross Moline Or, void∣ed throughout; this with the addition of Cross Croslets Or, dispersed in the Field, is the Coat of Knowles,Knowles. of which Family is the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Banbury,Earl of Banbury. Viscount Wallingford, and Baron Knowles of Greys.
16. Or, a Cross Croslet Gules, by the Name of Taddington.Tadding∣ton. Argent, a Cross Croslet Sable by the Name of Wickerley.Wickerley Argent, a Cross Croslet Gules, by the Name of Brightley.Brightley. Vert, a Cross Croslet Or, by the Name of Bury.Bury. Sable, a Cross Croslet Ermine, by the Name of Durant.Durant. 17. Argent, a Cheveron between three Cross Croslets Gules, born by Richard SternStern. of White Cliff in York-sbire Esquire, Son to his Grace, Richard late Lord Arch-Bishop of York Deceased. 18. Azure, a Fess Dauncette Ermine, between six Cross Croslets Argent, born by Sir Thomas BarnardistonBarnadi∣ston. of Kediton in Suffolk, Knight and Baronet, By Sir Samuel Barnardiston of Brightwel Hall in the said County Baronet. 19. Argent, a Cheveron Azure be∣tween three Cross Croslets Fitche Gules, born by Sir John BuckworthBuck∣worth. of London, Knight. 20. Argent, a Cross Couped Sable, charged with another Or.
21. Azure, a Cross Engrailed Ermine, born by Nathaniel StoughtonStoughton of St. Johns near Warwick, Esquire. 22. Sable a Cross Engrailed Or, in the dexter quarter a Mullet Argent by the Name of Peyton, of which Family is Sir Thomas PeytonPeyton. of Knolton in Kent, Ba∣ronet. By Sir—Peyton of Doddington in Cambridg-shire, Baronet: and Sir Robert Peyton of East Barnet in Hartford-shire, Knight. 23. Sable, a Cross Engrailed Argent, in the Dexter Quarter an Escallop shell of the second, born by Justinian PagitPagit. of Grays-Inn, Esquire. 24. Azure, a Taw Argent Ermine, or a cheif indented Gules, 3 Taws Or, born by Edward Thurland Esquire, only Son of Sir Edward ThurlandThurland. of Reygate in Surrey, Knight, one of the Barons of his Majesties Court of Exchequer, Deceased. 25. Azure, a Cross Flury Argent, by the Name of Cheney.Cheney. Sable, a Cross Flury Or, by the Name of Manox.Manox. 26. Gules, a Cross Pall Argent.
engraving of blazon showing chiefs with charges folio 43 Cheifs, with Charges thereon.
27. Azure, a Cross Avelane Argent. 28. Gules, a Cross Furche Or. 29. Or, a Cross Ankred Sable. Thus much for Crosses which may be born between, or Charged with a Charge, Examples of CHIEFS. 1. OR, a Chief Gules, born by Sir Martin LumleyLumley. of Bradfield in Essex Baronet. 2. Azure, a Chief Engrailed Or. 3. Argent, a Chief Invected Vert. 4. Saphir, a Chief Indented Topaz; born by his Grace James Duke,Duke of Ormond. Marquess and Earl of Ormond, Earl of Ossery and Brecknock, Viscount Thurles, Baron of Arklow and Lanthony, Lord High Stew∣ard of his Majesties Houshold, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter,
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, Lord Leiutenant of Ireland, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honou∣rable Privy Councel, &c. By The Right Honourable James Lord Butler Baron of More Park in England, and Earl of Ossery in Ireland,Earl of Ossery. Grand Child to his Grace James Duke of Or∣mond. By the Right Honourable Richard Earl of Arran,Earl of Arran. Viscount Tulough, Baron of Clougrenan in Ireland, and Baron Butler of Weston in England, second Son to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, and Lord Leiutenant of Ireland, Anno, 1683. 5. Azure, a Chief Nebule Argent. 6. Gules a Chief Crenelle or Embattuled Or. 7. Ermine, a Chief Dauncette Sable. 8. Vert, a Chief Wavey Or. 9. Ermine, a Chief Quarterly Or and Gules, by the Name of Peckham.Peckham. 10. Or, a Chief Checky: Argent and Azure. 11. Gules, a Chief Argent surmounted of another Or. 12. Argent, a Chief Sable, in the ne∣ther part thereof a Fillet Argent.
13. Sable, a Chief Or, charged with a Shapournet Ermine. 14. Azure, three Barrs Argent, in Chief three Bezants, born by Sir Rich. AtkinsAtkins. of Much Hadham in Hartfor-shire, Knight and Baronet. 15. Azure, on a Chief Or, three Martlets Gules, born by Sir William WrayWray. of Ashby in Lincoln-shire, Baronet. By Sir — Wray of Glentworth in the said County Baronet. This Ordinary is subject to a Charge, as the others are.
Examples of FESSES and BARRS. 1. Azure a Fess Or, by the Name of Eliot.Eliot. Ermine a Fess Gules, by the Name of Barnaby.Barnaby. Or, a Fess Gules, by the Name of Colvil.Colvil. 2. Ermine, a Fess Dauncette Sable, by the Name of Pennington.Penning∣ton. Argent, a Fess Dauncette Sable, by the Name of West.West. Azure, a Fess Dauncette Argent, by the Name of Bengham.Bengham. Vert a Fess Dauncette Ermine, by the Name of SomnerSomner. of Kent. Argent, a Fess Dauncette Gules, by the Name of NevilNevil. of Leicester. 3. Gules, a Fess Wavey Argent. 4. Argent, a Fess Humid Sable.
engraving of blazon showing fesses and bars folio 46 Fesses, Barrs &c.
5. Argent, a Fess per Fess Indented Vert and Sable, between two Cottizes counterchanged, by the Name of HuddyHuddy. of Dorsetshire. 6. Per Fess Indented Or and Azure, by the Name of Saunders.Saunders. 7. Parted per Fess Sable and Argent, a Fess Batile Counter-Battled, Counter∣changed. 8. Per Fess Or and Argent, a Fess Necule Gules, by the Name of Ante∣shed.Anteshed. 9. Argent, on a Fess between a dou∣ble Cottize Gules, three Griffons Heads erazed Or, born by Sir Robert DashwoodDash∣wood. of Norbrook and Wiekham in Oxfordshire, Knight. And by Samuel Dashwood of the City of London Esquire, now Sheriff of the said City. 10. 4 Fussils in Fess Pearl, born by the Right Honourable George Lord Carteret,Carteret. Baron of Hawnes in Bedfordshire &c. And by Sir Philip Carteret of St. Ouen in the Isle of Jarsey Baronet. 11. Gules, a Fess Wavey between 3 Flower delis Or, born by Sir William HicksHicks. of Ruckolls in Essex, Knight and Baronet.
12. Or, on a Fess Azure, three Garbs of the Field, born by James Vernon of St. Martins in the Field in Middlesex, Esquire, descended from the Vernons of Cheshire. 13. Argent, a Barr Azure, born by Captain James BurkinBurkin. of London, E∣squire. 14. Topaz, three Barrs Wavey Ruby, born by the Right Honourable James Earl of Perth, Lord Drummond and Stobhall, Steward of Strathern and Balahidder by Inheritance; Lord Justice General of the Kingdom of Scotland, one of the ex∣traordinary Lords of the Session, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel for the said Kingdom. Barry Wavey of six Or and Gules, born by John BassetBasset. of Heanton Punchar∣don in Devonshire, Esquire. 15. Ermine, a Croslet Sanguine. 16. Sable, a Barulet Argent.
engraving of blazon showing pales and pallets folio 49 Pales, Pallets &c.
Examples of PALES. 1. GUles, a Pale Or, by the Name of Grandmain.Grand∣main. 2. Azure, a Palle Argent. 3. Vert, an Endorse Or. 4. Argent, a Pale Lozenge Sable, by the Name of Savage.Savage, Gules, a Pale Lozenge Argent, by the Name of Manduit.Manduit. 5. Argent, a Pale indented Vert, by the Name of Dixon.Dixon. 6. Argent, a Pale Flory Counterchang∣ed Sable. 7. Gules, a Pale Radiant Or, by the Name of Coleman.Coleman. 8. Party per Pale Argent and Sable, a Pale Counterchanged. 9. Argent, three Pallets Wavey Sable, by the Name of Downes.Downes.
10. Argent, a Pale between two In∣dorses Gules. 11. Paly of six Topaz and Saphir, a Canton Ermine, born by the Right Ho∣nourable Robert Lord Shirley, Baron Fer∣rers,Lord Fer∣rers. of Chartley, &c. 12. Argent, on a Pale Sable, a Con∣gers Head Erected and Couped Or, born by Sir Bernard Gascoyn,Gayscon. Knight. Note that such Ordinaries as are either of themselves, or else by reason of some charge imposed on them, do challenge the third part of the Field, are exempted from this kind of Bear∣ing one besides another, of such the Field can conteyn but one of them at once, but their Derivatives and Subdivi∣sions may well be sorted in the same Es∣cocheon, as a Pale between two Endor∣ses, a Bend between two Cottizes, and such like.
engraving of blazon showing chevrons folio 51 Cheverons,
Examples of CHEVERONS. 1. GUles a Cheveron Argent, born by Thomas Fulford of FulfordFulford. in Devonshire Esquire. Argent, a Cheveron Azure by the name of Swillington.Swilling∣ton. Or a Cheveron Sable by the name of Heningfield.Hening∣field. Argent, a Cheveron Gules by the name f Trye.Trye. 2. Ermine, a Cheveron couped Sable, by the name of Jones.Jones. 3. Or a Cheveron in chief Azure. 4. Sable, a Cheveron Rompe Argent. 5. Azure a Cheveron engrailed voyded Or, by name of Dudley.Dudley. 6. Argent, two Cheverons Sable, born by Sir Joseph AshAsh. of Twittenham in Mid∣dlesex and of Downton in Wiltshire Baro∣net.
By Samnel Ash of Langley-Burwel in Wiltshire, Esq. By William Ash of Hatchbury in the said County Esq. And by John Ash of Fifield in the said County, Esq. Ermine, two Cheverons Azure, born by Sir Walter BagotBagot. of Blithfield in Staf∣fordshire, Baronet. Or, two Cheverons Gules, born by Sir John MounsonMounson. of Burton in Lincolnshire, Knight of the Bath and Baronet. Ermine, two Cheverons Gules, by the Name of Fanner.Fanner. 7. Azure, three Cheverons Argent, born by John Lewkenor of West Dean in Suffex Esq.Lewkener Argent, three Cheverons Gules, born by Richard LougherLougher. of Tytleston in Clamor∣ganshire, Esq. Gules, three Cheverons Or, by the Name of Horn.Horne. 8. Argent, three Cheverons reversed Gules. 9. Argent, a Cheveron Enarched Gules. 10. Azure, three Cheverons braced in the base of the Escocheon, Or, by the Name of Fitz-Hugh.Fitz-hugh.
engraving of blazon showing bends folio 53 Bends.
11. Ermine, on a Cheveron Gules, three Cinquefoils Or, born by Skepper of Skepper, Lincolnshire. 12. Gules, a Cheveron engrailed be∣tween three Owles Argent, born by Sir George Hewytt of Pishobury in Hartford∣shire, Baronet.Hewyt. 13. Per Cheveron Azure and Argent, in Chief two Falcons Volant Or, by the Name of Stephens,Stephens. and is born by Tho∣mas Stepbens, Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Stephens of little Sodbury in Glocestershire, Knight. 14. Vert, a Cheveronel Argent. 15. Ermine, a Coupee-Close, Gules. Examples of BENDS. 1. OR, a Bend Azure, by the Name of Caltherupe.
Gules, a Bend Or, by the Name of Colembert.Colem∣bert. Argent, a Bend Vert, by the Name of Kendal.Kendal. Or, a Bend Gules, by the Name of Cottel.Cottel. 2. Argent, a Bend Engrailed Sable, born by Sir Francis RatcliffRatcliff. of Dilston in Nor∣thumberland, Baronet. Argent, a Bend Engrailed Gules, by the Name of Culpeper,Culpeper. and is the Coat of the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Culpeper Baron of Thonway. It is also born by Sir Thomas Culpeper of Preston Hall in the Parish of Aylesford in Kent Baronet. Argent, a Bend Engrailed Azure, by the Name of Grove. Or, a Bend Engrailed Azure, by the Name of Clark.Clark. Gules a Bend Engrailed Or, by the Name of Marshal.Marshal. Gules, on a Bend Argent, three Cros∣ses Patte or Forme Sable, is born by Sir John Rerersby of Thribergh in the West Riding of York shire, Baronet, Gover∣nour of the City of York. Argent, on a Bend Engrailed Sable, three Plates born by John CuttsCutts. of Arks∣don
in Essex, and of Childerly in Cam∣bridgeshire, Esq. Argent a Bend Wavey Sable, born by Henry Wallop of Farleigh-WallopWallop. in Hamp∣shire, Esq. 3. Gules, a Bend Wavey between two Cottizes Or Costs, Argent by the Name of Etton.Etton. Azure, a Bend Wavey Cottized Argent, by the Name of Keynes.Keynes. Sable, a Bend Engrailed Cottized Ar∣gent, by the Name of Willington.Willing∣ton. Azure, a Bend Engrailed Argent, Cot∣tized Or, by the Name of Fortescue.Fortescue. 4. Sable, a Bend Flory Argent, by the Name of High-Lord.Highlord. Sable, a Bend Flory Or, by the Name of Bromfleet.Broom∣fleet. 5. Per Bend Sable and Argent, a Bend Ragule Counter changed by the Name of Strangman.Strang∣man, 6. Vert, a Bend Lozenge Or, by the Name of Knight,Knight. of Hampshire. Sable, a Bend Lozenge Argent, by the Name of LenthalLenthal. of Oxfordshire. Ermine, a Bend Lozenge Gules, by the Name of PlumleyPlumley. of Devonshire.
7. Sable, a Bend engrailed between six Cinquefoyls Or,Povey. born by Tho. Povey Es∣quire, one of the Masters of Requests to his Majesty King Charles the Second. 8. Ermine, a Bend voided Gules, by the Name of Ireton.Ireton. 9. Or, two Bendlets Azure, by the Name of D'oyly,D'oyley. and is born by Sir John D'oyley of Chisleyhampton in Oxfordshire, Knight, by Christopher D'oyley of Al∣derbury in the said County Esquire, and by Laud D'oyley of St. Giles in the Fields, in Middlese Gent. Or, two Bendlets Gules, born by the Name of Tracy.Tracy. Or, two Bendlets Engrailed Sable, by the Nme of Brantwait.Braint∣waite, 10. Azure, three Bendlets Wavey A∣zure,Wilbra∣ham. born by Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in Cheshire, Baronet. 11. Bendy of six Pieces Argent and Gules. 12. Or, a Garter Gules. 13. Argent, a Cost or Cottize Sable. 14. Or, a Ribon Gules. 15. Argent a Bend Sinister Sable. 16. Azure, a Scrape Argent. 17. Gules, a Battune Argent.
engraving of blazon showing saltires folio 57 Saltiers,
Examples of SALTIERS. 1. PEarl, a Saltier Ruby, born by the Right Honourable Charles Lord Gerard, Baron of Brandon and Earl of Maxfield,Earl of Maxfield. &c. By the Right Honourable John Fitz-Gerard, Earl of Kildare,Earl of Kildare. Primier Earl of the Kingdom of Ireland. By the Right Honourable Digby, Lord GerardLord Ge∣rard. Baron of Gerards Bromley, and Lord of Dutton. By Sir Francis Gerard of Harrow-hill in Middlesex, Knight and Baronet. By Gilbert Gerard Cossein of Brfferton Hall in the North ding of Yorkshire, Esquire, Son ad Heir to Sir Gilbert Ge∣rar, Knight and Baronet. Ruby, a Saltier Peral,Bergaven∣ny. born by the Right Honourable George Lord Nevil,
Baron of Bergavenny in Monmouth-shire, but the Family of the Nevils beareth in the middle of the Saltier a Rose Gules for a Distinction. Or a Saltier Sable, born by the Right Honourable Sir Edward Dering of Sur∣renden Dering in Kent,Dering. Baronet, one of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesties Treasury, &c. Argent, a Saltier Sable, born by Mar∣tin Baldwin of Castle Geshel in Kings Coun∣ty in Ireland,Baldwin. Esquire. Azure, a Saltier Argent, born by Sir William York of Burton Pedwarding in Lin∣colnshire,York. Knight. Gules, a Saltier Argent, charged with a Rose of the Field, born by the Name of Nevill.Nevil. Sable, a Saltier Argent, born by Tho∣mas Ducket of Steplemorden in Cambridg∣shire,Ducket. Esquire. Vert, a Saltier Or, born by the Name of Hunt.Hunt. Per Pale Azure and Gules, a Saltier Argent, by the Name of Gage.Gage. 2. Pearl; on a Saltier Engrailed Dia∣mond, 9 Annulets Topaz, born by the Right Honourable Robert Leak Earl of Scarsdale,Earl of Scarsdale. and Baron Deyncourt.
Vert, a Saltier Engrailed Argent, by the Name of Hawley.Hawley. And is born by the Right Honourable Francis Lord Hawley, and by Henry Haw∣ley of Branford in Middlesex, Esquire. Argent, a Saltier Engrailed Sable, born by Sir George Middleton of Leighton in Lancashire, Baronet.Middleton 3. Parted per Saltier Argent and Gules, a Saltier Counterchanged. 4. Azure, a Saltier quarterly quarter∣ed Or and Argent, being the Arms of the Episcopal See of Bath and Wells.Bath and Wells. 5. Per Pale Argent and Azure, a Sal∣tier Counterchanged by the Name of Hodbonel.Hodbonel. 6. Gules on a Saltier Or, another Vert, by the Name of Andrews.Andrews. 7. Gules, a Saltier Cleche, that is pier∣ed through, Or. 8. Per Pale, Argent and Gules, three Saltiers Counterchanged, born by LaneLane. of London. 9. Girony of four Argent and Gules, a Saltier between as many Cross Croslets all Counterchanged,Twisden. born by Roger Twisden of Bradborn in Kent, Esquire, Eldest Son to Sir Thomas Twisden, Knight and Baro∣net, one of his Majesties Justices of Kings Bench.
Examples of INESCOCHEONS and ORLES. 1. ERmine an Inescocheon Gules. 2. Or, an Orle Azure, by the Name of Bertram.Bertram. 3. Argent, an Orle Engrailed on the Innerside Gules. 4. Gules, an Orle Engrailed on both sides Or. 5. Argent, an Orle of three Peices Sable. 6. Argent, three Escocheons Sable, by the Name of Lowdham.Lowdham 7. Topaz, a Lyon Rampant, and Treasure of Scotland Ruby, within a Border gobonated Pearl and Saphir, this is the Coat of the Right Honourable
engraving of blazon showing inescutcheons and orles folio 60 Inescocheons, and Orles.
Alexander Earl of Morray,Earl of Morray. Lord Doun and Abernethe in Scotland, and one of his Majesties principal Secretaries of State for that Kingdom. 8. Topaz, a Lion Rampant cut in pie∣ces at the Joynts Ruby, within a Trea∣sure of Scotland Saphir, born by the Right Honourable Richard Lord Maitland,Lord Maitland. Lord Justice Clarke of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel for that Kingdom, and Eldest Son to the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Lauderdale, &c. 9. Gules, an Inescocheon Argent, within an Orle of Cinquefoyls Or,Chamber∣lain. born by Do∣ctor Hugh Chamberlain Doctor in Physick in Ordinary, to his Majesty King Charles the Second, and by his Brother Doctor John Chamberlain, Doctor in Physick.
Examples of PILES. THe Pile is an Ordinary consisting of a twofold Line, formed like a Wedg, and is an Antient Addition to Armory, being that which makes all Foundations and Fortifications sure and Firm, especial∣ly upon Moorish and Watry Grounds. The Examples follow. 1. Or a Pile Engrailed Sable, born by the Name of Waterhouse.Water∣house. 2. Azure, a Pile Ermine, born by Sir Cyrill Wyche of Flansford in Surry,Wyche. Knight, sometime Embassadour at Constantinople, for his Majesty King Charles the First. Azure, a Pile Or, by the Name of Aldham.Aldham. Or, A Pile Azure, by the Name of Bagginton.Bagging∣ton.
engraving of blazon showing piles folio 62 Piles.
Sable, a Pile Ermine, by the Name of Moriswith.Moris∣with. 3. Ermine, two Piles in point Diamond, born by the Right Honourable John Lord Haughton,Lord Haughton, Eldest Son to the Right Ho∣nourable Gilbert Earl of Clare, &c. And is also born by the Right Honou∣rable Francis Lord Holles,Lord Holles. Baron Holles of Ifield in Sussex. 3. Argent three Piles, meeting near the base of the Escocheon Azure, by the Name of Bryan.Bryan. Or, three Piles Gules, by the Name of Basset.Basset. Azure, three Piles Or, by the Name of Salbourn.Salbourn. Azure, three Piles Gules by the Name of Gildesborough.Gildesbo∣rough. Argent, three Piles waved Gules, by the Name of Candish.Candish. Ermine, three Piles waved Gules, by the Name of Gernon.Gernon. Ermyne, three Piles Engrailed Sable, by the Name of Cade.Cade. 5. Argent, three Piles, one issuing out of the Chiefe, between two others, trans∣posed, or reversed Sable, born by Captain Richard Hulse of Bethersden in Kent,Hulse. Es∣quire.
6. Argent, a Pile waved, issuing out of the Dexter Corner of the Escocheon Bendways Or, by the Name of Ald∣ham.Aldham. 7. Argent, a Pile in Bend, issuing out of the Dexter Corner of the Escocheon Sable, Cottized Engrailed Gules. 8. Argent, a Triple Pile flowry on the tops Sable, issuing out of the Sinister Base in Bend, towards the Dexter Cor∣ner. 9. Or, on a Pile Vert, three Wheat-Sheaves of the Field, born by Sir Antho∣ny Oldfield of Spalding in Lincolnshire,Oldfield. Ba∣ronet. Partitions of EXAMPLES. PArtitions are such in which there is no Tincture, that is Metal, Colour, or Fur predominating in them, and are formed of sundry sorts of Lines of Par∣tition,
engraving of blazon demonstration partition folio 64 Partitions.
occasioning oft times Counter-changing and Transmutation, and these kinds of Bearing are subject to be born Wavey, Engrailed, or the like: for Ex∣ample. 1. Parted per Pale Argent and Gules, by the Name of Walgrave.Walgrave 2. Per Fess Or and Azure. 3. Per Bend Embattuled Pearl and Ru∣by, born by the Right Honourable Boyle Lord Clifford,Lord Clif∣ford. Eldest Son to the Right Honourable Richard Boyle Earl of Burlington, and Baron Clifford of Lans∣borough in England, Earl of Corke, Vis∣count Dungarvan, and Baron Youghal of Ireland, &c. And by the Honourable Robert BoyleBoyle. of Staulbridge in Dorset-shire Esquire, Brother to the Right Honourable the Earl of Burlington. Per Bend Or and Vert, by the Name of Hawley.Hawley. 4. Quarterly Ermine and Sable, born by John StanhopeStanhope. of Elveston in Derby∣shire, Esquire. Some Blazon this Coat parted per Cross. 5. Per Bend Sinister Argent and A∣zure.
6. Per Cheveron Sable and Argent, born by Sir Willoughby Aston of AstonAston. in Cheshire, Baronet. 7. Per Pile in Point Or and Sable. The Pile part of this Coat may be charg∣ed, but no other part thereof, and that may be used as one only Coat. 8. Per Pale Travers, Argent and Gules. 9. Parted Per Pile Transposed Or, Gules and Sable. This is a Bearing rare∣ly met with. 10. Per Saltier Gules and Ermine, by the Name of Restwold.Restwold: 11. Per Pale and Base Gules, Argent and Sable, a Bearing unusual. 12. Girony of 6 pieces Or and Azure. 13. Girony of eight pieces Topaz and Diamond, and is born by the Right Ho∣nourable Alchibald Lord Lorn, Eldest Son to the Right Honourable Archibald Earl of Argile, Lord Kintire Champ∣bel and Lorn,Lord Lorn. &c. 14. Per Pale and Cheveron Argent and Gules. 15. Chappe Or and Vert Counterchang∣ed. From Partitions I shall proceed to Coun∣terchanges, which doth also admit of a
engraving of blazon showing counterchanges folio 67 Counterchanges.
Charge, as these Examples will Demon∣strate. Examples of COUNTERCHANGES. 1. OR a Cross parted per Pale Gules and Sable, by the Name of Brook.Brook. 2. Per Pale, Argent and Sable, a Pale Counterchanged. 3. Per Pale Argent and Azure, per Bend Counterchanged; this the French Armorist term Tranche. 4. Per Pale Argent and Gules, a Bend Counterchanged by the Name of Chau∣cer.Chaucer. 5. Paly of six Argent and Sable, a Chief Counterchanged. 6. Per Fess Gules and Argent, a Pale Counterchanged by the Name of Lavi∣der.Lavider.
7. Parted per Pale Or and Gules, three Roundels Counterchanged. 8. Per Fess Argent and Vert, a Pale Counterchanged three Lyons Heads Era∣zed Gules, born by Sam. ArgalArgal. of Wal∣thamstow in Essex, Doctor in Physick, Candidat & Honorary and Physitian in Ordinary to Her Majesty. 9. Per Fess Sable and Argent, a Lyon Rampant Counterchanged by the Name of Vaugham, and is born by the Right Honourable Richard Earl of CarburyEarl of Carbury. in Ireland, and Baron of Emlyn in En∣gland. 10. Per Pale Nebule Azure and Or, six Martlets Counterchanged by the Name of Fleetwood.Fleetwood 11. Per Fess Argent and Gules, a Bar between three Crescents Counterchang∣ed. 12. Paly of six Argent and Gules, a Bend Paly of as many Counterchanged. 13, Paly Bendy or and Sable. 14. Barry of six Indented the one in∣to the other Argent and Sable, by the Name of Gill.Gill. 15. Barry Bendy Argent and Vert. 16. Checky Topaz and Saphir, a Fess Ruby, fretty Pearl, born by the Right
Honourable Charles Lord Cheyne,Lord Cheyne. Vis∣count of Newhaven in Scotland, &c. which said Dignity, upon the Death of his Lordship, descends on his Son and Heir William Cheyne Esq. 17. Checky Argent and Gules, a Chief Indented Azure, born by Joseph Mickle∣thwaiteMickle∣thwait. of Swayle in Holderness in York∣shire, Esq. 18. Checky Or and Gules, on a Fess Azure, three Escallops Argent, born by Sir Robert BaldockBaldock. of Talconeston in Nor∣folk, Knight. 19. Barry of six Parted per Pale In∣dented Argent and Gules, Counterchang∣ed, born by William PeytoPeyto. of Chesterton in Warwick shire, Esq. 20. Barry Pily of eight pieces, Or and Gules. Thus much of Coat Armours that have an obscure derivation from some of the Ordinaries, and do keep their Name. I shall next proceed to some Examples where two or more Ordinaries are joyn∣ed in one Shield, and which are Subject to a Charge.
Examples of ORDINARIES Joyned together. 1. GUles on a Cheveron Argent, three Bars Gemelle Sable, born by Sir Barnham ThrogmortonThrog∣morton. of Clower-wall in Glocestershire, Knight and Baronet. 2. Sable, a Pile Argent Surmounted of a Cheveron Gules, by the Name of Dix∣on.Dixon. 3. Argent on a Pile Azure, a Cheve∣ron Counterchanged Argent, and Sable, born by Sir John OtwayOtway. of Igmire, in the West riding of York-shire, Knight, Chan∣cellor of Durham, Vice Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Lancaster, and one of his Majesties Councel learned in the Law. 4. Argent, two Barrs Gules, on a Can∣ton of the second, a Cross of the first,
engraving of blazon showing ordinaries joined together folio 70 Ordinaries joyned together.
born by Thomas Broughton of BroughtonBrough∣ton. in Staffordshire Esq; Son and Heir of Sir Bryan Broughton, Knight and Baronet. 5. Sable on a Saltier Engrailed Argent, an Escocheon Or, charged with a Cross Gules, by the Name of Morris.Morris. 6. Or, a Fess between two Cheverons Sable, born by John LisleLisle. of Moxhul in Warwick-shire Esquire. 7. Gules, two Bars and a Chief Indent∣ed Or born by Sir Thomas HareHare. of Stow-Bardolph in Norfolk, Baronet. 8. Argent a Cheveron and Chief A∣zure. 9. Paly of six Argent and Gules, a Cheveron Or, born by Sir Edward Bark∣hamB arkha. of West Acre in Norfolk, Baro∣net. 10. Barry of six peices Or and Azure, a Bend Gules, by the Name of Gaunt.Gaunt. 11. Argent a Pale and Chief Gules. 12. Gules a Saltier Engrailed Argent, and a Chief Vairy. 13. Checky Or and Azure, a Fess Gules, born by the Right Honourable Hugh Lord Clifford,Clifford. Baron of Chudleigh in Devonshire, Son and Heir of the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Clifford deceas∣ed, late Lord High Treasurer of England, &c.
14. Per Pale Argent and Vert, a Che∣veron Engrailed Counterchanged. 15. Topaz, a Saltier and Chief Ruby on a Canton Pearl, a Lyon Rampant Sa∣phir; born by the Right Honourable Ro∣bert Bruce, Earl of Ailesbury and Elgin, Viscount BruceBruce. of Ampthil, Baron Bruce of Whorltone, Skelton and Kinloss, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Bedford and Huntington, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. 16. Sable, a Cheveron within a Bordure Engrailed Argent. 17. Barry of six Or and Sable, an Es∣cocheon, Argent. 18. Gyrony of four Or and Gules, a Saltier Engrailed Ermine. 19. Barry of six Argent and Gules, a Pale Ermine. 20. Or a Fess Azure surmounted by a Bend Gules, born by Sir Gervas ElwesElwes. of Stoke juxta Clare in Suffolk Baronet, and by Sir John Elwes of Gravehouse in the Parish of Fulham in Middlesex, Knight. 21. Gules, a Fess and three Piles in Chiefe Wavey Argent, born by Sir Ju∣stinian IshamIsham. of Lamport in Northampton shire, Baronet.
22. Quarterly Topaz and Ruby, a Bend Vairy, born by the Right Honou∣rable Charles SackvileSackvile. Earl of DorsetEarl of Dorset. and Middlesex, Baron Bruckhurst and Cran∣field, one of the Gentlemen of his Ma∣jesties Bed Chamber, and Lord Leiutenant of Sussex, &c. This Coat is also born by Collonel Thomas Sackvile of Selscombe in Sussex, Son of Sir Thomas Sackvile of the said place, Knight of the Bath. 23. Quarterly Or and Gules a Bend Sable, born by Sir James ClaveringClavering of Anwel in the Bishoprick of Durham, Ba∣ronet. Quarterly Argent and Gules, a Bend Sable, born by Tho. WidringtonWidring∣ton. of Fen∣ham in Northumberland Esquire. Quarterly Sable and Or a Bend Ar∣gent, born by Gorge Laughton of Laug∣tonLaughton in Lincolnshire Esquire. 24. Argent a Cross Gules and Chief Vert. 25. Or, a Bend Ermine Perforated through a Cheveron Gules.
CHAP. III. Treats of Goat Armour formed of things Artificial, to wit, such as are made by Man, and for his use, which shall be reduced under seve∣ral Heads, as they Relate to the use of Civil Life, as the Ensigns of Dignity, both Temporal and Ecclesiastical; or of Professions both Liberal and Mechanical, or as they Relate to Military Actions, as well for the Land as Sea. CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS. 1. JƲpiter a Scepter Royal in Pale, in∣signed with an Eye Sol. The Eye betokeneth Providence in Government, being the Watch∣man of the Body, and the Scepter is an Emblem of Justice.
engraving of blazon showing man-made objects folio 74 Civill Artificiall things.
2. Luna a Mound, Saturn environed with a Circle, and ensigned with a Cross Evallane Mars. This as Guillim notes, is an Ensign Re∣presenting Soveraign Majesty and Juris∣diction of a King, and therefore it is bla∣zoned by the Planets. By the roundness of the Mound, and insigning thereof with a Cross, is signifyed, that Religion and the Faith of Christ ought to be received and embraced throughout his Dominions. 3. Sol, a Cap of Maintenance Mars turned up Ermine. This is called a Cap of Maintenance, for that Pope Julius the second sent such an one with a Sword to King Henry the eighth, for he had lately before that written a Book against Martin Luther; and after that, Pope Leo the Tenth gave him the Title of Defender of the Faith. 4. Luna, a Mantle of Estate, Mars doubled Ermine, ouched Sol, garnished with Strings fastned thereunto fretways dependant, and tasselled of the same. The Mantle is a Robe of Estate pecu∣liar to Monarchs, and free Estates. These Arms do belong to the Town of BrecknockTown of Brecknock. in Wales.
5. Jupiter; a Mace of Majesty in Bend Sol. It is called a Mace of Majesty to di∣stinguish it from a Mace born by a Com∣mon Sergeant. 6. Pearl three Garters Buckled and nowed Saphir, garnished with Diamonds. This Garter is worn by the Knights of the Garter. 7. Gules three Tassels Or, by the Name of Wooler.Wooler. 8. Saturn an Imperial Crown Sol. Of Crowns I shall speak more in the Chapter of external Ornaments. 9. Gules three Ducal Crowns Or, on a Chiefe of the second as many Laurel Leaves proper, born by Sir John Berkea∣headBerken∣head. Knight, deceased. 10. Pearl a Sword of Estate in Pale, the point erected Ruby, hilted, and po∣melled Topaz; the Scaberd enriched with precious Stones proper. The manner of bearing this Sword varieth according to the several Estates and Dignities of the Persons for whom they are born. 11. Or, a Cardinals Hat with Strings pendent and plated in true-love, the ends meeting in base Gules.
Such Red Hats are worn by the Cardi∣nals at Rome and other Catholick Coun∣tries. 12. Venus, a Staff in Pale Sol, and thereupon a Cross Pattee, Luna surmount∣ed off a Pall of the last, charged with 4. like Crosses fitched Saturn, edged and stringed as the second. This Coat be∣longs to the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbu∣ry, to whose place it appertains to Crown and Inaugurate the Kings of England. 13. Vert, three Gem Rings Or, en∣riched with Turkasses proper. Though Custom and Time hath made the Ring a common Ornament for every Mechanick Hand, yet right none should use and wear them, but such as either by Blood, Wars, Learning, or Office and Dignity were made capable thereof. 14. Azure; a Bishops Crosier in Pale Erect Or. The Crosier was given to the Bishops as an Emblem to fetch and draw the Souls of men to their Lord and Ma∣ster Jesus Christ. 15. Or, Six Annulets 3 2 and 1 Sable, by the Name of Lowther,Lowther. and is born by Sir John Lowther of Lowther-Hall in West∣moreland Baronet.
By Sir William Lowther of Pontefract in the North-Riding of Yorhshire, Knight. By Anthony Lowther of Mask in Cleave∣land, in the North Riding of Yorhshire, Esq. By Henry Lowther of Cockermouth in Cumberland, Esquire, Azure six Annulets, 3 2 and 1 Or, born by Sir Phillip Musgrave of Edenhall in Cumberland, Knight and Baronet, Go∣vernour of Carlisle Garison. By Sir Edward MusgraveMusgrave. of Hayton Castle in the said County Baronet. By Sir Christopher Musgrave of Eden Hall in the said County Knight, second Son to the said Sir Phillip. By William Musgrave of Musgrave Hall in Penrith. By William Musgrave of Clea, both of the said County, Esquires. And by Edward Musgrave of Ashby in Westmorland, Esquire. 16. Argent a Cheveron between, three Annulets Gules, born by Thomas GoreingGoreing. of Kinston in Staffordshire Esquire, and by Lovet Goreing of the Inner Temple, London, Gent. The Charge of Annulets are born se∣veral ways, and of greater or lesser quan∣tities, as by these examples may appear.
Argent, three Annulets in Chief Gules. Azure, fiue Annulets in Cross Or. Barry of six Argent and Azure, over all three Annulets Or. Per Fess Argent and Sable, six Annu∣lets Counterchanged. Gules on a Chief Indented Argent, three Annulets Sable. 17. Gules, ten Billets, 4, 3, 2 and 1. Or, by the Name of Cawdrey.Cawdrey. If the number of Billets be ten, or un∣der, then in the blazoning Name, the quantity of them, but if above, then the Number is not exprest. 18. Diamond a Bend Engrailed be∣tween six Billets Pearl, born by the Right Honourable VVilliam Lord Allington,Lord Al∣lington. Ba∣ron of VVymondley in the Kingdom of England, and Baron of Killard in Ire∣land, Constable of his Majesties Tower of London. 19. Gules 3 Pens Argent. 20. Ermine 3 VVheeles Sable. 21. Argent, a Cross Gules in the first quarter, a Katherin VVheel of the second. This VVheel differs from the plain, which is of use for Carts and other Carri∣ages, it having Teeth set round it, and was much in use in the primitive Age of
the Church for the torturing Christians, and took it's Name St. Katherin, that suf∣fered Martyrdom on such a kind of Wheel. 22. Gules 3 Katherin VVheels Argent, on a Chief of the second a Bulls head cou∣ped Sable, born by Sir Phillip Matthews of Edmonton in Middlesex Baronet, and by Joachin Mathews of Lincolns Inn in Mid∣dlesex, Esquire. 23. Or, three Text Esses Sable. 24. Vert, two Organ Pipes in Saltier between four Crosses Pattee Argent. It is said that Jubal the Son of Lamech was the first that found out Musical In∣struments. 25. Azure a Harp Or, stringed Argent, this is the Armes of Ireland, quartered in his Majesties Royal Atchievement.
engraving of blazon showing man-made objects folio 81 Civill Artificiall things.
Other Examples of CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS. 1. PEarl, a Maunch Diamond, born by Theophilus Earl of Huntington,Earl of Huntington Ba∣ron Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaulx, Moulins, Moules, Homet and Peverel, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. The word Maunch is derived from the Latin word Manica, which signifies the Sleeve of a Garment. 2. Argent, a Cheveron between three Maunches Sable, born by Sir Edward MauncelMauncell. or Mergan in Glamorganshire, Baronet. 3. Or a Purse Overt Gules. 4. Gules a Cheveron between three I∣rish Broges or Shoes, Or.
5. Azure a Plough in Fess Argent, by the Name of Kroge.Kroge. 6. Gules three Scithes in Pale Barways Argent, by the Name of Kemple.Kemple. 7. Sable, a Cheveron between three Tuns Argent, born by the Company of Vintners. 8. Argent three Fusils upon Slippers Gules. They are called Fusils from fucus, which signifies a Spindle of Yarn. Pliny saith it was a fashion and custom at Rome, that when Maids were to be Wedded, there attended upon them one with a Distaff with dressed Wool, as also with a Spin∣dle and Yarn upon it, to put them in mind that Housewifery and Wivery were to go together. 9. Argent, three Weavers Shuttles Sa∣ble, tipped and furnished with their Quills of Yarn or Thread Or, born by John ShuttleworthShuttle∣worth. of Newby Hall in York∣shire, Gentleman. 10. Argent a Cheveron between three Carpenter Squares Sable, by the Name of Atlow.Atlow. 11. Argent a Fess between three pair of Pincers Gules.
12. Gules a Cheveron between three Malletts Or, born by John SoameSoame. of little Thurlow in Suffolk Esquire. 13. Or on a Fess Azure, three Hawks Bells of the first. These sort of Bells are of great anti∣quity, being worn by the Hebrews High-Priests on the Skirts of their upper Gar∣ments, in their Divine Worship, to move the People to Attention. And the great Bells were invented to hang in Churches, to call the People to Divine Service. 14. Sable three Bells Argent, by the Name of Porter.Porter. 15. Argent three Bugle, or Hunters Horns Sable stringed Gules and garnished Or, born by Alan BellinghamBelling∣ham. of Leaven in Westmoreland Esquire. Argent three Bugle-hornes Sable, string∣ed Vert and Garnished Or, is born by Humfrey WyrleyWyrley. of Hampstead Hall in Staffordshire Esquire, one of the Protho∣notaries of his Majesties Court of Common Pleas. 16. Vert, fretty Or, born by Sir Will. WhitmoreWhit∣more. of Apley in Shropshire, Baro∣net. By William Whitmore of Balms in Mid∣dlesex Esquire.
Sable Fretty Or, born by Sir John Bel∣lew of Bellews Town in the County of Meath in Ireland, Knight. 17. Gules a Frett Argent, born by Sir Daniel FlemingFleming. of Ridale in Westmoreland Knight, and by Edward Fleming of In∣slow in Devonshire Esquire. Sable a Frett Argent by the Name of Harington.Haring∣ton. Gules a Frett Engrailed Ermine, by the Name of Eyneford.Eyneford. 18. Or Fretty Gules, a Canton Ermine, born by the Right Honourable Edward Noel, Viscount Campden, Baron of Red∣lington and Elmington, and Earl of Ganes∣borough,Earl of Ga∣nesborough. Lord Leiutenant of Rutland∣shire: And with a due difference, is born by the Honourable John Noel of Luffingham in Rutlandshire Esquire, third Son of the Right Honourable Baptist Noel,Noel. Viscount Campden, &c. 19. Argent, a Frett of eight peices Gules, each charged in the midst with a Flower de lis Or, by the Name of Ha∣milden.Hamilden 20. Argent Frette Gules semy de Castles of the second by the Name of Nechur.Nechur.
21. Argent three Weels, their Hoopes upward Vert. 22. Or three Dice Sable, each charg∣ed with an Ace Argent, by the Name of Ambes Ace. There is no Fortune in the Dice, but all Ominous, for he that looseth is tor∣mented, and he that wineth is enticed to play on until he is ensnared, and it may be loose far more then he formerly won, besides the ill Accidents that often attend, even to murther it self. 23. Ermine on a Cross quarter pierced Argent, four Ferdemolins Sable, born by Sir Edmond Turner of Stoke Rochford in Lincolnshire, Knight.Turner. 24. Azure a Fess between three Chess-rooks Or, by the Name of Bodenham.Bodenham This is a thing used in the Play of Chests, being for the defence of all the rest, and stands in the utmost Corner of the Chest Board, or Frontier Castle.
Other Examples of CIVIL ARTIFICIAL THINGS. 1. SAble three Cups covered Argent, bore by Edmond Warcup of North More in Oxfordshire,Warcup. Esq. 2. Argent, on a Chief Sable, three Cups Covered Or, born by Sir James But∣lerButler. of Lincolns Inn, Knight, Steward of his Majesties Palace and Marshalssea Court. And by Nicolas Butler of Hailes in o∣ver Rawcliff in Lancashire, and of the City of London, Doctor in Physick. 3. Gules a Fusil Argent. 4. Saphir, a Cheveron between three Lo∣zenges Topaz, born by the Right Honou∣rable Henry Earl of Clarendon,Earl of Clarendon. Viscount Cornbury, and Baron Hide of Hendon, and by the Right Honourable Laure Hide,
engraving of blazon showing man-made objects folio 86 Civill Artificiall things.
Earl of Rochester,Earl of Ro∣chester. first Lord Commissio∣ner of his Majesties Treasury, and one of the Lords of his most Honourable Privy Councel. 5. Gules Mascle Argent. The Fusil is longer then the Lozenge, having its upper and lower parts more acute and sharp then the other two cola∣teral middle parts. The Lozenge differs from the Fusil in that it is not sharp at the top and bottom, but all the Lines of an equal length. A Mascle is in form and shape like the Lozenge, but that it is voided as in the Escocheon appears. 6. Argent a Cheveron between 3 Fusils Ermenois, born by Sir John ShawShaw. of El∣tham in Kent, Baronet, and by Mr Tho∣mas Shaw of the City of London, Mer∣chant. 7. Argent on a Bend Sable, three Mas∣cles of the Field, born by Rowland Carle∣tonCarleton. of Ampthil in Bedfordshire, Gentle∣man. 8. Pearl three Lozenges in Fess Ruby, within a Bordure diamond, born by the Right Honourable Charles Mountague,Montagne Earl  Me Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandevil, Baron of Kimbolton.
By the Right Honourable Edward Montague, Earl of Sandwich,Earl of Sandwich. Viscount Montague of Hinchingbrook, and Baron of St. Neots. By the Right Honourable Edward Lord Montague of Boughton. By Edward Montague of Horton in Nor∣thamtonshire Esquire. And by William Montague Esquire, Son and Heir of the Right Honourable Wil∣liam Montague, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesties Court of Exchequer. 9. Argent a Rundle. The Rundle is a thing much used in Coat Armour, but by different Names, it retaining one and the same shape, and the Names appropriated to it, doth de∣clare the Colour without naming it; and of these Rundles, there are nine sorts, (viz.) Bezants whose Colour is Or. Plates whose Colour is Argent. Torteaux∣es, whose Colour is Gules. Hurts, whose Colour is Azure. Pellets or Ogresses, whose Colour is Sable. Pomeis is Vert. Golpes is Purpure. Oranges is Tenne, and Guzes is Sanguine. And of these three are the usual bear∣ing either in a Field by themselves, or on, or between any of the Ordinaries, as by
the Examples in the Escocheon doth ap∣pear. 10. Or three Torteauxes, born by Sir William CourteneyCourte∣ney. of Powderham Castle in Devonshire Baronet. And by John Courteney of Knowstone in the said County, Esquire. 11. Argent, three Torteauxes in Bend, Cottized Sable by the Name of Ince.Ince. 12. Or, on a Fess Sable three Plates, born by Sir John BramstonBramston. of Screens in Essex, Knight of the Bath, and by Fran∣cis Bramston of Sergeant Inn London, Sergeant at Law, Brother to the said Sir John. 13. Sable, two Bars Argent in Chief, three Plates, born by Sir Edward Hunger∣fordHunger∣ford. of Farley Castle in Hampshire, Knight of the Bath. 14. Ardent Six Plates, three, two and one. 15. Or, on a Pale Azure. 3. Bezants born by John Wildman of Beaucot alias Becket in Berkshire, Esq. 16. Argent a Cross Sable between four Pellets, born by Sir Robert ClaytonClayton. of the City of London, Knight and Alderman, late Lord Mayor thereof.
17. Sable ten Plates, four, three, two and one, on a Chiefe Argent, a Lyon Passant Sable, born by Sir John BridgmanBridgman of Castle Bromwick in Warwick∣shire, Ba∣ronet, Son and Heir of the Right Ho∣nourable Sir Orlando Bridgman, Knight and Baronet deceased, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. By Orlando Bridgman of Within-Brook in Warwick∣shire Esquire, second Son of the said Sir Orlando. And by William Bridgman of York-build∣ings in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex Esquire. 18. Gules on a Cheveron Or three Cros∣ses Forme Fitche Sable, between as many Bezants, born by Erasmus SmithSmith. alias Herez of St. Jones in the Parish of Clar∣kenwel in Middlesex Esquire, Son of Sir Roger Smith of Edmonthorp in Leicester∣shire, Knight, deceased. 19. Argent, three Bars Sable in Chiefe, as many Torteauxes, all within a Bordure Ermine, born by Sir Thomas BludworthBludworth of Leather-head in Surrey Knight, Son and Heir to Sir Thomas Bludworth of the said place, and of the City of London, Knight, Alderman and Lord Mayor, An∣no 1666.
engraving of blazon showing man-made military objects folio 91 Military things.
Having treated of CIVIL ARTIFICI∣AL THINGS, next comes in Order Military things as well for Offence as Defence. Examples of MILITARY THINGS. 1. ARgent a Tower triple Tower'd Gules, chained Transverse the Port Or. Castles and Towers are places of strength, and commonly seated on a lofty Assent, and in places of strength both by Nature and Art, and do serve for places of re∣fuge and retreat, rather then for the va∣lorous to perform any Noble exploit in, and many times Castles and Towers have proved very pernitious to those that have reposed trust in their safety. 2. Or a Tower Sable, having a Scaling Ladder raised against it in Bend Sinister Argent.
3. Argent a Tower tripple Tower'd Sa∣ble, on a Mount proper, born by Sir Richard ChivertonChiverton of London Knight and Alderman. 4. Or a Castle tripple Tower Gules, the Ports Displayed of the Field, leaved Argent. Mr. Guillim observeth that when the Architecture or Masonry extendeth all o∣ver the Field, from one side to the other, it must be blazoned a Castle. 5. Argent a Bridge of three Arches in Fess Gules masoned Sable, the streams transfluent proper, a Fane Argent, by the Name of Trowbridge.Trow∣bridg. 6. Sable a Cheveron between three Tents Argent, by the Name of Tenton.Tenton. Tents and Tabernacles were the Chiefe Habitation of our Fore-Fathers, and such kind of Habitations were best for their convenience for the often removing their Seat, for the refreshing their Cattle with change of Pastures. And this Custom is at this day observed by the Tartarians, and some other of the Eastern People: 7. Gules three Single Arches Argent, the Capitals and Pedestals Or. 8. Azure three Banners disvelloped, or displayed in Bend Or.
Banners are very useful for every Band of Foot, or Troop of Horse to gather their Company together, each Banner having some particular mark of distin∣ction for their better knowledge there∣of. 9. Ermine a Cross Bow bend in Pale Gules, by the Name of Arblaster.Arblaster. The Cross Bow is said to be first devised by the Grecians. 10. Gules a Cheveron Engrailed be∣tween three Trumpets Argent. The Trumpet was made by the imme∣diate direction and command of God to Moses, and was to be used for the assem∣bly of the Congregation, and for the de∣parture of the Camp. And the sound of the Trumpet is but as the loud voice of the General, and although the Trumpeter fights not, yet his sounding doth much excite and encourage the Soldiers to valour. 11. Gules a Drum in Fess between three Drumsticks erected Argent. This loud sounding Instrument is of like use with the Trumpet, and used by many Nations. Zizca that renowned Captain of the Bohemians being sick to Death, desired his Souldiers, when he was dead, to flea
him, and make a Drum of his Skin, as∣uring them that when their Enemies should hear the sound thereof they would put them to flight. 12. Sable, a Beacon fired Or, the flame proper. Upon the Invasion of an Enemy the Beacons are set on fire, which presently gives an Alarum to the whole Country, and such Beacons are placed upon high Hills, as in Kent, Essex, and other Fron∣tier Counties of England, for the like oc∣casion when need requires. 13. Argent a Culvering dismounted in Fess Sable, by the Name of Leigh.Leigh. 14. Azure three Murthering Chain shots Or. 15. Pearl three Battering Rams bar∣ways proper, headed Saphir, Armed and Garnished Topaz, by the Name of Be r∣tie, and is born by the Right Honourable Robert Earl of Lindsey,Brtie. Earl of Abington. Baron Willoughby of Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Lord Leiutenant of Lincoln∣shire, and one of the Lords of his Maje∣sties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. Also by his Lordships Brother the Right Honourable James Lord Bertie, Barron Norris of Rycot,Earl of Lindsey. Earl of Abing∣ton,
and Lord Leiutenant of Oxford∣shire. This Coat with a due difference, is born by the Honourable Captain Peregrin Bertie of Waldershire in Kent. By the Honourable Captain Richard Bertie of Creton in Lincolnshire. And by the Honourable Captain Charles Bertie of Ʋffington in Lincolnshire, Brothers of the Right Honourable Robert Earl of Lindsey aforesaid. The Battering Ram was an Instrument much used by the Romans at their besieg∣ing Cities, or holds with purpose to sur∣prize them; and such an Engine did Titus Vespatianus Erect against Jerusalem, when he took it. 16. Azure three Launces in Bend Or. Guillim observes that it was the custom of the Romans, before they waged War, after a denial of restitution of things un∣justly taken, or Satisfaction for injuries offered, that their King at Armes should amongst other Ceremonies throw a Spear headed with Iron, and imbrued with blood, and scorched with fire into the soyl of that People, against whom they intended Wars, to declare to them that they would with Fire and Force se∣verely
punish them for injuries done them. 17. Ruby three Clarions Topaz, born by the Right Honourable John Earl of Bath,Earl of Bath. Viscount Greenvile of Landsdown, Baron Greenvile of Kilhampton and Bidi∣ford, Lord Leiutenant of Cornwal, Go∣vernour of Plimouth, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Steward of the Dutchy, Groom of the Stool, first Gent. of his Ma∣jesties Bed Chamber, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. The Clarion by some is said to be a rest for Launces, and by others a Musical In∣strument used in Battle and Turnaments like unto Trumpets, for in many old de∣scriptions of Tiltings, we find Knights to come in with Clarions. 18. Sable three Scaling Ladders in Bend Argent, by the Name of Shipstow.Shipstow. 19. Argent a Sweep Azure, charged with a Ston Or, by the Name of Mag∣nal.Magnal. This Instrument was used to cast Stones into the Towns, or Fortifications of the Ene∣mies.
engraving of blazon showing man-made military objects folio 97 Military things.
Other Examples of MILITARY THINGS. 1. ERmine three Long Bowes in Pale Bent Gules, by the Name of Bowes.Bowes. 2. Gules three Arrows Or, feathered and headed Argent, born by Sir Edward Hales of Tunstal in Kent, Baronet. By Sir Robert HalesHales. of Beakesborn in the said County Baronet. And by Sir John Hales of Coventry in Warwick-shire Baronet. 3. Sable a Cheveron Engrailed between three Arrows Argent, born by Sir Hum∣frey FosterFoster. of Aldermaston in Bark-shire, Baronet. 4. Saphir a Cross between 4 Pheons To∣paz, born by the Right Honourable Richard Jones Viscount and Earl of Rane∣laugh.Earl of Ranelaugh.
5. Vert on a Cheveron Argent, three barbed Arrow-head Sable, born by Sir Charles KeymisKeymis. of Kaeven Mabley in Gla∣morgan-shire, Baronet. The Bow and Arrows were Military Instruments, much used in former Ages, before the Invention of Guns by the En∣glish, and great Execution was done thereby. And it was the custom of the Persians when they went to war, for eve∣ry one to put an Arrow into a Chest for that purpose, placed before the Throne of their King, and at their return, for every one to take forth an Arrow, and by those remaining, the number of the slain did the better appear. 6. Argent three Spears heads Gules, a Chiefe Azure by the Name of Reyce.Reyce. 7. Sable a Cheveron between three Spears heads Argent, the points embrew∣ed proper by the Name of Morgan.Morgan. 8. Argent a Sword erected in Pale Sa∣ble, by the Name de Dymock.Dymock. The Sword is a Weapon fitted for Ex∣ecution, and hath been used in all Ages. 9. Gules three Swords conjoyned at the Pomels in Fess; their points extended in∣to the Corners of the Escocheon Argent, by the Name of Stapleton.Stapleton.
10. Azure three Swords, one in Pale with the Point upwards, Surmounted of the other two, placed Saltier ways, with the points downwards Argent, by the Name of Norton.Norton. 11. Sable three Swords, one in Pale, two with their points downwards, and the middlemost upwards Argent by the Name of Rawlins.Rawlins. 12. Gules three Swords Barways Argent, the Hilts and Powels Or, born by Chalo∣ner ChuteChute. of the Vine in Hampshire, Es∣quire. 13. Diamond, three Swords with their Points downwards, meeting in the mid∣dle base point Pearl hilted Topaz, born by the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Wiltshire,Earl of Wiltshire. Son and Heir to the most Ho∣nourable Charles Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Baron St. John of Basing, &c. 14. Azure a Curtelasse in Bend Argent garnished Or, by the Name of Tatnal.Tatnal. 15. Sable three Battle Axes Argent, born by John HallHall. of Bradford in Wilt∣shire, Esquire. 16. Argent a Galley under full Sayl A∣zure.
The first Ship that we read of was made by Noah, for the preservation and in∣crease of all living Creatures in the time of the Deluge, to wit the Ark, but Ja∣son first made the Galley, which Sesostris King of Egypt used after him. 17. Azure three Peices of Masts Cou∣ped with their tops Argent. 18. Gules, a Ruther or Helm of a Ship Argent. 19. Vert three Sails Argent, by the Name of Cavel.Cavel. 20. Gules, an Anchor in Pale Argent, the Timber or Cross peice Or, by the Name of Goodreed.Goodreed The Anchor signifies succour in extre∣mity.
engraving of blazon showing man-made military objects folio 101 Military things.
Other Examples of MILITARY THINGS. 1. ARgent three Escocheons or Shields Sable by the Name of Lowdham.Lowdham. 2. Or three Escocheons barry of six Verry and Gules, by the Name of Moun∣chensey.Moun∣chensey. 3. Argent a close Helmet Gules, gar∣nished Or, by the Name of Kingsley.Kingsley. It was the custom of the Romans in their Wars, to cover the Head peices of their light harnessed Soldiers, whether Horse or Foot, with the skins of Bears; and the Grecians used to cover their Heads with the skins of Otters, instead of He∣mets, and both to the end that they should appear more terrible and gashly to their Enemies, and by such a surprize they might the better gain the Victory.
4. Azure two Bars Argent, between three Close Helmets Or, born by Gabriel ArmigerArmiger. of North Creake in Norfolk, and of the Inner Temple London, Es∣quire. 5. Argent, three Helmets with their Bevers open Sable, by the Name of Mi∣niet.Miniet. 6. Azure a Morion proper. This is the Morion now in use for the Foot Sol∣ders. 7. Pearl a Cheveron Ruby between three Morions or Steel Caps Saphir, born by the Right Honourable Francis Lord Brudenel,Brudenel. Son and Heir to the Right Ho∣nourable Robert Earl of Cardigan, Baron Brudnel of Stonton, &c. 8. Saphir three left hand Gaunlets To∣paz, born by the Right Honourable Charles FaneFane. Earl of Westmoreland, Ba∣ron de Spencer and Burgwash, whose se∣cond Son is the Honourable Sir Francis Fane of Fulbeck in Westmoreland Knight of the Bath. 9. Gules three Dexter Arms Vambra∣ced proper, by the Name of Armstrong.Arm∣strong. 10. Argent on a Pile Azure, three Dexter Gauntlets of the Field, born by Thomas Joll ffJolliff. of Costen Hall in Worcester∣shire
Esquire, and by William Jolliff of Craswel Castle in Staffordshire, Esq. 11. Ruby three Legs Armed proper, conjoyned in Fess at the upper part of the Thigh flexed in triangle, garnished and spotted Topaz. This is the Arms of the Isle of Man,The Isle of Man. and is quartered by the Right Honourable the Earl of Derby. 12. Vert a Bar Company Argent and Azure, between three Curasses, or Brest-Plates of Armour of the second, on a Chiefe of the same, as many Fermailes or Buckles, as the third by the Name of Baldberny of Scotland. 13. Argent three Saddles with Stirrups Gules. 14. Or, three Chaplets Vert, by the Name of Richardson. Guillim observeth that Chaplets were by the Romans, given as a Reward of Honour for some Military Services performed, and they were of several sorts, some were made of Lawrel, others of Oaken Leaves, Palme, Ivy, Olive, and some of Gold, and some of Silver, also some of Roses, Violets and such like Flowers. 15. Argent on a Cheveron Sable, five Horseshoes Or, born by Sir Nicholas CrispeCrispe. of Hamersmith in Middlesex, Baronet.
16. Argent, a Shackbolt Sable, by the Name of Newthal.Nevvthal. 17. Gules, three Waterbougets Argent, by the Name of Roos.Roos. 18. Gules, a Fess between three Wa∣terbougets Ermine, born by Sir Thomas MeersMeers. of Lincoln Knight, one of the Commissioners of the Admiralty. 19. Argent, three Waterbougets A∣zure. This kind of Waterbouget was antient∣ly used in Cout Armour. 20. Vert, a Chevalier Armed at all points a Cape a pee Brandishing his Sword aloft Argent, garnished Or, mounted on a Barded Courier, furnished throughout as the second, garnished as the third.
CHAP. IV. Treats of Common Charges in Coat Armour whereof some are Natu∣ral, and meerly formal as Angels, and Spirits, and others both for∣mal and material as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, also such Na∣tures as are sublinar, as all kinds of Minerals which have Life after a sort as Vegetables, and Sensitive Creatures which have perfect Life. COmmon Charges are things Natural, or Artificial; those Artificial are al∣ready handled. Things Natural are Formal, or Material, and are of that great variety that it can't be expected in so small a Volumn to pass through all the particu∣lars of them, but only give some exam∣ples that may serve to instruct the Reader to Blazon a Coat of the like charge.
Celestials are born single, or upon, or between any of the Honourable Ordinaries, and then three are the usual number. Examples of CELESTIALS. 1. MArs an Angel standing direct with his hands conjoyned and e∣levated upon his breast habited in a long Robe close girt Luna. his Wings display∣ed as prepared to fly Sol. Angels are incorporeal Essences of a Spiritual Nature void of all material sub∣stances. They are the Mssengers by whom God hath manifested his Will and Power to his Elect, and in Scripture they are said to be ministring Spirits. 2. Luna, on a chief Jupiter a Cherub displayed Sol. The Cherubins were drawn with Wings before the place where the Israelites pray∣ed
engraving of blazon showing celestial bodies
folio 106 Coelestialls.
manifesting the great speed when they went about the Lords business. 3. Or a Sphere Azure beautified, and replenished with variety of Celestial Bo∣dies encompassing the Terrestrial Globe all proper. These were the Ornaments wherewith the shield of Achilles was garnished. 4. Azure a Star of sixteen points Ar∣gent born by John Huitson of Cleasby in Yorkshire Esquire, one of the Captains of his Majesties Companie of Foot Guards. 5. Sable a Fess Wavey between the Pole Stars Artick and Artartick Argent, born by Sir Francis DrakeDrake. of Buckland Mona∣chorum in Devonshire Bar! Descendant of the famous Sir Francis Drake Knight that sailed about the World, making great discoveries thereof. A Star commonly consists of six Points, or Raies, and then in the Blazoning the number needs not be exprest; but if of more, then name of what number as in the former examples. Stars were Created by God to give light, and with their influences to be as∣sistant to the Sun and Moon in the Procrea∣tion, Production, and Fructification of Seeds Plants and Herbs; as also for the desig∣nation
and foreshewing of Times and Seasons as the Sun and Moon were. Stars are sometime peirced, and other whiles charged, and when peirced the peir∣cing is round. 6. Pearl, a Cheveron between three Stars Diamond, born by the Right Ho∣nourable Charles Lord Viscount Mordaunt of Aveland,Lord Mor∣daunt. and Baron of Rygate. 7. Saphir, three Stars and a Chief Wavey Topaz born by the Right Honourable Charles Bodvel,Lord Bod∣myn. Viscount Bodmyn Grand∣son and Heir to the Right Honourable John Lord Robarts, Baron of Truro, Vi∣scount Bodmyn, Earl of Radnor, and Lord President of His Majesties most Honoura∣ble Privy Counsel. And is also born by the Honourable Hender, and Francis Ro∣bartsRobarts. Esquires, Sons of the Right Honou∣rable John Earl of Radnor, &c. 8. Gules, a Blazing Star, or Comet streaming in Bend proper. The Comets have been observed to Prognosticate dreadful events of things to come, as Pestilence, Famine, War and the like. Sometimes the stream is born upwards as it was before the great Pestilence in 1665, but most commonly it is born downwards.
9. Argent, a Cheveron Sable between three Flames of Fire proper. Fire in the Scripture is oft times taken for a special token of Gods favour, and that he is pleased with the Sacrifices that are done unto him, and Fire betoken∣eth zeal. Some Writers affirm that none of the Mechanical Trades were found out before they had Fire; but afterwards dai∣ly was put in practice some new inven∣tion or other, yet as it is a good Servant so it is (as also Water) a bad Master. 10. Azure, a Crescent encircled within an Orl of Stars Or, a Border of the Se∣cond, born by Thomas BurtonBurton. of London Esquire. 11. Azure a Sun in his Glory, by the name of Saint Clere.St. Clere. The Sun is a glorious Body, the Foun∣tain of Light, and the production of Fruits, Plants, and all the Splendor that the Moon hath she borroweth from him, and between both these there is a great con∣formity. 12. Gules a Chief Argent on the lower part thereof a Cloud, the Suns resplendent Raies issuing thereout proper, by the name of Lesone.Lesone. 13. Azure one Raye of the Sun issu∣ing
out of the dexter corner of the Esco∣cheon Bendwayes proper by the name of Aldam.Aldam. 14. Or a Sun Eclipsed Sable. The Suns Eclipse is occasioned by the in∣terposition of the Moon betwixt it and the Earth. 15. Gules an Increscent Or by the name of Descus.Descus. This is the State of the Moon from her entrance into her first quarter, in which time she is more and more illumi∣nated until she hath filled her Circle. 16. Gules, a Moon in her Complement Or Illustrated with all her Light proper which is sufficient without naming the colour which is Argent. The Moon is the Mistress by which all moist, mutable, and inconstant things are ruled, as a Woman, the Sea, Rivers, and Fountains The Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea following the Moons motion. 17. Azure, a Moon decressent proper, by the name of De la Luna.De la Luna. This is the state of the Moon in her Wain, the Horns must always be turned towards the left hand of the Escocheon, as that in her Complement is towards the right.
18. Argent, a Moon in her detriment or Eclipse Sable. The Moon is eclipsed always in her full State, and is so occasioned by the inter∣position of the Earth betwixt her and the Sun. 19. Azure, a Crescent Argent, born by Jacob LucyLucy. of London Esquire. 20. Azure, three Crescents Or, born by Robert Rither, or RiderRider. of Scarcraft in Yorkshire Esquire. And by Thomas and William Rider of Bednal Green in Middle∣sex Esquire. Sable, three Crescents Argent by the name of Glove.Glove. Gules, three Crescents Argent by the name of Perpoint.Perpoint. Gules, the Crescents Ermine by the name of Fleming.Fleming. Gules, three Crescents Or, by the name of Monnings.Monnings. 21. Pearl, a Fess between three Crescents Diamond born by the Right Honourable Edward Henry Lee Earl of Litchfield,Earl of Litchfield. Viscount, Quarenton, and Baron Spils∣bury. 22. Diamond, a Fese Ermine between three Crescents Topaz,Coventry. born by the Right
Honourable George Coventry Baron of Alesborough in Worcestershire, &c. And by the Honourable Henry Coven∣try Esquire, Son to the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England. 23. Azure, a Fess Nebule between three Crescents Ermine born by Hum, WeldWeld. of Lulworth Castle in Dorsetshire Esquire Governour of His Majesties Isle and Ca∣stle of Portland, and Sandes Foot. 24. Gules, a Star issuing from between the Horns of a Crescent Argent. Other Examples of Crescents. OR on a Chief Indented Sable, three Crescents Argent, by the name of Harvey.Harvey. Sable, a Cross engrailed between four Crescents Argent by the name of Barn∣ham.Barnham. Per Pale Sable and Argent, three Cre∣scents counter-changed by the name of Topcliff.Topcliff.
engraving of blazon showing celestial bodies folio 113 Coelestialls.
Barry of six Ermine and Gules, three Crescents Sable, by the Name of Watter∣ton.Watter∣ton. Or, five Crescents, one, three, one, by the Name of HamondHamond. of Hampshire. Argent six Crescents, three, two, one Sable, by the Name of Blare.Blare. Per Pale Argent and Sable, six Cre∣scents Counterchanged by the Name of, WickhalseWick∣halse. of Devonshire. Other Examples of CELESTIALS. 1. ERmine, a Mullet of six Points pierced Gules, by the Name of Hussenhul.Hussenhul Meteors are an imperfect kind of mix∣ture engendered in the Airy Region of a certain attracted fume drawn up by the operation of the Sun and Stars, and is of a hot quality, which at length breaks
into Fire, and so looseth or wasteth it self, and such are Mullets or Flaming Stars. Antiently Mullets were born of six Points, as in this Example, but now usu∣ally of five. 2. Per Cheveron Or and Vert, three Mullets Counterchanged by the Name of Hothe.Hothe. 3. Sable six Mullets, three, two, one Argent, by the Name of Bonvile.Bonvile. Azure, six Mullets, three, two, one Or, by the Name of Welsh.Welsh. 4. Gules, on a Chiefe Argent, two Mullets Sable,Bacon. born by Sir Edmond Bacon of Redgrave Hall in Suffolk Baronet. By Sir Henry Bacon of Lounde in Lo∣vingland in Suffolk Baronet. By Sir Nicolas Bacon of Shrubland Hall in Codenham in the said County, Knight of the Bath. Pearl on a Chiefe Ruby, 2 Mullets pierced Topaz, born by the Right Ho∣nourable Oliver Saint John Earl of Bul∣lingbrook,Earl of Bulling∣brook. &c. St. John:And by Sir Walter Saint John of Lydi∣ard Tregos in Wiltshire, and of Battersey in Surrey Baronet.
5. Azure on a Cross Argent, five Mul∣lets Gules born by Sir Ralph Verney of Middle-Claydon in Buckingham-shire,Verney. Knight and Baronet. 6. Argent two Barrs between three Mullets of six points pierced Sable, born by Phillip Dougty of York Buildings in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex Esquire.Doughty. 7. Per Bend Argent and Sable, three Mullets of six points in Bend Counter-changed. 8. Argent, three Mullets pierced Sa∣ble, by the Name of Wollaston.Wollaston Azure, three Mullets pierced Or, by the Name of WhittingtonWhit∣tington. of Lincolnshire. Azure, three Mullets Or, by the Name of Grundin.Grundin. Or, three Mullets Sable, by the Name of Pelton.Pelton. Sable, three Mullets Argent, by the Name of Puliston.Puliston. Gules, three Mullets Argent, by the Name of HansardHansard. of Lincolnshire. 9. Sable, on a Bend Ardent, three Mullets Gules, born by Francis Glisson, Doctor in Physick.G isson.
10. Azure, a Cheveron between three Mullets Or,Chetwynd born by Walter Chetwynd of Ingestre in Staffordshire Esquire. 11. Or, a Cheveron between three Mullets pierced Sable, born by Thomas Davies of Crissing-Temple in Essex Esq. Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Davies of London,Davies. Knight and Alderman decea∣sed. 12. Gules, a Fess between six Mullets Argent, born by Sir Denny Ashburnham of Broomhal in Sussex Baronet, and by  AshburnhamAshburn∣ham. of Ashburnham in the said County Esquire. 13. Argent, a Mullet Sable, on a Chiefe Gules, a Flower de lis Or, born by William Rogers of Castle-Hale in the Parish of Pans∣wick in Glocester-shire.Rogers.
Other Examples of Mullets. PEr Fess Or and Azure, a Mullet of eight points Counterchanged by the Name of Scotto.Scotto. Azure, three Mullets and a Chiefe in∣dented Or, by the Name of Bright.Bright. Azure, a Crescent between three Mul∣lets Argent, by the Name of Minshal.Minshal. Per Pale Argent and Gules, three Mullets, Counterchanged by the Name of Langford.Langford. Per Fess Indented Gules and Or, three Mullets Counterchanged by the Name of Eglington.Eglington 14. Azure, Jupiters Thunderbolt in Pale Or, inflamed on both ends proper, shafted Salterwise, and Winged Fess ways Argent.
15. Barre Nebule Or and Sable, born by the Name of Blunt.Blunt. 16. Argent, a Rain-Bow of divers co∣lours proper. Examples of VEGETABLES: Under which Head all Trees, Flowers, Plants, Leaves and Fruits are or may be comprized. 1. OR on a Mount in Base, a Pear-Tree fruited Proper, by the Name of Pyrton.Pyrton. Argent, on a Mount in Base, a Pine Ap∣ple Tree fruited, by the Name of Pine.Pine. Vegetables have in them a living Power of Growing, Budding, Leasing, Blosom∣ing
engraving of blazon showing plants folio 118 Vegelables.
and Fractifying, as Trees, Plants, Herbs, Grass, &c. and of hes some on Trunks or solid Bodies, and some upon Flexible Stocks; some again grow upon a single Stem, as commonly all Tre do, and some upon several Stems, as Shrubs, Roses, and the like. 2. Gules, the Stem or Trunck of a Tree Eradicated, as also couped in Pale, sprouting out two Branches Ardent, born by William Burrough of BurroughBurrough in Lei∣cestershire, Gentleman. 3. Azure a Limb of a Tree Raguled and Trunked in Bend Argent. 4. Argent, three Stocks or Stumps of Trees, couped and eradicated Sable, by the Name of Retowre.Retowre. 5. Gules, three Woodbine Leaves Pen∣dant Or. The Woodbine is a loving and amorous Plant, embracing all that groweth near it, but without hurting of that which it loveth, and is contrary to the Ivy (which is a Type of Lust rather then Love) for it injureth that which it most embrac∣eth. 6. Sable, three Laurel Leaves slipped Or.
The Laurel was in Antient times thought to be a remedy against Poyson, Lightning and the like, and in War used as a Token of Peace and Quietness. 7. Argent, three Woodbine Leaves Bend ways, two and one proper, by the Name of Theme.Theme. 8. Or, three Holly Leaves Barrways, two and one, their Stalks towards the Dexter part of the Escocheon proper, by the Name of Arnest.Arnest. 9. Vert, five Figg Leaves in Saltier. 10. Topaz, two Barrs Ruby, each charged with three Trefoyles slipped of the first, born by the Right Honourable Ro∣ger Palmer Earl of Castlemain,Earl of Castlemain and Baron of Limberick in Ireland. 11. Azure, three Quaterfoyls Argent born by Sir Anthony VincentVincent. of Stoke-Da∣bernon in Surrey, Baronet. As also by Samuel Vincent of Bucking∣ham House in Norfolk Esquire. 12. Argent on a Cheveron Sable, three Quaterfoiles Or, born by N. EyreEyre. of Wil∣ton in Wiltshire, Gentleman. 13. Argent, three Cinquefoils Gules, born by Sir Thomas DarcyDarcy. of St. Clerrs Hall in St. Oseth in Essex, Baronet.
14. Argent, three Cinquefoyls Gules, each charged with five Annulets Or, born by Sir Robert SouthwelSouthwel. of Kingsweston in Glocestershire Knight. 15. Or, a Cheveron between three Cinquefoyls Gules, born by the Right Ho∣nourable Sir Thomas ChicheleyChicheley of Wimpley in Cambridgshire Knight, Master of the Ordinance, and one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, Anno 1681. 16. Argent on a Chiefe Gules, three Cinquefoyls of the Field, born by Sir Tho∣mas Bellot of Moreton in Cheshire,Bellet. Baro∣net. 17. Saphir, a Cinquefoyl Ermine with∣in a Bordure Topaz, born by the Right Honourable Jacob Lord Astley,Lord Ast∣ley. Baron of Reading, &c. And is also the Coat of Sir Jacob Ast∣ley of Melton-Constable in Norfolk, Ba∣ronet. 18. Argent, a Fess Engrailed between three Cinquefoyls within a Border Sable, born by Tho. FoleyFoley. of Kidderminster in Worcestershire, Esquire. By Paul Foley of Stoak Court in Herefordshire Esquire; and by Phillip Foley of Prestwood in Stafford∣shire Esquire, Sons of Tho. Foley of Wit∣ley, of Court in Worcestershire, Esq.
These Charges, as also Fruits, Flow∣ers, &c. are born on, or between, any of the Ordinaries. Examples of FRUITS and FLOWERS. 1. ARgent, a Pomegranate in Pale slip∣ped Prope. This Fruit is esteemed very good in Physick, whose juice is used for the allay∣ing the heat of Burning or Feavorish Agnes. 2. Azure, three Pears Or, by the Name of Stukeley.Stukeley. 3. Gules, a Cheveron Ermine between three Pine Apples erected Or, by the Name of Pine.Pine. Under this head may be comprehend∣ed all other kind of Fruit. 4. Azure, a Garbe or Wheat-sheafe Or, born by Sir Thomas GrosvenourGrosve∣nour. of Egton in Cheshire, Baronet.
engraving of blazon showing fruits and flowers folio 122 Fruits, & Flowers.
Azure, a Garb Argent, by the Name of Holdesheafe.Holdes∣heafe. 5. Sable, three Garbs Or, born by Wil∣liam StychStych. of Newbury in the Parish of Barkin in Essex Esq. Argent, three Garbs Sable, by the Name of Wanting.Wanting. 6. Azure, seven Garbs Sable, four, two and one Or, born by Sir Thomas Doleman of Shaw in Bark-shire Knight,Dolman. one of the Clerks of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, Father of Sir Humfrey Doleman, Knight. 7. Argent, on a Cheveron between three Garbs Gules, as many Bezants, born by Tobias EdenEden. of the Inner Temple, Lon∣don Esq. Azure, a Cheveron between three Garbs Or, born by the Right Honourable Chri∣stopher Lord Hatton,Lord Hat∣ton. Governour of the Isle of Jarsey. And by Mr. Roger Hatton of London, Merchant. 8. Azure, three Ears of Guiny Wheat couped and bladed Or, by the Name of Grandgorge.Grand∣gorge. 9. Saphir, a Flower de lis Pearl, born by the Right Honourable George Earl of Bristol,Bristol. Baron Digby of Sherbourn, and
by the Right Honourable Simon Lord Digby,Ld. Digny. Baron of Geashill in Ireland. Or, a Flower de lis Azure, born by Sir William PortmanPortman. of Orchard in Somerset∣shire, Knight of the Bath, and Baro∣net. Azure, a Flower de lis Or, by the Name of Stepkin.Stepkin. Argent, a Flower de lis Gules, born by John MordenMorden. of London Merchant. Gules, a Flower de lis Or, by the Name of Palford.Palford. Gules, a Flower de lis Argent, by the Name of Waldenfield.Walden∣field. Vert, a Flower de lis Argent, by the Name of Fowk.Fovvk. 10. Pearl, a Cheveron Ruby between three Flower de lis Saphir, born by the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Viscount Faulconberg,Lord Vis∣count Faul∣conberg. Baron of Yarum, Lord Leiutenant of the North Riding of York∣shire, and one of the Lords of his Maje∣sties most Honourable Privy Councel. And by the Right Honourable John Lord Belasis,Ld. Bellasis Baron of Worlaby, &c. Or, a Cheveron between three Flower de lis Sable, born by the Right Honoura∣ble Evelyn Lord Viscount Fanshaw,Fanshaw. his Majesties Remembrancer of his Court of Exchequer, &c.
By the Honourable Henry Fanshaw of Dengy-hall in Essex Esquire: And by the Honourable Charles Fanshaw of Dengy∣hall aforesaid Esquire, his Majesties En∣voy extraordinary in Portugal, Sons of the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Vi∣scount Fanshaw. deceased. 11. Topaz on a Fess Ruby, three Flower de lis of the Field, born by the Right Honourable Thomas Leonard Earl of Sussex,Earl of Sussex, and Lord Dacres of Giles-land, &c. Argent, on a Fess Gules three Flower de lis Or, born by Gervase Disny of Nor∣ton-DesneyDisney. in Lincolnshire, Esquire. 12. Quarterly Gules and Or, in the first quarter a Flower de lis Argent, born by Elias AshmoleAshmole. of the Middle Temple, London Esquire. 13. Sable a Fess Dauncette Or, in cheif three Flower de lis Argent, born by William Feak of Stafford in Staffordshire,Feak. Gentleman. 14. Sable, three Lozenges Argent, on a chief Or, as many Flower de lis Gules, born by Sir Nicholas PedleyPedley. of Abbot∣sley, and Tetsworth in Huntingtonshire, Knight. 15. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between
three Columbines slipped proper by the name of Hall.Hall. 16. Sable on a Cross between four Flower de lis Argent, five Pheons Azure born by Caleb Banks of the Friers in Aylesford in Kent Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir John BanksBanks. of the said place Barronet. 17. Or on a Bend Engrailed between six Roses Gules, born by Edmond Warner of Warner-Hall in Essex Esquire: And by John WarnerWarner. of Brokenthwait in the Pa∣rish of Kirby-overbow in Yorkshire Esquire, descended from the Warners of Warners-Hall aforesaid. 18. Gules, two Swords with their points erected in Saltier proper, Hilts and Pomels Or, between three Roses Argent, viz. one in Cheif, and two in Fess, born by Patrick TrantTrant. of Saint Giles in the Fields in Middlesex Esquire. 19. Or, three Flower de lis Azure, a Bordure Gules charged with eight Roses Argent, born by Sir Walter ClargesClarges. of Saint M rtins in the Field Baronet. 20. Sable, on a Cheveron Argent, three Roses Gules, seeded and Barbed proper, in the dexter cheif a Helmet close Bevered of the Second, born by Robert RoseRose. of Hasland in Derbyshire, Gentleman.
Under this head all other Flowers may be comprized; some few more exam∣ples I have here set down. Argent, three Roses Gules, by the name of Young.Young. Gules, three Flower de lis Argent, by the name of Wisemale.Wisemale. Azure, a Vine with Fruit and Leaves all Or. Per Pale, Ermine and Gules, a Rose Counter-changed, by the name of Nigh∣tingale.Nightin∣gale. Sable, three Roses Argent, seeded Or, by the name of Powel.Powel. Argent, six Roses 3, 2, and 1, Gules, by the name of Palton.Palton. Argent, ten Roses 4, 3, 2, 1, Gules by the name of Payens.Payens. Gules, three Flower de lis Argent, by the name of Mondeford.Mondeford Or, five Flower de lis 2, 1, 2, Sable by the name of Spindelow.Spindelow. Gules, six Flower de lis 3, 2, 1, Ar∣gent born by Sir Gilbert Ireland of Hut,Ireland. and Beausie in Lancashire, Knight. Argent, three Gilly Flowers proper, by the name of Jorney.Jorney. From Vegetables as Leaves, Trees, Plants, Fruits and Flowers, I shall next treat of the parts of Mans Body.
Examples of the PARTS of MANS BODY. 1. JƲpiter, our blessed Lady with her Son in her right hand, and a Scepter in her left all Topaz, this Coat belongs to the Bishoprick of Salisbury.Bishoprick of Salis∣bury. 2. Gules, a Saracens Head erazed at the neck Argent, environed about the Tem∣ples with a wreath of the Second and Sa∣ble, by the name of MergithMergith. of Wales. 3. Argent, three Blackamores Heads couped proper, banded about Gules, born by John TannerTanner. of Court in Corn∣wal Esquire. Or, three Blackamores Heads couped proper, banded about Argent, born by Samuel Mico of London Esquire, and by Edward and Aaron MicoMico. of London Mer∣chants.
engraving of blazon showing human body parts folio 128 Parts of Mans Body.
4. Argent, a Cheveron Gules between three Peruques Sable. Claudius surnamed Comatus when he gained the Government of France insti∣tuted a Law that the French men should wear their Hair long (as his Arm was) in token of Liberty, for shaving off the Hair was then a token of Bondage, and this was observed by the Romans who u∣sed to shave the Hair of their Bond∣men. 5. Or a Heart proper, a cheif Sable, by the name of Scambler.Scambler. 6. Argent, a Fess Gules, between three Hearts vulned and distilling drops of blood on the sinister side proper, by the name of Tote.Tote. 7. Azure an Armsinister issuing out of the Dexter point and extended towards the sinister base in form of a Bend Ar∣gent, 8. Vert, three Dexter Arms conjoin∣ed at the Shoulders and flexed in Trian∣gle Or, with Fists clenched Argent born by Arthur Tremaine of Cullocombe in De∣vonshire Esquire.Tremain. 9. Argent, three sinister hands couped at the Wrists and erected Gules, born by
Sir John MaynardMaynard. of Gunnersbury in the Parish of Ely in Middlesex, Knight, Ser∣jeant at Law to His Majesty King Charles the Second. 10. Or, a Mans Leg couped at the midst of the thigh Azure, by the name of Haddon.Haddon. 11. Argent, a Mans Leg erazed at the Thigh Sable, by the name of Prime.Prime. 12. Ruby, three Legs Armed proper, conjoined in Fess at the upper part of the Thigh flexed in Triangle, garnished and spurred Topaz, this Coat is the Arms of the Isle of Man,Arms of the Isle of Man. and is quartered by the Earl of Derby as Lord of the said Isle. 13. Argent, Guttee de Sang, by the name of Lemming. These Drops are seldom born by them∣selves alone, but upon or with some of the Ordinaries. Gutte de Sang without naming the Co∣lour signifies drops of Blood, and is al∣ways Gules. Gutte de Harmes drops of Tears which is Azure. Gutte de Hau drops of Water which is Argent. Gutte de Poix, or Gutte de Sable; that is drops of Pitch, and is Sable. Gutte de Or, drops of Gold, and is, Or The form or shape of these drops are
all as one, only the names change the Co∣lours. 14. Azure, a Pale, or, Gutte de Sang, born by Sir Thomas PlayerPlayer. of London, Knight, late Chamberlain of the said City of London. 15. Or, on a Cheveron Gules, three dead mens Skulls, of the field by the name of Bolter.Bolter. 16. Sable, a Shin-bone in Pale surmoun∣ted of another in Cross Argent by the name of Bayns. OF ANIMALS. FROM the parts of Mans Body I shall proceed to Animals born in Coat Armour both whole and in parts, which the following Examples will demonstrate. And of Animals those of prey are of most Esteem, as the Lyon, Tiger, Bear, Wolf, &c. And in Coat Armour the bearing of whole Animals being more
worthy then the several parts, I shall first begin with them. Of all Creatures apt to generation and corruption Animals are most worthy. All Savage Beasts are naturally armed with something wherewith they may hurt their Enemies as the Boar hath Turkes; the Lion Tallons, the Stag Horns, the Ser∣pent Poyson, and the like. All four Footed Beasts are esteemed more worthy of bearing then Fishes, or Fowls in regard they contain in them more worthy and commendable signifi∣cations of Nobility: and the Males are esteemed more worthy then the Fe∣males. Examples of BEARINGS of LIONS. 1. ARgent, a Lion Rampant Sable, by name of Stapleton.Stapleton. Argent, a Lion Rampant Gules by the name of Verdon.Verdon.
engraving of blazon showing lions with various bearings folio 132 Lions.
Argent, a Lion Rampant vert by the name of Springs.Springs. Or a Lion Rampant Sable by the name of Poley.Poley. Azure, a Lion Rampant Or, by the name of Beckingham.Beckingham Ermine, a Lion Rampant. Azure, by the name of Hardness of Kent. Argent, a Lion Rampant Sable Crown∣ed Or, born by Charles MorleyMorley. of Drox∣ford in Hantshire Esquire, one of the Ma∣sters of Requests to his Majesty King Charles the Second. Azure, a Lion Rampant Crowned Or, born by Sir Francis DayrelDayrel. of Castle Camps in Cambridgeshire Knight. Vert, a Lion Rampant Or, by the name of Morgan.Morgan. Ermine, a Lion Rampant Azure, crown∣ed Or, born by Sir Henry PickeringPickering. of Whaddon in Cambridgeshire Knight, and Barronet. 2. Azure a Lion Rampant Gardant Or, born by Fitz Hammond.Fizt Ham∣mond. Or, a Lion Rampant Gardant Gules, by the name of Horon.Horon. Gules, a Lion Rampant Gardant Or, born by George MastersMasters. of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex Esquire.
Gules, a Lion Rampant Gardant Argent, by the Name of St. Marney.St. Marney, 3. Gules, a Lion Rampant Regardant Or, born by John MoriceMorice, of London Esq. Or, a Lion Rampant Regardant Vert, by the Name of Hume.Hume. Or, a Lion Rampant Regardant Gules, by the Name of Roberts.Roberts. This Action of the Lion, manifests an inward and degenerate Perturbation of the Mind, which is Repugnant to the generous Nature of the Lion, this deno∣ting a timerous Mind, yet it betokens a diligent Circumspection, and Considera∣tion of things to come. 4. Argent, a Lion Rampant Coward Purpure, by the Name of Rowch.Rowch. This Cowardly Action of claping his Tayl betwixt his Leggs (as all Beasts do that are affrighted) is contrary to the Noble Spirit of the Lion. 5 Or, a Lion Rampant Double Quene Azure, born by Sir Christopher WansfordWansford. of Kirklington in York-shire Baronet. Or, a Lion Rampant Double Quene Sa∣ble, by the Name of Wells.Wells. Sable, a Lion Rampant Double Quene Or, by the Name of Kingston.Kingston. Azure, a Lion Rampant Double Quene
Or, by the Name of Bromhall.Bromhall. The Forked Tayl is an Emblem of Mag∣nanimity, and Strennuousness. 6. Argent, a Lion Saliant Gules, by the Name of Felbridg.Felbridge. Sable, a Lion Saliant Argent, by the Name of Sturmy.Sturmy. Gules, a Lion Saliant Argent, by the Name of Salisbury.Salisbury. When the Lion prosecutes his Prey, he pursueth the same Leaping, or Saliant, which action he never useth when he is Chased in Fight, but is always Passant. 7. Or, a Lion Rampant Double Leste Azure, born by Simon MasonMason. of Great Gransden in Huntington-shire Gent. 8. Sable, two Lion Cells Rampant Com∣batant Or, born by Nicholas CarterCarter. of Willesborrow in Kent, and of London Dr. in Physick. Leigh saith, That these two Lions were of sundry Regions which strove for Go∣vernment, for the Lion is as desirous of Mastery, as a Courageous Prince is am∣bitious of Honour. Azure, two Lions Rampant Gardant Combatant Argent, born by Sir Jacob Gar∣rardGarrard. of Langford in Norfolk Baronet.
9. Azure, two Lioncells Rampant En∣dorsed Or. This Coat is said to be born by Achilles at the Siege of Troy; and Leigh suppo∣seth it to be a Combat intended between two Valiant Men who both met in the Field, but the Prince savouring them ta∣keth the Matter into his hands, and then they turn back to back, and so leave the Field. 10. Or, a Lion Passant Gules, by the Name of Games.Games. Or, a Lion Passant Sable, by the Name of Pynoke.Pynoke. Sable, a Lion Passant Or, by the Name of Taylor.Taylor. Sable, a Lion Passant Or, by the Name of Field.Field. Ermine, a Lion Passant Gules, by the Name of Drew.Drew. Ermine, a Lion Passant Sable, by the Name of Wither.Wither. 11. Azure, a Lion Passant Gardant Or, born by Sir John BromfieldBromfield. of Suffolk place in Southwark Knight. Azure, a Lion Passant Gardant Or, born by William ThompsonThompson. of the middle Temple London Esquire. Argent, a Lion Passant Gardant Sable by the Name of Stone.Stoe.
Argent, a Lion Passant Gardant Gules, by the Name of Querleton.Querleton. Gules, a Lion Passant Gardant Or, by the Name of Brett.Brett. Gules, a Lion Passant Gardant Argent, by the Name of Redeshall.Redeshall. The Lion Passant seemeth to go with more Confidence and Resolution, but the Gardant with more Vigilancy and Cir∣cumspection. 12. Argent, two Lioncells Counter Passant Gules, the upermost towards the Sinister side of the Escocheon, both Colour∣ed Or. 13. Gules, a Lion Sejant Argent. Although this Gesture hath affinity with the Lion Couchant, yet the difference is easily to be observed. 14. Gules, a Lion between six Cross Crosslets Argent, born by Sir Halswell Tynte,Tynte. of Halswell in the Parish of Goat-hurst in Sommerset-shire Baronet. The Lion must not be thought to be compelled to Couch, but that he hath so settled himself of his own accord; for it is contrary to his Nature, to be compel∣led to any thing by Chastisement, and a generous mind is easier to be led then drove.
15. Azure, a Lion Dormant Or. 'Tis said, That the Lion sleepeth with his Eyes open, being an Emblem to Go∣vernours, whose Vigilancy should shew it self, when others are most at rest and secure. Some are of Opinion, That the Lion should not be made Gardant, affirming that to be the property of the Leopard. The generous Nature of the Lion, is dis∣cerned by his plentiful Shaggy Locks which cover his neck and shoulders, and doth shew his Noble Courage, especially if curled and short; also the thickness of the Lions Mane, is a Testimony of his ge∣nerous Birth, and by the same he is di∣stinguished from the Bastard Race of Leo∣pards, begotten by the Adulterous Lioness and the Parde▪ which are Naturally depri∣ved of this Noble Mark, nor have they the Courage. To Lions, Bares, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey, Nature hath given sharp Teeth and Tallons, for the seizing and keep∣ing their Prey, and therefore in the Bla∣zoning of Beasts, their Teeth and Tallons must not be omitted, and for expres∣sing them, say Armed of such and such a Colour, which is always Gules or Azure,
engraving of blazon showing lions rampant folio 139 Lions Rampant
and contrary to the Colour of them. All Beasts of Prey in their going do contract their Tallons within their Flesh, to keep them sharp for the tearing their Prey, which otherwise would be blunt, and so become useless to them. Other Examples of LIONS RAMPANT. 1. SAphir, a Lion Rampant Pearl, born by the Right Honourable John. Lord Crew,Ld. Crew. Baron of Stean in Northamp∣ton shire, &c. Argent, a Lion Rampant Sable, charged on the Shoulder with a Mullet Or, born by Sir Thomas MompessonMompesson of Bathampton in Wilt-shire, Knight. Vert, a Lion Rampant Or, born by Ar∣thur ShaenShaen. of Great Kewe in Surrey, Esq; Son and Heir of Sir James Shaen of the said place, Knight and Baronet. 2. Vert, a Lion Rampant between three Trefoyles Slipped Or, born by Thomas She∣ridanSheridan.
of Cavan in the Province in Ʋlster in Ireland, Esquire. 3. Pearl, a Lion Rampant Ruby, be∣tween three Pheons Diamond, born by the Right Honourable John Egerton, Earl Bridgwater,Earl of Bridgwater Viscount Barkley, and Baron of Elesmer, Lord Lieutenant of Bucking∣ham-shire, and one of the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Coun∣cil, &c. This Coat is also born by John Egerton of Broxton in Cheshire, Esquire, Eldest Son of Sir Phillip EgertonEgerton. of Egerton and Outon, in the said County Knight. 4. Argent, a Lion Rampant between three Cross Croslets Fitche Gules, born by Sir John BowyerBowyer. of Kingspersley in Stafford-shire, Knight and Baronet. 5. Ermine, a Lion Rampant Gules, within a Border Sable, born by Sir William PritchardPritchard. of the City of London Knight, Lord-Mayor thereof Anno. 1684. 6. Gules on a Pale Or, a Lion Rampant Sable, born by John DarnallDarnall of the Middle Temple London, Esquire. 7. Barry of 10 Argent and Azure, over all a Lion Rampant Gules, born by Richard StratfordStratford. of Hayling and Neither-Getting in Glocester-shire Gent. descended
from the Stratfords of Farmcot in the said County. 8. Azure, Floy a Lion Rampant Ar∣gent, born by Sir John HollandHolland. of Quiden∣ham in Norfolk, Baronet. 9. Pearl, Semy de Cinquefoyls Ruby, a Lion Rampant Diamond, born by the Right Honourable William Pierrepont, Earl of KingstonEarl of Kingston. upon Hull, Viscount Newark upon Trent, Baron of Holme Pier∣repont, Manvers, and Herris. And by Gervas Pierrpmont of Tonge Ca∣stle in Shropshire, Esquire.Pierrepont. Sable, Semy de Cinquefoils a Lion Ram∣pant Argent, born by Sir Thomas CliftonCliffton. of Clifton in Lancashire, Baronet. 10. Per Bend Sinister Ermine, and Er∣mines, over all a Lion Rampant Or, born by Sir Roger MostinMostin. in Flint-shire, Baronet. This Coat is also born by Sir John Tre∣vorTrevor. of Brynkynalt in Denby-shire, Knight. 11. Girony of 4 or and Azure, a Lion Rampant Counterchanged, born by John GouldGould. of Broadnemett in Devonshire, Gentleman. 12. Girony of 8 Pieces Ermine, and Ermines a Lion Rampant Or, born by Sir Trevor WilliamsWilliams, of Langibby Castle in Monmouthshire Baronet.
13. Sable a Lion Rampant Argent de∣pressed with a Bendlet Gules, born by Sir John ChurchillChurchill. of Churchill in Sommor∣setshire, Knight. 14. Argent, a Bend between two Lions Rampant Sable, born by Sir John OsbornOsborn. of Chicksands in Bedfordshire, Bar∣ronet. 15. Ermine three Lions Rampant Gules, by the name of ChudleyChudley. in Devon∣shire. 16. Argent, three Lions Rampant, and a cheif Azure, born by Samuel GrantGrant. of Crundal in Hantshire, and of the Inner Temple London, Esquire. 17. Per Pale Saphir and Ruby, three Lions Rampant Pearl, born by the Right Honourable the Earl of PembrookEarl of Pembrook. and Montgomery, Baron Herbert of Shurland, Cardist, Ross of Kendale, Parr, Marmion, and Sir Quintin, Lord of the Lordships of Ʋsk, Carleon, Newport and Treleg. By the Right Honourable William Her∣bert Earl and Baron of Powis,Earl of Powis. &c. By the Right Honourable Edward Lord HerbertLd Herbert Baron of Cherbury, and Castle-Island in Ireland. By the Honourable Arthur Herbert,Herbert. Esquire, Admiral and Commander in
Cheif of His Majesties Fleet in the Medi∣terranean Seas Anno 1683, and one of the Right Honourable the Commissioners of the Admiralty. By Sir Thomas HerbertHerbert. of Trinlern in Monmouth shire, Baronet. By Sir Matthew Herbert of Bromfield in Shropshire. This Coat is also born by Sir William Jones of Slowey in Sommersetshire, Knight. By Edward Proger Esquire, one of the Grooms of His Majesties Bedchamber. 18. Pearl, six Lyons Rampant Dia∣mond, born by the Right Honourable Thomas Savage, Earl Rivers,Earl Rivers. Viscount Colchester and Rock Savage, Lord Darcy, and Baron of Chich, &c. 19. Ermine, on a Cheif Azure, three Lions Rampant Or, born by Sir Anthony AncherAncher. of Bishopsbourn in Kent, Knight and Baronet.
Other Examples of LIONS PASSANT. 1. DIamond, a Lion Passant Gardant Topaz, between three Helmets Pearl, born by the Right Honourable James Earl of Northampton,Earl of Northamp∣ton. Baron Comp∣ton of Compton, Lord Leiutenant of War∣wickshire, Constable of the Tower of Lon∣don, and one of the Lords of His Maje∣sties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. 2. Azure, a Lion Passant between three Pheons heads Or, born by Sir Thomas WolstonholomWolston∣holom. of Minsingden in the Parish of Edmonton in Middlesex Baronet. Three Sable, three Piles Argent on a Cheif of the second a Lion Passant Gules, born by Sir Andrew HacketHacket. of Moxhull in Warwickshire Knight. 4. Or a Lion Passant Sable, in Cheif, three Piles of the second, born by Cap∣tain
engraving of blazon showing lions passant folio 144 Lions Pasant
John LoganLogan. of Ibury in Oxfordshire, Esquire. 5. Argent, on a Fess Gules between two Lions Passant Gardent Sable, a Flower de lis Or, between two Crescents Argent, born by the Honourable Sir Henry Good∣rickGoodrick. of R bston Park in Yorkshire, Knight and Baronet His Majesty's Envoy Extraor∣dinary to the King of Spain Anno 1682/3. 6. Argent, two Lions Passant Gar∣dant Azure, born by Sir Thomas HanmerHanmer. of Hanmer in Flitshire Baronet, and of Sir John Hanmer of the Middle Temple, London, Knight. Or, two Lions pasant Gardant Sable, born by Sir James RushurstRushurst. of Milast Green in Essex, Baronet. Gules, two Lions Passant Gardant Ar∣gent, born by Sir Nicholas L'estrange of Hulston in Norfolk Baronet, and by Roger L'estrangeL'estrange. of Saint Giles in the Fields in Middlesex, Esquire. 7. Gules, two Bars Ermine in Cheif a Lion Passant parted Per Pale Or, and Argent, by the name of HillHill. of Nor∣folk. 8. Ermine, a Saltier and Chief, Gules, on the last a Lion Passant Gardant Or, born by Evers ArmineArmine. of Osgodby in Lanca∣shire,
and of Ketton in Rutlandshire, Esq 9. Or, three Lions Passant Sable born by Sir Thomas CarewCarew. of Hackcomb in De∣vonshire Barronet. Sable, three Lions Passant Argent, born by Thomas EnglishEnglish. of Buckland in Maid∣ston in Kent, Esquire. 10. Argent, three Lions Passant Gar∣dant Gules, born by Thomas BrograveBrogrve. of Hamels in Hertfordshire, Barronet. 11. Ruby, three Lions Passant Gar∣dant Per Pale Or and Argent, born by the Right Honourable William O' Brion, Earl and Baron Insiquin, and Baron of Burren in Ireland, and one of the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel for that Kingdom. 12. Azure a Fess Wavey, between three Lions Passant Or, by the name of Hawes.Hawes. From whole Lions I shall proceed to the parts thereof.
engraving of blazon showing lion body parts folio 147 Parts of Lions
Examples of the PARTS of LIONS. 1. ARgent, a Lions head erazed Vert. 2. Ruby, a Cheveron between three Lions heads erazed Pearl, born by the Right Noble Christopher Duke of Albe∣marle, Earl of Torrington Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamps and Teys, Knight of the Garter, Captain of His Majesties Life Guard, Lord Leiutenant of Essex and Devonshire, one of the Gentlemen of His Majesties Bedchamber, and one of the Lords of his most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. Azure, a Cheveron between three Lions heads erazed Or, born by Sir Hugh Windham of Silton in Dorsetshire Knight, one of the Justices of His Majesties Court of Common Pleas at Westminster. And is
also born by Thomas WindhamWindham. of Tale in Devonshire Esquire, one of the Grooms of His Majesties Bedchamber, third Son of Sir Edmund Windham of Cathanger in Som∣mersetshire, Knight Marshal of His Maje∣sties Houshold. 3. Or, three Bars Azure, on a Canton Gules, a Lions head erazed Argent, born by Thomas CoxCox. M. D. Physitian in Ordi∣nary to His Majesty King Charles the Se∣cond. And is also born by Daniel Cox of London Dr. in Physick. 4. Ruby, a Bezant between three Demy Lions Rampant Pearl, born by the Right Honourable Henry Earl of Arling∣ton,Earl of Arlington. Viscount Thetford, Knight of the Gar∣ter, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties houshold, and one of the Lords of His Majesties Honourable Privy Councel. And is born by the Right Honourable Sir John Bennet Knight of the Bath, and Baron of Oswestre,Lord Oswestre. &c. Bennet.Also by John Bennet of Abington in Cambridgeshire, Esquire. 5. Azure, two Bars Wavey Ermine, on a Chief Or, a Demy Lion Sable, born by Sir James Smith of the City of London Knight and Alderman.Smith.
6. Or, out of the midst of a Fess Sable, a Lion Rampant Naissant Gules, by the name of Emme.Emme. This Form of Blazon is peculiar to all living things that shall be found issu∣ing out of the midst of some ordinary, or common charge. 7. Vert, three Quarterfoils Argent, each charged with a Lions head Erazed, Sable, born by Thomas Plot Esquire,Plot. Se∣cretary to his Highness the great Duke of Tuscany; descended of the Family of the Plots Sparsholt in Berkshire. 8. Argent, two Lions Paws erected in Saltier, the dexter furmounted of the si∣nister Azure. 9. Sable, two Lions Paws issuing out of a dexter and sinister base points erect in form of a Cheveron Argent, by the name of Frampton.Frampton. 10. Gules, three Lions Paws or Gambes Erazed Argent, born by Richard Newdigate of Arbury of Warwickshire,Newdigate. Esquire. 11. Azure, three Lions Paws couped and erected Argent, by the name of Ʋsher.Ʋsher. 12. Argent, three Lions Tails erected and erazed Gules.
The Lion hath great strength in his Tail, and his much motion thereof is a sure sign of Anger. When he intends to assail his Enemy he stirreth up his cou∣rage by often beating his back and sides with his Tail, and when he is hunted the better to escape his Pursuers (with his Tail as he goeth) he sweepeth out his footsteps and leaveth no tract behind him. These and the like Parts of Lions, and all other Beasts are born on, and be∣tween, any of the Ordinaries. From Lions I shall proceed to Elephants, Horses, and other Beasts. Examples of Other BEASTS in whole and in part. 1. GUles, an Elephant passant Argent, tusked Or, by the name of Elpington.Elpington. The Elephant is a Beast of great strength but of greater wit and docility
engraving of blazon showing various mammals folio 150 Beasts in hole & in Part.
surpassing all other Beasts, and is so am∣bitious that if they are praised they will kill themselves with labour, his strength appears in that he carrieth on his back in a Castle of Wood about thirty men, as is accustomary in the Eastern Countries to make use of them in their Wars. 2. Or a Fess Gules between three E∣lephants heads erazed Sable,Fountain. born by John Fountain of Melton on the Hill in York∣shire, Esquire. 3. Purpure; a Proboscide Trunk or Snout of an Elephant in Pale couped, flex∣ed and reflexed in form of an S Or. The Elephant hath great strength in this part and useth it for his hand, as well to feed himself, as for all uses of Agility. 4. Or, an Asses head erazed Sable, by the name of Hackwell.Hackwell. The Ass is the lively Embleme of patience: From this Beast, and the Horse cometh the Mule which being so produced doth not bring forth young as other Beasts. 5. Pearl, three Bulls Passant Daimond, This was the Coat of the Right Honoura∣ble Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury,Earl of Shaftsbury. Baron Astley of Wimborn Saint Giles, Lord
Cooper of Pawlet, &c. The Bull is the Ringleader amongst ruther Beasts, and through hope of his encrease of breed he is priviledged to rang freely in all Pastures. The Bull being Gelt changeth not on∣ly his nature but his name to an Ox. And it is said that the Athenians to express their gratefulness for the laborious tra∣vel of the Ox, did stamp it's Figure on a certain Coyn called a Didrachma. 6. Sable, Cheveron Ermine between three Bulls head cabosed Argent, born by Thomas Sanders of liitle Ireton in Derby∣shire,Sanders. Esquire. 7. Pearl, three Bulls head erazed Dia∣mond, born by the Right Honourable Sir John Skeffington of Fisherwick in Stafford∣shire, Barronet, Baron of Loughneugh, Viscount Massereen,Lord Mas∣serene. Custos Rotolorum, and Governour of the County of London∣derry and Town of Coleraine and one of the Lords of His Majesty most Honoura∣ble Privy Councel for Ireland 8. Gules, a Goat Passant Argent, by the name of Baker.Baker. The Goat is not so hardy as poli∣tick. 9. Gules, a Stag standing at Gaze Ar∣gent,
attired Or, by the name of Jones.Jones. The Stag is a goodly Beast, full of State in his Gate and View, and amongst Beasts of Chase is esteemed the cheif for Game. It is observed that when he findeth himself Fat he lodgeth in obscure places to avoid Chasing. This Beast is indued with two excellent faculties above others to wit quickness of hearing, and swiftness of Foot, which makes the Chase more long and difficult. 10. Argent, a Stag springing forward Gules. Pliny saith that the Horns of this Beast whilst they are growing are so mollified with Wax that they may be made capable of divers Impressions. All Horns are hal∣low except towards the tip, but the Deers are solid throughout. 11. Vert, on a Cheveron between three Bucks trping Or, as many Trefoils slipped Gules,Robinson. born by Sir Lumbley Robinson of Kentwell-hall in Suffolk Barronet, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Robinson, chief Pro∣thonotary of his Majesties Court of Common Pleas, deceased. The Buck is a worthy Beast, and hath much of the properties of the Stag,
but cometh short of his stateliness and boldness. 12. Or, three Bucks head couped pro∣per,Colleton. born by Sir Peter Colleton of Saint James's Fields in Middlesex, Baronet. Bearing of the Head of any liv∣ing thing betokeneth jurisdiction and Authority to administer Justice, and to execute Laws. 13. Saphir, a Stags head Pearl, born by the Right Honourable George Leg, Ba∣ron of Dartmouth,Lord Dart∣mouth. Master General of the Ordnance, Leiutenant of Alceholt, and Wolmer Forest in Hantshire, Master of the Horse to his Royal Highness James Duke of York, Admiral of His Maje∣sties Fleet of Ships in the Mediterranean, Anno 1683, and one of the Lords of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Coun∣cel, &c. 14. Saphir, a Bucks head cabosed To∣paz, vulned in the forehead proper, born by the Right Honourable Kenneth, M' Kenzie, Earl of Seafort,Earl of Seafort. Lord M' Kenzie and Kentail, Baron of Ardelu, Islandonan and Lews, Sheriff principal of the Shires of Ross, and North Nass, &c. 15. Diamond, three Bucks heads ca∣bosed Pearl, attired Topaz, born by the
engraving of blazon showing various mammals folio 155 Beasts in whole, and in part.
Right Honourable William Earl of De∣vonshire,Earl of Devonshire Baron Cavendish of Hardwick Lord Leiutenant of Derby-shire, &c. 16. Azure, a Fess between three Ti∣gers heads erazed Or, born by Sir Henry HunlockHunlock of Wingerworth in Derbyshire, Baronet. 17. Argent, a Cheveron between three Attires of a Stag fixed to the Scalp Sa∣ble, by the Name of Cockes.Cockes. 18. Or, three Attires of a Stag born paly Barry Sable. Other Examples of BEASTS in whole and in part. 1. SAble, a Fess between three Horses passant Argent, born by Sir Thomas StampStamp. of London, Knight and Alder∣man. A Horse erected, (that is bolt upright) may be termed enraged, but his noblest
Action is exprest in a saliant form. The Horse of all Beasts for mans use is esteem∣ed the most noble, and useful either in Peace or War, he is naturally stubborn, fierce and pround, and of all Beasts there is none that vaunteth more after Victory obtained, or dejected if van∣quished, and none more prone to Battle, or desirous of revenge. 2. Gules, a Horses head couped Ar∣gent, this was the Coat of Sir Thomas MarshMarsh. of Darkes in the Parish of South Mimums in Middlesex, Knight deceased. 3. Argent, a Ʋnicorn seiant Sable, horned Or, by the name of Har∣ling.Harling. The Ʋnicorn takes his name from his one Horn which grows on his Forehead, yet there is another Beast called a Rino∣ceros which hath but one Horn, but that doth grow on his Snout. The Ʋnicorn is no less worthy of re∣mark for his Vertue then for his Strength in that his Horn is said to be a powerful Antidote against poyson, in so much as (according to the general opinion) the wild Beast (for fear of the venemous Ser∣pents) use not to drink before he hath stirred the Waters with his Horn; he is
said to be of such a great and haughty mind that he will never be taken alive, but rather will be killed; being by nature of so untamely a disposition. 4. Gules, an Ʋnicorn triping Argent, armed Or, by the name of Muster∣ton.Musterton. 5. Vert, three Ʋnicorns in Pale cur∣rant Argent, armed Or, by the name of Farington.Farington. 6. Sable, a Camel passant Argent. This Beast doth surpass the Horse, not only for strength (his common burthen being 1000 l. weight,) but for his swift∣ness in Travel. 7. Argent, a Bore passant Gules, arm∣ed Or, by the name of Trewarthen.Trewarthen The Bore though he wanteth Horns is no way defective in his Weapon of de∣fence or rather of offence, to wit his strong and sharp Tusks, being reckoned for the most absolute Champion amongst the Wild Beasts. In his sight he is so cru∣el, and stomackful that he foameth all the while for rage, and against the time of any encounter he often whetteth his Tusks to make them more peircing, and he beareth the encounter with a noble cou∣rage.
8. Topaz, three Bores heads erazed and erected Diamond armed of the first, born by the Right Honourable George Lord Booth Baron de la MereLord De la Mere. of Dunham Massey in Cheshire. And by Sir Robert Booth of Salford in Lancashire, Knight, Lord Cheif Justice of his Majesties Court of Common Pleas in Ireland, and one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel for the said Kingdom. And is also born by Richard BoothBooth. of the City of London, Esquire. 9. Argent, a Cheveron between three Bores head erazed Sable, born by Theophi∣lus OglethorpOglethorp. of the Parish of Saint Mar∣tins in the Fields in Middlesex Leiutenant Collonel to his Royal Higness's Troop of his Majesties Horse Guards, &c. 10. Azure, three Cups, Or, out of each a Bores head erected Argent, born by Sir John BollesBolles. of Scampton in Lincolnshire, Baronet. 11. Azure, a Toison d' Or within a Treasure of Scotland Or, born by Sir Robert JasonJason. of Broad Somerford in Wilt∣shire, Baronet. 12. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Rams heads erazed Azure, born by
engraving of blazon showing various mammals folio 159 Beasts.
Sir John BendishBendish. of Steple-Bumsted in Essex Baronet. The Ram is a Captain of the whole flock, and his strength consisteth in his head. Other Examples of BEASTS. 1. ARgent, a Tiger passant regardant, gazing in a looking Glass all proper. The Tiger is said to be a Beast of great cruelty and exceeding swift of Foot, whence some think the River Tigris took its name. It is reported that when those that go to rob her of her young, do use a policy to detain their Dam from following them, by casting sundry Looking Glasses in the way, on which she useth to gaze long upon whether it be to behold her
own beauty, or because when she seeth her shape in the Glass she thinketh she seeth one of her young ones; but by this means they escape her. 2. Argent, a Bear Rampant Sable, musled Or, by the name of Barnard.Barnard. The Bear by nature is a cruel Beast, and in its combates useth no less policy then strength. The Female is most cru∣elly enraged against any that hurts her young, or robbeth her of them. 3. Argent, three Bears heads erazed Sable, Musled Or, born by Sir James Lang∣hamLangham. of Cottes-brook, in Northamptonshire, Knight and Baronet. By Sir William Langham of Walgrave in the said County Knight. And by Sir Stephen Langham of London Knight, Sons of Sir John Langham, Baronet de∣ceased. 4 Gules, a Wolf preyent Argent, born by Sir Edward LowLow. of New Sarum, in Wiltshire K. one of the Masters of the high Court of Chancery. The Wolf by nature is a greedy, rave∣nous and cruel Creature, and a great E∣nemy to the poor harmless Sheep; inso∣much that (for the publick good) Laws have been made to give a gratuity to
those that kill, or take any of them alive. Macidon Grand-child of Cham the Son of Noah bore a Wolf when he went under the Conduct of Osius. And the Image of a Wolf was set up at Delphos before Apollo who was called Lycoctones a Wolf killer and he was rewarded by the Laws of Draco and Solon that killed or took alive this Creature. 5. Argent, on a Bend Vert, three Wolves heads erazed of the Field, born by Sir Richard MiddletonMyddelton. of Chirk Castle in Denbighshire Baronet. And by Sir Thomas Middleton of Stan∣sted Mount-Fitchet in Essex Knight. 6. Vert, a Greyhound currant Argent, collored Gules, studded Or, born by Ri∣chard Blome of Abergwlly in Caermardenshire, Esquire, by John BlomeBlome. of Sevenoke in Kent, Gentleman, and by Richard Blome of London Gentleman, the Author of this Tract of Heraldry. The Dog whether it be for Pleasure and Game in the Field, as the Grey-hound, and the Hound (of which there are several sorts as the Buck hound, Blood-hound, Harier, Grey-hound and the like; or for safe-guard at home as the Mastiff
deserveth a very high estimation, and of all Dogs those of Chase are the most de∣serving in Heraldry. It is observed that there is scarce any vertue incident to a Man, but there are some resemblances thereof in the sundry kinds of Dogs; and the Mastiff hath that undaunted courage and true love to his Master that he will take his part even to death, insomuch that the Romans took Mastiffs hence to carry in their Army in∣stead of Souldiers; others there are that when they happen to be lost will refuse meat to eat untill they see their Masters again; others are to be admired for their excellent properties in looking to their Masters Goods, others in fetching, carrying, and finding out any lost thing that they are enjoyned to do; and others in pursuing any thing or Game in the Chase by the scent of its foot. 7. Argent, three Grey-hounds in Pale currant Sable collered Or, born by Sir Cleve More of More-hall, and Bank-hall in Lancashire Baronet, and by Sir John More of London, Knight and Alderman, late Lord Mayor thereof. Gules, three Grey-hounds currant in Pale Argent, collered of the Field, born
by Sir Thomas MaulevererMauleve∣rer. of Allerton-Mauleverer in Yorkshire, Baronet. 8. Argent, two Bars Sable charged with three Trefoils of the Field, in Chief a Greyhound currant of the second, born by William PalmerPalmer. of Ladgrave in War∣wickshire, Esquire. 9. Gules, a Talbot passant Or, a Chief Ermine, born by Thomas ChaffinChaffin. of Chettle in Dorsetshire Esquire. 10. Argent, two Reynards or Foxes counter-Saliant in Bend, the dexter sur∣mounted of the sinister Saltire wise Gules by the name of Kadrod-HardKadred-Hard. of Wales. The Fox for his great wit and subtilty doth surpass all Beasts, and is compared to the crafty Lawyer. 11. Ermine, on a Fess Gales, a Fox passant Or, born by Sir Thomas ProbyProby. of Elton-hall in Huntingtonshire, Knight. And by John Proby of the middle Temple London, Esquire. 12. Or, three Foxes heads erazed Gules, a Border Argent charged with eight Flower de lis Azure, born by Nevin∣son FoxFox. of Stadbrook in Suffolk Esquire. 13. Gules, an Ermine proper. The Skin of this little Beast is an ex∣ceeding rich Fur used for the Lining of
Kings and Princes Robes, and is that Fur so much used in Heraldry called Er∣mine. 14. Argent, three Cat a mountains passant in Pale Sable, born by Sir Jona∣than Keat of Pauls Walden in Hertford∣shire,Keat. Baronet. There is no Creature that contendeth so much for liberty as the Cat, and therefore the Dutch formerly bore it for their Ensign. It is also a Creature of such great use that no house can well be without one for the destroying Vermine. 15. Argent, two Squirrels Sciant en∣dorsed Gules,Samwell. born by Sir Thomas Samwel of Ʋpton and Gayton in the County of Northamptonshire Baronet. This little Creature is much to be com∣mended for his great industry in gather∣ing, and providing his food in the Sum∣mer for the Winter, which should be an example to the slothful man who regard∣eth nothing but from hand to mouth. 16. Argent, three Coneys Sable, by the name of Stroud.Stroud. From the Coney 'tis said that men first learnt the Art of undermining and sub∣verting
engraving of blazon showing various animals
folio 165 Animalls.
of Cities, Castles, and Towers, by the Industry of Pioneers. From Beasts I shall proceed to Ani∣mals. Examples of ANIMALS. 1. VERT, a Tortois passant, Ar∣gent, born by Sir Charles Gawdy of Crows-hill in Debenham in Suffolk, Kt. and Baronet.Gawdy. By Charles Gawdy of Sta∣peston, and by Anthony Gawdy of Ipswich both of the said County Esquires. Tortoises, live both by Land and Sea, and are much esteemed as well for their Ver∣tues, and operation, as for the delicacy of their Shells used for divers curious works, and their flesh to eat. They are Enemies to Vipers destroying both Snails and Worms that eat the Fruits. The Shells of the Arcadian Tortoises are very
great of which they make Harps where∣of Mercury is said to be the first inven∣tor, who finding a Tortoise upon the Rocks after the falling of the River Nilus, the flesh being consumed, and the sinews dried up, he stroke them with his hand, and making a kind of musical sound he framed it into a Harp. 2. Azure, a Tortoise erected Or, by the name of Cooper.Cooper. 3. Argent, a Cheveron between three Mouls, or Wants Sable, born by Richard TwisletonTwistleton. of Drax in the West-riding of Yorkshire Esquire. This Animal is very pernitious in Gar∣dens, Orchards, and other grounds casting up the Earth in great hillocks with their Snouts. They are very quick of hear∣ing, and have a good smell. 4. Argent, three Toads erected Sable, by the name of Betereux.Betereux. Toads and Frogs when they sit, hold up their heads without motion, which state∣ly action Spencer in his Shepheards Calen∣der calleth the Lording of Frogs. 5. Or, a Cobweb in the Center thereof a Spider proper. The Spider may be said to be born free of the Weavers Company, for she
studieth not his Art, nor hath his stuff having her thread out of her womb, from whence she laboriously draweth it, and through the Agility of her Feet she weav∣eth gins and dilateth, contracteth and knitteth them in form of a Net, and with the threads that she draweth out of her body she repaireth the same, and these Webs are framed with much artifi∣cial cunning, and yet are fit for no use, but to entangle Flies; and as it is ob∣served, the Execution of the Law is com∣pared to Cobwebs. Laws like Spiders webs are wrought. Great Flies escape, and small are caught. The Spider is poisonous, yet her Web, although it be drawn out of her Womb, is said to be an Antidote against it. 6. Argent, 11 Emets 3, 2, 3, 2, 1, Sable. By the Emet, or Pismire, as indeed by the Spider may be signified a man of great labour, wisdom, and providence in his Affairs: And to these little Creatures the slothful man is sent to learn wis∣dom. 7. Vert, a Grass-hopper in Fess passant Or,
In the Summer Season the Male Grass-hoppers do sing, but the Females are si∣lent. Amongst the Athenians Grass-hoppers were holden for a spe ial note of Nobi∣lity, and therefore did use to wear in their Hair golden Grass hoppers. Solo∣mon reckoneth the Grass hopper for one of the four small things in the Earth that are full of wisdom, but according to the Fable the Emet thinks him otherwise. 8. Gules, an Addr nowed Or, by the name of Nathiley.Nathiley. The Serpent is very subtile and pru∣dent, as well to hurt others, as to save himself; and knowing, that his most prin∣cipal and most weakest part to be his head, he hath the greatest care thereof; this here enfolded may seem as Guillim noteth to be one of the Locks of that Monstruous Dame Medusa, every Hair of whose Head was said to be a Snake, and indeed Alertus saith that the Hair of Women taken at some Seasons and laid in Dung will become venemous Serpents, which some have supposed to befal that Sex for the ancient familiarity it had at first with that accursed Ser∣pent.
9. Azure, a Cheveron between three Ʋrchins, or Hegdhogs Argent, born by William Mainston of London Gentleman, lineally descended from Thomas MainstonMainston. of Ʋrchinfield in Herefordshire Gentle∣man, who lived Temps Edward the Third. The Hedghogs may be compared to a Man expert in gathering of substance, and as it were one that maketh Hay whilst the Sun shineth. 10. Sable, a Fess between three House Snails Argent, by the name of Shelley.Shelley. The Snail though a slow goer yet in time by the constancy of her Course ascendeth to the top of the highest Tower. It is Fabled that when the Hare was to go a Journey for a Wager with the Snail, the Hare too confident of his Foot manship resolved to take a Nap by the way but the Snail well knowing that he had nothing to trust unto but his indefati∣gable perverance came to his Journeys end before the Hare awaked. 11. Argent, a Cheveron Gules between three Scorpions reversed Sable, by the name of Cole.Cole. Scorpions are venemous yet the Oyl
made of them is an approved Antidote a∣gainst their own stinging. Thus much of Animals under which head may be comprehended all those of four or more Feet that lay as Eggs, as Croco∣diles, Salamanders, Cameleons, Ewtes, Li∣zards, &c.
CHAP. IV. Treats of Fowls and Birds of all sorts, which may be termed Areal Animals, and may be considered by their Feet, which are either whole, which resembleth the Palm of a Hand, and such are the Swan, Goose, Duck, and for the most part all River Fowls: or divided as the Eagle, Falcon, Raven, and the like, and Birds of the Air as shall appear by the following Ex∣amples. ALL Fowls of what kind soe∣ver must be bore in their natural Actions, of Going, Setting, Standing, or Flying. Concerning the Beaks or Bills, and Feet of Birds all those that either are
whole Footed, or have their Feet divi∣ded, and yet have no Tallons should be termed Membred; but the Cock and all Birds of Prey should be termed Armed; and the Arming, or Membring them is always to be of a different Colour from the Fowl or Bird it self. It is generally observed that the Fe∣males amongst Birds of Prey are the no∣blest and most hardy which nature hath so ordered, as being her part to take care, and to provide for her young. In the Blazoning of Fowls much used to fly, if their Wings be not displayed they must be termed close. The Parts and Members of Fowls are usually born in Coat Armour both couped and erazed, and that on, or between, any of the Honourable Ordinaries. Birds are of a more noble bearing than Fish for that they perticipate more of the Fire and Air the noblest Elements.
engraving of blazon showing various birds folio 173 Fowle & Birds.
Examples of FOWL and BIRDS. 1. GUles, a Swan Argent, by the name of Leigham.Leigham. All River Fowls have their Tails shor∣ter then other Birds, for the length of the Tail doth hinder their Swiming, Diving, or Running. The Swan is a Bird of great Beauty and Strength, and it is said that he useth not his Strength to Prey, or Tyranize over any other Fowl, but only to be re∣venged on such, as first offer him wrong, in which case he often subdueth the Eagle, and it is observed that he never encoun∣ters with any other of his own kind, but in two cases, the one if any be a Rival in his Love, or offer to Court his Mate, he will be revenged to death; the next is if another do incroach upon his possessi∣on,
or place of haunt, he is never quiet until he hath expulsed him. 2. Azure, a Bend Engrailed Argent, between two Signets Royal proper, born by Sir Charles Pitfield of Hoxton in the Parish of Saint Leonards Shoreditch in Middlesex Knight,Pitfield. deceased. Azure, three Swans Argent, by the name of Charlton.Charlton. Gules, three Swans Argent, by the name of Bawdrip.Bawdrip. Sable, a Swan with her Wings expand∣ed Argent, Memhred Or, wichin a Border Engrailed of the Second, by the name of More.More. Azure, two Swans Argent, between as many Flanches Ermine, born by Sa∣muel Mellish of the Inner Temple,Mellish. London, Esquire. 3. Sable, a Cheveron between three wild Ducks Volant proper. The Wild Duck hath many enemies, as Men, Dogs, and Hawks, yet by their shifts in Flying, Swimming, and Diving, they often beguile the hope of their pur∣suers. 4. Argent, a Stork Sable, Membred Gules, by the name of Starkey.Starkey. The Stork is a Bird most careful of her
young, and therefore nature requiteth her care; for their young do take the like care of them in their old Age, whence it is that the Stork is the Em∣blem of a grateful Man, and a dutiful Son. Aelian writes of a Stork, which bred in the House of one that had a beau∣tiful Wife, which in her Husbands ab∣sence used to commit Adultery with one of her meaner Servants, which the Stork observing, in gratitude to him who free∣ly gave him House room he flying in the Villains face struck out both his Eyes. 5. Ermine, a Spread Eagle, or Eagle displayed Gules,Bedingfield born by Sir Henry Bed∣ingfield of Oxborough, and Beck hall in Nor∣folk Baronet. The Eagle hath a sharp and peircing sight, and soareth so high that oft times she transcendeth the sight of a man. She hath a tender care of her young, and when they are ready to flie taketh them on her Wings, and so soareth with them through the Air to teach them to fly. 6. Argent, a Spread Eagle wirh two Heads Sable,Glyn. born by Sir John Glynn of Burcester alias Bisister in Oxfordshire Ba∣ronet.
7. Gules, a Bend between two Eagles displayed Or,Travel. born by Thomas Travel of Saint Martins in the Fields in Middlesex, Esquire. 8. Vert, three Eagles displayed in Fess Or, by the name of Wynn.Wynn. Other Examples of Eagles. AZure an Eagle displayed Argent, born by Sir Robert Cotton de Bruce of Hatley,Cotton. Saint George in Cambridgeshire Knight. Gules, an Eagle displayed Or, born by Edward Goddard of Standen,Goddard. by Thomas Goddard of Swinden, Richard Goddard of Catford, and by Edward Goddard of Og∣bourn all of Wiltshire Esquires. Argent, an Eagle displayed Sable, by the name of Millington.Millington. Sable, an Eagle displayed Argent, armed Gules, by the name of Boy∣land.Boyland. Argent, an Eagle displayed Vert, by the name of Bilney.Bilney.
Or, an Eagle displayed Sable, by the name of Kirkhill.Kirkhill. Gules, an Eagle displayed Ermine, by the name of Waney.VVney. Parted per Pale Or, an Argent, an Eagle displayed Gules, by the name of Thomp∣son.Thompson. Parted per Pale Gules and Ermine, an Eagle displayed Or, by the name of Bor∣dam.Bordam. Parted per Bend, Gules and Vert an Eagle displayed Or, by the name of Grave.Grave. Azure, three Eagles displayed Or, by the name of Billesworth.Billesworth Or, three Eaglets displayed Gules, by the name of Eglesford.Eglesford. Argent, three Eaglets displayed Gules by the name of Eaglesfield.Eaglesfield Sable, six Eaglets displayed Argent, by the name of Barantine.Barantine. 9. Sable, a Goshawk Argent, Perching upon a Stock, fixed in the Base point of the Escocheon of the second, Armed, Jes∣sed, and Belled Or, by the name of Weele.Weele. Next to the Eagle which is reckoned the Sovereign Queen of all Fowls, the the Goshawk, the Ger-Falcon, the Falcon,
and other Birds of Prey are the Cheif. Gules, three Falcons Argent, Armed, Jessed and Belled Or, by the name of Atherton.Atherton. Azure, three Falcons Argent, Armed, Jessed, and Belled Or, by the name of Pennington.Pennington. Sable, a Falcon Argent, Armed Or, by the name of Yedling.Yedling. 10. Gules, a Cheveron between three Facons Argent,Hadley. born by George Hadley of East Barnet in Hertfordshire Esquire. 11. Azure, three Bustards rising Or, by the name of Nevill.Nevill. It is observable that all long Shank'd Fowl in their flight do stretch forth their Legs at length to their Tails, but the short do truss their Feet up to the midst of their Bodies. 12. Or, a Raven proper born by Sir John Corbet of Stoke upon Teane,Corbet. and Adderley in Shropshire Baronet. The Raven is said to give no food to it's young until she seeth what colour they will be of, and when she seeth them black like her self she is very careful of them. This Bird is said to live about 100 years, and doth take it's name from it's rapine quality.
13. Gules, a Pelican in her Nest, with Wings displayed, feeding her young ones Or, vulned proper, by the name of Carne.Carne. The Egyptian Priests as Farnesius noteth used the Pelican for a Hierogliphick to ex∣press the duties of a Father to his Chil∣dren. 14. Gules, three Cocks Argent, arm∣ed, crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of Cock.Cock. The Cock may not improperly be term∣ed the Knight amongst Birds, being of a noble courage, and also prepared to Bat∣tel, having his Comb for an Helmet, his sharp and hooked Bill for a Faulcheon, or Courtlax, and as a compleat Soldier arm∣ed a Cap-a-pee, he hath his Legs armed with Spurs. When he is Victor he crow∣eth which gives testimony of his Con∣quest, and when he is vanquished he shun∣eth the light, or society of men. 15. Or, three Swallows, their Wings close proper, by the name of Watton.VVatton. The Swallow is the welcome harbinger, shewing the approach of the Spring. 16. Argent, a Cross Gules between four Peacocks Azure, born by the Right Honourable Francis Lord Carington,Lord Ca∣rington. Ba∣ron
of Wotton in Warwickshire, and Vi∣scounth Barreford in Ireland. The Peacock is so proud that when he erecteth his Fan of Plumes he admireth himself, and doth display them against the rayes of the Sun that they may glister with the greater Glory. Other Examples of Fowls. Argent, three Swans disclosed Sable, by the name of Folgnardly.Folgnardy. Sable, a Heron Argent, by the name of Heron.Heron. Argent, a Cock Gules, Armed, Crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of Bron∣cham.Broncham. Argent, a Raven proper, by the name of Morton.Morton. Sable, a Falcon Argent, Armed Or, by the name of Yedling.Yedling. Azure, three Falcons their Wings ex∣pansed Argent, by the name of Nevile.Nevile. Argent, a Pelican in her Nest, vulned, and disclosed Sable, by the name of Can∣trell.Cantrell. Azure, three Pelicans Or, vulned pro∣per
engraving of blazon showing birds and bees
folio 181 Birds.
born by Sir John Pelham of Lungton in Sussex Baronet.Pelham. Argent, a Cock Gules, Armed, Crest∣ed, and Jolloped Or, by the name of Brougham.Brougham. Argent, three Cocks Gales, by the name of Coliborn.Coliborn. Argent, three Cocks Sable, Armed, Crested, and Jolloped Or, by the name of Pomfret.Pomfret. Sable, three Heath Cocks Argent, Membred Gules, by the name of Hathe.Hathe. Argent, six More Cocks Sable, Mem∣bred Gules, by the name of Fitz-Mores.Fitz-Mores. Other Examples of BIRDS. 1. PEARL, on a Bend Diamond, three Owls of the Field, born by the most Honourable George Savill, Marquess Earl and Viscount Hallifax, and Baron of
Eland in Yorkshire, Lord Privy Seal, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. The Owl was Minerva's Bird, and was born by the Athenians for their Armorial Ensign. In Armoury he signifies Prudence, Vigilancy, and Watchfulness by Night. 2. Sable, an Orle of Owls within an Escocheon Argent, born by Sir Henry CalverleyCalverley. of Eryholme in Yorkshire Knight. 3. Diamond, Gutte de leau, on a Fess Pearl, three Cornish Choughs proper, born by the Right Honourable Charles Lord Cornwallis,Lord Corn∣wallis. Baron of Eye in Suffolk, &c. 4. Argent, a Cross Potance between four Martlets Sable, a Canton Ermenois, born by Thomas StringerStringer. of Bexwells in Essex Esquire. 5. Or an Escocheon within an Orle of eight Martlets Sable, born by Sir John BrownlowBrownlow. of Belton near Grantham in Lin∣colnshire Baronet. The Martlet hath Legs so short that they can't go, and if they happen to fall upon the ground they can't raise them∣selves upon their Feet as other Birds do to prepare themselves for flight, and for this reason they make their Nests upon Rocks, and high places, from whence they may easily take their flight.
6. Per Fess Gules and Argent, six Martlets counterchanged, born by Sir Jo. FenwickFenwick. of Wallington in Northum∣berland Baronet, Cornet to the Queens Troop of his Majesties Guards. 7. Azure, a Cheveron between three Martlets Argent, born by Tolemach DukeDuke. of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex Esquire, Exigenter for London in the Court of Common Pleas. 8. Gules, a Cheveron embattuled Er∣mine, three Martlets Or, born by the Honourable Sir Francis WithinsWithens. of Eltham in Kent Knight, one of the Ju∣stices of his Majesties Court of Kings Bench Westminster. 9. Gules, a Ferdemolin Argent, be∣tween two Martlets Or, born by Sir William BevershamBeversham. of Millbeck-hall in Suf∣folk Knight, one of the Masters in Chan∣cery. 10. Sable, on a Cheveron between ten Martlets Argent, five Plates, or Ogres∣ses born by Thomas BardBard. of Caversfield in Buckinghamshire Esquire. 11. Azure, three Bees volant en arriere Argent, by the name of Bye.Bye. The Bee is a very profitable Insect for its Wax and Honey which is esteemed a great preser∣ver
of Nature. To speak of the pro∣perties of the Bee, and their Govern∣ment would be too tedious for this place. 12. Argent, three Eagles heads erazed Sable, by the names of Yellen.Yellen. 13. Argent six Ostriches feathers 3, 2, and 1 Sable, by the name of Jervis.Jervis. 14 Gules, two Wings impailed con∣joyned in Fess, or two Wings in Lure Or, by the name of Seymour.Seymour. 15. Sable, an Eagles Leg in Pale erazed a laquise Argent, the Tallons Gules, by the name of Canhanser.Canhanser. 16. Or, two Eagles Legs barways era∣zed a la quise Sable, armed Gules. Other Examples of Birds. Argent, an Owle Gules, by the name of Herwart.Herwart. Argent, a Cornish Chough proper, by the name of Trenethyn.Trenethyn Gules, three Doves proper, by the name of Hodby.Hodby. Az re, 3 Larks Or, by the name of Ayer.Ayer. Argent, three Owles Sable, by the name of Bridge.Birdge. Sable, three Owles Argent, armed Or, by the name of Boughton.Boughton.
Argent, three Coots proper, by the name of Coote.Coote. Parted per Fess Argent and Sable, a Martlet counterchanged, by the name of Remis.Remis. Sable, a Martlet Argent by the name of Adam.Adam, Argent, three Martlets Gules by the name of Fornival.Fornival. Azure, three Martlets Argent by the name of Kirketon.Kirketon. Sable, three Martlets Argent, by the name of Naughton.Naughton. Gules, three Martlets Argent by the name of Wotton.Wotton. Per Cheveron Or, and Azure, three Martlets counterchanged, by the name of Edgeworth.Edgworth. Sable, four Martlets two and two Ar∣gent by the name of Monter.Monster. Argent, five Martlets three and two Gules by the name of Dowdal.Dowdal. Sable, six Martlets 3, 2, 1, by the name of Apleby.Apleby. Per Pale Indented Argent and Sable, six Martlets counterchanged, by the name of Wren.Wren. Sable eight Martlets 3, 2, 2, 1, Argent by the name of Stanton.Ltanton.
Argent, a Flower de lis between eight Martlets Sable by the name of Rochdale.Rochdale. Argent, an Escocheon within eight Martlets Gules, by the name of Vaux.Vaulx. Gules, a Cressent Ermin between eight Martlets Or, by the name of Bohun.Bohun. Gules, ten Martlets 4, 3, 2, 1 Or, by the name of Tochet.Tochet. Sable, three Swans necks couped Ar∣gent, by the name of Squire.Squire. Azure, three Peacock heads Erazed Or, by the name of Beconthorp.Beconthorp Argent, three Cocks heads erazed Sable, Membred and Jolloped Gules, by the name of White.White. Gules, two Wings inverted and con∣joyned Ermine, by the name of Reney.Reny. Sable, a pair of Wings conjoyned, and elevated Argent, born by the Right Ho∣nourable Robert Ridgway Earl of London∣derry,Earl of Lon¦donderry. and Barron of Gallon-Rigeway in Ire∣land. Gules three Winges elevated Argent, by the name of Newport.Newport. Gules three Wings pendant Or, by the name of Baud.Baud.
CHAP. VI. Treats of watry Animals, being such as have their abode, and relief only in the water, to wit Fishes of all sorts, which as they are of a less compleat nature then Earthy, or Aerial Animals, so are they of less esteem in Coat Armour. As Birds have their Plumes, Wings & Trains for their cutting their passage through the Air; So are Fishes provided with Finns wherewith they guid themselves in their swimming, and cut the current of the streams and waves for their more easie passage wherein their course is directed by their Tayl, as Ships are conducted by their Helm, or Ruther. Fishes are born after divers manners, viz. directly upright, imbowed, extended, in∣dorsed, respecting each other, surmounting one another. Fretted and Triangle, &c. All Fishes (saith Leigh) that are born feeding shall in Blazon be tearemd devour∣ing,
and that whereon they feed must be expressed. All Fishes raised directly upright, and having Finns must be termed in Blazen Hauriaunt, signifying to draw, or suck because that Fish do oft times put their Heads above Water to refresh themselves with the cool Air, but especially when the Waters in the depth of the Seas do so rage, and as it were boyl against some Tempestuous Storm, that they cannot endure the un∣wonted heat thereof, All Fishes being born transverse, must be Blazoned Naiant, or Swiming, for in such sort do they bear themselves in the Water when they swim. Of Fishes some have hard and crusty Cover∣ings, others a more softer outside, and these latter are of two sorts, some having only Skin and others Scales. Fishes are also born in part, and on, or be∣tween, any of the Honourable Ordina∣ries. Of these several kinds, these following Ex∣amples shall suffice.
engraving of blazon showing fish and other sea creatures folio 189 Fish:
Examples of FISHES. 1. AZure three Dolphins Naiant exten∣ded in Pale Barry Or, by the name of Dolphin. The DolphinDolphin. is here in its natu∣ral form of swiming, and is said to Mar∣shal their great Troops in admirable or∣der; for in the Vaunt-guard swim all their young ones, in the middle the Females, and in the Rearward all the Males, like good Husbands that have a care to their Wives and Children. The Dolphin is a Fish of such great Strength, and Swift∣ness, that in his pursuit of other Fishes for his prey (who make to the Rocks, or Shoar for Shelter) he oft receives danger. The Naturalist say that the She Dolphin hath Dugs, and gives suck to her young. That the Dolphin is a great lover of Musick, and loveth the Company of men, but
that I leave to the Opinion of the Rea∣der. 2. Sable a Dolphin Naiant Imbowed, and devouring a Fish proper, by the name of Symonds.Symonds. 3. Azure, three Dolphins hauriant Or, born by Mr. Peter VandeputVandeput. of London Merchant. 4 Per Cheveron Sable and Argent, in chief two Dolphins Naiant respecting each other of the second born by Ambrose AtfieldAtfield. Dr. in Divinity; and Vicar of St. Leonards Shorditch in Middlesex. 5. Vert, two Barbels hauriant respect∣ing each other Argent. 6. Gules, two Pikes hauriant endorsed Or. 7. Sable, three Salmons hauriant Ar∣gent, by the name of Salmon.Salmon. 8. Azure, three Trouts fretted in Tri∣angle teste ala queve Argent, by the name of Trowtheck.Trowtheck. 9. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Crevices upright Gules, these are not to be Blazoned hauriant as Fishes that have Finns but upright 10. Argent, a Lobsters Claw in Bend sinister Saltire like, surmounted of ano∣ther dexter ways Gules, by the name of Tregarthick.Tregar∣thick.
11 Per Pale Argent and Gules an E∣scallop Shell Or, born by Sir Humphry WynchWynch. of Harleford in Great Marlow in Buckinghampshire, and of Hamnes in Bed∣fordshire Baronet. 13. Topaz, on an Chief Diamond, three Escallop-shells Pearl;Lord Preston, born by the Right Honourable Richard Grayham, Vis∣count Preston, and Lord Graham of Eske, Embassadour for his Majesty King Charles the Second to the King of France, 1684. 13. Azure, three Escallops Or, born by Sir John MalletMallet. of St. Andrems in West Quantox-head in Sommersetshire Knight. 14. Gules a Fess dauncette Or, between three Escallops Ermine, born by Francis DivesDive. of Bromham in Bedfordshire Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Lewis Dive of the said place Knight. 15. Or, two Barrs Azure, in Chief, three Escallops Gules, born by Edward ClarkClark. of Chipley in Somersetshire Esquire. Sable a Fess engrailed between three Welks Or, born by Sir John ShellyShelly. of Michelgrove in Sussex Baronet.
Other Examples of Fishes. Gules, a Dolphin hauriant Argent, by the name of Fores.Fores. Sable, a Dolphin naiant imbowed Ar∣gent by the name of Fitz James.Fitz James Gules a Dolphin naiant Sable by the name of Visacher.Visacher. Vert, two Dolphins indorsed Or, by the name of Hanner.Hanner, Argent, three Dolphins naiant Sable, by the name of Darburg.Darburg. Argent, three Pikes in Pale naiant Gules by the name of Pickton.Pickton. Vert, three Dolphins naiant in Pale Or, by the name of Dolphingley.Dolphing∣ley Azure, three Congers hauriant Argent, by the name of Conghurst.Conghurst. Argent, three Eeles naiant in Pale Bar∣rey Sable, by the name of Ellis.Ellis. Argent, three Dog-fishes naiant in Pale Sable, by the name of Gesse.Gesse. Barry wavey of six Or and Gules, three Prawns naiant, in the first of the second by the name of Sea,Sea. or Atsea. Argent, a Cheveron engrailed Sable, be∣tween
three Sea Crabs Gules, by the name of Bridger.Bridger. Argent, an Escallop Gules, by the name of Prelate.Prelat Azure, an Escallop Or, by the name of Bayton.Bayton. Gules, three Escallops Or, by the name of Pale.Pale. Argent, three Escallops Gules by the name of Barnaby.Barnaby. Argent, three Escallops Sable by the name of Strickland.Strickland. Sable, three Escallops Or, Walcot.Walcot. Azure, three Esccallops Or, by the name of Hartfield.Hartfield. Gules, three Escallops Or, by the name of Palmer.Palmer. Or, three Escallops Gules, by the name of Harbottle.Harbottle. Azure five Escallops 2, 2, 1 Argent, by the name of Rowton.Rowton. Azure five Escallops 2, 2, 1, Or, by the name of Shorevile.Shorevile. Azure five Escallops 2, 1, 2 Or, by the of Ratesden.Ratesden. Azure five Escallops 1, 3, 1 Or, by the name of Barker.Barker. Gules, six Escallops 3, 2, 1 Argent, by the name of Scales.Scales.
Sable six Escallop 3, 2, 1 Argent, by the name of Escot.Escot. CHAP. VII. Treats of Monstrous Animals such as are exorbitant from the general course of Nature either for quali∣ties or essence, and of these there are divers sorts, as Amphibia, that is such as live sometimes as if they were Water Creatures, and other times as if Land Creatures. And those of a more Prodigious Shape, being formed, or rather deformed with the confused Shapes of Crea∣tures of diffrent kinds and quali∣ties, and such are Monsters which St. Augustin saith can't be rekoned amongst the good Creatures that God created before the fall of A∣dam.
engraving of blazon showing monstrous creatures folio 195 Monstruous Creatures:
Examples of Monstruous CREATURES. 1. ARGENT, a Beaver erected Sable, devouring a Fish, pro∣per. The Beaver hath his Tail only Fish, which he keeps for the most part in the Water, his hinder Leggs are like a Swan, and his foremost like a Dogg; so he swims with the one, whilst he preyeth with the other. 2. Argent a Fes. between three Otters Sable, born by Symon Lutterel of LutterelLutterel. in the County of Dublin i Ireland Esquire. It is reported that in Cina they train up Otters as we do Spaniels which go into the Water and bring forth Fish at the command of their Masters, which custome hath been practised of late years by some in England.
3. Azure, a Musimon Argent. This is a Bigenerous Beast of an un∣kindly procreation being engendred between a Goat and a Ram; like as Tyterus is between an Ewe and a Buck Goat. 4. Gules, a Leonard passant gardant, Or, spotted Sable. The Shape of the Leopard denoteth his unkindly Birth, and to be degenerate from the Lyon, but more agreeable to the Pardus in his shape and spots; nor hath he the noble Courage of the Lyon, to whom he is a mortal Enemy, and oft times by his subtle, treacherous policy doth get him into a Snare. 5. Argent, on a Cross Sable a Leopards face Or,Bridges born by George Rodeney Bridges of Keynsham in Somersetshire, Esquire. One of the Grooms of the Bedchamber to his Majesty King Charles the Second. 6. Diamond, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads or Faces Topaz by the name of Wentworth.Wentworth. This with a Garter is born by the Right Honourable William Earl of Straf∣fordEarl of Strafford. Viscount Wentworth, Baron of Went∣worth Woodhouse Newmarch, Oversley and Rabby, Knight of the Garter, &c. This Coat with a due difference is born
by Sir William Wentworth of Wakefield Kt. By Jo. Wentworth of North Empsal Knight. By Jo. Wentworth of Wolley Esquire, and by John Wentworth of Elmshel Esquire, all of the West Riding of Yorkshire. Pearl, a Cheveron Ruby between three Leopards Faces Diamond, born by the Right Honourable Francis Viscount Newport of Bradford, Baron Newport of High Ercall,Lord Vis∣count Newpert. Lord Leiutenant of Shropshire, Treasurer of his Majesties Houshold, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Coun∣sel, &c. Or, a Cheveron between three Leo∣pards faces Sable, born by Sir Charles WheelerWheeler. of Burbury in Warwickshire Baronet, antiently of Martin Hussingshire in Worcestershire. Vert, a Cheveron between three Leo∣pards faces Or,Stich. born by Sir Thomas Fitch of Elthans, and Mount Mascal in Kent Knight. Sable, a Cheveron between three Leo∣pards faces Argent, born by Mr. Thomas HawesHawes. of London Merchant. 7. Argent on a Bend engrailed Gules, three Leopards faces Or, born by Nicho∣as BarbonBarbon. of London M. D. and one
of the Colledge of Physitians of Lon∣don. 8. Sable, two Barrs Ermin, in Chief three Leopards faces Or, born by Owen FelthamFeltham. of Grais Inn in Middlesex Esquire. 9. Gules on a Bend Argent, three Leopards faces of the field, born by Col∣lonel Robert WerdenVVerden. of Chester, Comptro∣ler to the Houshold of his Royal Highness James Duke of York, and first Lieutenant and Major of his Guards. Or, on a Bend Azure, three Leopards faces Argent,Mingay born by Jo. Mingay of Ginninham in Nrflk Esquire. 10. Gules a Cheveron between two Leopards faces in Chief, a Bugle horn in Base Argent, born by Sir Thomas Slingsby of Skriven in the West Riding of York∣shire Baronet.Slingsby. 11. Sable a Leopards head Argent, Jessant a Flower de lis Or, born by Sir William Morley of Halnaker in Sussex Knight of the Bath.Morley. 12. Argent a Cheveron between three Seals feet erected, and erazed Sable, These Arms belongs to the Town of Yarmouth in Norfolk.
engraving of blazon showing monstrous creatures folio 199 Monstruous Creatures.
The Milk of the Seal is said to be very good against the falling Sick∣ness. Other Examples of Monstruous CREATURES. 1. AZure, a Griffon passant, and a Chief Or, born by George Evelyn of Godstone, and Ditton in Surrey Esquire, And by John EvelynEvelyn. of Sayes Court near Deptford in Kent Esquire. 2. Ermine, a Griffon Segreant, or Ram∣pant Saphir, born by the Right Hono∣rable Francis Lord Aungier, Earl, Vi∣scount, and Baron of Longford in Ireland, and one of the Lords of his Mjesties most Honourable Privy Councel for that King∣dom, &c. Sable, a Griffon Segreant Or Rampant Argent, born by Edward Griffin of Ding∣ley in Northamptonshire Esquire, Treasurer
of the Chamber to his Majesty King Charles the Second, and Leiutenant Collonel of his Majesties own Troop of Horse-Guards. Azure, a Griffon Segreant Or, by the name of Read.Read. This Coat is also born by Mr. James CorsellisCorselis. of London Merchant. Argent, a Griffon Segreant Or, born by Owen MeverellMeverell. Doctor of Physick. Azure, a Griffon Segreant Sable, born by Richard ColingColing. of Coreley in Shropshire Esquire, principal Secretary to the Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesties houshold. 3. Or, on a Cheveron between three Cinquefoils Azure, as many Escollops Ar∣gent, on a cheif Gules, a Griffon Passant of the Third, born by Richard HawkinsHawkins. of Marsham in Berkshire Esquire. 4. Argent, a Dragons head erazed Vert, holding in his mouth a sinister hand couped at the wrist Gules, born by Sir John WilliamsWilliams. of Mustow house in Fulham in Middlesex Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Williams of Eltham Court in Kent Knight and Baronet. 5. Argent, on a Fess between a dou∣ble Cottize Gules, three Griffons heads e∣razed Or, born by Sir Robert DashwoodDashwood. of Norbrook, and Wickham in Oxfordshire Knight.
6. Sable, a Cheveron between three Griffons heads erazed Argent, born by Sir John CottonCotton. of Lanwade of Cambridgshire Baronet. 7. Argent, a Wivern his Wings display∣ed, and Tail nowed Gules, by the name of Drakes.Drakes. Like as the Griffin doth pertake of a Fowl, to wit an Eagle in the fore-part and a Lion in the hinder, so doth the Wi∣vern in the fore-part the Wings and Legs of a Fowl, and of an Adder, Snake, or Serpent in the Tail. 8. Sable, a Cockatrice displayed Ar∣gent, Crested, Membred, and Jolloped Gules. The Cockatrice is of that pestiferous, and poysonous quality that he is termed the King of Serpents. 9. Azure, a Harpey with her Wings disclosed, and her Hair flotant Or, This Coat stands in the Church at Hun∣tington. 10. Argent, a Mearemaid Gules, cri∣ned Or, holding in her right hand a Mir∣ror, and in her left a Comb, by the name of Ellis.Ellis. 11. Or, a Dragon Passant Vert. 12. Argent, a Reremouse or Bat dis∣played
Sable, by the name of Bakster.Bakster. The Reremouse doth pertake both with the Beast and Bird, so that it can't be well said to which it doth belong; for by her Wings and Flying she should be a Bird, and by her body a kind of a Mouse. She bring∣eth forth her young, and suckleth them with her Paps which Birds do not. Under this head cometh Montegres, Sa∣tyres, Monk-fishes, as also Lion-dragons, Lions-poisons, and all other double shaped Animals.
CHAP. VIII. Having in these foregoing Chap∣ters treated of the whole Body of Heraldry, with Rules and Ex∣amples sufficient to blazon any Coat Armour; my next business shall be to lay down some few Rules for the Marshalling and Impaling of Coats in one Shield. BY Marshalling of CoatsMarshal∣ing of Coats. is to be understood an orderly dispo∣sing of sundry Coat Armours pertaining to distinct Families, and of their contingent Ornaments with their Parts and Appurtenances in their pro∣per places. And of these some have their place within the Escocheon, and some without: of those within some have their occasions obscure, and others manfest, as are those whose Marshalling (acord∣ing
to ancient and prescript forms) do apparently betoken Marriage, or some gift of the Soveraign. Such as betoken Marriage do represent either a Match single, or Hereditary: By a single Match, is meant the conjoyning the Coat Armour of the Man with the Woman which is Impald on the sinister side of the Mans; but if she be an Heiress then her Coat is to be born in an Escocheon of Pretence in the midst of his Shield, and over the Charge, if there charged. It is also accustomary for Bishops to Impale on the dexter side of their Coats, the Coat belonging to their Episcopal See. And if a Man hath had more than one Wife, the way of Bearing them is to Impale them betwixt his own, which is to be in the middle part of the Shield, Ex∣amples of all which shall be given for the Readers better instructions therein.
woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by quartering, showing fret and garbs He Beareth, two Coats quar∣terly both by the name of Ver∣non,Vernon. 1. Argent, a Frett Sable, 2dly. Or on a Fess Azure, three Garbs Or, the 3d. as the 2d. the 4th. as first. These Coats thus Marshalled are born by George Ver∣non of Sudbury in Derbyshire, and of Ha∣slington in Cheshire Esquire, descended of the Vernons who were anciently Barons of Shibbrook in the said County of Chester. After this manner are a greater num∣ber of Quarterings born, as will appear by the Examples given in the Second Part.
woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by impalement, showing a cross and a bear rampant He Beareth Per Pale Baron and Femme, the first Argent, a Cross Sable, by the name of Clayton,Clayton. the se∣cond Paly of six Or, and Gules, on a Can∣ton Argent, a Bear rampant Sable, by the name of Trot. These Coats are thus born by Sir Robert Clayton of Marden in Surry, and of the City of London Knight and Alder∣man, Lord Mayor thereof Anno 1680, who is now Married to Martha Eldest Daughter of Perient Trot of London Merchant.
woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling three coats, showing a bezant, lions, fleur-de-lis, and wolves He Beareth Baron, Impaled between his two Wives, first in the midst Ruby a Bezant between three Demy Lions Rampant Pearl by the name of Bennet.Lord Os∣westre. 2dly. On the dexter side Topaz on a Pallet Saphir, three Flower de lis of the Field, being the Coat of Elizabeth Countess of Mulgrave, and Daughter to the Earl of Middlesex first Wife to the bearer hereof. 3dly. On the sinister side Topaz, a Fess between three Wolves heads couped Dia∣mond, born by Bridget How of the Fami∣ly of Sir Gruham How present Wife to the hearer hereof the Right Honourable Sir John Bennet Knight of the Bath, and Baron Bennet of Oswestre in Middlesex.
woodcut blazon demonstrating escutcheon, showing hand, garb, mullets, and sable He Beareth Azure, a Wheat Sheaf Or Garb Or, by the name of Gros∣venor, in an Es∣cocheon of Pre∣tence the Arms of Davies viz. Or a Cheveron between three Mullets pier∣ced Sable; this with the Arms of Ʋlster is the Bearing of Sir Thomas Grosvenor of Eaton in Cheshire Baronet, now Married to Mary sole Daughter and Heir to A∣lexander Davies of the Mill-Bank in the Parish of Saint Margarets Westminster in Middlesex Esquire.
woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by quartering and escutcheon, showing lion rampant, pheons, torteaux He Beareth quarterly, first Argent, a Lion rampant Gules between three Pheons Sable, by the name of Egerton.Egerton. 2. Barry of six Argent, and Azure, in Cheif three Torte∣auxes, a File Ermine, by the name of Grey. 3. Sable, on a Bend between two Cot∣tizes Argent, a Rose Gules between two Amulets of the Field, by the name of Con∣way. the 4th. as the first on an Escocheon of Pretence, Gules, two Helmets in chief Ar∣gent, and a Wheat Sheaf in base Or, by the name of Cholmeley. These Coats are thus born by John Egerton of Broxton in Cheshire Esquire, eldest Son of Sir Philip Egerton of Egerton, and Outon in the said County Knight, which John is now Married to the Daughter and Co-heir of Tho. Cholmeley or Cholmondley of Vale Roy∣al in Cheshire, Esquire.
woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by impaling, showing leopards, crescents He Beareth Gules, on a Bend Argent, three Leopards heads, Or, faces of the Field by the name of Werden,Werden. Im∣paled with Sa∣ble, a Cross en∣grailed between four Crescents Argent, in right of Jane Daughter of Edward Barnham of Cockhall in Kent Esq; first Wife to the bearer hereof; and in an Escocheon of Pretence Sable, two Swords Saltierwise with their points down∣wards Ardent, Pomeled and Hilted Or, by the name of Towse, in right of Mar∣garet Daughter and Heir of William Towse of Basingborn-hall in Essex Esquire, present Wife to the bearer hereof Collonel Robet Werden of Chester, Comp∣troller of the house of his Royal High∣ness James Duke of York, and first Leiu∣tenant, and Major of his Guards. This Example sheweth how a Man should Bear the Arms of his Wives the
one being an Heiress, and the other not. The other Examples shew how the Coats of the Wives are to be born. Having given examples of the Mar∣shalling of Quarterings, Impalings, and Escocheons of Pretence for Wives. In the next place I shall treat of Augmentations of honour bestowed on the Bearer by his Sovereign for Favour or Merit, and of these some are Impaled with their Pa∣ternal Coats, and others born only on a Canton, Quarter, or Chief. woodcut blazon demonstrating marshalling by impaling, showing fleur-de-lis, lions passant guardant, wings The Lady Jane Seymour,Seymour. af∣terwards Wife to King Henry the 8th. Mother to the most noble Prince Edward the Sixth, received as an Augmen∣tation of ho∣nour to her Family by the gift of her said Husband these Arms born on the dexter side of of the Escocheon, viz Sol, on a Pile Mars, between six Flower de lis, Jupiter, three
Lions Passant Gardant of the first, Impal∣ed with her Paternal Coat, viz. Mars two Wings Pale ways inverted, Or two Wings in Lure Sol. This Coat is now born by the Right Noble Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset, Marquess and Earl of Hert∣ford, Viscount Beauchamp, Baron Seymour, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. woodcut blazon with bend and escutcheon, showing crosses and lion Ruby, on a Bend between six Cross Croslets Fitchee Pearl, an Escocheon Topaz, there∣on a Demy Li∣on peirced through the mouth with an Arrow, within a double Trea∣sure counter-floured of the first: and is the Paternal Coat of the Right Noble and ancient Family of the Howards, which now flourisheth in the persons of his Grace Henry Duke of Norfolk,Duke of Norfolk. Earl of Arundel, Surrey, Norfolk, and Norwich, Baron Howard, Fitz-Allen, Matravers,
Mawbrey, Segrave, Bruce, Clun, Oswald∣stre, and Castle-Rising, Earl Marshal of England, Constable of Windsor Castle, &c. The Right Honourable James Earl of SuffolkEarl of Suffolk. Baron Howard of Walden. The Right Honourable Thomas Earl of Berkshire,Earl of Berk-shire. Viscount Andover, and Baron Howard of Charlton. The Right Honourable Charles Earl of Carlisle,Earl of Carlisle. Viscount Howard of Morpeth, Baron Dacres of Gisland, Lord Leiute∣nant of the Counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland, Vice-Admiral of the Coasts of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmore∣land, Durham, and Maritine parts adjacent. The Right Honourable William Ho∣ward Viscount and Baron Stafford,Lord Staf∣ford. An∣no 1680. The Right Honourable William Lord Howard,Lord Ho∣ward. Baron of Escrick. The Honourable Charles HowardCharles Howard Esq; of Grastock in Cumberland Esquire, brother to his Grace Henry late Duke of Norfolk. The Honourable Sir Robert HowardSir Robert Howard. of Vastern in Wiltshire Knight, Brother to the Right Honourable Thomas Earl of Berk∣shir.e And the Honourable Sir Philip HowardSir Phillip Howard. Knight, Captain of the Queens Troop of
his Majesties Guards, and Brother to the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Carlisle. And from these and their Ancestors Loins, have issued forth divers worthy Gentle∣men as Stems to support the Dignity of the said Family. The said Augmentation on the Bend was Granted unto the Right noble Thomas Duke of Norfolk and his descendants by King Henry the eigth, for his signal Ser∣vice as General of the Army which gave that remarkable overthrow at Floding to King James the forth of Scotland; which said Duke was by King Henry the Seventh created Knight of the Garter, and made Lord High Treasurer of England. To all the Arms of all Baronets King James granted according to the first Insti∣tution of that degree as an Augmentati∣on of honour to them and their descen∣dants the Arms of Ʋlster, viz. a sinister Hand couped at the Wrist Gules, to be born in a Canton or Escocheon Argent, which said Augmentation is placed in the most convenientest place of the Shield.
woodcut emblazon demonstrating chief quartered, showing lion passant guardant, fleur-de-lis The Field is Topaz, two Bars Saphir, a cheif quarterly Jupiter and Mars on the first two Flower de lis Sol, on the second a Lion Passant Gardant of the last; the third as the second, the fourth as the first. This Coat belongs to the Right Honou∣rable John Mannors, Earl of Rutland,Earl of Rutland. Ba∣ron Ross of Hamlake, Trusbut, and Belvoyr, which was given in Augmentation to this Family, being descended of the Blood Royal from King Edward the Fourth.
CHAP. IX. In the former Chapters have been treated of such things in Coat Armour as are within the Shield or Escocheon; I shall now treat of those external Ornaments with∣out the Escocheon, viz. Hel∣mets, Torces, or Wreaths, Caps, Crowns, Crests, Mantlings, and Escroles: and to Noble Men Supporters; of all which in or∣der. THE HelmetHelmet. is placed next above the Escocheon or Shield to all under the degree of a Noble Man, And to the No∣bility there is a Crown, and the Helmet issiung out of the said Crown. The Helmet doth distinguish the dig∣nity of the Bearer, for to a Gentleman and
and Esquire the Helmet is placed sideways with the Bever close. To a Knight,Knights Helmet. or Baronet (which is all one) the Helmet is placed foreright with the Bever open. The full faced Helmet doth signifie direction and command, the close attention and obedience. The open Helmet placed sideways with Bars doth belong to all Nobles under the Degree of his Majesty, and Sovereign Dukes, or those of the Blood Royal. To Kings,Kings Hel∣met. Sovereign Princes and Dukes of the Royal Blood the Helmet is placed foreright with open Bars; all which will appear in the second Part of this Book in the Chapters relating to that Degree they are of; as will the Crowns or Coronets by which each Degree of the Nobility are di∣stinguished. Coronets. The Barons CoronetBarons Coronet. is with six Pearls of an equal height, and distance one from the other. The Viscounts CoronetViscounts Coronet. is composed only of Pearls close set together and of an e∣qual height without Flowers or Points.
An Earls CoronetEarls Coronet. is composed of Points and Flowers, but the Points are Spiry with Pearls on the top above the Flowers. The Coronet of a MarquisMarquess. Coronet. is of Leaves, and Points, with the Leaves and Flowers above the Points. The Coronet of a DukeDukes Co∣ronet. is only Floral. The Coronet of a PrincePrinces Coronet. is the same with the Crown of a King, only the Arches, Mound, and Cross are wanting. The Crown of a King is as a Dukes, but with Arches, Mound, and Cross. To a Bishop instead of a Coronet doth belong a Miter. Torce or VVreath.Next above the Helmet is the Wreath or Torce which is of the principal Metal and Colour in the Bearers Paternal Coat, this the Crest stands upon: besides which it oft times stands upon a Mount, Hill, Chapeau, Or Coronet. Crests.Crests are various each Family hav∣ing one appropriate to themselves. A∣bout the Shield reaching from the top of the Helmet to the bottom of the Shield is the MantleMantle. which is to cover or wrap a∣bout the same. And these Mantlings are of a different shape, and composure, and at the will of the Bearer to be altered at pleasure, those commonly made use of
are the Cloaks Mantles (antiently used) and the Folding Mantles. On each side of the Shield are placed SupportersSupporters. for Noble Men. The Escrole is at the bottom of the Shield in which is placed the Motto Or Device of the Bearer which is according to his Fancy, and may be altered at plea∣sure, but most commonly it alludes to the Coat, Crest, Name, or Imploy. And on the Escrole stands the Supporters. The End of the First Part.
HONOUR CIVIL ACCORDING TO THE LAWS of ENGLAND. With Examples of the Atchive∣ments of each Degree of Honour: And for the better explanation thereof one Example of each Degree is Blazoned: Which me∣thod is to be observed to all o∣thers. The Second Part. CHAP. X. As in Mans Body for the preservation of the whole, divers Functions and Offices of Members are required, even so in
all well governed Kingdomes a distin∣ction of persons is necessary, and the policy of England is such to have made a threefold division of persons, first the King, under which name a Soveraign Queen is comprised, Secondly the No∣bles, viz. the Prince, Dukes,Degrees of Honour. Mar∣quesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Thirdly the Commons which comprehends Baro∣nets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentle∣men, &c. Our Laws contrary to other Coun∣treys calls Noble under the degree of a Lord, and the Nobility are Peers of the Realm, and do sit together in the Kings great Councel of Parliament with his Ma∣jesty, and the word Nobility or Noble sig∣nifies to express men of generosity of blood and degree, as also the Reward of Vertue, but a word or two of each De∣gree in particular, and first of the King the Fountain from whom all Rivulets and swelling Streams of Honour spring Of the King or Monarch of Great Brittain. Monarchy is as ancient as Man, Adam being created Soveraign Lord of the U∣niverse, whose Office was to govern the World, and all Creatures therein, his Po∣sterity
divided into Tribes, and Generati∣ons acknowledged no other dominion then Paternity and Eldership, till men and vice multiplying, pride and violence ad∣umbrated filial Piety, and obedience, the powerful oppressing the feble, which ne∣cessitated the introduction of a Politick Government, and put an end to the good old Age; the most valiant Stems, or Na∣tions electing to themselves Kings to com∣mand them in peace, and to lead them forth to battle, which the Greeks call Monarchies; others became governed under a select number of Majestrates which is called A∣ristocracy, and others were so unfortunate as to fall under the yoke of Democracy. The Island of Great Brittain ab Ori∣gine owned a Regal Power as Caesars Com∣mentaries, our Chronicles sets forth. The Brittains were at first divided in∣to many Kingdoms which afterwards were contracted into two Monarchies, viz. the English and the Scots, and in the end united into one, and the ancient name of Great Brittain restored in King James as the right Heir and Descendant of the Brittish, Saxon, Danish, Norman, and Scottish Kings, from whom it de∣scended to our immediate Soveraign King
Charles the Second, in whose Veins all those Soveraign Streams of Royal Blood are conjoined to Unite those jarring Na∣tions into one Body under a Head unto which each one may justly claim an inte∣rest. The King is Gods Vice-Gerent, and ought to be obeyed; if good he is a blessing, if bad a judgment, against whom we are to use no other Weapons but Prayers and Tears for his amendment, he is stilled Pater Patria and because the pro∣tection of his Subjects belongs to his care, the Militiae is annexed to his Crown that the Sword and Scepter may be both in his hand. It is the manner for Kings to Write in the Plural number, which is Gods own stile, Mandamus, Volumus, &c. And the Scripture calls them Gods, in which sence they may be stiled Divi, or Dij, quia Vica∣rij, & Dei voce indicat: And our Lawyers say, Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, which denotes his Power in Causes Ec∣clesiastical. The Ceremonies at the Coronation are many, and more solemn with us, then in many other Countries, as the anointing with Oyl, an Imperial Crown set on his head
(which is always done by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, as a Prerogative belonging to that See) A Scepter the ancient Ensign of Regality is put into his hand to signi∣fie Justice, a Ring is put on his Finger to denote Faithfulness; a Sword for Ven∣geance, and a Mound that is a Globe Crest∣ed with a Cross put in his right hand, the Globe denoting his Dominions by Sea and Land, and the Cross his Faith. The Kings Office.The Office of the King of England ac∣cording to Fortescue is to fight the Battles of his People, and to do them Right and Justice. To enable him to perform this weighty office certain Powers and Privi∣ledges are allowed him by the Law of the Land, amongst which he hath the power of the Militia both by Land and Sea, of making Peace and War, he hath all strong holds as Castles, Forts and the like; he hath the power of calling, adjourning, pro∣roging, and dissolving Parliaments at plea∣sure; also the encreasing the number of the Members of both Houses by creating new Peers, or bestowing new Priviledges to Boroughs, to elect and send Burgesses by his Writ to Parliament. The Bills that pass both Houses receive the name of Laws from his breath, and
are annihilated if he lays them by with∣out giving a reason for it. He hath the sole nomination of all Commanders and Offices both Military, Civil, and Ecclesiasti∣cal, the power of conferring Honours, dispencing with Penal Statutes, the par∣doning of Criminals, the Coyning of Mo∣ney, the erecting and making Cities, Ʋni∣versities, Colledges, Hospitals, Fairs, Mar∣kets, Forests, Chases, &c. The Enfranchi∣sing of Aliens, the granting of Letters of Mart: he hath the regulation of Weights, and Measures, and the setting of prizes on Provisions within the Verge of his Court, which is twelve Miles round, which said office is executed by his Clerk of the Mar∣kets for the said Verge; he hath also the power to take Carts, Wagons, or Boats for the carrying his Goods from one Palace to another paying the Rates allowed by the Statute. And for declaring his Royal pleasure he issueth forth his Proclamations which ought to be strictly obeyed by all his Subjects. Debts due to the King are first to be satisfied, and all Receivers of his Money and Revenues, their Persons, Lands, Goods, Heirs, Executors, &c. are at all times
chargeable for the same, for Nullum tem∣pus occurit Regi. In doubtful cases no Statute restrains the King unless he be especially named therein, no Escoppel can bind him, no Judgment final in a Writ of Right Judg∣ments entred against him are with Salvo jure domini Regis. The King hath the Custody of all Idiots and Lunaticks; to him belongs all Estates for want or Heirs, by Forfeitures, Eschats, &c. A Treasure, Trove, all Waifs, Estrais, Wrecks at Sea, and the like not granted from the Crown belongs to him, the like doth all waste Lands, Gold, and Silver Mines, the Royalties of Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling. In the Church his Prerogative Power is very great, he can all National Synods for the making of Canons for the introdu∣cing of Ceremonies into the Church to reform Heresies, Schism and the like. He hath the Patronage of all Bishopricks; and the making of all Bishops. These with many other are the Prero∣gatives that belongs to the Crown of Eng∣land.
engraving of royal coat of arms, King Charles the 2nd, showing lions, unicorn, helmet, coronet, harp, fleur-de-lis Folio 227 HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. DIEU ET MON DROIT. Atchivement of his Sacred Malie. King Charles the 2d. &ca.
The ATCHIEVEMENT of the KING. THe Royal Atchievement, or Armorial Ensign of Honour belonging to His Majesty is as followeth, Quarterly quar∣tered first Jupiter three Flowers de lis Sol, quartered with Mars, three Lions passant Gardant in pale Sol. 2dly, Sol within a dou∣ble Tressure counter flowred, a Lion Rampant Mars. 3dly, Jupiter an Irish hap Sol, stringed Luna, the fourth and last quarter in all points as the first; all within the Royal Garter, on a Helmet adorned with an Imperial Crown, a Lion passant Gardant crowned Sol, mantled with Cloth of Gold, lined Ermine, supported on the dexter side with a Lion Gardant crowned Sol, and on the sinister with an Ʋnicorn Luna, thereto a Chain reflexed over his back, and armed Sol, and in a Compartment below this Motto DIEV ET MON DROIT.
Of the PRINCE. THe Kings eldest Son (who is Heir ap∣parent from the day of his Birth) is entituled Prince, from the Latin word quasi principalis post Regem. See Guil∣lim Second part Chap∣ter 3.The first that is read of in England was Edward eldest son to King Henry the Third, since which time the eldest Son of the King hath been by Patent, and other Ceremonies Created Prince of Wales,Prince of Wales. Earl of Chester, and Flint, &c. King Edward the Third added the Dukedome of Cornwal with the said Principality, and made the Black Prince his Son Prince of Aquitane, and since the Union of Scotland his Title hath been Princeps Mag. Brittania, but ordinarily Prince of Wales. As eldest Son to the King of Scotland he is Duke of Rothsay, and Seneschal of Scotland from his birth, and so long as Normandy remained in the Kings possession he was stiled Duke of Province. At his Creation he is presented before the King in Princely Robes, who puts a Co∣ronet
on his head, a Ring on his middle Finger, and a Verge of Gold into his hand, as also his Letters Patents after they are read. The Mantle that he wears in Parlia∣ment is once more doubled upon the Shoulder then a Dukes, his Cap of State indented, his Coronet formerly of Crosses and Flower de lis, but hath now an Arch added, with a Ball and Cross in the midst on the Summit, by order of his present Majesty King Charles the Second. And the Coronet with Crosses and Flower de lis was then allowed to his Royal Highness James Duke of York; and all immediate Sons and Brothers of the Kings of Eng∣land, but their Sons although they hold the Titles of Dukes are to use the Coronet of Leaves only as other Dukes do. The Prince is a distinct Person from the King, he is a Subject, and holds his Principalities of the King, and is subject to the Law, in token of which subjection he useth this Posie ICH DIEV an old Saxon word which signifies I Serve, which is placed about a Flower de lis.
DUKES. A Duke is called Dux a ducendo from being a General or Leader of an Army, but of late days this dignity is given by the King to men of Blood and Merit by Patent. And the first English Duke was Edward the Black Prince who was created Duke of Cornwal by his Fa∣ther Edward the Third. Their Chapron,Chapron. or head attire is of Scar∣let doubled Ermine; their Coronet made of St awberry Leaves, his Mantle guarded with four Guards, he holds a Verge of Gold in his hand, and at his Creation hath his Sword put over his Shoulders, or guided to him which V scounts, and Barons have not. Dukes Privi∣ledges.He may in all places out of the Kings or Princes presence erect his Cloth of E∣state hanging down within half a yard of the Ground; his Dutchess may have her Train born up by a Baroness, and no Earl without his permission is to wash with him. By Curtesie all Dukes eldest Sons are
engraving of achievement of Grace Christopher, Duke of Albemarle, showing lions, helmet, coronet, griffin folio 231 HON SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. FORTIER FIDELIER FOELICITER. Atchivement of his Grace Chris∣topher Duke of Albemarle &c.a
stiled Ma qu sses and the younger Lords, and take place of Viscounts; he hath that Title of Grace, and is stiled most potent, and noble Prince. Dukes of the Blood Royal are stiled, most High, Mighty, and Illustrious Princes. The Kngs younger Sons are stiled Princes by Birth, but have their Titles of Dukes, Marqusses, &c. from Crea∣tion. The D ughters are stiled Princesses, and the Title of Roy l Highness is due to them all both Sons and Daughters. I shall give you for example of the Bearing of a Duke the Atchievement of his Grace Christopher Duke of Alemarle.Atchieve∣ment of the Duke of Albe∣marle. The Right Nble Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teys, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, Lord Leiutenant of Essex and Devonshire, Captain of his Majesties Life Guards and Guards of Horse, one of the Gentlemen of his Bed-chamber, and one of the Lords of his most Honourable Privy Councel, &c. Beareth within a Garter, Ruby a Cheveron between three Lions heads erazed Pearl, Ensigned with a Coronet, and Helmet be∣fitting
his Graces quality, thereon on a Cheapeau Ruby, lined Ermine a Cat-a-Mountain passant per Pale Diamond and Pearl between two Palm branches proper; mantled Ruby, double Ermine; support∣ed on the dexter side by a Lion, and on the sinister by a Griffon both Pearl, and holding on their Shoulders a Palm Branch proper; and for his Motto in a Scrole FORTIER: FIDELITER FOELICITER. MARQUISSES. A Marquiss according to the Saxon word Markenreve signifies a Go∣vernour of the Marches; he hath the next place of Honour to a Duke; he is Created by girding on a Sword, by puting on his Head a Chaplet of Gold, and deli∣vering into his hand a Patent under the great Seal for the said Dignity, his Coro∣net is partly Flowred, and partly Pyrami∣dal, his Mantle and Cheapeau is Crimson or Scarlet, doubled Ermine, with three guards and a half on the Shoulders; his Title is most Noble and Honourable Prince. In
engraving of achievement of George Savil, Marquis of Halifax, showing owls, helmet, coronet, talbots folio 233 BE FAST Atchivement of the most Honble. George Marquess of Halifax &ca.
the absence of the King, or a Duke he may have his Clothof Estate reaching within a yard of the Ground; and his Marqui∣ness may have her Train born by a Knights Lady in her own House, but not in the presence of a Dutchess. His eldest Son hath the Title of Earl, and his younger Sons are Lords. Also his eldest Daugh∣ter is a Countess, and his younger Ladies by curtesie. For the example of the Bearing of a Marquiss, I shall incert that of the most Honourable George Savil, Baron of Eland, Viscount, Earl and Marquiss of Hallifax,Marquiss of Halli∣fax. Lord Privy Seal, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Coun∣cel, &c. who Beareth for his paternal Coat Armour Pearl, on a Bend Diamond three Owls of the Field. Mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine, and for his Crest on a Coronet and Helmet befiting his Lordships Degree, on a Wreath or Torce of his Co∣lours, an Owl Pearl, supported by two Talbots Pearl, gorged about the Necks with Ducal Crowns per Pale Pearl and Ru∣by. And for his Motto in an Escrole BE FAST.
EARLS. See Guil∣im Se∣cond Part Chapt. 6.THe word Earl by the Saxons was cal∣led Erlig, or Ethlin; by the Ger∣manes Plsg ave or Lantgrave, and by the Normans Counts, being esteemed compani∣ons for Kings and Princes; they were Of∣ficers of great trust in former times in England, and have those Ensigns of Ho∣nour as the Marquisses and Dukes, viz. a Chapeau or Cp for the head with a Coronet of Gold which for distinction is Pyrami∣dal pointed and pearled, and between each Pyramide is a Flower much shorter then the Pyramid. Their Body is adorned with Robes, viz. a Hood, Surcoat, and Man∣tle of Scarlet as for a Marquiss, but there is but three Guards of Ermine Fur on the Shoulders; they are also begirt with a Swod and have a Patent delivered them. Their Titles are the Right Honourable, and truly Noble Lord, as also most Po∣tent and Noble Lord, out of his Superi∣ours presence he may have a Cloth of State fringed with Pendants, and his Coun∣tess may have her Train born up by an Esquires Wife.
engraving of achievement of George, Earl of Berkeley, showing crosses, helmet, coronet, lions folio 235 VIRTVTE NON VI Atchivement of the Right Honble. George Earle of Berkeley &ca.
For the Example of the Bearing of an Earl I shall make use of the At heivement of the Right Honourable George Earl of Berkeley. The Right Honourable George Earl of Berkeley, Viscount Duresley Lord Berkeley,Atchieve∣ment of the Earl of Berkley. Mawbray, Segrave and Bruce, and Baron of Be kel y Castle, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Coun∣cel Anno Domino 1678 descended frome Harding a younger Son of one of the K ngs of Denmark that came into Eng∣land with William the Conquerour. Who Beareth for his Paternal Coat Armour Ru∣by a Cheveron between ten Crosses forme Pearl, above the same, on a Coronet and Helmet befitting his Lordships quality a Wreath of his Colours, thereon a Miter Ru∣by charged with his Honours Coat; mant∣led Ruby, doubled Ermine; supported by two Lions Pearl, the sinister Crowned, and gorged about the neck with a Collar and Chain reflecting over his back Topaz, and on a Scrole below, his Lordships Motto VIRTƲTE NON VI.
VISCOUNTS. See Guill. Chap. 7.VIscount (an ancient name of office now in being for such that are She∣riffs of Counties) was about the eigh∣teenth of King Henry the Sixth made a Degree of Honour who conferred the Ti∣tle on John Lord Beaumont by Letters Pa∣tents, by which he was Created (as an Earl) having a Hood, Surcoat, and Mantle with two Guards and a half of plain white fur on his Shoulders (whereas other Degrees a∣bove this are Ermin'd) and hath his Coro∣net and Chaplet with a row of Pearls close set together on it. They have the Title of Right Honourable and truly Noble, or potent Lord. His Viscountess may have her train born up by a woman out of her Superiours presence. Atchieve∣ment of the Lord Viscount VVenman.For the Example of the Bearing of a Viscount I shall incert the Atchievement of the Right Honourable Phillip Viscount Wenman of Tuam in the County of Gallo∣way in Ireland, and Baron Wenman of Kil∣mainham in the County of Dublin in the said Kingdom of Ireland; who beareth two Coats
engraving of achievement of Richard, Lord Viscount Wenman, showing crosses, greyhounds, cock's head, helmet, coronet folio 236 OMNIA BONA BONIS Atchivement of the Right Honble. Richard Lord Viscount Wenman &ca.
quarterly, first Ruby and Saphir a Cross Patonce Topaz. Secondly, a Fess between three Anchors Topaz, the Third as the Second, the Fourth as the first; supported by two Greyhounds Ruby Collored, Topaz; Mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine, and for his Crest on a Coronet and Helmet befitting his Lordships Degree, on a Wreath of his Colours a Cocks Head erazed Saphir, Crest∣ed and Jolloped Topaz; And for his Motto in an Escrole OMNIA BONA BONIS. The said Dignity of Viscount, and Ba∣ron Wenman is by Letters Patents, Creat∣ed on the Honourable Sir Richard Wenman of Caswell in Oxfordshire Baronet to com∣mence after the death of the said Phillip Lord Viscount Wenman.
LORDS SPIRITUAL. EP scopacy is as ancient as Christian Religion, being ordained by the Apo∣stles who took that Office upon them, and commended it to their Successors where they planted the Gospel. They are Barons of the Realm by Writ, by Tenure, and by Consecration. They are in Precedency next after Viscounts, and are placed upon the Kings right hand in Par∣liament. They have the Title of Lords, and Right Reverend Fathers in God; and their Sees by the Piety of former Ages are amply endowed with revenues suffici∣ent to maintain their Dignities.Arch-Bi∣shops, Bi∣shops, Deans. There are two Arch-Bishops, viz. Canterbury, and York, under whom are five and twenty Su∣fragan Bishops, six and twenty Deans of Cathredrals and Collegiate Churches, sixty Arch-Deacons, and 544 Prebendaries. The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury is Me∣tropolitan of England, hath power to Sum∣mon the Archbishop of York, with the Bishops of his Province to a National Sy∣nod; he takes place of all Dukes, and
great Officers at Court except the Royal Family; his Office is to Crown the King. The Bishop of London is his Provincial Dean▪ Winchester his Chancellor, and Ro∣chester his Chaplain. The Arch-bishop of York also hath pre∣cedency of all Dkes ecept those of the Royal Blood, and of all Great Officers, except the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper; he hath the Honour to Crown the Queen, and to be her Chaplain. Archbishops ave the Title of Grace, and most Reverent Fathers in GOD. They have their Armorial Ensigns of Honour which is the Coat of their E∣piscopal See, on the Dexter side impal∣ed with their Paternal Coat, and for Ex∣ternal Ornaments, there is placed above a Miter, with Keys Saltierwise, according to this example.
TEMPORAL BARONS. See Guill. Nar. 2d. Chap. 9.A Baron is a Dignity next unto a Viscount, and our Law Books makes a difference between Dukes, Mar∣quisses, Earls, and Viscounts, which are al∣lowed Names of Dignity, and the Baron; for they affirm that such a Baron needs not to be named Lord, or Baron by the Writ, but the Duke, Marquis, &c. ought to be named by their Names and Dignity. This Dignity is very ancient, they were first called Valvasors, which name the Sax∣ons changed into Thanes, and the Normans to Barons. And 'tis the received opini∣on that in those days every Earl had ten Barons under him, every Baron ten Knights fees holden of him, and those that had four Knights fees in Possession were usually called to the Degree of a Baron. Three sorts of Barons.There are three sorts Or kinds of Barons, viz. by Tenure, by Writ, and by Creation or Patent. 1. Barons by Tenure or Prescription are those that hold any Honour, Castle, or Mannor, as the head of their Barony of
which there are two sorts Spiritual and Temporal and these are the most ancient Barons. 2dly. Barons by WritBarons by Writ. are those to whom a Wit of Summons n the Rings name is di∣rected to come to Parliment, &c. which kind of Writ is the same as directed to Barons by Tenure, as also to Barons by Pa∣tent, but those that are not Barons by Te∣nure not Paent, and have only such Writs, after the receipt of such a W it and place taken in Parliament accordingly ought to enjoy the Name and Dignity of a Baron. The first institution of them is sup∣posed to be in the 49 of Henry the Third, to supply the places of the R bellious Ba∣rons then engaged against him in a Civil War. 3dly. Barons by PatentBarons by Patent. are Created by the Kings Letters Patents to them and their Heirs Male lawfully begotten, and this was begun in the Reign of King Ri∣chard the Second. Barons have their Hood or Chapean, their Surcoat and Mantle which hath two guards of white Fur, on their Shoulders: Also a Coronet with six Pearls placed at equal di∣stance. They have the Titles of Right Ho∣nourable
and truly noble Lords, and the Baroness may have her train born up by her Page. For the Example of a Barons At∣chievement, I shall incert the Coat Ar∣mour of the Right Honourable Digby Lord Gerrard, Baron of Gerrards Bromley in Staffordshire, &c. who beareth Pearl a Saltier Ruby, for his Crest on a Coronet and Helmet befitting his Lordships degree, on a Wreath of his Colours a Munky pro∣per with a Chain over his back Topaz, Mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine, support∣ed by two Lions Ermine crowned To∣paz. KNIGHTHOOD. KNIGHTS of the GARTER. IT was the custom and policy of puissant Princes both ancient and modern to carass men of Heroick Spirits and re∣nown with remarks of Honour,Guillim. Part 2. Chap. 11. viz. pre∣cedency of place, honourable Robes and engraving of achievement of Digby, Lord Gerard of Bromley, showing cross, helmet, coronet, monkey with chain, lions
folio 242 Atchivement of the Right Honble. Digby Lord Gerard of Bromley &c.a
Badges, and additional Titles; amongst which none seems more ancient then that of Knighthood, most Nations having di∣vers distinct orders, some Military, and some Civil; but amongst all orders pure∣ly Military that of Saint George which we call Knights of the Garter deserved∣ly hath the preheminence for it's anti∣quity, glorious institution by that Trium∣phant King Edward, and for the many Emperours, Kings and Princes that have thought themselves honoured in being admitted into the Fraternity. It was instituted about the year 1350, by the victorious King Edward the Third. The Patron of the order is Saint George a man of renown for Chivalry and Christia∣nity in confirmation whereof he suffered Martyrdom in Asia, to whose memory many Temples and Monasteries were dedi∣cated in the Eastern, and afterwards in the Western Churches. And the 23th. of April is assigned for his Feast. The number of Knights of the Garter are not to exceed six and twenty, but there is usually left one or more vacancies for the gratifying a foreign Prince, or Ally. The Habit of the order are Robes of
Crimson, and Purple Veivet Cassocks, with Collrs to be worn over them on Feast and Solemn Days, and a Star of Stiver to be embroidered on the left side of their Cloaks, or Coats. They are also to wear the Image of Saint George on Horseback encountring with the Dragon to be made of Diamonds set in Gold, whi h is to hang on a blue Ribon, and always worn cross their Body or Shoulders, as also a Grter on the left Leg Enamelled with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stone with the Motto HONI SOIT QƲI MALY PENSE. Or instead thre∣of a Blew Ribbon, of all which stately Rob s, together with the Solemnities at their In∣staulation, &c. is at large treated of by Mr. Ashmele. The distinction of Honour in their Shields is always within a Carter accord∣ing to the examples following, born by the Right Noble Henry Duke of Beaufort Marquiss and Erl of Worcester,Atchieve∣ment of the Duke of Beau∣fort. Bron Herbert of Chipstow, Raglon and Gower, Lord President, and Lord Leiutenant of Wales, and Marshes, Lord Leiutenant of the Counties of Glocester, Hereford, and Monmouth, and of the City and County of Bristol, Lord Warden of his Majesties Forest
engraving of achievement of Henry, Duke of Beaufort, showing spotted panther with flames, wyvern, helmet, coronet folio 244 HONI SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE. Mutare Vel Timere Sperno Atchivement of his Grace Henry Duke of Beaufort &ca.
of Dean, and Constable of the Castle of S. Bavells Kight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Cuncel, &c. who beareth withn a Garter, Fnce and England, quarterly within a Bodr Gobonaied Pearl and Saphir. En∣signed with a Co onet and Helmt befiting his Graces quat, thereon on a Wreath of his Clours a Pcullis Topaz, mantled Ruby doubled Ermine, supported on the Dexter by a Panthur Pearl, spotted of all Colours, collored, and chained To∣paz, with Flames of Fire issuing out of his Mouth and Ears proper. On the si∣nister side a Wivern emeral'd, gorged a∣bout the Neck with a Crown Ducal, and Chain reflecting over his back Topaz, holding in his mouth a dexter hand cou∣ped Ruby; and for his Motto in an Escrole MƲT ARE VEL TI∣MERE SPERNO.
KNIGHTS BANERETS. THIS Order of Knighthood was in for∣mer Times reputed Barons, and had the admittance amongst the Peers in Parlament, in the Saxon Regiment, amongst the French the Honour was Hereditary, but with us now adays for Life only, yet they retain some Ensigns of Honour, such as Supporters, and have Precedency of all under the Degree of a Baron. But they must be such Banerets as are made under the Royal Standard displayed, in time of battle the King or Prince being present, of this Order, there is at present none that I can hear of living. BARONETS. THE lowest degree of Hereditary Ho∣nour is that of a Baronet, instituted by King James, Anno 1611. They are created by Patent under the Great Seal as the No∣bles, to them and their Heirs male lawful∣ly
engraving of achievement of William Portman, Baronet, showing helmet, fleur-de-lis, talbot Folio 247. Atchivement of Sr. William Portman Bart.
begotten, without otherwise by a par∣ticular Clause: They are styled in all Writs and Commissions Baronets, with the Addition of Sir, and the Title of Lady to their Wives. There are also Baronets of Nova-Sco∣tiaBaronet Nova sco∣tia. for Scotland, but these of England, as an Armorial Ensign of their Honour, bears on a Canton, or in an Escocheon placed in some convenient and perspicuous Place of the Shield, the Arms of Ʋlster, (viz.) Argent, a sinister hand couped at the wrist, Gules. For the Example of the Bearing of a Ba∣ronet, I shall incert the Atchievement of Sir VVilliam PortmanSir William Portman. of Orchard in Somer∣setshire Kt. of the Bath and Baronet, who beareth for his Paternal Coat Armour Or, a Flower de lis Azure on a Canton, the Arms of Ʋlster as aforesaid: And for his Crest on a Helmet, befitting his De∣gree, a Wreath of his Colours, thereon a Talbot Seiant Or, mantled Gules doubled Argent. There are some Baronets that besides the Augmentation of a hand as aforesaid by a peculiar Grant doth bear Supporters; for an Example I shall make use of the At∣chievement of the Honourable Sir HenrySir Henry Goodrick
Goodrick of Rbston-Park in York-shire Kt. and Bar. His Majesties Envoy Extraordina∣ry to the King of Spain, Anno Domini, 1682/3 who beareth Argent, on a Fess Gules, between Two Lyons passant Gar∣dant, Sable, a Flower de lis O, between two Crescents Argent: For his Crest, on a Helmet, and wreah of his Colours a Demy-Lyon Sable, holding a Pole Ax Argent, Mantled Gules, double Argent, for his Supporters two Naked Boys proper, and for his Moto in an Escrole FORTIOR LEO∣NE JƲSTƲS. KNIGHTS of the BATH. THESE Knights are so called from Part of the Ceremonies at their Crea∣tion which is at the Coronation of a King or Quen, or at the Creation of a Prince of VVales, or of a Duke of the Blood-Roy∣al. This Order saith Froysrd was institu∣ted in Anno 1399. by K. Hnry the IV, but others say they are of a longer continu∣ance, being then revived after a Disu∣sage.
engraving of achievement of Henry Goodrick, Baronet, showing lions passant, lion holding pole ax, fleur-de-lis, crescents, helmet, nude boys folio 248 FORTIOR LEONE JUSTUS Atchivement of the Honourable. Sr. Henry Goodrick &ca.
They have Rbes and Ceremonies appro∣priate to them, they wear a Red ibbon cross their left shoulder to which a Medal (being the Gift of the King or Prince that creates them) is affixed. There is no Badge of Honour in their Arms, being in all respects the same as to external Ornaments with a Knight Batchelor. KNIGHTS BATCHELORS. KNights Batchelors are such that are raied to this Dignity for their Prow∣ess and Merit being at first a Military Ho∣nour, and bestowed as well for their Re∣ward as to encourage others to Noble At∣chievements. They are called Knights Batchelors, as Slden in page 458. notes from Buccellarii signifying in the declining Empire a Soul∣dir or Servant must be ready for Military Employmnt, to which word Chevalier was joyned to denote a Souldier tryed and fit for Hors Srvice, and by their Honou∣rable Atchievements obtained great repute throughout the Christian World.
In all Foreign Countreys Knights have place according to their being Knighted, a Privilege debarred Noblemen; for be they never so Noble and Antient, they are only reputed as Gentlemen in Foreign Countreys, and cannot demand Place of the youngest Knight there by Law of Arms. The other Privileges and Honours allow∣ed them in England is at large discoursed in Guilims Heraldry, Second Part. Chap. 21. For the Bearing of a Knight Batchelor, I shall incert the Atchievement of Sir Ro∣bert Dashwood.Atchieve∣ment of Sir Robert Dashwood. He beareth Argent on a Fess between a double Cottize, Gules, 3 Griffons heads Erazed Or, Mantled Gules doubled Ar∣gent, and for his Crest, on a Helmet and Wreath of his Colours a Griffons Head Ermenois erazed Gules. This is the At∣chievement of Sir Robert Dashwood of Norbrook and Wickham in Oxfordshire Kt.
engraving of achievement of Robert Dashwood, Knight Bachelor, showing heads of griffins, helmet folio 250 Atchivement of S.r. Robert Dashwood Kt.
ESQƲIRES. ESQƲIRE by the Latin Word Armiger seemeth to take it's Original from Bearing the Armour of a King, Duke, or some great Warrier, as we find Saul and Jonathan to have their Armour Bearers; likewise Troilus and Achiles and Clytus A∣lexander the great in the same Office; so that amongst all Civil Nations such Men were in use, and of such reputation in those ancient days, that their Posterity were careful to own their Descent, and to con∣tinue the Title, and as in those antient Times, so are these in our days descended (for the most part) of worthy Ancestors, that for their warlike Exploits, or for their merits and service of the Common∣wealth in times of Peace, had both the Title of Esquires, and Coat of Arms al∣lowed, or bestowed on them, and their Descendants as a Reward for the same, of those that bear that Title amongst us are several sorts of Honours that precede Knights, and such are the Eldest Sons of Viscounts and Barons and Noblemens youn∣ger
Sons of the second rank, are the Se∣lect Esquires of the Kings Body, then Knights Eldest Sons. In a fourth rank are such as the King together with the Title, giveth Arms or Creates Esqires by Imposition of a Silver Collr o SS, or by Patent Creamus te Armgerum; &c. and that but rarely. In the first place are reckoned all such Gentlemen as by the Kings Patent, under the Great or Privy Seal are so Intituled by reason of their publick Offices, &c. and such are all Serjeants at Law, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs and other Officers and Commanders Military and Civil. Lastly Esquires by Reputation, the Principal whereof are those that Attend Knights of the Bath at their Creation, then Baristers at Law, Mayors of Cities, Offi∣cers of Courts, &c. The better sort of Esquires are stiled Worshipful. For the Example of the bearing of an Esquire, which is the same of a Gentle∣man, I shall incert the Atchievement of William Stych of Newbury in the Parish of Barkin in Essex Esquire, who beareth Sable three Garbs Or, Impaled with the Arms of Longueville, viz. Gules a Fess Daun∣cette
engraving of achievement of William Stych, Esquire, showing garbs, cross crosslet fitchy, helmet, eagle folio 252. PRO PATRIA MORT Atchivement of William Stych Esqr.
Ermine between six Cross Croslets Fitche Argent, in right of his Wife Mar∣garet Maria, Daughter of Sir Thomas Lnguevile of Wolverton in Buckingham∣shire Baronet; and for his Crest on a Hel∣met and Wreath of his Colours an Eagle Displayed Argent, Gorged with a Coller Azure, and holding in his Beak a Trefoil slipped Proper, Mantled Gules doubled Argent, and for his Motto in an Es∣crol PRO PATRIA MORI. GENTLEMEN. GEntlemen had their beginning ei∣ther of Blood, viz. Such as were brn of worthy Parents, or that had done some noble exploit in War where∣by they deserved to Bear Arms and to be accounted Gentlemen, but now a days who∣soever studieth the Laws of the Realm at any of the Inns of Court or Chancery, or who is a student at the Ʋniversities, also he that professeth the liberal Sciences, or can live without manual labour, or by his Wealth can live and bear the Port of a Gentleman, shall be called Mr. and
may purchase a Coat of Arms to himself and posterity. And the Saxons admitted none to the Estate of Genry out of all the Trades conversant in Gain, but such, only as encreased their Wealth by honest Husbandry, or plentiful Merchandize from beyond the Seas. Some others there are that number up nine several sorts of Gentlemen. First, those of Ancestry which must be Gentle∣men of Blood. Secondly, those of Blood, and not of Ancestry, as when he is the se∣cond degree descended from the first. Thirdly, Gentlemen of Coat Armour and not of Blood, as when he beareth a device given him by the Heralds, and then he and his issue are so stiled to the third descent, who are Gentlemen of Blood. Fourthly Gentlemen of Coat Armour and not of blood, as when the King gives them and their Heirs a Lordship by vertue thereof they may bear the Coat Armour of the old Lord, the Heralds approving thereof, and provided the said old Lords Family is ex∣tinct. Fifthly, a Christian Soldier that in the Service of God and his Prince killeth a Heathen Gentleman he shall bear his Arms, and if he hath issue to the third Degree, then they are Gentlemen of
engraving of achievement of Frances Stewart, Duchess Dowager of Richmond, showing fleur-de-lis, wolves, coronet folio 255. Atchivement of the Right Noble Frances Stewart Dutchess dowager of Richmond &ca.
blood; but note that no Christian Soldier may bear another Christians Coat al∣though vanquished by him in Battle, but may bear his Coat, in the finister Quarter with the proper Coat of such a Gen∣tleman that he killed or put to flight, pro∣vided it be done in an Army Royal. Sixth∣ly, if the King Knight a Yeoman he is then adjudged a Gentleman of blood. Seventh∣ly, when a Yeomans Son is advanced to Spi∣ritual Dignity he is then a Gentlman, but not of Blood, except he be a Doctor of the Civ l Laws. Eightly, or such that are brought up in a Cathredral or Abbey there serving in good office, or such as are of near kind to the Bishop or Abbot. And, Ninthly, such as serve a Prince as a Page: and afterwards by their diligent and faith∣ful service are advanced to higher places although without badge by Birth are e∣steemed Gentlemen. Thus you see the Scale of Nobility both Major and Minor. In the next place I shall give you the Bearing of a Woman, not under Femme Covert The Right Noble Frances Steward, Dutchess Dowager of Richmond and Lenox beareth two Coates quarterly; First, Sa∣phir 3 Flower de lis Topaz within a Border
Ruby charged with Buckles Topaz. Se∣condly, Topaz a Fess checky Pearl and Ruby within a Bordr Engrailed of the Third the Third as the Second, and the Fourth as the First, over all in an Escoche∣on of pretence Pearl, a Sler Engrailed between Four Cquefyls Ruby, Impaled with Pearl, a Bnd Egrailed Ruby sur∣mounted by a Fess checky Pearl and Sa∣phir, supported by two Wolves proper. It will not be unecessary to take notice of the princpal Parts of Honour and Vertue, that every Gentleman of what Degree of Honour soever, ought to be en∣dowed with, which are as followeth, To fear God, and walk after his Com∣mandments, and to his Power to dfend Holy Church. To love Honour, to be loy∣al and serviceable to his Prince and Coun∣try. To delight in Military Exercises, to frequent the War, and to prefer Honour before worldly wealth. To be charitable to the distressed, and to support Widows and Orphans. To reverence Majestrates, and those placed in Ahority. To che∣rish Truth, Vertue and Honesty, and to es∣chew Intemperance, riot, sloth, all disho∣nest recreations and Company. To be cour∣teous, gentle and of an affable Deport∣ment
to all men, detesting Pride, and Haughtiness. To be true and just in word and dealing, and to give no just cause of offence to any man. To be of an open and liberal heart delighting in Hospitali∣ty and to promote and encourage all publick useful and honourable works, especially such as relate to the advance∣ment of knowledge and learning as the Printing of Books which are lively Mo∣numents Registring to Future Ages an honourable Account of such persons that by whose generosity such undertakings were finished, for what greater satisfa∣ction can it be to any Gentleman to find in Books an Honourable and Commend∣able Account of his Ancestors which certainly every one should be ambitious of, for Books the Trumpet of Fame sounds forth their praise not only in their own Country, but throughout the World, and that to Fuure Ages; Whereas if no such Remarks were taken of their Fami∣lies in process of time they will be for∣gotten, nay probably in that part of their own Countrey where they dwelt, espe∣cially upon removals of Families from one Countrey to another which is very accustomary and that for several reasons.
PRECEDENCY. PRecendency may be thus observed. The King who is the Fountain of Honour. The Prince of England who is eldest Son to the King, and is born Duke of Cornwal, &c. Princes of the Blood Royal who are the Sons, Brothers, Ʋncles and Nephews of the King, The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Arch-Bishop of York, Lord Treasurer of Eng∣land, Lord President of the Privy Coun∣cel, Lord Privy Seal, Dukes, Marquisses, Dukes eldest Sons, Earls, Marquisses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Viscounts, Earls eldest Sons, Marquisses younger Sons, Bishops, Barons, Viscounts, eldest Sons, Earls younger Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Privy Councel that are not Noblemen, Judges, Vis∣counts younger Sons, Barons younger Sons, Knights of the Garter if not otherwise dignified as is rarely found, Knights Ba∣nerets, Baronets, Knights of the Bath, Knights Batchellors, Collonels, Serjeants at Law, Masters of Chancery and Doctors, Esquires, and those may be comprehend∣ed
under five Heads, 1. Esquires, to the Kings Body, 2dly. The descendants by the Male line from a Peer of the Realm. 3dly. The eldest Sons of Knights of the Garter, Baronets and Knights, 4thly. The two Esquires attending on the Knights of the Bath at their Creation, and 5thly. officious Esquires as Justices of the Peace, Baresters at Law, Leiutenant Collonels, Majors, and Captains, and last∣ly, Gentlemen of Coat Armour.
An Alphabetical TABLE of the NAMES of the NOILITY and GENTRY, whose COATS are made use of for Paterns of BEAR∣INGS in this Treatise of HE∣RALDRY. A ABinton Folio 94 Adam Folio 185 Albemarle Folio 147, 231 Aldham Folio 62, 64, 110 Alleyn Folio 37 Allington Folio 79 Alman Folio 37 Ambesace Folio 85 Andrews Folio 59 Antested Folio 47 Apleby Folio 185 Aran Folio 44 Arblaster Folio 93 Archer Folio 37 Argall Folio 68 Arlington Folio 148 Amiger Folio 102 Armine Folio 145 Armstrong Folio 102 Arnest Folio 120 Ash Folio 51, 52 Ashburnham Folio 116 Ashmole Folio 125 Astley Folio 121 Aston Folio 66 Atfield Folio 190 Atherton Folio 178 Atkins Folio 45 Atlow Folio 82 Atsea Folio 192 Ancher Folio 143 Ayer Folio 184 B Bacon Folio 114 Baggington Folio 62 Bagot Folio 52
Baldberny Folio 103 Bldock Folio 68 Bawyn Folio 58 Bnuy Folio 40 Band Folio 186 Banester Folio 39 Banks Folio 126 Baantine Folio 177 Barbon Folio 197 Bard Folio 183 Barkr Folio 193 Bakham Folio 71 Barnaby Folio 46, 193 Barnham Folio 112, 210 Barnard Folio 160 Barnardston Folio 41 Basset Folio 47, 63 Bath Folio 96 Bawdrip Folio 174 Bayns Folio 131 Baynton Folio 193 Beckingham Folio 133 Beconthorp Folio 186 Bedingfield Folio 175 Bellasis Folio 124 Bellew Folio 84 Bllingham Folio 83 Bllot Folio 121 Bendish Folio 159 Bennet Folio 148, 207 Bengham Folio 46 Bergavenny Folio 57 Berk ley Folio 38, 235 Brknhead Folio 76 Berneston Folio 39 Bertie Folio 95 Bertram Folio 60 Betereux Folio 166 Feve sham Folio 183 Billesworth Folio 177 Blny Folio 176 Blare Folio 113 Blome Folio 161 Bludworth Folio 90 Blunt Folio 118 Bodenham Folio 85 Bdmyn Folio 108 Bohun Folio 186 Bolles Folio 158 Bolter Folio 131 Bnvile Folio 114 Booth Folio 158 Bordam Folio 177 Boughton Folio 184 Bowes Folio 97 Bowyer Folio 140 Boydel Folio 39 Boyland Folio 176
Boyle Folio 65 Bramston Folio 89 Branchley Folio 37 Brantwait Folio 56 Brett Folio 137 Bridge Folio 184 Bridger Folio 193 Bridges Folio 196 Bridgman Folio 90 Bridgwater Folio 140 Bright Folio 117 Brightley Folio 41 Bristol Folio 123 Brograve Folio 146 Bromfield Folio 136 Bromfleet Folio 55 Broncham Folio 180 Brook Folio 67 Brougham Folio 181 Broughton Folio 71 Brownlow Folio 182 Bruce Folio 72 Brudenel Folio 102 Bryan Folio 63 Buckworth Folio 41 Bullingbrook Folio 114 Burkin Folio 47 Burrough Folio 117 Burton Folio 109 Bury Folio 41 Butler Folio 44, 86 Bye Folio 183 C Cade Folio 63 Caltherup Folio 53 Calverley Folio 182 Candish Folio 63 Canhauser Folio 184 Cantrell Folio 180 Carbery Folio 67 Carew Folio 146 Carington Folio 179 Carleton Folio 87 Carne Folio 179 Carter Folio 135 Carteret Folio 47 Castlemaine Folio 120 Cavell Folio 100 Cavendish Folio 155 Cawdrey Folio 79 Chaffin Folio 163 Chamberlain Folio 61 Charlton Folio 174 Chancer Folio 67 Cheyne Folio 68 Chetwynd Folio 116 Chicheley Folio 121 Chiverton Folio 92
Cholmondley Folio 209 Chudley Folio 142 Churchill ibid. Chute Folio 99 Clarendon Folio 86 Clarges Folio 126 Clark Folio 54, 191 Clavering Folio 73 Clayton Folio 37, 89, 206 St. Clear Folio 109 Clifford Folio 65, 71 Clifton Folio 141 Clopton Folio 38 Cock Folio 179 Cocks Folio 155 Cole Folio 169 Coling Folio 200 Coleman Folio 49 Colembert Folio 54 Colisborn Folio 181 Colleton Folio 154 Colvil Folio 46 Compton Folio 144 Conghurst Folio 192 Conway Folio 209 Cooper Folio 166 Coote Folio 185 Copley Folio 40 Corbet Folio 178 Cornwallis Folio 182 Corsellis Folio 200 Cottel Folio 54 Cotton Folio 176, 201 Coventry Folio 112 Courteney Folio 89 Cox Folio 140 Cranefield Folio 207 Crew Folio 139 Crispe Folio 103 Cross Folio 37 Culpepper Folio 54 Cuts ibid. D Darburg Folio 192 Darcy Folio 120 Darnall Folio 140 250 Dashwood Folio 47, 200, Davies Folio 116, 208 Dayrell Folio 133 De la luna Folio 110 De la Mere Folio 158 Dering Folio 58 Descus Folio 110 Devonshire Folio 155 Digby Folio 124 Disney Folio 125 Dive Folio 191
Dixon Folio 49, 70 Doleman Folio 123 Dolphingley Folio 192 Dorset Folio 73 Doughty Folio 115 Dowdall Folio 185 Downs Folio 49 D'oyly Folio 56 Drake Folio 107 Drakes Folio 201 Drew Folio 136 Ducket Folio 58 Duckenfield Folio 40 Dudy Folio 51 Duke Folio 183 Durant Folio 41 Dymock Folio 98 E Eden Folio 123 Edgworth Folio 185 Egerton Folio 140, 209 Eglesfield Folio 177 Eglesford ibid. Eglington Folio 117 Eliot Folio 46 Ellis Folio 192, 201 Elpington Folio 150 Elwes Folio 72 Emme Folio 149 English Folio 146 Etheldred Folio 37 Eton Folio 46 Evelyn Folio 199 Eyneford Folio 84 Eyre Folio 120 F Falconhergh Folio 124 Fane Folio 102 Fanner Folio 52 Farington Folio 157 Fanshaw Folio 124 Feak Folio 125 Felbridge Folio 135 Feltham Folio 198 Fenwick Folio 183 Ferrers Folio 50 Field Folio 136 Fitz Hamond Folio 133 Fitz Harding Folio 38 Fitz Hugh Folio 52 Fitz James Folio 192 Fitz Mores Folio 181 Fleetwood Folio 68 Fleming Folio 84, 111 Foley Folio 121 Folgnardly Folio 180 Fornival Folio 185 Fores Folio 192
Fortescue Folio 55 Foer Folio 97 Fountain Folio 151 Fwk Folio 124 Fox Folio 163 Frampton Folio 149 Fulford Folio 51 G Gage Folio 58 Games Folio 136 Ganesborough Folio 84 Garnard Folio 135 Gascoyne Folio 50 Gaunt Folio 71 Gawdy Folio 165 Gerrard Folio 57, 242 Gernon Folio 63 Gesse Folio 192 Gildesborough Folio 63 Gill Folio 68 Gleve Folio 111 Glisson Folio 115 Glyn Folio 175 Goddard Folio 39, 176 Goodred Folio 100 Goodrick Folio 145, 248 Goring Folio 78 Gould Folio 141 Grandgorge Folio 123 Grandmain Folio 49 Grant Folio 142 Grave Folio 177 Grayham Folio 191 Greenvile Folio 96 Grey Folio 209 Griffin Folio 199 Grill Folio 39 Grosvenour Folio 122, 208 Grove Folio 54 Grundin Folio 115 H Hacket Folio 144 Hackwell Folio 151 Haddon Folio 130 Hadley Folio 178 Hales Folio 97 Hallifax Folio 181, 232 Hall Folio 99, 126 Hamilden Folio 84 Hamond Folio 113 Hanmer Folio 145 Hanner Folio 192 Hansard Folio 115 Harbottle Folio 192 Hare Folio 71 Harington Folio 84 Harling Folio 156 Hartfield Folio 192
Harvey Folio 112 Hathe Folio 181 Hatton Folio 123 Haughton Folio 63 Hawes Folio 146, 197 Hawkings Folio 200 Hawley Folio 59, 65 Henningfield Folio 51 Herbert Folio 142 Heron Folio 180 Hepwart Folio 184 Hewit Folio 53 Hicks Folio 47 Hide Folio 86 Highlord Folio 55 Hill Folio 145 Hobart Folio 29 Hodbonel Folio 59 Hodby Folio 184 Holdesheaf Folio 123 Holland Folio 141 Holles Folio 63 Horn Folio 52 Horon Folio 133 Hoheie Folio 114 How Folio 207 Howard Folio 212 Huddy Folio 47 Huise 63 Hume Folio 134 Hungerford Folio 89 Hunlock Folio 155 Hunt Folio 58 Huntington Folio 81 Hussenhull Folio 113 Hussey Folio 37 I Jason Folio 158 Jervis Folio 184 Ince Folio 89 Insiquin Folio 146 St. John Folio 99, 114 Jollif Folio 102 Jones Folio 51, 97, 143, 153 Jorney Folio 127 Ireland ibid. Ireton Folio 56 Isham Folio 72 K Kadredhard Folio 163 Kemple Folio 82 Kendal Folio 54 Keymis Folio 98 Keynes Folio 55 Kildare Folio 57 Kingsley Folio 101 Kingston Folio 135, 141
Kirkhill Folio 177 Kirketon Folio 185 Knight Folio 55 Knowls Folio 40 Kroge Folio 82 L Lane Folio 59 Langford Folio 117 Langham Folio 160 Latimer Folio 39 Laughton Folio 73 Lavider Folio 67 Lee Folio 111 Legg Folio 154 Leigh Folio 94 Leigham Folio 173 Lemming Folio 37, 130 Lenthall Folio 55 Lesone Folio 109 L'estrange Folio 145 Lewkener Folio 52 Lindsey Folio 94 Lisle Folio 71 Litchfield Folio 111 Logan Folio 145 Londonderry Folio 186 Lorne Folio 66 Lougher Folio 52 Low Folio 160 Lowdham Folio 60, 101 Lowther Folio 77 Lucy Folio 111 Lumley Folio 43 Lutterell Folio 195 M Magnall Folio 96 Mainston Folio 169 Maitland Folio 61 Mallet Folio 191 Manchester Folio 87 Manduit Folio 49 Mannock Folio 39 Manox Folio 42 Maplesden Folio 37 St. Marney 134 Marsh Folio 156 Marshall Folio 54 Mason Folio 135 Masserene Folio 152 Masters Folio 133 Matthews Folio 80 Mauleverer Folio 163 Maunsell Folio 81 Maynard Folio 130 Maxfield Folio 57 Meers Folio 104 Mellish Folio 174 Mergith Folio 128
Meverell Folio 200 Micklethwait Folio 69 Mico Folio 128 Middleton Folio 59, 16 Millington Folio 176 Mingay Folio 198 Miniet Folio 102 Minshall Folio 117 Molineux Folio 39 Mompssn Folio 139 Mondeford Folio 127 Monk Folio 147 Monnings Folio 11 Montague Folio 88 Monter Folio 185 Mordaunt Folio 108 Morden Folio 124 More Folio 162, 174 Morgan Folio 98, 133 Morice Folio 134 Morley Folio 133, 198 Morrey Folio 61 Morris Folio 71 Morriswith Folio 63 Morton Folio 180 Mostin Folio 141 Mounchensey Folio 101 Mounson Folio 52 Musgrove Folio 78 Musterton Folio 157 N Nathiley Folio 168 Naughton Folio 185 Nether Folio 84 Nevile Folio 180 Nevill Folio 46, 58, 178 Newdigate Folio 149 Newport Folio 186, 197 Newthall Folio 104 Nightinghale Folio 127 Noel Folio 84 Northampton Folio 144 Norton Folio 37, 99 O Oglethorp Folio 158 Oldfield Folio 64 Ormond Folio 43 Osborn Folio 142 Ossery Folio 44 Otway Folio 70 P Pagit Folio 42 Pale Folio 193 Palford Folio 124 Palmer Folio 120, 163, 193 Palton Folio 127 Payens ibid.
Peck Folio 36 Peckham Folio 44 Pedley Folio 125 Peham Folio 181 Peton Folio 115 Pembrook Folio 142 Pennington Folio 46, 178 Perpoint Folio 111 Perth Folio 48 Peyto Folio 69 Peyton Folio 42 Pickering Folio 133 Pickon Folio 192 Pierrepont Folio 141 Pine Folio 118, 122 Pitfield Folio 174 Player Folio 131 Plot Folio 149 Plumbley Folio 55 Poley Folio 133 Pomfret Folio 18 Porter Folio 83 Portman Folio 124, 247 Povey Folio 56 Powell Folio 127 Powis Folio 142 Prelate Folio 193 Preston Folio 19 Prichard Folio 140 Prime Folio 130 Proby Folio 163 Proger Folio 143 Pulston Folio 15 Pynok Folio 136 Q Querlton Folio 137 R Ranelaugh Folio 97 Ratcliff Folio 54 Ratesden Folio 193 Rawlins Folio 99 Rynsford Folio 36 Read Folio 200 Redeshall Folio 137 Remis Folio 185 Reny Folio 186 Rstwold Folio 66 Retowre Folio 119 Reyce Folio 98 Rchardson Folio 103 Rchmond Folio 255 Rd Folio 111 Ringway Folio 186 Rivers Folio 143 Robarts Folio 108 Roberts Folio 134 Robinson Folio 153 Rochdale Folio 186
Rochester Folio 86 Rogers Folio 116 Roos Folio 104 Rose Folio 126 Rowch Folio 134 Rowton Folio 193 Rushurst Folio 145 S Sackvile Folio 73 Salborn Folio 63 Salisbury Folio 135 Salmon Folio 190 Sanders Folio 152 Sandwich Folio 88 Savage Folio 49, 143 Savill Folio 181 Saunders Folio 47 Scales Folio 193 Scambler Folio 129 Scarsdale Folio 58 Scotto Folio 117 Sea Folio 192 Seafort Folio 154 Seymour Folio 184, 211 Shaen Folio 139 Shaftsbury Folio 151 Shaw Folio 87 Shelley Folio 169, 191 Sheridan Folio 139 Shipstow Folio 96 Shirley Folio 50 Shorovile Folio 193 Shuttleworth Folio 82 Shiffington Folio 152 Skepper Folio 53 Slingsby Folio 198 Smith Folio 90, 148 Soame Folio 83 Somner Folio 46 Southwell Folio 121 Spindelow Folio 127 Spring Folio 133 Squire Folio 186 Stamp Folio 155 Stanhope Folio 65 Stanton Folio 185 Stapleton Folio 98, 132 Starkey Folio 174 Stephens Folio 53 Stepkin Folio 124 Sterne Folio 41 Steward Folio 255 Stone Folio 136 Stoughton Folio 42 Stoway Folio 40 Strafford. Folio 196 Strangman Folio 55 Stratford Folio 140
Strickland Folio 193 Stringer Folio 182 Stukeley Folio 122 Sturney Folio 135 Stych Folio 25, 197 Sussex Folio 125 Swinston Folio 38 Symonds Folio 190 T Taddington Folio 41 Tanner Folio 128 Tatnall Folio 99 Taylor Folio 136 Theme Folio 120 Thomson Folio 136, 177 Throckmorton Folio 70 Thurland Folio 42 Topcliff Folio 112 Totte Folio 129 Touchet Folio 186 Towse Folio 210 Tracy Folio 56 Trant Folio 126 Travell Folio 176 Tragarthick Folio 190 Trelesk Folio 39 Tremain Folio 129 Trenethyn Folio 184 Trevor Folio 141 Trewarthen Folio 157 Trot Folio 206 Trowbridge Folio 92 Trowtheck Folio 190 Turner Folio 85 Twistleton Folio 166 V Vandeput Folio 190 Vaulx Folio 186 Verdon Folio 132 Verney Folio 115 Vernon Folio 48, 205 Vincent Folio 120 Visacher Folio 192 Ʋsher Folio 149 Ʋudall Folio 39 W Walcot Folio 193 Waldenfield Folio 124 Walgrave Folio 65 Wallop Folio 55 Waney Folio 177 Wansford Folio 134 Wanting Folio 123 Warcup Folio 86 Ward Folio 39 Warner Folio 126 Waterhouse Folio 62 Waterton Folio 113
Watton Folio 179 Weel Folio 177 Wld Folio 112 Wells Folio 134 Welsh Folio 114 Wenman Folio 40, 236 Wentworth Folio 176 Werden Folio 210 West Folio 46 Westmoreland Folio 102 Wheeler Folio 197 White Folio 186 Whitmore Folio 83 Whittington Folio 115 Wickerley Folio 41 Wickhalf Folio 113 Widdrington Folio 73 Wilbraham Folio 56 Williams Folio 141, 201 Willington Folio 55 Wiltshire Folio 99 Windham Folio 147 Windwood Folio 40 Wisemale Folio 127 Withens Folio 183 Wither Folio 136 Wollaston Folio 115 Wolstonholm Folio 144 Wooler Folio 76 Wotton Folio 185 Wray Folio 45 Wren Folio 185 Wroth Folio 40 Wyche Folio 62 Wynch Folio 191 Wynn Folio 176 Wyrley Folio 83 Y Yedling Folio 178 Yelling Folio 184 York Folio 58 Young Folio 127 FINIS.
