B3407 12255574 57401
Forty Questions of the Soul concerning its Original, Essence, Substance, Na∣ture or Quality, and Property, what it is, from Eternity to Eternity. Framed by a Lover of the Great Mysteries DOCTOR BALTHASAR WALTER, and Answered in the Year, 1620. by Jacob Behme called Teutonicus Philosophus Englished by John Sparrow. In the first Question is contained, an Ex∣ation, of the Philosophick Globe, or Won∣ Eye of Eternity, or Looking-Glass of sdom, being ONE half Light or Dark Glob half Eye with a Rainbow about it, parted; th the Halves reversed, A Cross, and Heart, ppearing in the Centre, with the Abyss every here, within it, and without it, in Infinity,  being th Looking-Glass. ed for L. Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1663.
To the Earnest Lovers of Wisdom. THE whole World would not contain the Books that should be written of Christ, if all that he did, and spake, should be Written of him, flowing from that Fountain of Wisdom which dwelt in him; What then can be expected in a little Preface? but some few Ob∣servations of the foot-steps, and Paths of Wisdom, and they are set down here, as they occasionally presented themselves to the Thoughts of him, who desireth to be made
fit for the acquaintance with the Lowest Scholar in her School. Many have been her Scho∣lars in their own way, which Nature hath inclined them to; or God, in them that have kindled the Divine Nature, and so have been made partakers of it in their Souls: We may per∣ceive the Excellency of every one of them by that which hath been left for a Record behind them, and their fitnesse to be followed in Order till we shall attain the highest Pitch we are capable of. Since the true Grounds of the antient Wisdom have been
hidden in the Dark Writings of the wise Men of former Ages, some in this latter Age have endeavoured to reform the Errors that have risen from the want of knowing those grounds from which they wrote: The Writings of that Learned SELDEN, are e∣minent in this kinde, among others, by which means, the true Fame, and Glory of Learn∣ing, hath been in some good part restored again; as also by contriving means to direct the way, to raise the several kinds of knowledge from the is own true Basis and Foundation. The Renowned, Sir Francia
Bacon Lord Verulam Vicount St. Albans, laid his foundation sure, and raised his building high; by his Instauratio Magna, he taught men, first to free themselves from the Idola Men∣tis humanae, and then laid down the whole process of the Mind, from a Natural and Experi∣mental History, to raise a Na∣tural Philosophy: which doth shew the way to compose a Divine experimental History, to the building of a Divine Phi∣losophy, or Mystical Divinity. Comenius also, by his Panso∣phia, designeth the best way to educate all from their Child∣hood so, that in the shortest
time they may get the highest Learning their Natures can at∣tain to. Pellius in his Platform con∣cerning the Mathematicks, doth design to raise the Principles, or whole Structure of that Art, out of every ones self, without the help of Books or Instru∣ments, by a Treatise he calleth Mathematicus ; which may well be transferred to a Philosophus, Medicus, Legislator, Jurisperitus, Politicus, Theologus, Theosophus, . Also that strict inquirer into Truth, Comes Castri Insulae in his Book De Veritate, teacheth the true progresse of the Mind
in finding the certain infallible truth in all things. Des Chartes doth lay the foun∣dation of his Philosophy in such Grounds, and Principles, as are undeniable to him that doth but consider what is in his own Thoughts. These and some others in their kind, have gone as far, as the Natural faculty of Mans outward reason can reach; This Author Jacob Behme, e∣steemeth not his own outward Reason, but acknowledgeth to have received a higher Gift from God, freely bestowed up∣on him, and left in Writing, for the good of those that should live after him.
And in his Writings he hath discovered such a Ground, and such Principles, as do reach into the Deepest Mysteries of Nature, and lead to the attain∣ing of the highest Powerful Natural Wisdom, such as was amongst the Ancient Philoso∣phers, Hermes Trismegistus, Zo∣roaster, Pythagoras, Plato, and other deep Men, conversant in the Operative Mysteries of Nature, and the Modern, Tre∣visanus, Raymundus Lullius, Para∣celsus, Sendivogius, and others: by which men will be satisfied, that not only they have gotten, but that we also may get that Lapis Philosophorum, the Philoso∣phers Stone, indeed.
Those Principles do also lead to the attaining such wis∣dom as was taught in Egypt, in all which Learning Moses had skill; to the Wisdom also which was taught in Babylon among the Caldeans, Astrologians, and wisemen or Magi, with whom Daniel was brought up: Also to that Wisdom of the East, from whence came the Three Magi, Mat. 2. 1. who saw the Star that led them to Jerusalem, and to Bethlem, where they saw the Child Jesus, and Worship∣ped, and so returned, with whom God himself vouchsafed to speak and direct them what to do.
The Ground and Principles in his Writings, lead to the at∣taining the wisdom, which ex∣celled the wisdom of the East, 1 Kings 4. 30, 31. which Solomon had, and wrote in the Proverbs, and in a Book (which hath not yet been extant with us in Eu∣rope, but is reported to be found in the East Countrey some few years since,) wherein he wrote of all Plants, from the Cedar, to the Moss that groweth upon the Wall, and of all Living Creatures, 1 Kings 4. 33. His Ground discovereth the way, to attain not only the deep∣est Mysteries of Nature, but Divine Wisdom also, Theosophie
the Wisdom of Faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen with the outward Eys: this Wisdom bringeth our in∣ward Eyes to see such things, as Moses saw in the Mount, when his Face shone like the Sun, that it could not be beheld: such things as Gehazi saw, when his Master Elisha had prayed that his Eyes might be opened, (his inward Eyes, for his outward were as open before, if not more then any of Ours, being he was Servant to so great a Prophet) so they were opened, and he saw Angels fighting for Israel: such things as Steven, who saw Jesus
sitting at the Right Hand of God; when his Face shone like the Face of an Angel at his stoning: And Paul, who saw things inutterable in Paradise, when his outward Eyes were struck blind: such Wisdom as this, seeth and knoweth all Mysteries, speaketh all Tongues of Men & Angels, that Tongue which Adam named all the Creatures by in Paradise, also it can do all Miracles: for the enjoying whereof, men would give all their goods unto the Poor, nay give their Bodies to be burned; so desirable a thing it is, to enjoy it in this Life, but while corruption sticketh to
the Soul, it must have Charity, or else this Seed of Faith will not bear the Fruit of Eternal Life in Paradise for ever, where there is Nothing but an Eternal Miracle, of which all Miracles on Earth are but in Part; but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is im∣perfect shall be done away. This is the Wisdom by which Moses wrought his Wonders above Nature; and all the Prophets from the First along to Christ, and it is that which Our Saviour Jesus Christ him∣self taught to his Apostles and Disciples, and which the Com∣forter doth continually teach
the Holy Servants of God ever since: and by what is written by this Author, it may be be∣lieved that both the same Wis∣dom may be attained now, and the same Power of the Holy Ghost, by which they speake and wrought their Miracles, and the Cause discerned why scarce any hath been wrought for so long a while: yes, men will believe that greater things shall be done, as our Saviour tells the Apostles, then they saw him do: for it will ap∣pear, that the Power in one Man, even of one Thought in a Man, is able to change the whole Universe in a Moment:
This Power was in part in the Prophets and Apostles, who could raise the Dead; and when the time appointed is come, that all the Dead shall rise, that Power will do it, though it should be but as a Grain of Mustard-Seed in one Man, and restore the whole Creature to the Glorious Liber∣ty of the Sons of God: Sure∣ly it will be worth our pains, to find such wisdom as this. By the study of these Wri∣tings, men may come to know (every one according to his condition, property, and in∣dination) how all the real differences of Opinions, of all
sorts, may be reconciled; even the nicest Differences of the most Learned Criticks in all Ages; that which seemeth different in the Writings of the Pro∣found Magical Mystical Chymick Philosophers, from that which we find in the Experimental Physicians; Philosophers, Astro∣nomers, may be reconciled by Considering what this Author Teacheth, that the Names which were given to the Seven Planets, do signifie the seven Properties of the Eternal Na∣ture, and are the cause of all those things, which are by Ex∣perimental Men accounted the first and deepest causes of all.
Also thereby the differences in Religion, may be so recon∣ciled, that the Minds and Con∣sciences of all doubting per∣sons may be satisfied about Predestination, Election, Crea∣tion, Corruption, Salvation, and Restoration, so clearly, that all will love one another, & that hard Lesson, to love our Enemies, will be readily learnt, and Men will quickly Contri∣bute to the studying that one necessary thing, that Treasure hid in the Field, that Gold of the Kingdom of Heaven, that Precious Pearl, that All in All, Faith and Love, and Christ, and God, when they shall per∣ceive
that all this lyeth hid in every Soul, in one Measure or other, and may be found, and the way set down so plain, that every Soul may find it. Thereby the Writings of all Men will be understood, even the very darkest Mysteries, conteined in the VVritings of the Prophets, and Apostles, will be made plain and easie to the simplest Thirsty Soul; and then when that appeareth which is now hidden, that Ex∣cellent Glory, every one will not only see it, but walk in the way that leadeth to it, and so at∣tain it in the highest Degree of every ones capacity and capa∣bility.
While this Wisdom is growing, it will so reform the Laws, the degrees in eve∣ry Nation, that at length, the whole World will be governed in Peace to the joy of all. Perhaps some will think this impossible, let them con∣sider, that if they be told of a Curious City, and of the incredible things that are done there, by him that hath been there, and seen what he relateth, and he describe the way so plain, that they may come thither themselves, wil they not go? that they may know as well as he that told
them: do so by this Author; Read this Book diligently, and seriously, till you appre∣hend the meaning but of some part of the way he here de∣scribeth, which may easily be done, and you will be satisfi∣ed the things are true, and that the way he sheweth is true, and be able to walk in it; and also be very thirsty to labour in that way, more and more, till you attain your whole desire: and then you will keep it as the best Jew∣el, a Memorial of all Myste∣ries. But let every one read it themselves, whether it be the
highest King that sitteth up∣on a Throne, or the meanest Maid that grindeth in a Mill, or hear it read with their own Ears, if they mean to partake of this so high a gift from the most High, or else the Devil may easily bereave them of it. J. S.
To the Reader. IF we knew the pretiousness of our own Souls, we would confess and acknowledge with an inward feel∣ingness, the Answer to Christ's Question, when he said; What shall it profit a Man to gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? Or, what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? The Soul is so pretious that No∣thing can truly be valued at so high a Rate. To save it is the greatest Gain, to lose it is the greatest loss: then who will not highly prize the study and un∣derstanding of the way to save it? Christ saith, He that will save his Soul shall lose it, and he that will lose his Soul shall save it: but who understand∣eth this? We know it is the earnest de∣sire of every Soul to be saved, and to be happy and glorious, but the way is
very unknown to us poor fallen Souls, for we can hardly suppose that losing will be the saving of our selves: Christ also taught that the way to Glory was through many tribulations & Death; this way he entered into Glory, and so have all the Blessed from the beginning of the World, and can no otherwise to the end thereof: but how shall a Soul know the way to lose and deny it self, so that it may assuredly attain Eternal Salvation? Let it listen, in its Heart and Conscience inwardly to that Teacher, which it shall find there, who is God himself: We have the Testimony of Mo∣ses for this; who told the Israelites, The Word, the Commandment is nigh thee, in thy Heart and in thy Mouth (not the outward but the inward Heart and Mouth.) As also the Apo∣stle Paul saith to the Romans, That Christ the Eternal Essential Word of God, the Word of Faith which they, the Apostles preached, is nigh us, in
our Hearts and in our Mouths: and in another place he saith, Do you not know that Christ is in you, except you be past reproof,  improbi? Futhermore the Apostle John saith, that God is love, and he that loveth; God dwelleth in him and he in God, which we all perceive is true, for in him we live and move and have our Being; And this may be known, though the Apo∣stle Paul had not said so much, for one of the Poets of Old spake what he knew, and said, We are all of his Off-spring, as the Apostle mentioneth it: Nay we all know that be that doth well is the Ser∣vant of God, but he that doth Evil is the Servant of the Devil who ruleth in his Heart: And though there is none that doth Good, no not one, nor can do of himself, while he is in this Mortal-Life, yet through Christ in him, he can de∣sire to do well, and be sorry when he hath been drawn away to do evil by the Lusts of his own Heart, by which the Devil
tempteth us to do Evil; but if we will resist the Devil he will flie from us, if we will leave off to do evil, and desire, trie, and learn to do well, without doubt we shall be able through God that dwell∣eth in us: and then he will teach us all things, and lead us into all Truth by his Spirit. All this we shall fully un∣derstand, and all Mysteries, when God shall manifest himself in us, if we ear∣nestly desire it with all Humility, self∣denyal, losing of Our Souls, and being Nothing in our selves; for then God will be All in All, and nothing is im∣possible with God: All this, and much more hath the Author of this Answer to these Questions concerning the Soul, found true, and hath out of his inward Mystery manifested many things in this, and other Writings of his, the knowing whereof will be exceeding useful to the furtherance of the Salvation of every Soul; which when I had read, I was very much satisfied in my own Soul, and
do desire that others may be made parta∣kers of them, so far as lyeth in me: I have therefore taken in hand to put this Trea∣tise into English, which I chose to do ra∣ther out of the Original then out of any Translations, because they many times come short of the Authors own meaning, and because I found many Errours in some of them, and he is so deep in his Writings, that we have need to desire that our Souls may be put into such a condition as his was in, else they cannot be fully understood: But the same God, that satisfied his desires, will satisfie ours, if we cast our selves upon him in Our Souls, and let him do with us what he pleaseth. Concerning the Author, I have now published the Brief Translation of his Life, written in High-Dutch by Abra∣ham Van Frankenberg, who was long his acquaintance and continued so till his death. The Relation is as followeth.
A brief Account of the Life and Conversation of Jacob Behme, afterwards by Learned Men in Germany called Teutonicus. Written in High-Dutch, by Abraham van Franckenberg, one very much acquainted with him. JAcob Behme was born in the year, 1575. at Old Seidenburg, distant about two Miles from Gerlitz, a City in Upper Lusatia, highly Esteemed by Learned Men: His Parents were Jacob his Fa∣ther, & Ʋrsula his Mother, both Countrey people. In his youth he kept Cattel, and at length by advice of Friends was sent to School, where he learned to Read and Write, together with the Fear of God; af∣terwards was put to the Handicraft Trade of a Shoomaker; when he became Master of his Trade in the year, 1594. he marry∣ed a Maid, one Catharine the Daughter of John Kunshman a Butcher of Gerlitz, with whom he lived quietly and well for thirty
years together, and had four Sons, that learned Handicraft Trades. Being from his youth inclined to the fear of God, and very diligent in fre∣quenting to hear the Preaching of Ser∣mons, he was at length stirred up by that saying and promise of our Saviours, Lube 11. 13. Your Heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him for it, and because of the very many Contro∣versies in Religion, about which he could not satisfie himself, he was moved, in simplicity of Heart or Spirit, inwardly ear∣nestly and uncessantly to pray or ask seek and knock, that he might know or appre∣hend the truth; whereby then according to the Divine Drawing and will in the Spirit or Heart, he was rapt into the Holy Inward Sab∣bath of Rest and satisfaction in his Soul. Sabbath, wherein he continued seven whole dayes by his own Confession, in high∣est Joy. Afterwards, when he was come to himself, and having put off the folly of Youth, he was driven by Divine Zeal, vehemently to reprove all scandalous reproachful and blasphemous Speeches, and withdrew from all unseemly matters and actings with earnestness for
Love to Vertue: By which way and Life, being contrary to the course of the world, he became but their scorn and derision. During which time he mentained himself with the labour of his hands in the sweat of his Brows, till the beginning of the sixth Seculum or Age, viz. Anno 1600. when he was a second time touched by the Di∣vine Light, and by a sudden Glimps of a Pewter Vessel, he was introduced into the Inward Ground or Center of the Hidden Nature. He not being yet sufficiently satisfied with this, went forth into the open fields, and there perceived the wonderful or won∣der-works of the Creator in the Signa∣tures, Shapes, Figures and Qualities or Properties of all created things, very clear∣ly and plainly laid open; whereupon be∣ing filled with exceeding Joy, kept silence, praising God, and so contentedly satis∣fied himself therewith for a while. But according to God's Holy Counsel, and Determination; who manageth his works in secret, about Ten years after, viz. in the year, 1610. by the overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, he was a third time stir∣red up and renewed by God, whereupon being so enlightned, with such great Grace
bestowed upon him, he could not put it out of his mind, nor strive against his God, therefore did by small means, and without the help of any Books, but only the Holy Scriptures, write secretly for himself these Books following, viz. (1.) Anno, 1612. the first Book called Aurora, the Morning Redness, or Rising of the Sun; and being complained of to the Magistrates of Gerlitz, for being the Au∣thor thereof, the Book was taken and laid up in the Councel House, with command to him, that he being an Ideot or Layick, should from thence-forth forbear such writing of Books, which did not belong to his condition and employment, upon which he abstained for seven years; but after that, being in like manner stirred up again by the moving of the Holy Spirit, and being ex∣horted to it by the entreaty and desire of some people that feared God, he took Pen in hand again, and went on to write, and perfected with good leasure and delibera∣tion these that follow. 2. Anno. 1619. The second Book con∣cerning the Three Principles, with an Ap∣pendix concerning the Three-fold Life-of Man. 3. Anno. 1620. A Book of the Three∣fold Life of Man.
4. The Answer to the Forty Questions of the Soul, proposed by Dr. Balthazer Walter; in the first Chapter whereof is contained a Treatise of the Reversed Eye, or Philosophick Globe; with an Appen∣dix concerning the Soul, the Image of the Soul, and the Turba or destroyer of the Image. 5. Three Books. First, 1. of the becom∣ing Man or Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Second. 2. Of the Suffering Dying and Resurrection of Christ. Third. 3. Of the Tree of Faith. 6. A Book of the small six Points, and a Book of the Great Six Points. 7. A Book of the Heavenly and Earth∣ly Mystery. 8. A Book of the Last Times, or of the 1000. years Sabbath, being two Epistles to Paul. Keym. 9. Anno. 1621. De Signature Rerum, of the signification of the Signs or Marks of All Things. 10. A Consolatory Book of the four Complexions. 11. An Apology to Balthasar Tilken con∣cerning the Aurora, and another to him concerning Predestination, and the Person of Christ and of Mary.
12. Considerations upon Esaias Stiefells Book. 13. Anno. 1622. A Book of True Re∣pentance. 14. A Book of True Resignation. 15. A Book of Regeneration, or the New Birth. 16. Anno. 1623. A Book of the Prede∣stination and Election of God. 17. An Appendix to the Predestination, being A Compendium of Repentance. 18. The Mysterium Magnum, or the Great Mystery, being an Exposition upon Genesis. 19. Anno. 1624. A Table of the Three Principles, or a Key to his Writ∣ings, written to Godfried Frewdenhammern and John Hausern. 20. A little Book of the Supersensual Life. (21.) A little Book of Divine Vision. 22. A Book of the Two Testaments of Christ, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Sup∣per. 23. A Dialogue or Conference between the Enlightned and unenlightned Soul. 24. An Apologie for the Book of True Repentance upon a Pamphlet of the Pri∣mate of Gerlitz, Gregory Richter.
(25.) A Book of 177. Theosophick Questions; 13 and part of the 15th An∣swered. 26. An Extract out of the Mysterium Magnum. (27.) A Prayer Book, called the Holy Week. 28. A Table of the Divine Manifestati∣on, or an Exposition of the Three-fold World, to John Sigismund of Sigismund, and to Abraham van Frankenberg, being at the End of an Epistle concerning the True and false Light. 29. A Book of the Errours of the Sects of Ezekiel Meths to A. P. A. or an Apology to Esaias Stiefel. 30. A Book of the Last Judgment. 31. A Book of several Letters written at several times. 32. A Clavis or Key of his Writings, be∣ing the Exposition of some words. The Books which the Author finished nor, are marked thus. () In these he hath left so Noble and Pretious a Talent and Treasure, for the setting forth God's Honour and Glory, and for the promoting Man's Salvation, both for the present and for the future times, that since the times of the Apostles higher and deeper ground∣ed
Mysteries concerning the Deity have scarce been revealed; his acquaintance for the most part was with Godly Learned People, and such as were experienced in the knowledge of Nature, with whom he conversed, as also with some of the Noble men of Lusatia and Silesia, in all fear of God; though some of the Common Preachers, have not forborn, as their usu∣al manner is, to cast forth their venom against his Writings, and to stir up the Rude and foolish People with all manner of Reproach and Scandal: yet the Truth liveth still, and hath prevailed, and will at length Tryumph in secret. But he the blessed Jacob Behme the Teu∣tonick, at Gerlitz in his House, near the Water-side of the River Neisse, Anno. 1624. the 18. Day of the Month of No∣vember, new-stile, about the sixth hour in the Morning, being the 24. Sundy after Trinity, after he had heard most exceeding lovely sweet Musick without his Chamber, and being refreshed with the Holy Use of the Testament of Christ at his Supper, his Sons and some Good Friends praying and weeping about him, with these his last and Comfortable Words, Now go I hence into Paradise.
Meekly and gently sighing, blessedly departed in the fiftieth year of his Age. After the Preaching of the Funeral Ser∣mon, he was buried in the Church-yard at Gerlitz, & upon the Grave a Wooden Cross was set with this Mystical three-fold Fi∣gure graven upon it, viz. An Eagle with a Lilly-Twig. A Lyon with a Sword. A Lamb with a Mitre. The Superscription over the Cross was this, V. H. I. L. I. C. I. V. That is, Vnser Heil Im Leben Jesu Christi In Vns. In English thus, Our Salvation is In the Life of Jesus Christ In Vs. Which was J. B. Motto, or usual speech, and Superscription in his Letters. Also these words were the Inscription of the Cross. Born of God. Dead in Jesu. Sealed with the Holy Spirit. Resteth here Jacob Behme of Old Sei∣denburg.
Note. 1. The Southern Eagle, stood upon a high Rock, and with one foot trod on the Head of a Serpent, and with the other held a Palm, and with its Beak re∣ceived a Lilly-Twig reached forth-out of the Sun. 2. The Northern Lyon was Crowned, and signed with a Cross, and held in the Right foot before, a fire-flaming-Sword, and in the Left a fiery Heart, and rested with the hough or hinder part of the Right Foot behind upon a Cube, and with the Left upon a Globe. 3. The Lamb with a Mitre, walked meekly and quietly between them both in the Meadows, and by the Brooks and Ri∣vers of Grace. His Seal or Stamp was a Hand out of Heaven with a Lilly-Twig. In the Memorial Books of good friends, he used to write these Verses. Text. Weme Zeit ist wie Ewigkeit, Und Ewigkeit wie die Zeit, Der ist befreyt von allem streit. Englished. To whom Time is as Eternity, And Eternity as Time, He is freed from all strife.
The outward Form of his Body was al∣most of no Personage, he was lean and little of Stature, with a Fore-head very much inbowed, high Temples, somewhat Hawk-nosed, his Eyes were Grey and ve∣ry Azure, otherwise as the Windows of Solomons Temple, he had a short thin Beard, a small shril Voice, an amiable pleasing Speech; He was modest in his Behaviour, humble in his Conversation, and meek in Heart; his highly enlightned Spirit is to be discerned by his Writings in the Divine Light. The following Relation was taken out of a Memorial of Michael Curtz, con∣cerning what happened at the Depar∣ture of the Blessed Jacob Behme. ON Sunday (November 18.) early in the Morning, he called his Son To∣bias, and asked him: If he heard the Ex∣cellent Musick, he said, No; then he spake that the Door should be opened, that the singing might be the better heard; afterward he asked what the Clock had stuck, and was told it had struck Two, he said, It is not yet my time, three hours hence is
my time; In the mean while he spake these words once. O thou strong God of Hosts, deliver me according to thy Will. O thou Crucified Lord Jesus Christ, have Mercy upon me, and receive me into thy Kingdom. When it was near about six, he took leave of his Wife and Sons; blessed them, and said, Now go I hence into Paradise; He did bid his Son to turn him about, sighed deeply, and so very meekly and quietly departed from this World.
PREFACE. Then followeth in the former Pre∣face Printed, 1647. Thus. IF it were not for the great Fruit that I conceive may grow to every one that studieth it; I should be sorry that I am the Instrument, to make such things known in my Native Language; and much more unwilling it should be pub∣lished to the view of so many various Minds, as are now sprung up: But my hope is, Goodness will get the upper Hand, and that the Fruits of the Spi∣rit will prevail to the subduing of the Lusts of the Flesh: Now I readily sub∣mit to the Censure of those who have that good desire; and of those who are not proudly and perversly wedded to their own conceits, (when they have considered this Authors meaning) whether this will not be as beneficial to us as it hath been
to other Nations: Indeed my Mind is led to think, that our troubled doubt∣ing Souls may receive much Comfort, leading to that inward Peace which passeth all understanding; that all the disturbing Sects and Heresies arising from the Darkness and Malice of Men and Devils, will be made to vanish and cease, by that understanding which may be kindled in them from it: they that rule will perceive how to effect all their good purposes, to the joy and happiness of them that are subjected to their Go∣vernment; And Subjects will soon learn to obey in every thing, as the Primi∣tive Martyrs did, though they should live under such Governours as they had: So God shall be glorified by all mens love to one another, and Peace will flou∣rish over all the Earth. It may be some will think it so hard to attain the understanding of this Au∣thor, when they read the Answer to the First Question (which is far more diffi∣cult
then any of the other, because it contains the sum of them all in brief) that they will forbear to take so much pains as they suppose is requisite; but if it should prove a little harder then other writings, the profit will counter∣vail the Labour with a hundred-fold ad∣vantage; yet let every One read it themselves, or hear it read with their own Ears, that others misreport, hin∣der them not from so great a benefit, and they shall no doubt attain it, for I am convinced by my own Experience, that every one may receive according to their vast or narrow Capacity, who have according to my own Measure been sa∣tisfied, though I be One of the unworthiest of the Children of Men, J. S.
Before the Catalogue to the 40. Questi∣ons was this Preface to the Reader. THe Author wrote this Answer to these Questions, chiefly for his Friends sake that sent them to him, as also for the Benefit of all such as love the knowledge of Mysteries: this Friend of his was Doctor Balthasar Walter, who travelled for Learning and hidden Wis∣dom, and in his return home, hapned to hear of this Author in the City of Gerlitz, and when he had obtained acquaintance with him, he rejoyced that at last he had found at home in a poor Cottage, that which he had travelled for so far, and not received satisfaction: then he went to the several Universities in Germany; and did there collect such Questions concerning the Soul, as were thought and accounted Impossible to be resolved sundamentally and convincingly: which he made this Catalogue of, and sent to this Author, from whom he received these Answers ac∣cording to his desire, wherein he and many others that saw them received full satis∣faction.
When this Book was first Printed, I en∣deavoured by a Friend to present one of them to his Majesty King Charles that then was, who vouchsafed the perusal of it; about a Month after was desired to say what he thought of the Book, who answered that the Publisher in English seemed to say of the Author, that he was no Scholar, and if he were not, he did believe that the Ho∣ly Ghost was now in Men, but if he were a Scholar, it was one of the best Inventi∣ons that ever he read. I need not add the Censure of any other Person: knowing none to compare with this one way or o∣ther.
This Author may be easily understood in every thing, by such a Considerati∣on as this which followeth. THis outward World is to the out∣ward Man, the best Looking-Glass to see what ever hath been, is or shall be in Eternity. Our Minds and the Co∣gitations therein, are our best Inward Look∣ing-Glass, to see Eternity exactly in: In God are all things, therefore every thing hath been in all Eternity in God both un∣manifested, and manifested only to himself in himself: but in the world and in our Minds they are unmanifested and hidden, and also Manifest or capable of being ma∣nifested in their real Truth and Exist∣ence, both as they are uncreaturally in God, and Creaturally in all things. Accord∣ingly one Text says, Rom. 1. 20. The Invisi∣ble things of him, that is, his Eternal Power and God head or Deity are seen by the Crea∣tion of the World, being considered in his works. Rom. 1. 19. And another says, What∣soever is possible to be known of God, he hath manifested in Man. John 17. 3. And it is life Eternal to know thee the only True God, and
him whom thou hast sent, sayes the Son of God himself Christ Jesus. The Eter∣nal infinite Powers both of Light and Darkness in their own Immensities in God have alwayes been the same, and have Eternally wrought the same effects, and produced the same Substances Spiritually, and Invisibly to any thing but God him∣self, which they are Manifested to do in the invisible inward world of God, Spirits and the Minds of Men, and in this visible outward world; So that we may truly learn to know him who is all things, in our in∣ward and outward World: all things that are manifested come out from him, and when they cease to be manifested, they en∣ter into him again as into their Center un∣manifested: So he is the cause of all Cau∣ses, and when we know how he causes any thing to be, as it is manifested to be in it self, then we understand the Thing, and him that is the cause of it: his works in all things whatsoever are good, and can∣not cease to be so, but when a Creature to whom he has given the power of the World to come, doth use it otherwise then its true property requires, that only be∣comes evil in and to the Creature not in
God. But God being every where pre∣sent in his Total fulness, as himself sayes, Am not I he that filleth all things? therefore the highest cause of every thing must needs be in the thing it self. The inward heavenly and Hellish Looking-Glass is in all our Minds, & outwardly we want not a Corpo∣real Looking-Glass of whatsoever is Eter∣nal to instruct our Minds withal. So that if we consider all the Works of God in the World, both inwardly and outwardly, we cannot but find and know him, and so know all things in our selves and in Him, and him in our selves, & in all things else. This I thought convenient to hint in brief as an Introduction of the mind into the Center of All Mysteries. John Sparrow. Sunday, Decem∣ber, 18. 1664.
ERRATA. FOrty Questions, Jacob Behme p. 2. l. 7. r. such new Presace v. 2. r. Learned Caldeans. v. 9. l. 10. r. also of that v. 10. l 8. for Beheme r. Behme. Question 1. v. 3 l. 9. r. Mysterie, to v. 22 l. 1. r. First, there is. v. 66. l. 6. f. one r. none v 77. l. 3. f. discetneth r. discovereth. v. 171. l. 10. f. in r. into. v. 183. l. 7. for † r. *. v. 190. l. last r. own self Are and wit. v. 216. l. 10. Marg. r. half Circles. l. 12. f. one r. on. v. 222. l. 17. f. world r. word. v. 253. l. 2 r. * One. Margin *. l. 5. f. turns r. turned. v. 254. l. 1. r. or the total. l. 19. Marg. l. 7. for parts r. Parrots v. 256. l. 7. r. Sulphur. l. 9. r. Magia. v. 257. l. 4. f. Magik r. Magick. v. 260. l. 4. f. beareth r. boweth. v. 278. l. 5. f. right r. Light. v. 287. l. 5. r. Christs Flesh. v. 327. l. 8. r. God put out the Inward. Q. 4. v. 9. l. 2. f. breatheth r. breathed. q. 6. v. 10. l. 8 f. Natue r. Nature q 6. v. 14. l 4. f conanteth r concenteth. v. 15. l. 4. Marg. f Stolyen r Stoltzen. q. 7. v. 9. l. 5. Marg, f Wondelt r Wan∣deit. q. 11. v. 5. l, 4. f Carnal r Councel. 16. f Prime r Prince. q. 11. v. 6. l 4. r Mymick. q. 12 v 27. l 2. r shouldst. l 3. r. to fill. q 12 v 32 l 9. f have r hear. v 40 l 6 f Charity r clarity. q 14 v 13 l 4 r Self-Desire. q 17 v 19 l 2 f yet r let. v 20 l 2 f the r Thee. l 6 f them r thou. v 11 l 4 r to, and depend. v 25 l 3 r the Harvest. q 18 v 5 l 1 f they r then. l 6 f one r and. v 11 l 4 r receiveth. q 21 v 3 l 1 f Seeketh r Seeth. v 23 l 5 r taken in. q 23 v 7 l 4 r thereby. v 10 l 11 f ceaseth r seiseth. q 24 v 17 l 4 r Chest, we say. q 26 v 19 l 7 f their r them. v 22 l 2 r acteth. q 30 v 17 r of the world. v 39 l 3 f breaking r breathing. v 50 l 8 r such short words or an∣swer. r 56 l 7. f been r heere. q 32 v 15 l 3 f Megia r Mag∣na. v 20 f keep r know. q 35 v 1 l 5 r herein. v 6 l 3 r Distinguish. v 37 l 2 r Self up. q 36 v 18 l 2 Marg. f Wa∣ser r Wasser. v 26 l 3 f and r as. q 37 v 5 l 4 f winking r working. q 40 v 10 l 5 r Lises-Essences. Appendix v 6 l 5 r it is. v 29 l 3 r Imaged. v 31 l 9 r or is. v 33 l 5 r Imaging. v 34 l 1 f Men r Man.
The TABLE of the Forty Questions. 1. WHence the Soul existed at the beginning. 2. What the Souls Essence, Substance, Nature, and Property, is. 3. How the Soul was created to the Image of God. 4. What the Souls breathing in, was, and when it was effected. 5. How the Soul was properly formed and fashioned. 6. What the Souls power or ability is. 7. Whether the Soul be corporeal or not corporeal. 8. In what manner the Soul cometh into Man, or into the Body. 9. How the Soul doth unite it self with the Body. 10. Whether the Soul be Ex Traduce, and propagated humanely and cor∣poreally, or every time new created and breathed in from God.
11. How and in what place the Soul is seated in Man. 12. How the enlightening of the Soul is. 13. How the Soul feeds upon the Word of God. 14. Whether such a new Soul be with∣out sin. 15. How Sin cometh into the Soul, seeing it is God's Work and Crea∣ture. 16. How the Soul is kept in such uni∣on or connexion, both in the Ada∣mical and Regenerate Body. 17. Whence and wherefore the oppo∣sition of the Flesh and Spirit is. 18. How the Soul departs from the Body in the Death of a man. 19. Whether the Soul be mortal or im∣mortal. 20. How the Soul returneth to God again. 21. Whither the Soul goeth when it parteth from the Body, be it happy or unhappy.
22. What every Soul doth, whether it enjoyeth or rejoyceth it self till the Day of the Last Judgment. 23. Whether the wicked Souls with∣out difference in so long a time before the Day of Judgment, feel any ease or refreshment. 24. Whether mens wishes benefit them or sensibly come where they are. 25. What the Hand of God and the Bosom of Abraham, is. 26. Whether the Souls departed, take care about men, their friends, chil∣dren and goods, and know, see, like or dislike their undertakings. 27. Whether they know & understand this or that art or business, whereof in the body they had good skill. 28. Whether also they can certainly know and get any more skill in Di∣vine, Angelical, Earthly, and Dia∣bolical things, than they had in the Body. 29. What their Rest, Awakening, and Clarification, is.
30. What the difference ef the livings and deads Resurrection of the Flesh and of the Soul, is. 31. What kind of new glorified Bodies they will have. 32. What furthermore in the other life, their form, condition, joy, and glory, is. 33. What kind of matter our bodies will have in the other life. 34. Of the miserable and horrible condition of the damned Souls. 35. What the Enochian life is, and how long it will continue. 36. What the Soul of the Messiah or Christ is. 37. What the Spirit of Christ is that was obedient, which he commend∣ed into his Father's hand? 38. Of those things which shall be done at the End of the World. 39. What and where Paradise is, with its Inhabitants? 40. Whether it be mutable, and what it will come to be hereafter?
The PREFACE of J. B. to Dr. Belthasar Walter. BEloved Sir, and my good Friend, it is not possible for Outward Reason, or Reason judging on things dis∣cerned no further than by the out∣ward senses. Reason to answer to your Questions; for they are the greatest Mysteries, which are alone known to God. 2. For as Daniel faith to King Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 26. to the 30. That which the King asketh and desireth of the Learned Chaldeans, Astrologians, and Wise men, Gen. 41. 16. is not in their po∣wer; only the God of Heaven can reveal or manifest the hidden Thing. It is not in my Reason to answer the King; but that the King may perceive the Thoughts of his heart, God hath revealed it, not that my Reason is greater than of all them that live.
3. So say I also to you; you shall be answered, not that my Reason is greater than of all them that live, but that you might perceive and obtain the thoughts of your heart, your earnest seeking and desiring, it is given to me to answer you. 4. And you should not in According to the Reason of the outward∣man. such a way so eagerly seek af∣ter such things, for it standeth in no outward Reason; but to the Spi∣rit of God nothing is impossible: and seeing we are the Chil∣dren of God, and in Christ born again in God, surely the Son must needs see very well what the Father doth in his house's and also learn his skill and work. 5. And seeing we our selves are the Mysteries of God, shall we not so much as look upon them, as if we ought not to meddle with such Mysteries, as Anti∣christ in folly forbiddeth us; for none ap∣prehendeth any thing of God's Mysteries unless it be given to him: and St. James saith, chap. 1. 17. Every good and per∣fect
Gift cometh from above from the Father of Lights, in whom there is no alteration nor shadow of change. 6. But seeing you seek these things so vehemently, you are even become the cause of finding them; for God giveth his Mysteries both by means and without means; but that none might boast, he of∣tentimes useth very mean people in it, that it may be known to come from His Hand. 7. You shall be answered with a very firm and deep Answer, yet comprized in brief, not according to outward Reason, but according to the Spirit of Know∣ledge. 8. And though I could have fully de∣monstrated these things, and set them down in a larger description; yet seeing they are all plentifully enough described and explained in my other Writings; I pass them ever now briefly for the delight of the Reader, and that this may be a brief Memorial of the great Myste∣ries.
9. But he that desireth to know these things fully, and from the ground of them, let him seek in the The Aurora, 1. Three Principles, 2. foregoing Wri∣tings, especially in the Threefold life, 3. Third Part, where he hath the whole ground of the Divine Substance; as also of the Creation of all things, of that which is Eternal; and also that which is temporary or transito∣ry; and how all hath come to be, and act as it doth; and what it will come to be at last. 10. Wherein lyeth the Mysterium magnum the great Mystery, so far as a Creature is able to apprehend or bear. Thither I would have you directed for further Explanation, and commend me to you in Christ, into the Brotherly Love. Anno Christi, 1620. Jacob Beheme, Called Teutonicus.
The First Question. Whence the Soul Existed from the Be∣ginning of the World. 1. VVE have sufficiently in the Three Prin∣ciples. Second and Threefold-Life. Third Book, explain'd the Mystery of the Soul, by the Three Principles of the Di∣vine Substance; where we have described the Eternal Centre of the Eternal Nature; as also the Number Three of the Divine Substance, with many cir∣cumstances; and what Eternity hath ever been; and how the beginning of the Crea∣tion came to be; what an Angel and Soul is; as also the heavy Fall of Lucifer, and then both the Mothers that have so brought it forth; the one generating the Heavenly Substantiality, the other, the Hellish or, Abomina∣ble substance. Abomination; also of Light and Darkness. 2. Therefore in this Trea∣tise we are not so very easily to be under∣stood, unless the Third part of our writings have been read and apprehended.
3. Although that Apprehension doth not at all consist in humane power, yet the way to it is very faithfully shewn; so that if any have a mind to attain it, if he will follow our counsel and advice therein, he will well get a The ho∣ly Spirit. lea∣der and directer, that will shew him the Key the Mysterium mag∣num, the great Mystery, to the noble Stone Lapis Philosophorum the Philosophers Stone, and to all Mysteries, let none account it impossible; for Mark 10. 27. with God All is possible; whosoever findeth God, findeth ALL with and in HIM. 4. Ye know from or in Reason, that all things are sprung and come forth out of the Eternity: and the Scrip∣ture telleth you, Rom. 11. 36. In God are All things; 2 Cor. 5. 18. in him we live and move; Act. 17. 28. and we are all of his Off-spring. 5. And though indeed we cannot say of God, that the pure Deity is Nature, but Majesty in the number Three; yet we must say, that God is in Nature, though Nature doth not contain or comprehend him, as little as the Air can contain or comprehend the glance or shining of the Sun; yet we
must needs say, that Nature is generated in his Will, and is a Seeking, proceeded out of the Eternity: 6. For, where there is no Will, there is also no Desiring: But there is in God, an Eternal Will, which is Himself, to generate his Heart or Sonne; and that Will, maketh the stirring or the exit out of the will of the heart, which is a Spirit: so that the Eternity standeth in Three Eternall Different or distinct kinds or manners of Subsistences. Forms, which are called Persons, as we have very exactly explain∣ed it in the Threefold∣life. third Book. 7. And since we see and know, that there is not only Light and Majesty, but also Dark∣ness, as is plain before our eyes. 8. Therefore we ought to know, from whence Darkness originateth; for in the Eternity without or besides Nature, no Darkness can be; for there is nothing that can afford it; we must only look into the Will, and into the Desiring; for a Desiring is an attracting. 9. And whereas yet in the Eternity it hath nothing, but only it self, it attracts it self in the Will, and maketh the Will fall; and that is its Darkness.
10. Whereas otherwise if it were not desirous, it would be nothing but an Eternal stillness without Being or Substance; the attracting therefore maketh Mobility and Essence, which otherwise in the stillness cannot be; and therefore also it maketh austere astringency, hardness, and grosness, as also sharpness. 11. Yet we cannot say neither, that the Darkness swalloweth up the Light, viz. the Eternal Liberty: for that which is Eternal, suffereth not it self to be altered or changed: but we must say, that Light and Darkness are IN One another. 12. Now the Light is good, and hath pleasant vertue or power; and the Dark∣ness hath austere or astringent, hard, cold; and the Wills Desiring, maketh Essences and attracting, that is, a stirring in the hardness: thus the attracted stirreth from the drawing, and is a whirling, whereby in the sharpness, Light and Darkness be∣come mingled. 13. And thus we are to consider, how the free Light in the sharp stirring, in the Substance is also sharpned, where we un∣derstand the Fire flash of Lightning, and the earnest severity, and yet cannot say that any rending asunder is there:
14. For that which is Eternal from no beginning, hath no parting of one from another, but stand∣eth as a Wheel or Orb, or Sphear, or Globe of Look∣ing-Glass. Wheel, that generates it self in it self; as you have a similitude of it, in the Mind of a man, where there is indeed a will of ri∣sing and flying, but no departing away; and the greater the will is, the greater also is the substance, and the more Or, ex∣press. potent is the matter or the thing represented, seeing it is sharpned. 15. Thus seeing the still liberty, which is neither Light nor Darkness, becometh sharpned in the sharp desiring & attracting, so that it appeareth as a flash of Light∣ning that shineth. 16. Therefore also we cannot say, that the Liberty holdeth or captivateth the Light, for from Eternity it hath had no∣thing: but we may well say, that the Light and the Glance shineth in the Liberty. 17. For that which is Or, tran∣sparent. free, letteth in the Light; but that which is not free, as the harsh or austere astringen∣cy, which maketh Darkness, and is Mate∣rial; spoken after a spiritual manner, that receiveth not the Light.
18. But we may well say, that which is meek, and not holding or contracting, re∣ceiveth the Light: as ye see in water, which receiveth the Light, and the harsh astrin∣gent Earth, not. 19. Also ye have in FIRE a sufficient Or Example or Instance. ap∣prehension of the Substance of all Substances; for ye see that the Fire burneth out of a harsh astringent, tart, matter, for it is the sharp Desiring, which thus as a great Anguish entereth into it self, and graspeth after the Liberty, whereby it catcheth the Liber∣ty as a flash, and with the Lightning kind∣leth it self, so that it burneth or flameth. 20. And though in the Eternal Sub∣stance no such Fire is to be understood, as shineth in the Outward, yet it is so in the Inward, in the harsh astringent Desi∣ring, and the outward remaineth a dark∣ness: therefore is the Eternal Fire in the outward, dark; and within in it self, in the will of the Eternal Liberty, it is a Light, which shineth in the still Eternity. 21. Now we understand in the Fire, Ten Or distinct man∣ner of differences. Forms, which are all generated in the
Will, and are all the Eternal Wills proprie∣ty, therefore we rightly say, it is God's; and the Liberty, which hath the will, is GOD himself; for it is the Eternity, and nothing else. The First Form. 22. First, Th there is the Eternal Liber∣ty, which hath the Will, and is it self the Will. Now every will hath a seeking to do or to desire somewhat; and in that, it beholdeth it self, and seeth in it self in the Eternity, what it self is; it maketh to it self the Looking-Glass of its like: and then it beholdeth it self, what it self is: and so finding nothing else but it self, it desireth sit self. The Second Form. 23. The Second-Form is, that it is Desirous, and yet hath nothing but it self; therefore its desiring draweth the Or Representation. Model: of its will in it self, and impregnateth it self, so that a darkness or Or, a shadowing every where, to make the repre∣sentation of figures, as blak shadowings or drawings on white, or shadowings of all colours, to represent things lively by, And this is done in the Mind as to all Re∣presentations. overshadowing com∣eth to be in the will, which the will yet
would not have; but the Desiring, the Seek∣ing maketh it, and there is nothing that can consume or drive away the Desiring. 24. For that which is before the Desi∣ring, beyond or besides the seeking, is Free and a Nothing, and yet it Is; but if it were any thing apprehensible or compre∣hensible, it were a Substance, and stood a∣gain in a substance, that did afford it: But being without Substance, it is the Eternity, that is the GOOD; for it is no source or pain, and hath no alteration or change, but is a Rest and an Eternal Peace. 25. But seeing the great Space is without ground: or foundation, where is no number nor end, and also no beginning, therefore it is like a Looking-Glass. It is ALL, and yet also as a NOTHING: it beholdeth it self, and yet findeth nothing but an A that is its eye; AVge signifies an Eye in the German Tongue. AVge. 26. AV: That is, the Eternal Original that something is; for it is the Eternal Beginning, and the Eternal End. Thus the Abysse seeth in it self, and findeth it self.
27. The A is below, and the V is above; and the O is, AVge, the Eye, and yet is in it self no Substance; but thus is the Original of Substance: there is neither below nor above, onely its Looking-Glass in the AV is thus a seeing. 28. But since there is no ground, there∣fore its Looking-Glass is such an O Eye AVge: For God himself saith in the Apocalips, Rev. 1. 8. I am A and O, Alpha and Omega, the Begining and the End. I am A and O, the beginning and the end; the first and the last. 29. GOTT in the German tongue is GOD. Observe this according to its pretious intimate sublimity; for we speak not here in Nature, in a form, but in the Spirit above Nature, in Chara∣cter GOTTes, in God's Cha∣racter or Letter. T. 30. The O is, GOTTes AVge, God's Eye, the Eye of Eternity, that maketh and is a Looking-Glass, and is a round circle like a globe, ⊙, not a ring, O. Since we cannot otherwise describe it,
thus understand hereby; the Globe ☉ of the Eternity, wherein standeth the ground of Heaven and Earth, and of the Elements, together with the star∣ry Wheel, Sphere, or Globe. Wheel or Sphere; 31. For that is a Globe ☉ like an eye, and is God's Wonder-Eye, where∣in from Eternity all Substances or things have been seen or discerned, but without substance, as in a Looking-Glass or Eye; for the Eye is the Eye of the Abysse; of which we have no pen or tongue to write or speak, only the Spirit of Eternity bringeth the Souls eye thereinto, and so we see it, else it would remain in silence mute, and undescribed by this Hand. 32. Thus there is in the Eternity such an Eye, which is God himself, and yet is not called GOD, but Eternity; yet as to the Eye, is A and O. Before the A there is NOTHING, and in the O there is ALL; and in the A and O beginning and end: therefore we fundamentally apprehend, that in the O there is a Will, and the Will is the O it self, and maketh the A; viz. the eternal beginning of the Seeking; so that the Abysse beholdeth it self, and so in it self maketh a Or Fi∣gure. Form like a Globe ☉.
33. For the Eye findeth no ground or foundation, therefore it closeth it self up as in a Looking-Glass, into a round Globe, so that it is the Eternities similitude, that can it self find it self; for in the Abysse there is no finding, for there is no Or Circum∣scription. place or limit, but only the Abysse; and when thus it findeth it self in the Eye, yet then it findeth nothing but the Eye, that is the Globe. 34. Now the Eye maketh the Globe, and is the Globe; and all this is together in the Will to seek it self, and so to see what the Eternity is, which becometh ma∣nifest or revealed in the Eye. 35. For the Eye maketh a beginning and an end, and yet there is nothing that affordeth it, but in giveth or affordeth it self, and is from Eternity in Eternity, and the Eternity it self; it toucheth nothing, for it is in nothing, but in it self. 36. Now being there is a Will, which is the Eye, which Or con∣taineth. holdeth or re∣taineth the eye, therefore that holding is a Desiring, viz. of the Eye, and so the Desire is at∣tracting into the Eye, and yet nothing is there but the Eye, and the Desiring only
draweth it self in the Eye, and impregna∣teth the Eye with that which is attracted, so that it is full, and yet is nothing but a darkness of the free Eye, although the Eye becometh not dark, but the Desiring in the Eye, impregnateth it self in it self. 37. The will of the Eye is still or quiet, and the desiring of the will maketh it full, and the Eye remaineth free in it self; for it is from Eternity, free: and that we call the Eternal Liberty in all our Writings. The Third Form. 28. Now a Desiring is sharp and drawing, and maketh the third Form; viz. a stirring in it self, and is the original of the Commonly cal∣led Qualities. Essences, that in the Eye and Will, Essences are. 39. And yet the Will cannot endure that it be drawn, for its own right proper∣ty is to be still, and hold or retain the Eye in the Circle in the Globe, and yet cannot defend it self from the drawing and the fil∣ling, for it hath nothing whereby it can de∣fend it self, but the Desiring. 40. And here originateth the Eternal Enmity and opposite Will. The Will, wil∣leth
not to be dark, and yet its desiring maketh it dark, it endureth the stirring rea∣dily, for it is its manifestation or revela∣tion, but the in drawing and darkning it doth not love; though indeed the Will becometh not drawen nor darkned, but the Desiring in the Will impregnateth it self. 41. But now being the Desiring sticketh in the darkness, therefore there is a great An∣guish, for it becometh stirred and drawn, and also darkned, and vexeth it self in it self, and desireth the Liberty, and draweth so eagerly after the Liberty, and willeth to draw it self into the Liberty, and yet maketh it self onely the more eager rough and hard, and is like a horrible sharpness, which is consuming; viz. of the Darkness; 42. For it graspeth the Liberty into it self, but is so sharp, that it appeareth in the Liberty as a flash of lightning, which consumeth the darkness, together with the eagerness: Therefore saith God, Deut. 4. 24. and Chap. 9. 3. Heb. 12. 29. I am a consuming Fire. 43. Here understand, how all Matter standeth in the right Fires, Might; and how the Mat. 3. 12: Floar shall once
be purged, for that is the original of the Fire, which hath ALL Might and Power, for it consumeth whatsoever the desire hath made, be it Stone or Earth: for it is the sharpness of the Eternal Liberty, and giveth or affordeth, Centrum Naturae the Center of Nature. 44. But that you may search yet deeper, know that the Fire in it self originally standeth in Three Forms, viz. First, In the Desiring; And then, secondly, in the Matter of that which is attracted, viz. in the Darkness, in which is Substantiality from the attracting: And Thirdly, In the An∣guish-source or Pain. The Fourth Form. 45. And the Fourth Form maketh it self; viz. the Flash of Lightning, for the Li∣berty causeth that, and that is the kindler of the Anguish-source: for the Desiring in the Darkness willeth only to have the Li∣berty; and the Liberty being a light with∣out shining, is therefore like a very deep Blew Colour mixed with Green, so that it cannot be discerned plainly what colour it is of, for all Colours are in it; and the
Desiring in it self in its eager anguish and sharpness, breaketh the colours, and maketh in it self the terrible consuming Flash of Lightning, and changeth it according to the Anguish, so that it becometh Red. 46. Yet the Liberty in the Desiring, suffereth not it self to be bound or held, but altereth it self from the Red flash of Lightening in the Light, into a Whose Colour is Yellow. glance of the Ma∣jesty: and that is in the Liberty, an exulting great Joy. 47. For in the Light, the Eye becometh manifested or revealed; as also the Sub∣stantiality in the Will, where then it be∣cometh apprehended what Light or Dark∣ness is. And thus the Eternity becometh apprehended, And thus originateth God's Holiness into wonders continually ever∣more, and from Eternity, and hath neither limit nor beginning; for it is an Eternal Beginning; comprised and framed into Nothing but into the Wonders, which are its own substance, wherein there is neither limit nor number. 48. And thus in the still Eternity, is nothing apprehended but the glance of the Majesty, and the Spirit which is generated
in the Will, and is the Government in the Majesty. 49. Beloved Sir and Friend, understand the sence aright; we mean not that the Birth or Geniture taketh hold of the Liberty ex∣ternally without it self, but in it self in the Center, it taketh hold of it self in it self, and maketh Majesty in it self; and yet there is no barring in, but is as when out of Death or Nothing a life cometh to be, that thus dwelleth only in it self; and that is called a Principle; and that wherein it dwelleth, is called Nature, and hath Seven Spirits or Forms: as is to be seen in our Three Principles. Se∣cond and Threefold Life. Third Book. 50. Yet the Principle hath but one Spi∣rit, which is the life of the Principle; and hath also but one Will, which is the filling of the Eternity, with the glance of the Majesty. 51. For the Principle is the power or vertue, generated out of the will of the Eternity: and the entrance or eternal be∣ginning of the Power, is the Powers Life and Spirit, which bringeth the Essences of the Genetrix, and openeth the Original of the Majesty.
52. And the whole Eye which hath thus comprised or framed it self into a Looking-Glass in the A and O, is ALL: it is the Eternity, and bringeth forth in it self in the Eye, the Majesty, which is the heart and power or vertue of the Eye; and also bringeth forth the Spirit, which in the heart goeth forth out of the Power, out of the fiery-light-flaming Essences. 53. Thus you understand the holy Num∣ber Three in one Substance; that the Father is the Eternity without ground, where is NOTHING, and yet there is ALL; and in the Eye of his glance or lustre he seeth himself, that he is All: and in the Power of the Majesty, he feeleth himself, and tasteth himself, and smelleth himself, that he is GUT, GOOD; that is, that he is GOTT, GOD, al∣though the The Tan or Crosse. T, viz. Schwa'rigkeit, the hardness, heaviness, so∣lidity, density, or pon∣derosity. Weightiness, origina∣teth in the Center. 54. And in the Spirit, is the stirring in the Power, and the Multiplicity without ground and number, wherein an eternal un∣searchable Multiplicity doth exist, and all in the Power. 55. For that which hath no ground, hath
no number, and is no closing up, or com∣prehension, or shutting in; and that which is within it self, is not apprehensible out of it self; but as to the Spirit it is feeling in∣deed. Thus the Inward driveth forth out of it self, and manifesteth or revealeth it self in Figures, else God would NOT be known or apprehended. 56. Thus God is together ONE Spirit, and standeth from Eternity in THREE Beginnings and Ends, and only in himself; Jer. 23. 24. 1 Kin. 8. 23, 27. There is no place found for Him; and he hath also nothing in him∣self that is Psal. 86. 8. like unto Him: also there is Nothing that can seek or ma∣nifest any thing more, than HIS Spirit, which alwayes it self, from Eternity in E∣ternity manifests it Self. 57. He is an Eternal Seeker and Finder; as, viz. of himself in great Wonders; and what he findeth, he findeth in the great Power: he is the opening of the Power: nothing is like unto Him, and nothing findeth him, but what inclineth or giveth it self up in him, that goeth into him, that which denyeth it self that it is, then is God's Spirit therein ALL; for it is A will
in the eternal NOTHING; and yet is in ALL, as God's Spirit it self is. 58. And this, My beloved Sir, is the Highest Mystery, and therefore if you will find this, seek it not in me, but in your self; but not in your Outward Reason. Reason, that must be as dead, and your desirous will, in GOD, and so it is Phil. 2. 13. the will and deed in you, and so the Spirit of God bringeth your will into it self, and so you may well see what GOD is; and what Spirits child this Hand is, out of which Spirit, it writeth. 59. And I exhort you brotherly, that you would not so toylsomely seek it; you will not fathom it so with searching, al∣though you are known and beloved of God: and therefore also this is given you for a Rule or Measuring-line. 60. Yet I have no power without me to give you; only follow my advice, and go out from your toylsome seeking in Reason, into God's Will, into God's Spirit, and cast the outward Reason away; then is your Will God's Will, and God's Spirit will seek you within you. 61. And then finding your Will in it self, it revealeth it self in your Will, as in
its own; for if you give up that, then that is its own, for it is All; and when it go∣eth, then go you forth, for you have divine Power; all which you then search, IT is there IN, and nothing is hidden to it; thus you see in its Light, and are its own. 62. Let no fear deterre you, there is nothing can take it away but Your Imagination, let not that into your Will, and then you will work God's Won∣ders in his Spirit; and acknowledge me as a Brother in him, else I shall be as one si∣lent or mute to you. I say this of good will. 63. And since we thus write of the E∣ternity, to satisfie you at length in your will and desire concerning the Soul, which is even our purpose in God's Spirit and Will; we will first clearly shew you the Ground of the Soul, also its Original, and so open your Eyes, that you may be re∣leased from your toylsome seeking. 64. For you have even to your Old age laboured in this kind, and as I understand, have not yet found out the profound deep Mystery in the Spirit: but seeing it is God's Will, that you should know and apprehend it, and that it is given to you as a reward
of your labour, see that you receive it and use it aright, and Mat. 7. 6. cast not the Pearl before Swine, which are not worthy of it; also in Eternity will not be worthy of it. 65. For that which is herein revealed unto you, belongeth unto God's Children; therefore be faithful, and trade with it according to the Spirit, and not according to The Reason or the earthly desire of the outward Carnal Man, of mortal corrupt flesh and blood. Reason. 66. For it is so subtile, that it endureth not that which is earthy generated, in Covetousness, Pride, or vain boasting and glorying in self: although you are one of them, yet look into whom you pour Oyl, for it is Poyson to many; let themselves seek as you have done; but give the Children their bread, that they may eat, and praise Our Father in Heaven: to that end it is given you. The Fifth Form of Fire in the Eternal Will. 67. Thus having opened to you an Entranoe and Looking-glass of the Eternal Original,
whence the Eternal Fire originateth, and what it is; so it is necessary also further to shew you, according to the highest Depth, what the Eternal Nature in its propaga∣tion is. 68. Wherein then Two Kingdoms are to be understood; the one a good and plea∣sant one, the other an evil and fierce wrathful one, an eternal envious sad one. After which two, the Philosophers from the beginning of the world, have continu∣ally sought and laboured; but the time of finding hath not been yet born. 69. But now it is, so that the hidden thing shall be found, not by me alone, but by many who will be faithful, and humble themselves in God, and seek in his Spirit and Will. It will only be found in God's Eye, else no where: therefore let none enter into any other thing with seeking, else he findeth the Devil. 70. Seeing then the Eternity is thus, which yet is NOTHING; but therein is Light and Darkness, Life and Spirit, which is ALL; therefore there is and must be in both a seeking, viz. a desiring continu∣ally to find it self, where yet there is no∣thing that can find but the Spirit. 71. Now seeing it hath nothing that it
findeth, and yet also the Desiring eternal∣ly goeth forward, therefore the Desiring is a figure of the seeking Will, a similitude according to God's Eye, and is a Looking∣glass of the Eternal Eye, which is called God. 72. Now this is in Two wayes, one ac∣cording to the Light, and one according to the Darkness; for the Seeking is in both, and yet there is no departing of one from the other: thus the Light is in the inward, and the Darkness in the out∣ward; whereas yet the most inward of all, is also the most outward; but the Light is the middlemost. 73. For it is in nothing, therefore it cannot be the innermost of all, for it hath no place or limit, it is its own finding, which the Darkness findeth not; but the will in the Darkness, which desireth the Light, that goeth forth out of the Darkness, and that standeth Eternally in the Light. 74. Now the Light's desiring, setteth be∣fore it self a Model of its likeness, wherein the Eternity standeth revealed or mani∣fested, viz. all and every thing which the Spirit in the Eternal Power of God from Eternity in Eternity findeth in it self. 75. That Model is not God, the Eterni∣ty
it self, for it beginneth it self in the Spirit, and is the Spirits wonder, which it from Eternity seeketh and findeth, and standeth in Gods Eye as a Figure, and all Wonders of the Abysse of Eternity are therein, and become seen in the Light of the Majesty, as one Wonder in many end∣less Wonders. 76. And that is an Image of God, a Virgin full of purity, and chastity, and no Genetrix, for the holy Spirit alone openeth the Wonders in the Power. 77. But this Virgin is God's Simili∣tude, his Wisdom, wherein the Spirit dis∣cerneth it self, and alwayes and in Eter∣nity openeth it self therein again; and the more is opened, the more is therein. 78. For it is without Ground and Num∣ber, as also unmeasurable, as the Eye of God it self is: there is Nothing like it, also Nothing can be found that may be likened to it; for it is the Eternal Simili∣tude of the Deity, and the Spirit of God is its Wesen, matter or work. substance there∣in. 79. It is a Circle and Mo∣del, which openeth to us our mind, so that we behold it, and God IN it, for our will is cast into it, and it standeth in our
will; and therefore speak we of God, and see him in himself as in that which is our own, according to the hiddenness of the Humanity; which Seeing is very highly dear and pretious. 80. Thus we should also speak as con∣cerning the Darkness, which is in it self a bolting in, and there being nothing to bolt, it bolteth it self, and generateth it self, and is its own Enemy to it self, for it maketh its own source or pain without Ground and Number, and hath no Giver that bestoweth it, but the Darknesse's own Form. 81. And that originateth from the First Desiring, where the Desiring attracteth into it self, and impregnateth it self, so that it is a stinging bitter astringent, or harsh, hard, cold, fierce, wrathful fire-spirit; for the Desiring maketh astringent, austere or harsh from the attracting in the Will, and the attracting is stinging, and the suffering is bitter, which the Will willeth not, and thereupon in it self goeth forth from the sting, and maketh a Principle of its own; in which the Majesty appeareth. 82. Thus existeth in the bitter suffering, the great Anguish, whereas yet nothing is there that suffereth, but it is in it self thus,
and it is its own Life; and if this were not, the Glance of the Majesty would not be neither, the one is the cause of the other, for in the Darkness is the flash of Lightning, and in the Liberty the Light with the Majesty. 83. And this now is the parting, that the Liberty is a still nothing; which Li∣berty receiveth the Light, and maketh the Darkness Material, whereas yet there is no substance of palpability; but dark spi∣rit and power, a filling of the Liberty in it self, understand in the Desiring not without, for without is the Liberty. 84. Therefore is God the most secret, and also the most revealed; and that is Mysterium magnum, the great Mystery. Thus the Abysse is also secret, and yet revealed, as the Darkness is before our eyes; but the source or pain is unsearch∣able, or unperceptible, till the will Immer∣seth. diveth thereinto, then it becometh felt and found, when the will loseth the Light: and herein lyeth the ground of right be∣leeving, or true Faith. Let this be told you ye Teachers in Babel. 85. Since then there is an Abysse, which is called the Ground, in respect of the com∣prehension
of the Darkness, where the source or pain is as a cause of the Life within: for the fierce wrathfull slash of Lightening, is the awakening of the Life; whereas there is nothing there but in it self, therefore it is also a Desiring, and the Desiring is a Seeking, and yet can find nothing but a Looking-glass, and a simili∣tude of the dark, fierce, wrathful source or pain, wherein nothing is. 86. For it is a Or, Repre∣sentation. figure of the earnest, severe, fierce, wrathful flash of Lightning, and of the sharp and strong Might, which is God's, according to which he calleth himself, Deut. 4. 24. a Con∣suming Fire, and an Angry, Zealous, or Jealous God. 87. This Looking-glass is also without Ground, without Beginning and End, and yet hath an Eternal Beginning and End, and is the Eternal Only Cause that the Abysse is Blew Dusky and Fiery. It is the Cause of the Stars and Elements; for the Firmament is the other or second Look∣ing-glass generated out of this. 88. Since then there is in all things a Threefold Source, one whereof is the others Looking-glass, Generating and Cause, nor
thing excepted, All standeth according to the Substance or Working of the Number Three. 89. Now seeing there is a Looking-glass in the Abysse, wherein the source or quali∣ty beholdeth it self, therefore that also is a figure and image of the source or quality, which standeth before the source or quali∣ty, and acteth or generateth nothing, but is a Virgin of the source quality or pain, wherein the fierce Wrath of the flash of Lightning discovers it self in infinity with∣out Number, and continually openeth its wonders therein, with the bitter spirit of the stirring Essences, which in the flash of Lightening hath its Life, so that it goeth swifter than a Thought. 90. Though indeed the THOUGHTS of the Creatures stand and move herein; and the Spirits of all living Creatures are with their Root standing herein, every Life according to its Principle. 91. And in this Spirit of the fire-flash, standeth the Great Omnipotent Life, for it is consuming, as the flash of Lightning con∣sumeth the Darkness, and that Fire all things, and yet continueth a Life in it self, but it is an Hunger and Thirst, and must
have Substantiality, else it continueth a Dark Hunger-fire, a will of devouring and having Nothing, a will to rage, prick and find nothing, but it self, out of which cause the Substantiality, viz. the Water, as also Sulphur is generated and generateth it self from Eternity to Eternity. 92. Here seek the first Root of the Soul, viz. in the Fire-Life, and the second, in the Light-Life in the Majesty, and then you will find God's Image and similitude, and the greatest Mystery of the Deity ly∣ing therein. 93. Since then there is such an Eye of the fierce Wrath, wherein the earnest severe stern fire-life originateth, yet is not at all sundred from the Fire-Life, it is One and the same Life, and hath Two Principles; for it burneth in a twofold source or qua∣lity, one within another, and is One Spi∣rit in Two distinctions with two Wills, the one dwelling in the Fire, the other in the Light. 94. And know for certain assuredly that the Dark Fire-Life is the the Abysse of Hell, for it is the stern severe Anger of God. 95. And seek it not so, as Babel the
great City of Confusion upon earth hath sought, which yet we blame for nothing else, but her negligence and inconsiderate∣ness, seeking self-honour and power, and so hath captivated her self in the fierce wrathful Anger of God, which hath had her a long time under its Wonders, and drawn many souls into its source or qua∣lity. Consider well of it. 96. In the Three-fold Life. Third Part of our Writings, it is large∣ly described, for that is somewhat easier to reach than this; but this is the deepest Ground of Eternity, as much as a Spirit can be capable of, for more it CANNOT bear, yet it may be expressed much more at large, but not more deeply, for it is comprized in the Abysse in both Principles; as indeed a Soul originateth in the Abysse in both Prin∣ciples, and in the spiritual Will in the Eternity. 97. And therefore if it be not circum∣spect, the Devil may easily ride upon its Chariot, viz. upon its Will; but if it be circumspect, and casteth it self into the Into Good Desires. Will of the Majesty of God, then the holy Spirit of God rideth upon its will, and it is his Chariot.
98. Herein you may clearly discern Heaven and Hell, Angels and Devils, Evil and Good, Life and Death, if you but search after it, as we shall further mention to you. The Sixth Form of Fire. 99. Thus then seeing Two Principles stand in One Substance, as none with reason can speak against it; for every Life standeth in Poyson and Light, every one in its own Principle, according as it hath the Source or Fountain Quality, so hath it also its Light. Thus it may be discerned concern∣ing the Sustenance of the Life; what that is which sustains or preserves the Life, that it starve or famish not, and what driveth forth its Source or fountain Quality, that it may subsist Eternally. 100. Now this also is in Two distincti∣ons; for the Light-Life hath its source or fountain quality, and driving forth; and the Fire-Life also its source or fountain quality, and driving forth, each in it self; but the Fire-Life is a Cause of the Light-Life; and the Light-Life is a Lord of the Fire-Life: and herein lyeth the Mysteri∣um
magnum, the great Mystery. 101. For if there were no Fire, there would also be no Light, and also no Spi∣rit; and if there were no Spirit that did blow up the Fire, then the Fire would smother and extinguish, and would be a Darkness; and so one without the other would not be; thus they belong both to one another, and yet they sever one from the other, but without flying away; and yet there is a flying of the Spirit. 102. To be understood, thus look upon a glowing red hot Fire; First, There is the Matter out of which it burneth; and that is the astringent austere source attra∣cted bitter Substance, which standeth in an anguish Source or Quality, whether it be wood or whatsoever else, which is a dark Body. 103. Now when that is kindled, then a Man sees three Principles; 1. The Wood in the Darkness, with the outward Source or fountain Quality of this World; 2. Which also hath its life, else it would not take fire. 104. Now the Fire hath a fierce wrathful, astringent or sour, strong or stern, bitter thirsty desirous Source or Quality, a de∣vouring
Consuming, and the Great Bitter∣ness is its right Life, a rager and a wakener, that hath all Essences of Life in it, and is also the power of the Life, and of the Dri∣ving forth, else there would be no Burning: 105. And that maketh the great An∣guish-seeking after the Liberty, and in the Fire it attaineth the Liberty, for it con∣sumeth in the fierce wrath, the Darkness and also the Matter of the Fire, from which the Fire burneth. 106. And here we apprehend the One only Spirit, which parteth it self into Two Prin∣ciples, into Two Spirits, yet not assunder, but one flying from the other, and yet the one comprehendeth not the other; and one is the Life and Cause of the other. 107. And therefore it is Two Princi∣ples, since it giveth or affordeth a two∣fold Source or fountain Quality and Life; and is but one Root which affordeth that: the one giveth Life, the other giveth food to the Life; and this is a wonder, and yet Not a wonder, for there is nothing that it self can wonder at, for it is it self all things in One Substance. 108. Now behold, the Fire is first the seeking, to draw into it self; that is the
Substantiality, the Phur; for the Seeking maketh that in the Desiring, in respect of its drawing, else Nothing would be; and the Drawing is the bitter sting, a Breaker, which cannot endure the Substantiality, nor will not endure it; and that not willing to endure, is an anguish in the will, to over∣power the Substantiality with the bitter Sting; and the Anguish penitrateth or pres∣seth into it self, and reacheth after the Li∣berty, and the Liberty is esteemed a Light in respect of the Darkness. 109. Now the Anguish is a horrible Sharpness; and thus is the Liberty capti∣vated and sharpned, so that it is a Fire-flash of Lightning; and the Anguish Will in the sharpness of the bitter Flash of Light∣ning consumeth the Substantiality, be it wood or any thing else. 110. And when it hath consumed it, then is the Anguish again a Darkness, and the Flash of Lightning remaineth hidden in it self again, and is an extinguishing; and the Anguish is in the Darkness, viz. before the flash of fire, and standeth now in a terrible Source or fountain Quality, where the Bitterness in respect of the rough attracting, becometh continually generated the more terrible
111. Now observe, this is thus according to the outward Principle of this World, as is undeniable before our eyes: and so then there is in the Eternity such a continual subsisting Substance, which we demonstrate to you thus. Observe and consider the Depth, and read here diligently. 112. The sinking down of the Anguish in the eternal Darkness, is an eternal Hunger and Thirst, and an eternal Desiring, and the Darkness in it self, attaineth in the E∣ternity, Nothing that it can have out of the Eternity for its satiating or fulfilling; therefore it is rightly the very Hunger and Thirst of the Abysse of Hell, and of the Anger of God. 113. But the will in the Anguish, being it can reach or find nothing, it maketh to it self a figure and a similitude in the Desi∣ring, with the stern strong drawing; and the strong, astringent, bitter, dark Substance, is the material Similitude it self; it devou∣reth it self, and is it self the Matter of the Fire, that so the Eternal Flash continueth perpetually, and the fierce Wrath is conti∣nually & eternally ever burning, and burn∣eth eternally out of the Darkness, and hath its own Life it it self, viz. the bitter Sting
of the Anguish, which raveth and rageth, and is the stirring and original of the Life; and that is a Principle▪ 114. And understand herein, the Eter∣nal desirous seeking, an Eternal Covetous∣ness; and yet having Nothing but it self, an Eternal Envious Enmity, a seeking of the Essences, wherein then the innumerable and unsearchable Multiplicity in the Will is continually generated, and an eternal craf∣tiness or subtilty, a continual climing up in the Hunger, and an eternal finding in the Will; as namely, of the Similitude of its desiring, the Similitude of the Essen∣ces, and in the Flash that is revealed or manifested; for the Flash raiseth up it self Eternally above the Darkness; and in the Flash are the Essences, and are continually brought into the Will. 115. Thus is the Fire-will a seeking of the rising Pride, a contemning of the Dark∣ness, it contemneth its own Root; it is a covetous one, and willeth to devour more then it hath, or, then is its right; It hath all Lust; for the desirous Essences become revealed or manifested in the fire; and thence it comes, that in every will of eve∣ry Essence, there is again a Center of a whole Substance.
116. And that is the Cause of the Creation of this World, in that the Mo∣del hath thus appeared in A Looking-Glass from Eternity, and hath stood in the Eter∣nal Essences in the Or represen∣tation. Fi∣gure, as in a Vigin with∣out generating, and hath been seen in the Light of God: And thence originateth the Matter of the Earth, of the Stars and Elements, also all Art, Wit or Ingenuity, Craft or Subtilty, Deceit, Falshood, Covetousness and high-minded∣ness, in the Creatures of this World. 117. For this World is a material seek∣ing out of the Eternal, and is in the Crea∣tion, viz. in verbo Fiat, in the word Fiat, through the Water-Heaven, become ma∣terial and palpable; as is to be seen in Earth and Stones: And the Firmament with the Elements is still the seeking, and seeketh the Earthly, for it cannot reach back into the Eternal. 118. For every substance or thing goes forward, so long, till the End findeth the Beginning; then the Beginning swallow∣eth up the End again, and is as it eternal∣ly was, except this, that the Model remain∣eth; for the Model is out of the Eternal, out of which the Creation went forth into
a Substance, like the Wonder-Eye of God. 119. Also it is mentioned to you, that the Spirit-Air, thus originateth out of the bitter eternal Fire-Spirit, which also go∣eth forward after the Wonders in the Will of the seeking of the Essences, as of the Stars, and therefore it maketh a whirling about, and cometh from many places; as, from above, from beneath, from this side and that side, and often as a Wheel, all according as the Fire-seeking, with the Essences of the Stars, become kindled. 120. And this is together as a wheel of the Mind, and hath its own Will-Spirit, and an Own Self-Life, and an own Will, and therefore it is a Principle, and stand∣eth so long, till the End-findeth the Begin∣ning; then the Beginning taketh the End into it self, and maketh the Middle, and whatsoever was done therein, manifest or revealed: as you should, and will well consider of this, unless you be foolish Vir∣gins. 121. Also this Dominion standeth no longer, then it is in the Number of the Creation; for every Day of the Creati∣on, is a Circle of a Revolution in the Eye,
and hath its Number; whereof Ten is the Cross X, the highest Number: and Man hath the Num∣ber Ten, 10 times Ten, viz. A hundred 100. and in the Crown of Paradise, the number Thousand, 1000. and in the eternal Substan∣tiality in the Divine Center of the Majesty, it hath No Num∣ber, O. 122. Now see aright with good clear eyes; God created in six Dayes this World, with all Substances or Things, and it was finished in the middle of the Sixth Day, past Noon, towards Evening; then began the Rest on the Sixth Day, and the Sabbath was the Seventh Day: Thus the Eternal Rest found the Beginning of the Creation on the Sixth Day after Noon, that was the End; there came the Beginning and End together into one, and it was manifested what God had made in the Dayes. 123. Now since Man hath destroyed the Ange∣lical Body through his Imagination, and hath introduced it into a cor∣ruptible Number, viz. into the Outward Principle; therefore he is also therein, for
he hath lost the Paradisical Number, and is set in the hundreth, 100, Number, where indeed also in the Outward Life, his Leader or Conducter is given to him; that is, he hath given himself to himself; therefore his Number of finishing in the Circle of the outward Principle, is clearly appre∣hensible to us. 124. If we fundamentally know, the Hour of the Sixth Day, in which the Crea∣tion was finished, we would set you down the Year and Day; understand of the last Day, for it stayeth not one Minute over; it hath its Limit, which standeth hidden in the Inward Circle. 125. Therefore know assuredly, that the time is near, for in the sixth Day after∣noon, began the Rest of the Eternal Day, and therefore hath God instituted the Sab∣bath of the Seventh Day for a Rest, and continual perpetual Remembrance. 126. And as on the Sixth Day towards Evening, began the Rest and the entrance of the Revelation of the Works of the Creation, where the End hath received the Beginning in again, and so the Six Dayes in the Circle have stood as a Wonder: So know this, that ye were created in Paradise, but are gone out of it, and entered into
the Spirit of the fierce wrathfull Death, which hath now wrought its Wonders in you above the half sixt thousand year, above 5500 years. 127. And now the End hath found the Beginning again, and ye shall see, also feel and find what the Paradise hath been, viz. all those that become generated or born in God. 128. For the Paradise is become gene∣rated or born again; thus spoken after the manner of Reason, and not in God: but ye cannot escape mortality, also the fierce wrath in the Flesh, but in the Mind and in the Soul the Paradise standeth now more and more manifested or revealed to the Children of God, and they have the right taste of the Power. 129. And, no Craft or Subtilty nor Might and Power can keep it back, no Subtilty can take it away or quench it, nor no Devil destroy it; for the End hath found the Beginning: there is no preven∣ting of it, the Might or Power, and Fals∣hood breaketh, and there is moreover a waiting for the Bridegroom, for the Chil∣dren of God shall become found in Para∣dise, when the Turba in the fierce wrath shall be swallowed up. We speak what we
dearly and pretiously apprehend and assu∣redly know in the Wonders. 130. Thus as above-mentioned, (un∣derstand us aright) there is generated out of the fierce wrath of the Anger, out of the Eternal Center, out of which this World is become generated and created, as a seeking of the Eternal in the Spirit of this World, in this Principle wherein we now live, and there will continually be gene∣rated, Falshood, Covetousness, Craft or cunning Subtilty, Deceit, Enmity in the will, Lying, Murder, High-mindedness, desire of Honour, own Self-might and power, Art, Wit, the VVisdom of this World proceeding from Reason; for all is out of this Root, and standeth in Gods An∣ger-Wonders; And how sine soever Reason and own Self-wit, is, yet it is in the Anger of God, and springeth out of the Abysse. 131. Here behold thy self thou fair World, it is no conjecture, as thou holdst it to be, it is apprehended in Ternario sancto, in the holy Ternary or Number Three. And they that cannot reach this Gole or Limit are captivated of Antichrist, and belong at last to this Lake, out of which they are grown: there is no time more of lingring, both Doors or Gates stand open;
the Turba will swallow up with it self whatsoever is grown up in it. 132. Thus now observe us, further, concerning the Eternal Fire, and take a similitude from all fire in this world, for what is in the Eternity, a Spirit, that is in this world a Substance: Thus ye see that Fire, in it self, is an anguishing fierce wrathful climing up, bitter substance and source or fountain-quality, and yet ye see in the Fires own Form, nothing else but the flash of the shining, the source or fountain quality of heat ye see not, you must only feel that. 133. Now ye see also that the burning Fire sendeth a Smoke up from it, and in the Smoke is a Water, whence Soot cometh to be, which cleaves to the wall, especially if the fire be closed in that it is not free, then is the Soot manifest as in a Furnace: this is Soot and Water mixed one in ano∣ther, by which, understand the Material Earth out of the Eternal Fire, which Lu∣cifer kindled, where then in the fierce wrath, Time began, and the Creation proceeded, as in the Threefold-Life. Third Part is mentioned. 134. Now understand the Great My∣stery Mysterium Magnum further: ye see that every fire giveth light, and then ye
see that Air goeth forth out of the Fire∣source or Quality: and ye understand ve∣ry well, that if the fire had not Air again, it would smother or go out, as all fires smother, if they have not Air, and yet they also generate Air; the Air is the Fires life, which originateth out of the anxious bitter stirring Source or fountain Quality of the Essences out of the Will. 135. Now ye see also well, that Fire must have somewhat to consume, else it is a Darkness; and though it devoureth it self, viz. its strong or stern attraction, yet that very fire is only a source or foun∣tain quality in the Darkness, whereby we understand the Abyss of the Anger; which in God, is not revealed or manifested, but only as a Cause of the Life in the Kingdom of God. 136. Ye see this, that every Fire must have substance, if it must burn: under∣stand this thus, the Fire affordeth Air, the Air, Water; and it draweth the Air strong∣ly again into it self with the water, whence the Fires source or fountain quality of heat becometh mittigated or meekned, so that it shineth. 137. For without Or Liquor; that is Oyl. Water, no Fire shineth, where in a thing, the Water is not to be
attained, there is no shining of the Fire, but only a glimps; as is to be seen in a glowing or red hot Stone, which hath the source or quality of Fire; & of the shining it hath nothing but only glimps, it may be not that: but in the Iron ye see a glimps, wherein the Fire attaineth the Water. Therefore also Iron is at length consumed, and getteth rust, and a Stone Not. This is thus to be understood according to the out∣ward Principle of this World. but accor∣ding to the inward, viz. according to the Kingdom of God; observe this understan∣ding: the Eternal Fire burneth Eternally, but it is a Spirit, and in the Kingdom of God, not manifested or revealed in a fierce wrathful manner. 138. Observe this thus, the flash maketh a shining, which originateth from the fire, and dwelleth not in the fierce wrath of the fire, but it satiateth or fulfilleth the fire totally, and giveth light also external∣ly out of the fire, and is not held or de∣tained by the fire, and bringeth also a se∣veral source or quallity, as Meekness, and hath yet the Fires vertue or power, Wit or Ingenuity and Art; for in the Light is first, the Fires Source or Quality in the Essen∣ces, manifested or revealed.
139. Now the Light maketh no source or pain, but goeth in it self into a Meek∣ness, and is also desirous, proceeding from the Fires source or Quality, and its de∣siring is also an attracting, as viz. of the meekness and vertue or power into it self, and impregnaeth it self with meekness. 140. For the Light is also a fire, a very yearning fire, a desirous fire, and a conti∣nual finding fire, which continually findeth, what is generated in the Original. 141. All the vertue and power which originateth in the fierce wrathful Fire, is manifested or revealed in the Light, and the Light desireth that, in meekness; for the Fires fierce wrathfulness and the Lights shining, are Two Principles of a twofold Source or fountain Quality, each dwelleth in it self, and the one comprehendeth not the Other, in Eternity, and yet the One is the others Life and Cause, Understand it thus: 142. As we consider, that a horrible an∣xious Source or Quality, maketh a sinking down in it self, like a death, where then is the parting limit, and yet the Anguish in it self retaineth its source or quality, but the sincking into it self, as a Death enter∣eth into its Aethen; where then the An∣guish-Life
is no more apprehended, for the sinking breaketh it self forth out of the Anguish-source, like a dying, and is a dy∣ing, whereas yet in the Eternity is no dy∣ing, but such an Entrance into another World of another Principle, of another Source or fountain-Quality. 143. For the sinking goeth into the still Eternity, as into the Liberty, and being the fierce wrathful fires-Source, continu∣eth in it self in its life; therefore is the sinking a going forth out of the Fire-Life, and yet is from the Fire-Life; but its source or fountain-spirit it hath not, for it is brok∣en off in Death, and is the parting-limit in Death, that so the sinking presseth through Death, and hath another Substan∣tiality, viz. another Water wherein the Light shineth, wherein no fierce wrathful∣ness is. 144. For in the Eternity is no Death that with-holdeth, but only such an en∣trance in; for that which hath no begin∣ning, that hath also no end nor ground: and thus originateth the Light out of the Fires-Source. 145. For the Light dwelleth in the Fire, & also not in the Fire, it is in another world, and is another Fire, which is called Love,
Vertue or Power, Wonder, Sweet, Mild or Gentle, Pure or Clean; and is no Sub∣stance, and also not Nature, but without or besides Nature in another Principle. 146. It is nothing else but a Light-fla∣ming powerful Majesty, and hath its own spirit, which bringeth the sinking through Death; which from the Anguish is the sinking through Death, which maketh the sprouting out through Death. 147. It is in it self free, both from the Fire and from the Light, and is held or detained by none, as little as the fire hold∣eth or detaineth the Air, and it goeth forth out of the Light, out of the Power of the Light, and openeth all whatsoever is in the Fire-Source or Quality, and also in the Lights-Source or Quality. 148. But it hath no perception in it self of the Fire, but it is a blower up of the Light-Fire, a bringer of the Love-Essen∣ces into the desirous power or Vertue, an Opener of the Love-Essences. 149. And yet that we may be un∣derstood when we speak thus of the Love-Essences, as of another Fire; Observe it; Behold, when the Light becometh thus generated through the fierce wrathfulness, so that the one Fire goeth forth out
of the other, then the Light-fire desireth no more, the fierce wrathfulness, for it hath dyed away from the fierce wrathful∣ness, and is an own peculiar fire in it self, and sendeth its Life out of it self, which is a sprouting, for it is also desirous and attractive, whence Essences exist, and hath all forms in it, as the Fire-life also hath such a rising up or springing. 150. But the Essences are generated out of the Lights power and vertue, and so the one alwayes tasting the other, there is a mere pure desiring and satisfying or fulfilling, whereas yet there is nothing that the Love desiring can draw into it self; therefore it draweth it self into it self, and impregnateth it self out of the Power of the Majesty, so that, that very will is full, and yet also nothing is there, but such pow∣er and vertue, and Image of the Wonder, it is a Similitude of the Birth or Geniture, and is the power and vertue it self; It is the Substance of the Spirit, whence the Spirit hath its food, for it goeth forth out of the Image, and floweth or bubleth, as the Air in this World doth. 151. But now, if the Spirit findeth no Similitude, wich is without or besides it, and yet findeth it self thus in the Power
and Vertue, then it is also desirous, for it dweleth in the powers or vertues ground, and is not it self the power or vertue: therefore its desiring also maketh a Simili∣tude according to it; for a desiring is a seeking; and in the seeking standeth the the Figure of the Seeking: the Figure maketh the Seeking manifest or revealed. 152. Thus the Spirit dwelleth also in its own Figure in the Power or Vertue, and in the Light of the Majesty; and is an Image according to the Spirits Property. 135. Not that the Spirit is the Image, but the Seeking & its Desiring is the Image, for it dwelleth in its self, in its seeking, and is another Person in its Figure, viz. the Powers or Vertues Figure; and accor∣ding to this Substance is God called, Three∣fold in Persons. 154. But that we may open your eyes wide, to see ALL the Ground of the Deity, as it now will and must be; therefore behold now the great wonder, which we had lost with going out of Paradise, where we must labour in the Six Dayes Works of this World, and so see what and where we are, and ye will find here such a thing, as hath stood hidden even to Nature.
AEIOV IEOVA 155. Behold, when you will speak of the Trinity, look upon the first Number upon A, up∣on the Eternal Beginning, which is the Fa∣ther, and then look upon the O in the mid∣dle, which is the Son; then look upon the V, which is the Exit of the Holy Spirit, which goeth into it self with the sincking through the sharp fierce Wrath into the second Principle, which hath E, and goeth through the Power or Vertue forth as a light-fla∣ming Flash, which hath I. 156. Now take the swift-going of the flam∣ing Flash to it, which is T, Allmach T, des Ewigen GOTTES, the Omnipotence of the E∣ternal God; which there in the fierce Wrath, as a flash, destroyeth; and in der LIEB, in the Love, in the I, as a Mighty loving God, exulteth, through presseth, and pow∣erfully exalteth or riseth up; and if you put the I thereinto, then have you the Matter of the Divine Substance; in the Power or Vertue, it is Ein Engel, an Angel, and in the Out-Birth, out of the Center, it is GOLDT, Gold. 157. The World is covetous, and full of boasting, especially those that would be accounted Masters of Arts; and say, they know Gold, and are blind People, why see
you it not; thou wilt say, How? Go with the outward life into death, there must the outward life die, and in the Anguish, give it self forth into the Number of the Crown, viz. into the Thousand Number, 1000, there is the End, and Death ariseth and standeth up to a glorious Life, with a New fair Body, and you need give nothing to it but the Soul, it bringeth forth manifold fruit; there thou hast an Angel which is free from the fierce Wrath, for it is totally clean & pure; seek it, and thou wilt find it. 158. But thou supposest perhaps to find it thus in thy Old Garment; no friend; we will now teach you another A, B, C; learn that first, then seek, if you will then have a love to it, if not, leave it; for the *†GOTT, God. GOLT, Gold, O is muchnobler and more pre∣tious than the L. 159. Observe, take the AV A O V ⊙ A, viz. the Begin∣ning of the AVge, Eye, with the V, which is the Spirits mark, and go with it through the O; then you will make a stroak, & mark through the O, thus,
160. Now part the Two Principles one from another, seeing they part themselves, and set one by ano∣ther, each with a half O like a Reinbow, thus, ; for so they stand in the Fi∣gure Set the fierce Wrath at the left O and the Light at the right C, for otherwise a Man cannot describe them so exactly, but they are One Globe. 161. And take the Spirit, which is generated in the Fire, and go with it out from the fierce Wrath, into the sinking down, through Death, into the other half Eye, viz. into the second Principle, then will you see this Figure, which standeth thus:
An Exposition of the Philosophick Globe or Eye, of both the Threefold Or halves of Circles as joyned. Circles, which especially signifie the two Eternal Principles; wherein yet the Third also is clearly understood; And how a Man should un∣derstand them. 162. THese Or halves of Circles as joyned. Circles should be like Though here parted into two halfe Globes. A round Globe, having the Cross Though here parted into two halfe Globes. go through it; for it is an Eye of the Eternity, that a man cannot delineate fully; it is the Eye of the Substance of all Sub∣stances, signifying the Eye of God, which is the Looking-Glass of Wisdom, wherein from Eternity all Wonders have been seen: and hereby is delinated how it came in∣to substance, for the Reader of this book to Think and consider of. 163. Not in such a way, as if a Man could fully describe or delineate it, for the
mind or Thought only can apprehend it, and only that Mind which can walk in the Di∣vine Mystery, not through Art or Outward Reason. Reason, but through the understanding which the Spirit of God openeth to the humane Souls-Spi∣rit in the Great Mystery, else it can NOT be apprehended. 164. The Reader should take consideration of the Number, and then of what standeth within or without the Or two halfe Circles, as joyn∣ed. Cir∣cle, or where every word in the Or two half Circles, Circle beginneth and endeth, it hath all its assured certain significati∣on; for every word stand∣eth in its exact place. 165. That which is without the Or two halves of one Wheel, as joyned. Circle or Wheel, signifieth the Li∣birty of the Abyss with∣out or besides the Principle. Number 1. Abysse. 166. The great Mystery of the Abysse, wherein the Divine Substance in the Looking-Glass of Wisdom, generateth it self in the Ground, is marked with Num∣ber
1. and Number 2. standeth by it: so also round about the whole Circles. Circle is to be understood. Of the three *Circles. 167. The Three Or two three-fold half Circles, as joyn∣ed. Circles drawn about one ano∣ther, signifie the Eter∣nal Birth or Geniture of the Divine Substance, together with All E∣ternal Mysteries, without and within Na∣ture; viz. the Original of all Things or Substances as they are here marked. Of that half of the Threefold Or half Circles, as joyned, and yet parted. Circle at the left hand, and of Numb. 2. 168. The Threefold Or half Circles, as joyned, and yet parted. Cir∣cle at the left, where without the Or half Circles, as joyned, and yet parted. Circle standeth Number 2. The Mystery without or be∣sides Nature, signifieth how the profundi∣ty or Or unsearchable∣ness in the Text. groundlesness, bringeth it self into a Ground; viz. the Eye of Eternity, the first Will, which is called Father of Eter∣ternity, and of all Beginnings, how in the Trinity, in the Wisdom, he introduceth
himself into an Eternal Ground, and dwel∣leth in himself, and possesseth himself, and how he bringeth himself into Nature; and how Substance originateth, as also Percep∣tibility and Perception. Of that half of the Three-fold Or half Circle, as joy∣ned, and yet parted. Cir∣cle at the right hand. 169. The other Threefold Or half Circle, as joy∣ned, and yet parted. Cir∣cle at the right, signifieth the Divine Substance of the holy Trinity, together with the Angelical World, which originateth out of the Great Mystery of the Eternity, and is manifested or revealed through the Principle of the Fire. What the Crose signifieth. 170. The Cross ✚ through the Two Or half Threefold Cir∣cles, being one. Circles, signifi∣eth the Persons of the Deity, how they part them∣selves in the Eternal One on∣ly Birth or Geniture, as fur∣ther is mentioned according to the Numbers.
Of the Eye in the Circle. 171. The Half Eye in the half Circle, thus, which turned, are a whole Eye, & whole threefold Cir∣cle thus, though half Globes, and joyned, make a whole Globe, yet each being every where together, they make each a whole Globe of dark or light though both together, every where as one; though also parted as to the Eternal Manifestation, virtually into half Globes, though whole, Eye in the Circle, where the Cross goeth through, with an Angle or Point and Line, signifieth each of them a World, both at the left and right: At the left it signifieth the great My∣stery of the Dark World, wher the Wonder-Eye introduceth it self in Nature, At the right it signifieth the Light-world, where the Divine Mystery, hath through the Fire, brought it self forth, and dwelleth in the majestick Light, with the first Mystery of Wonder. Of the Heart in the Angle of the Cross. 172. The Heart ♡ in the Angle or Center of the Cross, ✚ signifieth the ground or the Center of the Deity, not in such a manner
as if it were partible, and did possess a se∣veral place, for it is it self the place or the ground of the Deity, and is every where all over the middlemost; but that a man may learn to distinguish or diffe∣rence the Deity from Nature; and that Christians may learn to understand the Re∣generation or the New Birth, how God in Christ hath regenerated us out of his Heart upon the Cross: for which things sake, this Figure hath been thus delinated, that the Reader should consider and think up∣on it; for this FIGURE compriseth all whatsoever God and the Eter∣nity is. An Exposition of the Circles at the left hand; Numb. 3, 4, 5. 173. The three Characters or Letters, AOV, marked with Number 3, 4, 5, signifie the Mystery of the holy Deity, without or be∣sides Nature, how it manifests or reveals it self in Nature. Of A, Num. 3. and Tincture, Num. 6. 174. A, signifieth the first profound or
groundless or unsearchable Will, which is called Father: go about that *Or half Circle. Circle to the nether point of it, there standeth Tincture, Number 6. which is the Wills Ens, and the first beginning to Nature; for the Divine My∣stery of the Trinity standeth above, and the Mystery of Nature beneath; each Circle signifieth one Person of the Deity in the first Mystery. Of the O. Numb. 4. and of Principle and of Fire; Numb. 7. 175. The O, with Number 4. signifieth the Ground of the Mystery, viz. the Geni∣ture or Birth of the Heart or Word of God, which the first will, viz. the A, in the Looking-Glass of Wisdom, compri∣seth and holdeth it in self, as a Ground of its substance. For the O, signifieth also the Eye of the Looking-Glass of Wisdom: for in the Wisdom is the Eternal Word compri∣sed, which manifests or revealeth it self through the Principle of the Fire, in the Light World. Go from the O, about that Circle, and so thou findest beneath, Prin∣ciple, and Fire Number 7.
Of V, Numb. 5. and of Substance, Numb. 8. 176. The V, with Number 5. signifieth the Spirit of the Mystery without or besides Nature; viz. the first eternal profound groundless or unsearchable Will-Spirit, which originateth out of the Will, and in the Power or Vertue of the Word, in the Great Mystery; and goeth forth out of the Will and Word, and its Exit maketh Sub∣stance, viz. Wonders, of the Power, Co∣lours, and Vertue, whereas yet in the My∣stery of the Profundity Groundlesness or Unsearchableness without or besides Nature, no colours are apprehended: for they lye all in ONE, and it is the twinckling of a great Wonder, and that is called a Sub∣stance of the Wonder. Go about from V, on that Or half Cir∣cle. Circle, and thou findest beneath at Number 8, Sub∣stance; signifying that all Substance is be∣neath the Spirit of the Number Three, or Trinity; and that men must alwayes distin∣guish Substance from the Deity. 177. For in Substance originateth Na∣ture, with its seven Forms; for the Num∣ber
Three is only a Spirit in Substance, and yet there is also no Substance without the Number Three: for the Desire of the Number Three is the Eternal Magia, and maketh Substance, it bringeth into a ground, according to the Model which the Spirit openeth in the wisdom, out of her is the Creation proceeded according to the Mo∣del of the virgin-like Wisdom. Further Information Concerning the First Principle, and the Mystery of the Beginning in the Crea∣tion, and of the Dark World, how the Angle or Point of the Cross, with Number 9. at the left, with its upper and neather Space is understood. Of FATHER; Number 9. 178. Number 9. there standeth before the Angle or Point of the Cross, FATHER, and before that the Abysse, signifying the Mystery of the Father without or besides Nature: for with the Or point or end of the Arm of the Cross. Angle of the Cross Nature beginneth. The
first and Greatest Mystery is the Abysse, where the Nothing introduceth it self into a will, which is called FATHER, or the Original to somewhat: Out of the My∣stery of the Father is the Creation, through Nature, originated: A Man is here to understand the Eternal Nature, with its Se∣ven Forms, with or by this Mystery. Soul; Numb. 10. 179. At the Angle or Or end of the Arm of the Cross at the left hand. Point of the line, standeth Soul, Number 10. signifying the Original of the Eternal Spirits, viz. Angels & Souls of Men: the Angle or Point, signifieth the Center in Nature, where the Threefold Spi∣rit revealeth or manifests it self with or by Nature, signifying the Magick Fire, in the Fathers Property, out of which the An∣gels have their Original, as also the Souls of Men. 180. A man should here understand the Ground and Original of an Eternal Spi∣rit, for nothing is Eternal, unless it hath its orsginal out of the Eternal Magick Fire. This Original is not understood to be the true or right Spirit, but to be the Center, viz: the Cause of the Spirit.
Souls Will; Numb. 11. 181. Every true or right Spirit is under∣stood with the understanding in the Light of Life: for in the Fire there can be no right or true understanding, but in the de∣sire of the Light. Therefore must the fiery Will Turn to be like the Light. turn it self to the Heart of God, viz. to the Power or Vertue of the Light and understanding, as here is to be seen, where, upon the line of the Cross standeth the Souls Will, marked with Number 11, and there it receiveth Power and Vertue from the Heart of God, and is generated or born an Understanding Spirit. Will, Numb, 12. and Soul N, umb. 13. 182. For it receiveth the Power or Ver∣tue of the Light, in the Meekness and Hu∣mility, and goeth with its Will-Spirit, viz. with the noble or pretious Image & Simi∣litude of God, through the Power or Ver∣tue of the Heart, into the second Princi∣ciple, viz. into the Light World, as here at the right beyond the Heart in the other or second Circle is to be seen, where stand∣eth Will Number 12. and then Soul Number 13. signifying, how the Soul out of the
fires source or quality out of the Fathers Property, entereth into the Sons Power or Vertue and Property, and dwelleth in the Divine Power or Vertue in the Light∣world. HOLY SPIRIT, Numb. 14. 183. Without or beyond the Angle or Or End of the Arm of the Cross at the right∣hand. Point of the Cross, stand∣eth HOLY SPIRIT, Number 14. signifying the holy Spirit, which from Eternity originat∣eth in the Will of the Father at the left at the Angle or Beyond the end of the arm of the Cross at the left Point, Number 9. and bringeth it self through Nature, through the Heart and Divine Power or Vertue at the right without or beyond Nature; also through the Angels or Souls-Spirits, Pow∣er or Vertue, forth, and dwelleth in the Liberty in the Glance of the Power or Ver∣tue and Majesty, and is in Nature, yet of Nature unapprehended, but only in the Divine Power or Vertues Property. Image, Numb. 15. 184. Beyond the word HOLY SPIRIT, Number 15. standeth Image, also without
or beyond Nature, signifying that the no∣ble or pretious Image sprouteth forth out of the Souls Fire, as a Blossome or Flower out of the Earth, and hath no feeling or sense of the Pain of the fiery Property; for the Fire standeth in it as it were swal∣owed up, and yet it is there but in ano∣ther source or fountain quality, viz. a de∣sire of Love, a light-flaming Fire in Divine Property. Abysse, Numb. 16. 185. Beyond Image, standeth Abysse, Num∣ber 16. signifying; that the right true Image standeth in the Abysse, without or beyond all source or pain, and dwelleth in Nothing, but only in it self, & with or through it, God dwelleth through & through it, yet is besides it, every where in it. GOD. Therefore there is Nothing that can find touch or break it, but only the Divine Power or Vertue; for it standeth not in Nature, although indeed, with the Root it proceedeth from Nature, and yet it is another thing; as an Apple is another thing than the Tree, though it stand upon the Tree, and receive pow∣er
and vertue from the Tree, and yet the Sun giveth it also power and vertue: So also the Divine Sun, viz. the Majesty, gi∣veth the Image power and vertue. Of the Word Omnipotence; Numb. 17. and Wrath; Numb. 18. 186. Further at the left standeth Number 17. Omnipotence; and it stand∣eth also without or beyond the Or half Globe of Nature, as par∣ted and yet joy∣ned. Circle, signifying the Fathers Mystery, which, with the Magia, viz. with the Desire, introduceth it self into the fierce Wrath, where then the strong loud∣sounding life, and strength, is understood in the entrance of Nature in the first Three Forms, viz. the astringent, bitter, and anguish, as the word Or fierce Wrath. Wrath standeth in the space under the Or Arm of the Cross at the left hand. Line, Number 18. signifying that the fierce Wrath, doth not touch the Angle, or Or end of the Arm of the Cross, whose three upper Arms signifie the Trinity. Point of the Number Three, but is generated or born in the Desire.
Craft; Numb. 19. 187. Under the word Omnipotence, Number 19. standeth Or cun∣ning Sut∣tlety. Craft, signifying the Essence out of the Looking-Glass of the My∣stery: which Craft or Suttlety in the se∣cond Principle is changed into a right or rectified understanding, and here in the Magick Fire it is only Craft or cunning Suttlety, for it is accute or pointed and sharp, and a cause of the Understanding. Devil; Numb. 20. 188. Over against it standeth, Devil, Number 20. in the space Or within the place of the Dark World, or dark half of the Globe in the lower space of that from the middle down ward. of the Dark World, signifying the evilness malignity or ma∣lice of the Devil, in that he is gone away from the Angle or Point of the Num∣ber Three, and hath set or put his will into the fierce Wrath Craft or Suttlety, in willing there∣with to rule or lord it over God's Meek∣ness, and himself to use the strength and
might or potency of the Fire, and of the Fierce-wrath. Devils Art; Numb. 21, 22. 189. Under the word Craft, standeth Devils : : : : : Art, Number 21, 22. De∣vils, standeth without the Or half Globe. Cir∣cle of Nature; and Art, stand∣eth within the Or half Globe. Circle of Na∣ture; signifying, that the Devil was crea∣ted, as well out of the Mystery of the Fa∣ther, upon the Line or Or Arm: Stroak of the Cross in the Eternal Nature as the other Angels. But he hath framed or created to himself his Art, Number 22. in the magick seeking of Na∣ture in the Center of the dark World, whereas yet he should have gotten framed or created it in God's Heart and Power or Vertue, and that is His own cau∣sing of his own Fall. his Cause of his Fall and of his Envy, or Hatred and Ma∣lice. Will; Numb. 23. 190. Above the Or stroak or Arm of the Cross. Line, Num∣ber 23. standeth, Will, signi∣fying, that the Devil hath
hath swung himself aloft above the Divine Line, upon or in which he was created as a proud or haughty stately Spirit, that would himself have been Lord, and have gover∣ned in own Self, Art and Wit. Darkness, Numb. 24. 191. As now at present, the pride or state and haughtiness, and cunning suttle Policy and Prudence of Men doth, which swingeth it self also thus, from the Line of God, up into own self, wherein it cannot reach or attain the Divine Power or Ver∣tue and Light within, but falleth in it self into the Dark anguishing Magick Fire, as above the word Will is marked Number 24. First into Darkness; for Reason loseth the Divine Understanding and Desire, wherein it can take hold of and receive God's Substance, and so impregnate it self with Power and Vertue out of or from God. Fire, Numb. 25. 192. And then the Magick Fire Geitz-fewer, Covetousness-Fire of Cove∣tousness, kindleth it self, in that it willeth to have much, and
yet hath not enough; as here Number 25. Anguish, Numb. 26. 193. And when it hath filled it self with Covetousness, then beginneth the Magick Fire in the Anguish, Number 26. to burn. For that which is brought in by the Cove∣tousness, and laden the fire with, is the Magick Fires wood or fewel wherein it burneth: and there is Death generated or born; which must separate what the Cove∣tousness hath laid in. Death, Numb. 27. 194. And here is also the Schwere; or weighty. heavy Fall of Adam, who imagined as the Devil did, and desired the multiplicity of this world for his own; he would be wise or suttle and prudent, and get much Wit or crafty Inge∣nuity, and also the earthly & hellish source or fountain quality in the wit. Had he re∣mained upon the Stroak or Arm in God's Line, then he had not become earthly; for his will-spirit had dwelt in God, and had introduced Divine food into the Body; but now he standeth in the Anguish, Number 26, and must again go through the Princi∣ple, into Death, Number 27, where his
Body must in the Mystery, be consumed. 195. And if he hath not in this time, converted his will into the Cross of Christ, as in this Figure is to be seen, then is he in the Mystery reserved to the Judgement of God, and there he shall be tryed in the Fire whether his will-spirit hath Divine Power and Vertue in it or not, or whether he can subsist in the Fire: And there the proud stately or haughty earthly works will be burned away from him, and the soul will remain in the dark Magick Will-Fire, for it self is also a Magick Fire, when the Di∣vine Light-Fire is not in it: and so now one Magick Fire layeth hold of another, out of which there is no remedy to help. Will, Numb. 28. Light, Numb. 29. Spi∣rit, Numb. 30. Man, Numb. 31. 196. But that Soul which hath in this time converted again, and hath with its will given up it self into the Death of Christ on the Line of the Cross, Number 27. that soul is sunk down from its proud or haughty evil works, and is as to them will∣less, or free from willing, and is entered into the Death of Christ, and sprouteth forth with the Will-spirit, Number 28.
through the second Principle in the Divine Power and Vertue, out of the Death of Christ, where then the Will-Spirit, viz. the Image, attaineth again the Divine Light, Number 29. and the Image stand∣eth, Number 30. again in the Divine Man, Number 31. Image, Numb. 32. God, Numb. 33. 197. For when the Will Spirit entereth into Death upon the Cross, then it draweth again Divine Substantiality, viz. Christ's Flesh to it self, and bringeth the same with it self into the Light into the Light world, there the Divine Life sprouteth again into the holy Body, and the Image standeth free again. As here Number 32. is to be seen, and dwelleth in God, Number 33. and eat∣eth of God's Word or Substance; for the Image is here without or beyond Nature in the Liberty; but the Humanity is within Nature, as is described. 198. But as to those Souls which stick in their proud or stately and haughty covetous Works in the Anguish, Number 26. they stick indeed in the Magick Anguish-Fire, and their works are wood, or fuel, to or for the Fire. 199. But if the Will-spirit do yet turn in
it self a little into the Death of Christ, and yet also is fast bound to the fierce Wrath, that soul hangeth as by a thred to the Death of Christ. The Ninth Number, Numb. 34. 200. This Soul may well thus burn a while, till the Will-Spirit can enter into the Death of Christ, till its sydereal wood or fuel be burned up: when the earthly body dyeth, then must the Image bathe: which the present too wise and subtle world contemneth, but in Death doth find it by woful experience: There must this little sparkle, which hangeth only by a thred, wind it self into the Death of Christ; for it hath lost body and substance, and stan∣deth naked and bare without Divine Sub∣stance or Body in God's Mercy or Compas∣sion in the Divine Tincture, viz. in the Ninth Number, Number 34. and waiteth for the last Judgment; wherein God will in the Tincture, bring and restore again whatsoever Adam lost; but its here-acted works, will not go or pass through the Fire, but the dark Magick Fire, hath swallowed them up into its Mystery into the Dark World; Let this be said to thee, O Man.
Souls Eternal Habitation, Numb. 35. 201. After Ninth Number, standeth the Souls Eternal Habitation, Number 35. sig∣nifying, that these escaped Souls are not∣withstanding in God, in the Angelical World, but without their works, and can∣not so highly attain the Glance or Lustre of the Majesty, as those Souls which have here cloathed themselves with God's Pow∣er and Vertue. The word Habitation go∣eth into the Liberty without or beyond Na∣ture, as also above, Image, doth; for the Soul must stand in Nature; but the Images Habitation is without or beyond Nature in the Divine Liberty. Angelical World, Numb. 36. 202. Without or beyond this Habitation, stan∣deth the Angelical World, Number 36. sig∣nifying the Angels Courts and Quires, or Princely Thrones, in the Liberty of the Divine Majesty, where yet their root also standeth IN Nature, but is not apprehen∣ded.
Proud Devil, Numb. 37. Will of the Devil Lucifer, Numb. 38. 203. At the At the left hand or left half Globe or Eye or Looking-Glass, in the upper space or quarter of it above the left Arm of the Cross. left in the upper space, Number 37. standeth Proud Devil, or stubborn Devil, with two Stroaks or legs drawn with pricks. Lines, one reaching up upon the Character or Letter O, Number 4. and the other reaching up Above the three half circles of the left half Globe, Eye or Looking Glass. above the Great Mystery of the Number Three, where standeth Will of the Devil Lucifer, Number 38. 204. Here is the Devils Fall to be con∣sidered, he hath brought his proud or stub∣born Will up from the Line or Stroak of the Cross, aloft, and hath willed to rule over or above the Mystery of the Divine Wisdom, in wit and cunning, suttlety and fierce wrath in the Fires might or power, and to kindle the Mystery of the Number Three, that he might be Lord: As indeed he then kindled the Substantiality in the Mystery; whence Earth and Stones have come to be, and hath willed to fly out above the Mystery of the Number Three, Num∣ber
38. as still at this day he desireth to fly out above the Angelical Princes-Thrones. Abysse of the Dark World, Number 39. Eternal Hell of Devils, Number, 40. 205. And upon this hath followed his thrusting out from the Divine Mystery, so that he is Thrust out from the Superiour Thrones into the Dark Magick fire, and is Thrust down below, that is, into the Abysse of the Dark world; For he must dwell externally without the Principle in the Fire-crack, viz. in the first Three Forms to Fire in the Anguish, there he hath his Hell as below at Number 40. is to be seen, and thereinto also the Damned souls fall back, so that Eternally they cannot see or behold God. The second Cross Line upwards thus † 206. Over the line Number 1. above aloft, standeth, Abysse, Eternity, signifying the Liberty, without or beyond the Principle; and thereby is understood the Mystery of the Eternity, wherein every Creature standeth in its source or fountain Quality, in its own Fire, be it in Darkness or Light, and hath therein no other Light than shin∣eth
within it, which light also it apprehend∣eth Externally without it self; there are Both worlds, viz. the Light-world, and Dark-world, are there in one another. But the Light becometh not attained, unless a creature be capable of it. 207. There are Angelical Thrones, which we know nothing of Experimentally, our knowledge reacheth but only into the Extent of the Place of this world, so far as the kindling in the Creation reached, and of THAT is this Or these two halves of the whole set back to back with the Cross appearing in the midst. wheel made with the Cross. SON, Numb. 41. and of the Heart. 208. Above the upright Line, standeth SON, and at the Left Angle or Point, Number 9. FATHER, and at the Right Line, Number 14. HOLY SPIRIT, signifying the Birth or Geniture, and Persons of the Holy Trinity. The Heart in the Cross is the Center, and ♡ signifyeth the Eternal Band of the Or Threeness. Ternary.
209. The Word SON, Number 41. signifieth the WORD, which the Eternal FATHER, continually and from Eternity, speaketh in the Light and Dark world, according to each worlds source or fountain Qua∣lity or Property. 210. But in that the Three Persons at the Cross are free, and touch not the Line, it signifieth that God is free from Nature, and not Or lyable to the apprehen∣sion of Nature in the apprehension of Nature, but he dwelleth in himself, indeed in Nature, but unapprehended, by that which doth not give up it self into Him. Of the Heart in the Cross. 211. The Heart in the Cross signifieth, that God's Heart hath manifested it self in Na∣ture, by or with the Principle of the Fire, whence the Majestick Light originateth. Secondly, It signifieth the Manifestation or Revelation in the Humanity, wherein God's Heart hath manifested it self by or with a Humane Heart, and how that Hu∣mane Heart hath attained the comprehen∣sion of the Holy Trinity. As indeed it is the Center in the Cross, by which a Man
is to understand the Inward Man, viz. the Inward Heart. 212. And you see, that the HOLY SPIRIT at the Right, on or in the Line, and at Number 14. goeth forth from the Heart into the Light World, signifying that the Holy Spirit, dwelleth in the Re∣generate or New born Heart, viz. in the Image, and continually introduceth the Images Will into the Divine Light-world. And as this Heart in the Cross is united with the Holy Ternary; so must the Hu∣mane Heart, understand the Inward-Man, be united with the Deity: that God may be in it, All in All, its Will and Deed. 213. But that the word SON, Num∣ber 41. above the Cross Line a loft stand∣eth distinguished from the Heart, signifieth that the Man Christ is become Lord over all, and is the King over this Or two half Cir les or Globes joyned in one. Circle: for, God hath manifested himself in the Humanity, and this Man compriseth the whole Divine Substance in himself, for within him and Externally without him is one and the same fulness, One God and Divine Substance: there is no other place, where we can be able to apprehend God then in the Substance of
Christ, there is the whole fulness of the God∣head or Deity Bodily or Corporeally. Heaven, Number, 42. 214. The Word, Heaven, on the up∣right Cross-line: Number 42. signifieth, that the Heaven is in the Man Christ, and also in us, and that we must through his Cross and Death go to him into his Heaven, which himself is; for on the Cross is Hea∣ven become opened to us again, or New∣born and Regenerated to us. Secondly, It signifieth that the right or true Divine Heaven is an Habitation of the Divine De∣sire, viz. of the Divine Magia; therefore it is called not aningoing, but an ingene∣ration of God's Fire, into Divine Substan∣tiality, and that even only on the Cross, viz. through and in the Birth or Geniture of the Holy Dreyfal∣tigkeit. Tri∣nity. Pure Element, Number, 34. 215. The word, Pure Element, on the Crosse's upper Line, Number 43. signifieth the in∣ward world, out of which this outward, with the Four Elements, is become gene∣rated forth, and standeth in the Inward
Root in the Substance thereof. Holy Spirit, Num. 44. Son, Num. 45. 216. Moreover it is to be observed ex∣actly, how the Words stand, begin and end, for they begin on the outward Or half Circle. Circle at the Left, where above Num∣ber 5. the Holy Spirits Character or Letter V. standeth; and beneath Number 8. Substance, and goeth through the two Or half Circles. Circles at the Right, even into the second Space, which signifieth the Pure Divine Elements Original, its in∣dwelling and Substance, whence it Origi∣nateth, viz. from the Spirit of the Eter∣nal Mystery in the Divine Substantiality, viz. in the Substance of the Great Myste∣ry, and yet is only manifest or revealed in the second Principle, viz. in the Sub∣stance of the Son and Holy Spirit, as above one the Or half Circles. Circle at the Right is to be seen, Num∣ber 44. and 45.
Father, Numb. 46. Holy Spirit of Di∣vine Wisdom and Understanding, Numb. 47. 217. The Pure Element is the working in the right true Heaven, and shutteth it self in and out with or by the Cross, it is the springing or flowing & moving in the Fire and Light-Heaven, from or by with the Divine Substantiality, understand Sub∣stance, and not the Spirit, of God, is a life for it reacheth not into the Substance of the Father, Number 46. where beneath on the Circle, standeth Divine Wit or Understand∣ing, for the Element giveth or affordeth not divine Wit, but the Holy Spirit, Num∣ber 47. giveth Divine apprehension, know∣ledge or skill and wit or understanding. 218. The Element is a Substance in re∣spect of the Deity; as the Life in the flesh is understood to be, in respect of the Soul; For the Tincture is higher, and giveth the ENS of the Spirit, wherein the Light-Fire is understood. Humanity, Flesh, Numb. 48. 219. Under the word, Pure Element
standeth at Number 27. on the stroak of the upper Line of the Cross, Death, and the word begin∣neth laying hold on the left Half Circle. Circle, and go∣eth through the Cross through the first right Half Circle. Circle: There observe both the outward Circles at the left and at the right, above and beneath, and then thou wilt soon find, what the right or authority of Death is, and how it is the dying source or fountain qua∣lity in the Magick Fire, and holdeth the Substantiality captive in itself; as at the left beneath at Number 8. & at the right, beneath at Number 4. 8. is to be seen; and then above on the same Circle at Number 44. and at the left above, at Number 5. there a man seeth, how the spiritual Life goeth and sprouteth forth through the Death, and possesseth the highest The outward Circle being ac∣counted whole. Circle: For all whatsoever willeth to reach or attain the Di∣vine Life, must go through the Dying Ma∣gick Fire, and stand or subsist therein; as the Heart on the Cross must and doth stand or Endures everla∣sting Burnings. Isa. 33. 14. subsist in the Fire of God.
220. Further it is to be known, that we in A∣dam have turned our selves away from the Cross, and are with the Desire of Lust or Pleasure, gone with our will above the Cross at Number 23. into an Own self Rule or Government; and now Death hath captivated us in it self, therefore we must now sink down out of Death on the Cross at the Line of Christ again into the Heart, and become new born or regene∣rate in the Heart, else Death holds us cap∣tive in it self. For now Death standeth on the Cross-Line: but at the Judgement it shall be given to the Dark World: For our Will must now enter through Death on the Cross, into Rest; but the outward Cross shall be taken away; and then Col. 2. 15. Death is a spectacle or scorn and derision. 221. Thirdly, it signifieth that the Life of God in Christ, bare * Death as a shew or spe∣ctacle of Triumph on the Cross, when Death became broken on the Cross in the dying of Christ, where the Life sprouted through Death, and the Heart gave up or yeelded it self into the middle, viz. into the Center, as 1 Cor. 15. 54. victorious Lord or Conquerour of Death.
Paradise, Numb. 49. 222. Under the Heart at Number 49. stand∣eth Paradise; the Word beginneth at the left on the outward Circle, where above at Number 5. is marked, the Spirit of the Great Mystery of the Profundity or un∣searchableness of Eternity, viz. V. and it goeth through the Cross at the right, through all the Three Or halves of the whole Circles. Circles, even into the Liberty: this signifieth the consti∣tution or existence of Paradise; it origina∣teth in the Mystery of the Eternity, and prouteth through the outward, and also hrough the Light World, hidden in the outward World, and manifested or revea∣led in the second Principle, in the Light World, as therefore the World penetra∣teth through all the Three Circles, shew∣ing the humane Bodies original. Divine Substantiality, Numb. 50. 223. For in or at this place, out of this substance, Adams Body (understand the outward Body) was created according to the Third Principle, and the inward Body, (understand the Images Body) out of the
Divine Substantiality, as at the right, near Paradise, is marked with Number 50. Christ, Flesh, Numb. 51, 52. 224. That very Divine Substance, un∣derstand Note. Substance, not Spirit, is included in the Wisdom of God; and therein is the heavenly Tin∣cture: For God's Word that became Man, brought this Substance into Mary, into her in Death inclosed Substantiality, viz. into the Images Body, and thereby God and Man became One Person. 225. For this Flesh is Christs Flesh, ac∣cording to the Heavenly part; therefore beyond Substantiality, standeth, Christ's, Flesh, Number 51, 52. Christ bare such Flesh in the Inward Man, as Adam had be∣fore his Eve was, when he stood in the Di∣vine Image in Purity. Therefore can no Man go into Paradise, unless he attain that Flesh again, that Adam had before the Fall, and Christ attained in the becoming Man or Incarnation. Therefore must we all become born out of the Heart upon the Cross, and Rom. 13. 14. Gal. 3. 27. put on Christ.
Mystery, Numb, 53. 226. Under Paradise, Number 53. stan∣deth Mysterium, Mystery, and the word beginneth at the left in the second Or half of the Circle on the left side. Circle, where above on the same Or half of the Circle on the left side. Circle, Number 4. the Cha∣racter or Letter, O, standeth, and beneath Principle, and Fire, Number 7. and goeth to the right, through the Cross, through the first Or half of the Circle on the left side. Circle at the right. This signifieth rightly and exactly Mans Creation accor∣ding to the Body. 227. For the Body, is a Mystery, taken out of the inward and outward World, from above and from beneath, understand out of the Earths Matrix; This is the Earths Matrix; out of this Mystery was it crea∣ted, and a Man seeth how it was created out of the inward and outward Substance, viz. out of the dark and light World, and is mixt with evil, viz. with fierce-wrath, and also with Good. Wonder, Numb. 54. Angel, Numb. 55. Spirit, Numb. 56. 228. But Man was out of the Mystery
created, an Image and Similitude of or according to God, to or for God's Wonder; Therefore at the right, Number 54. stand∣eth Wonder. For he was a Wonder of all things or Substances, a Lord of All things or Substances, taken out of all things or Substances, and was in the Inward Image, an Angel. As next Wonder, in the Liberty, standeth Angel, Numb. 55. For his Spirit dwelleth in the Liberty of God, viz. in the Majesty, as beyond the word Angel, Number 56. Spirit standeth. Which all, sig∣nifieth, the right or true Man, viz. the First before the Fall, and the second in Christ, into which he must enter again, or is rent or separated from God. Four Elements, Numb. 57. 229. Under Mystery, Number 55. standeth Four Elements; they begin at the left, on the outward- Or that half of the Circle at the left. Circle, and go to the right through the Cross, through Or the two Halves at the right, of the two first Cir∣cles. two Circles; signifying the outward World, which ori∣ginateth as an Out-birth out of the inward Substance on the outward Circle, and bringeth its Won∣ders
into the Mystery, first into the second Principle, into the first two Circles; for they shall not go with their Substance in∣to the Liberty, through the Or third half at the right of the third Circle, and so into the Liberty. Third Circle at the Right, but pass in the Principle into the Mystery, and in the Principle be tryed or purged in the Fire. For there is the Limit of Separation. The Souls Joy, in Ternario Sancto, Number, 58. 230. Above on the second Circle at the Right Number 45. standeth Son, the same is the Judge and Separator, and beneath on the By this it appears the Circles are whole though parted, and the words in the Liberty go round at the ends of the halves of the Circles, as if the Cir∣cles were joyned, and yet are considered as invisibly in the Li∣berty. same Circle, Number 58. standeth Souls Joy in Ternario Sancto, in the Holy Ternary, signifying, that the Soul shall have joy in its works, which it hath wrought in the Four Elements, to the Praise and Glory of God, which it hath in∣troduced into the Angelical World into
the Mystery. For the Four Elements stand, with their Root in the Great Mystery. 231. And were the Earth not come in∣to such a perished Condition, and that the Devils Poyson and kindling or inflamati∣on, had not been done, it were still one and the same Substance with or in the other Three Elements, as indeed it is now, in the Heavenly Substance. Spiritual Bodies Habitation, Num. 59. 232. This Bit, hath Adam swallowed down into himself, and thereby Lost his Angels Form. For the Four Elements should stand hidden in him, and he should live only in the One Element, in Gods Power and Vertue, and know or experiment no∣thing of the Evil: As at the Right, in the Liberty, Number 59. standeth, the Spiri∣tual Mans Habitation, there should the I∣mages Body dwell, viz. the Souls Body, but that became hindred from it; it must now under the Earth, and become includ∣ed or shut up in the Earthliness. Earth, Number 60. 233. Under the Four Elements, stand∣eth Earth, Number 60. signifying that the Earth is wholly fallen back to the Inner
World. For the word touch∣eth neither the The left or the Right half of the one Circle. Left nor the Right Circle, it is as a Death, but the Cross goeth through it, signifying its Restauration, or bringing again to what it was, that the Humane Earth is new-Born or Regenera∣ted on the Cross, and that the Heavenly and Divine Substance, shall be severed from the Dark worlds Substance, through the Fire of God, where then shall be new Earth in a Heavenly Source or Fountain Quality, Form, Essence and Property, and that which is hidden in the Earth, in the Heavenly Part, shall sprout or spring again. Further is to be Considered, that the Earth standeth thus upon or in the A∣bysse, for it reacheth no Principle, there∣fore it must pass away, or vanish. Earthly Man, Numb. 61. 234. Underneath standeth Number, 61. Earthly Man, where the Cross goeth through the midst of the Word, which sig∣nifieth the fallen Earthly Man, who is fallen under and into the Earth, that is, he is fallen home or back to the Earth, and the Cross parteth or separateth the words,
Earthly and Man; for Man shall again become separated from the Earth, and en∣ter into his Eternal Part, either into the Light or Dark world. Wonder, Number 62. 235. Under the Cross Line standeth Number 62. Wonder, sig∣nifying that the evil Or Wonders, or Works, or Products. Wonder, also the Evil part of the Earth, shall in the Judgement of God, when God will make separation; fall home or back to the Abysse of Dark∣ness, and that shall be to All Devils and Evil Men their Earth, on which they shall dwell one among another, for the Abysse standeth under it below, at Number 1. Babel, Number 63. 236. Near Wonder standeth Babel, Num∣ber 63. signifying, how Babel is only a Wonder of the Abysse, and worketh only Wonders in the Abysse. Own Reason in Babel, Numb. 64. 237. Further, above under the Or half out∣ward Circle at the Right. Circle at the Right, after Earth∣ly Man, Number 64. stand∣eth Own or self Reason in
Babel, which goeth round about the out∣side of the Circle of the Second Principle, and goeth in own self Authority under the Divine World, backward, and supposeth She is in God, and serveth or worshippeth him, but is without God in self, She or it Teacheth, and doth only its own Things or Matters for it self, for its own Ends, it Ruleth the outward world in own self Reason, without Gods Spirit and Will, on∣ly according to its own Will. Therefore it goeth about the Light world, dissembling in Hypocrisie, and giveth God good Words, and continueth only without God, upon or in the Abysse, and thereinto also it falleth back and entereth. Wonder of the Great Folly, Num. 65. 238. Under Own Reason, Number 65. standeth, Wonder of the Great Folly, signi∣fying Babel, who hath found all Art, Sut∣telty and Cunning, Politick Devices, and Lost it self; It seeketh Gold, and loseth God; it taketh Earth for Gold, Death for Life: and that is the Greatest Folly that is found in the Substance of All Substances; as is sufficiently mentioned in other Pla∣ces.
The Conclusion. 239. Thus we see, when we are at home, not in this World, but in the two inward Worlds; in which soever we labour here, into that we enter when we die: we must Lose the outward, we must only be new-born or Regenerated on the Crosse. 240. Babel hath turned it self wholly away from the Crosse, which signifieth the Proud own self Reason-Wise, Subtle Men, who rule and order themselves in or according to the Wit or Ingenuity of Folly. 241. The Earthly Man on the Crosse, Number 61. signifieth the simple heap or company, which yet hang to the Crosse of Christ, and become at length new-born or regenerated through the Crosse. 242. But Outward self Reason, Reason hath even rent and torn it self off from the Cross in its own self Pleasure and Voluptuousnesse, in its own Pomp, Might or Power and Laws, and that is a Wonder of Folly, which even the Devils do scorn and deride. 243. This the Reader should further
consider of, for there lyeth much under it, it hath the understanding of all the Three Worlds. See thy self therein, it is a right true Looking-Glass, for the Number Three is a Cross, and hath Two Kingdoms in One, parting themselves thus by the sink∣ing down through Death. 244. Therefore would the Devil be above God, and therefore God became Man, that he might bring the Soul out of the fierce Wrath through Death into ano∣ther Life, into another World, which yet standeth in the First; but they turn their backs, as this Fi∣gure standeth, and the Cross standeth between both the Princi∣ples, and goeth out of the Fire-Life, into the Light-Life. 245. Beloved Sir, understand us thus, the Soul originateth in the Fire-Life, for without the fire source or fountain quality, no spirit doth subsist, and it goeth with its own self will, out of it self, forth through Death, that is, it esteemeth it self as dead, and sinketh down in it self, like Death, and so falleth with its will through the fires Principle into God's Light-Eye, and then it is the holy Spirits Chariot, on which he rideth.
246. But when it will go of it self, it then continueth in its own Fire-Nest in the Original, where it was awakened, like Lu∣cifer: for it was awakened at the begin∣ning Point of the Cross, at the left, as in this Figure is to be seen; that is its ori∣ginal, as shall be further mentioned. 247. The Soul is a total Figure of a Cross, and is like a Cross-Tree, according to the outward Image of the Body, the Bo∣dy having two Arms, which signifie two Principles, the Body standing in the midst, as a whole Person; the Heart is the First Principle, the Brain the Seond; the Heart hath the Soul, and the Brain the Souls-Spi∣rit, and it is a new Child, and yet not a new one; the Stock is from Eternity, but the Branches are born or generated out of the Stock. 248. Though indeed it hath not been a Soul from Eternity, yet it hath in the Virgin of the Wisdom of God upon the Cross from Eternity, been known; and in the Root belongeth to God the Father, and in the Soul to God the Son, & in the Will to God the holy Spirit. 249. And being it could not stand in the Father in its will, when it would rule in its will, and thereby fell into the fire
of the fierce Wrath; therefore the Father gave it to the Son, and the Son took it into himself, and became in it, a Man; and brought it again with or by the word Fiat, into the Majesty, into the Light; For the Son introduceth it through the Angel and Death again into the Eye of Holiness at the right, into another World, in God, to the Angels; of which here-following shall be mentioned further. 250. Now come we again to the Sixt Form of Fire: and it is to be known, why we set the Cross here, which else is the Tenth Number, accounting ac∣cording to the order or ✚ X. way of Outward Compu∣tation in the Ro∣man Numbring with Capital Letters. Reason, but according to the two Principles, the Eye ap∣pearing parted, the Cross belongeth to the place between the fift and the sixt Form, wherein Light and Darkness part. 251. But know, that God is the Beginning and the End, therefore we set the Cross according to reason at the End, for there we go through Death into Life, it is our Resurrection.
10. 252. The Tenth Number, 10. is again the first, and also the last, and beyond through that is Death, and af∣ter or beyond Death, the Hell, that is the fierce Wrath of Darkness, that is exter∣nally without or beyond the Cross, for it falleth again into the A; and in the A is the Creator, into which Lucifer would have flien back, but was thrust out into the Darkness, and there is his Kingdom in the Source or Torment. 253. You should understand us thus, that we by the Twofold Eye understand one That is, Two halves of one round Globe, conceived thus vir∣tually partible, and yet alwayes whole and entire. round Globe, thus parti∣ble, or each half divided assunder, and turns away from the other, where the Cross is standing from Eternity within it: A man cannot fully de∣scribe it with any pen or pencil, for it is so in one another, it is but ONE only, & yet TWO, the Spirit understandeth it only; and who∣soever doth not enter into the Regenera∣tion, through the Death upon the Cross, as viz. into Gods Body, he understandeth not this, and let him leave it uncontrouled, or he will be a Maker and Controuler-De∣vil.
We would have the Reader faithful∣ly warned, and it is in earnest Sincerity and true Zeal. 254. For this Figure hath All, or total Ground, or the Foundation of All things, as deep as Or any. a Spirit is in it self, and is not apprehensible or knowable to the Reader without Right or True Spiritual Eyes. True Eyes, also a man cannot set it down in due & ex∣act Order aright with Every word stands as it doth and every where al∣so; therefore it is impossible to express it with any words. any words, for the first is also the last, and the middle goeth through All, & yet is not known or apprehended but IN it self: Therefore searching is not the chief or most especial means to know or apprehend the Mystery, but to be born or generated in God, is the right Or the very In∣vention it self. Invention or finding; for without that is All is but Babel the Knowledge of all Mysteries; right∣ly as the Apostle mentions, Without Charity, which is the New Birth, is but a tinckling Cymbal; or Babel a mere babble, of parts, words, if not understood by them that speak them, in the true experimental sence of the Spirit. Babel. 255. All lyeth in the Will and in the earnest Sincerity, that the Will
enter into the Magia, for the Eternity is magical, All is out of the Magia come in∣to Substance, for in the Eternity, in the Abysse, is Nothing; But that which is, is the Magia. 256. And out of the Magia, existeth Phylosophy, which searcheth out the Magia, and seeketh therein, and findeth Astrology Eternally; and Astrology seeks again, its master Preceptor or Teach∣er and Maker, Composer or Producer, viz. A stronomy, the Sulpher & the Mer∣cury, which hath a Principle of its own, and the third Magia is therein; viz. the Medicus the Physician, who seeketh the Corrupter or Disease, and will heal or cure it; but he findeth the fourth Magia, viz. the Theologus, the Divine, who seeketh the Turba in all things, and will heal the Turba; but he findeth the Eye of the first Magia, and there he seeth that all is the wonder of the Magia, and there he leaveth seeking, and becometh a Magus in the first Will, for he seeth that he hath all power to find & to make what he will
and there he maketh of himself an Angel, and continueth in himself; and thus he is free from all others, and continueth stand∣ing Eternally; This is the highest Ground of the Substance of all Substances. 257. And though indeed, the Whore at Babel will not relish this; therefore we say with good ground, that Babel in her Children, are in Magick, Philosophy, Astrology, Astronomy, Medicine or Physick, and Theology or Divinity, born or genera∣ted of Whoredom. 258. Babel is the true Child of none of these, she is a perverse stubborn obstinate Bastard; we have apprehended or known her in the A and O, by searching of her Philosophy and Astrology, and have found her in all Looking-Glasses to be a Whore, who committeth Whoredom in all Look∣ing-Glasses. 259. She saith She is the Eye, but she hath a false or adulterous Eye, that glan∣ceth out of or from her Whoredom, out of Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Anger, and her seat in the Magia, is the averse back∣turned left Eye; Praget Boasts & makes a glorious shew in Pomp and Pageantry, as in Theatrick Sceens and Masks. She tri∣urnphs upon the Cross,
but she entereth not in into the Center, She wil NOT go through Death into Life. 260. She saith She liveth, but hath ar injurious unrighteous life, yet that is her right or proper life, if she would live in it alone to her self, but she oppresseth, born∣eth & compelleth the Children that are born or regenerated on the Cross, and treadeth them under foot. 261. Therefore hath the Crossbent and drawn its Bow, and will shoot away Babel from the Cross, signifieth the Spirit of Wonders in the Magia. The Seventh Form of Fire. 262. One Magia goeth alwayes out of the other, and is the others Looking-Glass and Eye, where the Wonders are apprehended or known and propagated, for in the Abysse is NOTHING, and in the Magia, is ALL: Every Looking-Glass is a Center, and yet of its own; for the first pleasure or long∣ing, seeking and desiring, generateth that, it is the model of the first. 263. For when I search for the Begin∣ning of Substance, then I find the Eye, which is God, that is a desirous Will of
Eternity, which entereth in into it self, and seeketh the Abysse in it self. 264. It is in nothing, but it is the A∣bysses Looking-Glass, and seeketh it self, and findeth it self, and that which is found seeketh again a Or Represen∣tation. model, that it may seek, find, and see it self therein. 265. And that goeth on to the Number X. 10. Ten, and then the last, find∣eth the first again in it self; and thus the Last is a model or looking-glass of the First, and the First of the Last, and is as an Eter∣nal Band, and standeth or consisteth in the Will, in the desiring seeking and finding: and in this Substance is the Mysterium Magnum; or great Mystery contained or included. 266. But now will the Middle in the Desiring have a satiating or fulfilling, wherein it may rest, else all would stand or be in an Anxious Source or Torment, and the Desiring draweth the Middle out of all Forms, wherewith it filleth or satiateth its hunger, wherewith or whereby in it self, it standeth in Perfection in Joy, and so out of the Anguish, a Love cometh to be, a satiating fulfilling or easing of the Source
or fountain Quality of Pain, and the mid∣dle is Sulphur; with that, the Spirit re∣fresheth it self in the Will; For Sulphur hath two Forms in it self, viz. Power or Vertue and Light. 267. And that is together, the Sub∣stance generated out of All Forms, it is Matter, Substantiality, Corporeity, God's Body, Christ's Flesh, the Heavenly, and is the total or universal fulfilling or satia∣ting of the Spirit in the O; it is the Rest and Manifestation or Revelation of the Deity, and standeth in the Virgin of Wis∣dom. 268. The Cross is its limit, and is the Substantiality, which goeth with the sink∣ing into Death as above mentioned, where the fierce Wrath remaineth in Death, and it is still & quiet as a Death or a Nothing, and the Life sprouteth out of it into ano∣ther Principle. 269. It is not the Principle, only the Principle becometh generated in it, in it are all Looking-Glasses of the Magia, manifested or revealed, moreover the Wonders of the Genetrix: It containeth the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Myste∣ry, and out of it, the Spirit openeth the Wonders of Eternity, the Spirit giveth it
the Essences, for that is its food for its hunger. 270. It is a substance of wonders with∣out number and end; and is also of no Be∣ginning; for the Spirit in the Desiring be∣ginneth it from Eternity, and continueth in Eternity, it is a Body of the Number Three, which is called God, and a Body of Angels, so that the Spirit standeth or is in an Image, else it would NOT be appre∣hended or known. 271. Thus it knoweth it self in the Image it self, and seeketh the best Magia, and what it seeketh, that it findeth, and eateth it, and therewith or thereby giveth to the Body of God, its will, so that there is an unity in the holy Principle. 272. For in the Will of the corporeal Spirit rise up the Wonders, those the Spi∣rit of Eternity, viz. the holy Spirit re∣ceiveth or apprehendeth, and so there is a ringing and song out of the eternal Won∣ders, for the corporeal Spirits will is there∣in. 273. And in these seven Forms the Joy of the Deity, becometh multiplied and per∣fect, for it is a fulfilling of the eternal De∣siring, and is the Eternal Food. 274. But seeing all things or every Sub∣stance
originateth from the Fire, we will clearly set before you the Mysterum Mag∣num, the Great Mystery, and plainly shew you Paradise, if any will be blind, to him it is told and discovered; let him go away with Babel. 275. Ye know that in Fire {fire} and Water {water}, all Life standeth or consisteth, and the Sub∣stantiality is its Body, and the Body is or existeth out of the Power or Vertue of the Spirit, for it is the Spirits Food, and the Spirit is again the Bodies Food, and the highest & greatest Nutriment is in it self; for the outward would not hold or retain it, if the right or true Life were not in it self. 276. Therefore now the Fire, is the first cause of the Life, and the Light thereof is the second cause, and the Spirit the third cause, and yet is but one substance or thing, which closeth it self into a Body, and manifesteth, and so with seeking find∣eth. 277. And every Substance is or consi∣steth in two Substances, viz. in an outward and inward, the one seeketh and findeth the other; the outward is Nature, the in∣ward is Spirit above Nature, and yet there is no schism or rending asunder, but only
in that which is included in a time, there∣in the time severeth the limit, so that the End findeth the Beginning. 278. Thus ye see also, how out of the Light, the right or true Substantiality, ex∣ists; for it is a fulfilling or satiating of the Will: The Water existeth out of the Meekness of the fight, for the desiring lay∣eth hold of the Meekness, and retaineth it, for it is a good relish; thus is the Meekness Substantial, and a Substance of the Fire, a fulfilling of the desirous fierce Wrath, an allaying of the fierce Wrath, and a corporeity of the Time; for when the Body falleth away, then is its Spirit in the Beginning, in that which hath given it forth, in that looking-glass it is. 279. So then seeing the Source or fountain Quality is twofold, therefore is the Water also twofold, viz. an outward and an in∣ward; the one belongeth to the Spirit, the other to the outward Life; the outward is accompted a Death, the inward is its Life, the outward standeth between the fierce Wrath and Paradise, in the in-sunk down Death; and the inward is the Paradise it self, for the Spirit sprouteth therein out of the Eternity.
280. And you may see that this is true thus; Consider Winter and Summer, also Cold and Heat, and you will soon perceive it, if you be born or generated internally and not externally only, but with the first Magick Will or Desire to find God, for that is done in the twinckling of an eye. 281. For the Water in the Deep, origi∣nateth from the Fire, yet not from the fierce Wrath, but from the Light, for the Light goeth forth from the Fire, and hath its own seeking or longing, it seeketh to it self a Looking-Glass, that it may be∣hold it self, and have it for a habitation, and draweth it in the Desiring into it self, and dwelleth therein; and that which is drawn in, is Water, which apprehendeth the Light, else the Deep of the World would not apprehend the Light, if the Light did not dwell in the Water: the Wa∣ter is the fulfilling or satiating of the Light, in its desiring. 282. And the Water seeketh again a Looking-Glass, and willeth to have a ha∣bitation, which is Flesh, as ye see, that the Water, receiveth the glimps or shadow of all Substances or Things in their Body, so that the Body it self is represented in the Water, which is because the seeking of the Fire hath taken hold of it.
283. Further herein is seen the End of Nature, for the Eye findeth its Life in the Water, and thus it goeth back into the se∣venth Form, and seeketh its Body in the Water, and there is further no desire more in the outward; this Body desireth no o∣ther Body more in the outward, but it look∣eth back after its mother, of which ye have a right and true Example in a Look∣ing Glass, which is Fire and Water, and that receiveth the Image very clearly. 184. And thus ye see, that the End go∣eth back again, and seeketh the Beginning, and nothing further in the outward: for this World is at the limit, and is included in a Time, and runneth on to the Limit; and then the End findeth the Beginning, and this World standeth as a Or Represen∣tation. Model, or as a Look∣ing-Glass, in the Begin∣ning. Let this serve you to the finding of the Mystery, and remit your self rightly into the Beginning, that ye may be apprehended or known to be a wonder in God's Love. 285. And thus ye are to know, that the the second Form of the Water, consisteth in the Spirit, it is its Fathers Looking-Glass, its Makers, which dwelleth in the Spirit,
and is found only by its Maker, it self find∣eth not it self; for so long as a thing go∣eth forward externally, there is no finding in the Inward internally, only the Spirit which dwelleth in the Inward, findeth it self in the Outward. 286. But the outward Life findeth not the inward, unless it have the inward Spi∣rit, then is the finding, and it is done ac∣cording to the inward Spirit, and then the outward Life speaketh of the inward, and yet knoweth it not; only the inward Spi∣rit filleth the outward, so that the outward is a Mouth, and the inward hath and pro∣duceth the Word, so that the inward King∣dom, standeth manifest in the outward in the sound, and that now is a wonder. 287. The inward is a Prophet, and the outward apprehendeth it not, but if it do come to apprehend it, then it hath God's Substantiality in it, viz. God's Flesh, Christ's Flesh, the Virgins Flesh, and yet the Prophet standeth or consisteth in the Spirit, but that Flesh conceiveth its Pow∣er or Vertue, and assureth the outward Man, that he doth even that which his Maker willeth; as indeed this Pen is in such a condition, and no otherwise. 288. Thus we apprehend the ground of
this World, that it is a Or Represen∣tation. Figure of the inward, ac∣cording to both Mothers, that is, according to both Fires, viz. according to the Fire of fierce Wrath; and according to the Fire of the Light; as the Model, viz. the Looking∣glass of the Light of Eternity, is the Sun, and the Looking-Glass of the fierce Wrath is the outward Fire, and the Substantiality of both is the Water and the Earth, the Earth is the fierce Wraths, Substantiality, the Water, the Lights; the Air, the Eter∣nal Spirits, which is called God the holy Spirit. 289. Yet ye are to know, that this World, is not the Substance of the Eter∣nity, but a Shadow, Re∣presentation, or Resemblance. Figure, a Look∣ing-Glass, therefore it is called a Principle of or by it self, because it hath a peculiar Life of its own, and yet standeth in the Magick Seeking of the inward. 290 The Word Fiat is the Master of the out∣ward, for it holdeth the outward in its con∣ceived or framed Looking-Glass, it is not the Looking-Glass it self, but a Simili∣tude,
in which its Spirit discovereth it self in deeds of Wonder, to behold the Won∣ders of Both Fires, viz. of the Wrath and of the Love; and thus continually bring∣eth the Substance of all Substances into the Beginning: And there∣fore is this World turning as a Sphear or Globe. Wheel or Orb, for the End seeketh continually the Beginning, and when it findeth the Won∣ders, then the End giveth the Wonders to the Beginning; and that is the Cause of the Creation of this World. 291. The Life of all and every Creature is a Wonder before the Beginning, for the Abyss knew nothing of it, and the begin∣ning of the Eye findeth it all, and setteth or placeth the Model in it self, so that it hath an Eternal Number, and recreateth it self in the Number of the Wonders. The Eighth Form of Fire. 292. Seeing thus there is ONE Substance in TWO Forms, one that taketh on an un∣searchable Beginning in it self, and holdeth it Eternally, and another that is the Eter∣nal Model, which compriseth, and with its
Body is included in a limit; therefore we are to consider of the Turba, which break∣eth the included comprised Life, again, and setteth the Model of the comprised Wonders in the Beginning, and presenteth such things to the Beginning as were not from Eternity, but came to be in the com∣prised Time. 293. Beloved Friend, to you and such as you are, who seek the Beginning, is this thing shewn, for your Mind is our Myste∣ry, seek it in U S, not in ME, I, the out∣ward Man have it not, but the Inward in the Virgin, in which God dwelleth, THAT hath it; and that calleth it self twofold. 294. My outward Man is not worthy of the Mystery, but God hath so ordained it, that he might manifest or reveal it to you by means, that you might know him by Means, and not say, it is from my own wit and understanding. 295. And seeing you are a learned Per∣son, you should know, that God loveth al∣so the silly and despised of this World, if he seek God, as indeed I have done, and that the right and true finding or inventi∣on, sticketh not in Art, but in Gods Spi∣rit and Will. 296. For this hand is simple, and ac∣compted
foolish in the esteem of the World, as you know, and yet there lyeth such a hidden secret or Arcanum therein, as is unsearchable to Reason. 297. Therefore have a care, pour Oyl into the Wounds that desire or require healing, and consider well what Christ saith, Mark 10. 24. How hard it is for a man to enter into the Kingdom of God, who is captivated with cares of the Belly, in Might or Potency and Honour. 298. You will not find this Plant in the High∣ness and Exaltation of the world, for you cannot, you are a Mystery to them: The Spirit it self seeketh the Beginning; look to it, flatter none; for the Beginning is Paradisical, that the impure come not into the pure, and at last the Serpent beguile Eve again. 299. Let there be no fair gloss in you, but speak roundly or sincerely with your Mouth, with Yea and Nay; also fear not, for that which is Eternal, remaineth stand∣ing, and it is only the filth and vanity, that causeth, that the Turba together insinua∣teth
it self as a breaker or corrupter; have a care of that, for the Old Serpent is sut∣tle, that ye may be pure in the Beginning and in the End. 300. For, this work, suffereth not much Glossing upon, it hath a clear ground, also it belongeth not to the Turba, but in and to the Beginning of the Clarity, or bright Transfiguration or Glory: Therefore take heed of those who are born, or become of a wolfish disposition, whose Spirit is a sut∣tle Serpent; this we speak out of Good will towards you. 301. Every thing that beginneth it self, is sought of the Beginning, for the Beginning seeketh through the Deep, and willeth to find the ground: If now the Beginning do find the ground, that there be a limit in a Thing, then the Beginning, slips into the limit, and leaveth or forsaketh the first, and seeketh further so long, till it findeth the Abyss, and there it must stand in it self, and can go no further, for there is nothing more. 302. But if the first be forsaken of the Begin∣ning, then it is fallen home to the Turba, which breaketh it, and maketh it again,
what it was in the Beginning. 303. And then if the Thing be broken, then the Turba standeth naked without a Body, and it self also seeketh it self, and findeth it self, but without Substance, and then it entereth into it self, and seeketh it self even in the Abyss, and then the first Eye becometh found, out of which it be∣came generated. 304. But being it is bare and raw without Substance, therefore it is put back or home to the Fire, for it putteth it self therein, and is in the Fire a Desiring, viz. to seek its Body again, and so the Fire of the Ori∣ginal becometh awakened. 305. And hereby apprehend we the last Judgement in the Fire, and the Resurrecti∣on of the Flesh, for the Turba in the Fire, is desirous of the Body which it hath had, but was broken in the limit; and its desi∣ring, was the Bodies Life, viz. the Soul. 306. Therefore being the Fires are TWO, the Turba also must be apprehended in a Twofold Form or Kind, viz. in a corrupti∣ble Body, and in an incorruptible Body, viz. one in the fierce wrathful Fire, and one in the Light-Fire, wherein or where∣by
we understand God's Body, and in the fierce wrathful Fire, the Earthly Body, which the Turba corrupteth or breaketh, for it findeth its Limit. 307. Therefore now the Eternal Fire in God's Eye, is, to be understood, both the fierce wrathful; and also the Light-Love-Fire: And we give you to understand, that the Spirit without a Body, must re∣main in the fierce wrathful Fire, for it hath lost its Substantiality, the Turba hath swal∣lowed it up in the Fire. 308. But the Spirit with a Body, which the Turba is not able to devour, remaineth Eternally in the Substantiality in God's Body, wherein his Spirit standeth; viz. the Body in the Love of God, which is the hidden Man, in the Old Adamical, which there hath Christ's Flesh in the corruptible or fragile Body. 309. Thus we understand the Soul to be an awakened Life out of God's Eye, its Original is in the Fire, and the Fire is its Life; and so if it goeth not out from the Fire with its Will and Imagination into the Light, viz. through the fierce wrathful Death into the Second Principle into the Love-Fire, then it remaineth in its own Original Fire, and hath nothing but the
Turba for a Body, viz. the astringent fierce Wrath, a desiring in the Fire, a con∣suming and a hunger, and yet an Eternal Seeking, which is the Eternal Anguish. 310. But the Soul which with its desi∣rous will, entereth into it self, and in its reason, that is, in its desiring, sinketh down, and seeketh not it self, but God's Love, is in its Fire as it were dead, for its will which awakeneth the Fire, is dead to the Fire-Life, and is gone out from it self, into the Love-Fire; that Soul is fallen home to the Love-Fire, and hath also the Love-Fires Body, for it is entered thereunto, and is a great Wonder in God's Body, and it is no more it self, for it hath killed its will, and so its Turba also is as it were dead, and the Love-will filleth or satia∣teth the Fire of the Original, and there∣in it liveth Eternally. 311. But those Souls which have awak∣ned the Turba, they have lost the Image: For the Turba hath swallowed THAT into it self, and therefore those Souls get or ac∣quire in the Anger and in Hell, Beastial Images, according as the Turba is in them, as Lucifer got a Serpents Image, all ac∣cording as the Will or Mind hath here been figured or framed, so it standeth then naked and apparent.
312. For, the fierce wrathful Turba, seeketh continually the Image, and findeth it not, therefore it figureth or frameth the Image according to the Will; for the earth∣ly Desire sticketh in the Will, and such an Image standeth now in God's Wonders, in the Eye of the fierce wrathful Principle. 313. And here we understand the eighth Form to be the Turba, which seeketh the Image, and if it findeth the Limit, it break∣eth it, and goeth into it, and seeketh fur∣ther into it self, and findeth at last the Abomination of that, which the Soul had done here in this life. 314. And then we understand here, the Fire which at the End shall purge the Floar, and the earnest severe Judgement: And we understand how every Fire, will re∣ceive its Substance from the Turba, and what that is. 315. Where then the Fire, will swal∣low up the Earth, and draw the Elements with the Wonders in them into the Begin∣ning, where then the First will be again, and the Elements in One; And every thing will set forth its wonders there, eve∣ry thing in its own Fire, into which the Will is entered. 316. Let this be said to you ye Children
of Men, it concerneth you, for No Beast is come out of the Eternal Beginning, but out of the Model of the Eternal, and in its Spirit reacheth not the Eternal, as the Soul of Man doth. 317. Also the corrupt or perished Body, can∣not possess the Eternal, it is fallen home back to the Turba, but the New Man ge∣nerated or born in God, will possess the Eternal, for it is gone forth from the cor∣ruptible, and hath put on God in Christ, which hath God's Body in the Old Body. 318. The earthly source or fountain quality, the Turba taketh that along with it, the outward Body from the Earth, re∣maineth with the Earth, but the will tak∣eth its Substance doings or works along in∣to it self, for they stand in the New Body, and follow after it, therefore a Man should consider what he doth in this Life. The Ninth Form of Fire. The great earnest Severity. 319. Thus we understand that all proceedeth out of the Beginning, and so one goeth out
of the other; and we understand, how the Fire is a cause of the Life, and how the Life divides it self into two parts, and yet breaketh not; but only the outward Life, which falleth home back to the Turba, which breaketh or destroyeth it; there∣fore we ought to consider, wherein it is that the Eternal Life consisteth, what its pre¦servation is, that the Body breaketh not; for Substantiality hath a beginning. 320. And yet we can say with good ground, that no End is therein; for it must have a Ground, else it belongeth to the Turba, which findeth the Limit: the Eternal Body must stand in no Limit, but be free in the Abyss in the Eternal Nothing; else there would be another substance or thing again in that substance or thing, which would cut that assunder and make a Li∣mit. 321. It is said before, how all must go or pass quite through the Fire, that will endure Eternally, for that which remain∣eth in the Fire, the Turba taketh that: there is no spirit created in the Fire, that it should remain in the Fire. 322. Only the Turba hath captivated mary of them, but not from or by God's will or purpose; for God's will is only
Love; but the Turba is his Anger-will, which hath with its vehement hunger, brought a great Kingdom of its Manifesta∣tion or Revelation into his wonders; viz. the Devils and wicked Souls of Men. 323. But being the Eternal Life standeth in Meekness, and hath no Death nor Turba in it: Therefore we must needs say, that the Soul and Spirit, stand not in the Turba, es∣pecially the Soule Body, else the Turba would break or destroy it. 324. To be understood as above menti∣oned, thus; that the Will in the Anguish∣source or quality, in the Fire, understand the Souls Will, sinketh down into it self, viz. into Death, and should not live in the Fire, and then that very Will falleth into another will, viz. into the Beginning; or to express it better, into the Free Eterni∣ty, into the Eternal Nothing; where there is no source or quality or pain, nor nothing that can either give or receive it. 325. But now there is in the sunk∣down will, no dying, for it is gone out from the fiery Beginning in the Eye, and so bring∣eth its Life into another Principle, and dwelleth in the Liberty, and yet hath all Forms of the Essences out of the Fire in it
self, but unperceptibly, for it is gone quite out from the Fire. 326. Therefore its Life of its Essences are in the Liberty, and is also desirous, and receiveth in the Desiring into its Es∣sences, the Power or Vertue of the Light, which shineth in the Liberty, that is, Power or Vertue without Turba: for that Fire is only Love; which consumeth not; but continually desireth, and satiateth, so that the will of the Soul attracteth a Body. 327. For the Will is a Spirit, and the Soul is the great Life of the Spirit, which upholdeth or preserveth the Spirit, & thus the Soul becometh indued with Power and Vertue, and dwelleth in Two Princi∣ples, as God himself doth; and accord∣ing to the outward, in Three Principles; and is the Similitude of God. 328. The inward Water in the Spirit of the Soul, is the Water of the Eternal Life: concerning which, Christ saith, John 4. 14. Whosoever drinketh of the Water that I give him, he will never thirst more; this is that Wa∣ter. 329. The Substantiality of the Spirit, which becometh put on to the Soul, is Gods,
Christs Body; concerning which, he saith, John 6. 56. Whoso∣ever eateth my Flesh and drinketh my Blood, continueth in Me, and I in Him. 330. But the right true Life in the Light of the Majesty in the Ninth-Number, is the Virgin Tincture; it is a Fire, and yet not a Fire, it burneth, but consumeth not; it is the Love, the Meekness, the Humility, this is God's Life, the Holy Souls Life, an uncorruptible Life; and an unsearchable Life, for it standeth in the Abyss in it self, there is a Center therein, which Center is its First Life, and yet it doth not compre∣hend it, as the Fire doth not comprehend the Light. 331. Thus the Ninth Number is the Life in the Fire of God, and is called the Life in the presence of the Number Three; As an Angel, which standeth before the Cross to or for God's Deeds of Wonder, and to or for the Manifestation of the Hea∣venly Honour and Glory.
The Tenth Number and Form of Fire. The Gate into the Holy Ternary. 332. We know in Reason, that where there is a Root, therein also is a desirous will, as, viz. the Noble Tincture, which driveth upwards and forwards, and seeketh a Si∣militude according to its Form. 333. The Tincture is a Virgin, and is known or apprehended in God's Wisdom in the Wonders; It is no Genetrix, but an opener or manifester of the Wonders which stand in the Wisdom, it seeks no Looking-Glass, but meerly openeth or discovereth the Essences, that so a total Similitude may generate or produce it self out of the Essen∣ces, it driveth the Twig or Branch out of the Tree. 334. This we understand as to Angels and Souls, which are proceeded out of God's Essences, out of the total Tree, the Angels out of two Principles; and the Soul with the Body of the outward Life out of Three Principles: And therefore Man is higher dignified than the Angels, if he continue in God.
335. And in the Tenth Number upon the Cross, are the Angels and Souls awak∣ned, and become corporised in the Hea∣venly Substantiality, although the Tenth Number belongeth to the place, between the Fift and the Sixt; but in a Globe, to be understood so, that the Heart is in the midst in the Center, which is God's Heart, that is, God's Word, the Power and Ver∣tue in or of the whole Tree, as the Kernel or Pith in the Wood, hath the Essences, Vertue or Condition of the whole Tree. 336. Thus God is a Spirit, and the Word is his Heart, which he speaketh forth out of all Powers or Vertues and Wonders; therefore Isaiah calleth it, * Isa. 9. 6.Wonder, Council, Power, Prince of Peace, viz. a Paci∣fier of the Anger, and an Eternal Power of Wonders, a Counsellour of the Gene∣trix. 337. For the Word upholdeth or pre∣serveth the Center of Nature, & is a Heart and Lord of Nature, it is the Genetrix in God's Eye, a Giver of the Power and Ver∣tue, and the strength of the Omnipotence: It holdeth the Fire-Center captive with the Love-Fire, so that it must be dark in it self, and the Word hath only the Light-Life.
338. We cannot apprehend the Tenth-Number any otherwise, then that it is a Cross, and is the Original of the Substance of all Substances; which Substance part∣eth it self into Three Beginnings, as above mentioned, whereof each hath its Substance and are in one another, and have no more than one Spirit. 339. And in the middle of the Point is the Center, which is the Cause of the Life, and in the Center, is the Light of the Majesty; out of which the Life, as ano∣ther Principle, existeth, out of which the Tree of the Eternal Life hath ever con∣tinually grown from Eternity, and the Twigs or Branches grow out of the Stock. 340. Which are the Spirits of Angels, which indeed have not been corporeal from Eternity, but the Essences or Qualities have been in the Tree, and their Or Represen∣tation. Image hath been Shone forth. discovered, & have appeared in the Virgin of the Wisdom from Eter∣nity: for they have been a Or Represen∣tation. Figure from Eternity in the Tincture, yet not Corpo∣real, but Essential, without Corporisation.
341. And therefore this is the greatest wonder that the Eternity hath wrought, that it hath created the Eternal into a Cor∣poreal Spirit, which no Reason apprehend∣eth, nor no Mind findeth, also it is not throughly searchable or fathomable to us. 342. For, no Spirit can throughly search out or fathom it self, it seeth its own deep very well even into the Abyss; but its framer or moudler it comprehended not, it behold∣eth him well, and searcheth into him, even into the Abyss, but yet it knoweth not its making, all that is hidden to it, and no∣thing else. 343. For a Child knoweth its Father and Mother well, but knoweth not how his Fa∣ther hath made or begotten it; it is also as high in Degree of Nature as its Father; but it is hidden to it how it was in the Seed; and though it search that, yet it knoweth not the Time and Place, nor did not; for it was in the Seed, in the Wonder; and in the Life a Spirit in the Wonders. 344. And here it is forbidden us to search further, and commanded us to rest from it and to be silent, for we are a Creature, and
should speak so far as the Creature reach∣eth, both in the inward and outward, in body and soul, in God, Angels, and Men, and Devils, also in Beasts, Fowls, Worms, in Leaves and Grass, in Heaven and Hell, all this we can search, only our own Ma∣king, not. 345. Yet of that, we know the Fiat, and know how we are made, yet we know not the first moving of God to the Creation: The making of the Soul, we know well, but how that which hath stood fixt in its Sub∣stance from Eternity, is become moveable, of that we know no ground, for it hath no∣thing, that hath stirred it up, and it hath an Eternal will, which is without begin∣ning and unchangeable. 346. But if we should say, the Angels and Souls, have been from Eternity in the Spi∣rit; the Propagation of Souls will not per∣mit that, as it is before our eyes; There∣fore this is God's Mystery alone; and the Creature should continue under God in humility and obedience, and not elevate it self further; for it is not altogether as God himself is. 347. God is a Spirit from Eternity,
without Ground and Beginning; but the Souls and Angels Spirit, hath an Original, and standeth in Gods hand, the Third Num∣ber, hath the casting shovle, and purgeth its Floar; Only Patience and Humility in Obedience is requisite, else it availeth no∣thing to be or exist from God: The Devil was also an Angel, yet his highmindedness, throweth him notwithstanding into the Darkness: Let none climbe up above the Cross, else he falleth into Hell to the De∣vil. 348. God will have Children, and not lordly ones about him; he is Lord and none else, Joh. 1. 16. of his Fulness have we received, out of his Essences are we born or generated, we are his right and true Children, not step∣children, of a strange Looking-Glass, also not only a similitude, but children; yet the Body is a similitude, and the Spirit is a si∣militude according to God's Spirit, but the right and true Soul is a Child born or generated out of God. 349. Rom. 8. 16. God's Spirit giveth witness to our Spirits, that we are God's Children, not in that kind as Babel makes a rumbling noise,
which so would fain be God upon Earth. 350. No, but our selves are Children begotten of God's Seed, our heavenly Bo∣dy is out of or from God's Body, which the holy Soul carrieth about it, hidden to the Devil and to the Old Adam. 351. Therefore beloved Brother in God's Body, know this clearly, and it is our An∣swer, upon your first Question; Whence the Soul originateth: 352. Viz. It originateth out of God, from Eternity, without Ground and Num∣ber, and continueth or endureth in its Eter∣nity: But the beginning to the moving of the Creature, which is done in God, that should not be mentioned. 353. Only we give or offer you this, that the Number Three hath pleased de∣lighted or longed to have Children like it self, out of it self, and so hath revealed or manifested it self, in Angels & in the Soul of Adam, and passed or transmigrated into an Image, as a Tree which bringeth forth Fruit, and generateth a Branch out of it self; For that is the right manner of Eter∣nity, and no other. 354. It is not a strange or different
thing, but one Looking-Glass out of the other, one Substance out of the other, and all seek the Beginning, and is all a Won∣der. 355. This is the entrance, and we should but in brief give you summary An∣swers upon the Questions, because you see in this description clearly all your Questi∣ons, Answered; yet to pleasure and accom∣modate the simple, and such as have not our knowledge, we will go through with them particularly.
The Second Question. What the Soul is in the Essence, Sub∣stance, Nature & Property. 1. THE Souls Essences are out of the Cen∣ter of Nature, out of the Fire, with all Properties of Nature; All the Three Principles lye therein; All whatsoever God hath, or can do, and whatsoever God is in his Number Three, that, the Soul is in its Essences, as a Branch out of the Power and Vertue of the Tree, its Sub∣stance is heavenly created, out of the hea∣venly Divine Substantiality. 2. But its Will is Free, either to sink down in it self, and to accompt it self No∣thing, but to sprout as a branch out of the Tree, and to eat of God's Love, or to climbe up in its Will into the Fire, and be its own Tree of it self, and of which so∣ever it eateth, of that it gets Substantiali∣ty; viz. the Body of the Creature. 3. Is Nature is the Center it self, with Seven Spirits to generate or propagate with; It is a Total Substance out of All
Substances, and a Similitude of the Num∣ber Three, if it be in God; If not, it is the Similitude of Lucifer, and of all Devils; all furthermore according to their Proper∣ties. 4. Its Property, was in the First Soul created according to both Mothers, upon which followed the Command, and the Temptation, that it should not suffer it self to Lust to Eat of Evil and Good; but of Heavenly Paradisical Fruit only, & should with its Will & Property be directed and inclined to be in God. 5. But all Properties lye in it; it may awaken and let in what it will, and what∣soever then it awakeneth and letteth in, that is acceptable to God, if it stand con∣verted with its will into Humility, and in∣to Obedience into God's Love; then may it do what All outward Works are the Wonders of God in this World. wonders it will, it stand∣eth or serveth all to Gods Honour and Glory.
The Third Question. How the Soul is created to the Image of God. 1. IT is clearly shewn, that the Number Three, with all the Three Principles hath pleased or longed to have a Total Si∣militude in Substance and Property, accor∣ding to the Sustance of all Substances. 2. And the pleasure or longing to have that, hath become awakened in Gods Heart, as a Great Wonder. 3. And that awakening was the harsh or astringent Fiat, viz. the desirous attracti∣on, which hath drawn out of ALL into ONE, and is become an Image according to the Similitude of God; according to Heaven and this World, and also according to the Anger-World; It hath created all; viz. the Total Fiat, in verbo Domini, in the Word of the Lord, out of God's, and out of the Anger-Kingdom. 4. And as there is nothing higher than the Soul, so there is nothing that can break it, for all is under it and in it; it is a child
of the Total Substance of all Substances: Thus it was created. The Fourth Question. What the Breathing in of the Soul is, and when it is done. 1. EVery Spirit without a Body is raw or void, and knoweth not it self: there∣fore every Spirit desireth a Body, for its food and for its habitation. 2. Now being God had before the Soul created the Third Principle, as a Looking-Glass of the Deity, therefore was the Look∣ing-Glass clearly appendant to the Eter∣nal, for it was generated out of the Eter∣nal Wonders, and so created: Therefore also the Third Principle would not leave the Soul free, being it also was created out of God's Wonders, and stood in the Begin∣ning as a Figure in God's Wisdom; and desired, seeing it was material, that it also might have a material Similitude in or on the Soul, & so stirred up in the Souls Crea∣tion, also its Spirit, together in the Fiat. 3. And there was the outward Image
according to the Spirit of this World, laid hold on by the outward Fiat, and became a Body created out of the Earths Matrix, A Mesch a Mixture, a Red Earth, consisting of Fire and Water. 4 And the Heavenly Matrix longed also after the Soul, and would that the Soul should bear its Image, and with the Bo∣dies creation laid hold of its own Fiat, and did create before the earthly Fiat created; that was the First, for out of the Center of the Word, went the Fiat forth with the Word: thus was the Third Principle Crea∣ted in the Second. 5. The Virgin-Wisdom, surrounded the Souls Spirit first with heavenly Sub∣stantiality, with heavenly Divine Flesh, and the holy Spirit gave the hea∣venly Tincture, which made heavenly Blood in the Water; as in our Three-fold Life. Third Book is menti∣oned at large. 6. Thus stood the inward Man in Hea∣ven, and its Essences were Paradisical, its glance in the inward Eye, was Majesty, an incorruptible Body, that could understand God's and the Angels Language; the Lan∣guage
of Nature, as is to be seen in Adam, that Gen. 2. 19, 20. he gave all Creatures their Names, every one according to its Es∣sence and Property; he stood thus in the outward Image, and yet knew not the out∣ward Image by Experience, as indeed the outward Body hath no apprehension. 7. Note the Hour when Christ was hanged on the Cross. In this Twofold Bo∣dy, which was created on the Sixt Day on the Sixt hour of the Day, even Mat. 27. 45. Mark 15. 33. in the Hour when Christ was hanged on the Cross, was the Kingly or Royal Soul, after the finish∣ing of the Body, breathed in by the holy Spirit, into the Heart, into the holy Man, into its Principle; like an awakening of the Deity. 8. The Third Number, hath moved it self with the Souls breathing in, for it was upon the Center in the Seed, as a sprout of the springing of the Essences; thus it was breathed in into the inward Center, into the inward Man, into the Heavenly Heart∣blood, into the Water of the Eternal Life, with all the two inner Principles. 9. And the Outward Spirit, viz. the Air, with the total outward Principle, with
Stars and Elements hung to the Inward, and the outward Spirit breatheth into him its life, together also with the Soul, Gen. 2. 7. through the Nostrils into the Heart, into the out∣ward Heart into the Earthly Flesh, which yet was not so Earthly; for it became cor∣poreal out of the Matrix out of the seeking out of which the Earth came to be. 10. Thus the Holy Spirit rode upon the Souls Chariot upon the Inward Majestick Will, and moved upon the Water; for the Water comprehended him not, there∣fore he moved upon it and in it, it is all one; and the Soul did burn or flame out of the Heart-blood, as the Light out of a Candle, and went through all the Three Principles, as a King over his Country or Dominion. 11. It could potently rule over the out∣ward Principle, if it were with its will entered again into the Heart of God, into the Word of the Lord. 12. Also the Source or Quality of the fierce Wrath did thus together press in with the Breathing in; viz. with the Original of the Soul. 13. And the Soul could not otherwise
continue to be God's Image, unless it continue in Humility and Obedience, and incline or set its will into God's Will; wherein it was an Angel and God's Child, else there was great danger, for a Creature to over-power two Principles, viz. the Angry, and the Outward, which was gene∣rated out of the Anger. 14. Therefore its Temptation, was not the mere biting of an Apple, and hath endured for a few hours only, but Forty Dayes, so long as Christ was tempted in the Wilderness, and even by all the Three Principles, and Israel in the Wilderness, when Moses was Forty Dayes upon the Mount; when they al∣so stood not, but made a Calf.
The Fifth Question. How the Soul is peculiarly formed and fashioned or framed. 1. VVHen a Twig or Branch groweth out of a Tree, then its Fashi∣on or Shape is from the Tree, it is not the Stock or the Root, but yet its Form is like the Tree; So also when a Mother breedeth a Child, it is an Image of her. 2. And that cannot otherwise be, for there is nothing else that can make it otherwise, unless it be fallen back home to the Turba, which often awaketh a Mon∣ster, according to the Spirit of this World, according to its beginning or inceptive Maker, viz. the Moon, where, the Fiat, maketh a Or a Menstruous Monster. Moon-Monster in the Turba. 3. Thus we are to apprehend and know in what Form it is, viz. of a round Globe, according to God's Eye, through which the Cross goeth or pierceth, and parteth it self
into two Or halves: The halves set for∣ward are two Eys, parts, viz. into Two Eyes, which stand back to back, as we have made the Figure above with a twofold As two Halves of one whole Circled Rain-bow. Rain-bow, where the Cross goeth or pierceth through both, and in the midst between the Or two Rain-Bows. Bows, one Arm or Point of the Cross reaching up aloft, which signifieth a Sprout through the Fire, through the Anguish, viz. through Death, and yet it is no Death, but an Exit out of it self, into another source or fountain quality, where it standeth thus before the two Bows in the midst as a sprout out of the Cross. 4. And the Arm of the Cross at the Right hand, signifieth its Spirit, which en∣tereth into the Light of the Majesty; and putteth on to the Soul, viz. to the Center, Divine Substantiality. 5. And the Arm at the left of the Cross, signifieth its Original in the Fire, and holdeth or containeth in it the first Princi∣ple; that it belongeth to the Father, and standeth in the Original Eye, in the strong
and stern power and might; as a Lord and Potentate or Ruler of Nature. 6. And the under Part or Arm of the Cross, signifieth the Water, viz. the Humility or the Death, so to resemble it, that it should not rule in Fire, nor kindle that, but sink down in it self and under it self, before God's Majesty; and accompt it self as dead in its will, that God might live in it, and the holy Spirit conduct its Regiment or Government; that it may not do what the Will of the Turba in the Fire, willeth; but what the Will in the Light willeth. 7. Therefore should its Will sink down under it self, into the meek Humility before God; and so it goeth out from the Turba of the Fire, for its Will is not therein, and so also there can no Imagination be acted out of which, that Looking-Glass, can be born or generated, so that it can be∣hold and apprehend it self experimentally in the Fire, that it is Lordly, whence it be∣cometh proud, arrogant or stubborn, and will rule it self in or according to its own might or power; as Lucifer did, and Adam in Paradise. 8. Understand us aright, thus; The Soul in
it self, is a Globe, with a Cross, with two Eyes, one Holy Divine, and one Hellish Wrathful one in the Cross; this it should shut up, and rule hiddenly through the An∣guish, viz. through Death in the Second Principle therewith in the Love. 9. And if it conceiveth or apprehendeth the Love, then is the fierce wrathful Fire as it were dead, and imperceptible: But it is the Joy-Life of Paradise, else in the Meek∣ness would be no Life and Government or Dominion, if the Fire did not give it self thereinto; but it would remain the still Eternity without Substance, for all and every substance or thing existeth in the Fire. 10. And thirdly, the Soul is formed, accor∣ding to the Total Body with all its Mem∣bers. 11. Which understand, thus; The Soul is the Stock, viz. the Root, which appear∣eth like the Center of the Number Three, as an Eye a Globe a Cross; and then its will, which originateth our of the Eternal Will, is a Spirit, which the right or true Soul hath in its power, and that Spirit openeth the Essences in the Fire and Water.
12. So that its whole Form appeareth like a Tree with many Twigs & Branches, and is distributed into all the Branches of the Tree. 13. Which is thus to be understood, the Spirit distributeth them into the whole Bo∣dy, understand in the Tincture, into all the Members, they are all its Branches, it ap∣peareth in its Spirit no otherwise than as the whole Man with all Members. 14. And herein it is also the right true Image of God: for the Holy Spirit dwel∣leth in the Spirit, if it be true and faithful; if not, the Devil dwelleth therein; to which soever it giveth up it self or inclineth it self, whether to Covetousness and High∣mindedness, or to Love and Humility, that's own it is. 15. But if it persist in A∣bomination and loseth Or Goodness. God, then it loseth the Cross, and its Eye is a Hellish Eye, where∣by the Turba introduceth the Form Shape and Model of an Abominable Beast into the Eye, into the Will and Spirit. 16. Therefore did Christ call the Pharisees Mat. 12. 34. Serpents and Generation of Vipers, for so stood their Figure before him, in their
Spirit, in respect of their Pride State and Covetous Will, that they would be Lords, and not Servants of God in Love and Hu∣mility. 17. And thus also standeth the Figure of Antichrist in Babel, as a Dragon with Seven Heads, which are seven Spirits, upon which its Hypocritical Spirit rideth in Mans Image, into the Abysse, it will needs be an Angel, and yet is a Monster, in respect of a right true Child of God; it beareth the Name indeed, but its Heart is that Beast in the Revelation of John: It would have God and the Devil too, and therefore is such a Mon∣ster, as is like a Man, and yet hideth the Devil in and under it self. 18. O Child of Man, fly away, the door is open, the Turba is come, which will de∣stroy the Image; if you will not go away, you must along with it; there is neither counsel nor remedy, but only to seek the right and true Image in the Love, or else there is nothing further to be expected but necessity and calamity and death, saith the Spirit of Wonder. 19. This now is our direct Answer; That the Soul in the First Principle according to the Original, hath the Form of an Eye, and yet
twofold like a Heart, wherein the Cross standeth. 20. And in the Second Principle it is a Spirit, and a total intire Image, such a one as the outward Man is. 21. And in the Third Principle, it is a Looking-Glass of the whole World, all ly∣eth therein, whatsoever is in the Poten∣tiality of Heaven & Earth, even the Pro∣perties of all Creatures: for that Looking-Glass is as the Firmament and the Stars and Constellations. 22. It is such a Crown as that, and there∣in standeth the Outward Mans Number, the end and termination of his Life, withal Prosperity and Adversity, if the outward Life be ruled by the Spirit of this World.
The Sixth Question. What the Ability or Potentiality of the Soul is. 1. IT is apprehensible to us; that whatso∣ever cometh out of the unsearchable Profundity, and is the Ground of it self, that it is able to do all things; for it is its own Substance, and maketh it self. 2. And though indeed the Soul be a Twig or Branch sprung out of this Tree, yet it is now come into the Being of a Creature, and is its own; it is now an Image of the whole, and a Child of the whole; for when a Child is generated or born, then is the Mother and the Child Two, they are two persons; but whilst it is yet in the Seed in the Mother, then the Seed is the Mothers, and the Mother hath dominion over it; for when the Child is generated, then it hath its own life in it self, and hath the Center of Nature in its own Form, it ruleth not only in it self, but al∣so externally without it self, in whatsoever is Seed.
4. Understand us aright, thus; God's Spirit & the Soul's Spirit are two Persons, each is free from the other, and yet they stand both in the first Beginning, each hath its will. 5. But now it is right and just, that the Child should be obedient to the Father, upon forfeiture of the Fathers Inheritance; the holy Spirit was the Souls work-master, and had created it, to that should the Souls Spirit be obedient, upon loss of the holy Spirits inheritance, viz. of the DEITY. 6. And though much might be written, yet it is very dangerous, in respect of the false or wicked Magia, for if the false or wicked spirit knew it, it would practise Witchcraft therewith. 7. Therefore we will so speak, that we may be well understood by the Children, and reserve the full or plain speaking of it for the Children, for it is not good to write that, seeing a Man knoweth not who will be the Reader. 8. But to the wicked and ungodly, we say, that they belong to the Devil, and shall have no part in our Writings, we shut them out with a thick wall or enclosure, and strong fortification or bullwark, that they may be blind, and not know our Spirit;
for we would not set the Serpent therein, our will and mind is gone out from them, therefore shall they not know us, though they carry us in their hands, there is a fast seal upon it. 9. Christ saith, Mat. 17. 20. If ye have Faith as a grain of mustard seed, then ye might say to the Mountains, be ye removed and cast into the Sea; that is not an empty void word, without truth and effect. The First Power of the Souls Will. 10. The The strong desire is faith. will if it go strongly forward, is Faith; It frameth its own Or, Repre∣sentation. form in the Spirit; it hath also the Might or Power, that it can form or frame another Image in the Spirit, out of the Center of Natue. 11. It can give to the-Body another Form, according to the outward Spirit, for the In∣ward is Lord of the Outward, the outward must be obedient to it; & it can set the out∣ward in another Image, but not permanent. 12. For Adams, Soul had let in the Tur∣ba
of this World, so that the Turba if it seeth a strange Child, is suddenly upper∣most, and breaketh or destroyeth it; only it continueth so long, as the Inward Spirit can tame and over-power the Outward. 13. And this Form Kind or Manner of Power, is called, Nigromancy, a transmu∣tation or changing, where the Inward doth over-power the Outward; for it is natu∣ral, as we consider, that when 1 Cor. 15. 51. we shall be changed, it is done by that very Turba, which hath the First Fiat. 14. For the Body is Sulphur, and stick∣eth in the Tincture, and the Spirit con∣ducteth the Tincture; therefore now if the First willeth therein or conanteth thereto, viz. the Soul, then can the Spirit of the Soul, make another Form or Manner of Image in the Sulphur; but the Devil mix∣eth himself readily therein, for it is the Abysses Wonder, wherein he is Lord. The Second Power of the Souls Will. 15. Also understand us, thus; The earnest will, which otherwise is called Faith, can with the Spirit do great things: the Will can set or put the Spirit into another Form
or Condition, which is thus: If the Spi∣rit were an Angel, a Similitude of God, yet the Will can make of it a proud or Stoltyen, Obstinate. stubborn Devil, and also of a Devil an An∣gel, if it sink down it self into Death, into Humility under the Cross, and cast it self again into God's Spirit, that he may lead it by his government, then it sinketh down into the still Eternity, quite out from the source or quality of Torment, into the still or quiet NOTHING, which yet is ALL, and then it standeth in the Beginning where God created it, and the word Fiat receiveth or embraceth it again, which containeth God's Image. The Third Power of the Soules Will or Spirit. 16. And then thirdly, the Souls Spirit, hath ability or power, to enter into another Mans Marrow and Bones, viz. into the Sulphur, and if he be false or wicked, to introduce the Turba into him; so far as any is not armed with God's Spirit, but that he be found naked in the Spirit of this World; as is to be seen by the bewitching Whores or Sorcerers.
The Fourth Power of the Souls Will. 17. Fourthly, It hath power, if it be God's Child, that it can lead the Turba captive, and can pour it out upon the house of the wicked and ungodly; 2. Kings. 1. 10. 12. as Elias did with the Fire; and Exod. 7. and 8. Moses before Pharoah; for it can throw down Mountains & break Rocks. 18. This is understood, to be, so far as a place is capable of the Turba, that it hath made the Anger stirring, then it can be; but if not, and that God's Spirit be in a thing, then it cannot be; for Water will be poured into the Fires Turba, and it is as it were dead, and its ability or power lyeth in the dirt. 19. And therefore is the Heaven the middle or medium, between God and Hell, viz. between Love and An∣ger; which Gen. 1. 6. Heaven is crea∣ted out of the midst of the Wa∣ters, so that the Devil cannot rule with his Turba, the Water turneth his purpose into scorn and derision; as therefore the false or wicked Magia is drowned in the Water with its inchantment & Blendung. delusi∣on.
The Fifth Power of the Souls Will or Spirit. 20. Fifthly, The Soul hath might or ability, that, it may and can seek or search out all Wonders or Inventions. Works, which are in Na∣ture, viz. Arts and Sciences, Languages, Building, Tilling or Planting, and Destroy∣ing; it can subdue the Starry Heaven; as Josh. 10. 12, 13. Joshua commanded the Sun that it stood still, and Moses the Sea, that it stood up, also he commanded the Darkness, and it came; also it can make or produce the Earthly Life; Exod. 14. 21. 10. 22. 8. 6. 16. 7. 12, &c. as Moses the Lice & Frogs, also Serpents and other Won∣ders. 21. Also it hath Death in its power or might, that it can over-power that, if it ride upon the Brides-Chariot; it can sub∣due and over-power the Devil, if it be in God. 22. There is nothing which it cannot subdue: only understand it aright, The Soul hath such might or ability from its Original, and such a Spirit it could have
given forth out of it self, if it had not let in the Earthly Great Turba, which now giveth the stop: unless it be so, that the holy Spirit rideth upon its Chariot; as with Moses, Elias, and all the Prophets, with Christ and his Disciples, also still continual∣ly, with the holy Children of God: they have all this Power or Authority, they can awaken or raise the Dead, heal the Sick, and expel all Diseases, it is natural, the Spirit only ruleth therewith, over the Turba. 24. But there is this on the other side to be considered, that the Soul knoweth very well what covenant, compact or agreement it hath with the Devil, and what propriety or part he hath in it; it goeth not naked, unless it be so, that the Spirit of God con∣duct it, so that it hath him for a shield or defence, so that the Devils suttlety cannot press or slip into it. 25. It makes no wonder, unless God's Spirit awaken or stir it up, it giveth God the Honour and Glory, and attributeth the might & power to him; it doth as a hum∣ble Child, and remaineth standing under the Cross, and letteth the Devil bluster over it, but it self sprouteth in Humility and Meekness through Death into the E∣ternal
Life, and bringeth forth much fruit in Patience. 26. Thus the Devil can do nothing to that Soul, it is as it were dead to him; he may with his Turba in the Earthly Life, with his helpers and instruments, wicked and ungodly Men, make a stir and rack∣et, but he hath only scorn and derision in the presence of God for it, for he is a proud arrogant spirit, and would fain be above God's Wonders, but an Humility can bind him, or subdue him. 27. In such a manner may every man escape the false and wicked Magus, and al∣so the Nigromancer; for no power takes hold on them where God dwelleth: As Christ Heb. 2. 14. in his Death overcame the De∣vil and Death: so also we in Christ; for the Word that became Man dwelleth in us, and in that Word, we can rule over the Devil and Hell, there is no hinderance. 28. Thus we give you for an Answer, up∣on this Question, that the Soul in its Original is greatly powerful, it is able, and can do much, but only in that Prin∣ciple
into which it looketh or standeth, is its power and might; for the Devil cannot rule over God: Its might or power is not given to it, as a King giveth Might, Power, Authority or Favour to any, but it standeth in Natures-right, therefore we are Children of the Omnipo∣tency of God, and inherit his Goods in the Omnipotency.
The Seventh Question. Whether the Soul be Corporeal or not Corporeal. 1. A Thing which is from no Beginning, hath also nothing, that can give it any thing; and if it be something, it must seek the Beginning in it self, for every spi∣rit dwelleth in the deepest Abysse of its sub∣stance, but if it must make the substance to it self, it can dwell in Nothing that is strange to it, but in it self in its own sub∣stance. 2. When God created the Soul, the ho∣ly Spirit surrounded it with the Tincture; for it stood therein, as to one part in it self it was raw or red as the glowing of the fire is raw or red, and is surrounded with the Tincture. 3. As you understand, that from the warmth the growing existeth, that is a dri∣ving of the Tincture; which driveth the Twig or Branch out from the Root, viz. out of the same Fire, be it cold or hot. 4. For the Darkness hath a Cold Fire, so long till it reach the Anguish, and then it
kindleth it self in the hot, as is to be seen in an Herb, if it come into another qua∣lity. 5. Thus we give you to understand, that the Tincture, is the right and true Souls Body: for the Soul is Fire, and the Tin∣cture goeth forth out of the Fire, which the Fire draweth again to it self, and meek∣neth or allayeth it self therewith, so that the fierce wrathful source or quality extin∣guisheth. 6. Thus the Tincture standeth in meek∣ness, and it hath no substance or might or power in it self, but the Water is its might or power, there cometh out of the meek∣ness of the Tincture, water to be. 7. For the Fire is desirous, and where there is a desiring of the Original, there is also a finding of the Original, thus the Fire findeth in the Tincture, Water, and turn∣eth that into Sulphur, according to power or vertue of all the Seven Spirits of Na∣ture, that is a Water of Life. 8. For the Tincture driveth up in the Water as a sprout, and the Fire in the A∣byss causeth that. 9. Thus is the Water in the Sulphur of the Seven Spirits changed into the My∣stery, and the great Areanum or Secret ly∣eth
therein, Whatsoever God and the Eternity can do: Thus the Mystery containeth Two Forms, viz. Fire & Water, and Wondelt. changeth it self accor∣ding to Both, viz. according to the Fire, into Red, and according to the Tincture, into White; so that a clear shining or glance existeth from the Fire; so that the Life seeth or knoweth it self, out of which Reason and Thoughts exist, and the Mind is in the Wheel or Orb of the Anguish in the Fire, out of which the Essences exist. 10. And thus you see what the Blood is, viz. a House of the Soul, but the Tincture is its Body. 11. The right or true Soul hath no pal∣pable Body which is called Soul, but in the Tincture groweth the Body in the Sulphur out of Sulphur, that is, every Spirit of the Seven Spirits of Nature desireth Substan∣tiality, which is together Sulphur. 12. For Sul is power and vertue out of the Light, and Phur is power and vertue out of the Four Forms of Natures Original; as in the Three-fold-Life. Third Book is menti∣oned at large.
13. Thus the Phur desireth Flesh, that is a Mixture out of Fire and Water, and is in the Tincture conceived and generated or born. 14. And the Tincture is the growing of the Body; and the Fire is an Original of the Spirit through the Tincture: For in the Tincture the Souls Spirit taketh its Origi∣nal, which, viz. the right true Image fi∣gureth according to God's Image, that is, according to all the Three Principles: for in the Fire the Soul is no Similitude of God, but in the Spirit, it is the Image of God. 15. For the First Soul was together in∣corporated with the Divine Substantiality, so that it had God's Body in the Virgin of Wisdom, in which the Tincture standeth; this is the Angels Image. 16. And I give you for Answer; that as to what concerns the Soul merely and purely, by which we understand not the Spirit; it is a Fire-Globe with a Fire-Eye, and with a Light-Eye, which turn back to back, and one within another, as A Wheel with∣in a Wheel. the Wheel in Ezekiel, that can go on all sides; Ezek. 1. 16. though Babel have made
clean another understanding upon it, but a blind one without Spirit. 17. But as to what concerns its Tin∣cture out of the Light, which existeth out of the Fire and Light, it is a Spirit, where the Original of the Soul and of the Spirit, in Eternity cannot separate assunder, Note. it is an Eternal BAND; and when the Blood goeth away, and the Body dyeth, then this Band con∣tinueth in Eternity. 18. The Body, as to what concerns the Soul purely, belongeth not to the Substance of the Soul, they are Two Substances, for the Body is the Souls Looking-Glass and dwelling House, also its proper portion, and it is also the cause that the meer pure Soul altereth or changeth the Spirit, viz. accor∣ding to the Pleasure or Longing of the Bo∣dy, or of the Spirit of this World. 19. By which then the Image in the Spi∣rit becometh attered, all according to what is contained in the Will, which the Soul hath framed or contrived, or brought forth out of the Center, also out of the Fierce Wrath into the Light, viz. according to the Imagination.
20. And we give you to understand, that the Spirit can alter it self in this Time of the Body, which is done without its know∣ledge or apprehension through the Imagi∣nation, viz. through the seeking Lust or Longing Pleasure and Delight, where the desiring figureth such a Form in the Souls Will, as the lust or longing Pleasure is, to Evil, or Good. 21. And we say, that the pure Soul, is not corporeal, but there groweth a Body in the Tincture either heavenly or hellish, and yet it is no palpable body according to the outward, but a Power-Body, God's Body, Christ's Heavenly Body, heavenly Flesh, which Christ giveth us to eat in his The Lord's Supper. Testament. 22. It is a Body which the Turba can∣not touch, or apprehend, it is immortal, unfadable, comprised in Nothing but only in the noble or pretious Tincture, which is without substance; and this body is to the outward Flesh incomprehensible. 23. But the Outward Spirit, if the Soul do not hinder it, but letteth it in, bringeth its Imagination thereinto, and covereth, vai∣leth or obscureth it, so that another strange
Image cometh to be in the Spirit, in the Tincture, according to the contents or con∣dition of the longing Pleasure, or lust, viz. a Covetous of a Wolf, an Envious of a Dog, a Proud of a Horse, Peacok or other Beast or living Creature; also of Toads, Adders, Vipers, Serpents, & other Worms or creeping things, which Image, God's Spirit, so long as it standeth or continueth so, doth not receive or accept. 24. And therefore Christ saith, You must be born anew, of Water and the Spirit, if you would see the Kingdom of God: and therefore God became Man, and brought the divine Image again into the Souls Tincture, being it was perished in Adam, so that now we must be born anew in Christ, if we will see God. 25. And this is done through the Ima∣gination or Faith or Believing, for believing is eating of God's Body: and every Body groweth by eating. 26. And the New-Birth is not in such a Manner as Babel teacheth, her Matters are only a Looking-Glass of the right and true way into God; which Looking-Glass must be broken: For Moses his cover or vail is done away, we should see further with clear Paradisical Eyes, under∣stand
thus much ye Children of God. The Eighth Question. In what Manner the Soul cometh into Man, or into the Body. 1. THis Question I understand of the Souls Propagation; For how it came into Adam, Moses telleth you, and it is mentioned above; but because you ask concerning its Propagation, how it cometh into a Child in the Mothers Womb; we must put on another Habit or Garment. 2. In our Three fold Life. Third Part, it is written very exactly and at large, with many Circumstan∣ces, concerning its Propagation, how Adam was created in an Image; He was Man and Woman before his Eve; he had the fires and waters Tincture, that is Soul and Spirit, and should have generated his like, an Image of himself, out of himself, through his Imagination and own Love; and this he could have done without disrupture. 3. For, as it is above mentioned, that the
Soul hath such might or ability, to change the Body into another Form; so it hath al∣so had ability, to generate a Branch out of it self, according to its Property, if Adam had stood out the tryal or Proba. 4. But being he imagined after, or de∣sired the Omnipotence, and let the Spirit of this World into the Soul into the Tin∣cture, and the Serpent, and gazed on the Earthly Fruit, longing to eat of Evil and Good: then also his Tincture conceived such an Image, viz. a Monster, which was half earthly, thereinto also instantly the Turba insinuated it self, and sought the Limit. 5. Thus the noble or pretious Image was found in the Earthly, where then Fra∣gility, Corruption and Death Began: and Adam could not then generate, for his Omnipotency was lost. 6. And would indeed for ever have been lost, if the Heart of God had not sud∣denly with the Word of Promise, turned in it self into Adams Soul, which so preser∣ved it, that so Adams Image must break; and the Soul with the heavenly Body, sink down through Death into the New-Life, where its Spirit became renewed again. 7. Thus Adam fell into inability into
sleep, and the other or second Creation be∣gan; for, God took the Waters Tincture, as in a Twig or Branch out of Adams Soul, and a Gen. 2. 21. Rib out of Adam,; and the Gen. 2. 21. Half Cross in A∣dam, and framed a Woman out of it. 8. As ye know that the Woman hath the one half Cross in her Or Scull. Head, and the Man the other; for in the Head, in the Brain dwelleth the Souls Spirit, out of which God hath taken a Branch, viz. a Child, out of Adams Souls Spirit, and given it to the Woman, that she should not generate or bring forth Devils. 9. And the Man hath the Fires Tin∣cture, viz. the right true Original of the Life. 10. And therefore hath the Woman gotten the Matrix, viz. Venus's Tin∣cture, and the Man the Fires-Tincture, understand, the Woman hath the Lights-Tincture, which can awaken no Life, the Life standeth in the Fires-Tincture. 11. But now being it could not be other∣wise, they must propagate in a Beastial Manner, in Two Seeds; the Man soweth Soul, and the Woman Spirit, and is, being it is sown in an Earthly Soyl or Field, con∣ceived
or hatched, after the kind and man∣of all Beasts, 12. And yet nevertheless, all the Three Principles are in the Seed, but the Inward is not knowable or apprehensible to the Outward; for in the Seed there is no li∣ving Soul, but when the Two Tinctures come together, then it is wholly in Sub∣stance, for the Soul is in the Seed, Essen∣tial, and in the Conception or Hatching it becometh Substantial. 13. For, so soon as the Fire is struck up by Vulcan, then is the Soul in the Substance wholly perfect, and presently the Spirit goeth out of the Soul in the Tincture forth, and draweth the outward Dominion, viz. the Stars with or by the Air. 14. And thus is an Eternal Child, and and hath also the frail or corruptible Spirit with the Turba hanging to it; which Adam through his Imagination took in. 15. And there the Turba instantly seeth the Limit in the Spirit of this World, and will enter into the limit, & then is the Body old enough, as soon as the Soul hath its Life, to dye: also many a Soul perisheth in the Essence while it is a Seed in the Sulphur. 16. But you are to observe this, that the
Man hath the Fires Tincture, and the Wo∣man the Lights Tincture in the Water, viz. Venus's Tincture, as is to be understood by both their vehement Imagination one towards another; for the Seed in the Es∣sence seeketh vehemently the Life: the Masculine in the Feminine in Venus, and and the Feminine in the Fire, in the Ori∣ginal of the Life. As we have very clearly explained it in the Three-fold Life. Third Part, to which we refer the Reader. 17. And we give you for Answer, that the Soul cometh not at all or is breathed in from without into the Body, but the Three Principles, have each of them its own work∣master, the one forgeth or striketh Fire in the Center, and maketh the Center of Na∣ture, and the other, Tincture and Fire, and the Third Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery, Earthly. 18. And yet is nothing new, but the Seed of Man and of Woman, is that ve∣ry thing, and in the Mixture it becometh conceived or hatched, there groweth only a Twig or Branch out of the Tree.
The Ninth Question, In What Manner the Soul uniteth it self with the Body. 1. THis is explained above, that all the Three Principles are in one another, and they generate a Child like themselves, all stand one in another, till the Turba breaketh the Body, and then the Soul stan∣deth in the inward Body, viz. in God's Body; or if it be false or wicked, it is in the Turba, which giveth it a Body accor∣ding to the Imagination, all according to the the here-acted or committed Abomina∣tions. 2. The Soul standeth in the Blood of the Heart, there it hath its seat and original, the outward Water and Blood mixeth it self, but it doth not wholly captivate the Water of the Blood, but with the Imagi∣nation it is captivated. 3. Indeed it naturally captivateth the inward Water, but the Light of the Ma∣jesty, together with the Lights-Tincture, it captivateth not, but only through the
Imagination; therefore a Child is often more blessed than one that is old, who hath the Devil for an Inmate. 4. But there are not many born holy, but only out of or from good seed, where yet oftentimes according to some potent or mighty strong Constellation, a fierce wrathful Turba insinuateth it self; as is to be seen, that often honest or godly Pa∣rents, have evil Children, but God know∣eth who are his. 5. This a Man may see by Jacob and Esau, who strove in the Mothers Womb, also by Cain and Abel, Isaac and Ishmael, and many others.
The Tenth Question. Whether the Soul be Ex Traduce, by Production, and humanely Corporeally propagated, or every time newly created and breathed in, from God. 1. IT is a high Wonder to me, what kind of Understanding & Philosophy the World hath, that it cannot resolve this, though hereby I do not blame you, for I know that such Questions pass among the Learned, in the Schools, where Men continually dis∣pute & contend; and their arrogant blind∣ness must needs be a wonder to me, that there is altoge∣ther no knowledge of God in Reason of the Outward Man. Reason. 2. Here behold your selves ye wise Men, what ye are, or what ye understand, even nothing at all of the Mystery; how will you then be Teachers? a Shepherds Crook were better in your hands, then for you to put on the Garment of Christ. 3. O, ye shall give a severe accompt, for seducing the World & leading it astray,
and yet ye boast, and set up your selves, as if ye were God, and ascribe to your selves Divine Power & Authority; see what you do, you shall see against whom you have kick∣ed; I fear that ye are for the most part of you in Babel; awake, it is day. 4. But to you my beloved Friend, it is answered, that the Soul is not every time newly created and breathed in, but is hu∣manely propagated, as a Branch groweth out of a Tree; or as I may better render it, as a Man setteth Grain or soweth Corn, and so a Spirit and Body groweth or sprou∣teth out of it. 5. And this only is the difference, that the Three Principles are ever wrestling about Man, each of them would fain have him, so that many times a wonderful Tur∣ba, becometh introduced, while it is yet a Seed. 6. But where the Parents, have Christ's Flesh, God's Substantiality in their Souls, so that Father and Mother are so, there it cannot be; for Christ saith, Mat. 7. 18. A good Tree cannot bring forth bad Fruit; but the Turba can with or by Acting accor∣ding to selfish Reason of the outward old A∣dam. Reason, in this time get or enter thereinto.
7. So also Mat. 7. 18. an evil Tree can∣not bring forth good Fruit; that is when the Parents are both evil, and captivated by the Devil, then an Evil Soul is sowen; But the Principles cannot yet judge it, nor the Turba can∣not, it is indeed an evil Child; but CAN, if it convert, through its Imagination, en∣ter in Verbum Domini, into the Word of the Lord. 8. But it is rare, and seldom done, that out of a black Raven a white one comes to be; yet where it is halfe in halfe, there it may more easily be done, yet it is possible it may well be done; God casteth no soul away, unless it cast it self away, every soul is its own judgement. 9. Observe this ye evil Parents, ye ga∣ther or procure Money for your Children, gather or procure Good Souls for them, that is more necessary for them.
The Eleventh Question. How and in What Place the Souls seat in Man is. 1. A Thing that is without Ground, and yet seeketh and maketh a Ground in it self, hath its original and seat in the first compaction or comprehension, where it compriseth it self in it self, there is the li∣mit in the most innermost, and it goeth forth out of it self, and seeketh forward, where then it maketh one Looking-Glass after another, till it findeth the first again, viz. the unsearchable limit. 2. Thus also is the Soul, it is compri∣zed by God in the Heart, and the VVord which compriseth it, was in the Heart, viz. in the Center; thus it continued in the Figure and Seat, as it was comprised by the Fiat, and is so to this day. 3. It dwelleth in the Three Principles, but the Heart is its Original, in the Heart therein, in the inward Blood of the Heart, it is the inward Fire, and in the Tincture is its Spirit, which hath a Glimps from the
Fire, for it is surrounded with the Tincture, and burneth in the Heart. 4. And the Spirit moveth upon the Heart in the Pit or Concavity of the Heart, where the two Principles sever them∣selves, and burneth in the Tincture, as a Brimstone-Light, and distributeth it self further forth in the whole Body into all the Members: for the Tincture goeth through all the Members. 5. But the right and true Fire-Smith, in the Center, sitteth on the Heart, and car∣ryeth his dominion with or by the Spirit, into the Head, and hath his carnal house, viz. the Mind and Thoughts, and the Five Prince-Counsellors, viz. the Five Senses, which exist out of the Five Spirits of the Original, as we have men∣tioned in the Threefold Life. Third Book, as also in the Three Princi∣ples. Second and in the Aurora. First. 6. The Soul sitteth indeed in the inward Principle, but it ruleth also in the outward, viz. in the Constellation & the Elements, and if it be not a mymmick Ape, & suffer∣eth it self to be captivated, then it is pow∣erful enough over the outward, and the outward must suffer it self to be subdued, if the Soul sinketh it self down into God, and
cometh upon the Chariot of the Bride again into the outward, that it hath the ho∣ly Spirit for an assistant. 7. Then no hinderance from the Devil availeth any thing, it destroyeth his nest, and driveth him out, he must stand in scorn and derision. 8. And this is our Instruction and An∣swer to this Question; that it is not so to be understood, that when a mans Head is cut off, and the Blood runneth out, and the out∣ward Life breaketh, that it hitteth and kil∣leth the Soul. 9. No, it loseth indeed one Principle, but not the Substance of that Principle; that followeth after the Soul, in the Tin∣cture in the Spirit, as a Shadow, for the out∣ward Substance reacheth not the inward in the Soul, but only through the Imaginati∣on. 10. Else there is nothing in this World that can touch or kill the Soul, no Fire nor Sword, but only the Imagination, that is its Poyson; for it is Originally pro∣ceeded out of the Imagination, and conti∣nueth Eternally THEREIN.
The Twelft Question. How the Souls enlightening is. 1. VVE are to consider, that if the Sun were taken away out of this World, then all things would be in Dark∣ness; and then outward Reason might say, we are in Dark Death, and in the fierce wrathfulness of the Cold, and it were so indeed. 2. Now behold, O beloved Mind, con∣sider when thy Body perisheth, then thy Spirit also loseth the Sun; and then how thou wilt be in the Light, and by what means thou wilt see, I offer to you in sim∣plicity for your mind to consider of. 3. A thing, that is in the Eternal Liber∣ty, if it continually entereth into the Eter∣nal Liberty, hath no Darkness, for it dwel∣leth in nothing which affordeth that, it is free, as the Eye of God, which seeth into it self by or through the Substance. 4. When it imagineth in or according to the Lust, Pleasure or longing after any thing, then the Will goeth into that thing,
which the desirous Pleasure or longing it self, maketh, that very thing receiveth or taketh in the will into it self and over∣shadoweth it, so that it dwelleth in the Darkness, and can have no Light, unless it go out again into the Liberty. 5. Thus we give you, earnestly to un∣derstand, that in all our matters and doings, we have no Light, if we enter with the will into that which is done or acted, if we set our Heart and Will, Or Sacrifice to out own Net. Hab. 1. 16. upon the Work of our Hands, viz. upon Covetousness. Then we are in our Souls totally blind, and have no Light in us, but only the outward Light of the Sun, which gi∣veth light to the outward Body; if that breaketh or perisheth, then is the Soul cap∣tivated with that thing. 6. Understand here; The Souls Spirit and Will, for the stock or stem of the Soul is a dark valley, it hath no Light, and if per∣haps it lift up & kindle it self, yet it is but a fierce wrathful Fire-Flash, and is like the Devil, and cannot attain the Divine Light in it self. 7. The Cause is, it hath introduced A∣bomination into its Will and Spirit, which darkneth the Spirit, and holdeth it captive
with the Turba, for God's Light goeth not back again, but forward into the Eter∣nity. 8. And therefore is God's Eye twofold or in two parts, and standeth back to back; as is shewed above in the Figure; One part goeth forward into the still Eternity, into the Eternal Nothing, viz. into the Liberty. 9. The other goeth back again into the Desiring, and maketh darkness in the De∣siring, and therein the Center of Nature, and driveth on to the great Anguish and Sharpness. 10. Where then the Will sinketh down again out of the Anguish, through the Darkness into the still or quiet Liberty, and so bringeth along with it, out of the An∣guish, the fierce wrath of the Mobility, and the earnest severe Sharpness. 11. In which Sharpness, the Liberty (when the will bringeth the sharpness thereinto) becometh a high Triumphant majestick Light, which is called God's Light, which giveth light Eternally, and can be barred in by nothing, for it giveth Light in the Eternal Liberty, and desireth nothing more.
12. And now if thou earthly Man shouldst think, that God would receive thy Spirit into his majestick Light, whilst thou intro∣ducest Abominations, viz. Covetousness, which hath pride and state, which is the Fire-Life of Covetousness, into thy will; then thou wouldst thereby darken God's Majesty, and thy will and spirit, would stick still only in thy Covetousness, and would burn with the fire-source or quality of the Soul, in the glance of a looking-glass, viz. in pride or state, and couldst not reach or attain God's Majesty. 13. And if thou didst sit in the Cross of the holy Number Three, and wert surroun∣ded with all the holy Angels, yet thou didst but sit in the darkness, and thy spirit would give Light only into the Looking-Glass of that substance or thing, which thou thy self hast introduced into the Spirit. 14. Therefore now if the Soul with its Spirit in its Image, will behold God, and see into God's Majesty and Eternal Light; then must it in this world go two wayes; and then it will retain the Eternal Body, viz. God's Image, as also the outward Life, together with the Earthly Body, and will introduce the Wonders for which God hath created it in the outward life, which
it shall awaken in the outward life, even ALL of them into the inward life, and eter∣nally rejoyce it self therein, and have them as a Looking-Glass, and the right and true way is as followeth. The highly pretions Gate of the Mor∣ning Redness or Aurora. 15. Behold thou beloved Soul, if thou wilt have God's Light, and see with God's Eye, and wilt also have the Light of this world, and nourish thy Body, and seek the Won∣ders of God, then do it as God himself doth it. 16. Thou hast in thy Soul Two Eyes, which are set back to back one of another, one seeth into the Eternity, and the other back into Nature, and goeth alwayes on forth, and seeketh in the Desiring, and ma∣keth one looking-glass after another, let it be so, it should be so, God would have it so. 17. But the other Eye, turn not that back into the seeking, but with the right Eye alwayes draw the left backwards to thee, and let the Eye, together with the will of the wonders, not go from thee, from
the Eye which is in-turned into the Liber∣ty; draw its opened & made or acted Or works. wonders to thee. 18. Let that very Eye, seek food for the earthly Life, but let it not go into the food, viz. into covetousness, but draw it hard and close to the seeing Eye, and let it not go. 19. But let the hands work and make or procure food, and let the Eye draw the Wonders to it, but not matter, else that which is drawn in will be darkness to thee. 20. Let the Devil behind thee roar be∣fore thy left Eye, he cannot enter in, un∣less thou lettest thy Eye take in matter. 21. Thus wilt thou, when thy earthly Body breaketh, see all the wonders in the left Eye with the right, which thou hast made or acted and found here in this life∣time: and so when the earthly Body fal∣leth away, then is also thy left Eye free from the Ephes. 2. 3. . Nature of the fierce wrath. 22. And though it hath Nature, for it is Nature it self, which awakeneth and re∣taineth the wonders, yet it standeth then with the wonders in the Eternal Liberty, being it hath let in nothing of matter, therefore it is free.
23. And Nature with the Wonders, is a fire-sharpness, and layeth hold of the Eternal Liberty, and so maketh Majesty in the Liberty in the Wonders, from which the right Eye, which accounteth it self here in this life as dead, becometh en∣lightened, and rejoyceth it self Eternally with the left Eye in the Majesty of the highly joyous Kingdom, and eternally seeth God with BOTH Eyes. 24. This is one Gate, whosoever rightly in the spirit apprehendeth & seeth THIS, he seeth ALL whatsoever God IS, and CAN do: He seeth also there∣with or thereby, through Heaven, Hell and Earth, and through the Substance of all Substances; and is the whole Scripture, of whatsoever hath been written from the beginning of the world: but it is a preti∣ous sight: the Old Man knoweth it not, he seeth it not, but the New Man born or generated in God. 25. But being we are so hard to be understood by the purblind mind, therefore we will render it more simply: behold when thou
wilt with thy Soul, see God's Light, and wilt that it be enlightened from God, then do it thus. 26. Thou art in this World, and if thou hast a lawful honest Calling or Employment without falshood or wickedness, continue therein, work, labour trade and manage it as necessity requireth, seek Curious Works of Artifice. Wonders both in the E∣lements and in the Earth, be it in what Art, Science or Employment it will, it is all God's Work; seek in the Earth Silver & Gold, make artificial works thereof, build, till & plant, it is all to God's God's Works in Nature. Deeds of Wonder. 27. But listen to this A. B. C. thou should not suffer thy spirit to enter there∣into, fil or satiate it self therewith, & make a Mammon of it, and to set thy self there∣in as in a Darkness; else it is but God's Fool therein, and the Devils mymmick Ape, and setteh its will therein. 28. And thy noble Image becometh al∣tered according to thy Imagination in the Spirit, according to thy will which is in Covetousness; thou losest God's Image, for it is Magical, it is as subtile as a Spirit, and much subtiler, yea much subtiler and thinner than the Soul it self.
29. It is as God is, who dwelleth in the Eternal Liberty unapprehended by any thing, for it is thinner or purer then any thing; and so is also thy noble or pre∣tious Image, which yet standeth in Hea∣venly Flesh and Blood, and is the Substan∣tiality out of or from God's Body. 30. It is Christ's Flesh and Blood, and thy Soul dwelleth therein, it is the Fire of the Majesty therein. 31. And the holy Spirit sitteth in the Heart of the Image, and goeth out of the Image forth, with Voices, Languages, Wonders, Songs and Sounds; Into this Image thou bringest thy Wonders, if thou art true and faithful; and do it thus. 32. Put thy left will into the work which thou dost; and consider that thou art God's Servant, in the Vineyard of God, and labour faithfully, and put thy right will into God, into that which is Eternal, and see that thou be at no time secure or care∣less, but consider that thou art only in thy day labour, and shouldst continually listen to have the voice of the Lord, cal∣ling thee to come home; give Reason no place to say, this is my Treasure, it is mine own, I have enough, or I will get or gather much, that I may come to honour
in the World, and leave much to my Chil∣dren. 33. Consider, that thy Children, are God's Children, and thou God's Servant, that thy work is God's work; and that thy Money, Goods, Labour and Blood stand∣eth in God's hands. 34. He may do with them what he will, when he calleth thee to go home into thy own Country, then he may take thy Labour and give it to another. 35. And give thy heart no place to in∣troduce into thee the Will-spirit of High∣mindedness, into the Image. 36. Sink down thy Will-spirit alwayes into Humility before God, and so thy I∣mage goeth alwayes in the Humility with thy will into God's Majesty, and thy Image becometh continually enlightened with the high-triumphing Light of God. 37. O how chearful is the Soul, when its Anguish Source or Quality of the Fire, Kostet. tasteth Gods Light, how very friendly kind and courteous is it, how it boweth it self before God! Thus standeth the Soul and also the Image in the Spirit, all three one in another: for it is a Substance according to the holy Trinity.
38. Thus my beloved Brother, we give you in answer to this Question, that the Soul can no otherwise be enlightened than thus, this is its enlightening: It is in this world, and also in God; it is here in this life, a Servant to the Wonders of God, those it should open with one eye, and bring them with the other into the Beginning, before God, and put all its substance and doings into God's Will, and by no means say of any thing in this world, this is mine, I am Lord over it, for it lyeth, if it say so. 39. It is all God's, it self is Servant, and should converse in Love and Humily to∣wards God and its Brother, for its Bro∣thers Soul is a Fellow-Member of it self, its Brothers Joy in Heaven with God, is also ITS Joy, his Wonders are ITS Wonders, for in Heaven 1 Cor. 12. 6. chap. 15. 28. Col. 3. 11. God is all in all, Ephes. 1 23. He filleth all. 40. The holy Spirit is the Life in all, there is mere joy, no sorrow is there known, there all is God's, and all belongeth to the Image of God, there all is common and uni∣versal, one rejoyceth at anothers vertue and power, charity or glory, brightness and
beauty, there is no grutching or envy, all that remaineth in Death and in Hell. 41. Therefore ye Elect Children of God Regenerated in Christ, take this into con∣sideration, go out from Covetousness and own Self-will, ye have been a long time lead blindfold in Bable, Rev. 18. 4. go out from her; ye are called with a strong loud voice, it will shortly awaken or raise the Dead, let it prevail with you, that you may attain Eternal Joy in God. 42. The Spirit signifieth clearly, that what∣soever will not grow forth together with the new Sprout, that spring∣eth forth in the Mother, Rev. 19. 20. shall and must go into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, together with the Dragons Whore in Babel. 43. It is a time of earnest Severity, look not upon it with earthly eyes, it con∣cerns thee nearly, thou wilt well see in thy Death, what kind of Judgement it is, in what time and under what Turba thou hast lived; this we speak most earnestly as we ought.
The Thirteenth Question. How the Souls feeding out of the Word of God is. 1. VVHen the Soul entereth into the majestick Light as above men∣tioned, and receiveth the Light of God, then is it altogether longing and Psal. 42. 1. panting after it, and continually draweth into its desire, God's power and vertue, that is, God's Body, into it self; and the holy Spirit is the pow∣er and vertue of God's Spirit; thus it ac∣quireth God's Body and Spirit, and eateth at God's Table; all whatsoever the Fa∣ther hath is his Sons, and whatsoever the Son hath is his Images. 2. It eateth Gods Flesh, Christs, Flesh and from that eating, God's Body groweth in it, so that it also hath Gods Body, and is Gods Child, not only his similitude, but Child, it is born in God out of God's Essence, and liveth in God. 3. When it heareth in this world God's
Word taught or spoken from or by God's Children, then it layeth hold of the same, and eateth it. 4. The outward Man eateth earthly Bread, and the Soul eateth God's Bread, concerning which Christ said, John 6. 27. he would give us his Body for food. 5. And his Testaments are nothing else, we eate not spirit without body, for the Soul is Spirit beforehand, it would have a body, and thus it getteth Body and Spirit together. 6. Let this be told thee, O Babel, and consider how thou managest Christ's Testaments, what thou teachest; when thou saist, Christ's Testaments are Spirit, without Body, thou denyest God, thou de∣nyest God's Substantiality, Christ's Hea∣venly Body, which is greater than All, which is the Fulness of all things; but in its own Principle. 7. Thou earthly Mouth shalt not chew it with thy teeth, the Soul hath another Mouth, and receiveth it under the outward Element; the outward receiveth the out∣ward, and the inward receiveth the in∣ward. 8. Christs last Supper with his Disciples,
was even so, the outward is a Remembrance, the inward is the Substance, for Rom. 14. 17. the Kingdom of God con∣sisteth or standeth in Power and Vertue, it is magical, not as a thought, but essential, substantial. 9. The Magia makes Substance; for in the Eternal Nothing, there is Nothing, but the Magia makes somewhat where nothing is. 10. There is not only and barely Spi∣rit in God, but Nature, Substance, Flesh and Blood, Tincture, and All: This world externally is a Similitude of the In∣ward World. 11. We tell you, we speak what we see, feel, tast, and know, and it is not fi∣ctions and conceits, and that not for our own sake, but for yours, as one Member is bound in duty to another, that our joy may be in you, and that we may partake with you as brethren in ONE Substance. He that desireth to know more in this, let him read our Three fold Life. Third Part or Book, where he shall find the Circumstances concerning the Souls eating, and of Christs Testaments.
The Fourteenth Question. Whether such New Soul be without Sin. 1. VVE understand here the Propagated Soul in a Child newly born; my beloved Friend, this is a very acute Que∣stion, but to you my beloved Friend, it shall be answered, that the time of the opening is born or generated, the day dawneth or breaketh, the night is passed away; praise and Col. 1. 12. thanks be given to God for it, that hath generated us again to the Light, to an uncor∣ruptible or unfadable Inheritance, and hath received us for his beloved Children. 2. You my beloved Friend know well the heavy Fall of Adam; as we have exactly set it down in all our Writings, viz. that the Soul with its right Eye, hath turned it self away from God into the Spirit of this World, and is become disobedient to God, and hath destroyed its noble and pretious Image, and hath introduced a monstrous
Image, and let in the spirit of this world, whereas it should with its will, have strong∣ly ruled over it, and not at all, with the Soul, have eaten Evil and Good. 3. But now it hath done against God's Command, and put its Imagination into the Earthly Spirit, where suddenly the Tur∣ba captivated it, which hath introduced the Earthly Monster into the noble Image: And thus the Turba suddenly sought and found the Limit, in which the Image be∣came broken; and if the Word had not instantly set it self in the middle, it had Eternally remained broken. 4. And now also the Turba is become seated in the earthly Abyss, and hath cap∣tivated both Body and Soul, and bringeth the Body continually to the Limit, where then it breaketh it and casteth it away, and then the poor Soul remaineth raw and na∣ked without a body. 5. Therefore it is necessary that it con∣vert and turn with its right Eye into the Word again, and acquire again a Body generated or born of God, else it is raw or naked, and hath the Turba in it, which the Fire awakeneth in its great Anguish, for it is a vehement hunger, a seeker and a finder.
6. Thus it is now very apprehensible to us, that we are tyed and bound to the Spi∣rit of this World with the Soul, for the Turba holdeth us captive in the fierce wrathful Anger of God. 7. And though our Soul do go forth, and become generated in God, yet it hath the Turba belonging to the outward Body, which consumeth it, for it searcheth through it even into the Abyss, and there it findeth that it is only a Looking-Glass of the Eter∣nal: and then it goeth forth out of the Looking-Glass into the Eternal, and lets the Looking-Glass lye in the Nothing. 8. Thus you know very well, that the Soul with the Body in the Seed, is half earthly, for it is Sulphur, that is Phur and Sul, one among another, and the Tur∣ba is therein, which hath indeed might and power enough to break or destroy the Seed. 9. How then can a pure clean Soul be generated? It cannot be; It bringeth the Turba along with it into the world, and is sinful in the Mothers Womb. 10. But know, that God is become Man, or Incarnate, and hath put the word Fiat again into the Seed, though now the Turba be also in the earthly part, so that the Seed is not altogether free.
11. Yet it is in this manner with the Soul, so far as the Father and Mother are honest and vertuous, and in God, that the Soul is not left or forsaken of God, for it proceedeth out of the Fathers and Mothers Soul; and though a Child die in the Mo∣thers Womb, as it were without Baptism, yet it is baptised with the Fathers & Mo∣thers Spirit, viz. with the holy Spirit, which dwelleth in them, and the Turba will be broken off in death, for the Faiths part presseth into God. 12. But with wicked and ungodly Pa∣rents it is in another manner; The Soul, if the Child dyeth in the Mothers womb, falleth home to the Turba, and in Eternity reacheth not to God; also it know∣eth nothing of him, but is a Life accor∣ding to the Essence & Property of the Pa∣rents. 13. Where yet it doth not reach to the kindling or burning, for the Soul had not it self acted or committed sin, but is a foun∣tain-quality-Spirit, without self-desire and wonders, like the flame of Brimstone, and like an Ignis Fatuus, which cannot reach to God, but remain so between Heaven and Hell, in the Mystery, till the Judgment of God, which will gather in its harvest, and
give every thing its right and true place of Repository. 14. Though perhaps our learned Ma∣sters in this may have another kind of Phi∣losophy; but we enquire not after their Art, we have eyes, they have Arts, we speak what we see. 15. Thus we give you to understand, that no Soul is generated or born into this world, without sin, how honest vertuous and godly soever the Parents are, for it is conceived and bred forth or hatched in earthly Seed, and bringeth the Turba of the Body along with it, and that hath also sur∣rounded the Soul. 16. Therefore in the Old Testament God made a Covenant with the Children in Cir∣cumcision, and so Sich in Bund Gethan. orde∣red in the Covenant that they must shed their Blood, and drown the Turba of the the Soul therewith. 17. And in the New Testament there is the Baptism, wherein the holy Spirit with the Water of Life, washeth off the Turba of the Souls water, that it may come to God, and become God's Child. 18. But if any will say, that every one that hath not baptism, as Jews and Turks
and other People, with whom is not the knowledge thereof, who have not the Can∣dlestick among them, that they are all re∣jected of God, although they never so ve∣hemently press with their teaching, Life, and Death into the Love of God, that is a phancy and Babel-like spoken without knowledge. 19. Blessedness and Salvation lyeth not alone in the outward Word, but in the Pow∣er and Vertue: Who will exclude those that enter into God? 20. Is it not Babel who seduceth, and confoundeth the whole world; so that they have devided People into Opinions, and yet in their wills go but one way? who is the Cause of this, but the Antichrist, when he drew the Kingdom of God into his might, authority and power, and made fictions con∣cerning the Regeneration, of which when it comes to be day, the very Children will be ashamed of them? 21. A Man may say with good ground, that Antichrists Doctrine, is a fighting with a shadow as in a looking-glass, and a falshood and wickedness of the Serpent, which continually beguileth Eve. 22. Thus it is apprehensible to us, that no
Soul cometh into this world without Sin, every one bringeth the Turba along with it; for if it were without Sin, then it must dwell in a totally pure body, which hath no evil will or inclination at all, in which there is no earthly seeking or desire. 23. But thus indeed is every body and soul tyed and united together, till the Tur∣ba findeth the Limit of the Body; and then the Turba seeketh the works or actions of the Body; as hath been mentioned above.
The Fifteenth Question. How Sin cometh into the Soul, being it is God's Work and Creature. 1. IT is in such a manner as is above menti∣oned; The Turba together with the earthly seeking, came along with it into this world: and so the Soul becometh ve∣hemently drawn by two parties; first by the Word of the Lord, which is passed into the middle, which there of Love is become Man or incarnate, that draweth the Soul continually into God's Kingdom, and set∣teth the Turba before the eys of the Soul, so that the Soul seeth in Nature what is false or wicked and sin; and if it suffereth it self to be drawn, then it becometh regenerated in the Word, so that it is God's Image. 2. And secondly, the Turba also draweth the Soul mightily with its bands, and bring∣eth the Soul continually back into the earthly seeking or longing, especially in youth, when the earthly Tree sticketh full of green sprouting driving Essences and Poyson, and then the Turba thus flyeth
strongly or mightily in, so that many a soul in eternity cannot become freed and loos∣ed from it. 3. A thing which is from two beginnings, which stand in equal ballance or weight, doth by putting in more weight on the one part sink down, be it either by evil or good. 4. Sin maketh not it self, but the will maketh it, it cometh from the Imaginati∣on into the Spirit, and then the Spirit goeth into a thing, and becometh infected from the thing, and so the Turba of that thing cometh into the Spirit, and destroyeth first the Image of God. 5. And then it goeth further, seeketh deeper, and so it findeth the Abysse, viz. the Soul; and seeketh in the Soul, and so it findeth the fierce wrathful Fire, by which it mixeth it self with the thing introduced into the Spirit: and so now sin is totally generated or born: and so now all is sin, which desireth to bring that which is out∣ward into the Will. 6. The will should simply or singly be in∣clined and exercised in Love & Meekness, as if it were a nothing, or dead; it should only desire God's Life, that God may
work, act or create in it, and whatsoever it doth besides, its will should be inclined or intended so, as to do it for God. 7. But if it put its will into the Thing or Substance, then it bringeth that thing or Substance into the Spirit, which possesseth its Heart, and so the Turba becometh ge∣nerated, and the Soul captivated with that Thing. 8. Thus we give you for an answer, that no Soul cometh pure and clean out of the Mothers body or womb, be it begotten by holy or unholy Parents. 9. For as the Abysse and Anger of God, as also the earthly world, do all cleave to and depend on God the Father, and yet can∣not apprehend or touch his Heart and Spi∣rit; so it is also with the Child in the Mo∣ther Body or Womb. 10. If it be begotten of godly pious Pa∣rents, then each Principle, standeth in its own part, by it self; when the Turba ta∣keth the earthly Body, then the Heaven ta∣keth the Spirit, and so the Majesty filleth the Spirit, and so the Soul is in God, and is free from pain.
11. But while the Soul sticketh in the Earthly Life, it is not free, and it is because, the Earthly Spirit continu∣ally bringeth its Abominations, with its Imagination, into it, and the Spi∣rit must continually stand in strife against the Earthly Life.
The Sixteenth Question. How the Soul both in the Ada∣mical Body, as also in the New∣born or Regenerate Body is held or preserved in such union toge∣ther. 1. VVE have mentioned above, that there are Three Principles, which moreover are all Three in the Soul, and stand in one another as one thing: and we offer you this, that the strife in the Soul, beginneth in the Seeds while they yet lye shut up in both sexes in the Man and in the Wife, then clearly the Turba stirreth it self, in that the Essence of the Seeds drive up to a false or wicked Imagination, to a false or wicked desire. 2. And though indeed the Spirit doth subdue the Body, yet Note. it imagi∣neth, and that the Turba causeth in the Seeds, and no Man can well deny, but that to many that very Ima∣gination it self is offensive, and they wish
it banished from them, where there is a right sincere Spirit; therefore ye are to apprehend that the Souls Spirit sticketh in a miserable Pinch, and cannot be freed or loosed till the Turba taketh the Body. 3. There is no full union or agreement between the outward and the new-born or regenerate Man: the outward would con∣tinually devour the Regenerate, for they stand in one another, but yet each hath its own Principle, so that the outward cannot over-power the inward, if the Spirit do but continue in strife. 4. And they can thus well cleave one to another: for they all three stand or serve to God's Wonders, if they stand in their right and due order or subordination, each standing or continuing in its own Principle. 5. For the Soul hath the Fire-Domini∣on, and is the cause of the life of all three [Principles;] and the Spirit hath the Lights Dominion, in which the noble or pretious Image standeth together with God's Love; and the outward Spirit hath the earthly Lifes dominion, which should seek and open the Wonders, and the inward Spirit should give it wisdom wit & under∣standing to do it; and the Soul should ma∣nifest
or reveal to it the Abyss, viz. the great Secresy. 6. The Soul is the Jewel, and the Souls Spirit is the inventor or finder of the Jew∣el; the earthly Spirit is the seeker, and the earthly Body is the Mystery wherein lyeth the Arcanum of the great hidden Secresy; for the Deity hath manifested or revealed it self, with or by the Earthliness, as in a comprehensible Substance; therefore now THREE Seekers belong to the Soul. 7. And you should not look upon it so, as if we undervalued the outward Life, for it is the most profitable for us of all, as to the great Wonders of God; there is no∣thing more profitable to the whole Man, then that he stand still in his Threefold Do∣minion, and not go back with the outward into the inward, but go with the inward into the outward. 8. For the outward is a Beast, and be∣longeth not to the inward, but its Won∣ders which are generated forth out of the inward, and have opened or discovered themselves in a comprehensible Substance, they belong with their Figures, not with their Substance to the inward, those should the inward Spirit receive and take in, viz. God's Deeds of Wonder, for they will in Eternity be its JOY.
9. But we say, that the Soul, can very well be retained or held in the New Man, if its Tincture Spirit do but hinder the seeking and Imagination; and though the outward Spirit be Beastial, yet the inward understanding Spirit can hold the outward and subdue it, for that is its Lord, but he that letteth the Beastial Spirit be Lord, he is a Beast, and hath also a Beastial Image in the inward Figure in the Tincture. 10. And he that letteth the Fire-Spirit, viz. the Turba, be Lord, he is a substantial Devil in the inward Image; and then it is necessary, for the outward Spirit to pour water into the Fire, that it may hold the stern Spirit captive, whereas (whiles it will not be God's Image) it is a Beast according to the Inward Image. 11. And when we consider our selves in or as to the union, the outward Spirit is very profitable to us: for many a soul would perish, when the Beast-spirit acteth, which yet holdeth the Fire captive, and setteth the earthly beastial Labour and Joy before the Fire-Spirit, wherein it can de∣light it self, till it can through the Won∣ders somewhat discover its noble or preti∣ous
Image in the Imagination again, so that it seeketh it self again. 12. You my beloved Children who are generated in God, to you it is said, that it is not done without cause, that God hath breathed the outward Spirit into Adam, viz. the outward Life into his Nostrils. 13. It was dangerous for this Image, God knew how it went with Lucifer, and what the great eternal Magia can do; A∣dam also might have become a Devil, but the outward Looking-Glass hindered that, for where water is it quencheth the Fire. 14. And many a Soul in its malice and wickedness would in a little while become a Devil, if the outward Life did not hin∣der it, so that the Soul cannot quite and totally kindle and enflame it self. 15. How evil wicked and venomous is many a one, that he would murther and commit abominable evil and wickedness; but that his Fire hath Water, else it would be done and committed: as is to be seen in the Gall which is a fire poyson or ve∣nome, but is mixed with water, so that the pomp and fury of the Fire is allayed. 16. Thus it is also with the inward Sub∣stance; the Spirit of this World hath in∣sinuated it self in the Abyss into the Soul,
and hath in its Source or Quality mortal Water, wherewith it often moisteneth the Soul, when it would spit fire. 17. Also the outward Spirit could not without the Fire have a Life, and though it hath Fire in all Creatures, yet the Fire is onely the fierce Wrath of the inward Fire. 18. The Inward Fire, consumeth Earth and Stone, also Body and Blood, as also the Noble and precious Image, if it becometh kindled or inflamed in the Will, and there the Water is a Medicine for it, which lay∣eth the pomp or fury of going forth aloft over the Meekness of God, as Lucifer did. The Seventeenth Question. Whence, and wherefore, there is Contra∣riety of the Flesh and the Spirit. 1. YOu know beloved Brother very well, that Fire and Water is at Enmity, for the Fire is Life, and the Water is its Death, which you see very well; when Water is poured into the Fire, then is the source or quality of the Fire out, and the Fire is in Death;
2. But in Man it is not so totally in Death, in respect of the Light, which con∣tinually causeth the Fire, yet there is an Enmity, as between God and Hell there is Enmity, and yet Hell or Anger-Fire is Gods. 3. And God's Majesty would not be if his Anger were not, which sharpneth the Divine obscure hiddenness of the Eternity, by the fierce wrath of Nature, so that it becometh turned into Fire, out of which the high Light in the free Liberty becom∣eth generated, which in the meek source or quality maketh Majesty. 4. And yet the Fire is the only Cause, that in the Light, in the Meekness there is a Springing; for the Light existeth from the Glance of the Fire, and hath in it the source or quality of the Fire. 5. But as afore-mentioned, the Will sinketh in the Anguish into Death, and sprouteth forth again into the Liberty, and that is the Light together with the Fires source or quality, but it now containeth or holdeth another Principle in it, for the Anguish is become Love. 6. And just such a manner and kind it hath in the Body, for the Flesh striveth against the Spirit, the outward Fleshes
Life is a Looking-glass of the most inward Fire-Life, viz. of the Souls Life, there∣fore is the Souls Spirit-Life, together with the Light in the Tincture the Middlemost Life, and yet becometh generated out of the Soul. 7. But understand us according to its precious height; the Souls Spirit wherein the Divine Image standeth, origi∣nateth in the Fire, and is first the Will to the Fire; but when the fierce Wrath to the Fire so sharpneth and kindleth or in∣flameth it self, then the Will cometh into great Anguish, like a dying, and sinketh down in it self, out of the fierce Wrath, in∣to the Eternal Liberty, and yet it is no Dying, but thus the other or second World cometh to be out of the first. 8. For the Will now sprouteth into the other World, as a Sharpness out of the Fire; but without such Quality flowing forth, in the Eternal Liberty, and is a moving, driving, and apprehending of the Anguish Nature; it hath all Essences, which are become generated in the first sharp Fire-world in the Anguish; but they are as one that goeth out of the Fire into the Water, where the Anguish of the Fire remaineth in the Water.
9. Understand us thus; Concerning this Life of the Souls Spirit-Life; the Soul is the Center of Nature, The Spirit is the precious Noble Image, which God created to his Image, herein standeth the High-Kingly and precious Image of God, for God is also thus, and comprehended in the same Lifes quality or source. 10. The Spirit is not severed from the Soul; No; as ye see that Fire and Shining is not severed, and yet also is not one and the same; it hath a twofold source or qua∣lity, the Fire, fierce wrathful; and the Light, meek and lovely; and in the Light is the Life, and in the Fire Δ is the Cause of the Life. 11. Thus you may very easily and without much seeking find the Cause of the Contra∣riety of the Flesh and of the Spirit, for the Inward Spirit hath God's Body, out of or from the Meek Substantiality, and the Outward Spirit, hath the fierce wrathfull Fires-Looking-Glasses Body, viz. the Souls Looking-Glasses Body, which would continually awaken the fierce Wrathful∣ness, viz. the Great Wonders which lie in the Arcanum or secresie of the Souls Sternness, therefore the Inward Love-Spirit,
hindereth it, that it should not lift up it self and kindle or inflame the Soul, else it would lose its Love-habitation and Image, and the Souls Fierce-wrath would destroy it. 12. The Contrariety is thus; the in∣ward Spirit would be Lord, for it Subdueth the outward; and the outward would be Lord, for it saith, I have the Great Wonders and the Arcanum or Secret, and thus Glo∣rieth about the Mystery, and yet is but a Looking-Glass of the Mystery. 13. It is not the Substance of the My∣stery; but a Seeking or Searching, like a palpable Looking-Glass, in which the Mystery becometh seen, he will needs be a Master, being he hath attained one Prin∣ciple, and is an own Self-Life; but he is to be accounted a Fool in respect of the Mystery. 14. Therefore loving Brother, if you would seek the Mystery, seek it not in the outward Spirit, for so you will be decei∣ved, and get but a Glimps of the Mystery: go in even to the Cross, then seek Gold, you will not be deceived, you must seek the pure Child without blemish, in another World, in this world you find only the Rusty or Drossy Child, which is altogether
imperfect, and now take this right thus. 15. Go from the Cross back into the Fourth Form, there you have Sun and Moon one in another, bring it into An∣guish into Death, and drive on the made or framed Magick body so far, till it be∣come again, what it was before the Center in the Will, and then it is Magical and hungry after Nature; 16. It is a seeking in the Eternal Seek∣ing, and would fain have a Body, there∣fore give him for a Body, Sol, viz. the Soul, and then it will suddenly make it a Body according to the Soul, for the Will sprouteth in Paradise with very fair heavenly fruit without spot or blemish. 17. There you have the fair noble and precious Child, you Covetous stiff-necked Person, we must indeed tell you, seeing it is together born and generated with the time, and yet we will hereby only be un∣derstood by those that are Ours. 18. For we mean not A Looking-Glass or Heaven; but Gold; wherewith you boast, that hath so long time been your Idol: That is born or generated, and puts the Eyes of the blind Cow or Beetle quite out at last, so that it seeth less than before; but the Children shall see, eat and be
fat, that they may praise God. 19. We speak wonderfully here, yet onely that, which we should speak, which yet none wonder at, that he knoweth the My∣stery, who never learned it. Doth not an Herb grow without your counsel or ad∣vice, it enquireth not after Art; so also is the Mystery grown without your Art; It hath its own School, like the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, who spake with many Tongues and Languages without the precognita or the fore-skill of Art, and so is this Simplicity. 20. And it is a forerunning Message to thee Babel of thy Overthrow, that thou mayest know it, no fierce Wrath or Anger will avail; the Star is born or generated, which leadeth the Wise-men out of the East, but seek them only where thou art, and find thy self, and cast the Turba away from thee, and so thou wilt live with the Chil∣dren; this we speak earnestly, there is no other Counsel or Remedy, thy Anger is the fire, which will devour thy self. 21. Or dost thou suppose that we are blind? If we did not see we should be si∣lent; how would a Lye be pleasing to God? and so we should be found in the Turba,
which sifteth through the work and doings and substance of all men; or do we this ser∣vice for Wages? is it our living? why do we not hold to; depend on Bread according to our outward Reason? 22. If it be our day Labour, we should do as the Father will have us, For † Mat. 20. 8.we shall give an account of it in the evening; this we speak dearly and earnestly with deep seriousness. 23. Thus we can certainly understand the Contrariety of the Spirit and of the Flesh, and apprehend very well, how Two Spi∣rits are in one another, one striving against the other; for the one would have God, and the other would have Bread, and both are profitable and good. 24. But let this be said to thee O Child of Man, lead thy life Circumspectly, let thy Souls Spirit be Lord, and then thou wilt 2 Tim. 4. 7. have fought a good fight here, for here it is a very short Time. 25. We stand here in the field or soyl, and grow, let every one have a care what fruit he beareth; at the End of Harvest, eve∣ry ones work will be put into its own Barn.
26. It is better to labour a little while in irksomness and Toyl, and expect the great reward, wages and refreshment, then to be here a little while a King, and after∣wards to be a Wolf, a Lyon, a Dog, a Cat, a Toad, a Serpent and Worm in Or shape. Figure. 27. O Child of Man consider it, be warned, for we speak pretious things out of a Wonderful Eye, you will suddenly know it by Experience; there is yet but a little Time, For, the Beginning hath clear∣ly found the End, and this is a A Rose bud. little Rose out of the Beginning, pray become seeing, put away Covetousness from your Eyes, else you will wail and lament, and none will have pitty on you; Gal. 6. 7, 8. for that which any one soweth, that he will also reap, and then what will Pomp and Honour avail you, when it falleth away from you. 28. Ye are here very Potent, and af∣terwards very Impotent: John 10. 34, 35. ye are Gods, and yet your selves run to the Devil; take pitty of your Life, and of your fair Heavenly Image. 29. You are God's Children, be not
the Devils; let not the Hypocrites with praise and flattery keep you back, they do it for their Belly and Honour sake, for Moneys sake, they are the Ministers or Servants of the Great Babel? 30. Search thy self, ask thy Conscience, whether it be in God, it will complain against thee and say, drive the flatterer and hypocrite away from thee, and seek the clear Countenance of God, see not by a Looking-Glass. 31. God is for you, he is IN you, worship him, come with the lost or pro∣digal Son, to him, else none can take the Turba from you when you give him good words; you must only through Death go into the other world, whereinto your hy∣pocrisie and flattery cannot enter, else there is no forgiveness of sins; and if you give all to the Hypocrites or Flatterers, yet you are at one time as well as the other, capti∣vated in the Turba. 32. It is not so, as if one stood by and did take away the Turba from you, if you give him good words, No No, it is Magical, John 3. 3. you must be born again, as Christ saith, else you cannot attain God, do what you will, all Hypocrisie or flattery is de∣ceit.
33. If you would serve God, then you must do it in the New Man, the Earthly Adam can do him no service, which is ac∣ceptable to him, Sing, Ring, Call, Crie, Pray, and what he will, and whatsoever he doth, it is but fighting before a Look∣ing-Glass, the Will must be in it, the Heart must give it self into it, else it is a Con∣jecture and a fable or fiction of Antichrist, which filleth the whole world. 34. The WILL is Greater and Migh∣tier, then much Crying, it can destroy the Turba, and enter into the Image, it hath might or power to be God's Child, it can cast away Mountains, and raise the Dead, if it be born or Generated in God, and that The Holy Spirit give it leave. 35. For it must converse in Obedience and great humility, and Only cast its will into God's Will, that God in it, may be the Will and Deed, that is the way to Blessednesse and Happinesse, and to the Kingdom of Heaven, and no other; let the Pope or Doctors, Preach what they will to the contrary, all is lying and an Hypocriti∣cal flattering, fighting before a Looking-Glass.
The Eighteenth Question. How the Soul departs from the Body in the Death of a Man. 1. HEre we will invite the World for a Guest, especially Babel the Whore, to try whether a Child can be made out of her; for Death is a Terrible Guest, he throweth the Proud Rider with the Horse to the Ground. 2. My beloved Friend, that is a very sharp question, and needeth the Eyes of all the Three Principles, which can see very well, they must not die in Death, if they will enter in and see this, it must be Poyson to Death, and a Pestilence to Hell, it must take Death Captive, if it will see, else it gets no understanding, unless it self come into Death, then it will well feel what Death is, it will well tast, what that is, when one Principle breaketh, viz. one Life. 3. You have perceived above, that all Substances or Things are Magical, one be∣ing the Looking-Glass of the other, where
in one Looking-Glass the desire of the first Looking-Glass, becometh opened and cometh into Substance, and then as in all substances or things, the Turba is, which breaketh or destroys all to the first sub∣stance, and that is alone and hath no break∣er or destroyer. 4. For, there is nothing more, it can∣not be broken or destroyed, it standeth in it self and out of it self, and goeth whither it will, and then it is every where in no place; for it is in the Abysse, where there is no place of Rest, it must only rest in it self. 5. They seeing all Substances or Things, are come or proceeded out of One, there∣fore is the Beginning also in the Last Sub∣stance or Thing, for the Last is again turn∣ed back into the first, and seeketh the first; and findeth it in it self, and when it findeth the first, it letteth all the other go, and dwelleth in the Limit, and there it can be without source quality or pain. 6. For, there is nothing that can give it source quality or pain, it is it self, the thing of the first Substance; and though it be another thing, yet it is but its Twig, or Branch, and hath its will, and none other, for there is nothing that can give it another will.
7. We give you to understand concerning dying, thus; the beginning seeketh the Limit, and when it findeth that, it casteth the seeking away, that is the Earthly Life, that will be cast away, it must break or de∣stroy it self. 8. For, the Beginning, viz. the Soul, continueth in the Limit, and lets the Bo∣dy depart, and there is no complaint about it; also the Soul desireth it no more, it must go into the Limit, viz. into the Wonders of that which hath been done or wrought. 9. The Souls Spirit hath no woe done to it, when the Body departeth, but woe is done to the Fire-Life; for the Matter of the Fire, which hath generated the Fire, that breaketh away, but only in the Sub∣stance. 10. The Figure, remaineth standing in the Will, for the Will cannot break, and the Soul must continue in the Will, and taketh the Figure for Matter, and burn∣eth in the Will; for the first Glance of the Fire, goeth not away, but its Matter of the Earthly Life, viz. the Phur, will be broken away from it. 11. Thus the Fire becometh impotent,
and passeth into the Darkness, unless it be so that the Spirit have Heavenly Substanti∣ality, viz. God's Body, then the Fire, viz. the right or true Soul, received that same meek Body for a Sulphur, then the Soul burneth in the Love-Fire, and is wholly gone away out of the first Fire-Life. 12. It is now in God's Principle, the first fierce wrathful fire cannot touch it in Eternity, for it hath gotten another Source or Quality, and is rightly and truly New born or Regenerated, and knoweth no more of the first Life, for it is swallowed up in the Magia. 13. The Turba remaineth in the Earth∣ly Body, and becometh that again which it was before the Body was, viz. a No∣thing, a Magia, wherein all its doings mat∣ters or substances stand in Figure, as in a Looking-Glass; but not Corporeally, but according to the Manner of the Eternity; as we apprehend that all Wonders, before this world stood in a Mystery, as in the Virgion of Wisdom, but without Sub∣stance. 14. Thus now we apprehend also here, that, that very Mystery, in its parting became
so Manifested, that it cannot in Eternity be extinguished, but remaineth Eternally standing in the Distinction and in the Sepa∣ration, and is seen in the Magia, in the Separation or Parting, after that manner as it hath here formed it self. 15. Thus it is apprehensible to us, what the Separation or parting is, viz. This; the Turba hath found the Limit of the Sub∣stance, for sickness to Death is nothing else, but that the Turba hath kindled it self, and will break or destroy the Sub∣stance; It is at the Limit, and will cast away the Introduced Medium or Mid∣dle. 16. And this is also the Cause that the Body Dyeth, the Turba passeth into it self into the Fire, and so the Outward Life extinguisheth, for the Lifes fire becom∣eth withdrawn from it, and then it goeth into its Aether, and is at its Limit. 17. And so now if the Souls Fire hath not in its Spirit, God's Body, nor in its will, in its Desire, then it is a Dark Fire, which burneth in Anguish and in great horrour, for it hath only the first four forms of Nature in the Anguish. 18. And if the Will hath nothing of the Power or Vertue of Humility, then there
is no sinking down or into it self, through Death into Life, but it is like an anxious furious Wheel, that would fain alwayes go upwards, and yet it goeth downwards on the other side; It is a kind of Fire, and yet it hath no Fire burning or flaming. 19. For the Turba is the very stern or strong Austereness or Astringency and Bit∣terness, where the bitterness alwayes seeketh the Fire, and would strike it up, and the harsh Astringency holdeth it Cap∣tive, so that it is only a horrible Anguish, and goeth alwayes in it self as a Wheel, and Imagineth; yet it findeth nothing but it self, it draweth it self in it self, and impregnateth it self, it devoureth it self, and is its own Substance. 20. It hath no other Substance but this, viz. what the Souls Spirit hath made or acted in the outward Life, as Covetous∣nesse, or High-mindednesse, Cursing, Swearing, Scorning, Jeering, Disgrace∣ing or Back-biting, Slandering, Envy, and Hatred, Fierce Wrath, Anger, Falshood or Wickedness, that is its Food and the pastime of its Exercise, for the Turba taketh its Substance Matters or Doings along with it in the will, As Rev. 14. 13. its works fol∣low after it.
21. And though perhaps it hath done or acted somewhat that is good, yet that is done but in a Glymps for a shew in ap∣pearance, out of a vain Glorious or Hypo∣critical Mind; and so it standeth after∣wards in a continual Climing up, it Ele∣vateth it self continually, it would alwayes be above the Meekness, and yet appre∣hendeth or knoweth it not, nor seeth it, it is a Continual Elevation above God, and yet is but an Eternal sinking down, it seeketh the Ground or Foundation, and there is None, and this is its Life. 22. And if it hath in its life-time, laid hold of any thing that is pure of the Love, as many that at Last convert in the End, those sink down thus in themselves, through the Anguish; for the Humble sparkle, goeth down through Death into Life, where indeed the Souls Source or Quality and Pain taketh its End; but it self is a little Branch or Twig Sprouting into God. 23. Now what Purifying-Fire or Pur∣gatory, the Soul hath, before it can enter into it self with the little Sparkle, cannot sufficiently be written or expressed, and how it is then detained and plagued by the Devil, which the too wise and politick
world will not believe, it is so Cunning, and yet so blind, it understandeth it not, and yet continually hangeth or dependeth upon the LETTER. Oh that none might come into it, we would willingly be si∣lent. 24. But we speak of no strange source, quality or pain, but only of that which is in the Turba, also of no Power of the De∣vil over the poor Soul, but only its ter∣rour and horrible Apprehension of what is represented before it, so that the Souls Ima∣gination is sufficiently terrified therein. 25. It is not by far in such a manner with the Soul, as Babel teacheth, saying, the Devil beats and torments the Soul; that is very blindly spoken; the Devil is not at Odds with his Children, they must all do his will; the Hellish Anguish, and horrour is torment enough to them, every one in his own abominations; Every one hath his own Hell, there is nothing else that layeth hold of it but its own Venom or Poyson. 26. The Four Forms of the Original of Na∣ture, is the Common or Universal source quality or Torment, which every one feel∣eth
according to his Turba, one different from another; as a Covetous one hath Frost, an Angry one Fire, an Envious one Bitter∣ness, a Proud stately one, hath flying up and yet Eternal sinking down, and falling into the Abysse; A Blasphemer swalloweth up into himself the Turba of his belched forth Abominations: A false or wicked Deceitful Heart hath the fourth Form, viz. the great Anguish. 27. For, the Turba standeth in the Fire The Fire-circle or the Globe, makes the Heart or De∣sire, whose Center and Circumference is all one every where. Cir∣cle or Globe, viz. in the Heart of the Soul, and false or evil speaking, Ly∣ing, and untruth or un∣faithfulness are an hor∣rour or abomination and Gnawing, a Cursing or Anathema in it self, and so on. 28. A Potentate, who hath oppressed the poor and Miserable, and consumed his sweat or Labour in Pride, he rideth in the Curse of the Miserable in the full height of the Fire, for the necessities and di∣stresses of the Miserable stick all in him. 29. He hath no Rest; his Pride climb∣eth up Continually, he doth in his condi∣tion there, as he did here, he seeketh con∣tinually,
and yet wanteth all things; that which he had too much of, that he hath now too little of; he devoureth himself continually for Substance to feed on, and yet hath none, for he is Magical. 30. He hath lost his right true Image, and hath as it were the Image of a Proud Prancing Horse, or of that which he hath here been Conversant about, that which he taketh with him in his will, that is his Image; Mat. 6. 21. where his Heart is, there is his Treasure also, and that in its Eterni∣ty. But Sir, smell and consider, what the Last Judgement bringeth with it, wherein all shall pass through the Fire, when the Floar shall be purged, Mat. 3. 12. and every one go into his own place, at which the very Devils do Tremble.
The Nineteenth Question. How the Soul is Mortal, or how it is Immortal. 1. A Thing which hath an Eternal Begin∣ning, hath also an Eternal End; as the Essence of the Soul hath. 2. But as to what concerneth the Image which God created, which hath a Tempo∣ral beginning, that is generated out of the Eternal, and will be set in the Eter∣nal Substance without source quality or pain. 3. And where there is no source qua∣lity or pain, there is no Death; and though there be source quality or pain, as in Hea∣ven there is source quality or pain, yet it is in One will or in Harmony, and that is grounded or founded in the Eternity: There is nothing that findeth it, and so no∣thing can come into it. 4. And now where there is one will, as in God, who is all in all, there is nothing else that can find the wil, there is no Turba there, for the will desireth nothing else,
but only it self and its Twigs or Branches, which all stand in one Tree in one Essence; the Tree is its own Beginning and its own End. 5. The Soul is proceeded out of God's Mouth, and goeth in the dying of the Bo∣dy, again into God's Mouth, it is in the Word, the Substance, and in the Will, the Deed. 6. Who will now judge or condemn that thing which he hath in his own Body? as the Souls is, which is in the Body of God, it is hidden from all Evil, in God; Who will find it? none but Gods Spirit, and one Soul another, and the Communi∣on and Fellowship of Angels. 7. But the wicked Soul hath lost its Image in the Limit, for it is entered into the Limit, and the Limit is the End of the Image; the Turba destroyeth the First Image, and draweth the Wills Substance or Actings to it for an Image, and these are also Immortal, for the Eternal Na∣ture dyeth not, for it is from no Begin∣ning. 8. If the Eternal Nature in the Anger∣fire, should die, then also God's Majesty would Extinguish, and of an Eternal some∣thing,
there would be an Eternal Nothing, and that cannot be; that which is from Eter∣nity continueth Eternally. 9. The False or wicked Soul can awa∣ken no other Source or Quality, but on∣ly that which hath stood from Eternity in the Anger-Eye, viz. in the Center of Na∣ture, 10. All hath been from Eternity, but Essentially in the Essence, not in the Sub∣stance of the Essence; not Substantial Spi∣rits but Figured Spirits, without Corpori∣sing, have been from Eternity, as in a Magia, where one hath swallowed up the other in the Magia. 11. And out of Both, the Third is come to be, according to the Form or Manner of them both: there hath been a stirring up from Eternity, and a figured Substance, and the Creation hath set all in Or Works of Wonder. Wonders, so that in the Eternal Magia now and in Eternity all standeth in Wonders. 12. If the wicked Souls had introduced no Substance in their will, then there had been no Woe in them, there would have been no feeling or perception of pain but Magia; but the Substance is an Image, and is in the Turba, and so there is a
perceptible source quality or pain. 13. It is a dying and yet no dying, but a will of Dying, viz. an Anguish in that same Substance or Thing, which is introduced into the will. 14. And that causeth that all things pant after God, and yet cannot reach him, and that maketh Anguish and Sorrow for the Introduced Evil, Note. the Soul continually thinking, if thou hadst not done this or that, thou mightest have attained the Salvation of God, and so the Evil Substance Matter or Thing done or committed, maketh the Eternal Despair. 15. Therefore we say, that no Soul Dyeth, be it in God, or in Hell, and its Substance or Doings remain standing E∣ternally to the Glory of God's Won∣ders.
The Twentieth Question. How the Soul comes or returns to God again. 1. THis is clearly enough explained al∣ready, that it hath been spoken out from God's Mouth, and by the Holy Spi∣rit created into the Image of God. 2. Therefore if it continue so, then, when it passeth out of the Earthly Life, it is clearly in God's Mouth; for it is in God's Body; No Source Quality or pain toucheth it.
The One and Twentieth Question. Whither the Soul goeth when it depart∣eth from the Body, be it Saved or not Saved. 1. HE that understandeth rightly the three Principles, hath here no further question: for the Soul goeth not out at the Mouth, for it went not in at the Mouth; but it passeth only out of the Earthly Life, the Turba breaketh off the Earthly Life, and then the Soul remaineth standing in its Principle. 2. For, the Body doth not lay hold of it, no Wood nor Stone layeth hold of it, it is thinner than the Air, and if it hath God's Body, then it goeth directly as a Conquerer quite through the Turba, viz. through the Anger of God, and quite through Death, and when it is through, then it is in God's Body: 3. It continueth with its here-made-Wonders and Substance or Matters and
Doings, it seeketh God's Majesty and the Angels Face to Face. 4. Where it is, it is in the unsearchable World, where there is no End nor Li∣mit, whither can it then go away from thence? Mat. 24. 28. Luke 17 37. Where the Carcase is, thi∣ther the Eagles gather together: It is in Christs Flesh and Blood, with Christ its Lord. 5. And though it should go a Thousand Miles, yet it would be in that Place where it was when it went forth, for in God there is no Limit, near and afar off is all One, in him. 6. It is as swift as the Thought of a Man; it is Magical, it dwelleth in its Or Works and Actual Thoughts, Words and Deeds which it Exercis∣ed in this Life. Wonders, they are its Therefore in our Fathers house are many Mansions or dwelling places or particular Houses House or Mansion or Habitation. 7. The Substantiality Externally without it, is Paradise, a springing or sprouting, blossoming and growing, of all bright fair Heavenly Fruits: As we have all sorts of Fruits in this World, which we feed on in an Earthly Manner: So also there are all manner of Fruits in
Paradise, which the Soul may Eat of, they are in Colour and Vertue and Power as al∣so in Substance, not as a Thought, though they are as Thin and Subtile or pure as a Thought, yet Substantial, comprehensible to the Soul, palpable to be felt and hand∣led, full of Vertue and Power, also Jucy or full of the Sap of the Water of Life, all from the Heavenly Substantiality. 8. The Heavenly Body of the Soul, is from the Pure Element, out of which the Four Elements are generated, and that giveth or affordeth flesh, and the Tincture, Blood; the Heavenly Man is or consisteth of Flesh and Blood, and the Paradise is the power or virtue of the Substantiality: It is Heavenly Earth, not comprehensible to our outward Reason. 9. But we will now once more teach another A. B. C. All have not Christ's Flesh on them in this World hidden in the Old Adam, indeed of very many scarce one, onely the Regenerate, who are gone forth from their own Will into Gods Will, in whom the Noble and Precious Mat. 13. 31. Ch. 17. 20. Luke 17. 6. Grain of Mustard Seed is sown, there a Tree is sprung up and grown.
10. Most Souls go from the Body with∣out Christ's Body, but they hang by a Threed, and are in their Faith at last en∣tered into the Will, which Souls are in∣deed in the Spirit in the Image, but not in the Flesh. 11. They wait for the last Judgement Day, wherein the Image, viz. the Body will go forth out of the Grave out of the first Image, for God will awaken or raise it up through Christ's Voice, even that Image which Adam had in his Innocency, which is sprouted or grown with or by Christ's Blood. 12. But the Earthly Body shall not touch it, that must also in the Turba come before the Judgement, but after the Sen∣tence of the Judgement the Turba swal∣loweth it up, and the wonders only remain standing. 13. Understand us aright thus; Those Souls which must thus wait for their Bodies at the Last Judgement Day, they continue with their Bodies in the still Rest without feeling any pain, till the Last Judgement Day, but in another Principle. 14. They have in the Earth no Dark∣ness, also no Majesty, but they are in the
One onely still-Liberty in Rest, without pain, without touching of the Body; 15. But they see their Their Thoughts Words and Deeds but Act nothing with them. Wonders, yet they per∣form nothing in them, for they wait upon God, and are in Humility; for they are sunk down through Death and are in another World; but there is yet a Cliff or Gulf, between them and the Holy Souls in Christs Flesh and Blood, yet not a Prin∣ciple, for they are in one and the same Principle. 16. But a Spirit without a Body, hath not that Might or Power, as that Spirit which is in the Body, therefore they are in the Rest, they are under God's Altar; 17. When the Last Judgement Day cometh, it will then go forth, and eat of God's Bread, and put on God's Body, as is mentioned in the Reve∣lation of John, where the Souls Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. in white Garments under the Altar; say, Lord when avengest thou our Blood? and it is said to them, that they should rest a little while, till their Brethren come to them, which shall be slain for the Witness of Jesus. 18. But the wicked Souls have another
place, viz. in the most innermost, which also is the most outermost, in the Darkness: those Souls dare go no whither, they re∣main directly with the Body, in their Sub∣stance or Doings, but not in this World; also they do not touch the Earth. 19. They are indeed powerful over the Earth, they can open it without Substance or Labour and Feeling, but the outward principle they have not, they are not pow∣erful enough over the outward Spirit, and yet it can a long time play jugling Tricks in the Astral starry or Airy Spirit. Sy∣dereal Spirit. 20. As many of them appear again in the Starry Spirit, and seek rest or Absti∣nence, also cause much terrour and hurli∣burly in Houses, all which they do through the starry Spirit, till that be consumed, and then its Pomp lyeth in the Darknesse, and expecteth the Last Judgement. 21. Our Babel saith, it is the Devil which go∣eth about so in the form or shape of the Soul; indeed there are right Devils enough with a Damned Soul; but it is not a very Devil, such a one, as is in the Abysse, and very readily plagueth the Soul in the time
of the Body, in the Abysse of the Soul. 22. Though indeed it is not difficult for him to put on a Deceivers Hypocritical Garment, he can easily put on an Out∣ward Garment, to seduce and to terrifie Man. 23. But this we must complain against Babel, that she is so altogether blind, and hath so little knowledge of God: she hath cast away the true Magia and Philosophy, and taken in the Antichrist; now she wanteth Wit Ingenuity or Understanding; she hath Art, but only Wit and Understanding fail∣eth her and breaketh, she hath broken the Looking-Glass, and seeth with Specta∣cles. 24. What shall a man say? the world is blindfold, men draw it into a Snare, and lead it captive, and it seeth it not, and it were indeed free, if it did but see it, there is wicked knavish Cunning in the String men bind it with: Thou wilt soon become seeing, it is bright day, only Psal. 44. 23. 121. 4, 5. A∣wake thou keeper of Israel. 25. Thus beloved Friend, be informed of this, that there is great difference of Place and Condition among Souls, all ac∣cording
to that into which a Soul is entred. Is it holy and born anew or Regenerate? then it hath a Body, which waiteth only for the Wonders of the Body, at the last Judgement Day; it hath comprised them clearly already in the Will, but they shall stand before the Judgement at the Last Day: All Souls the Good and the Evil, every one shall receive its Sentence and Wages: 26. The Holy shall be set in the sight of the Wicked, that they may see and tast the Causes of their Source and Torment. 27. If any shall conceit a several place or space, where they shall sit one among ano∣ther, that is quite contrary to the Magia; every one is in its own Land Soyl or Countrey, and not bound to the place of the Body, but it may be where it will, and and then wherever it is, it is there either in God or in the Darkness; 28. God is every where, and the Dark∣ness is also every where; the Angels are also every whery; every one in his own Principle and in his own source or quali∣ty. 29. The Conceits of outward Reason, without apprehension and knowledge of
the Principles is a fighting with a shadow in a Looking-Glass; If I did ask a Thou∣sand times, and should be alwayes answer∣ed something concerning God, if I were but still in Flesh and Blood; I should look upon it as Babel doth, which supposeth the Soul goeth up into a Heaven above the Stars; I know nothing yet of that Hea∣ven, and I can well forbear being there. 30. It is indeed above, and there are the Angelical Prince-Thrones, but this Eye or Globe. Eye of this Aether, is OUR Principality and our Kingdom. 31. Indeed it is all one with them that are in the UPPER Heaven and with them that are in OURS, but our Creation and Substance or Doings is in our Aether; A Soul may well go thither if it desireth, it will be very lovingly received and enter∣tained by Gods Angels. 32. For there is the same Substance of God with them as with us, and this only is the difference, that they have Angelical works among them wholly pure without spot or Blemish, and we have the Great Wonders, therefore they delight also to be with us, and they are besides that, Heb. 1. 14. Our Mini∣string
Servants during the Life of the Bo∣dy, and resist the Devil. 33. Now being the Angels are in this World in the Holy Principle, whither should the Soul then first go? perhaps into Pride as Lucifer did, might Babel think; O no, it remaineth in Humility, and looketh upon Gods Or Works. Won∣ders; as God's Spirit goeth, so that goeth also. The Two and Twentieth Question. What every Soul departed doth, whe∣ther it rejoyceth or no, till the Day of the Last Judgement. 1. THis Question compriseth or treateth of the richly Joyful Glorious Gate to the apprehension of the Or Souldierly triumphant prize-Garland. Victorious Garland of the Soul. 2. When a beloved Son travels abroad, for Arts and Sciences and Honour into a strange Countrey afar off, he often think∣eth
of Home, and of the time of return to enjoy his Parents and Friends; he rejoy∣ceth at the thought of that day, and waiteth for it with inward Joy and Longing, and exerciseth himself in his Substance or Matters business and employment. affairs, that he may get also Art and Ingenuity or understanding and experience, wherewith he may rejoyce his Parents Kindred and Friends. 3. In like manner we offer to your Mind, and give you this to Consider of, that the Soul without the Body, hath great inward Joy, and waiteth for the last Judge∣ment Day, with great inward desire, when it shall get its bright fair Holy Body with the wonders again. 4. Also its rest in its Will, where then it seeth its works according to the kind and manner of the unsearchable Magia, which it will first get in the Figure at the last Judgement Day, with the New Body out of the Old. 5. And it is highly apprehensible and perceptible to us, but in the Spirit accord∣ing to its knowledge, that the blessed Souls, rejoyce in their here-Exercised-La∣bour, and do exceedingly recreate them∣selves in their Wonders which they see
Magically; For those which have brought many to Righteousness, those have their wages in the Magia in the Will, before their Eyes. 6. Those who have suffered much per∣secution for the Truths sake, they see their bright Triumphant Garland, which they shall at the Last Judgement Day, set upon the New Body. 7. Those that have done much good, shall have it shining in the Will before their Eyes. 8. And they that have been for Christs Doctrine and Truths sake, despised perse∣cuted and slain, their Tryumphal Victory is before their Eyes, like one that hath o∣vercome his Enemy in Fight, and represents the Victory before his King and Prince, which he hath in Great Honour and Glo∣ry, where his King receives him with great Joy, and keeps him by him as his faithful Assistant. 9. Now what joy is in these, we have no Pen to Write; only we apprehend that those for the most part, in this world have put on God's Body, and so are in greater Perfection then the other; they wait for the Last Judgement Day, with Great Joy Honour and Glory, when their Works in
the Heavenly Figure shall pass before their Eyes, and the wicked shall see Acts 9. 5. against whom they have kicked. 10. Every such Soul rejoyceth in great Hope before the Face of God, at that which shall befall it: for it apprehendeth its wages, but cannot receive that without the Body, for it hath done its Labour in the Body, therefore it will get that again also which will follow after it in the New Body. 11. For although the highly pretious Holy Souls have in this world put on Christs Body, so that they stand as an Image of God in Heaven, yet all their works have been made or wrought in the Old Body, which was God's Looking-Glass, and they shall in the Resurrection be presented to them in the Figure exactly Heavenly in their Body. 12. For the first Image which Adam was before the Fall, is become Regenerated in Christ, and will be put on to the Soul again with its Wonders, and though it hath Gods Body aforehand, yet the Wonders stand in the first Image. 13. But the Turba, with the outward Kingdome of the outward source or quali∣ty,
is gone, for it was a Looking-Glass, and is now become a Wonder; It liveth without Spirit as a Wonder, and will be put upon the Soul in great clarity or Brightness from the Light of God: which the Holy Souls rejoyce at exceedingly, and wait for it with great longing. 14. And we present to your apprehension, that every blessed Soul Mat. 29. 6. 7. trimmeth its lamp, that it may go to meet its Bridegroom at the Last Judgement Day, they renew their Wills continually, and consider how they shall rejoyce in their New Bodies in the Wonders with all holy Men and Angels; there is a Continual ri∣sing up of Joy in them, when they think of that which is to come, every one accord∣ing to their vertue or capacity. 15. As their works have been different upon Earth, so also is their Hope; for a day Labourer who hath done much ser∣vice, rejoyceth at his wages, so also here there is a friendly Substance of Solace a∣mong them and in them. 16. All scorn and blasphemy laid upon them, which they were not guilty of, is a great Victorious Honour and Glory to
them, that thus have suffered in Innocen∣cy wrongfully, and put on Patience in Hope, and this they have moreover, that death cannot take from them nor add to them, the Soul taketh along with it what it hath comprehended. 17. Their often hearty Prayers well wishing and well doing to their Neigh∣bour, is their food, which they eat, and rejoyce themselves, till their New Body shall eat Paradisical Fruit. 18. But those which have put on God's Bo∣dy here, they eat without Ceasing at Gods Table; but the Paradisical Fruit belongeth to the Body of the Wonders, which shall a∣rise out of the Grave, which was created in Paradise: For it was made out of the beginning, and bringeth the End with the Wonders again into the Beginning. 19. And wonder not, as if we speak, as like∣ly we are understood in your Eyes, con∣cerning TWO Bodies of the most holy Saints, indeed there is not two of them, It is but ONE; consider only how God's Substantiality filleth all, and that is God's Body, which is in this Life, put on to the holy Souls.
20. For they cast their Will into God's VVill, and so they receive also God's Bo∣dy, which filleth All: their VVill dwelleth in God's Body, and eateth in God's Bo∣dy, of God's VVord, of God's Fruit, of God's Power and Vertue, and Christ is in God, God is become Christ: 21. Thus they carry about them Christs Body in God, and yet nevertheless wait for their First Adams holy Body with the VVonders, which shall be put on them with Paradisical source or quality. 22. For, God's purpose must stand, he created the first Body in and for Paradise, it should remain eternally therein; It must go in thither again, and the Soul upon the Cross of the Number Three, into the Mouth of God, from whence it came; and and yet the whole Person with Body and Soul remaineth one in another; but God filleth all in All. 23. O, that we had a Humane Pen, and could according to our Apprehension write it down in your Souls-Spirit: How would many convert out of Sodom and Gomorra, out of Babel and the Covetous proud valley of Misery, which yet is but Anguish and Source Quality or Torment, full of fear pain and terrour.
24. Thus we give you to apprehend, and give you highly to consider of, the Lamen∣table and Miserable State and Condition of the Damned Souls; what they have to Ex∣pect, and but briefly, because the next question doth it at large. 25. Their Expectation is like a Captive imprisoned Malefactor that continually li∣steneth, when any thing stirreth, when the Executioner should come and execute Ju∣stice, & give him his Reward; so also they: 26. They have a false evil or wicked Conscience, which gnaweth them, their sins present themselves continually before their Eyes, their works they see also Ma∣gically; they see all the injuries and un∣righteousness they have done, their vani∣ty and voluptuous wantonness, their unmeasurable Pride pomp state and surly highmindedness, they see their Oppressi∣on of the Needy and Miserable, their scorning and domineering Implacable∣ness. 27. Their false or wicked Refuge Confidence and relyances flyeth from them, their Hypocrisie and slattery, was but a fighting with a shadow as in a Looking-Glass, it did not reach the
The Heart of Gods Love shed abroad in their own Hearts. Heart of God, these stand indeed before them in the Magia, viz. in their Will & Mind visibly, but when they seek and search therein, then they stir up the Turba of the Fire, which will al∣wayes consume the Looking-Glass, and then there is fear and terror. 28. For, they see and know, that at the Last Judgement Day, all shall be tryed by the Eternal Anger-Fire of God, and they feel very well, that 1 Cor. 3. 15: their works will remain in the Fire. 29. This doth astonish even the De∣vils, when they consider their Fall, which now standeth in, or lyable to, God's Judge∣ment, expecting what he will do, which the Holy Scriptures mention sufficiently to us, especially the Judge Christ him∣self. 30. And thus we give you to under∣stand the total Miserable Estate and Con∣dition of the Damned, so that when they should trim their Lamps for the Bride∣groom, then they tremble, and their works wound them, which yet the Turba conti∣nually sets before their Eyes. 31. Now those that are highly Damned
Souls, are Desperate, they renounce God, they Curse and Blaspheme him, and are his Enemies to the utmost. 32. They hold their Cause to be just, they resolutely set themselves against God, and think thus with themselves, Is there Fire with him, so are we Fire; Is there source quality or Torment with him, so will we climb up in the Fire qua∣lity or Torment above God and Heaven; what care we for humility, we will have the Might Power and Strength of the Fire, we will be above God, we will do Won∣ders by our own Power Might and Abi∣lity. 33. We have the Root, God hath but the Glance; let us be Lord Paramount, God shall be our Servant; our Mother is his Life, we will at once destroy his strong City, and Fortress. 34. They have the same thoughts that Souldiers have, who storm Walls Forts and Towers, and think the City is their own, though it cost them their Lives. Un∣derstand us thus, as there is a Hell, so there is a Heaven, and as there are Inhabitants in the one, so there are Inhabitants in the other, and that in God is a Great Wonder, all standeth or serveth to his Glory.
The Three and Twentieth Question. Whether the Wicked Souls without difference in so long a time before the Day of Judgement, find any Mi∣tigation or Ease. 1. A Thing that goeth into an Eternal En∣trance, that is also at the Eternal End; who will or can give any thing into the hand of him that is a far off, and is not present, that so he might have the thing given him; surely that onely is given to him, which is in that place where he is; and a thing that goeth forth with its Will out of its self, can receive nothing within it self, for it desireth nothing within it self. 2. Thus is the Wicked in this World inclined, he is gon forth with his Will out from himself, into Covetousness, into Pomp Pride and Voluptuousness, into Blasphemy, Gluttony and Drunkenness, Whoredom and Wantonness, his Will is
continually Conversant in scorning and de∣spising the Miserable, in disgracing and Contemning, plaguing and vexing the Righteous, and to tread him under foot with Power and Authority. 3. The Right and Truth he hath mixed with Lies and Falsities, and continually Job 15. 16. swallowed down unrighteousness as a Cow doth Water, his going forth hath been bitter Anger, and that he hath esteemed to be his Might and Power, his Will hath been willfulness, he hath done what he listed, he hath Danced after the Devils Pipe, and hath only entered into Cove∣tousness, he hath accounted his Money and Goods for his only Treasure, into which his Will and Mind hath continually entered. 4. He hath not entered into himself and sought the Love, much less Humility, the Miserable and needy have been accounted his Footstool, he hath oppressed them with∣out Measure, and hath counted that for Art and Wit, when he could Circumvent the simple, and take away the Fruit of his Labour; he hath supposed he hath used good Policy in it, that he might gain some∣what to himself, that he might be able to
do what he will, thus artificial is he and dextrous, and standeth in Great VVis∣dom. 6. All this and much more he hath fra∣med in his VVill and Mind, and therewith hath he filled the Image of his Souls-Spi∣rit, and all standeth in its Figure, and now when the Body deceaseth, then hath the Turba comprised all this in the Spi∣rit. 7. And if the Spirit would now go into it self, then the Turba goeth alone with it, and seeketh the Ground, viz. the Souls Root, and so the Fire doth but there be∣come kindled. 8. And we give you to understand that the Souls of the VVicked have no Mitigation; it is their best Mitigation and Joy, when they clime up in their Will and Mind with their here-acted Works and Matters, and they desire still continually to do those things, it grieves them if they have not sufficiently oppressed an honest or vertu∣ous Man. 9. Their Will and Mind is just as it was here; they are Spirits of Pride as the Devil is, also of Covetousness, and so they swallow down their Abominations
which they have here In Thought Word or Deed. Act∣ed: Their Joy is onely to think how they will despise and scorn God, and be their own Lords and Masters, that is their Ease and refresh∣ment, and no other. 10. For, where will they get any other Ease? They dare not for shame lift up their Eyes to God, and they dare not fly to the Holy People which they have here despised, they are ashamed of that, for their falshood and wickedness smiteth them on the Face continually, and their Malice and Wickedness riseth up from Eternity to Eternity: If they think of the Last Judgement Day, then Fear and Terrour ceaseth on them, they had rather let that thought alone and recreate themselves with high-mindedness. 11. And that is also a Wonder, and the Greatest Wonder of all, how out of an Angel such a furious Devil is come to be. 12. Thus is the Might and Power of the Anger in God, become manifested; for God hath manifested himself, according to both Eyes, viz,. both in Love and An∣ger, and Man standeth free, he may go into which of them he will, God casteth none into Anger, the Soul casteth it self thereinto.
13. But know this, that the Anger hath set its Jaws wide open, and draweth migh∣tily, and would devour all, for it is the Covetousness and Pride, above humility: 14. And so the Love and Humility have also set open their Jaws, and draw with all their Power and Vertue, and would draw all into Love into Heaven. 15. Now into which soever the Soul departeth there it is, and in that it grow∣eth, be it either in Love or Anger, in that Tree it standeth, and from thence is no de∣liverance in Eternity; here in this Life the Soul is and standeth in the Angle in the Ballance or even weight, and can if it have been Evil, become regenerate in the Love; But when the Angle or Ballance breaketh, then it is past recovery, it is afterwards in its own Coun∣trey, in its own Principle. 16. Now who shall break or destroy that which is Eternal, where no breaker or destroyer can be found? for it is its own Maker or Framer; whence will ano∣ther Turba come, when a thing is in the Eternity, where there is no limit more?
17. And that yet you may see that God willeth not the Evil, he caus∣eth his Will to be made known; Mat. 21. 34, 36. He sendeth you Prophets and Teachers, and giveth them his Spirit, that they may warn you; now if you will not Convert, then you let the Anger withhold you, which is also your Wages & your Kingdom. 18. It is grievous to you that you should be snatched from your own will, from your Pleasure and Voluptuousness, your Pride your sumptuous delicate Life; go to, so will the Hellish Dregs hereafter relish pleasingly also. 19. We teach you the Cross, and the Devil teacheth you pleasure, now you may lay hold of which you will, and that you will have, whether it be Love or Anger. 20. We labor for you, and you despise us; what should we do more for you? are we not your very slave? If you will not convert, away, and take that which is yours with you, and we will take that which is ours, and so we are Eternally parted. 21. We will still work in our Day-La∣bour, and do what we are Commanded to do Mat. 13. 30. in the Harvest, we shall come
one before another, and there you will know us, and do that to your selves, which you had done unto us here, this we should not hide from you, but speak what we see. The Four and Twentieth Question. Whether Mens Wishes profit them any thing, or sensibly come where they are; or not. 1. MY beloved Friend, look upon the Luke 16. 20. to 24. Rich Man, and Poor Lazarus, and so you shall find that there is a Great Cliff or Gulf, between them and us: so that those that would with their Prayers and Will, go to them, cannot, neither can they come to Us; there is a Principle between us. 2. The Prayers and Wishes of the Righteous penetrate into Heaven, and not into Hell; also the Scripture saith, Out of Hell there is not Redemption, they lie in Hell as Dead Bones, they Cry and none heareth them; No Prayer availeth them at all.
3. And though many Pray for the Dam∣ned Souls, yet their Prayer continueth in their own Principle; and goeth into Hea∣ven, not into Hell: out of Hell there is no Recalling, saith the Scripture. 4. Ye know what Christ said to his se∣venty Disciples, Mat. 10. 12. Luk. 6. 49. When ye enter into a House, Salute that House: if the Child of Peace be in it, then will your Wish and Salutation rest upon him; if not, then your Wish returneth to you again: so it is also there. 5. No good Wish goeth into Hell; but it is thus, if the Wicked leave much fals∣hood wickedness and deceit behind him, so that Hell Torment is wished to him in the Grave, that goeth to the wicked Soul, that is the Wish that cometh where they are, that they must swallow up into them∣selves from their here-made, acted or committed, Abominations, that is their food, which the Living send after them. 6. But yet very wrongfully, and it doth not belong to God's Children to do so, for they sow thereby into Hell, into God's Anger, they should have a care that they do not reap the same in the Harvest which they have sown: assuredly if Re∣pentance
and Conversion be not exercised, it will be no otherwise. 7. Further, we offer you this according to our apprehension in the Spirit, not ac∣cording to the outward Man, in Conceit and Opinion, but according to our Gift; that it is with the Soul, which thus hang∣eth by a Threed, and yet at the last in the End entereth into sorrow, and so layeth hold on the Kingdom of Heaven by a Threed, where Doubting and Believing is mixt, it is with such a Soul in this man∣ner, that a Hearty Prayer and Wish, com∣eth to them, which with total Earnestness presseth to the poor captive Soul into its source quality or pain. 8. For that Soul is not in Hell, also not in Heaven, but in the Gate in the Midst in the source or quality of the Principle, where Fire and Light part, and is detain∣ed by its Turba, which continually seek∣eth the Fire, and then that comprehended little Twig or Branch, viz. the weak Faith, sinketh down in it self, and presseth after God's Barmherty ig∣keit. Warm-hearted∣nesse. Mercifulness, and giveth it self patiently in∣to the Death of the sinking down, out of the Anguish, and that sinketh down out
of the source quality or pain into the Meekness of Heaven: 9. And though many a Soul be deteined a Tedious while. competent time, yet can the Anger not devour that lit∣tle Faith, but must at last, let it go. 10. But what that is, I leave to them to try, who wilfully and obstinately per∣severe or continue in sin, till their End, and will then first be Blessed, then the Pfaff. Priest must make him Blessed, he should consider it. 11. But this we say, that a Mans Hearty fie∣ry or Zealous Prayer cometh to them, for a Faithful Earnest Prayer hath Might and Power to break open the Gates of the Deep: it breaketh open a whole Principle: and seeketh or searcheth, and if there be any thing therein that its Will or Mind is capable of, then it taketh hold of that, viz. the Poor Soul in its sin source quality or pain, layeth hold on its loving Brothers divine Earnest Will; so that it becom∣eth strengthened, and can sink down out of the Anguish in his Brothers Spirit and Will, through Death, and attain God's Kingdom.
12. But into its Glorification he can∣not help it, for that shineth out of the Souls own Substance or Doings and VVill: also the Soul of a Neighbour goeth no fur∣ther with him, though that is not the Soul; but the Souls Spirit that doth this, then into Death, where the Anger severeth it self; where it is freed from the fierce VVrath, and then the Spirit passeth or en∣tereth again into its Soul: 13. Here in Popery much Jugling hath been contrived, with Seel-Messen. Souls-Meals. Masses for Souls, only for the sake of Money; but it hath been a Gross deceit of the Babylo∣nish Pfaffen. Priests, for earnestness is required to strive with and Overcome the Anger of God. 14. VVe say assuredly, and readily acknowledge it, that the Congregati∣on of Christ hath great Power and Authority, to Ransome such a Soul: if it be fervent, and do it with earnestnesse, as it was done in the first or Primitive Churches, when they had Holy People & Holy Priester. Priests, whose Service and Ministry was Earnest:
15. They have indeed effected some∣what, but not in such a kind and way as the Bapst. Pope Boasteth, that he hath the Key, he can let a Soul out with his Blessing when he will, if a man will give him Money; but that is a Lye. 16. Is he HOLY? then he beareth the Great Mystery, and is Christ's Shepherd over his Sheep, and then he shall with the Congregation, in Great Earnestness, press into God in great Humility, and come to the Place of the Poor Soul, but NOT for Money. 17. In Money there is alwayes Cove∣tousness, and it never reacheth the Ear∣nest Principle, the Prayer of the Cove∣tous entereth into his Chest, we say, that all whatever is done and administred in the Churches of Christ for Money, belongeth to Antichrist in Babel, for they hang their Hearts upon it; it were better Men did give them Meat and Drink, and other Necessaries, and no Money, and then they would not so set their Hearts upon it. 18. VVhat can that Spirit seek and find in the Mystery, which is not it self in the Mystery? O, there is a great deceit
herein, when it comes to be Day, you will see that it is so; you are still in Darkness in the Mystery, Babel hath so blinded you. 19. And therefore it is, that you have looked upon Art and Favour, and not upon God's Spirit; are not ex∣ceeding errours 2 Thes. 2. 11, 12. and strong delusions come upon you, that you believe lying Spirits, who speak in Hypocrisie and Deceit, and ye de∣pend hang and cleave to them, and commit Hyprocrisie with Errour, and exercise flat∣tery with delusion? See what the Revela∣tion of John, and Daniel say to you; It is Day, the VVages will soon follow. 20. You have now Teachers, which suppress and throw to the ground the First or Primitive Church with its Spirit; prove and try them and you will find, that for the most part they are VVolves and Har∣lots, which first sprung up and were ge∣nerated in the Primitive Churches, when Men slept, and they will indeed devour the VVhore. 21. But prove and try them, they are VVolves, sent from the Turba, they must do it, God suffers it to be done, and will have it done, that so he may with one
Besom sweep out the other; but they are Besoms, and will after the finishing of the VVonders of the Anger, be given up to the Turba together. 22. Suffer this to be said to you by this Spirit, it is your Own Prophet, it is ge∣nerated out of your Turba upon the Crown, awake or else you must thus be devoured by one another. 23. For No stranger consumeth you, but your own Turba, which is come to the Limit; boast not your selves of a Gol∣den Time, it is a Time of Wonders.
The Five and Twentieth Question. What the Hand of God, and the Bosom of Abraham are. 1. THis is indeed sufficiently explained already; for it is the All-Substantial or All-Being, every-where-presence of God; but in its own Principle; as the Rich Man, who was in Hell, could not prevail with Abra∣ham to send Lazarus to him with a Drop of Cold Water, to cool his Tongue in the Flames, Abraham said there was a great Cliff or Gulf between them, that is a whole Principle. 2. The Bosom of Abraham is thus to be understood; Abraham was the Father of the Faithful, and God gave him the Pro∣mise, that in his Seed all People of the Earth should be Blessed; this was to be understood in the Messiah Christ, who would become Man in the Faithful; and as in Abraham's Seed he became Man, so he would also be∣come Man in the Children of the Faith∣ful, and bless them.
3. And this is now the Holy Christian Congregation generated in Christ, that is the Bosom of Abraham, & we are in Christ all one Body, and to Abraham was the Pro∣mise Given, he was the Patriarch, or Arch-Father; and we are all become generated in that Promise, understand, in the New∣birth in Christ, and are in that Bosom, which taketh us into it. 4. When we through earnest Repen∣tance, enter into Abrahams Promise, then we go into the Bosom of Abraham, viz. into Our Promise, and in the Bosom of Faith Christ becometh generated or born in Us, and that is the Fulfilling. 5. Thus we are in Humility with La∣zarus in the Bosom of Abraham; for Christ is Abraham, and to Abraham was Christ Promised, now he hath him, and we with him, and thus we come into his Bosom, and are his Children in the Pro∣mise, and CHRIST is the Fulfilling. 6. Thus we sit in the fulfilling in the Bosom of Abraham, and are Abraham's Seed according to the Spirit. Here ye blind Jews, open your Eyes, what did Abraham in the Circumcision signifie? no∣thing else, but that Sin should in the Blood and Death of Christ, who shed his Blood
for the Children of the Faith of Abraham, be drowned, and in that Blood as in a Hea∣venly Tincture become Regenerate a∣gain. 7. Abraham and his Children drowned Sin in their Blood in the Faith on Christ, who in their Blood was to become Man, and now it is fulfilled, and therefore hath God set the Seal of Faith in the Substance, and now we are and should be born a new or Regenerate in the Real Blood of Christ. 8. Christs Blood taketh away the Turba from us, and we rise again in his Blood, as a New Man out of the Old, and bear or carry Christ's Image, Christ's Flesh and Blood in us in Our Image, if we are the Children of Abraham and Not Ishmaels. 9. For to Isaac belong the Goods of the Image of the Body of Christ; the Circum∣cision is Ishmaels, for he converseth about Works, but the Goods are Isaac's, and Ish∣mael shall at Last dwell in Isaac's Tents; but the Kingdom belongeth to Sem. 18. Rom. 11. 6. Not out of Merit by works have we Isaac's Goods, but out of Grace, out of Gods Love, we cannot attain it with the work, but in the Faith, Phil. 2. 13. in the Will and Deed, in the Entering in.
11. But he that enter∣eth into Herrschafft. a Dominion, which is not his own by the right of Nature, he entereth into it by the Grace and Favour of the Giver or Do∣nor; why is the Servant in the House An∣gry and Discontented at it that the Lord is so Good and Gracious, and giveth a stranger the Dominion? 12. We were Strangers, and the Work was in the Family, but the Lord hath gi∣ven us the Promise in Paradise, he would bestow upon us again his Kingdom out of Grace; he left Cains Offering, but to Abel he gave the Kingdom of Grace, for Abel sought it in the Spirit, and Cain in the Work. 13. Thus understand how God's King∣dom is Magical, for, the first Will attain∣eth it, and the Will in the Substance or Work NOT, for it remaineth in the Sub∣stance or Work; but he that goeth free, findeth the Eternity, and the Kingdom of Grace therein, and the Promise with the Substance or Work together; and then the Work dwelleth in the Will, and is the Wills Houshold Servant; 14. Thus ye understand, if ye be see∣ing,
the whole Old Testament, this is the Only Ground, but comprised briefly; and if we come to write upon Moses, you shall find it wholly: and thus we have shewen you the right and true Ground of the Bo∣som of Abraham, and of the true Chri∣stian Religion. 15. Whosoever teacheth otherwise is of Babel, beware of him, he hath not Christs Spirit, but he is Ishmael, and seek∣eth or gropeth in his own conceit. 16. O thou VVorthy and Pretious Christendom, be yet seeing, else it will no more shine so clearly to thee, go yet to Lazarus into Abrahams Bosom.
The Six and Twentieth Question. Whether the Souls of the Deceased, take care about Men, their Children Friends and Goods, and know see like or dislike their Purposes and Un∣dertakings. 1. MY beloved Friend, this Question is above all humane Reason, and know∣ledge according to Outward Reason; but being we are Abrahams Children, there∣fore we have Abrahams Spirit in Christ; And as Abraham looked backward upon the Promise in Paradise, and forward up∣on the fulfilling of the Promise, so that he saw in the whole Body of Christ, what was to be in the Middle, Joh. 8. 56. and saw Christ afar off; so also we. 2. And being you so vehemently long after the Great Mysteries, and desire them with earnest seeking, giving God the Glo∣ry, and accounting your self in your high knowledge very unworthy of it, and so humbling your self before God, therefore
God also giveth it you, though by so slight and mean an Instrument, who accounts himself much more unworthy, yet doth not desire to resist his Will, thus you are the finding in this Hand, and the Cause of at∣taining it. 3. For this Hand, knew nothing of the Mystery, it sought only Abrahams Faith, but Abrahams understanding was also gi∣ven to it, which you have caused by your seeking. 4. Now see that you attain also Abra∣hams Spirit, which hath written in the Knowledge and Apprehension of this Hand: we will set you it down in a Bro∣therly manner, for we are not your Lord in the Mystery, but your Servant. 5. Apprehend us aright, we are Laza∣rus, and you are in respect of us to be ac∣counted Abraham; you have laboured much more then we, but we are fallen into your Harvest, not of Merit but of the Grace of the Giver, that no Tongue might boast before God, and say, this hath my Ʋn∣derstanding done. 6. You ask a high Question, I under∣stand it not; for if I should apprehend it, then must I be in the Departed Soul, and must be in that Souls Spirit & apprehension.
7. Nevertheless, being we are in Christ one Body, & have also Christs Spirit, there∣fore we see all in Christ, out of one Spirit and have its apprehension; for he is in us be∣come Man, and all Holy Souls are our fel∣low Members, ALL begotten from or out of ONE, and we have all, one Will in Christ, and the right and true Bosom of Abraham. 8. And so now we have gotten Might and Power to Manifest or Reveal unto you that Hidden thing in Christ; for our Soul seeth in their Souls, not that they press and come to us, but we press and go to them, for they are in Perfection, and we but in Part. 9. And Now we can Answer you, not from Reason of the outward World, but from or out of the Image of Christ, and out of his and our Spirit. 10. You ask whether the Souls Departed take care about Humane Matters or Do∣ings, and see, like or dislike them? Now this is to be understood in Three several wayes, as to Three sorts of Souls, as indeed there are Three distinct kinds of them. 11. First. I. concerning the Souls that have not yet attained Heaven, which-stick
in the source quality or pain in the Princi∣ple in the Birth, these have still humane Matters with the works on them, and they search diligently after the Cause of their Detention. 12. And therefore many of them come again with the Starry Spirit, and walk a∣bout in Houses and other Places, and ap∣pear in Humane Shape and Form, and desire this and that, and often take care about their Wills and Testaments, suppo∣sing thereby to get the Blessing: of Holy People for their Rest and Quiet. 13. And if their Earthly business and Employment stick in them and Cleave to them still, then indeed they take care about their Children and Friends, and this continueth so long, till they sink down into their Rest, so that their Starry Spirit be consumed, then all is gone as to all care and perplexity, and they have no more feeling knowledge thereof, but meerly that they see it in the Wonders in: the Magia. 14. But they touch not the Turba, nor seek what is in this World, for they are once sunk down from the Turba through Death, they desire that no more, neither do they take any more care, for in care,
the Turba is stirring; for the Souls Will, must enter with its Spirit into Earthly things, which it would fain forsake, for it hardly got rid away from them before, it would not cumber it self to let in the Earthly Spirit again. 15. This is an Information concerning that one part or sort of Souls: and we speak freely and certainly, that this Part or sort, do no more, after they are come to Grace, purposely, take care about Humane Earthly Matters: but about Heavenly Matters, which come to them through Mans Spi∣rit, they see them, and have their Joy therein. 16. But there remains this still to be said; that a Living Man hath such Power and Authority, that he can with his Spirit reach into Heaven to the Souls departed, and stir them up, often in a Question, or a hearty Desire: but it must be Earnest, there belongeth Faith to the breaking open of a Principle. 17. Such a thing we see in Samuel the Prophet, whom the King of Israel raised up, that he might manifest his Will to him; though some look upon it otherwise, of whom we say they are blind without ap∣prehension
or knowledge, and speak their School-Conceits, and make meanings and Opinions, about that they have no know∣ledge of in the Spirit, and that is Babel. 18. And secondly, II. The second Part or sort, which sink down in their Dying with∣out a Body, they are with the first sort, which are now sunk down further then they were, all in one and the same Place of the Principle, these all take upon them no evil business or Matter, wherein the Turba sticketh: 19. But as concerning the Living ho∣nest vertuous Souls which send their works with their Spirit and Will to them, they re∣joyce therein, and are so Courteous and Friendly and Ready, that they appear to Men Magically in their sleep, and shew their Good Wayes, and often reveal Arts and Skill to them, which lie deep hidden in the Secret or Arcanum, viz. in the Souls Abysse. 20. For, while the Earthly Spirit draw∣eth the Mystery before the Soul, and hold∣eth the Soul Captive in the Mystery, the Souls Spirit cannot alwayes reach the Deepest secret or Arcannm of the Soul: But after the departure of the Body, the
Soul is free, and especially without a New Body, that Soul seeth it self, and also its Wonders, it can indeed to one that is living, shew somewhat in the sleeping Ma∣gia, if the Man be honest or vertuous, and hath not awaked the Turba: for Dreams are all Magical, and thus the Soul without a Body is in the Magia of God. 21. Thus know, as concerning wicked Matters or Doings, the Soul which is de∣parted from the Body, entereth not into them, unless it be a Damned Soul, and that Soul goeth Magically into them, and hath its recreation therein, and teacheth many in Dreams great Master-pieces of wickedness, for it serveth the Devil. 22. Now, that which an Evil Man desireth, that the Devil acted for him very readily; for he can better do it by or through a Hu∣mane Soul, then by or of himself; he is too rough, and terrifyeth the Magia, which astonisheth the Elementary Spirit, and awaketh the Body: and we acquaint you, that all is done Magically in the Will, without awakening or stirring up of the Source Quality or pain; for, No Soul awakeneth or stirreth up its Essences to
please Man, unless a Man awaken them and disquiet them himself. 24. Also there are many pieces of wick∣ednesse in Nigromancy, which many times can torment the Spirit of a Man, but of No Soul which carrieth about him Christs Substantiality, for that Soul is Free. 25. The Third Part or sort of Souls Depar∣ted, are those which are in the Bosom of Abraham, in Christ with Heavenly Sub∣stantiality, those none can stir unless they will themselves, that they bear favour, to a Soul, which is like it self, these take not upon them any Earthly Thing at all; unless it serve to Gods Honour and Glo∣ry, and then they are very diligent and restless to reveal somewhat in a Magical Manner. 26. But they let in No Turba, neither do they pray for us, in the presence of God; what cometh to them, that they have Joy in Luke 15. 7. among the Angels of God, for the An∣gels rejoyce at a Sinner that Repenteth, much more the Souls: 27. What should they pray for to God for us? It lyeth not in their Prayer, but in Mans Entring in to God, when he p∣teth
his Will into God, then God's Spirit helpeth him unprayed to by them; 28. Rom. 10. 21.For his Arms are stretched forth Day and Night to help Man, what need then their Praying? It is the Will of God, that Man should come to him. 29. Why then should a Soul be so per∣verse, as to account God to be so severe a Judge, that he will not recieve a Convert∣ing Sinner? such a thing were not agree∣able with the apprehension and knowledge of God: but if the Blessed Souls see that a Soul with the Spirit presseth to God, then they rejoyce that God's Kingdom is in∣creased. 30. The Heavenly Soul hath God's Will, what God willeth, that it willeth also; but it is Gods Spirit it self, that will help a Converting Sinner. 31. The Souls see very well how God's Spirit penetrateth into a Soul, if the Souls Will do but give Way and Place o if, it needeth not the Prayer of any Angel, they all wish that God's Kingdom may come into us, and God's Will to be done, but in the Dominion they give God the Glory. 32. But that Men in Popery have prayed to
the Great Saints Departed, and that they have then appeared to Men, and wrought Wonders, all that we affirm, it is true, though perhaps now it be taught to the Contrary, yet there is not any true ap∣prehension among them; it hath another A. B. C. which neither of the two Parties understand. 33. One Faithful Soul layeth hold of the other, the Livings Faith hath laid hold of the Deceased Saints Faith, and the Faith hath wrought Wonders. 34. Yes it is so powerful that it can re∣move Mountains, should then the Pure Faith of the Saints be able to do nothing in the Livings Faith? they could even dissolve the World, if God would give leave; 35. As God hath given leave, that the Heathen have been converted by such means, when they have seen such Wonders done at the Burial of the Saints. 36. Should a Soul in Heaven not be willing to afford its Faith to serve the Glory of God and his Deeds of Wonders; the Wonders are done in the Holy Spirit, who hath wrought the Wonders through the Faith of both the Parties, and they are only the Wonders of God and his Chil∣dren.
37. But that this way is so wholly thrown to the Ground, and that now there is so learned a School, that it contemneth all Gods Wonders, that is Babel and not Spirit, it is Envious Pride, for a Man to stand up and Cry, Come ye all to me, Mat. 24. 23. Mark 13. 21. Luk. 17. 21, 23. here is Christ, here is the Go∣spel; Indeed there is Pride, Covetousnesse, seeking of Honour and Vain Glory, own self will, an Exalting of Proud Obsti∣nate Babel: 38. It is even the Old Antichrist, they are young Branches sprung out of the Old Tree, they have awakened the Turba with their strong fierce wrathful sap, which will root out the whole Tree, for God hath said it, it is altogether evil and Worm-eaten it must fall, 39. For it self is a Young Tree sprung out of the Root, even out of the Old Root which will make known the Old Tree, what it hath been in its Wonders. 40. But we would hereby despise none, but we speak thus of our Wonders and say, that the Servant shall enter into the House, and become Free; for the time is
near, Luk. 15. 22, 23. that the Servant should eat with the Sonne, and be Mer∣ry and rejoyce with him. 41. And thus we give you for an Answer to this Question summarily, That indeed the Holy Souls, know and like our Holy Works; but they do not meddle about our false or wicked works, for they dwell in another Principle: No evil work cometh thither, neither do they look upon it or regard it, what belongs to the Devil they take no notice of, only of what belongeth to their Principle. 42. Their Children Parents Friends are all alike to them with strangers, for in Heaven we are all Brethren, they have no greater care about their Children and Pa∣rents, then about others, unless they work and Act in God, and then indeed their service of God is much more full of Joy to them: but they enter not into their Turba, 43. For after the Last Judgement Day, the honest Parents, will know Nothing of their Children that are in Hell: And so it is sufficiently apprehensible to us, that they now take no care about their wicked Mat∣ters or Doings.
The Seven and Twentieth Question. Whether the Souls in Death, know or understand this or that Business and Art, in which they were skilled when they were in the Body. 1. THis is as in the following Question, all their Substance or Matters and Do∣ings, appear to them in their Will or Mind, in a Magical kind or manner, they see it, but the Figure or Frame of them will first be given to them in the Day of the Restoration, that they may be able to look upon them aright, for they must first be tryed by the Fire, and that which is false or wicked must remain with its Turba in the Fire, according to the purport of the Word of Christ. 2. But, if the Question be concerning Arts, whether they know them: surely they know all Arts, though never so Deeply founded, but they dare not awaken or stir them up, that they should appear in their
Spirit, for Arts are Generated in the Cen∣ter of Nature, out of the Essences wherein the Wonders stand, which they have sought in this World, so much as hath been open∣ed to them in the Mystery. 3. A Soul without Gods Body goeth not in∣to the Mystery for Art, it standeth still and quiet in its Rest, it feareth the Turba, it giveth Glory to God. 4. But the highly Enlightned Souls, which carry Heavenly Substantiality in their Spi∣rit, they have the skill and knowledge of Heavenly Matters, and of all whatsoever lyeth in the Mystery, especially those which have been conversant in the Mystery here, the other do not use to search into the Mystery. 5. For every one continueth in his own Calling and Employment, which he hath here loved and delighted in, though indeed there be no such working or Labour there, yet they have Joy in it; for in Heaven there is a simple humble Childrens Life. 6. Why should Men there enquire after Arts and Sciences? The whole Mystery standeth Open: God filleth all in all,
there are meer Wonders, they live all in Wonders, and are all the Art of God, they have all great skill and knowledge, but in a Paradisical simple Childrens Life. The Eight and Twentieth Question. Whether they have any more skill or knowledge of Divine Angelical and Earthly things, and also of Devilish, and can have more certain Experi∣ence and Knowledge of them then they had in the Body. 1. Concerning Divine and Angelical Skill and Knowledge, they have certainly much more, for they are in the Principle of God: and the Son seeth very well what the Father doth in his House, so also the Soul seeth what is in Heaven. 2. Their skill and knowledge, is very various; for the highest skill and know∣ledge is apprehended in the Majesty, and there must most Souls wait till the Last Judgement Day, when they shall get their New Bodies:
3. But the highly Enlightned, How Souls, that are in God's Body and Power, they have surpassing overflowing skill and knowledge of God, and of the Angels, for they are in the Wonders of God, till their own: Wonders shall be presented also to them. 4. The Souls without a Body, are in Heaven in God, as it were Magically, they awaken or stir up no Won∣ders, but are under Gods Altar; and wait for the Wonders at 2 Tim. 4. 1. Tit. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 7. the day of Appearing. 5. They take no care about Devilish things, for that belongeth to the Angels to strive with the Devil, and defend Men, No Soul Imagineth into Hell, it is Enmity to them.
The Nine and Twentieth Question. What the Souls Rest, awakening and Clarification are. 1. THis is also clearly enough Explained, its Rest is without Or Works. Substance in the stilness, where they are in God's Hand, and no source or pain toucheth them, they have no feel∣ing of any pain. but it is as one that ly∣eth in a sweet sleep, and resteth qui∣etly. 2. Their Or Glorification. Clarifi∣cation during this time, is when they think and consider of the Joy to Come, then the Spirit entereth into the Majesty of God, whence they have Joy and Clarity or Glory, and so during all the time they Mat. 25. 6, 7. trim their Lamps, that they may be ready in their New Body to be recei∣ved by their Bridegroom. 3. There is a very sweet Paradisical Joy in them, but Paradise is not stirring
in them, with full perfection, for that be∣longeth to the New Body out of the Earth, The First Body which God Created, which Christ hath redeemed by his Death, that will bring the Wonders, and enter again, into Paradise, and be surrounded or Cloath∣ed with God's Majesty, and then is Note. Rev. 21. 3. the Tabernacle of God with Men. The Thirtieth Question. What the difference of the Livings and Deads Resurrection of the Flesh, and of the Soul is. 1. COncerning this saith Christ, there shall be great difference, wherefore we remit you to the Scripture, for it shall all be according to the Scripture. 2. But seeing this is unsearchable and unapprehensible to Mans Reason, therefore I know not how to answer you more then the Scripture saith, but seeing you long and desire to know these things, therefore you are also in your seeking, the finding: and I am only the Instrument.
3. And though it be given and opened to me, yet it is not from my own under∣standing and knowledge, but the knowledge standeth in the Spirit of Christ, according to which; this Hand calleth it self Two-fold, and saith WE, for it speaketh from Two Persons; and two Persons say not I but We, and speak of Two; as a Lord that speaketh of his Person and of his Do∣minion. 4. And so Gods Children and Servants, should not say, the knowledge is Mine, the understanding is Mine, but give the Honour and Glory to God, and in their opening or manifesting the Or declaring the Works of God. Wonders of God, should speak of two, viz. of the Gi∣ver and of the Receiver. 5. Neither should any understand our Writing so, as if the hand did boast or Glo∣ry of it self, according to the Authority and worthiness of Man, though indeed in Christ we are worthy: but according to the Outward Man, we would have no boasting or praise and honour, for the Praise is Gods. 6. VVe are Children of the Father, and should do that which he would have us do,
and not Mat. 25. 25, 28. hide or bury in the Earth, the Talent which he hath given us, for the Fa∣ther will require it of Us with Increase, and if nothing be increased with it, then he taketh it again from him, to whom he had given it, and giveth it to him that hath gained much; which would be a Miserable taking away from me, to have God, and to know him, and lose that again, it were better to lose the World and the Outward-Life, then to Lose God and the Kingdom of Hea∣ven; 7. It is not a thing to be dallied with, to be disobedient to God, see what befel Corah Dathan and Abiram, about Moses, the same will befal the Disobedient and Scorners: 8. Indeed the Scorner feeth not his punishment presently, but his Turba ta∣keth it in; now hath he laughed any to scorn in derision, and would fain be freed or released from the Turba thereof? then he must in Sorrow & Lamentation grieve before God for it, or else he will bring his scorn along with him into the Anger-Fire, and that will Eternally gnaw him, this we would have said for a Warn∣ing.
9. For here we write of an: earnest or severe business, it is not to be slighted: be not led a∣stray, Gal. 6. 7. God will not suffer himself to be mocked or scorned, the fierce wrathful Anger is in his Might and Power, he hath Hell and Heaven in his Power. 10. The last Judgment is an Earnest or severe work, but being we are to set down the Resurrection of the Dead, therefore we must write the Manner of it, how it shall be performed, in what power this world shall pass away, and the Dead arise, it will be earnest or severe, let none slight it, we will speake of the ground of it. 11. And think not that it is a Conceit, it becometh generated out of the Turba upon your Crown, the Turba of your own Spirit telleth you that, for the End hath found the Beginning; thus the whole Sub∣stance Matters or Works of the World stand in the Middle, in the Light, and out of that goeth your Prophet, viz. out of your wrought Wonders or practised works. 12. For it is not the Spirit of the Tur∣ba that will govern, but the Spirit of Christ; it hath overcome Death, and taken
the Turba captive; Eph. 4. 8. He lead-leadeth Captivity Captive as a Conquerour. 13. But the Turba will execute the Judgement or Justice, for it is God's Ser∣vant in the Anger, not his Lord, but Ser∣vant; therefore the Thunder which will terrifie the Earth, goeth out of the Mouth of God, which will kindle or inslame the Firmament and the Elements. 14. The last Judgement, belongeth to the Judge Christ, together with the Ho∣ly Spirit; For here will the Eternal Spi∣rits Center stir it self, which also hath par∣ted it self into Three Principles, viz. One in the Anger-Spirit, and One in the Di∣vine Love-Spirit, and One in the Air-Spirit of the outward World. 15. The last moving belongeth to him, he is in Christ's Mouth according to the Deity, and according to the Anger, in the Hellish anguish source quality or Torment, and according to the Wonders, in the Spi∣rit of this World. 16. He was the Work-master of All Things or Substances, and he it is also that will give to Every work its Eternal Lodging, and Mat. 13. 30. gathereth every thing into its Barn.
17. For he hath many helpers, for the Angels shall sever and seperate all things; and then will the Mouth of God the Fa∣ther with the Word of the Lord, through the Mouth of Christ speak the Sentence, and then Beginneth the burning World, and the Entrance of Every thing into its Barn and Reservatory. 18. For the Reservatories will be mani∣fold, not only two, viz. in two Principles, yet in two Principles, but in many di∣stinctions all according to the several pow∣er and vertue. 19. For every work standeth in a Ma∣gick Principle as a several distinct Won∣der, both in the Heaven and in the Hell, every one according to its Spirit; and so will its Form or Condition be and appear, according as it is good or evil, and so will its Power and Vertue be, like the Flowers or Blossoms of the Earth in their Varieties, and so will Man also have Joy and Glori∣fication all according to his here-wrought acted Substance or Works. 20. But we understand Substance or Works of Faith, the Power and Vertue in the Love-Substance or Works, not of the outward works, for all shall be presented
or set forth in the Figure in the Wonders, and that will be so with its Beginning and Circumstances. 21. When the Last Judgment Day shall Dawn, then all shall open it self once more, viz. the Third Time, the Deity in all forms in Love and Anger; then will all stand equally manifested at once, and vi∣sibly before all Creatures; and that is done thus. 22. The Beginning of the Creation, in the Word Fiat, hath included this World as a Model in it self, and founded the limit, wherein now the Wonders are become in∣cluded, which should be manifested or opened in the middle and in the time, and come to Substance or Effect, which were seen from Eternity in the Wisdom of God's Magia, and so those Wonders are then all in the Substance or Work, and then the Limit is at hand, and no time of seeking more; for it is finished; whatsoever God hath in his Eternal Councel, that he hath comprised and opened in a Time. 23. And now is the End of Time, and the beginning hath then found the End, and the End is then the beginning, & passeth
again into that which it was from Eter∣nity. 24. But the middle in the time, with its opened wonders, remaineth Eternally in the beginning and in the End, as an Eternal Middle with its Wonders, viz. with Angels and Men in their Substance or Works, as also the Figures of all Crea∣tures, as also all Creatures, and all what∣soever hath become Essential at any time, the Earth with its Mettals Stones and all material Substances things or works, as al∣so Trees Herbs and Grass, all of them stand in the Figure in the middle and in the Wonders, but without such Essences and Life [as they have here.] 25. For no Beast cometh again, but its Figure in the Magia remaineth standing, for it is originated out of the Eternal Look∣ing-Glass, therefore also it must now when the outward Earthly Looking-Glass break∣eth, stand in the Eternal as a Wonder to Gods Honour and Glory: 26. And these very Substances belong all to Paradise, for it will be the Holy Pa∣radise, wherein the Heavenly Elements will bear Substantial palpable Fruits. 27. And as we here in this Life, ac∣count the Fruits of the Earth, out of its
Essence, as dead things without under∣standing; so will also the Beastial and Earthly Images of this world appear as dead Substances things or works, as also all other Creatures Substance or Work, it shall stand as a shadow; but the Paradise hath and beareth Fruit out of the Eternal Lifes Power and Vertue, viz. out of God's Essences. 28. This all, which for the most part lyeth hidden to us, is included in the word Fiat, in the beginning and End, and lyeth therein as a great VVonder. 29. And now will the Spirit of the first Creation, move all the Three Principles, and before that is done, the VVord of God compriseth it self with or by that Spi∣rit, like an Elevation or Manifestation of the Deity. 30. For, the Spirit stirreth up the Tur∣ba of all things or Substances in all the Three Principles, and then in one hour all will stand manifest, whatsoever is in Hea∣ven Hell or this VVorld. 31. For the Turba stirreth up all things substances or works of all Creatures, and all will be visible, whatsoever is in Hea∣ven or Hell, and every one will see the work of his Heart good or Evil.
32. And in this hour appeareth also the Judge Christ, upon the Bow of the Number Three, like a Rain-Bow; for according to the Prin∣ciple of this VVorld it is a Na∣tural Rain-bow, but according to the Prin∣ciple of God, it is the Number Three, The Cross with a Doubled Rain-bow, one part whereof standeth turned into the In∣ward Principle, viz. into the Abysse of the Anger, there he sits upon God's Anger, and that the Devils and all wicked Men shall see; 33. For that Bow is included in all the Three Principles, and this Judge Christ sitteth upon and in the Omnipotence of the Eternity, above all whatever is called Substance or Thing. 34. And there will rise up the lamen∣table horrour of all Devils and wicked Men, and they will trem∣ble yell and cry, Mat. 25. 8. and say to the wise Virgins, give us some of your Oyl of Joy and Gladness. Heb. 1. 9. Oyl, comfort us a little, and teach us what we should do, give us some of your Holiness, that we may stand before the Angry Countenance of God, for the Eye of Hell standeth wide
open, whither shall we fly from this Anger? 35. And the wise Virgins, viz. the Children of God will say, Mat. 25. 9. Away to your Sellers, and buy of them, we have Oyl only enough for us, lest you and we both want; away to your Hypocrites Flatterers and Deceivers, who have tickled your Ears with Hypocrisie for your Money, buy of them, we have need of ours: have we not been your Fools? Now away with the Glistering of your de∣ceit and Hypocrisie, we will not make our selves partakers with you, lest we suffer what will come upon you. 36. There will they stand in great hor∣rour, yelling and Crying to the Judge Christ, but his Anger-Eye with their Tur∣ba gripes them in the Heart, quite through Spirit and Flesh, through Marrow and Bones; for the Soul, is in the Turba with the moving of God, clearly stirring in the fierce VVrath. 37. And then for very Anguish they will fall to the Earth, and one part of them will bite their Blasphemous Tongues; the Proud will say, Luke 23. 30. Isa 2. 19. Hos. 10. 8. Rev. 6. 19. 16. O ye Mountains fall on us, and ye Hills cover us, from this Eye of the fierce wrath,
they will creep into the Holes, into the Cliffs of stony Rocks and Mountains to shelter them; they would fain put them∣selves to Death, and yet there is no more Death; they use VVeapons to put them∣selves out of the Body, but there is no dy∣ing there, but only fierce VVrath and Anger. 38. In this horrour will all buildings in the World fall down, for the Earth will Tremble, as shaken with Thunder, and the horrour will be in all and every Life, every one according to its source quality or pain; A Beast hath no such source or quality or pain, as the Soul, only it is affraid of the Turba. 39. And in this Elevation and moving all the Waters will flow up above all high Mountains, that there will be no breaking upon the Earth, it will be so high as if they were all consumed; for they will all be comprised in the Anger in the Turba, so that in the Elements there will be nothing but Anguish. 40. All high Rocks and Mountains will crumble and fall down, the Stars will fall to the Earth with their strong or stern pow∣er or vertue, and all this will be done in several Dayes, all accordingly as the World
was Created, so it shall also have an End: for the seeking of the Earth in its Anguish, will draw the Stars to it, as they have al∣wayes done in this time, so that the Earth∣ly Body hath drawn the seeking or influence of the Stars to it. 41. For the Stars are a Magical seek∣ing, which have awakened Life, so that now the Earth standeth awakened in the Creat Turba, and therefore it is so hungry and thirsty, that it will draw the Stars to it, such an Anguish will be upon the Earth. 42. But the Children of God will lift up their Eyes with folded hands to Christ, and rejoyce, that Luk. 21. 28. Rom. 8. 23. the Day of their deliverence is come, for the Anguish toucheth them not. 43. And in those dayes (which are hid∣den in God how many belong to it; for Gen. 2. 1. Exod. 20. 11. in six dayes the World with its Hosts was Created, this is hidden from us) the Water will find it self again, and fill all deeps, more then before. 44. For now Death cometh with it, and in that hour all Creatures except Man shall the, and all the Men that have crept
into the Clefts of the Rocks and Moun∣tains, will come forth again, but with An∣guish of their Consciences, though now the Turba hath permitted that the horrour stand in Death, for the falling of the Water taketh hold of the Turba. 45. And then will the voice of the Ho∣ly Number Three according to all the Three Principles open it self, and through the Mouth of the Judge Christ, say, Arise ye Dead and come to Judgment. 46. This voice is the Original Eternal Spirit, which holdeth or preserveth the Life of all things, and hath alwayes ruled in all the Three Principles, for it is the Spirit out of which all and every Life is existed, and in which it standeth in Eternity, which hath been the Life & moving of all things, in which the Beginning of Every Life hath stood, as also its End, and the Eterni∣ty, for it is from Eternity and the Creator of all things. 47. It hath two Eternal Beginnings, viz. in the Fire and in the Light, and the Third Beginning hath been a Looking-Glass of the Eternal, viz. the Spirit of this World; It hath been as a Wonder in this World, and through it the Wonders are become manifested or revealed, and
that it is which possesseth the last Judg∣ment, its Motion is the Last. 48. For in the Creation it moved the Father, and in the Incamation or becom∣ing Man; it moved the Son, and now the last moving and Judgment is its own, it wil bring home every thing into its Eternal Place; and this is done through the Voice of the Word out of the Mouth of Christ. 49. And the Spirit goeth forth in God in Two Principles, viz. in the Anger, viz. in the Fire, it goeth forth as the Earnest or severe fierce wrath of the fire-life; and in the Light of the Love, it goeth forth as a flame of the Divine Majesty, and in the Spirit of this World, as a Wonder of Life, as indeed all this is undeniable. 50. And if there were one that would seem to be so highly Learned as to deny it, he is required to shew it in any thing; we will not have any thing in this World excepted, but it shall give testimony to Us, let him come when he will, he ought not to for bear and say, We are Mad, such a short words answer are not enough, we will demonstrate it to him so, that he shall find himself, and see, who he is, and though the Devil should burst for Anger, yet we will set it before his Eyes.
51. And being that Spirit hath the VVord Fiat, viz. God's VVord, with the Center of Nature, out of which it hath ori∣ginated from Eternity, and as the Spirit of the Center goeth forth in two wayes, viz. one in the Fire, in the Essences of the Lifes Original, in the Ground of the Souls Original; and then secondly in the Light of the Fire, viz. in the second source or quality, which sprouteth through Death, and is called God's Kingdom, where in the Light it is the Flame of Love, and in the Fire, the Flame of Anger; 52. So it will also shake the Gates of Death, and awaken or raise the Dead, and it hath the word Fiat in it, and that Fiat is in the Soul and also in the Body, and though it hath consumed the Body long agoe, yet the Turba with the Wonders of the Body are remaining in the Fiat. 53. And now must the Elements give the Substance or Works, which they have swallowed up, again to the Fiat, for the Word of the Lord is therein, but in its own Principle, every one of them must render or give up what it hath received, viz. the Earth, the Body, viz. the Phur; and the VVater also its Essences; the Air the sound of the Voice of VVords; and
the Fire, the Essences of the Soul; for it shall all be judged distinctly, and sentenced. 54. All words which the Mouth hath spoken, which the Air hath received into it self, and the Words which it hath served to make, those the Air shall set forth again, or represent again, for it is the Looking-Glass of the Eternal Spirit; the Spirit seeth all in the Looking-Glass. 55. And now will Man in Heart Mind and Thoughts be proved and Judged; for the Turba standeth in all Evil, Malice, or wickedness, which is against the Love, and there will not much excuse be made, for every one complaineth of, or accuseth himself, his Turba accuseth him. 56. Understand us thus, that Spirit which is all in all, will awaken and raise every Life that hath been immortal, and with or by the Fiat, give it to the Body, for the Fiat draweth the Body to the Soul, with all its Deeds and VVonders, with all whatsoever it hath been done, with Words or Works; all whatsoever hath reached, the Souls Abysse, that must come forth. 57. For in the still or quiet Eternity, there shall be no Turba, more, and there∣fore shall all things or Substances, be tryed
by the Fire, and the Turba shall remain in the Fire, with all whatsoever hath been Evil and capable of the Turba, unless in the Time, it hath been washed in the Wa∣ter of Life by the Souls Conversion, else it must remain in the Fire: 58. Now 1 Cor. 3. 15. many ha∣ving sown in the Fire, will suffer loss is Christ telleth us, that the works of the wicked will re∣main in the Fire, and he will suffer loss. 59. Understand us aright thus; The Body which hath conversed here upon the Earth, that evil perished Body, which hath swallowed up that Noble precious and fair of bright Image of Paradise, shall come, and present it self, with the Pre∣cious Image in it, and give an account of God's Image. 60. Now it is well with those, who have Christ's Spirit, they have their first Image in the word Fiat, and that they must give again to the Soul, and that in the Adamical Body; 61. But those which have not Christ's Spirit, they will stand indeed presented in the Evil Body, but their Soul will have lost the right and true Image, and will have an Image in their Souls-Spirit; what their
daily Lust or delight hath been, such will their Image be. 62. And in this hour, will also the fierce wrathful Fiat of the Darkness, pre∣sent the Devils, which now also shall re∣ceive their Wages and Habitation, at which when they hear of it they Tremble. 63. And thus will all the Dead both Evil and Good arise, every one in his Two-fold Body, and will have the Soul with the Spirit in the Body. 64. One will have the outward Earth∣ly Life, and therein, a Beastial Image in the Souls-Spirit, and will have the fierce wrathful Angers Substantiality or Works in the Inward Image. 65. And another will have, the out∣ward Body, and therein Christ's Image, and in the Souls-Spirit will God's Love-Spirit give Light, on to these the Word Fiat draweth the right and true Adamical pure Image, again; 66. For the pure Image stood in God hidden in the Word, which was Incarnate or became Man; And now when the Soul standeth at the limit, it getteth that again, with the fair Virgin of the Wisdom of God. 67. For the Noble and Precious Image
was destroyed in Adam, when the Woman was made out of him, so that he only re∣tained the Fires Tincture, now each of them cometh whole home again; 68. For the Woman will in the Fire of God receive the Fires Tincture, so that she will be as Adam, neither Woman nor Man, but a Virgin full of Chastity and Mo∣desty, without Feminine or Masculine shape or Members: 69. And here it will no more be, as we are, and say, thou art my Husband, thou art my Wife, but they are Brethren: In the Divine Magical Wonders, somewhat of it will be apprehended, but none will regard that, but there we are all only Gods Children, in a Life and Love Sport of Chil∣dren. 70. All this will be done before the Sen∣tence, for the Sentence will first be on the Last Day of the Judgement, and the Living will not then Die, but be with the Voice of God presented together before the Judgment of God. 71. For the word Fiat, will bring them all thither, and all will be presented in its order by the word Fiat, viz. a King and Emperour with his Subjects over whom
he hath Ruled, a Prince, Nobleman, Burgomaster and Superiour Magistrate, each in his own Office and Employment. 72. And here shall every one who have set themselves up for Shepherds of Christ without God's calling, stand with the flock of their Sheep, and give an account of their Doings and Doctrine, whether they have been Christ's Shepherds, and have pastured the Sheep; or whether they have been their Belly-Shepherds; here will the Spirit make enquiry after their calling and office, whether they have from his Electi∣on and power or vertue, entered into the Office of a Pastour or Shepherd, or through Mans favour, without God's Spi∣rit and Election. 73. For the Judge will say: Luk. 16. 2. Mat. 12. 36. Now give an account of your Lives, of your words Works, Deeds and Matters or Substance; then will the Turba tell every Man, what his Substance or Matters have been: for now will all within them and without them stand in the Figure before them, that so there may be no denyal; for the Spirit tryeth with the Turba, Soul Spirit and Flesh, here all is manifest. 74. The Kings and Princes shall give
an account of their Subjects, how they have governed and protected them, what Government they have exercised, why they have taken away the lives of Many in Tyranny, and shed innocent Blood, why they have made War for their Covetous∣ness and pleasure sake: 75. In like manner other Superiours, why they have intruded themselves, and have set themselves up for Lords over the sim∣ple, oppressed and squeezed them and ta∣ken away their sweat and labour from them and Consumed it in Pride. 76. Now will the Root of every thing be enquired after whence it comes, and out of what it is grown, whether it bear God's Ordinance, and whether it Origi∣nateth in the Heavenly Fiat, or in the Hel∣lish out of the Anger, there shall every one give an account of his State and Con∣dition, whether he have intruded out of Coverousness and Pride, and made him∣self a Lord and Master, or whether his Go∣vernment be ordained of God. 77. There see O ye Worldly Rulers, ye Potentates, whether ye be God's Ordi∣nance; whether ye sit in a right and true Divine Ordinance; what you do with the miserable and needy; now they stand be∣fore
your eyes, and complain of you, that you have been the Cause of their sins and of all their Evil; 78. For there one will cry and complain against the other, that he hath caused him to commit such and such abominations, and will curse him; the Inferiour the Su∣periour, the Superiour his Superiour, the Prince his false or wicked Counsellours, the Counsellours, the Priests, who have not reproved their Courses, but soothed and flattered them for advancement and honours sake. 79. Oh how will you now subsist ye high Schools and Doctors, all you that have sitten in Christ's Sear, that you have so contended about Christ's Cup, about his Honour Glory & Doctrine in your Pride, and have irritated or stirred up and con∣strained the Princes of your Countreys, who are the Ordinance of God, to Wars and Blood-shed, for your Words sake, which you your selves have forged. 80. Where is now Christs Spirit, in the Love, which saith, Mat. 13. 34, 35. Love one another, thereby men shall know that you are my Dis∣ciples? where is now your Love? see your
Bloody provocations wherewith you have involved them in War, and led the World astray from Love and Condescention; 81. You have made Rents and Divisi∣ons, so that Kings have divided, and been at Enmity for your Pride sake, in that you have drawn Christ's Word about by the Hair, and not considered, whether you have Christ's Spirit and Will or no; there you above all others shall give a se∣vere account, for you have known the Lord's Will and have not done it: you have run, and intruded your selves into Christ's Office, only for Gain Favour and Honour sake: you have not regarded God's Spirit, therefore the Spirit calleth you Babel, a Confusion of all that live; 82. You have set the whole World at Odds, you should teach them Love, and you have taught them strife and Contenti∣on, so that one Brother hateth and perse∣cuteth the other for your contrivance sake; how is the Name of Christ despised for your Contentions sake! whither will you go, and where will you abide when the whole World shall Cry, Wo, wo, on you? 83. Here the Angels will be the Dividers,
these will seperate them into two Heads, and set the Honest and Godly at the right, and the evil and wicked at the Left, viz. at the Anger-Eye: For the right is here called the Lights Principle, and the Left, the fires Principle; 84. And there will the Judgment be set; all the Great Shepherds which God hath sent for Lights into the World, who have reproved and taught, viz. the Pa∣triarchs, concerning the Promise of Christ, together with the Prophets and Apostles, at the right hand of the Judgement; and Moses and all teachers of the Law, at the left hand of the Judgement: 85. For Moses and Elias, have the Fire-Sword, together with all highly wor∣thy Teachers of the Law, and require God's Justice and Righteousnesse; and those at the Right, God's Mercy. 86. And in this hour is the Last Day of the Judgement, when the Judge will say, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning; for I have been hungry thirsty naked sick, and in Misery, and you have served or Ministred unto me.
87. And to the wicked Crew, Mat. 25. 41, to 45. Away ye Cursed; I know you not; into the Eter∣nal Fire: For I have been hungry, thirsty, sick naked and in Prison, and ye have not served or Ministred unto me. 88. And then they will excuse themselves as to the Judges Person, Lord we have not known thee: and he will say, what you have not done to my Children in Misery, you have not dono unto me. 89. And here will the Spirit of God first move himself to Justice in all the Three Principles, and awaken the Center of Na∣ture; that it may burn in the Anger-Fire; for All will stand in the Fire, both Heaven Earth and the Firmament; 90. And the Turba will swallow up the Earthly World into the Fire, and set it in that condition again, as it was before the Creation; onely the Wonders remain standing in both Principles; the Third passeth away all to the Wonders, which will be set in the Beginning again. 91. And there will the Earthly Life with the Earthly Body fall away, and the fire will consume them. 92. And in the Righteous, will the
Glorious bright Paradisical Body passe through the Fire with its Wonders or Works, which will follow after it; and that which is false or wicked will remain in the Fire. 93. And they will be snatched through the Fire in the twinckling of an Eye, al∣though the Fire will not take hold of them; as little as the Fire can detain the Light or the Wind, so little also can it hold the Light of the Holy Men or Saints: for they can dwell in the Fire without feeling any pain. 94. And then instantly with the kind∣ling of the Fire, is God's Majesty prepa∣red, and the Paradisical Life, into which they go as Children, and live Eternally with their Father, in one Love, in a sim∣ple Loving Childs Life, and there is a Communion of Saints or Holy Ones. 95. No Dayes and Nights, for the Sun passeth away, and the Stars pass away, and their Wonders only stand in the great Magia to the Honour and Glory of God: thus they will sever themselves. 96. The wicked must also go into the Fire, and their Earthly Life also fall away, and in their Spirit will be seen their Vizard-Image: according to all manner of Abo∣minable
Beasts like the Devils. 97. For they dwell in one and the same Principle, and Luoifer is their Great-Prince, whom they have here served and ministred unto: and it was so that they did hang to their flattering Hypocrites for the sake of the Joy of a Fools Para∣dise. 98. Thus beloved Friend ye have a short explanation and information concerning the Last Judgment Day; for all in this World will pass away: 99. The Earth and all Rocks and the Elements, will melt away, and THAT only will remain which God would have, for the sake of which he created this World. 100. There hath before clearly both Good and Evil been seen in Eternity, and hath in this World been only brought to Substance, and that is a Wonder, and it standeth afterwards so in Eternity.
The One and Thirtieth Question. What manner of New Glorified Bodies the Souls will have. 1. THis is also sufficiently declared al∣ready: For according, as any is in∣dued with the Power of Love, Righteous∣ness and Purity, he will accordingly have fair bright Works of Faith, and so he will shine and give Light. 2. But this will be very different, the works of Many will almost all remain in the Fire, and themselves will scarce escape, and such a one is not so fair and bright as the Holy are. 3. For, as the Scrip∣ture saith, 1 Cor. 15. 41. They will ex∣cel one another as the Stars of Heaven, but there will be no disrespect for it, but one will rejoyce at the beauti∣ous brightness of another, for there is no other Light but this, viz. that Ephes. 1. 23. God filleth all in all.
4. And thus every one will receive God's Glance or Lustre and Majesty, ac∣cording as his vertue or power will be ca∣pable of the Light, for after this Life there is no bettering, but every one remains as he entered in. 5. For here will the Judge 1 Cor. 15. 24. Christ, deliver up the Kingdom to his Father; and then we shall need no Teachers and Conductors more, but he is our King and Brother: there is no intercession, but we are with him as a Child with the Father, and what we do then is good, for there is no fals∣hood or wickedness more.
The Two and Thirtieth Question. What other Form, State and Con∣dition, Joy, and Glory, there will be, to Souls, in that other Life. 1. IN this Question Paradise is to be Con∣sidered by us: For this outward World with its Fruits and Colours hath been a Figure Type or Resemblance of Paradise, for Paradise was in us, and the Outward Spirit robbed us of it, and drew us into it self; when Adam lusted after that, then his lust laid hold of him: 2. But now we shall be in Paradise a∣gain, and Eternally Rejoyce therein, and enjoy the fair bright springing of all man∣ner of Flowers and variety of Forms, as also of Trees and Herbs, and all sorts of Fruits; but not so Earthly, Thick or Gross and Palpable: 3. For our Bodies shall not be so, how then shall the Substance of Paradise be so? All is Angelical: Those Fruits are all
Clearer and Subtiler, then the outward Elements now are: we shall have no in∣trails into which we shall need to stuff our stomacks as here in this sack of Worms or Carcass: but all is in power and vertue, we eat in the Mouth, not into the Belly, we shall not have need of Teeth to Chew with, all is vertue and power, and yet in a right and true natural form and shape with clear bright Colours. 5. Also Rom. 14. 17. the Kingdom of Heaven consisteth not in Eating and Drinking, but in Peace and Joy in the Holy Spirit, with singing and sound∣ing forth God's Deeds of Wonder, con∣cerning the Corporiety of Paradise. 6. We lead there a Childs Life, and like them when they rejoyce and are chearly upon a Mount; for then there is no sorrow in our hearts, nor fear of any thing, but a sporting with the Angels: 7. This World will be no more regarded, for all earthly knowledge and skill and thoughts remain in the Turba of the Earth∣ly Body in the Fire. 8. We are concerned no more in know∣ing of our Parents or Children or Friends which are in Hell.
9. But we shall all know one another by Name that are together, though yet the Earthly Name will remain in the Tur∣ba; but we shall have our first Name, a Name according to the Language of An∣gels, which here we do not understand fully; in the Language of Nature we un∣derstand somewhat of it, but we have here no tongue to express it withall. 10. None saith to the other, thou art my Husband, or thou art my VVife, thou art my Sonne, Daughter, Man-Servant or Maid-Servant, all are alike as to that, we are all Children, not Husband nor VVife, Children nor Man-Servants, nor Maid-Servants, but all free, EVERY ONE is ALL; and yet there is but one Sex, viz. Heavenly Virgins, full of Modesty, cha∣stity and purity. 11. We all are God's Spouse and Wife, he is our Husband, he soweth his power and vertue into us, and we generate or bring forth to him, praise and honour: 12. There are also Dancings round and Singings, as Children use to do, which take hands and sing, and dance a Ring to∣gether. 13. All Art will not be regarded: but
know, that those who here have born the Mystery, and have had it opened to them, they have great Ingenuity or Wis∣dom and understanding above others, and exceed others. 14. Indeed not in Contention & Doctrine, but their Wisdom beginneth all manner of Exercise out of the Mystery, so that the joy is stirred up; for as Children run to∣gether when one beginneth to sport, so al∣so here. 15. And little Children are our School-Masters, before they Meddle with Evil, that the Turba Magra the Great Turba layeth hold of them, for they bring their sport with them out of their Mothers Womb, which is partly from Paradise, else all is lost, till we attain that again. 16. A King avails no more there then a Begger: if he hath ruled well, then his vertue followeth him; and he will have Clory of it in the Majesty, for he attaineth a bright Glorification, as a Shepherd over his Sheep. 17. But if he hath been Evil, and yet at last become converted, and enter in as it were by a Threed, then his Kingly Royal Works remain in the Fire, and here he will avil no more then a Beggar;
who hath been honest, nor be so beauti∣ous neither. 18. In the works of every one, men will apprehend what every one hath been, when they shall open their Packets and present them in the Heavenly Magia, as the Chil∣dren do in their Sport. 19. Yet know that it will not be a King∣dom of Sport, onely, for Men will speak of God's Wonders and Wisdom, and of the Great Mysteries of the Heavenly Magia; The Rev. 15. 3. Song of the Driver will remain to the Scorn and reproach of the Devil, and to the Praise and Glory of God. 20. Yet men will keep somewhat of Hell, but see it no otherwise then in the Magia in the Mystery; for the Devils must dwell in the Darkness, the fierce wrathful Fire in them is their Light, they have Fire-Eyes with which they see, else all Fire is gone, for the Majesty hath diffused it all, that it may burn in Love. 21. Although yet there is Fire in the Center, from whence the Majesty Origi∣nateth, but that will not be afforded the Devils, they will be thrust out into the darkness, Mat. 8. 12. where will be howl∣ng and gnashing of Teeeth, where there is more Frost then Heat.
The Three and Thirtieth Question. What kind of Matter our Bodies shall have, in the other Life. 1. MY Beloved Friend this is a hard Question; which the outward Man should do well to let alone and not meddle with it, for it is not worthy of it. 2. Ye know very well, that God is be∣come Man, and hath taken upon him our Flesh, Blood and Soul: But now saith Christ; John 3. 13. I am from above, none goeth to Heaven but the Son of Man which is come from Heaven, and who is in Heaven: 3. Understand ye that which he saith, that he was then in Heaven, he spake not only of his Deity, viz. of the Word; but of the Sonne of Man, of the Word that became Flesh, that is now to be consider∣ed by us: for in that Flesh and Blood we shall live Eternally, and must have Christs Body if we will subsist in God.
4. Yet we know of no other Body that we shall have, but our Own out of the Old Body, as the Blade groweth out of the Grain: and such a Body also Adam had in the Creation; but he became captivated by the Kingdom of this World, so that he became Earthly, and that was his Fall, and that caused God that he divided Adam and framed a Woman out of him, as is written very largely in our Threefold Life. Third Book. 5. Now we know very well that Adam was a Chast Virgin before his Eve was, before his sleep, and afterwards became a Man, like a Beast with deformity, which we at this day are ashamed of in the pre∣sence of God, that we have beastial Mem∣bers for propagation. 6. Yet now Adam had the Virgin of the Wisdom of God in him: but when he fell, then it remained standing in its Prin∣ciple and Adam went out from it: 7. And know that Christ is in that very Virgin in the Earthly Mary Incarnate or become Man, for the Word of the Lord brought that with it in Maries Body or Womb. 8. And understand us thus, that Christ is become Flesh in the Water of the Eter∣nal
Life, Col. 2. 9. which the whole Deity filleth; and even in the Essences of the Earthly Mary. 9. But Mary was blessed with the Hea∣venly-Virgin, so that Christ became Man in a pure Vessel, and so the outward Man hung to him. 10. For it was for the sake of the Soul which he assumed from Mary, that he must take Maries Flesh, but in the Blessing of the Heavenly Virgin. 11. The Tincture of the Blood in the Heavenly Virgin was Heavenly, for an Earthly had not been able to go through the Anger of God and Through Death, also it had not had might or ability to have ari∣sen out of the Grave. 12. The Word that became Flesh had the Water of Eternal Life, it was out of God's Majesty, and yet also in Maries Blood, here we refer you further to our Third Book, viz. of the threefold Life, there it is written of at Large. 13. Thus we intimate to you that we shall have a Body in flesh and Blood, a Body as CHRIST had: for Christ is with his In∣carnation or becoming Man also born in US Men.
14. When we become New-born out of the Spirit and Water, then are we in Christs Spirit, new born out of Christs Flesh and Blood. 15. We put on Christ, Christ is born in the Converting Sinner, and he in Christ becometh God's Child, and that very Bo∣dy shall we have in Heaven; 16. Not gross Beastial flesh, as we have in the Old Adam, but subtil Flesh and Blood, such Flesh as can go through Wood and Stone, unhurt by the Stone; John 20. 19, 26. as Christ entred in to his Disciples through the shut-Door, that is a Bo∣dy, in which no Turba or fragility is; for Hell cannot lay hold of it; it is like and conformable to the Eternity; and yet is very true Flesh and Blood, that our Heaven∣ly John 20. 27. 1 John 1. 1. hands do handle feel and take hold of, a visi∣ble Body as here in this World. 17. We offer to your Consideration, how such a Body, as we here carry about us, would be capable of God's Majesty: It must needs therefore be such a Body as is like the Majesty, so that the Majesty can give light and shine out of the Body, out
of the Tincture and Water of Eternal Life. 18. We shall here indeed be silent to Rea∣son, but to our Brethren Intelligible e∣nough: it belongeth to the Children, a Wolf would have his Mouth filled with a piece of Flesh that he may devour into his Guts, of such a One we speak not, but of such a one as Christ hath given us in his His last Supper. Testa∣ment and left us at Last, which is, John 6. 58. 1 Thes. 4. 17. John 15. 4. that he will re∣main with us Eternally, we in him and he in us. 19. Thus we say, that we shall have Christ's and God's Body, which filleth the Heaven; not that we shall stick in his Creature, but be one with another as mem∣bers Brethren and Children: It is all ONE Life in US, not Mortal, all out of the Eter∣nal; nothing that beginneth but only the Wonders: our Substantiality is come to be out of the Eternal; we are as Gods, God's right and true Children out of his Essences in Body and Soul.
The Four and Thirtieth Question. Of the Lamentable Horrible Miserable Condition of the Damned. 1. THis is also sufficiently mentioned a∣bove: for God's Anger is their Habi∣tation in the Darkness; their Light shin∣eth out of their Fiery Eyes, that glimmer out of the Fire-flash, else they have no Light; for they dwell in the outermost, and fly out of Highmindedness above the Thrones as Potent Commanders, and yet one otherwise then the other, all according as his Spirit is. 2. For a Dog acts in a Dogish manner, a Wolf in a Wolfish, also a Horse, a Fowl, Todes, Serpents, after their Manner; but they are all flying and swift as a Thought. 3. They have yet their Joy in their Abominations and that is their best Joy, that they reproach God, and say that they are Fire-Spirits, and God, a Light-Spi∣rit. 4. Their boast is alwayes of their strong
fires Might; as a Dragon that spitteth Fire; so also they, they seek Perdition and find Abomination: 5. Also Fruit groweth to them out of their Principle, all according to the Abo∣minations of their Will: 6. They have a sport, like that of Fools, that spit fire out of Rockets, Jug∣ling and Fooling is their pastime, though indeed there is no Time; and also after the Last Judgment Day no fear more of any other Source or Quality or Torment then they have, but their whole Life is a continual fear, a Horrour and Lamentati∣on, every one hath his Works in the Figure, what he hath here done; and then it awa∣keneth the Turba and rideth in the Fire. 7. The Soul hath no feeling, for it is without the Fire; only the Turba with the Introduced Abominations, plagueth it; there is an Eternal Despair in them, and therefore they are also God's Enemies. 8. Whatsoever belongeth to Blasphemy and Cursing, that is their best power and vertue, they devour Hellish Brimstone and Abominations: For their Fruits are such manner of things, a kind of Matter, that is outwardly fair, and inwardly meer fierce wrath, and as they have been such
flattering Hypocrites upon Earth, there∣fore also their Heaven giveth them such Bread to Eat. 9. They are at Large, shut up in No∣thing, they may go as Deep as they will, yet it is every where the Abysse and the Darkness, and yet they are but in their First Place; the Deeper they desire to swing themselves, the Deeper they Fall, and yet are no where at an End, or at the Ground or Bottom. 10. Their Number is no Humane Number, their delight is a stink of Fire and Brimstone, because of their Cursed Blasphemy, that they were Angels and now Devils, when they consider themselves then first riseth up the gnawing Worm that Devoureth and Tormenteth them: 11. What should a Man write of their Cursedness? they are filthy Evil Beasts, all that they have practised upon the Earth, that followeth after them, and that they would also do there; they swallow down Abomination and Cursing without Mea∣sure; a Man cannot apprehend their Do∣minion better, then by the Antichristian Horse, and by Cursing blaspheming Men, which are Mad with Cursing, though it be but a Looking-Glass, in respect of the
Hellish Abominations; and we will not further mention them, for they are not worthy to be named. The Five and Thirtieth Question. What the Enochian Life is, and how long it lasteth. 1. THis is also above Humane Reason, and which no outward Reason can Comprehend: but seeing it is born or generated, therefore it shall stand open, for there stick such Mysteries here, that the World cannot comprehend, and we shall not mention them at large, for it hath its limit, how far it shall go; for in this [Time] shall Wonders be done upon Earth, for which cause our speech is taken from us that we must be silent. 2. Yet we shall shew what kind of Life it is, or whither Enoch is gone, as also Elias and Moses: It is no Conjecture, we speak what here is given us, we shall fur∣ther be silent, and not believe Reason, it is a Fool herein.
3. And we may well mention this, for the Time is Born, that Enoch speaketh, and Elias worketh Wonders, which Babel shall try by Experience: For Moses hath Horns, and yet is a Patient or Meek Lamb. 4. O how wouldest thou rejoyce, if thou wouldst go amongst Moses Flock: for he hath a good Message or Embassie, re∣joyce ye Heaven and be merry ye Earth; for Enoch is in the field and keepeth his Flock. 5. What will Elias do? He had a white Garment on, and was with Christ on the Mount, and spake to him concerning the finishing the Redemption of Mankind, and spake to him also of the Entrance into Paradise, and of the final Deliverance from the Driver or Persecutor. 6. He that is born Blind seeth Nothing: how can a Lame Man run to the limit for the Prize, and a Deaf Man distinguish Words and Languages? Doth not the Sun shin all the Day, and yet the Mole re∣maineth blind still; Will Babel then come to see? We say she is a Scorner, and therefore also she must be blind though the Sun shineth to her: 7. How can any see what is in TWO
Worlds, that dwelleth alwayes but in ONE? Or is it not Art and Wit, that hath understanding, that can search the Deep Gates? But it flyeth aloft like a Wind, that holdeth nothing, and yet maketh such a Bluster; so also Babel. 8. When we will speak of the Enochian Life, we must consider the Scripture, and see who Enoch was, and what Life he lead; and then we may soon find, where he is, and what his going away and taking up is. 9. The Scripture saith, his Father was called Jared: if you understand the Lan∣guage of Nature, you had the whole Ground; 10. And Enoch begat Methusalah, who attained the Highest Age of any Man; and after he had begotten him, he conti∣nued in a Godly or Divine Life, till the Lord took him into his Principle. 11. And we are not so to understand it, as if he were wholly perfect in the Light of God's Majesty, and should not appear at the Judgment Day: He is indeed in God without necessity and Death, also in God's Love, but in the Birth of God's Principle; for he had also Adam's Flesh. 12. So you know very well, that the
outward Kingdom, with the Earthly Flesh, belongeth to the Turba, though indeed, he had in the outward Body, the Body of God's Wonders, as to which he was taken up into the Mystery, so that the outward Body, was as it were swallowed up of the Mystery. 13. But now must the Mystery give up again, all whatsoever it hath swallowed up, as ye know that at the End it shall present the outward Body with all Substances or Works, before the Judgment of God, so also is the Turba still in the outward Body with the Wonders, which shall be mani∣fested and tryed in the Fire. 14. Seeing then Enoch is taken up, with Body and Soul, with both Bodies, there∣fore his outward Body is in the Mystery, and the inward Body is a Heavenly Myste∣ry in the Arcanum or hiddenness, and so he liveth in two Mysteries, invisibly and incomprehensibly to the outward World: as we give you to understand, that Para∣dise is still at hand and not vanished, but is as it were swallowed up by the Curse of God, and lyeth yet as a Mystery uncorrup∣ted in the Curse. 15. For we can with good ground of Truth, say; that Paradise is still upon
Earth; but we are not therein, yet Enoch is therein; but he hath still the Body of the Turba in the Mystery, and in the Hea∣venly Mystery he hath God's Body, a Pa∣radisical Body, that is capable of Paradise: thus he is a Wonder, and is a Prophet on the Crown at the limit of the Wonders. 16. For ye know, the Scripture saith, that after he begat Methuselah, the Man of the highest Age, that afterwards he conti∣nued in a Divine Life: and that is signifi∣cant. 17. Methuselah sheweth the end of the Wonders of this World, and Enoch in his Divine Life after the Birth of Methu∣selah, sheweth as to his Three hundred years, the opening of the Wonders, and the open Ministry, viz. a preaching of Righteousness, whereby every one hath his Turba shewen him, and the End of the Wonders of this World is shewed, viz. God's punishment and reward to the Good. 18. And the Time after Enoch, wherein Enoch lived till the Number of the Crown, when Enoch with his Preaching was taken up, sheweth that the Enochian Light, which appeared in his Time, will pass again into the Principle, and will
seek the Earthly Body of Enoch, and it will be found that the Turba is still there∣in, so that there is no seeking more, for the Turba is found at the Limit, and worketh only to the Fire and to the Judg∣ment. 19. Thus the End of this World is as the Dreggs of the Cup, and worketh in the Turba, to the blowing up of the Fire, and to the Judgment; for the outward World is become generated out of the Turba, and hath taken its beginning in the Turba, and the Turba is its proper own, thus the Be∣ginning seeketh the End again in the fierce Wrath. 20. And as this World is become Cor∣poreal in the fierce Wrath, so also will the beginning at the End, have the Spirit again in the fierce Wrath; for the Begin∣ning and the End is all one; therefore you see very well, that in the Beginning the Turba swallowed up Adam, and brought him into Anger and Murthered Abel. 21. Therefore ye Elect, desire none of you to live to the time of the End, after Enochs taking up; but consider, that when Enoch Preacheth, the Sun shineth, then go out of Babel it is a Golden Time; but your
Turba causeth that Enoch shall be taken up. 22. Enoch is not flyen away out of this World, he is passed into the Mystery in the VVonders; for he is God's Preacher, and after that the Turba hath overcome the VVorld, then must he be silent, till the six Seals have ended their VVonders, and the Angels of the Turba poured forth their Viols, and then are the VVonders of the Anger finished. 23. Then cometh Enoch again out of the Mystery, and goeth into the Mystery, and telleth what hath been done, and re∣proveth the World because of the Turba, hecause they have let the abomination come into them, and have not withstood it. 24. And after the world becometh fat and wonton in the Golden Year, and seek∣eth Sodom and Gommorrah again, then will also their Turba be fat and Wanton, and seek the fierce VVrath and the Limit, and the Golden Time cometh to an End, and will be swallowed up in the Turba, and then Methuselah, the oldest Man dy∣eth, and suddenly cometh the Sin Deluge in the Fire; think of it, it is an Earnest severe thing.
25. We say not, that you shall feel Enoch with your hands, No! Enoch preach∣eth not from the Earthly Lifes Spirit, but from that which was a Prophet which in∣troduced the outward Man into the Prin∣ciple: thus you shall not touch the out∣ward Enoch, but hear the Prophet which speaketh out of Enoch out of the Mystery; 26. Babel holdeth it in derision, and despiseth Enoch for a time, then Enoch calleth Noah, but they account him an Old Fool, for Preaching of the downfal of Babel. 27. And Noah passeth into the other World through the Water, and calleth to Moses, with his Wonders, and he Com∣eth, for he hath God's Wonders. 28. For, he is gone through Death, and hath brought his Body through Death, where then the Turba desired to consume it, and the Devil contended about it, and would have the Turba in Moses, because he had been an Angry Man, and brought the Turba on many. 29. But it was said to the Devil, that the Turba in the fire did not belong to him, for it served to the Majesty of God, and hath the VVonders: to him belonged the Turba in the Darkness in the fierce
wrath, and is without the City, it shall not dwell in the City in the Principle, but without it; 30. For, God hath not Created him in and for the Fire, he may continue in his own awakened fire-Life, for he hath no∣thing to do with Moses Body; for Moses's VVonders in the Anger belong not to his Turba, he is an Outcast a Castaway. 31. And Moses's Body is gone through Death, his unfadable Body, which hath the VVonders, hath swallowed up the Earthly in the Turba, and yet not in a fa∣dable manner consumed it; but he is also in the Mystery: and his Turba which killed the first born in Egypt, and drowned Pha∣raoh in the Water, and slew the Wor∣shippers of the Calves, also swallowed up Corah Dathan and Abiram with the Earth; that remained in Death; 32. When he dyed, then went his Spi∣rit and Soul forth out of the Turba, and he remained in the Wonders in the My∣stery. 33. And now he is become a Lamb, and bringeth his works into Isaac's and Sems Goods, as a Mystery of God in his Deeds of VVonder; But the House is Isaac's, and they all dwell in Sems Tents, in his
Kingdom: Consider that, ye Jews and Christians. 34. Now seeing Moses is gone from the con∣tention of the Turba and of the Devil, with Righteousness, into the Mystery, and hath likewise his first Body, yet unfadably on him, brought out from the Turba, but yet it shall be tryed in the Fire, at the End of the Day, therefore his Prophet is in the Mystery: 35. And seeing he is become a Lamb after the Turba, therefore he hath sent his people many Prophets, to Preach of the Mystery, as in the Mystery there is not only the Law and Works, but also the Lamb Christ, into which he also Entred and made his Law to be of the houshould of the Lamb, so that his Wonders dwell in the lodging of the Lamb. 36. This Moses calleth to Enoch, seeing he also is in the Mystery, & hath the white Garment on, which he gat from the Lamb in the other VVorld; to whose help Moses cometh, with the Lamb's Deeds of Won∣der, seeing they call Noah Fool, who with∣out Wonders teacheth as an honest or ver∣tuous Man. 37. This will not Babel endure, for so
her pomp and loftiness will be taken away, she sets her self against Moses and Enoch, and persecuteth them, she would kill them; but Moses is dead already, and Enoch is taken up, and none in the outward Life is with them: They say, well, where is Enoch and Moses, let us see their Won∣ders, and they are blind, and cannot see them: thus they rage against Moses and Enoch, and go forth to Battel. 38. Then Moses calleth to Elias, which went out of this World in the Fire of God, in the Abysse of the Principle, with Body and Soul, he dwelleth in the Principle with strong Might, and when he cometh and seeth the Cry that Babel standeth in the Fire, then he kindleth the Turba, where∣in the Great Fire Burneth, which consu∣meth Flesh and Blood, also Stones and the Elements, and then shall Babel drink her last Draught. 39. And after that Enoch hath peace a little Time, and it is the Golden Year, till my Beloved become fat and wanton, and stuffeth his Turba well, so that it seek∣eth the Limit, and then cometh the End of all Time. 40. Let it not be a Wonder to you, we will
stay in the mean while with Noah, till Moses and Elias, come; and then you will find it by Experience, all you that are the Children of God, 41. But to the wicked it remaineth hidden, till the Turba devoureth them; they look upon it, as the Jews did upon Christ, and the first World upon Noah; what should a scorner do with the Myste∣ry? he seeketh only for plenty to Eat and to Drink, and looketh how he may satisfie his Pomp, wherewith he might Ride on in Babel. 42. Thus, my Beloved Friend, we have given you a short hint of the Enochian Life, also what his Office and Condition is, as also of Moses and Elias: you should further consider of them as a discerning Man; for we dare not speak otherwise of it; also our Understanding and Will is turned into such a way of Speech, and in this place at this time I am not allowed to write more fundamentally with a simple understanding, 43. If God permit, and that it be given to Us, to write somewhat upon the Genests fin∣nished. first and also the Exod. none of it exstant. second Book of
Moses, more may be opened; for the Names that are set down of the Fathers be∣fore the Deluge or Flood, belong all to the Mystery, and there are Great Won∣ders therein; when it will be Day, then you shall by them apprehend the whole Course of the World. The Six and Thirtieth Question. What the Soul of the Messiah or Christ is. 1. THis we have explained in our Third Book, concerning the Three-fold Life of Man, yet seeing every one that readeth this hath not that at hand, also because of the Question, more must be answered, therefore it also shall be set down: for you ask in the following Que∣stion, concerning Christ's Spirit, which was obedient, and which Christ Commen∣ded to his Father. 2. Here shall be given to the Old sick Adam, a Good reviving Cordial, a Me∣dicine for Death, that he may be awaken∣ed:
for his Mother will bear or bring forth a young Son, who shall live in her Bosom, and shall rejoyce at it. 3. And now if we will consider of Christ's Soul, we must our selves seek it and find it, for Christ's Soul is a Hamane Soul, conceived in Mary in the twofold Virgin. 4. Though we acknowledge the out∣ward Mortal Life in Mary for no Pure Virgin, for that which is Mortal hath the Anger, and the Turba, which breaketh or corrupteth all purity, so that no pure Vir∣gin is born of Eve, but all are her Daugh∣ters. 5. And Eve her self, was but half a Virgin, for Adam was the other half, ac∣cording to the Two Tinctures, wherein man appeared in a total entire Virgin and pure Love, and God through him, as the Original through the Creature, which he made out of himself. 6. And thus also in one whole or entire person there is a pure Love and Chastity, for it seeketh no other Mixture; it is it self the Mixture of both the Tinctures, viz. of the Souls Tincture, and of the Spirits Tincture, and therein is power and abi∣lity, that it can generate a Spirit out of
the Fires-Tincture, which is called Soul and Spirit; 7. Which Adam squandred away, when he let the Earthly Life captivate him, and therefore he must be broken and a Woman be made out of him, which must set her Love Delight Longing and Imagination into Adams Tincture, if she would be im∣pregnate with a Soul: 8. And None can say, that Eve, before the Touching of Adam, was a pure Chast Virgin: for as soon as Adam awaked out of sleep, he saw her standing by him, and imagined suddenly after or into her, and took her to him, and said, This is Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone of my Bone; she shall be called a she-Man or Woman, because she is taken out of Man. 9. And she Eve also suddenly Imagin∣ed into Adam, and one kindled the other in the seeking. 10. And where is now the pure Chasti∣ty and Modesty? It is not Beastial, is not the outward Image become a Beast? As is sufficiently to be seen in the Will and Substance or Doings, that Man doth as a Beast, and more foolishly; for he hath Reason, and rideth on in Reason so sens∣lesly.
11. But that it might be remedied, and the Image come into One again, therefore is the Word, which spake the Soul forth out of God's Mouth, and by the Holy Spirit, breathed it into the Image, become Man, and is entred into the Earthly Image, viz. into the Turba of Destruction, 12. And you know very well, that the Word hath the Water of the Eternal Life, and the Fire of the Deity, and out of the Fire, the Tincture of the Deity, and in the Tincture, the Spirit of God; which goeth forth out of God's Mouth, and in the go∣ing forth, is the Glance of the Majesty in the working of the Spirit, Manifested. 13. That very word, is in the Virgin of the Wisdom of God, and surrounded with the Eternal Wonders; and that now out of the Great Love and Humility to∣wards our Image, which was destroyed to us in Adam, is entered into us again, and is in Mary, understand in the Earthly Mary, but with the Blessing, become Man or Incarnate. 14. The Blessing is this, that to the Soul of Mary the Heavenly Virgin the Wisdom of God was put on, which Adam had lost, and therefore the Angel
called her, Luk. 1. 42. the Blessed a∣among Women. 15. No Woman from Adam to this Day, had the Heavenly Virgin put on to her, but only this Mary; and therefore with the Blessing she became Chast and full of Modesty, for the Spirit goeth not into the Earthly, it Mixeth it self not with the Looking-Glass: for that cannot be, that the Looking-Glass, should be as the Life it self. 16. Thus understand us dearly accord∣ing to its precious Depth; Mans Soul is out of God, and out of the Eternal; but Mans Body is a Looking-Glass of the Eter∣nal. Thus hath God put on to the Virgin Mary, God's Virgin; but in the Souls Principle, not in the Earthly Flesh, as if she were Deified; no, she must die, as all mankind doth. 17. And in that very Virgin hath Gods Word, out of God the Fathers Heart, as∣sumed the Seed of the Woman, viz. the Souls Seed, and the first Images Seed, which now stood so long time in the My∣stery, broken: 18. And now God's Life came therein∣to, & made again a whole or Entire Image, for the Water of the Eternal Life, out
of God's Heart mixed it self with the Souls Geist-Wasser. Spi∣rit's Water, for the Spirit existeth out of the Water, and the Soul is Fire. 19. Thus the Word, took hold of the Souls Tincture, and the Holy Spirit of the Spirits Tincture, viz. of the Waters Tin∣cture, and out of Both became one Soul, and yet the Creature remained distinct from God's Spirit: but God's Spirit dwelleth therein, and so out of God's Water and Tincture, and out of the Seed of Mary, out of her Tincture and Water in the high Blessing, came one Flesh and Blood; so that a Heavenly Man Equally at once in the Earthly, became Man, or was Incarnate. 20. So that a Man might say, this is the Womans Son, viz. Maries right true bodily natural Sonne with Soul and Body, with Flesh and Blood, and all whatsoever a Man hath; and also God's true Sonne, which was generated out of God's Eternal Substance from Eternity, before the Foun∣dation of the World was laid, which stood in the Majesty of the Holy Number Three, and also in the Body of Mary equally alike at Once:
21. And the Soul of Christ belongeth half to the Principle of this World, and half to the Holy Spirit: for the Soul of Christ made use of the outward Spirits Air of the Stars or Constellations, with the Power and Vertue of the Elements, and also of the Word of God, and of Divine food: for such a Man was Adam in Inno∣cency. 22. Thus hath God in Christ Regenera∣ted us anew, and thus are we, born anew in Christ, out of God's Word and Spirit, through the Water of the Eternal Life, & thus are we Gods Children in CHRIST; and if we give our selves up into Christ, out from our The outward Rea∣son of the Old Adam in Corruptible Flesh and Blood. Reason, then we are indued with Christs Body, and our Will and Spirit liveth from or of CHRIST in US and we in him. 23. Thus you may understand what Christ's Temptation was, viz. that the New Regenerate Man, should now hold out or endure Adams temptation, to try whether his Soul could stand in God, and there he was tryed in the Turba, to see whether he could rightly stand in the Three Principles, and rule over the Outward:
and therefore his food of the outward Life was withdrawn from him, that the inward Life might overpower the outward, and eat of the Word of the Lord, and hold the outward in its own power and full Omni∣potency, and also hold Death Captive, that it should not destroy the outward Life, this must needs be a Great Combate. 24. And then the other two Temptati∣ons were these, he was tryed whether Man would live in full obedience to God, and let God work in him, or whether he would lift up himself again, and free him∣self from God as Lucifer did: and there∣fore the Devil must tempt him, seeing this Man was to possess his Kingly or Royal Throne. 25. Therefore the Devil complained, that he was not able to stand, the Mother of the fierce Wrathfulness drew him so hard; therefore, it was now permitted to him, that he should tempt and try it in this Man, and should set before him, that which was set before himself; and if this Man did overcome; he should be the De∣vils Judge, who was found to be a Lyar. 26. For he Tempted him in the second and third Assault fully to try, whether he would flie in his own self might, and he
himself had done, and had awakened the Anger, or whether he would put his Trust alone in God, and live in God, with Will and Substance or Deed, as a Child in Obe∣dience to the Father; and this he tryed so long with him, as Adam was in the Temp∣tation before his sleep. 27. Thus must we also Continually be Tempted; but in Christ who hath over∣come we can have the Victory, for his Soul is our Soul, and his Flesh our Flesh, if we trust in him and give up our selves wholly to him, as Christ gave himself up to his Father. 28. And thus beloved Friend; you un∣derstand what Christ's Soul and Body is, viz. Our Soul and Body, if we cleave to God; but if not, then we are rent off, and are according to the outward Life, fallen home to the Spirit of this World, viz. to the perished corrupt Adam, and according to the Soul, fallen home to the Devil in the Anger of God; seek this more at large in our other Writings, where you shall find the whole ground of Heaven and of this World.
The Seven and Thirtieth Question. What the Spirit of Christ is, which was Obedient, and which he Commended into his Fathers Hands. 1. THis is that Great Jewel, for which we highly rejoyce, that we know it, so that we know our selves what we are, and it is more dear and acceptable to us then the whole World; for it is that Pearl Mat. 13. 46. for which one sold all his Goods and bought that Pearl, of which Christ speaketh. 2. For it is more profitable to Man then the whole World, it is more Noble and Precious then the Sun, for the Noble or Precious Stone of the Wise Men, the Philosophers Stone lyeth THEREIN, it hath the Mysterium Magnum, The Great Mystery, Heavenly and Earthly; and there is nothing like it in this World, but only the mean simplicity, which standeth still, and generateth or awakeneth no Tur∣ba, this hath the Jewel hidden in it; as
the Gold lyeth in the Stone. 3. And continueth unconsumed, if a Robber with the Earthly Turba cometh not upon it, and destroyeth it, and yet at∣taineth it not, so is also the own self-Rea∣son in the Mystery. 4. Therefore we dare, and can with good ground say, that a simple Layick, which in simplicity, without much Skill and Art cleaveth to God, hath the Mysterium Magnum better and surer, also undestroy∣ed, then a high learned Doctor, that flyeth aloft in his Reason, and destroyeth the Jewel and setteth it in Babel; this indeed will not relish well, but we are not much concerned in that, we should set forth the Truth and baulk or shun none. 5. Now when we speak of Christ's Spi∣rit, then Reason understandeth the Soul, or indeed the outward Life's Spirit, which standeth in power and vertue and winking of the Stars and Elements; but no, it is ano∣ther thing, wherein the Image of God standeth; the outward Spirit belongeth not to the Deity, but to the Wonders. 6. We have truly and clearly menti∣oned before, but since it is hinted expresly in the Question, that Christ commended it to his Father in his Dying, therefore
we must speak thereof how it was. 7. You have sufficiently conceived before, in what manner the Soul is the Center of Nature, the Original of Life, and the Mo∣bility; as viz. a Fire of God, which should be turned and inclined into Gods Eternal Will, wherein it is Originally generated out of the Magick seeking, and out of the Eternal Nothing is become a Great My∣stery, wherein ALL Things lye; The Deity, with all the Three Principles, and all whatsoe∣ver is or is called Being or Substance or Thing. 8. Also it is explained, how out of the Fire, the Light is generated, and the Spirit-Air, and then how the Fire draweth the Spirit-Air again into it self, and so conti∣nually bloweth up it self again, and so with the Light and the Air, and the source or quality of the Fire, is the Life of its own self. 9. We have also mentioned moreover unto you concerning the Noble or Precious Tincture, which thus ariseth in the Light, in which is the Light's meekness, which
is Generated out of the Anguish, as a Therefore Mor∣tifie your Mem∣bers which are on the Earth. Col. 3. 5. Mortifica∣tion or killing, and sprout∣eth forth out of the Mor∣tification: as another life of another source or qua∣lity, where the Fires-source or quality, is apprehended to be a Tincture, like a dri∣ving forth of a Spirit, and yet also is de∣sirous, and so draweth the power and ver∣tue of the Light, into it self, and maketh it be a Substance, viz. Water, 10. Wherein the two Forms become ap∣prehended, one according to the Fire-source or quality, viz. Red, and therein the pow∣er and vertue, viz. Sulphur; and the other as a Thin Meekness, and yet Substantia∣lity, viz. Water, which the desirous Tin∣cture draweth and turneth into one in a thing, so that it becometh Blood. 11. Now in the Blood is the Original of the Fire, viz. the Warmth, that is a Tin∣cture, a Life, and in the power and vertue of the Tincture, goeth forth out of the Thin Water of Life, the power and vertue out of the power and vertue, and the vertue and power receiveth that going forth or exit continually again, and that going forth is free from the Fire; and also from
the power and vertue, for it is going forth and yet is generated out of the Power and Vertue: 12. And this is now the right and true Spirit, that becometh generated out of the Soul, wherein the Image of God with the Divine Virgin of the Wisdom of God, standeth: for in the Spirit lyeth all Wit or Ingenuity, Wisdom and Understanding; it hath the THOUGHTS, and the Noble or Precious Life, which uniteth it self with God, and is so subtile, that this Spirit CAN and may enter into God. 13. And then if this Spirit do give it self up into God; and casteth away its Souls Fire-pomp and Wit, then it attain∣eth God's Image and God's Body; for it goeth with the Will into God, and dwelleth with Power and Authority in God; Thus it hath God's Substance on it or in it, and is without this World in the Life of God. 14. But being this Spirit out of the Center of Nature, first originateth out of the Fire-Life, though it is not the Fire-Life, but its Spirit, and the Fire-Life with the Original in the Abysse standeth in the quality or source of the Anger of God: therefore hath Christ not Commended this his Spirit, to the Fiery-Life, but to his Fa∣ther, into his Hands.
15. His Hands are the Love Desiring, wherewith he reacheth after our Spirit, when we enter into him, and Commit or Commend our selves to him: Note. 16. For now when his Body was to die on the Cross, How Christ descended into Hell. and his Soul was to go through Hell, God's An∣ger: then the Devil waited and thought, we will surely keep him well enough in our Turba in the Fire, therefore CHRIST Commended his Spi∣rit into God's Love. 17. And thus came now the Soul of Christ with the Spirit, into God's Hands comprised in the Anger-Fire in Death; there Death would have held him, but it was broken and made a scorn of: 18. For it slew the outward Man, viz. the outward Life, and took it away, and thought, now must the Soul needs stay in the Turba, but there was a stronger, in the Soul, viz. God's Word: that took Death Captive, and destroyed the Anger, and quenched the fierce Wrath with the Love in the Spirit of Christ. 19. That was a Poyson to Hell, that the Love of God came into it, and slew
it in the Soul, and was Heb. 2. 14. to Death a Pestilence and a Dying, a Breaking and destroying: it must now suffer that an Eternal Life grow up in it. 20. Thus the Spirit of Christ, took the Devil Captive, and brought him out of this Souls-Fire forth into the Darkness, and thrust him into Darkness, out from the Souls Fire, & out from Gods Fire, into the fierce wrathful harsh austereness and bitterness in the Cold, there he may heat himself lest he freeze for Cold. 21. Consider the first four Forms of Nature, and then you may be informed what the Devils dwelling house is; For, before Christ he held the Soul Captive in the Turba with the Fire: and though clear∣ly he doth not hold the Souls Spirit, yet he had the root in the Turba; but there the forbearance was commanded him, and he was thrust out, and brought into the Darkness, and his Malice and Wickedness was thus destroyed by Christs going into Hell, and Christ became his Judge. 22. Thus ye have in brief, described, what Christs and our Spirit is, viz. not the outward Life, but the Spirit of the Soul, not the Soul it self, but its Lifes-Spirit.
23. As there is in God, the Holy Num∣ber Three, a Distinction, of Three Persons in One Substance, and yet but ONE God, where the Sonne hath the Spirit, viz. the Life, proceeding out of his Heart and Mouth; and the Heart is the Flame of Love, and the Father, the Source or Qua∣lity of Anger, and is meekned and allay∣ed by his Son in the Love, so that ALL in God is ONE Will and Substance or Deed. 24. So it is also in Man, and no other∣wise in one Syllable: whatsoever God, in Christ, is; that are we also in Christ, in God; his true Children, and therefore should we also commend our Spirits into his hands, and so we may also enter through Death into Life, with Christ in God. 25. Be not led astray and deluded by the facetious pleasant specious shews, as Men hither to have been in Babel, where they have conceited this and that concern∣ing the Soul, and its Spirit, one thus, ano∣ther otherwise; there is no Ground but Conceits and Opinions. 26. The Understanding is generated in God, not in the Schools or Universities, from Art, though we despise not Art, for if it be generated in God, it is a TEN-fold Mystery, for it attaineth alwayes the Tenth
Number in Wit or Understanding, more then the Layick, for it can of many Num∣bers make One: 27. But it standeth not in own self abi∣lity, No; the Entrance upon the Cross, must be in One as well as in the Other, be he Doctor or Layick, in God's Mysteries there are none Doctors but only Scho∣lars: yet a Learned Scholar, can go far. 28. Had this Hand the High Art, and also this High Gift, you should well see it; but God would have it as it is, it pleas∣eth him well, that he might 1 Cor. 1. 20. turn the Wisdom of this World into Foolishness, and he giveth his power to the weak, that every Life, may bow before him and ac∣knowledge him that He is Lord, and doth whatsoever he will.
The Eight and Thirtieth Question. Of those things which are to be done at the End of the World. 1. MY Beloved Friend: here we ought not to answer your Question, also it standeth not in our Ability, neither ought any to Ask, for it is the secret Counsel of God; and none should Esteem himself as God, and know, ALL, before hand. 2. Our knowledge, standeth in God's Spirit and Will, when that moveth, then go you on in the Heavenly Magia, and pass into the Wonders of the Earthly: Now is the Prophet Born, for he standeth upon the Crown and speaketh Magically, concern∣ing the Beginning of the Wonders and of its Turba, and how it shall come to an End, and break again, and come into the First. 3. For all Prophets speak out of the Turba, they declare what is false or wick∣ed, and shew that which is better, which goeth in God's Will. 4. Therefore do not burthen us with
this Question, for we should be captiva∣ted by the Turba, you may understand it well enough in all the other Questions, what is to be done, and it is explained enough. 5. We dare not answer concerning future things, otherwise then after a Or by way of similitude. Magical Manner, and the Cause is this, the Future VVonders are all seen in the Turba, and if the Spirit seeth them, then it speaketh clearly out, how the Turba is loaded with Evil or Good: 6. But it seeth that all is mixed; for God is become Man, and setteth forth his Mercy every where in the Anger, and hin∣dereth the Perdition, and therefore must the Prophet now speak Magically, and not with Runden Worten. plain VVords; for it cometh to pass many times, that a thing that is Evil in the Sub∣stance, yet there groweth suddenly a small Twig or Branch out of it, which breaketh the Turba, and so there cometh a Conver∣sion into it. 7. Therefore God causeth you to be admonished, that you should subdue and resist the Heaven of the Firmament, and then often, the Evil, which the Firmamen∣tal
Heaven sheddeth abroad, becometh turned into that which is Better: 8. Else, if all must needs come to pass, which the Firmamental Heaven hath, Men would need no Teaching, but it would all be a certain stedfast and Eternal Calender. 9. You know very well, what Daniel Ezekiel as also David Mentioneth in his Prophecies, especially the Revelation of Jesus Christ, there ye have all lying in them, whatsoever is to be done, they have spoken Magically of things to come. 10. But in our Writings ye have them clearer, for the time is now nearer the End, and the Beginning hath sound the End: therefore it appeareth clearer, what shall be done at the End. 11. And I would have you directed to the other Questions, where you shall find enough concerning it, for the Evil VVorld is not worthy of a round clear explanation; for alwayes the Great Mystery is touched thereby, which belongeth only to the Chil∣dren of God: for God would not have men Mat. 7. 6. cast Pearls before Swine, Mat. 15. 26. but to give Food to the Children. 12. Thus do you also, it lyeth not in this, that the Mystery should stand under
a Worldly Protection or Patronage, that is a Folly, and God would thereby be reject∣ed, as if he were not able enough to Pro∣tect it. 13. You ought not to seek the Mystery among those in power, or rely upon them above others, for there cometh a Turba suddenly, thereinto, viz. by a Law: and then is God's Spirit as it were bound or ty∣ed up, and that thing becometh an Anti∣christ. 14. Look upon Israel, when they re∣jected Samuel and their Judges, and sup∣posed, when their Teaching stood under a worldly Arm and Power, and that they had a King, then they would keep their Law; as it came to pass that their King intro∣duced the Turba thereinto; and made Calves for the Service and VVorship of God, and compelled the Congregation or People, to Honour and VVorship those Idols, this we say from a good meaning. 15. And we give you no Answer to this Question particularly by it self, you will find enough of it in the other Questions, for we ought to do no otherwise.
The Nine and Thirtieth Question. What and where Paradise is, with its Inhabitants. 1. THis hath been explained to you in the Enochian Life, that it is in this World, but in the Mystery as it were swallowed up, whereas yet in it self it is not altered: It is only withdrawn from our Eyes, from our source or quality; else if our Eyes were open we should see it. 2. Nay God in his Number Three is with us, how then should Paradise be lost? indeed we have lost the quality or source and fruit of it, in the outward Life; as the Devil lost God, when he with his own self will went forth as a proud arrogant Spirit, and would be Lord, so it hath gone with us; 3. When Adam would have Eaten of the Earthly Fruit, Evil and Good, then he gat also an Earthly Life, Evil and good, and became thrust out of the fair delight∣ful Garden of Paradise, where Heavenly Fruit grew, into the outward Life.
4. Many have written wonderfully of Para∣dise, but their blindness appears now in the Day Light, whom yet we shall not con∣temn, for they have been seekers, every Age hath had its seekers; who have sought the Mystery; but it hath been a long time very dark in Babel. 5. Now within two hundred years it hath begun to open it self again, wherein Anti∣christs Fall hath been discovered, where Men have begun to storm Babel on One side, but the strong Fort in Babel standeth firm still; Men have revealed or manifest∣ed the Whore indeed, but her Beast, is but the more grown. 6. Therefore there is yet a Wonderful time at hand, which shall change all; Ma∣ny Ezek. 38. 20. high Mountains and Hills shall be made a plain Field, and a Fountain shall flow out of Sion, wherein the Miserable shall drink and be refreshed. 7. And they shall be led to Pasture with a staff, and the Shepherd will rejoyce with his Sheep; that God is so Gracious. 8. For Silver and Gold is as common as in Solomons time, and his Wisdom Ruleth over the Face of the Earth, this is a Won∣der.
The Fortieth Question. Whether Paradise is Alterable, and what shall be afterwards. 1. AS little as God is alterable, so little also is Paradise alterable; for it is a part of the Deity; when the outward Do∣minion shall pass away, then will in the Place where this world now standeth, be meer Paradise, For there will be an Earth of Heavenly Substantiality, which we may be able to dwell in Through and through. 2. At the Last Judgement Day, we shall not fly away from the Place of this World, but continue so in our Native Countrey, and go home into another World, into ano∣ther Principle of another source or quality. 3. For there will be no Frost nor heat, also no Night, and we shall be able to go through the Heavenly Earth, through and through, without dividing or disturbing any thing. 4. This Earth will be Rev. 4. 6. Like a Cristalline Sea, wherein all the Or Works that have been in the World. Wonders of the World will be seen,
all very Transparently, and God's Glance Lustre or brightness, will be the Light there∣in; and the Holy Jerusalem the Great City of God, where Men shall offer to God the Calves of their Lips, there will be Paradise, Note. Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3, 5. And the Tabernacle of God with Men: For it is Written, Behold I make all things New, a New Heaven and a New Earth, so that Men shall not regard the Old any more; in that will the fair bright City of God, with the Wonders and Wisdom, stand; and the Temple of God, the New Jerusalem, will stand upon the New Earth, which is prepared and made ready out of God's Power and Wonders: 5. ALL whatsoever the Prophets have written will there be fulfilled, for God's Word and Wonders, will spring and grow as Grass upon the New Earth; 6. Rev. 21. 4. There is no more Death, also no fear, or sor∣row or sadness, No sickness, No Superiour Lord but only Christ, who will dwell with us; and we shall be in one Communion with the Angels; Our Fruits will Spring and grow to us there according to our De∣sire and Wish.
7. There will be no old Age there, but a Man of a Hundred Years, will be as a Child newly Born, and live in meer de∣light of Love, 8. All whatsoever is Joy will be sought after, and which way soever one can pro∣cure Joy to another, to that is his will en∣clined. 9. We shall lead a Holy Priestly Life, and all speak of God's Wisdom and Eter∣nal Wonders; for the Divine Magia hath Wonders without Number, the more is sought, the more is therein, and that is the Multiplication and increase or procre∣ation of the VVill of God; 10. And to this End hath God mani∣fested himself in Images Created, as in Angels and Men, that so he might have Joy in himself, and rejoyce himself with his Lifes-Essences Eternally. Hallelujah.
Conclusion. 11. THus my beloved Friend, is set down a round Answer to your Questions, ac∣cording to our Gifts, and we exhort you Brotherly, not to despise us, in respect of our simple Speech and Incongruity. 12. For, we are not born of Art but of simplicity, and speak great things with simple Words; take it as a Bounty of God, you will find so much therein and more then in the High Art of the Best Eloquence, unless they also be born or Generated from this School, whom we will not under∣value
but acknowledge them for our Beloved Brethren in Christ, with whom we expect Eternally to rejoyce in the Hea∣venly School, of which we here have attained a little foretaste: 13. And here Our know∣ledge is only in part; but when we shall attain the whole per∣fection, then will we say what God IS and CAN DO. AMEN. ANNO, 1620. Jacob Behme.
A Short Summary Appendix concerning the Soul and its Image and of the Turba which destroyeth the Image. Written in High-Dutch, Anno. 1620, by Jacob Behme called Teutonicus Philosophus, Printed in the Year, 1665.
Of the Soul, and of its Image, and of the Turba which destroyeth the Image. A short Summary Appendix; which in the other Books is written of more at Large and Fundamentally. 1. THe Soul is an Eye in the Eternal Abysse, a similitude of the Eterni∣ty; a Total Figure and Image ac∣cording to the first Principle: and, is like, God the Father, according to his Person; according to the Eternal Nature. 2. Its Essence and Substantiality; as to what it is purely of it self, is first, the VVheel of Nature, with the first four Forms. 3. For the Word of the Lord, with the Eternal Fiat, comprised the Soul in the Eternal Will of the Father, in the Center of the Eternal Nature, and opened it by the Holy Spirit, or blew it up as a Fire, which hath lien in the Eternity: wherein, from Eternity stood all the Forms of the , and were only apprehend
ed in the Wisdom in the Divine Magia, as a Figure or Image without Substance, from Eternity. 4. Yet that thing was not Substantial but Essential; and was apprehended in the Principle in the Flash of Lightning, where the Fire originateth: but the Sha∣dow of it hath fashioned it self into a Fi∣gured Image in the Desirous VVill of God; and hath stood before the Number Three of God, in the Magia in the VVis∣dom of God, as a similitude of the Holy Trinity; in which as in a Looking-Glass God hath manifested or revealed himself. 5. The Substance, and Image of the Soul, is to be considered in a fair Flower that springeth out of the Earth, and in the Fire, and Light: as men see that the Earth is a Center, and yet No Life; but it is Essential: and out of it, groweth a fair flower, which is not like the Earth; also it hath not the Smell and Tast thereof: much less its Figure; and yet the Earth is the Mother of the Flowers. 6. Thus is the Soul also discovered out of the Center of Nature, out of the Eternal Essence with the VVord Fiat, in the VVill of God, and held or preserved in the Fiat, so that is a Fire-Eye, and a  of
the First Principle; discovered in a Crea∣turely Form and Substance. 7. And our of this Eye, is gone forth the Glance of its Fire; as a Lightout of the Fire, and in that Glance of its own Fire, was the Eternal Image seen, which is in the VVisdom of God, and comprised by the VVill of the Heart of God, in the second Principle: understand; by the VVord Fiat, of the Second Principle, in the Love and Power or Vertue of the Holy Trinity; in which the Holy Spirit goeth forth. 8. Thus is the Soul become a Total si∣militude and Image of the Holy Trinity, where a Man is to understand, the Soul, to be the Center of Nature; and its Fire-Life to be the first Principle; but the Sprout, or the Image of the Soul, which is a Similitude of God, groweth forth out of the Soul; as a Flower out of the Earth: and is Ergriffen Compacted. comprised by the Holy Spirit; for it is his Ha∣bitation. 9. If the Soul, putteth forth its Image, understand out of the Fire Source or Qua∣lity, into the Light of God, then it receiv∣eth the Light, as the Moon doth the Glance of the Sun: and thus its Image standeth
in the Majesty of God, and it self, viz. the Soul, in the Light of God; and its Fire-source, becometh changed into Meek∣ness, and desirous Love; wherein it is acknowledged for God's Child. 10. But being the Soul is Essential, and its own Substance a Desiring, therefore it is apprehensible, that it standeth in two Fiats, the one is its Corporeal Propriety, and the other is the second Principle, out of the Will of God, which standeth in the Soul; in which God desireth IT for his Image and Similitude. 11. Besides, God's Desiring, is like a Fiat in the Center of the Soul, and it con∣tinually frameth or inclineth the Will of the Soul, towards the Heart of God: for the delight or longing of God willeth to have the Soul; on the Contrary the Center in the Fires-Might, willeth also to have it: 12. For the Life of the Soul Originat∣eth in the Fire: therefore now there is strife about the Image of the Soul; and that form or quality that overcometh, whether it be the Fire, or the Meekness of the Love, according to that, is the Soul qua∣lified or conditioned; and out of the Soul, such an Image appeareth, as the Will of the Soul is qualified.
13. And we are to know, that if the Will of the Soul Altereth, then its Form becometh altered also; for if the quality or source of the Soul be fiery, then also ap∣peareth such a fiery Image out of it. 14. But if the Soul in the Center, Ima∣gineth Or accord∣ing to. into the stern harsh∣ness and bitterness, then its fair Image becometh capti∣vated, with the Dark harshness; and in∣fected with the harsh fierce wrath. 15. And then is that fierce wrath be∣come a Turba, which possesseth the Image, and destroyeth the similitude of God, for in God is Love-Light Meekness; and in this Image, is Darkness, Harshness and Bitter∣ness; and its Essential Quality, is Fire, out of the fierce wrathful Essences, and so this Image, as long as it standeth in such a Quality and Form in the Darkness, be∣longeth not unto God's Kingdom. 16. Further, in the Fire, ye have a si∣militude of the Soul; the Soul is an Essen∣tial Fire, and the Flash of the Fire, maketh in it, the Life; the Soul resembleth a fire-Globe or a fire-Eye. 17. Now, the burning fire, in the source or quality, signifieth the first Principle and the Life; whereas yet the fire is not the
Life; but the quality or Pain-Spirit, which existeth in the Anguish of the fire; & which goeth forth out of the fire; like Air, that is the Right Fountain Quality or Source-Spirit of the fire-Life; which continually bloweth up the fire again so that it burn∣eth. 18. Now the fire giveth forth a shining and Light, forth out of the quality or source, which dwelleth in the quality or source, and shineth forth from it: and yet the quality or source, comprehendeth not the Light, that comprehendeth not the se∣cond Principle; wherein the Deity dwel∣leth. 19. For Men apprehend, that the Pow∣er and Vertue is in the Light, and not in the fire; the fire giveth only to the Light Essences, and the Life or the Light, giveth Meekness, and the Substantiality, viz. Wa∣ter. 20. Now, we understand, that in the Light, is an amiable Life without source or pain: and yet there is a source or pain in it, but not perceptible: it is no other then a longing Delight, or Love-Desire. 21. Where we apprehend that source or quality to be a Tincture, in which the growing and Blossoming of flowers spring∣eth
up: and yet the fire is the cause of it: and the Meekness is the Cause of the Substantiality; for the Love-desire in the Light, draweth, and retaineth it, so that it is a Substance, but the fires desire, con∣sumeth the Substantiality. 22. And we are to conceive of the Soul thus: as to what concerns the Soul solely and purely in the Center, it is an Essential fire in the Eye of Eternity; and yet that Eye is desirous, viz. a Figure and Image according to the Wisdom of God. 23. And in its desiring, in its Imagi∣nation standeth the Image; for the Word Fiat, hath laid hold of it, that it might be a similitude according to the Eternal Wisdom of God, in which he dwelleth, in which he may manifest him∣self with his Spirit, and whatsoever hath been in his Eternal Wheel, Orb, Sphere or Globe. 24. Thus the Majesty of God flameth in the Image, in the Essential Fire, if the Essential Fire introduceth its desire into the Majesty; but if not, then is the Image Row and Naked, without God; and the Tincture becometh false or evil. 25. For, the Image standeth in the
Tincture, and Originateth in the Tincture, in the Light, not in the fire source quali∣ty or pain: as God's Heart or Word tak∣eth its Original in the Light of the Maje∣sty in the Eternal-Fires-Tincture of the Father; and so also doth the Image of the Soul. 26. The Image, dwelleth in the Fire of the Soul; as the Light dwelleth in the Fire; but it hath another Principle, as also the Light is another source or quality then the Fire. 27. Thus the right and true Image of God, dwelleth in the Light of the fire of the Soul; which Light, the fiery Soul must frame in the Love Fountain in the Maje∣sty, through its Imagination, and glving up. 28. And if the Soul doth it not, but Ima∣gineth in it self, in its fierce wrathful Form to the fire source quality or pain, and not in the Love Fountain in the Light of God, then ariseth its own source or quality, of its harshness, sowerness, and bitterness; and the Image of God becometh a Turba, which swalloweth up the Image of God, in the fierce wrath. 29. And then the sower Fiat in the fiery Essence of the Soul, figureth or frameth an Image for the Soul, according to its Ima∣gination
in the Will, so that whatsoever the Essential Fire of the Soul desireth, that becometh Imagined in the Soul, viz. Earthly Figures: whereinto the Will of the Heart casteth it self, and such an I∣mage, the Fiat of the Soul maketh, under∣stand, according to the ability or power of the Third Principle, according to the Spi∣rit of the Stars and Elements. 30. Seeing the will of the Soul casteth it self into the Kingdom of this World, therefore now the outward Kingdom hath power and ability to introduce its Imagi∣nation into the Inward Principle: and if the Inward Fiat discovereth that, in the fire of the Soul, then it becometh impreg∣nated therewith, and retaineth the same. 31. And now the Soul hath a Beastial Image, according to the third Principle, and it cannot be broken in Eternity: un∣less the Soul with its will, goeth out again from the Earthly Lust longing or delight, and press into the Love of God again, and then it getteth God's Image again, which can only be done in this Life, while the Soul standeth, is in its own Aother or soyl, in the growing of its Blossom or flower, Essentially; and after this Life, it can∣not be.
32. Thus, we give you to understand, what the Soul, Spirit, Image, and Turba, is: the Soul dwelleth in it self, and is an Essential Fire: and its Image standeth in it self in its Imagination, in its Light; so far as it cleaveth to God; if not, then it standeth in Anxiety, in the fierce wrath of the Darkness, and is a Visards Image, and an Image of the Devil. 33. Its Turba, which, breaketh the Di∣vine Image, is the Essential fierce wrath∣fulness, and it is done through the Ima∣gination; or false or wicked Love and Ima∣gining: therefore it lyeth wholly in the Imagination; whatsoever a Man letteth into his desire, in that standeth the Image. 34. And it is highly necessary, for Men continually to strive against the Earthly Reason in flesh and Blood, and give up his Spirit and Will to the Mercy and Love of God, and continually cast himself into God's Will, and NOT account Earthly Goods or Pleasure its Treasure, and so set its desire therein; which destroyeth its Noble or Pretious Image: for that is a Turba of the Image of God: and bring∣eth Beastial properties into the I∣mage.
35. In sum, Christ saith, Mat. 6. 21. where your Treasure is, there is your heart also: and ac∣cording to that, Rom. 2. 16. will God Judge, the Secrets of Man∣kind, and seperate the clean from the un∣clean, and give that which is false or wick∣ed to the Turba of the fire to be devoured; and that which is Holy, which is Entered into God, he will introduce into his King∣dom; AMEN. FINIS.
