B5759 R7109 11626335 47923
AN ANSWER To A PAPER Printed with Allowance, Entitled, A New Test of the Church of England's Loyalty. I. THe Accusing the Church of England of Want of Loyalty, or the put∣ting it to a new Test, after so fresh a one, with relation to His Majesty, argues a high degree of Confidence in him who undertakes it. She knew well what were the Doctrines and Practices of those of the Roman Church, with Relation to Hereticks; and yet She was so true to her Loyalty, that She shut her eyes on all the Temptations, that so just a fear could raise in her: and She set her self to support His Majesties Right of Succession, with so much Zeal, that She thereby not only put her self in the power of her Enemies; but She has also exposed her self to the Scorn of those who insult over her in her Misfortune. She lost the Affections even of many of her own Chil∣dren; who thought that her Zeal for an Interest, which was then so much decry'd, was a little too fervent: and all those who judged severely of the proceedings, thought that the Opposition which She made to the side that then went so high, had more Heat than Decency in it. And indeed all this was so very Extraordinary, that if She was not acted by a principle of Conscience, She could make no Excuse for her conduct. There appeared such peculiar Marks of Af∣fection and Heartiness, at every time that the Duke was named, whether in Drinking his Health, or upon graver Occasions, that it seemed affected: and when the late King himself (whose Word they took that he was a Protestant) was spoke of but coldly, the very Name of the Duke set her Children all on fire; this made many conclude, that they were ready to Sacrifice all to him; for indeed their behaviour was inflamed with so much Heat, that the greater part of the Nation believed they waited for a fit oppor∣tunity to declare themselves. Faith in Jesus Christ was not a more frequent Subject of the Sermons of many, than Loyalty; and the Right of the Succession to the Crown, the Heat that appeared in the Pulpit, and the Learning that was in their Books on these Subjects, and the Eloquent Strains that were in their Addresses, were all Originals; and made the World conclude, that whatever might be
laid to their charge, they should never be accused of any want of Loyalty, at least in this King's time, while the remembrance of so signal a service was so fresh. When His Majesty came to the Crown, these men did so entirely depend on the Promise that he made, to maintain the Church of England, that the doubting of the performance ap∣peared to them the worst sort of Infidelity. They believed, that in His Majesty, the Hero, and the King, would be too strong for the Papist: and when any one told them, How weak a tie the Faith of a Catholick to Hereticks must needs be, they could not hearken to this with any patience; but looked on His Majesties Promise as a thing so Sacred, that they imploy'd their Interest to carry all E∣lections of Parliament-Men, for those that were recommended by the Court, with so much Vigour, that it laid them open to much Censure. In Parliament they moved for no Lawes to secure their Religion; but assuring themselves, that Honour was the Kings Idol, they laid hold on it, and fan∣cied, that a publick reliance on his Word, would give them an Interest in his Majesty, that was Generous, and more suteable to the Nobleness of a Princely Nature than any new Laws could be: so that they acquiesced in it, and gave the King a vast Revenue for Life: In the Rebellion that followed, they shewed with what Zeal they adhered to His Majesty, even against a Pretender that declared for them. And in the Session of Parliament, which came after that, they shewed their disposition to assist the King with new Supplies; and were willing to Excuse and Indemnify all that was past; on∣ly they desired with all possible Modesty, that the Laws which His Majesty had both Promised, and at his Coronation had Sworn to maintain, might be executed. Here is their Crime, which has raised all this Out∣cry; They did not move for the Execution of Severe or Penal Laws, but were willing to let those sleep, till it might appear by the behaviour of the Papists, whether they might deserve that there should be any Mi∣tigation made of them in their Favour. Since that time, our Church-men have been constant in mixing their Zeal for their Reli∣gion against Popery, with a Zeal for Loyalty against Rebellion, because they think these two are very well consistent one with an∣other. It is true, they have generally ex∣pressed an unwillingness to part with the two Tests; because they have no mind to trust the keeping of their Throats to those who they believe will cut them: and they have seen nothing in the conduct of the Papists, either within or without the King∣dom, to make them grow weary of the Laws for their sakes; and the same princi∣ple of common sense, which makes it so hard for them to believe Transubstantiation, makes them conclude, that the Author of this Paper, and his Friends, are no other, than what they hear, and see, and know them to be. II. One Instance in which the Church of England shewed her Submission to the Court, was, that as soon as the Nonconformists had drawn a new Storm upon themselves, by their medling in the matter of the Exclusion, many of her Zealous Members went into that Prosecution of them, which the Court set on foot, with more Heat, than was perhaps either justifiable in it self, or reaso∣nable in those Circumstances; but how cen∣surable soever some angry men may be, it is somewhat strange to see those of the Church of Rome blame us for it, which has decreed such unrelenting Severities against all that differ from her, and has enacted that not only in Parliaments but even in Ge∣neral Councils. It must needs sound odly to hear the Sons of a Church, that must de∣stroy all others as soon as it can compass it, yet complain of the Excesses of Fines and Imprisonments, that have been of late among us. But if this Reproach seems a little strange when it is in the Mouth of a Papist, it is yet much more provoking, when it comes from any of the Court. Were not all the Orders for the late Severity sent from thence? Did not the Judges in every Cir∣cuit,
and the Favourite Justices of Peace in every Sessions, imploy all their Eloquence on this Subject? The Directions that were given to the Justices and the Grand Juries were all repeated Aggravations of this Matter: and a little Ordinary Lawyer, with∣out any other visible Merit, but an Outra∣gious Fury in those Matters, on which he has chiefly valued himself, was of a sud∣den taken into His Majesties special Favour, and raised up to the Highest Posts of the Law. All these things, led some of our Obedient Clergy, to look on it as a piece of their Duty to the King, to encourage that Severity, of which the Court seemed so fond, that almost all People thought, they had set it up for a Maxime, from which they would never depart. I will not pre∣tend to excuse all that has been done of late years: but it is certain, that the most cry∣ing Severities have been acted by persons that were raised up to be Judges and Magi∣strates for that very end: they were Instructed, Trusted, and Rewarded for it, both in the last and under the present Reign. Church-prefer∣ments were distributed, rather as Recom∣pences of this devouring Zeal, than of a real Merit; and men of more moderate Tempers were not only ill lookt at, but ill used. So that it is in it self very unrea∣sonable to throw the load of the late Ri∣gour on the Church of England, without distinction: but it is worse than in good manners it is fit to call it, if this Reproach comes from the Court. And it is somewhat unbecoming to see that, which was set on at one time, disown'd at another; while yet he that was the Chief Instrument in it is still in so high a post; and begins now to treat the Men of the Church of England, with the same Brutal Excesses, that he bestowed so lately and so liberally on the Dissenters; as if his design were to render himself e∣qually odious to all Mankind. III. The Church of England may justly expostulate when she is treated as Seditious, after she has rendred the highest Services to the Civil Authority, that any Church now on Earth has done: She has beaten down all the Principles of Rebellion, with more Force and Learning, than any Body of men has ever yet done; and has run the ha∣zard of enraging her Enemies, and losing her Friends, even for those, from whom the more learned of her Members knew well what they might expect. And since our Author likes the figure of a Snake in ones Bosom so well; I could tell him, that ac∣cording to the Apologue, we took up and sheltred an Interest, that was almost Dead, and by that warmth gave it Life, which yet now with the Snake in the Bosom, is like to bite us to Death. We do not say, we are the only Church that has Principles of Loyalty; but this we may say, that we are the Church in the World that carries them the highest; as we know a Church that of all others sinks them the lowest. We do not pretend that we are Inerrable in this point, but acknow∣ledge that some of our Clergy miscarried in it upon King Edwards Death: Yet at the same time, others of our Communion ad∣hered more steadily to their Loyalty in fa∣vour of Queen Mary, than She did to the Pro∣mises that she made to them. Upon this Subject our Author by his false Quotation of History, forces me to set the Reader right, which if it proves to the disadvantage of his Cause, his Friends may thank him for it. I will not enter into so tedious a digression as the justifying Queen Elisabeths being Legi∣timate, and the throwing the Bastardy on Queen Mary must carry me to; this I will only say, that it was made out, that ac∣cording to the best sort of Arguments used by the Church of Rome, I mean the constant Tradition of all Ages, King Henry the VIII. marrying with Queen Katherine, was Incestuous, and by Consequence Queen Mary was the Bastard, and Queen Elisabeth was the Legiti∣mate issue. But our Author not satisfied with defaming Queen Elisabeth, tells us, that the Church of England was no sooner set up by her, than She enacted those Bloody Cannibal Laws, to Hang, Draw and Quarter the Priests of the Living God: But since these Lawes di∣sturb
him so much, what does he think of the Laws of Burning the poor Servants of the Living God, because they cannot give Divine Worship to that which they believe to be only a Piece of Bread? The Representation he gives of this part of our History, is so false, that tho' upon Queen Elisabeth's coming to the Crown, there were many Complaints exhibited of the Illegal Violences that Bon∣ner and other Butchers had committed, yet all these were stifled, and no Penal Lawes were enacted against those of that Religion. The Popish Clergy were indeed turned out; but they were well used, and had Pensions assigned them; so ready was the Queen and our Church to forgive what was past, and to shew all Gentleness for the future. Du∣ring the first thirteen years of her Reign, matters went on calmly, without any sort of Severity on the account of Religion. But then the restless spirit of that Party, began to throw the Nation into violent Convul∣sions. The Pope deposed the Queen, and one of the Party had the Impudence to post up the Bull in London; upon this followed several Rebellions, both in England and Ire∣land, and the Papists of both Kingdoms en∣tred into Confederacies with the King of Spain and the Court of Rome; the Priests dis∣posed all the People that depended on them, to submit to the Popes Authority in that Depo∣sition, and to reject the Queens: These endea∣vours, besides open Rebellions, produced many Secret Practices against her Life. All these things gave the rise to the severe Laws, which began not to be enacted be∣fore the twentieth year of her Reign. A War was formed by the Bull of Deposition, between the Queen and the Court of Rome, so it was a necessary Piece of Precaution, to declare all those to be Traitors who were the Missionaries of that Authority which had stript the Queen of hers: yet those Laws were not executed upon some Secular Priests who had the Honesty to condemn the Deposing Doctrine. As for the Unhappy Death of the Queen of Scotland, it was brought on by the wicked Practices of her own Party, who fatally Involved her in some of them; She was but a Subject here in En∣gland; and if the Queen took a more Vio∣lent way, than was decent for her own. Security, here was no Diloyalty nor Rebel∣lion in the Church of England, which owed her no sort of Allegeance. IV. I do not pretend that the Church of England has any great cause to value her self upon her Fidelity to King Charles the First, tho' our Author would have it pass for the only thing of which She can boast: for I con∣fess, the cause of the Church was so twisted with the King's, that Interest and Duty went together: tho I will not go so far as our Author, who says, that the Law of Nature dictates to every Individual to fight in his own Defence: This is too bold a thing to be de∣livered so crudely at this time. The Law of Nature are perpetual, and can never be cancelled by any special Law: So if these Gentlemen own so freely, that this is a Law of Nature, they had best take care not to provoke Nature too much, lest She fly to the Relief that this Law may give her, unless she is restrained by the Loyalty of our Church. Our Author values his Party much upon their Loyalty to King Charles the First: but I must take the Liberty to ask him, of what Religion were the Irish Rebells; and what sort of Loyalty was it, that they shewed ei∣ther in the first Massacre, or in the progress of that Rebellion? Their Messages to the Pope, to the Court of France, and to the Duke of Lorrain, offering themselves to any of these, that would have undertaken to pro∣tect them, are Acts of Loyalty, which the Church of England is no way inclined to fol∣low: and the Authentical Proofs of these things are ready to be produced. Nor need I add to this, the hard terms that they of∣fered to the King, and their ill usage of those whom he Imployed. I could like∣wise repress the Insolence of this Writer, by telling him of the Slavish Submissions that their Party made to Cromwel, both Fa∣ther and Son. As for their Adhering to King Charles the First, there is a peculia
Boldness in our Authors Assertion, who says, that they had no Hope nor Interest in that Cause: The State of that Court is not so quite forgot, but that we do well remem∣ber what Credit the Quen had with the King, and what Hopes She gave the Party; yet they did not so entirely espouse the Kings Cause, but that they had likewise a flying Squadron in the Parliaments Army, how boldly soever this may be denyed by our Author; for this I will give him a proof, that is beyond exception, in a Declaration of that Kng's, sent to the Kingdom of Scot∣land, bearing date the 21. of April 1643. which is printed over and over again, and as an Author that writes the History of the late Was, has assured us the clean draught of it, corrected in some places with the King's own hand, is yet extant: so that it cannot be pretended, that this was only a bold assertion of some of the Kings Mini∣sters, that might be ill affected to their Party. In that Declaration the King studied to pos∣sess his Subjects of Scotland with the Justice of his Cause, and among other things, to clear himself of that Imputation that he had an Army of Papists about him, after many things said on that head, these words are added: Great numbers of that Religion have been with great alacrity entertained in that Re∣bellious Army against us: and others have been seduced, to whom we had formerly denyed Im∣ployments; as appears by the Examination of ma∣ny Prisoners, of whom we have taken twenty and thirty at a time of one Troop or Company of that Religion. I hope our Author will not have the Impudence to dispute the Credit that is due to this Testimony: but no Disco∣veries, how evident soever they may be, can affect some sort of men; that have a Secret against blushing. V. Our Author exhorts us, to change our Principles of Loyalty, and to take Example of our Catholick Neighbours, how to behave our selves towards a Prince, that is not of our Per∣swasion: But would he have us learn of our Irish Neighburs, to cut our Fellow Subjects Throats, and rbel against our King, be∣cause he is of another Religion? for that is the freshest Example that any of our Catho∣lick Neighbours have set us: and therefore I do not look so far back, as to the Gunpow∣der-plot, or the League of France in the last Age. He reproaches us for failing in our Fi∣delity to our King. But in this matter we appeal to God, Angels, and Men; and in particular to His Majesty: Let our Enemies shew any one Point of our Duty, in which we have failed: for as we cannot be charged for having preacht any Seditious Doctrine, so we are not wanting in the Preaching of the Duties of Loyalty, even when we see what they are like to cost us. The point which he singles out is, that we have failed in that grateful Return, that we owed His Majesty for his Promise, of Maintaining our Church as it is established by Law; since upon that we ought to have repealed the Sanguinary Laws, and the late Impious Tests: the former being enacted to maintain the Usurpation of Queen Elisabeth; and the other being contrived to exclude the pre∣sent King. We have not failed to pay all the Gratitude and Duty that was possible, in return to His Majesties Promise; which we have carried so far, that we are become the Object even of our Enemies Scorn by it. With all Humility be it said, that if His Majesty had promised us a farther De∣gree of his Favour, than that of which the Law had assured us, it might have been expected, that our return should have been a degree of Obedience beyond that which was required by Law; so that the return of the Obedience injoyned by Law, an∣swers a Promise of a Protection according to Law: yet we carried this matter further; for as was set forth in the beginning of this Paper, we went on in so high a pace of Compliance and Confidence, that we drew the censures of the whole Nation on us: nor could any Jealousies or Fears give us the least Apprehensions, till we were so hard pressed in matters of Religion, that we could be no longer silent: The same Apostle that taught us to Honour the King, said like∣wise, that we must obey God rather than man.
Our Author knows the History of our Laws ill; for besides what has been already said, touching the Laws made by Queen Elisabeth, the severest of all our Penall Laws, and that which troubles him and his friends most, was past by K James after the Gunpowder. plot; a Provocation that might have well justified even greater Severities. But tho our Author may hope to Impose on an Ignorant Reader, who may be apt to believe Implicitly, what he says concerning the Laws of the last Age, yet it was too bold for him to assert, that the Tests, which are so lately made, were contrived to exclude the present King: when there was not a thought of Exclusion many years after the first was made, and the Duke was excepted out of the second by a special Proviso. But these Gentlemen will do well never to mention the Exclusion; for every time that it is named, it will make people call to mind, the ser∣vice that the Church of England did in that matter, and that will carry with it a Re∣proach of Ingratitude that needs not be aggra∣vated. He also confounds the two Tests, as if that for Publick Imployments, contained in it a declaration of the King's being an Idolater, or as he makes it, a Pagan: which is not at all in it; but in the other for the Members of Parliament, in which there is indeed a De∣claration, that the Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry; which is done in general terms, without applying it to His Majesty, as our Author does: Upon this he would Infer, that his Majesty is not safe till the Tests are taken away: but we have given such Evi∣dences of our loyalty, that we have plainly shewed this to be false; since we do openly declare, that our duty to the King is not founded on his being of this or that Religion; so that His Majesty has a full Security from our Principles, tho the Tests continue, since there is no reason that we, who did run the hazard of being ruined by the Excluders, when the Tide was so strong against us, would fail his Majesty now, when our Interest and Duty are joyned together: but if the Tests are taken away, it is certain that we can have no Security any longer; for we shall be then laid open to the Violence of such rest∣less and ill-natured men, as the Author of this Paper and his Brethren are. VI. The same reason that made our Savi∣our refuse to throw himself down from the roof of the Temple, when the Devil tempt∣ed him to it, in the vain Confidence, that Angels must be assistant to him to preserve him, holds good in our Case. Our saviour said, Thou shalt not Tempt the Lord thy God. And we dare not trust our selves to the faith and to the Mercies of a Society, that is but too well known to the World, to pretend, that we should pull down our Pales, to let in such Wolves among us. God and the Laws have given us a legal Security, and His Majesty has promised to maintain us in it: and we think it argues no Distrust, either of God, or the Truth of our Religion, to say, that we cannot by any Act of our own, lay our selves open, and throw away that defence. Nor would we willingly expose His Majesty to the unwearied Solicitations of a sort of men, who, if we may Judge of that which is to come, by that which is past, would give him no rest, if once the restraints of Law were taken off, but would drive matters to those Extremities, to which we see their Natures carry them head-long. VII. The last Paragraph is a strain worthy of that school that bred our Author; he says, His Majesty may withdraw his Royal Protection from the Church of England which was promised her, upon the account of her constant Fidelity; and he brings no other proof to confirm so bold an Assertion but a false Axiome of that despi∣sed Philosophy, in which he was bred: Cessante causa tollitur effectus. This is indeed such an Indignity to His Majesty, that I presume to say it with all humble reverence, these are the last persons whom he ought to pardon, that have the boldness to touch so sacred a point as the faith of a Prince, which is the chief security of Government, and the Foun∣dation of all the Confidence that a Prince can promise himself from his People, and which, once blasted, can never be recovered: Equivo∣cations
may be both taught and practised with less danger by an Order that has little Credit to lose; but nothing can shake Thrones so much, as such treacherous Maximes. I must al∣so ask our Author, in what point of Fidelity has our Church failed so far, as to make her forfeit her Title to His Majesties Promises? for as he himself has stated this matter, it comes all to this. The King promised that he would maintain the Church of England as established by Law. Upon which in Gratitude he says, that the Church of England was bound to throw up the Chief Security that she had in her Establishment by Law; which is, that all who are Intrusted either with the Legislative or the Executive parts of our Government, must be of her Communion; and if the Church of England is not so tame and so Submissive, as to part with this, then the King is free from his Promise, and may withdraw his Royal Protection, tho I must crave leave to tell him, that the Laws gave the Church of England a Right to that Protection, whether His Ma∣jesty had promised it or not. Of all the Maximes in the World, there is none more hurtful to the Government, in our present Circumstances, than the saying, that the Kings Promises and the Peoples Fidelity ought to be Reciprocal; and that a Failure in the one, cuts off the other: for by a very Na∣tural Consequence the Subject may likewise say, that their Oaths of Allegeance being foun∣ded on the Assurance of His Majesties Pro∣tection, the One binds no longer than the Other is observed: and the Inferences that may be drawn from hence will be very terrible, if the Loyalty of the so much decryed Church of England, does not put a stop to them. FINIS.
