C20 R33296 13131482 97861
AN ESSAY TOWARDS The Deciding of the so much, and so long Controverted CASE OF USURY. IN A Problematical Paradox, discussed, whether it be lawful (and not rather sinful) for any man to Borrow, meerly to encrease his Wealth. As also, some Animadversions upon the Resolution of the Case of Usury, by a Reverend, and very Learned Doctor. By D. C. Prov. 28.8. He that by usury and unjust gain encreaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the poor. Psal. 15.1, 5. Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that putteth not out his money to usury. Luk. 6.35. Do good and lend, looking for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, &c. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the sign of the Fountain and Bear in Cheap-side. 1661.
TO THE Consciencious READER. WHat my Judgement formerly was' and now is, concerning the Case propounded, I shall not much scru∣ple to discover to the Reader, to the World: whiles I was young and low in Estate, not furnished with Tools for the Trade of Ʋsury (though I bless God, as I had no ability to Lend, so had I no great need to Borrow) I was in my Judgement against all Ʋsury, (as I believe, most in that condition are: none but either Prodigals or Proud persons, would borrow up∣on Ʋsury, if they might borrow freely:) but when, by the blessing of God, I came to be Master of a little Money lying by me, new thoughts, or ra∣ther temptations began to molest me; For on the one side, I thought a Talent, though little, should not lye idle, but be improved: on the other, I was told by some Casuists, that amongst other persons, Ʋsu∣ry was permitted to Ministers or Scholars, who are not allowed, or want skill to drive any secular
Trade: and by some not meanly both learned, and pious men, that to lend to wealthy men, leaving it free to the Borrower, to give what profit he please, without any compact, was very lawful: Hereupon I was too easily perswaded to venture on this way, yet but a little, and for a little time; for finding so much said against Ʋsury in Scripture, and by men of all Nations and Professions, I could not satisfie my Conscience with the way: and therefore I recall'd my Money, with the loss of the Ʋsury, or Gain of∣fered me. This put me upon further study of the Case, which, at vacant times from other more ne∣cessary businesses of my calling, I have more or less, prosecuted, I think well nigh these thirty years past; and after all the disquisition I could make, have not found, where to fix the foot of my Conscience, for the lawfulness of it: but rather, by the weak∣ness of the Arguments for it, the nicety of the di∣stinctions upon it, and the multitude of Cautions about it, very difficult, if not impossible to be due∣ly observed, I thought it rather unlawful, or at least so doubtful, that I took the safer way; as not to borrow without great need, so nor to lend to any that needed not (no not without Ʋsury) unless in Cases hereafter cautioned, in the Probleme it self. All that hath been said hitherto, by learned and pious men, (as I have observed) against lending upon Ʋsury, hath not made scarce one professed Ʋsurer less; but rather confirmed some, and increased more, by their condescensions in the Case: For whilst they yeeld, Usury in some Cases, may lawfully be taken of the rich,Lucrum cessans, aut damnum e∣mergens. as 1. in case of loss of gain the Lender might have made, had his Money been
in his own hand (to say nothing of the gain of loss, for want of his Money.) And 2. when the rich Borrower gains by the use of the Money: now rea∣son will come in, and plead, Ʋsury is very equita∣ble: as being injurious to neither party. But they do not consider, that these Cautions may be as equi∣table, when they lend to a needier man: for as on the one side, he may get gain by the borrowed; so on the other, the Lender may sustain loss, whiles another hath his Money: and so all Ʋsury almost, may be lawful. But of this more in a more proper place. So much labor then being lost upō the Lenders, we must try, whether we can prevail any better, with the Borrowers: for if there were no Borrowers upon Usury, there would be no Lenders: and contrari∣ly, if there were no Lenders upon Usury, there could be no Borrowers; and till mens Consciences be convinced of the unlawfulness of Usury, both in taking and giving, and in giving, as well (though perhaps not so much) as in taking; it will be im∣possible to suppress Ʋsury, or to regulate them in the Case. For let States make what Laws they can, against Ʋsury, either wholly to suppress it, or to confine and limit it, Ʋsurers, with the concurrence of some Borrowers, will evade, and elude them all, by secret underhand contracts, &c. Salmasius, the stoutest Champion for Ʋsurers, tells us, and I think,See Jer. 15.16 truly: [That Foenoration, if it be a sin, is a sin of both parties, the Borrower as well as the Lender:] And to make out this, I have a whole Chapter, in a larger discourse: But I say further, My present undertaking is far harder, to perswade
men to two paradoxal truths. 1. That it is not on∣ly unlawful for men, that are not Needy, to borrow upon Usury, but to borrow at all, except in case of a just necessity. 2. To perswade rich men, that they are bound, as not to lend to any, but the needy, so to lend to the needy freely: and then there will be no Usury found. How hard a task I have un∣dertaken, the success will prove. I do not deter∣mine the Case to other mens Consciences, but only tender this as an Essay, to give the learned, and stu∣dious in this Controversie an occasion to discusse the Point, to some further issue: entreating them, that if they approve hereof, they will signifie so much to me, or my Stationer, which may encourage me to publish a larger and fuller Discourse on this intricate Subject: if they approve not of my way, and will modestly convince me privately, or by pub∣lication of their Reasons, I shall either publickly acknowledge it, if I be convinced, or very modestly reply, to discover further the truth of the Case, if I be not convinced, Farewell.
THE PREFACE. THere hath been a question sometimes started amongst men (of no great moment, or diffi∣culty, (I confesse) [What profession or calling of common life, was the most Ancient?] And that is easily resolved; The Gardiner in Adam himself; and then, the Husbandman, and Shepherd, in his two Sons; [Abel was a keeper of sheep,Gen. 4.2. and Cain was a tiller of the ground.] The question were better put, [Which of the many professions now, is the most innocent, and freest from doing wrong?] The Solution whereof will be more difficult: for since the time that Man corrupted himself, and got too much of the Subtilty of the Serpent, all Trades, more or less, have been corrupted; and are grown, from their pristine Simplicity, to be called My∣steries; I fear too often, Mysteries of Iniquity: Even one of the most ancient, and most simple, hath long ago been complained of, as full of fraud and oppression, Amos 8.4, 5, 6. and more generally, Jerem. 5.26, 27. Hence are those many and difficult Cases of Conscience, discussed by Learned Men, about gain taken in Trading, and after long disputes, its left to Conscience it self, to make the
Determination. Amongst other Callings, a Wise Man (but not so wise as Solomon, whom some would make the Authour of the Book) hath given his observation of two, that in his experience, were too prone to offend: [A Mer∣chant cannot lightly keep himself from Wrong, and a Victualler is not free from sin, Eccles. 26.30.] The former failing often, by Monopolizing, Engrossing, Fore-taking, and making a scarcity, in plenty, &c. The other of false Measures, excessive prizes, and being par∣taker of other mens sins, of Riot, Drunkennesse, and other abominations. Amongst the many grievances and complaints, in pub∣lick Comerce, or Trading, none is more Ancient, none more difficult to resolve, than that of Usury, the Subject of this present Discourse: Ancient it is, for, besides the Scripture, where it was prohibited early, and yet practis∣ed, it was controverted amongst the Heathens of old, and decryed by men of severall professions, in all succeed∣ing Ages to this day, Philosophers, Polititians, Lawyers, Divines, &c. The Difficulty appears, in that the patronage thereof, is undertaken by Learned, and some pious men: and the Case not yet decided to most Mens Satisfactions. The Causes of the difficulty of Decision of the Case, seem to me (after some tryall and observation) to be these, or some of these: 1. The different Judgements of the Learned about the Explication of the Nature and quality of those Original Lawes concerning Ʋsury, Exod. 22.25. Levit. 25.36. Deut. 23.19. viz. Whether they were Morall, and so concerned all Nations, or Judiciall, and so concerned onely the Jewes: or mixt, as partly Morall, and partly Judiciall: and so partly in force, and partly void. 2. The New Distinctions raised upon these
Texts; as amongst others, these, (to omit those old ones, of poore and rich: of biting and helping Ʋsury) 1. Ʋsury by compact, and Ʋsury without any compact: e. gr. If a Man lend his money to a rich wealthy Mer∣chant, upon bond, not specifying, nor requiring any use, this they hold lawfull; and this was the Judgement and Practice, (they say) of many very Learned and pious Men: wherein, I doubt, there was this double deceit; First that there was in it, mentall Ʋsury (which themselves condemned) appearing sometimes by this, that if an over∣plus of gaine was not tendred, they grumbled at it, and would presently call in their money. Secondly, that they thought it lawful to lend to Rich men, that had no need to borrow (which is the thing, I shall endeavour to con∣fute:) for had they lent it to needy men freely, it had been truly commendable; themselves having no power to use it, and as they made shew, no great need, or care to improve it. 2. They distinguished the manner of lend∣ing their money, either as Meat, and Victuals, pre∣sently eaten and consumed; Or as Merchandise to trade with: the first utterly unlawful: the second lawfull, but this also is subject to this exception, (besides others) that a poor or needy man, may borrow money as Mer∣chandise, to keep up his Trade; and yet the Lawes, as they make no such distinction, in a poor mans borrowing, so they allow no Ʋsury to be taken of him, however he use it, of which more largely hereafter. 3. Another cause of the difficulty and doubtfulnesse of Ʋsury, was the prescrip∣tion of so many Cautions, for the Lender, for the Bor∣rower, and the manner of lending upon Ʋsury; which are very hard to be remembred, and will hardlier be observed by the Usurer; if Grave, Learned, and Pious men, will but say, Usury is in any case lawful. 4. The difficulty
is increased, by the Casuists propounding so many Cases of Contracts, very like to Usury, (and sometimes as bad or worse) and yet confessed lawful: The instances are well known to those, that are versed in this Controversie, and largely spoken to else where. Lastly, another Cause is, that Learned Men are not agreed upon the Defini∣tion of Ʋsury; some give one, some another, and each rather labouring to confute others Definitions, than able to maintain his own: as it is easier to pull down an house than to build it. And yet, notwithstanding these seeming difficulties, as some men resolve, and expound the former originall Texts, the Resolution of the Case, and the Definition of Ʋsury is easie to be made; For 1. Some make those Laws to be Judiciall, and so to concern only the Jewish Politie: and then the Definition of Usury was this [Usury is increase, or gain taken for lending to a Brother a Jew] which is seemingly at least confirmed by this, that U∣sury was by God permitted to be taken of any stranger of o∣ther Nations. Both which if they be true, the Case is easi∣ly decided, the Judiciall Law being annulled, all Usury is lawfull, in lending to poor or rich: So concludes the Learned Salmasius; So the Authour of Quaestio quodlibetica, and his Publisher, and others, though (with their good leave I speak it) they sometimes contra∣dict themselves, denying it lawful to the poor. 2. Some again, make the Lawes (at least in part) Moral, viz. with respect to the needy, instanced in all the Lawes, ex∣presly, or by necessary consequence; and then the Defini∣tion is clear; [Usury is gain taken for lending to the poor] and the Case easily determined: Ʋsury is unlaw∣fully taken of the poor, but lawful when we lend to the rich. This is the ordinary Resolution of the Case. But yet some
scruples may arise, even in this way: both that it will be hard to resolve, who is poor, or rich, because, as the wisest man sayes, [There is one that is poor, and maketh himself rich: and there is another that is rich, and makes himself poor,] & also, because in some cases, they yeeld Ʋsury may be sinfull, if taken of the rich, and sometimes lawfully taken of the poor, and more, else where specified: which may perswade tender consciences, not to medle with lending on Usury at all, rather than to in∣dure the perplexities arising from it: especially, there be∣ing so many tother lawful ways to improve their money. Seeing therefore the first way, to take Usury of all, is both too loose, and uncharitable and the other too thorny and perplexed with so many distinctions and cautions: what is to be resolved on, in this case? To assert, that all Usury is unlawful, at first sight, will seem to rich trades∣men, and well monyed man, not onely a Para∣dox, but a very Heterodox opinion; and as some have told mee, the way to destroy all Merchandizing, and Trading: for as the Merchant (say they) cannot traf∣fick without borrowing upon Usury: so nor can other trades goe on, or subsist, without Selling for day, at a dearer rate, which is, say some, to sell that which is none of their own, viz. Time; and no other, no better than Usury: some of those, who are patrons of some con∣tracts, esteemed by others, to be Ʋsurious, do roundly as∣sert [That all Usury is unlawful, but all lending for gain, is not Usurious.] But, under favour, this seemes a contradiction to the true definition of Ʋsury: for if Ʋsury be rightly defined [a gain taken for lending;] then all lending for gain is Usurious; the definition, and the thing defined, being convertible, as all Logicians know: the truth is, as I said, that the controversie is made so difficult for want of an agreement
in the definition of Ʋsury: if that were fixed, and assent∣ed to, the business were quickly ended: now the definition must be collected, not out of private mens fancies, but out of the original texts, that prohibite Ʋsury: and it seems strange to mee, that any man rational should assert, that there is no definition of Ʋsury given in, or to be collected out of Scripture; for then (to add no more now) how should the Jews be able to observe those laws, if they did not clearly know, what the Usury was, which was forbidden them: And besides, if those Laws were Judicial, as some, to concern onely the Jews; or moral, as others, to con∣cern all poor onely, the definitions were easily gathered, as was said afore, and there expressed. The several definitions given by several men, are else where discussed, and all,Lucrum ex mutuo pa∣ctum. but one, discovered imperfect, and unsatisfying: the old and common definition, is that, which, I think, comes neerest to the truth, and scripture-texts: [Ʋsury is gain covenanted for lending:] and each pirticular ingre∣dient is to be found there. 1. It is a gain, called in one text, increase. 2. For lending; when thou lendest. 3. Covenanted or compacted for; thou shalt not impose or lay upon him Ʋsury: and its added, nor take it of him; which thou canst not well require, without a Cove∣nant explicite, or implicite. If any say, your definiti∣on wants one thing expressed, or implyed in all the three texts, that is the needy, who is the borrower; I an∣swer, its needless to add that, in the definition, which is perfect without it; as included in the word lending, which as it is an act of charity, or courtesie, supposes the borrower to be needy, and in some necessity to borrow: and consequently excludes all others from borrowing; and then, borrowing and lending being Relata, if it be un∣lawfull for men in no necessity, to borrow, it will prove al∣so
unlawful to lend to such at all: and so there can be no Usury. This indeed is the mark I aim at, and hope to hit: more largely discussed else where: at pre∣sent, to make it appear feazable, and probable, I say onely thus much; that if it be lawfull to lend to the rich, which have no need to borrow, it seems to mee, that thereupon it will follow, that Ʋsury for Lending may lawfully be taken of all, poor as well as rich, in some cases; Reasons of equity and justice will be pleaded in both; as 1. When the Borrower gets well by the mo∣ney lent. 2. When the lender is damaged for want of his money, by Lucrum cessans, or Damnum emergens; which may happen in lending to the poor and needie; he may gain well by the money lent: and the lender may suffer, for want of his money: therefore say some, gain may law∣fully be taken of poor & rich: on the other side, some are so charitable as to deny Usury to be lawfully taken of the rich, when either he gets nothing, or loses by the mony lent, though it might have concern'd the lender, to have had his money in his own hand: others are not so mercifully minded: I forbear to say any more; having at large spoken of it, in another place: I onely desire it might be observed, that instead of the word poor, which in our language in∣ports one neerer unto beggery, I use the word needy, (the original word signifying one afflicted with any ne∣cessity) wch may extend to the rich sometimes, who may have just need to borrow, as well, though perhaps, not as much, as the poorer sort; and in such cases, I allow thē both to borrow, and to be lent unto; the one in cour∣tesie, the other in charity, but both freely, without any Ʋsury. To make way then, for the further discovery of my
judgement in the Case of Usury, & for the discussing of the problem propounded in the title page; I shall lay down my thoughts in these five following Theorems, the first onely to be discoursed of, by way of essay, at present. viz. 1. None may lawfully borrow, but the Needie. 2. No man is bound to lend to any, but the Needie. 3. To the Needie, an able man is bound to lend. 4. When he lends to the Needie, he must lend freely. 5. A man is bound not to lend to such, as are not Needy. This way may seem something about, to prove all Usu∣ry unlawful; but if I be not much deceived, it is the surest and neerest way to decide the controversie: If it be not, I desire, with reason, to be undeceived. Of the three middlemost, I know not, whether any can well make any doubt: the difficulty lies, in proving the first and the last; and the last by the first: And if both be sufficiently con∣firmed, I doubt not to make good, [That all Usury for lending, is unlawfull;] How I performe my under∣taking in the first, is now to be judged, by the learned, Judicious and Conscientious Reader, to whom I humbly submit all my labours.
THE PROBLEM, Whether it be lawful (and not rather sinful) for any man to Borrow, in no necessity, or meerly to increase his wealth? BEfore I undertake the Discussion of the Pro∣blem or Paradox, I shall, by way of explica∣tion, premise these three things, to prevent ex∣ceptions in the way. 1.1. The first Lawes speake onely of the needy. That the three first Laws concerning Ʋ∣sury, afore named, do all, either expressely, or implicitely, by rational consequence, intend the Borrower should be a Needy man, and say nothing directly (if at all any thing) of the Rich and wealthy; as is evident to him, that consults, and seriously considers the texts: whereupon some have peremptorily concluded, that these texts, concern onely the poore; and that Usury, was ever lawful to be taken of the Rich, forbidden onely to the Needy: but then it con∣cerns them to shew some texts in Scripture, that allowed them Usury from the Rich, or some instance there, of any that did lawfully so practise, which I believe they cannot do. Some have said, that Ʋsury was forbidden, by a Judicial Law, to rich and poorer Jews, in the word brother, opposed to a stranger: which Judicial Law, being now void, Usury is lawful, as well from a rich brother, as from a stranger: but both these and the former, do forget to take notice, that Ʋsury forbid∣den
to the brother was Nesher, biting Ʋsury, and so being op∣pressive, was forbidden both to Jew and Gentile, be they poor or rich: how ever, my assertion is evident, that the Borrower in the texts, is held forth to be a needy man: whence, one of these things, will be consequent. 1. That either it was lawful then to lend upon Usury to wealthy men, that borrow not for need, but for some other reason, or end, which is both contrary to the judgement, and practice of the Conscientions Jews, who lent not upon Usury, to any of their Brethren poor or rich (as their Rabbins tel us) and also to reason it self, as was hinted before; because Nesher being oppressive, is un∣lawful to rich and poor. Or, 2. That God intended, that none but the needy should borrow (rich or poor) and that freely without any Usury: who are needy, comes next to be considered; whom we allow to borrow. 2. Necessity is two fold.2. What we mean by need, or necessity, will appeare by way of distinction: there is a double necessity, 1. Feigned or Forced, by.1. Feigned or forced, as made by a mans selfe, for ends of his owne, when he needeth not: nor God allowes. And this may arise from many causes, but all may be reduced to two heads, Prodigality and Covetousness, 1. Prodigality,1. Prodigality. to spend upon his Lusts, of several kinds, pride in Apparel, vain-glory in Hous-keeping or Building, Ryot, and Luxury, Intemperance, and Incontinencie; Gaming and the like; of one of these (applyable to all) a wise man gave good counsel; [Become not poor by making banquets of that which thou hast borrowed (on Ʋsury) and so leave nothing in thy purse; else thou shouldst insidiously lie in wait, for thine owne soul (thy life) Ecclus. 18.33,] Now all, al∣most, that understand Reason, or Religion, consent, that it is unlawfull for such, upon such ends, to borrow, or to lend to such. And yet these are Common Ʋsurers best Clients, if they have but sufficient to Pawne or Morgage. 2. Covetousnes2. Covetous∣ness. to advance his estate; to increase in wealth and riches; to load himselfe with thick clay; to purchase Mannors and Lord-ships, &c. The Apostle speaks of some, that will be rich, that set up their resolution they will be rich any wayes, by right or wrong, &c. As these two vices, of Pro∣digality and Covetousness are directly contrary; so I know-
no third ground of borrowing between them, except of necessity: Some have talked of lending upon Ʋsury, (and so of borrowing) to get to exercise their charity; by being better able to give to the poor or lend to the Needy freely: but they either forget, or misconstrue that Proverb of Solomon [He that gathtereth riches; by Ʋsury and increase; shall gather for him that will be merciful to the poor; Pro. 28.8.] He himself may pretend such a thing, but hardly e∣ver intended it, yet by the just providence of God, it shall at last fall into such a mans hands, as shall be mercifull to the poore. And yet if Ʋsury were lawfull, this were a probable, and speedy way to be charitable. A man of a great Estate, that had 1006 li. to spare to lend upon Ʋsury, might be able to give more in a yeer to relieve the poor, than most Ʋ∣surers, or rich men do in many. But I never heard an ex∣ample of this way, and end of lending. Though perhaps, some might strain the words of our Saviour to such a sence: [Thou shouldst have put thy money to the exchanger that I might receive my own with Usury] But I let that passe: the hinge of the question will hang upon this, the lawfulnesse to borrow out of Covetousnesse; to get wealth, as shall appear, when we have considered the other kind of Necessity: which is 2. True and Real, cast upon a man, by some accident,2. True & Re∣al, which is and by the providence of God; and his gain, may be distinguished into imminent, or permanent. 1. Imminent, or Occasional,1. Imminent or occasional. present necessity (for I want words to express this distinction) which arises from some sud∣den exigent: and this sometimes is incident to the Rich, and wealthy. As in the parable of the man, that had a friend come to him in the night: he having no bread nor provision at home, runnes to his neighbour, to borrow three loaves, till next day, when he would returne them againe with thanks: so in many the like cases, a man otherwise rich, may have a ne∣cessity cast upon him, to borrow some necessaries, even for his life: or money, (being in a strange place, & his own spent) to carry him home, &c. But then, the thing is so small, or the time so short, that it may well go for a courtesie, scarcely valuable, but with the like another time. 2. Permanent, or continual,2. Permanent or (like to be) perpetual. at least likely to be with∣out supply, heavy upon the borrower; by reason of his poor
and weake estate. And this is the case of poor men only: & to bend to such, is an act of charity, as to the former, an act of Courtesie, which is a larger charity. The question then pro∣pounded, is not to be meant of this latter sort of Borrowers, whom in all reason, we must allow to borrow, in their neces∣sity: but of the former kind, which is sometimes feigned, for the most part forced, by their owne lusts of Prodigality, and Covetousnesse, and especially of this latter, that borrows meerly to encrease their wealth: which shall be manifested, when we have premised a third thing. 3. what is meant by bor∣rowing to in∣crease wealth3. What we mean, by borrowing to increase his wealth (to prevent exceptions) for it may be said; you allow a Needy Trades-man to borrow, and that freely: but he may borrow to increase his (little) estate: which contradicts your Problemes. To which I answer; 1. It cannot proper∣ly be said, such a man borrows to increase his wealth; for that supposes him to have wealth already: but he borrows onely to be able to manage his Trade, that by getting some∣thing by the use and imployment of the money borrowed, he may not need to borrow heareafter. 2. I mean it therefore of such a borrower, as hath an abundant, at least a competent estate already, which he is allowed to improve to the utmost, in all lawful ways, as his entrusted Talent: but not to borrow, meerly to advance his estate, no not if he can borrow freely, much less upon Ʋsury, when he hath no true, real, just, need to borrow. Having thus illustrated the Problem;The Problem proved. I come now to indea∣vour the proof thereof, in manner following. 1. Its natural principle.1. This seems a natural notion, common to all that go to bor∣row; they still pretend necessity, true or false, feigned or real; or they would not borrow: I lack this or that; I have great need, I pray, lend me this or that, or so much money. And indeed borrowing is so great a trouble, that it is grown into a proverb, [He that goes a borrowing, goes a sorrowing.] So that he were scarcely wise, that would borrow, were he not forced to it, by Necessity. Hence was that Law, or Aphorisme of Plato, written (it seems) by the candle-light of nature; [No man ought to borrow water of his neigbours well till he, hath drawn his own dry to the bottome;] which holds as wel, in all commodities else, of which the life of man hath need. A great Patron of Ʋsury,Solmas. approves of this Rule of Plato, but
restrains it too strictly, t poor men onely. As if rich men might borrow, before they are come to the bottom of their estates, that is, before they need; but poor men might not: which seems very unreasonable. Yea, in reason, poor men should rather have this liberty, than the rich, though Plato allows it to neither. Plutarch also (by the same twilight) dis∣cerned this truth: He blamed them both, the rich and poore, for borrowing (upon Usury) when thus he argued; [If thou beest very poor; why dost thou borrow that, which thou canst not restore? if rich, why dost borrow, when thou hast of thine owne, and needst not borrow?] So that Nature it selfe, taught them what I affirme. And if we look back, to the beginning of nature; In innocency, as there would have been no want, so no need of borrowing. After the Fall, the first kind of borrowing was in case of necessity onely. No man had all, none but wanted something, which another had: hence it came, that they were forced, either to exchange one thing for another, or to borrow one of another; and the requital was the lending again, at another time, what they had need to borrow. 2. The principles of Religion, that is, the Scriptures,2. Its a princi∣ple of Scrip∣ture. do many wayes confirme, what I assert [that no man ought to bor∣row, but the needy, that is, meerely to inrich himselfe.] this is thus made good. 1. Expressely;1. Expressely. the Scripture forbids running into debt, and continuing in debt, without just cause, as [Rom. 13.8. owe nothing to any man, but to love one another.] which to me seemes to require, that all civil debts, be either wisely prevented, or speedily discharged: that is, that if men be out of debt, they be careful, not to come into debt: and if they be in debt, they should hasten out; unlesse urgent necessity force them thereunto: either to goe into debt, or to stay in debt, if able to pay it: which is the onely dispensation from this precept: but now I assume, they that borrow to inrich themselves, when they need not, run themselves into debt, without any just necessity, continue voluntarily in debt, when able to pay it, and so sin against this precept. 2. By Consequence,2. By Conse∣quence. they forbid it often, when they forbid the very desire to be rich, much more rich indeavours to saits∣fie those desires.1. From the contrary a wayes. 1. From the contrary; and that two wayes. 1. The
Scriptures, the word of God, require Contentment, with our present estate; [1 Tim. 6.9. If we have food and rayment (convenient for our condition) let us be therewith con∣tent. Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without covetous∣nesse, and be content with such things, as you have.] The argument is thus framed; If we be commanded to be contented with necessaries, then they that desire, and seek after Superfluities (as riches are) do sin: but the first is evi∣dently true: ergo. Again, Covetousness is a sinne, often de∣cry'd in Scripture: but not to be content with our estate, is a fruit and hath a tang of Covetousnesse: for the Apostle would have men to be content, lest they be concluded to be covetous; [Whence it follows (saith Estius) that he, that is not contented with such things as he hath, but desires and seekes to bee richer (for he is supposed to be rich already; or not to be needie) is guilty of Covetousnesse.] 2. What we may not pray for, that we may not desire, or seek after: but it is not lawful to pray for Superfluities: witness our Saviour him∣self, who teaches us to pray only for our daily bread, that is, on∣ly for necessaries, So [Pro. 30.8, 9. Feed me with food con∣venient for mee:] Nay so far is he from praying for riches, that he deprecates riches, as well as poverty, [Give me nei∣ther riches nor poverty:] for reasons there given, and made use of, by and by. 2.2. From the causes of it. 1. Discontent.2. From the causes, that set men on borrowing, to this end, to be rich: and they are one of these; 1. Discontentednesse with their condition: this is intimated in the former Scriptures, that require Contentment. Men are not contented to be men of meane rank;2. Covetous∣nesse appear∣ing, 1. By desire to be rich. but they will be rich, that they may be honoured, that they may live in pleasures, and worldly delights, which their present estate will not procure them. 2. Covetousness, which is discovered, 1. by the will to be rich. 1 Tim. 6.9. called the love of money; the root of all evill; even of prodiga∣lity it self; sometimes the same man that is prodigall, may be covetous also he covets to have abundance, which he may prodigally spend upon his lusts: he spares where he should spend, that he may spend, where he should spare. 2. By Hasting to be rich,2. By hasting to be rich. [Prov. 23.4. Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own Wisdom.] These think themselves to be Wise men; and if they had but money, they could easily, and speedily be rich: this puts them upon borrowing, what they
want, to get, what they so earnestly desire; So [Prov. 28.22. He that hath an evill eye, hasteth to be rich; or he that hasteth to be rich hath an evill eye.] that is, a covetous eye, which is called, the lust of the eyes: for a man may commit, or act covetousness (as well as adultery) with his eye: But what follows in the place? [He considereth not, that poverty shall come upon him.] God commonly crossing, if not cursing such Covetous (indeed Idolatrous) desires, of such as set up Mam∣mon for their God. 3. From the Ends of such unnecessary Borrowing:3. From the ends of such unnecessary Borrowing. which are specified above, to be one of these two. 1. Prodigality to spend upon their lusts, of severall kinds; Pride, Vain-glory, Riot, Gaming, &c. 2. Covetousnesse to advance an Estate, to make themselves and their posterity great, by great Trading, Purchasing, &c. To borrow to spend it prodigally, will not be defended (I think) by any Patron: The other of growing great, &c. is clothed with better garments, cloaked by other names of good Husbandry, Diligence, Activenesse in a call∣ing, &c. Some men, (they say) have more nimble fancies, more Active Spirits, more able to manage a bigger stock, to drive a greater trade, to improve five Talents better, than o∣thers can two. But what are their ends and intentions? are they not to grow rich hastily? and that with undermining, if not the undoing of others, of their own profession: Yea, of other professions also sometimes, by dealing in, and medling with more callings than one. 4. From the many evill effects, and mischiefes,4. From the evil effects. that at∣tend upon such unnecessary Borrowing, for this end to become Rich: whereof these are some: 1. Upon Himself,1. Upon himself. in his own personal condition: and they these two: 1. A Curse,1. A Curse. by borrowing when he needs not; It is so threatned, Deut. 28 44. to borrow, as contrarily, pro∣mised as a Blessing, to be able to lend. If any shall say (as some do say) To borrow for need, is indeed a curse, but not to borrow when he hath no need: I answer (besides that this beggs the question now before us, that it is lawful to borrow without any need) it seemes strange to me, that a man should be able, by his own Wit and Wisdom, to turn a Curse into a Blessing: or rather turn a Blessing into a Curse: that is, that when he needs not borrow, but is able to lend, which is a Bles∣sing,
he should run himself into a Curse (as the consequent mischiefs will evince) to borrow when he needeth not. 2. A∣nother mischief is,2. Slavery. that being free, by borrowing when he needs not, he runs himself into Slavery: which is a misery suf∣ficient, as Liberty and Freedom is a special mercy: and we ought to stand fast, in the Libertie, which God hath given us; (as the Apostle in another case.) Now Solomon tells us, [Prov. 22.7. The borrower is servant to the lender.] He is in∣deed his slave, whom he keeps in bonds, and fetters of bills and obligations, &c. and upon all occasions, though he be his far Inferiour, is ready to Lord it over him, and for non-paiment, at his day,Cartwright in locum. to lay him up in prison. So that (as one sayes) [Such a man hath so many cruel Lords and Masters, as he hath Creditors: And this may teach us (saith he) not hastily to cast our selves into debt, though we need much more, if we need not.] 3. To run voluntarily into debt, when there is no need, fills the head and heart with cares, or scares, or griefs, and many perplexities; which as thrnes, do prick and torment the soul. [1 Tim. 6.9, 10. They that will be rich, fall into snares, and pierce themselves thorow with many sorrowes.] And were not he a mad man, that when he might lie upon a Down-bed, would willingly cast himself into a thicket of thornes to sleep upon? Debt (at least to an honest man) breaks his sleep, distasts his food, distempers his heart and af∣fections, &c. 2. Upon his E∣state and poste∣rity.2. But he proves as injurious, to his estate and posterity: It's observable, what the wisest of men saies, [Prov. 20.21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the first, but the end thereof shall not be blessed.] Those great Dealers, & borrowers in the wold; either they thrive not at all, God crossing them for their Discontent, and worldly mindednesse; or if they do, yet either they live, to see it all wasted; or in a generation or two, the world may see it all dispersed; and their posterity re∣duced again to their Parents first condition, and well if not to a worse. 3. Upon his owne soul ex∣posing it.3. The worst of alls, that such Borrowers, are too often injurious to their own souls, exposing themselves needlesly both to temptations and sins. 1. To temptations;1. To tempta∣tions. so the Apostle expresly, [1 Tim. 6.9. They that will be rich, fall into temptation:] and that two ways, first, passively to be tempted by riches; either get to them ill, or spend them ill,
or keep them ill: which is to cross their daily prayer, [lead us not into temptation;] and these lead themselves into tem∣ptation. Secondly, actively by tempting God, having no permission of such desires; and endeavours to be rich, nor promise of a blessing: This is to tempt and try God, whe∣ther he will prosper such endeavours or no: Suppose he do succeed them, yet having no promise, there can be no solid comfort in them: If he crosses them in these undertakings, (as oft he does) how are they exposed to other temptations, to use shifts and frauds, to deceive their Creditors, &c.2. To many sins. But 2. They expose themselves to many sins; [They that will be rich, fall into a snare also, and into many foolish and hurt∣ful lusts, which drown'd men in destruction, and perdition.] In general, the same Wise man tels us, [He that maketh haste to be rich, shall not be innocent, Prov. 28.20.] This is illustrated by the contrary, [A faithful man shall abound with blessings.] A faithful man (whether he mean one, that hath faith to trust God, which is opposed to making haste to be rich, as the Prophet, [He that believeth, maketh not haste, Isa. 28, 16.] or a man of faithfulnesses, as the Original hath it; one that is true in his words, and plain, just, faithful in his dealings; which way, the world thinks, either none, or about, and too long, to get riches) such a man going slowly, shall abound with blessings: intimating, that a man that makes haste to be rich, (as such Borrowers do) is a man that [trusts not on the Lord, but leans on his own wisdom, Prov. 3.5.] and is too often, false in his words and promises, and fraudulent in his deeds; subject to lying, defrauding, oppression, &c. which are (as he thinks) the shortest, and neerest way to sa∣tisfie his hasty desires to be rich: but more often prove the furthest way about, and expose him to the curses of God. And upon this consideration, it is observed by one:Salmas. That the Persians of old, did utterly dislike borrowing (upon Usu∣ry) because Borrowers are very prone to lie, deceive and be unthankful: In a word, Hasty desires, and endeavours to be rich (whereof great borrowing without need, is a Symptom, exposes a man to sins of all kinds of Omission, multitude of businesses causing him to neglect holy services in private or publick, and of Commission; as lying, fraud, oppression) pride, and noysome lusts: Therefore Agur deprecated Riches,
[Give me not riches, lest I be full and deny thee, &c. Pro. 30.9.] These at present eat out the heart and vitals of Religion, and the power of Godliness, and at last, drown too many in per∣dition and destruction, 1 Tim. 6.10. Riches, at which they aim, are well compared to thornes, not onely because they pierce the soul, with cares, fears, &c. but also because they choak the Word, and make it unfruitful. Mark your great Dealers in the world, either they have no Religion, or if any, it is eaten up and withered, by worldly-mindedness: that therefore which is the root that bears such gall and worm∣wood, cannot be good. 5. We may argue à pari, from the like: It is not lawful to beg without urgent,5. A pari from the like. real necessity, therefore nor to borrow: The reason is, because they are both alike objects of charity; allowed only in cases of such necessity. As then it is unlawful for a rich man, that needs not, to beg; so for a man that needs not, to borrow. Borrowing and begging, (and so lending and giving) are commonly joyn'd together in Scripture; [Deut. 15.8, 9 Mat. 5.42. Give to him that asketh, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.] Hence it was observed afore, that the texts which speak of borrowing (and forbid Usury) Exod. 22.25. Levit. 25.37. Deut. 23.19. ap∣ply lending, only to needy borrowers: [My people, that is poor; waxen poor, whose hand shakes, that borrows victuals.] The argument from all this, shall close up this discourse, when an objection is removed, which is this; Ʋsury in all the texts, (in your own assertion and confession) is prohibited to be taken only of the poor and needy; and consequently lawful of the rich; and then the rich may borrow, that need not: I answer, 1. By denying the consequence; by a like inference; Oppression is forbidden towards the poor and stranger, Exod. 22.21. will it follow hence, that its lawful to oppress the rich, or a neighbour? 2. All Ʋsury being Nesher, biting and op∣pressive, it is here intended to be forbidden to the rich, though chiefly to the poor, who most need to borrow. 3. If a rich man fall (as he may) into a present urgent need, he also falls under the Law, as at this time, and in this case, a needy man, and so is by me allowed to borrow, but still freely. 6. A Testimonio6. Lastly, we dispute à Testimonio, the assertions of the Pa∣trones of Usury; hear how, neer they come, to affirme our Para∣dox,
That necessity is the only true ground of borrowing. 1. Salmasius himself, the greatest and strongest Advocate for Ʋsury, saith thus, [In Judaea, where was neither Merchandize, nor Money, nor was there any great Wealth or Ryot, by means thereof, only poor men did need to borrow: but that they should be oppressed, especially of their own brethren, seemed hard to the Law-giver.] 2. The Author of a Tract, called Quaest. Quodlibetica, &c. pag. 8. [The borrowing of such Indigent persons, as are spoken of in the Law, being of things of so small value (that the use of them for a small season, was scarcely valuable) might be a great reason, of the prohibition of Usury.] And pag. 28. [I acknowledge (saith he) the word Nesher, might well denote some malignant quality in Ʋsury, because the first kind of borrowing in the world, was in case only of necessity: and to ask an overplus in such a case, was a sin, that well deserved the worst name.] And yet, both Salma∣sius, and himself, do plead strongly, that Ʋsury now is lawfully taken of the poor; if at least, we relieve him some other way: which I leave to the Readers consideration: And propound the Argument. [If none but the really needie (as afore explained) may borrow, and when they borrow must be lent unto, freely; then all Ʋsury is unlawful:] The Antecedent is proved above, in both the parts of it, from the three Original Texts, & from light of nature, and Scripture reason. The Consequence, is thus made good; If wealthy men, that need not, may not borrow at all, either to spend it prodigally, or to use it covetously; to increase their wealth, then none may lend to such; and consequently not upon Usury; and so all Ʋsury is unlawful, taken of rich or poor. This Consequence, that none may lawfully lend to such, is my fift Theorem, which waits its time of further confirmation. Some ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Reso∣lution of the Case of Ʋsury, by a Reverend and very Learned Dr. D. H. Decad. 1. Case 1. "Whether it be lawfull, to raise any profit, by the loan of Money? HAving given forth the former Essay, upon the main questi∣on, which if it be strongly bottomed, may of it selfe, put an end to the present Controversie: yet it shall not be amisse, to manifest the strength, or weakness, of some of the Arguments, and
distinctions, brought by some very learned men, for the Allowance of some kind of Ʋsury: And amongst many Patrons thereof, I have made choice of one, who, as he appears latest in publique, and so may be thought, to bring the strength of all the former: So he was well known, to be a man, of no lesse piety, than learning; and by his Age, and Gravity believed to be of a Mature and Solid Judgement; fit to make a Casuist, on whole Resolutions of Cases in matters of Conscience, men that were Scrupulous, might more safely rest and rely. Upon which considerations, I was very eager to read his Determination upon the Case in hand; here (if any where) expecting that Satisfaction, which (under favour be it spok∣en) upon search I have not found; but by want thereof, am rather confirmed in my own opinion, as I fear, others are in their practice of Usury: Some things I shall say in general, to his Resolution; 1. That I find not in it, any Definition of Usury (wherein others also are defective) which had it been done, it might have been more easie, both for him to Resolve the Case, and for others to judge of his Resolution. 2. That he is inconstant, in his assertions, and sometimes contradictorius to himself, implicitely, if not expressely and directly. 3. That yet this must be said for the Honour of the Rev: Doctor, that he, though he seem to allow, in some cases, profit, for the loane of money, yet makes all Ʋsury, properly so called, especially taken of the poor and needy, to be unlawfull: whereas some of late, make all to be lawful, taken of poor or rich. To the Decision of the question, he proceeds warily, by distin∣ction of circumstances, (which some others have altogether negle∣cted) before he make his determination of the Case, as thus. [First, Who it is that borrows? A poor neighbour that is con∣strained out of need: or a Merchant, that takes up money for a free Trade, for the inriching of himselfe: or a rich man, that lays it out upon superfluous occasions. From the first, you must not expect any profit, for the loane: but for the other, the case is different. For God hath not commanded you, to love any man more than your self: and there can be no reason, why you should vaile your own just advantage, to another mans excess.] Where 1. It is observable, that the Doctor hath made a right and full enumeration of Bor∣rowers. 1. Poor and needy. 2. Such as borrow to inrich them∣selves, the rich Merchant, (that is, the covetous.) 3. Prodgals that borrow to spend it on their excessive lusts, and superfluities. 2. But herein he yeelds, I think, too much, that the Merchant borrowing to inrich himself, or the prodigal to spend it on super∣fluities,
may borrow, and be lent unto; who have (I yet believe) no right to borrow, nor can be lent unto, without being accessary to their sins. The latter, [To lend to a prodigall, to promote his wanton lusts, and superfluous expences] is by all sober men grant∣ed to be sinfull. The former is as truly sinfull, though not so ea∣sily granted, or proved to be such: Yet to borrow (for no need) meerly to inrich himself, seems to be a sprig of that root of all e∣vill, Covetousnesse, so much decryed in Scripture; which if it be sinfull in the Borrower, cannot but be so in the Lender, who wa∣ters that cursed root by lending his money: Now if these two sorts may not borrow, it remains to assert, that none but the Needy, may borrow, or be lent unto; and then no profit for the loane of money, being lawful to be taken of him, all Ʋsury for lending, is unlawful. 3. His reasons are in themselves good and true, but if applyed to the case, they beg the question; That it is lawful to lend, to such, or for such, as the two last sorts, to borrow. True it is, God hath not commanded men to love another better than themselves; nor yet to vail their own advantage to anothers ex∣cess: But suppose the Merchant borrow, not to use it to excesse, but to get gain, to inrich himself, and to satisfie his lust of the eyes which is covetousness; the question is, whether such may borrow, which this reason supposes to be granted. On the other side, I am not to vail my own just advantage to anothers excess; but suppose I cannot use it at my own advantage (the Patrons of Usu∣ry, allow only such to lend upon Usury, Orphans, Widows, &c.) is it lawfull then to lend it upon Usury, to such as will use it to ex∣cess? this is taken for granted also. In a word, suppose I can improve it (which the Dr. supposes I can) is it necessary for me, or lawful, to lend it to one that is prodigall, that will use it to ex∣cess? If not, then I ought not to lend it to another, that will so use it: If so, then I say again, he begs the question; for I ought to use, and improve it my self, and not to lend it to one that will so abuse it, to excesse; nor (I think) to one that needs it not, but to increase his own wealth. 4. I think, there is no Ʋsurer, but will go away satisfied with these grants from the pen of so grave, learned, pious a Divine: and think himself wise enough now, to justifie the worst of his Ʋsury. For as he will think no man poor, that is able to give him good security for his money: So he is willing, and desirous to deal with none, but [the rich Merchant, that takes up money for a free Trade, for the inriching of himselfe, or the prodigall person, that layes it out upon excess, and superflu∣ous
occasions] from whom the Dr. more than seems, for good reasons, to allow him Usury, yet not without some other Cautions. [Secondly, Ʋpon what termes do you lend? Ʋpon an absolute compact, for certain increase (what ever become of the principall) or upon a friendly trust to a voluntary satisfaction, according to the improvement of the money? The former is not safe, if benefit be disappointed, and rigorously to require profit in that case, is ma∣nifest oppression: The other is lawfull, being nothing but gratitude, which with the conscionable, is a bond no lesse strong, than that of law, and justice.] To which, it may be returned, 1. The compact, is a part of the Definition of Usury, Lucrum ex mutuo pa∣ctum: So that if there be no compact, express or implicite, it is not Ʋsury, which cannot be required, (nor need to be paid) with∣out a compact: and it is absolute, among Ʋsurers, what ever be∣come of the principall. 2. Gratitude is one thing, Ʋsury ano∣ther: Even the poorest borrower, gain or gain not, is bound to be thankefull, yet to take profit of him, for the loane of money, is already judged to be unlawful. 3. This also supposes, what is denyed, that it is lawfull for such as borrow for no need, but to the ill ends afore, to borrow, and to be lent unto. 4. We shall finde hereafter, that the Dr. allows an absolute compact, of certain gain, in some cases, and so, I think, differs from himselfe. But I go on. [Thirdly, If upon an absolute compact, is it upon a certainty, or an adventure? for where you are willing to hazard the princi∣pal, there can be no reason, but you should take part of the advan∣tage.] But besides that I understand not, how an absolute com∣pact, can be upon an Adventure; this varies the question, from loan or lending, or partnership, and so is not to the case of Ʋsury: for in partnership a man must be content to bear a part in the losse, as well as in the advantage: and if a man resolve to do so, there is no reason but he should take part of the profit. [Fourthly, Where the Trade is ordinarily certain, there are yet further considerations to be had. 1. That the value of money is arbitrable, in severall places. 2. What ever is saleable, is capable of profit, in the loan of it, as an horse or an oxe may be let. 3. Mo∣ney is not only the price of other commodities, but it selfe in some ca∣ses is a traffiqueable commodity; the price whereof rises and falls, in severall Countreys, and mony thus considered, may be bought & sold, and improved to a just profit.] To which it may briefly be said; 1. Where money is a traffiqueable commodity, yet there is cōmonly a State-prohibition, to transport money to a place where
it is dearer prized, and so it's unlawful to raise any profit by it, that way. 2. From the 2d consideration, we may reasonably conclude against lending of money upon Usury: Whatsoever commodity is not saleable, is not capable of profit, in the loan of it: But money, as it is the price of other commodities, is not saleable. Ergo. The instances by him given, of an horse, or oxe, are heterogeneous; for they are capable of more contracts, lending, letting, selling, as things, not spent in the use; but money, being only the price of other commodities, is spent in the use, and so cannot, or should not be sold, or let: At least, that's the question, of which in the next: but I adde, 3. If money as Merchandize, may be bought and sold, that's nothing to the Case in hand; which is in lending; where not the money it selfe, but the use of the money (if any thing) is sold, and bought. To which he speaks in the next. [The main doubt is, whether money meerly considered, as the price of all other commodities, may be let forth to profit, and a warran∣table increase: For the resolving whereof, be it determined, That all Ʋsury, which is an absolute contract, for the meer loan of money, is unlawful, by all kind of laws, both divine, and humane.] This alone were a full Resolution of the Case, and utterly destroys the Ʋsurers Trade; for as he lends his money, meerly as the price of other things (not as a Merchandize improveable elswhere) so, his contract is absolute, for the meer loan of money, (whatever be∣come of the principal) and for nothing else in him the Lender; whether the Borrower be rich or poor, gain or lose: His Reasons are very considerable to this purpose, and weighty. [1. Nature teaches us, that metals are not a thing capable of superfetation. 2. that no man ought to set a price, on that which is none of his own Time. 3. That the use of the stock, once received is not the Lenders, but the Borrowers: the power and right of disposing the principal, is, by contract, transferred to him that receives it. So that he that takes the Interest, by vertue of such transaction, doth but in a man∣nerly, and legal fashion, rob the Borrower.] This witness is full, and the reasons strong, against all Ʋsury whatever, of any persons whatever, rich or poor. For 1. mony does not breed mony, more to a rich man, than to a poor man. 2. Time cannot be prized, more to one, than to another. 3. The use of it, once received, is the Borrow∣ers, rich, as well as poor; the power and right of disposing the principal, being equally transferred to both. Let the conclusion then be added; He that takes Interest, by vertue of such transacti∣on, doth but in a mannerly and legal fashion, rob the Borrowers.
How this is reconcileable with what was said in the first Para∣graph, I cannot imagine: or with that which now follows. Thus he saith, [However it is unlawful to covenant for a cer∣tain profit, for the meer loan of mony: yet there may be, and are circumstances appending to the loan, which may admit some benefit to the Lender, to be lawfully made, for the use of his mony, espe∣cially these two. 1. The loss that he sustains, And 2. the gain that he misses, by the want of the sum lent: for what reason, that to pleasure another man, I should hurt my self? that I should in∣rich another by my own loss?] To which divers things may be said; for besides that this interferes, with the last recited asserti∣ons, and with those three Arguments, strong against all Usury; I add: 1. Lending being an act (not of justice, but) of charity, the Lender is not to respect his own loss or gain he might have made, but the good and profit of the Borrower, even sometimes with the loss of his principal: [lend looking for nothing again] 2. By this way, Usury is lawfully taken, of the poorest Borrower; for I may sustain loss, or miss some gain, I might have made for want of my money lent him. 3. It may also be lawful to Cove∣nant for gain, for the meer loan of the mony; for from the first day of lending my money, I may meet with some loss, or miss some gain, for want of my money: yea, supposing (as he does) that the Lender is one, that at the very time of lending, could improve it to his own advantage; Ʋsury, or (as he calls it) Interest may be ever lawful, and lawfully covenanted for; and that absolute∣ly: for so he saith, [If there be a true danger of loss, to me immi∣nent, when the transaction is made, nothing hinders, but that I may by compact, make sure such a sum, as may be sufficient for my indemnity or gain, I for go, &c.] p. 10, 11. and more to the same purpose: Thus now, all Ʋsury, is nothing but Interest: whereas Interest had wont to be taken in this sense, when for delay, after the appointed day of payment, the Lender suffered loss, or missed gain (having lent it freely) but now, Interest, and so Ʋsury may be due from the very day of lending; when the Lender fore∣sees a danger of loss, or forgoes a present profit: and that Ʋsury may be covenanted for, with any Lender, poor or rich, though he perhaps, makes none or little gain of the money; yea, loses of the principal upon this Argument, [What reason, that to plea∣sure another man, I should hurt my self?] And what would any common Ʋsurer desire more? so that instead of confuting him, he hath confirm'd him more in his Practice and Trade. And this is
the issue of all the distinctions, and cautions multiplied by the Pa∣trons of Usury: nor can it be avoided, but in their way, (bringing the Case to the bar of corrupted Reason) Ʋsury may be just & law∣ful to be taken of all, poor as well as rich; at least in some cases, if there were no divine Law against it: How to prevent this mischief, I find no way; but only what I have propounded, that if none but the needy may borrow, or be lent to, then, all Ʋsury for lending will prove unlawful: for when it is granted, (as it is by this learn∣ed Dr.) that rich and wealthy men, may borrow and be lent unto, (whether prodigal or covetous) there is a wide door opened for Usury: because of the reasons pleaded afore. 1. What reason is there, that to pleasure another, I should hurt my self? 2. That I should inrich another, by my own loss, when I could otherwise improve it? How to answer these, I know not; but by saying, In such a case, where the Borrower hath no need to borrow, but either to waste it prodigally, or to increase it covetously, and I can im∣prove it to my own advantage, I am not bouud to lend him my money, yea (I think) bound not to lend him; but charity bids me improve it my self; if I cannot improve it my self, yet I am bound not to lend it to such Borrowers, but to imploy it some other way, more safe and secure, without so many perplexities and scruples, as attend upon lending upon Ʋsury. This is the substance of his Resolution of the Case, there are some other things of lesser concernment observable. First he says, p. 13 [Charitie will teach you, that every increase by loan of mony, is not Ʋsurary.] But had he defined Ʋsury, he would have found, this teaching to be erroneous: For if Ʋsury be gain covenanted for lending of money, then gaine or increase for lending of money is Ʋsurary: the definition and the thing defined being convertible, as he well knew. And Usury thus defined, is rationally condemned by himself, by three strong Arguments. Secondly, Saith he, [If you can find out a way by loan or sale, to advance your stock,Pag. 6. that may be free from all oppression and extor∣tion, and beneficial as well to others, as your self; you need not fear to walk in it, with all honest security.] In answer to this, I shall say, 1. In way of sale, it may be possible to find out such a way; but in way of loan of money, it will be very hard, if not impossible, to meet with such a way, as is free from all oppression; if either his Assertion, or his Arguments be of any strength: unless by lending freely, to the needie only, which may expect a blessing from God: which only makes a man innocently, and comfortably rich: And
therefore there can be little security, in walking in such a way, especially there being so many scruples to be answered, and so many cautions to be observed, & as he saith, [our hearts being too apt to beguile us, in misapplications; and rather to draw the Rule to us, than our selves to the Rule.] Better therefore it were, and safer, to improve their stocks, any other lawful way, (as he sup∣poses they can) than to lend to such as need not, to entangle them∣selves, with so many scruples and cautions, and to make them∣selves accessary to other mens sins, which they can very hardly, if at all avoid, by lending promiscuously unto all. 2. Because its usu∣al with the Advocates of Usury, to put stumbling cases, that are ve∣ry like to Ʋsury, and yet free (seemingly) from all oppression; be∣neficial as well to others, as the Lender, and Borrower, I shall put the next undertaker a case, which (I have heard) is ordinary in London. A poor Fisher-woman, or Herb-woman, comes to a Brok∣ing Ʋsurer, and borrows 5 s. to trade with, for that week; leaving a sufficient pawn, to return it, with a peny in the shilling, for the use of it. The woman trades with it, and turns her stock, 4 or 5 times in the week, with gain every return, with which she maintains her self and her family: at the weeks end, she pays 5 d. with, and for the use of her 5 s. and receives her pawn; and the next week does the like. Now, I ask, what iniquity or oppression, is there in this contract of lending? The Borrower gets well; the Buyers of her commo∣dities, have no wrong, but rather gain; for they are eased, by the womans fetching the fish from Billingsgate, and bringing it, to the remotest part of the City to their doors, which may justly require consideration, for the womans labour and pains: The Lender gains enough, if not too much, for after the rate of a peny in the shilling for a week, he gains but after 400 l. for an 100 l. so put out, for a a yeer: If then where there is no violation of Justice or Cha∣rity (as here seems none) Usury be lawful: why not this? I leave it to Resolution. Lastly, He laments [the ignorance of some, whose zeal cries down Usury as most hateful, but make no bones of actions no less biting and oppressive; not caring how dear they sell; at how high rates they Let their Lands, &c. not considering, that there is no less, nor less odious Ʋsury in Selling, and Letting than in Lend∣ing.] To which I say in a word. There may be as great, and odious oppression in Selling, and Letting; but there is no Ʋsury to be found there, which is only committed in lending of money and things of the like nature, as the Definition does import. FINIS.
