C2434 15565337 103820
A MESSAGE FROM The Royall Prisoner at Windsor, to the Kingdome of Scot∣land; And His Majesties Resolution, concerning the Ordnance and Impeachment of High Treason, against His Royal Person, by the Parliament and Army, and His Majesties Speech and Prayer, upon receipt of the Intelli∣gence, of their chusing Commissioners, for bringing Him to a speedy Tryall. Dated from Windsor the 3 of January, 1648. Liknwise, a Declaration from Gloucester-shire, VVorcester∣shire, and Hereford-shire, concerning the King, and His Tryall; And a Declaration of the Ministers of Lanca∣shire, touching his Majesty, and the Army; Delivered in their Pulpits to their severall Congregations. royal blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed for W. FIELDING, 1648
A MESSAGE From the Royall prisoner at WINDSOR TO The Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the dangerous pro∣ceedings of the Lord Gen: Fairfax and the Army against his Majesties person. Right Honorable, HIs Majesty hath received intelligence from West∣minster, that the Generall Councell of the Army are resolved to bring him to a speedy tryall, and to that, have drawn up the Bill of Attainder and Charge a∣gainst him, for profecuting the same; all which his Majesty doth very ill rescent; for, (with a sad and melancholy heart,
and tears trickling down his sacred cheekes) he saith, That his conscience begins to dictate sad and dismall apprehen∣sions to his memory, and that he much feareth, the Clouds begin to gather to a head, for the eclipsing and evacuating the splendor and glory of his dayes: However, hee hath made his peace with God, and is resolved to undergoe the crosse and afflictions of this transitory life, be it with losse of Life, or Imprisonment. Yesterday by another expresse from London, the King re∣ceived a further confirmation of the proceedings of the Lords, Commons, and his Excellency, touching the Ord∣dance of attainder, for impeaching him of high treason, who after receipt thereof, betook himself to private meditation, and as it is said, besought the Lord in prayer, for the space of two hours, humbly imploring his sad and miserable con∣dition, and desiring of the Lord, to inspire his heart with wisdom and understanding, and to inable him to stand firm in the presence of all those, who are now acting and con∣triving things of so great consequence against him, and also, that he may have both power and knowledge, to answer to all the objections, clauses and particulars, which shall be ex∣hibited against him. Which done, his Majesty withdrew from his privy cham∣bed, and took a walk upon the Territs of the Castle, who fixing his eyes towards London, was seene to lay his hand upon his breast,, uttering many sad and mournfull expres∣sions. His Majesty hath had some conference with one Mr. San∣ders, who intimates, that he desireth to heare his Charge, and to be brought to a speedy tryall. We hear that the Royall prisoner Duke Hamilton hath sent a message to Scotland, purporting the affairs of England
between King, Parliament, and Army: the rest of the Royall party begins to bewayl their sad and deplorable conditions, and some have vowed, that if once they could escape this present Net of Justice, they would enter into protestation, never to incur the like penalty for the future. Windsor 3 Jan. 1648. Jan: the third, The Commons communicated the Ordi∣nance (for tryall of the King) to the house of Peers for their concurrence, which was assented to. And for the bet∣ter confirmation of the present trvall, and foundation there∣of, and prevention of the like for the future, the House de∣clared, viz. Resolved, That the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament do declare, and adjudge, That by the fundamentall Laws of this Realm, it is treason in the Kings of England for the time to come, to levy Warre against the Parliament and Kingdom of England. The Commons appointed to consider of drawing up of a charge against, and consider of the manner of the Tryall of his Majesty, reported an Ordinance this day to the house, for attainting him of high-Treason, and for trying him by such Commissioners as should be nominated in the body of the said Ordinance. The house having read it the first time ordered to have it read again to morrow morning at ten a clock. The charge runs thus, That Charles Stewart hath acted contrary to his trust, in departing from the Parliament setting up his Standard making a war against them, and thereby been occasion of much bloodhed and misery to the people, whom he was set over for good: That he gave Commissions to Irish Rebells, &c. and since was occasion of a second war, &c besides what done contrary to the Liberties of the Sbuject, and tending to the destruc∣tion of the Fundamentall Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, &c. The Bill of Attainder runs high, against his person, char∣ging him with high treason: His tryall will be at Westmin∣ster, and his Majesty is expected to be there on Mundy next.
The further resolution of the Army touching the King. HIs Excellency, and the General Councell of the Army have fully resolved upon their debates, touching the tryal of the King, and are resolved to bring him to a present tryal, the manner of it is as followeth, viz. 6 Lords, forty Commons, and ten Colonels, Lieutenant colonels, and Ma∣jors, who are to receive Instructions (as Commissioners) Ior managing and prosecuting of the Bills of Attainder and Impeachment against the person of the King; and are resol∣ved to establish and confirme a true and lasting Govern∣ment within this Kingdome, and that the best they can ima∣gine for a Common-wealth, which containeth these parti∣culars, viz. 1 The Magistrate to have power in things civill and na∣turall. 2 The Subject to be free, submitting to the Civill Lawes. 3 No toleration for Popery nor Prelacy. 4 None to be forced to fight in War against their will▪ &c. And the Generall Councell have further resolved and de∣clared, That the Parliament shall not proceed against any persons to give Judgment, but according to what is Law, Rason, and Equity. And for the better facilitating and establishing of a true and lasting peace within this Nation, the Generall Councel of the Army have passed the remaining part of the Articles for an Agreement of the People, and are determined speedi∣ly to consider of a forme of conclusion and subscription to this Agreement as to the Officers of the Army. Summons are also sent to the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York, to require their present appearance, and to de∣sist from their Engagement, in acting against this Kingdom, and involving their place of Nativity in another bloudy and intestine War, and a day is prefixed, for their return, that in
case they refuse to yeeld obedience to the said Summons, then to be declared against as Enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and to be degraded of all Titles and Honours, be∣longing to either of them. Yet notwithstanding, we have one precious Flower and Blossome to six our eyes upon, viz. the Duke of Glouce∣ster, (the Kings youngest Son) who in all probability, will speedily be advanced to great Honours and Dignities, to the great admiration of the whole Kingdom. Yesterday the Committee reported the Ordinance of At∣tainder against Charles Stuart, and the names of such Com∣missioners as should try him, which are, the Earl of Den∣bigh, Earl of Pembroke, E. of Kent, E of Mnlgrave, E. of Not∣tingham, and Lord Grey of Wark. Of the House of Commons, the Lord Munson, L. Lisle, L. Grey of Groby, Lieu. Gen. Crumwell, M. G. Skippon, Com. Gen: Ireton, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Iohn Danvers, Col. walton, Col: Moor, Col: Boswell, Col: Rossiter, Col: Ven, Col: Thorney, Col: Lassels, and about 30 Members more. Of the Army that are not members of the House of Com∣mons, the L. Gen. Fairfax, Col: Whalley, Col: Rich, Col: VVal∣ler, Col: Tomlinson, col: Scroop, Col: Sanders, Col: Pride, col: Twisleton Col: Huson, Col: Barkstead, Col: Horton, Col: Des∣borough, Col: Dean, and Col: Okey. Of the City of London, Alderman Pennington, Alderman VVoollaston, Ald: Fooks, Ald: Gibbs, and Alderman Andrews. The Judges are, the Lord chief Justice Rolls, chief Justice of England, Justice St. Iohn, Lord chief Justice of the Com∣mon-pleas, and Lord chief Baron VVild. And two out of all the 40 Counties throughout the Kingdom, all which com∣missioners, who are to fit as a Jury, are to consist of 150,
and any 20 of them are to be a Cmmittee for tryall of the King, and to give sentence against him. By this Ordinance the Commissioners are limited to a moneths time, to make a finall determination of the businesse, the place of tryall is said to be at Westminster. A message is said to be sent from the Parliament, to the severall Counties of the Kingdom of England, concerning the tryall of the King, for satisfaction of the people. Letters this day from severall Counties in the West of England purports, That the Knights, Gentry, and Commo∣nalty▪ of Gloucester-shire, Somerset shire, Hereford-shire, and Worcester-shire, have declared their unanimous reso∣lutions to comply with the Army, for the setling of the peace of this bleeding and distracted kingdom, and execu∣ting of speedy and impartiall Justice upon the grand De∣linquents of this kingdome, and that all of them may bee brought to a speedy tryall, to answer to their Charge and Impeachment exhibited against them▪ But from the North letters say, That the Clergy in those parts cannot rescent the proceedings in the South, especially the Black-coats of Lancashire, who doe openly declare in Pulpit to their severall Congregations, That the wayes of the army are inconsistent with the word of God, and that their Designs tends to nothing more, then the subversion of Religion, Government, and Law; But some of the Grandees are silenced, and taken into custody by the well affected of that County. FINIS.
