C592 11766942 48791
Count Taaffe's LETTERS FROM THE Imperial Camp, To his BROTHER the Earl of Carlingford HERE IN LONDON: Giving an Account of the most Considerable Actions, both before, and at, the Raising of the Siege at VIENNA, together with several Remarkable Passages afterward, in the Late Victorious Campagne against the TURKS in HUNGARY. With an Addition of two other LETTERS from a Young English Nobleman, a Voluntier in the IMPERIAL ARMY. LONDON, Printed for T. B. and are to be sold by William Abbington, near the Wonder Tavern on Lud-gate-Hill. 1684.
TO THE READER. THE Siege of Vienna, and the War of Hun∣gary being at present the common Subject of Discourse, I presume it will not be un∣pleasing to you, if I give you a more faithful and di∣stinct Account of those Successes of the Christian Arms against the Turks, than hath yet been published; an Account not collected from Fame, or Transcribed out of Mercuries and Gazetts, but Original Letters themselves, which have been already seen and approv'd off, by his MAJESTY and his ROYAL HIGH∣NESS; and those written by a Cavalier of a high Reputation, who was not only present in the Acti∣ons of which he writes, but being a general Officer in the Imperial Army, bore a considerable Part in them himself. This is the Lord Taaffe, a Subject of His Majesties, who to his Elder Brother the Earl of Car∣lingford, and to the Marquiss of Grana Governor of Flanders, sends these Letters, in which you may not only discern a vein of Truth, but a certain Mode∣sty and Nobleness of Nature, since without arroga∣ting any thing to himself, he does not omit to do Justice to others; By these Qualities, and his prudent Conduct in a Forreign COURT, he hath acquir'd much Esteem
and Trust with the Emperor, whom he serves, the Affection and Confidence of his Highness, the Duke of Loranie, and a great Name over all the Empire. So that he does honour not only to himself, but to his Country, and to his Loyal Family, and Noble Ance∣stors of which he is descended. An Example to awake the Vertue of the English Nation, and make all Gentlemen sensible how much more it would be both for their Interest and Honour to imploy their Swords in this Occasion for the Defence of Christendom, than to wast their Youth in Gaming-houses and Taverns, and kill one another as they do in senseless and brutal Quarrels,
Passaw, July 24. 1683: For the Earl of Carlingford at London. I Had the Honour to hear from you by my Lord Lansdowne, who had he not been very full of Courage and Bravery, the Unhappy State of Affairs here had certainly diverted him from so generous a Design, but since he is resolv'd to try his For∣tune with us, the Duty I owe to the King, and his Royal Highness's Commands, the pleasure I have in obliging so gallant a Gentleman as my Lord Lansdowne, and the Interest you take therein ingages me to omit nothing for his Service, as well as to seek an opportunity to acquire a Friend of his merit. Instead of Seventy thousand Men, which was promis'd the Duke of Loraine to carry on this Terrible War, he never muster'd yet above Thirty Thousand; and for these two Months we have lain in Hungary, we have been Idle, at∣tempting little for fear of lessening our Strength before the Arrival of the Ottoman Forces, having already, what through Sickness, and necessary Detachments reduced our Army to Three and Twenty Thousand Men, and that was the ut∣most
of our Force, when the Grand Visier on the Seventh Instant, with an Army of at least, One Hundred and Threescore Thousand Figh∣ting Men, posted himself within Cannon-shot of us, the small River Raab running between, neither do I speak the most, but on the con∣trary all the Prisoners we have taken as well as other Advices make them above Two hundred Thousand, besides the Tartars and the Hungari∣an Rebels. You may easily imagine, my Lord, whether this Appearance did not surprize us, ha∣ving always pleas'd our selves with the hopes, That our Alliance with Poland might have obli∣ged the Turk to divide his Forces, however tho we sound the contrary, we yet maintain'd our Post that day, and repuls'd Twenty Thousand Tartars, who forded the River under our very Noses. The Enemy thus finding how difficult it was to force his way to us, ordered out a De∣tachment of Thirty Thousand Horse to spread themselves all along the River over against our Right Wing, with a Reserve of Hungarians com∣manded by the Count Budiani, a Nobleman of that Country lately revolted, and being inform'd at night, that the Turks were come over the Ri∣ver, without any difficulty, Budiani, with the said Hungarian Rebels joyning with them, and decla∣ring
for the Rebel Teckeley, as also considering the disproportion in our Numbers, that the Ri∣ver was fordable in several Places, the Enemy possest of all the advantageous Grounds, and a∣ble when they pleas'd, under protection of their Canon to force this Passage, and at the same time a great Body of their Horse, who being alrea∣dy on this side, were in a posture to charge us, either in Flank or Rear, his Highness judg'd that Post not safe, quitting it that night, having first put Six Thousand Men into Raab, which of all Places, seemed most in danger to be besieged. Our Foot marched towards Presburgh by the Isle of Schutz, where they were out of the reach of their insulting numbers, and our Horse through the Plains which extend from Raab to Presburgh. The Thirteenth Instant, I commanded the Rear Guard of Four hundred Horse, when I was at∣tack'd by Two Thousand Tartars upon the Plains of Peternel, and at the same time as ill luck would have it, they had Alarm'd our A∣vaunt-Guard, with a Party falling upon our Baggage, and his Highness fearing least the Enemy might cut us off from Vienna, where the Emperor with the whole Courtas yet was, made the Horse march with all possible speed thither, leaving only behind one Regiment to Mount
the Guard; this Regiment seeing the hasty march of the other Troops, supposing it was oc∣casion'd by the Terror of those that fell upon us in the Rear, under that apprehension in the most shameful manner in the World fled, with∣out once drawing a Pistol, or offering to stand the least shock of the Enemy; whereupon those Four hundred Horse of the Rear Guard under my Command were surrounded, and I cannot tell by what Providence I was deliver'd, having for at least half an hour marcht pesle mesle a∣mongst the Enemy; there was at this time so great a dust that those who fled could not as yet discern the coming of their Succours, and in that confusion disordered several of our own Squadrons that were wheeling to their Relief. The first that rallyed were Five Troops of my Regiment, one Squadron being wholely broken by the Regiment which fled, the other behaved themselves so bravely, that the poor Prince of Aremberg and Count Millini, Brother to a Cardi∣nal of that Name, and at present Nuntio in Spain, both Captains in my Regiment, with Prince Arem∣berg's Cornet, and Eighty Cavaliers were kill'd upon the place. The Duke of Lorrain at length having with much difficulty drawn up the rest of the Horse
hastned himself to us, where finding the fore∣most Squadrons, yet under a panick Fear, aligh∣ted from his Horse at the Head of his Men to let them see there was no danger, this Example gave fresh Courage to our Troops, and the Dust being somewhat abated, we discovered, that all this Disorder was only occasion'd by Six Thousand Turks and Tartars; We made up then to them, his Highness being in the Head of us, but they would not endure the very sight of our Troops, and 'twas in vain to follow them with our heavy German Horse, since our Light Horse was wanting, the Enemy flying with an incredible Swiftness: But we learn'd from this, that which we since found, that these Six Thou∣sand Horse were only to cover the gross of their Army, with the which they thinking it not so much for their purpose to Attacque Raab, as sup∣pos'd was first design'd, were marching direct∣ly to Vienna. You will perhaps think it very strange that we should be no better inform'd of the Design and Marches of the Enemy, but not so much when you hear that all Hungary was a∣gainst us, and not so much as a Peasant but for Teckeley. And as for the Party that we sent out to scout on the Plains between Raab and Vienna, there could not a Man of them ha've escaped
had they been discovered; such is the Number and Swiftness of the Enemy. To conclude, my Lord, we are in a very desperate Condition. All Hungary is against us, the Court removed to Passaw, All Austria round Vienna from Newstat and St. Hippolitt in flames, and we not able to hinder it, having now only a Body of Ten Thou∣sand Horse, at most, left with the Duke of Lor∣rain; Vienna has been besieged these ten Days, and had not his Highness, out of his great Pru∣dence and Conduct, clapt in Ten or Eleven Thou∣sand Men into the Town, in that nick of Time, and the which was all the Foot he had in his Army, by this time the Place had certainly been lost. Bavaria is sending us Ten Thousand brave, but unexperienced Souldiers, and we shall be re∣inforced with Ten Thousand more from the Em∣peror. The King of Poland is obliged by our Treaty to march himself in Person at the Head of his Army to the Relief of Vienna, and the least Delay is lookt upon as most dangerous. Saxony, Franconia and Brandenburgh promise us their Troops, God grant they may all come in time. If Vienna should be taken, I cannot see the end of our miseries, but I hope God will not for∣sake his Cause, nor the House of Austria that has been ever so devoted to him.
From the Camp at Angrem, Aug. 17. 1683. For the Earl of Carlinford at London. I Received yours of the Seventeenth of July from London, and render God a thousand Thanks for saving our Royal Master the King and the Duke from that execrable Design of those wicked As∣sassines; Good God! What Madness is this? Let us view all Europe, and see, if we can find a∣ny Subjects so well treated, or who do enjoy so blessed a Peace as those of England; Or if there be any Nations in the World that do not envy the Happiness of ours; I have so great a Detestation for those Infamous Villains, that I shall henceforth look upon Turks and Tartars as the most honest Men. You have by this time doubtless received the Account I sent you of our Campagne from Passaw. The Lord Lansdowne delivered it to the Spanish Ambassadour, who promised to send it in his Pacquet to Don Petro de Ronquillio into England. The Duke of Lor∣rain has since had the good Fortune with Four∣teen Thousand Horse to give a Defeat to Tcc∣keley's Army, consisting of Twenty Thousand Hungarians, and Six Thousand Turks near Pres∣burgh, where he was going to possess himself of
the Town, and to be Crowned King of Hun¦gary: We marcht up towards them by a Defile, [i. e. Narrow Passage] which they had lined with Dragoons, and though the Enemy were drawn up in good Order, they had not the Courage to make any opposition: Our Avaunt Guard was scarcely past, when a Panick Fear so seized those Rebels, that they presently fled, leaving the Turks to shift for themselves, who for a time retreated orderly, but the Poles seconded by some Regiments of our Curiasiers fell so furious∣ly upon them that at last they were routed, lea∣ving a Thousand of their Men dead behind them, with Twelve Hundred Wagons of Baggage, whereof our Men had the plunder, the Rebels Cavalry saving themselves by the Swiftness of their Horses; and the few Foot they had in Woods and Mountains, which were inaccessi∣ble to our Horse; this blow was such a Terror to Teckeley that we saw him no more. Vienna has now been five weeks besieged, and although the Enemy took their Post the First day at the Foot of the Glassis under protection of the Sub∣urbs, which we neglected to demolish, they have spent four weeks in only gaining one Point of the Counterscarp, betwixt the Bastion of the Pallace, and that of Lebell. Five days ago they
sprung a Mine under the Point of the Ravelin betwixt the said two Bastions, where they gave a furious Assault, in hopes to have made a Lodgment of it, but they were repuls'd with great Loss, and we have it from the Prisoners themselves, as well as Spies we have in their Camp, that they have already lost above Twelve Thousand Janizaries. The Bavarian Succours of Nine Thousand Men are already arrived at the Bridge of Crembs, those of Franconia being Eight Thousand will be here to Morrow. The Ele∣ctor of Saxony with Ten Thousand Men more is upon his March, but can hardly be with us before the end of the Month. The King of Poland is also coming with Three or Four and Twenty Thousand Men, and we are now a∣bout Three and Twenty Thousand Imperialists, with which Troops we are resolved towards the end of this Month to succour Vienna, or dye in the Attempt; but if the King of Poland de∣lay coming, and we find the Town much press'd, we shall endeavour the Relief of it without him; they assure us that the Emperor intends to be with us in Person, and I heartily wish it for his greater Glory. We think to pass the Danube at Crembs, a little Town about Ten Leagues up the River from Vienna, the Country
thereabouts is very Mountainous and Woody, till you come within a little League of the place. We shall have a Body of Thirty Thousand Foot, if the Enemy come to meet us they must then forsake some of their Posts, if they do not we shall have them betwixt us and the Town, and the Scituation thereof is such, that their Horse will be of little use to them, in which consists their greatest Force. My Lord Lans∣downe is in great esteem with his Highness the Duke of Lorraine, and extreamly beloved by all the Officers and best Men of our Army. From the Camp at Korn, Neigburgh upon the Danube, Aug. 25th. 1683. For the Earl of Carlinford at London. I Have given you in my Letters under Cover of Don Petro de Ronquillio, as well as in those from the Camp at Maregg, sent in the Governour of Flanders's Pac∣quet, a faithful Account of the State of Affairs here; as also what hath happened most remarkable in this Campagne. The Twen∣ty First instant, the Duke of Lorrain left the Mark, a little fordable River that divides Austria and Moravia from Hungary, that he might the better
get to the Banks of the Danube, above Fulme and Crembs, there to pass over for the disposing Mat∣ters for the great Affair, I mean, the relieving of Vienna, hoping that those two blows the Enemy had already received, as well as the King of Poland's March towards their Confines, might for a while retard their advancing in the Siege. Yesterday we encamped at Stockeraw, where we were told, that a considerable Body of Turks and Tartars had past the Mark, and we were quickly convinc'd of the Truth of it, by the Flames of Five or Six Villages; which we saw Burning within a few Miles of our Camp, it being a barbarous Custom amongst those Infidels to set all on Fire wheresoever they march: Upon this his Highness, with a Flying Body of Ten Thou∣sand Horse resolved to march immediately to∣wards them; we found them, being about Twelve Thousand, drawn in Battalia near the Bridg of Vienna. His Highness in person char∣ged on the right Wing, where the Turks gave a furious Onset, disordering some of our Po∣lish Troops, but being presently seconded by some of our German Horse they were put to flight, with the loss of Three hundred of their Men, and Five Hundred more that were sent from the Grand Visier's Camp over the Danube in Boats,
thinking by the same means to save themselves, were so hotly pursued, that they were most of them drown'd in the River, leaving their Hor∣ses for a booty behind them. Our right wing extended it self to a little Wood, the left Wing, where I commanded spreading it self all along the Plains, which the Enemy seeing encoura∣ged them to bend their chiefest Force against us, that they might fall upon us both in the Flank and Rear; but Prince Lewis of Badin ordering some of the Horse on the Right Wing, by easie Movements to close in with us, and the Enemy finding after several Attempts that they could not break us, but were always repulsed with Loss, despairing of Success, they drew off their Squadrons upon a little Hill within Mus∣ket-shot of us, by which they kept us from see∣ing any Reserve, that might possibly have lain hid behind them. At the same time that they seem'd thus ready to engage us, a hundred and fifty desperate Turks and Tartars, perceiving the distance that was betwixt our Squadrons, and the Right Wing, sliping behind the Wood fell upon us in the Rear, but I ordering two Squa∣drons of our Second Line to charge them, they were quickly disperst, and few of them esca∣ped. We did expect the Enemy would have
made use of this Disorder to attack us with their whole Body, but it was far otherwise, it serving them only as an opportunity to save themselves, by a hasty Retreat; We by this time finding that those Squadrons of theirs drawn up before us upon the said Hill were on∣ly to amuse and cover the Retreat of the rest, and it had been time lost to pursue them with our Curiasseers, who could not overtake them in a Race Campagne, they never keeping toge∣ther, and are very nimble and run with great Swiftness, and impossible to get them into a Body, unless they please themselves; Our Poles might have indeed pursued them, but seem'd un∣willing, and his Highness judging that they might probably be reinforced by Teckeley, who but few days before was encamped near the Mark, thought not fit to pursue them any fur∣ther, but to return to mind the great Affair, which now drew near: The Enemy lost be∣sides those kill'd on the place, several Kettle Drums, and above twenty Colours in their Re∣treat. His Highness with singular Courage and Bravery conducted this Engagement with the Enemy, but too much exposed his Person, as he does too often upon all occasions. We are here still intent, and at the Eve of our great bus∣siness,
the Relief of Vienna. His Majesty of Poland with above Twenty Thousand Men will be with us in seven days. Bavaria, Saxony and Fran∣conia have already sent us Seven and Twenty Thou∣sand Men, and we are above Twenty Thousand Imperialists. If God be not against us, I hope in a few days to send you a Relation of a glo∣rious Victory. My Lord Lansdowne did parti∣cularly signalize himself in this Action, being always in that part of the Fight where it was hottest, and he is certainly a very gallant young Man. From the Grand Visier's Camp at Mid∣night, Septemb. 12th. 1683. For the Earl of Carlingford at London. VVE have relieved Vienna, but if the Victory be not so compleat, as we promised our selves it should, it proceeded only from the Cowardise of our Enemies, whom from Morning till Night we drove before us, beating them from Post to Post, without their having once the Courage to look us in the Face, and that through seve∣ral Defiles, [i. e. Narrow Passages] which had they any reasonable Courage we could never
have forc'd. The Combat held longest where the King of Poland was, but that only added to his Glory, he having beaten them with the loss of their Canon, and a great number of their Men; They have left us their whole Camp in general, with their Tents, Bagg and Bag∣gadg, and time will tell us more particulars. We intend to follow them to morrow; and it is impossible but there must be much more than we yet know; If night had not come on, at our very entring the Suburbs, we had certainly gi∣ven them a total overthrow. My Lord Lans∣down hath done me the Honour to accept the Command of a Troop of Horse in my Regi∣ment; He is a very brave Youth, and Courts all Occasions to shew his Courage, and to di∣stinguish himself; attracting the Friendship and Esteem of all our Army. I am just now told we have taken all the Grand Visier's Treasure, you shall hear more by the next. From the Grand Visier's Camp at Midnight, Septemb. 12. 1683. For His Excellency the Marquiss of Grana Go∣vernour of the Spanish Netherlands, &c. INstead of Vienna being relieved, and the Turks utterly defeated, I beg your pardon, if I tell You, that the Siege is only raised, and the Ene∣my
forc'd to fly away, which was not our fault for from Kalemberg as far as Filberg-Bastie we pur∣sued them from Hill to Hill, and from one Desile [i. e. from one narrow Pass to another] to another, they never having the Courage to stand before our Troops. I refer my self for the rest to Mon∣sieur Preudhomme, who is a very good Man, and deserves a Reward for the News he carries, in the which he bore a very particular Part, but less than he hoped, through the Cowardise of the Enemy, and I beg he may receive some Mark of your Favour. I have heretofore told you, that the King of Poland is le plus honeste homme of his Kingdom, and I must now tell you again, that there are few Kings now in the World who deserve better to be so than himself; and that his Competitor, our Duke of Loraine, hath performed all the Parts of a great Captain and excellent Soldier, and hath withal so managed Matters, and found the way in this Conjuncti∣on of our Troops to accommodate so many Majesties and Electoral Highnesses and Sove∣raign Princes together, that there hath not been the least dispute or difference arisen amongst them. I take the Freedom to send you some of our Plunder from the Turks, being a very small present: We have taken all the Enemies Tents
in general, and you will admire the modera∣tion of our Troops, who amidst so great a boo∣ty, pursu'd the Infidels from Camp to Camp; neither Officer nor Souldier once offering to touch any thing till they had first made sure of the Victory. I cannot yet learn the number of the Canon taken, nor how many were kill'd on the right Wing, against whom the King of Po∣land fought in Person, Monsieur Preudhomme will tell you the rest. 'T was night before we got hi∣ther, which hindred us from pursuing them far∣ther, but to morrow early we shall be at their heeles. I am for ever, Yours, &c. From the Camp near Presburg, Septemb. 22. 1683. For the Earl of Carlingford at London. I Did my self the Honour, my Lord, to give you a rough Draught of the Action of Vi∣enna, the very same night that it happen'd, by an Officer of the Marquiss of Grana's, whom he sent Express from Flanders, to bring him that great News, and I must add, that never Victory of so great Importance, cost so little blood. There were no Officers kill'd on our side but the Brother of the Prince de Crouy, the Count de Trantmanstorf Major, the Count de Batzi Captain
of Dragoons, and some people of quality a∣mongst the Poles, who stood the shock of a ve∣ry rude Encounter, with a Transcendent Bra∣very. If the Grand Visier had been Master of his Trade, we could never have past from the Hills of Kalemberg to Vienna, without a bloody and desperate Engagement, and upon very dis∣advantageous Terms, we having three terri∣ble Defiles to pass from the Mountains to the Ci∣ty; But God did so infatuate them, that they let our Foot and Dragoons quietly post them∣selves in such manner, as to secure our Cavalry, who passing but one and two at a time posted themselves under their very Noses. Their Re∣treat was so hasty that they left us all their Ar∣tillery in general, and the Account being made they are found, what in their Approaches and Camp, to amount to above One hundred and Twenty Pieces of Canon, with a prodigious quantity of Provisions both of Ammunition and Victuals, and all their Camp, without gi∣ving themselves so much Time as to take down a Tent. The Field was covered every where with all sorts of rich booty; Our German Troops marching through the middle of all this Spoyl, and not a Soldier, either Foot or Horse went one Step out of his Rank to pillage, and we
value the glory of this Continence and Exact∣ness of military Discipline more than all the Booty of the Poles, which was incredible, All the Grand Visier's Treasure fell to their share, the King confesseth he hath gotten great Riches and the Equipage of the Grand Visier's alone, which fell to his Lot is valued at One Hundred Thousand Crowns. The Poles have also taken the Great Standard of Mahomett, and the Horse Tails which the Sultan himself gave the Grand Visier on this great Expedition. Some of our Caval∣ry next day in rummaging their Tents, found betwixt Five and Six Thousand Duckats in ready Money, and amongst other things the Imperi∣al Resident, who following the Army, was for∣got behind their Camp, who assured us, that since the beginning of this Siege, their Army was lessened Seventy Thousand Men, and the Tur∣kish Prisoners avow, that of Forty Thousand Janizaries which came before the place, there are not gone off Eighteen Thousand. If night had not come on us, at the very Suburbs of Vienna, we had made it an entire Victory; having already gain'd the Defiles, and the Enemy was in an extream Confusion, and had we but two hours more of Day-light, we should have driven them to the little River of Shwechet, where we
might have had them at our Mercy, but they past it in the night, and though the Duke of Loraine would have next Morning pursued them at Break of Day, yet the King of Poland thought it not fit, because his Horse had not drank in Eight and Forty hours before: But those who are given to detract say, that the Polish Troops, with whom the King is sometimes obliged to comply, had demanded one day more, to make an end of pillaging the Turkish Camp. We hope before the end of this Cam∣pagne to take some Place on the Frontier. Teckeley applys himself to the King of Poland for his Mediation. The Grand Visier enrag'd at this shameful loss, has since caused the Heads of the Visier of Buda, of two Bassa's and Five hun∣dred Officers to be cut off, this will be a ready way to make an end of his Army, if he kill thus on one side, and we on the other. Adieu, In fine, it was high time to succour Vienna, there being two considerable Breaches in both the Bastions, and half of the Curtain undermin'd, the Garrison which consisted of Twelve Thousand Men reduced to Four Thousand, and certainly never any Garrison behav'd it self better. I am endeavouring to get a Draught of the Place, and the Attacks to present to the King and his
Royal Highness, and here's an Engineer upon the Place has promised to do it very well. My Lord Lansdowne will have the Honour to see the closing of this Campagne, as thinking it not suf∣ficient to have bore his Part in the Relief of Vienna and defeating the Turk. It were to be wisht the Elector of Saxe had taken the same consideration along with him, but he quitted the Army the very day after the Succour of Vienna, finishing his Campagne with the Glory of Re∣lieving the Town. The Elector of Bavaria with his Troops as well as those of Franconia march with us still, being resolved to see the end of this Campagne. From the Camp near Barrakan over against Gran, Octob. 10. 1683. For the Earl of Carlingford at London. I Sent you a short Account of the Relieving of Vienna, and of the shameful flight of the Enemy from before it, of which that advan∣tage was not made that might otherwise have been by reason of the backwardness of the Poles to follow the pursuit next day. But the Grand Visier being enrag'd at this Disgrace, dis∣charged his Fury upon the Officers of his Army, having strangled the Visier of Buda, a Man of Eighty years of Age, (and as he was
perhaps the most able Person of the Ottoman Empire, so would he have prov'd the more dangerous Enemy to him) with four other Bas∣sa's, and Four or Five Hundred other Officers, upon pretence that they did not do their parts, and disobeyed his Orders. The Count Budiani an Hungarian Lord, who after our Retreat at Raab, revolted with a considerable Party of his Coun∣try-men to the Rebel Teckeley, to give the Em∣peror a convincing Proof of his sincere Repen∣tance, cut in pieces two thousand Auxiliary Turks that the Grand Visier had sent to reinforce him, and tho the advantage we got by his Treason was very great, yet we could not but abhor the Traitor. On the Fifth instant the Polish Ar∣my with our Cavalry past the Danube at Gomor∣ra, leaving our foot one days march behind; but the Duke of Loraine having resolved to at∣tack Barrakan, was forc'd to stay some time for the Foot, because those of Bavaria were for some unhappy Reasons six days march from us: The King being told that there were not above Five Thousand Turks in Barrakan made his Troops ha∣stily advance towards it, without once acquain∣ting his Highness with the Design, and thinking himself sure, and that his very Avaunt Guard would have carried it, hè did not so much as
march his Troops in Battalia, but his Ambition and the great contempt he had of the Enemy upon the Success of Vienna cost him dear; in∣stead of the Five Thousand Men which he was told of, he found in a bottom under the very Cannon of Barrakan a Body of Twelve Thou∣sand, who instantly attackt the Avaunt Guard of the Poles with such a Fury, that though they behaved themselves bravely, they were at last forc'd into their main Body, and that in such confusion, that the whole Army which had not then time to draw up into Battaile seized with a panick Fear had been entirely routed, had not the Duke of Loraine (who by this time heard of the Kings departure) made his Troops hastily follow, and so kept them from farther disorder. My Brigade had this day the Avaunt Guard, and his Highness ordering me to make haste, tho we had a Defile to pass about half an hours march from the Enemy, yet our Troops carryed on with a desire to redress the loss, and repair the affront received by their Allies, past it with all chearfulness, and so in a very little time we drew up in a Line of Fifteen Squadrons. The Arrival thus of our Troops put soon a stop to the Carriere of the TURKS, and gave us an Opportunity thereby of passing the
rest of our Men, and to the Poles of knowing each other. The Enemy thus contenting them∣selves with the advantage they had gotten over the Poles, retired in good order into the bottom where they were first, and we thought it not then safe to follow them farther with the Poles, who were, as it were stund with the blow they had received, and under an apprehension that the Grand Visier's whole Army was there; They thereupon encamp'd themselves about an hours distance from Barrakan near the Danube, and the King was then of opinion to stay for the com∣ing up of the Foot, before they should attempt any thing farther. There were about One Thou∣sand Poles kill'd most of them Dragoons, who having alighted from their Horses in a Plain were abandoned by the Horse, and so cut in pieces by the Enemy; the King ventur'd as far as any Man with his usual undaunted Courage, and had it not been for a German Cavalier that serv'd him, he had then certainly been either kill'd or taken Prisoner, and his Majesty in Re∣quital made him a Colonel. The next day the Ma∣reschal Comte de Staremberg who so bravely de∣fended Vienna came with Eight Thousand Foot to us. The Poles were so disheartened by their wounds, which were yet bleeding, and appre∣hending,
that the Grand Visier with the rest of his Army might be near at hand, that they did endeavour to divert the King from any farther vigorous Action at that time, but the Duke of Loraine did so strongly press the contrary, that they were at last brought to it. We march'd in Battalia the ninth instant towards the Enemy, his Highness giving the Poles their choice where to post themselves, but instead of the right wing which till then they always affected, they divi∣ded themselves on both the Wings, and on our Reserve. The Enemy seeing us thus march to∣wards them came out of their bottom, ranging themselves in Battaile, and by the Confession of those Prisoners that make them the most, the Turks did not exceed Sixteen Thousand Men, and certainly there never was committed a greater nor worse supported rashness, but yet they stood us with that boldness at first, that the whole Grand Visier's Army could not have done more, and not being able to front our whole Line, they drew up to the Right, and without once at∣tempting to attack the German Squadrons fell with an incredible Fury on those Poles they found on our Left, hoping to find as cheap a business of't as they had done the day before: But the Great General of Poland Iablonouski receiv'd them so
briskly, that it stopt their Fury, and at the same time we charging them with our first Line of Curiasseers put them totally into disorder. The Defeat of those was immediately followed with a general Rout of all their Troops, and the shock of the first Line of our said Left Wing was so vigorous and succesful, that neither my Lord Lansdowne, to whom I had given the Com∣mand of a Squadron in my Regiment, nor I my self, who commanded the Second Line of the Wing that was attacked had either of us occa∣sion to fire a Pistol: His Highness let loose the first Line of Curiasseers, the Croats, and some Poles to the pursuit of those that fled, whom we chased with the points of our Swords in their backs to the very Fort of Barrakan, making a most terrible Slaughter of them, the Crowd of those that thought to save themselves by the Bridge was so great, that the Bridge broak un∣der them, and there were abundance of them who threw themselves into the Danube rather than they would stand the Fury of our Men, and the Revenge of the Poles. It is most cer∣tain that with those who were slain, and those who were drown'd, the better half of their Number perished, and one shall seldome find in a pitch'd Battle a greater loss of Men, these
were the very flower of the Turkish Army, com∣manded by the new Visier of Buda, Ali Bassa of Aleppo, and Six other Bassa's, the Visier of Buda was kill'd the Bassa's of Aleppo and Silestria are taken Prisoners, and a third Bassa was drown'd. We have also saved about six hundred Prisoners from the Fury of the Poles, and there are cer∣tainly taken above three thousand Horses and at least as many drown'd. The taking of Barra∣kan was a consequence of this Victory, our Men entring it vvithout Opposition, though there vvere several Janizaries, and many others reti∣red into it. But the Poles having first sackt and pillaged, seeing some of their Comrades heads vvhich the Turks had pitch'd in Parade all along the Pallizadoes of the Fort, did brutally in Re∣venge burn that place of Importance vvhich vve vvould have preserved. Let us however give thanks to God vvho has thus so visibly shewn himself in his ovvn, and our Cause by delivering our Enemies into our hands, I shall continue to Give you a Faithful Relation of vvhat passes here, and do intreat you to commu∣nicate it to His Majesty and the Duke.
A Letter from an English Nobleman, a Volun∣tier in the Imperial Army, to his Father at LONDON. Oct. 5.  1683. My Lord, THE same day that we delivered Vienna, I sent your Lord Lordship the News, by an Express that was dispatched to the Marquiss of Grana, and have since given your Lordship a larger Account thereof; since which we have without opposition advanced in Hungary, and some six days ago with the German and Polish Horse crossed the Danube at Gomora, leaving our Canon and Infantry behind us, resolving after one days march, it leading us into a Country of Fo∣rage, to stay for them; but the King of Poland ha∣ving Advice, that Four Thousand Turks had passed the River at Gran, by break of day next Morning, with∣out giving any notice to the Duke of Loraine, march∣ed with his Dragoons and Hussars towards them, but finding them much stronger than he was informed they were, his Majesty was beaten, and his Troops in great disorder, and his person in danger, and pursu∣ed by the Enemy till they saw our Horse appear, which by good luck marched some two hours after the Pelanders, by the Duke of Lorains Command, who was in the head of them; upon which the Turks ceased their pursuit, and retired under the Canon of Gran, and we encamped within sight of them till the next day the Eight instant, that our Infantry came up to us, upon which yesterday we marched in Bat∣taile
towards them, and found them posted in the same posture to receive us; the first Line of our Left Wing a bout'noon charged their Right with so much vigour & Success, that the Infidels were forced to give way, and not long afterwards their whole Army betook them∣selves to slight, and were pursued by ours to the Ri∣ver side, into which they precipitated themselves, in∣somuch that very few of them escaped, after this the same night we attacked Barrakan, a Fort on this side of the Danube at the head of the Bridge of Gran, and have taken it by Assault; Our Prisoners tell us, they were Sixteen Thousand Men chosen out of the best of their Troops, and sent thither by the Grand Visier to hinder us from ruining that Bridg, by which they had their Communication with the Rebels, Carama∣mett Bassa, lately made Visier of Buda, who comman∣ded there in chief was kill'd upon the place; Ali Bas∣sa of Aleppo and the Bassa of Silestria are taken Priso∣ners, another Bassa is drown'd, and their loss to speak modestly of it, exceeds the number of Eight Thou∣sand Men. The frequent occasions of Action we meet with, hinders me from quitting the Army as yet, altho most Voluntiers of any Consideration, except our Countrymen, are already returned, and that the sea∣son in this Country is very troublesom, nay not sup∣portable, were it not for the continual Favours I do dayly receive from my Lord Taaff, and as occasion offers from his Highness, and all the chief Officers of the Army, some of my Servants being dead, and almost all sick, I am with utmost respect, My Lord, Your, &c.
Another Letter from the same hand directed as the former. From Presburg, Novemb. the 7th. 1683. My Lord, IN My last to your Lordship, I gave an Account of the Battle we gain'd over the Turks near Gran, and our taking Barrakan by Assault the same day, since which we have crossed the River, besieged and taken Gran it self, and that without any great loss, they having within three days after our Batteries were fi∣nished asked to capitulate and surrender the Place, with their Cannon, Munition, &c. up to us. After this, there being no prospect of any more Action this year, upon the first instant I left the Army with the E∣lector of Bavaria, and waited on him as far as Gomor∣ra, where I left his Electoral Highness, and went my self to Raab, not being willing to leave unseen a place, which all over this part of the World is called Propug∣naculum Christianitatis, from whence yesterday, through a burnt and desolate Country I came hither, where I found my Brother John and Mr. Alman, whom I was surprized to find at this time of the year making to∣wards the Army; I must confess I am heartily sorry that my Brothers Sickness did hinder him from mee∣ting me going to the Army in July, instead of com∣ing from it in November; for then he might have seen three ranged Battles sought, besides skirmishes with the Infidels, the famous Siege of Vienna raised, a Fort stormed, a Town antiently of great Note, the Metropolis of Hungary, and long in Possession of the Turks, besieged and taken at the later end of October, and several other Places and Castles of Importance, rendred to the victorious Arms of the Christians,
which is more than has been, or than probably will be seen in any three Months this hundred years; from hence I intend to set out tomorrow for Vienna, and from thence to Lintz to wait upon his Imperial Maj∣sty before my return, from whence I will immedi∣ately, in obedience to your Lordships commands, dis∣patch Mr. Alman for England: And as for my Brother whom you are pleased to commit to my care, do assure your Lordship, that as I have nothing but what I hold from your Goodness; so all that I have shall be in common between us, and believe me ever with utmost respect, My Lord, Your, &c. Lintz Jan. 4. 1684. For the Earl of Carlingford at London. ABout two days since I received two of your most welcome Letters, one whereof had (in seems) first made the Tour of Hungary, I am overjoyed to hear that the King and his Royal Highness seem satisfied with my Relations, because they are two Persons whom I Infinitely Love, and Reverence as I ought, and whom I very well know to be of most discern∣ing Judgments; I confess I am proud to think that I have some part in their good Opinions. My Lord Lansdowne hath been pleased to set too great a value upon those little Services I have done him, he is a very brave Cavalier, and the most obliging, best conditio∣ned Man I know, and as he does me the Honour to love me, so he would procure me the like Favour with my Lord his Father, whom I most highly honour. The Emperor sends him into England with the quality of a Count of the Empire, to shew the consideration he has for brave Men, and although it cannot add any
thing to the Lustre of his noble Family, yet his Poste∣rity will have no reason to be displeased at his having gain'd it upon so glorious an occasion, nevertheless I desire you to publish nothing of this without the per∣mission of my Lord of Bathe. We have now by the taking of Gran, otherwise Strgonium, finifh'd our Campagne, notwithstanding the opposition of the Poles, who did all that was possible to divert us from it, in a Season which in truth was not so proper to make War. The Easiness that the Duke of Loraine found in making a Bridge, convinc't him of the Con∣sternation the Enemy was in, and that he ought to make the best use of it. His Highness passed the Da∣nube without the Poles, and in spight of the Rain that fell continually, he push't on the Siege with that Vigour, that at the end of five days he made himself Master of the Town, it is a place not strong, save only by its scituation, nor considerable, but for passing the Danube, and commanding a great extent of the Country; It is the Metropolis of Hungary, and in the last Age cost the Christians as well as Turks a Siege of several Months. This taking of Gran was soon followed by a Reducement of the Rebels, who of themselves came in and begged Pardon. The Poles for their Quarters chose the upper Hungary, pro∣mising to reduce Csha and Esperies, but finding great∣er opposition then they imagined, they rather chose to leave it, then run the Riscue of so troublesome a Quarter, but the Imperialists made sure of theirs by the taking of Dutsch and many other Castles, from whence they drove the Rebels. There are who sus∣pect an understanding betwixt some of the Polish Of∣ficers and the Rebels, but for my own part I believe nothing of it, and the reason why I suppose they did
not reduce Caschaw, was because they wanted both Foot and Provisions, thinking that by the sole Repu∣tation of their Arms, and presence of the King, they might have carryed it, and besides that, besieging of Towns is not their business. My Lord Lansdowne will bear me Witness that I did all was possible even be∣fore your sending to me, to find out a Couple of fine Turkish Horses for you, but upon my word we could find none worth the trouble, for all that were better then ordinary were taken by the Poles, and other of our Generals, who were more eager after plunder than my self, I have bought a Turkish Tent without seeing it, but they say it is very fine, with some Turkish Arms, which are also curious in the kind, which I in∣tend to send by way of Hamburg, and you may make a Present of them to the King or Duke, if you think it worth their Acceptance, or other wise dispose of them as you think best. I will send you when you please the Duke of Loraine's Picture, and I will, if I can, procure that of the King of Polands too. My Lord Lansdowne's Courrier is just a going, so that I cannot now say any thing of the business of Newheusell, but will by the first send you an Account of that, as well as other matters which I purpose to write you. I am for ever Yours, &c. Lintz Jan. 5. 1684. For the Earl of Bathe at London. My Lord, I Know not what my Lord Lansdowne can have writ∣ten to your Lordship in my Favour, to draw from you such obliging Expressions of Civility and Good∣ness to me, as I find all your Letters fill'd with, the
Truth is, it is I, who have a Thousand Obligations to my Lord, your Son, for making his Campagne with me, and giving me so distinct a mark of his Friendship, as there is not a gallant Man of the greatest conside∣ration in all the Army but would think himself ho∣noured with it. He found us in a Condition which would have discouraged any man but himself; Our Army by reason of the great Garrisons which we were forced to leave in Raab and Vienna reduced to a flying Body of Seven Thousand Horse, the Court in Retreat, which might have justifyed him if he had followed so great an Example, but he would finish what he had begun, and the truth is we may date our good Fortune from the time that he came amongst us. He had a part in the defeat of the Turks at Presburg, Korneigburg, Vienna and Barrakan, and in the taking of Gran, He hath signalized himself every where, and done like the Son of such a Father, and so illustrious Ancestors; and if he have suffer'd in this Campagne, which was one of the rdest that we have made a long time, he re∣turns loaded with Glory, and the marks of a particu∣lar esteem from His Imperial Majesty, and leaves a me∣mory of his; Person behind him, which will ever do ho∣nour to his Family and Country; I pray God, my Lord, that you may long enjoy one another and that I may enjoy you both I will seek all occasions of meriting by my most humble to that part in the honour of your Favour, which you allow me before-hand by a meer effect of your Generosity, and that I may have the means to do it, I  you as soon as may be to send us back to our Lord Lansdowne. The King can employ no Person in this Court who will be more acceptable, him I am with respect, My Lord, Your  obedient Servant, TAAFFE.
